MUSAEUM REGALIS SOCIETATIS: OR, A Catalogue and Description Of the Natural and
Artificial RARITIES Belonging to the ROYAL SOCIETY, And preserved at Gresham
College.

MADE By Nehemiah Grew, M. D. Fellow of the Royal Society, and of the College
of Physicians.

Whereunto is Subjoyned the Comparative Anatomy OF Stomachs and Guts.

By the same AUTHOR.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Malthus, at the Sun in the Poultrey, 1685.

TO THE Most Illustrious THE ROYAL SOCIETY, The following CATALOGUE IS Most
Humbly PRESENTED By the Author NEHEMJAH GREW.

To his Honored Friend Daniel Colwall Esquire Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY.
SIR,
NOthing can be more fit, than to dedicate a Catalogue of that Musaeum to your
Self, of which you are the Founder. You having, in your Devotion to the Royal
Society, offered up to them That so noble an Hecatombe.

The truth is, I have herein prosecuted, what the Royal Society, by their Order
for the making and publishing of this Catalogue, had begun: they having done
the same, as with regard to Common Use; so to return that which is but Right to
your Self, and that they might always wear this Catalogue, as the Miniature of
your abundant Respects, near their Hearts.

Neither must your Voluntary Undertaking for the Engraving of the Plates for
this Work, be unknown. You having done this, not only out of respect to my
Self; but likewise in order to a Public Good; whereby you are a Benefactor to
all Ingenious Men.

Besides the particular regard you had to the Royal Society it Self; which
seeming (in the opinion of some) to look a little pale, you intended hereby, to
put some fresh Blood into their Cheeks; pouring out your Box of Ointment, not
in order to their Burial, but their Resurrection.

To conclude, I have made this Address, not only to do You Right, but to do
Right unto Virtue it self; and that having proposed your exemplary prudence
unto others; they may from you, learn, To use the redundant part of their
Estates, either to a Charitable end, as this City will witness for your Self;
or the Promotion of Masculine Studies, as in the present Case: or other
laudable ways, so as with you, to merit a lasting esteem amongst the wiser and
better part of Mankind.

I am, Sir, Your very humble obliged Servant N. GREW.

THE PREFACE.
AS to the following Catalogue, I have some things to say, of the Order, Names,
Descriptions, Figures, and Uses of Particulars, and the Quotations I have made
therein.

As to the first, I like not the reason which Aldrovandus gives for his
beginning the History of Quadrupeds with the Horse; Quod praecipuam nobis
utilitatem praebeat. Being better placed according to the degrees of their
Approximation, to Humane Shape, and one to another: and so other Things,
according to their Nature. Much less should I choose, with Gesner, to go by the
Alphabet. The very Scale of the Creatures, is a matter of high speculation.

As to the Names, where they were wanting, (which in our own Language were
many) I have taken leave to give them. But have generally reteind them, where I
have found them all-ready given. Although, from some distinguishing Note less
convenient; as the Color is, than the Figure. And sometimes very Improper, as
Concha Persica, and the like, from the Place. For it often falls out, that the
same Thing breeds in many Places. But there is no Natural Reason, why it should
be called by one, rather than another. So that the Names of Things should be
always taken from something more observably declarative of their Form, or
Nature. The doing of which, would much facilitate and Improve the Knowledge of
them many ways. For so, every Name were a short Definition. Where as if Words
are confused, little else can be distinctly learned. Yet I took it not to be my
part, actually to reform this matter; unless I had been writing an Universal
History of Nature.

In the Descriptions, I have taken care; First, to rectify the mistakes of
such as are given us by other Hands. Secondly, not to Transcribe any; as is too
commonly done: but having noted something more especial therein, to refer to
the Author. Thirdly, where there is no Description at all, or that is too
short, or the faults therein many, to give one at large. For the doing of all
which, what the trouble of comparing Books together has been, I say with
Sleydan in another Case, Post Deum Immortalem Ipse novi.

In the Descriptions given, I have observed, with the Figures of Things, also
their Colors; so far as I could, unless I had viewed them Living, and Fresh.
And have added their just Measures. Much neglected by Writers of Natural
History.

If any object against their length: perhaps they have not so well considered
the necessity hereof, for the clear and evident distinction of the several
Kinds and Species, in so great a variety of Things known in the World. And
wherein also regard is to be had, to all that after Ages may discover, or have
occasion to enquire after. The Curiosity and Diligence of Pliny, is highly to
be commended. Yet he is so brief, that his Works are rather a Nomenclature,
than a History: which perhaps might be more intelligible to the Age he lived
in, than the succeeding ones. But had He, and Others, been more particular in
the Matters they treat of: their Commentators had engaged their own and their
Readers Time much better, than in so many fruitless and endless Disquisitions
and Contests. It were certainly a Thing both in it self Desirable, and of much
Consequence; To have such an Inventory of Nature, wherein, as on the one hand,
nothing should be Wanting; so nothing Repeated or Confounded, on the other. For
which, there is no way without a clear and full Description of Things.

Besides, that in such Descriptions, many Particulars relating to the Nature
and Use of Things, will occur to the Authors mind, which otherwise he would
never have thought of. And may give occasion to his Readers, for the
consideration of many more. And therefore it were also very proper, That not
only Things strange and rare, but the most known and common amongst us, were
thus described. Not merely, for that what is common in one Country, is rare in
another: but because, likewise, it would yield a great abundance of matter for
any Man's Reason to work upon. He that notes, That a Gray hound has pricked
Ears, but that those of a Hound hang down; may also the Reason of both: for
that the former hunts with his Ears; the the latter, only with his Nose: So
that as a blind Man, minds nothing but what he Hears: so a Hound, having his
Ears half Stopped with the Flaps, minds nothing but what he Smells. He that
shall observe, That a Horse, which ought to have many and strong Teeth, and
large and thick Hoofes, has no Horns: and that an Ox, with Horns, has fewer
Teeth, and weaker Hoofs: cannot but at the same time see the Providence of
Nature, In disposing of the same Excrementitious parts of the Blood, either
way, as is most suitable to the Animal. One that considers the Teeth of a
Horse, sees the reason, why he has so long an upper Lip; which is his Hand,
and in some sort answers to the Proboscis of an Elephant; whereby he nimbly
winds the Grass in great quantities at once into his Mouth. So that for Nature
to have made him a short Lip, had been to make a little Hopper, to a great
Mill. The same Animal having need of great Lungs, how necessary is it also for
him to have a broad Breast, well bowed Ribs, and wide Nostrils to give them
play? That being much pestered with Flys, he should have a long brush Tail to
whisk them off. Whereas the Ass, which either for the hardness and dryness of
his Skin, or other Cause, is less anoy'd with them, has no need of such an
one. That being heavy, he should not Tread or Leap stiff, as a Man; but have a
Pastern made him, gradually and safely to break the force of his weight. By
This, his Body hangs on the Hoof, as a Coach does by the Leathers. Without
this, the most through pa^'d Horse, would tread so hard, that as it were
impossible for any man to endure long upon his Back: so his Joints would be
much chafed, and he must needs presently tire. Yet if it be too long, by
yielding over much, it makes every step somewhat more laborious, and to loose
some ground. He that would have one for Carriage, will choose him short, and
high Backed. For Running, long, an clean or slender Limbed: another, were like a
Man that should run a Race in his Boots. And a due length is as necessary:
which is, when the Measure between the Main and the Tail answers to the hight,
or thereabout. If much under, his hinder Feet will want their full scope: if
much over, there will be more weight to be moved with the same force, as if the
weight were less. But he that would have one for Draught, looks not that the
Limbs be slender, if they are strong; especially those behind. For though the
fore Legs pull sometimes, most when they make an acute angle with the Belly;
yet the greatest stress usually lies upon the hinder; these being as the Center
of Gravity, and the Load, and Body of the Horse, the two Counter Weights. And
when he Goes without Drawing, his fore Feet only support him; but his hinder,
serve also as Leavers to carry him on. And therefore when he walks, he always
moves his hinder Foot first.

Together with such Notes as these, arising from the Description of the outward
Parts; how largely and usefully might that of the Inner; his Generation,
Breeding and the like, be also insisted on. And so the like of other Animals.
Whereby a better History of them might be written in five years, than has
hitherto been done in two Thousand.

As for the Figures, I have given only those of such particulars, as are
omitted by others. Saving one or two, found in some Authors less known, or
common. Nor any, but what is also described: which makes any further
Explication of these needless, besides what the Reader will find next before
them.

After the Descriptions; instead of meddling with Mystic, Mythologick, or
Hieroglyphick matters; or relating Stories of Men who were great Riders, or
Women that were bold and feared not Horses; as some others have done: I thought
it much more proper, To remarque some of the Uses and Reasons of Things. Where
also for the sake of the English Reader, I have undergone the transcribing some
particulars. More I could have done, with less trouble. These I hope will
compensate the room, they take up. Amongst Medicines, I have thought fit to
mention the Virtues of diverse Exoticks. Because the greatest Rarity, if once
experienced to be of good use, will soon become common. The Jesuits Barque, of
which, no Man yet has well described the Tree, and very few know precisely
where it grows; yet what great quantity, does the much use of it bring over to
us? Unicorns Horns, upon the like motive of Trade, would be as plentiful as
Elephants Teeth.

I have made the Quotations, not to prove things well known, to be true; as one
Aldrovandus.
(and he too deservedly esteemed for his great Diligence and Curiosity) who
very formally quotes Aristotle, to prove a Sheep to be amongst the Bisulca:
Ovem, (inquit) ex genere esse Bisulcorum, non solum (...) ipsa loquitur, sed
Aristoteles etiam scripto publicavit, inquiens; as if Aristotle, must be
brought to prove a Man has ten Toes. But partly, To be my Warrant, in matters
less credible. Partly, to give the Authors, that which is their due: not at all
liking the Malignant-way of some, who never mention any, but to confute him.
Yet withal, To rectify his Mistakes where I found them. And to mind the
Reader, Not to peruse the most Honest, or Learned Author, without some caution.

A Prospect of the whole WORK. Of the MUSAEUM.
PART. I. Of Animals.
Sect. 1. Of Humane Rarities. Sect. 2. Of Quadrupeds.
CHap.: 1. Of Viviparous; and particularly of Multifidous Quadrupeds. Chap. 2.
Of Bifidous, and Solidipedous Quadrupeds. Appendix. Of certain Balls found in
the Stomachs of diverse Quadrupeds. Chap. 3. Of Oviparous Quadrupeds.
Sect. 3. Of Serpents. Sect. 4. Of Birds.
Chap. 1. Of Land-Fowles. Chap. 2. Of Water-Fowles; particularly of the Cloven
Footed. Chap. 3. Of Palmipeds or Web-Footed. Chap. 4. Of their Eggs and Nests.
Sect. 5. Of Fishes.
Chap. 1. Of Viviparous Fishes. Chap. 2. Of Oviparous Fishes; particularly such
as are Not-Scal'd. Chap. 3. Of Scaled Fishes. Chap. 4. Of Exanguious Fishes.
Sect. 6. Of Shells.
Chap. 1. Of Shells Whirled and single. Chap. 2. Of Shells Double and Multiple.
To which are subjoyned 7. Schemes comprehending them all.
Sect. 7. Of Insects.
Chap. 1. Of Insects with Naked Wings. Chap. 2. Of Insects with Sheathed Wings.
Chap. 3. Of Creeping Insects.

PART. II. Of Plants.
Sect. 1. Of Trees.
Chap. 1. Of Woods, Branches and Leaves. Chap. 2. Of Fruits; particulary such
as are of the Apple, Pear, and Plum Kinds. Chap. 3. Of Calibashes; and some
other like Fruits. Chap. 4. Of Nuts, and diverse other like Fruits. Chap. 5. Of
Berries, Cones, Lobes, and some other Parts of Trees.
Sect. 2. Of Shrubs and Arborescent Plants.
Chap. 1. Of Shrubs, chiefly. Chap. 2. Of Arborescent Plants.
Sect. 3. Of Herbs.
Chap. 1. Of Stalks and Roots. Chap. 2. Of Fruits. Chap. 3. Of Seeds.
Sect. 4. Of Mosses, Mushrooms, etc. Togegether with some Appendents to Plants.
Sect. 5. Of Sea Plants.
Chap. 1. Of Sea Shrubs. Chap. 2. Of other Sea Plants; and of Sponges.

PART. III. Of Minerals.
Sect. 1. Of Stones.
Chap. 1. Of Animal Bodies petrified; and such like. Chap. 2. Of Vegetable
Bodies petrified; and Stones like them. Chap. 3. Of Corals, and other like
Marine Productions. Chap. 4. Of Gems. Chap. 5. Of other Stones Regular. Chap.
6. Of Stones Irregular.
Sect. 2. Of Metalls.
Chap. 1. Of Gold, Silver, and Copper. Chap. 2. Of Tin, Lead, and Iron. Chap.
3. Of Antimony, Mercury, and other Metallic Bodies.
Sect. 3. Of Mineral Principles.
Chap. 1. Of Salts. Chap. 2. Of Ambar and other Sulphurs. Chap. 3. Of Earths.

PART. IV. Of Artificial Matters.
Sect. 1. Of things relating to Chemistry, and to other Parts of Natural
Philosophy. Sect. 2. Of things relating to Mathematics; and some Mechanics.
Sect. 3. Chiefly, of Mechanics. Sect. 4. Of Coyns, and other matters relating
to Antiquity. Appendix. Of some Plants, and other Particulars. Index. Of some
Medicines. List. Of those who have contributed to this Musaeum.

Of the Anatomical Part.
Chap. 1. Of the Stomachs and Guts of six Carnivorous Quadrupeds, sc. a Weesle,
Fitchet, Polecat, Cat, Dog, and Fox. Chap. 2. Of the Mole, which seems to feed
on Insects, as also of the Urchan, Squiril, and Rat; chiefly frugivorous. Chap.
3. Of a Rabbit, Horse, and Pig; both frugivorous and graminivorous. Chap. 4. Of
a Sheep, and Calf; chiefly graminivorous. Chap. 5. Of the Uses of the Gulets of
Quadrupeds. Chap. 6. Of the Uses of the Stomachs of Quadrupeds. Chap. 7. Of the
Uses of the Guts of Quadrupeds. Chap. 8. Of the Stomachs and Guts of Birds.
Chap. 9. Of their Uses. q Chap. 10. Of the Stomachs and Guts of Fishes.
With a Short Explication of some of the Figures, next before them.
At a Meeting of the Council of the Royal Society, July 18th 1678.
Ordered, Grew be desired, at his leisure, to Make a Catalogue and Description
of the Rarities belonging to this Society.

Thom. Henshaw Vice-Praeses R. S.

At a Meeting of the Council of the Royal Society, July 5th 1679.
Ordered, Musaeum Regalis Societatis, etc. By Dr. Nehemjah Grew, be Printed.

Thom. Henshaw Vice-Praeses R. S.

The Reader is desired to amend the following ERRATA.
PAge, 5. line, 3; for, only; read, chiefly* p. 7. l. 24. r. Biliaria. p. 16.
l. 12. r. Conical. p. 41. l. 20. r. Humorous. p. 49. in the margin, r.
Schroderi Pharmac. p. 65. l. 15. f. European, r. Common. l. 22. again, r.
Common. p. 70. l. 1. f. Poop, r. Prore. p. 72. l. 16. f. Mona, r. Man, and. p.
73. l. 1. f. Mona, r. Man. p. 103. r. Oviparous. p. 126. l. 34. dele, other. p.
136. l. 12. r. Fore-Whirled. p. 182. l. 18. add, Or rather, Prunus Sylv.
Americana; the AMER: BLACK THORN. p. 202. l. 14. r. Ciliare. p. 220. l. 26. r.
Taxocoquamoclit. p. 252. l. 10. dele, a Cap.

A DESCRIPTION OF THE RARITIES Belonging to the ROYAL SOCIETY, And preserved at
Gresham College.
PART I. OF ANIMALS.
SECT. I. Of Humane Rarities.
AN EGYPTIAN MUMMY given by the Illustrious Prince Henry Duke of Norfolk. It
is an entire one taken out of the Royal Pyramids. In length five feet and,
defended with several linen Covers, all woven like ordinary Flaxen Cloth. But
by the spinning, distinguished into three kinds. The utmost, is like Flaxen
Cloth of two shillings an Ell: the inmost, of half a Crown: the middlemost, of
three shillings, or thereabout.

The utmost Cover is divided into several pieces, each of doubled Linen, and
adapted in figure to the part it covers, as one on the Breast, another on the
Belly, and so on all the principal Parts. On each of these pieces is laid a
white Paint, of a kind of chalky or limy substance, of the thickness of a
Hen-Egg-shell. Upon this chalky ground are drawn the Hieroglyphick Figures of
Men, Women and Birds; in Gold, yellow, red and blew. But with very rude shapes,
and the Colors no where mixed together. So very mean was the Art of Painting
amongst the Egyptians heretofore. For we have reason to believe, that what was
done for one of their Kings or Nobles, was done with their best skill.

The middlemost Cover consists of one single and entire piece of Linen,
almost like a Winding Sheet. It is also tinged with some kind of Paint, but
very lightly, and without any Figures.

The inmost Covering is wrapped round about the Head, Trunk, each Arm, and each
Leg apart, about thirty or forty times, like so many swathing Bands. About
twenty of the utmost of these folds are lightly tinged, all the other inmost
more fully, with a blackish and gummous substance. But the Flesh so fully, as
it seems to be converted into a black Rosin; which being held to the flame of a
Candle, is a little odorous and inflamable. The Bones also, are not only
outwardly, but also quite through of a black color, as if they were burnt.

From hence it is very probable, That the way of Embalming amongst the
Egyptians, was by boiling the Body (in a long Cauldron like a Fish-kettle) in
some kind of liquid Balsome; so long, till the aqueous parts of the flesh being
evaporated, the oily and gummous parts of the Balsome did by degrees soak into
it, and intimately incorporate therewith. Much after the same manner, as the
Sugar does, in the conditing of Pears, Quinces, and the like.

It Is also likely, that a better way might be taken, than this used by the
Egyptians. And that is, by boiling, or rather soaking the Body in some white
sort of Oil, and such as will dry, (as that of Walnuts) made and kept so hot,
as to evaporate the watery parts by degrees, and to keep the flesh white, and
not brittle, but limber and plient. Which, especially in the business of
Anatomy, would be of good use: because, that all the Muscules of the Body,
being first parted one from another, might hereby be preserved sound, clean,
and limber upon the Bones; and so all the motions of the parts be explicated
with the greatest ease, and without any offensiveness.

It Is equally probable, that the whole Compages of the Muscules, as they lie
upon the Bones, might with little trouble, and less charge than by the former
way, be truly Tanned, or reduced to a limber sort of Leather; whereby also the
westage of the fibers, or other mechanisme of the Muscules might more easily
and leisurely be observed. For the skins of Beasts, whereof Leather is daily
made, are Muscular; and in man's body consists, for the most part, of the same
carneous fibers, as the Muscules, but more closely woven or matted together.

Mummy, says Wormius Musaeum Wormianum.
(and so most Writers hereof) is of great use against Contusions, clodded
Blood, Hard Labor, etc. But let them see to it, that dare trust to old Gums,
which have long since lost their virtue.

By some Chemists are also prepared Mummiae Tinctura Quercetani; Mummiae
Extractum Crolly; Oleum Olivarum Mummiatum. Schrod. Pharm.
But the prudent Reader will take heed of words.

A MALE HUMANE FOETUS. Given by Thomas Cox Esquire An Abortive of about the 4th
Month. In length five inches. The Head, from the hinder part to the face, an
Inch and. The Face, an Inch and. The Back, from shoulder to shoulder, an Inch
and broad. The Buttocks an Inch. The Arms and Thighs Inch over. The Wrist and
small of the Leg, of an Inch. The Navel-string 1/^ of an Inch; twisted like a
Rope; and cut off five Inches long. The Eyes shut. But the Mouth open. It has
neither Nails, nor Hair. The Skin white and smooth, almost as in Children newly
born. See Dr. W. Needham's curious Book de Foetu Formato. And Hobokenus's
Anatomia Secundinae Humanae.


The largeness of the Head and Chest, with respect to the other parts, is
observable. The mouth being open, shows that the Foetus, even in the 4th Month,
may that way take part of its Aliment. See Harvey de Generat. Animalium.
The Skin has been kept white and smooth for so long a time, scil. above
fifteen years, by being included with rectified spirit of Wine in a Cylindrical
Glass; to the middle of which the Foetus is poised, by means of a Glass Buble
of an Inch diametre, the Neck whereof is fastened to the Anus of the Foetus by a
wire.

The entire SKIN of a MOOR. It Is tanned with the Hair of the Head, and even the
smallest in all the other parts remaining on it.

Herein are observable, the Fibers in the skin of the Penis, which are very
white, and exquisitely small, like the thread of a Spiders Web. Likewise the
thinness of the true Cutis in the sole of the Foot; and on the contrary, the
extraordinary thickness of the Cuticula, especially in the Heel, exceeding the
sixth part of an Inch: which is about fifty times the thickness of that in the
ball of the Hand. Bartholine Historiar. Cent. 5.
mentions a Farrier who had several Callosities on his Right Hand Fingers, as
big as Walnuts.

The same Author Historiar. Cent. 3.
shows the way of tanning a Humane Skin. I believe it may be tanned by all the
ways which are used upon other Skins.

He says, Ibid.
That a Thong hereof tied about the middle, is of good use for facilitating the
Birth; and especially against Mother-Fits. Whether any other way, if so, than
by raising and fortifying the fancy (which will sometimes produce strange
effects) I leave to the Reader to judge.

All the Principal VEINS, ARTERIES, and NERVES, both of the Limbs and Viscera.
The generous Gift of John Evelyn Esquire. He bought them at Padoa, where he saw
them with great industry and exactness (according to the best method then used)
taken out of the body of a Man, and very curiously spread upon four large
TABLES, whereon they are now preserved. The Work of Fabritius Bartoletus then
Vestingius's Assistant there, and afterward Physician to the King of Poland.

The Veins and Arteries are so exceedingly well done, as to show the most
curious Schemes which Laurentius and other Physicians have given us of them,
are real and not fictitious. But the Nerves have been much more truly and fully
represented to us of late by Dr. Richard Lower, in Dr. Willis. De Nervorum
Descript. and usu.
Especially as to their Plexus and Inosculations, and their admirable
Distributions to the Organs of the Senses, and the Viscera.

Aristotle Histor. Anim. lib. 3. c. 3.
by the account he gives of the Doctrine of the Naturalists of his Time, and
before him, seems to have been the first, who to any purpose, observed the
Distribution of the Sanguineous Vessels. Yet he describes them only from the
Heart upward. Nor makes he any distinction betwixt the Vena Portae, and the
Vena Cava. So that even here he comes far short of that exactness which
Anatomists have since arrived at; as appears, upon inspection, by the TABLES
above mentioned.

The SCELETON of a Man. Wherein the number of Bones (about two hundred and
fifty) together with their dimensions, figures, and articulations are all
easily observable. Given by Thomas Povey Esquire.

The History of the Bones, as finished, is well performed by most Anatomists.
But the manner, and order of their beginning and perfection, has been given
us, so far as I know, by the diligent Observations of Kirckringius Kirckringii
Osteologia.
only.

Of all Humane Bones indifferently, as well as of the Skull, are prepared,
Spiritus simplicior, Spiritus oleosus, Oleum rectificatum, and Magisterium.
Amongst which, the spiritus oleosus, if well prepared, is of undoubted use
against Hysterical Passions; and in some other Cases, where the Nerves
especially are affected.

The SCELETON of a Woman; of equal height with the former. By comparing these
two together, it may be noted, That the Os Ilium is larger and more outward in
the Female Sceleton, than in the Male; sc. for the more easy Labor, as
Bartholine and others have also observed by the like comparison. I add, That
the same Bone is also broader by an Inch in the Female Sceleton, than in the
Male: sc. for the better sustentation of the Foetus in the Womb. Again, That
the Os Sacrum is half an Inch longer in the Female: both for the forementioned
reason, and also the better proportion of the Parts. On the contrary, That the
Vertebrae, especially of the Loins, are much broader, thicker, and stronger in
the Male Sceleton, than in the Female; being hereby better fitted for the
bearing of burdens. And, that as in the Male Sceleton there are 32 Teeth, as
is usual, and in the Female but 28; So the nether Chap in the Male Sceleton is
half an Inch broader than in the Female, as being made to accommodate a bigger
Muscule for the motion of those Teeth. And for the same reason, the Angles
subjected to the Os Jugale are above an Inch more distant; For that a Man being
fitted, in other respects, to undergo more labor; his Chaps also should be the
better made to eat the more. Once more, That the Skull of the Male Sceleton, is
much bigger, than of the Female; and so capable of more Brains. Although a
little House may be well furnished, and look better than a great one that
stands empty.

The SCELETON of an Abortive Humane Foetus. It Is not above two Inches long. The
parts of the Head, Chest, and Limbs are all entire, but not perfect. For the
extremities of the Bones of the Arms and Legs, are at both ends plainly
cartilagineous. They are in thickness like a Tailors stitching Thread. Given by
Thomas Povey Esquire. See Kirckringius de Foetus Ossibus.

It may possibly be conceived by some, That the Bones, at least some of them,
are hard at the first; as Salts and other like Crystallizing Bodies are as hard
upon the very first instant of their shooting, as they are when grown into
great Crystals. But it is so far evident, that all the Bones are soft at the
first, that I am of opinion, That originally they are a Congeries of Fibers or
fibrous Vessels, as true as any other in the Body; which by degrees harden into
Bones: even as the inmost Vessels in a Plant, do in time harden into Wood. See
the Authors Anatomy of Plants.
And that as in a Plant, there are successive additions of Rings or Tubes of
Wood, made out of Vessels: So in an Animal, it seems plain, That there are
additions successively made to the Bones out of the Fibrous parts of the
Muscules; especially, those whitest Fibers which run transversly, and make the
stamen or warp of every Muscule. So that as in the Barque of a Plant, part of
the Vessels are successively derived outward to the Rind, and part inward to
the Sap, which afterward becomes hard wood. See the Authors Comparative
Anatomy of Trunks.
So in the Flesh of an Animal, part of the white transverse Fibers are
successively derived to the Skin (of which this chiefly consists) and part of
them inwardly, making still new Periosteum's one after another, as the old ones
become so many additions to the Bones.

A HUMANE SKULL that was never buried. Whereof there are several Medicines
prepared, See Schrod. Pharm. and others.
as Cranium Humanum praeparatum, Cranium Humanum Calcinatum. Cranii Humani
Magisterium, Spiritus Essentificatus, Oleum, Sal Volatile, Tinctura, Galreda,
i. e. Extractum Cranii Theophrasti. But the Cranium praeparatum, and the spirit
are most, and most deservedly, in use.

A HUMANE SKULL covered all over with Moss, by the Paracelsians called Usnea.
This Moss is by them commended for its peculiar Virtue in stopping of bleeding
at the Nose.

Upon comparison it appears to me, to be the same, in specie, with that
described by Johannes Bauhinus under the Title of Muscus facie Abietis. So that
we may probably expect the same advantage from the use of this, as of that
which grows upon Skulls. For a Skull can have no further influence, than has
the alteration of the soil: which although it may produce some differences, yet
is seldom or never known to alter the specific Virtue of a Plant.

A HUMANE SKULL covered all over with the Skin. Having been buried, as is
probable, in some Limy, or other like soil, by which it was tanned or turned
into a kind of Leather.

The GALL BLADDER, together with the VASA BILARIA, taken out of the Liver, and
filled with soft red Wax. Performed, and given by Dr. Swammerdam.

The SPLEEN most curiously EXCARNATED, and the Vessels filled with wax: whereby
its Fibers and Vessels are very well seen. Performed, and given by the same
Hand.

A Portion of the PENIS and Urethra: wherein the Corpora Nervosa are most
conspicuous. By the same Hand.

A Portion of the INTESTINUM JEJUNUM: wherein the Valvulae conniventes observed
by Rhuysserius, delineated by Kirckringius, are well seen.

It is observed Philosoph. Trans. N. 125.
by Dr. William Cole, That not only these Valves, but the Fibers of the inner
Muscular Membrane of the Guts are admirably continued in a spiral Line, all
along from the Stomach to the very Anus.

The PROPER VESSELS of a HUMANE TESTICLE, separated and expanded, from their
most close and numerous into wider folds, for the space of a foot in length,
and half a foot in breadth. Performed by Dr. Edmund King.

It is taken for granted, I think almost by every body, That Van Horn and de
Graaf were the first Observers of these Vessels. But that every one may have
his due, it is worth the Readers notice, That ten years before de Graaf's Book
concerning the same, a Description with Figures thereof, in the Testicles both
of a Boar and of a Man, were first published by Vauclius Dathirius Bonglarus,
sc. in the Year 1658. Whereof also Mr. Oldenburgh has given an account in the
Philosophical Transactions. N. 42.

The WOMB of a WOMAN, blown up and dried. Together with the Spermatick Vessels
annexed; and the Arteries in the bottom of the Uterus, undulated like the
Claspers of a Vine; all filled up with soft Wax. Also the Membranous and Round
Ligaments of the Womb, the Ureters, Bladder, Clitoris, Nymphae, Hymen,
Fallopian Tube, and the Ovarys, commonly called the Testicles; all made most
curiously visibly, and given by Dr. Swammerdam. The Descriptions and Figures
hereof may be seen in the same Authors Book, printed at Leyden, 1672. and
presented to the Royal Society.

Of the Organs appropriated to Generation in both Sexes, see also Van Horns
Prodromus, and Regnerus de Graaf.

Of the manner and use of filling the Vessels with Wax, or other like
substance, see the Honorable Mr. Boil, in his First Part, Of the Usefulness
of Natural Philosophy; who, I think, was the first that made mention of
managing and representing them this way.

A TOOTH taken out of the Testicle or Ovary of a Woman, and given by Dr. Edward
Tyson. It Is near an Inch long, pointed like the Eye-Tooth of a Man, but more
slender. As hard and white as any in the Head.

Here is also the Draught of another TOOTH, taken also out of the Ovary of a
Woman, by the same Hand, being shaped pretty like one of the Grinders or great
Teeth, and as big. It is as white and as hard as the former. The Woman's Husband
keeps the Tooth it self by him.

HAIR taken out of the Ovary of a Woman, and given by the same Hand. It is
fine, and most of it gray. The length of one Hair (longer than the rest) of a
yard.

HAIR found by the same Person in the Ovary, and Horns of the Womb of a Bitch:
as also in the Omentum, Veins, and Heart. It Is all short, answerable in length
to the Hair of a Dog; and of a brown color.

The BONES of a Humane LEG and FOOT grown together, and in some places rarefied
like a Sponge or Pumice-Stone. It Is very probable, it was a Disease in the
Bones somewhat like to that which Chirurgions call an Exostosis; and that they
became such, by some malignant and strumous Ulcer.

A piece of a BONE voided by Sir W. Throgmorton with his Urine. Given by Thomas
Cox Esquire. It Is about the 3d. of an Inch over, and almost square. Smooth on one
side, and spongy on the other, on the edges rugged. About the bigness of a
little green Peace.

In the Philosophical Transactions ( Number. 41.) there is a Relation of a BULLET
that was voided by the Penis with the Urine. Communicated by Dr. Nath. Fairfax.

A STONE voided from the Penis or Urethra of a Man who lived at Exeter. Given
by Dr. Cotton. It is of a whitish color, and soft substance, almost like
Chalk. In length two Inches and a quarter. Of a Pyramidal figure; with an
obtuse Cone. Near the Base an Inch over. Where it has a little Hole or Canale
tending toward the Cone. When it first slipped out of the Bladder into the
Penis, it was neither so thick or big, nor so hard, but that, as it seems, the
Urine pressing forward, forced a hole for its passage through the middle of it.
Which being opened, the Stone continued fixed in the same place, viz. about an
Inch behind the Glans Penis, for the space of Thirteen Years. In which time, it
gradually grew bigger, till it came to the bulk above mentioned. And the said
Hole or Canale being by the continual accretion of new matter, at last stopped
up, the Stone was then forced out of the end of the Penis.

This Man, in all this time, scarce felt any great Pains; neither did he omit
his usual Recreations or his business. And once he took a Journey ( on
Horseback) from Exeter to London, is about an hundred and thirty eight miles,
without any trouble.

Bartholine Histor. Cent. 5.
mentions a Stone as big as a Walnut, of an Ounce weight, which was voided at
the upper end of the Urethra, through which it there forced its way.

Of Humane Stones bred either in the Kidneys or Bladder, are prepared, The
Crystalline Salt, and the Elyxir. Medicines hardly to be got, and at last, to
little purpose.

Of the Nature of the Stone, and of those Medicines which are most effectual to
prevent the Generation of it, see some experiments of the Authors in his Book
of the Luctation arising from the mixture of Bodies.

SECT. II. Of Quadrupede's.
CHAP. I. Of Viviparous Quadruped's; particularly, such as are Multifidous.
A MONKEY. Cercopithecus: qu. Simia caudata. See the Descriptions and Figures
of several kinds in Aldrovandus, Marggravius, and others. Aldrovandus speaks of
some as big as a Mastiff, having Tails five Cubits long. In Brasile there is a
sort of yellowish Monkey, which smell like Musk. Barl. Rerum gest. in Bras.
Hist. p. 223.
In which place they are numerous, and in great variety. Joh. de Laet.
As also in all the Mountanious places of the East Indies. Aldrovandus a Monfet
de Re Cibaria.
As they climb the Trees, if in danger of falling, they save themselves not
only with their Feet, but their Tails, by wraping them round about the next
Bough. The Zygantes in Africa esteem them good meat.

The SCELETON of a MONKEY. Wherein the distance betwixt the Os sacrum and the
Ischia, as it is much greater, than in the Sceleton of a Woman, is observable.
Likely so, in other Viviparous Quadrupede's: for which cause, partly, they have
all more easy Labor than a Woman.

The THROTTLE BONE of a Male AQUIQUI; which the People of Brasile call the
King-Monkey; being far bigger than all the other kinds; described by J. de
Laet, Lib. 15. c. 5.
out of Lerius. It Is a Bone, so called by the English, with the help of which
he makes a very great noise. For it is hollow, and very hard. Exceeding thin,
and so half transparent. In length two Inches and. In height an Inch and. In
breadth almost two Inches. At one end, has an Aperture an Inch wide every way.
On the top furrowed, so as to resemble a Puppies Skull*

I suppose it is placed in the Throat, or at the upper end of the Larynx, near
the Epiglottis. Joh. Lerius describing of it, J. de Laet. lib. 15. c. 5.
falsely calls it a Membrane.

The SLOTH. Ignavus sive Pigritia. An Animal of so slow a motion, that he will
be three or four days, at least, in climbing up and coming down a Tree.
Bartaeus de Reb. Bras. p. 222.
And to go the length of fifty Paces on plain ground, requires a whole day.
Clusius.
The Natives of Brasile call him Haii, from his voice of a like sound: which he
commonly repeats about six times together, descending, as if one should sing,
La, sol, fa, mi, re, ut. Id.
Whatsoever he takes hold of, he does it so strongly ( or, rather stiffly) as
sometimes to sleep securely while he hangs at it. Guliel. Piso.
See his Description in Clusius, Marggravius, Piso, and others. They all seem
to omit the length of his fore feet, which is almost double to that of his
hinder.

From the shag of his Body, the shape of his Legs, his having little or no
Tail, the slowness of his gate, and his climbing up of Trees, as little Bears
are used to do, he seems to come near the Bear-kind: from which he chiefly
differs, In having but three Claws upon a foot. He breeds principally in
Florida and Brasile.

Two BLACK-BEAR CUBS. The Description of the Bear, see in Aldrovandus, Gesner,
etc. The Anatomy, in the Philosophical Transactions, N. 49. They breed most in
Nova Zembla, and other of the more Northerly Countries. In Norway they hunt
him, and so in Helvetia and Muscovy, and if he be fat, they account him a
delicate Dish. Moufet, de Re Cibaria, and Musaeum Worm,


It Is observed by Aldrovandus, That a Bear has Hair on both the Eyelids, as a
Man, which other Quadrupedes have not. Natalis Comes (cited by the same Author)
comparing his parts with those of a Man, reckons his Claws among them, which
are much more like to those of a Lion. So easy it is, to drive on the
comparison too far, to make it good.

The FOOT of a white Groenland BEAR, which is half a foot broad. Vadianus
Quoted by Gesner.
saw a Bear-skin five feet long, and broader than a Bulls Hide. The Bear to
which this Foot did belong, might be as big.

A LEOPARDS SKIN. It Is a yard broad. From the Snout to the hinder end of the
Tail near three yards. The Tail a yard. See the Description of the Animal in
Aldrovandus, etc.

If they are well compared, he is every way, in shape, like a Cat: his Head,
Teeth, Tongue, Feet, Claws, Tail, all like a Cats. His actions also like a
Cats; he boxes with his fore-feet, as a Cat does her Kitlins; Leaps at the
Prey, as a Cat at a Mouse; and will also spit much after the same manner. So
that they seem to differ, just as a Kite does from an Eagle.

The Leopard (and all of this kind) as he goes, always keeps the Claws of his
fore-feet turned up from the ground, and sheathed as it were in the Skin of his
Toes, whereby he preserves them sharp for Rapine, extending them only, when he
leaps at the Prey. See somewhat to this purpose in Gesner, out of Pliny.

He is begotten by a Lion, upon a Panther, Aldrovandus.
which has her name from her being so fierce. Yet in Tartary they keep
Leopards tame, and breed them up for hunting of Deer, and other Beasts;
especially for the Great Cham's use. Gesner out of Paulus Venetus.
They are most numerous in Africa and Syria.

The SKULL of a young TIGER. Both as to the Teeth, and otherwise it well
resembles that of a Cat. Except that in the room of the Transvers Suture in a
Cat, there is one in the figure of a great Y; so wonderfully close and firm, as
the Bones seem to be continuous. Except also the outward Sinus's of the lower
Jaw, where the Musculi Temporales and the Mansorii primi are inserted: as
being, rateably, much deeper than in a Cats; and so better fitted to receive
those Muscules which are here also much more robust.

Two CLAVICULAR Teeth or Tusks of a Tiger. A little crooked like those of a Dog
or Cat. Their exerted part very white. By the bow, almost five Inches long.
From the top of their Root, or from the seat of the Gooms, to their apex near
two Inches. An Inch over, and two and about. The Animal to which they belonged,
was killed in Java major, and weighed 435 pounds. A great weight, considering,
that not feeding on Grass, but Flesh only, they have no great Belly.
Aldrovandus says, He saw the Skin of one above five foot long, and therefore
guesses the Animal was almost as big as a Horse. Which this also may well be
thought to have matched.

One of the fore-CLAWS of the same TIGER. It Is somewhat white and half
transparant, very flat, sharp pointed, and extremely hooked; every way in
color and shape like the Claw of a Cat. At the Basis, it is an Inch broad, and
measured by the bow, it is two Inches and long. Note, That as the Bone, whereon
the Claw is set, receives it into a little Fovea or Groove; so is the Bone,
again, by a double Epiphysis, inserted into the Claw: by which means it is more
strongly and immovably contained in its place, for the surer grasping of the
Prey.

Two other lesser CLAWS of a TIGER.

The Tiger excels in swiftness; from whence he has his Arabic Name, as well
as the River called Tigris. As also in Fierceness: and yet in fondness and love
to her Cubs; of which see diverse instances in Gesner. An Impression which
Nature has stamped upon all Creatures, to secure the succession of Generation.
They abound in Mexico, Brasile, and in the East Indies.

A Great STONE taken out of a Dogs Bladder. Given by the most Reverend Seth
Lord Bishop of Sarum. The figure hereof is Oval, but flat on both sides. It Is
above an Inch and thick, two Inches and over, and above three Inches long. Of a
limy or chalky color, and all over rough.

Note, that nitrous spirits dropped here upon, scarce produce any ebullition;
although dropped on the redish Stones, bred in a man's bladder, it produces a
great one. Of a like Stone bred in a Dogs bladder, see a Relation in the Phil.
Trans. N. 84. Taken out of the Roman Journal de Letterati.

The GREAT TAMANDUA; by the People of Brasile, Tamandua-guacu; by the English,
the Great Ant-Bear; Because he feeds upon Ants, and is shagg'd, and
hinderfooted almost like a Bear. He has also a very long and sharp Snout, a
slender Tongue, and extensible to a great length, also a long and brushy Tail:
which are his principal Characters. See him described in John. de Laet, out of
Lerius, in Guliel. Piso, Marggravius, and others. Abbaevillanus, quoted also by
Joh. de Laet, Lib. 16. c. 15.
has given a different Description; and probably a false one.

He catches Ant's by scratching open their subterraneal Hives, and then
thrusting his Tongue into them; which after a while, he draws back into his
mouth laden with the Prey. Barlaei Res Brasil. p. 223.
He uses his Tail for a Cover, which, like a Squirrel, he sometimes spreads
over his whole body. Ibid.


The SKULL of the RIVER-HORSE or HIPPOPOTAMUS. If we respect his Figure, he
were more properly called BUPOTAMUS, or RIVER-OXE. And accordingly the Germans
rightly call him Wasser-Ocks; and the Italians at Constantinople BOMARIN. The
same Animal, which in the Book of Job is called BEHEMOTH; as is solidly proved
by Bochart, in his Hierozoicon. He is almost every where described very falsely.
Aristotle falsely gives him a Maine, like that of a Horse: deluded, it is likely,
by the Name. Kircher Chin. Illustr.
falsely gives him all Horse Teeth. In the Musaeum Romanum, he is described with
double Hoofs like an Ox, and pictured with four or five Claws like a Bear;
neither truly. Bellonius, who saw one alive, but yet very young, was the first
that has given any tolerable Description of him. Yet as to the Teeth, he is
mistaken, comparing them all to those of a Horse: probably because they were
not yet grown. Fab. Colum. lib. de Aquat. and Terrest.
But Columna, who also saw one, and that full grown, has given a most accurate
Description hereof, his principal Characters being these; Four yards and half
long, about two yards high, a yard and half broad. Short legged. Cloven-hoofed;
yet not with two, but four Hoofs. Tailed like a Tortoise. (Or like a Hog,
Solinus and others quoted by Bochart.
which he also twists in the same manner) Head almost like an Ox. His Chaps
wide. His Eyes small. His fore Teeth prodigiously great, being some of them a
foot round about, above of a foot long; as is evident in the Skull here
preserved; and other particulars mentioned by Columna in his copious
Description hereof.

The great prominency of the Os Jug^le is also observable; as being thereby
fitted for the reception of marvelous great and strong Muscules for the drawing
of his Chaps together.

Rings made of his Teeth, are believed to be very effectual against the Cramp.
Charl. On. Zoci.
Those that sell Artificial Teeth, usually make them of the long Teeth of this
Animal, as being supposed the best for this purpose.

His Teeth, says Columna, are so hard, that being struck against Steel, produce
sparks of fire. And thence concludes it probable, That this Animal, by striking
his Teeth one against another, in the night time, might produce the like, and
so seem, as it were, to vomit or breath out fire; a thing attributed to him by
the Ancients. But the error of this Conjecture is double: First in his not
considering, That the fire (could any be produced by striking Steel against
these Teeth) would be struck not out of the Teeth, but out of the Steel. And
next, In that, in truth, no fire can be produced by either striking of these
Teeth one against another, or against Steel it self; as I have tried.

He is found in the Rivers Nile and Bamboth; Fab. Colum. out of Strabo and
Solinus.
as also near the Indian; and in Zaire, the great River of Congo. Mus. Septal.
c. 29. and Linschot. 204.


Several Teeth, both of the upper and nether Jaw of the Hipopotamus. Some so
big, that they seem to have belonged to a much bigger Skull, than this here.

A PISLE said to be that of the HIPPOPOTAMUS. It seems to be only that part of
the Pisle which he exerts. It Is in length, above a foot. The Glans even now it
is dry, above seven Inches about. The other end very slender.

The fore-TOOTH of a BEVIR, so called from FIBER by a transposition of Letters.
It Is three Inches and half long, with the Root, or that part which is fixed in
the Chap. Near half Inch broad. A little crooked, and distorted or writhen.
Triangular, the inner Angle more obtuse. Its end sharpened very obliquely,
after the manner of a Chizel. So that these Teeth may properly be called DENTES
SCALPRARII: wherewith this Animal, as with so many strong Chizels, pairs off
the Barques of Trees for his use.

The TAIL of a CASTOR or BEVIR. Of a peculiar shape, being very broad and flat,
like an Apothecaries Spatula, but much bigger, being ten Inches long, and five
broad. Almost bald, though the Beast very hairy; and cancellated with some
resemblance to the Scales of Fishes. Nature having hereby, as well as in other
respects, marked him for an Amphibious Animal. The Scythians Gesner out of
Pomponius Sabinus.
eat the Tail of a Castor, as a dainty, being sometimes as fat as bacon.

The PISLE-BONE of a CASTOR. So I find it inscribed. It Is very smooth and
solid. In length four Inches and ^/^. Chonical, about 1/^ Inch over at one end,
Inch at the other. At both ends inflected like the letter S.

See the Description of the Animal in Gesner, and others. His parts most
remarkable, are those now described, and the Castor-Bag. His Anatomy see in the
Philosophical Transactions, N. 49. Many strange Stories of his Ingenuity in
Aldrovandus, Wormius, and others. He breeds in Italy, France, and other places:
but our best Castor is from those of Russia. The great and principal use
whereof inwardly, is in Hysterical and Comatose Cases.

An OTTER. Lutra. See him described in Aldrovandus, etc. The Toes of his hinder
feet, for the better swimming, are joined together with a Membrane, as in the
Bevir. From which he differs principally in his Teeth, which are canine; and in
his Tail, which is feline, or a long Taper. So that he may not be unfitly
called Putoreus aquaticus, or the Water Polecat. He makes himself burrows on
the water side, as a Bevir. Is sometimes tamed, Gesner out of Olaus Magnus.
and taught, by nimbly surrounding the Fishes, to drive them into the Net. In
Scandinaria they will bring the Fishes into the very Kitchen to the Cook. See
some Observations of this Animal in the Philos. Trans. N. 124. He breeds every
where.

The QUILLS of a PORCUPINE. Tela Histricis. The Animal is described by
Aldrovandus, and others; but the Quills not so fully. They are very smooth, and
thick as a Goose-quill. With black and whitish portions alternately from end to
end. Their Root ^/^ of an Inch long. Their Point not round, but flat and
two-edged, like that of a Sword, or of some Needles. So that they both bore
with their Point, and cut with their edges at the same instant, whereby they
wound the more surely.

The Porcupine erects his Quills, at his pleasure, as a Peacock does his Tail.
And, partly by stretching his Skin, Gesner out of Solinus.
shoots them at his pursuing Enemy. It may also be noted, That being rooted so
little a way in the Skin (nothing near so deeply as the Quills of Fowls) they
are the more easily ejaculated. They breed in India, Africa, and Ethiopia.

An HEDGHOG, or Urchan. Echinus, Herinaceus. See him described in Aldrovandus.
Anatomized in Bartholine's Acta Medica. The Urchan, though a Viviparous Animal,
yet has his Testicles lying within his Body, as in the Oviparous kind. Arist.
H. Anim. l. 3c. 1.
In the Island Maraguan, in the North of Brasile, are some Urchans very great,
almost as big as Boars. Joh. de Laet. ( out of Abbaevilanus) lib. 16. c. 15.
He makes his Bury with two Entries, to the North and South; and according to
the weather and season, keeps the one stopped up, the other open. Gesner, out of
Plutarch.
The Liver, Stomach, and fat of this Animal are sometimes medically used.

The GREAT SHELL'D HEDGHOG. By the Natives of Brasile, called TATU; By the
Spaniards, ARMADILLO; as Names common to the several species. And by Latin
Authors, Echinus Brasiliensis. This once belonged to the Duke of Holstein. See
the Description of this Species in Clusius, and others.

Those Creatures which are covered with Feathers, Scales, or Shell, says
Aristotle, Histor. Anim. lib. 1. c. 11.
have no Auricula or outward Ear. So that he never saw this Animal; nor many
others now known, and some which he ventures to describe; as appears by those
general Assertions, whereof he is too often guilty.

He gathers himself up, Head, Feet and Tail, within his Shell, as round as a
ball: as Piso has also pictured him. Hist. l. 3. 8. 3.
And this he does, not only when pursued, but also when he sleeps. Unless he be
tied, he will dig out his way under the very walls of a house. Mus. Septal.
For it is his nature to dig himself Buries, as the Coney does; which he does
with very great celerity. Clusius.


For the tenderness, whiteness and delicacy of his Flesh, he is reserved for
Feasts; Barlaeus de Rebus Bras. p. 222.
and therein preferred before either Conies or sucking-Pigs. Guil. Piso.
The Plates of his Shell being powdered and given in a draught of the Decoction
of Sage in the quantity of 3j, provokes sweat; and are a singular remedy
against the Lues Venerea, says Barlaeus. P. 369. out of Franc. Ximines.
If it provokes sweat, it may be used to good purposes, whether it cures that
Disease, or no.

The PIGHEADED ARMADILLO. Tatu Porcinus. Nierembergius has described this
Species, but yet imperfectly. The best of any Wormius; who also omiteth some
particulars, and in others is mistaken.

From his Snout-end to his Tail, about ten Inches and; being younger and lesser
than that of Wormius. His Body four Inches over. His Head an Inch and, and
three Inches long. The end of his Nose scarce half an Inch over, shaped like
that of a Pig; from whence I have taken leave to name it. His Ears not above of
an Inch distant one from the other. His fore-foot two Inches and long, above
Inch over. On which he has four Toes; the two foremost of which are an Inch
long, the other two an Inch. The hinder-foot of equal length, but thicker. On
which there are five Toes; the three foremost, and thickest whereof are an Inch
long, the other two an Inch. His Tail about 11 Inches long, at the Buttocks an
Inch and over, at the end as small as a Shoomakers waxed Thread.

His Head, Back, Sides, Legs, and Tail, are all covered with a shelly Armor.
His Head, with Shells, Scales for the most part, five and six angled. His
Shoulders, with round ones, and lesser, about of an Inch over; betwixt which
other lesser ones are interjected. The Back-piece consists of about ten shell
Plates, joined together by the mediation of as many parallel Skins. Every Plate
is about Inch broad, curiously composed of small triangular or wedgelike
pieces, indented one against another, and pounced or pricked all along their
edges. His Buttocks adorned in the same manner as his Shoulders. His Shell
ending next his Tail, with an Elipsis. The forepart of his Tail is encompassed
with shelly Rings, in number eleven; composed not of triangular, but sixangl'd
and square pieces. The other half with Scales set together, as on his Head. His
nether Buttocks, Belly, Breast, Neck, and Ears are all naked. His Eyes black,
round, and very little; resembling a black Bead of the bigness of a Vetch. His
Grinders in each Chap about twelve. More properly Tunsores; because they are
level and smooth on the top. No thicker than a great Needle. Besides these
Teeth, I find none.

By the help of the aforesaid Plates, and parallel Skins together with the
Muscules that lie under them, this Animal is able, like the Hedgehog, to
gether up himself into a round ball. For the better performance of which
action, Nature has also left his Throath, Neck, Breast and Belly naked. As
also his Ears, that he may turn them more expeditely for the reception of
sounds from every quarter. His Eyes, like those of a Mole, very little, as most
suitable to a Creature living for the most part in the dark, and under ground.
His hinder feet, like a Conies, more strong, for the better working of his
Buries.

Piso Hist. l. 3. S. 3.
makes the action of conglobation peculiar to this species, but very falsely,
as will appear by the following Description.

The WEESLE-HEADED ARMADILLO. Tatu Mustelinus. I find this species no where
described. For that Description of a third species in Clusius, was taken only
from some Picture, no way answering to the Animal before us.

His Head in figure almost like a Weesles, whence I take leave for his Name.
It Is three Inches and long; his Forehead two Inches and broad, and very flat;
the end of his Nose Inch. His Eyes small, of an Inch long. His Ears two Inches
distant one from another; an Inch long. His Body or Trunk 11 Inches long, about
six broad. His Tail 5 long; near the Buttocks an Inch and over, the extremity
^/^ of an Inch. His fore-Leg two Inches and long, broad. On which there are
five Toes; whereof the three foremost are an Inch long, the other two half an
Inch: all with Claws the ^/^ of an Inch. On his hinder foot (which is somewhat
bigger) he has also five Toes, as in the foremost.

His Head, Back, Sides, Legs, and Tail are covered with a shelly Armor. His
Headpiece, as also the shells on his Legs, are composed of roundish Scals, a
of an Inch over. His Neck-piece is a single Plate, composed of little pieces, a
of an Inch square. His Shoulder-piece consists of several Ranks or Rows of
such like square pieces, but not set together by any Articulation, or movable
Conjunction. His Back-piece, reaching also over his Buttocks to his Tail, is
composed of several Plates, in number eighteen, moveably joined together by as
many intermediate Skins. The foremost and greatest of these Plates, consist of
square pieces Inch long, and a broad. The hindermost, of square and round ones
together. The extreme part of the Shell next the Tail, is Parabolick. The fore
part of the Tail is surrounded with six Rings; consisting of little square
pieces. The other half with Scals. His Breast, Belly* and Ears all naked; for
the same purposes, as in the former.

This Species, by the greater number of Plates, seems able to draw,
especially his hinder parts, more roundly inward, than the other.

The FLYING SQUIREL, qu. Sciurel, from Sciurus. Not described, unless by
Scaliger. The color of his Body a dark gray. Of his Tail, almost that of
straw. Lesser than the common Squirel, not above five Inches and from his Nose
end to his Buttocks. His Skin, from his Sides, Thighs and Legs (almost as the
wings of a Bat) is stretched out about an Inch in breadth, or more or less at
his pleasure: by means whereof he leaps further, and alights the more safely;
and is therefore called The flying Squirel. In other respects, like the
Europaean kind. It was sent from Virginia, its breeding place.

He seems to be the same Animal which Scaliger describes under the Name of the
Flying Cat. Exercit. 217. S. 9.

The Squirel, when he has a mind to cross any water for a good Nut-Tree, picks
out, and sits on some light piece of Barque for a Boat, and erecting his Tail
for a Sail, he makes his Voyage. Gesner, out of the Author of the Book, de
Natura Rerum; out of Vincentius, Beluacensis, and Olaus Magnus.


CHAP. II. Of VIVIPAROUS QUADRUPED'S, Particularly such as are BIFIDOUS, and
SOLIDIPEDOUS.
THe LEG of a GREENLAND STAG. It is scarce four Inches long. Nor above d of an
Inch over. Covered all over with very short hair, of the ordinary russet or
reddish brown color. The hoofs somewhat black, inch long, broad, and high.
Given by Mr. Palmer.

The BONES of a STAGS heart. About an inch and long, and broad. Very thin, but
yet hard and solid. They seem to be a help for the stronger and more steady
motion of the Muscules of the heart. Butchers often find the like in the heart
of an Ox; which are easily substituted for the former: and I would as soon
trust the one, as the other.

A STAGS TEARS. A thickened Excretion from the inward Angle of his Eye. In
color and consistence almost like to Mirrh; or Ear-wax that has been long
hardened in the Ear. Of a strong stinking smell, like that of the Animal's
sweat. They are generally affirmed to be sudorifick, and of an Alexipharmick
nature. And if they were as easy to be had, as some Women's, it were worth the
trying.

They are quite a different thing from that little round and hard Bone, which
Scaliger describes Exerc. 112.
by the Name of Lachryma Cervina, and which he affirms to grow in the great
Corner of a Stags Eye to the Bone, after an hundred years old. I doubt a
stranger sight, than the Ludus Secularis; such as no man (but himself) ever
saw, or shall see.

The MUSK DEER. Capreolus Moschi. Gesner reckoning up the Names, tells us, That
the English call him a Musk Cat. But is better at other Languages. He breeds in
China, and the East Indies. Not ill pictured in Calceolarius's Musaeum. That in
Kircher's China Illustrata faulty as to the Snout and Feet. That of Johnston
absurd. Almost every where worse described. That he is a two-horn'd Animal,
says Aldrovandus, all agree, except Simeon Sethi, who says he has but one.
Neither of which is true. The Description likewise given by Scaliger, and out
of him by Chiocco in Calceolarius's Musaeum is false, and very defective. The
best I find is amongst the German Transactions. To which I would have referred
the Reader, but that comparing it with That I had drawn up before I met with
it, I see some differences.

From his Nose end to his Tail, a yard and a foot long. His Head above a foot.
His Neck of a yard. His Forehead three inches broad. His Nose end scarce of an
inch, being very sharp, like that of a Greyhound. His Ears like a Coneys,
about three inches long, and erect. As also his Tail or Scut, which exceeds not
two inches. His fore-Leg a foot and two inches long, taking in Foot and Thigh.
Near an inch over: the Foot deeply cloven; with two fore-Hoofs, an inch and
long, each of an inch over; and two Heels, almost as big, and therefore
conspicuous. His hinder feet are here wanting.

His hair on his Head and Legs about inch long, and rateably small. On his
Belly an inch and long, and somewhat thicker. On his Back and Buttocks three
inches long: thicker in proportion, than in any other Animal, except perhaps
some of the Deer kind, sc. three or four times as thick as Hogs Bristles:
consisting of brown and white portions alternately from the Root to the top. On
the Head and Legs, brown; On the Belly and under the Skut, whitish. As it were
frizled, especially on the Back and Belly, by a kind of undulation. Softer than
in most Animals, and exceeding light and rare. For being split, and viewed with
a Glass, they appear to be made up of little Bladders, like those in the Plume
or Stalk of a Quill: so that it is a thing betwixt a common Hair and a Quill.
On each side his lower Chap, almost under the corners of his mouth, there is a
peculiar Tuft (about of an inch long) of short, thick and hard hairs, or rather
Bristles, of equal length, as in a scrubing-Brush.

The Musk Bladder or Bag is about three inches long, two over, and swelling out
from his Belly one and. Standing before his Groin about as much. I find it cut
open, whereby the observation of its natural Aperture (which I suppose it has
as the Castor-Bag) is prevented.

He has 26 Teeth. In his lower Chap, sixteen; of which there are eight little
Cuters before; behind, four Grinders on each side, rugged and continuous. As
many like Grinders in the upper Jaw. About an inch and from the Nose end, in
the same Jaw, on each side a Tusk, two inches and long, hooked downward, and
backward, and ending in a point. Not round, but flat, the breadth of an inch;
thin, and having a sharp edge behind: so as it may not unfitly be liken'd to a
Sith. There are no Horns.

The Hair of this Animal, by its softness and rarity, are a singular
contrivance of Nature to keep him warm. For all Garments, the softer and rarer
they are, ( caet. par.) they are the warmer. For the same cause, the Hair on
his Back, is also the longest; sc. for the better protection of the Spinalis
Medulla, His two Tusks, by the Figure, appear to serve for fighting partly, and
partly for feeding; by the help whereof he is able either to stub up edible
Roots out of the ground, or to tear off the Barques, or break down the Boughs
of Trees. By the help of his great Ears, he hears his approaching enemy the
further off, to make his flight. So also the Hare, being a fearful Animal, has
the like. Nature has furnished him with great heels, both to enable him to
make the greater leaps, and to light also upon his Feet the more safely, for by
their means, the force of his weight is gradually broken.

Scaliger's mistakes Exercitat. 21.
about this Animal, are principally these two; In saying his Tusks grow out of
his nether Jaw; and in calling the Musk, A postemated Blood. For he might as
well call Civet and Castor the Blood of those Animals that yield them. And if
it were apostemated, it would not be separated from the Flesh, but contiguous
to it: whereas it is plain, that the Musk was here enclosed on all sides, in an
entire Cystis or Bag made by nature for that purpose.

The VELVET HORNS of a Greenland Roe-Buck. They are a yard high, with
numerous, and round Branches. Covered all over with an ashcolour'd hair, a of
an inch long, and standing upright, as the Pile of Velvet.

The HORNS of an Indian Roe-Buck; which the people of Brasile call
Cuguacu-apara. See the Description of the Animal in Marggrarius. His Picture in
Johnston; but under the name of the Capreolus Marinus.

The HORNS of a Roe-Deer of Greenland. They are very little more than an inch
long, and half an inch over. They are pointed at the top, and knobed or
tuberous at the bottom.

Deer in New Mexico so big, Joh. de Laet. from the Observation of Alfonsus de
Benavides.
that they breed them up to draw with, as we do with Oxen and Horses. So
strangely does the Climat alter the Bulk of some Animals. Dear, and they only,
may be supposed to cast their horns, because they have neither a long Tail, as
Oxen; nor so long hair as a Goat or a Ram; by either of which is made a
continual consumption of the same matter, which in Deer goes into the horns.
The horns of Deer, are of all other the fullest of Volatile Salt. Which may
lead us to conjecture of the like nature of his flesh, and blood; and the cause
of his great salacity.

The ROCK-DOE. Ibex foemina. A kind of wild Goat. See the Description of Pliny,
and Bellonius. She breeds chiefly upon the Alps. A Creature of admirable
swiftness. And may probably be that very Species mentioned in the Book of Job.
Chap. 39.
Her horns grow sometimes so far backward, as to reach over her Buttocks.

The HORNS of the WREATHED-Horn-Goat, or Antilope of Barbary, called Capra
Strepsicerotes, and Gazella. See the Description of the Animal in Wormius.
These Horns are about a foot and long. But in Septalius's Musaeum there is one
pair said to be above a yard in length. They are twisted into a kind of spiral
shape, but the Rings which seem to be spiral, are really circular.

The BONE of the ANTILOPES HORN; which is solid, and also spiral or twisted,
but without Rings. Given by Henry Whistler Esquire.

The HORNS of the SYRIAN GOAT; called Capra Mambrina 1. Syriaca being. Mambre,
a Mountain near Hebron; where about, chiefly, this Goat breeds. Gesner in his
Paralypom.
See Gesner's Description of him. And compare it with the Picture he gives,
which seems to be the truer, as to the horns. His Ears are so long, Gesnet
ibid.
as to reach almost to the ground. A sufficient supplement for the shortness of
his horns: being not above two inches and long, and a little crooked backward,
almost like a Dogs Tooth.

The HORNS of a DOG-GOAT. I find them inscribed, The horns of a Dog. Johnston
gives the figure of the Animal, without any Description. According to that
figure, he is headed like a Dog, and of the bigness of a Tumbler. But footed,
and horned like a Goat. To whose also the horns here preserved are like in
color, and somewhat near in shape: but nothing near so big; being not much
above two inches long. Not only the horns themselves, but also the bones
whereon they stand, are hollow to the top. They were sent from a certain
Kingdom near China.

The HORNS of a HARE; so I find them inscribed. Although it is probable, that
they are the horns of a small kind of German Deer. Yet Wormius says, There
are horned-Hares in Saxony. See also Gesner of the same. Johnston gives the
Picture, without a Descripton. This pair, once belonged to the Prince Elector
of Saxony.

A pair of very great English Rams HORNS.

The HORNS of a Spanish-Ram. In length, of a yard. The Tips a yard distant.
Somewhat flat, wrinkled, and twisted, as those of an ordinary Ram.

The HORNS of a MUSCOVY-Ram. I meet no where with the Description of the
Animal, or these Horns. He seems to be of kin to the Hircus Cotilardicus,
which Johnston has pictured. These horns are black: and somewhat wrinkled.
Consist of four Branches: The two greater whereof are a foot long, and as thick
as an ordinary Rams, very strait, standing in the form of the letter V, or like
the legs of a pair of Compasses, and a little writhen. The two lesser are seven
inches long, not so thick, winding downward, and inward one toward another, in
the form of two half Moons. The points of all four very blunt.

A very great HORN of the ROCK-BUCK, or of the Ibexmas. In shape almost like a
bended Crossbow. By the string, of a yard long; but by the bow, about an Eln.
It was formerly tipp'd with silver, and kept in a Gentleman's house, and showed
(to some special Friends) for the Claw of a Griffin. See the figure hereof in
Moscardus's Musaeum.

The HORNS of a WILD BULL; called Bubalus sive Buffalus. They are broad at the
Roots, but grow very sharp of a sudden; and bended inwards about the middle; so
that the Tips are not above two inches distant. See the Animal described in
Bellonius, and others. He is much bigger than the Europaean Bull. This kind
breeds most in Asia. But they are also kept in Italy, in their Cities. In India
they sell the Milk of the Female about the streets, as they do Cows Milk here.
The Leather called Buff, is made of the Hyde. These Horns were brought from
Africa.

The HORNS of the BUNCH-BAK'D BULL. Cornua Bisontis. This pair belongs to
that Species, which has a great Maine. These, contrary to the former, stand
wide, and especial upwards, their Tips being an Eln distant. See the
Description of the Animal in Aldrovandus, his Picture in Johnston. He is
swifter than any other Bull, and untameable. He breeds in Lithuania. To the
horns is joined the forepart of the skull, together with the skin, which is
very thick and tough. The skin of any Bulls Forehead, either for its toughness,
or other cause, is the only part of the Hyde made use of by Horners, whereupon
they shave their Horns (which they take out of a Tub of warm water by them) to
fit them for Lamphorns.

The TAIL of an Indian COW. The Male is called Bonasus. The hairs hereof are
greyish. Above a yard and ^/^ long. Yet almost as soft and fine as a Woman's.
The Cow is said to be worshipped by the people that live near the River Ganges.

A little STONE out of an Oxes Liver. Inscribed Tetraedrum inventum in Hepate
Bovis. But I find it broken into several pieces. It is just of a liver-colour.
And is composed, as the Bezoar Stone, of several crusts or soft shells one over
or within another.

A MONSTROUS CALF with two heads. Each head is a little less than usual; the
rest of the parts according to Nature.

The SKIN of a CALF with two heads, tanned with the hair on. There is a very
strange story of a Monstrous Calf in the Philos. Trans. N. 1. and N. 2.
compared together: communicated by the Honorable Mr. Boil.

The TUSK of a Wild BOAR. It winds about almost into a perfect Ring or Hoop;
only is a little writhen. In measuring by the ambit, it is long or round about a
foot and two inches. Its basis an inch over. Almost all the way triangular,
especially toward the point.

Another BOAR-TUSK, somewhat slenderer, and of a semiannular Figure.

The wild Boar breeds in Helvetia, especially near the Alps. In Barbados very
great. Ligon History of Barbado^.
says, he saw there one so big, that when his head was off, and his entrails
taken out, weighed 400 l. It was well observed by Aristotle (as to those Beasts
which he had seen) that no one was horned and tusked too: Histor. Animal. lib.
2. c. 1.
the superfluous parts of the blood proper for their production, not being
sufficient to feed them both.

The SKULL of the HORNED HOG. By the people of the Island Bouro, not far from
Amboina, he is called Baby Roussa. Barthol. Hist. Cent. 2.
See the Picture hereof in Bartholine, Ibid. 2.
taken in Java, from whence he received it. As also the Description, though but
imperfect. See likewise Guilielmus Piso, In Boutius's Hist. N. Ind. Orient. l.
5. c. 9.
who gives a figure somewhat different, making him slenderer and shaped in Body
like to a Deer. But his Description seems to be taken out of Bartholine. His
principal Characters are these, About as big as a Stag, shouted and tailed like
a Boar, footed like a Goat: besides what is observable in the skull, which I
shall now particularly describe.

It is a foot long, seven Inches high, and about five over. The Snout scarce
two. The Teeth are 32. In the upper Jaw, four Cuters; in the nether, six. In
each Jaw, ten Grinders. In the lower Jaw, two Tusks, one on each side, like
those of a Boar, standing outerly, an inch behind the Cuters; near their Root,
of an inch over, sharp-pointed, hooked very much backward; by the bow, four
inches long.

On his upper Jaw, he has two Horns, of the same hardness and substance with
the two great Teeth now described: and Bartholine Histor. Cent. 2.
calls them Teeth. Yet are they not Teeth, but Horns; because they are not, as
all Teeth, even the Tusks of an Elephant, fixed in the Jaw with their Roots
upward, but downward: and so their Alveoli are not open downward within the
Mouth, but upward upon the top of the snout: where these Horns bore or pierce
the flesh and skin, as the Teeth do the Gooms. Yet being two, they stand not in
the middle, as in the Rhinoceros, but on the sides of the snout, sc. behind the
Cuters about two inches. Near their Roots about half inch over, ending in a
sharp point, bended upward and backward like a fish-hook, by the bow about a
foot long.

Piso In Bont. Hist. N. Ind. Orient. l. 5. c. 9.
describing of it, says, That in his nether Jaw (his upper Jaw he describes
after) there are two great Tusks which stand upright, and bore through his
snout ( Rostrumque perforantes): which is a senseless mistake. Bartholine
indeed says of the Horns (which he calls the Teeth) of the upper Jaw, --
prodeunt ex superiori Maxilla carnem Rostri perforantes: which Piso
transcribing, mistakes, and feigns as great an absurdity, as if Nature had put
a Padlock or Bolt upon the Creatures Mouth.

Aristotle, as was before noted, said well, as to the Animals he had seen, That
no one has both Tusks and Horns. But of his fault in affirming too generally,
this Animal is not the only instance, by many. The reason why this has both,
may be, because neither of them are very great, and his Horns, proportionably
to what they are in others, are very little. Besides that he is covered with
hair, and not, as the Boar, with Bristles, which probably spend more upon the
same matter, which in other Creatures makes the Horns. For Bristles seem to be
nothing else but a Horn split into a multitude of little ones.

This Creature is said Piso in Bont.
to breed only in the Island Bouro. Yet that which the Brasilians call the
Tajacuguitas, Joh. de Laet, out of Lerius.
may be the same. As also Pigafeta's Porcus Quadricornis. There are Swine,
says he, Cited by Aldrovandus.
in the Philippick Islands, with two, three, and four Horns. He might mistake
the two Tusks for Horns; and from those which he says had but two or three,
they might be violently broken off.

Another SKULL of the BABY ROUSSA. It is altogether like the former, saving
that the Tusks and Horns are not so crooked. So that one seems to be of the
elder, or the Male, the other of the younger, or else the Female. Both the
Natives, and others that live amongst them, esteem this Animal a delicate sort
of Venison. Piso in Bontius.


The SKIN of a young RHINOCEROS, composed indifferently to the shape of the
Animal. In the Description whereof Jacobus Bontius Histor. Not. Ind. Orient.
comes the nearest to the truth. Yet is he very short and defective. To whose
therefore, as far as may be by this Skin, I shall add a better.

It Is a yard long, and almost a foot over; his head nine inches long, almost
eight over at the top. His Snout broadish, as in a Calf. His Eyes little, as
those of a Hog, about of an inch long. They stand low, not much more than three
inches above his Nose end. His Ears also like a Hogs. His Legs, as of the
Hippopotamus, rateably short; about ten inches long. His Tail, five and; flat,
as that of the Castor; but not so broad, near the Buttocks an inch and, at the
end an inch.

The said Skin is every where thick, and very hard; excepting only his Ears
which are softer, and extreme thin. It has about ten Plicae or Folds; two
under the nether Jaw, one on the Breast, in the figure of the letter V, on the
Neck one on each side, one between the Shoulders semicircular, on the Back two
transversly extended to the bottom of the sides, with two more strait ones,
carried obliquely on the Buttocks.

The lower part of the Forehead and Snout covered with a kind of hard Crust.
His Ears naked and smooth. All the other parts rough with round scaly Crusts;
on the Back, Sides, and Belly, lesser, near a of an inch over; on the nether
Chap and Shoulders, bigger; on his Buttocks and Legs, the biggest, about an
inch over. His Hair is black, short, and fine. So few, that there are not many
more than scales or shells; growing for the most part, out of the center of the
shell; so that he is almost naked. His Dock is also naked on both sides, but on
the edges there grows a considerable quantity of longer and thicker Hair. The
Animal being very young, had no Horn, nor so much as any sign of it.

The Rhinoceros, says Bontius, Histor. Not.
is near as big as an Elephant, saving that he is not so tall. He will lick a
Man to death, Ibid.
by raking away the flesh to the Bone with his rough and sharp Tongue.

In Piso's Figure, which he has added to Bontius's Description, and which, he
says, was taken from the life, the Eyes are placed very low, as they are also
in this Skin. But the Cloven-Feet, in the same Picture, I find not here:
peradventure, the Skin not being well taken off the Feet.

In the time of Domitian the Emperor, there was one so big, as to toss not
only a Bear, but a Bull upon his Horn. Mart. Epigr. 22. and Epigr. 9. lib. 1.
But what Martial means, speaking of the Rhinoceros,

Namque gravem gemino Cornu sic extulis Ursum, etc.

I do not well understand. The Figure given by Piso, as above, represents but
one Horn only. Neither does Bontius (who says he has seen great numbers of
them both in houses and in the woods) describe or mention any more than one
Horn, And those who do speak of another, yet make it a very small one, and not
over against the other, but on the forepart of his back, and so in a place
where it is immovable, and can no way be made use of for the tossing up of any
thing, as the other on his Nose.

The Rhinoceros breeds not in India, Linschot p. 88.
but in Bengala and Patane, where they much frequent the River Ganges.

A piece of a great RHINOCEROS-SKIN, tanned. It Is wonderful hard, and thick,
about inch; exceeding that of any Land Animal which I have seen.

The HORN of a RHINOCEROS. It once belonged to the Duke of Holsteine. Although
Bontius describes the Animal the best of any before him, yet neither he, nor
others describe the Horn to any purpose. It Is in color and smoothness like
those of a Bull. Almost a yard long. At the base, above half a foot over; and
there surrounded with a Garland of black and stubby Bristles. Sharp-pointed. A
little crooked backwards, like a Cocks Spur. Quite through solid. An instance
contrary to that Assertion of Aristotle, De Partib. Animal. l. 3. c. 2.
(...).

Another HORN of a RHINOCEROS, as big as that now described. Given by Sir
Robert Southwell, present Ambassador to the Prince Elector of Brandenburge.

A THIRD, almost as big as the former.

A FOURTH, a little one, about a foot long.

The Rhinoceros fights the Elephant with his Horn, and sometimes overcomes him.
In Septalius's Musaeum there are several Vessels mentioned to be made out of
this Horn, as well as diverse others. The Rhinocerous Horn, in India, as also
his Teeth, Claws, Flesh, Skin, Blood, yea Dung and Piss, are much esteemed, and
used against Poison, and many Diseases; and sold at great rates. Linsch. p. 88.
Yet some for an hundred times as much, as others of the same color and
bigness; for some difference which the Indians (only) discern betwixt them.
Ibid.


The TAIL of a great RHINOCEROS. Not well described by Bontius. The Dock is
about inch thick, and two inches broad, like an Apothecaries Spatule. Of what
length the whole, is uncertain, this being only part of it, though it looks as
if cut off near the Buttock; it is about nine inches, black, and very rough. On
the two edges, and there only, grow also very black and shining hairs, a foot
long, stubborn, and of the thickness of a smaller Shoomakers Thread. Yet not
round, as other hair, but rather flatish; like so many little pieces of
Whale-Bone.

A SPIRAL or WREATHED TUSK of an ELEPHANT. Presented from the Royal
African-Company by Thomas Crispe Esquire. It Is about an Ell long. At the base, a
foot about. From the thin edges whereof, it is chonically hollow to the depth
(or height) of near a yard. It is twisted or wreathed from the bottom to the
top with three Circumvolutions, standing between two strait lines. It Is also
furrowed by the length. Yet the furrows surround it not, as in the horn of the
Sea-Unicorn; but run parallel therewith. Neither is it round, as the said Horn,
but somewhat flat. The Top very blunt.

Pausanias (cited by Gesner) affirms, and seems to speak it as a thing well
known, That the Tusks of Elephants, which he calls, and uses arguments to
prove them Horns, may, by the help of fire, like Cows horns, be reduced to any
shape. Whether this be naturally twisted, or by art, I will not determine.
Terzagi in Septalius's Musaeum mentions though not a Spiral, yet strait Tusk of
an Elephant, two yards high, and 160 pounds in weight.

The LEG BONE of an ELEPHANT. It was brought out of Syria for the Thigh Bone of
a Giant. But the proportion which the thickness bears to the length of the
Bone, shows it to be the Bone not of a Man, but an Elephant. For the Leg-Bone
is usually about ^/^ of an inch over: and so its traverse Area contains about
(49) square eighths of an inch. But this Bone is above four inches over, in the
transverse Area whereof therefore, are contained about (1088) square eighths of
an inch. Which number (1088) being divided by (49) gives (22) for the Quotient.
So that it is two and twenty times as thick as the Leg-Bone of a Man: I mean,
the transverse Area of the one contains that of the other 22 times. Yet is it
but three times as long; and therefore should contain the same but about nine
times, were it the Leg-Bone of a Man. It Is about a yard and ^/^ foot long, and
above a foot about in the slenderest part. And the shape of it, shows it to
have belonged to the Leg, and not the Thigh. The Elephant to which it did
belong, might be about five yards high.

Another LEG-BONE of an ELEPHANT, scarce so long, but of equal thickness. Given
by Sir Thomas Brown of Norwich.

Elephants are brought into Europe out of Ceylan, Sumatra, Cochin, Siam,
Bontam, Melinda, etc. But they breed most in the Kingdoms of Aracan and Pegu.
Linchol. p. 29. etc.
In the Island of Ceylon, most docile. The Aethiopians behind Mosambique eat
them, and sell their Teeth. The Indians use them to draw, and ship their Goods.
In Winter, when it begins to rain, they are altogether mad and ungovernable,
and so continue from April to September, chained to some Tree; after that, they
become tame and serviceable again. Ibid.
See more of the nature, and ingenuity; and of the way of hunting and taming
them, in Linschotus and Tavernere. East. Ind. Voyage.


One of the GRINDERS of an ELEPHANT. He has four of these Teeth in each Jaw,
wherewith he grinds his meat. This here is above a foot long. But the exerted
part, or that part which stands above the Goomes, is but seven inches in
length, and three in breadth. It Is not above an inch above the Goomes, but
fastened within the Jaw a foot, where deepest. The said exerted part looks like
eight or nine Rows of Teeth, three, four, and five in a Row, all coalescent.
The sides all along waved. The furthermost Roots like the folds of an old set
Ruff. It weighs above eleven pounds and Haver-dupoyse.

ANOTHER of the same Teeth, somewhat lesser.

A THIRD, having part of it broken off.

The Elephant, in my mind, has some affinity with the Boar. Both are
Taper-Tail'd, hunch-back'd, little-Ey'd, armed with Tusks, have the nether Chap
sharp before, and a moveable Snout; the Elephants Proboscis being but a long
Snout, and the Boars Snout a short Proboscis.

The HOOF of a Solidungulous Animal. It was brought from Angola. Perhaps of a
kind of Zebra there, answering to the Indian described by Pigafeta. It Is much
about the shape of a Horse's, but not so big; two inches and broad, two inches
long, and as much in height. Somewhat thick and strong. For the greatest part,
blackish; but just before yellowish, and half transparent. Within this is
contained another young one (together with its enclosed Bone) all over of a
yellowish color. The Zebra, Indica, Aldrovandus.
is in all his parts like a Mule, saving that it is not barren.

Another strange HOOF of a Solidungulous Animal. It is of a blackish brown and
opacous color. Very thin, like that of a Calf. But rateably much broader than
in other Animals, being not much above an Inch over foreward, yet expanded
side-ways two inches and a.

Another HOOF of the former kind, a little less, blacker, and altogether
opacous.

APPENDIX. Of certain BALLS found in the Stomachs of diverse Beasts.
A NAKED and round HAIRY BALL; almost three Inches over, taken out of the
Stomach of a Calf.

Another somewhat Oval, and more compact.

Several other lesser ones, and with the hairs more loosely composed.

Another, with the outward parts of the hair not complicated, as in the former,
but standing parallel, and somewhat winding, as in the Crown of a Man's head.

Two HAIRY BALLS, SPHAERICAL, and INCRUSTATED. About two inches Diametre,
covered with a smooth and very thin Crust, of the color of Occidental Bezoar,
having neither taste or smell, nor stirring at all, upon the effusion of Acids.

A HAIRY BALL, incrustated, and FLAT. Taken out of the stomach of a Bull in
Brasile. It Is very smooth, and of the color of Oriental Bezoar. Figured just
like a Bowl. Somewhat above two inches thick, and three, over. Ferranti
Imperato Lib. ult.
has another like it. If you scrape a little of the Crust off, and pour spirit
of Nitre upon it, it makes a conspicuous bullition, as it does upon Bezoar. See
the Author's Discourse of the Luctation arising from the mixture of Bodies.


Another BALL, in figure, color, and substance, like the former; but bigger,
being above three inches Diametre. It was taken out of the stomach of a Cow.

Another with the like Incrustation, but of an Oval Figure.

A FIBROUS BALL. Consisting, not of Hair, but for the most part of the fibers
of Plants. Perfectly Sphaerical. An inch and Diametre. Covered with a brown,
and very rough Crust. The like substance being also mixed with the most
intimate parts of the Ball.

Another like Ball, but somewhat less.

Half a FIBROUS BALL taken out of the stomach of a Sheep. Two inches over, and
a little flat. It consists of most fine herby Threads or Fibers, short, and
very closely compacted. Covered with a black, shining, and most thin Cuticle. A
piece hereof fired, burns like Match-cord, all away to ashes.

These Balls, especially those of Hair, we may suppose to be made by the motion
of the stomach, which in these Creatures is very strong, and frequent: by which
motion the Hair is wrought and compacted together, as Wool is, by the Workmans
hand, in the making of a Hat.

CHAP. III. Of OVIPAROUS QUADRUPED'S.
A Femal LAND-TORTOIS. Testudo terrestris foemina. Usually described, but no
where fully, nor without errors. This here is eight inches long, and five
broad. The Head an inch and long, almost as broad; in shape somewhat like a
Toads. The Orbits of the Eyes very large, almost inch over; a of an inch behind
the Snout. The lower Chap is received by a groove into the upper. The Tail
three inches long, and sharp-pointed. The Feet two inches and, and above inch
over. The fore-Feet have five very short Toes, with Claws about inch long. The
hinder feet have but four Toes, with somewhat bigger Claws.

The Head, Back and Belly, have all bony Covers, faced or over-laid with
shells. The head and back-pieces blackish, with citrine or straw-colour'd
specks sprinkled up and down upon them. The back-piece unequal, and almost Oval.
On the sides, for the length of two inches as it were doubled inwards, and
joined to the Belly-piece. It Is cancellated with little squares on the Margin;
on the top of the back, sexangularly; and with the largest Area's between. The
Belly-piece is party-colored black and citrine, almost flat; but turned up a
little at the ends. Cancellated in the middle with squares, with triangles
before, and behind with Hyperbolick lines. The Feet are covered with small
round Scales, the Tail with square ones. He breeds in the Deserts of Africa.

Three little LAND-TORTOISES of the same kind.

Another little LAND-TORTOISE, of kin to the former. It Is somewhat rounder.

A lesser LAND-TORTOISE, almost circular and ridged on the back.

A great CHEQUERD TORTOISE-SHELL. Testa Testellata major. It was sent from
Madagascar. I find the Animal no where described or figured. It is above half
oval; being of all that I ever saw, the most concave; a foot long, eight inches
over, and almost six inches high.

The Unequal is curiously wrought with black and whitish pieces, alternately
wedged in, one against another, and notched, as it were, with transvers
Incisions. Those near the Margines and on the sides are composed into several
Pyramidal Area's, or great Triangles, whose Bases are about two inches broad.
On the Back, into sexangular ones, each of them unequal. On the sides, and quite
behind, the Shell is carried somewhat inward. Before, and hinderly, the edges
are toothed, and bended outward and upward. The inward edges are covered with
shelly Plates above an inch and broad.

The Concave is composed of six and forty Bones. Along the middle of the Back,
are twelve, all, except the foremost and the four last, almost square. Next to
these, are eight on each side, like to so many contiguous Ribs; together with
two lesser square Bones before: Next to these, eight more, as it were,
under-Ribs, on each side. To the twelve middlemost Bones, the Ribs are joined
by an alternate commissure, so as one of them answers to the halfs of two Ribs,
and vice versa. To these, the under-Ribs, in a wonderful manner, scil. by a
branched Suture or Indenture. For the great Teeth of the under-Ribs, being
first inserted into those of the upper-Ribs; the Indenture is afterward
repeated, by lesser Teeth, out of the sides of the great ones. The Belly-piece
is here wanting.

Besides the most elegant ordering of the Work in the Unequal, there are
three-things chiefly observable, which serve for the greater strength of the
Shell. That is to say, The Convexity of the several Area's on the Back, the
branched Sutures, and the Alternate commissures of the Bones. Answerable to the
Rule of Nature, in a Humane Skull: and of Art, in the laying of Stones in
Buildings; and in covering of broader Vaults, not with one Arch, but several
lesser ones, for the greater strength.

A lesser CHECKERED SHELL. Perhaps Stellata Wormii, See his Musaeum.
or a kin to it. The Unequal work is composed of black and citrine pieces,
cancellated, and transversly notched; ten, eleven, or twelve of them meeting in
a square, and rugged center; each looking like a Star surrounded with Rays. The
several Area's rise up into a convexity somewhat greater, than in the Shell
above described. Just before the Tail, the edges are bended a little upward;
over the Tail, downward. The Belly-piece is joined to the Back-piece for the
length of two inches and, with the edges turned upward. The middle of it flat,
streaked, and cancellated; the hinder part ends in a double broad point.

Two more CHECKERED SHELLS of the same Species; saving, That here are not so
great a number of Rays to each Star.

Another of the same; excepting, that the several arched pieces are not so
high, as in the former.

A CHEQUER'D-SHELL, from Suranam. I think no where described, or figured,
unless perhaps by Moschardus. The unequal work is composed of black and citrine
pieces, in the Margin, of a Pyramidal or wedged Figure, oppositely set, and
with transverse Notches: amongst which there are also little square, rugged,
and citrine pieces intermixed. All the rest, which are also black and citrine,
are six times as big, adorned not with transverse but parallel Notches. Neither
are they Radiated, but several of the same kind contiguous side to side. They
are composed into Area's almost flat: the centres whereof are also rugged, but
much bigger than in the Shell last described. The Belly-piece is also less
unequal.

Another of the same Species.

Another CHECKERED SHELL from Suranam, of kin to the last described. The edges
of this are round about, excepting before, turned up outward. The Back also is
less unequal; the Belly, more deep.

Another of the same Species.

A CHECKERED SHELL from Virginia. It Is in figure somewhat like the femal
Tortoise first described. Saving that it is more unequal, and divided into
Area's also somewhat unequal, and with transvers Furrows or Notches. It Is also
near the Tail, turned up outward; but the hindermost part bended inward.

Another Shell of the same Species.

Another, like the first described, excepting also, That it is more unequal; and
instead of specks, has long streaks, and great blotches.

A SCALY TORTOISE SHELL. It seems to be of the Lutarious kind. I find it not
described, or figured. Above a foot long, ten inches broad, unequal to the
height of 3. The unequal, all along the middle, high ridg'd. Composed of Scales,
very smooth, part colored, of a brownish red and citrine; in the utmost edge
lesser, and almost square, but with acute Angles prolonged toward the Tail,
and toward the Head doubled downwards. The rest are five, six, and eight times
bigger, set alternately, as the Scales in Fishes, or Slate-work upon a house.
The Concave is strengthened with a Backbone, and eight Ribs, obliquely
appendent, on each side. The Belly-piece is here wanting.

A SEA-TORTOISE. Curiously figured by Besler. Fascicul. Rariorum.
Described by Aldrovandus and others. He differs from the Land- Tortoise,
chiefly, in having a more rude, and softer shell, and Feet rather like the
Finns of a Fish, as proper to swim with. As also in Bulk. In the Brasilian
shore, said to be big enough, for one sometimes to dine fourscore men. Mus.
Roman.
In the Indian-Sea so big, Ibid.
that the shells serve the Natives for Boats. In the Island Cuba so great, that
they will creep along with five men upon their Backs. Joh. de Laet.


He squirts the water out at his Nostrils, in the same manner as the Dolphin
does at his Spout. Rondelet
In Generation, the embraces of the Male and Female continue for a whole Lunary
month. Trapham's Disc. of Jam. Cap. 4.
They take them, by turning them on their Backs with staves, in which posture
they lie, till they are fetched away. Lig. Hist. of Barbados.
As they lie on their Backs, they will sometimes fetch deep sighs, and shed
abundance of Tears. Trapham, ut sup.
They kill them, by laying them on their backs, and so ripping them up round
about where the Back and Belly-pieces meet. Lig. Hist.
They abound in the Caribdy and Lucayick Islands, and in Jamaica, As also in
the Red Sea.

Of their Nature, Generation, and inward Parts, see some Observations in the
Philos. Transactions. N. 27. and N. 36.
The flesh hereof makes a most pleasant jelly. Trapham's Disc. of Jam.
The Callapee, i. e. the Belly-part so called, baked, is an excellent Dish.
Ibid.


The Legs, says Schroder out of Solenander, applied to the part affected, are
a most experienced Remedy in the Gout. In Turkey, the Shells are used for
Bucklers. In Tabrobana, to cover their houses. Aelianus.
In China, Mus. Romans
to make Girdles for Noble men.

A LITTLE SEA-TORTOISE, taken out of the Egg.

The SHELL of a Sea- Tortoise.

The HEAD of a SEA-TORTOISE. It Is large, and so shows the make of the Mouth the
better: where the sharp and toothed edge of the nether Chap, strikes into a
Canale cut into the Bone of the upper; and the toothed protuberance of the
upper, into a Canale in the nether: by which means he easily sheers the Grass,
or other Plants, whereon he feeds. Given by Mr. John Short.

The SKULL of a SEA-TORTOISE, Nine inches long. The head of a Sea- Tortoise a
foot long, is but about two inches. Therefore the Tortoise to which this skull
belonged, was a yard and half in length.

Three other SKULS about the same bigness. One whereof, given by Henry Whistler
Esquire.

Two pieces of the SHELL of a very great TORTOISE, each with a Rib fixed in it.
Given by Sir Robert Southwell.

The HEART of a SEA-TORTOISE. It is about as big as a Lambs. Herein both the
single Ventricle, and two Auricles, are all plainly visible. The Hearts of all
great Animals, says Aristotle, De Part. Anim. lib. 2. c. 4.
have three Ventricles; of lesser, two; of all, at least one. One would a
little wonder, how so observing a man, should discover so many mistakes, in so
few words.

The PISLE of a SEA-TORTOISE. It Is fourteen inches long, and two and round
about. In substance like a Bulls. There are three more about the same bigness.
See the great efficacy attributed hereto by Ligon, Hist. of Barbad. p. 118.
in curing him of two Fits of the Stone.

An EGG of a SEA-TORTOISE. It Is very white, and Sphaerical, which I find no
Author distinctly to say, but only to be like the Eggs of Fowls. About the
bigness of an Hand-Ball. The shell rather thinner and softer than of a Hen's.
She lays them in the sand, where they lie till they are hatched. Sometimes
above a hundred at a breed.

The CHAMAELEON. By Wormius well described. Johnston's Figure, especially as to
the feet, very false. A most curious one in Calceolarius. As also in Besler,
saving that his eyes are drawn somewhat too little. Of the skin it may be
noted, that it is every where rough, as it were, with little round blisters or
knobs; on his Head and Back, greater; on his Legs, Sides and Belly, lesser; of
the bigness of Silkworms Eggs. As also, that his hinder Feet are thicker than
the fore-Feet: and the Heels or hinder Toes as long again, as the other;
whereas in the fore-Feet, they are all of a length. The shape of his hinder
Feet is therefore the better fitted to assist him in the climbing of Trees; the
Heels being like strong Leavers to hoist him up. And the make of his Skin, for
the changeableness of his Colors; which seems to depend on the falling or
swelling of the said Knobs; whereby the light, receiving different Reflections,
produces different Colors. Of his Colors, says Scaliger, Exercit. 196.
Sect. 4.
from the Observation of Joh. Landius, it is not so properly said, that they
are changed, but only the several Species highten'd or deepen'd. He has a long
Tail, as a Lizard, but slenderer: which, Panarolus.
as he descends from a Tree, he laps round about the Boughs, to keep himself
from falling. His Feet also are all made where with to take fast hold.

Of the inward Parts, see the Philos. Trans. N. 49. But especially Dominicus
Panarolus, who together with his Medicinal Observations, has published the
Description and Anatomy hereof. Amongst other particulars, the Muscular
Membrane of the Eye, by which singly all those motions are performed, which in
other Animals require six, and in some seven Muscules, is remarkable. As also
the distinct continuation of the Optique Nerves from their Original to each
Eye; whereby the uniform or conjunct motion of both his Eyes is not necessary,
as in other Creatures; but he is able to move one upward or backward, and the
other downward or forward, or any other way, at the same time. No less the
fabric of his Tongue; which being hollow from end to end, with a string
running through the hollow, fastened behind to the Os hyoides, before to its
extremity, it darts out and contracts it self in an instant: and with a Viscous
substance at the end, catches the Prey, which are Flys and other Infects, as we
use to do Birds with Limetwigs. Thus far Panarolus.

In the High-hoe, and other Birds of this kind, there is a peculiar Cystis,
wherein a Viscous matter, like that above mentioned, is stored, and a Pipe
deriving it thence into the Mouth; the Description whereof I may hereafter
publish. I suppose therefore, that upon further examination, the like
Contrivance will be found in a Chamaeleon.

It may be noted, That Panarolus, about the beginning of his Description, calls
the Chamaeleon a slow Creature: Yet says afterward, (toward the end) that he
climbs Trees so wonderfully swift, as if he flew. He is not therefore so
properly slow, as perhaps sullen and humerous.

Bartholine Hist. Cent. 2.
has also the Anatomy of this Animal, but transcribes it all out of Panarolus.
In one particular much forgets himself, saying about the beginning of his
Discourse, that the Chamaeleon has very great Lungs; and in the end, that they
are but little.

A young brown CHAMAELEON.

A third, with black, yellow, and ash color mixed together.

A CROCODILE, about two yards and long. He differs not much from a Lizard;
chiefly in his Bulk, and the hardness of his Skin, which on his Back has
Scales proportionably hard and thick. In Paname there are some an hundred feet
long; as is affirmed both by Joh. de Lopez, Hist. Ind. l. 6. c. 1.
and Joh. de Leri. Cap. 10.
In the Musaeum Romanum, there is a Tragical Relation of a very great one that
devoured a Virgin, Cap. 6. The same Animal which in the Book of Job is called
the Leviathan, and has been commonly taken to be the Whale; but falsely, as
Bochart has demonstrated. He is tolerably well described by most; and
curiously figured by Besler. He breeds in diverse places in both the Indies, as
well as in Egypt.

Nature, says Aristotle, has denied a Tongue to this Animal. Which Sir Thomas
Brown takes notice of as a Vulgar Error. On the hinder half of his Tail he has
firm leathern upright Finns, wherewith he governs himself, as a Fish, in
swimming.

He is esteemed good meat, not only by the Natives in Brasile, but also by the
Hollanders there. Gulielmus Piso.
He is taken thus; They fasten a thick long Rope to some Tree by the Waterside,
and to the other end, a strong iron Hook, which they bait with a Weather. Scal.
Exer. 196. Sect. 5.


In Brasile, they hunt them much for the sake of their Fat, which they commonly
and successively apply to their Wounds, when bitten by him. Gul. Piso.
As also for his Testicles, which smell like Ointment, and which they sell very
dear. Ibid.
In New Spain, the Kernels under their Throat, smell like Musk, and are a
present Remedy against burning Fevers. Joh. de Laet. l. 5. c. 4. out of Franc.
Ximenex.
The Stomach dried in the Sun, powdered, and taken to the quantity of j, is an
admirable Diuretic, and brings away Stones from the Reins and Bladder. Ibid.
The same taken to the quantity of a spoonful in the Morning, after Dinner, and
before Supper, or as often as the Patient can bear it, is an excellent Remedy
for the Dropsy. Ibid.


A CROCODILE, which, with part of the Tail that is broken off, is about a yard
long. Perhaps that lesser sort which breeds in Brasile, whereof Linschoten
says, That they will come into the Houses, and let the Children play with them
harmlesly.

Another young CROCODILE not a foot long.

The SKELETON of a CROCODILE. Given by Sir Robert Southwell; to whom it was
sent from the East Indies. It Is about four yards and three quarters long. The
Head about two feet. The Neck, from the hinder part of the Head, almost a foot
and. The Trunk, from the fore-Ribs to the Tail, four feet. The Tail, seven.
From the top of the Back to the Breast, a foot and 1/^ high.

The Orbites of the Eyes proportionably little; what ever Piso says of his
great Eyes.

The Articulations of the lower Jaw with the upper; and of the Occiput with the
foremost Vertebra of the Neck; are here both made in the same manner, as in
other Quadrupeds: notwithstanding the Tradition of his moving the upper Jaw.

The Teeth are about threescore, thirty in each Jaw. All of them Claviculares,
or Peg-Teeth, not much unlike the Tusks of a Mastiff; and scarce bigger:
notwithstanding that Aristotle calls them great Teeth, (...). Hist. An. l. 2.
c. 10.
And yet, whereas a Dog has but four Tusks, or exerted Teeth, in this Animal
being all of that figure, their smallness, with respect to so great a Head, is
fully compensated by their number. For the most part, those that are new and
not worn, are toothed, like a small Saw, on their sides.

The Vertebrae, in all, sixty. Those of the Neck, are seven, as in a Man. The
first whereof, in a Man called the Atlas, has a Processus in the figure of the
Epiglottis. The other six, have each one Processus or Prominent Part, which is
long, broad, sharp, and upright: and two that are transverse, and short; to
which are joined, by a Cartilage, so many Ossa mucronata, one shorter than
another from the Head toward the Trunk. But the Vertebrae, one lesser than
another, from the Trunk toward the Head.

The Vertebrae of the Back, nineteen; that is, three sevens running one into
another. Each of which has three Prominent Parts, which are sharp, broad, and
long; one perpendicular, and two that are transverse, or at right angles.

The Ribs 24, twelve on each side. Seven of which, have each of them double
Cartilages, that is, one after another, appendent to them.

The fore part of the Sternum is plainly bony. The hinder part, cartilaginous;
shaped like the Os Hyoides in a Man.

The Vertebrae of the Tail, are 34; or (if you add the last of the Trunk as
common to both) 35; that is seven times seven. The first fourteen, have each
three Prominent Parts, like those of the Vertebrae in the Back. The next
nineteen, have only an upright Processus. The last of all, has none. The first
14, are double, in number to those of the Neck, the next 19, are equal to those
of the Back; the last answers to the Head. To all the Vertebrae of the Tail,
except the last, are also subjoyned so many Ossa Mucronata, directly opposite
to the upright Processus.

The Shoulder-Blades are two on each side; each foot long.

The Bones of the fore-Foot, 27. The Thigh Bone near a foot long; an inch and
over. The Leg-Bones, two; each a little above a foot long; and of equal
thickness, sc. about of an inch over. The Foot strictly so called, the length
of the Thigh. The Bones of the Pedium, four. The Fingers or Toes, five. The
inmost, the thickest, like a Thumb. From thence, the third, the longest. The
Bones of the Thumb, three; of the next Finger, four; of the next, five; of the
two outmost, four; in all 20. All armed with black Claws, a little crooked, and
not much above an inch long.

The Hip-Bones are three; each of them a foot long.

The Bones of the hinder Foot, 24. The Thigh Bone above a foot long, and an
inch and over. The Leg Bones almost eight inches long. The inmost, above an
inch over; the other, but an inch. The Foot, so called, the length of the
Thigh. The Bones of the Pedium, four. The Toes, four; whereof the inmost, the
greatest; the third, the longest. The Bones of the great Toe, three; of the
next, four; of the third and fourth, five. The Claws somewhat bigger than in
the fore-Foot.

Amongst other things worthy of note, the senselesness of the tradition of the
Crocodiles moving his upper Jaw, is plain from the structure of the Bones, that
is, the Articulation only of the Occiput with the Neck, and of the nether Jaw
with the upper, as above said.

The first Author of it was Aristotle, in his Fourth Book de Partibus
Animalium, Cap. 11. And thus much is true, not only of this Creature, but of
all others, which have a long Head, and a wide Rictus, that when they open
their Mouths, they seem to move both Jaws; as both the Viper, and the Lizard.
And for the same reason, Columna Lib. de Aquatil.
might say as much of the Hippopotamus, that he moves the upper Jaw, as the
Crocodile. So all Birds, especially with long Bills, show the contemporary
motion of both the Mandibulae; the Musculi splenii pulling back the Occiput,
and so a little raising the upper, while the Musculi Digastrici pull the other
down. But that this motion was not meant by Aristotle, appears in his First
Book de Hist. Anim, c. 11. and lib. 3. c. 7. where he says more plainly, That
of all other Animals, only the Crocodile moves the upper Jaw. So that he
speaks of it, as a motion strange and peculiar; as if the upper Mandible did
make an Articulation with the Cranium: contrary to what is here seen. And if we
will hear Piso, who probably speaks Aristotle's meaning, as plainly as he does
his own, he goes further, and says, Hist. N. lib. 5.
That the Crocodile does not only move his upper Jaw, but that his nether Jaw
is immovable. Than which Assertion, to one that has any competent knowledge
in Anatomy, and sees the Head and lower Jaw of this Animal articulated in the
same way, as in other Animals, nothing can appear more ridiculous.

The WINDPIPE of a CROCODILE. It is almost an inch and over. Composed of
Cartilaginous Rings, not broken off, with a Membrane betwixt their ends, as in
most Quadrupedes, but entire.

The GREEN LIZARD. It was brought from the West Indies. See the Description
hereof in Gesner, and others.

The SENEMBI, a Lizard so called in Brasile. Also called Igvana. Curiously
figured by Besler. Well described by Marggrarius, and after him, Wormius.
Saving as to the odd structure of the hinder Foot. The inmost Toe is joined to
the next, by a Membrane, for the length of an inch and. This to the third, by a
like Membrane for the length of an inch. This again to the fourth, for the
length of an inch and. The fourth, almost loose from the last. The Picture
also, commonly given, falsely represents the fore-Leg equal to the hinder, which
is far longer and thicker.

Another SENEMBI lesser than the former.

The SWIFT, or SPOTTED LIZARD. Commonly called STELLIO, or the STARRY-LIZARD;
but not properly, the Stars, in the Figure given by Aldrovandus and others,
being feigned. For the Animal is not marked with Starry, but with round Spots.
The lesser are sprinkled up and down. The greater composed into about 13 half
Rings or Girdles. On the Back the spots are also more distinct, than on the
Tail. They breed in Thracia, Syria, and Sicily. The Powder hereof being taken,
is believed by some plurimum stimulare Venerem.

The SWAPTAIL LIZARD. Uromastix, vel Caudiverbera. Called also CORDILUS. In
Calceolarius's Musaeum there is a curious Picture hereof, under the Name of
CROCODILUS TERRESTRIS. As also in Besler. Gesner, from Thomas Erastus, has
very copiously described him, especially his Tail.

The BUGELUGEY. Of kin to the former. Aldrovandus and Johnston give only his
Figure, with the Name of Lacertus Indicus. He is distinguished from other
Lizards, chiefly, by the Scales on his Belly, which, like those of a Crocodile,
are very great; sc. five or six times bigger than those on his back. It was
brought from Africa. This Lizard, says Wormius, moves his upper Jaw, as the
Crocodile. Which, in what sense it is false and absurd, I have above showed.

The SCALY-LIZARD. He is well pictured in Besler. As also in the Musaeum of
Olearius. Aldrovandus gives only a rude half draught, and without any
Description, as well as the former. Clusius only says, He remembers that he
had seen one of them. Bontius Hist. N. l. 5. c. 8.
has his Picture, but a very bad one. Elsewhere I find it not. He has also
described him, but very defectively, and with several mistakes.

He is a yard and long. His Head from his Nose-end to his fore-Feet not above
three inches. He has no Neck. His Trunk, from the Forelegs to the hinder, not
above ten inches and. His Tail exceeding long, sc. a yard and half a quarter.
His Head above two inches over. His Nose near an Inch. His Trunk almost four.
His Tail moderately taper'd, and ending obtusely. The under part of the Tail is
plain or flat; the upper part, hyperbolick. His Forelegs, contrary to what
they are in other Lizards, are longer than the hinder; these, not above three
inches and; those, above four. The Claws also of the fore-Feet are longer; the
longest about an inch; those of the hinder, but an inch. He has only four Toes
and a Heel, both before and behind.

He is all over, except his Throat, Belly, the lower part of his fore-Leg, and
the inward part of his hinder, covered with Scales, very thick, and in hardness
answering to the most solid Bone. The basis of each Scale (perhaps through age)
of a blackish yellow, the Cone betwixt yellow and straw-colour, or like old
Ivory. Adorned with Striae proceeding from the base to the Cone. Set together,
with an alternate respect, as the Scales of Fishes. In the Trunk, there are 10
or 11 filed to each Rank. Toward the end of the Tail, but five. The greatest,
near two inches broad; the least, a quarter of an inch. On his Forehead, Back,
and fore part of his Tail, they are flat. But on the edges of the Tail, they
are doubled into an acute Angle, the one half of each standing on the Unequal,
the other on the flat of the Tail.

He is said to be a most tame and innocent Creature. Which is very likely;
according to the way of Nature, which usually leaves dangerous Animals, as
Serpents, and other hurtful Lizards, naked: but defends the Bodies of fearful
and innocent Creatures, as the Tortoise, the Tatu, and the like, with Armor.

Johannes Lerus, quoted by Linschoten, mentions a white scaly Lizard in
Brasile, as thick as a Man's middle, and five or six feet long. Perhaps a bigger
of the same kind with this above described.

There is a sort of little Lizard, Ligon's Hist. of Barbad. p. 62.
which when he swells with anger, like the Chamaeleon, changes his color,
from green to a kind of Hair-colour or Russet. The Eggs of some, if not of most
Lizards, eat very pleasantly. And in Linschot. Lib. 2. 248.
Brasile there are a sort of Water- Lizards five feet long, which being flayed
and sodden, for whiteness, sweetness, and tenderness, surpass all other meats.

A LAND-SALAMANDER. Described by Aldrovandus, and others. Much like a Lizard;
but his Mouth is shorter, and broader, more like a Toads: and seldom exceeds
a foot in length.

Bartholine tells of one that was kept alive in a Glass nine Months without
food. Hist. 50. Cent. 2.


The LITTLE COMMON EFT. He has a thicker Trunk, a blunt Oval Snout, his hinder
feet are very distant from the foremost.

The SLENDER EFT. His Head is rateably very great; his Snout also longer and
sharper than in the former. His Trunk slenderer and much less bellied. His
hinder Legs also stand nearer to the foremost.

The THICK-TAIL'D EFT. His Head is here wanting. His Tail is not so slender or
tapering as in both the former, but ends more obtusely. And his hinder feet
stand yet nearer to his foremost.

The SCINK. Described by Wormius, and others. Curiously pictured by Besler.
Like a Lizard; saving that he has a shorter Neck and Tail, short Legs, a flat
and broad Foot like a Hand, with very short Toes, and without any Claws. The
Powder hereof is said, Potenter Venerem stimulare.

SECT. III. OF SERPENTS.
A SNAKE preserved in Spirit of Wine. In Barbados there are some about a yard
and half long, that Ligon's Hist. of Barbad. p. 61.
will slide up the perpendicular Wall of a House out of one Room into another.
A greater agility without feet, than we see in most Creatures that have four.
Much helped, as it should seem, by their great length; whereby they can, in an
instant, reduce themselves into so many more undulations for their better
assent. In Brasile, says Joh. de Laet, Lib. 15. c. 14.
there are Snakes found sometimes 25 or 30 feet long. The Indians, in some
places, eat Snakes very greedily.

The greater SLOW-WORM; Caecilia. Called also the BLIND-WORM; so commonly
thought to be, because of the littleness of his Eyes. His Skin also is very
smooth and glistering. His Teeth very small. Of a lighter color than the
Adder; which are his principal Notes. See the Descriptions of Gesner and
Aldrovandus. The Female is Viviparous, as well as the Viper. Bellonius says,
that out of one, he has taken above forty young ones.

The VIPER. Vipera, qu. Vivipera; because she only among Serpents has been
thought to bring forth her young Ones. All Animals, says Aristotle, Hist.
Anim. l. 1. c. 11.
that bring forth their young, have also external Ears: yet knew that an Adder
which has no Auricle is Viviparous. And this, indeed, he observes with a good
Remark, which is, That she first lays her Eggs within her Womb; Histor. Anim.
l. 6. c. 34.
wherein they are afterward hatched. Which had been a fair Introduction to
him, to have observed, That all other Viviparous Animals are Oviparous within
themselves. And it is much, that the hint has not been long since taken from
the Raya, and some other Fishes. The Viper, says Sir Thomas Pseudod. Epidem.
Brown, from the experience of credible Persons, in case of fear, receives her
young Ones into her Mouth; which being over, they return thence again.

The chief use of Vipers is for the Medicine called Theriaca Andromachi. But
there are also diverse Medicines made out of them: as Oleum per Infusionem, Sal
Viperarum Spiritus, Oleum Stillatitium, Volatile, Essentia, Vinum Viperinum,
Fixum, Alcohol Burgravii, Schroderi. Pharmac.
Theriacale, Pulvis Viper': Germanus. Praevotius.



Of the nature of the Viper, see the Observations of Bourdelot, Redi, and
Charas. See also the Phil. Trans. N. 87.

The SLOUGH of an ENGLISH VIPER. That is, the Cuticula. They cast it off twice
every year, sc. at Spring and Fall. The separation begins at the Head; and is
finished in the space of 24 hours. From all parts so entire, that the very
Tunica Adnata, or outward Skin of the Eye it self is here plainly to be seen.

A Gelly made hereof, is ordered to be used for the making up of the compounded
Powder of Crabs Claws into Balls. Which way of preservation, were no less
proper for diverse other Cordial Powders; especially such as are Aromatic, and
whose Virtue lies in parts that are of themselves volatile and easily
evaporable. Of which kind, there are none in this Powder.

The SKIN of a BOIGUACU; a Serpent so called, by the Natives of Brasile. As far
as can now be seen, it is mixed of ash color with cancellated work of brown;
somewhat after the manner, as in diverse other Indian Serpents. Toward the Head
it is somewhat slenderer, than about the middle; where it is in compass, half a
yard. It Is almost seven yards long. See the Description of the Serpent in Piso.
He is of all other kinds the greatest. But not so venomous, as are many others.
I have now at home, says Bontius, the Skin of a Serpent (of this kind) twelve
yards long, which I killed in a Wood in Java. And, that in that Kindgom, was
one taken thirteen yards and long, with a Boar in her Belly; of which, being
boiled, the general D. Petrus, and others did eat a part. Hist. Not. l. 5. c. 3.
And Joh. de Laet. reports, Lib. 14. c. 1.
That in Rio de la Plata, a Province of the West Indies, there are some quatuor
Orgyas longi, and so big, as to swallow a Stagg whole, horns and all. Of such
kind of Serpents, see also Marcus Paulus Venetus, and Athan. Kircher. China
Illustrata.


This Serpent, says Piso, will thrust his Tail up a Man's Fundament, and gird
him about the middle till he kills him. Hist. N.
Yet is it probable, that they communicate no Venime by their Tail, but only
are so cunning as to use that way, whereby to take the faster hold. Not only
the Natives, but the Hollanders that live amongst them, make them part of their
food. Ibid.


The SKIN of the IBIBABOCA. Another Serpent of Brasile, so called by the people
there. It Is a foot round about, and almost three yards and half long. His
colors, originally, are white, black, and red. Joh. de Laet. from J. Lerius.
Of all the kinds of Serpents, his Bite is the most pernicious, yet works the
slowest. Ibid.
It Is healed by a Cataplasme made of the Head of the Serpent. Piso.


Two SKINS of the same kind, about eight feet long; and with their colors
elegantly checkered, as in the former.

The SKIN of a RATTLE-SNAKE; a Serpent so called, from the Rattle at the end of
his Tail. By the Natives of Brasile, BOICININGA. Well described by Franciscus
Ximenez; and from him by Joh. de Laet. But his Rattle is no where well
pictured. Neither does Ximenez, or any other Author observe the true structure
of it.

It is composed of about 8, 10, or 12, some times, as this before us, of
sixteen white Bones, but very hollow, thin, hard, and dry, and therefore
brittle, almost like Glass, and very sonorous. They are also all very near of
the same bulk; and of the self same Figure, almost like the Os Sacrum in a Man.
For although the last of all only, seems to have a kind of a Ridged Tail or
Epiphysis adjoined to it, yet have every one of them the like; so, as the Tail
of every uppermost Bone, runs within two of the Bones below it. By which
Artifice, they have not only a moveable coherence, but also make a more
multiplied sound, each Bone hitting against two others at the same time.

By this Rattle, those that travel through the Fields, or along the Highways,
are warned to avoid coming near so noxious a Creature. For those that are
bitten with him, sometimes die miserably in 24 hours; their whole body cleaving
into chops. Franc, Ximenez quoted by Joh. de Laet. l. 5. c. 15.
They commonly bury the Limb that is bitten, and so keep it, till the pain
wears off. Bontius.
By thrusting the end of his Tail, says Piso, up into a Man's Fundament, he
kills him immediately. But he seems here falsely to attribute that to this
Serpent, which he does much more probably to the BOIGUACU. For this is but a
lesser sort, seldom exceeding a yard and, and therefore cannot do it by girding
a Man about. And for there being any Venime in the Rattle, it was, I believe,
hardly ever imagined by any other man. Their progressive motion, says Joh.
Lerius, is so swift, that they seem to fly. Which makes the Rattle to be so
much the more useful, in giving timely notice of their approach. Some of the
largest are in Panuco, a Province of Mexico. It Is said, that the smell of
Dittany kills him. See the Phil. Trans. N. 3. and N. 4.


It is affirmed by Marggrarius and others, that as many years old as the
Serpent is, the Rattle has so many joints. Which if it be true, then they will
live at least sixteen years, some Rattles (as this here) consisting of sixteen
joints. Which makes the Tradition very suspicious.

About fourteen more SKINS of the RATTLESNAKE. Some of them are all over of a
dark-brown. Others checkered with a brown, upon ash color.

Several RATTLES of the same Serpent; most of them composed of above ten joints.

A POWDER said to be taken out of a Serpents Head. It Is as white as Starch, and
tastless. Makes a noise between the Teeth, like that Mineral called Agaricus
Mineralis. Acid, and especially Nitrous Spirits dropped upon it, produces a
considerable effervescence.

The SERPENT-STONE. Said by some, to be factitious, By others, to be a Natural
Animal Stone. Particularly by Sir Philiberto Vernatti, an observing Person, to
be taken out of the Head of a Serpent in Java, from whence it was sent by him
hither. It seems to be that called Bulgolda, which Boethius, out of Ferdinando
Lopez, says is taken out of the Head of an Animal, which the Indians call
Bulgoldalf. Whether it be natural or artificial, I shall here describe it.

It Is about of an inch long, above over, and thick; flat and almost orbicular,
like a Cowslip-Cake, or other like Confection. All round about very smooth, and
shining, for the greater part, black; but with some ash color intermixed; so
as to look like a River-pebble. But of a substance soft and friable, like the
Oriental Bezoar. And in like manner, as the same Stone, is easily dissolved
with any Nitrous Spirit dropped upon it, but not with other Acids. Which is to
me an argument that it grows within some Animal: it being the nature of most
Animal-Stones, to be dissoluble only by Nitrous Spirits.

Sir Philiberto Philosoph. Trans. N. 6.
amongst other passages of this Stone, says, That if it be laid to a Wound,
made by any Venomous Creature, it is said to stick to it, and so to draw away
all the Venime. And the like I have heard affirmed of the same Stone by a
Physician of Note in this City.

SECT. IV. OF BIRDS.
CHAP. I. Of Land-Fowls, and of their Parts.
A Great BAT or FLITTER-MOUSE of the WEST INDIES. Vespertilio Americ. The Bat
stands in the Rear of Beasts, and in the Front of Birds. I meet with no full
Description of this kind. From his Nose-end to his Anus almost a foot. His Body
almost three inches over. His Head two inches and long, one and over. His Nose
like a Dogs, the end about inch broad. His Ears extreme thin, about of an inch
long, and as broad; an inch and asunder. His Eyes of an inch long. He has six
and thirty Teeth. In each Chap before, are four little ones, roundish, blunt,
and almost flat-ended; rather Tunsores, than Incisores. The next are large,
shaped like the Tusks of a Dog, two in each Chap. Next to these, two more of
the first kind in each Chap. And last of all twenty Grinders.

The Wings stretched out, are two or three inches above a yard wide from end to
end. The upper part of the Arm that governs them, about four inches long, and
fleshy, sc. an inch over. The next, or the Cubitus also four inches long,
tendinous, and slender, not above of an inch thick. The Fingers are five, or
four and a Thumb. Each has three Bones. The first Bone of the Forefinger or
Thumb, is above an inch long; the middlemost, an inch and; the last very short,
sheathed within a sharp and crooked Claw, of an inch long, almost like that of
a Hawk. The first Bone of the next Finger, is above three inches long; the
middlemost, but of an inch; the last, about an inch; having a very little Claw.
The first Bone of the third or middle Finger, is four inches long; the
middlemost, three; the last, three and. The first of the fourth, is also four
inches long; the middlemost, two and; the last, as much. The first of the fifth
or utmost Finger, is also four inches long; the middlemost, two; the last, as
many.

His Thigh an inch and long, and fleshy, yet not much above inch over. His Leg
two inches long, tendinous, and about of an inch thick. The Pedium, above inch
long. The Toes, five; each of them about an inch and long; and each having a
Claw, like that on his Thumb. The two inmost, have each two Bones; the other
have three.

The Membrane which makes the Wings, excepting only his Head, Neck, two joints
of his Thumb and the bottom of his Feet, is spread from the top of his Back,
over all his Parts.

He has no Tail.

The shape and number of his Teeth, show him to be a Voracious Creature. The
Claws of his Thumb and Feet, that he is also Rapacious. The structure of his
Wings is admirable. For were they to be always stretched out, they were (as to
the length of the Bones) the most irregular and ill contrived of any thing that
ever was seen. But being made to open and shut, show the greater Artifice, in
having the Bones of such a length, as might serve for all the Positions betwixt
being quite open and quite close. The particular explication whereof,
notwithstanding, cannot be made, without examining the several Muscules, by
which all the said positions are determined.

Another WEST-INDIAN BAT of the same kind. There are many of them in Brasile.
The Chinese esteem of them as a delicate sort of meat. Kirch. Chin. Illustr.
Barlaeus mentions a Water-Bat, which the Natives of Brasile call Guacucua. Res
Brasil. p. 224.
In the same Island, there is a sort of great Bat, that as Men lie asleep with
their Legs naked, will suck their blood at a Wound so gently made, as not to
awake them: whereby they are oftentimes in danger of bleeding to death. Piso's
Hist. N.


The HEAD of an OSTRICH. Caput Struthiocameli. He is accurately described in
Mr. Willughby's Ornithologia. His Head, like that of a Goose; he has great
thick black Hairs on his upper Eyelid, as in Quadrupedes; his Tail standing in
a Bunch, and not expanded, as in other Birds; his Wings very short and little;
and his Foot not divided into three or four Toes, as in other Birds, but into
two only; which are his principal Characters.

The Ostrich is the greatest of Birds; when he holds up his Head and Neck, near
two Else high. Willugh. Orn.
In the Kingdom of Abasia, they are as big as Asses. Gesner out of Paulus Ven.
The American, are lesser than those of Africa. Barl. 223.


He flys not, because his Wings are short. But with their help, is able to
outrun a Horse. Gesner out of Pliny.
He is a gregarious Bird. His Feathers are made use of for the adorning of
Hats, Caps, etc. for making of Women's Fans, and the like. Willugh Ornithol
The Stomach of an Ostrich, says Schroder, taken in power, wonderfully
dissolves the Stone.. Pharmac*
It Is probable it may bring away Gravel.

The Leg of an OSTRICH. It Is near half a yard long without the Foot. The Foot,
no less than ten inches, as long as of most men. The Leg-Bone in the smallest
part four inches about, and in the Joint nine inches: which is thicker than in
most men. It has but one triangular Claw; of that substance, as to look liker
a little Hoof, and seems rather harder than that of a Horse.

The CASSOWARY. Emen. Accurately described by Clusius, and pictured in
Willughby's Ornithologia. His Bill, almost like that of a Gooses, but not so
broad. Next to the Ostrich, he is the greatest of Birds; and in Bulk little
inferior, but not near so tall. On the top of his Head, has a horny Crown,
which falls off when he moulters, and grows again with the Feathers. His Wings
extreme small. The plumage of his Feathers so little, that he seems at a
distance to be hairy. Has three Toes without a Heel, as the Bustard. Has no
Tail: which are his chief Marquis. He is brought from Tabrobana, the Molucca
Islands, and others of the East Indies.

The HEAD of a CASSOWARY. The Bill is longer, but not so broad, and so the
mouth not so wide, as of an Ostrich.

The LEG of a CASSOWARY. It Is almost as long, and as thick, as that of an
Ostrich.

The HEAD of the SEA-EAGLE or OSPREY. Caput Haljaeti.

The CLAWS of the same BIRD. See the full Description of the Bird in
Willughby's Ornithologia.

The Eagle breeds abundantly on the Mountains Taurus and Caucasus. Not only
comes into England, Willugh. Ornithol.
but is said to build yearly on the Rocks of Snowdon in North Wales. In Ibid.
the Year 1668. on the Peke in Darbyshire, was found an Eagles Nest, flat or
level, and about two Else square; together with a young one in it.

The BIRD of PARADISE. By the Natives of the Molucca Islands (where they breed,
and by whom they are worshipped,) called MANUCODIATA, i. e. The Bird of God.
Because they know not from whence they come; and for their beauty. From his
swift flight to and again, the Indians, in their Language, call him a Swallow.
Marggravius reckons up several sorts of them, and describes them all. The least
kind, Clusius calls the King. Because (as he says, from the report of the
Dutch Mariners) as they fly together, about 30 or 40 in a flock, he always
keeps higher than the rest.) Besides the smallness of his Body, in respect to
what his copious Plumes show him; the long Feathers which grow upon his sides
under his Wings, and are extended thence a great way beyond his Tail; and the
two long Strings or Quills which grow upon his Rump, do most remarkably
distinguish him from all other Birds. He is elegantly figured in Calceolarius's
Musaeum, with the Title of Chamaeleon aereus.

Antonius Pigafeta was the first that brought this Bird, or any certain
knowledge of him into Europe. Clusius.
Before which, he was believed, not only by the Vulgar, but by Naturalists,
(amongst whom Scaliger See Exerc. 228. (...). 2.
was one) that they had no Legs, but always flew up and down suspended in the
Air, by the help of their Wings and Tail spread all abroad. According to which
silly fancy, he is also pictured in Gesner.

Agreeable to this conceit, it is likewise commonly thought, and by Georgius de
sepibus, who describes the Musaeum Romanum, is affirmed, that those two long
Quills that grow upon the top of this Birds Rump, being at his pleasure twined
or wrapped round about the boughs of Trees, serve quietly to suspend him.
Whereas, as Mr. Wray has also rightly observed, Willoughb. Ornith.
not being Muscular, it is impossible they should be of any such use. His
hooked Claws show him to be a Bird of Prey; and he ordinarily flys at
Green-Finches, and other little Birds, and feeds on them. Bont. H. N. l. 5.
The Tarnacenses shoot them down with Darts. Ibid.


Two more MANUCODIATA'S of the same Species.

The GREAT RED and BLEW PARROT. Psittacus Erythrocyaneus. All the great kind
called also MACCAW and Cockatoone. It was sent hither from Java. See his
Description in Willoughby's Ornithologia. There are of these greater, the
middlemost called Popinjayes, and the lesser called Perroqueets, in all above
twenty sorts. Their more remarkable Parts, are their hooked Bills, whereby they
catch hold of Boughs, and help to raise themselves up in the climbing of Trees.
Their broad, thick, and muscular Tongues, for which they are called (...) and
by which they are the better enabled to speak, and to roll their meat from side
to side under the edges of their Bills: and their Feet, which, like those of
the Woodpecker, have two Toes before and two behind, with which they bring
their meat to their mouths; and that after an odd way, sc. by turning their
foot outward. Willoughb. Ornith.


The Parret only, says Scaliger, Exercit. 236. S. 1.
with the Crocodile, moves the upper Jaw: Yet the same is affirmed of the
Hippopotamus, by Columna; of the Lizard, by Wormius; and of the Phaenicopter,
by Cardan. Which confirms what I have said under the Description of the
Skeleton of a Crocodile, and in what sense it is absurdly said of them all. In
their Cheeks, says Piso, Hist. N. I. Occid.
in each Nostril, and on the top of their Heads, in a certain Tumor, there
lies, about August, a thick Worm; all which, in a little time, fall out of
their own accord, without any sign left of their ever being there. They are a
gregarious sort of Birds. Bart. 118.
They breed very numerously in both the Indies. In Barbados, fly in flocks like
Clouds. In Calechut they are forced to set people to watch their Rice-Fields,
least they should spoil them. Gesner out of Ludov. Romanus.
The flesh of their Chickens eats just like a Pigeon. Piso.


The BILL of a BIRD, by the people of Brasile, called COA. It is of a
blackish-brown mixed with ash color. In shape, and bigness, very like that of
the least sort of Parret called Perroqueets. He is said to feed upon all manner
of venomous things: and to be himself a Cordial. Which, if true, yet is it not
to be much admired. For if by venomous things, be meant Animals that have a
venomous bite; Do we not know that the flesh of such Animals, as of Vipers, is
esteemed a Cordial? Or is it understood of things that are Tota substantia
Venomous, or at least malignant to humane Bodies, do not Ducks feed on living
Toads? Again, what is a Cordial? are not many things so called merely from
their collateral effect? Carduus Benedictus it self, and other things given as
such, Nature does certainly abhor: but being able to cast them off, by Vomit or
Sweat, and so perhaps something else that offends her together with them, they
are therefore called Cordials.

A young LINET which being first embowel'd, has been preserved sound and
entire, in rectified Spirit of Wine, for the space of 17 years. Given by the
Honorable Mr. Boil. Who, so far as I know, was the first that made trial of
preserving Animals this way. An Experiment of much use. As for the preserving
of all sorts of Worms, Caterpillars, and other soft Insects in their natural
bulk and shape, which otherwise shrink up, so as nothing can be observed of
their parts after they are dead. So also to keep the Guts, or other soft parts
of Animals, fit for often repeated Inspections. And had the Kings or Physicians
of Egypt thought on it, in my Opinion, it had been a much better way of making
an everlasting Mummy.

A young CHICKEN emboweled and put into rectified Oil of Turpentine, at the
same time, with the Linet, and preserved sound; Only there is a little sedement
at the bottom of the Glass.

The HEAD of the HUMGUM, or Horned-Crow; called RHINOCEROS Avis. It was brought
from the East Indies. It Is of kin to that described by Bontius. Mr. Willoughby
gives the Picture, but no Description. It has a Crown on the top of the Bill,
of the same color and substance therewith, and prolonged in the shape of a
Horn, to the length of of a foot. Yet not bended upward, as in that of Bontius,
but standing horizontal. It is spongy behind, and hollow before; so that it is
very light, although so big. The Bird described by Bontius, and probably this
also, breeds in Bantam and Molucca.

The nether BEAK of the RHINOCEROS Bird. If we believe, says Georg. de
Sepibus, Musaeum Roman.
the Reverend Fathers, which are used to go to the Indies; the Bill of this
Bird is a most precious Antidote against all manner of Poisons. For which cause
also, the Indian Kings preserve it as a great Treasure, and account it a Royal
Present.

The HEAD of the CROWNED CROW Mr. Willughby pictures it. But I meet with the
Description hereof no where. It Is almost a foot long. The Skull not above two
inches and ^/^ long, above two broad, and as high. The Bill likewise as broad.
The nether Beak an inch and high, one forked Bone, in the shape of the Os
Hyoides in a Bird, hooked or bended downward, the edges indented like a Saw;
but with the points of the Teeth directed forward. The upper Beak an inch and
high, consists of one concamerated Bone, bended downwards, and Toothed as the
other. To this and the Skull, grows a square horny-Crown, about six inches
long, three and over, and one and high, spongy behind, and hollow before. The
Nostrils, which are about of an inch wide, open between the Eye and the top of
the Bill.

The Teeth of the Bill, not being made to point inward, but forward or outward,
plainly shows, that they serve not, as they do in some other Birds, to hold
fast the Prey; but rather, for some purpose or other, to perform the use of a
Saw.

The HEAD of the TOUCAN, so called by the Indians. From the noise he makes,
Aracari. Piso.
And Pica Brasiliensis, for the likeness of both their Tails. Will. Orn.
In the Musaeum Romanum, this and the Rhinoceros Avis, are confounded. They
breed not only in Brasile, but also in Guajana, and other places. This Bill was
sent from Peru. See the Description of the Bird in Mr. Willughby's
Ornithologia. That which is most remarkable of him, is, that his Bill is almost
as big as his Body, which is not much bigger than that of a Blackbird. The
Bill and Head I shall describe more fully.

They are in length eight inches. The Skull but a little above an inch and
square. The upper Beak, which is prominent above the Skull near 1/^ an inch, is
almost two inches high, and an inch and ^/^ over; consisting of one not hollow,
but very spongy Bone, as the Crown of the Indian Crow, or rather more; with a
ridge all along the top, which is blunt behind, and very sharp before; the end
or point hooked down like that of an Eagle; and both the edges Toothed, as in
the Indian Crow. The nether Beak near an inch and 1/^ over, one and high,
hollowed, ridged underneath, and Toothed as the upper.

The Nostrils stand strangely, in a place altogether unusual, sc. on the top of
the Head, behind the top of the Bill. The Teeth serve, doubtless, for the same
purpose, as in the Humgum, and the Indian Crow.

Within his Bill, says Piso, Lib. 3. Sect. 2.
in the place of the Tongue, is contained a moveable Feather or black Quill.
Were it really such, it were most absurd to think it any other, than one there
by chance. But if a Tongue, or natural Part, it might have some such odd
figure, as to have some resemblance to the stump of a Feather.

The BILL of the FLEMING of Suranam. Very like to that of a Toucan, saving,
that it is not so sharp-ridged; neither is it spongy within, but perfectly
hollow. So that the Bird seems to be an other Species of the Toucan kind.

The LEG of a DODO. Called Cygnus Cucullatus, by Nierembergius; by Clusius,
Gallus Gallinaceus Peregrinus; by Bontius called Dronte; who says, That by
some it is called (in Dutch) Dod-aers. Largely described in Mr. Willughby's
Ornithol. out of Clusius and others. He is more especially distinguished from
other Birds by the Membranous Hood on his Head, the greatness and strength of
his Bill, the littleness of his Wings, his bunchy Tail, and the shortness of
his Legs. Abating his Head and Legs, he seems to be much like an Ostrich; to
which also he comes near, as to the bigness of his Body. He breeds in Mauris's
Island. The Leg here preserved is covered with a reddish yellow Scale. Not much
above four inches long; yet above five in thickness, or round about the Joints:
wherein, though it be inferior to that of an Ostrich or a Cassoary, yet joined
with its shortness, may render it of almost equal strength.

The LEG, as it seems, of a certain MONSTROUS BIRD. It Is half a foot long. Two
inches and ^/4 about. Has five Toes. The second from the inmost, the longest.
The fourth, the shortest. The fifth or utmost the thickest. It has a very
great black Spur, yet not crooked as a Cocks, but strait, and sharp-pointed,
two inches long, and next the Leg an inch and about.

A KING-FISHER, Ispida. Described by Mr. Willughby and others.

Two HEADS of the GROSSBEAK called Coccothraustes. See the Description of the
Bird in Mr. Willughby's Ornith. There is a most curious Picture hereof in Dr.
Charlton's Onomasticon Zoic. They breed in Germany and Italy: but rarely, and
not except in Winter, seen in England. They will crack Cherry-stones, and
Olive-stones too (which are as hard again) very easily; Willughb. Or nith.
his Bill and Temporal Muscules are so strong.

The HUMING BIRD. By the Brasilians, called Guanumbi. By Clusius, Ourissia, i.
e. a Sunbeam; because of his radiant-colours. By the Spaniards, Tomineius;
because J. de Laet, l. 15. c. 7. out of J. Lerius, as he from Oviedus.
one of them with its Neast, weighs but two Tomino's, a weight so called by the
Spaniards, consisting of 12 Grains. Marggravius reckons up and describes nine
sorts of them.

Yet whether he has taken in this amongst them, seems doubtful. It is of the
greater kind. From the point of his Bill to the end Tail, above four inches and
^/^ long; His Bill black, almost an inch and ^/^ long, as thick as a Shoomakers
waxed Thread; sharp-pointed, and crooked all along like a Sith, or exactly as
the Bill of the Guara or Indian Curlew. His Head the third of an inch long, and
as broad. His Neck two thirds. His Trunk an inch. His Tail an inch and. In
which there are ten black Rudder-Quills ^/^ of an inch broad. Each Wing is two
inches and long. Wherein there are sixteen Oar-Quills, of a blackish-brown or
Eagle-colour, a little more than of an inch broad. Of which color are the rest
of the Feathers, and no where radiant, as of the other Species. His Thigh, inch
long. His Leg,. On which are four Toes, above of an inch long, and thick as a
Tailors Stitching-Thread. His Claws near of an inch long.

The Lesser HUMING BIRD. His Head is lost. From the top of his Breast, to the
end of his Tail he is two inches long. But his Trunk or Body alone, is not
above of an inch in length. The other Parts are answerable. His color various:
on his Wings and Tail, a dark-brown; on his Belly, a yellowish-Red; on his
Breast, White; on his Back, Green, mixed with glorious golden Rays.

The Huming-Bird is every where ill pictured: even in Mr. Willughby, for want
of the Bird it self. But all those Birds, at least, whereof he had the sight,
are most curiously and exactly represented. He is said to have a loud, or
shrill and sweet Note, emulous of that of a Nightingale. Thevetus Gallus and
Linschot. l. 2. p. 249.
He moves his Wings swiftly and continually, whether flying, or sitting on a
Flower. Lig. Hist. Barb.
He feeds, by thrusting his Bill into a Flower, like a Be. Ibid.
For which purpose Joh. de Laet, describing this Bird, (whether out of Oviedus
or Lerius is not plain) says, That his Tongue is twice as long as his Bill.
Which Clusius has omitted; because he took his Description from the Picture
only. Gulielmus Piso observes also the same. And it is very likely to be so,
as a Part more apt, by its length, and flexibility, to thrust and wind it self
to the bottoms of the deepest, and most crooked Flowers: in which, and not the
upper and open parts of Flowers, it is, that the Honey- Dew which these Birds,
as well as Bees, do suck, is usually lodged.

His Feathers are set in Gold by and sold at a great rate. Charlt. On. Zoie.
The Indians make of them very artificial Images. Will. Orn.
They take them by mazing them with Sand shot at them out of a Gun. Lig. Hist.
of Barb.


Piso relates, Hist. N. lib. 5.
as a thing known to himself, and many curious and credible men with him in
Brasile, That there are there a sort both of Caterpillars and of Butterflys,
which are transformed into this Bird: and that in the time of Transformation,
there is plainly to be seen half a Caterpillar or half a Butterfly, and half a
Bird, both together. Yet the same Author says, That this Bird builds her
Nest of Cotton-Wooll, and lays Eggs. That a Caterpiller should produce a
Bird; and a Butterfly too, the like; and yet this Bird lay Eggs to produce its
own kind, are three greater wonders than any thing that has been said of the
Barnacle. But we will rather suppose these men were themselves deceived, than
that they designed to deceive others.

CHAP. II. Of WATER-FOWLES, particularly, of the Cloven-Footed.
THe HEAD of the JABIRU. The Bird is described by Marggravius, Piso, and
Willoughby. He is bigger than a Swan. I will take leave to describe the Bill a
little more fully.

It Is above a foot and long; The Skull about three inches, and two broad. The
Bill black, 13 inches long, an inch and 1/^ broad underneath. Both the Beaks
are bended upwards and crooked all along. The upper, an inch and high,
consisting of one triangular Bone, having a sharp Ridge on the top, and is
sharp-pointed. Its hinder edges are carved with oblique Furrows or Grooves. The
Nostrils an inch long, an inch and before the eyes. The nether Beak an inch
high, and concave, but one Bone, or if you please, two joined together for the
length of half a foot from the point.

The oblique Furrows in the Margins of the upper Beak, are a singular
Contrivance of Nature, not only here, but in many other Birds, for the more
safe reception of the nether Beak; vidt. least it should go awry either within
or without the upper, as often as it is forceably pulled to it, and so cause a
dislocation, or a strain.

Another HEAD of the same kind and bigness.

The HEAD of an INDIAN HERON. I meet neither with the Animal nor with the Head
any where described, or figured. The Skull is about three inches square. The
Bill above of a foot long. The upper Beak from edge to edge near two inches
over. Consists of one Bone, Triangular or Ridged at the top, a little crooked
downward, Concave, and sharp-pointed. Its hinder Margins are obliquely
furrowed, as in the Jabiru. The nether Beak underneath two inches and ^/2 over.
Consists of two Bones, joined together for the length of not above an inch
and from the point, which is not above a fourth part of the length of
Conjunction in the Jabiru. The edges of both the Beaks run along in a strait
line.

Of the use of the oblique Furows, before. According to the length of the said
Conjuction of the bones of the nether Beak from the point, the Bird may be
conjectured more or less voraceous. For by how much this is the shorter, by so
much more may the Skin of the Beak be dilated for the comprehending of the
greater Prey: as is more remarkable in the Pelecan.

The HEAD of an INDIAN STORK. I find not the Bird, nor the Head* any where
described, or figured. The Skull is four inches high, and almost square. The
Skin of the Neck, as it is stuffed up and stretched out with Wool, is a foot
about; standing out with a bunch in the usual place of the Crop. The Bill it
self is above a foot long: and three inches and high. The upper Beak, from edge
to edge, two inches over; is one triangular, and sharp-pointed Bone, ridged at
the top, and a little crooked downward; but with strait Margins, and obliquely
furrowed behind, as in the Jabiru. The Nostrils of an inch long, and two inches
before the Eyes. The nether Beak consists of two Bones joined together for
the length of three inches from the point; the edges whereof are a little
crooked upwards. Underneath, above two inches over. The edges of both the Beaks
are made rough, like a Saw, with numerous small and oblique Incisions directed
backward, or looking toward the Throat.

The same oblique and small Incisions are visible in the Bills of diverse other
Birds of the Rapacious kind; in all made for the more secure retention of the
Prey.

Of our Europaean Storks, several of the Parts are used in Medicine, at least
put into the Materia Medica; as the Stomach, Gall, Fat, and Dung. Of the same
also are prepared Oleum Stillatitium, Sal volatile, Aqua Antepileptica, etc.
Vulgus, si decipi vult, decipiatur.

They sometimes (says Mr. Willughby Ornith^
of the Storke) devour Snakes and other Serpents: which when they begin to
creep out at their Breeches, they will presently clap them close to a Wall to
keep them in.

A BUNCH of black FEATHERS, of the Crest that grows on the Head of the lesser
ash-colored or gray Heron. The length of those whereof Mr. Willughby makes
mention, was five inches; but of these, above eight. The Turks value these
Feathers at a great Rate. It is reported, says Wormius, That in England it is
death, to kill a Heron. But our Lawyers know of no such Law.

The BALEARICK CRANE. He differs, as to his outward shape, but little from the
European: saving that on his Head he has a Crown of thick Hairs or Bristles
very full and spreading. See the Description and Picture of the Bird in
Willughby's Ornithologia.

I once dissected this Bird, but found not the same kind of Windpipe (with
curious flexures) as is described by Barthol. Hist. Cent. 4.
and Mr. Willughby, and by them observed in the European Crane. They are
therefore so far two different Species.

The HORN of the UNICORNE BIRD; In Brasile called ANHIMA. Described by
Marggravius, and Willughby, out of him. His principal marks are these; Headed
and Footed like the Dunghill Cock, Tail'd like a Goose, Horned on his Forehead
(with some likeness) as the Unicorne is pictured; Spurd on his Wings; Bigger
than a Swan. The Male, say Marggravius and Piso, as big again.

The HORN was given by Father Hieronymus Lobus. In the Bird which Marggravius
describes, the Horn was but a little above two inches long. But this is above
three, and about as thick as a Bodkin. The top also of this is not sharp, as
figured (and I doubt feigned) by the same Author, but blunt; and, contrary to
what is seen in Horns, rather thicker than toward the bottom. It is but of a
softish and brittle substance, inferior to the softest sort of Horns.
Considering which, and the bluntness of it, as well as smallness, compared with
the Bird, it cannot be thought to be defensive or offensive, as a true Horn,
but must have some other use.

Being taken in any convenient Liquor, says Piso, to the quantity of about ij,
it is often successful in Malignant Fevers, and against Poison, by provoking
sweat.

The SPUR of the UNICORNE BIRD. It grows as is above said, on the fore-Joynt of
the Wings. Triangular, sharp-pointed, and an inch and long. Said by
Marggravius, mistakingly, to be strait; it being crooked (a little upwards) as
a Cocks Spur; and thereby fit more effectually to wound.

The HEAD of the SHOVLER or SPOONBILL. The former Name the more proper, the end
of the Bill being broad like a Shovel, but not Concave like a Spoon, but
perfectly flat. The extremity of each Beak is a little hooked downward. And
they are both made very rough within with numerous and crooked Striae. A device
of Nature, for the better holding of the Prey.

This Bird is of affinity with the Heron-kind, from which he scarce differs in
any Part, saving the Bill. He feeds on Shellfish. Wherewith having filled his
Crop, he lets them lie there, till the heat of it makes them open: whereupon
disgorging them, he picks the meat out of the Shells. Related by Gesner out of
Aristotle, Aelian, and Cicero. Lib. 2. de Not. Deorum.


The SEA-CURLEW. By the people of Brasile, called Guara. By Clusius and other
Latin Authors, Numenius Indicus, and Arcuata Coccinea. Given by Dr. Walter
Charlton. See the Description hereof in Willughby's Ornithologia. About as big
as a Shoveler, long Legged, short Tail'd, with a Bill slender, long, and crooked
like a Sith. But that which is most remarkable, is the alteration of his
colors, being at first black, then ash-colored; next white, after that
scarlet, and last of all crimson, which grows the richer die, the longer he
lives. Joh. de Laet lib. 15. c. 13. and Will. Ornith.


The BRASILIAN MOOR-HEN, called Jacana. Given by Dr. Richard Lower. See
Marggravius's Description hereof. The Colors not the same in all parts, as in
that of Marggravius; the hinder part of the Back and Tail being here of a
bright Bay or Chestnut, inclining to red: in his, only black and green mixed.
Perhaps depending on the difference of Ages as in the Guara. The Membrane
wherewith he says the Head is covered, in this, growing on the Bill, is
extended only over the Forehead like an inverted Peak. He says, that on all
the four Toes there grows a Claw, an inch long: whereas the Claw of the hinder
Toe or Heel is at least an inch and long. On the fore Joint of each Wing, grows
a Spur, as in the Anhima; but not above d of an inch long, round, and exceeding
sharp. Which is omitted also by Marggravius, but mentioned by Piso. She is
remarkably distinguished from all other Birds, by the slenderness of her Legs
and Toes.

CHAP. III. Of PALMIPEDE'S, or WEBFOOTED FOWLS.
THe PHAENICOPTER; So called from the scarletcolour of his Wings. By the
French, Flammant, for the same reason. Given by Thomas Povey Esquire. There are an
abundance of them in Peru. Joh. de Laet.
In Winter they feed in France. See Willughby's Description. His Neck and Legs
are exceeding long. When Scaliger therefore says, Exercit. 233. (...). 2.
That he has the shortest Legs of any Animal yet known; he would have said,
the longest. But that wherein he is most remarkable, is his Bill. Which I shall
describe more particularly.

The Figure of each Beak, is truly Hyperbolical. The upper is ridged behind;
before, plain or flat, pointed like a Sword, and with the extremity bended a
little down. Within, it has an Angle or sharp Ridge which runs all along the
middle. At the top of the Hyperbole, not above of an inch high. The lower Beak,
in the same place, above an inch high; hollow, and the Margins strangely
expanded inward for the breadth of above of an inch, and somewhat convexly.
They are both furnished with black Teeth (as I call them from their use) of an
unusual figure, sc. slender, numerous and parallel, as in Ivory-Combs; but also
very short, scarce the eighth of an inch deep. An admirable invention of
Nature, by the help of which, and of the sharp Ridge above mentioned, this Bird
holds his slippery Prey the faster.

What Cardane affirms of the Phaenicopter, That he moves the upper Jaw or
Beak, I have observed, says Wormius, to be true. Menippus the Philosopher
also, Lib. de Homine.
cited by Rondeletius, says the same. But Wormius adds, That the cause is not
so manifest, as in the Crocodile: yet shows not, in what respect. Hereof see
Sect. 2. Chap. 3.

As for the Phaenicopter, it must needs be said, That the shape and bigness of
the upper Beak (which here, contrary to what it is in all other Birds that I
have seen, is thinner and far less than the nether) speaks it to be the more
fit for motion, or to make the appulse, and the nether to receive it. But there
can be no determination of these matters, without Inspection into the Muscules
and the Articulation of the Bones.

Another PHAENICOPTER. The Tongue of this Bird, as Apicius says, was a
delicious Morsel amongst the Romans.

The GREATEST LOON. Colymbus maximus sive Arcticus Clusii. Given by Mr.
Houghton an Apothecary in London. Described by Mr. Willughby. Ornithologiae, p.
259.
This is as big as a Goose: of a dark color, dapled with white Spots on the
Neck, Back, and Wings; each Feather marked near the point with two Spots. They
breed in Far Island.

The GREAT SPECKLED LOON of NORWAY. By the people there called LUMME. Described
by Wormius, and out of him by Mr. Willughby. In the former, the Spots are fewer
on the Neck, more on the Back: In this, more on the Neck, and fewer on the
Back. There, each Feather has two Spots; here, but one, near the point.

The Legs, both of these and the other Species of the Loon kind, are broad and
flat, by which they are distinguished from all other Birds. Willughb. Ornith.
p. 256.
Their Claws are also broad, in shape almost like a man's Nail; as Mr. Willughby
also observes. Ibid.
They are called Colymbi, because they are great Diverse. Their Legs are joined
to the Loins near their Rump; That they may both swim and dive with the
greatest swiftness and ease. Ibid.
And their Bodies being hereby extended so much the farther from the center of
gravity, it becomes the more laborious to them to walk, and so inclines them to
keep more on the water, as their fittest place; P. 258: and 259.
as the same Author much to this purpose.

The Skin of this Bird is sometimes worn on the Head and Breast to keep them
warm; and preferred before the Swans.

The BILL of the GREATEST LOON. It belongs to the first Species, but the Bird
was of lesser growth.

The two FEET of the GREAT NORWEGIAN LOON. Will. Orn.


The FOOT of the LESSER LOON, called the DIDAPPER or DOBCHICK. See the
Description of the Bird in Mr. Willughby. All the Loons breed in Mona, Farra,
and other Scottish Islands.

The FOOT of the SHAG, called Graculus Palmipes. See the Bird in Mr. Willughby.
He is a little bigger than a Tame Drake. His Foot stands more sloaping than in
the Loon; the inmost Toe being the longest. It is observable, that of all
Web-footed Fowl or Palmipede's, only the Shag and the Cormorant, are known to
sit and build their Nests in Trees. Willugh. Ornith; p. 248.


The PELECANE. Onocrotalus, from the noise he makes like an Ass. See the
Description hereof in Aldrovandus, Willughby, and others. I add, That the
shortness of his Trunk or Body, in respect to the other Parts, is observable;
not being a foot long: whereas from the end of his Bill to his Rump, he is near
an Eln long: and to the end of his Toes, he is above a yard and half. I shall
describe his Bill a little more particularly.

The upper Beak, from the bottom of his Forehead, is fourteen inches long;
behind an inch over, and unequal or ridged; before, an inch and half over, and
almost flat. It is composed of three Bones; the end of the middlemost is hooked
like a Hawks Bill; the edges of the two utmost are sharp, and bended downwards;
all made rough within with five or six edged-lines running through the length
of the Beak: thus well contrived for the holding the most slippery Prey. The
end of the nether Beak, is almost like the Poop of a Ship. It Is in length
sixteen inches, being extended (I think further than in all other Birds) an
inch beyond the Eye: whereas the usual Picture, makes it to end as much before,
or on this side it. Partly by this unusual production; the swallow is the
greater, as fit for so voraceous a Bird. It consists of two Bones, united
together only at the end. To which, and part of his Neck, is subjoyned a
Membrane vastly expansible; as appears in the Bird here preserved, capable of
above two gallons of Water, and which Franciscus Stellutus, quoted by Mr.
Willughby out of Joh. Faber, says, he lets hang down and contracts again at
his pleasure. It may not be improperly called the Crop, which in other Birds
lies under the Neck, but in this is extended to the very end of his Bill.

It Is probable, that the use of this Bag is not only for the reception, but
also the maceration of his Meat. And that having taken his opportunity to fill
it, by contracting it, presses the meat down into his Ventricle and Guts, by
degrees, as they are able to subdue it. Besides the luxury of the Taste, which
perhaps he enjoys all the while it lies in his Throat. It Is also probable, that
the meat being herein warmed, and made a little tenderer, the Female does
disgorge part of it, wherewith to feed her Young. And might occasion the
Fiction, of this Birds feeding her Young, with her own Blood.

The HEAD of a PELECANE. Another of the same. Also the nether Beak of another.

The SOLUND GOOSE. Anser Bassanus. See the Description hereof in Gesner and
Willughby. He is in bigness and Feather very like a tame Goose. But his Bill
longer, and somewhat pointed, more like that of the Guilemot. His Wings also
much longer, being two yards over. Near Colshill in Warwickshire there was one
found, Nov. 1669. (by some means fallen on the ground) alive, not able to raise
her self up again for the length of her Wings. Will. Orn.
But they scarce breed any where except on the Rocks of the Island Bass in
Scotland, Ibid.
from whence the Name.

She has this strange property, that she will swallow and disgorge again a
great many Fishes, one after another; and at last, return with one (in her
Crop) to her young Ones: related by Gesner from an observing Scot. It seems
probable, that she trys which, of many will best agree with her own stomach,
and when she finds one more delicate than the rest, she carries that to her
Young. When they come to build, they bring so great a quantity of broken Wood
with them, that the People there supply themselves from thence with as much as
serves them for firing all the year. Gesner out of H. Boethius.


They are extraordinary fat. Out of their Fat the Scots make a most excellent
Oil to be used in the Gout, and other Cases: Not inferior to that Oleum
Comagenum, so much celebrated by Pliny. Gesner out of H. B. and Turner.
The young Goslins are by them also accounted a great Dainty. Will. Orn.


The PENGUIN. So called from his extraordinary fatness. For though he be no
higher than a large Goose, yet he weighs sometimes, says Clusius, sixteen
pounds. His Wings are extreme short and little, altogether unuseful for flight,
but by the help whereof he swims very swiftly. See his Description at large in
the same Author; as also in Wormius, and Willughby out of both. I shall give a
more full Description of the Bill.

It Is black; from the corners of his Mouth four inches and long. But the Horns,
or horny portions, whereof it chiefly consists, are shorter; in the upper Beak,
a little more than three inches long; in the nether, two. Again, in the upper,
it is obliquely prolonged from the Margins to the Forehead; contrariwise, in
the nether, it is obliquely shortened from the Margins to that part under the
Tongue. The upper Beak is an inch high, between the corners of the Mouth as
wide, but presently rises up into a sharp Ridge. Its Edges about the middle, a
little unequal; about the end, concave and sharp. They are double Grooved, sc.
before and behind. In the end, it is crooked. The nether Beak behind as much
over, as the upper; toward the end, more compressed. Hollow like a Trough. Its
edges sharp, and unequal before; behind, they are groov'd. In the middle, it
bunches out underneath. The upper Beak, is out with seven or eight oblique and
crooked Notches; the nether, with as many strait ones.

The height of the upper Beak; the sharpness, and the extuberance of the lower;
together with the grooved Edges of both, do all give the Bill a sure hold, and
wonderful strength. The three Grooves, as so many Joints, keep the Beaks from
distortion, when in case of missing the Prey, they are swifty and forceably
clapped together. The sharp Edges of the nether Beak, serve instead of Teeth. The
Bunch underneath, answers in some measure, to the strength of an Arch. The
hight of the upper Beak, to that of a Board, when set upon its Edge.

The Penguin breeds in Canada, in the Island called Newland, in those of Fero,
and of the Magellanick-Sea, and is therefore by Clusius called the
Magellanick-Goose. They work themselves, as the Coney, deep Buries by the
Seaside. Wormius.


The AUK, RASOR-BILL, or MURRE. Alka Hoiari. See the Description in the
forementioned Authors. She breeds on the Rocks of the Island Mona in Scotland.
As also in those of Fero. Scarce so big as a tame Duck. His Bill is like that
of the Penguin. But the upper Beak is sharper Ridg'd: and the Horny part of it
shorter. The nether has a lesser Bunch. The Notches also on both are fewer;
whereof one or more of them are white, as Mr. Willughby rightly observes.

The HEAD of an AUK.

The GUILLEMOT, so called especially in Northumberland; in Wales, the Guillem;
in Yorkshire, the Skout; in Cornwall, the Kiddaw. Willugh. Ornithol.
LOMWIA HOIARI. He Is like the Auk, but bigger. See the Description hereof in
Willughby; as also in Wormius. They build in Norway and Island. As also in
Farra an Island in Scotland.

The HEAD of the GUILLEMOT.

The PUFFIN; called also Bottlenose, Coulterneb, Mullet and Pope. Anas Arctica
Clusii. Hereof see Clusius, Wormius, and Willughby. They are less than a tame
Duck. Their Bill is much like to that of a Penguin, saving that the Horn of the
nether Beak is not shortened, as there, but contrariwise obliquely prolonged
from the Margins. It Is also shorter, and answerably higher, and therefore
rather stronger. When they fight, they will hold by their Bills so hard, as
sometimes to break one another necks, before they will part. Whatever Willugh.
Orn.
they eat in the day, they disgorge a good part of it in the night into the
mouths of their Pullen. They breed in Island, in the Isle of Mona in Scotland,
in those of Fero and the Syllies; also in Ireland, and other places; laying
their Eggs under ground.

The Puffin, Penguin, and Guillemot; all want the Heel or hinder Toe. Have all
black Backs, but their Bellies, which are much under water, are White. All lay
but one Egg at a sitting: proper perhaps to other Birds of this kind. Willugh.
Ornith.


The HEAD of a PUFFIN.

The HEAD of the MAN of WAR; called also Albitrosse. Supposed by some to be the
Head of a Dodo. But it seems doubtful. That there is a Bird called The Man of
War, is commonly known to our Seamen; and several of them who have seen the
Head here preserved, do affirm it to be the Head of that Bird; which they
describe to be a very great one, the Wings whereof are eight feet over. And
Ligon, Hist. of Barbad. p. 61.
speaking of him, says, That he will commonly fly out to Sea, to see what
Ships are coming to Land, and so return. Whereas the Dodo is hardly a Volatile
Bird, having little or no Wings, except such as those of the Cassoary and the
Ostrich. Besides, although the upper Beak of this Bill, does much resemble that
of the Dodo; yet the nether is of a quite different shape. So that either this
is not the Head of a Dodo, or else we have no where a true figure of it. I
shall describe it as follows.

The SKULL is four inches long; the Bill, seven; two and high; one and broad.
The upper Beak is hollow. Is composed of six Bones. The uppermost whereof is
four inches and long, above inch high, and unequal. The middlemost on each side,
also four inches long, and about 1/^ of an inch high or thick. The lowermost,
above five inches long, and high. Their Edges are furrowed with oblique and
deep Grooves both before and behind. All these five Bones are resimated or
bended upward, with some resemblance to a Saddle. The sixth, at the end of the
Beak, is a wonderful strong Bone, crooked exactly like the Bill of a Parret,
and hollow; by the bow, almost three inches, and near an inch over. Its Edges
are very keen, and standing out with two sharp or pointed Angles. The Nostrils
are of an inch long, and almost two inches before the Eyes. The nether Beak is
composed of three Bones. The two hinder, four inches long, near an inch high,
and bended answerably to those of the upper Beak. Their Edges are cut with deep
Furrows. The third, at the end of the Beak, is hollow, above an inch long, near
as high. Its Edges very sharp, and hard, and exceedingly unequal or bended
downward. Underneath, a round and sharp Pin grows out from it in a level
toward the Skull, near an inch and long. It was brought from the Indies.

The shape of this Bill shows it to belong to a Bird of Prey, and as is most
likely, some great Sea-Fowl; which I will venture to call The Great Indian
Gull. The strength of the end of the upper Beak is remarkable: as also are the
sharp and hard Edges of the nether; and the Grooved Edges of both; the use
whereof see in the Description of some other Birds, as of the Jabiru and the
Penguin. The upper Beak seems to be composed of so many Bones, partly, that
if a Fracture should happen to one, it might there terminate, and the rest be
secured.

The GREAT GRAY GULL, or the Herring-Gull. Larus griseus maximus. Perspicuously
described by Mr. Willughby. Who only omits to say, that the upper Beak is
bended upwards, as in the Bill above described; and (which is observable) that
the Edges of the nether are not sharp, as is usual, but broad or expanded
inward (and almost contiguous) as in the Phaenicopter. They Will. Orn.
are very numerous near Gravesend.

Another GRAY GULL, whereof the Rump, Tail, and upper part of the Wings are
very white. Given by Henry Whistler Esquire.

The TROPIC BIRD. So called, because said never to be seen but between the
Tropicks. Avis Tropicorum. Well described by Mr. Willughby. He only omits the
Denticulation of the edges of his Bill, or those small oblique Incisions,
which, from their inward respect, are plainly made for the better retention of
the Prey. Besides some very short Feathers on his Tail, he has two Quills
above half a yard long.

Another TROPIC BIRD like the former.

Another all over WHITE, except the fore part of the Wings. Both given by the
forementioned Person.

The HEAD of the TROPIC BIRD.

The two Tail-Quills of the same.

CHAP. IV. Of the EGGS and NESTS of BIRDS.
OF EGGS, there is here a considerable number: which therefore I thought fit to
put altogether in this Chapter. Their Figures, as they stand together, appear
the more various. For some are almost Sphaerical or Round as a Ball: others, as
the most, are more oblong. Of these, some few are perfectly Oval, i. e. with
both the ends defined with two equal Ellipses: but most are Conical, or with
one end sharper than the other. Of these again, most have their smaller end but
Blunt; some few, very sharp. Lastly, almost all both Blunt and Sharp are
Convexly Conical, i. e. they are all along Unequal, not only per ambitum, but
between both ends: whereas some few are Plano-Conical, whose Superfice is in
part level between both ends.

Their Colors are also various; as White, Pale, Livid, Ash Color, Blew,
Brown, Green. Their Spots, and Speckles, are also Iron-colour'd, Red, Bay,
Musk-colour, Black, etc. the Causes of all which, both Figures and Colors,
were no unfit subject of enquiry. But here I can do little more than show, to
what Eggs in particular any of them do belong.

The EGG of an OSTRICH. It Is very smooth, and white; all over prict as it were
with extreme small brown Specks. Almost of a Sphaerical Figure. About half a
foot, by its Axis, from end to end. Round about, by the breadth, sixteen
inches, i. e. near five inches and strait over. Both the ends of an equal
Convexity. Sometimes so big, says Mr. Willughby, as to weigh fifteen pounds.
The Shell is of answerable thickness, in regard to its bigness, to that of
other Birds Eggs. They are sometimes set in Silver, and used as Cups.

Another white EGG, almost Sphaerical. It Is scarce so long as a Hens Egg, yet
is as thick, as that of a Goose.

A third white EGG, almost Sphaerical. It Is scarce bigger than a little Nutmeg.

The EGG of a CASSOARY. The Shell underneath or within is white: without, it is
all over rough-cast with a Testaceous Crust of a pale Green color. It is of an
exact Oval Figure, or with both ends equally Unequal. In length, by its Axis,
five inches, round about the breadth, eleven; i. e. a little above three and
strait over.

Another EGG of a CASSOWARY, like the former.

Another EGG perfectly Oval, or with both ends equally Unequal. Exceeding white,
as big as a Pigeons Egg.

Another EGG perfectly Oval, but somewhat lesser, and of a light Ash Color.

Another EGG exactly Oval, and also of a light Ashcolour, but no bigger than a
Nutmeg.

The EGG, as I take it, of the lesser DIVER or LOON. In bigness equal to a
Hens. Of a pale wan color. Obtusely Conical, so as to come very near to an
exact Oval.

The EGG, I think, of the WIGEON. It is of the same Color and Figure as the
last described: but somewhat lesser.

Another EGG like the two former, but a little lesser. Inscribed, Arts: perhaps
of the Anas Arctica or Puffin.

The Egg, as it seems, of the AUK or RAZOR-BILL. Of a pale and livid color,
with Iron-colour'd Spots sprinkled all over it. Obtusely Conical. In bigness,
between those of a Turkey and a Hen.

The EGG, perhaps, of the biggest Arctick Loon. It is of a dark Green color,
besprinkled all over with Spots of a sad Bay. Both in figure, and bigness, like
that of a Goose.

The EGG of a CROW. Of a Blew color, besprinkled all over very full with dark
brown Spots. Obtusely Conical. As big as a Pigeons.

The EGG of a GOLDFINCH. Of a whitish Ash Color, besprinkled with dark brown
spots. Yet not every where, but only on the thicker end. It comes near to an
exact Oval.

The EGG, I suppose, of a HOOP. It is longer than a large Damascene Plum.
Obtusely Conical. Of an Ashcolour, stained with spots of a sad or deep Bay, and
of a dark Brown.

The EGG of the KITTY. In Color, Figure, and Bigness, not much unlike the last
described: yet somewhat lesser, and almost exactly Oval.

The EGG of the CADEY. Perhaps the Jackdaw, by some also called the Caddo. It
is of a pale Blew, besprinkled with dark Spots.

An ash-colored EGG, speckled with Spots of a sad Red. Obtusely Conical; and
as big as that of a Pigeon.

The EGG of the SEA-MOIT. In color, almost like the last described. In bigness
like to that of the Hoop.

An EGG in shape and bigness, like a Damascene Plum. Dyed with a full Blew, and
sprinkled here and there with a few spots of a sad Bay.

The EGG of a REDSTART. Of a whitish Ash Color. Speckled on the thicker end
only, with a few spots of a sad Bay. In figure and bigness almost like an
ordinary Acorne.

A pale wan colored EGG, in bigness not much unlike the former.

The EGG of a WAGTAILE. Of the same bigness with the last, but more Conical. Of
a white color besprinkled with very small and numerous specks of a blackish
tincture.

An EGG of the same color with that of the Redstart, but more Conical.

The EGG of a THROSTLE. Of a pale Blew, and speckled with a few spots of a sad
Bay. As big as a lesser Damascene Plum. But with one end sharp.

The EGG of a STONERUNNER. Of an Ash Color, besprinkled with sad Bay spots.
Conical, and sharp. Of the bigness of a little Walnut. Here are four of them.

The EGG of a ROOK. Painted all over with Green and dark Brown spots. Conical,
and sharp. Somewhat less than a Crow's.

An Ash-colored EGG, besprinkled with sad Bay spots. Conical, and sharp.
Almost as big as a Pullets.

The EGG of the SEAMEW; perhaps, of the lesser GULL. Of an Ash Color tinged
with blackish spots. In bigness equal to that of a Hen. But acutely Conical.

An EGG of a kind of Greenish Ash Color. In bigness, and in shape like that of
a Stonerunner. Here are two of these.

The EGG of the HORNPIE; perhaps, the SEAPIE. Of an Ash Color mixed with a
kind of Citrine, and stained with blackish spots. Almost as big as that of a
Hen.

The EGG of a RED-SHANK. Of a kind of Straw color, tinged with sad Bay spots.
Most acutely Conical, or with one very sharp end. In bigness like to that of a
Rook; but a little shorter.

The EGG, as I take it of the GUILLEMOT. Of a Green color, stained with Black
spots. Acutely Conical; and also, in part, level between both ends or
Planoconical. Somewhat bigger than that of a Turkey.

The EGG of a LAPWING. Of a kind of Citrine color, stained with large black
spots. Sharp, and Plano-conical. A little bigger than that of a Redshank.

The EGG of the SEACOB; a kind of GULL. Of an Ash Color, besprinkled with
little black specks. In shape very like to that of a Lapwing. But not above
half as big.

The EGG of a HEN, with a thick knob so growing on its greater end, as to
appear to have been originally liquid.

The EGG of a SWAN with another within it. Given by Sir Thomas Brown of
Norwich. Who has also observed the like both in Hens and Turkeys. The utmost
seems to be a little bigger than ordinary, sc. near five inches long by its
Axis, and ten round about, or three and 1/^ strait over. In shape like a
Turkeys. The other which is included sticks fast to the side of the greater;
whether it did so originally, as also whether both of them contained White and
Yelk, is uncertain. It is of the same figure, about four inches long, bigger
than the biggest Hens Egg. The Shell of the same hardness and thickness as that
of the greater.

It Is plain, that the lesser Egg was first perfectly formed. But not being big
enough to provoke the Vterus to exclusion, new matter gathered round about it
for another Egg: and was the more easily supplied, because so little spent upon
the former. And it may be noted, That Nature is so intent upon finishing her
Work, that she may be observed much oftener to over do, than under do: you
shall find twenty Eggs with two Yelks, or hear of twenty Animals with two
Heads, for one that has none.

From the Egg with the Lump at the greater end, it seems also plain, That the
Shells of Eggs, although as hard as any Animal Stones, yet are not bred, as
those, out of stony Parts visibly praeexistent in liquor, and so clustered
together: but out of a liquid substance, not much unlike to that which is
separated by the Reins of Birds.

Of the figure of the Egg, it is observable, That it usually answers to that of
the Body or Trunk of the Bird to which it belongs: as the Fruit is longer or
broader, answerable to a tall or spreading Tree. And as it is a Transcript from
the Original; so it self an Original for the next Copy. So those Birds that
have a Rump and hinder Parts more Oval and spreading, as the Duck; or more
Conical, as the Dunghill-Hen; breed, and are bred of Eggs alike shaped, viz.
That so there may be sufficient, yet no superfluous Room, or Matter, for the
Chick.

Of the Number of Eggs laid at one Breed, it is also worth the noting, That
Land-Fowl, and of these especially, such as are Domestic, and whereof there is
continually great destruction made, for the most part lay a considerable number
of Eggs for one sitting. Whereas some Sea-Fowls, (as Mr. Willughby observes of
the Penguin, and some others) lay but one. Because building upon the Rocks,
where they are seldomer destroyed, were they greater Breeders, there would not
be room enough for the reception of the hundredth part of them.

The NEST of a little Bird of CHINA. Almost of a Semilunar Figure, and about
two inches and 1/^ broad. Of a white substance, becoming soft, being moistened,
and transparent like a Gelly; whereinto it seems to be convetrible, in part,
being boiled: and by the Gentry of China is esteemed a delicate sort of meat;
although, like that of Hartshorn, it has no Taste. Outwardly, it is more close
and solid; within, consisting of parts loosly Netted together, as those in the
middle of Harts-Horns, or some spongy Bones. See also a short Description
hereof in Wormius.

The Birds breed in Coromandel, and build their Nests (as is supposed of the
Sperm of Fishes) Gulielm. Piso.
on the sides of the high Rocks; from whence the Natives fetch them, and sell
them to the Chinese at a great rate. Mus. Worm.


The TREBLE NEST of an Indian Bird, made to hang down from the Bough of a Tree,
with three Venters or Bellies, and three Necks all open one into another. See
the Picture of such a like one in Willughby's Ornithologia.

The NEST of another East-Indian Bird, which, to avoid the rapine of Apes and
Monkey's, she hangs down from the Bough of a Tree, by a very long Neck. See the
figure hereof also in Mr. Willughby.

The NEST of a little BIRD of BRASILE, which she hangs also on a Tree out of
the reach of Serpents. About ten inches in length. The Structure admirable. The
upper part by which it hangs to the Tree is a flat Label, about four inches
long, and three over. To this the other two Parts, sc. the Neck and Belly of
the Nest, are suspended. The Neck is five inches long; below, an inch and over;
above, a little straiter. The Belly is likewise about the same length as the
Neck, of an Oval figure, in the middle two inches and over. The Neck is open,
not above, but below, at the very end: for this and the Belly hang at the
Label, as you would imagine a Sack of Corn hung up by the middle, quite double.
So that the Bird first ascends by the Neck, and then descends into the Belly of
the Nest. It is composed of Reeds and other parts of Plants curiously woven
together, like a piece of Hair-Cloath.

A GREAT NEST of an other West-Indian Bird. Above three quarters of a yard
long, besides part of it broken off. Where broadest, near a foot over, and
almost flat. Narrowed from the bottom all the way to the top. It has two
Apertures. Above, about a foot from the top of the entire Nest, one larger and
longer; below, sc. a foot above the bottom, another perfectly round, and three
inches over. It consists of the parts of Plants somewhat loosely woven
together. The Invention seems very subtle. The entry above, for the Bird her
self; her Eggs and Chicks hanging safe at so great a depth; the lower, till
these are fleg'd, being in the mean time stopped up with Feathers, Moss, or
other like materials: but afterward laid open for them, that cannot reach the
top, to fly out at below.

SECT. V. OF FISHES.
CHAP. I. OF VIVIPEROUS FISHES.
THe RIB of a TRITON or MAREMAN. About the same length with that of a Man's, but
thicker and stronger; and nothing near so much bended. The Fish to which it
belonged, was taken near Brasile. Of this kind, Wormius, in his Musaeum, gives
us diverse Relations, together with the Descriptions of several Species. See
also Joh. de Laet. L. 15. c. 12.
of the same. And Barlaeus, who says, That in Brasile he is called Ypupiapra.

A BONE said to be taken out of a MAREMAIDS HEAD. It is in bigness and shape
not much unlike that called Lapis Manati; but the knobs and hollows thereof are
somewhat different.

One JOINT of the ^^CK-BONE of a WHALE. By Anatomists called a Vertebra. (...)
one of those Parts or Joints which answers to one single Rib on each side. It
weighs Thirty pounds Haverdupoi^ In length, i. e. by the length of the
Backbone, near of a foot; above a foot high; and three quarters of a yard
broad, i. e. by the breadth of the Whale. The Hole in the middle of it, which
the Marrow of the Back passes through, near half a foot over. All its Knobs,
are much alike those in Quadrupedes.

The PISLE of a WHALE. In length, above a yard. Near the Root a foot round
about, notwithstanding its being now dry and much shrunk. From thence it tapers
to the very end, which is scarce one inch about. It Is now as hard as a Horn.

Part of the EAR-BONE of a WHALE. It Is as hard, and heavy for its bulk, as any
Bone whatsoever. As big as a laboring man's Fist: The same Bone which in an Ox,
is little bigger than a Nutmeg.

Part of a BONE said to be taken out of the Brain of a Whale, taken near the
Bermudas. Given by Dr. John Wilkins, the late Bishop of Chester, to whom it was
sent from thence. It seems to be part of the Brain-Pan, that was broken off and
struck into the Brain, when the Whale was taken.

A ROUND BONE of a WHALE. Given by Dr. Walter Pope. It Is almost a foot
Diametre, and in the middle about five inches thick. It Is rounded on the Edges,
and thinner than at the middle, resembling a thick Holland Cheese.

Three more Round BONES of a WHALE; all of them lesser, and one ratably thicker
than the former; the other thinner, like a white penny Loaf. The third the
thinnest, almost like a Tansey.

Wormius Musaeum.
makes mention of a Manuscript, entitled, Speculum Regale* but written in the
ancient Danish-Tongue, as he says is supposed, by King Suerron; in which are
reckoned up two and twenty kinds of Whales: of all which he gives a brief
account in his Musaeum. Of which, the last save one, is said to be sometimes
almost an hundred and thirty Elns long. The last of all, liker a little Island,
than an Animal.

Bartholine Hist. Cent. (...)*
(...) ^^^kons up the same number; but with some different Names, and a
different Account; which he gives from a Manuscript History of the Fishes of
Iceland: which, says he, a curious and observing Shepherd of Iceland sent to
Wormius some years before his death, with all their Figures. But how these two
accounts agree, I see not. I would not think, That Wormius did here put in the
King, and leave out the Shepherd, to make the story better.

On the Snout of one of these Whales, called Hoddunefur, grow about five
hundred horny flat pieces, which Tailors in Denmark use in making of Clothes.
Ibid.
The same in substance, with that we call Whale-Bone, belonging to the Finns.
In Island they are so commonly taken, That the hard Bones are there used for
the impaling of Houses and Gardens. Mus. Romans


The HORN of the SEA-UNICORNE. Given by Sir Joseph Williamson now President of
the Royal-Society. It is an entire one, eight feet long, or about two yards and
three quarters. Very beautiful in length, straitness, whiteness, and its spiral
Furrows bigger and less, making about seven Rounds from the bottom to the top,
or point. At the Basis or bottom, about seven inches round. From thence, for
about a foot, it swells a little, and then again grows slenderer, all the way,
and so ends in a sharp point. It Is also conically hollow at the Basis, for near
three quarters of a foot deep.

The same Horn (together with the Fish it self, sometimes above 30 Elns long,)
is described by Wormius. Musaeum Worcester.
But I cannot, with him, call it a Tooth. In that, it performs not the office
of a Tooth, but of a Horn. Neither does it stand as a Tooth, but horizontally.
Nor is it fixed in the Mouth, where all Teeth stand, but in the Snout. The
reason why he calls it so, is, because it is fastened in the Snout, as Teeth
are in the Jaw. See also the Description hereof in Bartholine. Hist. Cent. 4.
But in that he makes it to be Gyris Intortum, is not (at least as to this
Horn) so clearly expressed: the Horn it self being strait, and not writhen, but
only surrounded with spiral Furrows. The same is also transcribed by Terzagi
out of Wormius, into Septalius's Musaeum.

Of the Virtue hereof, Wormius mentions two Experiments. The one, upon its
being given to a Dog, after a Dose of Arsenick: but he expresses the quantity
of neither. The other, upon twelve Grains hereof given after a Dram of Nux
Vomica. Both the Dogs lived; whereas two other Dogs having the same Doses,
without the Horn, died. Both experiments are attested by several Physicians of
Note.

The credit of these Persons is not doubted. But the question is, Whether these
Dogs might not have lived without the Horn. As some Dogs that have been bitten
by an Adder, have been observed to get over their Convulsions, and recov^^. It
is also said in one of the Experiments, that the Dog which lived, vomited: and
in the other, there is nothing said to the contrary. The question therefore is,
Whether many other things, which will cause vomiting, may not do as well, as
this so much celebrated Horn?

Whatever it may perform against Poison, it has, says Bartholine, been very
successfully used by Physicians in Malignant Fevers. As in that, which at
Coppenhagen in the years 1652, and 1653. was very brief: and which it carr'd
off with very great Sweats. Barthol. Hist. Cent. 4.
It was used also by Albertus Kyperus at Leyden in the Year 1655. in the like
Case, and with the like success. Ibid.
And that the sweating proceeded not merely from Natures own strength over the
Disease, but as she was helped by the use of the Horn; seems probable from what
Bartholine further says, Ibid.
That a scruple or hereof being given in Carduus-Water, or other convenient
Liquor, causes a free and copious sweating, even in those that are not used to
sweat, except with much difficulty.

Heretofore, the chief Bishops in Denmark, used to make their Episcopal Staffs
of these Horns. Ibid.
The Natives of Groenland, and other Places where the Sea-Unicorne is taken,
arm the sharp ends of the thickest and longest of these Horns with Iron Beards,
and so use them for the wounding and taking of Whales.

The Sea-Unicorne is it self a lesser Whale, and is that Species which the
People of Island, where there are many, call Narwhal. The figure which Olaus
Magnus gives of the Head, is fictitious.

A PIECE of the SEA-UNICORNS HORN.

The SAW-FISH. Pristis. Johnston has given a good figure Tab. 4. N. 1.
hereof, but without either Name or Description. And that of Wormius is
defective, and in some particulars, out.

This here is a young One; from the end of the Saw to the end of the Tail, four
feet. The Saw it self above a foot; near its Basis, two inches broad; at the
fore-end, one. Armed, on each side, with seven and twenty Spikes, each an inch
long, bended a little backward, and with two sharp edges behind, as the Spur of
the Unicorne Bird has above.

His Head very flat, about three inches long; behind, almost four inches broad;
before, two. His Eyes an inch long, as much behind the Snout, two inches
distant. Above an inch behind his Eyes he has two Spouts, about of an inch
wide, by both which (as some Fishes by a single one) he casts out the Water,
which in taking the Prey, or otherwise, he receives into his mouth. Beneath,
close by the Root of the Saw, are two oblique Nostrils, an inch distant,
figured like the letter S. An inch behind these, his Mouth, two inches and
over. His Lips are rugged with extreme small round knobs. He has no Teeth.

The Apertures of his Gills are five; placed obliquely, not on his sides, but
his Breast, about four inches behind his Mouth.

His Trunk or Body presently behind his Head, becomes fives inches broad, and
about three high; from whence it is again extenuated all the way to the end of
his Tail.

He has seven triangular Finns. On the bottom of his sides, two Gill-Finns,
not behind the Gills, as in most Fishes, but for a good part before them; near
eight inches long, above three broad, and almost horizontal. Three inches
behind these, two Belly-Finns, two inches broad, five long, and as much
distant. Directly over these, on the Back a fifth, four inches long, above
three high. On the Back also, but near the Tail, a sixth, four inches long, and
as high. The Tail-Finn, as it were half a Finn, being a foot high, but
underneath level with the Tail.

Covered all over with a tough and dark-colour'd Skin, somewhat rough, as you
draw your hand forward: from the Belly-Finns to the end of the Tail, as it were
pinched together into a little Ridge on each side. There are many of them in
the Indian-Sea.

The reason why he has two Spouts, seems to be the flatness and breadth of
his Head or Mouth; in which the Water lying more spread, could not so
expeditely be carried off by a single one in the middle, as by one on each side.

He is said to defend himself from the Whale with his Saw. Wherewith, by its
structure, it is plain, that he fetches his stroke backward or side-ways, the
Spikes being bended, pointed, and edged, and so made to prick and cut, that way.

The SAW or SPIKED SNOUT of the SAWFISH. It Is a very large one, four feet long,
or above an El'n by three inches. Its Basis, excluding the Spikes, seven inches
broad. On each side are seventeen Spikes, most of them two inches and long, and
figured as above described.

The length of the Fish before described, from end to end, if compared with the
Saw is as four to one. Therefore the Fish, to which this Saw belonged, was near
five yards and half long. Again, the number of Spikes in the Saw of the Fish
now described, compared with those in this great Saw, is somewhat more than as
three to two. Therefore had the said Fish lived to the Age of this to which the
great Saw belonged, it would have been eight yards in length.

Five more such like SAWS, somewhat less.

The HEAD of the RAPIER-FISH; called Xiphias. By the Brasilians, Araguagua. He
is pretty well described by Rondeletius. Grows sometimes to the length of five
yards. The Sword, which grows level from the Snout of the Fish, is here about a
yard long, at the Basis four inches over, two edged, and pointed exactly like a
Rapier. He preys on Fishes, having first stabbed them with this Sword. Charl.
Onom. Zoic.
The Whale, says Ligon, to shake off the Sword-Fish and Theshall, his two
mortal enemies, leaps sometimes more than his own length above water. Hist. of
Barb. p. 6.
He is taken frequently in the German Ocean; as also in the Black-Sea; and
sometimes in the Danuby.

The HEAD of the TUCK-FISH. Of the Sword-fish kind, but a different Species
from the former. Whether it be any where described, seems doubtful. The hinder
parts of the Head are here broken off. The Snout is not so flat as in the
Rapier-fish, but thicker and rounder, more like a Tuck, from whence I take
leave to name it. It Is half a yard long; near the Head, two inches over; about
the middle, one. Not with a flat point, but one perfectly round. The upper part
hereof is smooth, the nether rough, the smooth and rough parts continued
obliquely from the Point to the Root. Both the Chaps are also rough in the same
manner, in the place of the Teeth, which this Fish has not. The nether Chap
has also a different shape from that of the Rapier-Fish: this being not above
four inches over, that half a foot; yet both are a foot long. It is composed of
two Bones, so joined together, for the space only of an inch and half, as to
make a sharp point.

Marggravius and Piso (and out of these Johnston) describe an American-Fish by
the name of GUEBUCU, of kin to this, the Head whereof is here described. But
cannot be the same, unless both the Pictures which they give, and Marggravius's
Description (who particularly says, That the Snout is sixteen inches long, the
nether Chap, ten) be false. For in this Head, the nether Chap is broader, and
comparatively not near so long.

The HEAD of the UNDER-SWORD-FISH. It is described by no Author that I have
perused. The Fish seems to be a smaller kind. The Head is of a triangular
figure, having one acute Angle below, and a blunt one on each side. An inch and
quarter high; the Forehead an inch over, flat, and scaly. In length it is about
two inches and a quarter. The Eyes, proportionably, exceeding great, sc. three
quarters of an inch over. The Snout half an inch broad, not above of an inch
long, a little ridged in the middle. The Chaps, instead of Teeth, are rough
with many little Asperities, almost as the skin of a Scate.

The Sword grows in a level, not from the upper but the under Jaw, from whence
we may give the Fish his Name. In length three inches; near the Jaw half an
inch over, from whence growing narrow all the way, it ends in a Point like
that of a Sword. It is not round, but flat, as that of the Rapier-Fish, and in
like manner two-edged. It seems to be composed of two Bones, but very firmly
coherent edge to edge all the way. Whether this Fish be Viviperous, is
uncertain; yet being of the Sworded-kind, I have ventured here to describe the
Head.

A pair of the MANATEE-STONE'S. Taken out of the Head of the SEA-COW, by the
Indians called Manati. Bigger than the biggest sort of Walnuts; with several
knobs and hollows, like as in the Ear-Bone, but much greater. It is said by
Joh. de Laet to be much commended against the Stone. There are two of them in
every Head.

The Head of the Manati is like that of an Ox or Cow, from whence the English
Name; his Eyes little; his Body long, like that of an Otter; his two Feet like
an Elephants. Sometimes he is about thirty five feet or twelve yards long, and
four broad. Charl. Onom. Zoic. out of Hieron. Benzon. Hist. N. Orb. l. 2. c. 14.
He feeds not on Fishes, but the Grass on the banks of the Creeks and Bays.
Traph. Disc. of Jam.
Calves and suckles her Young (as some other Fishes) with two Duggs. Ibid.
A certain Indian King kept and fed one of them with Bread six and twenty years
in a Lake near his House, which grew tame, beyond all that the Ancients have
written of Dolphins: He would sometimes carry ten people on his Back, with
ease, a cross the Lake. Charl. On. Zoic. out of Petr. Martyr.
They breed in Hispaniola, Jamaica, Brasile, and other places.

The BALANCE-FISH. Zygaena Libella. Curiously pictured in Salvian. Where also
see the Description. He has his Name not unaptly from the shape of his Head,
very different from that of all other Fishes, being spread out horizontally,
like the Beam of a Balance; his eyes standing at the two extremes, as the iron
Hooks do at the end of the Beam. He grows sometimes to the length of four or
five yards: but this is a young one. They breed in the Mediterranian,
especially, says Bellonius, near Smyrna.

The HEAD of a great BALANCE-FISH. It is two feet over, or from eye to eye. The
Head of the lesser now mentioned, is five inches over, the Fish, 20 inches
long. That therefore to which this great Head belonged, was ten foot long.

The SKULL of the MORSE: so called by the Muscovites; by the Danes, Rosmarus.
He has four feet, and his Body shapen not much unlike the SEA-CALF. But
grows sometimes to be bigger than an Ox. In his upper Jaw, he has two
remarquakble TUSKS, bended a little inward. In this Skull, the exerted part is
five inches long, and four round about at the Root. His other Teeth are
undescrib'd. They are sixteen, eight on each Jaw. Not Grinders but Punchers, or
somewhat answerable in shape to the Tusks of a Dog. In the upper Jaw, the
longest; standing on each side, two or three of them, within side of the Tusks.
They have a small flat on their insides, against which the Teeth of the under
Jaw work; which are much smaller, and flat-sided. The shape of these Teeth
seems no way fitted, and their strength very superfluous, for the eating of
green Leaves at the bottom of the Sea, as this Animal is supposed to do.

The Figure which Olaus Magnus gives of this Animal, is fictitious. But that in
Joh. de Laet (as to the Head at least) is a very good one: from whom Wormius
borrows his. One of the Cubs is accurately described by Everh. Vorstius, quoted
by John de Laet, by Wormius, and by Terzagi in Septalius's Musaeum. This
Animal, when he goes, drags his hinder part after him, as the Seal. They
always, says Scaliger, Exer. 218. S. 4.
come on Land in Companies; and when they sleep, one of them, as among Cranes,
is set to watch. They climb upon the Rocks on the Seaside by the help of their
great Tusks, wherewith, as with two Hooks, they hold themselves from sliping.
They breed numerously near St. Lawrence Isle.

Their Tusks are used by the Turks and Tartars for the making of Sword-Handles.
Musaeum Wormianum.
I have a Girdle, says Wormius, Ibid.
composed of Plates made of these Tusks; which being worn, is an infallible
Remedy against the Cramp: a Spasmo proculdubio immunes reddit.

A piece of a MORSE-HIDE. Than which, says Wormius, I believe there is no
Animal has one more close and solid. I add, nor perhaps any that has a
thicker, being above half an inch thick.

A PISLE, said to be that of the MORSE. It Is above a foot long, and seems to be
only the exerted Part. At the Glans, half a foot about, now it is dry. The
Muscovites, says Vorstius, Quoted by Laet, l. 2.
take the Powder hereof to bring away the Stone.

The MALE or WHITE SHARK. Canis Carcharias mas. See the Description hereof in
Rondeletius. This is about two yards long, and near of a yard over, where
thickest. But they are found sometimes seven or eight yards in length, and
more. One has been taken, says Gesner, from an other person, near four
thousand pounds weight. The sharpness and multitude of his Teeth especially,
and the widness of his Mouth, are remarkable. They will often bite off the Legs
or Arms of those that venture into the Sea in a Calm; and sometimes swallow
them up whole. Ligon's Hist. of Barb. p. 5.


Their Teeth generally stand in a six-fold Row; but Bellonius observes one with
four Rows only. There are some other Fishes which have as many, and the Scate
has more: but take their Number and Bigness together, and they are more
considerable. In Septalius's Musaeum, there is one, says Terzagi, (in words at
length) with a thousand and two hundred Teeth. But neither has this here, nor
had any other that I ever read of, near half so many.

Of his Optique Nerves, Rondeletius observes, That they are not, as in other
Animals, but plainly Cartilaginous.

The Goldsmiths in France, says the same Author, set the Teeth of the Shark
(which there they call Serpents Teeth) in silver-Cases; and the Women hang them
about their Childrens Necks, to make them breed their Teeth the better. The
Brain of the Shark, says Wormius, Out of Laet.
is highly commended by some for the Stone. The people of Island, says the
same Author, boil them for Lamp-Oil. They are found sometimes upon our own
Coast, near Cornwall.

The LONG-SNOUTED SHARK. So I call it, because it is much longer, than in the
abovementioned; so as to be as it were the beginning of a Horn. The Body of
this likewise, in proportion, is much shorter and thicker. Rondeletius seems to
give the Figure of this particular Species.

There is no sort of Animal, says Aristotle, Hist. An. l. 2. c. 1. near the
end.
about us, which has a double Row of Teeth. So that he never saw a Shark, nor
diverse other Fishes that are commonly known, and such as are not unlikely to
breed about Greece. That he includes Fishes, is plain by the Context.

The GILL-FIN of the long-snouted Shark.

The JAWS of a SHARK. There are six or seven pair of these here preserved.
Terzagi mentions one pair in Septalius's Musaeum, that were wide enough to have
swallowed any Man.

Two great TEETH of a SHARK. They are both curiously indented, like a Saw, on
each edge: as also the Teeth are in younger Sharks, but not so visibly. One of
these is above an inch and half long. But one of those in a Shark of above two
yards in length, is not half an inch. The Shark therefore, to which This
belonged, was about eight yards long.

What the Teeth of a Shark wants in thickness, they have in breadth, whereby
they are the more terrible; both pricking with their Points, and cutting with
their Edges at the same stroke.

Part of the BACKBONE of a SHARK.

The TOOTH of a PICKED-DOG. Not much unlike that of a Shark. The difference is,
That the exerted part of this is bended, not inwards, but side-ways.

The SPOTED HOUNDFISH or SEA-PANTHER; Galeus Asterias; because of the Stars or
Spots upon his Skin. But the radiation of the Spots in the Figure commonly
given, is fictitious. See Rondeletius's Description. He has a rough Skin, as
have all of this kind. Yet this Author says, he has a smoother Skin, than the
Galeus laevis: which, however comparatively taken, it may be true, is not well
expressed of either. The said Roughness is caused by an infinite number of most
hard and sharp Prickles, composed in the same manner as the Scales of Fishes.

The Female brings forth often times twice in one month, and so is said to
Superfoetate: which, says Aristotle, Hist. An. lib. 6. c. 11. and l. 5. c. 10.
seems rather to be, because her Eggs are hatched (in her Womb) one after
another.

The PICKED-DOG. Galeus Acanthias. Because he has two strong and sharp Spikes
growing on his Back, behind the two Finns, and pointing toward his Tail. See
the Description in Salvianus and Rondeletius. Besides the two Finns which grow
on each side the Anus, the Males, says Salvian, Hist. 42.
have also two Appendices, one on each side the Anus. But betwixt the Anus and
the Tail there is no under-Finn; by which he differs from the rest of the
Dogkind. He is said scarce to grow so big, as to exceed twenty pounds in
weight. His Skin is rough with the like Prickles, as in the former; so small,
as scarcely visible without a Microscope. But easily felt by drawing your hand
toward the head. The shape also of the Teeth is odd and unusual, being armed
with little sharp Hooks on each edge. They are taken sometimes upon our English
Coast.

The Anatomy of the Galeus (the Male) is given us by Sir George Ent, in Dr.
Charleton's Onomastic. Zoic. Some of the most observable Remarks, are the
peculiar shape of the Pancreas, and especially the Spleen, having a Label
produced from one side, above twice its own length. Likewise the Purse at the
farther end of the Duodenum, into which it opens only by a very small round
Hole, not so wide as to receive the end of ones little finger: all which are
described and figured. He has also growing on the lower Eyelid, a thick and
firm Membrane, wherewith he often winkles or covers his whole Eye: the same
with that called the Periophthalmium, common to very many Birds.

The Description of the Viviparous Eggs in the Female; which are not unlike to
those of the Raya, is given by Rondeletius. Bellonius has seen an indifferent
One, to bring forth thirteen young ones at a Birth. So soon as ever she has
brought them forth, they swim along with her, and if any of them are afraid of
any thing, it runs immediately into the Mouth, say some, into the Womb of the
Dam: when the fear is over, returns again, as if by a second Birth.

The Skin is used for the polishing of Wooden and Ivory Works.

The HEAD of a DOLPHIN, about a foot and long. The Dolphin therefore to which
it belonged, was above two yards and half long. In the Skin, it is hard to find
any passage of sound for Hearing. And Aristotle denies that the Dolphin hears.
But Rondeletius truly says, that he does, and that the whole structure of the
Internal Ear may be seen in the Skull. See Bellonius's Description and Figure
of the Dam and her Foetus.

The HEAD of a DOLPHIN, lesser than the former.

The TAIL of the DOLPHIN. It is expanded (as also in the Porpess) in a way
peculiar, not uprightly, as in other Fishes, but horizontally: by the help of
which, he makes his Gamboles above the Water. And at the same time takes his
Breath: as Mr. Ray has well observed of the same use in the Porpess. It is
also of use to cast him forward by strong and repeated jirks, whereby he is so
admirably swift, as it is said, above all other Fishes. Phil. Trans. N. 76. p.
2275.
There is also another Dolphins Tail here preserved of the same bigness.

The SKELETON of a PORPESS, or Sea-Hog. Tursio Plinii. Phocaena Rondeletii.
The Description and Anatomy of the Animal is given us by Bartholine ( Hist.
Cent. 2.) By Mr. Ray ( Phil. Trans. N. 76.) By Dan. Major ( Miscel. Curios.
German. An. 4.) And lately more largely by Dr. Edward Tyson. Some of the
particulars more remarkable are, That the Fat, which is an inch thick,
encompasseth the whole Body, as in a Hog. That the Fibers which run through the
Fat from the Membrana Carnosa to the Skin, do obliquely decussate one another
like a Lattice. And I may here observe, That the like Decussation is made
betwixt the white and red Fibers of all Muscules.

It Is further noted, That the Fat is nothing else but Oil contained in a great
number of little Bladders. I add, That all these Bladders are the continuation
of the Fibers which decussate, in a finer Work. And that there is no difference
betwixt the said Fibers and those of the Membrana Carnosa, saving their
Relaxation, (as when a Spung swells with water) by the interposition of Oil.

The Stomach remarkable, consisting of three Bags. The Guts eleven times the
length of the Fish. The Glands of the Kidneys so distinct, that each having a
white substance in its center, and out of that its Papilla, seemed to be
another little Kidney, about the bigness of a large Peace. And I shall here take
notice, That the whitish substance within every Gland, and the same which is in
the Kidneys of other Animals, is truly Carneous or Muscular, by which the
conveyance of the Urinous parts of the Blood into the Pelvis is promoted.

The Paps are placed one on each side the Pudendum. The Ovaria (it being a
young Fish) not above an inch long, and thick as a Goose-Quill. The Diaphragme,
without the usual Tendon in the center. The Heart, with two Ventricles and two
Auricles. The Foramen Ovale, closed. The Lungs consisting of two great Lobes.
The Larnyx very prominent, oddly shaped, like an old fashioned Ewer. The Spout
with strong Muscules; and Papillae for the issuing of Snot. The Eye with the
Musculus Suspensorius, as in Bruits. The Brain large, weighed above lbj
averdupois, the Fish lbxcvj. The Musculus Psoas, and two others on the Back,
very large and strong.

The Teeth (96 in all) so placed, that those of one Jaw, are received into the
distances of the other. Stand not in distinct Sockets, but all in one common
Furrow. The Ear-Bone is oddly seated in a hollow, and encompassed with
Muscules. The Drum well braced, but no Incus stapes and Malleolus to be seen.
The Brain-Pan five inches broad, and but three long; the Brain answerable. The
Backbone is composed of sixty Vertebrae. The same number, as is before
observed to be in that of a Crocodile. The Bones of the Fore-Finns, resemble
those of an Arm with Hand and Fingers. Of the Tail, like those of two feet
joined together.

From the Nose to the Tail-end about an Ell long, and roundish, the Eyes and
the Gape of the Mouth small, the Back and upper parts black, the Belly white,
the Tail horizontal: much like a Dolphin, saving that she is shorter snouted.

The SEA-CALF or SEAL. Phoca. Vitulus Marinus; From the noise he makes like a
Calf. See Rondeletius's Description. His Head comparatively not big; shaped
rather like an Otters; with Teeth like a Dogs; and Mustaches like those of a
Cat. His Body long, and all over hairy. His fore-Feet, with Fingers clawd, but
not divided; yet fit for going. His hinder Feet, more properly Finns, and
fitter for swimming, as being an Amphibious Animal. The Female gives suck, as
the Porpess and other Viviparous Fishes. This here is about a yard long. But
sometimes they are as big, says Mr. Ray, as a Heifer of two years.

The Skin of this Fish is commonly used for the covering of Trunks. They are
innumerable in the Atlantick-Sea; especially the Bay there called The Seal-Bay.
Laet. l. 13.
Our Mariners and Fishermen often take them in the Isle of Wight, as they lie
asleep upon the Shore. Charl. Onomast. Zoic.
As also about Cornwall.

Another SEAL like the former, only somewhat thicker. Given by Mr. J. Houghton,
Ph. L.

The LONG-NECK'D SEAL. I find him no where distinctly mentioned. He is much
slenderer than either of the former. But that wherein he principally differs,
is the length of his Neck. For from his Nose-end to his fore-Feet, and from
thence to his Tail, are the same measure. As also in that instead of fore-Feet,
he has rather Finns; not having any Claws thereon, as have the other kinds.

The SKULL of a SEAL. Given by Henry Whistler Esquire. The Teeth are shaped
somewhat like a Dogs. The tops of them all are flat, being doubtless filed off.
The processus of the Os Frontis which makes up the Orbit of the Eye in
Land-Animals, is here wanting; and the said Bone pinched up much more narrowly:
Both to make room, as it should seem, for a very large Eye. The passage into
the Ears stands very oddly. In Dogs, Cats, and most other Land-Animals, forward
and outwardly. But here it stands just oppositely, sc. behind and inwardly.

The FORE-FOOT of a very great SEAL.

The VIVIPAROUS EEL-POUT. Mustela marina vivipara. (the Male, Lupus marinus
Schonfeldii.) It Is well pictured by Adam Oleareus, Tab. 27. f. 2.
who calls it a Sea-Wolf ( Ein See-Wolf). As also by Johnston; but not
described. But in Gesner's Paralypomena it is both figured and described by Ge.
Fabritius under the Name of Klipfisch ( i. e. Rock-Fish,) so called by the
people near the Baltic (where he breeds.) Fabritius is particular only as to
the Teeth, and is also mistaken in some things. I shall therefore add the
Description I drew up before I met with his.

It Is a yard long. The Head a foot long, and almost as high; being compressed
on the sides, three inches and over underneath, her Forehead but a little above
two. Her Snout a little Unequal. The Eyes very high, an inch long. The Nostrils
before the Eyes of an inch. Both the Chaps blunt-angled before, from the
Corners of the Mouth three inches long, between the Corners, as much.

The Teeth all very thick, like those of Quadrupedes; both in figure and
situation, very unusual. In the upper Jaw, five before; not Incisors, or
Cutters, but thick Punchers. To the Roots of which, within side, grow as it
were nine little Teeth. Behind, are three Grinders; one of which, on each side,
is fastened obliquely inwards, half an inch broad, and above an inch long. The
third, and the greatest, stands betwixt them in the middle of the Palate. Each
of these having deep Incisions, seem, as it were, eight or ten Teeth. In the
under Jaw, are two Punchers or Claviculars, each of them having two sharp
Processes within side. Behind, there seems to be only one Grinder on each side,
half an inch broad, and above two inches long, arched inward, and with sixteen
or eighteen Incisions looking like so many Teeth.

Her Gills open almost from the top of her Head to her Throat. The Fins are
four. The Gill-Fins about five inches long, and as broad, placed so low, as to
meet in the Breast, and so to supply the Breast-Fins. The Back-Fin is extended
from Head to Tail; before, an inch high; behind, above two. The Belly-Fin
reaches from the Anus (which opens a foot behind the Head) to the Tail, about
an inch deep. The Body, where highest, above a foot, the Back a little unequal,
grows slender all the way to the Tail, the extremity whereof is here wanting.
She is covered with a tough Skin, now of an Iron-colour, besprinkled all over
with round spots.

That which is most remarkable in this Fish, are his Teeth: which are so made,
as to be fit either for Ravine, or for the eating of Grass and other Herbs on
the Rocks, and under Water. They seem also to be made for the Cracking of
Shellfish. As likewise for Rumination: which may as well be ascribed to this
Fish, as to the Scarus.

This Fish is one, amongst diverse other instances of Aristotle's error, where
he says, (...). De Part. Anim. l. 3. c. 1.


The tops of this Fishes Grinders are commonly sold for Toadstones. As Dr.
Christopher Merret has also observed in his Pinax.

The SCATE, or Angel-Fish. Squatina, sive Angelus Marinus. The figure in
Johnston is tolerable. But the Description very short and imperfect. That of
Rondeletius is better, yet not full. And either the Fish he describes is a
different Species, or his Description of the Teeth is not true.

This is above an Ell long. His Head about of a yard long, and near as much
over, (here) with several Angles or Ridges: His Mouth five inches over, his
Lips almost Semilunar.

Each of his Jaws are armed with about six and thirty Rows of most sharp Teeth,
and in every Row there are four Teeth. So that in all they are about two
hundred fourscore and eight, all couched a little inward.

About three inches behind his Nose-end stand his Eyes, as it were on the top
of his Head, and three inches and distant. Proportionably very small, sc. not
above an inch over. About an inch and quarter behind his Eyes, and a little
lower, he has two Spouts, one on each side, above an inch long, and unequal
before. His Neck a foot over. His Back before, three inches above a foot,
expanded (here) on both sides, as if it were shouldered. His Middle or Wast
about eight inches. The lower part of his Back, ten inches, spread like a pair
of Buttocks. From his Shoulders to the bottom of his Buttocks about a foot and.
The length of his Tail, as much: the forepart whereof above four inches over,
growing slenderer all the way to the end.

He has seven Fins. His Shoulder-Fins with Cartilaginous Rays, expanded a foot
out like a pair of Wings, and almost square. His Buttock-Fins prolonged
hinderly a foot, stand continguous to the Tail on both sides. On the top of his
Tail, two lesser; three inches high, and couched backward. At the end a forked
one a foot long, and almost as high. From hence half a foot forward, the Skin
is as it were pinched up into a little Ridge or Doublet on each side.

Above he is very rough with innumerable small Prickles, especially felt upon
drawing your hand forward. And the edges of the four side-Fins are all thorny.
But underneath the Skin is so thick or closely covered with little hard round
knobs, as it seems almost smooth.

This Fish has two Spouts, like the Saw-Fish, because of the breadth of his
Head. His Teeth admirable for taking sure hold of the most slippery Prey. Those
Doublets on the sides of his Tail, seem to add strength to the Muscules which
move the Tail-Fins. And so in some other Fishes. By the posture of the Fins he
seems to make at the Prey, not by a forward stroke, but by ascending as a Dog
to his Meat, or descending as a Hawk when she stoops. With the broad Fore-Fins,
says Oppian, the Female shelters her Young, as a Hen her Chickens with her
Wings. But Aristotle affirms, That she gives them protection as does the
Dogfish, by receiving them into her mouth. He also says, That of the
Cartilaginous kind the Scate only bears twice in a year, sc. Spring and Fall.

Salvianus Histor. 50.
says, That the Skin of his Back is smooth; deceived by the Authorities of
Aristotle, Epicarmus, Athenaeus, and Pliny: witnesses enough to prove an Error.
The Skin of this Fish is used for the polishing of Wooden and Ivory Works. He
is taken, says Mr. Ray, sometimes near Cornwall.

Another SCATE. It Is a young one, but in shape altogether like the former,
saving that the Shoulder-Fins are here produced, more like a Wing, into a sharp
Angle before.

The HEAD of a SCATE, about the bigness of that above described. Sometimes they
grow to the weight of a hundred and sixty pounds.

The HEAD of the GREAT MAID. Caput Rajae Oxyrrhynchae majoris. See the
Description of this and the other Kinds in Rondeletius, and Bellonius. They all
differ from other Fishes, in having a broad and squat Body, with a long slender
Tail appendent, but not so slender, as in the Cat-Fish. The end of the Snout in
this, is all beset with little sharp Hooks pointing backward. And with the same
Hooks, both the Jaws: but far bigger, and standing in several Rows, eight, ten,
or twelve in a Row.

The Skin of the Raja, being artificially reduced to a monstrous shape, is by
some showed, and is commonly taken, for a Basilisk.

The EGG of a THORNBACK. Ovum Rajae Clavatae. Or rather the Bag or Case of the
Egg. Hereof see Rondeletius. It Is very smooth, and (now) black and horny. Seven
inches long, and four over. From each of the four Corners is stretched a sharp
ended Membrane two inches long. In the middle it swells up on both sides: so
that in shape it is just like a Pulpit-Cushion. There are some other lesser ones
of the same shape and color.

In the upper part of the Womb, says Rondeletius, are a great number of Eggs
of several sizes, consisting only of a Yelk, as in the Ovary of a Hen. These
successively ripening, are found in the lower part, consisting of Yelk and
White, and covered with the said horny Case. Out of every one of these mature
Eggs, another Foetus is also successively generated. Whereby it is
intelligible, How this Fish produces but one at once, and yet so numerous a
breed.

The SKREW-GUT of the RAJA, described by Steno's Son. Sent by Dr. Swammerdam
with some other particulars mentioned in the first Section. It winds between
parallel lines like a Screw or Staircase.

The knobed TAIL of a THORNBACK. Of an ashcolour, and about a yard long.

The spiked TAIL of a THORNBACK, almost black. The knobs of both are so hard,
that they will file Iron or Brass. The Skin of this Fish is used for
Knife-hafts, etc.

The smooth CAT-Fish. Pastinaca marina laevis. Fabius Columna, Lib. de Aq. and
Terrest.
has described two Species of this kind: but both of them seem to be different
from the Fish here. It is somewhat phantastically stuffed; yet I shall give the
Description as well as it will admit.

From the tip of his Snout, to his Tail, a foot and three inches, about a foot
over, and a foot (being, I suppose, thrust out somewhat more than the natural
dimension by the stuffing) in height. His Eyes an inch long, two and inches
distant, three and behind his Nose-end. Just behind his Eyes, and a little more
distant, he has two Spouts, one way, an inch and over. His Snout prolonged
forward an inch and with an Obtuse Angle; and extended toward the side-Fins,
wherewith it is also joined by the mediation of a Skiny-Border an inch broad.
His Mouth very little, not an inch and over; curiously rough-cast like a file,
underneath, and behind his Snout-end two inches and. Over his upper Chap hang
two little Labels above inch long.

His Gills are five on each side, but toward the middle of his Belly. He has
four side-Fins. His fore-Fins are stretched out two inches in breadth, extended
in length toward the Tail, almost a foot. The hinder-Fins are almost two
inches broad, and above an inch and long.

The Tail a foot and two inches long, at the Root about an inch and over, the
extremity very small like a Shoomakers Thread. The Skin not very thick, nor
stubborn, (now) of a yellow color on the back, on the Belly strawcolour'd:
every where very smooth, excepting on his Tail, where there are some few very
short prickles.

Whether this be not a young Fish, and upon that account only wants the
Radius (as the sharp Saw upon the Tail is called) to me is uncertain. With this
Radius he is said to strike and kill his Prey, for which he lies as it were
dormant, till it swims within his reach. Aelian, cited by Rondeletius, says,
That he sometimes flies. Which that he may do a little above the water, as the
flying Fishes, seems possible by the horizontal production of all his Fins, and
their extension all along his sides.

The Chinese and Moors eat this Fish greedily.

The nether LIP of the smooth CAT-FISH, two inches long.

The BRASILIAN FROG-FISH. Rana Piscatrix minor. In Brasile, GUACUACUYA. The
figure which Johnston gives is tolerable; but his Description very defective.
The length of this is eight inches. His Mouth open makes a Circle of an inch
over. His Lips, in the usual place of Teeth, are rough; as also is his Tongue.
He has a black Horn on his Forehead, stooped forwards, round, an inch and
long, one third over at the bottom, pointed, and having little Spikes round
about it. What Johnston means by the Cuteus Nervus, appears not. At the top of
his Head, just under the Horn, stand his Eyes a of an inch over, and (here) no
more distant. The Nostrils a little before the Horn.

His Body two inches and long, and four broad; before, Semilunar. His Back
unequal, his Belly flat; with a Border or Fin all along each side an inch broad.
Behind are subjoyned a pair of Fins almost two inches long, and an inch and
wide. In the middle of his Belly are two other lesser close together, above an
inch long, but not more than broad.

The length of the Tail four inches and. At the root it is round, and an inch
over; at the end, with the sides compressed, and an inch high. The Tail-Fins
three, one above, another just under it, the third at the end much bigger. The
Skin of his Belly and Tail underneath, whitish, thin, and rough. Of his
Backside, Fins, and Tail above, black, thick and set with short spikes arising
from a round Base radiated like a Star. He seems, by his shape, to be near of
kin to the Thornback; and therefore to be less appositely Named.

A lesser Brasilian Frogfish of the same kind.

The TRUMPET-FISH. So called from the figure of his Bill, which is an entire
Pipe, shaped almost like that of the Snipe-Fish. Acus Aristotelis. Well
described by Rondeletius; saving, that he describes the Body to be Sexangular
all along. Whereas from the Head to the Anus it is Septangular. The Scales are
also engraven with small lines almost of an Elliptick figure. Salvianus errs in
saying he is not scaly. Another also of the same Species.

The Female, says Rondeletius, has a Canale extended from her Anus, in which
the Eggs are hatched into young Ones. Of the use of the Bill, see the Snip-Fish.

The lesser TRUMPET-FISH, or Viviparous Needle-Fish.

The HORSE-FISH. Hippocampus. A small Fish. So called, because his Head is
shaped like a Horses, and his Tail divided by several Incisures, somewhat like
those of Caterpillars, called (...). Given by Mr. Scotto a London Merchant. It
has the same number of Fins, and in the same place, the same kind of Bill, the
fore-Body Septangular, and the Tail square, as the Trumpet-Fish. And is,
therefore probably, also Viviparous: and so I have ventured to place it here.

Another HIPPOCAMPUS taken in the Mediterranean.

A STURGEON. Acipenser. Sturio, because one of the greatest of edible Fishes;
for Stur, in the Danish-Tongue, signifies Great. Wormius.
See Wormius his Description. Especially that of Salvianus, with his curious
figure. The like in Besler. The parts by which he is best distinguished, are
his very long and sharp Snout, his little Mouth, to be seen only when he lies
on his back, and his thick and bony Scales; which stand in Rows so, as to make
the Fish almost Pentangular. The figure of most of the side Scales is
Rhomboidal. It is affirmed by Moufet, L. de Re Cibaria.
That the Scales of a Sturgeon turn toward the Head; borrowing his Error
herein of Pliny.

Lately, a piece of a Sturgeons Gut was showed me by Dr. Edward Tyson, which he
had cut off of a great One sent to my Lord Major. It is very thick, strong and
Muscular. And the inner Coat made of Fibers, so loosely woven together, as to
look like a Net; and that above the eighth of an inch in thickness. In which a
plenteous Chyle is conveniently lodged, and thence gradually transmitted to the
Lacteal Veins.

Scaliger says Exerc. 182. S. 2.
of the Guts of a Sturgeon, that being taken out and cut all to pieces, those
pieces will still move. Which may partly depend upon their great thickness and
muscularity; the like being observable in cutting the Heart and other Muscular
parts of diverse Animals.

The Sturgeon is taken in most great Rivers, as well as in the Sea. He has
sometimes been seen, says Bellonius, six yards long. The bigger he is, as all
other Fish, the better meat. The Italians Salvian.
prefer the Belly before the Jole. His Liver very delicate. At Hamburge and
Dantsick they eat (or did in Moufet's time, who reports it, eat) Sturgeon
roasted. In the same Author, see a most excellent Pickle for this Fish. The
Eggs being salted and made up into a Mass, were first brought from
Constantinople by the Italians, and called Caveare. Of the way of making it,
see Gesner. The pickled pieces made of the Chine, are by some called Schinalia.
Of the long Bag Salvian.
which grows next the Chine, the people that live near Tanais make Glue.

The HEAD of a great STURGEON.

MOON-FISH. Mola Salviani Luna; Because the Tail-Fin is shaped like a
Half Moon, By which, and his odd trussed shape, looking as if he were only the
Head of some great Fish cut off from his Trunk, he is sufficiently
distinguished from all others. Well described by Rondeletius and Salvian; and
by this latter, very curiously pictured. The Gill-Fins, as he observes, are so
postur'd, as not to move from Head to Tail, or vice versa, but from Back to
Belly, and e contra. The use whereof seems to be, To enable him to make a more
direct and sudden descent; that so when any Ravenous Fish makes full speed at
him, he may in an instant strike himself under his way, and so escape him. It
may also be noted, That being a tall Fish, and with his sides much compressed,
he has a long Fin upon his Back, and another answering to it on his Belly: by
which he is the better kept upright, or from swaging on his sides.

Another MOON-FISH of the same Species, but somewhat lesser. Neither of these
is above a yard long. But that which Salvian describes, was above an hundred
pounds weight. They are taken, as Mr. Ray says, about St. Ives and Pensans in
Cornwall.

CHAP. II. OF OVIPEROUS FISHES, particularly such as are NOT-SCALED.
THe HEAD of the RIVER-WHALE. Caput Siluri. Johnston gives the figure of this
Fish, but without a Description. That of Rondeletius is not full. This Head is
a foot long, as broad, and half as high. The Snout flat. Both the Chaps before
of a Semilunar figure. Armed with an innumerable company of prickly Teeth,
standing like those in a Card wherewith Women Comb Wool. The nether Chap
stands out above an inch before the upper. The Eyes round, and for such a Head,
very small, scarce the third of an inch over. Distant three inches and. An inch
above the corners of his Mouth, he has two strings, smooth and round, here
(for they are broken) a foot long, about the thickness of an Earth-Worm,
taper'd and bended backward; outwardly nervous, inwardly Cartilaginous or
Grisly. His Gills descending almost from the top of his Head, meet under his
Throat.

What may be the use of these strings is uncertain, and to be collected only
from observing their communication with other parts, and the manners of the
Fish. But the intent of their structure is less obscure; the Nervous part
serving to draw it too and fro; the Cartilage, as the spring in a Pendulum
Watch, to stint the motion and make it more steady. And being flexible, it does
the same as a joynted Series of many little Bones.

The little SEA-UNICORNE. Monoceros minor. It was sent from Brasile, I find it
not described nor pictured in any Author. Nor is it certain whether it be
Oviparous. Yet I have ventured to place, and shall describe it here.

It Is a yard long, almost high, with its sides very much compressed, being not
above two inches and a over. High-Bac'd, like a Perch. And also (which is
unusual) bow-Belli'd. His Head has some resemblance to that of a Baboone; from
the top to the bottom four inches and. His Mouth, which stands below, not much
above an inch over. His Teeth, in both Chaps, the thickness of a midling
Needle, the eight of an inch long. His Gills subtended to his Eyes and Mouth
like the segment of a Circle. His Eyes stand near the top of his Head; and are
an inch over.

From the top is prolonged a smooth (now) blackish, round, taper'd, strait
Horn, couched a little down below the level, two inches round about the Root,
and three inches long. It seems not to have any Bone within it; nor is it
inserted into any, as in the Unicorne of the Cetaceous kind before described;
but is the Skin it self prolonged and hardened (as the Cuticula turns to
Corns) into a kind of horn.

The Fins are seven. The Gill-Fins two inches long, and one broad. The Back-Fin
is extended from Head to Tail, above an inch and high. The Breast-Fins of an
inch before the Anus, near two inches long. The Belly-Fin, like that of the
Back, and extended from the Anus to the end of the Tail. That at the end of the
Tail triangular, two inches and long, three high. The Anus, if you measure by a
perpendicular from the Gills, opens, oddly, not above an inch and behind them.
He is covered with a (now) blackish, thick and tough Skin, and when you draw
your hand forward, also rough.

The SHIPHALTER. Echeneis. Remora. Johnston has given an indifferent figure of
it. But I meet with no tolerable Description any where.

It Is about of a yard long. His Body before, three inches and over; thence
tapering to the Tail-end. His Mouth two inches and over. His Chaps ending
somewhat angularly. The nether a little broader, and produced forward near an
inch more than the upper. His Lips rough with a great number of little
prickles. His Eyes round, of an inch over, an inch behind his Mouth.

His Head squat, adorned with a kind of Oval Coronet, somewhat Concave, five
inches and long, above two broad, cut traversly with three and twenty Incisions
or long Apertures, making so many distinct Membranes, with rough edges, joined
altogether with a Ligament running through the middle of the Coronet, and
perforated on each side the Ligament.

The Gills wind from an inch and behind the Eyes down to the Throat. The Fins
seven. The Gill-Fins above four inches long; The Breast-Fins as long. About a
of a yard behind the Coronet a fifth extended on the Back above of a yard. A
sixth like it on the Belly. The Tail-end, like a Spear, a little compressed.
The Tail-Fin three inches and long. The Anus open about the middle of the Fish.
His Skin is (now) brown, smooth, and tough, or like tan'd Leather.

Perhaps the same Fish, which Ligon Hist. of Barbados.
says, always swims along with the Shark, and frequently sticks to some part
about his Head. At least, it is very probable, that this Fish is able to fasten
himself to any great Fish, Boat, or Ship, with the help of the Coronet or
Sucker on his Head; which seems to be most fitly contrived for that purpose. In
some sort answerable to the Tail of a Leech, whereby she sticks her self fast
to the smoothest Glass. Or to those round Leathers, wherewith Boys are used to
play, called Suckers, one of which, not above an inch and diametre, being well
soaked in water, will stick so fast to a Stone, as to pluck one of twelve or
fourteen pounds up from the ground.

Of the stupendous power which this Fish is supposed to have, there are many
concur in the story; as that he is able to stop a Ship in its career under full
Sail: and what not? and great pains is taken to assign the Cause; and to prove,
That though the Moon be made of a Green Cheese, yet is not the only Nest of
Maggots. Rondeletius alone, in ascribing it to his easily altering the position
of the Helm, and so the motion of the Ship, coming near to good sense:
especially if he had proved, That the Name of the Fish, and the Story, were not
Things much older than the Helm of a Ship.

It Is plain, that the Tradition had a very early beginning, when little light
Boats were the Ships which people used. To the side whereof, this Fish
fastening her self, might easily make it swag, as the least preponderance on
either side will do, and so retard its Course. And the Story once begot upon a
Boat, might still, like the Fish it self, stick to it, though turned to a Ship.
Assigning as great a power to this Neptune in the Sea, as the Poets have done
to Apollo the God of Life in the Heavens; who yet appears by the best accounts
of him put together, to have been at first no better than a Crafty Mountebank.

The TOBACCOPIPE-FISH. By the People of Brasile, and by Marggravius who
describes it, called Petimbuaba. He has only omitted the Line, which, like a
very small Chain, runs along both sides, as in the Sea-Scorpion, from Head to
Tail: Both the Body and Snout are long and slender, from whence its Name. It Is
also pictured, and in some sort described by Piso.

The PRICKLED TURBUT. Rhombus aculeatus. So called from his figure and the
prickles on his Back or brown side. Described by Rondeletius. The two strings
that hang at the nether Chap, are here wanting. He is said, having hid himself
in Mud, with these, to Prey upon little Fish, which seeing them rigle, make at
them, supposing them to be Weeds.

The little GLOB-FISH. Orbis minor. So called from his Orbicular figure.
Described in most Musaeums. Most curiously figured in that of Calceolarius. He
is armed with long, round, hard, and sharp Spikes or Needles all round about,
almost like those of a Hedg-Hog; and is a sort of Porcupine-Fish.

It Is probable, That the Fish swims with these Needles all closely couched down
round about, for that otherwise they would hinder her swimming. But if at any
time she is pursued, she immediately advances her Pikes, and bids the enemy
come at his peril.

This and the other kinds are found, especially, in the River Nile.

The SEA-PORCUPINE. Histrix Piscis. Johnston has figured it ( Tab. 45.) but
not well. Neither do I find any tolerable Description of it.

This here is above a foot long, near half a foot over, and as high, round, and
almost of an Ovale figure. His Chaps about an inch long, shaped somewhat like
the Bill of a Sparrow, each of them one single Bone, without any Teeth, but
sharp-edged; at the corners of the Mouth an inch over. His Eyes an inch over,
an inch behind his Mouth, and two and distant.

The Gills but of an inch long, Unequal before, very high, viz. in the same
level with the Eye. As also the Gill-Fins, which are about two inches long, and
three broad. Two inches and before the end of the Tail, a third an inch and
broad and two inches long. An inch and before the end of the Tail underneath, a
fourth somewhat less. The Tail-Fin above two inches long, an inch and high,
with its extreme edge Unequal.

He is covered with a Skin on the Back (now) of a brownish yellow, on the Belly
whitish. Armed all round about, excepting his Tail, with round, hard, and most
sharp Needles, about an inch and long, an inch distant one from another, each
having three Roots (now) visibly spread under the Skin, one on each side, and a
third before.

It Is most probable, That to these Roots are fastened so many Muscules, whereby
these little Pikes are governed in their motion, and kept steady in their
posture of defense.

Another SEA-PORCUPINE like the former.

The FROG-GLOB-FISH. Orbis Batrachoides. Figured by Johnston under the Title of
Gestachelt mere Taube, Tab. 24. But I find it not described to any purpose.

This is seven inches long, three broad, and as high. His Forehead above an
inch and over, by the eminency of his Eyebrows a little hollow. His Eyes
round, above an inch over. His Mouth very broad and semilunar, like that of a
Frog; from whence I take leave for his Name. His nether Chap a little broad and
more forward than the upper. Without any Teeth, but rough like a File. The
Gills an inch long, an inch and behind the Eyes. The Fins are five. The
Gill-Fins above an inch long, almost as broad. Before the end of the Tail, one
above about an inch long, that underneath broken off. The Tail-Fin above an
inch long, near as high. The Anus opens an inch and quarter before the Tail-end.

He is covered all over with a very hard and tough Skin, (now) of a yellowish
straw-colour. Armed round about with strong Spikes about of an inch long,
couched backward, and fixed with three Roots, as in the former. But not, as
those, round, but flat with two edges like the point of a Sword.

It may further be noted of these Spikes, That being fixed in the Skin, both
here and in the other kinds, so as to couch and point backward, the fish needs
not to tack about, but is at the same time in a posture of defense, and of
flight, for its surer escape.

The EGYPTIAN GLOB-FISH. It differs from the rest, especially by the smallness
of its Prickles, which are rather like the little Thorns on a young
Rasperry-Bush. He is not armed with them, as Rondeletius says, all over; the
Skin behind the Gills for the length of of an inch, and on the lower part of
the Tail, being bald.

The HARE-GLOB-FISH. Orbis Lagocephalus. I find it not any where pictured or
described. It Is above a foot long, a foot high, almost five over. His Head
almost like a Hares, from whence I have Named him. His Forehead plain and
almost square, an inch and broad. His Eyes round, above of an inch over, and
stand high. Three quarters of an inch before the Eyes, two holes like Nostrils.
From thence to the Nose-end a little above an inch. The end above an inch over,
and round. His upper Lip stretched thence to the breadth of an inch. Each Chap
as it were divided into two great Teeth of an inch broad.

The Gills an inch and long, behind the Eyes an inch, below them an inch. The
Fins are five. The Gill-Fins stand obliquely between the Back and the Breast,
an inch and long, and three broad. Three inches before the Tailend, a third
almost two inches long and one broad. Underneath, a fourth somewhat less. This,
which may be noted, being couched backward, the other foreward. The Tail-Fin
two inches and long, and as high, with its utmost edge Unequal.

His Skin Membranous and limber, on the top of his Head, Back, upper Sides and
Breast, and round about his Tail, smooth and bald. On his Belly and lower part
of his Sides and Breast, armed with little short Prickles, about the third of
an inch distant, and fixed with little Roots, as in the former.

From the Crown of his Head are drawn two Lines almost to those holes like
Nostrils. From the hinder part of the Head, two more all along the Back and
Tail, in the figure of the Letter s. And two others from the Gill-Fins toward
the Anus, and from thence to the end of the Tail. By these Lines, were there no
other marks, it is easy to distinguish him from all the other Species.

An OVAL COMPAGES of BONES, said to be the Sceleton of a Globe-Fish.

The RED-GOURNET. Pavo Salviani. Cuculus, from the noise he makes like a Cuckoo
when he is taken. Well described by Rondeletius. But his figure, especially in
making him with a long Snout, answers not, unless it be of another Species. For
the Forehead of this is square, and the Head almost cubical, like that of the
Scorpion-Fish. From which this chiefly differs in not having the Fins of the
Back prickly or spiked, and having a Line running from the top of the Back on
each side the Back-Fin to the Tail, like a small linked Chain.

The LONG-SNOUTED GOURNET. Cuculus Rondeletii. By which Author it is well
described. It differs from the former Species, chiefly, in having a much longer
head, and a saddle-Nose.

The STAR-GAZER. Uranoscopus. Because he looks directly against the Sky:
whereas, as Rondeletius observes, the Ray and several other fishes, although
they have their Eyes standing on the top of their Heads, yet the Pupils of
their Eyes are not directed upwards, but side-ways. The Fish is accurately
described by the same Author. Saving, that he has omitted the arching or
bowing of his Body with the Head and Tail upwards: unless both the shape of the
Fish here be forced, and his own figure thereof false.

This Fish, when alive, has a slender Membranous string, which he projects and
draws in, at pleasure, as a Serpent does his Tongue. With this he duckoys
little fishes, and then preys upon them. For plunging himself in Mud (
Rondeletius says, he has seen him) and then lifting up his head a little, he
casts out the said string; which the little fishes taking for a Worm, and
nibling at it, he immediately plucks them both in together.

The SQUAR-FISH. Piscis quadrangularis. I think it is not described or figured
by any. There are two square fishes described by Wormius, the former of which
he supposes to be made so, not bred. But neither is this, as that is, spiked
behind; nor as the other, horned before, besides other differences: 'Twas sent
from the East Indies.

It Is about fifteen inches long, four high, in the middle three and over. His
Forehead square, by the eminency of the Eyebrows, a little hollow; two inches
and over. His Eyes near an inch. His Nose blunt, not very steep, an inch and
long. Two small holes in the place of Nostrils. His Mouth exceeding little, an
inch over. His Teeth also very small.

The Gills are strait, an inch and long. His back a little Unequal; toward his
Tail, and on his sides blunt angled. So also his Belly, but plain or flat; and
considerably rising up toward his Tail. He has five Fins. The Gill-Fins are
two inches in length, and two in breadth. They stand a little obliquely. Like
these, a little before the Tail, one above, another under. The Tail-Fin three
inches long, and three and high.

Some part of both the Chaps and of the Tail are covered only with a Skin. The
rest of the fish with a kind of Crust: yet not altogether so hard as in the
Crustaceous kind. This Crust is all over adorned with innumerable little round
knobs reduced, for the most part, into hexagonal figures, subdivided into
equilateral Triangles.

Wormius calls this Crust a Leathery Skin: but not rightly; as any one that
compares it with the true Skin upon his Chaps and Tail, whereof he takes no
notice, may easily judge. That it may be bent, proves it not a Skin; for so may
the Crust of a Lobster. To which this seems to stand in the next degree, as
that does to a shell. Or to speak properly, it seems neither a Skin, nor a
Crust alone, but a Medly of both together, or a Crust upon a Skin: Nature
having here, as in many other examples, united two extremes by a third Thing in
the middle.

Another SQUARE FISH stained with black Spots. Given by Mr. John Short.

The CONEY-FISH. Piscis Triangularis. Described by Marggravius. Wormius also
supposes his first Square-Fish to be the same. But neither of them are
particular enough.

It Is above a yard long, above a foot high, the Belly flat, and almost a foot
over. From whence his sides rise up into a sharp Angle. His Head somewhat like
that of a Coney; from whence his Name. His Eyes great, sc. an inch and long;
and stand high. His Forehead almost square, and by the eminency of the
Eyebrows a little hollow; an inch and broad. Half an inch before the Eyes two
little holes like Nostrils. His Nose descending almost perpendicularly, three
inches deep, and blunt-ended. His Mouth not above an inch over. The Teeth of an
inch long, and sharp: ten in the lower Chap, in the upper twelve. His Back
arched between the Head and Tail, and, as is said, very sharp. On each side his
Belly he has a strong sharp Spike of an inch long, standing near, and pointing
toward his Tail.

His Gills are strait, above an inch long, and parallel to his Nose. The Fins
five. The Gill-Fins here broken off. A little before his Tail, one above,
another below, both two inches long, an inch and broad. The Tail-Fin three
inches long, and two and high. Excepting his Chaps and Tail, which are naked,
he is covered all over with the like Crust, as the former. On the upper part of
the Tail, also grows a distinct Crust, of an Oval figure.

The Chaps and Tail of this Fish, and the rest of the kind, are both left
naked, for the more easy and convenient motion of the one in eating, and of
the other in swimming. And for the same reason, the Gill-Fins do also stand
upon a naked Membrane.

The Female-CONEY-FISH. The Nose here descends not so steeply. The Belly not
so broad. The Crust every where, except the middle of the Belly, stained with a
great number of round black Spots. Has not many of the triangular
subdivisions. Nor the Oval Crust upon the Tail.

Another of the same Species, with that now described.

The HORNED CONEY-FISH. Piscis triangularis cornutus. Johnston has figured it.
Tab. 45.
But without either Description or Name. It differs from the fish last
described chiefly by its Horns, which he has upon the top of his Forehead, an
inch long, near an inch about the bottom, and pointed; almost like an Horses
Ears when he pricks them forward. His Teeth are also smaller, his Mouth lesser,
and more naked. His Belly narrower, and so his sides more compressed. The
Tail-Fin longer. And the Oval Crust on the Tail, not above but beneath.

ANOTHER of the same Species, with two Oval-Crusts, one on the top of the Tail,
the other underneath.

A THIRD, without the said Oval-Crust, and the triangular subdivisions.

Two more HORNED CONEY-FISHES. All five of one unmixed ash color.

CHAP. III. OF SCALED-FISHES.
THe HEAD of the CUCUPU-GUACU; so called by the people of Brasile, where it
breeds. Described by Marggravius. Who says it is sometimes two yards long, and
a yard and half about. The Mouth of this Head standing quite open, makes a
circle of a yard in compass. So that, probably, it is the biggest of
Scaled-Fishes, excepting the Sturgeon. Of all our European Fishes, it seems to
come nearest to the Cole-Fish or Black-Cod.

The SCALES (perhaps) of the same Fish. They are almost circular, above three
inches in Diameter, and answerably thick. Like other Scales, they are horny,
transparent, and elastick or springy. That part of their edge which is inserted
into the Skin, bluntly Toothed. They have a great many exceeding small Striae,
hardly visible, but by holding them up against the light.

The FILE-FISH. CAPRISCUS. It was sent from the Bermudas. Curiously pictured
and described by Salvian. Hist. 71.
I call it the File-Fish, from the likeness which the foremost Bone upon his
Back has to a file. There are three of them: which, says Salvian, he raises
and depresses at his pleasure; yet so, as not one alone, but altogether. And
although you press the foremost, and greatest never so hard, it will not stir:
but if you depress the last and least of all never so softly, the other two
immediately fall down with it: just as when a Cross-Bow is let off by pulling
down the Tricker. For which reason also the fish is called, at Rome, Pesce
Balestra.

Another thing peculiar to this fish is, that his Scales (as Salvian calls
them) are separated by cancellated lines, or Lattice-wise. I add, and that they
are all incrustated, and rough-cast with little round knobs. So that the cover
of this fish, is near a kin to that of the Square-Fish; that being only one
entire Crust, this divided into many little ones.

It may be noted, That where Salvian describes this fish to be compressum and
latum, atque fere orbicularem, he has not properly expressed his shape. For he
is not Broad, but Tall; and much nearer to a Rhombus or Diamondsquare.

This fish seems to be the same which the People of Brasile call GUAPERUA;
described and pictured by Marggravius and Piso, and out of them by Johnston.
Tab. 34.


The TALLEST FILE-FISH. This seems to be that Species particularly described by
Salvianus. It differs from the foregoing only in being taller and narrower: and
in having the Tail-Fin with longer horns.

The PRICKLE or longest FILE-FISH. It is a young One. Differs from that of
Salvian. In that on the sides hinderly, grows a little short Prickle upon the
center of every Scale, pointing backward. It is also ratably much longer and
lower, his Nose a great deal shorter, and less steep, and his Tail-Fin less
spread.

Another LONG-FILE-FISH of the same Species, and about a foot in length. But
the Prickles abovesaid are here worn off.

The STREAKED FILE-FISH. Capriscus striatus. This differs from the last, In
that its Scales are not prickled, but streaked with many small Lines; forward,
entire; but hinderly composed of many little knobs.

The SNIPE-FISH. Scolopax. It was taken in the Baltick-Sea. I find it no where
well described.

It is a little fish, when at full growth, as Rondeletius, who had seen three
of them all small, and full of Eggs, well observes. This here, about three
inches and ^/^ long, ^/^ of an inch high, the sides much compressed, being not
^/^ of an inch thick. The Orbits of his Eyes very great, sc. a of an inch over.
His Forehead as much.

He has a tubular or pipe-like Snout, resembling that of the Hippocampus, or
the Horse-Fish. It consists of only one hollow Bone, strait, and from his
Eyes above an inch long, or one third of his whole length. At the root, above
^/^ of an inch high; at the extremity, ^/^. Where he has an exceeding little
Mouth; which opens not before, but above.

His Gills large, behind the Eyes ^/^ of an inch, from whence carried to his
Snout or Bill, they describe ^/^ of a circle. The Fins four. The Gill-Fins
almost an inch long, in the same level with his Mouth and the bottom of the
Eye. The Tail-Fin as long, ^/^ of an inch high. Before and above the Tail a
fourth, a of an inch long, ^/^ broad.

A little before this Fin, stands a white and very sharp Spike, or Saw, above
an inch long, couched a little backward, and armed with a double row of small
sharp Teeth, all pointing upward. To this great One, are subjoyned two lesser,
by one common Membrane, as in the File-Fish.

His Skin gray with some few rays of red; possibly more in the living fish. He
is scaly, and rough with a single Row of very small Prickles near his Eyes,
with a treble one on his Belly and Sides; hardly visible without a Glass.

By the great length and structure of this Fishes Bill, he should seem, upon
dilating his Throat at his pleasure, to suck in his food, and so to use it as a
Sirynge. Withal, his Mouth not being open before, but on the top of his
Bill-end, like a Gutter-Trough, does much promote the current, of all that
comes in at it, to his Throat. And so in the Trumpet-Fish.

The three Spikes on his Back (whereof Rondeletius and others only observe the
greatest) being associated in the same manner, and having the like mutual
proportion, as in the File-Fish; it may reasonably be supposed, that they have
also the same Motions, depressions and erections, as, in speaking of the said
fish, has been described. And that therefore, while the fish swims secure,
they are all couched down close to his Back, that they may not hinder his
course: but that when ever he is pursued, he strait erects them all, and by the
help of the lesser, keeps the great one tite up against his Enemy.

The SQUARE ACARAUNA; by Mariners, The Old Wife. It has some marks of kindred
with the tall Acarauna, described and pictured in Marggravius and Piso. But
has also diverse others of distinction from it; as the different position of
the Spurs, the different shape both of Head, Body and Tail, etc. as may be
observed by comparing the Descriptions and Figures of both together. The tall
Acarauna is figured also by Johnston, Tab. 32.
out of Marggravius; but without any Inscription of Number or Title.

This here was brought from Suranam. Eight inches long and, above three high,
about one and over. His fore parts and Tail are (now) of a pale straw-colour;
all the rest are of a blackish brown. He is covered all over with Scales
engraven with small parallel Lines: except on his Forehead and Chaps before,
where his Skin is only ruged as you draw your Finger downward.

The Crown of his Head rises up into a blunt Angle, his Forehead flat, above an
inch broad. His Eyes round, ^/^ an inch over, and stand high. A little before
them, two small holes like Nostrils. His Mouth also stands high, and is extreme
small, scarce ^/^ of an inch over. His Teeth contiguous, like small Needles.

On his upper Jaw grow four little Prickles on each side. On each side his
nether, two great Spikes or Spurs, hard, and very sharp, about an inch long,
pointing obliquely downward, and bended a little like a Cocks Spur. From the
Root of these several little short Prickles run in a strait Row to the Eyes.

The Gills behind make a strait Line, and an Angle, from whence they are
produced forward. The Fins seven. The Gill-Fins hang under the Spurs, an inch
and long near an inch broad. The Breast-Fins also an inch and long, ^/^ broad.
The Back-Fin from the top of his Head, the Belly-Fin from his Anus are carried
to the Tail-Fin, so as to stand betwixt two parallel lines, making the fish
almost square; from whence I have Named it. They are both stretched out beyond
their roots with two sharp Angles. The Tail-Fin an inch and ^/^ long, and
higher, with its utmost edge Unequal.

The Spur above described, is a dangerous, and as it seems, a malicious Weapon;
wherewith the fish strikes side-ways, and as it were underhand, not suffering,
in its doged humor, any other fish to consort with it.

The SWALLOW-FISH. So called from the length of his Gill-Fins, which reach to
the end of his Tail, like a pair of very long Wings. By some, the
Flying-Herring, from a likeness in the shape of their Body. Perhaps
Rondeletius's Mugilis Alatus. But by Salvian called Hirundo, by whom it is well
described. Histor. 62.
That Line (says he) which in other fishes goes either from the Head or
Branchiae by the sides to the Tail; here runs from the Belly-Fins along the
Belly to the Tail. Johnston also describes it out of Aldrovandus, but omits the
just number of seven Fins. In the figure also which he gives, the Belly-Fins
are wanting. And the Orbits of the Eyes, which are extraordinary great, he
represents little.

His Gill-Fins he uses as Wings, wherewith he flies, for escape, above the
water, when pursued by another fish; especially, as Piso says, by the Dolphin.
But as they fly (as the same Author) they often become a prey to Waterfowl.
Hundreds of them are sometimes seen above the Water at once. When they fly,
they make a kind of Stridor, as some Fowls with their Wings.

KITE-FISH. So called also from his Wings or Gill-Fins, which, what they want
in length, they have in breadth and strength. Figured by Rondeletius, and
accurately described. Saving, that he mentions but seven of his eight Fins.

This fish seems to be the same with that which Marggravius describes by the
Name of PIRAPEBE.

Another KITE-FISH of the same Species. Figured by Johnston, Tab. 17. N. 9.

Of the GILL-FINS of the FLYING-FISH, it is further observable, That they are
fastened very high near their Backs; that so at the same time their Bodies may
be in some part sustained by the Water, and their Wings have a little scope to
play above it, for their easier advance into the Air.

The BEARDED-LOACH or GROUNDLING. Gobites Barbatula. It is a small fish about
five inches long, bearded with six small Threads, three on each side. Yet
Bellonius mentions but four. Nor does Gesner picture more in his corrected
figure. See them both.

The MAILED-FISH. Cataphractus Schonveldii. It was brought from Guiny. But is
also often taken in the Mouth of the Elb. It is well described by the Author of
the Name. And by Johnston well figured, Tab. 46. But in Tab. 24. but scurvily,
unless it be another Species. It is a small fish about five or six inches long,
with a broad squat head, and thence taper'd to the end of the Tail. His Scales
are as it were doubled, by which he becomes of an angular figure, with about
eight Angles before, and six behind. His Nose-end armed with two Prickles
standing together in a semilunar figure; supposed to be venomous.

The TAMOATA pictured and described by Piso, seems to be the same with this
fish.

Another MAILED-FISH of the same Species.

The MAILED-FISH of Brastle. It has a near resemblance to the former; from
whence I have Named it. I find it no where described. It Is a foot long. His
Head an inch and long, and near as broad. On the hinder part of his Head he
has three Angles, one on each side, and a third in the middle. The Forehead
almost flat. His upper Chap Elliptick. The Orbits of his Eyes round, of an inch
over, an inch behind his Nose-end, distant. A little before the Eyes, two large
holes like Nostrils. His Mouth a little prominent, near ^/^ an inch over. His
Lips in the place of Teeth, only rough. His lower Jaw and Belly flat. His Body
before, an inch and ^/^ broad, an inch and high, his Back round, the Sides
ending in two Angles. His Tail taper'd, and with the Sides a little flat.

One half of the Gills opens on the sides, the other underneath in the Breast.
The Fins are eight. The Gill-Fins of an unusual structure, having their utmost
Spine or Bone very rough, thick and strong, above an inch and long, flat and
crooked, almost like a Reaping-Hook, seven or eight times as big as any of the
rest of the Fin-Bones. The Belly-Fins much less, and above an inch behind. Just
over these the Back-Fin. On the Tail one above, underneath, and at the end: But
the two first are here broken off.

His Head is covered with a brown and rough bony Helmet. His Back, Sides and
Tail with Scales of the same color, but a little lighter, rough, engraven with
small parallel Lines, and of a Rhomboidal figure. His Breast and Belly only
with a thin limber Skin.

The BRASILIAN NEEDLE-FISH; by the People of Brasile called TIMUCU. Acus
Brasiliensis. Marggravius has described and figured it well. It Is a long
slender fish, from whence its Name. It has also a pair of Chaps like a long
Bill. He only omits the two scaly Lines which run along the Belly and Tail of
the Fish, which every where else has a naked Skin.

The CHAPS (perhaps) of the GREENLAND NEEDLE-FISH. The Teeth which stand in
single Rows on the Edges of the Chaps are thick and strong, yet very sharp. In
the lower Chap, near the two edges, are two furrows, into which the Teeth of
the upper Chap strike. The two Bones which compose the Chap, are joined
together by an indented Suture, most curious to look upon. The fish seems next
a kin to the common great Needle-Fish, or the Girrock, which is described by
Rondeletius, Aldrovandus, and others, and pictured by Johnston, Tab. 15.

It is an Observation of Aristotle's, Hist. Anim. lib. 2. c. 17.
That most fishes having no Gullet, but their Stomachs standing just behind
their Mouths; it often comes to pass, that while the greater pursue the lesser,
(...), their Stomachs come out into their very Mouths. Some resemblance
whereof, in a low degree, may be felt by those that with an eager Appetite
first begin to eat; the Gula rising up a little as it were to meet the meat
half way; which, upon its retreat, it sucks in after it. Which has happened in
some with that violence, as to have endangered their being choked.

CHAP. IV. OF EXANGUIOUS FISHES.
THe Rough HORNED-LOBSTER. Given by Dr. Thomas Allen. I call it so, from the
many pointed knobs which he has all over his Back. Squilla Crangone. Described
by Rondeletius. See also the figure hereof in Gesner, p. 1099.

This fish, instead of the Plates on the Tail of a common Lobster, has so many
Fins, which for the far greater part of them are naked, or without a Crust upon
them.

All Lobsters use their Tails, as Fins, wherewith they commonly swim backward
by Jirks or Springs; reaching sometimes ten yards at a Spring. For which
purpose, whereas the Gill-Fins of other fishes, which are their Oars, are a
little Concave backward; these have the Plates of their Tails when they bend
them down, as they use to do, a little Concave forwards.

Another HORNED-LOBSTER with a smoother Back. These fishes are the most
pleasant meat of all the Crustacious kind; except perhaps the Punger.

A CLAW of the GREAT LOBSTER. Astacus Leo. It Is above a foot long, and a foot
and three inches round the middle. So that, ratably, the Lobster it self must
have been about a yard in length.

TWO more of the same, a little lesser.

The CLAW perhaps of a rare sort of CAMARUS, with the inner Joint forked.

The MOLUCCA-CRAB. Cancer Molucensis. The best figure hereof is given by
Besler, who alone shows the Eyes; yet not so clearly as could be wished. Not
ill described by Joh. de Laet. That which Clusius makes to be the fore part, he
makes the hinder: and Wormius does the like; and says, it is plain, from the
position of the Legs; With both whom I agree. And to what Wormius says, I also
add, the position of the Eyes; for from Clusius's Description, it would follow,
that they stood in the hinder part of the Crab. Here are eight or nine of them;
the entirest and largest, given by Henry Whistler Esquire.

The Eye of this Crab, has a horny Cover. But stands almost flat, or in the
same plain with the rest of the shell. It Is pleasant to look on, being latticed
like the Eye of a Butterfly. The latticed-work is discernable to a naked Eye,
but much better through a Glass.

The People J. de Laet. l. 2.
that live near the River Chovacoel in Nova Francia, pile their Shafts with the
Tails of this Crab, which breeds there abundantly.

The CLAW of the PUNGER, or the VELVET-CRAB, called Pagurus. It is one of the
biggest sort; and the best meat of any. Linschoten reports, That some (but he
says not of what kind) in India, have been found so big, that whenever they
got any man with in their Claws, it cost him his life.

The PRICKLED-CRAB. Hippocarcinus, or Cancer asper, because of the Spikes that
grow upon his Back. They breed near Norway.

Another with a great number of Center-shells growing upon its Back.

It is noted by Aristotle, De Part. Anim. lib. 4. c. 8.
That all Lobsters and Crabs have their Right Claw, the greater and stronger.
Crabs have no Tail, nor need it, says the same Author, Ibid.
as Lobsters do to swim with; because they live much upon the Land.

CRAB'S-EYES. Oculi Cancrorum. A Crustaceous-stone so called, growing as is
commonly (but I doubt falsely) said, in River Crabs. Especially, says Cerutus,
Mus. Calceol. Sect. 1.
in the Female, at that time, when the new shell begins to grow.

Both the Powder and the Magistery of Crab's-eyes; and the Claws, and
Distilled-Water of Crabs, are all used in Medicine.

The NAKED-SHRIMP, commonly called The Souldier-Crab. Cancellus. Here are two
of them housed; one in a Sea-Snail-shell; the other in that of a common Wilk.
It is accurately described by Aristotle. Hist. An. lib. 4. c. 4.
His fore part is armed with crustaceous Plates, as the Lobster, but rather
resembles the Shrimp. His hinder part is naked, or without a Crust: from whence
I take leave for the Name: Neither the usual English Name, nor the Greek, (...)
(according to which the Latin) being suitable to the shape of this Animal, a
quite different kind from a Crab.

Two NAKED-SHRIMPS unhoused, or without a shell.

This Animal, because his hinder part is naked, always houses himself in some
empty shell, or other capable Body. When he has filled one shell with
Excrements, says Bellonius, or grows too big for it, says Aristotle, he
transplants himself to another. Those that house themselves in the shell of the
little long Wilk, or the Purple-Wilk, are called Little Souldier-Crabs, those
in the great Wilk-shell, the Great Souldier-Crab: and so, if in other shells of
like bigness.

The INMATE-CRAB. Pinnophylax. Because it is said to watch for the Prey, and to
give notice to the Pinna when to apprehend it. It Is shaped like a Crab; but
seldom grows bigger than a Chestnut. They are of a lovely white, and some with
rays of a light Red or Pinck-colour. One difference betwixt the Cancellus and
this, is, That that always chooses an empty shell, this hospitates with the
living Animal in the same shell. He cohabits not only with the Pinna, but also
the Muscle, Oyster, and Scallop.

The PREKE or POULPS. Polypus. See the Description in Rondeletius and others.
It Is a Naked-Fish, having eight Fingers or Arms spread out almost like the Rays
of a Star-Fish, and the Mouth in a manner in the middle of them. Their Arms
serve them both to swim with, and to Attaque the Prey. When they are pursued by
a fish, they presently cast forth a black Liquor, which they have always ready
in a Bag, and wherewith they darken the water, and so make their escape. Being
boiled with Wine and Spices, they are, says Moufet, Lib. de Re Cibaria.
a very excellent meat.

The SMOOTH STAR-FISH or SEA-PAD. Stella marina laevior. It was sent from the
East Indies. I find it not described. When alive, it is of a flesh-colors. It
has five Arms or Rays, each an inch broad, and proportionably very long, sc.
above five inches; the Trunk being not above an inch and Diameter. The upper or
unequal side is wrought all over with very little lenticular knobs, almost like
a Chamaeleon's Skin; with small Concavities interjected, like those in
Poppy-seed. Underneath, each Arm is furrowed, the Margins of the Furrows being
set with a kind of curious Fring. The Margins of the Arms wrought with
Lenticular eminencies set in a straight Row, and besprinkled as it were with
little Century-seed.

All Stars have their Mouths in the middle underneath, as the Sea-Urchin. They
feed upon Shellfish. And seem, says Rondeletius, to have no other passage for
their Excrements, but their Mouths. Whereof I much doubt. They take the Prey,
as the Polypus, and swim very swiftly, by stretching out or contracting their
Arms at their pleasure.

The BRANCHED STAR-FISH. Stella marina arborescens. A rare kind. It was taken
in the Bay of Mastachuset in New England. See the Descrisption hereof in
Rondeletius, and out of him in Wormius. As also in the Philosophical Trans.
Number. 57.
under the Title of Piscis Echinostellaris Visciformis. Before I had perused
these, I had drawn up a Description of my own, which I will take leave to
subjoyn. It is above a foot Diametre. The Mouth, in the middle, is divided into
five Lips. The figure both of this and of the Trunk or Body is pentangular. The
Diametre of the Trunk almost three inches. The sides grow thin from the Mouth
to their Edges, which are so many exact Hyperbola's.

From the five Corners of the Trunk, as many Branches being produced, are
presently each divided into two others, about an inch in compass; round, but by
a double Row of little knobs, seeming to be square. Each of these, are again
subdivided into lesser and lesser Branches. The last whereof, are scarce
thicker than a Horse-Hair. In number, by a moderate estimate, above a Thousand.

As he swims, he spreads and stretches out all his Branches to their full
length; but so soon as he perceives the Prey within his reach, he hooks them
all in, and so takes it as it were in a Net.

The PRICKLED STAR-FISH. Stella marina hirsuta. Perhaps Rondeletius's Pectinata
prima. It has five Arms, each Arm pointed, and also slender or narrowed next
the Trunk, but spread in the middle. Two inches and long; the Trunk it self not
above an inch Diametre. The upper part has a rough shag of short Prickles; the
other, of longer: where also the Arms are furrowed. These innumerable Prickles
upon their Arms, are all movable, as in the Sea-Hedg-Hog.

Three more PRICKLED STAR-FISHES; which indifferently answer the second, third,
and fourth of Rondeletius.

The CROWN'D-STAR-FISH. Stella marina Coronalis. It was taken in the
Danish-Sea. I meet not with the Description any where. It Is a little One. It
has five short Arms, bluntly pointed, about two inches long. The Trunk two
inches and ^/^ over, the five Sides whereof are Hyperbolick. The upper part
rises up like a Crown, adorned with round Knobs of the bigness of a green Peace,
with other little ones, on both sides like Pins heads, ranged into five even
Rows from the ends of the Arms to the top of the Star; in some sort, as
precious Stones are set upon a Royal Crown: from whence I have named it. The
spaces also between them are beset with little knobs. The edges of the Arms and
Sides are in like manner set round about with lesser upon greater. Underneath,
the furrows of the five Arms meet in the middle, paved with little Stones
almost like Teeth; the broad Margins, with other round knobs or stones.

These Stones, are in color, substance, and nature congenerous, with those
which are commonly called Crab's-eyes.

The HIGH-CROWN'D STAR-FISH. It differs from the former, in being much taller,
and in having no Knobs, but only Spikes, the one half whereof are ranged into
certain correspondent Orders.

A FLAT SPIKED STAR-FISH, taken in the German Ocean.

Little STAR-FISHES with five Arms, taken in the British Seas.

A STAR-FISH with six Rays or Arms. They are almost like those of the smooth
Star-Fish; excepting, that two of them are as short again as the rest. Whether
a monstrous Production, or a distinct Species, I cannot say.

A STAR-FISH with TWELVE RAYS; by some called Sun-Fish. 'Twas taken in the
British-Sea. The Basis of each Ray is much slenderer than by the figure in
Johnston is represented. Neither is it shag'd only on the edges, as in the same
figure, but all over.

SECT. VI. OF SHELLS.
CHAP. I. Of whirled and single SHELLS.
THere is a large Treasure of Shells in this Musaeum: in all, great and small,
about six hundred. The Reduction of all which to the Order of Nature, whoever
shall go about, will find to be no little Task. Nor can it be perfectly done
here, because as yet the Collection it self is not perfect. According to the
best Method I can at present think of, I shall here place them. And that it may
be the better judged, how far it is natural, or not, I shall afterward digest
them into Schemes. Most of them are Strangers in England and the British-Seas,
and therefore I must be allowed a little more than ordinary liberty for the
English Names.

Note, That when I speak of the Right or Left Lip of a Shell, I mean, as it is
held with the Mouth downwards.

The FROG-WILK. Murex Coracoides. Described and pictured by Johnston out of
others. As are also most of those that follow, which are only named. It has
three Appendices on each side, like fingers or feet, and one at the end.

The BROAD-LIPP'D WILK. Aporrhais. The Lips of this are pale and even. Of this
kind, three great Ones are here preserved, one of them above a foot in length.

The BROAD-LIP'D WILK, with wrinkled Lips, and dyed with a deep purple. See a
curious figure of this in Calceolarius's Musaeum, Sect. 1.
under the Title of Conchilium Muricatum. This Shell, says Cerutus, Ibid.
the Indians use as a Trumpet, both in their Wars, and in Hunting.

The MARBLE WILK. Murex marmoreus, from its mixed colors, which make it look
like spoted Marble. Of these, here are five.

The ORIENTAL WILK. Murex Orientalis. The right Lip of this is even. Here are
four great Shells of this sort, near a foot in length.

Another ORIENTAL WILK, with the right Lip undulated.

Betwixt the three sorts of Shells above mentioned, there is this difference,
That the right Lip of that commonly called The Oriental, is only expanded; that
of the marbled, expanded or spread, and turned outward; of the Broad-Lip'd,
spread outward, and as it were Fingered.

A SHELL like the ORIENTAL, with a KNOBED Turban or Whirle.

Another of the same sort with an EVEN Whirle. It is a small shell, not above
an inch and long. Forward, somewhat flat, and white as Milk. Hinderly, stained
with tauny spots. The left Lip is turned or spread out. The right, at the
bottom wrinkled, and stained with a light purple. Toward the Cone or fore
Corner, is gathered into an open Angle. The Whirle is smooth, not very high,
makes six Rounds.

The LONG-MOUTH'D WILK. Murex Labris parallelis. Both the Lips of this are
plain or even on the Surface. I call it Long-Mouth'd, because the Mouths of all
that have been named before, are very wide.

The LONG-MOUTH'D WILK, with oblique furrows on the left Lip. Here are four of
this sort: whereof one is near a foot long. Each of the inner Rounds of the
Whirle or Turban, is one third part lesser than that next without it.

The SPIKED-WILK. Murex Aculeatus. This, of all the rest, has the Name, Murex,
most properly given it; from the spiked Instrument used in War, so called. The
Spikes of this are round. Here are three of these Shells, one of which is of a
foot long. Well figured by Olearius. Tab. 32. f. 5.
And better by Besler.

The SPIKED-WILK, with doubled or PLAITED Spikes. Here are two of this sort,
one of them near a foot long. Both the Lips are a little drawn outward, and so
the Mouth almost Oval, both the corners thereof pretty long, the left Lip
spread outward, the right wrinkled; the main Body somewhat Conical, the Whirle
low, consisting of six Rounds; both striated, and armed with plated Spikes
standing in a spiral Order.

The BOSSED or KNOBED-WILK. In the place of spikes it has round knobs. Here
are five or six, all lesser ones, about the length of a Katharine-Pear; so that
it is probable they grow not much bigger.

The CONICK SNAIL. Cochlea Cylindrica; so it is commonly called by Zoographers,
but very improperly, the figure hereof being Conical. Here are about fourteen
of this sort. Whereof some have a plain, others a knobed Turban. Some are all
over white, or yellowish, others are stained white and black, or blackish-bay,
white and brown, or white and yellowish. In some the colors are laid in spots,
in others undulated, and in some others Lattice-wise. Rondeletius says, That
this Shell seldom exceeds the thickness of the Thumb. Yet one of these is above
a foot long, and the Base above three inches over. The rest are small, all of
them plain Cylinders. Not unelegantly expressed in some variety of figures by
Olearius, Tab. 31. and Fig. 3. of Tab. 32.

The Whirle makes nine or ten Rounds: which hold the same proportion one to
another, as in the Long-Mouth'd Wilk. In the Kingdom of Congi, and some other
places in the East Indies, these Shells go for Money.

The CONICK SNAIL a little unequal, and with the Rounds of the Turban also
unequal.

Another Unequal Conick Snail, with the Rounds of the Turban Concave.

The GREAT PERSIAN WILK. Concha Persica major. Of this sort there are four here
preserved, of which, two are above a foot long.

This Wilk yields a purple juice, anciently used for deying. The Cover of this
Shell is called Onyx or Unguis, because in shape like the Claw of a Carniverous
Bird. The best of these Opercula or Covers are found in and brought from the
Red Sea.

The lesser PERSIAN WILK, with furrowed Lips. Of this sort there are five here
preserved of a middle size. The Great Persian Wilk is knobed, and has only one
Series of wrinckles. This even, and with a double Series of wrinckles a cross
one to the other. Each of the outer Rounds of the Whirle is double the
thickness of the next within it.

The lesser PERSIAN WILK with even Lips. It Is a small shell, scarce bigger than
the Kernel of a Filbert. The Mouth is almost Oval, each Corner ending in a
small Channel. Both the Lips are turned outward sideways, and as far as the
end of the Turban. The Back is speckled with white, red, and blew. The Turban
not high, nor has more than three Rounds.

The PERSIAN WILK, with the Rounds of the Whirle plated and interrupted; so as
the Plates of the several rounds do anticipate one another. Of these here are
three.

The FLAT-LIP'D SNAIL. Cochlea sinistri Labri angulo duplici. Not described. In
a manner half a long Oval. The left Lip is flat, whereby it has a double edge.
Deep within, it is stained with a shining Bay. The left Lip near the Turban
almost an inch broad; before, it ends sharp. The Turban makes but about two
Rounds. Both this and the Body are beset with knobs in a spiral order, and are
covered over with a pale purple Crust.

The short FLAT-LIP'D SNAIL. It Is white within; yet the left Lip is stained
with two Bay spots. The Back of a light ash color. The Knobs of this have no
Incrustation. The Rounds of the Turban are three.

The WRINKLED-SNAIL. Cochlea rugosa. Here are two of these, whereof one is near
a foot long. Each of the outer Rounds of the Turban is twice as big as the next
within it. One of these is curiously figured by Besler.

The HOOK-NOS'D SNAIL. Cochlea Rostro recurvo. So I call it, though it is not
properly the Nose or Beak of the Snail, but of its shell. The Turban is pretty
high. Both this and the Body are wrought with knobs and lines in an oblique and
spiral Order.

The SNAIL with the SPIKED TURBAN. Cochlea Turbine aculeato. This shell is
described and figured by Fabius Columna. In his Purpura. But better in his Book
de Aquat. and Terrestr.
Yet in some things he hardly reaches it. The Mouth is a kind of long Oval. The
right Lip is spread, and as it were doubled outward. The Back faced with smooth
Plates like so many more lips, carried obliquely from the left Lip to the
Turban, and there set with short but very sharp Spikes. The spaces betwixt
these are an inch broad, wrinkled with very small furrows, and curiously
stained with pillars of white and brown lines meeting together in several
Arches, as if it had been done by a Painter.

The SHORT-NOS'D SNAIL, with a low and plain or even Turban.

The DIPING-SNAIL, Cochlea Immerso Turbine. Not described. In other Snails the
Rounds of the Whirle stand either in or else above a plain; here, they dip or
run down within the shell. Here are diverse of them; all very smooth, and of an
Oval figure. One of a white color, besprinkled with an innumerable company of
small brown specks; about the bigness of a little Horse-Plum. The rest are
smaller.

The LONG-MOUTH'D SNAIL. Cochlea Labris parallelis, s. Cylindrovalis. The
figure hereof is betwixt Cylindrical and Oval. One half only of the left Lip is
turned outward, and uneven with oblique furrows. The right Lip plain. The
fore-angle of the Mouth crooked. The Rounds of the Turban furrowed, not high,
four or five in number. The Back is painted with a mixture of yellow, bay, blew
and black specks. It is about two inches long. There are some more of the same
Species that are less.

The NAVLE-SNAIL. Cochlea Umbilicalis. The Turban of this is smooth. The end of
the inmost Round is produced like a Navle, whence its Name.

Another sort of NAVLE-SNAIL. The Turban of this is set with short doubled or
plated Spikes. It is almost a foot in length.

The OVAL LONG-MOUTH'D SNAIL. Scarce bigger than a Filbert Kernel. The Lips are
parallel. The right turned or doubled outward. The left uneven with three
oblique furrows. The Back speckled with white and red. The Whirle has four
Rounds pretty high.

The PURPLE-WILK with solid Spikes. Purpura aculeis solidis. This and the other
kinds commonly found in the Dead-Sea.

The PURPLE-WILK with long plated Spikes. Purpura Aculeis plicatis longissimis.
By Ferranto Imperato, called Echinata. Olearius gives a good Figure, Tab. 29.
fig. 1.
Fab. Columna the Description, with the Title of Purpura muricata sive Murex
Rostratus parvus. I will add my own a little fuller. The main Body is not much
bigger than a good big Nutmeg. But has a Horn no less than two inches and
long, near the Mouth of an inch over, and sharp-pointed. Almost a Pipe, but a
little open underneath by the length. Along the right Lip and the Turban it
self, in three Rows, stand several long sharp plated or gutter'd Spikes
triangularly. But on the Turban they a little anticipate each other. As also do
the Plates of the several Rounds. The right Lip is in some sort toothed, the
left turned outward.

The PURPLE with REDOUBLED SPIKES, i. e. with the greater doubled Spikes
collaterally subdivided into lesser. Of these there are four. Two of them
white, described by Columna with the Name of Purpura sive Murex Pelagius
marmoreus. Another, ash-colored; and a fourth, brown.

All Purples have a Canale or Gutter'd Horn long or short, in which is lodged
that part which is called the Tongue; but performs the same Office as the Gills
in other Fishes. Fab. Column. Purpura.
The Animal creeps and directs its own way with its Horns, like a Snail: yet
has it not four, but two only. Mart. Lyster de Cochl.


The Purple Tincture it yields, is contained betwixt that part which is called
the Papaver and the Neck. Aristot. Hist. Anim. lib. 5. c. 15.
It is of a different degree; in some, more upon the Red, like that of
Cochinele; in others, more upon the Blew, like that of Violets. It was
anciently (pressed out of the living Musaeum Worm.
Animal, and) used especially for the deying of Silks. But is now grown out of
use, as is likely, from the great abundance of a sort of Fucus, which the
Italians call Roccella, wherewith Silk-Dyers do now make very rich Purples of
all varieties, with less labor and charge. Fab. Colum. Purpura.


That little Shell called Blatta Byzantia, is the Operculum or Lid of the
Purple.

The SQUARE-WILK. Buccina Rhomboidea, i. e. It has in a sort four equal sides,
with unequal Angles. I find it not described. The Mouth almost Oval, both the
Corners a little gutter'd. The right Lip is first turned outward, and then
doubled or returned back again inward; and the edge a little toothed. Just
opposite to this Lip, is laid upon the shell a kind of list, and doubled down
in the same manner. Upon every Round of the Turban also are certain edged
pieces in two opposite Rows. By these and the list above said the shell is made
square. Both the main Body and the Turban are wrought over with knobs great and
small standing in oblique and spiral Orders.

All WILKS that have the Rounds of the Turban thus edged, are betwixt a Purple
and a common Wilk.

The LONG SQUARE WILK. Neither do I find this described or figured. Both the
doubling of the right Lip, and the opposite List, are less close, than in the
former. Neither has it any of the larger knobs.

The LONG THICK-LIP'D WILK. The right Lip of this is swollen or stands thick
outwardly; and on the Rounds of the Turban are many edged pieces.

The same sort of WILK, with few edged pieces on the Turban.

The THIN-LIP'D WILK. The fore Corner of this ends in a gutter'd-Horn. Columna
describes and pictures it with the Name of Bucciunm Rostratum. Lib. de Aquatil.
and Terrest.


The GREAT THIN-LIP'D WILK. Strombus magnus. This sort has edged pieces on the
Rounds of the Turban. The biggest of turbinated-shells: this here is almost 1/^
a yard long, and above 1/^ a yard round about.

The TRIANGULAR WILK. No where described that I find. The Mouth almost Oval.
The fore Corner hereof ends in a gutter'd-Horn bended a little upward. The left
Lip only turned outward. The right is first bended outward, and then doubled or
returned inward. From thence at the distance of d of the circuit of the shell,
is laid a a List, in shape imitating the said right Lip. At the same distance,
a pretty broad-pointed knob. By both these and the right Lip the shell is made
Triangular. The knobs on the right Lip and List, are white, the other parts
tawny, and as it were wrinkled. The Turban, which has six rounds, is also a
little angular.

The COMMON WILK. This sort is short-snouted, or has no horn. Of this sort are
several here preserved.

It is affirmed by Aristotle, Hist. An. lib. 5. c. 15.
That you may know how many years a Wilk is of, by the number of Rounds in the
Turban. Of the manner of laying their Eggs, see Bellonius. They are desired by
some, as a rare sort of Meat. The best are in clean Creeks. That which Mr.
Lyster describes, De Cochl. Mar. Tit. 1.
by the Name of Buccinum maximum, is fished out of the Sea at Scarbrough.

A Wilk, says Nicolaus Myrepsius, being burnt, powdered, and mixed with old
Oil to the consistence of Glue, and so the Head, first shaved and rubbed,
anointed therewith, is an admirable Remedy against Baldness and Morph of long
standing. It Is usual to give Drink to Children that have the Chin-Cough, out of
a Wilk-shell; and it is observed, says Wormius, Musaeum.
to do them good.

The WILK-SNAIL. Buccicochlea. So I call it, because, in Figure, it approaches
to the Wilk; to the Common Snail, in the thinness of its shell. Columna Lib. de
Aquat. and Terrest.
describes and figures this with the Title of Buccinum exoticum variegatum.

The WILK-SNAIL winding, from the Mouth, toward the right Hand; whereas almost
all other shells wind the contrary way. The Mouth is white as Milk, and almost
Oval. The left Lip spread and turned outward. The Rounds are Unequal, as in the
Wilk. In number six, speckled with yellow Bay and blew spots. The shell is as
thin as that of common Land-Snails. Of kin to that shell described by Mr.
Lyster under Tit. 1. lib. de Cochl. Mar.

The BELLY'D-LONG WHIRLE. Turbo Ventricosus. This shell runs all into a Whirle
or Turban. It is also bellied, i. e. swells out a little betwixt the Mouth and
the Cone. And the left Lip is uneven with oblique Furrows.

The WHIRLE-SNAIL. Turbocochlea. The rounds of this sort wind from the Mouth to
the right Hand, and that very obliquely, in number six, speckled with Chestnut
spots in Rows. The Mouth very long, and one Lip ridged. It Is thin like a common
Snail-shell. Columna Lib. de Aquat. and Terrest.
describes and figures one pretty like this by the Name of Turbo alter minor.

The SMALL WHIRL-SNAIL, with numerous rounds, and also winding from the Mouth
toward the right Hand. There are about fifty of them in a Bottle. They are of a
brown color; and thin as the shell of the common Snail. Their Mouth almost
round. The right Lip has a little Angle. It has nine rounds with very small
transvers Striae. Columna describes and figures one like this with the Title of
Turbo Terrestris non descriptus. Mr. Lyster Lib. de Cochl.
calls it Buccinum pullum; and very aptly compares it, both as to shape and
bigness, to an Oat. He says it is found in England in the Cracks of old Trees,
and in Garden-walls.

The BELLY'D-LONG WHIRLE, with small spiral Furrows.

Another BELLY'D-LONG WHIRLE, with little knobs in spiral Orders.

The LEVEL-WHIRLE, or the SPIRE. Turbo planus sive vere Conicus. The rounds are
all knobed, and the right Lip gathered into small wrinkles.

Another KNOBED SPIRE, with the right Lip plain or even. Here are several
little Ones of this sort.

The SMOOTH SPIRE, with high or swelling rounds. Here are two sorts of these;
one with oblique, the other with spiral small Furrows. This shell is described
by Mr. Lyster. Lib. de Cochl. Mar.


The SMOOTH SPIRE, with flat rounds. Here are also two sorts of these; the one
furrowed, the other not, described and figured by Columna under the title of
Buccinum Persicum eburneum nitidum maculosum. Of all these here are several
small Ones.

The Natives of Brasile make a sort of Musical Instruments with these kind of
shells. Joh. de Laet.


The LOOSE WHIRLE. Penicillus. The one half of it windeth loosely like a Worm;
the other is a small long Turban.

The SHORT WHIRLE. Trochus. This is somewhat more prolonged than some others of
this kind, the Base broader, and the Rounds in a level. Of this sort here are
two great Ones, curiously stained with Crimson waves from the Base (which is
about four inches over) to the Cone. It is of kin to that which by Columna is
called Turbo Persicus maximus.

Another level SHORT WHIRLE, also somewhat longer than the rest, and with the
Rounds in a level, but the Base narrow.

A thin level SHORT WHIRLE, shorter than the former, and with flat rounds. Here
are two sorts of this; the one with smooth, the other with ruged or knobed
rounds.

A fourth WHIRLE of the same kind, with high rounds. Here are also two sorts of
this; the one smooth, the other ruged.

The BELLIED SHORT WHIRLE with spiked rounds. It Is no where described that I
find. The Base two inches broad, the Cone as high. The Mouth almost round, and
within of a Pearl color. The whole shell without whitish. The Base all over
wrought with round, and obliquely radiated wrinkles. The rounds are knobed, and
the under edges of every round with flat doubled Spikes. Here are two more of
the same sort, with the Spikes ground off.

Another BELLIED SHORT WHIRLE, almost smooth, having only very small wrinkles,
without any Spikes.

The CONCAVE SHORT WHIRLE. Trochus centro late concavo. Hitherto undescrib'd.
It Is two inches broad, an inch an high, being Bellied, and having the Cone much
depressed. As also the Mouth, which is therefore a flattish square. Both the
Base and the Rounds are wrought with small spiral and radiated wrinkles running
across. It has five or six rounds, somewhat swelling. Not, as in most other
shells, contiguous in the center, but thence receding, leave a wide space in
the middle of the shell, representing in some sort a pair of Winding-Stairs.
The ridges also of the rounds are wrought with Tooth-Work, answering to the
Sculpture on the edges of a Staircase.

There are several sorts of short Whirles or Trochi, says Mr. Lyster, Lib. de
Cochl. Mar.
found in England, as at the Mouth of Umber, and in Lincolnshire by the
Seaside.

The LITTLE ROUGH WILK. Nerites Turbine rugoso.

The LITTLE KNOBED WILK. Nerites Turbine tuberato.

The GREAT ROUND-MOUTH'D SNAIL, with a Pearl color. Cochlea caelata. Here are
three of these; of which two, are each above 1/^ a foot wide. Their pearly
gloss, on the outside is artificial; within, natural. The natural color
without is sometimes green, with white and bay spots.

One way whereby it receives a bright pearl color, is by being steeped in
Vinegar; which eats away the rough and duller surface.

The GREAT NAVLE-SHELL. Umbilicus marinus Indicus major. It is the lid of the
Cochlea Caelata; and has its Name from its shape. Very well described by
Wormius.

The LITTLE NAVLE-SHELL, with wrinkled edges.

A SECOND, with the Unequal side more plainly winding like a Navle.

A THIRD, with the same side besprinkled with a great company of small round
knobs.

The little Navle-Shell is well expressed by Olearius, Tab. 33. Fig. 7. Here
are several of them kept in a Glass.

Not only this, but other turbinated shells have their lid. Which, as Mr.
Lyster well observes, is as it were another Valve.

Spirit of Nitre droped upon this Shell, rises up with a strong efferrescence.
The admirable Virtue of this Shell is experienced, says Wormius, Musaeum
by men of very good note, in stainching of Blood; the flat side hereof being
only applied, with Spittle, to the Forehead. It Is usual to lay a cold Key or
Stone in the Neck. But if the same, especially a good big Pebble with one side
flat, like a Painters Mullet, were applied to the Forehead, I should expect as
good advantage from that, as from the application of this shell.

The Women in France, says Boethius, Lib. de Gem. and Lapid.
nimio Mensium fluore laborantes, commonly take this shell reduced to a fine
powder, which they find to be a very good remedy, and keep it as a Secret.

The LESSER ROUND-MOUTH'D SNAIL, with a shorter knobed Turban.

The SPIKED or TOOTHED SNAIL. Cochlea Echinophera sive Echinis plicatis. Of an
ash color. The Mouth round. The Turban short, having only three rounds almost
flat. The Base wrought with circular wrinkles. The utmost round, as it were
toothed with short flat-doubled Spikes.

The FINGERED SNAIL. Cochlea Dactylata. Not yet described. The Spikes of this
are doubled and redoubled, yet not flat, but thick and round, so as to resemble
so many little Fingers. Without, it is of a sad brown. Within, of a Pearl
color. The Mouth round. The Turban low, making only three rounds, which so
recede from the center, as to leave an empty space in the middle of the shell.
It Is all over rough with small plated Spikes, and pointed wrinkles in a spiral
Order.

The HIGH-CROWN'D SNAIL, with a semicircular Mouth.

The LOW-CROWN'D SNAIL, with a semicircular Mouth.

The HALF-LIP'D SNAIL. So I call it, because one half of the inner Lip being
spread outward, the other half seems as if it were clipped off. Of this here are
two sorts; one with the upper, the other with the nether half deficient.

Another SNAIL like the former, saving that the inner Lip is whole, and the
Turban somewhat higher.

Another SNAIL with the Turban somewhat lower. Of this here are two sorts; one
with the rounds of the Turban even or smooth; the other, wrinkled.

The SEMICIRCULAR MOUTH, TOOTHED on both sides. The Teeth of the outer Lip are
the lesser; they stand not on the edge of the Lip, but deep in the Mouth, just
over against the inner Lip: where the white parts of the shell on both sides
are defined or circumscribed by a Circle, whose center is at the edge of the
inner Lip. Outwardly, the shell is speckled with white, red, and black Spots,
and ruged with spiral wrinkles. One like to this is described by Columna with
the Name of Cochlea marina marmorea.

The BLOBBER-LIP'D SNAIL. Cochlea Labrosa. The Mouth of this is also
Semicircular, the outer Lip being round and spread out a little; the inner
strait, like white Marble, its inner edge toothed, and spread outward almost as
far as the Navle of the shell; from whence I have named it. The Turban is low
and almost flat. It makes scarce more than two rounds, which therefore
immediately run from great to small. On the outside it is ruged with transverse
wrinkles, and speckled with red and black spots upon white.

The toothed Lips of both these last Shells, most probably, serve as Joints to
hold their lids, so much the more close and steady.

The FORE-WHIRED SNAIL. Cochlea Turbine antico. This is no where described.
It Is smooth, of an ash color. The outer Lip is spread a little backward; and
toothed within: as is also the edge of the inner Lip. Both the corners of the
Mouth are placed on the circumference of the utmost round. Whereby, contrary to
all other shells I ever yet saw, it has the Turban or Whirle made before. It Is
much depressed, consisting of five flat rounds. The assertion of Aristotle,
Hist. Anim. lib. 4. c. 4.
That the Turban always stands behind, is here proved false.

The FLAT-WHIRLE. This Snail is a perfect Helix, all the shell lying as it were
between two levels. Of this kind Mr. Lyster Lib. de Cochleis. Tit. 26.
describes three sorts. Of which he observes, That upon the sprinkling a
little Salt or Pepper, or the like, into their Mouths, they yield a Crimson
liquor.

The same Author Ibid. p. 1.
has observed some particulars of the parts of Snails; as their Horns, Eyes,
(as he supposes them) Teeth, Anus, Lungs, milkly Veins (which are all they
have) parts of Generation, etc. Which last, says he, are so like, as to make
it seem very probable, That they are Hermaphrodites. In the time of Coition,
they strike a sort of small testaceous Needles ( Spicula testacea) into one an
others Necks. For what cause, or in what manner, he could not so well observe.

No Shell with a Turban, has less than two rounds, nor has any, says the
same Author, Ibid.
of English Shells, above ten.

The slick SAILER. Nautilus laevis. This sort is brown on the Back, and black
on the Belly. Curiously figured both in Calceolarius's Musaeum, and by Besler.
Here are two of them, whereof one is near of a yard long.

One half of the same sort of shell cut down the middle. By which it appears to
be divided by about 40 oblique transverse Partitions.

The Animal is of kin to the Polypus. Famous for the Art of Navigation. He
rises to the top of the Water with his Shell inverted; and being there, returns
it. Then having a thin Membrance spread against the Wind for a Sail, two Feet
for the Rudder, and two for the Helm, he sails along. If any fear arises, he
pulls all in, and filling his shell with Water, immediately sinks himself to
the bottom of the Sea. Arist. Hist. Anim. l. 9. c. 37. Scal. exercit.
Rondeletius out of Oppianus. Bellonius. And out of him Septalius's Musaeum.


The PEARLY SAILER, It Is both within and without of the color of the best
Oriental Pearl. This sort is brought from India and the Persian-Gulf. Hereof
Necklaces are sometimes made. As also Images and Beads used at Devotions.

The SPIKED SAILER. The Back and Belly of this are flat with two ridges, and on
each ridge grows a row of short Spikes.

The MAILED SAILER. Nauticlus Laminatus. I meet with it no where. Both within,
and especially without, of the color of the richest Pearl. It is composed of a
considerable number of Plates, as if in Armor. Yet the Plates continuous;
furrowed along the middle, and produced with a blunt Angle, almost like a
Widows-Peak. From under each of which, emergeth a kind of little Tongue, like
that of a Shoo-Buckle.

VENUS-SHELL. Concha Veneris. Because beautiful. Or else, says Terzagi, quod
partem Veneris Imperio subditam referat. The first I shall name is that with
Blobbed-lips, or having as it were a white thick Facing. They are also
furrowed, and stained with Chestnut Spots. But the Back with a Purple.

VENUS SHELL, with the right Lip furrowed, but neither of them faced or turned
out.

A SECOND of this kind with the left Lip furrowed.

A THIRD, with both Lips furrowed.

The HIGH-BACK'D VENUS-SHELL. Of this kind, here are three of a Chestnut or
Bay-colour; one stained with Green, another with Brown, a third with white
spots. And a fourth, white, speckled with yellow, red, and purple.

The NAVLED VENUS-SHELL. It Is also somewhat high-back'd, and with each Lip
furrowed. On the thicker end, it has some resemblance of a little Turban or
Navle.

The LONG-VENUS-SHELL. Of this sort here is one stained with white spots upon a
Bay ground. The rest of the same Figure, are somewhat rough, having, as it is
likely, been steeped in Vinegar, or some other ways corroded.

The BUNCH-BACK'D VENUS-SHELL. Described and figured by Columna under the Name
of Concha utroque latere se colligens. It has a transvers Angle or Ridge in
the middle. Where also, there is a distinct piece, most closely inlaid into the
Back of the Shell. The Lips also are both even.

The VENUS-SHEL with smooth or even Lips, and without any ridge on the Back.
The little white Ones of this kind, are those which are particularly called
ENTALIA. With these, says Rondeletius, the French adorn their Horses Bridles,
and other parts of Equipage. Of these and Jet mixed together, they also make
Bracelets, and other Ornaments, for Widows in Half-Mourning. Many of this sort,
striated, are found, says Mr. Lyster, near Hartle-pool in the County of
Durham, where the People call them Nuns.

Diverse other lesser VENUS-SHELLS of several kinds, and stained with several
colors, are here collected.

The Italians use this Shell for the polishing of Paper, and other things.
Wormius.
The people living near the Red Sea gather them in abundance, and sell them to
those that trade to Memphis; for with these the Egyptians smooth their Linen
Cloth. Bellonius
Goldsmiths cut them in two, and make Spoons of them. They are commended
against those Ulcers in the great Corner of the Eye, which usually turn to
Fistula's, because of their admirable drying quality without heat. Rondeletius.
Yet we have no reason but to believe, that most other shells may be of equal
Virtue. But if we observe, it is usual for people to have a high esteem of
those things, even as to their Medicinal Virtue, that look prettily, or that
are rarely to be had. Whereas, it is plain, that Nature generally supplyeth us
with the greatest plenty of those things, which are the most useful.

The round SEA-URCHIN or BUTTON-FISH. Echinus orbicularis. Here are several
Species hereof. The first I shall name is the Edible Button-Fish. These have
very great Prickles, with Seats or Bases proportionable, in five double Orders.
And the shells are orbicular. See the full Description in Rondeletius.

They were anciently eaten raw before Supper, as Oysters are now, and as much
esteemed.

The ROUND BUTTON-FISH, with ten Orders of midling Prickles. Of these Prickles
it has five Orders of bigger, and five of less, all Conical at each end, and
bounded by ten more. Of this kind, here are some more, others less round. Some
also that are White, and others Redish.

The ROUND BUTTON-FISH, with the least sort of Prickles, and disposed into ten
Orders. Of this sort here are White, Brown, and Green. These, Mr. Lyster says,
are found in the English-Seas.

The GREAT OVAL SEA-UR CHIN. Echinometra Aristotelis. See the Description
hereof in Calceolarius's Musaeum. The greatest, and so as it were the Mother of
all the other kinds; from whence its Name. This here is near a foot long. Its
Figure is not orbicular, but comes near an oval or flatish Heart.

The MARE-MAIDS-HEAD, or lesser Oval SEA-URCHIN. Echinus Spatagus. This differs
from the former, only or principally in being much less; seldom exceeding the
bigness of a Hens Egg. These are shells rarely found.

The Sea-Urchin makes its progressive motion with its Prickles which it uses
instead of Feet. Arist. H. Anim. lib. 4. c. 5.
And it is affirmed, by Moufet, particularly of the Great Oval, that it moves
in a spiral line.

The SEA-EAR. Auris marina. It has its Name from its Figure, somewhat like a
Man's ear. The inside is of a Pearl-colour, the outside brown and ruged with
many small radiated and spiral wrinkles running across. There are several Holes
on one side it, through which the Animal admits and expels the water at
pleasure. Here are three of them, whereof two, are each about five inches long.
This shell is found in abundance near Garnsey Island. List. lib. de Cochl.
The Goldsmiths in France Bellonius
split them into thin Plates, wherewith they beautify Cabinets, and other
Works.

The VAULTED-LIMPET. Patella concamerata. No where described, that I know off.
It seems to be of the Limpet-kind, or to stand betwix this and the Sea-Ear. It
is in a manner a half Oval split by the length, which is an inch and half. It
has a Navle, as the Sea-Ear, winding to one side. The Back is rough, and of a
whitish ash color. Within, very smooth and of a pale purpleish white. The
hinder half is vaulted with a most white Plate, joined to the sides of an inch
below the edges.

The EVEN OVAL LIMPET. See the figure hereof in Johnston. That part which may
be called the Navle, stands a little above the convexity of the shell. The Seat
of the Animal is shaped so, as in some sort to resemble the Stag-Beetle. The
edges thereof curiously angul'd, part colored white and bay. The edge of the
shell is perfectly Oval, and the inner Margin of a pale blew. Here are two fair
Ones of this sort, about three inches long.

The PEARLY OVAL LIMPET. The inside hereof is of a curious pearl color, with
some rays of purple. It has a greater convexity than the former, and is waved
all round about.

The OVAL LIMPET, with very deep furrows round about. Whereby the edges also
are very angular. The Seat of the Animal white. Columna Lib. de Aquat. and
T^rr. c. 50.
seems to have described this by the Name of Lepas sive Patella maxima striata.

The LEVEL-LIMPET. Patella Plano-convexa. The sides of this lie level betwixt
the edges and the top. It Is also furrowed, but not deeply. Yet the edges are
more angular than of the former. The Seat of the Animal is white, surrounded
with a kind of double Glory. The outer Margins are of a blackish shining Bay.
There are several small ones of this sort, having the inner side streaked with
black and yellow.

The CONICK-LIMPET, with the top high, and the sides and edges level round
about.

The CONICK-LIMPET, with part of the edge raised toward the top or Navle of the
shell. This sort I meet with no where. Without of an ash color, rough with
wrinkles in rays, and waved Circles. Within smooth, the Margin white, about of
an inch broad; the Seat of the Animal yellow spread out both ways.

The Animal it self is headed and horned like a Snail. See Bellonius's
Description. Our Fishermen use the ordinary kinds to bait with, who find them
every where in our Seas on the Rocks near the shore. Lystri lib. de Cochl.
If they feel themselves touched, they stick so very fast to the Rock, that
they can hardly be loosened thence without a Knife. Wormius.


CHAP. II. Of SHELLS Double and Multiple.
NOte, That when I speak of the Base, I mean, that part on which the Teeth,
Joints or Hinges stand. When of the Navle, the peeked end of the shell, which
for the most part stands behind the Base; as also that part which answers to
it, where it does not. When of the sides, not the Concave and Unequal, but the
edges produced from the Navle on the right and left.

The SEA-WING. Pinna. Each Valve is very like in shape to the Wing of a large
Fowl, from whence I name it. Where broadest, near of a yard over. In length two
feet: being the largest and longest of all the shells that I know. The two
Valves are naturally tied together with a sort of Tow; whereby they are also
fastened to some Stone or other Body under Water. The Animal is very good meat.

The SEA-OYSTER; in distinction from the common, which may be called the
Shore-Oyster. Ostrea Pelagia. Here are several of this sort, all of them but
small. Rondeletius says, that in India they are sometimes a foot long.

The CHESTNUT-OYSTER. I meet with it no where described or figured. It is near
two inches and long, of an Oval Figure, and somewhat writhen. The outside is of
a dark-brown, very uneven with large Oval Furrows. The inside of a dark-Bay;
from whence I name it. Held up against the light, it looks like a deep Tincture
of Safforn or Myrrh. The Seat of the Animal is rough with small frizled or
undulated Wrinkles, surrounded with a smooth Margin, on one side above an inch
broad, after an odd fashion turned or spread outward, Unequal inward, and
entirely encompassing the Navle of the shell. Here are three or four smaller
Ones of the same Species.

A SHELL with the Base a little covered. Ostrea Basi Cooperta. I find it not
described. It Is somewhat doubtful whether a Limpet or an Oystershell. I think
the latter. The Navle stands obliquely. But the sides make equal or similar
lines from the Base. Somewhat above an inch in length, very Unequal, the Margin
oval. The Base is as it were shaded with a transverse Plate th of an inch
broad. The inside, blew; the outside speckled below with tawny and black spots,
above with white and purple, with very small lines running across or Net-wise.

The PLAIN ROUND ESCALLOP. Pecten Valvis rotundis and aequalibus.

The ROUND FURROWED ESCALLOP, with smooth Shells or Valves.

Another of the same sort, with rough shells.

The LONG ESCALLOP. These and the other kinds seldom exceed the bigness of the
palm of the Hand. But Linscholen P. 90.
says, That by Malacca are shells found like Scallops, so big, that two strong
men can hardly draw one of them, with a leaver, after them. Scallops will move
so strongly, as oftentimes to leap out of the Catcher wherein they are taken.
Arist. H. A. lib. 4. c. 4.
Their way of leaping or raising up themselves, is, by forcing their under
Valve against the Body whereon they lie. Scal. exerc. 219. S. 1.
They are taken amongst other places, near Portland, and at Purbec and Selsey,
where they are excellent good. Rondeletius prefers them, for Meat, before
Oysters.

COKLE. Pectunculus. Here are of these, both White, Red, and speckled with
various Colors.

The CORALLINE SCALLOP. Concha Corallina. I call it a Scallop, because it seems
to be but another sort without ears. This is only waved. See Rondeletius's
Description. He says it is rarely found, and seldom, except in the Dog Days,
after long Southern Winds, cast on the shore.

The CORALLINE-SCALLOP both waved and wrinkled; the Wrinkles and Waves standing
not across, but the same way.

The long GAPING COCKLE. Chama. It Is thiner and more easily broken than most
other shells. The Valves are seldom or never close shut. The sides are produced
from the Base by similar lines, as in the Cockle, and the figure of the shell
oblong: from whence I have taken leave for its Name. Whether the Anatomy of the
Animal would suggest a better, I know not. This here is about an inch and long;
and of an ash color.

Of this, and probably all the other Species, it is omitted by those that
describe them, that from each of the two Joints at the Base, is produced a kind
of bony Epiphysis, about of an inch long, thin, sharp and flexible: whereupon
some of the muscular parts of the Animal seem to be fastened, for the
restraining the opening of the shell from any inconvenient degree.

The BLACK GAPING COCKLE. This is somewhat lesser than the former, and of a
rounder Figure, radiated, and the edges waved. As thin as the former, and has
the like Epiphyses.

This sort, when the South Wind blows, rise up to the top of the Water, and
setting their two shells wide open; with the one under them, as a Boat; and the
other, on one side as a Sail, they scour along. Bellon* H. Anim. lib* 15. c.
12.


The Broth of this Shellfish is affirmed by Dioscorides to be both Laxative
and Diuretic. They have a kind of biting taste, like Pepper; and are therefore
called, by the French, Des Flammes: and the Italians, for the same reason, call
them, Peverazas. Bellonius


The SHEATH-FISH; commonly so called from its similitude to the sheath of a
Knife. Solen. Unguis. As the Sea-Wing is the longest, so this is the most
expanded of all Shells; though usually called A long Shell, but improperly. For
it may be noted, that the length of a shell is properly from the Navle to the
edge directly opposite; the breadth, between the two sides thence produced,
which in this Shell are the two ends: as if you should crush the two ends of a
mouldable substance of an Oval figure, till you made the two sides become the
two ends. Some of these are foot wide, or more.

This Shell is found on the shore near Scarbrough after long Winter-Storms.
Lyster. de Conch.
The Animal shines much in the dark, especially when the shell is full of
liquor, the drops whereof glister where ever they fall; by virtue of which, it
is most probable, that the Flesh it self becomes shining. Pliny.


The ROUND-OYSTER, with similar sides produced from an oblique Navle. The
Unequal is very white, and finely wrought with circular, and radiated lines
across.

The MULTARTICULATE OYSTER with a bended Base. The Unequal is smooth, and
stained with Chestnut upon white. Its Base is in a manner semilunar, produced a
little forward from the Navle. Upon this Base are fourteen, sixteen, sometimes
twenty small Joints, standing obliquely, and also in a bended line answerable
to the Base. To the two ends whereof, the Seat of the Animal is contiguous. The
fore-edge and Margin are furrowed and toothed within. Here are four of this
sort.

The BROAD-OYSTER, with similar sides.

The FISTULAR OYSTER. Concha Valvis Fistulosis. Described by Columna with the
name of Concha exotica margin in Mucronem emissa; who has also figured it
well. It has not only several Furrows or Gutters reaching from the Navle to
the edges round about, but the Furrows are also covered over, and so properly
fistular; whence I have named the Shell. The circumference or edg is also
prolonged into several Peaks, which have some kind of likeness to Sword-points.
But Columnas name is somewhat obsurdly given, unless instead of diverse, there
had been one only.

The MULTARTICULATE OYSTER, with a strait Base. Described and figured by
Columna with the name of Concha (...). Here are two of this sort. The chief
marks hereof are, that it has a great number (twenty or more) of slender
Joints, about of an inch long, placed parallel, upon a strait Base.

The ASSE-FOOT OYSTER. Ostrea Gaderopoda, So called from its Figure. Described
by Bellonius. Its chief Characters are, that it has very great Joints, like
the eyeteeth of a Man, and upon a strait Base. It grows not loose, as other
Oysters, but fixed to the Rocks under Water: and therefore in those Seas only,
which ebb and flow not, Bellonius
as the Aegean, the Hellespont, etc.

The CORALLINE-OYSTER. Spondylus Echinatus and Corallinus. I meet with it no
where. It Is of an unusual Figure. The Base hereof is strait, and an inch and
over. In each end hereof is a roundish cavity, doubtless for the reception of
answerable Joints. An inch and or more beyond this, the Navle, which is a
little bended upward, smooth within side, and scaly without. The inner part of
the shell is exceeding white, smooth, hard, and thick. The outward Crust
thiner, yet also very hard, wrinkled, spiked, and of the color of red Coral.
Part of it is broken off.

MOTHER of PEARL. Concha Margaritisera. See a true, and good Figure hereof in
Calceolarius's Musaeum. It is naturally within of the same color with that of
a Pearl. It is sometimes seen with a pearly Knob growing within it, as in this
here, near the center. But the Pearls themselves grow within the Animal: within
the Flesh (as Athenaeus Quoted by Rondeletius.
affirms) as that sort of Kernel in a Hog, called Grando. Although more
probably in the Stomach, as Bezoar, and the like, in other Animals. Philos.
Trans. N. 101.
As Eggs in the Belly of a Pullet, says Tavernier. Indian- Voyage.
The Shell is said to be found near the Island Borneo sometimes so big, as to
weigh forty seven pounds. Charl. On. Zoic.


Take Mother of Pearl, the small White Venus-Shell of each equal parts. Pour
upon them, being first powdered, the juice of Lemons, and let them stand
together (a day or two) then filtre the liquor, and keep it, as the best wash
for the Face in the World. Praevot, lib. de Med. facile paralilibus.


MOTHER OF PEARL, with the backside covered all over with those little Shells
called DENTALIA, as having some little likeness to Teeth: that is to say,
White, Smooth, Conick, and bended Tubes, which grow to this and other Shells.
See Gesner of Entali and Dentali, p. 940. The inside of the Sea-Ear, of some
sorts of Limpets, and of diverse other Shells, are commonly sold in Shops for
true Mother of Pearl.

ORIENTAL PEARL, round, and with a good Water.

PEARLS of the bigness of a large Peace, and perfectly round, but without a
Water.

ROUND PEARLS, of diverse Colors, sc. White, Ashen, Brown, Red, and Bay.

PEARLS of diverse Figures, sc. Oval, Cylindrical, Flat, Conick, Twins, and
three and four together.

WELSH-PEALR. Given by the Honorable Mr. Boil. They are most of them flatish,
and of a shining blackish color.

Heretofore, the most rich fishing for Pearls, was at the Island Margarita.
Whence their Name. Gesner.
At this time the chief Fishings in the East Indies are three, the
Persian-Gulph, on the Coast of Arabia the Happy, and in the Island Ceylan. In
the West Indies, five; along the Islands Cubagna, and Manguerita, at Camogete,
Riodela Hacha, and St. Marthas. They fish in twelve-fathome Water, five or six
leagues off at Sea, Spring and Fall. Tavern. Indian- Voyage.


Of Pearls we have these following Preparations, and probably the first, of
all, the best, if perfectly ground.

Pulvis, Essentia, Flores, Sal, Tinctura, Magisterium, Liquor, Arcanum,
Commune Butyraceum Plumaceum Riverij.


The PEARLY OYSTER. Concha Coelata. It Is shaped much like the Mother of Pearl,
but is somewhat oblong. It has also a pearly-colour within-side; but of a more
leadenwater.

The SQUARE-MUSCLE. Concha Rhomboidea, s. Musculus striatus Rondeletio. That
part where the Valves join, i. e. the Base, is long, not rounded, but strait,
and stands erect or perpendicular, by which it may be distinguished from
other Shells. It lies in the deeper parts of the Sea, and is rarely found.

The RUGGED-OYSTER. Not described, that I know. The Joints hereof very shallow.
The Navle very oblique. The Sides thence produced, dissimilar. The Back cut
with round Furrows; and the Furrows edged, and beset with a number of little
short prickles. It is of a dull ash color, roundish, and somewhat bigger than
a Half-Crown.

The SAND-MUSCLE. Tellina. They live much in the Sand; for which reason, unless
they are shaked long in water, before they are boiled, they are very gritty.
Rondeletius.
At Rome, they are esteemed a pleasant Junket. Wormius.
Here are several shells of this sort.

The TOOTHED-MUSCLE. It is of a roundish Figure, and the edges, especially
before, toothed almost like a Saw.

The GREAT WAVED-MUSCLE. Well described and figured by Columna with the Name of
Concha Maxima marmorea exotica imbricata. It is also called Concha Tridachna:
because it contains as much meat, as a Man can swallow at thrice. A certain
number put for an uncertain: for some of them hold meat enough almost to fill a
man's belly, being a foot in length, or rather in expansion or breadth; this
here of a foot. The Back is waved with broad and deep Furrows, and the edges
indented answerably. It is Bellonius
commonly found in the Red Sea.

The LONGISH-MUSCLE, with rough Wrinkles or Rays.

ANOTHER with smooth Rays, i. e. Concha Rondelet. Striata 3.

The ROUNDISH radiated Muscle.

The PLAIN LONGISH MUSCLE. This has no Rays on the Back.

The PLAIN BROAD MUSCLE. Of these here are two sorts* the one less, the other
more expanded. This latter is by Rondeletius called Concha longa; mistaking
what is properly the breadth, for the length of the shell. Of this Rondeletius.
Shell, is commonly made a sort of Lime.

The BROAD-MUSCLE, with deep Joints.

The TOOTHED BROAD-MUSCLE. Described and figured by Mr. Lyster, Lib. de Conch.
Tit. 35.
with the Name of Tellina intus ex Viola purpurascens, etc. It Is a little shell
not much above an inch broad, the edge indented round about with curious small
Teeth; and having within-side a faint purple blush.

ANOTHER little broad Muscle, without Teeth, or evenedged.

A BLOBLIP'D-SHELL, which seems to be a kind of Muscle. I find it no where.
Here are several single shells of this sort, but not one pair: which makes me
somewhat doubtful what to make of them. Most of them have about an inch of
expansion. The Concave in the inside, is triangular, with small strait
transvers Wrinkles, one Angle obtuse, two acute. From the two longer sides of
the triangle, the Margin is spread out, and on one side as it were doubled
backward. It has also one, sometimes two Joints, very deep, and for so small a
shell, remarkably strong.

The Natives of Brasile use Muscle-shells for Spoons and Knives. Barlaeus, de
rebus gestis in Brasilia.
The ashes of Muscle-shells, says Wormius, are of a Caustick-nature. As if it
were peculiar to this shell. Whereas the shells of all sorts of Shellfish,
being burnt, obtain the like. Most of them, being so ordered, and powdered,
make excellent good Dentifrices.

Hitherto go the Double Shells, or with two Valves. There remain some which are
made up of several shelly pieces conjoined to make one Concave-shell: as

The Conick CENTRE-SHELL. Balanus major. Described by Rondeletius, and others.
It is in shape somewhat like a Tulip, the several shelly Plates which compose
it, being pointed at the top, and standing together, as so many leaves. They
always grow fixed to some other Body. When boiled, they are a delicate sort of
Meat.

The SPUNG-CENTRE-SHELL. Balanus Spongiarum. So I name it. Commonly, but
somewhat absurdly, called Lapis Spongiae. For being well observed, they appear
to be little Centre-Shells, which probably never grow very big; and wherein the
leaves seem to be a little more separate, than in the former Species. They look
just like small petrifi'd Buds of Trees.

A small Centre-Shell, growing upon a Branch of Coral.

The FLAT CENTRE-SHELL. Balanus compressa. Commonly called the BARNACLE-SHELL;
and CONCHA ANATIFERA. Because supposed to be the Egg of the Barnacle. And by
some Hector Boethius quoted by Gesner, and our Countryman Dr. Turner.
it is confidently delivered, that in the Orcades there are certain Worms grow
in Hollow-Trees, which by degrees obtain the Head, Feet, Wings and all the
feathers of a Waterfowl, which grows to the bigness of a Goose. Scaliger also
describes this (supposed) Bird within this shell. Exercit. 59. toward the end.
And with respect to so worthy a Person as Sir Robert Moray (who never meant to
deceive) I my self was once induced to publish his Description of the same.
Philos. Transac^. N.
But having examined the Shell it self, I am of Opinion, That all that is said
of a Bird, is fabulous. Bartholine Histor. Cent. 6.
would have it to belong to a kind of Cancellus. But I rather agree with
Columna, that it is a sort of Centre-Shell; as being fixed in like manner upon
it is Base, and composed of several shelly parts.

Of these Shells two Species are here preserved. One of them consisting only of
five shelly pieces. Two greater, almost like little Muscle-shells. To these are
joined, edge to edge, and oppositely, a much lesser pair, sc. in such manner,
as their Base stands over the Cone, and their Points descend half way toward
the Base, of the greater pair. Both these pairs are on one side hemmed in with a
fifth piece, narrow, long, and inwardly Concave, almost like a Larks Heel. The
Neck to which they are fastened is here wanting. This Species is figured, and
in some sort described by Wormius. But the Figure in Calceolarius's Musaeum
answers not.

The FLAT CENTRE-SHELL with the Scaled Base. Balanus compressa and Squamata; so
I call it. This Species is in some sort figured by Rondeletius. But his
Description worth nothing. It Is near an inch long, and of an inch broad at the
Base, where it is somewhat narrower than in the middle. Whitish, and with some
Rays of blew. It consists of five greater pieces, whereof the middlemost pair,
the greatest and the longest. The lesser pair are joined to them edge to edge,
reaching half their length, but not oppositely with their Points downward, as
in the former Species, but upward. The fifth piece not joined to this lesser
pair, as in the other Species, but to the opposite edge of the greater. Round
about the Base of the Shell several little pieces, some bigger and some less,
stand after the manner of Scales, with their points also forward. So that it
looks almost like a great Bud crushed flat. It Is joined to a Neck about of an
inch over; an inch, sometimes more, or less, in length; of a brown color,
rough, and composed of an innumerable company of small Knobs, almost like those
on some Fishes Skins. Several Shells, by the like Necks, commonly grow all
together in a Cluster.

I have seen some of these Shells perfectly formed in all their parts, not much
bigger than a Cheese-Mite.

Thus far the Titles and Descriptions; the Schemes follow, which take in all,
save one or two of the Sub-Species: and wherein the Order is a little more
corrected.

Scheme 1.
Shells are
Single Not Whirled. Scheme 2. Whirled. The Whirle Apparent, with more Body
Conick. Scheme 3. Oval. Scheme 4. Scheme 5.
Whirle. Scheme 6.
Latent.

Not Single. Double. Scheme 7. Multiple. Scheme 7.

Scheme 2.
Not whirled
A little open Orbicular, with Button-Fish, or Edible Sea-Urchans. Echini
esculenti.
Five Orders of Prickles The Greater White Red
The Lesser White Brown Green

Ten Orders of Prickles.
Oval The Greater. The Great Mare-Maids-Head, Echinometra. The Lesser. The
Little Mare-Maids Head. Echinus Spatagus.

Wide open Limpets. Pattellae.
Level, or plain-sided Low. High or Conick. With the edge Level. Not level.

Oval. With the Navle. Prominent, with sides Equal or even, Uneven. With Waves,
deep Furrows.

Winding Only a little obl^quely. The Vaulted Limpet. Patella concamerata.
Spirally. Auris marina.



Scheme 3.
Conick, with the Turban.
Long. With The Right Lip Broad Expanded and Turned out. Armed with Fingers On
both Lips. Frog-Wilk. Murex Coracoides. On the Right only. The Broad-Lip'd
Wilk. Aporrhais.
Naked. The Marble-Wilk. Murex Marm.
Only expanded. More Even Lip'd. The Oriental-Wilk. Murex Orientalis. A little
angular.
Less. With the Whirle Knobed. Even.


Parallel Lips. With the Body Bellied. With Lips Even. The left Furrowed.
Level. With the Turban. Knobed. Spiked. Murex Aculeatus.


Low. With the Mouth. Oval. The Wilk with plated Spikes. Long. With the Body
Conick Snails. Cochleae Conicae; vulgo Cylindricae.
Level. With the Whirle Even. -- Knobed --
Bellied. With the Rounds of the Whirle Concave Unequal



Scheme 4.
Oval. With
Both Lips turned out. The Mouth Persian- Shells. Conchae Persicae.
Even Furrowed. With the Rounds of the Whirle Un-interrupted With the Body
Knobed. Wrinkled.
Plated

One only The Left. With a Double Edge. With the Body The Flat-Lip'd Snail.
Oblong. Short.
Single Edge. The Mouth Even. The fore-Corner Produced Strait. Cochlea Rugosa.
Crooked. The Hook-Nose.
Reduced With the Whirle Low. The Short-Nose. Immersed. The Diping-Snail

Furrowed. With the Mouth Long. Cochlea Cylindrovalis. Round, With the Whirle
Smooth C^c^l. Spiked Umb



The Right. With the Mouth Snailes.
Even Furrowed. With the Turban Smooth Spiked



Scheme 5.
Shells More whirled with the Mouth
Longer. With the Whirle Plated. With the Mouth Horned. With Spikes Purpurae.
Entire Plated, or Gutter'd Singly. Redoubled.

Only prolonged. With Both Lips single. The Right Thin. Strombus magnus. Thick.
The Right Lip'd doubled. Buccina Rhomboidca.

Uninterrupted. Short. With the Mouth. Little Wilks. Buccinae.
Horned. With The Lips single. The right doubled. Buccina Triangularis.
Not horned. With the Whirle Smooth. Winding from the Mouth to the Wrinkled.
Right Buccicochlea. Left


Long. With the Whirle Long Whirls Turbines.
Wholly Compact Unequal or Bellied Smooth Thin. Turbo cochlea. Thick.
Rough. With Knoby Rows Strait Spiral

In part Loose. Penicillus Level Rough. Smooth. With the Rounds Unequal Level




Shorter. With the Crown. Low. With the Whirle Short Whirls Trochi.
Level. Prolonged More. With the Base Narrow Broad
Less. With the Rounds Level Unequal Smooth Rough


Bellied. With the Center Filled The spiked short Whirle wrinkled. Hollow. The
concave short Whirle

High. With the Mouth Round. With the Turban Prominent More Wrinkled Knobed.
Level Less Knobed. Spiked. With spikes Cochlea Caelata.
Single Cochlea Echinophera. Redoubled. Cochlea Dactylata.



Cornered. With the Whirle. Behind. With Neither Lip turned back. More high.
Less high.
The Crown. One Lip. The Outer. Iner. Half way. Wholly. With the Whirle. Less
low. More low. With the Mouth Even. the Back Even Furrowed
Toothed. The Back with wrinkles
Spiral. Transverse. Cochlea labrosa.





Before. Cochlea Turbine Antico




Scheme 6.
Shells With a Latent Whirle. With the Body
Compressed Sailers. Nautili.
Even Brown and Black Pearl-colour'd
Uneven Spiked Plated

Expanded With Lips Venus- Shells. Conchae Veneris.
Not Doubled With Furrows, on One Lip. The Right. Left.
Both Lips Thin. Thick Lips High-back'd Long. Navled Not Navled



Smooth-Lip'd. With the Back Plain Bunclied

Turned out or doubled.

Scheme 7.
Shells
Double Inarticulate The Great One, called Pinna. Sea-Wing. Lesser. With the
Circumference Heming in the Navle. Chestnut-Oyster. Running through it. With
sides Similar. Dissimil ar.

Base shaded.

Articulate. With the Navle. Strait. With Valves Less Concave Eared Rounder
Longer. Scol^ops. Pectines.
Even Furrowed Smooth Rough


Not Eared Gaping-Muscle. Conchae Corallinae.
Waved Waved and wrinkled. Chama.
More.


Oblique. With the sides. Almost similar. Strait. The Sheath-Fish. Solen.
Crooked. Few. With Valves Expanded. Rounder Solid. Fistular

Numerous.

More dissimular. With the Circumference In part strait. The Base. With Joints
Few. Ostrea Gaderopoda. Numerous. Conchs (...).
Side Erected. Square* Muscle. Produced Less. More. Concha Margaritifera.


Crooked round about. With Valves Uneven. With Furrows. Circinated Rough.
Smooth. Tel^inae.
Radiaed. With the Edge Even Uneven Toothed. With Valvs Round. Expanded. Concha
Tridact.
Fu^ro^'d. With Valvs Longer. Shorter.



Even Long. Expanded. Less. More. With Joyncs Deep. Shallow. With the Edge
Even. Toothed.

Plated Valves.






Multiple Conick Greater. Centreshell. Less. Sponge- Centre-shell.
Flat. With the Base vulgo, Conchae Anatiferae.
Naked Scaled.


SECT. VII. OF INSECTS.
CHAP. I. Of Insects with Naked-Wings:
THe Bigger HUMBLE-BEE. Bombylius major. First, With a broad-Belly, colored
with Ashen, White, and Brown.

Another, with a Broad-Belly, Yellow and Citrine.

A Third, with a Long Tawny-Belly, and Brown Wings.

The Middle HUMBLE-BEE, with a Scarlet Breast, and Wings spoted with white and
brown.

The Lesser HUMBLE-BEE, painted with Citrine and Iron-colour.

A WILD-BEE, with her Follicle or Bag, near the bigness of a Wrens-Egg.

Another sort of WILD-BEE, with their BAGS. They are about an inch long, of a
Cylindrical Figure, very thin and transparent, like the inner Coats of the Eye.
Admirably placed, for warmth and safety; sc. length-ways, one after another, in
the middle of the Pith of an old Elder-Branch, with a thin boundary betwixt
each Bag. The little Bees are somewhat thicker than the Flying-Ant; and their
Bellies marked with four or five white Rings.

Another sort of WILD-BEE, which breeds in the stocks of old Willows. Curious
to observe. They first bore a Canale in the Stock, which, for more warmth, they
furnish afterward with Hangings, made of Rose-Leaves, so rolled up, as to be
contiguous round about to the sides of the Canale. And to finish their Work,
divide the whole in to several Rooms or Nests, with round pieces of the same
leaves. Hereof see in the Philos. Trans. Number. 65.
the Observations of Dr. Edm. King; whereto some others are added by Mr.
Willughby, and explained by Figures.

Some parts of the NEST of another WILD-BEE. Not much unlike the first of those
not inelegant figures, which Johnston gives under the Name of WESPENSTOCK.

The under or hinder Wings of a Be, are the least; that they may not incommode
his flight. Mouf. de Insect. cap. 1.
The Honey-Bag, is the Stomach, which they always fill to satisfy, and to
spare; vomiting up the greater part of the Honey, to be kept against Winter. A
curious Description and Figure of the Sting, see in Mr. Hook's Micrography. In
windy Weather, Bees often hold a little stone in their hinder Feet; which
serves as a Ballast to make them sail through the Air more steadily. Ibid.
The History of Bees, the best that Aristotle has given us, Hist. An^ lib. 9.
c. 40.
of any one Animal. Of their Polity, Generation, Conservation, Diseases, and
Use; see also Moufet, Butler, and a late Treatise of Mr. Rusden. All that
Authors speak of the Spontaneous Generation of Bees, is fabulous. The ashes of
Bees are put into most Compositions for breeding of Hair.

A WASPES-NEST. Vespetum. Given by Sir Jonas Moore, who received it from
New England. See the Figure of one in Johnston. It Is above a foot high, and
near a foot over. Composed of a great number of little Cells, as in the
Wild-Bees Nest, and encompassed with a Cover of the same stuff. All wrought
about the Branch of a Tree.

Both this, and the Bees-Nest now mentioned, consist of the small Fibers of
Plants, cohering, altogether as in Paper; as may be seen by a Glass. So that
the Stuff may not be improperly called BEE-PAPER.

Another WASPES-NEST, like the former. Given by Dr. Thomas Allen.

A LONG-OVAL FOLLICLE (perhaps of a sort of Hornet) with this peculiar, That
the Silk is covered with a kind of brown Crust, marbled with blackish Veins.

A NESTED FOLLICLE, or one within another. Here are three of this sort, not
fortuitous, but according to Nature. The utmost, is about an inch long, brown,
and composed of Stiff-work, with a great many small Interstices: so that it
looks just like an Oval-Net. Within this, lies loose another much smaller, of a
light Ash Color, and made like other Insect-Bags.

The Polished FLESH-FLY; that which is of a blewishblack, like Steel.

Another FLESH-FLY with a strong Proboscis or Trunk, tawny Wings, black Eyes,
bunched Back, brown, long, and sharp Belly, forked Tail, Chestnut Feet, the
hinder the longest.

The GOLDEN-EYE. Musca Chrysopis, as Moufet calls it. The Eye of this Fly is
very curious, not only with its golden color, but in being most elegantly
latticed, like that of a Butterfly. Whilst alive, they have a very stinking
scent.

The OX-FLY. Musca Boaria. Asilus.

The WHAME. Musca Apiformis. Tabani species.

The WASP-FLY. Tabani species altera.

The TWO-BRISTLED-FLY. Musca Bipilis. He has two Bristles upon his Tail,
standing level. Moufet describes five Species.

The THREE-BRISTLED-FLY. Tripilium. Of these Moufet also describes five sorts.
Here are two of them; One greater, the other less. They are most in May and
June before and after the Rains.

Flys, at the end of their Proboscis, have a Piercer wherewith they broach the
Skin. Mouf. de Ins. c. 10.
They go only, says Moufet, with four Feet, using the two foremost instead of
Hands. Ibid.
This latter part of his Assertion is true; but the former, contrary to common
Observation.

The Hair of the Head being often wet with the water of common Flys distilled
in Balneo Mariae, will grow to a very great length. Id. c. 12.
Almost all Flys, being chewed and swallowed, cause violent vomitings. Id. c.
12. out of Arnoldus.


Two FLY-NESTS; with some of the Flys. They are all black, with four Wings, the
Horns and hinder Legs both long, and the end of the Tail thick. Of kin to the
M. Bipilis.

The Nests are fastened or wrought, one, upon a head of Cypress-Grass; above an
inch long: the other, on the top of a Branch of Fern; and is about an inch
long. Both oval, and white like Wool; very porous and compressible, like a
fine Sponge; and perforated with several little round Holes. Cuting one of them
down the middle, I found, within, the more elaborate Work, consisting of a
great number of little oval Cells, as in a Wild Bees-Nest. These Cells are
placed in their length transversly to that of the Nest. In each of which, each
Fly is bred a part from the rest.

The Great BUTTERFLY. Papilio major. This is of the second magnitude. The Wings
are painted with citrine and black, both in long streaks and spots.

The Great PLUMED BUTTERFLY. The Wings are painted with black and scarlet
Rings. In the place of Horns, he has a pair of Plumes in his Forehead.

Another, with LONGER PLUMES. The Wings of this are spotted with black and
tawny.

The lesser BUTTERFLY, with scarlet Wings; the foremost of which are far
shorter than the other.

Another, having the Wings speckled with red, yellow, brown and black spots.

Of the larger, middle, and lesser kinds, Moufet reckons up and describes five
and thirty sorts. Latter part of C. 14.


That which seems to be a Powder upon the Wings of a Butterfly, Is an
innumerable company of extreme small Feathers, not to be discerned without a
Microscope. See Dr. Powers Microsc. Observe. and Mr. Hook's Micrography.


Butterflys, as most Insects, says Moufet, are very Diuretic ( urinas egregie
movent) and with more safety. Cap. 14.
It Is worth the trial.

The Great ADDERS Boult; from the strait long figure: Dragon-Fly, from the
color and bigness. Water-Butterfly, because they most frequent Rivers and
watery places. Perla, from its color. Libella, from its figure, when the Wings
are spread out. In this, the Bases of the Wings are spoted, the Belly almost
triangular, the Tail pointed, painted with black and gold-colour.

Another GREAT ONE, with silver Wings, a golden Mouth, a green Forehead,
Chestnut Eyes, a round Belly painted with citrine and black.

A THIRD, with citrine Wings, a green Back, and a yellow Belly. It is furnished
both with Horns and Plumes in the Forehead.

The Middle ADDERS Boult. It is of a dark-Green. The Head small, the Chest or
middle part short, the Belly very long and slender. Moufet reckons up in all
about 20 sorts.

The LANTHORN-FLY of Peru. Cucujus Peruvianus. A quite different Species from
that described by Moufet. And, with respect to his Wings, is no way of kin to
the Beetle or Scarabeus-kind, but rather the Locust. I find it no where
described.

It Is above three inches long, and thick as the Ring-finger. His Head, in
bigness and figure, admirable; near an inch and half long, in the thickest part
of it above half an inch over. From the Eyes forward it first swells or bellies
out, afterward contracts into a smaller, yet blunt end. It Is also crowned with
a broad blunt knob, and the end resimated or bended upward. In its
Circumference it has seven low Ridges or Angles, marked with so many black
lines, an eighth line being added betwixt the two uppermost Angles. The greater
part hereof (now) betwixt yellow and straw-colour. Yet stained with brown and
red streaks and spots, neatly ranged, especially on the top and both sides. It
seems, at least in the fore part, to be hollow, and almost like a Bladder blown
up.

The Eyes, for the bigness of his Body, very small. Of a dusky-colour, yet
glossy, and Sphaerical, looking just like two brown Seed-Pearls. Under these
stand two small round parts, open at top, which seem to be the Roots of a pair
of Horns: unless any will conceit them to be his Ears. Both these and the Eyes
are guarded with a semilunar Ridge.

The other parts, being more or less spoiled, cannot be perfectly described.
His Proboscis sufficiently strong, about an inch long, and as thick as a
stitching or Taylers Needle. The Feet all broken off. His Body an inch and ^/^
long, not much exceeding the length of the Head; about ^/^ over. Composed,
besides the Shoulders, of about ten Rings. He has four Wings, almost like
those of the Locust; the uppermost somewhat stronger and stiffer than the
other. Both Pairs are of a dun-colour, sprinkled with dark-brown spots. They
are extended considerably beyond the Body; yet the ends are worn off.

That which, beside the figure of the Head, is most wonderful in this Insect is
the shining property of the same Part, whereby it looks in the Night like a
little Lantern ( Lamphorne.) So that two or three of these fastened to a
stick, or otherwise conveniently disposed off, will give sufficient light to
those that travail or walk in the Night.

A BAULME KRICKET. Cicada. It is the fourth in order described by Moufet. The
upper Wings of this Insect also are stiffer than the other, like those of the
Locust. But that which is most remarkable, is the broad Hood which is spread
over his Head and the top of his Shoulders. It is a Stranger here in England.

This Insect, says Moufet Lib. de Ins.
after others, feeds only upon Dew; and has no Excrement; which is most
unlikely. It is by some given inwardly instead of Cantharides, both as a safer,
and more effectual Diuretic. And so far also a better Remedy in Veneris
languorem. Cap. 17. p. 133.


A Great WINGED-LOCUST. Given by Sir John Hoskins. It seems to be the second
Male described by Moufet. In length almost three inches. The Face
perpendicular, from the Mouth to the Crown of the Head an inch. The Wings
Membranous; the upper pair, the stiffest, stained with dark brown spots, and a
few Rays of Red. It is one of that Swarm which some years since destroyed all
the fruits in the Island of Tenariffa.

Of the Winged-Kind, Moufet reckons up about a dozen Species. Of their
Generation, and the Description of the Parts thereunto subserving, see the same
Author. The Description and Figure of the Lungs in Malpighius. De Bombyce p.
28. Tab. 4.


Locusts hurt the Corn, Meadows, and Hort-Yards, not only by eating, but also
by their Dung; and an ill-natured Spittle, much of which they spew out of their
Mouths, as they eat. Moufet out of Valleriola.
It Is probable, That the Spittle (if they spew any) is not ill-natured; because
the Jews were permitted to ^at this as a clean Animal. Yet may prove hurtful to
the Corn, as a Nest fit for the breeding of small Worms, or other Animals,
which may disease it.

The Ethiopians, and diverse other Nations, eat them, being first salted and
dried. Mus. Wormian.


The FEN-KRICKET or CHUR-WORME: Because toward Night, when he comes out of his
Buries, he makes a noise like that of a Kricket. So great, says Moufet, as to
be heard above a mile off. Gryllotalpa: so called by the same Author, for that
with his fore-feet, which are very strong and broad, and shaped like those of a
Mole, he continually digs up, and makes himself Buries in the Earth. His hinder
Feet are very long, wherewith he leaps; and by which, as well as by his Hood,
he borders at least, upon the Grashopper-Kind. His Hood or Mantle, which Moufet
I think omits, is about an inch long; extended forward, over part of his Head;
behind, over part of his Wings; before Concave, behind Unequal.

His Eyes protuberant, yet not great (as Moufet would have them) but very small
if compared with his Body: in color, shape, and bigness like a Strawberry-seed.

His Wings, says the same Author, are longer than his Body. Whereby it
appears, that he did not take notice, That this Animal has four Wings, whereof
the uppermost pair are not above of an inch long. The other indeed are
prolonged above of an inch beyond the Tail. Each of these apart is most
curiously foulded up inwards with a double Roll, so as to end in a point;
having their middle Rib (as I may call it) which covers the two Rolls, flat and
edged, and divided with transverse lines at right Angles. Their being thus
folded up, is a contrivance to secure them from being torn, as he runs to and
fro under ground.

CHAP. II. Of Insects with sheathed-Wings.
THe TINGLE-WORME. Proscarabaeus. He Is remarkable, especially, for his Teeth,
which are two great Hooks bended inward, almost as in the Squill-Insect. He
differs from the Scarabaeus, chiefly, in that the Vaginae or Wing-Covers are
very short, reaching but about way toward the end of the Tail. His Wings,
notwithstanding Moufet calls them Alarm rudimenta, are very perfect, and by a
treble fold lodged under their Crustaceous Covers. He also omits the
Description of his Eyes, which, through a Microscope, are a curious sight.

This Insect* with the least touch, drops a kind of Oily liquor from his Mouth;
for which cause Moufet calls it The Oil-Clock. Cap. 23.
Being bruised, it yields a fragant smell. Id. out of Toxites's Onomastichon.
They are numerous in Heidleburge and other parts of Germany.

The Great BULL-CHAFER. Taurus volans maximus. Johnston out of Marggravius in
some sort describes four Species of Bull-Chafers, of which, as I take it, this
is one. I meet also with the Picture of it in Olearius. Tab. 16. Fig. 2.
He has three Horns. The first is only the Snout produced and bended upward,
and is therefore moveable with the Head. In length, according to the figure in
Olearius (for it is here broken off) about an inch and forked at the end, and
with one upper branch a little before the Eyes. The Head very little. Upon his
Shoulders he has two immovable or unjoynted Horns, about of an inch long, of
an inch over at the Base, directed forward, and with their points inward, like
a Bulls-Horns. From the end of his Snout or fore-Horn to the end of his Tail he
is about five inches long, over his Back above two and a; the bigest of Insects
yet known. His fore-Feet are armed with Spikes, as so many Claws; wherewith,
it is likely he digs himself Buries. Of his Wings it is Observable, That at
their utmost Joint, they are laped up, or doubled inward toward the Head, and
so kept safe under the Wing-Covers; being, when out at their full length,
almost twice as long as the hinder Body or Section of the Animal. The like is
observable of the Wings of some other Beetles. His Horns, Legs, Back and
Wing-Covers are all black; his Belly brown.

Another Great BULL-CHAFER. Of the same sort.

The Lesser BULL-CHAFER. Nasicornis Triceros minor, so it may be called. It Is
all over of a shining-black. Above two inches long, almost one broad. The
Snout-Horn is not bended upward, as in the former, but downward, 2/^ ds of an
inch long, and edged above. On the top of his Back or fore-Section he has two
other little Horns, about ^/^ of an inch long, thick as those of a Snail, and
bended down as the former.

The HEAD and Fore-SECTION of the same Animal; but of one far bigger.

The TODDY-FLY. Taurus volans Marggravii Quartus, or Nasicornis Diceros. This
here came from Guinea. It Is very well described by the said Author. Except,
that he does not well compare the Eyes to a Hemp Seed: for they are not only
Sphaerical, but as big as a well grown green Peace. But that shelly-Guard,
which, as it were, hoops in the Eye, and hides the greater part of it, unless
you lay the Insect on his Back, might occasion his mistake. He has but two
Horns, yet those great ones. A Snout-Horn bended and toothed upward, and a
Shoulder-Horn bended downward. From the end of which to the end of his Tail,
about five inches. But he is not so broad as the Great Bull-Chafer.

Thirty or forty of these together, rasping or sawing off part of the Barque of
the Toddy-Tree by the help of their Snout-Horn, will drink themselves drunk
with the liquor that flows from it: from whence their English Name. For which
purpose, Nature has well placed the Teeth of the said Horn, above: for that
here, the Work is not done, as by a Man in sawing, by the weight of the Animal,
which is inconsiderable; but by the strength of his Legs, which force the Horn
upward.

See the Description of the Parts subserving to Generation in the Philos.
Transact. N. 94. Communicated by Dr. Swammerdam.

Two more TODDY-FLY'S, like the former.

The RHINOCEROS BEETLE. Scarabaeus Rhinoceros. See the Figure and Description
hereof in Imperati. It has only one Horn upon the Nose standing almost
upright, only bended a little backward, as in the Rhinoceros; whence its Name.

The PRICKLE-NOS'D BEETLE. Scarabaeus Naso aculeato. I meet with it no where
else. So I call it, because that in the place of the Horn abovesaid, it has
only a small short Prickle. The fore-Section also, near the Head, is depressed
and somewhat Concave. It Is very near as big as the former, and of a like
Chesnut-colour.

The STAG-BEETLE. Cervus Volans. Described by Moufet, Imperati and others. He
has his Name from his two Horns, which are branched like those of a Stag: but
yet moveable. His Head is very big and broad; ratably, far bigger than in any
other known Beetle, much exceeding the bigness even of the fore-Section. Under
his fore-Feet, he has Tufts of short brown Hair. His Wings are doubled up
inward and toward the Head, as in the Great Bull-Chafer. From the Tips of his
Horns (which are about an inch long) to the end of his Tail, above three inches
in length.

His Horns being moveable, he uses them to catch hold with, as a Lobster does
with his Claws. For which purpose, they are not only branched inwardly, but
also toothed with a numerous Series of little knobs, by which to take the surer
hold.

The Description and Figure of the Lungs of this Insect is given by Malpighius.
De Bombyce, p. 27. Tab. 3.
Some Observations of his Nature, see in the Philosoph. Trans. N. 127. Chioccus
says, That there are many of them in Lombardy. Mus. Calceolar.


The Horns of this Insect being set in Gold, and so worn as an Anulet, are said
to be of excellent force Chioccus in Mus. Calceol.
in easing of Pains, and against the Cramp. Read Fienus, Of the Power of Fancy.

Four more STAG-BEETLES; but lesser than the former.

Another, with the Head broken off.

The little THREE-HORNED BEETLE. Scarabaeus Triceros minor. Moufet seems to
describe it by the Name of (...); but imperfectly. His Head is guarded with two
Shoulder-Horns, and one in the Neck between them, not in his Forehead, as
Moufet mistakes. They are all three immovable or unjoynted, of the thickness
of a little Pin, or the bigness of short Gooseberry Thorns. That in the middle
stands reared upward, the other two are bended a little downward. In all other
parts it is shaped like the Scaraboeus Melanocyaneus with furrowed Wing-shells;
of which anon.

The NOCOONACA. So called by some of the Natives of the West Indies, from
whence it came. I meet with it no where else. It Is three inches long, and an
inch broad. The Head 1/^ an inch broad, of an inch long. The Horns rooted on
each side the top; but are all broken off, saving a Joint or two: which are of
that thickness, as he seems to be of kin to the Capricorne-kind; and may be
called The Great West-Indian GOAT-CHAFER.

His Back-Piece near an inch long, broad, armed with two black sharp Prickles,
1/^ of an inch long, and bended a little backwards. The Wing-shells almost
square, knobed on each side before, where each of them has one, and at the
hinder end two more very short Prickles. They are covered with a kind of Down,
or very short and fine Hair, like the Pile of Velvet; for the most part brown,
but adorned with Dashes of Red and Yellowish, or Citrine, of an answerable
shape upon both shells. The brown spaces before are also rough-cast with a
great number of small round black knobs, like Mourning Pins-Heads. The
fore-Feet are four inches and ^/^ long, as long again as the other; contrary to
what, at least, for the most part, they are in other Beetles. They are also set
with sharp black Prickles like those on the Back-Piece. The rest without them.
All of them varied with the aforesaid Colors.

Another NOCOONACA of the same bigness.

The Great European GOAT-CHAFER. Capricornus maximus Europeus. Given by Sir
Philip Skippon. Described by Moufet. It Is about two inches long. Of a dark
brown or Musk-colour. He has on his Forehead two slender Horns, knoted or with
many Joints; above an inch long, and commonly standing backward, like those of
a Goat, from whence his Name.

The Goat-Chafer, says Moufet, being weary with flying, to spare his weak
Legs, wraps his Horns ( I doubt weaker than his Legs) about the Twig of a Tree,
and so rests himself.

The LONG-SHELL'D GOAT-CHAFER. Capricornus Vaginis longioribus. I think no
where described. It is above an inch long, and the Wing-shells of themselves an
inch, being prolonged near of an inch beyond the Anus; and near an inch broad;
so deep, as to come down below the Belly on both sides. All over of a
straw-colour. The Shoulders a little knobed. The Neck, red; and about ^/^ of an
inch square. The Head still lesser, scarce so big as a Flesh-Flys.

The MUSK-GOAT-CHAFER. Capricornus odoratus. It is of the Middle-kind.
Described by Moufet. Cap. 21.
While it lives, and for sometime after its death, It has a fragrant smell;
from whence the Name.

The lesser Goat-Chafer blew and green. Minor Chlorocyaneus, as it may be
called. About ^/^ of an inch long, the Head and Neck green, the Wing-shells
blew, both glossy. The Horns 1/^ of an inch. The Legs like bright Steel.

The little Saffron-Goat-Chafer. Minimus rubrocroceus. About an inch long. His
Horns ^/^. His Legs like polished Steel.

The little Brown Goat-Chafer. Minimus pullocroceus, as we may call it. About
inch long, and slender. Of a brown color, with a yellow Ring on the upper part
of his Neck, two more on his* Wing-shells, and two sloap streakes upon each:
His Horns and Legs of a Chestnut.

The GREAT GOGLE-EYED BEETLE. Carabus Indiae Orientalis maximus. I find it no
where described or pictured. Two inches and long, and an inch broad. His Head
of a middle size. His Face perpendicular, about ^/4 of an inch long, in the
middle of a golden green. His Teeth like polished Steel, of great thickness and
strength. His Eyes of a fine color betwixt a light Chestnut, and that of red
Coral; of an Oval figure; and ratably, very great, sc. of an inch long. Which
also, so far as I have observed, is the principal Character of all the
Carabus-kind, so far, as distinct from the Capricorn: whence I take leave for
the English Name. His Horns rooted between the Eyes and the Snout; but they are
here broken off. His Shoulder or Back-Piece almost square; yet edged with a
Unequal Margin on each side; above of an inch broad, and an inch by the length
of the Insect; burnished with two large spots of the color of polished
Bellmettle; betwixt which, and on the edges or margins of a shining-green.

The Wing-shells almost two inches long, with small furrows running by the
length, and united with short transverse lines, all together, like Network. Not
Oval, but rather expressing the figure of a Speer-Mint-Leaf. At the end of
each, two very small points or prickles. In the middle, of a glorious golden
red like that of burnished Copper; On the edges of a shining bluish green. The
Belly of the same color with the middle of the Wing-shells; saving, that the
fore part of every Ring (whereof there are three) and the Tail-piece, is also
variegated with a curious sort of small white Streaks, which, at the first,
look like fine Hair.

The great Joints of the Legs (as is also best observable in other larger
Insects) are joined together, not only by Ligaments, as are the Bones in other
Animals; but the globular knob of one, is entirely enclosed* and so winds,
within the globular Concave of another. The imitation whereof, may be seen in
the Joynted Images, which some Stone-Cuters make use of, for their direction as
to Postures.

The THICK GOGLE-EYED BEETLE of the East Indies. Carabus Orientalis crassus. I
find it not described. About an inch and long, ^/4 of an inch over where
thickest. His Eyes near the color, shape and bigness of golden Millet-seed.
His Teeth of a sad Chestnut, and very robust. His Horns are broken off. His
Forehead, the sides of his Breast, Shoulder-piece, and Wing-shells, all rough
cast, especially the two parts last named; the Shoulder-piece with numerous
small punches, the Wing-shells with greater and fewer; two whereof before,
rounder and larger than the rest.

On his Breast he has a short, thick and sturdy Thorn or Spike directed
forward, and somewhat downward. He is all over of a curious green, bright and
with strong Rays of Gold, but mostly on his Belly, Forehead, and the inward
Margins of his Wing-shells. The hinder ends of which have one or two little
Indentures. His Legs broken off.

The long GOGLE-EYED BEETLE of the East Indies. Neither is this described, that
I find. About an inch and long; where broadest an inch. His Head small,
somewhat bigger than that of a common Be. His Eyes great, Oval, and of a
Chestnut color. His Forehead between them of a shining green, and rough cast.
His Teeth very strong. His Horns broken off. His Shoulder-piece almost square,
but somewhat broader behind. This, his Wingshells, and his Breast of a glorious
green mixed with some faint Rays of Gold; but their outer Margins, especially,
as you turn him on his Belly, look of a pure Bice-Blew. Their hinder ends (as
also the Tail) tinged with the color of bright Copper. Their ends are likewise
indented like the leaves of some Plants; and so rounded, as both together to
make an Elliptick. His Feet are lost.

The LONG STRIATED CARABUS. Carabus sextus Aldrovandi. Above an inch long, and
broad. The Wingshells are furrowed by the length with small Striae, and also
wrought with punched or pricked lines in the same Order. The fore-feet are
soled each with four little Tufts of Down or short Hair. Here are Three of this
sort. One, all over of a blackish color. A second has his Shoulders and the
Rimms of his Wing-shells, blew. The third has Crimson shoulders, or like pure
Lake, and the Wing-shells of a sad green with some Rays of Gold.

Another Carabus of the same kind with the former, but lesser, being not above
1/^ or of an inch long. Here are of this Species of several colors. Some, of a
dark-brown; others, cole-black; others, of a gilt-green; and others, of a
giltred like bright Copper. None of these are punched, but only striated.

The LONG SMOOTH CARABUS. It Is all over of a shining-black; very smooth,
without either pricked or striated Lines. Only a row of very small Pricks just
above the Rimm of the Wing-shells. Also in proportion somewhat longer and
slenderer than the former.

The little GREEN CARABUS. About an inch long. His Head small, scarce so big as
of the common Black-Fly. His Snout oblong. His Eyes gogling, and of a Chestnut
color. His Neck also little. His Belly and Wing-shells much broader,
especially behind, which is unusual. Above, of a curious green; the Wing-shells
marked with seven or eight white Specks on the Margins, and two in the middle.
Underneath of a golden red.

The Little BROWN CARABUS. Like the former, saving his colors; his Snout being
of a shining straw-colour; as also his Eyes, and very great; finely
Cancellated; through a Glass a curious sight. His Wing-shells brown, with
whitish Spots, fewer and bigger. His Legs of a golden red.

The Little BROAD CARABUS. Shorter, and proportionably broader, than any of the
precedent Species. All over black. The Head extreme small. The Shoulder-piece
broad, smooth, and almost square. The Wing-shells striated, each with three
ridge-lines, and each having a narrow and level Rimm or Margin; as in the other
Species. Of this sort, here are three or four; the bigest ^/^ of an inch long,
and 1/^ broad.

The common slender SPANIHS-FLY. Cantharis vulgaris. It seems to border both
upon the Capricorn and the Carabus.

Spanish-Flys, being taken in too great a dose, will exulcerate the Bladder.
Some bold Whores take them to kill and bring away their Conception. Moufet Lib.
de Insect. c. 19.
speaks of a singular Remedy which he had, Contra Veneris Languorem. Which
seems to be some Praeparation of Spanish-Flys, by the Symptom which he says
did once follow the use of it, which was bloody Urine. Yet this has sometimes
happened, only ex effraenata Venere.

Spanish-Flys j, Rhenish-Wine, or rather Spirit of Wine iiij. Digest them,
without fire, for some days. Then filtre the Spirit through a brown Paper. To
every spoonful of this, add seven of clean Wine or Ale. Of this mixture take
the first day, one spoonful; the second, two; and so increasing every day.
Against a Virrulent Gonorrhaea, a suppression of Urine, and the Stone, the
happy success of this Tincture, says Bartholine, Thom. Barthol. Hist. Cent. 5.
has been experienced by Dr. James-Francis Kotzbue. I mention it, for a safe
way of using this Insect inwardly, if in any Case we may expect more from them,
than other Medicines.

The BROAD GILDED BEETLL. Cantharis latus Moufeti. Here are several of them.
They all agree in shape; their Principal Characters, That they are broad
Backed, and Headed, like the Scarabaeus Melanocyaneus; Tail'd, like the
Scarabaeus Fullo (of both which anon) and have a small Part indented betwixt
the fore-ends of the Wing-shells, like the Tongue of a Buckle. But their
Colors are various. Two of a golden green on the Back, and like burnished
Copper on the Belly. One like Bell-metal on the Back and Belly. And one like
Copper on the Back and Belly.

The DORR or HEDGE-CHAFER. Scarabaeus Arboreus. Described by Moufet. His chief
marks are these, His Head small like that of the common Beetle. This and his
Eyes black, notwithstanding Moufet says these are yellow. His Shoulder-piece
and the middle of his Belly also black; but just under the Wing-shells spoted
with white. His Wingshells, Legs, and the end of his Tail (which is long and
flatpointed) of a light Chestnut. His Breast, especially, covered with a
downy-Hair.

The LEOPARD-FLY. Scarabaeus Fullo. Described also by Moufet. It Is bigger than
the Dorr. His Nose as black as jet, his Wing-sheaths, and almost all other
parts, speckled with ash color and black: in other respects like the Dorr.

The little TAIL'D-BEETLE. Scarabaeus caudatus minor. The Head and Shoulders
are wanting. The Wing-shells almost two thirds of an inch long and over. Of a
dull ash color besprinkled with extreme small blackish specks. His Legs and
Belly of the same. He has a strait, pointed Tail prolonged beyond the
Wing-shells of an inch, from whence I have named him; and by which he seems of
kin to the Hedge-Chafer.

The SHORT-SHELL'D BEETLE. By Aldrovandus, called Scarabaeus Serpentarius,
somewhat absurdly, sc. for that he once found them in a Serpent. But his
Description is not ill. He seems by the shortness of his Wing-shells to border
on the Dorr or Hedge-Chafer, as the former. As also by their color, composed
of black and Chestnut Rings indented together. Here are five of this Species.

Another of the same Species, with the Wing-shells all over of a Chestnut
color. Described also by Aldrovandus. Of this sort here are several small ones.

The BLACK and BLEW BEETLE. Scarabaeus Melanocyaneus. See Moufet's Description.
Of this, the Wingshells are striated or furrowed by the length. All the upper
parts are black, the under parts blew, exactly like that color which
Watch-Makers and others give to their Steel-Works. Sometimes the nether parts
are rather reddish, just like pure bright Copper. Sometimes their Tails and
Belly of a golden Green, of which is that called by Wormius, Scarabaeus (...).
Here are of these, in all, about half a score.

ANOTHER, of the same kind. But this has both the Shoulder-piece, and also the
Wing-shells very smooth.

A THIRD, a kin to the former. Yet different from them, not only in being all
over black, but especially in the make of his Feet. In those, hard and sharp
with several little Prickles standing in a Row, with some straggling hairs. In
this, having only two sharp Hooks or Claws at the end of his Feet, and his Feet
soled with a treble Tuft of a close short tawny Down.

The SQUARE-SHELL BEETLE. The Head and Shoulders of this are lost. The
Wing-shells together, make almost a long square; being flat on the top, which
is unusual, and the sides making right angles with their upper end. They are
also striated or furrowed by the length; and the sides curiously punched or
pricked.

The BEETLE with pointed shells. The Head and Shoulders of this also are lost.
All over of a very dark shining Bay. The Wing-shells above an inch long, and of
a peculiar figure; being not only much narrower, but also pointed behind.

The LONG-HEADED BEETLE. Here are several of them; all of a dun or blackish
brown. But that whereby they differ from all other Beetles, is the shape of the
Head, which, in proportion, is very long and slender.

The small PURPLE BEETLE. Of this sort here are two somewhat flat; and one
thick and round.

The BLEW ROUND BEETLE. Viola. One as big as a Lady-Cow, but longer: the other
near an inch long; Both of a Violet color.

The GREEN ROUND BEETLE, burnished with glorious golden Rays.

The Round Chestnut BEETLE, not without some Rays of Gold.

It may be worth the trial, Whether any of the Gilded sort of Beetles, are of
the same Nature with Spanish Flys, or may produce the same effect, with less
pain.

The SPIKED WATER-CLOCK. It seems to be that which Aldrovandus describes (but
very imperfectly) under the Name of Scarabaeus Aquaticus. It Is about two inches
long, and over where broadest. All over of a shining black: excepting, that his
Eyes are brown; his Antennae, tawny, his fore-Belly overlaid with a kind of
Lemon colored Velvet. On his Back, there is a triangular piece indented
between the Wing-shells. The Legs are much broken, on the third Joints, at
least of four of them, grow a pair of black sharp Prickles about the length and
thickness of the sting of a Be. But that which is most remarkable, is a strong
and sharp Spike or Needle which stands horizontally on his fore-Belly, and with
its point toward the Tail. His Wing-shells are carried down considerably below
his Belly: so that being turned on his Back, he looks as if he lay in a Boat.

By the shape of the Wing-shells, this Insect seems, like the Notonecta
(whereof presently) to swim on his Back. In which posture, in case of an
approaching enemy, the aforesaid Needle is also ready for his defense.

The Great English WATERCLOCK. Hydrocantharus major Anglicus. Described Lib. 1.
c. 23.
and figured At the end of the Second Book
by Moufet. It comes near, in bigness, to the former; as also in shape; but
has no Needle, neither are the Wing-shells below the Belly. That part most
observable in him, is his Eye, which is of a curious bright color, almost like
a Butterflys.

Another Water-Clock of the same Species.

The small brown Water-Clock. It Is flat and narrow, and of an inch long.

The smallest Water-Clock. Scarce bigger than a Sheep-Tick, all over of a
shining black.

These Insects make use of their hinder Feet instead of Oars. They are seldom
or never seen in the day, excepting in the Water, which they leave in the
night, and fly up and down, Moufet, lib. 1. c. 23.


The BOAT-FLY. Notonecta. Described by Moufet, but very briefly. Lib. 2. c. 38.
A Water-Insect, in shape like that which lives in Cuccow Spittle, but six
times as big, sc. ^/^ of an inch long. The upper Wings are opacous and thicker
before; at their hinder ends, where they lap over; transparent and extreme
thin, like the Wing of a Fly.

He swims, faith Moufet, Lib. 2, c. 38.
contrary to other Creatures, on his Back. And the shape of his Back seems to
favor it, being very like the bottom of a Boat. Nor do his hinder Legs, which
are thrice as long as the former, unaptly resemble a pair of Oars.

The Great WINGED PUNEE. Cimex sylvestris alatus major. Moufet Lib. 1. c. 29.
has given three good Figures of this Kind, but scarce describes them. All the
Species agree, in having a very small Head, broad Shoulders, a Pyramidal
Back-piece, and the upper Wings somewhat like as in the Boat-Fly, sc. half
Crustaceous and half Membranous. This, is almost of an inch long, near an inch
broad. His Shoulder and Back-Pieces yellow, shining and rough cast. The fore
half or crusty part of the upper Wings of a russet, the Membranous of a sad
green. The Belly straw colored and Chestnut, and divided into several Sections
with black Lines, half of them meeting at the ridge of the Belly.

The SPIKED PUNEE. In proportion longer and narrower than the former. The Back
russet, brown and black. The Belly, ashen. Where, that which is most
observable, is a short, flat, and very sharp Thorn or Spike standing level, as
in the Spiked Water-Clock, but with the point the quite contrary way, sc.
toward the Head.

The HIGH-SHOULDER'D PUNEE. He is otherwise of the shape and bigness of the
former: all over of a brown or dun color, especially the Membranous parts of
his Wings.

The SQUARE-WINGED PUNEE. Scarce of an inch long, and almost as broad. Partly
colored with a shining black, and three spots of white on each side.

Another Square PUNEE, with the Crustaceous part of the Wings russet.

The SHORT-WING'D PUNEE. In which respect chiefly, it differs from the former;
the Wings being in those prolonged to the end of the Tail; here, but half way.

The LONG-PECKLED PUNEE. This kind, Moufet has pictured among the small
Beetles; but by a mistake, it being really a sort of Flying Punee, with Wings
partly Crustaceous and party Membranous, which is their Characteristick. The
Shoulder-piece, Back-piece, Sides, Belly, and crusty part of the Wings, are all
red bespeckled with black spots; the Membranous part, dun and speckled with
white.

CHAP. III. OF CREEPING INSECTS.
THe SMALLEST ANT or EMMET. When well grown, they are then hardly bigger than a
good big Flea. In Barbados, says Ligon, there is a larg sort of Ants, that
build their Nests, with Clay and Lome, against a Wall or a Tree, as big as
Bee-Hives, and divided into several Cells. Hist. of Barb. p. 64.
Of the Ingenuity of this Insect, see diverse Relations in the same Author. P.
63.
They are exceeding numerous throughout all India. So that they are forced to
set the feet of their Cupboards and Chests in Cisterns of Water to preserve
their Clothes and Victuals Linchot. p. 80.
from them.

Of their Kinds, and Generation; as also their use for feeding of Pheasants and
Partridges, see some Observations in the Phil. Trans. N. 23.
Communicated by Dr. Edmund King. Of their Nature, some others in the same
Transact. N. 64.
Communicated by Mr. Ray from Dr. Hulse and Mr. Fisher. The former observing,
amongst other particulars, That the Liquor which they sometimes let fall from
their Mouths, droping upon the blew Flowers of Cichory, immediately gives them
a large red stain; and supposes, it would produce the like in other blew
Flowers. The latter, That not only the Juice, but also the Distilled Water or
Spirit of this Insect will produce the same effect, etc. Amongst which, Mr. Ray
mixeth some Notes of his own.

The Liquor of Ants is commended by Schroder Pharmac.
for a most excellent Ophthalmick.

The BAHAMA-SPIDER. It is of the Tarantula kind, and may be called Phalangium
maximum Indicum; being the biggest of all the Species, sc. two inches long.
Described by Wormius, and others. He has six Eyes, not so big as the smallest
Pins head. They stand not in a circle, as represented by Laet, Wormius, Piso,
and Olearius, but two and two on each side, and two betwixt them transversly,
thus:^^: He has two strong black shining Teeth, like crooked Claws, standing
parallel, and with their points downward, above an inch long by the bow. These
Teeth being set in Gold, are used Piso, Hist. N. l. 5.
by some for Tooth-Pickers. Being vexed, they strike with a Sting so very
small, as it is hardly visible. Ibid.
They will live several Months without eating any thing.

The Nhanduguacu, a great Spider in Brasile Barlaei Res Brasil. p. 224.
so called, is probably of the same Species.

The TOOTH of the NHANDUGUACU or Bahama-Spider.

The WEB of a Bermuda-Spider. It is so strong, as to snare a Bird as big as a
Thrush. Philos. Trans. N. 40.
It Is here wound upon a Paper like Raw-Silk.

Spiders, says Aristotle, Hist. An. lib. 9. c. 39.
cast their Threads, not from within, as an Excrement, as Democritus would have
it; but from without, as the Histrix does his Quills. Of the spining of
Spiders, and the rest of their History, see the curious Observations of Mr.
Lyster. Lib. de Araneis.


The CLAW of a SCORPION. It Is long and slender, and belongs to the first
Species described by Moufet.

A thick and short CLAW of a Scorpion, belonging to the third Species in Moufet.

The TAIL of another, with the Sting at the end, which is a little crooked, and
as sharp as that of a Be. The other parts of all three are broken off and lost.

In the Musaeum Cospian: is the Figure of a very large Scorpion, three times as
big as I find any where, yet said by Lorenzo Legati, to be drawn after the life.

This Insect abounds in Brasile. Those that are stung with them, suffer
extraordinary pains for about twenty four hours, but seldom die upon it. Joh.
de Laet. l. 15. c. 6. out of Lerius.


Of Scorpions are prepared, Oleum Compos. Magnum, i. e. Matthioli, Sanguineum
Schrod. Pharm.
Magni Ducis, and Ol. Scorp. purgatum. Poterius.


The GRFAT GALLY-WORME. Scolopendra. Described both by Moufet and Aldrovandus:
but yet imperfectly. Neither is this here entire. Yet thus much remains
Observable of the Feet; That each of them is armed, in the room of Claws, with
three, four, or five Needles, of different thickness and length; some of them
above of an inch long; of a black shining color like the Sting of a Be, and
equally sharp; in respect to which the Figure neither of Moufet nor of
Aldrovandus does any way answer. Besides these, there are a great many more on
each side, of the like shape and bigness, but of the color of Copper or
tarnish'd Brass. The Back and Sides are shag'd, the Belly smooth or bald. He is
about three inches and long.

The Teeth of this Animal, are said by all to be venomous. And probably, all
the Needles above described, are so likewise.

The middle Bald GALLY-WORM. Julus glaber. They have commonly betwixt forty and
fifty Legs on a side answering to so many crustaceous Rings, with some
resemblance to a Triremis; whence Moufet gives it the English Name.

Another Bald Gally-Worme, of a yellowish color, and fewer Feet; being the
third sort mentioned by Moufet.

Of the Gally-Worme Mr. Lyster conjectures, That it may yield an acid Spirit,
like that of Ants. Phil. Trans. N. 68.


The SILK-WORME. Bombyx. The full History hereof is written by Malpighius; as
to the manner of his feeding, the several changes he undergoes while a Worm,
and while transformed into an Aurelia, and thence a Butterfly, with the
business of Generation afterward. But principally in the Anatomy of the Parts;
as Feet, Mouth, Muscules, Lungs, Heart, Stomach, Medulla Spinalis, etc. in the
Worm. And in the Butterfly, the Penis, Parastata and Testicles of the Male;
and the Womb and Ovarium of the Female. Particularly, of the Lungs, he says,
That the Silkworm has not only these, or Parts analogous, but that almost
every Ring has two pair, which are branched out to all the other Parts
abovesaid: their several Orifices being remarquable, by so many little black
Circles which encompass them, on the sides of the Worm. If any of these
Orifices be oiled over, so as to exclude the Aer, the Parts to which they
belong, presently grow Paralytick; and if all, the Worm will die within the
space of a Pater Noster. Of the Medulla Spinalis, he says to this purpose,
That, from the Head to the Tail, there are about thirteen large Nodes therein;
which he conceives to be, as it were, so many little Brains; the Worm having
no visible Brain distinct from these Nodes.

A very large Aurelia and Slough of a Silk-Worme. Moufet affirms, That in the
Transmutation of the Worm into a Fly, the Head of the Worm makes the Tail of
the Fly; and the Tail of the Worm the Head of the Fly. But Sigr. Malpighius
makes no mention hereof; neither is it any way likely to be so.

Two BAGS of the Virginian Silk-Worme. They are of an Ash Color, and about the
bigness of a Pullets Egg. Of exceeding thickness, thrice as thick as the shell
of a Hen-Egg. It seems not to be one entire piece of Work, but composed of
several Skins one within another, woven by so many Worms, ready for spining,
one after another. And accordingly, in each Bag, being opened, I find four
Aurelias.

The RED or CRIMSON CATERPILLER. Vinula. So called, because, while living, his
Body is died all over with a deep Claret color. See Moufet hereof. Lib. 2.
cap. 2.


The YELLOW-CATERPILLER. Eruca flavescens. Both this and the two former are all
smooth or bald. This is also mentioned by Moufet.

The PALMER-WORM. Ambulo. For that he has no certain home, or diet, but
pilgrims up and down every where, feeding upon all sorts of Plants. In respect
of his great shag, called also The Bearworme.

EARTH-EGGS. About the bigness of Nutmegs, and somewhat Oval. So called,
because made of Earth by some sort of Caterpillar, or other Insect, for their
Nests, wherein to breed under ground.

The SQUILL-INSECT. Described by Moufet. L. 2. c. 37.
So called from some similitude to the Squill-Fish: chiefly, in having a long
Body covered with a Crust composed of several Rings or Plates. The Head is
broad and squat. He has a pair of notable sharp Fangs before, both hooked
inward like a Bulls Horns.

The WATER-SCORPION. Moufet Cap. 38.
figures three sorts; to the third of which, this answers. He describes it not.
Nor can I well, being glewed to a Paper with the Belly upward. But it may be
easily known by its pointed Tail. He has four Legs, and two Arms or Claws,
betwixt which a very small Head. He Is about of an inch long.

The SHARP-TAIL'D SEA-LOUSE. Pediculus marinus cauda acuta. Moufet Lib. 38.
describes an Insect by the Name of Pediculus marinus. But with a bunched, not
a taper'd Tail, nor with long nodous Horns, like this. It Is about an inch and
long, and inch broad, composed of several shelly Plates, like the Asellus or
Wood-Louse, with as many Feet on each side.

ANOTHER, with a Tail of four Spikes or Bristles, about of an inch long, thick
as a small Needle, sharp, and spread horizontally.

OSCABIORN. An Insect so called in the Danish-Tongue, the name signifies as
much as Ursus Voti, or the Lucky Bear; Because the people commonly believe,
That he who for a good while holds a certain Stone or Body contained in it
under his Tongue, shall enjoy his Wish. It is usually found adhering to a kind
of Asellus or Cod-Fish in the Island-Sea, to which it is very troublesome. This
account together with the Insect it self were sent hither by Mr. Olaus
Borrichius. Not disagreeing from That which is described in some sort by
Wormius, by the same Name: nor from That in Piso, called by the Americans,
Acarapitamba. Yet I find not the Figure any where to answer to the Animal; the
entire length whereof, is about two inches and. The fore part Oval: whence it
narrows all the way to the Tail. Where broadest above of an inch. Its shelly
Armor consists of about twenty Plates, of a straw color: The Legs on each
side in number answerable. The Eyes are most curiously latticed with cross
lines, so as to divide them into an infinite number of Rhombs. He seems to
have notable sharp Chisell-Teeth, whereby partly he becomes so troublesome to
his Bearer. The other parts are lost.

The SEA-HORSE-LEECH. Hiru^do marin^^. Described by Rondeletius. De Ins. c. 7.
He has a harder Skin, than the Poole-Horseleech: for which cause, he cannot
draw up himself so round, but exerts and contracts his Head and Tail only. Ibid.


A WATER-WORME. Lumbricus Aquaticus. Not four inches long: but doubtless shrank
up much when it died.

The HAIR-WORME. Vermis Setarius. Given by Mr. Malling. It Is little thicker
than a Horse-Hair or a Hogs Bristle; Of a light Flesh-colors; and about of a
foot in length. It Is commonly believed, but erroniously, that this sort of
Insect is nothing but a Horse-Hair animated. By some, that they are bred out of
Locusts. See Aldrovandus hereof. But especially the Observations of Mr. Lyster
in the Phil. Trans. N. 83.
who found them in the Belly of a kind of black and not uncommon Beetle; in
some one only, in others two or three together: of all which he has several
Remarques.

Whether there are not a sort of Eggs first laid by some Animal upon the
Beetles Breech, which being hatched eat their way into his Belly, may be a
Question. And therefore, whether the like Worms, may not sometimes be also
found in the Bellies of Locusts.

A SEA-WORME NEST. It Is a piece of TUBULATED WOOD; part of the sheathing of a
Ship. Brought in, by Wormius, improperly amongst Woods; as not being naturally
Tubulous, but made so by a sort of Sea-Wormes; described by Rondeletius, and
out of him, by Aldrovandus and others. The Tubular Holes are numerous, of that
width as to admit a Swans-Quill, very round, equally wide, and winding every
way too and fro, so as some times to run one into an other. Most curiously
lined, or as it were Wanscoted with a white Testaceous Crust, of the same
substance and thickness with those called Tubuli Marini.

PART II. Of Plants.
SECT. I. OF TREES.
CHAP. I. Of WOODS, BRANCHES, and LEAVES.
A Piece of LIGNUM ALOE, with its own GUM growing upon it. Given by the
Honorable Mr. Boil. The taste of the Gum is perfectly like to that of the Wood.
The Color, like that of the purest and most lucid Aloe, called Succotrina: for
with the light reflected, it looks almost like Pitch; with the light
transmitted, it glisters like a Carbuncle; powdered, it is of a reddish yellow.
This, or some other like Aromatic Gum, the Aloe of the Hebrews: whence the
other, from similitude, has its Name.

The Tree is described by Linschoten; Lib. 1. c. 76.
about the bigness of the Olive. This Wood is the Heart of the Tree, the
outward part, commonly called the Sap of a Tree, being whitish and soft. It Is
said by Sir Philiberto Vernatti, Phil. Trans. N. 43.
formerly Resident in Java major, to yield a Milk so hurtful, that if any of it
lights in the Eyes, it causes blindness; or scabbiness, if on any other part
of the Body. But this, doubtless, is to be understood neither of the Heart, nor
the Sap; but only of the Barque: there being no Milk-Vessels in either of the
former, that I remember, in any Tree, by me observed.

Of this Tree there are two sorts: Linsch. l. 1. c. 76.
The best, called Calamba, and grows most in Malacca and Sumatra. Much used in
India for the making of Beads and Crucifixes. The wilder, called Palo Daguilla,
and grows most in Seylon and Choromandel. With this, they burn the dead Bodies
of their Bramenes and other men of account, in token of honor. See hereof also
Jac. Bont^us. Notae in Garsiam.


A piece of Indian-Wood, called GARON. Very oily; in color, hardness and
weight, like to Lignum Aloe. But being held a little to the fire, has a strong
fragrant scent, much like to that of Cloves* and seems therefore, as well as by
its Name, to be the Wood of the Clove-Tree. The Clove-Tree is described by
Li^schoten. Lib. 1. c. 65.
Shaped like a Bay Tree. It grows in Amboyna and the Neighbor Islands. The
best sort in Makian and Tidor.

The BARQUE of the Tree LAWANG. Sent from Java major, where it is so called.
Being well chewed, it has the self same Taste with that of Sassafras-Barque, so
that, probably, the Tree is a Species of Sassafras.

Part of an Arm of the STINKING-TREE; as it may well be called: for it
naturally smells like the strongest humane excrements, especially, as upon the
emptying of a House of Office. It grows in the Isles of Solon and Timor, from
whence Sir Philiberto Vernatti procured it and sent it to this Musaeum. Phil.
Trans. N. 43.
Where, though it has now been preserved many years, yet seems to give as full
and quick a scent as ever. Yet in burning, it yields no smell; as do Lignum
Aloe and some other Woods. It Is ponderous, hard, and of the color of
English-Oak; and as that, has large Aer-Vessels; yet but few. I should have
conjectured, that this Wood belonged to the Tree called Ahovaj, which has a
stinking smell, but that this is said to be the more odious when it burns.

A piece of SERPENT-WOOD. Lignum Colubrinum. There are diverse sorts of Woods so
called. This here is different from all those Species described by Garsias, and
out of him by J. Bauhinus. Yet comes nearest to the Second. It Is above three
inches in Diametre, the Barque thin, the Wood solid, more than that of
Pear Tree. Of a very bitter Taste; especially when reduced to powder.

A piece of an other sort of SERPENT-WOOD. Within of a pale yellowish color.
Full of great Aer-Vessels. And also very bitter, as the former.

They grow in diverse places of the East Indies, as in Seylon, etc. And have
their Name from one of their especial Uses, being an excellent Remedy Linsch.
l. 1. c. 75.
against the Bitings of Vipers and other venomous Serpents. They are also,
says Bontius, given in India against Intermittent Fevers. From whence, and
their bitter Taste, one may guess, That they are either of kin to the Tree
whereof the Pulvis Patrum; or might give occasion, to some who have been in
both the Indies, to find out the Virtue of it.

The WOOD of a Tree of Angola, there called Tacusa. It Is very solid and
ponderous, like that of the Lignum vitae, and with a blackish grain.

Another sort of Angola-Wood by the Inhabitants called CHICENGO. It Is somewhat
hard and ponderous, and of the color of Spanish-Oak. Being power'd, it has a
bitterish Taste. Both these Woods, may be of the like use with the former.

Part of the Trunk of a young MOUNTAIN CABBIGE. Sent from Jamaica by Mr. Sam.
Moody to the Author. Now it is dry and shrunk in, not above a foot and in
compass. Consists of a great number of very thin fibrous Rings or Tubes one
within another, now, by the shrinking up of the pithy parts, distinct.

It Is said by Mr. Stubs Phil. Trans. N 36.
who lived for some time in Jamaica, where this Tree grows, That it is one sort
of Palm Tree. It grows also in Barbados: where, as it was confidently reported
to the same Person, there was one about three hundred feet high, i. e. about
thirty yards higher than the great (...) Pillar in this City called The
Monument. The young tender Sprouts of one year, are eaten both boiled and raw,
and are both ways excellent good meat.

The BARQUE of a kind of Pine Tree in Nova Scotia. Hereupon grow up and down
many Knots, about the bigness of a Horse-Bean, hollow, and filled with a
liquid, clear, and fragrant Turpentine; which, as it drops, the Natives gather
and use as the Balsom of Peru.

A natural KNOT of Wood of an Oval Figure, and as big almost as a Turkeys-Egg:
the fibers whereof are prettily waved by the transverse eruption of several
small sprigs.

A supposed naturally entire RING of Wood, almost in the shape of a Woman's
Head-Roll, but not so big as now worn, about four or five inches Diametre.
Wormius also mentions one in his Musaeum like this, but somewhat bigger.

PITT-WOOD. Lignum fossile. Colored like that of the Cedar, but a little
brighter. Smooth, light and soft; yet has no conspicuous pores. Has neither
taste nor smell. Whence this was dig'd, is uncertain. But in Lancashire, and
some other places here in England, the people find the Bodies of large Trees at
a good depth underground, and which the poorer sort burn, being splinter'd, to
save Candles.

A BRANCH of a Tree, by some called The COCKSPUR Tree. Perhaps more properly,
Oxyacantha Americana, or the AMERICAN HAWTHORNE. I meet with it no where
described or mentioned. This Branch is an Eln long, without any appendent
Branches. An inch Diametre. Of the solidity of Hawthorne-Wood. Encompassed with
great Thorns alternately placed on every side, so ascending, as every two
Thorns on the same side are about four inches and one above another. Most of
them about 1 inch, some an inch and long, of the thickness of a large
Cocks-Spur, and very strait. Not merely Cortical, as the Thorns of Raspis,
Gooseberry, and the like; but Lignous or Woody, as those of Hawthorne.

A BRANCH with a great WEN. It seems to be of the Hawthorne. The Branch, not
above an inch in compass; the Knot or Wen, almost ^/4 of a foot. It Is tuberous
and spiked. So that it seems to be made by the casual eruption of several
sturdy Buds together, which having begun the draught of the Sap, it still
continued to swell the Knot, after they were fallen off. And it is probable, that
Animal-Wens are then produced, when two or three sprigs of a Nerve bigger or
more than ordinary, shooting into a part of a Muscle, do thereby more
invigorate it, and so make it capable of a more copious nourishment.

Another tuberous Knot like the former. There is one like these in the Musaeum
Cospianum. Lib. 2. c. 26.


A little Oaken BRANCH with a great WEN growing round about it. It Is above a
foot in compass, as big as a midling Bowl.

A WARTED-BRANCH. It Is of Oak, about as thick as ones middle Finger; the Warts
the bigness of Hasle-Nuts.

Another BRANCH with four or five great Warts or Wens upon the sides. Wormius,
who has one like to these, not of Oak, but Hasle, calls it Lignum Strumosum.

An Oaken BRANCH permitted to grow for some time, after the Barque had been cut
round about to the Wood. By which means, that part of the Branch above the
Cutis, is grown much thicker, than that underneath; the one being little, more
than an inch about, the other almost two inches. Neither is it only the swelth
of the Barque, but the Wood it self is augmented. An Experiment lately made by
Sigr. Malpighi; and may seem an argument for the Circulation of the Sap. In
what manner the Circulation of the Sap is performed, especially in the Root,
the Author of this Catalogue has some years since explicated. In his first
Book Of Plants, Chap. 2.


A piece of a BRANCH naturally shaped like a Penis with a pair of Testicles
annexed. Wormius has one like to this, which he calls Lignum Inverecundum.

A WINGED-BRANCH of Ash. About two feet and long, and subdivided into two
lesser. Where the division begins, the Barque is spread out from the Wood for
the breadth of above an inch, and of the thickness of Sheeps Leather, and so
joins both the Branches together for the length of about a foot. From thence
they are perfectly divided, and so wind two several ways, almost like a Rams
Horn; the Barque being spread out all along to their ends: yet only so as to
make them edged. The two ends, with Buds like little Claws on the edges, look
like a Seals Feet. Wormius has some Branches, not of Ash, but Firr, which seem
in some part answerable to this now described.

A HASLE BRANCH seeming as if it were naturally TWISTED. But made so by a
Woodbind or some other Convolvulous Plant. In the Mus. Cospianum is such
another of Hawthorne.

A WILLOW BRANCH, winding to and again, like a Snake, with six or seven close
flexures. A Figure not uneasily given to a young Twig.

A Pipe made of a hollow BRANCH, and twisted into a loose Knot, in which one
part of the Branch is incorporated with the other.

Two large BRANCHES incorporated in the form of a St. Andrews Cross.

Two lesser, growing together in the same form.

Two BRANCHES growing together in the form of our Saviors Cross.

It Is probable, That these were bound together (as may be any other) when they
were young, and with the Barque pared off, where contiguous; and so, by a kind
of ingrafting, became coalescent.

A PALMETO LEAF. Palmae humilis folium. It Is a yard and long. Has about a
hundred and forty Plates, seventy on each side the middle Rib, whereupon they
are all folded. Which Rib also distributes it self into Plates toward the top
of the Leaf. The Plates are of several bredths from an inch to an inch and.
Most of them are now broken or torn asunder. But originally they make all one
entire piece, rudely imitated by a folding Fan.

These are the Plates, which both the Arabians and Indians make use of to write
upon, by Impression with a Style.

Part of another sort of PALM-LEAF. It Is of a yard long, and at one end seven
inches broad: but rolled up, and with the ends of the Fibers unwoven, so as to
look like a Broom. Of a wonderful substance, in some places 1/^ of an inch
thick, and very dense and stubborn work. Consists of great and lesser flat
Fibers; and small round ones; somewhat alike as in the Palm-Net, whereof
presently.

The Leaves of some Palms, are used, where they grow, for making of Garments,
and thatching of Houses. The Country People Tap the Wine-Palm about two feet
above the ground, and of the Liquor which runs from it, and which they catch in
Earthen Vessels, they make an excellent Wine called Mignol, like the White
Champane. Thevetus
The fruitful kinds flourish chiefly in Egypt and Syria: as also in the hotest
parts of the Indies; and in the Canary-Islands: amongst which, there is one
called, The Palm-Island. J. Bauh.
The barren kind in Italy and Sicily.

The PALM-NET or BAG. The Tree which produces it called, Palma Saccif^^^^
Whether Bauhinus gives this under the Name of ^olium Nucis Indicae, is
uncertain. If so, both the Figure and Description are very imperfect.

Some part of it has been cut off both at the bottom and on the side; yet is
it above two feet long; at the bottom a foot broad; from whence it tapers to
the top. Originally entire, like a taper'd Bag, commonly called Hippocrates's
Sleive: but by some inconsiderate hand cut open on one side.

It Is naturally sewed or woven together with admirable Art. And yet not with
more, than that which may be observed in every Plant; though not so visibly,
and with variation. There is a five-fold Series of Fibers herein. The greatest
of all swell out above the rest, and like so many Ribs, are obliquely produced
on both hands, so as to encompass the Sack. Along each of these woody Ribs, on
the inside the Sack, runs a small whitish Line; which seems to be a Thread or
Fiber of Aer-Vessels growing thereto. Betwixt the said large Ribs, there are
others, as it were lesser, parallally interjected. On the inside a third Series
also obliquely produced, and transversly to the former. The fourth and fifth,
consist of the smallest Fibers, not only transversly produced, but also
alternately from the outside to the inside of the Sack, and vice versa. By
which all the rest are most elaborately woven into one entire and strong piece
of Work. A Cover which Nature has provided, to protect the delicate Fruit of
this Tree, from all the extremities of the weather, and the ravine of Birds.

Another PALM-SACK or Net, almost a yard long, and made of different Work. See
one like to this in J. Bauhinus. L. 3. c. 176.


About the Year 1599. the Hollanders, says Clusius, returning from America, in
an Island there, by them called Coronopes, found whole Woods of this Tree: and,
probably, then first discovered the same to Europe.

A LEAF of the ROCOUR-TREE. It Is near a foot long, four inches broad, the lower
end Oval or Elliptick, pointed like a Spear. From the middle Fiber diverse other
collateral ones (all prominent underneath) are produced alternately, and at
acute Angles. It Is smooth on both sides, and of an obscur^ ^^dish color. Of
this Tree (which I think grows in New England) is made a sort of red powder,
used for a dry color; but being wet, at least, mixed with Oil, makes but a
dull one.

CHAP. II. Of FRVITS; particularly such as are of the Apple, Pear, and
Plum-Kinds.
PArt of a PRICKLE-APPLE. The Tree is in some sort described by Ligon. Hist. of
Barb. p. 70.
The Fruit is remarkable for the several Tussucks or Bunches of Thorns
wherewith it is armed all round about: each Bunch consisting of about six or
eight Thorns; some of which stand erected, the rest couched down a little and
crooked outward; of several lengths, from one inch, to above two; altogether,
if pulled off, somewhat resembling a Jack a long-legs.

A MALE-ORANGE of Chio, commonly called Sio.

A FEMALE-ORANGE of the same Island.

A CROWNED-ORANGE: that is, having an Orbicular Piece on the top.

A FRUIT like a little ORANGE: perhaps, Aracynappil Paludani; described by J.
Bauhinus. Tom. 1.
This here is crowned with a circle of an inch Diametre.

A sort of BASTARD-QUINCE. Cotoneaster Gesneri. J. Bauh. Tom. 1.


An HERMAPHRODITE-LIMON, exhibiting the pudenda of both Sexes.

A FRUIT of BRASILE, probably described in Bauhinus by the Name of Bras. Tom. 1.
Of the bigness and shape of a little Limon. It Is now yellowish, when fresh,
likely, of a golden color. Filled with an innumerable company of Seeds, which
Bauh. describes not. They are almost as hard as Stones, of an inch broad, and
flat, almost as the seeds of Lillies.

An INDIAN FRUIT, having its surface (now) very uneven, with Furrows and Knobs
all round about. The Furrows, ten. Both the Description and Picture hereof
taken by Bauhinus Lib. 3. cap. 204.
from Platerus; But ill placed.

A Round Indian FRUIT with one end pointed, and a (now) granulated surface.
Described as I take it by Bauh. Lib. 3. cap. 50.
With the Name of Fructus Peregrinus orbicularis cuspidatus.

The POLVILLERIAN-PEAR: because either it grows most about Polvilla in Alsatia,
or was first taken notice of there. A very small fruit, (now) no bigger than a
Nutmeg. See Bauhinus.

The MOUNTAIN SERVIS. Sorbus Alpina. Chiefly upon the Alps.

MYROBALANUS CHEBULA. The largest and longest of all the five Kinds known in
Shops. Next to which is the Citrine, also long. Then the Belliricks and
Emblicks, but both these are round. The Indian or Black, the smallest, and
long. The Stone of the Emblick Myrobalan, of a peculiar angular Figure. This,
and the five Myrobalans are all figured in Besler.

The GREAT CITRINE MYROBALAN. A rare kind. In shape like that which Bauhinus
Lib. 2. c. 19.
gives by the Name of Myrobal. Rauwolfij; but is much bigger, near two inches
long, and above an inch and over.

Myrobalans grow most of them in Cambaia, Goa, and Malabar; Chebs, in Bisnagar
and Bengala; Emblicks and Belliricks, in Java; the Great Citrine, in Palestine.

These Fruits, say Fallopius and others who have purposely made enquiry, are no
where mentioned by any of the ancient Greeks; but by the Arabian Physicians
first of all. In the Countries where they grow, and may be had fresh, they are
doubtless of good Medicinal use to the Natives. But as they come over hither,
they are most of them mere rubbish, whereof, with the plenty of far better
Medicines, we have no need. The Chebs, Belliricks and Indians, are Preserved
with Sugar in India, and sent thence into all the Neighboring Countries. The
Emblicks are there used, as Sumach, etc. for the tanning of Leather.

SEBESTEN, i. e. Fructus Mixae. It grows naturally in Aegpyt and Syria: And is
also nourished in Italian Gardens.

The JUJUBE of Cappadocia. Bacca Ziziphi Cappadocicae. In shape like the wild,
but lesser, and somewhat redish. Of a dryish substance, almost like that of
Hawthorne-Berries. The Tree well described by Dalechampius. It grows, to the
bigness of the Willow; especially in Syria and Ethyopia.

A Black round FRUIT of the shape and bigness of the largest Red Cherries.
Perhaps, Prunula Insana.

A STONED-FRUIT in shape and bigness like a Quince. The Flesh or Pulp being now
dried and shrunk, very thin. It comprehends three very great Oval Stones, thin,
and brittle: in each of which is also included a Kernel of answerable bigness.

An ORBICULAR STONE of an Indian-Plum. Os Pruni Indici fere globulare. Of the
bigness of a midling Wallnut, of a dark bay color, knobed all round about,
extraordinary hard, at the base and top a very little prominent.

Another GLOBULAR STONE. In shape and bigness, like the former; excepting, that
the base is a very little broader. Of a citrine or straw-colour. Hard as a
Wallnut. Very uneven and ruged all round about, with small furrows and holes
intermixed.

A third GLOBULAR STONE. Yet so, as to be divided into five Valves or Sides,
all ruged as in the first, equally hard, and of the same bay color. But not
bigger than a midling Cherry.

An OVAL PLUM-SONE. As big as a Pigeons Egg, and of the same shape. Somewhat
rough, of an Iron color, and hard substance, but not very thick.

Another OVAL STONE. As big as a Hens Egg: and almost of the same figure;
saving that the Base is a little blunter, the Cone or top a little smaller. Of
a bay color. Wonderful hard. Divided into five sides, ruged and uneven, with a
great many holes and deep furrows. The Sides distinguished by as many strait
Fissures, beginning a little above the Base, and thence prolonged toward the
Cone. Within each of which also grows a stony, and as it were toothed piece
above an inch long. This, the Third, and the First, are all of kin.

A LONG OVAL STONE. In length two inches, and one inch over; shaped like that
of an Olive. Covered with a kind of straw-colour'd Membrane. Under which, it is
all over unequal with furrows. Of a dark ash color without; inwardly, whitish.
Exceeding hard.

Another LONG OVAL STONE. Naked or without any Membrane. Much bigger than the
former, being two inches and long, and an inch and over. The furrows also of
this are more, and deeper.

A THIRD of kin to the former, but far less, not much bigger than the common
Cornelian-Cherry. These three last are all of kin. Not to be supposed the elder
and young stones of the same fruit: for that they are all equally hard, and
therefore at their full growth.

A PLUM-STONE almost like a Wallnut. An inch and long, half an inch broad at
the Base, which is a little hollowed in; in the middle an inch and, the top a
little sharp and prominent. It has three sides, all uneven with many furrows,
and somewhat deep. Of a straw-colour, and very hard.

A STONE figured into a SPHAERICAL TRIANGLE. Near two inches long. Hard, rough,
and of a Wallnut color. The three sides unequal: one above an inch broad, the
others narrower; all united at acute angles, and a little prominent. This Stone
seems to belong to the fruit which, together with the Tree, is described in
Laet Descr. Ind. Occ. l. 17. c. 4.
by the Name of Totocke.

ANOTHER, of like shape, substance and color with the former. But much less;
and ratably, broader; sc. about an inch long, and as broad. Consists of three
sides; whereof one the greatest, and unequal; the other two almost plain or
level.

A STONE ANOMALOUSLY figured. Above two inches long. One way, almost two, over.
Another, an inch and. Of a dark citrine, and somewhat rough, as it were
besprinkled all over with sand. On one side, flattish, but unevenly. On the
other swelling up into a double Lip, very rough; and having a Fissure running
by the length.

Another ODDLY figured Stone. Above two inches long; In the middle, two over.
At the Base, in a manner, an inch and square, 1/^ an inch over at the top.
Almost smooth, and of the color of spruce Oker.

A THIRD. Three quarters of an inch long; one way, 1/^ of an inch over;
another,. One side, Concave; the other, Unequal. The Margin pinched out into a
sharp edge. Of a dark bay.

A Great MAMMEE-STONE. Two inches and long, an inch and broad in the middle,
flat, and somewhat sharp at both ends. Bauhinus gives the Description and
Figure hereof both out of Clusius, by whom it is called Avellana Indica. It Is
also curiously figured in Calceolarius: but with the same Name. And with the
same, described by Matthiolus. All of them mistaking it for a Nut. Whereas in
truth it is the Stone of a kind of Fruit like a great Peach, and bigger; in
which there are commonly two of these Stones.

A little MAMMEE-STONE. Described by Clusius with the mistaken Name of Avellana
Indica minor. And, out of him, by Bauh. Tom. 1.


A ROUND MAMMEE-STONE. Of the same color with the former; but that which is
here the far greater part, of an obscure brown, and somewhat uneven with a few
crooked furrows. The remainder and here the far less portion, of a shining bay.
It Is of the bigness of a good large Walnut.

The Fruit grows in Jamaica, Barbados, and other parts of the West Indies. Of
the flesh or pulp whereof, they there make very good Conserves.

A NETTED-STONE. Described by Bauhinus Tom. 1. p. 328.
with the Title of Fructus reticulato corio: mistaking it for a Nut. The
greater part of the Stone is of the same substance with that of other
Plum-stones. But over this is spread a netted Work of larg woody Fibers. It was
brought from Guiney; but it grows also in Virginia.

Another WOODY STONE. A very great one; but ratably short, sc. two inches long,
and two and over, like a midling Pippin. Very little stony, but all its outer
part, at least, perfectly woody, or made up of a multitude of woody Fibers. The
largest whereof are prolonged from the Base to the Cone, associated all along
by lesser ones running betwixt them.

A Third WOODY STONE. Almost of the shape and bigness of a Pigeons-Egg. But a
little compressed. It Is covered all over with Liguous Fibers, so extreme
closely woven together, that it looks as if it were all Wood. Some of the
greater run directly from the Stalk to the Flower or top. So great a difference
there is betwixt these Indians Stones, and those of our Europaean Fruits, which
have very few, and most not above two or three on the outside.

The STONE of the Brasilian Fruit called AND A. Wormius has given hereof but a
bad Figure: but describes it better. Yet with a mistaken Title, as if it were
the entire Fruit. It Is a very hard and great Stone, as big as a midling
Bell-Peare, but a little compressed: broad at the Base, and sharp pointed, with
some resemblance to a Heart. The sides of the Shell of a wonderful thickness.
Penetrated to the Kernel with three great holes.

Amongst many observable Instances of the Contrivances Nature makes for the
growth of the Seed, in whatsoever Cover See the Authors Book Of Plants, c. 1.
and ult.
it be included; this Stone is one. For being so extraordinary hard and thick;
it were impossible the Kernel within it (which is also great) should be
supplied with Aer and Sap sufficient for its growth; were not those three great
holes made on purpose, for a plentiful admission of both.

And as great an instance it is of the seemingly wonderful force of the
Radicle, or that small and tender part of the Kernel, which becomes the Root of
the Plant; by which, chiefly, the sides of the Stone, those thick Walls, are
made to cleave asunder to make way for its descent into the ground. But Time
seems to do the same thing here, as Celerity does in the Statera; where a small
Weight set at a greater distance from the Center of gravity, will balance a
bigger that is nearer: because, what it wants in bigness, is made up by the
Celerity of its motion. So the Radicle of a Kernel, having though a slow
motion, yet some, and that continued, it is able in time to master a sturdy
Body which has no contrary motion at all, but is at rest.

One or two of the Kernels, which are as big as Damascene-Plums, both Purge,
and sometimes Vomit. If taken raw, they work roughly: but boiled and preserved
with Sugar, may be given to Children. Piso.


Another POYNTED-STONE. A very great one: three inches and long, an inch and
over, one way; another near two inches. On one side, very Unequal; on the
opposite, almost flat. The Base Oval; the top, presently sharpened into a
point. Of a russet color, very hard, ruged, and having broad Furrows, most of
them running by the length; out of some of which arise several woody Fibers.

Another like STONE. It Is as big as a Pullets Egg. On one side more Unequal, as
the former. Of a russet color, hard and granulated. All over uneven with many,
though not very deep Furrows, diverse whereof are produced from the Base almost
to the Cone.

The said Furrows, both in this and all the other Stones, are to be understood
the Seats of woody Fibers, wherewith they were originally filled up.

A TWIN Almond-Stone.

GUM LACK, naturally adhering to a small Branch of its own Tree, called Ber
Indica; a sort of Plum-Tree growing in Pegu, Martaban, and some other parts,
sometimes as big as a Wallnut-Tree. Garsias ab Horto.
It Is generally agreed, That this Gum is made, in Summertime, by Winged- Ants,
out of the Tree it self. Garsias adds, as Wax is by Bees. How far the
Comparison holds, requires examination. In the mean time, it is most likely,
That these Ants finding the Sap or Gum of this Tree agreeable for their food or
other use, and nibling the Barque to come at it, it thereupon issues at the
Wounds they make.

The Indians make several sorts of artificial Lacks, by mixing this Gum with
other Materials of all colors. With these, all the turned Wood-Works in India
and China are wrought and burnished. Trochisci Dialaccae, a Medicine formerly
much commended, but now obsolete.

CHAP. III. Of CALIBASHES, and some other like Fruits.
THe Great OVAL CALIBASH. In length, almost of a foot; above a foot and in
compass. Its Figure answerable to that of a Hens-Egg, one end, sc. the top,
being somewhat smaller than the other. It Is now of a kind of tawny color, or
like that of an old Pomgranate-Pill. About as hard as a Wallnut, and the shell
somewhat thicker. Originally filled (as may be seen by some of them) with a
Pulp and a great number of Seeds, as is a Melon or Gourd. Yet a Calibash is the
Fruit of a Tree. In some sort described by Ligon. Hist. of Barb. p. 72.


The Middle OVAL CALIBASH. Of the same tawny color, as the former; as also a
little slenderer at the top, than the bottom. In length four inches and, and 3
and broad; of the bigness of a China Limon. It has a little round knob at the
top, as big as a Great Pins Head. The Seed, almost of the color, size and
shape of an Apple-Kernel; saving that the top is shaped like the common Picture
of a Heart.

The little OVAL CALIBASH. Of a like color with the former, but stained with
some black Spots. Three inches and long; two and over; somewhat bigger than a
Turkeys-Egg. Of a perfect Oval, that is, with both the ends cut by the same
Ellipsis, yet both a very little prominent. And the top apiculated, as in the
former. It seems a kin to the Cucurbita Indica minor Taberna Montani; and that
the said Author mistook a Calibash, for a Gourd.

An ORBICULAR CALIBASH. Of the shape and bigness of a Jack-Bowl.

The halfs of an ORBICULAR CALIBASH, four inches and Diametre.

The Middle See the Great sort misplaced in Sect. 3. Chapter 2.
FLAGON CALIBASH. Figured after a manner by Bauhinus with the mistaken Title of
Cucurbita Indica Lagenaria: it being not a Gourd, but the Fruit of a Tree, as
is abovesaid. It has a Head and Belly divided by a Neck, somewhat resembling
an old fashioned Flagon. The Belly, about five inches and long, and four and in
Diametre. The Neck, two inches long, and about an inch over. The Head, about as
long, and above an inch and ^/^ over. Originally, of a straw color: but by the
Indians painted, after a rude manner, with a dull red. The Shell very hard, and
about a of an inch thick.

The little FLAGON or BOTTLE CALIBASH. About four inches and long. The Belly,
three inches over. The Head, an inch and. The Neck, a little above an inch. The
Shell, at the top of the Head above of an inch thick.

The PEAR-CALIBASH. In length about five inches, the Neck somewhat long and
slender, the Belly two inches and over: so as both in figure and bigness to
resemble the Pear figured by Bauhinus with the Name of Pirum Strangulatorium.
On one side, colored with a light, on the other with a deeper yellow.

A Double PEAR-CALIBASH.

A TRIANGULAR CALIBASH. It Is smooth, and black, shaped like the Egyptian
Cucumer, called Chate. About five inches long. The Neck triangular; whether
naturally, uncertain. From thence bellied like a Pear; two inches and over. The
shell very hard, and as thick as of the Flagon-Calibash.

These Fruits grow in Guiney; as also in Virginia, Barbados, and other parts of
the West Indies. Where they are used, either whole or cut through the middle,
for Cups, Dishes, Basins, Buckets, Flagons, etc. according to their bigness.
The Natives sometimes line their insides with some kind of Rosin (as we rosin
Wooden-Cans) the better to preserve the Liquor they put into them; which, if
spirituous, would otherwise either drench through, or loose of its strength.
Whether the Rosin they use, be such as gives no ill taste to the Liquor may be a
query.

The BAOBAB. Abavi Clusij. Of affinity with the Fruit by Scaliger called
Guanabanus. Wormius, I think mistakingly, makes it the same. It Is well
described and figured by Bauhinus. Lib. 1. c. 42.
This is of the bigness of a midling Pomecitrine, and of answerable shape. The
shell of a good thickness, but not very hard; of a kind of dusky green, and
faced almost all over with a velvet Down. When fresh gathered, it is filled with
a soft Pulp, and as it should seem, much more juycy, than in the Calibash.
Within the Pulp is contained a great number of Seeds, or little Stones, of the
bigness, and with somewhat of the shape, of Indian Wheat. Besler has a good
Figure hereof, representing it cut open, to show the Seeds.

The GREAT LONG BAOBAB. I meet with no Description answering to this Species.
It Is in length ten inches, a foot in compass, being ratably much slenderer than
the former, and almost Cylindrical. The upper end, made a little slenderer; the
top of all, flat, and an inch and over.

The GREAT BELLY'D-BAOBAB. Much bigger than the former, and no where described,
that I find. In length, an inch above a foot; and above a foot and in compass.
Toward the upper end, bellied. But the end it self pointed almost like a Limon.

The Baobab grows in the Island Zeilan, and in Egypt. The Juice hereof is of
an acidulated Taste, very grateful: of which the Egyptians make much use,
especially when they travail, to quench their thirst.

The MACOCQUER. A Virginian Fruit, described by Tom. 1. 254.
Bauhinus. It seems to be of affinity with the Calibash, or perhaps a small
Species thereof. It is of an Orbicular-Figure, and of the bigness of a little
Hand-Ball. Though Clusius affirms Exot. l. 11. c. 11.
it to be sometimes four inches in Diametre. The shell is thin and brittle.
Originally filled with a soft and juycy Pulp, in which a great many Seeds of
the color and bigness of an Apple-Kernel.

The Natives, having emptied the shells of the Pulp and Seeds, and in the room
hereof, put in some little Stones, use them as Rattles, wherewith to rejoice
upon any special Occasion.

The GENIPAT, Junipap, or Junipappeeywa. A Brasilian Fruit so called. Described
by Bauhinus. Tom. 1. 253.
And probably by Piso with the Name of Janipaba. This also is a kind of little
Calibash. Of the bigness of a Wallnut, and almost Oval; containing a Pulp and
Seeds much like those of the Macocquer. It grows upon a tall Tree.

The Natives use this Fruit against Diarrhae'as. As also to paint themselves.
They chew the Pulp, and then squeezing the Juice out, rub it upon their Body:
as it drys, it turns to a blackish blew. This they do, when they visit a
Friend, or upon any solemn Occasion, would be fine.

Another FRUIT, of kin to the former, with a pointed top. It was brought from
Guiney.

A FRUIT resembling that described by Bauhinus Tome 1.
under the Name of Charameis Acostae. Yet this here, by the reduction of the
point or seat of the Flower to the Base, a little flatish.

CHAP. IV. Of NUTS, and Diverse other like Fruits.
THe JACAPUCAIO-NUT. A West-Indian Fruit. Both this and the Tree tolerably well
described by G. Piso. Hist. N. Ind.
It is about the bigness of a Boys Head of ten or twelve years old, somewhat
oblong, with a circular Ridge toward the top. Now all over, without and within
of a dark or blackish color. The sides extraordinary warm, being an inch
thick. Within, divided into four Quarters. In each of which (says Piso) are
contained about thirty Kernels. But here they are wanting. Described also in
part, and figured, in Calceolarius's Musaeum, out of Jos. Acosta Histor. Ind.
lib. 4.
by the Name of Amygdala dell' Anidi.

Of these Kernels, much bigger than Almonds, the Natives make both Medicines,
and pleasant Meats. Sometimes the Fruit of one Tree, has served to Victual a
whole Camp. Those that fall are, with leave, greedily devoured by the Cattle.
Of the Timber of the Tree, are made the Rowls of Sugar-Mills; as being tougher,
or otherwise fitter for that purpose, than other Woods.

Another of the same NUTS of equal bigness.

The COVER of the said NUT. A like colored, and in shape almost like a
Mushroon. When the Nut is ripe (which always hangs down) this Cover, with the
least shake, falls out, and the Kernels after it, into the Laps of the Natives.

One half of the MALDIVE-NUT; called Coccus de Maladiva. Tavarcare, in the
Language of the Island. Described by Chioccus Musaeum Calceolar.
out of Clusius and Garzias ab Horto; and well figured. Piso Mautissae
Aromaticae, c. 19.
also has the Description and Figure, together with a prolix Discourse hereof.
They are said to be no where found, except upon the Seashore. Nor is the Tree
it self to be seen any where in the Island. The entire Nut, somewhat like a
double Box, or a pair of Panniers. This half, about a foot long, and near a
foot broad; a kind of half Oval; yet flat on that side, where the two halfs are
conjoined. The shell about ^/^ th of an inch thick, and as hard as that of a
Coco-Nut. As black as a Coal. This is empty; but originally they contain a
certain white Pulp, of no great Taste.

Of this Pulp both the People and Princes of Malabar have a high opinion, as if
of great Virtue against most Diseases; especially in case of Poison, or
Epileptick and other like Affections. So that sometimes they value them at
about five and twenty pounds a Nut. It Is also highly commended for the same
purposes, by Piso, both from the experience of others, and his own. They
sometimes make Drinking-Cups of the Shells, and tip them with Silver or
Gold-Plate. It Is Death for any to be known to take up any of them; because
those things that are cast upon the shore, are the Kings.

The COCO-NUT. The Fruit of a very tall Tree, both in the East and West Indies,
growing only upon the top of it. Mentioned by many Writers of Natural History,
but not by any one distinctly described. As by one sent me fresh by Mr. Sam.
Moody from Jamaica, I had the opportunity to observe. Here are three of them
entire. The bigest whereof is about a foot in length, and one and in compass.
With three sides, one whereof more flat; bellied in the middle, and somewhat
Conick at both ends; so that it is a kind of Sphaerical Triangle. The Husk or
outmost part of the Nut on the sides, about an inch thick; at the Corners, an
inch and; almost wholly consisting of tough woody Fibers; so that being cut
transversly, it looks like a stiff Scrubbing-Brush. Next within this Fibrous
Part, lies the Shell, brown, hard, and brittle, like a Plum-Stone; the 1/^ of
an inch in thickness; about three inches Diametre, and of an Oval Figure, not
much unlike that of an Ostriches, or sometimes a Cassowarys-Egg. Yet so, as
always to be Trivalvous, i. e. composed of three Sides or Plates joined
together by the length of the Shell; one Side being commonly much bigger than
either of the other two. At the Base of the said Shell, are always likewise
three conspicuous Holes, by which originally are admitted a considerable number
of Fibers into the Concave of the Shell. Next within the Shell is a thin, dry
and Membranous Coat, branched or veined all round about with a great number of
Fibers, chiefly for the conveyance of Sap. Within this Veiny-Coat, lie's a
soft, white, thick and Oval Body, commonly; but falsely, supposed to be the
Kernel: it being only the Cover next or immediate thereunto. In thickness about
an inch, and of a sweet and pleasant taste. This Body, while the Nut is yet
unripe, is filled full with a very limpid and sweetish Liquor; which, in the
Nut I had sent me, was in all about 1/^ a pint: all conveyed from the said
fibrous Coat, and filtred through this thick soft Boby. Out of this Liquor, the
true Kernel is in time produced: the Liquor diminishing, as the Kernel
increases, in the same manner, as in an Egg, the White wastes, as the Chicken
grows. Or as, indeed, in the Seeds of all Plants whatsoever, See the Authors
first Book Of Plants, Cap. ult.
which are not merely Metaphorically, but really so many Eggs (like those of
many Animals) without a Yelk.

Letting this Liquor stand in a Bottle, corked up, for some months; although at
first as clear as Rock-water, yet was it not only grown very fetid, but being
after left open for some time, did let fall a Sediment above ^/2 an inch thick.
Arguments of its being impregnated with a sufficient store of seminal
Principles.

And as no Animal Egg is vital without the Male: so neither is this Liquor,
without the abovesaid Fibers; which communicate their prolifick Virtue to the
same. Amongst which Fibers, being many Aer-Vessels, they also serve for the
hardening of the Shell. As in like manner do all those that compose the outward
brushy part of the Nut. For were the Shell not only filled with so great a
quantity of Liquor; but also, as in many Fruits, surrounded with a juycy Pulp;
betwixt both, it would remain a soft Parenchyma (as all vegetable Stones at
first are) and never, or not soon enough, harden into a shell.

For the more easy and convenient eruption of the Radicle, the Shell is not
one entire piece, but divided into three (as are most Seed-Covers into two or
more) distinct Plates; which gradually cleave asunder, to give way to the
descent of the said Radicle into the ground.

Two more LONG COCO-NUTS, somewhat less than that now described.

A THIRD, about as long, but much slenderer. Of the rounder kind, there is a
good Figure in Besler; as also of the Shell.

A LONG OVAL COCO-SHELL. About a foot in length, and three inches and over. One
of the three Holes at the bottom, cut wider by some Body, who had a mind to
cheat the Spectator by imitating a mouth. Almost in shape and bigness like a
Cassowarys-Egg.

Another Shell of the same shape.

THREE short Oval COCO-SHELLS.

An ORBICULAR COCO-SHELL; four inches and long, and as much in Diametre.

Another Great ORBICULAR one. It Is a foot and ^/^ in compass. A Coco-Nut of a
foot and ^/4 compass, has a Shell in compass about nine inches. The Nut
therefore to which this Shell belonged, was in compass above three quarters of
a yard.

The COCO is one of the most useful Trees in the World. Of the Husk or outmost
fibrous Cover of the Nut, all manner of Ropes and Cables are made throughout
India. Of the Shells, the Indians make Ladles, Wine-Bottles, and many sorts of
Vessels. The inmost Cover next the Kernel, while it contains only Liquor, they
eat with salt, as a very pleasant meat. The said Liquor, is commonly used, as a
clear sweet and cool Drink. Sometimes they cut away the Blossom of the young
Nut, and binding a convenient Vessel to the place, thereby obtain a sweet and
pleasant Liquor, which they call Sura. This standing an hour in the Sun,
becomes good Vinegar, used throughout India. The same Distilled (I suppose
after fermentation) yields a pretty strong Brandy, called Fulo, and is the
first running. The second, is called Uraca, the only Wine of India. Of the same
Sura, being boiled, and set in the Sun, they also make a sort of brown Sugar,
which they call Jagra. From the Kernel it self, when fresh, and well stamped,
they press out a Milk, which they always mix and eat with their Rice-Meats. Of
the Kernel dried (called Copra) and stamped, they make Oil, both to eat, and to
burn. Of the Leaves of the Tree (called Olas) they make the Sails of their
Ships: as also Covers for their Houses and Tents; and Summer-Hats. Of the Wood,
they make Ships without Nails; sewing the several parts together with the Cords
made of the Husk of the Nut. Linschoten. Joh. de Laet. Piso, and others.


A small ORBICULAR FRUIT, as it seems, of the Nut-kind, not bigger than a
Physical Pill; a little flattish on that part which grows to the Husk. Very
hard. And of a shining color, like that of red Coral. Described L. 2. c. 30.
also by Clusius: and neatly figured in Calceolarius's Musaeum. Sect. 5.


ANOTHER of the same hardness, shape, and bigness; but of a shining black.

ANOTHER hard and orbicular Fruit, by Casp. Bauhinus called Milium Indicum. For
what reason I see not, it having no similitude thereto. That for which it is
observable, is, that it looks as if it were artificially turned upon a Lath.
See a rude Figure hereof in J. Bauhinus.

An Oval Stone or Shell, of the bigness and shape of a midling Olive. Given by
Mr. Anth. Horneck. It seems doubtful, Whether of the Plum or Nut-kind. It Is all
over smooth, and of a shining light bay, like that of a Mammee. Excepting only
the Base which is of a dull color, and ruged, and having two narrow smooth
Margins like a pair of Lips, or an open mouth: from the corners whereof runs a
natural Notch round about the Stone or Shell.

The YECOTL. The Fruit of a little Tree in New-Spain, which the Spaniards call
Palmam Montensem; and which I take to be all one with the Palmapinus, or the
Palma Conifera. It Is described and figured both by J. Bauhinus, and by Wormius.
Who Reports out of Laet, That these kind of Nuts are always found empty, or
without a Kernel. Which is a mistake; for this here has one. It Is likely all
that he saw (and so he should have said) were barren. The length of this, about
two inches and half; the Diametre, one and 1/^, the Figure Oval. Smooth, and of
a shining Bay* Composed of Scales, from the middle (where they are about an
inch broad) growing lesser toward both ends, so as in some sort to resemble a
Cone, of the Picea Latin: or Male Firr-Tree. Yet a quite different Fruit: for
whereas in a Cone, the Seeds or Kernels are numerous, all placed between the
Scales of the Cone; here (so far as can be guessed by the sound) we have but
one single Kernel, within the hollow of the Shell.

But that which is most observable, and whereof no Author takes notice either
in the Description or Figure of this Fruit, is this, That the Scales which
compose the Shell, are not so set together, as to have their open ends or
points upwards, as in a Cone: but on the contrary, so as to have their roots
uppermost, and their open and outmost ends or points downwards, or toward the
Base of the Shell, as of the Slates upon a House toward the ground. A singular
contrivance of Nature, to prevent the rain from running into the hollow of the
Shell, and so rotting the Kernel. And although the Scales of a Cone are open
toward the point of the Cone, yet even hereby they answer the same end;
because it always or most commonly hangs upon the Tree with the point downward.

This Fruit is pictured in Besler, Tab. 1. But mistakenly, for the Arecca or
Faveel.

The CONICK YECOTL. I find it not described. It Is much less than the former; in
length, an inch and d; in the middle near an inch thick. Slenderer at both
ends, and the upper plainly taper'd. The Scales, as in the former.

Of the Leaves Ximenes
of this Shrub, the Indians make a sort of Thread.

A SCALED FRUIT a kin to the YECOTL. It Is of a rounder Figure, almost like a
Pippin, and about as big as a midling Peach. See the Figure hereof in Bauhinus,
under the Title of Nux Indica Tessellata. They grow in Guyana.

A Great PALMACOCO-NUT. Bauhinus describes Tom. 1.
another Species by the Name of Fructus Palmae Nuciferae. Perhaps the Tree may
not be improperly called Palmacocus, as bearing a Fruit, though small, yet
resembling the Cocoshell. This is the biggest of several here preserved, which
make it doubtful, Whether it belong to a Cocus or a Palm. In length, near 1/^
a foot; in the middle, two inches over. The Base somewhat Oval, and Prominent,
with three large Holes, as in a Coco; the upper end Conick, and a little
inflected. Composed of three Valves or Plates, making so many Angles, below,
obscure; above, more sharp. The color mixed, according to the distribution of
the woody Fibers.

A middle PALMACOCO-NUT. As big as a larger Walnut. In length, an inch and 1/^;
the Base, an inch over. Figured into a kind of Unequal Cone. Upon the Margins of
the three Holes in the Base, are finely spread a great many small black Fibers;
like the Fibrillae of the Lig. cili are round about the Crystal Humor. See
also Clusius's Description hereof in Bauhinus. Two of this Species are here
preserved.

ANOTHER also Conick, but less: In shape like the Pear called Moscatellinum:
but is scarce so big as a small Nutmeg. Of a woody substance, and the color of
Box. With three open Holes, as in all the rest.

The DOG-PALMACOCO. Bauhinus describes and figures one of these Nuts by the
Name of Nux larvata. The like is performed in the German Ephemerides. But I
take this to be a different Species from them both. In length, an inch and 1/^;
an inch over, where thickest; and of a Conick Figure. The Crown or thicker end
of the Shell is encompassed with a great many small Fibers, originally spread
all over the Shell, but here clipped off by some Body, to make it look like a
Head of Hair. About the middle of the Shell are two natural Holes, ratably
large, like a pair of Eyes; and the upper Margins prominent, like Eyebrows,
whereupon are naturally spread a number of small black Fibers, like the Hair on
the Eyebrows. Underneath a third Hole, also hairy, standing in the place of a
Mouth. Betwixt which, or before, there are three little Knobs, which together
make no ill resemblance of a Nose, and the upper Lip all natural; So that, at
the first sight, one would take it to be a little Head of a Greyhound carved in
Wood.

TWO more, of the same kind, but much shorter.

An Oval PALMACOCO, about the bigness of a Nutmeg.

Another, of a straw color, wrinkled, knobed, and somewhat compressed, Figured
in some sort by Bauhinus, Tom. 1.
under the Title of Avellana Indica peculiaris Camerarij.

A BROAD PALMACOCO. An inch over or in breadth; from the Base to the top
directly, not above. That almost flat, this with a blunt point. It has three
Holes on the sides, almost equidistant.

An ORBICULAR PALMACOCO. Yet a little compressed, as a Bowl. Not above an inch
Diametre; of the color and hardness of Box; furrowed as a Peach-Stone. On the
sides are three equidistant Holes, overspread with black capillary Fibers.

A RHOMBOID-NUT, of affinity with the former. An inch and long; broad, and an
inch thick, the sides being a little compressed. Covered round about with small
woody Fibers, produced from the Stalk or Base to the top of the Shell.

The FAVEEL or FAUFEL. The Fruit of a kind of Palm, by the Malabarins called
ARECCA. Described by Garcias, Bauhinus, and Wormius. But by none of them well.
It has a threefold Cover, of so many sorts of work. The utmost, consisting of
straw-colour'd, soft and (as Garcias rightly) downy Fibers. The middle, of
yellowish, and sturdy ones, of the thickness of a sewing Needle: about an inch
longer, than to the top of the Shell, yet couched down round about it. The
inmost, a thin slender Case, but woody. Yet lined with a pithy substance. All
contrived for the greater warmth, and gradual exposing of the Nut within to the
Aer. This Nut is about the bigness of a little Nutmeg; but not so long.

This Fruit grows in Malavar and the Island Mombaim. Being eaten unripe, it
stupifies, and as it were inebriates. For which cause, Garcias.
some eat them to make them unsensible of great pains. Garcias says, That he
used their Distill'd-Water, in Bilious Diarrhaea's, with great success.

A FRUIT very like to the Faufel. Bauhinus describes and figures it out of
Clusius, by that Name. Yet it seems, to me, to be the Faufel it self in the Bud.

The DATE-NUT, qu. Nucidactylus. I find it neither described nor figured by any
Author. It Is above two inches long; near the Stalk, above an inch over; toward
the top near two, being bellied like a Pear. Along one side, a little ridged.
The Stalk covered with a whitish Down, like a Quince's. The outward Skin of a
dusky Bay, smooth, soft, and thin. Next under this is a Work of Fibers, not
produced, as in other Fruits, by the length, but standing bolt upright, like
the Pile of Velvet, about a of an inch in depth; or rather, like the Bristles
upon a Hogs back. So that the outward Skin being taken off, the Fruit looks and
feels like a round Scrubing-Brush. These Fibers are continuous all round about
with the next Cover, which is of a woody substance, and very tough, about of an
inch thick. Next within this Cover or Rind, is contained a soft and light
substance, which, by the space it has left, appears to have been originally a
very fleshy and sappy part. Within This lies the Stone, about as big as a young
Pigeons-Egg. This Stone is not hollow, like others, but altogether solid, like
the Stone of a Date, and is within of the same whitish, dense, and horny
substance: from whence I have taken leave for the Name. At the top of the Stone
is formed, like as in a Nutmeg, a little round Cell, in which the true Seed is
contained, no bigger than a midling Pins head.

A TWIN DATE-NUT of the same Species.

A THIRD, a single one, with the outward Rind taken off, whereby the said
brisly Fibers are conspicuous.

A CACAW-NUT. Given by Francis Willughby Esquire. It Is five inches long; and about
two, over; shaped like a Garden-Cucumer; but the Stalk-end a little slenderer.
Now it is dry, angular with five wrinkled and black Ribs an inch broad. The
spaces between, half as broad, smooth, and of a redish Bay: the blackness of
the Ribs proceeding also from a fuller and deeper Red under the Skin; as in
many other Fruits: or as Scarlet Blood makes blew Veins. Within the Rind are
contained about fifteen or twenty Kernels, near as big as a Garden-Bean, but
smaller at one end; somewhat like a little Birds Heart. Yet the shape, I
suppose, in different Nuts, may have some variation.

Another CACAW-NUT, like the former; given by Mr. John Short.

This Fruit grows principally in New Spain, and the Province of Guatimalla in
Mexico. In which, and other places of the West Indies, the Kernels are used,
says Jos. Acosta, Hist. l. 4. c. 22.
instead of Money; and commonly given to the Poor, as Alms. With Chacawlate,
the Indians Treat Noble Men, Ibid.
as they pass through their Country.

These Kernels being well pounded, as Almonds, in a Mortar, and mixed with a
certain proportion of Sugar and Spices (according as the Trader thinks or finds
it best for Sale) are commonly made up in Cakes or Rowles; which are brought
over hither from Spain, and other parts. But those that would have a good
quantity for their own private use, had much better procure the Nuts themselves
(as fresh and new as may be) and so prepare and compound them to their own
Constitution and Taste. And for those that drink it, without any Medicinal
respect, at Coffee-Houses; there is no doubt but that of Almonds finely beaten,
and mixed with a due proportion of Sugar and Spices, may be made as pleasant a
drink, as the best Chacawlate.

The BUTTER-NUT: a Fruit growing in New England, and there so called, because
the Kernel yields a great quantity of a sweet Oil. I meet with it no where.
In length, two inches and; in the middle, near an inch and over; the two ends
narrower, and a very little prominent, shaped somewhat like a small Cucumer.
The Skin smoothish, and (now) brown. The substance within it, black:
originally, a kind of Pulp or fleshy Rind about of an inch thick, answering to
that of a Walnut. The Stone almost Oval, and edged with six or seven Angles by
the length, the greatest, which are also opposite, ending in a sharp point. The
Spaces betwixt the Angles, very uneven with a great many ruged and thin plates
and knobs.

With a Decoction of the Barque of the Tree, the English Planters dey their
Linsey Woolsey of a Cinnamon color, without Alum, or any thing else being added.

The EDGED-WALNUT of New England. In color, as the common kind. Near an inch
long, as broad, and a little above an inch thick. The Base, and especially the
point, a little prominent. Figured with eight Angles or Edges, whereof one half
sharper than the other. The Kernel shaped, as in the common kind.

A WALNUT shaped like a Pear. Whether monstrous, or of any Species, is
uncertain. It Is two inches long, at one end of an inch thick or over, and the
other, above an inch.

Another, with one Concave of the Shell twice as big as the other.

A Third, with a Shell composed of three Valves or Plates.

A NUT, which seems to be a sort of Indian Filbert. I find it not described. Of
a triangular Figure, one greater side subtended to two lesser. The Base 1/^ an
inch thick; an inch and long, or wide; from thence to the Cone as much. Of a
brown ash color; and ruged all round about by the distribution of a great
number of Fibers. Only the true Base, by which it joined to the Husk, is
smooth; and, as that of a Filbert, cleavable along the middle.

The HAZLE-NUT of New England. Neither is this described. Here is a Box of
them. They are shorter, and broader, than the common sort; the point depressed,
and the Base more produced. In color, both alike.

HAZLE-NUTS, some three, and some four growing together.

The NUT called MEHEMBETHENE. It grows upon a small Tree, like a Hasle, in New
Spain. Described in Bauhinus. Lib. 3. c. 36.
It Is somewhat Oval, an inch and long, ds over. Divided by a triangular
partition into three Cells, for the lodging of so many Kernels.

The BARBADO-NUT. The Fruit, in truth, of a kind of Plum-Tree. Lig. Hist. of
Barb. p. 67.
Yet the Name prevailing, I have placed it here. Described in Bauhinus,
Wormius, and others by the Name of Avellana purgatrix Americana s. Ben magnum
Medicorum vulgo: Mus. Wormian.
but not well. It Is about the bigness of a Filbert. The shell blackish, thin,
and brittle, and somewhat angular. Within, there is a white soft Body,
commonly, but falsely supposed to be the Kernel. For this Body is not divided,
as are all Kernels, into two distinct Lobes, but is one entire part. Yet so as
to have some little hollowness in the middle, capable to lodge a very thin
Filme. This Filme, is the true Kernel, consisting not only of two large and
perfect Leaves (answerable to the two Lobes in other Kernels) but of those
parts also, which in time become the Trunk and Root of the Tree.

These Nuts work strongly both by Vomit and Stool; Bauh. Tom. 1.
four or five of them a great Dose. Being eaten tosted, or injected in
Clysters, Monardes.
which is the safest way of using them, they are a present Remedy in the
Cholick. One thing, very observable, is mentioned by Mr. Boil; In his Book of
the Origin of Forms.
and since, also by Mr. Ligon: Hist. of Barb. p. 68.
and that is, That the Cathartick Power of the Nut, although so great, yet lies
only or chiefly in that very thin Filme abovesaid, by me affirmed to be the
Kernel: for this being taken out, the rest may be ^aten, as any other Nut.

A small Indian Nut, about an inch long, and about half an inch over; with a
pretty hard Rind, and of a shining black. Excepting the color, very like to
that described and figured in Bauhinus, with the Name of Nucula Exotica
Pistacij specie.

The ANGOLA NUT. About of an inch long, and as broad, on one side Unequal; on
the opposite, flat; and of a tawny color. The Shell very hard. The Kernel thin
and leafy, and loged within a thick white Cover, as in the Barbado Nut.

They purge upward and downward: one of them will give about a dozen Stools.

The Purging-CHESNUT. Castanea purgatrix. Well described and figured in
Calceolarius's Musaeum. Sect. 5.
The Figure in Bauhinus (who describes Tom. 1. lib. 3. c. 116.
it by the Name of Fructus Indicus decussatus) not so good. It Is a blackish
Fruit, about an inch and long, almost square, and pretty flat. But that which
is most observable, is the double Sinus which compasses it both by the length
and breadth, as if it had been girded across with a string. And, as it were, a
Crescent on that side, by which it grows to the Shell.

A FRUIT in figure like a Chestnut; but it is much less, at least, than the
common sort. The outward shell of a dusky color, and thin, yet almost as hard
as a Pebble; or like that of the Seed of Gromwell. Under this lies another of
the usual hardness of a Fruit Stone. Within which is included a whitish Kernel,
of a pleasant taste, yet producing a roughness in the Throat.

The New England CHESTNUT. In figure, like the common sort; but a little less.
The Chestnut was first brought from Sardis in Lydia, Mouf. de Re Cib.
into Italy, France, and England. In some places where they abound, the people
make Bread Bauhin.
of them. Heretofore, says Bruyrinus, Lib. de Re Cibar.
they were brought, with the last course, to the Tables of Princes. In his
time, (about an hundred years since) the French used to make and eat
Chesnut-Pottage.

A kind of small HORNED NUT. Not so big as a little Nutmeg, it is of a brown
color, and with two pointed knobs at one end, bended outward, like little
Horns. Figured, as I take it, in Bauhinus Lib. 3. c. 104. Fig. 3.
by the Name of Fructus peregrinus, exiguus orbicularis, cum Sex Nervis.

A Virginian AKORN within its Cup. There is one like this described and figured
in Bauhinus out of Clusius, by the Name of Calix cum Glande incluso maximus ex
Wingandecaow, i. e. Virginia. The Cup is about an inch and Diametre, and the
sides very thick; composed of a great number of Scales, as the Empalement of a
Thistle, and many other Flowers; but here very hard: of an Orbicular Figure,
only open at the top about the breadth of an inch. The Akorn it self, little
bigger than the common sort. But their taste and substance may be more grateful.
For in Virginia they are dried and preserved for food. They steep, and boil
them, and so eat them either with Flesh or Fish.

The ANACARDIUM. A fruit so called from some likeness it has to a little
Heart; but yet flattish, and near as big as a Garden-Bean. Described and
figured by Garcias, Bauhinus, Wormius, Moscardi, Besler, and others. Being held
to the flame of a Candle, Bauhinus
it spits Fire, or sparkling flashes of diverse colors. Anciently much used in
Medicines, now obsolete, as Confectio Anacardina, etc. The Oil or Mellaginous
Succus betwixt the Rind and the Kernel is that which is called Mus. Wormian.
Mel Anacardinum. Either the Name of Oil (given it by most) or of Honey, must
be improper. It is of a very Caustic and ve^imous Nature. Being mixed with
Lime, it is used for the marking of Cottons Bauh. Tom. 1. 336.
throughout India. The Indians pickle the green Fruit, Garcias ab Horto.
and eat them as Olives. When perhaps they contain little or none of that
Caustic Oil.

The ACAJU, or Cajous-AKORN. The Fruit, or rather one part of the Fruit of a
Tree growing in Brasile (where it is called Acajaiba) and other West-Indian
Countries. Chiefly described and figured by Linschoten, Lib. 1. c. 52.
and Piso. Lib. 4. c. 6.
The whole Fruit is called Acaju. That part next the Branch, by Piso, the
Apple; but is shaped more like a Pear. To the top of which grows this part,
which he calls the Akorn. In shape almost of an Hares Kidney; saving that where
it grows to the Apple it is thicker, than at the other end. Of a smooth Surface,
(here) mixed with ashen and brown.

Piso in describing this Fruit contradicts himself. Flori (says he) succedit
Castanea, exqua crescit Pomum. A little after, Pomum hoc, tum Glans ei
superinnascens --. Wherein he is false to himself, but true to Nature; the
Apple not growing upon or after the Akorn, as he had affirmed at first; but the
Akorn, upon the Apple: as by one I have now by me, may be seen.

Wormius confounds the Picture of the Acaju, with the Description of the
Anacardium. As may be seen by comparing Chap. the 22. and 24. of his Second
Book.

The Kernels being pounded or ground, as Walnuts, yield abundance of Oil by
expression. That Oil (so called) which is distinctly contained in the Shell or
Rind of the Akron, is of a hot biting taste, and of a kind of caustic quality.
Used by the Indians to cure the Itch, Shingles, Malignant Ulcers, Piso.
and St. Anthonys Fire. Linschoten.
But the Kernels are accounted a great dainty, either eaten raw with Wine and a
little Salt; or especially, when they are roasted, or else preserved in Sugar.
For the sake of this Fruit only, Piso.
the Natives sometimes go to Wars; the Victors keeping possession of the Place,
till they have plucked the Trees upon it, all clean.

By comparing what has been said hereof, and of the Anacardium, together; they
seem to be two Species, under one Kind.

The ANOVAI. The Fruit of a Tree, or rather the Name of the Tree it self,
growing principally in Brasile. Piso distinguishes a lesser sort, from the
Greater, or Aho^guacu, the Tree whereon this Fruit grows. Of a triangular
Figure, almost like a little Pouch; about an inch from corner to corner, very
hard, smooth, of a Chestnut color, and now made hollow, the Kernel being picked
out; and a hole cut on the top for that purpose. Figured in Bauhinus, Piso, and
others; but more neatly in Calceolarius's Musaeum.

The Kernel, being eaten, is a strong Poison. The Natives of Brasile Piso.
especially when they go to Dancing, hang the empty Shells, for Ornament, and
the pleasure of the Noise they make, about their Legs: as Carriers do Bells
about their Horses Necks. The Wood Lerius.
or Boughs being broken, stink intollerably; somewhat like to Garlic.

The true METHEL; or the VOMITING-NUT commonly so called. Nux Vomica
Officinarum. Very well described Tom. 1.
in Bauhinus. Of the shape and bigness of a midling Troch, covered with short
Hair, of a greenish brown. Very hard, and horny, and almost solid; saving that
in the middle it incloses, as the Barbado-Nut, a thin Filme, which is the true
seed; whereof the said horny Body, called the Nut, is only a great thick Cover.

This Fruit is, by Celaspine, most absurdly called Fungus Orientalis. And
Wormius Mus. l. 2. c. 30.
speaking of it, says, That no Body knows certainly what it is. Whereas, by
Dissection, it plainly appears to be a Fruit.

I find, that Cordus goes thus far, as to observe, That within this Nut is
contained a Rudiment of the future Plant, consisting as it were of two little
pretty veined Leaves, and a Stalk. But that these Leaves were the two Lobes or
main Body of the Seed, that the Stalk of these Leaves, as he calls it, was the
Root, and that between these Leaves was cooped the Bud, of the future Plant,
are things whereof he had not the least notion. Neither did he know (for he
speaks of it as a peculiar) that the like conspicuous foliation, is, as in
truth it is, observable in the seeds of a great many other Plants.

Half a Dram of this Nut, given to a Dog, in powder, has killed him, says
Bauhinus, in four hours. About j, has put a Dog into so great Convulsions,
that he has died in less than half an hour.

The true VOMITING-NUT. Nux Methel Officinarum. So that by a mistake, the Names
of the Nut before described, and of this, are commonly transposed. An
East-Indian Fruit described by Bauhinus Tom. 1. l. 3. c. 144.
with the Name of Nux peregrina oculata and compressa: from its flatness,
although a little swelling on one side; and from the resemblance which the
Seed-Cells, in number five, have to so-many little Eyes.

Two Drachms hereof being given to a man in Powder, purges strongly, and
especially by Vomit, but also by Stool.

CHAP. V. Of BERRYS, CONES, LOBES, and some other Parts of Trees.
CEDRE-BERRYS. The Tree by some called Cedrus Phaenicea; although Baccifera
were better, thereby to distinguish it from the Coniferous or great Cedre.
Described by Clusius under the Name of Oxycedrus; from its sharp-pointed
Leaves. It grows wild in France and Spain. The Berry bigger than that of the
lesser Juniper, and of a deep Purple; with little knobs about it, and some
resemblance of Scales.

Great JUNIPER-BERRYS. Beccae Juniperi majoris Clusio. As big as Myrtle-Berrys,
round, soft, odorous, and of a redish color. The lesser Juniper-Berrys (and
probably these) are of good and various use in Medicine, if they are fresh. One
of the best ways of using them, is by extracting a deep and strong body'd
Tincture of them with Spirit of Wine, whereof a spoonful, or more or less, to
be taken in Wine or other convenient Vehicle.

The BERRYS of the MASTICH-TREE. Baccae Lentiscinae. About half as big as a
midling Peace, round, and of a blackish color. The Tree flourishes in Italy,
Spain, and diverse other places.

AROMATIC INDIAN BERRYS. Cocculi Indi Aromatici. There are a sort called Cocci
Orientales, used for the taking of Fishes; but not so round as these: neither,
as I take it, are they Aromatic. Of these some are not much bigger than a
Black Pepper-Corn; others, as big as a Black Cherry: all of them of the color
of Cloves. They seem to come nearest to that Fruit commonly called
Jamaican-Pepper.

A CONE of the CEDRE of Mount Lebanon. Conus Cedri magnae s. Libani. Given by
Abraham Hill Esquire Described and figured by Bauhinus. Lib. 9. c. 15.
Yet with the Scales represented by far too narrow or not enough expanded: in
which Besler is more exact. It Is about three inches and 1/^ long, and two and
1/^ over; of an Oval Figure, saving that the top is flat. Of this Tree it is
affirmed by Melchior Lussy, In suae Peregrinat. Hierosolym. cap. 13.
That upon the said Mount (on which he has seen them grow) there are some so
thick, that six or seven men can hardly encompass one of them with their Arms
stretched out: which may be supposed above half as thick again, as the thickest
Oak in England.

A CONE of the MALE-FIRR. Conus Abietis maris s. Piceae Latinorum. Described by
Bauhinus. It grows abundantly in Burgundy, and the Alps; sometimes in height
Simlerus.
above a hundred and thirty feet. The Cone almost Cylindrical, about eight
inches long. To each Scale underneath, two winged Seeds or little Kernels are
adjoined. Curiously pictured by Besler.

A little Twin PINEAPPLE. Pini Conus gemellus.

Several CONES of the WILD-PINE. Of this Tree they make great store of Pitch in
Burgundy.

A CYPRESS-NUT. Strobilus Cupressinus. By Caesalpine not so properly called a
Cone, because of its Figure, which is rather Orbicular. Yet any Cone is
appositely called Strobilus, from the winding order of the Scales. It Is not
much bigger than a large Nutmeg. The Tree grows abundantly in France and Italy,
and there bears Nuts.

CAMPHIRE. The Gum of a Tree about as big as the Hazle; and probably of the
Coniferous kind. Formerly thought a Mineral; and by Kentman Nomenclat.
called Bitumen Odoratum. There are two sorts hereof. One of China, which is
carried in Cakes and Balls, into all Places, in great abundance. The other of
Borneo, which is far the best.

A LONG FLAT LOBE. Lobus Buglossoideus, so I call it for its being somewhat
like a Cows Tongue. Described by Bauhinus Lib. 12. c. 3.
with the Name of Ceratium Monococcon Indicum. But this here, is thrice as big
as his. It Is ten inches long; in the middle, 4 over; both ends somewhat Oval.
Very flat, scarce above an inch where thickest; the Belly level, the Back
Unequal and with a blunt Ridge. Of a dull russet, and all over rough with a
great number of small Knobs. Its whole Cavity is filled up with one single
Fruit; which Bauhinus not well examining, only calls it Fructum ex fungosa
quadam materie compactum. Whereas it consists chiefly of a wonderful
Congeries of white Fibers; not produced by the length, or breadth, but the
thickness of the Fruit, both ways, as the Teeth in a double Comb. The spaces
betwixt which are filled up with dust or powder; which was originally, the
sappy Parenchyma or Flesh of the Fruit.

Another LOBE of the same Species, but much less.

A THICK LOBE from Virginea. Lobus ex Wingandecaow. Not ill described by
Clusius. This here is not much above three inches and long, an inch and broad,
and an inch thick. Unciam densus, says Clusius improperly; that word not
expressing the Dimention, but closeness or little porosity of a Body. There are
some Lobes, says Laet Lib. 3. c. 22.
of the same Species, that are two or three times the bigness of This.

A short FIBROUS LOBE. I meet with the Description hereof no where; nor the
Figure, excepting in Besler, Tab. 1.
by the Name of Fructus reticulato corio. It Is almost three inches long, an
inch and broad, near an inch thick. At one edge it is cut through by the
length; where, if you try to spread the sides open, it resists, from its great
fibrosity, like a thick sturdy piece of tanned Leather. Lined within with a
most smooth and thin Membrane. The Cavity all over even, or without any
Sepiment: showing it to have been filled up with only one large Fruit.

A Great SCALLOP'D LOBE; or rather part of it. Of ki^^^ that described and
figured in Bauhinus Lib. 12. c. 8.
by the Name of Lobus Brasilianus ingens Siliquae Acaciae forma. The whole
Lobe, is above two feet long; where broadest, near four inches, flat; and
composed of six or seven Joints, as Bauhinus calls them; rather Cells, so
rounded or scallop'd on both Edges, as to look like so many Joints. In this
part of the Lobe, are only three. In each of them is contained a great NUT
round and flat, and of a shining Bay; an inch and 1/^ Diametre, and half an
inch thick. In the Lobe Bauhinus describes they were not ripe.

A round FRUIT (probably) of a sort of SCALLOP'D LOBE. It Is almost of the
color, bigness, and shape of the former; saving that the sides are not so
flat, but both of them a little Unequal.

ANOTHER, almost of the Figure of a Cat's Kidney; having at the edge a shallow
Sinus or depressure where it was fastened to the Lobe. Described in Bauhinus
Lib. 17. c. 1. p. 276.
by the Name of Phaseolus Novi Orbis, Cordis sigura. But, as is most likely,
very improperly; This being so like the Fruit of the Scallop'd Lobe above
described, which he himself makes the Fruit of a Tree; Neither does the
Kernels, its being naturally cleft into two halfs, ( ut sunt omnia Phaseolacea,
as Clusius speaks) argue any thing. For that is not peculiar to the Phaseolous
kind; but all other Seeds whatsoever, excepting Corn and that Kindred, are
naturally cleft See the Authors first Book Of Plants, Chap. 1.
into two or more Lobes. This Fruit is said to be Cathartick: and therefore
it is probable, the other Species are so likewise.

A long FRUIT of another LOBE. Described and figured in some sort in Bauhinus
Lib. 17. p. 277.
by the Name of Faba Americana purgatrix longior. It Is two inches and long, an
inch and broad, flat, the edges thick, of an Oval shape, and dusky ash color.
Where it was fastened to the Lobe, not depressed, as in the former, but a
little produced.

A broad FRUIT of another LOBE. Probably described and figured in Bauhinus Lib.
17. p. 278.
by the Name of Lobus Membranaceus planus niger. If so, he should not have
called it a Lobe, but the Fruit contained in it. It Is about an inch and long,
and almost as broad, flat, and very thin, and of a blackish brown. One of the
edges sharp, the opposite somewhat thick.

A square FRUIT of an other LOBE. I find it no where. It Is almost an inch and
long; at one end, an inch and broad, at the other, an inch; above an inch thick
in the middle, where it swells up on both sides. Two of the edges opposite,
Unequal; the other two, Concave. Smooth, and of a blackish Bay.

So many of the abovesaid Fruits, as are described by Bauhinus, or other
Authors, are numbered amongst Herbs, as if a sort of Beans. But by comparing
them all together, and with the Fruit of the Scallop'd Lobe; they appear to
have been all included in the Lobes of several sorts of Trees.

The COD of the wild LOCUST of Virginia. Arbor. Lanif. Species. Described by
Hist. of Barb.
Ligon. The Cod somewhat hard and brittle. In length, a foot; sharp at both
ends, in the middle an inch and over, Unequal on the back, the Belly plain.
Filled with white Down, not like Cotton, but that of the Pappous kind of
Plants, appendent originally to the end of the Seed: but the Seeds are here
wanting.

A sort of SILK COTTON with the SEEDS. Given by Th. Povey Esquire. They seem to
have been taken out of the Cod of a Tree which grows about Bantam; described in
Bauhinus Lib. 3. c. 154.
out of Clusius, by the Name of Lanifera Arbor peregrina. That this Cotton is
not so white as that of Clusius, may proceed from Age, or some difference in
the Tree. It Is rather of the color of raw Silk, and has a gloss like it;
extreme soft and fine, but not so long as Cotton wool; and therefore unfit for
Spinning.

Of this Cotton I suppose the Chinese make their soft thin Paper. And it is
probable, That many of our English Plants yield a Down, which would be
altogether as fit for the same purpose. It Is also used, by the Indians, instead
of Feathers, for the stuffing of Pillows.

SECT. II. Of SHRUBS and ARBORESCENT Plants.
CHAP. I. Of SHRUBS, chiefly.
THe DWARF-OAK. The Leaves shaped like those of the Ilex, but not prickly. It
differs not in the hardness of the Wood or Boughs, from the common Oak; nor in
the shape of the Acorns it bears; some whereof are also here preserved. Yet is
it not above a yard in height. Sent hither by Mr. Winthrop, not long since
Governor of Connecticut. In the Inland Parts of New England grow whole
Forests of this Oak.

The SEED of the Male HOLLY-ROSE, called Cistus, mas; and the first in number,
according to Clusius. It Is included in a shelly Cover of a Pentagonal Figure;
and is it self also angular, about the bigness of the Seed of Patience, or
Lapathum Sativum.

The SEED of the second Male CISTUS.

The SEED of the Female CISTUS. The shell of this, not so big, nor so sharp at
top, as of the Male; and both this and the Seed it self blacker. It may be,
because older.

Upon the Root of the Cistus grows a Parasitical Plant, called HYPOCISTIS: the
Juice whereof, is commonly condensed, and so formed, like that of Liquirish,
into Balls, and sold as a Drug.

The SEED of the CISTUS LEDON; being the first in order according to Clusius.

The SEED of the fourth CISTUS LEDON.

Off of the Cistus Ledon is gathered, the Drug called LADANUM: which is a kind
of Gummous Exudation, chiefly found upon the Leaves. It Is gathered Hereof see
Bellonius.
in the Dog Days, and when the Sun shines hottest, and therefore not without
intolerable labor. These Shrubs grow in Cyprus, Creet, France, Spain, etc. In
Creet, the Principal Place for Ladanum is at the Foot of Mount Ida.

The BERRYS of the Indian JASEMIN with a yellow and most fragrant Flower. The
Oil of the Ben Nut being impregnated with the odor or spirit; especially of
these yellow Flowers, and so mixed with Pomatum, is that which is commonly
called Jasemin Buttyr.

The FRUIT of the NAMBUGUACU, a Shrub so called by the Natives of Brasile.
Described by Piso and others with the Name of Ricinus Americanus; and Palma
Christi. Curiously figured by Tobias Aldinus. Descr. Horti Farnesiani.
Where note, That in the said Author, through some inadvertency, the Titles of
this Plant and of the Spinacia Fragifera are transposed. The Seeds are of the
bigness of a Horse-Bean, somewhat long, smooth and glossy, ash-colored and
mixed with black specks. The Kernel white and very oily. Given by Dr. Wilkins
late Bishop of Chester, and to him, by Captain Hind.

The Oil expressed out of these Kernels, is not only used in Lamps, but by the
Natives of Brasile against all cold Distempers Pison. Hist. l. 4. c. 31.
both outward and inward. Six or seven of the Kernels taken inwardly, purge and
vomit with great vehemence. But a Tincture extracted out of them, is well
proposed by Piso Ibid.
as the safer Medicine. Although the Kernels themselves work so strongly; yet
is it affirmed by Mr. Stubs, Phil. Trans. N. 36.
That the Oil which is expressed out of them, has no Physical ( Cathartick)
Operation, although a spoonful of it be taken down at once, or three put up in
a Clyster. The Leaves, says the same Person, Ibid.
are the only Remedy, which the Indians use for the Headache. Being steeped in
Water or Vinegar, they are daily experienced to cure the Shingles Piso, ubi
supra.
and other like Affections.

The FRUIT of the URUCU, a Shrub growing in Brasile. Described by Clusius and
Piso. Bauhinus ventures to call it Bixam Oviedi; although Clusius only says it
is like it. In shape and bigness, says Wormius, like an Aurange-Tree. This
Fruit is about two inches long, an inch and over; composed of two Concave
Valves; below, Oval; above, Conich and sharp-pointed; beset all over with
brisly hairs 1/^ of an inch long. Within their Concaves, thirty or more little
Grains, figured like a Pear, and originally of a curious bright red.

The Shrub grows wild: Yet the Natives cultivate it in Gardens with great Care
and Industry. For with the scarlet Grains abovesaid, they paint and adorn
themselves. The Tincture also which they extract from them, called Orellana,
they sell to the Portuges, and others which Trade with them. They likewise beat
and make them up into Balls and Tablets, which they send into all parts of
Europe. Piso.
The same Grains are sometimes mixed with Chacalet, for the grateful color and
taste which they give to it. Ximines
Of the Barque of the Tree, they make Ropes. Wormius


A small Grain, in color and shape not much unlike that abovesaid, and
probably belonging to a Species of the same Kind, is brought hither from the
Barbados by the Name of NOTTA. Yet used by Deyers, made up in Cakes, for a
Limon-colour. With whom, nothing is more usual, than to alter the colors of
their Ingredients, by the admixture of Salts, and other ways.

BEIDEL OSSAR, i. e. The Egg or Cod of the Ossar, a kind of Syriac Dogs-Bane so
called; Beid, being the Arabic word Honorius Bellus.
for an Egg. Accurately described by Honor. Bellus. And by Wormius very well
figured. Yet Wormius in his Description, which he borrows of Alpinus, (with his
Author) mistakes, in giving the Name to the Plant, which belongs only to this
Egg or Cod. It Is soft or skinny, with some asperity. About four inches long, at
the upper end sharp, and (now) hooked backward. Filled with a company of small
flat Seeds, enclosed in a fine and white Down.

This Shrub grows near Alexandria, upon a Branch or Arm of Nilus Wormius.
called Calig. One Plant, at an Incision of the Barque, will yield no less than
four pounds of Milk. A Dram and half of this Milk, Hon. Bellus.
will purge a Man to Death. But used outwardly, is an excellent Remedy for the
Itch. Mus. Calceol.


A COD, with the Wool and Seeds, of the COTTON SHRUB; called Xylon Herbaceum.
Said Lacuna.
to have grown heretofore only in Egypt; but now is sown, and grows abundantly
in Creet, Sicily, and diverse other Places in Europe. The Cod is trivalvous,
almost like to that of a Tulip, or the Peony. Upon the Seeds which are black
Oval, and near as big as a Horse-Bean, hang the greatest part of the Wool.
They are composed chiefly of two long and thin Leaves, admirably rolled up into
an Oval Figure; as I may have occasion else where to represent. They are
sometimes an Ingredient in Pectoral Medicines. Some Cotton Wool, though of its
self, pure white; yet contrary to Flax and Hemp, loses of its whiteness by
being washed. But whether it be that of this Shrub, or that of the Cotton-Tree;
or whether, according to the Climate, etc. there is not good and bad of both, I
determine not.

SAVINE-BERRYS. About as big as those of the common Juniper, and of a blackish
blew. The little Sprigs, (of which there are some here) are square; and not
prickly, as those of the other Species. The Shrub, called Sabina Baccifera, and
described by Bellonius, grows plentifully in some places in Asia.

The ROSE of JERICO, or CHRISTMAS-ROSE. Rosa Hierichuntina. Either an ignorant,
or a crafty Name, agreeing neither to the place, nor nature of the Plant. For
about Jericho it is no where found, Bellonius.
but in Arabia, upon the shore of the Red Sea. A woody Shrub, but grows not
above a foot or there about in height. Originally of an Aromatic smell. The
Leaves of this are soft, but the Flowers remain, somewhat less than those of
Cumfrey, and seem to consist only of two Leaves. All the Branches are closed up
together, with some resemblance to the Umbel of the Plant called Bees-Nest, or
some others of that kind.

Being set in Water, its several Branches will gradually be expanded. Which
some Imposters knowing, choose Christmas-Eve for the Experiment, and so make
people believe that it only opens at that time.

ANOTHER of the same less globous, or with the Branches more erect.

Part of an INDIAN PLANT, in shape like a Wooll-Combe; being composed of a
number of strait black Teeth, very sharp, near as thick as a Cock-Spur, and
most of them two inches long, naturally set upright, as it were, in a
wooden-socket.

CHAP. II. Of ARBORESCENT Plants.
A SPIKE of LONG PEPPER; a sort of Climber or Winder, after the manner of Hops,
and other like Plants. Not much differing from the Round, saving in the Spike.
It grows in Malabar, Java, and Sumatra; but especially in Bengala, where it is
called Pimpilim. See Piso hereof. Mantissae Aromat. c. 8.


AETHYOPIAN-PEPPER, or rather the Coded-Fruit hereof. Well described by
Bauhinus. Lib. 15. c. 46.
By Besler curiously figured. Here, upon one Stalk, hang about 15 Cods, most of
them three inches long, thick as a Goose-Quill, fibrous, and of the color of
Cloves; containing ten or twelve blackish and longish Seeds, each in a Cell by
it self; not half so big as the least of French-Beans, which Bauhinus affirms
them to equal, but more like the Seed of the Laburnum majus. Neither, according
to the same Author, has it the taste of black Pepper, but rather of the Clove;
viz. not much biting, yet very Aromatic, especially being well heated at a
fire.

POYSON-BERRYS. So they are inscribed. The fruit of a Plant growing in the
Burmudas, somewhat like to Ivy. They grow in Bunches, almost as those of Round
Pepper, and are much of the same bigness, almost of a stony hardness, yet
enclosed in a thin brittle and pellucid Cover. Whether they were gathered full
ripe, appears not.

The COD of a West-Indian Plant, called TAXOCOQUAMOCHIT. This Cod, but not the
Plant, is described and figured in Bauhinus. Tom. 1. cap. 11.
It Is five inches long, an inch broad, and sharp-pointed. Divided into twenty
or four and twenty distinct Cells, made by so many thin Membranes, for the
lodging of as many Seeds apart, of a dark Bay, and somewhat like those of Broom.

The COD of a KIDNEY-BEAN of Brasile. Lobus Fabae Brasilianae Nephroideae.
I find it not described. It Is Divided into two Cells, by a Partition an inch
thick. Each of the Cells near two inches and long, and as broad, swelling out
on both sides the Lobe, which outwardly is very rough and tawny, has two
furrows along the Belly, the Back much bowed, and both of them about an inch
thick.

The BEAN belonging to the said COD. Bauhinus seems to describe and picture
Tom. 2. Cap. 17.
under the Title of Phasiolus peregrinus magnus, color Castaneae, cum magno
hilo, laevis. About half as big again as a Chestnut, flatish, and having a
broad, blackish Seat, reaching above half its compass. Whereby it appears to be
of the Bean-kind, and no Phasiolus; the Seat whereof, like that of the Lupine,
is always round. Of these Beans, are here preserved both black and bay.

The COD of another Brasilian KIDNEY-BEAN, with the Beans enclosed. It differs
from the former in being black, and in the number of its Cells, which are
three. The Bean is somewhat Oval, and wrinkled, and having a Seat which reaches
almost its whole compass. See a good Figure hereof in Calceolarius's Musaeum.

HERCULES'S CLUB. Rubi facie senticosa Planta. A tall woody Plant, described in
some sort, and so called, by Lobelius. Near three yards long; how much longer,
is uncertain, being cut off at both ends; almost seven inches in compass,
strait, and but very little taper'd. Originally, had two or three Branches,
here cut off. Encompassed with a great many pointed Studs, (whence its Name)
thick set, and sometimes growing double, flatish, and about an inch broad by
the length of the Club, after the figure of the Thorns of the Rasberry-Bush.
Like to which they are also merely cortical, having not one fiber of wood in
them, whereby they break like Cork, but are not so soft. The wood is as hard,
as that of Holly, and the Pith but small. So that notwithstanding the
similitude of their Thorns, yet is it a different Plant from the Rubus.

The STALK of a Plant like a NET. It Is only the woody part of it, the Barque
and Pith being both taken away. It Is above an Eln long; likely, when entire,
much longer, for now it is broken at both ends. Almost six inches about. The
spaces between the reticulated portions of Wood, are about or 1/^ of an inch
over, and from two inches to four, in length. Prince Maurice, looking upon This
as a Curiosity, upon his Return from Brasile, brought it thence with him.

This being, as is likely, an Annual Plant, and therefore having a large Pith,
and very open Network, is a conspicuous example of the like Work (though more
or less open, yet) observable in the woody part of all other Plants whatsoever.
See the Author's Anatomy Of Plants, Chapter 2. and 3.


Several SPIKES or Heads of MAYZ or Indian-Wheat; with the Grains, as is not
unusual, of three or four colors. The Description of the Plant, with a large
Account of its Culture, and Use, were communicated by Mr. Winthrop sometime
since Governor of Connecticut in New England: and by me lately published, in a
succinct but full Relation, Phil. Trans. N. 142
with some alteration of the Method. The Plant grows to the height of six or
eight feet; and is joynted like a Cane. It Is also full of a sweet juice like
that of the Sugar-Cane. On the Spike grow several strong thick Husks, which,
before it is ripe, shut it close up round about. Thereby defending it, not only
from all Weathers, but also the Ravine of Birds, to which, the Corn, while
tender, is a sweet and enticing food.

The Stalks of this Corn, are good Fodder for Cattle. As are also the Husks
about the Spike. The Indian Women slit the Husks, and weave them into Baskets
of several fashions. Of the Juice abovesaid may be made a Syrup as sweet as
Sugar: which probably, may also be made of it, by the usual method. The Indians
eat the ripe Corn either boiled; or more usually parched; of it self, or, as
Bread, with Flesh. The green Corn also, which, as is said, has a sweet Taste,
being boiled, dried, and kept in Bags, and when they eat it, boiled again, they
account a principal Dish. The English, of the ripe Corn, make very good Bread:
but it must be mixed nothing near so stiff as our Wheat-Meal. But the best sort
of Food made hereof; they call Samp. Having watered, and ground it to the
bigness of Rice, and winnow'd or sisted the Hulls from it, they boil it tender,
and so with Milk, or with Butyr and Sugar, make it a very pleasant Dish. 'Twas
often prescribed by Dr. Wilson to his Patients here in London. The Indians that
live much upon it, seldom troubled with the Stone. The English also make very
good Beer, both of the Bread, and of the Malt, made of this Corn. But it will
not make good Malt the ordinary way, because, not without sprouting both ways
to a considerable length: whereby it is so matted before it is fully malted,
that it cannot be opened without breaking the Come. To avoid which, they pare
off a Turff about three inches thick, and laying the Corn all over the bare
ground, cover it with the Turff, till the Plot looks like a green Field, at
which time, the Corn is well malted. Then taking it up in matted pieces, they
dry it on a Kiln, or in the Sun.

The SPIKE or HEAD of the EGYPTIAN MAUZE. Given by Sigr. Boccone (formerly
Botanick to the Great Duke of Tuskany) who brought it with him from Sicily,
where it is frequently nursed in Gardens. The Figgs (as Acosta calls them) here
grow upon it in several Bunches, nine or ten in a Bunch; two inches and long,
and as thick as the middle Finger of a laboring man; being now shrunk up, and
perhaps also dwarfed by the place of its growth.

This Plant, as it grows in Egypt and the Indies, is described by Thevetus,
with the Title above; by Oviedus, under the Name of Platanus, absurdly received
by some, as himself notes; by Piso, who, with the Natives of Brasile, calls it
Pacoeira; by Acosta, with the Name of Musa, from the Arabian Mous. It grows
three or four yards in height, and of a yard Thevetus.
in compass. Yet this Trunk, so great, is Oviedus.
but annual. It has Leaves above a yard and long, and more than 1/^ a yard
broad. The Figs grow toward the top of the Trunk, near the shape and bigness of
a midling Cucumer, sometimes one or two Acosta.
hundred of them: Of a soft melting substance, and a sweet and most delicious
Taste. In Brasile, either eaten by themselves, or with their Mandioca-Flower;
boiled, or fried Piso.
with Butyr.

Part of a sort of MAMBU, a great Indian Cane. In Bauhinus's Pinax called
Arundo Arbor. Described by Wormius. But whereas his was black, This is of a
straw-colour: and much smaller, sc. about seven inches in compass. Some of them
grow nine or ten yards high. It Is hollow, quite through, excepting, that at
every Joint, it is closed up with a transverse Plate or Floor. Necessary, for
the adding strength and sturdiness proportionable to so great a height.

It grows in Malabar, especially about Coromandel, near the Seaside. In the
several hollows is found a curdled juice, whereof the Natives make a sort of
Sugar, by the Aethyopians called Tabaxyr, much valued by the Arabians, because
of the Medicinal Virtue, Wormius out of Garsias and others.
they at least suppose it to have. In Bantam, the Cane is much used for the
building of their Houses.

The SUGAR-CANE. Arundo Saccharina. In Brasile called Tacomaxee; to which place
Piso, l. 4. c. 1.
it was first transplanted from the Fortunate Islands. A great Reed about seven
or eight feet high, with many Joints, one at about every foot, and a large
close Pith; out of which, the greatest part of the Juice, whereof the Sugar is
made, is expressed. See the Description hereof at large in Piso Hist. l. 4. c.
1.
and Ligon; Hist. of Barb. p. 86. etc.
together with the way of Planting, gathering and pressing the same; and of
ordering the expressed Juice, for the making of several sorts of Sugar, and
Brandy: as also the Engines, and contrivance of Vessels for the same purposes.

The principal knack, without which all their labor were in vain, is in making
the Juice, when sufficiently boiled, to kerne or granulate. Which is done, by
adding to it, a small proportion of Lie made with (vegetable) Ashes: without
which, it would never come to any thing by boiling, but a Syrup, or an Extract.
But a little of that Fixed Salt, serves, it seems, to Shackle or Crystallize
(which is a degree of Fixation) a very great quantity of the Essential Salt of
this Plant.

In refining the Sugar, the first degree of pureness, is effected only by
permitting the Molosses to drain away through a hole at the bottom of the
Sugar-Pots; the Pots being, all the time, open at the top. The second degree is
procured, by covering the Pots at the top with Clay. The reason whereof is, for
that the Aer is hereby kept out from the Sugar, which, in the open Pots, it
hardens, before it has full time to refine by separation. And therefore,
whereas the first way requires but one Month, this requires four. The finest
Sugar of all, See Barl. de Reb. Brasil. p. 119. etc.
is made with Limewater (and sometimes Urine) and Whites of Eggs. Sugar Candy
(Saccharum cantum, because it shoots into angular Figures) by placing a great
many slender sticks across a Vessel of liquid Sugar, for it to shoot upon.

That which Dioscorides calls (...); Galen, Sacchar; and Archigenes, Sal Indum;
is the same thing for substance, says Matthiolus, with that we call Sugar:
saving that, whereas this is made of the Juice expressed and boiled; that of
the Ancients, as is likely, was only the Tears; which bursting out of the Cane,
as the Gums or Milks of Plants are used to do, were thereupon hardened into a
pure white Sugar. That the Sugar of the Ancients was the simple Concreted Juice
of a Cane, He well conjectures: and what is above said of the Mambu, may argue
as much. But that it was the Juice or Tears of the Sugar-Cane, he proves not.
Nor, I think, could be, if, as is supposed, it was, like Salt, friable, and
hard. And in affirming our Sugar to be the same for substance with that of the
Ancients, he much mistakes; that being the simple Juice of the Cane, this a
compounded Thing, always mixed either with the Salt of Lime, or of Ashes;
sometimes of Animals too.

The COD and SEED of the true Greater CARDAMUM, figured by Besler, in
Calceolarius's Musaeum, and others with the Name of the Middle Cardamum. The
Plant it self, both Lesser, and Greater, described and figured by Bontius;
Hist. l. 6. c. 36.
who glories himself the first that has done it will. The Lesser grows about a
yard high, with a joynted Stalk, like a Reed. But bears its Spikes, with the
Flower and Seed, near the Root. The Greater grows two yards in height, the
Stalk not joynted, with a Spike of Flowers at the top, somewhat like to that of
a Jacynth. Both of them plentiful in Java.

The Indians season all their boiled Meats herewith, preferring it before other
Spices, as not being biting.

That which is commonly received amongst Botanicks for the Greater kind, from
the fiery hot Taste of its Seeds (called Grana Paradisi) seems to be no
Cardamum, but of another Tribe.

The PAPYR-REED of Nile. Papyrus Nilotica. By the Egyptians called Berd. Given
by Sigr. Boccone, who brought it out of Sicily, where it grew. Described and
figured in Bauhinus; Lib. 18. c. 196.
who with Gesner, makes it a Species of Cyperus, to which ( in Leaf and Stalk)
it is like; but has a more compacted Head. This seems to have been no tall
Plant: but upon its Native Bed, sc. near the Banks of the River Nile, it grows
above three yards high, (as high, says Alpinus, above the Water) and
abundantly. Which Moses's Mother knowing, chose well, to lay her Babe in
Pharaohs Daughter's way, yet, in the mean time, under good shelter from the
scorching Sun.

Both the Barques and Leaves of some Plants, are used for writing upon by
Impression. But this Plant has its Name, not from the use either of its Leaves
or Barque, but of its Pith; whereof, being beaten into a Pulp, the Pulp spread
into thin Leaves, and several of those Leaves clapped together, Papyr fit to
write upon was formerly made, as now it is of Rags. It was also used by
Chirurgions, as sometimes Spong, or Elder Pith is now, for the dilating of
Fistula's, and imbibing the sanious matter of ill-natured Ulcers.

Another Head of the same Plant.

SECT. III. Of HERBS.
CHAP. I. Of STALKS and ROOTS.
THe BULBIFEROUS GARLIC. Given by Dr. Daniel Whistler. So called, because in
the place of Seed, it bears Bulbs at the top of the Stalk. Described by
Bauhinus Lib. 19. c. 3.
with the Name of Allium proliferum: although Bulbiferum, be more apposite; for
that every Plant which bears Seed, is proliferous; the Seed being Plantae
Proles, or the Foetus of a Plant. The Bulbs (not fully described) are about
twenty; in a round Head or Cluster as big as a Nutmeg; each Bulb equal to a
midling Peace; consists of four or five shells; of which, the outmost is
shrunk up to a dry Skin, on one side, of a purplish color; the inmost
incloseth that little Particle which in time becomes another bulbiferous Stalk,
with a Root.

The STRINGY BRITHWOORT. Aristolochia Polyrrhizos. So called in distinction
from the other kinds with tuberous Roots. Described Lib. 32. c. 8.
by Bauhinus. It grows in France and Spain; but this came from Virginia. Of all
the Species the most Aromatic, as by tasting the Roots, although now very old,
may easily be perceived.

The upright PENYROYAL. Pulegium erectum, Virginianum. It has a Leaf almost as
large as that of the Pulegium montanum. Yet smells rather like Thyme. Which is
all the description it admits, now withered.

A sort of SNAKEWEED, growing near the River in Connecticut. So called, because
the Root is used for the biting of the Rattle-Snake. The Roots, especially
powdered, are of a fragrant smell, and very Aromatic taste. Yet seems a
different Plant from the Serpentaria of the Shops, as having a Leaf deeply
jagg'd or scallop'd, as that of Ladies-Mantle.

The ROOTS of a sort of Asarum, found about Staniford in the Western parts of
New England. It seems the same with the Serpentaria of the Shops, i. e. the
Virginian Snakeweed. A Plant of excellent use in some Fevers.

The ROOT NINZIN, corruptly called Gensing. Taken from a parcel sent over by a
Chinese Physician, and given by Dr. Andrew Clench. Described Mantissae Aromat.
c. 15.
by Guliel. Piso. Almost of the color of a Parsnep, with something of a
yellowish hue. No bigger than a little Skirret; and of like consistence. Not
stringy, as that in Piso, but divided, as often the Mandrake and some other
Roots, into two Legs. Of a sweetish Taste, as Piso says rightly. But this here
is also bitter; sweet in the first or lowest degree, and bitter in the second.

This Root is not known to grow (wild) any where, but in the Kingdom of Corea.
In which place, as also in Tunquin, China, and Japan, it is much used, and
relied upon in Epilepsys, Fevers, and other both Chronick and Acute Diseases;
either alone, or in composition Ibid.
as the Basis. In China, accounted so great a Cordial, that one pound hereof,
is there sold for three Phil. Trans. N. 14. out of Thevenot's Voyages, Tom. 3.
pounds (weight) of Silver. Which shows, That there it is no Native, but only a
Drug. So that if the Root or Seed be desired fresh for propagation, or other
purpose, it were better sought for, where it grows wild, than from thence.

The ROOT of the Egyptian ARUM. Described by Fabius Columna, Pars 2. c. 1.
with the Name of Arum Aegyptiacum: but called by Alpinus, Rarior. Pl. lib. 2.
c. 18.
Colocasia Strogulorhiza s. rotunda Radice; not rightly, as Columna notes. Nor
do either of their Descriptions well reach it.

This here (as it is often) is a double Root; each of them round, and somewhat
flat. The uppermost like the dried Root of Arum, white and friable; but the
Taste is extinct. Full and frim, in breadth or transversly, two inches;
encompassed with three or four very small Circles, whereupon several Leaves did
once grow: underneath, are the portions of several small dead Stalks; on the
top and sides, the Buds of others to come. To this, by a short Neck between,
hangs the lower; which being also the elder, is more fuzzy and shrunk up.

This Description cannot be understood, without knowing that, which is very
observable of this, and a great number of other Plants; and whereunto, no one
Botanick has adverted: viz. That the Root is annually repaired, or renewed out
of the Stalk it self. Particularly, of this Plant, that one of its two Roots
does every year perish, the other is new made; not out of the other Root before
it perishes, but out of the Stalk it self. The Stalk descending by such
degrees, as that part thereof which, the last year, was the lowermost above
ground; this year, being sunk (or rather by the appendent strings pulled) under
ground, becomes the upper Root; the next year, the under Root; and the year
after, rots off; another new Root being still yearly made out of the Stalk. By
which way, and not as Trees by the same numerical Root, this and other like
Plants are perennial.

This Root, the Egyptians eat very greedily, both raw, boiled, and all manner
of ways; supposing them, praevalide excitare venerem. The Roots of the common
Arum boiled, were heretofore eaten among the Greeks: and may taste as well as
boiled Onions.

A pair of large GINGER ROOTS; one of which, when green, might weigh four or
five ounces. And is said to be dug up, sometimes, of fourteen Ounces. The Plant
uncertainly described. Acosta compares it to that called Lachryma Jobi;
Lobelius, Lib. de Bals.
to a Reed; Garcias, to a Flag; and Bauhinus pictures it accordingly with a
trivalvous Cod. Piso, out of Bontius's Papers, gives two Figures, one of the
Male, the other of the Female: and supposes, that the uncertainty of Relations
hereof may proceed partly from the not distinguishing betwixt them. The Stalk
of the Male indeed seems to have some little likeness to a Flag. But the
Seed-Cod is there neither figured nor described.

The best Ginger grows upon the Coast of Malabar. That which is preserved with
Sugar, comes, or did at least in Linschotus's time, from Bengala and China.

CHAP. II. Of FRUITS.
THe great FLAGON GOURD, or rather CALABASH, for such I take it to be, and that
therefore it should have been placed with that sort of Fruit. Bauhinus Lib. 16.
c. 1.
describes a Gourd in shape pretty like to this by the Name of Cucurbita
Lagenaria; but mentions neither how big, nor of what hardness the shell; in
which latter respect the Fruit here before us, (as do most Calibashes) far
exceeds all the sorts of Gourds that I know. It Is very smooth, and of a
parchment-colour: near eleven inches long. That part of the Neck next the Tree
three inches and over; next the belly three and; the belly it self, nine
inches; or two feet three inches about; the top depressed. The shell as hard
almost as a Plum-stone, and at the small end above a quarter of an inch thick.

A LONG Indian GOURD. I find it not described. Almost of a golden color; in
length, ten inches; in the middle, where it is thickest, three over; from
thence it grows slender to the Stalk; the top Oval. Made angular with ten Ribs,
or great Fibers produced by the length, in the middle about an inch distant one
from another, and appearing the higher, by the shrinking down of the sides
between them. The Rind not hard, within, whitish and very fibrous. The Seeds,
black and rough, near an inch long, flat, oval, and horned, as it were, with
two knobs at the Base: being chewd, of a very bitter taste.

The WARTED GOURD. Figured, and in some sort described Lib. 16. c. 1.
in Bauhinus. Probably, Lobelius's Sicyopepon Strumosus. This is above a foot
and about, near a foot long, thickest toward the top, and there a little
depressed as an Apple. Soft and brittle, and now just of the color of
Buff-Leather. The Warts or Knobs all round about it, are neither blisters, nor
solid, but embossed parts of the Rind.

Another of the same Species, but lesser.

The LONG WARTED GOURD. Not described. Almost two feet in compass, and near a
foot in length. In other respects, altogether like the former.

ANOTHER with small and few WARTS. About four inches long, toward the upper
end, as much over. The color, and shape at the top, as of the rest.

The BROAD TUBEROUS GOURD. Probably that described and figured in Bauh. Lib.
16. c. 1.
by the Name of Cucurbita Clypeiformis s. Melopepon latus; at least of kin to
it. Of a Buff color, as the former; four inches long, four and 1/^ broad;
surrounded with undulated Knobs an inch or 1 over, with furrows between each
Knob and by the length; depressed at the bottom; the top with a knob 1/^ an
inch over.

The FLAT GOURD. Melopepo compressus alter, Lobelio. This came from Virginia.
It Is three inches long, or from the Stalk to the top, and three and 1/^ inch
broad; at both ends, compressed like a Bowl. Of a dusky yellow mixed with tawny.

The Little, Round, Bitter GOURD. Figured in Bauhinus Lib. 16. c. 1.
under the Title of Cucurbita amara, fructu parvo, globoso, color varia. The
Description lies in the Name. A sort of Colocynthis.

The Yellow, Round, GOURD. In Bauh. the Fruit and Plant together, entitled,
Cucurbita aspera, minima, sphaerica, crocea, variegata. With a conjecture of
its being the same with that which by Tabernamontanus is called Pepo Indica
minor.

Not only the shells of Calabashes, but also the Rinds of Gourds, are used as
Vessels for Gums, and other matters better than Earth or Wood, as being both
light, and not brittle. The little bitter Gourd, being eaten, works by Vomit
and Stool. The Water distilled from unripe Gourds, applied with Linen, is most
successful, and a great Experiment against that Heat, called Syriasis, Bauh.
lib. 16. c. 1. p 217
especially in Infants.

A FRUIT in shape somewhat like a WILD CUCUMER; yet not, as that, hairy, but
smooth. The Seeds also of both are in figure, color, and taste, altogether
alike. So that perhaps it may not be improperly called Cucumis Sylvestris
glaber.

A FRUIT, supposed by Clusius, Exot. lib. 2. c. 18.
to be that of the EGYPTIAN-BEAN of Dioscorides, a Water-Plant. It Is of a brown
Bay, and of a softish and light substance; the top, which is broadest, above
three inches over, and flat; divided into about twenty round and open Cells,
almost like an Honeycomb. In each Cell is contained a Bean or Nut, alike
colored, of an Oval shape, as big as a small Akorn, and in the same manner
pointed at the top. See also the Figure in Bauh.

A slender COD of GUINY-PEPPER. Capsici Siliqua angusta. Piso Hist. l. 4. c. 51.
describes and figures nine or ten sorts, all growing in Brasile, and there
called Quiya; of which this is the longest and most slender. It Is used as a
great Stomachick Medicine, and in Sauces, both in substance and infusion, in
America, Spain, and other Countries, and by many preferred before the best
Pepper.

The COD of the Broad Leaved DOGSBANE. Siliqua Apocyni latifolij. Given by
George Wheeler Esquire. Described and figured in Bauhinus: L. 15. c. 15. p. 135.
but with the Cods shorter and thicker than their natural shape. Of kin to that
which Lobelius calls the Scammony of Montpelier. Along the middle or center of
the Cod, runs a slender fibrous pillar, to which, and not to the sides of the
Cod, the Seeds are fastened on both sides it; and so encompassed about with
Down, wherewith the Cod is filled up. A provident forecast of Nature to keep
them warm. The said Down consists not of single Hairs, but Plumes, affixed to
the Seeds, wherewith they are winged for their being more dispersedly wafted by
the Aer, and prevent their falling in a ruck on the ground.

The CODS of the wild WOAD, ( Glasti Sylvestris) together with the Seeds
therein contained.

A small SPIRAL FRUIT. Above an inch long, and over. It consists of five
little Cods, all growing upon one Stalk, and thence twisted all together (as
several strings in a Rope) are at the end united in a slender point.

The WATER-CALTROP. Tribulus aquaticus. Described in Bauhinus. A kind of shelly
Fruit of a brown color; divided into four thick and sharp-pointed Spikes,
quadrangularly. In the center of which is lodged a white and well tasted
Kernel. They grow in the Rivers and Lakes in Italy and Germany. Where, in times
of scarcity, the people make Bread of the Kernels.

Some EARS of Tangier WHEAT. Given by the Honorable Charles Howard of Norfolk
Esquire. The Plant described in Bauhinus by the Name of Triticum cum multiplici
Spica. For it is a great broad Spike, as it were branched out into several
little lesser ones; yet all closely compacted: in the middle inch thick, and an
inch and 1/^ broad; four long, and sharp pointed.

Some more EARS of the same sort, brought from Portugal where it grew.

CHAP. III. Of SEEDS.
THe THICK FRENCH-BEAN. Phaseolum maxim tumidum. An inch and long, broad, and
an inch thick. The seat of the Bean, or of its Plancentula, that is, the part
whereon it grows, as long; of a brown color, with a black rimm.

The slender FRENCH-BEAN, of several sizes and colors, sc. Red, Black, White
or Ash Color, and the same spoted with black. Although these are quite
different from the Fabaceous kind, yet I have retained the English Name,
because in use.

The ROUND scarlet Phaseolus. Abrus coccineum majus. Bauhinus Lib. 17. p. 264.
describes it under the Title of Pisum Americanum; improperly, for that the
Peasen, and the Phaseolous kind, are very different. And for the Figure hereof,
by some oversight, is placed that of a sort of Palme-Nut. It Is a scarlet Fruit
about as big as a Rounseval Peace, and somewhat flat.

The LESSER AMERICAN-BEAN. About of an inch broad, almost square, and very
thick. The seat of the Placenta, black; which reaches almost half round the
Bean. Here are preserved both Black ones, and of a Scarlet or Coralline color.

An ORBICULAR Indian PEACE. A large one, sc. of an inch Diametre: of a shining
straw-colour, mixed with yellowish Striae as it were in rings: not much unlike
the little round stones wherewith Children play, called Marbles.

Another ROUND Indian PEACE. About as big as the former, and also round. But
somewhat flat on both sides, as a Loaf. And of a whitish color.

An OVAL Indian PEACE. A very large one, sc. near an inch long, and above an
inch over; of a long Oval Figure, so as to resemble a Sparrows Egg. But of a
shining bluish ash color, like a Jaspis. Bauhinus Lib. 17. p. 276.
figures and describes a Fruit (or Seed) pretty like to this, with the Name of
Phaseolus Ovo Columbino fere similis. But by his Description it is neither of
the Phaseolous, nor Fabaceous, but of the Peas-kind; as both This, and the two
precedent ones, also are. The Characteristick of which kind is, To have the
Placenta, and so the Seat of it, always very small.

The GUINEY-PEAS. Described in Bauhinus by the Name of Pisum Americanum
coccinem s. Abrus minus. Although the Abrus majus be of the Phaseolous kind.
It Is of the bigness of a young Peace, of an Oval shape, and Scarlet color, when
fresh very pure; and adorned upon the seat of the Placenta with a black spot.
Here are some also of the same sort, all over black. They grow in Madagascar
and China; where they eat them not, but only use them for weights. In Europe,
sometimes for Necklaces and Bracelets for the Wrists.

The great CICHE. Cicer ruffus major. In Italy, Spain and France Ciches are
commonly sown (as Clover-Grass) in the Fields. In some parts of France, they
use them not only medically, but for food.

The great LENTIL. Leus major. This also is sown, in France, in the Fields, as
the Ciche.

The great Wild VETCH. Vicia maxima sylvestris.

The CANDY VETCH. Arachoides Honorij Belli, s. Cretica. Described, in Bauhinus,
Lib. 17. c. 19.
by the Author from whom the Name. The Seed it self, like a little Lentil.
Seldom more than one in a Cod. The Cod is short and broad, about the bigness of
a Silver Halfpenny; On the outside cancellated or favous, almost as in the seed
of Poppy.

What H. Bellus affirms Ibid.
of this Plant, is observable, sc. That it bears Cods not only on the Stalk,
but also on the Roots under ground.

The KIDNEY-VETCH. Semen Anthyllidis leguminosae.

The CRIMSON GRASS VETCH. s. Catanance.

The MEDICK FITCHLING. s. Onobrychis.

The EVERLASTING VETCH; so it seems to be. Vicia multiflora perennis.

The EVERLASTING PEACE. Lathyrus perennis.

The PRICKLY HEDG-PARSLY Seed. Semen Caucalidis echinatum. s. Lappulae Canariae
latifoliae.

The Seed of MACEDONIAN PARSLEY.

The AZORICK sweet FENIL Seed. Shaped like that of the Shops, but much less.

The Seed of the stringy BIRTHWORT of Virginia. s. Pistolochiae Virginianae.

The Seed of Indian SCABIOUS. Somewhat bigger than the common.

The Seed of the BUGLOSS with the yellow Flower.

The Seed of a SENSITIVE Plant. s. Herbae mimosae. There are several Species
described by Clusius, and others. That of Clusius, about five handful high, and
has the taste and smell of Liquirish. This Seed is of a dark brown, not much
bigger than that of a Purple Stock, angular, and frequently of a Rhomboidal
Figure. It takes its Name (as is commonly known) from its Imitation of sense or
Animal motion. For so soon as you touch the Leaves, they presently fall, till
they lie upon the ground. After a while, they rise again; but being touched,
fall as before.

The Seed of VENUS LOOKING-GLASS. Of the shape and bigness of a Fly-blow, but
of a dark glistering color, like polished Steel. Figured and described by Mr.
Hook. Micrographia.


The Seed of PRICK MADAM; Sedi minoris. In color, shape and bigness, almost
like to that of Pancy-Seed, or the Viola tricolor, but a little less.

The Seed of Wild GARLIC.

The SEED of the Carduus headed HAWKWEED. The Plant described by Bauhinus, but
not the Seed. It Is 1/^ of an inch long, as thick as that of the lesser
Hawkweed, and of a yellowish straw color; a little crooked, with the top
swelled and pointed, and viewed in a Glass, appears wrinkled round about.

The lesser Champaine TREACLE Mustard Seed. s. Thlaspios Campestris.

The Seed of the great STAR of BETHLEHEM. s. Ornithogali sl. pleno. Of the
bigness of Mallow-Seed, and very black; on one side round, on the other angular.

The Seed of the VERVAINE MALLOW of Japan. s. Alceae Japonensis. As small as
that of the common Mallow, but longer and more like a Kidney; of a brownish
yellow, yet covered with a white, thin, and very short Down.

Summer WHEAT of New England. So called (though less properly) because sown and
ripe the same year. Whether from the Nature of the Grain, or the Soil and
Climate, trial has not been made.

SECT. IV. Of MOSSES, MUSHROONS, etc. Together with some Appendents to Plants.
OF MOSSES here are about four and twenty Species. Most of them gathered in a
Wood in Surrey, and given by John Evelyn, Esquire.

The CREEPING TREE MOSS of America. 'Twas found betwixt Virginia and Florida.
It consists of several Threads, somewhat thicker than a Tailors, covered all
over with little skiny Scales, hardly visible without a Glass. The greater
number of these Threads put forth two or three more, and so those as many,
repeating them after every two inches, all of equal thickness. In which manner
they spread wonderfully both in length and breadth. It Is probable, that under
those little Scales may lie the Seed of the Moss.

The SHIELDY Tree MOSS. Muscus arboreus scutellaris. So called, for that it
grows with several broad round Heads, from a ^/4 to an inch over, and a little
Concave, not unlike a Buckler. Described and figured in Bauhinus.

The soft BEARDED Tree-MOSSE. Muscus arbor: barbat. Imperati. Described by the
Author of the Name. It consists of a great number of strings in a cluster;
some of them at the bottom, as thick as a Knitting-pin, and a foot in length;
all ending as small as a fine Thread; and not unaptly resembling a Beard.

The Crisp BEARDED MOSS. Different from the former, only in being more rough
and woody.

The FISTULAR Tree-MOSSE. Described in Bauhinus by the Name of Muscus arbor:
Villosus. By whom it is mistakenly said to be woody: it being wholly of a pithy
substance, and having all its Branches hollow as so many little Pipes: from
whence I have named it.

The Dwarf PIPE-MOSSE. Different from the precedent in being shorter, and more
spread thick and bushy. That which is called Usnea Officinorum.

The HORNED Tree-MOSSE; consisting of short crooked Pipes.

The greater FLAT-MOSSE. Muscus arbor: ramosus, s. latiramis major. Figured, as
if it were nothing else but a branched Skin.

The dwarf FLAT-MOSSE. M. latiramis humilis.

The CROWNED FLAT-MOSSE, having a flat Head or Crown on the top. Thus far of
Tree-Mosses.

The greater CAPILLARY-MOSSE. Polytrichum majus.

The lesser CAPILLARY-MOSSE.

The greater BRAINCHED Ground-MOSSE. Described and figured in Bauh. with the
Title of Muscus terrestris repens a Trago pictus.

The lesser BRAINCHED Ground-MOSSE. Muscus terrestris ramosus minor. Of the
same Species with the Skull-Mosse. Described in Bauhinus, as I take it, with
the Title of Muscus Abietis facie.

The FIRN-MOSSE. M. silicinus; so called from its likeness to a young
Firn-Branch.

The TOOTHED-MOSSE. M. terrestris denticulatus. The several strings hereof,
bordered on both sides with jagged or toothed Membrans. Figured and described
in Bauhinus, under the Name of Muscus pulcher parvus repens.

The smallest CREEPING MOSS. M. terr. repens minimus.

The lesser ground MOSS with REVERTED Leaves; that is, with their points
doubled backward. So small, as hardly to be observed distinctly without a Glass.

The CROWNED Ground-MOSSE. The Branches hereof are of an ash color, an inch
log, flat and skinny, and crowned at the top with round, flat, and blackish
Heads.

The greater FISTULAR Ground-MOSSE. The Pipes of this Moss are also of an
ash color, about an inch long, and as thick as an Oaten straw.

The lesser FISTULAR MOSS. The Pipes of this are an inch and high, and as
thick as a good big Needle.

The FLORID FISTULAR MOSS. M. Tubul. Esslorescens. The Pipes of this are also
ashen, slender, an inch long, with jagged and redish Heads, somewhat like
little Flowers.

The CUP-MOSSE. Musc. Pyxidatus; so called, because its several Sprigs have
Concave Heads like little Cups.

Of Mosses, it may be Noted, That they are all comprehended under two general
kinds. One whereof, is properly to be called WOODY, or That, in which we find a
stringy or fibrous Part, included within a Cortical: and are therefore to be
numbered amonst perfect Plants. Of which sort, are the Terrestris repens,
Denticulatus, Ramosus, Capillaris, Filicinus, Folijs retroversis, Barbatus,
Scutellatus, and Americanus. The other simply CORTICAL, whether flat or round;
and therefore to be reckoned of the Family of Imperfect Plants. Of which sort,
are the Pyxidatus, Terrestr. Tubularis, Arboreus Tubularis s. Usnea offic.
Latiramis, Latiramis Coronatus, Corniculatus, Terrest. Coronatus and Tubul.
efflorescens.

The Jagged Tree-LIVERWORT. Lichen arboreus laciniatus.

The Curled Tree-LIVERWORT. L. laciniatus crispus.

A Great FISTULAR MUSHROON. So I call it. Given by Sir Rob. Southwell. I find
no Description of this Species. They commonly grow upon the Elm. This is a
Cone, as having grown to the side of the Tree without stalk. The Diametre of
the Base, near a yard; from whence it rises above of a yard in height,
narrowing all the way to the top. Girded with several Rings of various breadth.
Outwardly, very hard and dense. Inwardly soft and compressable, like a Pith,
and is in substance really such. Consisting of an innumerable company of small
soft Fibers, wrought together almost as pure fine Wool in a Hat. The bottom is
all over perforated with Pores; of the bigness of those little Foveae in the
seeds of Poppy; and are the extremities of as many small strait and parallel
Pipes of a considerable length, probably, almost through to the top, as I have
seen them in a lesser of the same kind. These Pores or Pipes may be distinctly
seen without a Glass. With one, a Slice of the Mushroon looks like a piece of
wood out of which Button-Moulds have been turned. Both the substance of the
Pipes, and of the other parts of the Mushroon, so far as visible, is answerable
only to the Cortical, or pithy Part of a Plant. So that it seems to be but half
of a perfect Plant: or wanting the Lignous Part, by which all Plants receive
their various Figures, is a kind of Vegetable Mola; in comparison, a rude
misshapen thing.

That which has formerly See the Authors two last Books Of Plants, the former
Of Roots, the latter Of Trunks; especially this* latter.
been by me observed with the help of Glasses, by the Pith of this Mushroon is
further confirmed, and clearly represented to the naked eye, sc. That the Pith
of a Plant, as well as the Wood, is wholly fibrous.

A smaller FISTULAR MUSHROON, about four inches in diametre. In which the
aforesaid Pipes apparently run parallel for the length of near two inches and,
or from the bottom almost to the top.

A THIRD and FOURTH still lesser than the former.

Part of the CORK-MUSHROON. It Is eight inches in Diametre, exactly of the
color and substance of the best Cork, sc. light, soft, compressible and
springy: from whence I name it. In the middle, an inch and thick, the
Circumference very thin; the upper side solid, the under divided into several
Plates by the Diametre, frequently so joined together, as to make a great many
little Cells, somewhat like to those in a Honeycomb.

The SPONGE MUSHROON. So it may be called, for that it is porous almost after
the manner of some Sponges, particularly the Cup-Spunge hereafter described.
And is also of the same color. But has the substance of a Tree-Mushroon.

The CORAL-like MUSHROON. Described in Bauhinus amongst Mosses, with the Title
of Muscus Coralloides. Figured by Lobelius.

The SCARLET CATSTAIL MUSHROON of Malta. Fungus Typhoides coccineus Melitensis.
Given by Sigr. Boccone, and by him described and figured. Desc. Plant. Rarior.


The round Venomous MUSHROON of the Hazle. F. Coryleus orb. venen.

The HART-FUSBAL. Tuber cervinum s. Cervi Boletus. So called, from a false
Opinion, that they are there only found, where Deer go to Rut. Described by
Bauhinus.

I find no Description hereof. It Is in length a foot; at the lower part, half
an inch thick, or in Diametre; in the middle, two inches and; the top, oval or
elliptick; not unaptly resembling the Boon critton-Pear. Of a brown color,
dense, and tough, almost like Glue. Being fired, it burns with much flame,
melts into a good deal of Oil, and yields a smoke of a grateful Aromatic smell.

The KERMES BERRY. Coccum s. Granum Infectorium. Commonly, but absurdly, so
called; as not being a Fruit, but only a round Ball or Button, nourished on the
Boughs and Leaves of the Dwarf-Ilex, or the Ilex Coccigera; a kind of Shrub, in
France, Spain, and Italy, with prickly Leaves, like a little Holly-Bush. This
Berry when fresh gathered (which is at the end of May and the beginning of
June) is full of a Crimson Juice, or Pulp, so called, which, for the most part
of it, is a heap of small red Mites. And contains also, as is probable, one
or more Maggots, which feed upon the Mites.

The said Juice or Pulp (as it is called) is made use of for the Confection of
Alkermes, and other purposes. For the Deyers use, the Berrys are spread abroad
upon Linen, and to prevent heating, turned twice a day. When the Mites creep
out and cover the Berrys, they are sprinkled with Vinegar, and rubbed a little,
and so separated by a Searce; repeating, till the Berrys yield no more. Of this
Pulp, Powder, or Heap of Mites, are formed little Balls, and so exposed to the
Sun to dry. The use of the Vinegar, is to kill or weaken the Mites and Maggots,
which otherwise would turn to little Flys (rather Bees.) The empty Husks, being
washed with Wine and dried, are put up in Sacks, either alone, or with a
quantity of powder in the middle. This Account I have drawn up out of the
Observations communicated by Dr. William Croon Phil. Trans. N. 20. p. 363.
from Mr. Verny an Apothecary at Montpelier, and those of Mr. Lyster, Ibid. N.
87. p. 5059.
which illustrate each other.

To the Remarques above mentioned, I shall add one more, which is, That as the
Pulp or Powder, so called, is a Cluster of small Animals: so the Husk it self
is an Animal Body, as it were grafted on the Stock or Leaf, whereon it grows;
and so converteth all the nourishment it deriveth thence (as Bread eaten is
turned to (...) into its own Animal Nature. And that the said Husk is really an
Animal Body, appears by that fetid scent it gives, like that of Horns, Hair,
and the like, upon its being burnt. A property, which I find belonging to no
Plant whatsoever, except to some Sea-Plants, as in the following Section shall
be insta^^^ed. So that, though in compliance with the Vulgar Opinion, I have
placed it here, yet ought it to be treated of amongst Animals.

English KERMES BERRYS. Observed, and sent by Martin Lyster Esquire. Together with
several Remarques, relating both to the Foreign kind, and to This. Phil. Trans.
N. 71. p. 2165. N. 72. p. 2177. N. 73. p. 2196. compared with N. 87. p. 5059.
This, he found upon the Plum, Vine, and several other Trees, especially the
Cherry. The Husk of a Chestnut color, containing four or five Maggots of the
Bee-kind, producing a Be less than an Ant; together with a Pulp or Heap of
Mites, (as the other Kermes) on which the Maggots feed. The empty Husk, rubbed
upon a white Paper, tinged it with a beautiful Purple or Murrey.

The principal difference which I note betwixt the Foreign and these English
Berrys, now dry, is, That in those, the powder is red, and more bitter, in
these white, and less bitter. But whether the powder in these also was not once
red, I cannot say. For in some even of the Foreign Berrys, I find it white.
Which I the rather note, that they may be separated by Apothecaries from the
rest, as being stark naught.

COCHINELE. Coccus Radicum. The former Name, seems to be but the diminutive
of Coccus. The latter, grounded upon the Opinion, That as the Kermes Berry
grows on the Body and Leaves, so this, on the Roots, of Plants, especially on
those of Pimpinel; yet in some places only. Further, I find no certain account.
To me, thus much seems evident, That it is neither a Vegetable Excrescence, as
some surmise; nor an Insect, as others: yet an Animal Body, as the Kermes
Berry, by some Insect affixed to a Plant; and thence nourished for a time, but
gathered before it be filled with Mites or Maggots. For being held, as the
Kermes Berry, in the flame of a Candle; it usually huffs and swells, but always
stinks, like Hair or Horn when they are burnt.

A scruple of Cochinele added to an ounce of Saccharum Saturni, makes a most
curious Purple; but I believe fading.

A GREAT GALL, which grew upon that sort of Oak described by Clusius in the
third place; and frequent in Spain. It Is now of a dark brown, and smooth; of a
Sphaerical Figure, with a few small knobs here and there; as big as a little
Apple, sc. near two inches in Diametre.

SECT. V. Of SEA-PLANTS.
CHAP. I. Of SHRUBS.
I Find, upon particular Observation, that of SEASHRUBS there are two general
kinds. Such as are strictly woody, that is, have the color and fibrosity of
Wood, and burn and smell like Wood. And such as are, in a manner, horny, or
look, bend, burn and smell like Horn.

A WOODY SHRUB. Frutex marinus vere ligneus. It Is here cut off from the Root.
About a foot in height, with four Branches spread out as broad, and covered
with several thick Knobs of a sort of softish white Coral; the sides of which
Knobs are a of an inch thick; the surface almost like that of Poppy-Seed.

ANOTHER, near a ^/4 of a yard high, as thick as the Ring-Finger, with white
and hardish Incrustations upon the tops of its Branches. Any strong Acid droped
on the said Crust, causes an Effervescence: so that it seems to be a Coralline
substance.

A THIRD, with the Branches broken, and without a Crust, three or four inches
high, and as thick as the middle Finger.

A FOURTH, with the Branches also broken, and without a Crust. It Is a small
one; but has a very large Root, curiously spread all over the backside of an
Oyster-shell.

And it may here be observed, That the Roots not only of this, but almost all
Sea-Shrubs, instead of being Ramified, are spread out in the form of a Skin or
Membrane, and so stick fast to some hard and steady Body as their Base.

Another slender one, about a of a yard high, but the Root broken off.

A FLAT WOODY SHRUB. Frutex M. ligneus, expansus, ramulis coeuntibus. In all
the former, the Branches are expanded every way: in this, only one way, or in
breadth. It Is also of a softer substance, and more brittle. Of a Purple color,
almost like the woody part of Alkanet Root. Above a foot high, and as broad.
Several of the Branches united together, as in the Sea-Fan. Some of these
Shrubs were found near the Straights of Gibraltar.

The Horny SHRUBS are also of two general kinds; either with the Branches
loose; or else united together.

A great tall HORNY SHRUB with LOOSE BRAINCHES. Frutex Corneo-ligneus major
erectior solutis Ramulis. It Is above a yard and high. Consists of five or six
principal Branches, equal to a Tobacco-Pipe-Stalk where thickest; having scarce
any callateral ones. Bends like Whalebone, and both without and within, looks
not unlike to that, or Black-Horn. And in like manner, curles, huffs or swells,
and stinks in burning. The Root cut off.

ANOTHER of the same, of a yard high, and more branched.

A THIRD, with more numerous Branches than the former. Covered with a very
thick, but soft Incrustation; originally of a Purple color, but now for the
most part turned brown; curiously perforated, as it were with Pinholes, all
round about. Probably the foundation of one sort of perforated Coral.

A great ARBORESCENT HORNY SHRUB. Half a yard High, and a foot in breadth,
being spread in the form of an Oak, with great Branches about as thick as a
man's Thumb. The Stock, six or seven inches in compass. The Root spread upon a
stony Base, and of a brown color. The Branches black both without and within;
and swell, or huff, and stink, like Horn, in burning.

ANOTHER, spread also, in part, as a Tree. Half a yard high, and near as broad.
Of a blackish color; and stinks a little in burning; but swells not. Covered
with a very thick, but soft purple Crust. To several of the Branches are also
curiously fastened the WOMBS or NESTS of a certain Insect, as big as a
Horse-Bean, of a roundish figure; within, whitish, smooth and glossy; without,
covered with the said soft and purple Crust.

A small HORNY SHRUB with LOOSE Branches. The Root is curiously spread upon a
Stone like a thin skin. The Trunk of a yellowish brown, and thick as an Oaten
straw, divided into slender Twiggs, to about a foot in height; flexible, and
having a soft and white Pith. Being burnt, they not only send forth a very
stinking smoke, but also swell into a light and spongy Cynder, just like that
of Whale-bone, Cow-Horn, Leather, or other like Animal-Body. Most of them are
covered with a soft ash-colored Crust. Neither Oil of Vitriol, nor any other,
except a Nitrous Acid, droped upon this Crust, causes an Effervenscence. Which
shows the Salt therein contained, to have affinity with that in the stones bred
in Animals.

TWO more small HORNY and incrustated Shrubs.

TWO more, growing together on a stony Base, not Incrustated.

A FLAT, HORNY SHRUB, with LOOSE Branches. Frutex Corneo-ligneus, expansus,
solutis Ramulis. In all the former, the Branches were expanded every way: in
this, only one way, or in breadth. The Root spread like a Membrane, upon its
Base, as in the former. It Is near a foot high, and almost broad, shaped not
unlike a Feather-Fan, formerly in use. The Trunk of an inch over, divided into
a great number of Branches round, black, smooth, somewhat flexible, and having
a Pith. In burning they huff and stink, as the former. Covered with a soft and
ash-colored Crust, all over knobed with little Vesicles, which are sometimes
perforated.

ANOTHER, more tall, and with both a White or Gray, and Red Crust; not on the
same but several Branches. The former, knobed; the other, as it were daubed
upon the Branches. Given by Sigr. Boccone, and by him also figured.

ANOTHER of these growing Double, or divided next the Root into two spreading
and parallel Bodies.

A flat HORNEY SHRUB, with more NUMEROUS Branches. About a foot broad, and near
as high. Rooted in a kind of Brain-stone. Without any Crust. The Branches, as
more numerous, so slender, longer, and more flexible, so as to be somewhat
bearded.

ANOTHER, with less numerous Branches, and SEMIPERSPICUOUS, if held up against
the light. Above a foot high, and broad. It neither huffs nor stinks so much in
burning, as do the former.

A Flat HORNY SHRUB with COLLATEARAL Branches. Frutex corneo-ligneus
filiciformis, So I name it. In all the former, the Branches are reciprocal, or
not of equal height on both sides the great Stemm: in this, just opposite, as
in a Feather or Branch of the Male-Firne. Near a foot high, and five inches
broad. The small or side Sprigs are round, as in all the former. But the middle
Stemm is flat. Both This and the others, Semiperspicuous. They stink in
burning, but swell not. Covered with a soft, purple, knobed, and perforated
Crust.

ANOTHER large one, with two middle Stems, but all the side Branches broken
off. In height an Eln. The Root of a light and skinny substance, spread abroad
so, as to make six inches compass.

ANOTHER not so tall as the former, (about a foot high) but the middle Stems
thicker. The collateral Branches here also broken off.

Another small one: but with the Root curiously spread upon its stony Base,
like a thin smooth Leaf. Most of these flat Shrubs grow in the
Mediterranean-Sea.

A Flat SHRUB with UNITED Branches. Frutex expansus, Ramulis coeuntibus. It Is a
foot high, and a yard broad. Divided reciprocally into severally Branches,
containing a Pith. In all the foregoing, the Branches are all loose or
separate; in this, some of the smallest meet in one; as Inosculated Veins, or
as the Fibers in the Leaves of Plants. Of a blackish color, and somewhat fetid
upon burning. Covered with an ash-colored, soft, and knobed Crust.

ANOTHER, with the Branches and Conjuctions much more numerous, so as to make
very close Work. Near a foot high, and almost as broad. Stinks in burning, and
is covered with a knobed Crust, as the former.

A Great SEA-FAN. Frutex m. maximus, RETICULATUS, s. Flabellum marinum maximum.
In the two former, only some, here all the Ramifications are united, so as to
make one entire piece of Network, in the shape of a Fan. It Is above of a yard
high, and almost a yard and broad. The Root wonderfully spread upon its stony
Base. For being extended every way, some of its Skirts meet underneath, and so
embrace it round about. The Branches of a blackish brown, and swell and stink,
like Horns, in burning. Covered with a soft Crust, originally Purple, but now
for the most part faded into an ashen color.

ANOTHER large SEA-FAN, of a yard high, and an Eln broad. Incrustated as the
former. It has this peculiar, sc. out of the sides of it, grow several other
small Fans, about a of a yard long (more or less) and near as broad.

TWO more large SEA-FANS, above a yard high, and as broad. Incrustated as the
former. Of one of these Fans, and about this bigness, see an elegant Figure in
Calceolarius's Musaeum. Sect. 1.


THREE Midling SEA-FANS, near a yard broad, and a foot high. Incrustated as the
others.

THREE small SEA-FANS. Two of them are a of a yard high, and as broad. The
Third, is less. Yet has several little netted Labels growing on the side. All
three incrustated, as before.

A SEA-FAN with CLOSE Network. Whereas the former consisted of more open work;
as by comparing even a lesser of those herewith, is apparent. Neither has this
any Crust. It Is an Eln high, and a foot broad. Several of the smaller
Ramification, thin or flat, sc. transversly to the breadth; looking like little
Splinters of Whalebone. In burning, it swells, and stinks, as the others.

ANOTHER of the same, but not above a foot high, and near half as broad. This
also is naked or without any Crust, as the former. Most of these Fans grow in
the American-Ocean.

Wormius, speaking of Sea-Shrubs Mus. l. 2. c. 35. at the end.
has this passage, -- Mirum profecto, quomodo hujus generis vegetabilia ex ijs
(saxis puta) nutrimentum trahere valiant. Whereas it is plain, That they receive
no nourishment from them, but the Seawater, and such nutritive Bodies
wherewith it is impregnated. And it is therefore observable, That although the
Trunk and Branches of these Shrubs are of a close and dense substance; yet
their Roots are always made soft and spongy (especially when recently gathered)
the better to imbibe their Aliment. So that the use of the Stone, or stony
Body, on which they stand, is only to be a Base to keep them steady, and in the
most convenient posture for their growth.

These, and other Sea-Plants hereafter described, stinking, as is said, like
Horns, in burning, and some of them not uneasily procured, it may be worth the
Trial; Whether in Hysterical, Epileptick, or other like Cases, they may not
prove more effectual, than Animal Bodies.

CHAP. II. Of other SEA-PLANTS, and of SPONGES.
THe HORN-PLANT. Tuba marina; as it may be called from its form. It Is about two
yards and high. At the bottom, not two inches about; from whence it grows
thicker all the way to the top, where it is seven inches in compass, and of an
Oval Figure. Hollow quite through from the top till within about two feet of
the bottom. The sides no thicker than a Hazle-Nutshell. Not woody, but tough,
like the young Barque of a Tree, or a piece of tan'd Leather; and within, of a
like color; but black without. It grows in the West-Indian Ocean. The Indians
cut off the top and so much of the small end as is solid, and lining the inside
with a sort of Glue, or of Lacker, make themselves Horns hereof either for
Hunting, or other use.

A Tuft or Bunch of CORALLINE. Described and figured by most Botanicks. I add
(what I think is unnoted) That the inward part of this Plant i^ truly Ligneous
or Fibrous: the outward, from when (...) its Name, being only a Crust growing
upon it, as in the Shrubs above described. It Is esteemed an excellent Remedy
against Worms.

FLAT CORALLINE, as it may be called, or Spangle-Wort. Described in Bauhinus
Lib. 39. c. 30. and figured.
by the Name of Opuntia marina. By Ferranti Imperato, Lib. 27.
with the Name of Serotlara. It consists wholly of Leaves, joined edge to
edge, as in the Indian-Fig; Somewhat round, and scallop'd, and not much bigger
than a silver Spangle. The inward part of the Leaves is fibrous, and by small
woody Threads are tacked together. But, as in Coralline, covered all over with a
white Crust; which, in like manner, makes a strong Effervescence with Acid
liquors.

The BEARDED SEA-WRACK. Fucus capillaris tinctorius, s. Roccella. Figured in
Imperatus; Lib. 27.
And out of him, in Bauhinus. Lib. 39.
But without a Description. Neither will it admit an exact one, now dry. It Is
three inches and ^/^ high; and five or six about. The Root, in compass, two
inches, one in height, divided into a great number of small capillary Branches
or Sprigs, thick set, as in a Broom or Beard, very brittle, and of a faded
Purple. It grows in the East Indies. Of excellent use, especially heretofore,
for the making of Tinctures both for Painting and Deying.

A sort of the common SEA-Wrack, called Alga Vitrariorum.

The BLADDER'D SEA-WRACK. Alga Vesicaria s. conifera, as it may be called;
having on the tops of its Branches several Conick Bags, an inch, or an inch and
1/^ long, warted round about, and originally filled with a light and fuzzy
substance.

The WARTED SEA-WRACK. Fucus verrucosus Imperati. Lib. 27.
On which grow a great many vesicular and soft Knobs all along the Branches, as
well as on the top.

The BROADEST SEA-WRACK. Alga latissima Membranacea. The Root hereof, stringy.
The Stalk, round, as thick as a Goose-Quill, and about five inches high. From
thence it is spread, by degrees, into a thin Skin too inches and ^/^ broad.

ANOTHER of the same Species, but not so broad.

The POUNCED SEA-WRACK. Alga marina (...), Bauhino. Poro Cervino, Imperato.
It Is wholly distributed into flat Branches, (...) of an inch broad, almost
after the manner of a Stags Horns. Of a russet color, and as it were all over
pounced, somewhat after the manner of a Rue-Leaf, or that of St. John's Wort,
when held up against the light.

The SPIRAL SEA-WRACK. It winds about, very curiously, with a great many
Circumvolutions, almost like a very deep Skrew. Described, figured, and given
by Sigr. Boccone. De Plantis Rariorib. p. 70. Tab. 38.


The SEA-MILFOYLE. Myriophyllum pelagium. s. Muscus maritimus silicis folio.
Clusius has a Figure somewhat answerable to this Title, and out of him
Bauhinus. Yet either it is faulty, or of another Species. His, represented with
alternate Branches. Here, they are collaternal, as in the Male-Firne. And
curiously denticulated, in the like manner. It grows in very deep Gulfs of the
Sea.

This Plant has the same odd property, with several of the Sea-Shrubs before
described; which is, that being fired, it makes a strong stinking smoke, like
that of burnt Bones, Horns, or other parts of Animals. And may therefore be
deservedly commended by Cortusus against Worms. And it is probable, all the rest
of the stinking kind, some of which are much more plentiful and easily
procured, may have the like Virtue.

The STEM of another Sea-Plant, Perhaps of affinity with that in Bauhinus,
entitled, Coralloides lenta foeniculacea. The several Sprigs hereof are
toothed, as in the Sea-Milfoyle, but with finer or smaller Work. It stinks,
upon burning, as the former.

SEA-HEATH. Erica marina. Described and figured in Bauhinus. Who yet omits the
coalition of all the Branches in a round and plain Base.

SEA-MOSSE, somewhat like the Sea-Heath. The Branches hereof are united in a
short Trunk. From whence they rise up to the height of three or four inches,
and are then multiplied into others. About the thickness of a small Rush, all
over shaggy, with fibrous hairs or bristles. Has a stinking smoke, as the
former.

The BEARDED SEA-MOSSE. A Congeries of tough or pliable, yellowish, capillary
Threads or Strings, almost cylindrical, or of the same thickness from the bottom
to the top; where the most part of them are as it were horned or forked. It
makes a crackling noise, in burning, and stinks, but less than the Sea-Milfoyle.

The FISTULAR SEA-MOSSE. Bauhinus describes a Sea-Plant (without a Figure) by
the Name of Fucus cavus, but of a quite different kind; sc. with the Leaves
like a Fillet. Whereas this is a Cluster or Brush of cylindrical, pellucid, and
strait unbranched Pipes, about the thickness of a great stitching Needle.

SEA-BLOBBER. Vesicaria marina. Spuma Maris Caesalpino. Bauhinus describes two
sorts, That, which is branched; and This, which is not. It Is a Cluster of small
roundish Bladers, almost in the shape of little Oystershells; of a light brown
color, all over veined with Fibers, like the uter Cover of a Plumstone. Which
makes it the more doubtful, whether it be an Animal Body, or a Vegetable. Which
soever, it is supposed the Matrix of a Sea-Infect.

Another CLUSTER of the same sort, but consisting of smaller Bladders.

The ROPED SEA-BLADDER. I find it no where mentioned. This is also wrought with
fibrous Veins, as the former. But the Bladders are of a different shape, not
with unequal, but flat and parallel sides, and the Fibers principally running
along and near the edges. Neither are they clustered in a lump, but joined
together, one after another, with a Ligament of the same substance, almost like
a Rope of Onions; saving that they are all on one side. They stink, upon
burning; supposed to be the Matrix of those Shells whereof the Indians make a
sort of Money, which they call Wampanpeage.

A GREAT SPONGE, of the common kind; of a flat Oval Figure, and almost a yard
and half in compass.

The SHAGGY-SPONGE. Spongia Villosa. It has no regular shape. Of a Texture
more rare, than of most if not all the other kinds. And with small short
capillary Fibers, as it were shagg'd all round about.

The FUNEL-SPONGE. Spongia Infundibularis. Described in some sort by Clusius,
and from him by Wormius. Figured by Bauhinus, without a Description. This here
is two inches and in height; the Rim, near three inches over. The sides about
1/^th of an inch thick. Of a Texture far more compact and close, than the
common Sponge. Yet the Surface all over wrought with little round Pores, almost
as in a Poppy-Seed: in some places visible to the naked eye, but better through
a Glass. On the inside, they are in some places a little bigger, and near the
Rim disposed into short Rays. Its Base, instead of a Root, as in Sea-Shrubs, is
spread out upon a hard stone, to a considerable breadth.

The Little BRANCHED SPONGE. Of much alike Texture and color with the common
kind. But finely rising up and distributed into several Branches, solid or not
hollow, about of an inch over, like a sprig of Coral. Given by Sigr. Boccone.

The BRUSHY-SPONGE. This also is branched, and the Branches not hollow. But
much more numerous. The Trunk somewhat dense, two inches high, and thick as a
Goose-Quill. Divided into three principal Branches, and these into about thirty
more of the same thickness with the Trunk it self, two or three inches long,
perforated with some larger pores, as the Funel-Sponge, and near their tops, a
little flat, and forked.

The CATSTAIL-SPONGE. This also is ramify'd, sc. into three large Branches, not
hollow, rising up strait, and immediately from the Root, to a foot in height;
below, an inch over; at the top an inch, not unlike the Head of the Typha
major, or a Cats-Tayle. To these, three other lesser Branches are appendent.
All of them of a blackish color, and a rare Texture, but the Fibers somewhat
more thick and stubborn, than in the common sort, and so woven, as to make some
larger superficial Pores. The Root or Base is spread out upon a stone. The
Ramous Sponges are sometimes found about the Islands of Fero.

The HOLLOW CONICK SPONGE. About a quarter of a yard high, and half a yard
about. It consists of fistular Branches, of a Conick Figure, rising higher
and higher, smooth within, without porous, and as it were a little jagged.

The HOLLOW CYLINDRICK or PIPE-SPONGE. From the Base rise up four or five
Pipes, above an inch over, smooth within, and tuberated without, with some
resemblance to the Corallium Verrucosum. Its Texture somewhat closer, than of
the common Sponge.

The FLAT HOLLOW SPONGE. Near five inches high. Below, above two inches broad;
above, more than three. Consists of two flat yet hollow pieces, above four
inches deep; but without, distinct for the space only of an inch and. Within
also smooth, and without tuberated, as the former, but more bluntly.

All Sponges stink, more or less, upon burning, as the Horny Sea-Shrubs. So
that it is a property belonging to most of the Vegetable Productions in the Sea.

It is the Opinion of some, that Sponges have sense, because said to shrink, if
they are plucked; and are therefore reckoned amongst Zoophyta. But of that
property I doubt very much. For a Sponge being a springy Body, and so
extensible, and yielding a little to one that plucks at it; so soon as he lets
his hold go, it will, from its elasticity, shrink up again. Which motion of
restitution, some probably, have mistaken for the effect of a Cap-Sense.

No Sponge has any Lignous Fibers, but is wholly compressed of those which
make the Pith and all the pithy parts of a Plant. Yet vastly thicker, and their
Texture much more rare or open, so as to be visible to a good eye, especially
assisted with an ordinary Glass. So that a Sponge, in stead of being a
Zoophyton, is but the one half of a Plant.

PART III. Of Minerals.
SECT. I. Of STONES.
CHAP. I. Of ANIMAL BODIES PETRIFIED; and such like.
IT has been much disputed, and is not yet resolved, of many subterraneal
Bodies, which have the semblance of Animals, or Parts of them, Whether they
were ever such, or no. And I am not ignorant of the Arguments offered on both
hands. If I may speak my own sense a little, Why not? Is there any thing
repugnant in the matter? Why not a petrified Shell, as well as wood? Or is the
place? If Shells are found under ground, far from Sea, or in Hills, unchanged;
as we are sure they are; then why not petrified? Or is the form, to which no
Species of Shells does answer? The assertion is precarious: no man can say, how
many are known to some one or other; much less, how many are not known: I have
reason to believe, that scarce the one half of the under Species of Shells are
known to this day. And so for Artisicials: if Coyns are found, every day under
ground, then why not sometimes also Pictures, and other Works, in time
petrified? And although Nature does often imitate her self; yet to make her in
any case to imitate Art, is unphilosophical and absurd: for the one, a natural
reason may be given, not for the other.

On the other side: although Nature cannot be said to imitate Art: yet it may
fall out, that the effects of both may have some likeness. Those white
Concretions which the Italians, from the place where they are found, call
Confetti de Tibuli, are sometimes so like round Confects, and the rough kind of
Sugar'd-Almonds, that by the eye they cannot be distinguished. To call these
Petrified Sugar-Plums, were senseless. What if we find in some Stones under
ground the likeness of a Cross? Does not Sal Ammoniac often shoot into millions
of little ones? Or do we find in other Stones the resemblance of Plants? Why
not naturally there, as well as, in Frosty Weather, upon Glass Windows? Or as
Salts sometimes figure themselves (as Sir Th. Brown, Relig. Med.
and Dr. Daniel Cox Phil. Trans. N. 108.
observe) into some likeness to the Plants whereof they are made. Nay, why not
too, a Face, or other Animal Form? Since we see that there are diverse Palm-Nuts
which have the like. That the Volatile Salt of Hartshorn, will shoot it self
into the likeness of little branched Horns. That of Flesh or Blood, into the
shape of little flat fibrous Tendons or Muscles, as I have often observed. And
though I have not seen it my self, yet I have been told by one Sir Thomas
Millington.
that does not use to fancy things, that the Volatile Salt of Vipers, will
figure it self into the semblance of little Vipers. But there can be no
convincing Argument given, why the Salts of Plants, or Animal Bodies, washed
down with Rains, and lodged under ground; should not there be disposed into
such like figures, as well as above it? Probably, in some cases, much better,
as in a colder place; and where therefore the Work not being done in a hurry,
but more slowly, may be so much the more regular. I shall now come to the
Particulars, and leave the Reader to judge of them.

Part of the Upper JAW of a strange HEAD, together with some fragments of other
Bones, and three very Great Double TEETH, or Grinders, all supposed to be of
the same Animal. Found, about twelve years since, seventeen feet under Ground,
in Chartham a Village three miles from Canterbury. The Ground within twelve
Rods of the River running thither, and so to Sandwich-Haven. An Account hereof
is written by Mr. William Somner: yet without a Description of the Jaw. But
supposing it to be part of the Head of an Hippopotamus, takes occasion thence
for a Discourse, wherein he endeavors to prove, That all the low Ground from
the East-Kentish shore, to Romney-Marsh, was once under Water, and an Arm of
the Sea. Published, since his Death, by his Brother Mr. John Somner: in whose
Ground these Bones were dig'd up; and by whom they were bestowed upon this
Musaeum.

This Jaw Bone, is only part of the far Cheek; about fifteen inches long, and
seven where deepest: yet part of both the ends, and the Sockets of the Teeth
are broken off. The Orbit of the Eye, neither so round, nor so big, as in the
Hippopotamus: yet the Teeth far bigger. For the bigest Grinder in the Head of
the Hippopotamus here preserved, is less than six inches about: one of these,
near eight. And it is much, if they belonged to that Animal, that none of the
long Cutters which grow before (as is represented in Tab. 1.) should be found
with them.

Besides, in that Skull of the said Animal, the Orbits of the Eye stand so
high, and the Forehead lies so low, that it looks like a Valley between two
Hills: whereas in this Bone, the Forehead evidently stands higher than the Eye.
The Knob also at the Corner of the Eye in this Bone, is six times as big, as in
the said Skull. Although this perhaps, as well as the tuberousness of the Bone
in some places, may be the effect of its lying so long under ground; as if it
were thereby a little swelled in those places: for they are more rare and soft,
than the other, and the whole Bone, than the Skull of any grown Animal not
buried. Considering all together, it seems to me more likely to belong to a
Rhinoceros, for the being whereof in this Country, we have as much ground to
suppose it, as of the Hippopotamus. See Wormius's Description of the Double
Tooth Mus. lib. 3.
of a Rhinoceros.

A PETRIFIED CRAB. Carcinites. It seems to be of the undulated kind; whereof
see the Description in Rondeletius. It Is very hard and solid, and as heavy as a
Pebble. Yet dissoluble with Acids. There is one pretty like this in
Aldrovandus, Musaeum Metallicum.
under the Name of Pagurus lapideus. And another in Besler.

A FISH-MOLD. Ichthyites in modum Typi. There are several figures of Fishes in
Stones in Besler, Aldrovandus, and Moscardo. In Aldrovandus also of the Heads
of Birds, Beasts and Men, in Flints. Septalius has a Head in Marble. And Mr.
Boil Of Gems p. 156.
a Pebble with a Serpent (all but the Head) perfectly shaped, and coyl'd up in
it. All these (except perhaps the last) are either semblances on a Plain, or at
least in solid Stones. But this here is hollow, and was so found in the
Island-Sea. About five inches long; now split into two halfs, like those of a
casting Mould. On the insides of which, are fairly impressed the form of the
Spine, with the Ribs, Fins, and Tail, of a Fish. Without, a long Plate of the
same substance, grows to each side; and others cross to these: as if to the
Mould of the Fish, were also added that of its Funeral Clothes.

This Stone, for consistence, is like that called Saxum Limosum, soft, inequal,
and unpolishable. Of a bluish hue, like that of Tobacco-Pipe Clay, with some
very small glossy Grains intermixed. Not only Spirit of Nitre, but Oil of
Vitriol droped upon it, dissolves it, and is excited into a violent
Effervescence. But the Saxum Limosum stirs not with any Acid. So that it is to
be ranked amongst the Gypso-limosa, or Calcilimosa.

A petrified BONE, taken out of a Gravel-pit in St. James Fields, above eight
yards deep.

A Stone like the VERTEBRA of a Fish. Given by Sir Philip Skippon. It may be
called SPONDYLITES.

Part of the SPINE of another Fish, consisting of several Vertebrae. It Is hard
and ponderous; yet dissoluble with Acids. It breaks flaky, as the Lapis
Judaicus, and many others, or with plain and glossy sides.

The TOOTH of a TIGER, growing to a kind of Limestone. It Is about as big as
that described in the First Part, and of the same shape and color.

A square crooked TOOTH, not much unlike that of a Bevir.

A very great DOUBLE TOOTH or GRINDER. It Is about five inches long, and two
broad; twice as big as a Sea-Horse's. The stumps seem to have been sawed off.
The top divided into several Points and Ridges, as other double Teeth. Of a
greyish color and glossy; ponderous, and hard as a Flint or the hardest Pebble.

ANOTHER of the same shape, but not an inch long. Besler has one like this,
under the Name of Pseudocorona Anguina.

The SHARKS TOOTH. Glossopetra: so called, for that these Stones were fabled by
some to be the Tongues of Serpents, in the Isle Malta or Melita, turned into
Stones ever since St. Paul Preached there. But the English Name, is much more
answerable to the shape. Which yet is various, as well as the size and color;
as ash-colored or black, long or broad, strait or crooked, with the edges
toothed or plain. Of the brown, strait, indented and broader sort here are
several very great ones. One, three inches broad; and four, long: with the
exerted part, smooth; the Root, rough. Every way, in shape, so like the Tooth
of a Shark, that one Tooth cannot be liker to another. Yet if it be such, then
by comparing those in the Head of a Shark, with This, That to which This
belonged, to bear a just porportion, must have been about six and thirty feet
in length.

A GLOSSOPETRA, growing to a stony Bed. It Is of a lightish color: and was
brought as is supposed, from Melita.

ANOTHER, of a lesser sort. The Root of this is rough, as of the rest. But not
expanded with the exerted part, as is usual, but of a globular Figure.

These Stones are dissoluble with any Acid. Whereby it appears, That (besides
such Metallic Principles they are sometimes tinctured with) they abound with
an Alkalizate-Salt. They are found not only in Melita, but in Germany, and many
other places. Figured by Aldrovandus Musaeum Metallic.
and by others.

DRAGONS TEETH. Given by Sir Phil. Skippon. Glossopetrae Claviculares. So I
call them, because they seem to be of the same kind; and are long and slender,
somewhat like a small Nail; and much more like a Tongue ( sc. of some small
Bird) than any of the former.

The GOATS-HORN. Tephrites Boetij; from its ashen color. Selenites Cardani;
from its almost Semilunar Figure. Inwardly, it is of a bluish Gray. Outwardly,
mixed with oblique and white streaks. Of a bended figure, yet with one end
thicker than the other, not unlike a Goats Horn; whence I have taken leave for
the English Name. Broken at both ends, yet above a foot long, and two inches
and where broadest. The Belly or inward Ambit, an inch over, and furrowed; the
Back somewhat edged. It Is found in Germany, Moravia, Silesia, and other Parts.

A Scruple Boet. de Gennis and Lapid.
hereof in powder, is an excellent Sudorifick* Spirit of Nitre droped hereon,
dissolveth it with an Effervescence.

The FISHES EYE. Ophthalmites. A parcel of them given by Sir Philip Skippon.
It Is a kind of Pisolythus. But by some of them, the Humors of the Eye, with the
Tunica Uvea, and therein the Iris, are not ill represented: for which reason I
have placed them here.

SOME other Varieties, from the same Hand.

The HERMAPHRODITE. Commonly called Hysterolithos. By Pliny, Lib. 37. c. 10.
Diphyes, more properly; as representing, in some sort, the Pudenda of both
Sexes. Well described by Wormius. It Is a black Stone, not much broader than
Half a Crown; very hard, and dissoluble with no Acid. Accounted an Amulet
against Hysterical Fits.

Another of the same shape, but lesser.

A soft BUTTON-STONE. Echinites albus. Given by Sigr Boccone. Of these Stones
there is some variety, with several Names, but confounded by Authors. They all
agree, in having some likeness to the shell of the Button-Fish. This resembles
that most with all small prickles. Of a white color. Not very hard, and
dissoluble, with Acids. See an excellent Figure hereof in Calceolarius's
Musaeum.

Another of the same Species and color:

THUNDER-STONE or hard Button-Stone. Brontias. So called, for that people think
they fall sometimes with Thunder. Yet different from the Ceraunias. This is
shaped like a little round Cake. Very hard and indissoluble with Acids; being a
kind of yellowish and opacous Pebble.

Another, a lesser one of the same Species.

A THIRD, also very hard (as all of them are) but Semiperspicuous.

A FOURTH, which is a whitish FLINT, stained with blew specks.

A FIFTH, a small one, and having a little flinty Stone growing to the middle
of it on both sides. This particularly resembling Gesner's Ombrias. De figur.
Lapid. c. 3.
Or the Stone sent him by the Name of Lapis Hyaeniae. Ibid. c. 12.


A SIXTH, somewhat oblong and striated all round about.

The SERPENTS EGG. Ovum Anguinum. From the roundness, and form of Snakes Tails
pointing upward, and toward the middle of the Stone. This also is an
Echinites, and by Ferranti Imperato called Histrix Marinus petrisicatus.
Agricola makes it a sort of Brontias. It most resembles that sort of
Button-Fish, with several Orders of great Knobs or Prickle-Bases, divided by
lesser; described in the First Part of this Catalogue.

A STONE with the SIGNATURE of a Button-Fish upon it. So that it was once a
Bolus or Clay.

The soft OVAL HELMET STONE. Given by Sigr. Boccone. So I name it from its
similitude to the shell of the Echinus Spatagus, See Part I.
which the English call Helmet -- Fish. Oval, to distinguish it from the
Conick. Soft, as being very brittle, and easily dissoluble with Acids. Several
of these Stones are figured by Aldrovandus, Musaeum Metallic.
with the Name of Scolopendrites. And some leaves after, diverse others not much
unlike, with that of Pentaphyllites from its likness in some part also to the
Cinquefoyle.

ANOTHER of the same kind, with four narrow Furrows, composed of fine short
Rays, and meeting in the form of a Cross; to which a fifth is added, more
broad. It Is somewhat hard, yet dissoluble with Spirit of Nitre.

The HARD OVAL HELMET-STONE. It Is an opacous Flint, and of a dark color. But
figured as the former.

ANOTHER, also flinty, and opacous; but betwixt citrine and yellow.

A THIRD, opacous and white.

A FOURTH, with one half, opacous and yellow; the other, whitish and
Semiperspicuous.

A FIFTH, somewhat rounder and more depressed than the former; and may
therefore more particularly be called Pentaphyllites. Some of these Ambrosinus
Aldrov. M. Metal.
has misplaced with the Astroites.

The blunt CONICK HELMET-STONE. It has, as it were, the Signature of the
Echinus Spatagus. But rises up in the form of a Cone. Of which Figure I have
not yet seen any shell. The top is blunt, and of a middle height. Encompassed
with five double pricked Rows, all meeting in the fore part of the Belly. The
spaces betwixt which, are cancellated much after the manner of the
Sea-Tortoiseshell. It Is a perfect Flint, brown without, and whitish within.

ANOTHER of the same sort, with bigger pointed Rows.

A THIRD, of the same Figure, but soft, sc. of a kind of Limy substance, or
that of Gypsum.

The SHARP CONICK HELMET-STONE. It Is a Semipellucid Flint. Surrounded with five
double pointed Rows, meeting not only on the top, but also at the center of the
Base or Belly. Besler figures a small Conick Helmet, by the name of Echinites:
a great one, by that of Scolopendrites. And several Species hereof are also
figured by Aldrovandus. Mus. Metallicum.
None of the flinty or other hard Helmet Stones make any ebullition with Acids.

The HELIX or Stone Nautilus; as from its Figure it may not improperly be
named. Cornu Ammonis; From Jupiter Ammon, pictured with Horns. Here are several
of them, both in size, shape, and substance distinct. I find no Author
describing them much broader than the ball of a man's hand. The highest Boethius
reckons, about three pounds in weight. But in this Musaeum there is one near
two yards in circumference, and proportionably thick. Of an Ash Color, and
somewhat gritty substance. The several Rounds, as it were, carved with oblique
waves. Given by the Right Honorable Henry Duke of Norfolk. With,

ANOTHER GREAT CORNU AMMONIS almost as big, sc. about five feet round about.

A SMALL CORNU AMMONIS, of an ashen color, and softish substance: yet
dissoluble only with Nitrous Acids. It makes but one or two Rounds; ratably,
far more swelling, than in the other kinds.

ANOTHER, of a soft and whitish substance; dissoluble in any Acid, and
consisting of several Rounds.

A THIRD, growing upon a Stone of a like substance. Figured in Calceolarius's
Musaeum, and that of Olearius; in both under the Name of a Petrified Serpent.

The CASED CORNU AMMONIS. The outer part of this is dissoluble with Spirit of
Nitre: of a shining blackish color, thin, and as it were the shell of the far
greater part within it. This also is very glossy, and transparent as Glass. Of
a brittle substance, breaking into square flakes, like those of a flaky Spar.
Yet no Acid will stir it.

The HARD CORNU AMMONIS. It Is a perfect whitish and pellucid Flint. These
Stones are found in Germany.

Note, that if one of these Stones be broken, the several Rounds will part so,
as the ridges of one, and the answerable furrows of the other, are apparent.

Likewise, that in some of them, there is not only a ridge, but a round part
about as thick as the biggest string of a Tenor Viol, winding round between two
Circumvolutions, as the Medulla Spinalis runs within the Backbone.

The Helick SERPENT-STONE. Ophites Ammoneus. See the Description hereof in
Wormius, with the Title of Lapis Sceleton Serpentinum ferens. It Is of kin to
the Cornu Ammonis; wrought all over with Striae, imitating the Scales of a
Serpent. In some parts of This, rather the jagged Leaves of a Plant. Of a pale
Okre color, but somewhat hard, and dissoluble only with Nitrous Spirits.

ANOTHER, which in the room of Scales or Leaves, is wrought all over, and as it
were joynted, with sutures in the form of an s. obliquely waved from the rim
toward the center. Which Articulations are not only on the Surface, but, as
Wormius well notes, in its intimate parts. This is of a dark amber color, and
somewhat hard; yet makes an Effervescence with Spirit of Nitre.

The HELICK MARCASITE. Marcasita Ammonea. So I name it, for that it has the
same Figure with the Cornu Ammonis, and to the first of these in Boethius, is
next a kin, if not the same. Yet appears to be a sort of Marcasite or Gold
colored Fire-Stone; both by its Weight, and Copperas Taste. And some of them
are covered with Vitriolick Flowers. Ambrosinus Mus. Metal. Aldrov*
figures two of these under the Title of Crysammonites: not so properly, as not
having a grain of Gold in them.

The HELICK MARCHASITE, having shallow Furrows on the Rim.

ANOTHER, with some also channell'd.

A THIRD, with the utmost round far more swelling, than in the other kinds;
having its Center lying deep, and its front spread wide on both sides.

A FOURTH, of all, the most flat, and with a sharp or edged Rim. Wrought all
over, with undulated Striae, almost as in the Serpent-Stone. These two last,
particularly, figured in Aldrovandus. Ubi supra.


A FIFTH, with the Rounds, on one fide, all concave: so that it looks almost
like one split through the middle.

A SIXTH, beded within a tuberated Fire-Stone.

Several small ones, of the kinds abovementioned.

The SHORT WHIRLE-STONE. Trochites.

The LONG WHIRLE. Turbinites. There are several of them. In one, the several
Rounds are hollow: a ground to believe it was once a shell.

The WHIRLED or SPIRAL MARCHASITE.

The CONICK SNAIL-STONE. Cochlites pyramidalis. Very brittle, and makes an
Effervescence with any Acid.

Diverse others SNAIL-STONES; some of them of a Limy substance, others perfect
Flint.

The SEA-OYSTER-STONE. Ostrites Cymbiformis. Shaped almost in the figure of a
Boat. In the right side especially there is as it were the signature or seat of
the Animal. So that one can hardly doubt of its being once a shell. Yet this
kind of Stone is sometimes found many miles from Sea or any great River.

A Petrified Oyster and Wilk growing together.

A great petrified SCALLOP. Figured by Ambrosinus Aldrov. Mus. Metal.
with the Name of Hippopectinites. Given with several more of the same bigness,
by Mr. Wicks. It Is half a foot over. Many of the same kind were taken out of a
great Rock in Virginia, forty miles from Sea or River.

The smaller PECTINITES, with smooth ridges.

ANOTHER, of a kind of Lead-colour. Dissoluble with Acids.

The Coralline PECTINITES, furrowed, and wrought all over with the Species of
fine Needle Work. Also soluble with Acids.

A blackish PECTINITES, a perfect Flint.

A soft Stone of a bluish gray, with part of the Belemnites growing to it on
one side, and a Pectinites on the other.

A petrified COCLE immersed in a Flint.

The SMOOTH SPONDYLITES, with an Oblique Navle.

ANOTHER, with an Oblique Navle, all over striated.

A THIRD of the same, furrowed.

A FOURTH, also furrowed, and with the Navle sharper and more produced. So
hard, as scarcely dissoluble with any Acid.

A FIFTH, with a strait Navle, and numerous Joints.

The OXES HEART. Bucardia. So called from its figure. Described and figured by
Ferranti Imperato, and others, and out of them by Wormius. It Is divided, by a
ridge along the middle, into two halfs. Each of them having a prominent Knob, a
little winding, somewhat like a Navle: so that it may not be improperly called
Conchites umbilicatus. Figured by Besler with the name of Hysterapetra.

A SMOOTH CONCHITES, with an Oblique Navle, unequal sides, somewhat round, and
filled with a Limy substance.

Part of one, filled with a sort of granulated Spar.

A smooth and round one, undulated.

ANOTHER, as hard as a Pebble; of a yellowish and pellucid red.

Another hard one, yet dissoluble with Acids.

Another, with the Margins of the two halfs furrowed and indented one into the
other.

A LONG CONCHITES, of a black color.

Another, undulated, and white; filled with a black and yellow substance, which
with Acids makes a strong Effervescence.

ANOTHER, compressed, and the end opposite to the Base, pointed, like the
common form of a Heart: and may therefore be called Cardites. It Is of a Limy
substance dissoluble with Acids.

A Broad equilateral CONCHITES, radiated.

Another, undulated, and radiated.

A Third, undulated, radiated, and circinated.

A Broad one, of a Limy substance, and filled with a flaky and glistering Spar.

The HIGH-WAVED CONCHITES; that is, where the middle of one Valve making a high
and broad ridge, the other falls into it. It Is of a white Limy substance.

ANOTHER of the same, but shining and pellucid like a Spar. Dissoluble with
Acids. I meet not with any shell of this form.

A little BIVALVOUS MARCASITE. Conchites Marchasita.

The MUSCLE-STONE. Musculites. This is black and of an oblong Figure.

A Second, lesser and rounder.

Another of the same, more Concave.

A Third, broader, and more expanded.

A sort of MUSCULITES filled with Earth like Tobacco-Pipe Clay or Marle. Found
amongst the earth of a Hill that was overturned at Kenebank in New England.

The square MUSCULITES. Musc. quadrilaterus. I have not yet met with any shell
of answerable shape. It Is, as it were, bivalvous: and each Valve, has two
sides. Of the four, two are broader, and a little Unequal, especially toward
the Base, at the other end somewhat sharp: with oblique furrows, from the first
to the last growing shorter. The other two, striated and plain, joined with the
former at obtuse Angles. Of a limy substance dissoluble with Acids.

The TOOTHLESS MUSCULE. Found, of several sizes, beded in a lump of Irish
Slate: yet not petrified, but a perfect shell. It is of a rare kind, no where
figured or mentioned, that I find, nor have I met with it elsewhere. The
biggest of them two inches long, and over. That end near the Base, as it were
pinched up, almost into the form of a Child's fore-Tooth. On the outside of the
Base, stands a plated piece, contiguous therewith at both ends, but in the
middle, joined to it by the intervention of other very small transverse Plates,
like the Wards of a Lock: supplying the use of the Teeth in other Muscles,
which are here wanting; from whence I have named it. The outside, is adorned
with circinated Lines, and in some sort also radiated with very small
Tuberculi, especially at the narrow end.

The SHEATH-STONE. Solenites. Like the petrified shell of the Sheath-Fish. It Is
filled with a kind of limy substance.

A piece of WHIRLY-ROCK. Turbinites Saxum. A sort of Gypsum of a dark color,
with the semblance of diverse kinds of turbinated or whirled shells immersed
therein. Dissoluble with Spirit of Nitre, but very slowly. There is one like to
this in Besler.

A Piece of white MUSCLE-ROCK. Musculites Saxum. With the similitude of little,
white, furrowed Muscle-shells.

Another Piece of an Ash Color, and more soft.

A piece of spoted MUSCLE-ROCK, sc. with white, red and brown, in imitation of
Marble. In which also are beded, as it were, several Muscle-shells. Although it
has the face of Marble, yet is it a kind of Gypsum, dissoluble with Spirit of
Nitre.

A Piece of MIXED SHELL-ROCK. Conchites miscellaneus. Composed of petrified
shells, both of the Turbinated, and the Bivalvous kinds, beded in a kind of
gritty Limestone. In Calceolarius's Musaeum Sect. 3. p. 317.
is one like to this, in the form of a Choping-Knife, but without a Name.
Another in Ferranti Imperato. Lib. 24. c. 25.
And in Aldrovandus's Musaeum, by Ambrosinus called Ostracomorphos Lapis. Not
properly, Lapis, as being part of a Rock: nor, by the former word, sufficiently
expressing the mixture of shells therein.

Another, consisting of such like shells (or their resemblance) beded in a
brown Stone.

CHAP. II. Of VEGETABLE BODIES petrified, and other like STONES.
OF this kind, here is also great variety; being, or representing, Fruits,
parts of Flowers, Leaves, Branches, Stalks, Trunks, and Roots: in which order I
shall set them down. Only reserving CORALS with other like Marine Productions,
to be spoken of by themselves.

A Petrified KATHERINE PEAR, or a Stone naturally very like one. Being, as that
is sometimes, a little bended, very slender at the Stalk or Base; turbinated
next the other end; umbellated at the top of all, or depressed round about the
place of the flower; and of a yellowish tawny color.

A STONE like a petrified DAMASCENE-PLUM. As that of a black color, and of the
same Figure; so far as to show the seat both of the Stalk and Flower.

The Great petrified STONE of an exotic PLUM. As one would think, both from
the figure of it, and the production of Fibers by the length, round about it,
(as in many Indian Plum-Stones) very apparent especially, near the top. The
granulated part of it, being turned to a soft opacous Stone; the Fibers into
pellucid Flint.

A black Stone figured like the STONE of (a Praecock-Plum) an Aprecock.

A petrified NUX VOMICA, sc. that of the Shops. As I call it from its figure
exactly respondent; being round, and flat, on one side a little Concave, on the
other somewhat Unequal. In Aldrovandus Mus. Metal.
we have the Figure of a petrified Nux Methel Officinorum: but under the
mistaken Title of Castanites. As also the exact figure of a petrified Castanea
Purgatrix; but this too with the false Name of Anacardites. The same Author
represents likewise a most exact figure of a petrified Melopepon.

A large JUDIAC STONE ( Lapis Judaicus) in the form of a PEAR. It Is an inch and
half long; stalked like a Pear; Next the stalk slender; turbinated upwards, to
an inch in Diametre; and umbellated at the top, or depressed as a Pear, round
about the flower. Adorned also round about with small tuberated Striae which
run from end to end. This Species not well figured by any Author.

ANOTHER of a somewhat like Figure, but much smaller. Best expressed by the
least of the four in Boethius. De Gem. and Lap. l. 2. c. 226.


A THIRD like an ALMOND; both of the same bigness, and shape, oval at one end,
pointed at the other, and somewhat flat. Besler has one or two like this,
which he calls Petrified Almonds.

A FIFTH, like an AKORNE, being of a like thickness at both ends. Another of
the same. This sort particularly called Phoenecites.

A SIXTH, like an OLIVE-STONE; being more oblong and oval than the precedent.
Besler two or three Stones somewhat like this, which he calls Petrified Olives.

A SEVENTH, of a long slender Figure, and knobed as the rest, almost like a
Hazel Catkin.

An EIGHTH, in shape like a Pestil. The upper part of this is knobed, the other
smooth, whether naturally appears not.

These Stones either grow chiefly, or were first taken notice of in Judea; from
whence their Name. They are commonly found, not in Earth, but in the Clefts of
Rocks, by those that work in them. They are dissolved with Spirit of Nitre, not
without Esservescence, especially when reduced to powder. And may therefore be
justly esteemed Diuretic, and so sometimes bring away, or (as people think)
break the Stone: for which, by Pliny, Lib. 37. c. 10.
it is called Tecolithos.

These Stones always break flaky, and with a strong gloss, like a Spar; or the
Entrochus hereafter described.

Of these Stones it is further observable, That being cut and polished
transversly, and then wetted, they fairly exhibit, at least in color, a
twofold substance. The one, whitish; answering to the Parhenchyma or Flesh of a
Fruit: the other black or dark-colour'd, not only in the Stalk, but also thence
produced, and disposed into two Rings, a large one next the Circumference, and
a small one in the center of the Stone; answerable to the Lignous Fibers,
distributed in much alike manner in some Fruits.

Two strait slender Stones, resembling the COLUMNS erected in the middle of
some FLOWERS. One, Unequal at the top, and almost flat. The other, spherically
triangular, somewhat like the Seed-Case of a Tulip. Beneath, of an ash color;
upward, of an obscure or brown Bay. Of that hardness, that if struck or let
fall one upon another, they have a kind of Metallic sound, like that of small
round Button-Bells.

Two other joynted Stones of the same nature with the former: looking as if
they were pieces of the GENICULATED STALK of some Plant.

It Is pleasant, especially with a Glass, to see the wrought Work on the surface
of these Stones. In which the small and curious Striae which run by the length,
answer to the Lignous Fibers, or the warp: and those which are transversly as
it were interwoven; to the Parenchymous Fibers, or Woofe of a Plant. A more
particular explication of which real Work in all Plants, has been by me
elsewhere given. See the Authors Book Of Trunks. And that Of Roots.
Calceolarius has one or two of these last fairly figured.

A Stone with the exact signature of a STEM of POLYPODY with the LEAVES. It Is
softish, and somewhat brown. Stirs not with Acids.

HIPPURITES. Or a Stone with the impressed Image or signature of the Equisetum
or HORSETAIL. There are three stalks which very elegantly rise up from one Root.

DENDRITES. Or a Flint naturally adorned with the Images of several epitomized
or minute TREES. There is the figure of a fair one like to this in
Calceolarius's Musaeum.

ANOTHER; being a SLATE about d of an inch thick, representing, as it were, a
plain Field, enclosed with a HEDGE of TREES; some bigger, others less; all so
lively, as if it had been the curious and elaborate Work of a Painter; or had
been cast through a Glass (as Kepler shows the way sometimes of taking
Lanships) upon a Tablet in a Dark Room.

It is very observable, That the same curious Work which appears upon one side
of the slate, does also on the other. Agreeable to what Ambrosinus Aldrov. Mus.
Metal.
also remarques, That if this sort of Stones be broken into several pieces, the
like Work will appear in the intimate parts. Which plainly demonstrates, that
not being superficial, it cannot be the effect of Art.

DENDROPOTAMITES. So I call it. It Is a piece of a kind of Alabaster, about
seven or eight inches square, polished and set in a Frame. It has much and
pleasing variety both in color and figure: showing a mixture of brown, tawny,
white, and green; and not unaptly resembling a couple of Rivers. One crooked or
very much winding too and fro; (as the Thames at Kingstone) and garbed all
along with Trees upon the Bank. The other strait, with a Footwalk upon the
Bank, and enclosed also with a little Hedge-Row.

A sort of ALABASTRITES, representing a Transverse Section of the TRUNK of a
TREE. That part answering to the Wood, consisting of white and black Rings one
within another. The other answering to the Barque, of two or three thin ones
(like that of a Cherry-Tree) of a russet or barque color. Yet the black Rings,
being held up against the light, are transparent. So the clearest Glass, in
some postures, appears black. Spirit of Nitre droped on it, dissolves it with a
vehement Effervescence.

A Stone expressing part of a Tranverse Section of OLIVEWOOD. On one side, it is
very well polished. By means whereof, not only the Annual Rings (appearing in
the Trunks of all Trees;) but also the Insertions or Parenchymous Rays which
run betwixt the Pith and Barque; and even the greater Vessels themselves
(either for Aer or Sap) are all to a good naked eye, but especially with the
help of a Glass, very fairly visible. It Is just of the color of the browner
sort of Olive-Wood well varnished. It Is as hard as a Jasper, and seems to be of
that kind.

ANOTHER sort of Jasper representing a piece of WOOD. It Is of a green color,
and stained with blackish spots. One would take it for a sort of Lignum Vitae.

A Stone, which in Color and Texture, seems to resemble a piece of YEW-TREE.

ANOTHER, which looks like a piece of BEECHWOOD.

A large piece of PETRIFIED WOOD (as it is supposed) above half a yard long,
and of a yard about.

Another Piece about the same bigness.

A Globular Stone, which looks as if it had been a piece of ASH-WOOD turned in
a Lathe into that figure. For it has not only the color, but the semblance of
the Annual Rings, and of the Aer-Vessels, as in that Wood.

Small pieces of (reputed) petrified Wood, commonly found between the Beds of
blew Marble. Two inches long, and near as thick as ones little Finger. Almost
as black as Ebony.

A Piece of INCOMBUSTIBLE Wood, as it were HALF PETRIFIED. For being held in
the fire, it becomes red like a Coal; but neither flames, nor smoaks in the
least.

A very odd Piece of the BRANCH of a TREE as thick as a Cable-Rope, whereof the
Barque is turned into perfect Iron, or at least a very rich Iron Ore; and the
Wood into Stone.

The petrified Barque of a Tree. It Is thin, and rolled up as Cinnamon; but
rather of the color of that called Winterane's. Withal, rough and knobed
without.

A Piece of Oak BARQUE covered with a stony Crust. Given by Philip Packer Esquire
From a Stump above Ground.

In Septalius's Musaeum, as I take it, is mention made of Petrified Wood found
an hundred and forty Pertches under the top of a Mountain. And by Kentman
Fossil. Nomenclat.
of a sort of petrified Beech (as the people call it) both Trunk, Branches, and
Leaves, taken (for Whetstones) out of the Ground in the Joachimick Vale, an
hundred and seventy Elns depth. But what kind of Eln is here meant, is not
certain.

Of petrified Woods it may be noted, That none of them (at least of these here
described) will make the least Ebullition with any Acid. Which would make one
suspect, That they are Stones originally, sui generis; else it were strange,
That some of them should not lie in places where such Stones are bred, which
with Acids make the said Ebullition.

The STELENTROCHITE. By some, called STELECHITES: Entrochites, by most. But, in
proper speaking, distinct from both. For it is not only of a Cylindrical
Figure, or near it, and contains a softer substance in the Center, answerable
to a Pith: and also radiated as the Branch of any Tree cut transversly. But
moreover consists of several flat round Joints like little Wheels, evenly
pil'd, and, with the said Rays, mutually indented, so as altogether to make a
Cylinder. Described also by Gesner, De Lapid. Figur.
Boethius, De Lap. and Gem.
Ambrosinus, Aldrov. Mus. Metal.
and others. But we have two Accounts hereof given us in the Philosophical
Transactions, far more accurate and particular, than is elsewhere extant. The
former, by Mr. Lyster; Number. 100.
together with between thirty and forty Figures of their Varieties, with some
other Congenerous Stones. The latter, by Mr. John Beaumont Number. 129.
Junior; who has added the Description of some more Diversities. And the
manner of their growth. In this Musaeum are several Species, which I shall here
enumerate.

A ROUND one, near of an inch Diametre; with the Pith near a, of a darker
color, hard and dense. The several Joints, about the tenth of an inch thick;
distinguished by slender Circles composed of very small knobs. With part of the
Rock to which it grew, altogether irregular, but of the same substance.

ANOTHER, with a Pith larger and more soft, the Joints thicker, and the Surface
almost smooth.

A THIRD, of the same thickness, with the Pith an inch Diametre. It Is also a
little bended; and the Joints distinguished not with knobed but entire Rings.

A FOURTH, with a Pith not much bigger than to admit a little Pin. Yet at one
end it is an inch over. At the other somewhat more than ^/3d. A little bended as
the former. And the Joints in proportion to its width, extreme thin; not above
6th of an inch. Their circumference, unequal, being distinguished not with edged
Rings, as the former, but with furrows.

A FIFTH, about of an inch over. The Pith answerable. The Joints distinguished
with edged Rings. And as thick as in the former.

A SIXTH of the same thickness. And a little crooked. The Joints distinguish
with furrows.

A SEVENTH, with the Joints unequal both in breadth and thickness; one narrower
and thiner, the next broader, or standing further out from the center, and
thicker, and so alternately: whereby it looks like some sort of Turn'd-Work.

An EIGHTH, a small one, yet finely shaped. First with a Joint embossed with a
knobed Ring. Next two small Joints, each of them scarce thicker than a Groat;
and so alternately.

A NINTH, not above th of an inch in Diametre; yet with Joints as thick as in
the fourth: and smooth.

A TENTH, ^th of an inch over, and with much thiner or more numerous Joints.

An ELEVENTH, a very small one, scarce having any distinction of Joints.

CORALLITES. As it may be called. With no Joints, no Rays, nor Pith, but more
like to a solid piece of Coral.

The ASTENROCHITE, or an Entrochites with a Pentagonal Pith, like the signature
of a little Asteria, a Stone hereafter described; from whence I have named it.

ANOTHER of the same. And also with a double Ring of Rays; so as to look like
one of these Stones within another. And may therefore of all the kinds, be most
properly called ENTROCHITES.

A FLAT ENTROCHITE. All the former are perfectly round: this compressed; one
way, an inch over; the other, about ^/^ths.

ANOTHER, a small one of the same shape.

A THIRD, not only flat, but also with two opposite edges, like the Scabbard of
a Rapier.

The BRANCHED ENTROCHITE. Yet here the Branches, which grew alternately as
Twigs on a Bough, are broken off. In one, leaving so many cavities in the Trunk
on which they grew. In another, so many Knots. In both, radiated, and
containing a Pith, as the Trunk it self.

The KNOTED ENTROCHITE. A very odd Species. Above two inches long, and in
Diametre. The Surface smooth, yet with an obscure appearance of Joints. The
Knots, no way like those in the last mentioned, as not being radiated; and
looking more like the bases of sturdy Thorns. Wherewith it not unaptly
resembles a piece of a Crab-Tree-Cudgel. It Is composed of three distinct
substances. The outer part, (as one would say, the Barque) is a flaky and
glossy Spar, as in the rest. But as black almost as Jet. The middle part is Ore
of Marcasite, or Yellow Mundick. The Pith, not unlike Tobacco-Pipe-Clay, when
baked pretty hard.

A sort not much unlike these, being found in the Isle Malta, by some says Mr.
Ray, Phil. Trans. N. 100.
are called St. PAUL'S BATTOONS.

The SYNTROCHITE, as we may name it, to distinguish it from the rest. It
consists of several Joints as the former; yet not piled evenly one over another
so as to make a Cylinder: but sliden as it were half on and half off.

The TROCHITES. It Is nothing else but one of the above described Joints single;
on both sides radiated, and also containing a Pith. So that it looks like a
slice of a stick. These, says Mr. Lyster, being usually hollow, or easily so
made, and stringed, are therefore by some called St. CUTHBERDS BEADS.

The ASTROCHITES. As it were, the Trochites and the Asteria (hereafter
described) together.

There Is one which may be called an Enthrochite, yet not a Stelechite, because
Oval, or at least smaller at both ends; no way resembling a Stick or Branch.
But there is no example hereof in this Musaeum.

The True STELECHITES, branched. It Is not only radiated, and furnished with a
Pith: but is one single piece without any Joints or joynted Wheels: in which
respect, it cannot be called ENTROCHUS; but very properly Stelechites, (from
whence the English word Stalk) as more answerable to the make of a stick or
stalk, than are any of the rest. It Is of an ash color, and curiously wrought
all over in the like manner as a Poppy-Seed.

A Piece of a Rock consisting wholly of several Species of ENTROCHI or
Stelentrochi, immersed in a bed of their Mother-Clay.

Another, with two or three small STELECHITES.

A hard Stone of the color of a Magnet, with the signature of a TROCHITES.

These Stones being broken, look flaky, and with a gloss, as the Lapis
Judaicus; but somewhat more obscure. They also make a like Effervescence with
Acids, especially with Spirit of Nitre. And may probably be as good a
Diuretic. That All Fossiles of what figure soever make an Ebullition with
Vinegar, is affirmed by Mr. Lyster: (a) but Phil. Trans. N. 100.
was a slip of his, otherwise most accurate Pen. For there are many, and those
of several figures, which, although powdered, yet are so far from making any
Ebullition with Vinegar, that neither Oil of Vitriol, nor Spirit of Nitre it
self, (which takes place sometimes where the former does not) will stir them:
as appears in several Instances in this Catalogue.

They are found in as great variety here in England, as in any other Country.
By Mr. Lyster, in certain Scarrs in Braughton and Stock, two little Villages in
Craven: in some places of the Rock as hard as Marble. In such plenty, that
there are whole Beds of Rock made of them. By Mr. Beaumont, in Mundip-Hills; in
the Rocks, from the Grass to twenty fathom: but most in Beds of a gray and
gristy Clay. In a Grotto, five and thirty fathom deep, he observed their
growth: which was, from the finest, and the softest of the Clay. At first, they
were whitish, soft, and smooth. Afterward, grew hard, and ridged, or divided
into Trochi or Joints; beginning at the top, and so descending. Being all the
while in a manner quickened with Mineral Steams; conveyed, from the Mother-Bed,
through the Pith of the several Feet of the Root (which Mr. Lyster figures) and
of the Stock it self.

It were also further worth the enquiry, In what Time, one of these Stones will
grow up. Whether it does so, by Starts, as Ice often does, and as I have seen a
little Icy-Tree to grow level upon a Table? And whether so much as serves for
the making of a single Joint, at every start?

A Stone figured like a Piece of ANGELIC A Root; with a large Pith, and very
distinct Rays, as the Cortical Insertions in that, or other like Root round
about.

TWO lesser round ones or more Cylindrical: one resembling the Root of CICHORY;
the other of TORMENTILE.

A STONE somewhat FLAT, like the Root of Iris: but radiated as the former. More
visible, if one end, being first polished, be then made wet; for so, both the
Pith and Radiation are very distinct.

A FOURTH, as it were bared of the Rind; and having one end with a kind of
Button, on which the Rays wind toward the Center; as the Lines of a Rumb upon a
Map, or the Suits of the Attire of any Corymbiferous Flower.

All these seem to be several stumps of Stone Roots, on which the above
described Stones often grow.

A FIFTH, with a Pith and Rays; but CONICK and CROOKED, not unlike the young
buded Horn of a Calf.

TWO more of the same Figure, but much less; rather resembling a COCKS SPUR.

Several CLUSTERS (as they appear) of petrified MOSS. Imperatus, with
Dioscorides, makes it a sort of Alcyonium.

A petrified TUBER, with several small papillary knobs, not much unlike that
called CERVI BOLETUS. It stirs not with any Acid.

CHAP. III. Of CORALS, and other like MARINE Productions.
THese having also a resemblance unto Plants, and a near analogy unto those
Stones, last described in the precedent Chapter; they may therefore not unaptly
be here subjoined.

A Piece of CORAL, smooth, white, and solid; with its Base or Root spread
abroad upon a Chalky Bed.

A SPRIG of solid Red Coral.

A knoted TRUNK of the same ^/^ inches and 1/^ in compass.

A Piece of solid CORAL both RED and WHITE, growing together.

The ROOT of a solid Red CORAL, spread upon the TRUNK of a White CORAL: in the
same manner, as the Membranous Roots of Sea-Shrubs are spread upon Stones or
other steady Bodies. As if it had been indeed originally one of those Shrubs;
particularly, of the Lignous kind, which has no Pith, like the Horny; but, as
this Coral, is altogether solid.

The SHRUB-CORAL. Corallium fruticosum. So I call it, for its more especial
similitude to a little Shrub. It Is of a brownish color, upright, and very much
branched. Curiously adorned round about with Striae running by the length;
looking like the superficial Fibers in the stalks of some Plants. And within,
radiated, as the same when cut transversly. In some of the greater Branches,
the Rays being pointed or pricked, as by the laxer distribution of the Fibers,
they are in some Plants. And many of them coming short of the Center, so as
also to form a kind of Pith.

The KNEED CORAL. Corallium geniculatum. Pseudocorallium fungosum Ambrosini.
Aldrov. Mus. Metal.
Madrepora ramo^a Imperati. Lib. 27. Cap. 4.
By which Name Bauhinus also describes it well. It Is striated without, and
radiated within, almost as in the precedent. And is also ringed or knoted
without, after the manner of Canes, or rather the upright Equisetum, and near
of the same thickness. Imperatus has another kind a kin to this, yet distinct;
not only knoted, but joynted, and by him therefore called CORALO Articulato, in
which the Conick end of one Joint is received into the like Cavity of another.

A Piece of the same CORAL found on St. Vincents Rock.

The Matripora, says Terzagi, Mus. Septal.
and all Pores (as he calls them) and these only, are outwardly rough with
transverse Wrinkles. But this now described, seems by the Striae more
apparently wrinkl'd by the length. So that what he means, I do not well
understand.

A JOINT of the shallow joynted CORAL. It Is near an inch in Diametre, two and
long, solid, heavy and white. Streaked by the length. The two ends a little
thicker, as of Bones at the Joints: and rising up from the Rim to the Center
into a little knob; and this it does at both ends: whereas in that of
Imperatus, the Joints are deeper, and one end hollow. It was given by Sigr.
Boccone.

A Piece of white FIBROUS or striated CORAL, but not knoted. Given by the same
Hand.

The BUBL'D CORAL. Corallium bullosum. From the same hand. It Is of an
ash color; and rough cast all over, with very small Blisters or Bubles.

The COOME-CORAL. Corallium cancellatum. It Is white, and divided into several
short and thickish Branches, turbinated or knobed at the top. Wrought all over
with small cancellated Work, like that of an Honeycomb, or the inside of that
Ventricle in a Sheep or a Cow, called the RETICULUM.

The FLORID COOME-CORAL. The Branches of this also are short; and numerously
flourished. Inwardly, white and porous. The Surface of a pale yellow, and
wrought, as the former, in imitation of an Honey-Coome.

A sprig of Rough and POROUS Red Coral.

The PUMIS CORAL. Corallium pumicosum. From the Person abovesaid. It Is
branched, of a gray color, and porous, somewhat like a Pumis Stone.

The POUNCED CORAL. Corallium punctatum. It Is white, and the Surface pricked
full of small holes, almost as in the precedent.

The BRANCHING POUNCED CORAL. It seems to be that described in Bauhinus Lib. c.
with the Title of Corallium asperum cauditans adulterinum. The Branches hereof
are very broad, and divided only at the top. Not only porous within, but also
pricked full of extreme small holes on the outside.

The STOOPING POUNCED CORAL. C. punct. procumbens. Porus Ramosus Bauhino. In
this, some of the Branches rise up obliquely, and distinct. Others of them,
trail or stoop, and are in several places inosculated.

The RUSSET POUNCED CORAL. This is also branched; and the Root hereof, as that
of a Sea-Shrub, spread upon an Oystershell.

The WARTED CORAL. This likewise is a sort of pounced and branched Coral; and
white. The Branches being also as it were warted or knobed. Imperatus, Lib. 27.
c. 4.


ANOTHER of the same; MORE branched.

The White STARRY CORAL. From the Person before named. Described and figured by
Imperatus. So called, because it is perforated with round and radiated Holes
resembling little Stars.

The Brown STARRY CORAL. Within, a little whitish. Not so porous, as the
precedent; and with nothing near so many Stars. The Branches flat, like the
Horns of an Elk; and spread abroad.

The OCULAR CORAL. C. alb. oculatum Officinarum. Very well described and
figured by Ferranti Imper. Lib. 27. c. 4.
and J. Bauhinus. Lib. c.
This sort is fistular, and has large round holes in the sides of the
Branches, sometimes near of an inch over; somewhat like a Birds Eye.

A Piece of the same sort, with its expanded Root.

The same growing on or round about some of the Branches of a Sea-Shrub. As it
is probable, That all the sorts of fistular Corals once did.

The CROWNED OCULAR CORAL. Given by Sir J. Hoskins. In this, which is also
white, to the eyes on the sides, are added little Heads crowned or radiated
round about.

A CLUSTER of Red Fistular Coral.

The spread FOLIATED CORAL. Clusius describes it by the Name of Planta Saxea
Abrotonoides. Of whom Bauhinus borrows his figure. His Description not clear.
It Is white, and porous; especially the center of every Branch, in imitation of
a Pith. The several Branches encompassed with little short round hollow sprigs,
or, as we may call them, Coral-Leaves, curiously striated round about.

The Upright FOLIATED CORAL. In all respects like the former, saving that it is
less spread.

Coral is fished for from the beginning of April to the end of July. Not in the
Ocean, but the Mediteranian-Sea only. In which there are eight or nine
Fisheries, among the Rocks, no where above forty miles from Land. Three upon
the Coast of Sardinia; on that of France, two; of Sicily, Catalonia, Corsica,
and Majorque, one. Tavern. Ind. Voyage, Chap. 21.
Of white Coral, there is great abundance in Brasile. J. de Laet.


Of the Nature and Generation of Coral, it is affirmed by the Honorable Mr.
Boil, Of the Orig. of Forms, 136.
That whilst it grows, it is often found soft and succulent, and propogates it
Species. And by Georg. de Sepibus, Mus. Romans p. 45. Col. 2.
That of those who had been used for many years, to dive for Coral in the
Red Sea, Kircher learned thus much; That it would sometimes let fall a
Spermatick Juice, which lighting upon any ( steady) Body, would thereupon
produce another Coral. And further, by Wormius and Tavernere, from the
Relations of others, That this Juice is white or milky. Which may seem the more
credible, when we consider, that the like milky substance is found in diverse
Mines. Dr. Brown's Trav.
Sometimes enclosed as is observed by Mr. George Planton, in great Hollows of
the Metallic Rock. Phil. Trans. N. 100.
And that Mr. Beamont has found in the Hollows of some Stones called Entrochi,
and Rock-Plants, or a kin to them, an evident concretion of such milky Juice.
Phil. Trans. N. 129. p. 730. l. pen.


Of Corals, are chiefly prepared, The Powder ground upon a Marble; the
Magisterial Salt; and the Tincture. To good purpose, in some Fevers, and some
other Cases. But the Name of Tincture, according to the common notion of it, is
a mere deceit: it being, in truth, no more but a Liquamen, or solution of the
Magisterial Salt. For those Acid Liquors which are used as Menstruums for the
making of it; by digestion or repeated heats, do always turn red: which not
being heeded, the said color has been believed to proceed from the Corals. Of
the Effect of this Tincture, or rather Salt of Coral, upon a Malignant Fever,
see a Memorable Relation of Boethius in his own Case. De Lap. and G. lib. 2.
(...) 154. p. 312.


BASTARD-CORAL. Alcyonium. So called, because a Marine Production, often of a
roundish form, like the Nest of an Halcyon, and by some fantastic thought to
be one of those Nests petrified. Hereof there are seven or eight sorts here
preserved. As

The Great, White, FISTULAR Alcyonium. Imperatus figures a Cluster of this
under the ill Name of Vermi Marini Impetriti. Lib. 24: cap. 26.
And Besler a single crooked Tube, with that of Exuviae Serpentis in Lapidem
conversae; which is as bad. This is such an one, but more strait and smooth, as
thick as the upper end of a Tobacco-Pipe stalk. But with a much greater bore.

The Middle white FISTULAR Alcyonium. A Cluster of Coralline Tubes, in some
places, meeting in parcels; in others, divaricated, almost as the Vessels do in
Plants. Not equally thick at both ends; beneath, not exceeding the Quill of a
Crow; at the top, as wide as that of a Goose. Rough all along with annular
wrinkles, almost like the slough of a Silkworm, or a Serpent. Being hollow,
it is probable they serve as the Matrices of some Sea-Insects.

The small white FISTULAR Alcyonium. By Imperatus Lib. 27. cap. 8.
(whom Terzagi imitates Sept. Mus. c. 13. n. 18, 19.
) called Vermicchiara; and Alcyonio Milesio; a much better Name. A Cluster of
crooked Tubes, not thicker than a Packthread; and also wrinkled.

The Red FISTULAR Alcyonium. By Imperatus called Tubularia purpurea. By Besler
Alcyonium Maris Rubri. A Congeries of strait, and red Pipes, of a Coralline
substance, about as thick as an Oaten straw, all standing parallel, as the
Cells in a Honeycomb: and divided into several Stories by transverse Plates or
Floors, at several distances from a to an inch, or thereabout.

The BRANCHED Alcyonium. It Is white, and of a Coralline substance, but somewhat
soft. The Branches solid, and in some places coalescent.

The KNOBED Alcyonium. Of a white and coralline substance, but somewhat soft.
Of such a Contexture, whereby it is every way, and pretty openly, pervious
throughout; somewhat answerable to that of a Sponge. Evenly tuberated all over
the top and sides.

Another, unequally tuberous, and of a little more open compages.

The LOBED Alcyonium. Of a like color and substance with the former: yet not
composed of round, but flat or lobed portions, with some likeness to Liverwort.

The BUBLED Alcyon. Given by Captain Th. Fissenden. About an Eln in compass.
Consisting wholly of Platework, so conjoined, as to make several large
Apertures, running one into another: somewhat after the manner of a Ruff. The
Plates or whole Body composed of most minute Bubles, divided by a very thin
Sepiment, and standing all in even, strait, and parallel Rows. So that it looks
not much unlike Linnen-Cloath: saving its brown tawny color.

A NETED Alcyon. Retepora Imperat. So called from its Figure.

MUSHROON-CORAL. Fungites. So called from a little likeness it has to a
Toad-Stool. Here are diverse sorts.

The WAVED Mushroon Coral. It Is round, and above two inches over; striated
beneath round about. The Rim and Area, both undulated. With thin Plates
standing all along, and on both sides transversly to the Waves.

ANOTHER, with DOUBLE WAVES. Circular, and about four inches in Diametre. With
the top rising high and round. With transverse Striae, rather than Plates. And
Waves both double, and more winding than in the former; much resembling those
of a Man's Brain. From whence, this sort, most properly, are called BRAIN-STONES.

A POLISHED BRAIN-STONE. It much resembles a sort of undulated Stone. Whereof
hereafter.

Part of a large BRAIN-STONE from the Bermudas.

The PLATED FUNGITES. So especially to be called, because it has no
Undulations, but Plates only. All very thin and sharp, and radiated, to the
circumference, after the manner of those in a common Mushroon; excepting, that
there they stand underneath, here above. This sort is curiously figured in
Calceolarius's Musaeum.

A FLAT RADIATED Fungites. Figured by Bauhinus. Lib. 39. c. 60.
It Is somewhat more than two inches broad, and with the sides as it were
crushed together. Waved round about, and the Rim raised like a border pretty
high.

A STARRY FUNGITES. Of a circular figure; beneath, a little concave; above,
unequal. Wrought all over with a great number of small radiated Stars, every
where contiguous.

A Piece of Fungites with GREAT STAR-WORK: every Star, with the Rays, being
near an inch over; and the Rays also plated.

The COOMED Fungites. The top hereof is circular; all over carved into radiated
Tubes, the Rays standing high without, and deep within. Composed together so,
as somewhat to resemble an Honey-Coome, from whence I name it.

ANOTHER of the same sort, of an Oval Figure. Given by Sir R. Moray.

A Fragment of a great One of the same sort. In which the Texture is fairly
observable. For the aforesaid Rays, are indeed the extremities of so many
Plates which run through the length of every Tube; and which are likeways all
the way conjoined with an infinite number of other extreme small thin
transverse Plates: dividing the whole Tube into little squares, after the like
manner, as in the Pith of a Bullrush.

The Fungites is found in the Indian-Sea, and the River Nilus. Clusius.


CHAP. IV. Of GEMS.
A ROCK of DIAMONDS. Given by Sir R. Moray. They grow upon their Bed (which is
about three inches broad, and four in length) in Crystals Sexangularly pointed.
Of several sizes from the thickness of a midling Pin, to a of an inch Diametre,
but all of them short. Not very perspicuous, but a little greyish, like the
Calcedony. Saving one small cluster of them, tinctured yellowish. They cut
Glass very deep and easily.

The principal Diamond Mines now known, are four. That of Raolconda, in the
Kingdom of Visapour; discovered 200 years since. In this Mine, the Diamonds lie
in sandy Veins in the Rocks. Of all, the clearest, and of the whitest Water.
They pound and wash the Vein for the Diamonds, just as we do some of our Ores
for the Metal. A second called the Gany, about seven days journey from
Golconda; found out 100 years since. They dig here not above 14 feet deep.
Sometimes above sixty thousand Men, Women and Children at work. It affords the
largest Diamonds, but not clear: one sometimes above 40 Carats, i. e. ^/3d of
an ounce. And there was one here found which weighed 900 Carats ( i. e. vij
ss.) A Third, that of Govel, a River in the Kingdom of Bengala. The Diamonds
are found in the sand of the River, for the space of 50 Leagues. From hence
come those fair pointed Stones called Natural Points: but not great. The
Fourth, that of Succadan, a River in Borneo. But there are none come from
thence but by stealth. How the Indians prove, work, and sell their Stones, with
other particulars, see in Tavernere. Ind. Tav. lib. 2. c. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.


Rough Diamonds are often naturally figured into Triangular Plains: a mark to
know a right one by, Mr. Boil Of Gems, p. 11.
as well as hardness. Many also of the best are pointed with six Angles; some,
with eight; and some Tabulated, or Plain, and Square. Joh. de Laet L. de G. and
Lap.
Diamonds receive no hurt, but are rather mended, by the fire. Boet. de Lap.
and G.
Some, says Garcias, Lib. 1. c. 43.
being rubbed, will take up straws, as Amber and other Electrical Bodies. And
Mr. Boil Of Gems, p. 109.
speaks of one of his, which with a little friction attracts vigorously. Of
another, Ib. p. 112
which by water made a little more than lukewarm, he could bring to shine in
the dark.

It Is the property of all true Diamonds, To unite the Foil closely and equally
to it self, Boet. de G.
and thereby better augment its luster, than any other Gem. That which is
called the Foil, is a mixture of Mastick and burnt Ivory: The latter, being
one of the blackest of colors; used by Painters for Velvet, the Pupil of the
Eye, etc.

The Water of those which are drawn, not from the Rock, but the Ground,
commonly partakes of the color of that Soil or Ground: Mr. Boil, Of Gems, p.
51.
and some are found as yellow as a Topaz. Ib. p. 35.


Between the Grain and the Vein of a Diamond, there is this difference, That
the former furthers; the latter, being so insuperably hard, hinders the
splitting of it. Although it seems, that a Vein, sometimes is nothing else, but
a Cross-Grain. Our European Jewelers, when they split one, they take a very
small iron Wyre, and having daubed it with Oil and Powder of Diamonds; draw it
upon the Diamond, by a Tool, to and fro like a Saw, so long as is needful for
that purpose.

The BASTARD-DIAMOND. Pseudo-adamas. Now remaining, as it was found, bred in a
Musculites, a Stone like a Muscleshell. Given also by Sir Robert Moray. It Is
angular, pointed, and very clear. And cuts Glass with great ease and depth. Of
our Bastard-Diamonds here in England, the Cornish are the best; much better
than those on St. Vincents Rock near Bristol.

CRYSTAL. From (...): because supposed to be only Water contracted or condensed
with cold. Here are several sorts.

A CRYSTAL ROCK. In which, several lesser Crystals Sexangular, pointed, and
most perspicuous, grow round about a great one, in the form of a Pyramid, above
eight inches about. The bottom of it being polished, all the sides to the top,
are very pleasantly apparent through the same.

A small COLUMN of Crystal, also exceeding clear.

A ROCK of midling Crystals, growing upon a Semiperspicuous Bed, or
Grey-Mother. They are very clear, notwithstanding that beneath they seem to be
tinctured yellow; being there only daubed with some substance of a yellow
color. Of these Crystals, the two opposite sides, are the greatest: which is
also observable in many others.

A small Crystal COLUMN, with a whitish Base.

ANOTHER clear Crystal, growing on a Semiperspicuous Mother, together with a
kind of Marchasite Spar, or tessellated Stone, of an Amethystine color.

A ROCK of small Gray Crystals, almost like a Calcidony.

Another of the same sort, growing upon a kind of Limestone.

A Third, with the Points of an Amethystine color, growing to a Matrix of a
purplish black.

A Crystal COLUMN, of an Hyacinthine color, but dilute. An inch in Diametre,
and almost a foot long. The two opposite sides of this also are the greatest.

A lesser one of the same Species.

A THIRD, growing upon a Bed of the same color; but opacous. Mr. Boil Of
Gems, p. 39.
mentions a piece of Crystal, in one part of an Emrald-green. And Terzagi Mus.
Sept.
another that was black.

A Crstyal COLUMN, naturally enclosing a kind of Moss (or the likeness of it)
at one end of the Column of a paler, at the other of a dark Green. It Is above a
foot in compass.

ANOTHER piece of CRYSTAL in which is immersed a Mossy substance of a redish
color. And there are some Crystals have been known naturally to enclose a
Liquor. Mr. Boil, Of Gems, p. 43. and Mus. Calc.


A Piece of polished CRYSTAL in the figure of a half Globe. It Is on one side
flaky, and has many very small Bubles, by which it appears cloudy.

ANOTHER Piece polished into a Sphaerical Triangle, and somewhat Oval.

A THIRD Piece polished into a Cone.

A Massy Piece of CRYSTAL. Not pointed, nor angular; but of a roundish figure;
much bigger than any man's head. One way, near a yard in compass; the other,
above three quarters. In weight, thirty nine pounds and a Haverdupoise. Yet is
it very clear, beyond the clearest Ice of the same thickness. The biggest piece
of Crystal I find mentioned elsewhere, is a Ball of six and thirty ounces in
Septalius's Musaeum.

Crystal, at least some sorts of it, is the softest, says Boethius, Lib. 2. c.
73. l. 1.
of all Gems. He should have said, of all perspicuous Gems: for the Turcois is
much softer. The most usual Figure of Crystal, is Sexangular: yet Terzagi Mus.
Septal. c. 9. n. 54.
mentions a Rock of square pointed ones. But it is observable, That he says
the Bed on which they grew, seemed to be Gold-Ore. If so, it might proceed from
some governing principle in the Ore. For I have heard it noted, as I
reremember, by Sir Christopher Wren, That Grain-Gold is often found naturally
figured into Cubes. Crystal grows in most Countries, both cold and hot: the
Globous, especially in Bohemia and Silecia.

A Dram Boet. de Gem. and L. Lib. 2. c. 74.
of the Powder of Crystal, with Oil of sweet Almonds, a present Remedy for
those that have taken sublimate. As also for bilious and chylous Diarrhaeas. Ib.
When Calcined, by some called Pulvis Caesaris, of excellent use against the
Epilepsie. Terzagi in Mus. Sept.


An AMETHYSTINE ROCK. The Gem has its Name from the opinion of its being an
Amulet against Drunkenness. This Rock consists of angular pointed and
contiguous Crystals; growing from both sides the Matrix, inwards, where their
Points meet, and are all closely indented. Some of them seem to be Pentagonal.
Several are Conick from the Points toward the Roots. These are well tinctured,
but the Roots are all white, or rather Diaphanous and colorless. As also is
the Matrix, or inward part of it; yet not so clear. The shell over all, flat,
opacous, and of a redish brown. There is the Figure of a very fair one in
Calceolarius's Mus.

ANOTHER, growing upon a Matrix or Bed spotted red and yellow, and
cross-grained, or composed of small Crystals set together decussatim.

A THIRD, the Matrix whereof is a kind of Amethystine Flint, i. e. not composed
of Crystals or Grains, as is usual, but one entire massy Stone,
Semiperspicuous, and of a pale blew, almost of the color of some Cows Horns.
Of an orbicular Figure, and somewhat flat like a Loaf. The Roots of the
Crystals are colorless, as in the former, and the points and upper parts of a
pale Purple. With these, is included in the same Matrix, a whitish and flaky
Stone, which is easily dissolved with Spirit of Nitre. Which is one, amongst
many instances, how near together two Stones may be bred, of so different a
nature one from another.

A WHITE AMETHYST. This is here naked, or without a Matrix. Consists of
diverse contiguous Crystals, half an inch and an inch long; their Roots gray;
but their Points clear, usually sexangular. From the Points the Roots taper'd
or conick: the Figure which does especially distinguish this Stone from
Crystal, whether white, or of an Amethystine color.

An AMETHYST of a pale Violet color; found growing in Scotland. Given by Sir
Rob. Moray.

ANOTHER, with a kind of Chrysolite growing to it.

The best of this kind, are, as Theophrastus well describes them, of the color
of a ripe (red) Grape: and are the hardest. These grow in the Indies: the rest
in Bohemia, Saxony, etc. The best, being burnt, excellently imitate a Diamond.
Boet. de Gem. and Lap.


Two little white or pale SAPHIRES, polished into a flat oval Figure. By some
called The Female: and so the paler kinds of other Gems. The best, grow in
Bisnagar, Zeilan, and other parts of the East Indies, especially in Pegu. The
meaner, in Bohemia, and other adjacent places. They are cut or fashioned with
Emery and Tripoly; and engraven with Diamond-Dust, as other harder Gems. Being
burnt, they imitate a Diamond, as does the Amethyst. Boet. de Gem. and L.
And Aes ustum and Glass melted together, imitate a Sapphire. Aldrov. Mus.
Metal.


The Sapphire, says Boethius, Lib. 2. c. 43.
being applied to any bruised part, prohibits the Inflammation of it, in a
miraculous manner. See also the Salt and Tincture Ibid.
of it described and commended by the same Author.

The GRANATE, qu. Ingranate, or Ingraind. And therefore by the French called
VERMEILLE: and the Matrix, by Moscardo, Minera de Ingranata. The deepest, well
compared by Imperatus to the Juice of a ripe Mulberry. Here are of several
sizes.

A BOHEMICK GRANATE, as big as a Nutmeg. With several more of the same size, or
near it.

Some other Large GRANATES, polished with Rhombs. But these are cloudy.

A Bag of Lesser GRANATES, of several sizes from a Pease to a Mustard Seed.

A BED of GRANATES from the West Indies. Given by the Honorable Rob. Boil
Esquire. Most of them as big as a large Pease, beded in a Stone which is friable,
and easily rubbed to a redish and glistering powder; in some places a little
black, and growing with cross Flakes. It seems, from its softness, not to
have been the original Bed or Matrix wherein the Stones were bred; but that
being, in pecking the Rock or Mine, broken off from that, they were afterward
casually lodged in this.

These Stones grow in Calecut, Cambaia, and Aethyopia. As also in Spain and
Bohemia, where, contrary to what is observed of most other Gems, they are found
exceeding the Oriental. Boet. de Gem. and L.
Many of them will abide the fire, without change of color. De Laet. de Gem.
and L.


Spirit of Salt extracts a rich Tincture out of Granates calcined and finely
powdered. Mr. Boil, Of Gems, p. 88.
And Aq. Regis, a rich solution of them, only powdered; colored somewhat like
a solution of Gold. ( a) ( h) Ibid.


The Jewelers TOPAZ. Chryselectron Plinij. This is an Oriental one. It Is of a
perspicuous Golden color, with some scarlet spots or like a deep Tincture of
Saffron.

The Whiter or Female TOPAZ. Composed of several Crystals, clear and colorless
at the top; below, clear and yellow. Growing on a white Matrix, with a light
yellowish Tincture. They grow in Arabia, Bohemia, etc. The best in India and
Bactriana: the Europeans, especially, being soft, and not without blackish
Clouds. The Oriental, the hardest of Gems, except the Diamond. And probably the
Ruby. Found sometimes so big as to weigh twelve pounds: Boet. de Gem. and L.
Aes ustum, stannum ustum, Cinabar, and Crystal, melted together, imitate a
Topaz. Aldrov. M. Metal.


The SMARAGDUS, growing together with a pale Amethyst in one Matrix. The
Crystals are angular, but seem to hold no proportion.

The Occidental, sometimes as big as a man's fist, especially in Peru; but soft
and cloudy. The Oriental, no bigger than a Filbert. The Europeans, in Cyprus,
etc. the worst. It Is imitated Ambrosin. ( in Aldrov. M. Met.) out of Porta.
with Aes ustum, and half as much Crocus Martis.

Six Grains of this Stone, in powder, procures sweat. Mus. Wormian.
Applied entire to the Belly, stopeth all kind of Dysenetries in a miraculous
manner. Boet. from Guainerius.


A CLEAR and GREEN STONE, (a kind of Smaragdus) which, being heated red hot,
shines in the dark for a considerable time, sc. about ^6th of an hour. Given
by Dr. William Crown. I tried the experiment my self also. And at the same time
observed, That as it grew hot in the fire, its Green color was changed into a
Sky-blew; which it likewise retained so long as it continued to shine: but
after that, recovered its native green again.

The AGATE. So called from the River Achates in Sicily, near which it was first
found. Theophr. de Lap.
Almost of the color of clear Horn. The hardest of Semiperspicuous Gems. They
grow in India, Germany, Bohemia. Naturally adorned with much variety of waved
and other figured Veins, Spots, the representation of Vegetable, and sometimes
of Animal Bodies. None more memorable, than that mentioned by Pliny, Lib. 7. c.
11.
of Pyrrhus King of Epyrus, in which, without much strain of fancy, one might
imagine a representation of the Nine Muses, and Apollo, with his Harp, in the
middle of them. It Is used for Sword-Hilts, Knife-Hafts, Beads, Cups, and the
like. There are pieces of it, sometimes Mus. Septal.
as thick as a Man's Arm.

The ONYX. So called, because in color not unlike the Nail of a Man's Finger.
Ambrosinus confounds the Agate and the Onyx together. But the Onyx differs from
the Agate, chiefly, in that, instead of Veins, it is generally composed, says
Boethius, of Zones. But I think rather of several Balls, one within another:
which, when the Stone is polished, do indeed represent a round spot in the
center, with several Zones or Rings about it. Here are of diverse sorts.

An ONYX with a white, and very broad Zone.

ANOTHER, of a pale Blew.

A THIRD, with Rings White and Bay.

A FOURTH, of a light yellowish color, or of Citrine Amber, with ash-colored
Rings.

A FIFTH, in Figure like an Eye, with the Iris, White; the Pupil, of the color
of Honey.

A SIXTH, with the middle Spot or Pupil encompassed with a gray Iris.

A SEVENTH, with the Iris party-colored, within, White; without, brown; and
the Pupil also of the same color.

An EIGHTH, with an ash-colored Pupil, the Iris of a pale Amethystine within,
and white without. These with more variety of colors, are by some particularly
called NICCOLI; qu. Onyculi.

A NINTH, which may be named, The BINOCULAR; as having the likeness of two
little Eyes. The Table on which Nature has drawn them, is of the color of
yellow Amber, and semiperspicuous. The Eyes are white, with their Pupils of the
color of the palest live Honey.

A TENTH, distinctly called BELI OCULUS: the Iris whereof is Gray; the Pupil,
and the rest of the Eye, Black.

An ELEVENTH, of the color of yellow Amber, with gray Girdles, not round, as
in all the former, but angular.

The EMBRIO of an ONYX. So I name it. It Is a half Globe, polished. The outer
Crust or Shell, Semiperspicuous, and as hard as of a true Oynx. The part
within, round, of an opacous liver-colour, and so soft as to be dissoluble with
Spirit of Nitre.

A PEBBLE of kin to the Onyx. It Is round or globous, and on the two opposite
sides, a little prominent. About an inch in Diametre. The outer Shell,
yellowish; the middlemost, red; both opacous. The intimate Part, diaphanous,
and of the color of a glowing Coal. It seems to me, That as some Pebbles, so
many more Flints, are a sort of ONYX. The Onyx, amongst other things, is used
for the making of Cups; of which, King Mithridates is said to have had two
Thousand. Sometimes so big, as to serve for Statues. At Rome, in the Basilica
of St. Peter, there are (or were in Boetius's time) six little Onychine
Columns. Boet. lib. 2. de Gem. and L.
They grow both in the East and West Indies, and in Europe.

The ONYCHATE: Betwixt an Onyx and an Achate. Composed not of Zones, or Balls,
but of Plates, perspicuous and ash-colored, mixed.

ANOTHER, of a Globous Figure, consisting of Plates ash-colored and brown:
like a little turned Bowl of Ashwood.

A THIRD, consisting of Black, and Horn-colour'd Plates, mixed together, these
latter, being also stained with red spots.

The PSEUDOPALUS. It Is of a pale bluish Water, like a Fishes Eye, or a drop of
Skim'd-Milk, with some Rays of yellow.

ANOTHER, growing to a thin Crust or Matrix of an Iron-colour.

This, and the Opalus it self, the softest of Gems. Boet. de Gem.
They are now found principally in Hungary. Tavern. Voyages.
The Opalus, says Boethius, has its variety of colors, only by Refraction:
(adds Laet, Lib. 1. de Gem. c. 13.
like those in a Prisme) for if it be broken it loses them. It Is true, that
these colors are produced by Refraction: yet not as in a Prisme; as not
depending upon the Figure, (for they will not be produced in other Stones of
the same figure) nor so much as any flaw or flakiness in the Stone; but its
peculiar Texture, which causes those Refractions. Tin and Venis-Glass melted
together, imitate an Opalus. Porta.
See also the Phil. Trans. hereof. Number. 38.


The ONYCOPALUS. By some called Oculus Cati. It has the Zones or Rings of the
Onyx, of a pale White. The best of these are found in Zeilan and Pegu. Much
harder than the Opalus. It might be tried, whether this Stone does in any
degree partake of the strange property of the Opalus; some of which, being only
steeped a while in common water, will become Transparent for some time. Laet,
ubi supra.


The CALCEDONY, i. e. Onyx Chalcedonius, as Kentman not amiss. Fossil. Nomencl.
This is polished and set in a Frame. Above four inches long, and near as
broad. Semiperspicuous, almost like to a piece of gray Ice. Consisting of white
and most perspicuous parts so mixed together, as to look in some sort like a
Honey-Coome.

Another small one, with a pointed and sexangular polish at both ends.

This Stone is next in hardness to the German Agate. The clearest, with a pale
cast of blew the best. In Germany, being cut into thin broad Tablets, many have
their Arms either engraven thereon, or painted on the backside; prefering it
to Crystal, as being harder, if good. Hereof also are made little Mortars for
the powdering of Emery; likewise Cups, Religious Beads, etc. Georg. Agric.


The SARDIUS or Cornelian, qu. Carnelian. A semiperspicuous Stone. The best, by
some called The Male, of the color of Flesh, says Boethius, with the blood in
it. I add, but of a living Animal. But this is diluted with somewhat of an
Amber-colour. Anciently not only This, but all the smaller Gems, were used
especially for Signets and Signet-Rings. Theop. de Lapid.


The SARDONYX. As it were compounded of the Sardius, and the Onyx. This is
polished, and so the better shows it self. It consists of White and Blackish
Rings, one with in another. And stained both with red, and pale green Spots
interjected. The Rings, with the help of a Glass, appear much more numerous,
curiously representing those in the Root of Taraxacum or Dan-de-Lyon, cut
transversly. Note also, That the said Rings are properly so called, only in the
polished Stone; being, when entire, really so many Balls, as in the Bezoar or
Onyx, one within another. This Stone is found in several parts in Asia and
Europe. Harder than the Onyx, or the Agate; and is therefore figured with
Emery. Hereof anciently Cups were made, and those Dishes called Vasa Myrrhina.
See Worm.

The JASPIS. An opacous Gem; always, says Laet, Lib. de Gem.
with some kind of earthyness. But I take this to be only the property of the
Lapis Nephriticus. It Is found of most colors; of which here is some variety.

A GREEN JASPIS, stained with White Spots.

A Flesh-colour'd JASPIS, with Blackish Striae.

ANOTHER, stained with Purple and Blew Spots mixed together.

A FOURTH, stained with white and red Spots.

A FIFTH, Variegated with White, Carnation, Red, dark Green, and bright Green
Veins and Spots. Very like to those, which Boethius says are plentifully found
in Bohemia.

A GEOMETRICK JASPER. It seems at least of affinity with the Lapis
Sanguinalis described in Boethius. Lib. 2. c. 184. out of Monardes.
But is certainly one sort of Lapis Cruciformis. See Aldrov. Mus. Metal.
This here is polished into a plain Oval Figure, or flat on both sides. About
an inch and long, and thick. In the center or middle part of both sides stands
a Rhumb or Diamondsquare part, of a blackish Green. From the four Angles
whereof are produced as many Lines of the same color; and from each of these,
two more, at acute Angles; the extreme parts whereof compose four more green
Parts, as it were half Rhumbs: all joined together with a circle near the Rim
of the Stone. Amongst these, some yellow and red Spots are sprinkled up and
down.

A Bag of a course sort of JASPER Stones, knocked off from those in Wilts-shire
near Marleborough, called The Grey-Weathers. Given by John Aubrey Esquire. So hard,
that no Tool will touch them. Generally of a light Gray, some almost white,
many of a dirty red.

Another, of a bluish Gray. Taken from a like shelf of Stones at Stone-heng.
It Is hard enough to scratch Glass.

Another like a green Pebble, found in one of the Streets of this City. Where
also, says the forementioned Person, many more are met with, and that they
are a sort of Jasper, brought, as Ballast, from the East Indies.

The JASPACHATES. It Is polished, and so figured, as to look like one half of a
Pear, with the Stalk, Coar, and dead Flower cut out. Curiously beautified with
Yellow, Purple, and Blood-red Spots, immersed in the Horny and Semiperspicuous
color of the Agate; with which also it is equally hard. This also is a kind of
BOODSTONE: as all other Jaspers with red Spots.

The JASPONYX. It Is polished with an Oval Figure. Composed of white Zones,
besprinkled with White, Brown, and Red Spots.

Another of a courser kind, composed of Green and Ashcolour'd Plates. Like that
Marble described by Imperatus with parallel black Lines.

The JASPAMMITES. So I call it; Having the Figure of the Ammites, with the
Color and Hardness of the Jaspis. For it is composed of little orbicular
Stones, somewhat bigger than a Pepper-Corn; all green without, and of a dark
Purple in the center. So as they seem also to have been once little crusted or
shell'd Balls, as those of the Ammites, hereafter described.

The Jaspis grows in India, Phrygia, Thracia, and Bohemia. Next in hardness to
the Agate. Sometimes so big, as to be used for Statues. Of great esteem, as an
Amulet, for the stainching of all Haemorrhages. Of its Effect herein, see some
Cases in Boethius; one of them a most remarquable one. De Gem. lib. 2. c. 102.
See also two others, in Mr. Boil, Of Gems. The specific Virtues ascribed to
This and diverse other Stones, seeming almost incredible unto some: Mr. Boil,
to render an intelligible Account of the same; does reasonably ( b) Page 177,
178.
suppose, That all opacous Medical Stones have been, some Bolus's, some Ores of
Metals, or Minerals of kin to Metals, so advantagiously altered, as by
application only to become Sanative. Of the Virtues Of Gems, p. 171. 172.
The Green-Jasper is by some preferred: but that which Boethius used in the Cases
abovementioned, was wholly Red.

The NEPHRITICK-STONE. Of affinity with the Jaspis, and rather harder. Of
several colors; but no one of two, nor any Red: for the most part of a pale
Green. It has some softer parts intermixed, which make it look sometimes as if
it were a little oily; and for which cause it admits not of a perfect polish.
Of these here are two Species; first,

The NEPHRITICK STONE of Brasile. Gemma, Gesnero, Oripendula. Described by the
Author of the Name. But this is smaller, and seems to be broken. Of a pale
bluish Green, with some pores containing a whitish substance. Polished and
shaped into a little Column. The better sort of the Natives of Brasile, to
distinguish themselves, when they go abroad, wear this Stone (as we Rings on
the Ear) upon their Lip; which is bored in their Childhood for that purpose.

ANOTHER, of affinity with the former. It consists mostly of parts of a dark
Green; yet glossy; and firmly cohering. Yet so as in several conspicuous pores
to contain a soft whitish substance.

This Stone, although of no beauty, yet is placed amongst Gems, for that it is
highly esteemed, as an Amulet against Nephitical Pains, and the Stone and
Gravel in the Kidneys. Of the admirable effects whereof, in diverse Cases of
this Nature, see the Relations of Monardes, and from him of Boethius; as also
from a Noble Person, his Kinsman. Lib. 2. c. 110.
The Green one with black spots, is commended by many. But Laet says, Lib. 1.
de Lap.
he had one almost of the color of Honey, which, upon frequent experience, he
found to do all that Monardes relates of it.

The TURCOIS. So called, because brought to most places from Turkey, or those
that trade from thence. By the Indians, Perose; for that it is found, most
abundant, says Cerutus, Mus. Calceol. S. 3.
only, says Tavernere, ( d) in Persia. See the Description hereof in Boethius.
This here, is all over tuberous on the top with round Knobs, of several sizes,
from that of the head of a small Brass Nail to that of a Pin; some of a
bluish, others of darker Green. Within (somewhat like the Onyx) disposed into
Zones, mixed with spots: both of a Greenish Black. It Is two inches broad, and
near three in length: a great one, if, as Boethius says, it seldom exceeds the
bigness of a Walnut.

Another, about as big as a Filbert.

A Third, a small one, like those set in Rings.

The MOTHER of the TURCOIS, as is supposed. Found in the Mines of Herngrunt in
Hungary; and given by Dr. Edward Brown. Here are two Pieces. One of them, for
the greatest part, blew; with some places black. In which is also immersed a
sort of small Sand-colour'd Stones, so hard as to scratch Glass. The other,
has also a mixture of some parts that are Green. The Blew and the Green, are
both, and they only dissoluble upon the effusion of Acids.

The best of these Stones are the Blewest. Boet. de Gem.
They have also this property; sc. to look blew by Day, Laet de Gem.
and Green by Candlelight. Many, says Boethius, have judged this to be
reckoned by Pliny, amongst Jaspers with the Name of Boreas. But either Pliny
and the Ancients, or those that make that judgment of them, were greatly
mistaken. For this is a very soft Stone, and easily dissoluble, with
Ebullition, immediately upon the effusion of some, especially Nitrous Acids:
and may be scraped with a Knife. So that I am of Opinion; That it is nothing
else but a sort of Aerugo in some measure petrified. Which also is further
confirmed in that it does not only resemble that in Color, but, being (as it
is easily) burnt, is of the same Taste. So that it is no marvail, if this Stone,
with Age and especially much worn and exposed to the Air, loses the beauty of
its color. And that it may be restored to the same by Oil of Vitriol; which
eats off its faded Surface.

CHAP. V. Of REGULAR STONES.
AS Gems are distinguished chiefly by their Colors; so other Stones Regular,
by their external Forms. This is of two general kinds. Such as is
Circumscriptive, or depending upon the whole Stone, as ex. gr. in the
Eagle-Stone; and this is properly called the Figure. Or such as is
Accumulative, where there is a repetition of the same Figure in several parts,
as in Muscovy-Glass, composed of parallel Plates: and so for the rest, whereof
in their order.

A GLOBULAR PEBBLE, an inch and in Diametre, whitish and semiperspicuous. It
seems to be an Assay toward the Eagle-Stone, hereafter described.

A CLUSTERED PISOLYTHOS. It consists of Globular and bay Stones, united
together with an Ash-colored Cement: But this is very hard, and stirs not with
Acids. Boethius and others figure a Cluster of these, but somewhat bigger.

This Stone may seem to belong to the second general kind abovesaid. But is
really a heap of distinct Stones in one Bed. Which is also to be understood of
others alike.

ANOTHER, composed of Globular Stones, consisting of a whitish, and soft or
friable substance; yet gritty, and indissoluble with Acids. United together
with a brown Cement.

A SINGLE one of the same Figure, but bigger; sc. as big as a Physical Pill. As
also semipellucid, almost as the bay Amber. Very hard and indissoluble with
Acids. Besler figures some of these, with the Name of Pisa majora lapidea.

The SINEPITES, as it may be called. Being a Cluster of small hard Globules,
like Mustard-seeds; and united together with an obscure or dull Red Cement.
Given by Sigr. Boccone.

The MECONITES. A Cluster of other like Globules no bigger than Poppy-seeds.
See one of these in Boethius and Besler. These two last, are properly of the
Hammites kind; but not the Pisolythos, although accounted so by Boethius. Of
these Globules, it is observable with the help of a Glass, That although they
are so very small, yet are they shell'd, or composed of little Balls one within
another, as the Bezoar-Stone.

The CLUSTERED STALAGMITES. A Congeries of Globular Stones, like so many
petrified Drops; of the color of Oriental Bezoar; cemented together with a
kind of Gypsum. The whole Mass, which here is polished, is two inches and
square, and an inch high. This, and the following Stones of affinity herewith,
differ from the five former, not so much in figure, as in substance, these
being all instantly dissoluble with Acids. So that they seem to be a kind of
Gypsum, first dissolved in some Mineral Menstruum, and after settling in this
Figure.

The CORALLINE STALAGMITES, also clustered. It consists of little round
Stones of the bigness of the former, but of the color of red Coral. Cemented
together with a sort of Gypsum. It is dissolved, upon the effusion of any
strong Acid, with a strong Effervescence.

The POROUS STALAGMITES. It Is a ruder Species, the Stones of which it is
composed, being not so distinct and round, as in the former. Covered all over
with one common Crust. Yet most of them pounced with small or more open pores.

A SINGLE one, called PISUM CAROLINUM; because frequently bred in the Caroline
Baths. Whitish, smooth and dense; and near as big as a Pistol Bullet.

Two SINGLE ones. Given by Sir Philip Skippon. Of a glossy Ash Color, and very
dense substance: yet easily dissolved with Spirit of Nitre. These are somewhat
angular.

Two more, which are TWINS. These are perfectly round, except where they join
together.

A Great TIBULINE SUGAR-PLUM. This and the other Rough sorts the Italians call
Confetti de Tibuli; the place (not far from Rome) where they are bred. It Is
above 1/^ an inch in Diametre, Globular, White, and Rough; exactly like a great
Confet.

A Parcel of SMALL ones; white, round, and as it were granulated: just like
Carvy Confets, and such like. Besler figures several of these under the Name of
Petrified Aniseseeds, Fenil-seeds, etc.

The SUGAR-ALMOND, bred also in the same place. In color, figure, size, and
surface, so like to the rougher sort which Confectioners sometimes make, that,
excepting the Taste, nothing can be liker.

Three STONES found very deep under ground near Hartford in New England. One of
an Oval Figure, flatish, and having a little Globule standing upon its center.
Another, two half Globes, joined edge to edge. The Third, much bigger than the
former, of a circular Figure, and flat; an inch and over; almost like the Caps
worn by Under-Graduates in our Universities. All soft, and fine, or not gritty,
and not unlike a hard Bole. Spirit of Nitre dissolves them with Effervescence.

A little round, flat, and blackish Stone, resembling a Medicinal TROCH, or a
thin CAKE of Terra sigillata, having as it were the Impression of a small Seal
on one side. It Is a perfect Pebble, not affected with any Acid.

The EAGLE-STONE. Aetites. All the former Stones were round and solid. This is
hollow. Named from a vulgar opinion, That the Eagle, when she sits, carries it
to her Nest, to keep her Egg from being addle. And this, joined with another,
That Bodies operate according to their Signature: as this Stone, which often
contains, or if you will, goes great with another Stone within it. Several
sorts hereof are here preserved.

The FLORID Male EAGLE-STONE. A rare kind. It Is a perfect Flint, and
semiperspicuous; of a Globular Figure, and as big as a good big Apple, or near
three inches in Diametre. Flourished all round about with several sets of Rings
one included within another, with some similitude to so many little Roses or
double Crowfoot-Flowers. It Is very ponderous, being almost solid. Yet hollow at
the center; containing not one, but several small Stones, as is argued from the
noise they make, upon shaking the Stone.

An ANGULAR or Ridged Male EAGLE-STONE. This also is about the bigness of a
good large Apple. Of a brown color, but daubed over with a kind of Okre; and
was therefore probably bred in a Bed of the same. It Is very heavy; which argues
it almost solid, as the former, and to have only a small hollow in the center.

An ORBICULAR EAGLE-STONE. About the bigness of a midling Apple. The outside,
rough and brown. Inwardly black. The Concave surface daubed with a sort of
Okre; a quantity of which, it is likely, it once contained.

An OVAL EAGLE Stone. About as big as a midling Walnut. Without, blackish and
rough, as it were granulated with some semiperspicuous Sands. Smooth within,
and of a spruce* Okre color. On one side, it has an oblong Aperture, with a
smooth Lip as it were turned outward.

One half of an OVAL EAGLE Stone. It Is near three inches in Diametre. The
inside rough-cast with small Grains, in size, like those of Bay Salt; so hard
as to cut Glass.

The FLAT round EAGLE Stone. Of a brown color, and figured like a Troch.

The AMYGDALINE EAGLE Stone. Shaped like an Almond. Of a glossy brown, like
half bright Iron. It contains a sort of Bole, of the color of Fullers-Earth.

The Eagle-Stone which contains no Stone, but Earth, is called GEODES.
GEAETITES were more express.

ANOTHER, of the same figure and bigness; but somewhat flatter.

A Rough and hard EAGLE Stone, the Concave surface whereof is daubed with a
soft white wash, a kind of Gypsum, dissoluble with Spirit of Nitre.

ANOTHER Hard one, immersed in Iron Ore. All these are Naked. Those that follow
have a soft Coat.

A COATED EAGLE Stone: A hollow Flint; one way, near two inches in Diametre,
and almost round. Covered with a kind of white Earth, about 1/^th of an inch
thick: yet not Chalky, but effoete, making no Effervescence with Acids.
Containing several sparks or grains of Flint, clustered in a round Lump,
together with some of the like Earth, as without.

A little Flinty LUMP taken out of another of the same Species.

TWO more EAGLE Stones, of the same Species, of a midling size, and almost as
round as a Ball. One of them as big as a good big Walnut.

A FOURTH, bigger than a Musket-Bullet, and as round. Covered, as the three
former, with a white earthy Coat; and containing the like substance in the
center. The main Body of all these, is either true Flint, or of a hard
substance approaching to it. All these are by some called Males.

The FOEMALE EAGLE Stone. It Is round, and in a manner Oval. As big as a good
large Apple. Ashcolour'd without, and white within. Of a soft friable and
chalky substance, instantly dissoluble with Acids. From the outside, to the
Concave, an inch thick. Contains a soft white chalky Stone, filling up its
whole hollow, and answering to it, as the Yelk does to the White of an Egg.
This Stone is by Pliny called CALIMUS.

ANOTHER, somewhat harder. It Is also round, and bigger than the former, and the
sides above 1/^ an inch thick. Rough on the outside, and smooth within. Yet so,
as to be furrowed with certain shallow Rings. To which also the Calimus,
therein contained, exactly answers, as any Metal does to the Mould in which it
is cast. Both of them make an Effervescence with Acids.

The CALIMUS of *another Eagle-Stone, as big as a good big Gall, and knobed in
the same manner.

Several Species of this Stone are figured by Aldrovandus. Mus. Metal.


The flinty Eagle-Stone, and many other Flints, if observed when they are
broken, seem to be an Assay toward the Onyx.

The Eagle-Stone is found in Apulia, Germany, Misnia, etc. Much accounted of by
some, as an Amulet against Abortions.

The SEMIGLOBULAR TOAD-STONE. Lapis Bufoneus s. Garatronens. It looks like the
the one half of a hard flinty Eagle-Stone; and probably, is nothing else. The
Diametre of an inch.

The SEMIOVAL TOAD-STONE. It Is an inch long, an inch over, of a brown color,
and flinty.

The Long SEMIOVAL TOAD-STONE. This also is flinty, and of a shining brown, or
the color of Oriental Bezoar, being polished. It Is about an inch long, and
near an inch over. Besler figures this, with the Name of Batrachoides.

Another sort of Toad-Stone, semiglobular, and solid, sc. with a flat base, is
described by Gesner. Lib. de Lap. Fig.
Thus far of Stones more Round. I shall next describe those which are
Cylindrick, or near that Figure. And first the Osteocolla, of which here are
several Species.

The SOLID or Pithless KNIT-BONE. Ranked by Kentman, Fossil. Nomencl.
and not improperly, amongst the sorts of Osteocolla. Yet obtains the peculiar
Name of ENOSTEOS: being porous, light, spongy, and cylindrick; so as to look
just like the inward part of a Bone, or of Hartshorn.

The KNIT-BONE with a small PITH. It Is bended almost like the Letter s.
Cylindrick, and three inches round. Almost solid, yet contains a very small
Pith. The outer part, of an Ash Color, and gritty or sabulous. The Pith, like
most white Chalk. Both of them make a conspicuous Effervescence with Acids; but
especially the Pith.

The GREAT-PITH'D KNIT-BONE. This is not a single one, but a Cluster. They
stand together parallel, equal to the thick end of a Tobacco-Pipe-Stalk;
without exceeding smooth, and of a yellowish color, somewhat like that of the
Plates in the Ludus Helmontij, hereafter described. Filled with a very large
Pith, answerable to that in an Eldern-Branch, hard and stony, and of a bluish
color, like that of blew Marle. The spaces between the several Cylinders,
filled up with another sort of Stone, of the color of old Elm. The yellowish
Cylinders, being rubbed hard, or scraped, has a strong stinking scent: but what
Species to compare it too, does not at present occur. They are presently
dissolved with Spirit of Nitre.

ANOTHER CLUSTER like the former; saving, that the Cylinders stand together
without any, or with little, order: and that the brown and bluish Stones are
both mixed in Veins, and several of the Cylinders hollow.

The EMPTY KNIT-BONE. This is neither solid, nor has any Pith, but a Pipe; yet
with a very small bore. Smooth both within and without. And transversly
striated, as the Belemnites, hereafter described.

ANOTHER, somewhat more hollow. This also is transversly striated, as the
former; but without rough and of an Iron-colour.

A THIRD, most hollow; knobed without, and of an Ash Color.

Of these Stones, see the Relation especially of Joh. Chrystophorus Beckmannus,
Physic Professor at Frank furt; Phil. Trans. N. 39.
who observes, That they grow in a sandy, seldom or never in a claiy-Ground.
Sometimes two men's depth; and with Branches side-ways. Taper'd, as in Plants;
where thickest, equal to an ordinary Arm; the small Branches, to ones little
Finger. The Place where found is noted by a white fatty Sand, the rest
yellowish round about; and underneath a dark, moist, and fatty putrid
substance, like rotten-Wood, running in Veins and is the Mother of the
Osteocolla. So that it seems to grow somewhat after the manner of the
Entrochus, or Stelechites above described. It Is found most in Saxony, and the
Palatinate.

This Stone, as is indicated by its Name, is highly esteemed for expediting the
Coalition of broken Bones; j hereof being given and repeated for above five
days together. See one or two very remarquable Histories hereof in Boethius. De
Lap. and Gem. Lib. 2.


The Larger Hollow STALACTITES, or WATERPIPE. The Greek Name supposes it to
grow somewhat after the manner of Icicles, from Lapidifick-Waters. Yet how it
should grow hollow, as this, is somewhat hard to conceive. For hereby, it seems
rather to grow or sprout upward, as the Stelechites. Only with this difference,
That as that grows from an open Bed: this probably, from one under Water.
Whence I take leave for the English Name. It Is three inches long, in thickness
equal to the little Finger. Of a Cylindrick Figure, saving that at both ends
it is a little more slender; whether naturally, appears not. Composed of several
ash-colored and blackish Crusts, exceeding thin crispe and brittle, not ill
resembling a rouled Wafer. The Bore is lined through with a small granulated
Candy. It Is instantly dissolved with Spirit of Nitre.

ANOTHER, consisting wholly of white Crusts or Wafers one within another.

The SMALL WATER-PIPE. It Is a Cluster of very small Tubes, with the Bore so
small, as scarcely to be seen without a Glass. Rough all over with a tuberous
Crust. They are found in Germany, Moravia, and other Parts. One Dram hereof
in Powder, is a potent Sudorifick. Boet. de Lap. and G.


A Stone like a Pebble with small TUBULAR KNOBS upon it, like the Primordia of
a Water-Pipe. They are so small, that their hollows cannot be observed without
a Glass. The Stone on which they grow, though very hard, yet makes a strong
Effervescence with Spirit of Nitre. Thus far of Cylindrick Stones.

The CONICK STALACTITES, solid. It Is about three inches long; the top sharp,
the middle an inch over; the base, an inch, with four or five excentrick
Crusts. The whole composed of several Crusts, one within another, as the
Water-Pipe. Yet not hollow, as that, or rather not empty, but filled with a Red
stony substance. Being kroken it shines like the Lapis Juda^cus. Without,
smooth, of an Ash Color, with some little cast of red. Instantly dissolved
with Spirit of Nitre. Aldrovandus Musaeum Metallic.
has one figured like this; but by himself, or by Ambrosinus, called
Stelechites Pyramidalis; very improperly.

The CONICK STALACTITES, hollow. It Is three inches long; at the top, which is
now open, over; in the middle, near ^/4; the base spread out, with several
round Crusts on one side, like half bubbles, to the breadth of above an inch.
On the opposite side, with a short single piped one. All of them contained
together within the utmost Crust. Smooth and ash-colored without, within pure
white.

The Black BELEMNITES. The generick Name is from the shape, like that of a
Bolt-head. This Species is outwardly of an ash color, but black within: and
therefore by some called Coraceas. Radiated as most of them are, with
transverse Striae. And bored at the thick end, which is not so usual, with a
Conick hollow. See the Description of two or three sorts in Boethius, Wormius,
and others.

The WHITE BELEMNITES. It Is Conick as the former; but the Rays not so plain.
Together with its white color is joined some little transparency.

The bigger YELLOW BELEMNITES. Particularly called Dactylus Idaeus; for that it
is in shape and bigness like a little Finger; and was first, or is now chiefly,
found upon Mount Ida. It Is solid, semiperspicuous, and of the color of yellow
Amber. They have usually a kind of notched Ridge all along one side; but this
has two opposite ones.

ANOTHER, with a little Hollow filled up with a Pith of Earth.

A CLUSTER of broken pieces of the Belemnites.

The SHELL'D BELEMNITES. qu. Stalemnites. Opacous, and of the color of gray
Horn. Pointed at both ends, as the Belemnites is at one. And at one end,
shows six or seven shells one over another, as in the Stalactites above
described. From whence I have named it.

Some of these being rubbed, take up Chaff or other light Bodies, as Amber does.
Kentman Fossil. Nomencl.
mentions one of an Ash Color, which being rubbed, smelt like a burnt Cows
Horn. And a white one, which smelt not much unlike to white Ambar. They are
found in Germany, and other Parts, sometimes in England. They all make a strong
Effervescence with Acids. Thus far of Stones simply Conick.

The WORME-STONE. It Is now broken at one end, yet about two inches and long.
Consists of about five solid Rounds, winding from the bigger end (about of an
inch over) so as to make a spiral Cone. Not much unlike a Steel Worm used for
the drawing of Corks out of Bottles.

Another of the same shape and bigness. This Stone I find neither figured, nor
mentioned by any Author, saving only Olearius. A Dutch Musaeum.
They were taken out of the midst of a Rock.

A NETED-STONE. Lapis retiformis. It consists of black and roundish portions,
severally surrounded with Veins, of an Okre-colour, running one into another
after the manner of Network. Along the middle of each Vein (about th of an
inch broad) runs a small Thread or Line, almost of the same color.

Another, with the Are'as of the Network not so black, softer, and somewhat
flaky.

A FLINT of a dull Red, with the Figure, almost, of a l encompassed with six or
seven Rings.

The FLAT BOLTHEAD. Anchorites. Of affinity with that well described by Wormius
Mus. lib. 1. Sect. 2. c. 13.
with the Title of Silex venabuli ferreum Cuspidem exact referens. By
Moscardo, Mus. lib. 2. c. 50.
with that of Pietre Ceraunie; who also figures it with three or four
Varieties. This like those, is a perfect Flint, and semiperspicuous. It Is
likewise in the same manner, pointed like a Speer. Having at the other end,
like those of Moscardo, a short Handle. But moreover, has this peculiar, that
it is pointed or spiked also backward on both sides the Handle; with some
resemblance to an Anchor, or the Head of a Bearded-Dart: from whence I have
named it. It Is likewise toothed on the edges, and the sides as it were wrought
with a kind of undulated sculpture, as those before mentioned.

ANOTHER, different from the former, in that it is longer, has a deeper
Indenture, but no handle. Both of them strike fire like other Flints. That of
Wormius was found in a Hill in the Diocese of Ripen.

Not only Moscardo, but others reckon these amongst the Cerauniae or
Thunderbolts. So called, because believed sometimes with Thunder to shoot down
with violence out of the middle Region. Amongst other Relations hereof, that of
Terzagi Mus. Septal.
is very express; who says, That the Corpse of one struck dead with Thunder,
being inspected in the presence of Septalius, and several others, and a black
Wound observed about the Hip, and searched to the Bone; they found therein a
round and edged Stone, which being broken, had a very strong sulphurious stink.
With this Author, I scarce think any thing of this nature incredible, to those
that read the Relation given at large by Wormius Musaeum
of the Norwegick Mouse.

Thus far of Regular Stones, whose external Form is Circumscriptive, or at
least depending upon the whole Stone. I shall now describe those, whose Form is
Accumulative, or where there is a repetition of the same figure, or near it, in
several Parts.

The GRAPE-STONE. Botrites, Wormio. Here are two or three sorts. One solid, of
a yellowish color, an inch and long, knobed with several small Clusters, like
a young bunch of Grapes.

The HOLLOW GRAPE-STONE, with high Knobs or white Berries clustered all round
about, as in the former, and somewhat thicker.

A SEMI-GRAPE-STONE, with white Drops or Berries only on one side. They all
make a vehement Effervescence with Acids; and are a sort of Stalagmites, next
of kin to the Confetti di Tibuli before described.

The STAR-STONE. Asteria vera, Boetio. Generally of a or an inch in Diametre,
consisting of several Joints, evenly piled one upon another, of a Pentagonal
Figure, like a Star, and with the signature also of another on both sides,
which is composed of short transverse Striae. When broken, it shines like the
Lapis Judaicus, or the Entrochites; to which latter it is next of kin.
Sometimes they are found single. When consisting of more Joints, it may rather
be called Synasteria. Several both of the joynted and singles ones are here
preserved.

A very hard Stone, a kind of Pebble with the signature of the Asteria upon it.

Mr. Lyster has given a particular Account of this Stone, and its varieties in
several Figures; published by Mr. Oldenburge, Phil. Trans. N. 112.
together with some Notes of Mr. Ray thereupon. Mr. Lyster found the fairest of
them near Bugthorp and Leppington in Yorkshire, in a blew Clay.

The STARRED-STONE. Astroites. So called, for that being tabulated, or polished
to a plain, it appears adorned with little Stars, about or 1/^th of an inch in
Diametre. Boethius conjectures Pliny to reckon this Stone for a sort of Agate.
Whether that be so or no, himself is greatly mistaken Lib. 2. c. 145.
in affirming as much: this being a very soft Stone. The same Author takes
notice, as of a strange thing, That this Stone being put into Vinegar C. 147.
will move up and down in it. Whereas it proceeds (as Mr. Lyster also observes
of the Asteria, which he calls the Astroites) ( d) Phil. Trans.
only from the Ebullition following upon the immersion: and happens to any
other Stone dissoluble with Acids, if immersed in small pieces.

Another, two inches long, and near as broad. This is unpolished, and seems to
be but part of a far bigger Stone. So that although the figure which Boethius,
and some others give, is but small, sc. not an inch long: yet is it sometimes
of good bulk.

The ASTROCHITES; polished with the figure of a Cross. The Stars are here more
round, than in the former. The spaces between the several Stars and Rays, of a
dark blackish color. The Rays or Stars themselves are pale. And also
surrounded with a toothed Circle; so as not unaptly to represent the Wheel of a
Watch: from whence I have named it.

The imperfect STARRY-STONE. Astroites Boetio Lib. 2. c. 164.
quartus. In this the Stars are more obscure, and scarce radiated, but rather
spots. But the Stone for substance the same as the former.

The WAVED Stone. Astroites Boetio Ibid.
tertius; but improperly so called. For although it be, for substance, like the
former; yet is not adorned with the likeness of Stars, but of Waves. The
several Waves are composed of whitish transvers Striae.

Another, with the Striae more conspicuous.

The SEIVE-STONE. Lapis Cribriformis. A kind of Tophus. It Is of a brown color,
porous light and friable, as a Pumice. And perforated with many Pores more
conspicuous, about as big as to admit a large Pin, and regular, sc. round,
strait and fistular.

I now proceed to several Spars; of which, although some belong to Metals; yet
here, have no Metal adhering to them. Those that have, will fall in amongst
Ores. And first of such as are pointed, both soft and hard, reserving the
Flaked for their place.

Let it only first be noted, That the specific difference betwixt the
Stalactites and the Spar, is, That the former, is always Opacous, and never
Angular: the latter, always or usually perspicuous, and never round.

A Silver-Ore SPAR. About an inch and 1/^ high, and three in compass. It
consists of several Crystals sexangular and pointed, and composed into the
figure of a great Bud. The four uppermost bigger than the rest. All
semiperspicuous, of the color of gray Crystal; and seem to be as hard.

ANOTHER large Piece consisting of hard and sexangular Crystals, and of the
same color with the former. Taken from the Coginnian Silver-Mines. Given by
Mr. Colepress.

Several other Pieces of the same, and given by the same Hand.

A METALLIC SPAR, of a pale AMETHYSTINE color. It Is angular and pointed, as
Crystal; but with sides more unequal. It Is also soft and brittle. Yet harder
than some others. And has no sense of Acids.

A SHOD. Spuma Lupi. The forerunner of the Load or Mother of the Tin-Ore. It Is
both blacker, and harder than the Mother-Spar.

Another of the same, mixed of black, gray, and yellow.

The MOTHER-SPAR of the Tin-Ore.

ANOTHER, arising from a Whitish Bed, mixed with a kind of rusty red. The
Crystals are angular, pointed, and soft, like the square Lead-Spar.
Semiperspicuous, yet mostly covered with an angular and blackish shell.

A pretty hard Ash-colored and Opacuous Spar, growing near the Tin-Mines.

A YELLOW TIN-SPAR from Ireland. Given by Sir Rob. Moray. The several Crystals
are angular, pointed, and soft; semiperspicuous like brown Sugar Candy.
Dissoluble with Acids.

An Iron-SPAR. A Cluster of small, pointed Crystals, almost of the color of
brown Sugar Candy; but sader, and less perspicuous. It Is hard enough to cut
Glass.

ANOTHER, Mixed. In the middle, it has many Striae, of a Lead-Ore color,
running cross one against another. These are encompassed with other parts of
the color of yellow Okre. With which are also mixed some white and green
spots. The Stone tastes like white Vitriol.

A large Copper-SPAR. Given by Mr. Langerman. It Is a of a yard long, and near
as broad. Consisting mostly of sexangular Points, upon a gray Bed, which is
also mixed with Granulated Spars. The other side, all besprinkled with yellow
Mundick.

A MUNDICK-SPAR; consisting of tabulated or flat and square Crystals, of the
color of Citrine Amber, and growing to a whitish Matrix.

Note, That almost all Spars of this kind, are composed of tabulated, and
square Crystals.

ANOTHER, consisting of black shining Crystals, of the color of Jet, and as
broad as a Dice; and some of them almost Cubical. Being broken, the fragments
are of an Amethystine color. There are also, underneath, some whitish
Crystals; above, some of yellow Mundick.

ANOTHER, partly plated, and partly pointed; of a black shining color, like
that of polished Steel. It Is very ponderous, and makes no Effervescence with
Acids. Yet soft and brittle. Which three Properties, belong to most, if not
all, Mundick-Spars.

A SPAR with CONICK CRYSTALS. They are most of them an inch and 1/^ long. All
very close and continuous, excepting at their Points, as in the Amethyst.
Semiperspicuous, and exactly of the color of the best brown Sugar Candy. Very
soft; and easily dissolved with Spirit of Nitre. It was taken out of a
Portland-Stone; and given by Sir Rob. Moray.

A SPAR with CRYSTALS TRIANGULARLY pointed. It Is a pretty round Lump. The
Crystals so placed, that the Angle of one, for the most part, answers to the
side of another. Of a pale and semisperspicuous color, coming near to that of
white Sugar Candy. In which also small parallel Streaks of a brighter color,
are observable. Very soft, as the former, and dissoluble with Spirit of Nitre.

The STYRIATED STALACTITES. Of the same kind with the Styriaeformis described
by Wormius. It is a congeries of strait, round Styriae, somewhat parallel, and
as thick as a Cherry-Stalk, or small Packthred. Each Styria is composed of
small, pointed and lose Grains, as big as those of Salt, piled in a strait line
one over another. It makes an Effervescence with Spirit of Nitre.

The MOSSE-STALACTITES. Consisting also of Granulated Styriae; yet not strait
and parallel, but winding too and fro, and the Grains with bigger points; so as
to resemble petrified Moss.

I NEXT proceed to PLATED-STONES; and first such as are of a Rhomboid Figure.

A CRYSTAL of TALK. Wormius describes Talk, to be a Stone divisible into flat
Plates, variously intricated, and divisible like Silver, which is all he says
of the form, and his words unintelligible. Far from a definition of that form,
which, so often, as its Concretion proceeds freely on all sides, or without
hinderance from any adjacent Body, it does obtain: being then, a Congeries of
flat, and perspicuous Plates, somewhat pliable, and figured into a kind of
double Rhomboid; or as it were two Squares, with unequal Sides and Angles,
clapped together, with the edges produced, to distinguish them: so, as to obtain
twelve Angles, and ten Sides, sc. eight lesser, and two greater ones. A piece
thus figured, I call A Crystal of Talk. And of this the form is both
Accumulative and Circumscriptive: the difference betwixt which is showed in the
beginning of this Chapter.

An HALF-CRYSTAL, having only six sides, four lesser, and two greater ones; as
if it were a perfect one, split.

A piece of FOLIATED TALK. It consists of several pieces, pellucid,
cleveable, and something pliable, of a Rhomboid Figure, and composed together
so as to resemble the indented leave of Wild Clary.

A large Piece of TALK, above a foot square.

A Piece of TALK taken out of the Ground in Wiltshire.

A lump of the TALK-ROCK near Spiral, in the upper Carinthia. Given by Dr.
Edward Brown. It consists of broken pieces, like those of the Selenites,
immersed in a white glossy Stone, stained with purplish spots, and so hard as
to scratch Glass.

Talk, although flexible, and regularly figured, yet feels no Acid; and is of
that obstinate nature, as neither to melt, nor scarce loose its color, in the
fire. Considering which, and that all Salts, yet known, will flow: I am induced
to think, That it has not its Figure from any Salt; but is almost a simple
Earth sui generis. And that there are earthy Particles, as well as Saline,
which are regularly figured; and of which this and some other Stones are
composed. Hereof is prepared a wash for the Face, which some Chymysts cry up
for the best in the World.

A GREEN TALK-SPAR. The whole piece, is here of a rude Figure; but is easily
broken into Rhomboid Plates, resembling those of Talk, from whence I have named
it. It Is tinged with a pale Green. It stirs not with any Acid. Yet is not
flexible, as true Talk, but brittle as Glass.

A great Crystalline TALK-SPAR. So I call it. Sent by Dr. Erasmus Bartholine,
together with a large account of it, published in a the Phil. Transactions.
Number. 67.
And by the Dr. Experimenta Crystalli Islandici Dis-Diaclastici.
himself in a distinct Treatise. It Is a foot long, a foot broad, and two inches
and thick. Of a Rhomboid Figure, and the narrow sides likewise sloaped, as in
the Crystals of Talk. It breaks also into parts of the same Figure, or near
it. Yet not flexible, but brittle. Polite, colorless, and transparent, as the
clearest Crystal. Yet soft and dissoluble especially with Nitrous Spirits; and
by a strong fire reduceable to a Calx. Of a very different nature from Crystal,
although the said Dr. is pleased so to call it. When heated, it is of an
Electrick Nature, or like Amber* takes up straws and other light Bodies. That
which he principally Notes is, That the Objects seen through it, in certain
positions, appear sometimes single, sometimes double, and sometimes sixfold.
Which he ascribes to a Refraction peculiar to this Stone. And to me, it seems
probable, That this various Refraction depends upon the structure of the Stone,
sc. as it is not one piece absolutely entire, but composed of several Plates;
and those not all in a like manner, but differently contiguous; so, as in some
places, several Plates may make but one Refraction; in others, two or more. It
was dug out of a very high Mountain in Island, one whole side whereof
consists of this Spar.

TWO PIECES of the same Stone, about two inches and 1/^ long, broad, and thick.
Thus far of Rhomboid Stones.

The RHOMBICK LEAD-SPAR. Frequently found in the Lead-Mines in Derbyshire, and
in others. By some called English Talk. But very improperly. For though it
consists of several Plates, yet not flexible, but brittle as Glass. Besides,
it is not of a Rhomboid, but Rhombiek Figure, that is, a Diamond-square, or with
the Angles unequal, the sides equal. Nor does Talk feel any Acid, but this with
Spirit of Nitre is easily dissolved. It breaks into pieces, which, though never
so small, yet retain the same Figure. Being burned, it yields a Lixivial Salt.

A clear FLINT, of the color of yellow Amber, with Striae on the sides shaped
into little Rhombes.

A RHOMB of MUSCOVY-GLASS. This Stone is by most called Selenites. By some
Mariae Glacies. By Agricola, and Kentman, Magnetis. By Ambrosinus, Aldrov. Mus.
Metal.
confounded, under the same Name, with Talk. It Is indeed the nearest of kin to
that of any Stone, being insensible of Acids; and consisting of very thin,
perspicuous, glossy, parallel, and flexible Plates. Seldom found figured. But
when it is, I suppose always, as it is here in this piece, sc. into a
Diamond-square, i. e. with unequal Angles, and equal sides; whereas in a
Talk-Crystal, both are unequal. It was taken out of Mount Haemus.

A very white Piece of Muscovy-Glass.

ANOTHER, of a pale Green color, with a kind of silver gloss, and
semiperspicuous.

Another, of the color of tarnish'd Copper mixed with black.

A lump of Selenites. It Is immersed in small pieces in a whitish Stone, a
little Diaphanous, and so hard as to cut Glass.

This Stone grows in Cyprus, Sicily, Saxony, and many other places; especially
in Muscovy, whence the English Name. Used in Saxony, and other places in
Germany, in Windows, instead of Glass. Ambrosinus Ubi supra.
mentions a Lead-colour'd sort so big, as to make not only Tiles, but Tables.

The BONONIAN-STONE, Prepared and given by Fr. Willughby Esquire. It Is somewhat
fissile, and may be here ranked. Now of a greyish color, and in some places
like the Rombick Lead-Spar. No Acid will touch it. Its quality of shining in
the Dark, after its being exposed a little while to the Sun, is now lost. See
the manner of its preparation in Wormius. Given in Powder, Mus. Wormian.
or the infusion of it, after calcined, is a strong Emetick.

An odd SPAR, Green by day; by Candlelight of an Amethystine color. Softer
than to cut Glass, yet harder than the common Rhombick Lead-Spar.

A FLORENTINE SLATE. A sort of Saxum fissile. Hereon is naturally represented
the PROSPECT of a City, Houses, Churches and Steeples, standing in length. To
make them all visible, it must be wetted.

ANOTHER, with the PROSPECT of a TOWN, lying round upon the side of a Hill.

Another with the like PROSPECT; but showing it, as at a much greater distance.

Another, with one half of the TOWN on a Rock, the other in a Plain. There are
some of this kind in Septalius's Musaeum.

A SALTRAM SLATE. Very like to Efford-slate (used for Writing, and Mathematick
Schemes) but not all out so good.

An odd SLATE with yellow Mundick in small Grains or Sparks immerced throughout
the body of it.

RUMPLEY-STONE. A common bluish Slate, for color and substance. But
excels, in that it rises large enough for Building. It may be cleft as thin
as you please.

A kind of whitish Slate, mixed with a rusly Iron-colour: plentiful in some
Mines.

Some others; one gray and spotted with tawny. Another, of a brown Purple. A
Third, Red. These abound in the Highways about the Mines in Cornwall. With
these may be placed.

The WAXEN VEIN. Ludus Helmontij. A Stone composed of two distinct Bodies. One,
and the far greater, is of a dirty ash color: in substance, not unlike the
Limestone. The other, somewhat harder; runs through it in several Veins, or
rather Plates, as being usually plain, as thick as the back of a slender Knife,
and exactly of the color of yellow Wax; for which cause I have placed it
amongst the Plated Stones, and taken leave for the English Name. Both of these
two Bodies make an Effervescence with Spirit of Nitre, but the ash-colored,
the greater.

The PIPED WAXEN-VEIN. So I call it, for that the greater ash-colored Body
enclosed within the yellow Plates, is stuffed top full of small Cylinders and
Tubes irregularly placed: most of which seem to be of the same yellowish
substance, as the Plates. This Species has some affinity with the piped
Osteocolla above described.

The STARRED WAXEN-VEIN. Given by Sir Rob. Moray. Found in the Isle of Sheapy.
On one part of the Stone grows a fair Star, with many Rays, about an inch long,
white and glossy: from whence I name it. This Star is of a quite different
nature from the Stone on which it grows, as making no * Effervescence with
Acids, and in figure agreeing rather with the Pyrites.

A Piece of WAXEN VEIN, with doubled Plates; in some places, as it were
efflorescent with several little protuberances consubstantial.

From the Description of this Stone above given, it appears, that Wormius was
mistaken, in reckoning it amongst Flints. This is that, which Paracelsus so
much extols for a Lithontriptick. And thus far I believe, that it is a very good
Diuretic; and may therefore sometimes be very well used for the carrying off
of Gravel. But let all that have any Stone too big to be voided, take heed of
such Medicines.

PLATED MARBLE. It seems to have been originally a striated Bole. Now a Stone
as hard as Marble, composed of Portions, of an inch thick, colored, growing
parallel, or as it were stratum super stratum; from whence I have named, and
here placed it.

Several soft PLATED STONES, found in the same place, and of the same color
and substance, with the Fish-Mould formerly described. One of them, Globular, a
little compressed on the two opposite sides: but composed of Plates or Crusts
narrowed from the middle of the Stone both ways, so as to make that Figure. A
second, Oval, with three Hemispherick knobs appendent; all plated, as the
Globular. A fourth and fifth figured almost like a Finger.

THUS FAR of Plated Stones. Next of those which we may call Fibrous. In the
former, the Parts are answerable to the leaves in a piece of Past-board. In
these to the Bristles in a Brush, or the Threads in a Skeine of Silk.

THRUM-STONE, as I call it. Amianthus Lapis and Asbestinus. It grows in short
Threads or Thrums, from about a of an inch to an inch in length; parallel, and
glossy; as fine, as those small single Threads the Silkworm spins; and very
flexile, like Flax or Tow. Nothing answers it better, than the hard fibrous
part of a large Oyster, when it is stewed. Here are several pieces, both of
White and Green. Of which, the latter has the longest Threads, and the most
flexile.

A piece of AMIANTHUS-ROCK; in which the Thrums (about of an inch in length)
lie in Layers between several Beds of a Green Stone, in some places of a redish
brown.

Another, with Veins or Layers between Beds of a bluish color.

A BASTARD-AMIANTHUS. It grows in Veins in a Claiy and Mundick Load, between
Beds of a Greenish Earth. The Threads 1/^d or near an inch long, of a glossy
black, and brittle. Given by Mr. Colepress, who observed it amongst the Cornish
Mines.

The best is found in Cyprus and India. Of late, very good in some Mines in
Italy. Of which see the Philos. Transactions. Number. 72.
It was anciently spun, like Tow, into Sheets; in which the Bodies of Princes,
laid on the Funeral Pile, were wrapped up, to keep them entire, when they were
burnt, from the other ashes. These Sheets were made clean, not by washing, but
by burning them; as being insuperable by the fire: from whence the Name of the
Stone. The Art, as well as the Use, is thought to be gone. But not so; for
Septalius Museum
has or lately had both Thread, Ropes, Paper, and Netted-Works all made
hereof; and some of them with his own hand. Boethius describes Lib. de Lap. and
Gem.
an Ointment made of this Stone, which he highly commends against the Sore on
Childrens Heads, usually called Tinea Puerorum; and Ulcers in the Legs. It has
no sense of Acids.

The FIBROUS BOODSTONE. Haematites. This I take to be that particularly, by
Pliny called Androdamas. It has affinity with the Amianthus, not only in being
divisible into Fibers; but in that these Fibers are also somewhat flexile, and
of a greenish color. Yet here, they stand not just parallel, but rather so as
to tend toward one point; like the Styriae in some sorts of Antimony. This
Stone is also altogether insensible of Acids. Found in Germany, Bohemia,
Silesia; among the Iron Mines; of an Iron color, a dull red, yellow, and
sometimes black. Much celebrated against an Haemoptoe. Trallianus prescribes it
ground to an impalpable powder, from j to iiij for a Dose.

A Piece of SPAUD or TARRAS. Schistus Capillaris; as I call it. It consists
of white, glossy, and parallel Fibers. But different from the Amianthus, in
that they are very brittle; nor so easily divided. From the Schistus described
by Wormius, In sine, Cap. de Amiantho, etc.
which is divisible into Plates. And that which Boethius describes, which is
yellow. This is pure white, almost like polished Silver, and in a thiner piece,
semiperspicuous. Being rubbed between ones Fingers, it divides into an infinite
number of Hairs, twenty times smaller than the smallest Needle. It stirs not
with Acids: and therefore seems neither to be any kind of Gypsum properly so
called.

Another Piece of the same, from Warwickshire* Given by Sir John Hoskins.

A Piece of HARD TARRAS, from Stinchcombe in Gloucestershire. Given by the same
Hand. It Is more close and firm than the former, rather like those in Sal
Ammoniac; the Fibers not altogether so regularly pild; nor so white, more
resembling the Mother of Green Vitriol.

The same Analogy as is between Talk Muscovy-Glass, and Amianthus: is also
between the Rhomboid Spar, the Saxum Fissile, and the Tarras.

CHAP. VI. Of STONES IRREGULAR.
AS GEMS are chiefly distinguished by their Colors, and all other Stones
Regular, by their Figures: So these, by the different degrees of Hardness.

EMERY. Smiris. Of a kind of blackish Iron-colour. The hardest of unfigur'd
Stones. And is therefore used for the polishing and cutting of all Gems, except
the Diamond. For the hollowing of flinty Mortars, together with Sand. Mus.
Metal. Ald.
For the brightening of Armor, and all Metallic Equipage. And for Moulds or
Forms for the casting of Medals and other Coins. Yet Mr. Boil Of Gems, p. 160.
has opened it with a Corrosive Menstruum so far, as to make an infusion of
Galls therewith to turn blackish.

A FLINT of the color of yellow Amber. It alludeth to a Topaz.

A polished FLINT, not unlike a Calcedony.

A rough FLINT naturally perforated with several large Cavities running one
into another. It seems to be an assay toward an Eagle-Stone, which is commonly
a Flint.

Flints are of all colors. Some so clear, that some Jewelers cut and sell them
for Bohemick Diamonds. Boet. de Gem.
They are also used for factitious Gems, with the mixture of Metals, in fusion.
For making of Glass. For Mortars for the powdering of the Fragments of Gems.
And sometimes added to melted Metals, to keep them, as is supposed, by the
Metallists, from spending. Ambros. in Aldrov. Mus. Metal.


A BALL of SERPENTINE MARBLE; called Ophites, from the winding of the Veins.
Near four inches in Diametre. Of the noblest sort; consisting of White, and Red
or Murrey Veins, in Black.

ANOTHER MARBLE-BALL, two inches and in Diametre, Veined, and spoted with Red,
Sand-colour, and White.

A THIRD, Veined and spoted with Black, Sand-colour'd, and White.

A Ball of ONYCHINE MARBLE, about the same bigness; on one side Sand-colour'd,
on the other Gray. That which is observable is this, That instead of winding
Veins, it has several Circles one within another, as if drawn with a pair of
Compasses on a Slate; or as in the Onyx; from whence I have named it. The
bigest Circle is about an inch and in Diametre.

Two pieces of EGYPTIAN MARBLE. Consisting of a blackish Ground, as it were
inlaid with little Green pieces, most of them of an oblong square Figure.

A Piece of the worst sort of CORNISH MARBLE, used for Lime. A bluish Stone,
mixed with some whitish sparry Veins; and some of a redish-slat, of the color
of Terra Lemnia rubra. Marbles, besides the places mentioned, are found in
Italy, Germany, Cappadocia, Hetruria, Numidia, and other parts. The uses are as
known, as great.

LAPIS LAZULI, i. e. Blew-Stone; Lazuli being the Arabic word for a blew
color. Whence also the corrupt Italick, Azure. It consists of parts of a
full Blew (usually with some yellow specks) immersed in a dull Bed, bordering
upon the color of Fullers-Earth. On this here, grow some pieces of Spar, so
hard as easily to write in Glass.

Another Piece growing to an ash-colored and softish Stone, dissoluble with
Spirit of Nitre.

This Stone is usually found in Gold Mines in Africa and Asia. Of two kinds;
The fixed, which being put in to the fire, keeps its color; The Not fixed,
also in Germany. Boet. de Lap. and G.
Hereof are sometimes made Knife-Hafts and Spoons. But especially that most
excellent BLEW, called ULTRAMARINE. The manner of preparing it, is very largely
and exactly described by Boethius. From Cap. 123. to 137. and 141.
The powder hereof given to the quantity of ss (or more or less) is an innocent
and useful Cathartick. Brassa^olus.
It will sometimes work by Vomit. Has been successfully used in Quartans and
Malignant Fevers. And yields a Narcotick Oil. Fioravantus.


The Fading BLEW-STONE. Lapis Armenius. This piece consists of Blew and Green
parts mixed together. And the blew parts themselves, at least, the color made
of them, will in time turn green. It Is softer than Lazuli, and not insensible
of Acids; and of Oil of Vitriol more, than of Spirit of Nitre.

Another Piece of L. Armenius; consisting of Blew parts immersed in a hard and
redish sand-colour'd Bed, with a Green piece growing to one side. Given by
Henry Oldenburge Esquire. It grows in Germany, Hungary, and Transylvania. It makes
also an excellent Blew, but, as is abovesaid, not holding. The way of making
it, see in Boethius. Lib. 2. c. 144.
Given in Powder, unwashed, to the quantity of j or iiij, it works by Vomit:
washed, to the quantity of v or ij, works by Stool; highly celebrated by some,
not only for its Innocent, and most easy; but also most effectual Operation,
in such Diseases, as are supposed to depend on Melancholy. See Trallianus,
Guainerius, and others.


The LOADSTONE. Magnes; from Magnesia, a Country between Thessaly and
Macedonia, where, it is said, it was first found. For the most part of an
Iron-colour, tending to Blew, by some called The Male; if Black, The Female.
Here are several both great and small. One weighing about sixty pounds. Given
by Dr. Edward Cotton. Dug out of the Ground in Devonshire. Although it takes up
no great weight, yet moves a Needle nine feet distant. Some part hereof, which
was broken off, being put in its proper place, adds much strength to it. Here
are likewise some other great Pieces from the same place.

Part of a LOADSTONE ROCK in Anglesey. Of a rusty Iron-colour, and in some
parts of a dirty slat-Blew.

Two Orbicular LOADSTONES; one of them with an Axis.

TWENTY SEVEN Lesser LOADSTONES: whereof eleven are Armed and Coated. They are
usually found in Germany, Italy, Misnia, etc. in the Iron-Mines; and sometimes
yield Iron. See the History hereof in Kircher, and Vincent Leodaud, who have
published what is said both by our own Countryman Gilbert, and by others.

The admirable and known Properties of this Stone, are, in general, these, That
it attracteth Iron; or any Body, if small, which has Iron in it. That it has
no perception of any other Body, though never so light. That it makes the
Attraction according to its Poles. And that it Communicates to Iron both the
same attractive power; and a Verticity to the North Pole. In which last, lies
its Great use, as applied to Navigation. Although by Observations made from the
Variation of the Needle, Time may produce further Discoveries in Astronomy.
Those that travail through the vast Deserts of Arabia, have also a Needle and
Compass, whereby they direct themselves in their way, as Mariners at Sea.
Majoli Colloquia.


The power of the Magnet depends not on its Bulk; the smaller, being usually
the stronger. Tergazi Mus. Septal.
mentions one, that would suspend sixty times, and Mr. Boil, Of Effluv. p. 33.
another, eighty times, its own weight. But the best, in time loose very much
of their strength; as these here kept have done: None of them now taking up
above vj ss. Of what they would have done formerly, I find no Register.

Some means have been proposed for preserving the strength of a Loadstone. But
there is none mentioned by any Author, that I know of, comparable to That,
experimented by Mr. Theodore Haac, Fellow of the Royal Society; not only for
Preserving, but also Recovering, and Increasing the strength of the Loadstone.
For he having One weighing about iiij ss. armed, which would take up sixteen
times its own weight: and having laid it by for the space of some years unused,
found it to have lost th part of its strength, so that it would now take up but
about lbiij. And, upon search, meeting with no means effectual to recover it;
considered with himself, That as in Morals, the exercise of Virtue, makes it
more generous; and that Animal Motions, by use, become more vigorous: so it
might possibly prove also as to some Properties of Inanimate Bodies. Whereupon,
he hung as much at his Stone, as it would bear; and so left it for the space of
some Weeks. Then, returning to it, and applying more weight to the former, it
very easily held the same. And repeating the addition of more weight, at
several periods in the space of about two years; he at last found, That his
Stone had not only recovered its former strength, but increased it; for whereas
before he had never known it to take up more than sixteen, it would now take up
twenty times its own weight. And he is now continuing the Experiment, to see
how far it will go further.

A GRITTY-STONE, from the Forest of Dean; with which they there make the
insides of their Iron Furnaces; wherein their fire is so vehement, that it
either breaks or melts down any other Material. The Grains of the Stone must
therefore be insuperable; yet not so united, but that it is somewhat soft and
crumbly: of a dirty color, near that of Fullers-Earth. Given by Sir John
Hoskins.

ANOTHER, from the same Hand, more gritty, harder, and of a brown color.

A Stone like a pure white Pebble, to which another lesser of the same color,
by mediation of a clean Red, and also stony Cement, is affixed. Hard, yet
dissoluble with Acids.

A little Red Oval Stone, on one side obliquely furrowed; on the other,
pounced, and stained with a stony Blot. This also is hard, yet easily dissolved
with Spirit of Nitre.

A piece of Soft ALABASTER. Alabastrites. It Is white and crumbly, an infinite
congeries of Chrystalline or shining Grains, no bigger than fine sands. It
grows in Warwickshire. And is like to that which comes from Holland. Given by
Sir John Hoskins.

Another piece, from Shepston near the Seaside.

Another piece of a YELLOW color, almost like to that of expressed Oil of
Mace. It has some of a bluish Clay upon it; but might rather casually fall
into such a Bed, than be bred therein.

A FOURTH, of VARIOUS colors, in spots, sc. White, Yellow, Red, Leaden, Brown,
and Black, mixed together.

A FIFTH (in a Frame) consisting of Ash Color, Black, and Tawny, mixed in
Spots and Veins.

It Is found also in Caramania, India, and other places. It has been more used
than now for the preserving of some more precious Ointments. But why, rather
than Glass or Glased Vessels, I know not, unless for show. A Scruple hereof
given in Milk, is affirmed by Boethius De Gem. and Lap. lib. 2. c. 270.
to be a certain Cure of a Dysentery. Yet I would have no man to trust to this,
who may have other Remedies.

BASTARD-ALABASTER, spoted. Gypsum variegatum. Here are Examples of several
Colors. One Black, with white spots. Another, consisting of parts some Black,
and some of a pale Green. A Third, of a dark Green, mixed with White and Red
Veins and Spots. A Fourth, consisting of White, Brown, and Yellow. A Fifth, of
White, Red, and Yellow. A Sixth (in a Frame) of Ash Color, Citrine, Red,
Black, and pellucid Spots. A Seventh, of White, Green, and a dark Purple. All
these Stones make a strong Effervescence with Nitrous Spirits. They are found
in Misnia, Burgundy, etc. Of these lightly burnt, is made that which is
properly called Gypsum. And Statues of any desirable bigness, yet very light.

A LIMESTONE ( Saxum Calcarium) having greenish Veins mixed with a silver
gloss. This being burnt, is that commonly called Quicklime. Pliny mentions a
mixture of Quicklime and Hog's Grease, usually called Maltha: whence our
English word Mortar. It Is also used for the Trying of Ores. See Agricola.
Boethius describes an Aqua Calcis, mixed with Sal Ammoniac, as an admirable
Remedy for Burns, Fistulas, Cancers, and Spots in the Eyes; he adds, and Spots
in Cotton-Cloaths. De Lap. and G. lib. 2. c. 293.


FLAKED DROPSTONE. Stalactites Laminatus. Found in the top of the Hills near
Wooten Underridge in Gloucestershire. In Aldrovandus Musaeum Metallic.
are several of these called Succi Concreti.

ANOTHER, dug from under the Root of a Tree in Cre-Forrest. Given by Dr.
Edward Brown.

A SPONGY DROPSTONE, of an ash color, as the rest.

A piece or two of small Dropstones sent from Pendennis-Castle: said to to have
had a strong scent; but now has none.

Yellow GREAT-GLIST. Ammochrysos, Boetio. So called, for that it consists of a
great number of glossy sparks almost of the color of Gold, immersed in a
gritty Bed. And by Wormius and others therefore called Mica.

White GREAT-GLIST. Ammargyros, as I call it, the sparks in this being of a
bright silver-colour.

Kentman Fossil. Nomencl.
ranketh both these with Muscovy-Glass. And it is plain, That the said sparks
are flaky, and flexible, as that Stone: and is therefore either the same broken
to small pieces, in digging for it; or, at least, an assay of Nature toward
it. But surely no Metallic Body, as Wormius supposes it; unless he means,
that it is sometimes found in Metallic Mines.

A Red DAZE, or small GLIST, from Cornwall. It differs from the Mica, chiefly,
in the smallness of the sparks. For they seem to me, to be altogether of the
same nature.

A Brown DAZE (from the same place) with an angular Vein of yellow Daze in it;
and both mixed with very small sparks of a yellowish Spar. Of kin to these,
seems to be.

A piece of Gold-colour'd Stone, from a Vein of the same, found in digging a
Trench in New England.

SOAP-STONE: Steatites. Given by Dr. Richard Lower. Taken from a Rock of the
same in Cornwall. Somewhat different from that described by Boethius. Consisting
of parts white, red, purple, and green mixed together, as in Castile-Soap; and
seeming, like hard Suet, greasy to the touch: whence the reason of both the
Names. Yet is it not at all dissoluble either in Oil or Water. Nor in any
indifferent Fire; by which it only becomes somewhat harder and whiter. It seems
to me to be much of the nature (for substance) of the Lap. Amianthus; and that
it is the Mother of it.

A softish Dirt-colour'd STONE ( Saxi Limosi Species) from Staffordshire. Of
which those Pots are there made, wherein they melt their Glass.

The Red CAUL (a Stone so called about the Tin Mines in Cornwall) beaten to
powder, and made up into a Ball with water. Of a faint red like that of a
withered Pink. Another of a purplish Brown, with black shining sparks.

A base Slate, i. e. neither of one color, nor good Grain.

An ash-colored PUMIS STONE. There are also whitish ones; and some Black, as
in Sicily. Where, and at Vesuvius, amongst other places, they are frequently
found. The smoothest are, or heretofore were, used by the Germans to rub the
skin, in their Baths. Boet. de Gem. and L.


A CYNDER from Mount Aetna; of a blackish color, homogeneous substance, and
something metallic. Quite through full of great Bubles. It Is ground to a long
Oval Figure.

ANOTHER, much more dense, and ponderous like Iron Ore. Given by Sigr. Boccone.

A THIRD, in some part vitrify'd. Of the Burning and Eruptions of this Mountain
we have a copious History given us by J. Alph. Borelli.

A Vitrify'd CYNDER, taken out of the Ruins of this City by the late general
Fire, and kept as a Memorial of it.

SECT. II. Of METALS.
CHAP. I. Of GOLD, SILVER, and COPPER.
GOLD ORE of HERNGRUNT, holding Silver. Given by Dr. Edward Brown. It
consists of sparks of a shining Gold-colour, together with some Black ones,
alternately immersed in a white and pretty hard Stone.

GOLD ORE of Chremnitz. Given by the same Hand. Here are several pieces. One
white, and semiperspicuous. Another, blackish, not much unlike some Flints. The
others, mixed of both. All so hard, as to write upon Glass. Yet Spirit of Nitre
droped on them, in a little while, will sink into them, almost as Water into a
Bolus. Which perhaps may depend upon some invisible Cracks in the Ore.

That with black spots in white, is accounted the best. Dr. Brown's Travails,
p. 99.
In an 100 l. weight of Ore, is contained about j of Gold, holding one third
part of Silver. P. 103.
In this Mine, sometimes are found pieces of pure Ib. p. 99.
Virgin-Gold. This, by some, is called Aurum Obryzum: qu. Ophrisum, like that
of Ophir. Of several particulars of the Working here, and of separating the
Gold from the Ore, with the Engines, etc. See the forementioned Doctors
Travails.

GOLDEN SAND, from the River Tagus. It Is very fine, and ponderous; consisting
of Grains of a redish Iron color mixed with black.

A lump of pure GOLD of the bigness of a Peace, melted out of the forementioned
sand.

GRAIN GOLD, or Golden Sand from the River Danuby. Given by John Bembde Esquire
taken thence with his own hand. Very fine as the former. Consisting mostly of
black Grains, wherewith are mixed some of a pure Gold color; in the proportion
of about one to twenty.

SAND out of a River near Conimbria, in which there are some few sparks of
GOLD. Together with a Knob of Gold fus'd out of it. Given by Sir Robert
Southwell.

Gold has the least variety of regular figure, in the Ore, of any Metal.
Because, more solid, and therefore, less wanton, than the rest. It Is a rare
Specimen, mentioned by Georgius de Sepibus, Mus. Roman.
which he calls Aurum Ramescens. The Ductility of Gold is admirable: one Grain,
in Leaves, is extended to above fifty inches square: and one ounce employed in
gilding small Hair-Wyre, will be extended to almost an 100 miles in length; as
Mr. Boil has observed. Of Effluv. p. 13. and 14.


The Uses of Gold for Vessels, Coins, Armor, Garments, etc. are infinite. The
Luxury of Galienus the Emperor, taught him to powder his Hair with the Dust of
Gold. Some Painters, says Ambrosinus, Aldrov. Mus. Met.
hang plated Gold over Vinegar, whereby is produced a pure Blew (as Ceruss out
of Lead) which they prefer before the Ultramarine. Of the Art of Refining, see
the Phil. Transactions, N. 142. Communicated by Dr. Christ. Merret.


Chymically managed, it is reduced to several forms, called Aurum Potabile,
Aurum fulminaus, A. Vitae; as also, Auri Calx, Crocus, Sal, Sulphur, Tinctura,
Oleum, Vitriolum, Flos: of which see Libavius, Crollius, Schroder, and others.
One principal use of Gold in Medicine is, for the Correction of Mercurial
Medicines. The original use of Leaf-Gold in Electuaries, and diverse other
Preparations, was not only for better grace, but from the opinion of its adding
Virtue to them. And Plates of Gold, anciently, have been used, especially for
Children, as an Amulet. Which I take to be the true reason, why the Kings of
England hang a piece of Gold upon those they Touch.

Pure SILVER, naturally BRAINCHED in the Mine. From a Silver-Mine in Suecia.
Some of the Branches are blackish being tarnished; the rest of a clear silver
color. Some pieces of a white Spar, dissoluble with Spirit of Nitre, stick to
them.

A piece of CAPILLARY SILVER, or with smaller Branches, also from the Mine:
whith a kind of white Rhombick Spar growing to it. Ferranti Imperato and
Aldrovandus, Mus. Met.
both give an Example of this kind.

PLATED-SILVER from the Mine. Argentum nativum Bracteatum. It lies in thin
Plates, of a clear silver color, between the Flakes, or in the Grain of a hard
white Stone; as the yellow Plates in the Ludus Helmontij, described in the
former Section. The several Plates are curiously wrought with Striae, which
obliquely decussate each other, and make their Impression all along upon the
Stone. This Stone is insensible of Acids. In some places, the Silver also lies
crude in a black Ore.

Pure Native SILVER, FLAKED, or as it were the Plated broken into several thin
pieces; lying also in the Grain of a white Spar, but dissoluble with Spirit of
Nitre.

Thick PLATED SILVER from the Mine; with a mixture also of Crude Silver Ore;
both in a white Stone dissoluble with Spirit of Nitre.

WHITE SILVER ORE, or of a silver-colour, from Cremnitz in Hungary. There are
also some parts of Black Ore mixed with it. And some Cinnabar; partly of a
Scarlet or Vermilion color, and partly of the Lapis Haematites. Given by Dr.
Edward Brown.

Another piece of WHITE SILVER ORE, growing in a white Stone, having a blackish
cast in some places, with the hardness of a Gem.

YELLOW SILVER ORE, or near the color of Gold, from Kottenberge in Bohemia.
It Is granulated in a hard white Stone. In some parts, also blackish.

ANOTHER Piece, rather of the color of Copper, from the same place. It grows
in a hard, black and white Stone.

BLEW SILVER ORE, from the Silver-Mine of Berre Ferris. Not Granulated, but
Flaked. In some positions especially, of a curious blew, like that of
Cichory-Flowers, or some blew Glass, but much fairer. Some yellow Mundick also,
with a piece of Green Spar, grow to it on one side.

PURPLE SILVER ORE, with Cinnabar.

GREEN SILVER ORE, The color is somewhat obscure, but lies not only in the
surface, but inward parts of the Ore. Here are growing to it some of the Lapis
Armenius, and yellow Okre.

BLACK SILVER ORE, for the most part Granulated; from the Silver-Mine at
Schemnitz. Given by Dr. Edward Brown. This sort is the best. An 100 l. of
Schemnitz Ore yields from an Ounce of Silver to twenty Ounces. Some has been
found to yield half Silver. Dr. Brown's Travails, p. 91.
Most of it holds some Gold; the best 1/^th part in proportion to the Silver.
Ibid. p. 93.


GROGUNNION ORE; also Black, and Granulated. It holds fifty lib. (sterling) per
Tun.

CUMBSIMLOCK ORE, Black, and most of it Granulated, immersed in a blackish
Stone, dispersed throughout It holds twenty eight lib. sterling per Tun. This,
and some other Welsh Ores, given by Sir Rob. Moray.

COGINNIAN ORE, holding fifteen lib. sterling. per Tun. It runs in Veins or
Layers, rather Grained than Flaked, together with yellow Mundick, between two
sorts of Beds; one of whitish Clay, the other of brown Stone.

A BLACK and FLAKED SILVER ORE, with some pieces of the Lapis Haematites
growing to it.

ANOTHER Piece FLAKED, from the Forest of Ore, not far from St. Veit in
Carinthia. With some adhering Cinnabar of a brown Purple. Given by Dr. Edward
Brown.

BLACK FLAKED S. Ore from Freyberge in Misnia. Here are two pieces: one simple;
the other, mixed with white Ore and Cinnabar.

The SCORIUM of the FREYBERGICK S. Ore. Porous, of a blackish glossy color,
and brittle: qu. Vitrum Argenti.

B. FLAKED S. Ore from Kottenberge.

B. FLAKED S. Ore from Cummustwith Rock. It runs in Veins, through a bluish
Gray Stone, together with a white, hard, and granulated Spar. It Is also
immersed in Grain, in the Gray Stone. Both the Stones are so hard as to cut
Glass.

CUMSUMLOCK ORE, holding twenty li. sterling. per Tun. It Is much like to that of
Cummustwith.

ANOTHER like Ore from CORNWALL. Given, with several others, by Sam. Colepress
Esquire. It grows together with Mundick and green and yellow Spar.

Black and small FLAKED S. Ore, from the same place. It Is immersed in a Slate,
with yellow Mundick.

A Piece of Bl. FLAKED S. Ore growing to a very hard Spar, white within, and
redish without, and incrustated with sparry Grains, not much bigger than
Poppyseeds.

Another Piece, with Red Cinnabar growing to it.

A large Piece of SILVER ORE, with MUNDICK; running between Beds of White,
Yellow, and Green Spar. The White, so hard as to cut Glass: The other two,
soft. The Ore runs in a Vein obliquely, so as to make an Angle. By which, the
Underlying or Dipping of a Load, may be well conceived.

The Preparations of Silver, are made in most of those Forms, as of Gold, and
described by the same Authors before mentioned. Goldsmiths sometimes give a
silver-wash to Copper, with that which is called Oleum Lunae. Soder (from the
Italick, Saldatura) of Gold is made of Silver, and half as much Brass. Painters
make a pure Blew hereof with Sal Ammoniac. Ambros. in Aldrov. Mus. Metal.
Of the Silver-Mines in Mexico, and the way of separating the Silver from the
Ore, see the Phil. Transactions. Number. 41.
And of the Art of Refining, Number. 142.

Pure CAPILLARY COPPER from the Mine at Herngrunt. Given by Dr. Ed. Brown. It Is
very ponderous, the several Styriae or Capillary parts but short, of a redish
Golden color, growing together almost like those of the little Stone-Moss.

Another Piece of the same Species.

Pure GRANULATED COPPER, from the Mine. Of a redish color, mixed with a sad
purple, and some green. Grows to a Stone, outwardly of a Liver-colour, within
Whitish; not very hard. This sort of Native Copper, by Chiocco, is called Aeris
Flos verus. Mus. Calceol.


An Iron-Chain and Heart, at least, covered with a Crust of pure GRANULATED
COPPER; by lying in one of the two Springs in the Copper-Mine called the Ziment
in Hungary. Given with the next by Dr. Edward Brown.

Pure Native COPPER, both CAPILLARY, and GRANULATED, in one piece. The
Capillary part, above two inches broad; and surrounded, like a Wood, by the
other. Aldrovandus Mus. Metallicum.
has a sort that is pointed, or at least angular; which Ambrosinus calls Aes
nativum figurae pangoniae.

BULLATED COPPER, Native, or from the Mine. Given by Sir Rob. Moray. It Is pure
and of the color of the best concocted. Whether this piece was not fluxed by
some subterraneal fire may be questioned. Of the rest, it is plain to the
contrary.

Pure MASSY COPPER from the Mine. Given by the same Hand. It grows to a white
and semiperspicuous Spar, which cuts Glass easily, and deep.

YELLOW COPPER-ORE, from the Mine at Herngrunt. Given by Dr. E. Brown. It Is of
a redish yellow, mixed with some sparks of the color of Gold, both without and
within. It yields ordinarily, ^th part Copper: sometimes ths or above half. See
his Travails. P. 108.


Another piece of YELLOW COPPER ORE. Given by Mr. Oldenburg. It Is immersed in
small sparks in a brown Stone; to which adhere some very green Flakes of the
nature of the Turcois.

BLACK COPPER ORE, holding SILVER. There are some Grains of a dark Purple mixed
with it. Given by Dr. Brown.

Another Piece, with some efflorescence of white Vitriol upon it; perceived
especially by the Taste.

A Third piece, with natural Verdegriece.

BLACK COPPER ORE, immersed in a Blackish Stone, which is flaked somewhat like
Lead-Ore; probably a courser sort of Cinnabar. Given by Sir Rob. Moray.

Of Copper, with the addition of Calamy, is made Brass with increase, in the
proportion of ^d or more, according to the Stone, and manner of operation. Of
the making of Brass, see Agricola.

Of Copper are prepared, the Calx, Crocus, Quintescens, Tincture, Oil, Vitriol
and Flowers. Some of them much, and well used outwardly against ill natured
Ulcers. And also justly to be reckoned among the best Remedies for the Eyes.
That the Laborers in the Copper-Mines, have them always good, in an
observation of Macrobius.

CHAP. II. Of TIN, LEAD, and IRON.
A Piece of pure TIN, refined in the Furnace.

Pure TIN, Native, or from the Mine. It lies as it were in bright drops in a
brown Stone.

CRUDE TIN powdered, consisting of shining black and Iron-colour'd Grains.

TIN-ORE, holding Silver.

FAT TIN LOAD, of a great Grain, in a bluish Clay. It Is a Cluster of Crystals
like black Glass.

Another piece also very FAT, but smaller Grained; consisting rather of sparks.

A SHOAD, a FAT TIN-Stone so called; of an Iron color, with some gloss where
it is broken. Very ponderous.

A sort of TIN ORE, with its Grewt. That is, a Congeries of Crystals or Sparks
of Spar of the bigness of Bay Salt, and of a brown shining color, immersed
therein. They are so hard, as to cut Glass.

TIN ORE, consisting of extreme small black Sparks or Grains, immersed in a
green and yellow Grit.

TIN ORE, of an Okre color, with a mixture of black shining Sparks.

A Specimen of GRAIN-TIN ORE of several colors; sc. blackish, brownish,
purplish, redish, and yellow. So good, that they need little or no preparation,
by stamping or dressing for blowing: neither is there any considerable wast in
the melting.

A SLAG, remaining in the bottom of the Tin-Floate. Sent by Mr. Colepress. Of a
bright color next to Silver. Yet contains (says he, mostly) Iron; which he
accidentally perceived, by applying the Magnet to it, both quickly uniting. But
note, that now, at least, they will not, unless you take small Sparks only, and
these will leap up to it. He also says, That one Dr. Stall a German Chemist,
affirmed, the Dutchmen make good spelter of it.

SCUM taken from melted TIN. Of a blackish brown, with some sparks of Metal. It
seems near as heavy as the pure Tin it self.

CHIMNEY-TIN, forced up from the Herd. It Is black shining and heavy; almost
like very fine black sand.

A Metalline Slat from the Tin-Mines.

See a large Account of the Tin-Mines of Cornwall and Devonshire, in the Phil,
Transactions; Number. 69
communicated by a Person much conversant among them. As also another accurate
one particularly of those in Cornwall; communicated by Dr. Christepher Menet,
and by Me published in the said Transactions. Number.


Tin is mixed with Copper, in the making of Metal for Bells, Organ-Pipes, etc.
the proportion of Tin to Copper, as two to seven, or thereabout. If under, it
will be too soft; if over, too brittle. The Metal used for Concaves and
Speculums, is likewise a Mixture of Tin and Copper. Of Tin, with Lead, and the
Marchasite of Antimony of each ^th part, is made one sort of Printing Letters.
Of this Metal is made that sort of Ceruss, called Spanish White; one of the
best, used either by Painters, or by Women. Stannum ustum, the best
preservative of the polish of Metallic Concaves, and the like. Riverius
Observe. Cent. 4. Obs. 56.
highly commends his Bezoardicum Jovis against Malignant Fevers. A Mixture
against the Bitings of Mad Dogs, consisting chiefly of Mithridate and the
Filings of Tin, is much used and relied upon by some Huntsmen.

CRYSTALLINE LEAD, from the Mine. So I call it, not that it is clear, but
consists for the most part of Hexagonal Points. Of the bigness of a midling
Apple.

LEAD ORE, rich in SILVER. Given by Sir R. Moray. It Is of the usual color, but
mixed with white Spar, so hard as to cut Glass. And I suppose, that most Lead
Ores with such a Spar, have Silver in them.

LEAD ORE holding SILVER, and growing together with Iron Ore.

LEAD ORE, probably also holding Silver. It lies in a whitish Spar, which is
not so flaky as is usual, and will cut Glass.

LEAD ORE holding SILVER, with a large Crystalline Spar consisting chiefly of
Hexagonal Points, and of the color of a Calcedony. Ferrant. Imperato has one
which he entitles Ingemmamento di Piombo; and seems to be like this.

SPARKS of LEAD ORE in the Caulk. One of the Sparks is branched almost like a
small Leaf. The Stone or Caulk is a Congeries of white Crystals of Spar laid
cross every way. They will cut Glass.

A large piece of LEAD ORE, flaky, and lying in spots in a white perspicuous,
flaked, and soft Spar.

Some other pieces of Lead Ore, English.

LEAD ORE, from Freiungen, called WEISSER FLIES. It consists of a soft and
friable Spar, of a pale color, near that of the Diaphanous natural Sulphur;
together with a redish substance intermixed.

LEAD ORE, from the same place, called Schlich. It Is a fine gray Sand, like
that used for Writings: with some few black Grains; which is, I suppose, the
true Ore.

A large piece of LITHARGE (of Silver.)

See a large and accurate Account of the Mendip Lead Mines in the Phil.
Transactions; Number. 28. and 39.
communicated by Dr. Jos. Glanvile.

Lead (besides the uses commonly known) is also employed for the Refining of
Gold and Silver by the Cupel. Hereof is made common Ceruss with Vinegar. The
way briefly, yet perspicuously set down by Theophrastus. Lib. de Lap.
Of Ceruss, Red Lead. Of Plumbum ustum, the best yellow Ochre. Of Lead and as
much Tin, Solder for Lead. Hereof are also made the like Chemical Preparations,
as of other Metals, as the Oil, Tincture, Salt, etc. Some of which, many bold
Chemists, without Discretion, give inwardly, and also extol them. But those
that are careful of their Health, will beware of them. I do not deny, but that
it is possible this Metal, as well as Mercury, may be so ordered and given, as
to be innoxious.

BRUSH-IRON, Native or from the Mine. It consists of strait, round, long
Styriae, about the thickness of a small Kniting-Pin, bolt upright, like the
Bristles of a stiff Brush, or the Teeth of a Wooll-Comb. They grow on a
double-Bed, the uppermost of an Iron-colour, the undermost of a dark yellowish
red.

BRUSH ORE; From Doward in Herefordshire. Given by Sir John Hoskins. A rich
sort. It consists also of strait and almost parallel Styriae, most of them as
thick as a strong Kniting-Pin; incrustated with very small Grains of Spar, of
the color and bigness of the Corns of Bay Salt, but very soft.

MIXED BRUSH ORE; from Clower-Wall in the Forest of Dean. By the same Hand. It
consists of several Piles of round and parallel Styriae, and Layers of
unfigur'd Ore, a Pile of the one, and a Layer of the other, crossways; seven or
eight in this piece, within the extent of betwixt four and five inches.

A piece of IRON ORE, from Doward, of kin to the former. By the same Hand. It Is
rich, yet has only some few Styriae.

ANOTHER piece, from the same place, and by the same Hand. In this the Styriae,
or figured pieces, are flat, and irregularly clustered. Aldrovandus Mus. Metal.
gives the figure of an Iron Spar ( Ore) ramify'd.

A piece of RICH IRON ORE, from a Hill of the same in Wiltshire, upon which is
situate a Village called Seen or Send, about nine miles from the Bath. Given
by J. Aubrey Esquire. Who says, It is so good, that the Smith there can make that
which he takes up in the street, to melt in his Forge; which that in the
Forest of Dean will not do.

The same Person observing there was great abundance of it, conjectured, it
might Impregnate some Neighboring Spring. And upon trial, found one, amongst
others, in the middle of the street very strong, beyond that of Tunbridge. For
upon the affusion of a Tincture of Galls, it immediately became as black as
Ink. The Village is well built, and standing so near the Bath, may be very
convenient for those who drink Chalybiate Waters, either before or after they
go thither. Mention also is made of this place by Dr. Christopher Merret. I
think in his Pinax:


MIXED IRON ORE, from Doward in Herefordshire. Given by Sir John Hoskins. It
consists of four or five substances. The best part, both brown and red, or
brickcolour'd. Wherewith is mixed a white and soft spar. With a blackish,
shining, and crumbly Body, knobed on the top, after the manner of the Turcois.

Ordinary IRON ORE, from Clower-Wall. By the same Hand. Almost of a
Brick-colour, or that of the Colcothar of Vitriol.

IRON BALLS, about the bigness of Musket Bullets. Made by the rolling of
Iron-Sand off the Banks among the Iron-Mines near Senneck, especially after
rain.

TWO BONES, (part of a Man's Foot) turned into Iron-Stone.

A Piece of Drop-Stone turned to Iron.

An IRON ORE rising near the Silver-Mines (in Wales.) In some parts of a brown
Cinnabar-colour, and mixed with Slate. The Loadstone takes up little Corns of
it no bigger than Sand.

An odd IRON ORE, scarce fixable. In a white Spar, almost like a Calcedony,
hard enough to cut Glass.

A sort of BLACK CAUL, holding IRON. Yet so little, that the Loadstone will
not take up any part of it, bigger than Pins head. It has a black, shining,
and very cross Grain; with white Spar interspersed, which cuts Glass.

Another IRON-SPAR, consisting of little white and umber-colour'd Columns, laid
together cross-ways.

An IRON BODY, that rubs away in glossy Dust; with part of its Wall, (a brown
Spar) in which it lay enclosed.

A Piece of the OLD CYNDER, which now they use as a Flux for the Iron Ore;
somewhat bubly. From the Iron-Mines in Monmouth.

Another, from the Forest of Dean, by Sir John Hoskins. It Is run into Styriae,
somewhat like those of Ice, brittle, ponderous, opacous, glossy, and of the
color of the coursest sort of Crocus Metallorum.

A Vitrify'd Cynder, of no use; like a piece of course green Glass.

An IRON STONE, with a Spar, on one side, consisting of pellucid squares; on
the other, of white flakes set crossways, almost at right Angles one against
another.

A Piece of RUSMA or crude Zernick, almost of the color of Crocus Metallorum,
or some sorts of the Haematites. Given by Mr. Lannoy, a Consul at Smyrna.

See a very good Account of the Iron-Mines, and Iron-Works in the Forest of
Dean. Communicated by Henry Powle Esquire and by Me published in the Philosoph.
Transactions. Number. 137.
Some of the ways of giving a due Temper to Iron, according to the use made of
it, are set down by Ambrosinus. Aldrov. Mus. Metal.
For one Temper is required for drawing it into Wyre; another, for a File;
another, for a Chisel; another, for a Sword; another, for the Edge of a Sword
in particular; and the like. For the hardening of Iron for Files; one of the
Kings Farriers, upon my enquiry, commends this following way.

Take Horse Hoofs or Rams Horns, and hang them over the fire till they drop
like Glue. Take also pieces of Leather, and burn them black. Powder them both,
and put to them stale Urine, and Bay Salt. Let them stand together; the longer
the better: at three or seven years end it will be excellent. Case the Iron
with this Mixture, and give it a strong heat, sufficient to fuse the Mixture,
for three hours; and then cool it. The surface of this Iron will be as hard as
the hardest Steel, and will make excellent Files: but the hardening reaches not
to the heart of the Iron.

Of Rusma (a brown and light Iron substance) with as much Quick Lime steeped
together in Water, the Turkish Women make their Psilothron, to take off their
Hair wheresover they please. There are many Medicinal Preparations of Iron or
Steel: But none, that I know of, equal to the Tincture made without Acids;
especially in Obstructions, and to strengthen the Tone of the parts, as in
Lienterick, and other like Cases. Against all outward and inward Haemorrhages,
Quercetan highly extols his Oleum Martis. A Tincture o Steel made with White
Wine, says Ambrosinus, Androv. Mus. Met.
is a strong Cathartick. What he means, I know not. Perhaps he might find some
such effect upon himself, from that, as one I know in this City, does from
Mithridate, which commonly gives him a Stool extraordinary. And another, upon
whom Marmalad has the like effect.

CHAP. III. Of ANTIMONY, MERCURY, and other METALLIC BODIES.
STYRIATED ANTIMONY, from the Gold Mines of Chremnitz. Given by Dr. E. Brown.
The Styriae, in this, are very fair, many of them as thick as in that which is
factitious.

STYRIATED ANTIMONY, also Native, from Cornwall; called ROSCARROCKS. A
Congeries of strait, long, slender, and edged Styriae, of a bright
Steel-colour, almost like a cluster of small broken Needles. Aldrovandus Mus.
Met.
has a sort of native Antimony, which Ambrosinus calls Plumosum.

GRAINED ANTIMONY, or rather Antimonial Ore, from Hungary. Given by Mr.
Oldenburge. It looks like black grained Silver Ore. Immersed in a Stone,
although of a scurvy opacous and sandy color, yet so hard as to cut Glass.

ANTIMONIAL ORE from Transylvania. Given by Dr. E. Brown. It grows in a soft
Bed, almost like Lead Ore.

ANTIMONIAL ORE, holding Iron, from Cornwall. Almost of the color of Amber:
yet with a Grain somewhat glossy and very cross.

A Metallic (probably an ANTIMONIAL) Cornish Stone, black, hard, and
ponderous. It consists of a great many Clusters of short glossy Styriae,
radiated almost as in the Belemnites. But because irregularly broken and heaped
together, but difficulty observed.

Antimony is of excellent use for the Refining of Gold: see an accurate
Process, communicated by Dr. Jonathan Godard, and by Me published in the
Philosph. Transactions. Number.
An ^th part in proportion to the Copper, is by some added with the Tin, for
the best Metallic Speculums. Founders add a little to their Bell-Metal, to
make it more sonorous. And so Pewterers, to their Pewter, to make it sound more
clear like Silver. It Is also used in the casting of Iron Bullets, to make the
Metal run the better. The Spanish Women rub their Eyebrows with it, to give
them an acceptable Black. Ambrosinus, and others.


The Cathartick Property of Antimony, was first taken notice of by Paracelsus.
And several Preparations hereof both Cathartick, and Diaphoretick, are now much
celebrated. Of the Virtue of it also taken Crude, see the Phil. Transact. N. 39.
The Red Oil, called Stibij Sanguis, admirable in Malignant Ulcers. Wicker.


MERCURIAL ORE. Given by Mr. Oldenburge. It Is all of one color, much like that
of the Hepatick Cinnabar, Dr. Popes account of the Mines.
but somewhat sadder. In the West Indies, all their silver is refined, or else
melted down with Quicksilver. Kirch. Hist. Ind. l. 4. c. 3.
A Past made hereof with Gold, is sometimes used for gilding of Brass Vessels;
which being daubed with the same, and held to the fire, the Gold adheres, and
the Mercury exhales. With this the Tin-Foile is made to stick close to the
backsides of Looking-Glasses. Of Sublimate, Ceruss, Juice of Limons, and
Rose Water, mixed like an Ointment; is made That Paint, which is both the best
and the worst in the World.

In Medicine, the great use of Mercury is in the Lues Venerea; sometimes in the
Cholick and Iliac Passion; and for Worms, especially those small ones, called
Ascarides; against which, if duly prepared, there is no Medicine so effectual,
or more safe. Being prepared, and mixed with convenient Catharticks, it is also
very properly used in diverse Chronick Diseases.

A rich piece of Native CINNABAR, from Carinthia. It weighs above ij and ij,
and is entirely of a Scarlet color.

Another Piece of CINNABAR, of a Scarlet-colour, from Tyrol.

A Piece of Native CINNABAR, of a purple color, almost like that of fine Lake.
Given by Mr. Oldenburge.

A piece of BLACK CINNABAR. Given by Dr. Walter Pope. Hard and ponderous, about
as big as a Lambs Heart. Where it breaks, of a shining black.

Another piece, of a shining Black, mixed with a sad Purple. By the same Hand.

The best Cinnabar in the Schemnitz Mines, ground with Oil, makes a Vermillion,
equal to, if not surpassing, that made by sublimation. Dr. Brown's Trav. p. 91.


YELLOW MUNDICK. Marchasita. Pyrites Aureus; not for that it has any Gold in
it, but is both within, and without, of a shining Metallic yellow. As heavy,
as most Ores. Here are of various Figures; as

The ORBICULAR MARCHASITE; tuberated, about the bigness of Hand-Ball.

Another, lesser, and a little compressed.

The GRAP-MARCHASITE. March. Botryidea. It consists of small Globules growing
together in the form of a young Bunch of Grapes. There is one like this in
Ferr. Imperato.

The APPLE MARCHASITE, as it may be called. It Is round, excepting on one side,
where it falls in, and has a stalk, like a young Apple.

The FLORID MARCHASITE. So I name it. For it looks like a Cluster of Buds ready
to flower.

The YELLOW BUD. Marchasita Phylloidea. For it looks like a single Bud composed
of several small leaves.

Part of a CYLINDRICK MARCHASITE, radiated from a Vitriolick Pith or Center.

The TABULATED MARCHASITE. Broad and plain, or flat like a Tablet. Consisting
of flaked and small Cubick knobs, growing on a rough Stone.

Another, only Flaked, growing to a blackish Stone.

A Third flaked, but of an irregular form.

The GRANULATED MARCHASITE. It grows on a brown Stone, in a Crust of about
^/12th of an inch thick, with the surface all over grained. This kind is found
near Hindon in Middlesex.

Not only the greater Flakes of which the other Varieties consist, but even the
smallest and almost invisible Grains, are all either Squares, or at least
pointed with Right Angles. Whereas the Pyrites, simply so called, is always
Radiated. Which, and not the color, according to others, I take to be the
principal difference between them.

The CUBICK Marchasite, about 1/^d of an inch square. The Marchasite seems to
attain the perfection of its Figure, in a Cube; that is, a Square upon a
Square. But sometimes it consists of parts neither Cubick nor Square; as in

The PENTAGONATE Marchasite. About the bigness of a little Gall; somewhat
round, defined with several sides, each with five Angles.

A Tuberated Marchasite with a Green Spar.

A MARCHASITE growing to its own Spar, together with a white one pointed and
semiperspicuous.

A Mixed MARCHASITE. It consists of yellow pieces partly cubick, and partly
flaked: with Lead-Ore holding Silver growing to it on one side; on the other,
several sets of ash-colored Flakes growing together in the form of little
Roses.

As all Metals, so Marchasites have their SPARS, called Fluores. Both because
they melt in the fire; and make the Ores to which they belong, to melt the
better. The reason whereof is, For that in all Spars, there is a certain Salt
which lies more loose and open, and which in mixing with the Ore, frets and
tears it all to pieces.

A Piece of WHITE MUNDICK.

WHITE MUNDICK ORE, immersed in Grains in an ash-colored Stone.

GREEN MUNDICK, or Mundick Ore, running in Veins in white Clay.

A large sphaerical and knobed FIRE-STONE, or Pyrites, about two inches in
Diametre.

Another, of the same Figure, as big as a Walnut, and of an Iron-colour.

A Piece of a large one of the same Figure, and with a black surface. The whole
Body is radiated from a Vitriolick Center or Pith about of an inch in Diametre.
Which radiation is also seen in most Fire-stones.

Another whole of the same form, a little lesser.

A Round PYRITES, compressed. Another lesser.

A PYRITES, partly Cylindrick, and partly Oval; Cylindrovalis. It Is two inches
long, and near an inch and ^/2 over; Cylindrick in the middle, and Oval at both
ends. The Surface, smooth, and of a shining black.

MUNDICK ORE, as it may be called; having the same Analogy to that which is
figured; as the Ores of Metals, have to such as are pure and perfect. This is
for the most part of a greenish ash color, not very hard, and somewhat gritty.

Yellow Mundick GRAIN-ORE; immersed in a Spar of an Amethystine color.

Another sort, like Silver Grain-Ore, in a Spar of the color of that of Tin.
So hard as to cut Glass.

A piece of Mundick-Ore in a white Spar, both Grained and Vein'd.

A piece or two of Veined Ore from a Silver-Mine.

Mundick Ore and Vitriol mixed with a White and Green Spar.

Mundick Ore, and Black Daze, mixed with a Vein of White and Green Spar; all
lying between two firm Beds or Walls. These Ores, by some are called Mock-Ores.

A MOCK-FIRE-STONE. Pyrites stirilis. Outwardly, of the color of polished
Steel. And radiated from the Center, as the true Pyrites. But of a light and
useless substance.

No sort of Mundick, that I find, either in the Ore, or perfect, stirs with
Acids. Every Metal has its Marchasite: which is sometimes added to them,
instead of Lead, Boet. de Lapid. l. 2.
to make them flow the better. But if too much, it robs them, by over
volatilizing them Dr. Brown's Travails.
in the Furnace. Out of most Fire-stones, may be made both Vitriol and Sulphur.

SECT. III. Of Mineral Principles.
BY Mineral Principles, I mean, neither such imaginary ones as some have talked
of: nor such as may possibly have a real existence, yet were never seen
solitary or uncompounded: but those which come within the cognizance of sense,
sc. Salt, Sulphurs, and Earths; and such Bodies as are reduceable to these
Tribes. For it seems to me, That most subterranial Bodies are either
compounded of these Three, or are hereinto resolved. So Copperas is the salt of
a Metal; either as an ingredient in its Generation; or resulting from its
Corrosion by some Natural Menstruum, equivalent to such as are applied by Art.
In like manner, a Bolus, as it seems to be the Basis of most Stones and Metals;
so, upon the Resolution of the same, to be nothing but their Caput mortuum.
There being a Circulation amongst Minerals, as amongst Plants and Animals; the
same Principles passing from one to another. And so, probably, amongst all
Bodies, at least between the Atmosphere and the Center of the Earth.

CHAP. I. Of SALTS.
A Parcel of NATURAL SAL AMMONIAC. (Rather Ammoniac, from its supposed
similitude to that of the Ancients, bred under the Sands in Africa.) This I
call Natural, as being found sublimed, by the subterraneal Fire, in a Cole-Mine
near New Castle upon Tyne. Given by Dr. L. Hodgson, who first made experiment
of the nature hereof. And has answered several Quaeries about it, proposed by
Mr. Boil. See Phil. Trans. N. 130.
Here is some of it lying upon and between Beds of a light and sooty Earth; and
some pure and white as Sow. It has the perfect Taste of the Factitious;
consists of the like Fibers or Styriae; and may be easily sublimed into
Flowers. See Part 4.
Cerutus has also described a Sal Ammoniac, as he calls it, sublimed by the
subterraneal Fires of Puteoli; but This is of a different kind, as appears from
his Description of it. Mus. Calceol. S. 2. p. 149.
Hereof are made several Preparations of great Use to Physicians, Alchymists,
and others, as the Spirit Simple, Aromatiz'd, and Tinctured; the Tinctured
Flowers, etc.

A parcel of SALT taken from Tenariffe, 1674. and given by Dr. George Trumbal.
It Is very white, and light like flowers of Sal Ammoniac, or the Earth called
Agaricum Minerale. Taken by some to be a kind of Nitre. But not rightly. For it
has the perfect Taste of a Lixivial Salt. Makes an Effervescence with Aqua
Fortis, as those Salts will, but Nitre will not do. Has, as those, a fixed
Body: neither will it flow, or flame, though exposed naked to the same fire,
wherein Nitre will do both. Yet has it somewhat of a nitrous Taste intermixed;
as have also many Lixivial Salts. I conclude it therefore to be a fixed Alkaly,
or, in nature, a kind of Lixivial Salt.

Another parcel of the same sort of SALT, taken out of the Cave or the Pique of
Tenariffe, 1674. by the same Hand. Different from the former, only in being of
a purer white.

A Third parcel of the same, taken, I suppose, from another quarter of the said
Mountain.

A square piece of Crystalline Sal Gemmae (rather Gemmeus) weighing almost
twenty Ounces.

A Ball of Crystalline Sal Gemmeus; with another piece of the same Species.

A piece of styriated Sal Gemmeus, tinctured with some Rays of yellow. It grows
almost in the form of Sal Ammoniac.

A piece of styriated Sal Gemmeus tinctured with partly an Amethystine, partly
a Saphirine Blew.

Ambrosinus gives a Figure of Crystal of this Salt, much like that of the Corns
of common Sea Salt; from which it differs no more, than Pit-Salt.

Sal Fossilis properly so called, is, as it were, the Ore of the Sal Gemmeus.
Yet This, as well as Metals, is sometimes found native. The principal Mines are
in Poland and Calabria: of which, see a Relation in the Phil. Transactions. N.
61.
In the lesser Poland, says Comer, Descript. Polan. lib. 1.
are some pieces of this Salt (he means the Ore) like huge Stones; so hard,
that Houses and even whole Towns are built with them. Near Eperies, a City in
Upper-Hungary, is a Salt-Mine, in which are pieces Ten thousand pounds weight.
Dr. Brown's Travails, p. 112.


Of This as of common Salt, may be distilled that Acid Liquor commonly, but
absurdly called the Oil. This moderately taken, but especially if it be
dulcified by Cohobations with a simple, or rather with an aromatiz'd Spirit of
Wine, is sometimes of excellent use to restore the Digestive Faculty to the
Stomach. But the common sort, taken, as it often is, without discretion, really
breeds more Diseases, than it pretends to cure. See several Preparations of
Salt in Schroder and others. Ambrosinus, I think it is, who reports, Aldrov.
Mus. Metal.
That in the Province of Canicla, in the Great Cam's Dominions, the people melt
and cast Salt into a round Form, for Money. But who ever knows the nature of
common Salt, must also, that this Report is a great mistake.

BLEW VITRIOL, Native, and crystalliz'd, from the Copper-Mines of Herngrundt in
Hungary. Given by Dr. Edward Brown, together with the several Species following.

GREEN VITRIOL, Native; from the Silver-Mines of Schemnitz in Hungary.

Native GREEN VITRIOL, mixed with some Rays of a pale Blew; from the same
place. With its astringent and sweetish Tastes, is joined some Acritude. It
grows to its own Ore, of a purplish ash color; and of a milder Taste.

A parcel of the same Species, from the Copper-Mine of Herngrundt.

Native VITRIOL of a pale Purple, and consisting of pointed Crystals. This also
has some Acritude. From the same Mine.

Native WHITE VITRIOL. It grows in glossy Grains like Nitre grossly powdered;
and not without some Acritude. From the same place.

Made WHITE-VITRIOL of Chremnitz.

WHITE-VITRIOL Ore of Chremnitz. Of a pale Okre color, and meanly astringent.

A sort of Native VFRDEGRIESE, from the Copper-Mines of Herngrundt. It
consists of flat and parallel Plates, as in a Slate; of a bluish Green, yet
not so blew, as the factitious. It Is also of a much milder Taste. It makes a
strong ebullition with Spirit of Nitre. These from the abovementioned Person.

A rich ORE of Green Copperas, from Cornwall. Of a kind of Brick-colour,
cracked a little with lying in the Air, and has upon it several efflorescent
lumps of Copperas.

A poorer sort of Green Copperas ORE. On one side, being scraped, of a bluish
ash color; and with little Taste. On the other, of a yellowish Green, and
tastes strong as Vitriol. Makes an Effervescence with Spirit of Nitre.

A Fibrous or STYRIATED ORE of Green Copperas. It Is white, and formed almost
like Sal Ammoniac; but has the perfect Taste of Green Vitriol. Acids stir it
not.

Besides the places mentioned, and others, Green Copperaas is plentifully made
here in England, as at Debtford, and else where. The Copperas Stones or
Fire-Stones are found on the Seashore in Essex, Hamphire, and so Westward; the
best of a bright Silver-colour. For the making of Copperas, they make Beds
sometimes an hundred feet long, and fifteen broad at top; well ram'd first with
Clay, and then with Chalk. In these Beds the said Stones are laid about two
feet thick: which by Sun and Rain, are gradually dissolved; and in five or six
years time, begin to turn into a kind of Vitriolick Earth, which will swell and
ferment like levened-Dough. And once in four years, the Bed is renewed with
fresh Stones. In a Boyler containing about twelve Tuns of Vitriolick Liquor
running from the Bed, they put in by degrees, about fifteen hundred pounds of
old Iron; which both quickens the boiling, and prevents the settling and melting
of the Copperas at the bottom of the Boyler, and of the Boyler it self.
Sometimes, in stirring the Earth on the Beds, they find pieces of Native
Copperas. See a particular and exact account of these Works at Debtford,
communicated by Mr. Colwal, the Founder of this Musaeum, and by Me published in
the Philosophical Transactions. N. 142.
Of the Nature of Vitriol, see several considerable Observations grounded on
Experiment, in the same Transactions. N. 103. and 104.
Amongst other particulars, an excellent way of purifying it from its Okre.

The three principal Parts hereof are, an Acid Spirit, fixed Salt, and Sulphur.
The last, a good Hypnotick, in some Cases, where Opium is not safe.

Native Vitriol, says Ambrosinus, Aldrov. Mus. Met.
given to the quantity of j in any convenient vehicle, is a great Remedy in
Germany and Hungary for the Plague. Blew Vitriol of excellent use against
Venereal Ulcers. Both of this, and the Green, is made the Powder called
Sympathetick; the Description whereof may be seen in Papinius, and out of him
in Wormius. I doubt not, but that the Stiptick Liquors of Mr. Lyster and of Mr.
Deny, are both made of Vitriol.

A sort of ALUMINOUS Earth, found near the River Patomach in Virginia. It Is
soft and very light; of an ashcolour, and acid-astringent Taste, almost like
that of Alum. Whether the people there make Alum of it, or use it in Deying, we
have no account.

Of the Nature of Alum, see a very good Discourse in the Philosophical
Transactions. N. 103. and continued, N. 104.
Of the English Alum-Works an accurate Account, communicated by Daniel Colwal
Esquire and by Me published in the same Transactions. Number. 142.
The Alum-Stone (of a blackish color, and flaky, like Cornish Slate) is found
in most of the Hills between Scarbrough and the River of Tees in Yorkshire. As
also near Preston in Lancashire. Of these Stones calcined, is made a Lee; and
of the Lee, Alum. The Lee after the first shooting of the Alum; is called
Mothers. In which, certain Nitrous and other parts called Slam, being
predominant; to precipitate the same, they add the Lees of Kelp; made of
Tangle, a Sea-Weed commonly among Oysters. And then, a certain proportion of
Urine, both for the same purpose, and to keep the Kelp-Lees from hardening the
Alum too much. The Mine, before it is calcined, being exposed to the Air, will
moulder in pieces, and yield a Liquor whereof Copperas may be made.

Fallopius's Aq. Aluminis Magistralis, is of good use against untoward Ulcers.
Deyers boil their Clothes, or Yarn in Alum-Water, that they may take both a
better, and more durable color. It is used, likewise, for the making of a
Leather soft and white, or fit to take a clear color, which the Tan'd, will
not do. And I little doubt, but that to wash the Skins of Beasts or Fowls
herewith on both sides, or perhaps on the Feathers, only strewing Alum in fine
powder, would be a good way to keep them from the Moth, and growing dank in
moist Weather, and so to preserve them for ever.

CHAP. II. Of SULPHURS.
A Piece of Opacous yellow AMBER half a foot long. Given by Thomas Henshaw Esquire.
Found, with several lesser pieces, in digging of a Ditch under the Walls of
Rensburge in Holstein, eighteen feet under ground. Which place is at least five
and twenty miles both from the Baltic and German Seas.

A Piece of AMBER of the color of Honey.

A Piece of clear yellow AMBER. Given by Captain Tailor.

Another yellow Piece, semiperspicuous; from the same Hand.

A Ball of yellow and opacous AMBER.

A Piece of clear yellow Amber, with a CICADA drowned in it.

A Piece of Citrine Amber, with several GNATS immersed.

A little Ball of citrine Amber, with an immersed Emmet.

A Heart of yellow Amber, with two FLIES.

Two or three more Pieces, with some other INSECTS. In Septalius's Musaeum, is
one so large as to bury a Frog. And Boethius De Gem. lib. 2.
affirms that Pieces are found sometimes as big as a man's Head.

Found in great quantity in Pomerania, and upon the Coast of Prussia in the
Baltick-Sea. The Elector of Brandenburge, Sovereign of that Coast, farms it
out Tavarn. Ind. Voyage.
for twenty Thousand Crowns yearly. Also plentiful on the Coasts of Soffala,
Mosambique and Melinde.

Boethius describes a Powder, De Them. lib. 2. c. 160.
in which Amber is the chief Ingredient, and which he highly commends for the
Epilepsie both in Children and grown persons. The two Salts of Amber united,
says Terzagi, Mus. Septal.
make an admirable Specific for that Disease.

Take Yelks of Eggs sixteen, Gum Arabic ij; Gum of Cherry-Tree j. Dissolve
them, and set them in the Sun for an Artificial Amber. Amongst the many
Opinions of the Original of Amber, I put this question, Whether it is not a
kind of hardened Petroleum?

FLAKED STONE-COAL. Lithanthrax scissilis. By some called Black Amber; not
properly. For, when fired, it has scarce any taste or smell. Neither does it
yield any Oil, or melt, as Amber. Only makes a very weak and thin Flame, which
presently vanishes; and little smoke. Yet keeps fire for a considerable time.
It Is black, glossy, and pretty hard. Yet being struck, easily breaks into
Flakes of a square Figure. Found in Misnia, Bohemia, etc. In some Pits two
Hundred paces deep. Boet. de Gem. and L.


A STONE taken out of the Dead-Sea. Blackish and somewhat flaky. Dissoluble
with Spirit of Nitre. When fired, it yields a sulphurious scent. Yet the
barbarous Arabians use it for fuel.

A Piece of Jet. Gagates, from Gaza a River of Lycia, where first found. Given
by Sir Rob. Moray. Of a shining color, and in some places, flaky. It cracks
when held to the fire; and in it, burns with a thick flame and smoke, and very
stinking. If rubbed till its warm, it takes up pieces of Feathers, and such
light Bodies. It Is found in France, Sicily. And in this Island, in Cleaveland,
on the top of Huntley and Whitby Clifts, where the Seawater never comes.

Pit EBONY. Ebenum fossile. Very brittle, and when held in a flame, breaks into
Flakes; it burns, with a sooty smoke, into ashes; but with scarce any flame.

A parcel of ORPMENT. Auripigmentum s. Arsemicum croceum.

Native SULPHUR or BRIMSTONE, crystalliz'd, of a pale Golden color, and
semiperspicuous. Sent from Peru. The like is described in Calceolarius's
Musaeum, and by Wormius.

ANOTHER Piece, of such a like color. Found in the Pike of Tenariff, and given
by Dr. George Trumbal.

A Lump of Native SULPHUR of the color of some Olibanum Drops, or opacous
yellow Amber. From the same Hand, and Place. As also,

Two Pieces of SULPHUR ORE. One, Earth, of a brown color; the other, Stone, of
a Sand-colour and gritty.

Native SULPHUR of Island. Of the color of the common factitious Brimstone;
and immersed in a stony Bed.

SULPHUR, of a curious Orange-colour, extracted out of Gold-Ore. Given by Henry
Oldenburge Esquire.

SULPHUR ORE of Freyberg. Here are three Pieces. One, almost of the color of
Cinabar. Put into the fire, it smells like Brimstone, but flames not. The other
two, consist of blackish and ash color parts mixed with the red; together with
some grains of Mundick. If fired, they smell like the first, but not so
strongly; nor make any flame.

GREEN SULPHUR-ORE. Like that in the Copper-Mines of Suecia, mentioned by
Wormius.

SULPHUR-ORE of Island. Opacous, and immersed in a bluish Glebe. If burnt, it
has the scent of Brimstone; but yet weak, and flames not.

Of the nature of Sulphur, Copperas, and Alum, see a very good Discourse in the
Phil. Transactions. Number. 104.
Of the Uses, see Agricola, Libavius, Crollius, etc. I have seen a Tincture of
Sulphur of Mr. Boyls, brought over the Helm, which will fume all away. I
remember not where he describes it, but as I take it, it is made with Sal
Ammoniac.

CHAP. III. Of EARTHS.
TWo Parcels of EARTH RAINED on the Archipelago, upon the Eruption of M.
Vesuvius, Dec. 6th 1631. Given by J. Evelyn Esquire. One, is gritty, and of the
color of Amber. The other a soft Bole, and looks like powdered Jalap. I
dropped some Oil of Vitriol on them, but they stir not. This Earth began to
rain about Ten of the Clock at Night, and continued till two next Morning: So
that it lay two inches thick on the Deck of Captain W. Badily's Ship, who sent
this Relation. While it rained, no Wind stirring. It fell in several parts a
hundred Leagues distant. See Phil. Trans. N. 21.


A parcel of EARTH, RAINED lately upon Tenariff. Given by Mr. Joseph Bowls, a
Merchant in this City. Of a pale Clay-colour, and insipid. Yet upon the
affusion of Oil of Vitriol, makes a sudden Effervescence; herein different
from the former.

FINE SAND, from a Sand-Pit near Bruley in Kent. Given also by Mr. Evelyn. Of
this is made the clearest and best English Glass. It consists of some Grains,
as clear as Crystal: with which others obscure, being mixed, give a whitish
ash color to the whole Mass.

A Sandy substance of a Gold-colour, found in a Vein of Stone in Hartford in
New England.

Black SAND of Virginia.

Black SAND found on the shore near New Haven in New England; with some Grains
of red and white.

The like out of St. Christophers Island.

Fine white SAND of Saco in New England.

Of BOLES and other EARTHS, here are examples of all colors, as White,
Ash-colored, Yellow, Red, Green, Blew, Brown, Black. Of which in their Order.

A parcel of MELITA EARTH. Given by Sir Phil. Skippon. By some called St. Paul's
Earth. It Is of a white color, but inclining to that of Mortar. Not gritty, yet
less soft than many other Earths. Makes a strong Effervescence with any Acid.
Cerutus Mus. Calceol. Sect. 2. p. 130
extols the use of it in Pestilential Fevers, and against Worms in Children,
and not unjustly. Not only the Earth it self, but the Images, Vessels, and the
like, made hereof, are fabled to derive these and other Virtues, as against the
bitings of Serpents, etc. from St. Paul, who lived sometime there, and
miraculously preserved himself from the Venom of the Viper. And Wormius Mus.
l. 1. c. 4.
has given himself the trouble to transcribe a printed Paper hereof.

SAMOS EARTH. It Is white, and softer than the former. Makes an ebullition with
any Acid; but very weak and slow. It has somewhat of an aromatic Taste, like
that of calcined Hearts Horn. Of this also Vessels were anciently made of great
esteem.

STONE MARROW. Stenomarga Agricolae, i. e. Saxi Medulla: because found between
the Commissures of great Stones. Agaricus Mineralis, Imperato; from its
likeness to Agarick in color; but no further. For between the Teeth it feels
somewhat like fine sand or grit; and has no Taste. Nor is it sensible of Acids.
It Is sometimes used by Chirurgions for the drying of Ulcers.

A BOLE like that of WHITE Mus. Worm. l. 1. c. 4. p. 9.
Terra Lemnia. Very close and heavy, and when scraped, of a pale white, smooth,
and glossy; almost like to white Wax. It Is but slowly dissolved in the mouth.

This and other like smooth Earths are commonly called Pingues, or Fat:
absurdly, for Laeves or Subtiles. Their seeming Pinguitude proceeding only from
the exquisite fineness of the Particles of which they consist.

A smooth BOLE, almost of the color of Castile Soap. More easily dissolved
than the former, so as it seems to melt in the mouth like Butter.

A parcel of very white, light, and soft EARTH. Taken out of the Cave opened at
the Royal Fort at Plymouth; where it lies in little Veins containing much
water. Supposed to be the materia prima of white Marble.

A White EARTH lying in a Load degenerated from Tin. very gritty, and
insensible of Acids.

A White EARTH, with a Ray of Red; very soft, without any grit, and inaffected
with Acids. Nor has it the common Taste of Boles, but is altogether insipid.
Found in the same place, as the former; but in different Veins. Supposed to be
the Embrio of white and red Marble.

A BOLE of a yellowish sandy color; somewhat gritty and friable.

SILESIAN BOLE. Of a redish yellow, exactly like the paler Emplastrum de Minio.
As dense as any other, crackling a little betwixt the Teeth. Yet without the
least Particle of Grit; feels as smooth as Castile-Soap; scrapes with a gloss;
and breaks like Beeswax, or the Salve abovesaid. Tastes like other Boles.

The BOHEMICK sealed BOLE. It agrees in all properties with the former; saving
that it has somewhat more of red.

The HEPATICK BOLE of LEMNOS. Of kin to the red Lemnian. And answers to that
which Wormius describes by the Name of Terra sigillata hepatica. It stirs
not with Acids.

ANOTHER of the same more PALE. Somewhat harder than the Armenian Bole. It
makes a small ebullition with Oil of Vitriol, and with Spirit of Nitre a very
strong one.

I take the principal Difference between Earths, as applied to Medical Use, to
be this, That some are not affected with Acids; others are: Those, Pauperes or
Fatuae; coming nearer to simple or mere Earths; These Saline, or impregnated
with a Mineral Alkali, and therefore of greater energy.

A smooth and pale redish CLAY, lying in a little vein, running East and West,
through a great Pillar of Sand, in a firm Marble-Rock. Supposed to be the
Embrio of the red Marble.

Red LEMNOS EARTH. As red as Radle; but much more close and coherent, and so
colors not the Fingers. Theophrastus Lib. de Lapid.
reckons up three sorts of Terra Lemnia; sc. the Deep Red, the Pale Red, and
the Whitish.

Celebrated by some of the Ancients against Poison, which, if right, it expels
by Vomit. Yet Theophrastus says, That in his time, it was used only for
Painting.

ARMENIAN BOLE. From that part of Armenia next to Cappadocia. Both of a deep
and a pale Red. Very soft, and easily rubbed to powder. Never makes any
ebullition with Acids. First brought to Rome in Galen's time, when the Plague
was there. In which, and other Malignant Diseases, it has generally been
esteemed of good use. Joubertus relates, as a Testimony of its Virtue, That
four men preparing some Cathartick of Antimony, were all well nigh suffocated.
And that upon his giving them each ij of this Bole, they became very well. But
the question is, Whether so soon as they were got out of the reach of the
Antimonial Fumes, (from which we may be sure he took them) they would not have
been well without it?

An English BOLE, like the Armenian. From Sir J. Hoskins.

A Red MINERAL EARTH, with some little glossiness in some places. Of the color
of the deepest Armenian Bole.

Red Cornish MARLE, used in Agriculture. It has some grains of fine Sand,
which, through a Glass, looks like Metal. A piece also of common Radle.

A BOLE consisting of Red and White Plates, thin and parallel; so as to look
like striped Work.

BERG-GRUN; a Green Earth, the sediment of a green Water in the Copper-Mine at
Herngrundt. Given by Dr. Ed. Brown. It Is used by Painters.

A VERDAZURINE BOLE. So I call it, for that it is on the outside of a bluish
green, like Verdegriese. Within, of the color of a Leek. It sticks to the
Tongue, as the Armenian, or Lemnian, and has the like Taste. Stirs not with
Acids. Not unlike to that, which is described by Wormius with the Name of Creta
Viridis. Yet cannot be the same, unless that Name be ill given: for Chalk
properly so called, makes a strong Effervescence with any Acid.

A GREEN EARTH like that which Kentman Fossil. Nomencl.
calls Saponariam s. Fulloniam.

A BLUISH Gray MARLE mixed with Red. Used in Agriculture.

A BLUISH EARTH, with the signature of an Escallop upon it. It gently
dissolves with Acids.

Earthen BALLS, about as big as mounting Stones, of a Bluish color, or that
of Tobacco-Pipe-Clay. With other irregular Lumps of the same nature: found
among the Earth of a Hill overturned at Kenebank in New England.

A Piece of IRISH-SLATE, so called. Given by Mr. Rob. Hook. Of the same color
as the Cornish, only somewhat paler. But as soft as the Terra Lemnia, and
several other Boles. And is therefore to be reckoned amongst them. Besides the
common Taste of Boles, it has a little Astringency. Yet not alike perceived in
all, for there is better and worse: which Apothecaries will do well to observe.

Kentman Ibid.
mentions a sort of very white Earth near Padoa, which in a short time would
turn Blew, only by being exposed to the Aer.

A sort of BROWN EARTH, very light; lying in Veins, encompassed with a Body of
greenish Sand. From Cornwall.

A BLACK EARTH, taken out of a spot enclosed in the same Sand, without any Vein
issuing from it.

PART IV. Of Artificial Matters.
SECT. I. Of Things relating to CHEMISTRY, and to other Parts of NATURAL
PHILOSOPHY.
ALL Arts are referred either barely to the Observation, Or also to the Command
and Management of their Object, for the Use of Man. But I must speak of those
Particulars here preserved, in that Order, as they will bear: and so shall
reduce them to four General Heads, sc. such as relate to Chemistry and other
parts of Natural Philosophy; To the Mathematics, Mechanics, and Antiquity.

The Phlegm, Oil, Spirit, Volatile, and fixed Salts, both of the Serous, and
Grumous Parts of HUMANE BLOOD. Together with the Oil, Volatile, and fixed
Salts, of that of an OX. Prepared, and given by Dr. Walter Needham. By whom
also was read a Discourse before the Royal Society, in which, as I take it, the
proportions between the said parts, with diverse other Remarques were delivered.
But I meet with no Register hereof. The different Proportions of the said
parts, as they are observable in the several Viscera, I may have occasion else
where to represent. I shall now only note, That the fixed Salts of Blood above
mentioned, are three of them Gray, and all but weak. The fourth, viz. that of
the serous part of an Oxes, although calcined to whiteness; yet is not so
strong, as That of most Vegetables.

The OIL of TOBACCO distilled per descensum. The notable effect hereof upon a
Cat, was tried some years since before the Royal Society. One or two Drops of
it being put upon her Tongue, she fell immediately into horrid Convulsions, and
died within the space of one minute of an hour. This very Oil I have several
times prescribed to my own Father (who takes Tobacco) in Lint to be held
betwixt his Teeth, against the Toothach, with a good effect, and no ill one.
But I, who take none, having once used it, my self in the same manner, although
I swallowed not so much as any of my spittle, yet it made me extremely sick,
and vomit once or twice.

The Stillatitious OIL of LAWANG BARQUE. Sent from Java major by Sir Phil.
Vernatti. It partaketh much of the color, smell, and taste of That of
Sassafras; but is much more fragrant. The Oil of Sassafras is distilled only
from the Wood. But if one were distilled from the Barque, it might equal This.

An Oil distilled per Alembicum, from the ROOTS of the CINAMON-TREE resembling
Camphire. From the same Hand and Place. The Roots being only bruised, and
steeped in Water, are then distilled. The Tree is about the bigness of the
Olive. Described by Linschot. Lib. 1. c. 63.
Grows in Cavit and Subanin, but the best and most in the Island Seylon; there
in whole Woods.

The LIQUID OIL of MACE, by expression. It Is made of fresh Mace. Has some few
curdled parts, as sometimes in that of Olives: but the most part of it is
liquid without heat, which the best expressed Oil of Mace in the Shops, is not.
Almost of the color of a Tincture of Saffron, and very fragrant. Confirming
what Linschot says, sc. That the original color of Mace, is Scarlet.

The FIXED SALTS of Carduus bened. Garden and Sea Scurvy Grass, Ash and Oak
Barques, Rosemary, Mint, Mugwort, Agrimony, Wormwood, Sorrel, Mallows,
Liquorish, Anise-Seeds, Sena, Jalap. By Me prepared and given. Together with a
Discourse read before the Royal Society concerning the same, which I purpose to
publish ere long. I shall here only Note, that although Many think and affirm,
That all the Fixed Salts of Vegetables are alike: yet by These, duly managed,
it does appear, That there is a great difference, both as to strength, and
otherwise, between diverse of them, even when they have been equally calcined.
So far, that the promiscuous use of some of them, in Physic, is unsafe: as,
for instance, of Tartar and Wormwood; half a Scruple of the former, being as
strong as one whole Scruple of the latter. Of the Fixed Salt of Vegetables, see
a Discourse in the Phil. Transact. N. 107, and 108. Of the Volatile Salt, N.
101. Both communicated by Dr. Daniel Cox.


An East-Indian Composition (as it seems of Vegetables) called CATO. Very
astringent, and infused in water makes it yellow. Used by the Indians against
the Inflammations of the Mouth or Throat.

SAL AMMONIAC sublimed in a Sugar-Mould from Beds of the same taken from a
Coal-Mine near New Castle upon Tyne; of which, see the foregoing part of this
Catalogue. Prepared and given by Dr. Luke Hodgson.

SPIRIT of Sal Ammoniac distilled from the said Salt mixed with Quicklime. By
the same Hand.

The Parts of the Medical WATERS of SCARBROUGH. Prepared and given by Dr.
Witty: together with an account of them. But this I find not. The Preparations
are these, The Phlegm, and Acid Spirit, not strong. The Sedement upon
evaporation, of an ash color, a bitterish and nitrous Taste. The Precipitate,
upon the mixture of Gall-powder; black, and of little Taste. One or two Grains
will precipitate j out of a Gallon of the Water. The Nitrous or Essential Salt,
as I take it, before the Precipitation be made. The like Salt, after the
Precipitation is made. These Salts have also somewhat of a Nitrous Taste, but
mixed with a smatch of a Vitriolick: And the latter, I take notice, is figured
into long square Crystals, or little square Bars. The Black Precipitate
calcined. The Lixivial Salts, made, as I take them, from the Precipitate, and
from the simple Sediment or Extract both before and after Precipitation made:
somewhat like to that of Vitriol.

What ever Ingredients, as Niter, Vitriol, or other known Salts, may go to
constitute these abovesaid; I am of Opinion, That the predominant is some
Metallic Principle different from them all.

A Solid HERMETICK PHOSPHORUS; a mixed Matter, which being exposed for about
half a minute of an hour to the Sun, or only to Daylight, or to a bright Fire
or Candle; will shine in the dark for some minutes. Made by Dr. Fr. Slare, and
by him given to the Royal Society, Apr. 3. 1679. The first of this kind was
made by Monsieur Baldwin, a German Lawyer who gave it the Name above, but with
no direction for the making of it. Nor does he so much as mention the Materials.

I call it Solid, to distinguish it from two Liquid kinds. The Author of one,
supposed to be Mr. Dan. Krafft. The other invented by the Honorable Mr. Boil;
which He calls the Aerial Noctiluca; and whereof He has lately published an
excellent Discourse. In whose Laboratory, the solid kind was also made by his
direction, several ways.

Of the Process for This here, Dr. Slare some years since received a hint from
Dr. Christian Connerding, Archiater to the Duke of Zell. And not hearing of any
one, amongst many that have tried, besides these Three, to have succeeded in
the making of it, he has imparted the following Account.

Take good firm Chalk, ignite it in a Crucible, and then powder it. Put into a
pint or half a pint of strong Spirit of Nitre, Cochleatim, as much hereof, as
will serve well to satiate it, i. e. till it becomes sweetish, and makes no
Effervescence upon the injection of the Chalk. Then dilute this Liquor with
fair Water, filtre it through a Paper, and so evaporate it in a large Glass, or
glazed Vessel, or good Hassian Crucible to a dry Salt. The preparation whereof
may be performed in four hours: whereas I have seen a Pocess, that would take
as many Weeks to follow it.

The main business lies in the good Enchiresis; about which these several
Directions must be carefully observed.

First you must prepare a Vessel of Clay, somewhat like a shallow Coffee-Dish,
of three, four, or five inches in Diametre, and an inch in depth, very well
baked and neal'd. Then place it under a Muffle, after the manner of a Refining
Furnace, in the place where the Cuppels usually stand: and so make it red hot.
Then put the prepared Salt into it, by little and little, not above j ss. or ij
at a time. Keep the fire to that degree, which will suffice to make the Salt
boil in the Dish, so as to spread it self every way, and creep up the sides of
it. Before the Salt, last put in, be consumed, be sure always to be ready, to
make a new addition, otherwise your labor so far is lost, and you must begin
again. When five or six Drachms are fumed away, take the Dish nimbly out of the
fire, so soon as the Salt last put in is dry. If you have wrought well, what
remains in the Dish will be yellowish in some parts, and every yellow part will
shine. Secure this Matter from the Air by fitting and cementing a Glass to it:
otherwise it will loose its property in one Week.

As to the Cause of this strange Phenomenon, Dr. Slare continues to this
effect. I shall in short offer my Thoughts, and refer them to your Judgment.
Two Questions may arise: What it is in this Mixture that yields the light? and,
How it does it? As to the first, I take it to be the pure fiery part of the
Spirit of Nitre embraced by the Chalk. For that the rest is weak and
phlegmatic; as appears, if it be distilled. Also, that about the end of the
Operation, a black Fume begins to rise and fly away. That if by continuing the
Dish too long in the fire, you drive all the Nitrous parts away, the Chalk
which stays behind will not be luminous. Or if the Matter duly prepared, be
exposed to the Air, and thereby preyed upon, the same effect will follow.

As to the Second, I suppose, That it shines not by Imbibition of Light, but by
Impression from it, from whence proceeds a motion therein productive of Light.
Which we may the rather be induced to believe, In that if it be put into an
Iron Cover, and then an Iron Box, and a good heat given to it, it will shine so
vigorously as to seem to kindle the Air about it. That two Men by following
their blow close, will make a Bar of Iron glow, or shine in the dark. And
although the Impulse of Light may seem small; yet upon Bodies nearly related to
it, as This seems to be, it appears to be great. As in those odd effects it
sometimes has upon Infants unused to it; and People that have sore Eyes; or
have been newly Couched; as it happened to Dr. Castle sometime since, who by
making bold with his Eyes too early, ( i. e. by a too frequent admission of
light to them,) after that Operation, did thereupon suffer such extreme pains,
and mischief in his Eyes, that he now dispairs of ever seeing more.

Mr. Haac Author of the Experiment upon the Loadstone, Part 3.
says he, has frequently repeated the following Experiment upon this
Phosphorus. If it be exposed to the Morning Light a little before Sun rising,
it presents a bright Rosy hugh. As the Sun approaches the Meridian, it advances
to a higher and more firey Complexion, like that of a red hot Iron. A little
after Sunset, declines to a pale wan color, like Chalk, or rather Mother of
Pearl.

Exposed, says he, to the light of a Candle, or flaming Faggot, it receives a
pale Luminous color, as from the Sun toward setting. But being exposed for a
considerable time to the most clear Moonshine that I have seen in London, I
could not perceive it to become Luminous in the least.

It has been kept, says he, in the Vacuum of my Great and Noble Patron, the
Honorable Mr. Boil called Vacuum Boyleanum, and by his Highness Prince Rupert
and Himself observed, for above four or five months, without any diminution of
its shining property.

He adds, That he has lately found a way to affix this Shining Matter to
Glass, whereby some not unpleasing Experiments may be made. Thus far Dr. Slare.

As to his Ingenious Conjectures of the Subject and Cause of Light in this
Phosphorus: because he has desired my Opinion, I shall therefore subjoyn it in
a few lines.

As to the first, What it is which gives the Light: It seems hard to say,
Whether it be the Cretaceous Salt, the Nitrous Salt, or some Igneous Particles
incorporated with them in the Operation? It is plain, That one way or other,
they do all concur to produce it.

As to the Question, How these Particles give light? It should first be stated,
What Light is; Whether it be a Body? Which, though much disputed, yet in strict
speaking, is an absurd Question; all one, as to ask, Whether a Quality, be a
Body? But the meaning of the Question is, or ought to be, Whether there be any
Body in Nature, which is the peculiar subject of Light, or metonymically may be
called Light? Or whether more Bodies than one, may successively be the
immediate subject thereof? If so, Whether it be any other Adjunct besides
Motion? If only Motion, Whether as there is one peculiar Motion, at least for a
Musical sound, so another for Light? And in regard there are some Experiments
which seem to favor each of these Questions: such an Answer should be given as
will correspond with all those experiments; and will be too long to suit with
this Catalogue.

I shall here only say, I am inclined to believe, That, in this Case, all the
three Bodies above mentioned serve together to compose an Apt Recipient of that
which is the true Luminous Body. That, as in the mixture of Sulphur and Water,
sulphurious Salts, of affinity with both, are used as a medium: so here, the
Cretaceous Parts serve to fix the Nitrous; and the Nitrous, to fix the Igneous;
being of a middle nature and readily incorporated with them both. And being in
this union exposed to the Sun Beams, or other Light, the Igneous parts serve,
for some time, to retain a certain portion of such as are Luminous, or to give,
as I may say, a degree of Fixation to These also: and that therefore this
Mixture is kindled or made to shine, by putting it into the Light, as a stick is
made to burn, by putting it into the fire.

Of shining Flesh, see a Relation of some Remarkable Circumstances, made by Dr.
J. Beal, and published in the Phil. Trans. N. 125.


Of Instruments relating to Natural Philosophy.
AN AIRE-PUMP; or an Engine to exhaust the Air out of any Vessel fitly applied.
Contrived and described Experiments Physico-Mechanick of the Spring of the Air.
by the Honorable Rob. Boil Esquire. Who has also made therewith, and published
in several Tracts, a great variety of accurate and instructive Experiments.

A Great CONDENSING ENGINE of Brass; contrived to ram and crowd a great
quantity of Air into a little room. Whereto is also fitted an Iron Gun or
Barrel.

A Little CONDENSING ENGINE of Glass, with a Brass-Neck, Rammer and Valve
fitted to it.

A WEATHER CLOCK. Begun by Sir Chr. Wren, See Hist. of the Royal Society, p.
312:
now President of the Royal Society. To which other Motions have since been
added, by Mr. Robert Hook Professor of Geometry in Gresham-Colledge. Who
purposes to publish a Description hereof. I shall therefore only take notice,
That it has six or seven Motions; which he supposes to be here advantagiously
made altogether. First a Pendulum Clock, which goes with of a 100 lib. weight,
and moves the greatest part of the work. With this, a Barometre, a Thermometre;
a Rain-Measure, such an one as is next described; a Weathercock, to which
subserves a piece of Wheel-Work analogous to a way Wiser; and a Hygroscope.
Each of which have their Regester, and the Weathercock has Two; one for the
Points, the other for the Strength of the Wind. All working upon a Paper
falling off of a Rowler which the Clock also turns.

An Instrument for MEASURING the quantity of RAINS that fall in any space of
time, on any piece of Ground, as suppose upon one Acre in one year. Contrived
by Sir Christopher Wren. In order to the Theory of Vapors, Rivers, Seas, etc.
A triangular Tin-Vessel hanging in a Frame, as a Bell, with one Angle
lowermost. From whence one side rises up perpendicular, the other sloaped;
whereby the water, as it fills, spreads only on one side from the center, till
at length it fills and empties it self. Which being done, a leaden poise, on
the other side, immediately pulls it back to fill again.

The Model of an Iron Instrument to fetch Earth, or other Bodies, from the
bottom of the Sea; made with several Valves and Springs to open and shut it for
that purpose. Contrived by Mr. Hook.

A LAMP-FURNACE. By the same Person. Toward the bottom is a partition with a
hole in the middle; below which, stands a Vessel of Oil with a Wick, and a Cork
to float it, so as to stand within the said hole. Over this is placed a Pan,
viz. with the bottom about two inches distant from the partition. Within which,
is fine Sand. Designed for the hatching of Eggs, in order to observe the
Process of Generation. As also for digesting of Liquors.

A pair of Semicylindrick LAMPS. Contrived, described, See his Lampus, p. 14.
and delineated Ibid. Tab. 3. Fig. 4.
by the same Person. Designed, for the poysing the Liquor which is to feed the
Flame, so as to keep the surface thereof always at the same height, till it be
all consumed. And thereby not only to secure, that it never desert the Flame,
and so to save Attendance: but also to keep the Flame of equal strength, for
all such purposes as require it.

The MODEL of an EYE. In which the Humors are represented by Glasses of an
answerable Figure.

A BURNING-GLASS, about half a foot in Diametre.

A HOLLOW BURNING-GLASS. That is to say, two thin concave Glasses set together,
and so to be filled up with water when it is used. About the same bigness as
the former: but burns not altogether so strongly* Contrived and given by Dr.
John Wilkins late Bishop of Chester.

A Large MICROSCOPE, with three Glasses, and several Screws to fit it for all
manner of positions. It magnifies the Area of the Object to above a hundred
times the extent thereof to the bare Eye.

A Lesser MICROSCOPE, somewhat more managable than the former.

The advantage of one with more Glasses, is that it takes in a bigger Object,
or a greater part of it. Of one with a single Glass, that it shows the Object
clearer. So that to have a distinct representation of it, it is convenient to
make use of both. Of the latter kind, I have seen several made by Mr. John
Malling in this City, not only with melted, but with Ground-Glasses so very
small, that one of these Ground-Glasses being weighed in the Assay-Scales in
the Tower, was found not above the fourscorth part of a Grain. The Diametre or
Chord 1/^^th part of an inch. Another, so small, that those Scales were not
nice enough to weigh it. The Chord hereof to that of the former, is as two to
three. These are the clearest and best that ever I saw.

An OTOCOUSTICK, or Instrument to help the hearing, made of Ivory. In shape
like a Funnel, saving that the Nose is bended for the more convenient
application to the Ear, and reception of the sound. Given likewise by Bishop
Wilkins.

Another of Copper, funnel'd at one end, as the former, and also bellied in the
middle.

A Third of Tin, of a Conick Figure, and with a Cochlea within it. The best of
all the three, is the first.

A Pair of HYDROSTATICK Scales. Used, amongst other purposes, to examine the
specific Gravity of Bodies.

A Box of ANATOMICK Instruments; sc. Saws, Steel and Ivory Knives, Chizels, a
Forceps, a Leaver, a Tenter, a Sirynge, Pipes, Probes, and Needles.

SECT. II. Of Things relating to the MATHEMATICS; and some MECHANICS.
TO Astronomy. A REFLECTING TELESCOPE. Contrived by Mr. Isaac* Newton,
Professor of the Mathematics at Cambridge. Whereby not only the cumber and
charge of other Telescopes is avoided; one of these less than a foot long,
magnifying as much as another of six feet: but the Object likewise, both by a
more regular Refraction, and a less expense of Rays, is much more clearly
represented.

It consists of a Tube open toward the Object, and close at the other end.
Where is placed a Metalline Concave, instead of an Object-Glass. Near the other
end, a flat Speculum, also of Metal; placed obliquely toward a small
Eye-Glass; sc. upon that point of the Tubes Axis, on which the perpendicular
falls from the said Eye-Glass. So that the Rays coming from the Object, first
fall upon the Concave; are thence reflected to the flat Speculum, thence to the
Eye-Glass, and through that delivered to the Observers Eye. The Authors
Description hereof at large; together with a Discourse of the Materials which
are or may be thought fittest for the Speculums; a Table of Apertures and
Charges for several lengths; As also Mr. Hugen's de Zulichem's Remarques on the
same; see in the Phil. Transactions. Number. 81, 82.


Arithmetic. An Instrument for working Questions by Multiplying and Dividing.
Contrived by Mr. Hook. Who purposes to give the Description hereof himself.

Geography. A WAY-WISER. Given by Bishop Wilkins. It Is very manageable. It has
five Indexes pointing to so many different Measures, sc. Perches, Furlongs,
Miles, Tens of Miles, and Hundreds of Miles; and turned about with as many
Wheels. Made to Work in a Coach, thus; In the middle of the Axletree is cut a
little Box to receive the Wiser: from whence the Axeltree is made hollow to the
end. In this hollow lies a Rod, loose from the Axletree, and fastened at one
end to the Nave of the Wheel, and so turns round with it. And with a Worm it
has at the other end, at the same time, it turns the Perch Wheel of the Wiser,
and that all the rest. Yet by this measure, 1 yard will sometimes be lost in a
100 yards.

Architecture. A Model of a Geometrick FLAT FLOOR. Given by the forementioned
Person. Contrived and delineated ( a) by Dr. J. Wallis Professor of Geometry at
Oxford. Who was pleased to give me the following Account, as an Abstract of
that he has formerly published hereof. See his Book De Motu, Cap. 6. Prop. 10.
Fig. 243.


I did first, says the Doctor, Contrive and Delineate It in the Year, 1644. at
Queens-Colledge in Cambridge. When afterward I was made Professor of Geometry
at Oxford, about the Year, 1650. I caused it to be framed of small pieces of
Wood, representing so many pieces of Timber; prepared by Mr. Rainsford a Joyner
in Oxford, and put together by my self.

This I showed soon after to diverse in Oxford, and particularly to Dr. Wilkins,
then Warden of Wadham-Colledge in Oxford. Who was so well pleased with it, that
he caused another to be made for himself, according to that Pattern. Which he
kept by him for many years, and afterward presented to the Royal Society.

After the King's Restoration, I caused another to be made; and, in the Year,
1660. presented it to his Majesty; who was well pleased with it, and caused it
to be reposited in his Closet.

On the Model first mentioned, I Read two Public Lectures at Oxford, on the
Vespers of the Public Act: the one, in the Year, 1652. as to the Construction
of it; the other, in the Year, 1653. as to the computation of what weight every
Joint of it sustains; whereby it might be the better judged how far it may be
safely practiced. The greatest weight charged on any one Joint, does not amount
to Ten-times the weight of one Beam: And the greatest weight bor'n by any one
Beam; not to seventeen times its own weight: and even this, not laid all on the
same part, but distributed to several parts of it. The sum of these two
Lectures, is to be seen in the Sixth Chapter of my Book de Motu.

A Third Lecture, much to the same purpose, I read, May, 1699. in the same
place, before the present Grand Duke of Tuscany, who honored the University
with a Visit, and me with his Presence at that Lecture. After which, he was
pleased very particularly to consider both the Delineation and Model, and
declared himself very well pleased with it,

The contrivance is obvious to the Eye. The outsides represent the Walls of the
Building on which this Flat Floor or Roof is to be laid. The Beams next
adjoining to the sides, have one end lodged on those Walls; the other end
sustained by another Beam, lying cross; both ends of which, are in like manner
sustained by other cross Beams; and those again by others; till they reach the
other Walls. So that no one of them can fall, unless the Walls fail, or the
Beams break: all mutually sustaining each other without any Pillar or Prop to
support them, besides the outer Walls.

The Models I caused to be made, and that of the Royal Society in imitation
thereof, are in Breadth, about four times as much as the Length of the longest
Beam. But may be continued, at pleasure, to farther breadth, as shall be
thought fit. With this Caution: That the farther the Work is continued, the
greater Weight will be charged on every Joint; especially near the middle. And
though in this Model, no one Beam is charged with so much as seventeen times
its own weight: yet if the Work be continued to a greater breadth, the
proportional Weight will be thereby increased. And therefore must be limited,
according to the strength of Timber, able to bear more or fewer times its own
weight.

I do not know, that yet it has been reduced to practice, in more than four
Pieces, in this Form. Such is one of the Floors in the Tower of the Public
Schools at Oxford: the Breadth whereof, to the Length of the Beams, is as three
to two. But may doubtless be continued much further: especially in such a Roof
or Floor, as is not to bear much more than its own weight.



Thus, for instance, a Bowling-Green of near an Acre of Ground, may be covered
with a Frame of long slender pieces, without any other Prop than on the sides,
for Vines, or other like Plants to run upon, so as to shade the whole.

Note here, That whereas the ends of the several pieces are to lie upon those
that cross them, about the middle thereof; it will be necessary at every Joint
to abate both pieces half way, or near it; that one may be thus let into the
other, and the whole reduced to a Flat. But whether such piece, so abated does
end even with that on which it lies, or does lie over somewhat beyond it; is
indifferent. And though That may seem more elegant; This, perhaps, may be
fitter for use.

Each piece, I say, must be so abated half way, or near it. For, whereas those
Beams, especially if of a considerable length, will, with the weight, bow a
little; if this abatement be somewhat less than half way, (whereby without such
bowing, the whole would somewhat rise in the middle) it will by such bowing be
reduced to a Flat.

Note also, That a Frame thus contrived, needs neither Nail nor Pin; the
several pieces fastening, as well as supporting one another. Yet, if it be to
bear a great weight more than its own; it will be convenient to fasten each
Joint with Pins; and, if need be, to strengthen it with Iron-Plates, or line it
with other pieces of Timber, to be fastened with Iron-Bolts; to make amends for
what is weakened by the abatements at the Joints: which will make the whole
Frame exceeding strong.

A Model of a Double Winding STAIRCASE. The Foot of one is opposite to that of
the other; whereby both make a parallel ascent, and within the same Cylinder.
The Newel or Column in the Center, is hollow, and built with long Apertures, to
convey Light, from Candles placed at the bottom, and on the sides of the Newel,
into both the Cases.

Another, of a single one, with a solid Column or Newel.

Navigation. A Model of the Hull of a DOUBLE-BOTTOM'D SHIP. Contrived by Sir
William Pettey.

It has two Heads, two Ruders, two Keels, two Holds, and a Vacancy between
them.

From Stem to Stern, four feet and seven inches long. The Deck, about four
Feet. From the foremost Rib to the Rudder, three Feet and seven Inches. The
Keel three Feet and about five Inches.

The Beam or breadth of the Ship, sixteen inches, or with respect to the Keel,
as two to five.

The height of the Round-House, or the Room in the place of it, three inches
and 1/^. Of the Great Cabin, three inches. Of the Fore-Castle, as much. The
depth of the Wast an inch and 1/^. Of the Holds, six inches and. Each of them
four inches broad. The Vacancy between them, eight inches over. Their inner
sides not bellied, but plain, and perpendicular.

These are the principal Measures; which I thought fit to set down. The great
Advantages of this Form, with respect either to the Speed, the Course, the
Safety of the Ship, or otherwise, I leave to the Authors own excellent Hand,
from whom is expected a particular Account hereof.

An INSTRUMENT, contrived by Sir Christopher Wren, to demonstrate, How far
against the Wind a Ship may Sail. Showing, that the Mechanical Power, to which
Sailing (especially against the Wind) is reducible, is a Wedge: And that a
Transient Force upon an Oblique Plane will cause the motion of the Plane,
against the first Mover.

A TERELLA, or an Orbicular Loadstone, about four inches and in Diametre, with
the one half immersed in the Center of a Plane and Horizontal Table; so as to
be like a Globe with the Poles in the Horizon. Together with 32 Needles upon
the Margin of the Table. By which the different respect of the Needle to the
several Points of the Loadstone; the reduction of the Filings of Steel to
Helical Lines, or near them, by the Magnetic Effluvia; and other particulars
may be observed. Contrived by the same Person.

Two DIPPING-NEEDLES. Designed for the taking of Longitudes.

A CANOO. Given by Mr. Hocknel. A sort of Boat so called, used in Greenland,
and some other places. Figured almost like a Weavers Shuttle. The Wooden-Work
is made up of five slender pieces, running by the length: one, which is round
at the bottom or in the place of the Keel; and two flat ones in each side: Made
steady with small bended pieces, set or pricked in cross-ways, instead of Ribs:
and so tied all together with Fin-Whale-Bone.

This Wooden-Work is covered all over, both below and above, with Seal-Skins,
sewed together with Leathern-Thongs. Saving, that toward the middle, is an
Oval Hole, encompassed with a Rim about four inches high, big enough for a man
to sit down in.

In length, seventeen feet. From the Center of the said Hole or Seat, forward,
Ten feet; from thence, backward, seven. In breadth at the Seat, a foot and. In
depth, backward, seven inches and; forward, a foot; because of the man's feet.
And the Boat seems thereby to be carried forward with the more ease: as a
Coach, in being hung higher behind. The whole Boat is answerable to a great
Bladder, in which, though the Waves dash and beat over it never so much, the
man still sits safe.

He makes use but of one Oar, about nine feet long. Made of Ash, and shaped
somewhat answerable to a strong Bow. In the middle, an inch and thick, and an
inch and broad, by the Horizontal measure: toward both ends, about of an inch
thick, and two inches and broad, by the Vertical. At each end is fastened a
Padle, here wanting. This Oar he holds in the middle, and Rowing with both
ends alternately, makes it serve instead of two.

War. A GUN affixed to an Iron Triangle; the middle of the Gun, to one of the
Angles; and the Breech, to the middle of the subtended side: and so to be
fastened to a Floor or steady Frame, either at all the three Corners, or only
at one of the hinder. Contrived by my Lord Vicount Brouncher, for the making of
Experiments of the RECOYLING of Guns. Delineated in the History of the Royal
Society. Part 2; p. 233.
Together with the Experiments made herewith by his Lordship; first before the
said Society, and afterward before the King: set down in a Table of five
Columns. The First showing the Corner stoped from Recoyling; the Second, the
different Charges of Powder; the Third, the Distances to which the Bullet was
carried wide of the mark; the Fourth, the side on which it was carried; the
Last, the distance of the Mark from the Muzzle of the Gun. As also, the Causes
assigned by his Lordship, for the particulars most observable.

An ASSAYER to try the strength of Gunpowder. Contrived by his Highness Prince
Rupert. Composed of two flat, upright and parallel Stands of Brass, about a
foot and high, with a shallow Indenture on both their inner edges. Upon the
Base on which they stand, and between them, is placed a Powder-Pan. Over which,
a Slider, with a thin Plate-Spring, which plays against the said Teeth, and two
Arms for the charging it with weight at pleasure. The stronger the Powder is,
it forces the Slider to a greater height.

A WIND-GUN. Given by Dr. Wilkins late Bishop of Chester. Composed of two
Barrels, one within another. To which is fitted a Rod to charge it with Air. At
the Breech, where the two Barrels are open one into the other, is placed a
Valve, to admit the Air into the outer Barrel, as the Rod drives it, and to
keep it there.

A Seven-SHOT GUN, or a Gun which carries Powder and Bullets, for seven Charges
and Discharges to be made presently one after another. Given by Dudly Palmer
Esquire. Under the Breech of the Barrel, is one Box for the Powder. A little before
the Lock, another for the Bullets. Behind the Cock, a Charger: which carries
the Powder from the Box to a Funnil at the further end of the Lock; opens one
Valve to let it into the Barrel, and the Priming-Pan; another, to let in the
Bullet after it; raises the Cock; and lets down the Steel; all at one time.

An Indian Poisoned DAGGER. About a yard long. The Hilt is a sort of Wood, as
firm as Box. Very curiously carved into a kind of Antique Head. The Neck by
which it joins to the Blade, plated with Gold, and embos'd with a Ring in the
middle, in which is set some small sparks of Gems. The Blade about 14 inches
long, and an inch broad about the middle; waved in the manner of some Swords
hung up for Signs, and much expanded next the Hilt, the better to stay the
Hand: where it is also curiously Damask'd with Gold. But every where else with
white flourished Work of the color of Silver. Saving both the Edges, which are
left naked, and are very sharp. But that which is most observable is the
Scabbard, which is one entire piece of Wood (near the color of the best
Walnut) with a Cavity cut down to the bottom of it answerable to the Blade.

A TAMAHAUKE, or Brasilian Fighting-CLUB. Made of Brasile-Wood. About an Eln
long. The Handle, above two inches and broad; in the middle, two; and four at
the other end. Has two double or square Edges of an inch thick. The broad end
wrought on both sides with two Tables or Areas of small lines obliquely
crossed, and filled up with a chalky substance to make them appear. In the
middle of which, seems to be a rude Representation of some one of their Idols,
whose help they expect.

A West-Indian TARGET. Given by H. Whistler Esquire.

A West-Indian BOW, ARROWS, and QUIVER. The Bow is made of Ash. Near two yards
long. In the middle, not an inch broad, but high-back'd and bellied, sc. above
an inch, as our Bows. But betwixt the middle and the ends, of a different
shape, sc. above an inch and broad, and not much above an inch thick. The
string made of a sort of Catgut; but consisting of three of them hard twisted
together, looks like thick Packthread.

Some of the Arrows are almost an Eln long. Made of a fine sort of unjoynted
and hollow Cane; about the thickness of one of our Arrows, and feathered in the
same manner. The Notch fortified with a Swath of split Quill, made tite with a
fine sort of Glue. In the other end of the Cane, is fastened a brown Stick,
about seven or eight inches long, and the Cane there kept firm from cracking,
with a Swath and Glue, as the Notch. This Stick is usually knoted, for greater
strength: and always Armed. One of them, with a curious Shark's Tooth near an
inch long, and indented or serrated on both edges: a scurvy Weapon. The rest
with Bones, Stones, and pieces of Metal, usually shaped not much unlike the
said Tooth.

The Quiver made of the Skin of the Beast, somewhat like the Pig-Badger. With a
round piece of wood for a Bottom; and in the middle of the wood, an Iron Wrest,
to keep it from the ground.

A Pot of MACASSAR POISON. Given by Sir Phil. Vernatti. With this the people of
the Island commonly poison their Arrows. They have of several sorts; the most
dangerous said Tavern. Ind. Trav. l. 3. c. 19.
to be made of the juice of certain Trees in Borneo. But in This are plainly to
be seen the Legs and other Parts of some Species of Cantharides; which seem to
be mixed with a kind of Corrosive Salt.

Three Cane-pieces ^/2 a foot long, filled with the same Poison.

A Siam DRUM. Given by Mr. John Short. The Body of it, as it were a great thick
Neck'd Earthen-Jug, fourteen inches long; the Belly nine over, the Neck four;
and with the Bottom out. In the place whereof is spread a thin Parchment, made
of a Fishes-Skin, beset all over with small round knots in strait and parallel
Rows. Stretched out tite with numerous little Braces made of Split-Cane, all
spread over the Belly of the Jug, and very curiously platted together at both
their ends. The Neck of the Jug flourished round about with a Mould. Both this
and the Belly covered with a black Varnish; and the Neck also with Red, Green,
and Gilt.

SECT. III. Chiefly of MECHANICS. Relating to
TRade. An Arabian BALSAME-BOTTLE. Given by Thomas Henshaw Esquire. It Is two feet
high, and near an Eln in compass. Shaped like a Long-Neck used in a
Reverberating Furnace. Examining it well, I find it made neither of Glass,
Earth, Wood, or any Vegetable Body; but only of Leather and Parchments. The
inmost Parchment, as thick as that used by Scriveners. Next to which, is
another, as thick as the best Cordovan-Leather; but as sturdy as Whale-Bone.
Next to This, another like the Inmost. Over all, is very titely and curiously
sewed a Cover of tan'd Leather. The top of the Neck has a Ring or Collar, made
only with raming in a kind of Gummy Earth very hard between the middle and the
utmost Skin. The Stople made of Firwood. So much of the Balsame which sticks to
the sides of the Bottle, is of an extraordinary fragrancy: and seems not
inferior to that which some Drugists sell under the Name of the Balm of Gil^ad.

ASSAY-SCALES, included in a Case with Glass Panels; to weigh with, out of the
Air.

A China STATERA, in the form of a Steel-Yard. The Chinese carry it about
them, to weigh their Gems, and the like. The Beam or Yard is of Wood, round, of
an inch over, and a foot in length. Upon it are Three Rules of Measure, made of
fine Silver-studded Work, as in Watch-Cases. One of the Rules is divided into
inches; and every inch into (25) equal parts. The other Two are also divided
into equal parts; but not into inches. They all begin from the end of the Beam:
whence, the First is extended (8) inches; the Second, 6; the Third, 8. The
first, is our Europe-Measure; the other two, I take to be the China-Measure,
and that of some other Country trading with them.

At the other end of the Yard hangs a round Scale, marked with a square Seal of
China-Characters. At Three several Distances from this end, are fastened so
many slender strings. The First Distance makes ths of an inch; the Second, is
double to the First, or an inch and ^/4; the Third, two inches and.

When they weigh any thing, they hold up the Yard by some one of these three
strings, and so hang a sealed weight (about an Ounce and Troy-weight) upon some
point of the Rule, as the Thing requires. It Is kept in a Case fitted to it,
almost like a Dancing-Master's Kit. There is one like to this in the Musaeum
Romanum. P. 34. Col. 2.


A Pair of WOODEN-BELLOWS. Contrived to save Leather. Given by Sir Rob. Moray.
They may be compared to a Box; saving, that here the Box moves, and strikes not
within, but over the Lid: and both of a square Figure. The length of the Box
from end to end, within, two feet. The breadth, at the Breech, a foot and; the
depth, about a foot. The breadth of the Nose-end, seven inches and ^/^. The
Breech-Board is bended, so as to make part of a Zone, answering to the Lid
(which moves upon an Iron Center or Axis) as the Radius.

The Lid has a Margin placed inward on both sides and both ends. From the
inner edge, to edge, longways, nineteen inches; in breadth, at the Breech, ten
inches; at the Nose-end, four. The Nose, of Iron, like that of an ordinary pair
of Bellows. The Valve, of Wood.

On the middle of the said Margin, are two Springs on each side the Lid, and
one at each end. Between the two Springs on the sides, and at the four Corners,
a kind of half Staple like a Bench-Hook. Within or under which are placed
squares of Wood, and by the said Springs, kept close to the sides of the Box,
(to keep in the Air) as it plays over the Lid.

A ROUPY of Silver. Given by G. Ent Esquire.

A HALF-ROUPY of Silver. By the same Hand. These and diverse other like Coins
are current all over the Dominions of the Great Mogul. I place them here, as
not relating to Antiquity, but of present known use.

Several sorts of Indian MONEY, called WAMPAMPEAGE. It Is made of a sort of
Shell, formed into small Cylinders, about a of an inch long, and ^/^th over, or
somewhat more or less: and so being bored, as Beads, and put upon Strings, pass
among the Indians, in their usual Commerse, as Silver and Gold amongst us. But
being loose, is not so current.

The meanest is in SINGLE STRINGS. Of which, here is both the White and Black.
By measure, the former goes at Five shillings the Fathom; the latter, at Ten.
By Number, the former at Six a penny; the latter, at Three.

The next in value is that which is Woven together into BRACELETS about of a
yard long; Black and White, in Stripes, and six pieces in a Row; the Warp
consisting of Leathern Thongs, the Woofe of Thread. These Bracelets the
Zanksquaes or Gentlewomen commonly wear twice or thrice about their Wrists.

The best, is woven into GIRDLES. Of This here are two sorts. One about a yard
long; with fourteen pieces in a Row, woven, for the most part, into black and
white Squares, continued obliquely from edge to edge. The other, not all-out so
long, but with fifteen pieces in a Row. Woven into black Rhombs or
Diamond-Squares, and Crosses within them. The spaces between filled up with
white. These two last, are sometimes worn as their richest Ornaments; but
chiefly used in great Payments, esteemed their Noblest Presents, and laid up as
their Treasure.

A string of Virginian MONEY. A Row of Teeth in shape like the fore-Teeth of a
Hare: all woven together, at one end, with brown twisted Thread, into one Piece
of a yard long.

Husbandry. The Frame of a SAFFRON KILN. Given by the Honorable Charles Howard
Esquire. Together with a Description hereof; and the way of Planting Saffron, and
ordering it upon the Kiln. And by Me published in the Phil. Transactions. Number.
138.


The Spanish SEMBRADORE. A Machine for Plowing, equal Sowing, and Harrowing all
at once. Contrived by Don Joseph Lucaleto a Spanish Knight. Used and approved
both in Spain and Germany. Given by J. Evelyn Esquire together with the Description
extracted out of the Authors Treatise hereof, and published in the Phil.
Transactions. Number. 60.


A CIDER-PRESS. Described also by Mr. Evelyn. Appendix to Pomona.
Contrived by Mr. Hook. For better Dispatch, and through breaking of the Apples.
Consists chiefly of four Cylinders. Those two, which are first to bruise
them, more distant; the other, to press out the Juice, as close as will well
consist with their motion.

A BOX-HIVE. Given by Sir Rob. Moray. But contrived by Sir Christopher Wren:
And the Description hereof first published By Mr. Hartlib.
in the Year, 1652. Since then by Mr. Moses Rusden. Designed to keep them
warmer, and more safe; but especially, to prevent their Swarming, and the
better to propagate them into Colonies.

Houswifery and Household Stuff. CASSAVI-BREAD. Made of the Root of the Hyjucca
Mexicana. They first pound it, and press out the Juice; which is of a noxious
(say some, of a deadly) quality: and the Pulp of the Root is reduced to a Cake.
These Cakes they fry, or rather bake over a gentle fire, and so set them in the
Sun to dry, for their Bread. The thicker Cakes, called Cassavi, and eaten by
the poorer sort. The thiner, called Sciam Sciam, by the Rich. Aldin. De script.
Hort. Farnes. Out of Monerdes and Oviedus.
In Hier. Benzoni's time, Histor. Americ. l. 4. c. 28.
all the Ships that were bound from Spain to Mexico; when they returned, were
Victualled with Cassavi-Bread. That is, instead of Bisco't.

A HAMMOCK. Like a Great Net, with several small Tassels on the sides, and two
huge ones at the ends. Between which, it is fifteen feet long. The Weft, seven
feet; and about as broad. It consists of twisted Thread, as thick as small
Packthred; made of the Barque of the Coco-Tree, and of the Rind of the Nut. Not
Netted; nor Woven with Warp and Woofe; but after the manner of Bobbin-Work. At
both ends, the Weft gathered up into several small Ropes, and those at last
into greater: by which it is commonly fastened to two Trees some yards above
ground. Thus fitted, the people in some parts of the Indies, lie down in them,
and so sleep secure from Serpents and wild Beasts.

A Pattern of the STUFF made by the Planters in New England: the Yarn whereof
they Dey of a kind of Phileamot, with a Decoction of the Barque of the
Butter-Nut-Tree (described in the Second Part) without Alum, Copperas, or any
thing else to strike the Color.

A sort of LEATHER, as thin as that of a Kid. Of which it is affirmed, That it
will keep out water better than the best Neats Leather. And I have been told,
That it has been used in the French-Camps, spread upon the ground, for Beding.
It seems to be made, by being thoroughly soaked in a mixture of Oil and Beeswax.

A CUP Turned out of Sassafras Wood.

A Little BOX Turned out of a Nutshell.

A JAPAN Wooden CUP: covered with a Red Varnish within, and with yellowish
Flowers without, upon a Black Ground.

An INDIAN-PAIL. Made of the Barque of Birch-Tree. Square at the bottom, and
thence rising up into a Conick Form. So ingeniously contrived, that the Sides
and Bottom are all made out of one single piece of Barque.

An INDIAN DISH or Potager. Made also of the Barque of a Tree, with the Sides
and Rim sewed together after the manner of Twiggen-Work.

Another DISH, cut out of Wood, as Hollow Ware commonly is here in England.

A RUSH-BASKET. The Rushes are partly of their Native color, and partly deyed
with a redish and brown Tawny. Very prettily woven together by the Indian
Women, in striped and indented Work. And also very oddly: for it seems to have
a double Woofe, one on each side the Warp; the Rushes running on the outside,
one way; on the inside the contrary.

A BASKET made of Porcupine-Quills. The Ground is a Packthred-Caule; not
Netted, but Woven. Into which by the Indian-Women are wrought, by a kind of
Lap-Work, the Quills of Porcupines, not split, as the Person that sent it
affirms, but of the young ones entire: mixed White and Black in Even and
indented Waves. Esteemed by themselves as one of their chiefest Curiosities.

ANOTHER, made of the same Materials; but with the Quills wrought in Triangular
Chequer-Work.

An Indian COMB. A Stick, whereof somewhat more than one half is cut into three
sharp and round Teeth, four inches long. The other part left for the Handle,
adorned with fine Straws laid along the sides, and lap'd round about it, in
several distinct Swaths.

Clothes and Ornaments. An Indian PERUQUE. Made, not of Hair, but Feathers, sc.
black, gray, yellow, red and white: all cut at the tops to the length of about
five inches. Saving the fore-Lock, which is made of small ones an inch and
deep. Fastened to a course Netted-Caule of Packthred.

An Indian MANTLE; Also made of Feathers. Given by Dr. G. Smith. About an Eln
square. The Feathers all of a Brown or Eagle-colour, small and wrought into a
Caul of Packthred.

An Indian BRACELET for the Wrist. Made of the Scarlet Feathers of the Indian
Sea-Curlew (described in the First Part) Clipped short, and woven into a Caul of
Packthred two inches broad. There are also a dozen Tufts of blew Feathers in
the middle, and two of Black at each end. Much like the usual Bumbast of black
Bits sewed into Ermine, which our English Women are made to think very fine.

A Pair of Iceland GLOVES. Given by Th. Henshaw Esquire. About a yard long, and
broad at the Tops. Made of Deer-Skin; not tan'd, but only dried, with the Hair
on; and lined with the same. The Tops faced with Scarlet Serge, Embroidered
with Flower-Work, made of Leaden-Wyre, twisted (as Silver-Wyre on Silk) upon
brown Hempen Thread. I call it Wyre, not because it is Drawn, which this Metal
cannot be, but for that it is so small. In the vacancies of the Work, are set
Copper-Spangles with knots of the same Wyre.

An Indian SCEPTER. Made, as it seems, of a sort of Cane. A yard long; and as
thick as a middle walking-Cane; without any Joint, and perfectly round.
Consists of hard and blackish Cylinders, mixed with a soft kecky Body; so as
at the end cut transversly, it looks as a bundle of Wires. Gilt and varnished
all over with Flowers in Green, Red and White; saving the two ends which are
Black.

The FAN of an Indian King. Given by H. Whistler Esquire. Made chiefly of the
Feathers of Peacocks Tails; composed into a round Form. Bound altogether with
a circular Rim, above a foot over, consisting of the parts of certain Plants
like split Cane. The middle strengthened and divided into squares with cross
Bars, made of the same materials, and some of them deyed Red. The bottom of
each Square over-laid with Moscovy-Glass. And in the middle of each, a knot of
white Feathers, like the Flower of a Jacynth.

A plain Indian FAN, used by the meaner sort. Made of the small stringy parts
of Roots, spread out in a round flat Form, and so bound together with a
Splinter-Hoop, and strengthened with small Bars on both sides. The Handle
painted with Japan Varnish, black, red, and yellow. When they use them, they
sprinkle them with sweet Water, which perfumes the wafter Air.

An Indian PURSE or CASE for the Pudenda of a Man. It Is a foot long, and closed
at the bottom. Made of small Reeds woven together after the manner of course
Linen.

An APRON for the Pudenda of a Woman. A of a yard deep, and shaped like a
Widows Peak. Has two transverse Labels, with several small Tassel'd Strings,
to tie it about her middle; and a great one hanging down before. Made of
Rushes, and other Plants. The outside of several colors, sc. white, yellow,
red, tawny, and brown; as flexible as any Thread. Woven in several Squares, and
Squares in a most exact and geometrick Order. The inside of smaller Rushes, all
of one color, and the Weaving uniform: as some Silks are plain on one side,
and flowered on the other. A piece of Work, which an European could hardly
imitate with all her Art.

A Pair of Iceland BOOTS. Given also by Mr. Henshaw. Made of dried Deer-Skin,
as the Gloves. Somewhat above a foot long, and about a foot broad at the Tops.
The small of the Leg, above a foot. The Foot, but eleven inches. Lined with
another sort of Skin, and that only dried. The Knee faced with course red
Cloth; and the top of the Foot with Lists of the same; both Embroidered with
twisted Leaden-Wyre, like that on the Gloves. On the end of the Toe, a Button
made of a Leathern Thong knoted in a round form, and wrought over, not with
twisted, but plain Leaden-Wyre. They are stitched together with Cat-Gut. How
the people use them, I see not; for the very same Skin, which is thin, and with
the Hair on, makes the Sole, as well as the Top, of the Foot, and the Leg.

A SNOW-SHOOE, used in Greenland, and some other places. Given by Mr. Linger. A
yard and long, and in the middle fifteen inches broad. Oval behind; the
foreend, sharp. The Margin is a piece of Wood of the breadth of a Lath, reduced
to the Form abovesaid, and so made tite and steady with two cross Bars. To the
sides round about, is stretched and fastened three pieces of woven Work,
resembling Network; made of small Leathern Thongs, in three parallel Orders,
one directly, and two obliquely transverse. In the middle piece is a hole made,
to affix It to the Foot.

Painting. A LANDSCAPE, being the Prospect of a fair City, painted upon Stone.

A Natural Landscape, or Prospect of Ruinous Buildings in Stone. Humored with a
Tree painted over it.

Another, with a Woman in a praying posture.

CATOPTRICK PAINT, on a Table or Board. Given by Bishop Wilkins. On one side,
the Paint looks as if it were altogether rude and irregular, so as nothing can
be made of it. But a Metalline Cylinder being placed perpendicular upon a
certain Point of the Table; the Rays are in such sort incident thereon, and
thence reflected to the Eye, as to represent a variety of curious Work: sc. a
Shepherd playing on a Pipe; and his Wife dancing with a Child in her Arms, and
a Basket on her Head.

On the other side, St. George and Don Quicksot both on Horseback, and a
Windmill betwixt them. And Don having made his Horse leap at the Sail, his
Horse hangs upon it, and himself is thrown to the ground. But a Metalline
Octogon, placed as the Cylinder, shows St. George in good posture upon Don's
Horse, killing the Dragon.

An Instrument to draw PERSPECTIVE with. Contrived by Sir Christopher Wren.

An Optique BOX, used as a help in DRAWING.

A piece of SMALT-GLASS. Used by Painters for Picture-Frames, and other
purposes. Given by Mr. J. Linger.

The Picture of a MUSK-DEER, in Colors, and after the Life. Taken in Java
major, and sent from thence by Sir Philiberto Vernatti.

The Picture of a BASILISK. Pretended by those that show it, to be a real
Animal so called. But is an Artificial Thing, made chiefly of the Skin of the
Raja, and the Legs of a Dodo, or some great Fowl. Given by Ellis Crisp, Esquire.

The Picture of the Plant called NINSIN. The whole Plant is drawn after the
Life on Parchment, in Colors. The Root, of a redish yellow; about five or six
inches long, and near as thick as a Skirret: agreeing with the Description
hereof in the Second Part of this Catalogue. The Stalk as thick as a
Wheaten-straw, and a foot high. The Leaves somewhat like those of the
Stock-Gilly-Flower. The Flowers redish in the Bud, and white when open; three
and three together, and composed of six round Leaves, like those of the
Round-Flower'd Moly figured in Bauhinus, but not so big.

The Draughts of several Indian PLANTS on a Table. In the first place, of

The CLOVE-TREE: Together with a Branch of the same after the life: The Mother
or Prolifick-Clove, from which the Plants are propagated: And the Stone and
Kernel of the same. Next of

The NUTMEG-TREE: Together with a Branch of the same after the life: The Fruit
of the Female-Nutmeg: Of that called the Thieving-Nutmeg, because it infects
and spoils the good ones where it lies: The Male, with its Fruit, both long and
short: And the little Kind, wherewith the Natives dey their Teeth black. Next of

A PLANT which bears a Fruit hanging with a long Stalk upon the top of the
Leaf; almost in the shape of a Can, with its Lid. If it be opened, though the
Weather never so hot, it is half full of Liquor. Then of

A SAGEWAR-TREE; whose Flower being cut, renders a Juice like Wine, far above
the Coco-Tree: With the Fruit both of the Male and Female. In the last place, of

The SAGOUS-TREE; which those that inhabit the Molucca Islands, eat instead of
Bread: With the Fruit, after the life.

Design. An Armed SOLDIER, in the posture of fighting. Together with a
Landscape, and the Prospect of an Army. Given by Mr. Will. Brownest; and all
very curiously Drawn with his Pen.

Wrighting. A Jewish PHYLACTERY. This here is only a single Scroll of
Parchment, of an inch broad, and 15 inches long; with Four Sentences of the
Law, ( viz. Exodus 13. from 7. to 11. and f. 13. to 17. Deuteronomy. 6. f. 3. to 10.
and 11. f. 13. to 19.) most curiously written upon it in Hebrew. Serarius, from
the Rabbis, says, That they were written severally upon so many Scrolls. And
that the Jews to this day, do wear them over their Foreheads in that manner. So
that they are of several sorts or modes, whereof this is one.

The original use of them, for Memento's: grounded on that Command, Deuteronomy. 6. 8.
and in the other places above quoted.
And thou shall bind them for a sign upon thine Hand, and they shall be as
Frontlets between thine Eyes. But afterward, served more for Ostentation. And
at last, for Spells or Amulets. Hierome, quoted by Bishop Montague.
From whence also the use of Charms amongst Christians was first learned; and
those who gave them called Phylacterij. Prohibited by the Council in Trullo.
Can. 61.


An Example of the ARABIC Letter in one or two Variations upon Parchment.

An Example of the CHINA-Language, in a considerable Variety of CHARACTERS,
upon two sorts of China Papyr.

An Example of the MALABARINE Letters and Language. The Letters have some
little resemblance to those of the Coptick. Written upon a single Plate of the
Palmetto-Leaf, an inch and deep, and 10 inches long. It seems, from the Hole
punched at the end of it, to have been filed with a great many more, and so to
have made a Book.

Another Variety of the ARABIC Letter, not properly Written, but Impressed
with a Style, or as it were Engraven, upon two double Plates of the
Palmetto-Leaf.

Sculpture. A CARVED Shell of MOTHER of Pearl. On which Andromeda stands naked
upon the Shore, having her Arms fastened to a Rock with two Chains. Near the
Shore, a great Seafish or Monster making toward her, and spouting out Water
at Perseus. Who comes flying upon Pegasus, with his Shield, and his Sword
advanced, to kill the Monster. Upon a Promontory between Andromeda and Perseus
stands a Cupid, and among the Trees upon it another, signifying their Marriage
afterward. All done with extraordinary Art.

ANOTHER, with the same curious Work, but different Fancy. Neptune making
toward the Shore, without his Mace, advances and spreads abroad his Arms, in
Courtship toward Diana. Who stands on the Shore in her Mantle half naked, and
holding forth her Hand in the posture of denial. Between them, two naked
Nymphs, one giving aim to the other, shooting a Dart at Neptune to give him a
further repulse. And a Cupid flying away over Dianas Head.

About 36 pieces of Ivory, with IMAGES CARVED upon Each. On some, of Men; on
others of Women and Children; and on others, of Cattle. One of them, a
Crucifix, with the Eleven Apostles. They seem to have belonged to a Cabinet or
Chest of Drawers, and to make some story; but the rest being wanting,
unintelligible.

One of them, is a curious piece of Work. On the top of a Rock, stands a
Castle. At the foot, a George or Chevaleer, armed and mounted, and combating a
Dragon; defending her self, and showing her rage in a most lively posture.
Behind the Horse stands one of her young Ones, expecting her Conquest. On the
brow of the Rock, a Woman, or if you will the Lady, praying for her overthrow.
Hereto may be referred,

A SEA-PIECE, consisting wholly of INLAY'D-WORK, of several Colors, in Stone.
As also,

A FOREST, with a House at the end of it; and several Beasts both wild and
tame, as the Lion, Unicorne, Boar, Camel, Stag, and a Dog pursuing him: all Cut
in PAPYR, in the compass of about three inches square.

Turned Work. A Box of CUPS, from Norimberge: being an Hundred of them one
within another; the Boll of the utmost about two inches and in Diametre. Given
by Dudley Palmer Esquire. I take the Wood to be Maple.

A piece of TURNED Work in Ivory. Given by H. Oldenburge Esquire. A solid Triangle,
turned open on the four sides. With a Flower standing out on each side, and
loose. In each Flower, a little Spike, also loose. But all the four Flowers by
themselves, and so the Spikes, are united in the center. On the Necks of the
Flowers likewise hangs a Sphaerical Triangle; and on each Neck, several small
Rings. Preserved in a Round Ivory Box.

The HEAD of a Princes, in her HAIR, and with a CORONET; in an Oval of Ivory.
That which is extraordinary, is, That it is not CARVED, but all TURNED Work.
It Is kept in an Oval Box, wrought with Undulated Work of several Forms, all
likewise Turned. The Art, I think, is now dead with the Author.

Molded-Work. Two HALF BODIES in Armor, betwixt four and five inches in length.
Given also by Mr. Dudley Palmer. The fancy is this, That upon a rude molded
Ground of Rosin and Wax, or some such substance, are laid, chiefly the parts of
several Plants and Insects, by which the Figure is completed. As the Forehead,
(all the Face of one) with the Scales of the Belly-Piece, of the Broad Golden
Cantharis; the Ball or White of the Eye, with Gromwell-Seeds; the Lids, with
those of a sort of Marigold; the Nose, with that of Carthamum; the Beard with
those of Lettice. Part of the Armor, of one, with the Wing-Sheaths of the Green
Broad Cantharis: of the other, with the Seeds of Cow-Parsnep: and so for the
rest. A couple like to These, are figured in Olearius's Musaeum.

Sir Robert Moray's HEAD in WAX. Taken off of a Plaster-Mold, which was made
upon it.

SECT. IV. Of COYNS, and other Matters relating to Antiquity.
THe Effigies of JOHN HOWARD, the first Duke of Norfolk, in Colors Neald on
Glass. From whom the Right Honorable the present Duke of Norfolk is the
eighth, inclusive. Given by Mr. S. Morgan. He is represented kneeling in a
Chapel, with his Dukes Cap by him, and Invested in his Coat of Armor, bearing
four Coats, Quarterly: sc. of Howard, Brotherton (Son to King Edward the First)
Plantagenet (Earl of Warren and Surrey) and Fitz-Allan. The first, is Gules, a
Bend betwixt six Crosslets fitchy, Argent. The second, the Arms of England,
with a Label of three Points Argent. The third Checky Or and Azure. The fourth,
Gules, a Lion Rampand Or.

The PEDIGREE of the most Noble Family of the HOWARDS, from the first Duke
abovesaid: Engraven on a Copper-Plate. Given by the same Hand.

A ROMAN URNE, of Glass, with a Handle. Given by Sir Christopher Wren. Above
fifteen Hundred years old. Almost like a Bottle containing a Gallon and; but
with a very short Neck, and wide Mouth, and of whiter metal. Encompassed
girth-wise, with five parallel Circles. Found in Spital-Fields.

STONES, not long since found near the Foundation of Charing Cross at a great
depth. Given by Sir Joseph Williamson. They seem to be a sort of course Marble.
Of a blackish color, and figured into several plain sides; but irregular: from
whence they may be argued to be very ancient.

A Piece of MOSAIC WORK, found deep under ground, in Holbourn near St. Andrews
Church. Inlaid with black, red, and white Stones, in Squares and other Regular
Figures.

A parcel of little square Stones, belonging to MOSAICK-Work, found in a Field
near Bath, in the Year, 1664.

Several Examples of MORTARS of old Castles and Roman Buildings. Given by John
Aubrey Esquire for comparing them with those now in use.

A ROMAN MONEY-POT. Given (with the Coin below mentioned) by the same Hand.
Found in the Year, 1651. in Week-Field, in the Parish of Hedington, in
Wiltshire; half full of Roman Coin, Silver and Copper, of several Emperors near
the time of Constantine. Of the color of a Crucible, and fashioned almost like
a Pint Jug without a Neck. Closed at the top, and having a Notch on one side,
as in a Christmas-Box. In the same place (where anciently was a Roman Colony)
and at the same time, were dig'd up the Foundations of several Houses for a
Mile together.

Of COYNS.
MOst of them being obscure, lest I should mistake, I presently took the help
of my Worthy Friend Mr. Abraham Hill, Fellow of the Royal Society, very well
acquainted with This, as well as other parts, of Antiquities.

Silver.
Twenty SILVER DENARII; whereof Nineteen given by Sir Paul Whichcote. The

I, II, and III. Consular. IV. Imp. Otho Caesar Aug. Trib. Pot. Reverse.
Securitas P. R. V. Aulus Vitellius Imp. Germ.......... Augusti. VI. Caesar
Vespasian...... Tr. Pot. VII. Caesar Aug. Pater Patriae. Princ. Juvent. Caes.
VIII. Imp. Caes. Domit. Germ. Pont. Max. Tr. P. Imp. iij. Cos. xv. Censor. P.
iij. IX. Imp. Caes. Trajan, Hadrian Aug. P. M. Tr. P. Cos. iij. Felicit. P. R.
X. Imp. Caesar Trajan Hadrian. Aug. P. M. Tr. P. Cos. iij. XI. Hadrianus Aug.
Cos. iij. P. P. Romulo Conditori. XII. M. Commodus Anton. Aug. Pius. Tr. P.
viij. Cos. iiij. P. F. XII. M. Commodus....... Cos..... Exerc. XIV. Severus
Aug. Parthic. Max. Restitutor Urbis. XV. Caes. Marc. Anton. Gordianus African.
Aug. Princ. Juventutis. XVI. Maximus Caesar German. Pietas Aug. XVII. Dom.
Nost. Julianus P. ( i. e. pius) F. ( i. e. felix) Aug. ( Julian the Apostate.)
Votis x ( i. e. Decennalibus) multis x. XVIII. D. N. Valentinianus P. F. Aug.
Urbs Roma. Lug. P. C. XIX. R. N. Valens P. F. Aug. Restitutor Reip. P. Lug.
These from Sir Paul Whichcote. XX. D. N. Valens P. F. Aug. Urbs Roma Tr. P.
(Treviris Perc.) Given by Walter Chetwynd Esquire. XXI. Henricus IV. Dominus
Hiberniae. Commonly called an Irish Groat. XXII. Carolus V.... L. M.....
Indiarum Plus Ult. In whose time the Indies
were more fully discovered. These two given by G. Ent Esquire.

Copper.
I. D. N. Constantius P. F. Aug. Fell. Temp. reparatio. Two more of the same.
II. D. N. Magnentius P. F. Aug. Felicitas Reipublicae. These from J. Aubrey
Esquire. III. Constantinus P. F. Aug. Soli Invicto Comiti. IV. Constantinus Nob.
Caes. Vot. x. Caesarum nostrorum. S. Tr. ( i. e. Sign. Treviris.) V.
Constantinus Aug.... Tranquillitas Vot. xx. The same again. VI. Constantinus
Jun. Nob. C. Vot. x. nostror. Caesarum. These found near Cambridge. VII.
Antonius Pius Aug. Virtus Augg. (Augustorum) Denarius. VIII..... Tit. Ael.
Hadr. Antoninus Aug. Pius. Cos. iij. S. C. ( i. e. Senate. Cons.) Annona. IX. D.
N. Constantinus P. F. Aug. Fell. Temp. Reparatio. X. D. N. Magnentius.
Felicitas...... XI. D. N. Magnentius. Salus DD. NN. Aug. and Caes. A. O. XII.
D. N. Constantius. Salus DD. NN. Aug. and Caes. A. O. Of these two last
together, here are 24, all with the same Revers, about the Initial Letters of
PISTOS. XIII. Constantius P. F. Aug...... Exercitus.

With Nine more obscure. These were taken out of the Pot above mentioned, found
near Hedington.

XIV.... Ptolomy....... XV. Divus Aug. S. C. Consensu Sen. and Eq. Ord. PQR.
XVI. Divus Augustus. Providentia S. C. XVII. M. Agrippa.... Cos....... XVIII.
C. Caesar Aug. German. P. M. Tr. Pot. Vesta....... The same again. XIX. Tib.
Claud. Caes. Aug. P. M. Tr. P. Imp. Constantia Augusti. The same again. XX.
Tib. Claud. Caes. Aug. P. M. Tr. P. Imp........ S. C. XXI. Drusus Caes. Tiber.
Aug. F. Divi Aug. N. Pontif. Tribun. Potest. iterum. XXII. Imp. Nero Caes. Aug.
Pon. M. Tr. P. Roma.... S. C. XXIII. Nero Claudius Caes. Aug. Germ. P. M. Tr.
R. Mac. Aug. S. S. (Macellum.) XXIV. Serg. Galba Imp. Caes. Aug. Adlocutio.
XXV. A. Vitellius Imp. German. Fides Exercituum S. C. XXVI. A. Vitellius Germ.
Aug. P. M. Tr. P. S. C..... XXVII. Imp. Caes. Vesp. Aug. P. M. Tr. Cos.
viij....... S. C. XXVIII. Caesar Vesp.......... S. C. XXIX. Imp. Caes. Domit.
Aug. Germ. Cos. xvj. Cens. Perp. Moneta Aug. The same again. XXX. Imp. Caes.
Magnentius. Felicitas Reipublicae. A Soldier holds in his right hand, a
Victory; in his left, the Standard, on which is as on the XII. XXXI. D. N.
Decentius. Salus DD. NN. Aug. and Caes. XXXII. D. N. Magnentius P. F. Aug.
Salus DD. NN. Aug. and Caes. XXXIII. D. N. Decentius Caes. Salus DD. NN. Aug.
and Caes. XXXIV. Urbs Roma. XXXV. Constans. Fell. Temp. Reparatio. XXXVI....
Constantius. Fell. Temp. Reparatio. Of these two last together, here are 43, all
with the same Reverse. XXXVII. D. N. Magnentius P. F. Aug. Gloria Romanorum.
XXXVIII..... Philip. Miliarium Saeculum Cos. iij. When Rome had been built a
Thousand years. XXXIX.... Aurelius Anton...... S. C. XL. D. N. Theodosius P. F.
Aug. Gloria Exercitus. XLI. D. N..... Reparatio Reipub. XLII. Constans Pius
Aug. Virtus Exercit. XLIII. D. N. Honorius........ XLIV. Crispus Nob. Caes.....
Tranquillitas. XLV. Gallienus Aug.........
With about 72 more, which are obscure. Paper or Pastboard-Money.

Lugdunum Batavorum.

Pugna pro Patria. 1574. When besieged by the Spaniards.

Appendix.
Of some Particulars lately given by Dr. Christopher Merret.
TO which I shall only premise a Note concerning the CLYSTER-BAG, described p.
239. of this Catalogue; but should have been placed in the last Part. 'Twas
given by Sir Rob. Southwell; of whom I lately learn, That the Portugal Negros,
having rolled a lump of Clay into the shape mentioned p. 239. they cut the
Branches of a certain Tree which yields an Oily Gum, and so turn the Clay
round, as the Gum drops upon it, till it has covered it all over like a thick
Skin; which being dried in the Sun, will be almost as tough as Leather. Then
picking out the Clay, it serves them for a Bladder. To which they tie the Shank
of a Hare for a Pipe: and so filling it with Seawater, as often as they feel
themselves much chafed with heat, put it up for a Glyster. These Bags they
commonly hang by their sides, to be always ready for their use.

The Particulars given by the Doctor are these that follow; with the
Descriptions, in his own words.

SAGU. A Gum, so called. It comes from the Islands of Malacca. It drops from
the Trees in small roundish Grains, of the bigness of Turnep-seed, but whitish.
Chewed, it tastes somewhat clammy. Boiled in water, exactly represents
Frog-Sperm; and in consistence, comes nearest to Gum Tragaganth. It Is used in
Medicine and Diet.

TERRA JAPONICA. Called also Catechu, Categu, and Casheu. It Is a Gummo-Resina.
For most of it will dissolve in Water; and some parts of it only in Rect.
Spirit of Wine. Most of it contains a great deal of Earth; the reason of the
Name. It Is covered with a rough brown Coat; within which it comes near the
color of Aloe; but darker, and with brown earthy Particles intermixed. The
Taste Astringent and very Dry. The Tincture of a bright Claret color. An useful
and effectual Medicine; and not ungrateful.

POCO SEMPIE. A Golden Moss, consisting of most fine, soft and flexible
Threads. Accounted a great Cordial. And said wholly to dissolve in the Mouth;
and seemed so to me, in barely chewing it: but the contrary upon Experiment,
which was thus: I tied some of it in a Cloth, and chewed it; keeping it in my
mouth a whole Night: but in the Morning, I found no diminution, nor alteration.
So that chewing only unfolds it, and then it is insensibly swallowed with the
Spittle.

RIZAGON. A Root brought from Bengala, of good use. Cut into flat pieces, of a
whitish color, bitterish and aromatic Taste; and has very large Fibers.

CAROLINA. A long red Root, so called, from the Place from whence it comes. It
draws on Paper red Lines. Answers not expectation, as to deying.

SADORE, or Bitter Wood. It has a brownish Barque: the Wood yellowish, and
exceeding bitter. If it be sliced long ways, you will find very white Fibers
running by the length.

CAIUMANIS Olearij. P. 2. p. 356.
By the Seamen, Caiomanes. By the Portugese, Canella de Mato. An Canella
Crassiori Cortice. Pinax, 409. b.
This Barque above of an inch thick. Distilled, it affords a somewhat harsh and
rough Liquor. But by Infusion, makes an Aromatic and grateful syrup.

SALT of Soap-Lees. An Exotic. Found in some quantities on the sides of the
Boylers. I have yet made no trials of it.

TEUTENAGE. A sort of Speltar, as many Experiments show. Hereof
Parallellepipedon Vessels are made in Japan, wherein their Thea is brought over.

I have several other Rarities, which, when I see what is wanting in the
Societie's Musaeum, I shall add to it.

Most of these Things were communicated by Mr. Samuel Clark, learned,
judicious, experienced in all things Natural and Artificial which are brought
to the King's Warehouse in the Port of London, whereof he is Surveyor.

An INDEX of some MEDICINES.
TO prevent Abortion, 297. For Quartan Agues, 316. Anodyne, 163, 203.
For the Bitings of a Mad Dog, 329. For the Bitings of Venomous Beasts, 52,
181, 227, 347. For Bleeding, 7, 134, 292, 333. For spitting of Blood, 314. For
broken Bones, 300.
Cathartick, 207, line 3, 22, and 24. 217, 316. Cordial, 58, 227. Cosmetick,
145, 309, 335. For the Cramp, 15, 89, 163.
Dentifrices, 148. For Bilious Diarrhaeas, 203, 284. Diuretic, 42, 157, 159,
267, 273, 300. For the Dropsy, 42. For a Dysentery, 319. For a Dysury, 168.
Emetick, 156, 207, 210, 217; 311, 316, 317. For the Epilepsy, 197, 227, 247,
284. In Children, 344. For an Erysipelas, 209. For the Eyes, 173, 327.
For Fevers, 42, 66, 84, 227, 278, 329, 349, For Fractures, 300.
For a Gonorrhaea, 168. For the Gout, 39, 71.
To fetch off Hair, 333. To make the Hair grow, 156. For the Headache, 217. For
Hysterical Fits, 247, 258. For an Haemoptoe, 314.
For the Itch, 209, 218.
For a Lientery, 333.
For Melancholy, 317. For the Menses, 134. Antidote for Mercury, 284, 323.
Narcotick, 203, 316. For Nephritick Pains, 293.
Obstructions, 333. Ophthalmick, 173, 327.
For the Plague, 342, 347. For Poison, 31, 59, 66, 83, 197.
For the Shingles, 209, 217. For Cold Swellings, ib. For the Stone, 40, 267,
222, 293, 312. Sudorifick, 66, 84, 258. Syriasis, 231.
Tinea Puerorum, 314.
Ad Veneris Languorem, 159, 168, 228. For Malignant Ulcers, 138, 209, 327, 343.
For Ulcers in the Legs, 314. For Venereal Ulcers, 342.
Wash for the Face, 145, 309, 335. For Worms, 247, 249, 335, 347.
A List of those who have Contributed to this Musaeum: excepting some Names
which are lost.
His Highness Prince RUPERT, Count Palatine of the Rhine.
THomas Allen M. D. John Aubrey Esquire.
WILLIAM L. Visc. BROUNCKER. Hon. ROBERT BOIL, Esquire. Dr. Erasmus Bartholine.
John Bembde Esquire. Sign. Paul Boccone. Mons. Olaus Borrichius. Joseph Bowls
Merch. Sir Thomas Brown Edward Brown. M. D.
JONH late Lord B. of CHESTER. EAST INDIA COMPANY. ROYAL AFRICAN COMPANY.
Walter Charleton M. D. Walter Chetwynd Esquire. Andrew Clench M. D. Samuel
Colepress, Esquire. Thomas Cox, Esquire. Edward Cotton M. D. Thomas Crispe Esquire. Ellis
Crispe, Esquire. William Crone M. D.
John Evelyn Esquire. George Ent Esquire.
Captain Thomas Fissenden.
Nehemjah Grew M. D.
Hon. CHARLES HOWARD of N. Esquire. Theodore Haac Esquire. Thomas Henshaw Esquire. Abraham
Hill Esquire. Mr. Hocknel. Luke Hodgson M. D. Robert Hook Geom. Pr. Anthony Horneck
B. D. Sir John Hoskins. John Houghton Pharm. L.
Edmund King M. D. Mons. Lannoy. Mr. Langerman Mr. Linger. Fath. Hieronim.
Lobus. Richard Lower M. D. Martyn Lyster Esquire.
Mr. John Malling. Sign. Malpighi. Christopher Merret M. D. Sir Thomas
Millington. Sir Jonas Moore. Sir Robert Moray. Mr. S. Morgan.
HENRY Duke of NORFOLK. Walter Needham M. D. Isaac Newton Math. Prof.
Henry Oldenburge Esquire. Philip Packer Esquire. Dudley Palmer Esquire. Sir William Petty.
Robert Plot L L. D. Walter Pope M. D. Thomas Povey Esquire.
SETH Lord B. of SALISBURY. Mr. Scotto Merch. Mr. John Short. Sir Philip
Skippon. Francis Slare M. D. George Smith M. D. Mr. John Somner. Sir Robert
Southwell. Dr. Swammerdam. Captain Tailor. George Trumbal T. D. Edward Tyson M.
D.
WILLIAM late L. WILLOUGHBY of Parham. Sir Christopher Wren P. R. S. George
Wheeler Esquire. Daniel Whistler, M. D. Henry Whistler Esquire. Sir Joseph Williamson.
Francis Willughby Esquire. John Winthrop Esquire. Robert Witty M. D.
THE Comparative Anatomy OF Stomachs and Guts BEGUN.

BEING SEVERAL LECTURES Read before the ROYAL SOCIETY.

In the Year, 1676.

By Nehemjah Grew M. D. Fellow of the Royal Society, and of the College of
Physicians.

LONDON, Printed by W. Rawlins, for the Author, 1681.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
WHereas a Book Entitled, Exercitatio Anatomico-Medica de Glandulis
Intestinorum, earumque Usu and Affectibus. Cui subjungitur Anatome Ventriculi
Gellinacei. Studio Joh. Conradi Peyeri Scafhu^a-Helvetij, 1677. In which are
found some of those Observations contained in the following Lectures. It was
therefore thought fit, here to take Notice, That the said Book was not
Published, till the Year after these Lectures were Read.

CHAP. I. Of the Stomachs and Guts of Six Carnivorous Quadrupeds; sc. The
Weesle, Fitchet, Polecat, Cat, Dog and Fox.
I Am not ignorant of what many Learned and Inquisitive Men, both at home and
abroad, especially in this last Century, have performed in the Anatomy of
Animals. After all whom, if it be demanded, what is left for me to do? I Answer
in the words of Seneca, Epist. 64.
Multum adhuc restat operis, multumque restabit; nec ulli Nato, post mill
Saecula, praecludetur occasio, aliquid adhuc adjiciendi.

I shall omit most of what is already noted by Anatomists; and princially speak
of those things, which have hitherto been unobserved.

A Weesle.
The Gulet of a Weesle (which from the Ears to the setting on of the Tail was
10 inches) about five inches long, in Diametre, equally wide, and thin. Enters
the Stomach at the left End.

The Stomach about three inches long; proportionably, more than a Dogs. An inch
in Diametre at the upper Orifice; at the nether,; having a flexure toward its
Conjunction with the Guts: shaped like to the body of a pair of Bag-Pipes.
Thin, and plain, or without Folds. Which seems to be the property of the
Stomachs of most Rapacious Quadrupeds.

The Guts thin, and plain, or with little store of Glands, especially of such
as in most Carnivorous Animals are conspicuous. About a yard in length, and 1/^
an inch in Diametre; without any considerable contraction, difference of Size,
Texture or Substance from the Stomach to the Anus. No Colon. No Caecum. So that
it seems to be all but One single Gut. Contrary to what is seen in any other
Quadruped, I have opened.

At the Anus, a Couple of Bags grow to the Gut; one on each side. Each of them,
filled, about the bigness of a large Garden-Peas: containing a yellow, and
thickish Liquor, extraordinary foetid, and having the peculiar scent of the
Animal in the most intense degree. Over the Bags or Bladders, is spread the
Sphincter-Muscle; which compressing Them and the Anus both together, forces
them to a contemporary evacution.

I have not yet dissected the Civet-Cat, but suppose, that these Bags are
analogous to those that contain the Civet in that Animal.

These Bags, so far as I have observed, are proper to all Carnivorous
Quadrupeds, and those only: as will further appear by the following Examples.

A Fitchet.
A FITCHET, being of kin to the Weesle; has also a Stomach and Guts much alike.

The Guts about a yard and two inches. At most, but two. The first, about two
feet and 1/^ long; and ^/^ths of an inch over, where widest. Has five or six
Necks or Contractions. And a little before most of them, stands a small Cluster
of Glands, about as big as a Silver Halfpenny. The second, is about 1/^ a
quarter of a yard long, and 1/^ an inch over where widest. Very thin, plain,
and without any Glands visible to the bare Eye.

On each side the Anus, there is also a Bag of foetid Liquor, with the stink of
the Animal.

The Guts of these Two Animals, and I suppose likewise of the Ferret, are the
most simple, and plain, of all I have observed in Quadrupeds.

A Pole-Cat.
The Gulet and Stomach of a POLE-CAT, are in shape like those of a Weesle. But
the Guts are different.

They may be reckoned, four. The first, about ^/4 of a yard long; 1/^ an inch
over; very thin, and plain.

The second, ^/^ of a yard in length; of an inch over, and in some places more.
This Gut is Glandulous and very thick, in comparison with the other, from end
to end. The Glands extreme small, no bigger than little Pins heads. Yet every
Gland has its Ori^ice, out of which a Mucus or Pituita may be visibly squeezed.

The Third, is a yard long; and about ^/^ an inch over, as the first. About the
middle hereof, is a Cluster (of petite Glands) about two inches long, and of an
inch broad. At the further end also, joining to the fourth Gut, is another like
Cluster, but as broad again. Each Gland in both these Clusters, is about the
bigness of a Mustard Seed.

Each of these Clusters, may be called a little PANCREAS INTESTINALE. Their
difference is, That This has not one common Ductus.

Of these Clusters, it is observable, That both here, and in all the other
Animals hereafter mentioned, they stand directly opposite to that side of the
Gut, into which the Vessels are inserted.

The Fourth, or Rectum, is separated from the former by a Contraction. Almost
five inches long; and near the Anus, of an inch in Diametre. So that all the
Guts together, are two yards, within a quarter.

This Animal has neither Colon, nor Caecum.

At the Anus, a pair of Bladders grow to the Gut, as in a Weesle; containing
also a Liquor with the peculiar foetor of the Animal, most intense.

A Cat.
The Gulet of a well grown CAT, ^/^ of an inch, where widest. The Texture
twofold. The Muscular Fibers of the upper half next the Throat, plainly
Platted. A sort of Work, which will best be seen in the Gulet of a Sheep. Those
of the other half, rather Annular, though not exactly so.

The Stomach in shape like that of a Dog, and most other Carnivorous
Quadrupeds; only somewhat shorter and rounder; being not above five inches
long, yet 3^/^ over.

But in the Guts diverse Specialties are observable. Altogether, about two yards
and ^/4 long. With respect to their substance, but two in number: To their
shape, the first may be subdivided into four.

This first may be called Musculare: being in proportion, thicker or more
carneous than the Guts of any Quadruped I have opened.

It has about 28 or 30 Contractions; some an inch, others two or three inches
distant one from another. I have not seen a quarter so many in any other
Animal. It may be subdivided into four.

The First, i. e. from the Stomach to the place where the Gut is considerably
amplify'd, about a of a yard; and somewhat more than of an inch, over.

The Second, i. e. to the place where more conspicuously contracted, about a
yard; and in its widest place, above ^/^ an inch, over.

The Third, i. e. to the next greater dilatation, a yard and ^/^th; and ^/^ths
of an inch, over; near the same width with that of the first.

The Fourth, about 1/^ a yard and 1/^th; and inch, over. So that two slender,
and two ample ones are reciprocally joined.

This Intest. Musculare, is furnished with several Clusters of Glands, six or
seven in number: each Cluster about of an inch long; and the last above three
inches. This especially, as in the Pole-Cat, may be called PANCREAS INTESTINALE.

The Next Gut (in the place of the Rectum) may be called Membranaceum, in
distinction from the former; being far more perspicuous and thin. About a yard
long; and where widest, an inch and, over. So that its hollow is more than four
times as great as of any part of the Intest. Musculare; and eight or ten times
as great as of the small parts. And does therefore contain far more than all
that Gut.

To the undermost part of this Gut, about an inch and ^/^ before the Anus, is
fastened the end of a slender Muscle; the other extremity, to one of the
Vertebrae of the Loins.

This Gut is furnished with several large Glands, not standing in Clusters, but
singly, as in a Fox or a Dog presently to be described; but not so big.

The upper End of this Gut where it joins to the Muscular, for the length of
^/4 of an inch, is partly Conick and partly Helick; being, as it were, the
beginning of a Caecum.

On each side the Anus, a Bag of foetid Liquor, as in the former Animals.

To the Guts of a Cat, I suppose those of a Leopard, Tiger, and Lion, may have
some Analogy.

A Bitch.
The Gulet of a BITCH (from the top of her Head to the setting on of her Tail
about of a yard) near an inch in Diametre. Somewhat thick, redish, and muscular.

The Stomach shaped as a Cats, saving that it is a little longer. In length,
nine inches; in breadth, six; in depth, as much. Somewhat Muscular, as the
Gulet. Not very visibly Glandulous, except near the lower Orifice. Where, for
the space of three or four inches, are a great number of small Glands, yet
fairly observable round about.

The Guts are Four. The Frist, or Crassum, two yards and, and near an inch
over, where widest.

The Second, or Tenue, about a yard and ^/4 long, and somewhat more than ^/^ an
inch wide.

The Third, or Caecum, where widest, near an inch; and about a foot long; but
winding with three flexures, three several ways. Not joined to the Tenue, but
the Rectum; and so postur'd, as to make an acute Angle not with the Rectum, but
the Tenue; in other Animals. And the passage between This and the Rectum
somewhat straight.

The Fourth, or Rectum, half a yard; next the Caecum, an inch over; near the
Anus an inch and. All the Guts together, near five yards.

This only, of the Animals yet mentioned, has a Caecum. Yet without a Colon.

The Guts of this Animal, as well as the Gulet, are all of them thick, redish,
and Muscular. The like, I suppose, are those of all Ossivorous Quadrupeds.

They are furnished with store of Glands. In the Caecum, at several distances
from 1/^th to ^/^ths of an inch. Very conspicuous to the naked Eye, even after
they are blown up and dried. In the two foremost, they stand in Clusters; and
the Clusters in all, about 20. Some of them round, as big as a Silver Penny or
Two-peny; and some Oval, the compass of an Almond: and some, especially toward
the Caecum, two or three inches long, and an inch broad. Every Gland, as big as
a Turnep-Seed. The Caecum besprinkled with Flat Glands, the breadth of a
Marshmallow-Seed or little Spangle. And so the Rectum, especially toward the
Anus; but here big.

In the center of these Flat Glands, the Orifice, or if you will the Anus of
every Gland is very conspicuous: by which the Gland speweth out a certain Mucus
or Pituita; as by compressing the Gut may be easily seen.

So that although the Glands of the Stomach and Guts, especially in Men and
Quadrupeds, seem to lie behind, or under the inner Membrane: yet the Mouths of
them all, do open into the Hollow of the Stomach and Guts. The Pituita which is
always found very copious in both, not being half of it, the spittle, or bred
of the Aliment, as is generally conceived; but spewed out of these Glands.

At the Anus, are two Bags of stinking Liquor, as in the aforesaid Animals.

A Fox.
The Gulet, Stomach and Guts of a FOX, ( a year old, and 1/^ yard from Head to
Tail) are much like to those of a Dog. But with some differences. The Gulet, in
proportion, somewhat larger. The Stomach deeper.

The first Gut, or the Crassum, far shorter, not above 1/^ a foot. The second,
or the Tenue, somewhat wider. The Caecum, much larger; near ^/4 of a foot long.
It lies not strait out, but is wound up almost spirally. Where it joyneth to
the other Guts, an inch over; at the other End, near an inch.

The Guts furnished with several Clusters of Glands, as in a Dog, about 14 in
number. That next the Caecum four inches long, and above an inch broad. Before
every large Cluster is a little Contraction in the Gut. In the Caecum and
Rectum much larger than in the Bitch.

I suppose it is proper to all other Ossivorous Animals, for the Rectum to be
furnished with such Glands.

Just upon the Anus lie two Bags of stinking Liquor, as in the Animals
abovesaid.

CHAP. II. Of the Stomach and Guts of the Mole; which seems to feed on Insects.
As also of the Urchan, Squirel, and Rat; which are chiefly Frugivorous.
A Mole.
THe Gulet of a MOLE, is not fastened to the End of the Stomach, as in the
foregoing Animals, but to the middle.

The Stomach shaped somewhat like that of a Polecat, and is as big; being three
inches long, an inch and broad, and as deep: which in comparison with the small
bulk of the Animal, is exceeding great: this Animal weighing not much above
three Ounces; but an ordinary Polecat betwixt 20 and 30.

The Guts, a yard and long; longer than in the Carnivorous kind. About of an
inch over every where. Near the Anus a little wider. So that they seem, so far,
to be but two. Yet taking in their Texture, they may be three.

The Texture of the First (about ^/4 of a yard long) is plain and simple, to
the Eye, as in other Guts. Of the Second, extreme Curious; the Fibers of the
Muscular Membrane, making Undulations or Indentures, continued for the length
of ^/4 of a yard, round about the Gut: very much resembling the Needle Work,
commonly called Irish-stich. But the Graver, though in other respects he has
done tolerably well, yet comes short of the elegancy of this Work.

Both these Guts are furnished with five or six small Clusters of Glands; each
Cluster as big as a little Spangle.

The Rectum, of a plain Texture, as the First. And without any conspicuous
Glands. Half a of a yard long, and where widest, inch over.

Here are none of the Bags described in the Weesle, etc. Nor any Caecum nor
Colon.

An Urchan.
The Gulet of an URCHAN enters the Stomach toward the middle, as in a Mole.
Somewhat small, not of an inch over.

The Stomach not so large as in the Mole, yet bigger than in Carnivorous
Animals; as than that of a Weesle, although the Body of an Urchan of the same
age be no bigger, as is plain, when the Skins of both are taken off. It Is also
of a rounder shape.

The Guts, for substance, seem to be but One. But from the difference of shape,
may be accounted Four. The First, or Crassum, a yard and ^/^th long; and near
an inch over, where widest. It has several, about 12 observable Contractions;
some of them an inch or two long, some more, and some less: which, as to their
length, is peculiar to this Animal.

The Second, or Gracile, is about of a yard long; of an inch over, and of an
equal size throughout.

The Third, or Amplissimum, ^/^th of a yard long; and above of an inch over,
where widest.

The Rectum, about as long; and above an inch over. So the length of all the
Guts, is Two yards and an inch or two: much longer, than in the Carnivorous
kind.

The Third and Last, are sprinkled with an innumerable company of extreme small
Glands, scarce discernible without a Glass; through which, they show as big as
little Pins heads.

This Animal has none of those Bags near the Anus, above described in the
Weesle, etc. Has no Caecum. No Colon.

A Squirell.
That I opened, was a Virginian, smaller than the European. The Gulet enters
the Stomach toward the middle, as in a Mole and Urchan very small, like the
top of an Oaten-straw: so that the upper Orifice of the Stomach, hardly lets
any thing, so much as wind, to pass into it.

The Stomach two inches long; the left end, an inch over; the right, an inch.

The Guts may be reckoned Four. The First, which reaches to the Caecum, above
a yard long; and near of an inch over.

The Caecum very large, near three inches long, and about an inch over. Lies
spirally wound up on it self.

The Third, about three inches long, not above th of an inch over.

The Last, about as long. Has two Contractions and Dilatations; where widest,
of an inch over. All the Guts together without the Caecum, not of a yard: the
shortest of all yet described.

Here are none of those Bags upon the Anus, above mentioned.

A Rat.
The Gulet of a RAT, is extreme small, like that of a Squirel; and inserted
into the Stomach in the same manner.

The Stomach, with respect to that of a Mole, very small; sc. three times less:
although the Body of a Rat, is above twice as big as the Body of a Mole.

The substance hereof is also more plainly distinguished into two sorts. One
half, toward the left end, more pellucid, thin and membranous. The other half,
sc. from the Insertion of the Gulet to the Pylorus, more opacous, thick and
Muscular.

The Guts may be accounted Five. The First, or Gracile, ^/2 an Eln long, and of
an inch over.

The Second, or Amplum, a yard long, and 1/^d of an inch over.

In these two together, are eleven or twelve Clusters of Glands; every Cluster
about the breadth of a Spangle.

The Third, or Caecum, contained by a Ligament in an Orbicular posture round
about the Amplum. Above an inch over, and three inches long. So that take it
breadth and length, and it is as big as the Stomach it self.

The Fourth, I crave leave to call the Abomafideum: for that it is in figure or
structure very like to that Ventricle in a Sheep or Cow, called the Abomasus.
About two inches long; and near its Conjunction with the Caecum, ^/^d of an
inch over, narrowing all the way to the other end. That which is curions
herein, is, That it is furnished with a considerable number of oblique Plates,
about 46; 23 or thereabout, on each side oppositely; exactly like to those in
the Abomasus of a Sheep.

The Last, or Stercoraceum, is six inches long; of an inch over, where widest.
And has one or two Contractions, as in a Squirel.

The Gulet, Stomach and Guts of a MOUSE, are little different. Only the Glands
of the Guts fewer; and the Caecum, less.

On the contrary, in a SHREW-MOUSE, the Caecum is rather greater, being ^/^d of
an inch over, and two inches long. Yet the Body of the Animal five or six times
less than that of a Rat.

CHAP. III. Of the Stomach and Guts of such Animals as are both Frugivorous and
Graminivorous; as the Rabbit, Horse, and Pig.
A Rabbit.
THe Gulet of a RABBIT is inserted into the middle of the Stomach, as in a Rat.

The Stomach shaped almost like a Dogs, but bigger, with respect to the Animal.
Its inner Membrane is gathered up into several little Plates, like those in a
Man. At the End next the Pylorus, much thicker, and more Glandulous, Nervous,
and Muscular than in any other part.

The Guts, without the Caecum, are four yards long. In number, five. The First,
or Jejunum, about four feet long, and (...) an inch over.

The Second, or Ileum, as long; and above an inch over. Whereas in some, as the
Polecat, Dog, Urchan, the Second Gut is smaller than the First.

The Jejunum is besprinkled with a great number of very small Glands: which
when the Guts are blown up and dry, look like a multitude of little Specks.
Whence the Gut is more opacous than the Ileum.

Besides these smaller Glands, the Jejunum and Ileum together, are furnished
with four or five Clusters, about as broad as a Two-penys; and every Gland as
big as Wallflower-Seeds.

Where the Ileum enters the Colon, it has a very thick white and Glandulous
Body, or Pancreas Intestinale: and the mouth of each Gland very apparent.

The Caecum, of a prodigious size; above a yard long, and and an inch and over
where widest.

At the End of the Caecum hangs a certain Label, also continuously hollow with
the Caecum, and may be accounted part of it. Betwixt three and four inches
long; and at the upper end, ^/4 of an inch over; in shape like a Man's Finger.
Lined quite through with a thick Glandulous Body, like that in the end of the
Ileum.

All the rest of the Caecum very thin, and transparent: so as being blown up,
it looks like those Skins of Iceing-Glass, formerly used for Transparent
Flower-Works.

This Gut seems at first, to have many Valvulae Conniventes. But by being
blown up, is fairly represented one single Valve or Plate, stretched out
perpendicularly from the circuit of the Gut, and most curiously winding, in a
spiral Line, from one End to the other.

This Gut runs into the Colon, which is above a foot long, where widest or next
the Caecum, an inch over; at the other end an inch. It has a double Vinculum,
one on each side; by which it is gathered up into a great number of little
Cells, contiguous one to another throughout.

In opening this Animal, being just dead, the Peristaltick motion of the Guts,
was very apparent, especially in this Gut. By means whereof, the several Cells
aforesaid, were made reciprocally to move in and out; so as while one moved and
was unequal inward, another next adjacent, moved and was unequal outward; and so
on by a kind of undulation, for several inches together.

This Gut is very thick and Glandulous all over, the Glands standing every
where close and contiguous: so that the inside of the Gut, looks like the
Seal-Fishes Skin. The Glands are not flat, as in the Guts above described, but
standing up round and high, like an infinite number of Papillae: the Mouths of
each visibly open; from whence a Mucus may easily be expressed.

So that all Intestinal Glands are either Flat, or Spherical; both with a Mouth
in the center. Answering to a Button-Mould; the Flat Gland, to a flat Mould;
and the Sphaerical Gland to the like Mould. The former may be called Rotulares:
the latter Papillares.

The Last Gut is about four feet long; as wide as the Ileum, and near the Anus
wider by of an inch.

This Animal has none of those Bags observed at the Anus of the Carnivorous
kind.

A Horse.
The Gulet of a HORSE, is large, thick, red, and very Muscular. The properties
of the Gulet in all Voraceous Quadrupeds. Inserted into the Stomach, not at one
End, but the middle, as in a Rabbit.

The Stomach single. Not much above a foot long, about of a yard deep, and
seven inches over. Which in respect to the Animal, and especially to his Guts,
is exceeding small, I had not time to observe the inside, but probably, it is
gathered up into Plates or Folds as That of a Rabbit.

The Guts are six. The First, or small Gut, about 28 yards. Near the Stomach,
two inches over; toward the other end, two inches and. Which though it be
wider by far, than the same Gut in any other Quadruped that I have opened: yet
in respect to the Amplitude of the other Guts in this Animal, it may properly
be called the Small Gut. It has six or eight Contractions or short narrow
Necks; and amongst them, a long one, about a foot before its entrance into the
Caecum.

It has very few, and but small Clusters of those larger Glands, observable in
the forementioned Animals. But of a smaller kind, the inner Coat is every
where full as it can hold, each Gland not so big as a Cheese-Mite.

The Second, or Caecum, is square; having not two, but four Ligaments which
contain it in that figure. By means whereof the sides are also gathered into
many Cells, small and great, as the Colon it self in this and other Animals.

The Bulk is vast: Near the Cone, or close end, about three inches over. But at
the Base, or where it joins to the Colon, a of a yard over. And in length, a
full yard. So that it is more than twice as big as the Stomach.

The Learned Dr. Glisson, in speaking of the Stomachs of Quadrupeds, says,
That a Rabbit and a Horse have a double Caecum. His words are these; In Equis,
Cuniculis, and Porcellis Indicis, Caecum duplex deprehenditur. But herein he is
mistaken. As to a Rabbit, the contrary has been seen in the Guts presented
entire before this Honorable Presence. And who ever will take the pains to
examine all the Guts of a Horse, will find, That neither has he, any more than
One Caecum, which I have above described.

The Third Gut, is the Colon. The unusual shape, and prodigious Amplitude
whereof, might give occasion to the Doctor to mistake it for another Caecum. So
that although a Horse has but one single Caecum; yet may he not improperly be
said to have a Treble Colon; sc. Two Ample ones, next the Caecum; and a smaller
one next the Rectum. Unless any please rather to call the two Great ones, the
two BELLIES of one and the same Colon.

The First Belly next the Caecum, is no less where widest, than of a yard over;
and in length, above a yard and 1/^.

The Second Belly, next the Rectum, as wide as the former; and above a yard
long. So that each of these Bellies are bigger than the Caecum. That next the
Caecum half as big again: And about four times as big as the Stomach.

These two Bellies are joined together by a Neck, about four inches over, and
of a yard long. Gathered likewise into Cells, as all the other parts of the
Colon. But with four Ligaments, as the Caecum. By which also they lie square.
And upon a passing view, might be another occasion of the forementioned
mistake. So that if any one shall call either of these Bellies, a Caecum; then
a Horse will not have two only, but three Caecums. But these Bellies have
neither of them, the defining property of a Caecum; which is, To be pervious at
one end only.

The small Colon, or the smaller part of it, runs betwixt the Second Belly and
the Rectum: likewise full of Cells, contained together by two opposite
Ligaments as in other Animals. It Is about three inches over; and six yards long.

The Rectum, very thick and Muscular, as in most other large Quadrupeds; about
three inches and over, and not above a yard long. The length of all the Guts
(without the Caecum) is about 37 yards. So that the Guts of a Horse, although
they come much short of those of the Animals next mentioned: yet in wideness,
much exceed them: So as to contain about ten times more than his Stomach.

A Pig.
That which I procured was but 16 days old. The Gulet was torn off; so that I
could only observe the Insertion, of it, which is about the middle of the
Stomach, as in a Horse. But that of a Hog, I have often seen, and it is very
thick, muscular and red.

The Stomach, was five inches long, and three over. Shaped somewhat oddly; in a
manner with a double Ventricle. The one, and the principal, may be called
Venture magnus, shaped like that of Carnivorous Quadrupeds. Very thick and
Muscular; especially in the Neck and at the Pylorus.

Against the Pylorus stands a round Caruncle, as big as a small Filbert Kernel,
like a stopple to the Pylorus. A part I think peculiar to this Animal.

This Ventricle within, has several Folds, about th of an inch broad, and as
deep; and wind to and and fro, as in a Rabbit or a Man. Situate only about the
right End or half of the Belly: the other End being, though also Muscular, yet
very plain.

At the left End of this greater Ventricle, another far less, yet distinct one,
is appendent. Much after the same manner as the Reticulum in a Sheep is to the
Panch. Or as the Intestinum Caecum to the other Guts: for which reason it may
be called Caecus Ventriculus. Separated from the greater by a Muscular
Ligament, like a half Valve. Where it joins to it, an inch and over, and thence
extended two inches in length; ending in a twisted or hooked Cone. Not so
Muscular, as the greater Venture, but thin and Membranous. The inner surface
also plain, or without Folds. Yet is it Glandulous, as the other: but the Mucus
the Glands yield somewhat thiner.

The Guts of this Pig (so young) were near fourteen yards in length. Which is
more than doubled, perhaps trebled in a well grown Hog. They may be reckoned
six or seven. The First, has several Flexures, next the Stomach, within the
length of a of a yard, and may be called Serpentinum.

The Second, about five yards and long, and an inch or 5/^ths over. In this (no
more than in the first) are scarce any conspicuous Glands; so that it may be
called, Perspicuum.

The Third, of the length of the Second; and somewhat less in Diametre. The
Vessels of This, are more numerous than of the former. And it is furnished with
several large Clusters of Glands, about nine or ten: some of them an inch and
1/^, two or three inches long; and, or an inch over. And may be called Minus
Glandosum.

The Fourth, is a yard and long; where widest, as the Third; but the greatest
part of it not above ^/^ths of an inch. This Gut, instead of Clusters, is Lined
with a Glandulous Lace, extended from one end to the other. At the beginning of
an inch broad; at the end next the Caecum, of an inch. Spread or extended (as
was first observed of the Glandulous Clusters) upon that side of the Gut, as is
directly opposite to the Insertions of the Vessels. The other part of the
Circuit of the Gut, is very thin and perspicuous. This Gut may be called Magis
Glandosum.

The extremity of this Gut, does not only join to the Colon, but is inserted
into it, and therein protuberant: very like, in shape and bigness to the Nipple
of a Woman's Breast that gives suck: and is likewise punched in several places
at the top and round about with the Orifices of so many several Glands.

The Fifth, or Caecum, is four inches long, and an inch and over. Among all the
Quadrupeds I have opened, peculiar to This and the Caecum of a Horse to have
the same structure with the Colon.

The Sixth, or Colon, is of a yard long. Where it joins to the Caecum an inch
over; from which place it tapers all along to the other end, where it is not
above an inch over. Gathered up into several Cells from end to end, with two
opposite Ligaments, as in a Rabbit. At the top of it, just under the abovesaid
Nipple, is a large round Cluster of Glands with very fair Orifices.

Of all the Quadrupeds I have opened, peculiar to this Animal, a Horse, and a
Coney (perhaps also an Ass and a Hare) to have a true Colon: if that of a Man
be the standard for the Definition of it.

The Last, or Stercoraceum, is also ^/4 of a yard long. Scarce any where more
than ^/^ an inch over; and toward the Anus, not so much. Whereas in most
Quadrupeds, it is there widest.

Here are no Bags, as above described in the Carnivorous Animals.

CHAP. IV. Of GRAMINIVOROUS QUADRUPEDS; a Sheep and a Calf.
A Sheep.
THe Gulet of a SHEEP (three years old, and weighing 120 pounds Haverdupoise)
about an inch and over: which with respect to the Panch is but small. Composed
of several Organical Parts: which because they are here, as well as in some
other larger Animals, more conspicuous, I shall somewhat more particularly
describe them.

They are all of them, by Anatomists, usually, but improperly called Coats: for
the inermost, are the chief Body of the Gulet: So that it is the same, as to
call the Wood of a hollow Plant, one of its Coats. It Is therefore composed of
Five Membranes; Three in the middle, lined with a Fourth, and faced with a
Fifth.

The Utmost, and the Inmost, are both Cuticular. The Inmost, or Glandulata,
exceeding white, and very friable: answerable to the outward Rind of the Root
of a Plant.

The next to it, is the Nervous. Which here, and in some other Voraceous
Animals, is so very thick, that it may more properly be called the CORPUS
NERVOSVM. Composed of Fibers, partly running by the length of the Gulet, and in
part tranversly to the two Muscular Membranes. Throughout the length of it, run
many small Nerves, like the finest Lawn-Thread.

This Corpus Nervosum, is, as I conceive the TENDON to the two next or Muscular
Membranes.

These Two (they are at least two) are truly Muscular. Stenon has observed
them to be spirally continued: which of some of them is true, not of all. And
Dr. Willis says also truly, That they Decussate, the one winding from the
right hand downwards, the other from the left. But, to proceed where these two
accurate Persons have left; of the admirable Texture of these two Muscules, it
is further observable, That of each parcel of Fibers, one half is so
distributed, as those Fibers which belong to the uppermost Muscule on the right
hand, are in their progress toward the left, cast into that which lies
underneath. And so on the contrary, those which belong to the Upmost on the
left hand, are cast, into that which lies underneath on the right: both
together making a perfect Plat, somewhat like to that in a Riding-Whip. The
other half keeps always above, and is continued by a compounded line, partly
Spiral, and partly Elliptick; especially toward and at the bottom of the Gula.

The Stomachs or Venters in a Sheep are Four. The First, or Panch, consists
of as many Membranes as the Gulet. The Inmost and the next, sc. the Nervous,
are raised up, and made all over rough with a multitude of small Nervous and
pointed Knots, in some places smaller and round; in other larger and flat: all
very like those upon the Tongue.

In the Panch also are several Gibbosities, caused chiefly by the doublings and
thickness of the Muscular Membranes, in those places. So that they are as it
were the Tendons of the said Membranes.

The Second Venture, is by the Latins called Recticulum. In which are the like
Nervous Knots, as in the Panch, but smaller. And comprehended within several
round Ridges or Plates composed together in the form of a Net or Honey-Coome.

The Third, is called the Omasus: by Butchers the Feck. Of a wonderful
structure: being divided into above 40 Receptacles by so many Sepiments, great
and small: some,, or of an inch, others an inch, or two inches broad. All
covered with the like Knots, as the two former Venters; but extreme small.

The Fourth Venture is called Abomasus: by Butchers, the Read. The only
analogous one to that in a Man; the Membranes hereof being all alike. Saving,
That the Plates (as here they are rather than Folds) are far deeper; and
oppositely and regularly met in an oblique posture.

The Guts are Six or Eight. The length of all, near 32 yards. The First, or
Serpentine, from its Flexures, about a yard long, and of an inch over.

The Second, or Jejunum, about 13 yards and, and as wide as the first.

The Third, or Ileum, 11 yards long; and an inch over.

The Fourth, or Caecum, above a Foot in length; and where widest, two inches
and ^/^.

The Fifth, is continued from the Caecum without either Valve or Contraction
intervening. Above a yard long; and an inch and where narrowest.

The Last, may by way of Eminence, be called the Muscular: being as thick as
the Gulet it self. And This may be subdivided into Three. From the Fifth, it
grows small to the length of an Eln; where it is an inch over. Of this width it
continues two Elns more and ^/^. After it widens again, to the Anus or the
length of another Eln and ^/^; where it is near an inch and wide. In the
Jejunum, the Vessels are less numerous; in the Ileum, more; in the Caecum, and
the next, most; and in the Muscular, least.

The Glands, not so observable, as in those of a Calf, which I shall next
describe.

A Calf.
The Number, Shape, and Texture of the Gulet and Venters of a CALF, are the
same, as of a Sheep. The Guts much different. In length, about 20 yards. In a
well grown Ox, at least thrice as long. Asking a Butcher, at his
Slaughterhouse, How long he thought they might be; he guessed 30 yards. But
believing him mistaken, I caused them to be measured, and found them full 60
yards, and four over, which may be allowed for their stretching, for that they
were measured empty.

They may be reckoned seven or nine. The First, the Serpentinum, as in a Sheep.
In length a yard, and of an inch wide.

The Second, or Amplum (being the widest of all the rest but the Caecum) is
five yards and long; and an inch and ^/4 broad. These two are very thin, and
have scarce any conspicuous Glands.

The Third, or Magis Glandosum, near seven yards long, and an inch wide.
Furnished with a great many Clusters of Glands, like those in a Pig, about 50
of them; an inch, or long, and some longer.

The Fourth, or Gracillimum, about two yards long; and not above an inch over.
Whereas in a Sheep, the Guts next the Venters, and that following, are near of
one width. Somewhat thicker and more fleshy than any of the former. Has
several Clusters of large Glands; but nothing near so many, no not with respect
to its length, as the precedent: and may therefore be also called Minus
Glandosum.

The Fifth, or Maxim Glandosum, is a yard and long, and an inch wide. By far
the most opacous, thick and ponderous of all the five. Lined throughout the
length, with such a Glandulous Lace, as in a Pig. This Lace is thicker than all
the other Parts of the Gut together. At the beginning ^/2 an inch, at the lower
end an inch broad. The rest of the Gut, over which this is not spread, is
perspicuous.

The Sixth, or Caecum, near two feet long, and above two inches and over where
widest; where narrowest, an inch. Very thin, and without any considerable
Glands.

The Last, or Musculare, two yards and long, and of the same Diametre in its
several parts as in a Sheep; being wide at both ends, and slender in the
middle: and may therefore, as that, be subdivided into three.

CHAP. V. Of the Uses of the Gulet and Stomachs of Quadrupeds.
And first of the Gulet.
IN speaking hereof, I shall, as in the Anatomical Part, insist chiefly on
those Particulars which have been omitted by others.

It may therefore first be noted of the bore of the Gulet, That it is not every
where alike answerable to the Body or Stomach. As in a Fox, which both feeds on
Bones, and swallows whole, or with little chewing; and next in a Dog, and other
Ossivorous Quadrupeds, it is very large; sc. to prevent a contusion therein.
Next in a Horse; which though he feeds on Grass, yet swallows much at once, and
so requires a more open passage. But in a Sheep, Rabbit, or Ox, which bite
short, and swallow less at once, it is smaller. But in a Squirel, still lesser,
both because he eats fine, and to keep him from disgorging his meat upon his
descending leaps. And so in Rats and Mice, which often run along Walls with
their Heads downward.

The Thickness of the Gulet is also different. So in a Weesle or Pole-Cat,
which eat no Bones, more Membranous or Skiny. In Dogs more Muscular, greater
force being required to carry down Bones, than Flesh. But in Sheep, Hogs, Cows,
Horses most of all; for three Reasons: First, For that Grass, and especially
Hay is less slippery, and apt to clog by the way. Secondly, Because they eat
continually, and so the Gulet is in continual action, which it could not bear
without pain, were it not made sturdy for hard labor: in like manner, as are
the Muscules of the Chaps, and especially the Masseter, in all the said
Animals. Thirdly, For that all they eat and drink (because they hold their
Heads down) must be made by a greater force to ascend into their Stomachs.
Whereas in Carnivorous Animals, and especially a Man, it passes by descent.
And there are few, but may remember, how difficult it was, when they were Boys,
to drink with their Heads down at a Spring. And although Dogs drink with their
Heads down, yet they can only Lap, their Gulet not being Muscular enough to
carry up much at once.

The several Parts of the Gulet, have their distinct Uses. The outer Membrane,
is both a Fence, and a Swath to all the rest; especially to the Muscular. For
the Nervous underneath, being always capable of, and sometimes subject to
inordinate expansions (as Dr. Willis does well conjecture) it would Rack the
Muscular Membranes beyond their Tone, were they not bound up within this.

The two Musculars, chiefly subserve the several Motions of the Gulet. Amongst
which, Dr. Willis reckons Oscitation or Yauning, and Expuition. Of the first,
Pharmac. Ration, P. 1.
his words are these; In Oscitatione, Oesophagi ductum ampliari, and quasi a
vento quodam inflari and expandi sentimus. But who knows not, that the
Windpipe, and not the Gulet, is the part concerned in all kinds of Respiration,
where of Oscitation is one. Of the latter, his words are these; Ibid.
Gulae Tunica carnosa, duplex quasi Musculus censeri debet; quorum alter,
expuitionis opus persicit. At that time forgeting, that no man ever spat any
thing out of his Stomach; no more than he can be said to vomit or eructate out
of his Mouth. The Doctor is one, of whom I have learned much: and therefore I
mention these Things, only because they lie in my way: and that we may still
remember, Nullius in Verba.

The Actions of the Gulet are therefore principally these Three, Deglutition,
Vomition, and Eructation. By one of the Muscular Membranes, says the
forementioned Doctor, sc. that which descends, Deglutition is performed; by the
ascendent, Vomition. His words Ibid.
are these, Cum unius Fibrarum ordo descendens, Deglutitioni inserviat; alter
ascendens, Vomitionis opus persicit. But that he was herein mistaken, I
conceive, appears from the structure of the said Membranes, neither of which,
is ascendent or descendent, more than the other; and from the manner of their
Contexture, as is above described. Besides, if it were so, why should there not
be Ascendent and Descendent Fibers or Muscules, for the Natural, and the
Inverted Motions also of the Guts?

I conceive therefore, That Deglutition and Vomition are made by the
Cooperation of both the said Membranes: only in the former, the Motion goes
from the Throat downward, in the latter, from the Stomach upward. And so in
Eructation, only with less force. For the performance of which Actions, Two
Muscules or Muscular Membranes are yet requisite; and those platted and
interchanged, as has been described: That is, by a double Plat of the Fibers
of both; whereby half the nether Membrane on the one side the Gulet, becomes
half the upper Membrane on the other side: and so vice versa, in spiral rounds
throughout. To the end, That the Gulet being hereby contracted in one part, and
dilated in the next, might at the same time, thrust forward, and let pass, any
body therein contained: and that the said Contractions and Dilatations might be
more easily and regularly made, and by reciprocal Undulations, carried on from
one end of the Gulet to the other. These Undulations, in the Gulet of a Horse,
when he drinks, are very plainly seen.

And that this Undulation may be made with more speed, it is observable, That
the said Muscular Fibers are not continued by a close, but very oblique or open
spiral Line. Whereby, as the spiral Rounds or Circuits, so the Undulations, are
the fewer; and consequently, not slowly (as in the Guts) but much sooner
finished.

Hence it is, That a Cat has so difficult a swallow, the meat commonly seeming
to stick in her Throat. Not from the smallness of her Gulet; but for that in
the longer half of it, the Muscular Fibers are continued in so close a spiral
Line, as rather to seem Annular. Whereby, the Undulations of the Gulet are more
slowly and difficultly made. So that a more difficult swallow, being one thing
necessary to make her not greedy, but patiently to watch for her Prey; Nature
has therefore contrived her Gulet for that purpose.

The Nervous Membrane, or (as in some Graminivorous Animals it may be called)
Corpus Nervosum, has hitherto been thought to serve only for sense. Dr. Willis
Conjectures, That it is also the Instrument of some certain motions of
expansion in Oscitation and Preternatural Inflation: which is all he says.

But to Me, it seems, That it Cooperates with the Muscular Membrane to all
the Natural Motions of the Gulet, in Deglutition, Vomition, and Eructation.
And, to speak properly, That it is nothing else but a HOLLOW TENDON; that is,
the Tendon of the two Muscular Membranes.

It may be Objected, That then it should lie above, not under the Membranes.
But in a Gizard, we find the Tendon spread within or underneath the Fleshy part
of the Muscules, as well as above.

The truth of this will further appear, if we consider the great Thickness of
this Membrane, where the most forceable motions of the Gulet are required. For
it would serve as well for sensation, if it were ten times as thin: the
grossness of the sensory, not being necessary to the exquisiteness of the
sense; but of the mover, always to the strength of the motion. And therefore,
whereas the Cuticular or utmost Membrane is much of the same thickness in all
Animals; the Nervous is much varied according to the thinness or thickness of
the Muscular: that is, where the Muscule is thick, the Tendon is
proportionable. The notice of which in Oxen, etc. shows the same use hereof
in a man.

The Inmost Skin or Lining of the Gula, is to be a protection to the Nervous,
as the outer is to the Muscular; that so nothing hard, salt, sower, or any way
acrimonious, may be injurious to it. To keep it the better within bounds, in
all the motions of the Gulet. To be the Bed of the Glands. And one seat of
Thirst; which oftentimes lies no deeper than the Throat and upper part of the
Gulet: and is cured by any thing which by moistening the Throat shall give vent
to the Mucus stagnant therein.

CHAP. VI. Of the Uses of the Stomachs of Quadrupeds.
ANd first, all Carnivorous Quadrupeds have the smallest Ventricles; flesh
going farthest. Those that feed on Fruits and Roots have them of a middle size.
Yet the Mole, because It feeds unclean, has a very great one. Sheep and Oxen,
which feed on Grass, have the greatest. Yet the Horse (and for the same reason
the Coney and Hare) though Graminivorous, yet comparatively have but little
ones. For that a Horse is made for labor, and both This and the Hare for quick
and continued motion: for which, the most easy Respiration, and so the freest
motion of the Diaphragme is very requisite; which yet could not be, should the
Stomach lie big and cumbersome upon it, as in Sheep and Oxen it does. For which
cause Nature has here transferred the greater part of the Alimental Lugage into
the Caecum.

The Neck of the Stomach, near the Gut, is commonly reflected backward, so as
to make an acute Angle with the Back of it. To the end, the extrusion of the
prepared Aliment to the Gut, may be stinted. And that the thiner part, which
will more easily wind about, may the better pass away, and leave the rest
behind. Sometimes it has three or four Flexures, as in Sheep and Oxen: for
that the Gut being so small with respect to the Venture, and with all so very
thin; it would, by too sudden or copious an irruption of the Aliment, be in
danger of being burst. And for the same reasons, the Stomach of a Pig, so
voraceous a Creature, is also furnished with a Stopple.

The distinct uses of the Parts of the Stomach, are many of them the same as of
the Gulet. I shall not therefore repeat, but proceed to those particulars as
remain to be explicated.

And first, it is plain, in those thick Stomachs of an Ox or a Sheep, that the
carneous Membranes are true Muscules: which conducteth us more easily to
believe that of a man also Muscular. It Is certain, that the Muscules of the
Abdomen in some Animals, as in Squirels, are thiner than those of a man's
Stomach.

Now the Nervous and Muscular Parts jointly subserve to all the motions of the
Stomach, which I reckon five, viz. Corrugation, Astriction, Undulation,
Convulsion, and Voluntary Motion.

Corrugation, is when there is a double motion of Contraction, beginning from
both the Orifices of the Stomach, and so drawing it up into innumerable small
Wrinkles. For the better expression of the Mucus out of the Glands of the inner
Membrane. For a closer comprehension of the Aliment, and immission of the said
Mucus or other fermenting Juice, into it. And for the gradual expression of the
colliquated parts thereof into the Gut. In this motion, the utmost Muscular
Fibers contract the Stomach in length; and the inermost, in breadth.

Astriction, is a Contraction only about the Pylorus; performed by the inermost
Fibers alone. For the firmer Retention of the Aliment, and its orderly
dismission into the Gut.

Undulation, is when the Contraction is made in several parts of the Stomach
successively, beginning at one Orifice, or End, and terminating at the
opposite. Made also by the Inner Fibers; after the same manner, as the
Undulation or Peristaltick Motion of the Guts. The use of it, is either for
Excretion or Eructation. If it begins from the Gulet, it serves, after the
finest of the Aliment is discharged by Corrugation, for Excretion of the rest.
But if the Undulation be Inverted, or begins from the Pylorus, it produces
Eructation. Answering to the like Inverted Motion, which sometimes happens in
the Guts.

Convulsion, is a forcible and sudden Contraction of all the Orders of Fibers,
outer, middle, and inmost. The use hereof with Undulation, is for Vomition. For
first, there is only an Inverted Undulation, that is, I conceive, when there is
only a Naucea or tendency to Vomit. Which Undulation also, carries part of the
matter by degrees, to the upper mouth of the Stomach. And growing quicker and
stronger, at last turns into a Convulsion; the Stomach being hereby contracted
both in width and length, and the Pylorus forced up to the upper Orifice (as a
Barbars Puff in powdering the Hair, or the Bladder in the Injection of a
Clyster) and so produces actual Vomition.

The Voluntary Motion of the Stomach, is that only which accompanies
Rumination. That it is truly voluntary, is clear, from the Command that
Ruminating Animals have of that Action. For this purpose it is, that the
Muscules of their Venters are so thick and strong; and have several
Duplicatures as the Bases of those Muscules, whereupon the stress of their
motion lies. By means whereof, they are able with ease to roll and tumble any
part of the meat from one Cell of the same Venture to another, or from one
Venture to another, or from thence into the Gulet, whenever they are minded to
do it. So that the Ejection of the meat in Rumination, is a Voluntary
Eructation. Not at all laborious to them, because of the great strength of the
Muscules of their Stomach and Gulet to command and govern the same.

By the Joint assistance of the Glandulous and the Nervous Membranes, the
business of Chylification seems to be performed. The Mucous Excrement of the
Blood being supplied by the former, as an Animal Corrosive, preparing; and the
Excrement of the Nerves by the latter, as an Animal Ferment, perfecting the
Work. And the Caecus Ventriculus of a Hog, seems to be a Repository provided
for such a mixed Leven or Menstruum: whereby he not only becomes more
voraceous, having thence continual irritations to eat: but all he eats, is
thereby likewise well digested.

The Folds of the Stomach, which in its Corrugation must needs be much deeper
than when it is dilated, or of use, To divide the Aliment into several
Portions, and thereby administer their Ferments not only to the Circumference,
but intimate parts of the Mass to be fermented.

The pointed Knots, like little Papillae, in the Stomachs of diverse Ruminating
Beasts, are also of great use, viz. For the Tasting of the Meat. Dr. Willis
describing the Inner Membrane of the Stomach (not of a Beast, but expressly of a
Man) speaks thus; Haec Crusta Ventriculum (Humanum puta) intus obtegens,
similis videtur Illi, quae Linguam obtegit. Wherein he was mistaken: this Inner
Membrane being Glandulous; the Skin of the Tongue not so, but only Fibrous. But
of diverse Beasts which Ruminate, thus much is true, That in their Three first
Venters, the Inner Membrane is Fibrous, and not Glandulous; the fourth only
being Glandulous, as in a man. Of the Fibers of this Membrane and the Nervous,
are composed those pointed Knots before described Chap. 4.
both in substance and shape, altogether like to those upon the Tongue. Whence
I doubt not, but that the said Three Ventricles, as they have a power of
Voluntary Motion: so likewise, that they are the Seat of Taste, and as truly the
Organs of that sense, as is the Tongue it self.

Lastly, and consequently, the said Nervous Knots, are of use to Methodize the
Work of Rumination, after this manner. The Animal having eaten enough for the
Panch well to govern; rowles and tumbles the meat to and fro therein: and at
the same time, with the help of the said Nervous Knots of several degrees of
fineness (as the Goldsmith has his Assayers of several degrees of niceness)
judges of the Courseness or Fineness, Crudeness, or Concoction of any part of
it; and accordingly lets it rest, or removes it. So then the grossest of these
Assayers standing about the Gulet, and so in the passage of the meat between
the Panch and the Reticulum, being the proper judges of what is Course or
Crude; if they find it so, then it is tumbled back to receive a further
maturation in the Panch. If somewhat fine and Concocted, it is then permitted to
pass on and roll into the Reticulum. And the said Assayers or Nervous Knobs
being here sharper and softer, than in the Panch; have still a more accurate
Taste: and therefore what they yet find too course, the Reticulum forthwith
throws it up into the Gulet and Mouth. From whence, being further refined, it is
remanded to the Reticulum; and thence after a while, into the Third Stomach or
the Omasus. And This again being a more nice Assayer than the Reticulum; if it
feels the meat fine and soft enough, passes it into the last Stomach or
Abomasus. But if otherwise, throws it back into the Reticulum, and the
Reticulum into the Gulet and Mouth to be labored once again, and so remanded.

CHAP. VII. Of the Uses of the Guts of Quadrupeds.
I Shall here, as before, pass over such particulars as have been spoken of by
others; and diverse also which being observable in the Gulet and Stomachs, as
well as here, have been already sufficiently explained.

And first the different Bore of the Guts is observable. So, for example, the
Guts of a Horse are very wide. For that he both swalloweth, and discharges
from his Stomach into his Guts, the meat more gross; which therefore requires
a more open passage, lest it should clog. As also, that it may move with
greater speed toward the Caecum, here, Chap. 6.
for the reason abovesaid, designed by Nature to be a second Stomach. Whereas
in an Ox or a Sheep, the meat having passed four successive Concoctions, it is
thence delivered to the Guts of a much finer substance; and so moves safe
enough throuh a much smaller Chanel; and fast enough, there being much less
work here left, for the Caecum to perform.

The Contraction also of the Guts, or lessening of the Bore by several Necks,
is of good use. As for instance, in an Urchan or Cat; serving to stint the
Transition of the meat, that it be not over quick, and dividing the Guts into
so many little Venters, in which the meat restagnates for some time, in order
to its reception of as many repeated Concoctions. Whereby also in these Animals
the work of the Caecum, and therefore the making of it, seems superseded.

Moreover, the rarious length of the Guts is observable, according to the
cleanness, or more fewer nutritive parts of the Food; or its colliquability
into Chyle. So in a Weesle or Squirel, that feeds much on Eggs, and Nuts, and
such like fine and nutritive food, they are extreme short. And in all Gross
eaters, longer than in other Quadrupeds. And therefore one reason, why the Guts
of a Sheep or Ox are slender, is, that they may be long. For were they shorter
and wider, it would not be tantamount: For the food being Grass, it is not
sufficient that they should hold enough: but also necessary, that they give a
longer voyage to a substance so jejune, for a through solution and exuction of
all its nutritive parts. Besides, that in a smaller Channel, the said parts
will all along lie nearer to the Lacteal Veins, and so more easily be expressed
into them.

The Membranes of the Guts, have a general analogy in all Quadrupeds, and
diverse of their Uses have been well assigned. I shall therefore only Note, That
as the spiral Fibers contract or purse up the Bore of the Gut; so those that
run by the length, draw it up shorter, and so dilate it. Whereby, as one part
of the Gut may press the meat forward, or as it were disgorge it, so another
gape to receive it, at the same time. And in case one Gut should by another, or
by some Bowel, be oppressed, being by the said Contraction in length removed a
little out of its place; the freedom of its motion, or any thing therein, will
thereby be regained.

But in a Mole, the same Fibers which run by the length, being Indented, do
also for a little way, each parcel obliquely run by the breadth of the Gut.
Whereby they are able, without the help of spiral Fibers, to narrow or shorten
the Gut of themselves* and also to do both in the same place. For by the
Relaxation of the Fibers, the sides of every Indenture, must needs grow both
wider and more distant, and the Gut wider and more extended, at the same time:
and so Vice versa. Probably with this design, That the Shells of Insects may
make a more safe transition, without raking against the tender sides of the
Guts.

The Glands of the Guts are likewise of great Use. The Mucus which they spew,
serves to make the Guts slippery, that the meat may the more easily and fasely
glide along. As also for another Ferment superinduced to that of the Stomach,
and so a further colliquation of the meat. With respect to both which Uses, the
said Glands, according to the Bore of the Guts, the hardness or softness,
courseness or colliquability of the meat, are more or less numerous; as in the
precedent Examples.

And that this Mucus may be duly supplied, Nature still allows Blood Vessels
proportionable to the plenty of Glands. And has taken care that the Vessels
enter not the Guts on the same side on which the Glands are seated, but the
opposite: that having space enough to branch themselves into the smallest
capillary Tubes, before they reach the Glands, there may be the less danger,
that any sincere Blood should with the Mucus make an Inundation into them.

Through the same Glands, as so many little Springs, I conceive, That the
Humors are either emunged, or precipitated, out of the Blood, in Purgation.
For that one so small a Pipe, as that of the Pancreas should bring so great a
quantity, is not at all probable. And the Glands being a visible way, I know no
reason, wherefore we should have recourse to any invisible one.

Thus the same Glands are a great means to prevent Fevers, and other ill
effects of Cold by a Diarrhea. For when by a sudden astriction of the Pores of
the Skin, or otherwise, the usual perspiration is stopped: the redundant matter
in the Blood, is often safely discharged, by the Glands, into the Guts. But if
the matter be very sharp, or rusheth upon the Glands too suddenly; it
sometimes corrodes or breaks them, and so makes way for Blood also: as may be
observed in the Guts of such as die of a Dysentry.

The Use of the Caecum is manifold, but diverse in diverse Animals; according to
the make of it, and the Relation it bears to the Stomachs and the Guts. And
first, for the most part, it serves to give a second Deliberate Concoction to
the meat, that nothing nutritive in it may be lost. For which purpose, it is
always furnished with Glands, as well as the other Guts. And, with respect to
its width, is commonly but thin, or less muscular, that so being less apt to
constringe it self, it may give a due time of stay to the meat delivered to it.
For which end also it is placed out of the common Road of the Guts; that being
thereby less receptive of their Peristaltick Motion; it may lie the more still.
For the same intent the Caecum in a Sheep has several Flexures answerable to
those in the 4th Stomach or Abomasus. And in a Hog, it is drawn up into Cells on
both sides, like the Colon, to make it so much the more retentive. In the
Coney, the same is done still more effectually, by the spiral Plate, or
Connivent Valve winding from end to end. And in the Horse, not by two only, but
four Rows of Cells on the four sides. In which two last Animals the said Use is
so eminent, that the Caecum, considering its bigness withal, is the chief
Stomach, and much superior to the Stomach so called. And it is also observable,
That the Abomasideus in a Rat, has the same relation to the Caecum; as in a
Sheep, the Abomasus has to the other Stomachs. Hence likewise it may be, that
some Animals have little or no Caecum: either because the meat is so
dissoluble, as not to need a second deliberate Concoction, as in a Weesle; or
for that Nature has made something else to serve without it; as those several
Contractions in the Guts of a Cat; and the Valvulae Conniventes in the small
Guts of a Man. Where we may observe, That these Valves are not every where
spiral, as is thought, but do also make some perfect and distinct Rings:
whereby they are fitter to retard the motion of the meat in its descent.

Another Use may be, For a Retreat; Either to the meat, if it should chance to
rush too fast into the Gut below it: Or to the Excrements, in case the Animal
is diverted from a present ejection of them.

The last Use, I shall name, may be this, That in case the meat, or the
Excrements in the lower Guts should be at any time so dry and hard, as too
slowly, and not without much stress to the Guts, to descend; the Caecum is as a
Clyster-Bag, always ready with its liquid Content, to be in some part thereinto
injected. For which purpose, it usually makes an acute angle with the upper
Guts, and opens directly into those below it.

The Make of the Colon, with other Uses, also answers to the greater need of
Retention. Either because of the upright posture, as in a Man; or frequent and
speedy motions, as in a Horse or Hare: where, without the Cells of the Colon,
to retain the Excrements from the Rectum, there would be a continual Conatus
egerendi.

The Rectum, or rather Stercoraceum of a Cat, being peculiarly of so great a
bulk; I will conclude with a Conjecture of one Use of it: and that is, To be as
a Counter-poise to her Head: whereby, from what height soever she falls, she
still lights upon her feet.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Stomachs and Guts of BIRDS.
BEcause that many particulars will here occur, which are intelligible from the
former Descriptions, and have already been explained; I shall therefore be the
shorter. Of about Forty, which I have opened, I shall describe these Thirteen
that follow, sc. of a Casowary, an Owl, a Cuckoo, a Dunghil-Cock, a Tame
Pigeon, a Jackdaw, a Starling, a Yellowhammer, a Bull-finch, a Wry-neck, a
Bunting, a Reed-Sparrow, and a House-Swallow: and figure them all, but those of
a Cuckoo. With Notes upon others, as I proceed.

Of a Casowary.
The CASOWARY has no Crop. But a wider Gulet, I suppose, as well as Guts, than
in any other Bird. Far greater than those of an Ostrich; although the Body be
much less. The Gulet, where widest, or near the Throat, about five inches over;
next the Stomach, two. Sprinkled with many small Glands, as it is, more or
less, in all Birds.

At the bottom of it, the Echinus; common to all Birds that I have opened. But
here less conspicuous. The Figure has not expressed it. It has always a
Lining of much larger Glands than those in the Gulet or Crop; commonly of an
Oval Figure, and each of them with an open mouth spewing out a Mucus.

He has no Gizard (as has the Ostrich); yet a thick Muscular Stomach, as in
other Carnivorous Birds. Almost of an Oval shape; and small with respect to the
Guts: expressed somewhat too big for the Scale, (as also the Gulet and Guts) in
the Figure. The Pylorus guarded with a kind of Valve.

The Guts not two yards and half long. Beside the two Caeca, are three. The
larger, next the Stomach: as it is, in almost all other Birds. About three
inches and over, where widest. The smaller, somewhat above two. The Rectum, the
largest, sc. about four. Much wider than even those of a Horse, excepting only
his Caecum and his Colon.

He has two Caeca; as have almost all Birds. Yet here very small, about a foot
long, but no thicker than a Woman's little Finger. Here, as in all other Birds,
making obtuse Angles with the Rectum. So that what is said of them in Mr.
Willughby's Ornithologia, -- Cum Intestino Recto angulos acutos faciunt: was
only a slip of that most accurate Pen.

The Rectum is separated from the next above, by a Connivent Valve.

Of an Owl.
The Gulet of a young Grey-OWLE, is of an indifferent size. At the bottom of
it, the Echinus. And somewhat more apparent, than in the Casowary, but less
than in most frugivorous Birds.

The Stomach, a middle Thing betwixt that of other Carnivorous Birds, and a
Gizard, sc. a plain Bag, yet in the middle somewhat Tendinous.

The Guts in length two feet and. Three, besides the Caeca. The first or
Amplum, a foot long; and above of an inch broad. The Gracile, which reaches to
the Caeca, a foot and three inches; and above of an inch where narrowest. In
this Gut, are 15 or 16 Contractions, like those in a Cat's, but made longer.

The Caeca, four inches and long. As the Gizard of a middle Nature, so these of
a middle size, betwixt those of some Carnivorous, and some Frugivorous Birds.
At their close or further ends, an inch over. But where they enter the Rectum,
no thicker than the bigest string of a Trebel Vial.

The Rectum, three inches long; toward the Anus, near an inch wide; almost in
the Figure of a little Pear. As it is also in most Wild-Fowl.

Of a young Cuckoo.
Neither has this Bird any Crop, nor a Gizard. But to the Gulet it is
peculiar, That it has Ten or Twelve Rows of more conspicuous Glands, which run
along from the Throat to the Echinus.

The Echinus, of a ratable bigness, and more distinct from the Stomach, than in
the Owl; being divided from it by a Muscular Neck. As it is also in most other
Birds.

The Stomach, a plain Bag, much like to that of an Owl; yet somewhat thicker,
and more Tendinous.

The Guts about a foot and long. Three besides the Caeca. The first, an inch
and long; and near of an inch wide. The second, above a foot, and th wide. The
Caeca, as wide in the middle, as the first; and above an inch long. The Rectum,
two inches and.

The Wild-Duck and Teal also, and I suppose all of this kind, and most other
Birds, are without a Crop.

Of a Dunghill-Cock.
A DUNGHILL-COCK, has one Stomach or Ventricle more than the former Birds, sc.
a Crop: all over besprinkled with small Glands, somewhat more visible than in
the Gulet.

The upper part of the Gulet, leading to the Crop, of an inch over. But the
lower part, leading from it toward the Echinus, very slender, not above wide.

The Echinus almost an Oval shape, being divided from the Gizard by a pretty
long and slender Neck. And may therefore be properly called the Second or Oval
Ventricle.

The Third, is the Gizard, in the place of the plain Bag or Stomach in the
former Birds. It Is made of Six Muscules and a Cartilaginous Lining in the
greater Concave; which may be called the Laboratory. Those four, which make the
greatest part of the Gizard, may be called the Grinders. Of extraordinary
thickness; whereby the length of the Unequal, is cross to the length of the
Concave of the Gizard. Yet thinner toward the Edges, so as to make a kind of
double Hyperbola. In the Center hereof on both sides meet the Tendons of the
said Muscules, continued or expanded for about an inch in breadth, without any
Carneous or Red Fibers mixed with them. From whence, they are divided, the one,
which is the stronger, spread over, the other, under the Muscules; into which
they are also branched all the way, so as meeting in the body of the Muscule
they make a sort of fine Cancellated Work, as may be seen better in the Gizard
of a Goose; especially in a thin slice hereof parboyl'd, and held up against a
Candle. And in all Gizards, so as to be seen to run cross, as in that of a
Pullet in Tab. 29.

The Fifth Muscule is that which stands between the Echinus and the four
Muscules now described, and may be called the Deductor, from the use hereafter
mentioned. Very thin with respect to the former; placed at the upper end of the
left edge of the Gizard, and spread a little on the side, but not so much as in
the Figure. Better represented, Tab. 29.

The Sixth, is such another Muscule, standing opposite to the former, sc. on
the right edge of the Gizard, and may be called the Reductor, as shall be
showed why.

The four Grinders are strengthened within, not only with a Tendon, but a
Gristly Lining, thicker than the outer Tendon, with a rough surface, and
wrinkled into several Transverse Furrows, from one end to the other.

The Guts are about a yard and long. Three besides the Caeca. The first, the
smaller; contrary to what it is in most Birds. Not much above of an inch, where
widest. About two feet and long. Where it joins with the Greater, stands the
end of the Ductus Intestinalis, accurately described Lib. de Foetu Formato.
by Dr. Walter Needham.

The Greater, where widest an inch. The Rectum, somewhat more. The Caeca near
eight inches long: at the further end, above of an inch over; but where they
open into the Rectum, no thicker than the great string of a Base-Viol.

It Is proper to the Gallinaceous kind, to have a great Gizard. That of a good
big Turkey, near eight Ounces Troy. Whereas that of a Japan Peacock is not
above two: yet the Body about half as big as that of the Turkey.

Not only all the Gallinaceous kind; but the Duck, and, I suppose, all of that
kind, have two very long Caeca.

Of a Tame Pigeon.
The Gulet of a Tame PIGEON, near the Throat, very wide; almost an inch and
over.

The Crop is above three inches broad; above two, long; and an inch and deep.
Not so distinct from the Gulet, as in the Gallinaceous kind; this and the Gulet
running one into another in a direct Line. In the Belly of it, are few visible
Glands: but the Neck thence down to the Echinus, is curiously Lined with six or
seven Glandulous Laces.

The Crop of a Carrier-Pigeon, is curiously shaped; as it were Treble-Belly'd:
the two outmost or side-Bellies, opening into that in the middle. The bottom
and Neck whereof, are lined with several Glandulous Laces, as that of the Tame
Pigeon.

The Crop of the Cropper-Dove, is almost of the same Figure. But the Gulet of a
wonderful extent; when blown up lightly, above nine inches in the girth.

The Echinus large, and so the Glands therein; for the sight of which, I have
represented it inside outward. Divided, as usually, from the Gizard by a
Muscular Neck.

The Gizard rounder than of most other Birds. The Muscules very thick and high
in the middle, and flater at the edges. The Deductor stands at the top of it,
and the Reductor at the bottom.

The Greater Gut a foot long, and near ^/^ths of an inch where widest. The
slender Gut above a yard long, and not much above ^/^th of an inch over where
smallest. The Caeca not more than of an inch long, nor thicker than a
Kniting-Pin. Placed about an inch above the Rectum. The Rectum near of an inch
wide, and an inch and long.

Of a Jackdaw.
The Gulet above an inch over at the top; at the bottom; being Conick all the
way, as in most Birds.

The Gizard, above ^/^ of an inch over, an inch and long, and very Tendinous.
The Guts a foot and long. The first or Greater, of a foot; and ^/^ of an inch
wide. The smaller, Ten inches long, and somewhat more than of an inch over. The
Rectum, two inches long, and above an inch over; shaped like the end of a
Plummers sodering Iron. The Caeca, not much above of an inch long, and very
small.

All along the slender Gut, and in part of the Rectum, the chief Muscular
Fibers are most curiously Indented, as in the Mole; especialy near the Caeca.
Not ill resembling the Needle Work called Irish-Stitch.

Transverse to these Fibers which make the Indentures, and which are continued
by the length of the Gut, run others of the same color, round about it; one of
them to every Indenture, which it divides into two equal parts.

The same Indented-Work is seen in most other smaller Birds, as well as here,
but not every where after the same manner, nor in the same place. In the Twite
or Avicula Anadavadensis, it continues also very far, sc. four inches above the
Caeca. In the Redstart, above three. And in the Titlark, as far. In the
Water-Wagtaile, not above two and; and an inch below them. In the
Solitary-Sparrow, they are also very pretty below the Caeca. In the
House-Sparrow, they are visible only in the small Gut an inch and ^/^ above the
Caeca. In the Chaffinch, only in the Rectum.

The Gulet of a Jay, being contracted in the middle, is divided into two
slender Venters, as the Guts of some Animals. So also is that of a Japan
Peacock.

The Rectum of a Jay, has several Muscular Plates, or Valvulae Conniventss
placed at the distance of ^/^ or ^/^ of an inch.

Of a Starling.
The Gulet exceeds not an inch in width. The Echinus small, with respect to
the other parts. The Gizard, mean; near an oval shape: the Reductor
conspicuous. Next to the Gizard stands the slender Gut, and the Greater
follows; as in the Dunghill-Cock: contrary to the order kept in most other
Birds. Where they meet, there is a remarquable Contraction. The Indentures run
along the lower half of the Ample Gut; with some Undulations over against the
Caeca.

Of a Yellowhammer.
The Gulet, at top is dilated into a Crop an inch and long, and above an inch
over. The Axis whereof, as in a Pigeon, is the same with that of the lower part
of the Gulet, and not transverse, as in the Gallinaceous kind. Curiously Laced
with 16 or 18 Rows of Glands, about half an inch long. The Green-Finch has a
Crop of the same shape: but the Glands sprinkled all over it; very small, yet
distinct.

The Echinus very small; not above of an inch long, and as broad.

The Gizard above an inch long, almost an inch broad; thin edged, but high in
the middle; very strong and Tendinous. And it may here be observed, That
although the Gallinaceous kind have a very large Gizard: yet in many other
Birds, even of the smallest sort, the Gizard, with respect to its bulk, is
altogether as strong: that is to say, the Muscules, with respect to their
length and breadth, are as Thick, and their Tendons answerable; as not only in
this Bird, but the House-Sparrow, Linnet, Titlark, and many more. And with
respect to the Body, some small Birds have also a great Gizard, as a Chaffinch,
which has one four times as big as that of a Linet.

The Guts about eight inches long. The Greater, three; and above over where
widest. The smaller, about three and; and above th wide. The Rectum an inch and
long, shaped like a Pear; ^/^ths over in its widest place: very great. The
Caeca stand of an inch, below its smaller end: not above ^/^th of an inch long.

The Indentures continued about of an inch from the Caeca both upward and
downward.

The Annular, or rather spiral Fibers, in the Rectum more apparent.

Of a Bull-Finch.
A very different Bird from all the Finches. For first he has a Lateral Crop.
It Is above an inch broad, and about long. The Gulet, between the Crop and the
Echinus, near ^/^th over. The Echinus near an inch long, and above broad:
Thrice as big, as that of a Martlets, Swallows, or Sparrows. The Gizard near an
inch broad; broader than long.

The Guts no less than a yard and an inch long: much beyond what they are in
any of the Finches. The Greater, a foot and an inch; and ^/^th wide. The
smaller five inches and; and ^/^th in width. The Caeca, at the end of the
Rectum, not above ^/^th of an inch long. The Rectum, near an inch: and where
widest, almost an inch. Figured like a Pear, as in most other Birds.

The whole smaller Gut, and about five inches of the greater, very curiously
Indented. And the Indentures deeper in the latter.

A Young Wryneck.
Has no Crop, and but a small Gulet; not much above of an inch, where
broadest. The Echinus of a prodigious bigness; near an inch and long, and an
inch over. Much bigger than in a Jackdaw, that is yet near six times as big as
this Bird. I found it full of meat. The Gizard of a mean size; an inch long,
and ^/^ths broad. The Guts about eight inches. The greater, near two; and near
wide. The next, four; and somewhat more than ^/^th broad. The Rectum, above two
and; and ^/^ths, where widest. The spiral Fibers herein more visible. He has
no Caeca. The Indentures not so regular, as in most Birds, and but few.

As this Bird has no Caeca; so the White-Throat, has no small Gut.

Of a Bunting.
Has no Crop. The Gulet from end to end; above a ^/^ of an inch over where
slenderest. The Echinus ^/^ths long, and as broad. The Gizard large, about of
an inch square. The Guts, ratably, extreme, short, not above nine inches long.
The larger, four inches, and wide. The next, as long; and ^/^th over. The
Rectum, about an inch; and not very wide. The Caeca not above ^/^th. The
Indentures continued from the Caeca upward, three inches, but less visibly.
Downward or toward the Anus, a of an inch, very curious.

Of a Reed-Sparrow.
The Gulet, Echinus, Gizard, and Guts of this Bird, are all much like in shape
to those of a Bunting: and ratably, less.

Of a House-Swallow.
The Gulet above of an inch over next the Throat; next the Echinus, ^/^th.
Laced with eight or nine Rows of Glands by the length, as in a Pigeon. He has
no Crop. The Echinus, above of an inch long, and as wide. The Gizard near an
inch long; and ^/^ths broad. The Guts about five inches long. For the bigness,
strong and muscular. The Indentures, for the length of an inch and, very fine;
especially, when the Guts are blown up. The Caeca ^/^th of an inch. Between the
Indented Gut and the Rectum, a great Contraction: but is omitted in the Figure.

In a Robin-Redbreast; the Guts are more Muscular, than in any small Bird. The
Caeca, fastened, not as usually either on the Neck of the Rectum, or where that
and the smaller Gut meet; but ^/^ an inch above the end of the smaller Gut.
None of them have any visible Indentures.

CHAP. IX. Of the Uses of these Parts.
THe Gulets of Birds, are bigger or less, according to the quantity they
swallow. More or less Glandulous, according to the Solidity, or the Dryness of
their Meat. And with respect to the same, the Figure thereof is more simple; or
expanded into a Crop; by which it is retained a longer time, before it further
descends. And according as less or more Time is required, the Crop is made so,
as either to have its Axis, the same with that of the Gulet; or else to stand
Collateral, and so open transversly into it.

After the Meat has been sufficiently macerated there, it descends into the
Echinus, for a second preparation. So much the more thoroughly made here, because
by far greater Glands. And what was done before to all at once, is here in, to
smaller parcels. This Part in some sort answering to the Crop, as the
Reticulum, in a Sheep, to the Panch. Withal it should seem, That when the
Gizard is either over loaded, or the Meat not enough prepared; it is thence
returned back to this Part, (as the Reticulum also subserves the Omasus) till
It and the Gizard are more ready, one for the other. For which end also the
Muscular Neck below the Echinus, serves as a Sphincter to purse it up.

At length it descends into the Third Ventricle. Either Membranous, as in
most Carnivorous Birds; where the Meat is concocted as in a Man. Or somewhat
Tendinous, as in an Owl; as if it were made indifferently for Flesh, or other
Meat, as he could meet with either. Or most Thick and Tendinous, called The
Gizard; wherein the Meat, as in a Mill, is ground to pieces, and thence pressed
by degrees into the Guts in the form of a Pulp. For which purpose, the Deductor
serves to deliver the Meat from the Echinus to the Laboratory; as a Hopper to a
Mill. The four Grinders or chief Operators, as the Millstones: Partly, as they
are extraordinary Thick, and made with double Tendons; whereby they are
constring'd with the greater force. And partly, as their Tendons stand high in
the center, so as to be arched: for so, every time the Tendons are contracted,
they must needs make a shallower Arch, and so force the insides of the Grinders
closer together. And as the Millstones are peck'd and cut with small Gutters,
least their force should be evaded: so the Gristly Lining of the Gizard is all
over rough, and gathered into answerable Furrows. And because the forceable
motion of the Grinders, must needs work the Meat from under them: as therefore
in some Mills there is one attends still to turn the Grist under the Stone; so
the Reductor here, to deliver it back to the Grinders, and so over and over,
till it be sufficiently elaborated for the Guts.

And as the strong and continual motion of all these Muscules, is taught us
from their structure, so likewise from their red color, which especially in
the Grinders is intense. Hence in a Fish, the Muscules which move the Fins are
usually Red, although the rest of the Flesh is very white: And so the Leg of a
Domestic Fowl. Whereas the Wings also of a Wild Fowl, are of the same color.
So likewise the Flesh of a driven Calf, or of a Hare, though that of a Coney be
white. And that which comes nearer, the Heart in all Creatures, having the like
continual motion, is of a Red Color.

The Guts are of different length and bigness, not always proportionable to
that of the Bird, but the nature of the Meat. So those of a Casowary, though it
be necessary, that they should contain Meat enough for so great a Body: yet
not, that the Meat, which is very nutritive, should make any long voyage. Yet
is it needful there should be a Connivent Valve before the Rectum, for the
guarding of so open a passage. And so with Variety in other Birds, according as
they feed on Worms, Seeds, Fruits, Flys, or Shell'd Insects, requiring a
longer, or more open passage, for their more deliberate, or safer Transmission
to the Anus.

The Indentures also seem to be made, and with variety; to the same Intent: sc.
That the Guts hereby receiving the greater Contraction and Dilatation, may so
much the more forceably detrude the Meat, or more easily give way to it; as it
is softer, or mixed with Shells, Stones and the like.

The Caeca, especially where large, and made for a further Concoction of the
Meat; for the better Retention hereof, where they open into the Rectum, are
very straight. And for the same reason, also thinner and less Muscular than the
other Guts: that so the Meat therein may lie the more quiet.

The ampliation of the Rectum, chiefly in Wild Fowls, amongst other Reasons,
is, I suppose, That the Dung lying there in good quantity, may be as a
Counter-poise to the Head, to keep it up in flying.

CHAP. X. Of the Stomachs and Guts of FISHES.
IN so many as I have opened, two Things are more generally observable, viz.
That many of them have no Stomach, that is one that is not Bellied; as in the
Salmon, Jack, Tench, Barble, Breme: or very little, as in the Place. And many
more, instead of One Caecum, as in some Quadrupeds; or Two, as in most Birds;
have three or four, as the Perch; nine or ten, as the Rochet; many more, as
the Trout, above thirty; the Whiting, above forty; the Salmon many more.

The Stomach of a Place shaped almost like the Echinus of a Bird. Bounded at
the bottom with a Connivent Valve. The Guts two only. The upper end of the
first, has two little extuberant Parts, the use whereof may be answerable to
one use of the Caecum, sc. To divert the Meat, lest upon any Inverted Motion of
the Gut, it should regurgitate into the Stomach, or strain the Valve. The
bottom of this Gut is separated from the Rectum, by another pretty Connivent
Valve: both which, and the visible Texture of the Fibers, are showed in the
last Table.

The Stomach of a Salmon is only like a wide Gut. He has about fourscore
Caeca, hanging on the great Gut, almost like the Mane upon the Neck of a Horse.
Being tied altogether with small Vessels, and the Vessels hid with Fat; they
have been mistaken by some for a Pancreas. The Rectum is guarded with about
thirty Annular Valves.

The Whiting has a large Stomach, which is a distinct Bag or Belly. And
numerous Caeca, not standing as in the Salmon, but all in a Ruck. The Stomach
and Guts of a Cod are very like.

Some NOTES upon the TABLES.
TAb. 1. Described, p. 9, 14, 19, 27. The Stone only, drawn after the life.
Tab. 2. Desc. p. 11, 13, 21, 24, 25, 29. All but the Ram's Horns, after the
life. Tab. 3. Desc. p. 36, 38. Tab. 4. Desc. p. 42, 50. Tab. 5. Desc. p. 63,
64, 67. Tab. 6. Desc. p. 78, 80. The double Egg drawn after the life. Tab. 7.
Desc. p. 87, 104, 108, 110, 113, and 114. Tab. 8. D. p. 115, 117, 121, 123.
Tab. 9. D. p. 126, 127, 128. Tab. 10. D. p. 130, 131. Tab. 11. D. p. 133, 135,
136, 137, 140. Tab. 12. D. p. 140, 141, 142, line 9. p. 146, 148. line 1. p.
149. Tab. 13. D. p. 154. line 13. p. 156, 158, 161, 163, 165, 166. Tab. 14. D.
p. 188. line 13, 23, and 30. p. 189, 190. line 18, 33, and 40, 191. Tab. 15. D.
p. 197, 198. Tab. 16. D. p. 201, 202, 203, 204, 205, 206. Tab. 17. D. p. 185,
216, 229. Tab. 18. D. p. 233, 243, line 22, p. 244. line 37. p. 245, line 33.
Tab. 19. D. p. 254, 255, 256. line 33, 263. line 35. p. 264. line 3, and 19.
Tab. 20. D. p. 267, 268, 273, 276, 291, 297, 302, 303. Tab. 21. D. p. 305, 306,
307. line 23. p. 308, 312. Tab. 22. D. p. 315, 323, 326. line 34. p. 329, 330.
The rest belong to the Anatomical Part. Tab. 23. In which the Stomach and Guts
of a Fox, are supposed to be turned inside outward, to show the Glands. Tab.
24. In which all the Guts are supposed to be inverted, to show their Glands and
inward Structure. Tab. 25. Where some Faults are to be rectified by the
Descriptions. To which the Reader is desired always to have regard. Tab. 26. In
which the Stomach and Guts of a Sheep supposed to be Inside outward. Tab. 27.
In which the width of the Casowary's Guts is somewhat above the Scale. Tab. 28.
In which the Gizard of the Dunghill-Cock is not so well drawn, as in the
following Table. The Pigeons Crop drawn Inside outward, to show the Glands both
in that, and in the Echinus.
FINIS.
Tab: 1.
Tab. 2.
Tab. 3.
Tab. 4.
Tab.5
Tab. 6.
Tab. 7.
Tab. 8.
Tab. 9.
Tab. 10.
Tab. 11.
Tab. 12.
Tab. 13.
Tab. 14.
Tab. 15.
Tab. 16.
Tab. 17
Tab. 18.
Tab. 19.
Tab. 20.
Tab. 21.
Tab. 22.
TAB: 23
TAB: 24.
Tab. 25.
TAB: 26
Tab. 27.
Tab. 28:
Tab. 29.
TAB.30.
TAB. 31.



