A SERMON Preached at St. LAWRENCE CHVRCH IN READING, IN THE COUNTY of BERKS.
On the 3d of October 1692. being the day on which the Mayor was Sworn.

By JOHN GRIFFYTH, M. A. and Vicar of White-Waltham, Berks.

Printed at the Request of the Mayor and Aldermen.

IMPRIMATUR, Geo. Royse, R. Rmo. in Christo Patri, ac Dom. Dom. Johanni
Archiep. Cant. a Sacris Domest. January 31. 1692/3.

LONDON: Printed for William Rogers at the Sun over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. 1693.

TO THE Worshipful Mr. JOHN SAVNDERS, Mayor; the Recorder, Aldermen, and
Burgesses of the Corporation of Reading.
Mr. MAYOR,
THIS Sermon, which was first Preached, being now Printed at your Request, I
shall make no Apology for it: I know a Plain Discourse will never please the
Curious, and one for Peace will always be unwelcome to the Factious; and as I
pretend not to gratify them, so I shall never endeavor to humor these.

My design in Preaching it, was to persuade People to lead quiet and peaceable
Lives in all Godliness and Honesty. And your desire of having it Published,
implies a Resolution of prosecuting this good End, and to convince the unruly,
That many things which are Impertinencies in private Persons, are Duties
incumbent on a Magistrate.

SIR, You cannot show your self a truer Lover of your Corporation, nor
contribute more to its Happiness any other way, than by encouraging the
Practice of True Religion, which will oblige Men to be useful in their
Generations, by employing their Hands more, and their Tongues less.

That your Town may thus flourish, by abounding in Love and every good Work, is
the hearty desire of,

SIR, Your Faithful Servant. JOHN GRIFFYTH.

1 THESSALONIANS. IV. 11. And that ye study to be quiet, and to do your own business,
and to work with your own hands, as we have commanded you.


AMongst the many other Advantages of the Christian Religion, which may
reasonably commend it to all wise men, this is no inconsiderable one; That it
is adapted to the real Interests of men in all Relations and Capacities; That
the Rules it prescribes tend not only to men's personal tranquillity and
contentment, but the Public Peace and Settlement of all Societies.

The Author of this Religion, Christ Jesus, his Entrance into the World was
celebrated with Proclamations, as of Glory to God in the highest, so of peace
on earth, and good will toward men. And the Christian Institution it self lays
the strictest Obligations on men's Consciences, to observe those Homiletical,
those public Virtues of Common Conversation, which are for the good of others
as well as themselves; such as Patience, Meekness, Gentleness, Charity, etc. so
that a good Christian cannot be an ill Neighbor; the Precepts of his holy
Profession require him to put on all those good Qualities and Habits of the
Mind, which dispose men to Peace and Good Nature, and to study to live so as to
be easy both to themselves, and all that are about them.

Ver. 9, 10. of this Chap.
And thus does St. Paul tell the Thessalonians, That they were taught of God to
love one another; that therefore they should increase more and more in such
Christian Charity; and to that end, They should study to be quiet, and to do
their own business, etc.

The occasion and design of this Epistle (which is supposed to be the first of
all St. Paul's Epistles) seems, by comparing it with the 17 th of the Acts of
the Apostles, to be this; When many both Jews and Gentiles had been converted
to Christianity by the Preaching of Paul and Silas, the Jews raise a Tumult;
whereupon St. Paul makes his escape to Athens; whence being certified by
Timothy, of the State of the Church in Thessalonica, how they continued
constant and firm in their Religion, notwithstanding all the Attempts of their
Enemies to discourage them; he writes this Epistle to establish and settle them
in those Truths they had received; he animates them by the Example of his own
Constancy, to perseverance in their Holy Profession; he sets down particularly
some of those Virtues which he would persuade them to the practice of. In the
first place he exhorts them to Holiness toward God; for this being the will of
God, even their sanctification, ver. 3. of this Chapter; he who was to teach
them how they ought to walk and please God, requires them to distinguish
themselves from the profane Gentiles, which knew not God by the purity of
their Hearts and Lives; Every one possessing his vessel in sanctification and
honor, etc. ver. 4, 5. He then dissuades them from Fraud and Injustice, and to
have a regard to exact Righteousness in all their Dealings; That no man should
go beyond, or defraud his brother in any matter, ver. 6. but that instead of
contriving and designing any Injury one to another, they should study to
promote each others Welfare, by Acts of Beneficence, and all the Offices of an
Active and Industrious Charity.

These Thessalonians were a People too prone to be turbulent, and (as it were)
naturally addicted to Tumults and Seditions; their City being very populous,
and one of the Metropolitan Cities of Macedonia, they were apt to create
Factions and Disturbances upon any slight Occasion: They called together the
Rabble upon Paul's Preaching, to drive out both the Apostle, and Christianity
it self (if they could) out of the City; Acts 17.5.
For they were moved with envy, and took unto them certain lewd fellows of the
baser sort, and gathered a company, and set all the City in an uproar: A
Practice too usual in all great and populous Towns, and (as it appears) no new
Trick of the Devil's to disturb the Peace both of Church and State.

Again, amongst those who pretended to embrace the Christian Religion, and to
be converted to the Belief of it by St. Paul's Ministry, there were some who
made their Holy Profession a Cloak for Idleness, and neglect of the Duties of
their Proper Callings; who instead of busying themselves in their own
Vocations, were still prying into other men's Concerns, and intermedling with
things which did by no means belong to them: And of these sort of people does
the Apostle speak in 2 Epist. 3.11. Who walk disorderly, working not at all,
but were busybodies. Now that which gave occasion to such Idleness, was this:
The Christians of this Church (they who were Believers in Deed, and not in Show
only) at St. Paul's Instance raised great Charities, and made very liberal
Contributions toward the relief of such as were not able to work, (who were
the only Poor that the Primitive Christians knew of, or judged proper Objects
of Charity): Their Alms were so considerable, and their forwardness therein
such, that the Apostle proposes them to the Corinthians, as Examples of
Goodness and Liberality, 2 Cor. 8.

Now some who were among them, and made a profession indeed of Christian
Religion, and that was all, seeing what good Provision was made by these
Collections for such as were in want, resolve to want too; wholly neglect the
Works of their Callings, and choose to live idly, and rely upon those
Contributions for a Maintenance; they think it better to live by the Sweat of
other men's Brows than their own, and so indulge themselves in all the Ease and
Softness that the Severity of those Times would admit of. Hereupon Idleness
makes them rude and saucy, and having nothing to do, they become impertinently
curious and inquisitive into other men's Affairs; and these are they whom the
Apostle admonishes in the Words of the Text, To study to be quiet, and to mind
their own etc.

Having thus showed you the particular occasion of this Advice; I shall in the
further prosecution of these Words,

I. Inquire into the Nature of the Duties prescribed.

II. Evince the reasonableness of the observance of them.

III. Make some short Reflections on the whole.

I. To the First of these: And the Thing recommended to us, is a Peaceable
Temper and Behavior, which will make us easy to our selves and others. This is
the End proposed, and the Means of attaining it is, by being intent on our
Proper Callings, and industrious to discharge the Duties thereof. One would
think that Peace had those many, and so desirable Advantages attending it, that
the very Sound of the Word should create a longing after it; and that there
were no need of pressing that as a Duty, which so much commends it self, as a
Public Blessing to all that are possessed of it; yet so inordinate are the
Passions, so contrary the Interests, and so different the Humors of men, that
it is no very easy thing either to procure or preserve so desirable a Mercy:
The Apostle therefore requires Christians not only to be contented to live
quietly (if they may), but to study and contrive it, to use all the Lawful and
Honest Arts they can think of, to obtain it; by laboring for that Temper,
which is not only inoffensive, but obliging:

Romans 12.17, 18.
And thus does he advise the Christians at Rome; Recompense to no man evil for
evil; provide things honest in the sight of all men; if it be possible, as much
as in you lies, live peaceably with all men; q. d. You must be so far from
offering Injuries, and so giving others a just occasion to trouble and be angry
with you, that you must make the best Provision you can for Quietness and
Agreement, and not omit any thing (which you lawfully may do) to prevent
Disturbances, and promote Peace.

This Peace which all men should pursue, is not only private between man and
man, but public, as that of Societies; The Peace of their Country, and that
both in Church and State; That all men should endeavor to promote Love and
Unity in the Town or Place of their abode, by a cheerful and strict observance
of all things that may conduce to such a good end. And on the contrary, by
showing themselves in all Companies, and upon all occasions, professed Enemies to
Faction, and abhorrers of Schism, and utterly to dislike all such devilish and
ill natured Projects, as tend to Trouble and Confusion.

A mind thus peaceably affected, teaches a Person readily to obey all lawful
Commands of his Superiors, not to dispute the Reasons of Laws, or to ask
Governors wherefore they have required such and such things; but to consider,
it is their Duty to be subject, and so readily to obey in all things, where God
has not forbidden.

When people are captious, and make it their Business to perplex their own and
other men's Consciences, by corrupt Constructions of wholesome Laws; this looks
liker a design of quarrelling, than a desire of quietness, viz. when persons
instead of contributing what they can to the Quiet of the State, by a due
submission to Governors, and a cheerful obedience to Laws, where the Matter of
them is Just and Honest, shall presume to question the Authority of their
Lawgivers, and to dispute the Titles of their Princes, this is downright
Faction, and smells of the Pride and Insolence of Absalom; O that they
themselves were but Kings in Israel! Again, when people instead of having a due
regard to the Precepts of the Gospel, which require all Christians to prosecute
Peace and Unity, and that external, by communicating in all the Parts of
Religious Worship, as well as that Internal, of Heart and Affections, and
instead of conforming to what they themselves own they lawfully may do for the
peace of the Church's sake; I say, instead thereof, employ all the Wit they
have, to invent new Scruples, and revive old Objections against some Ceremonies
and Circumstantials of Religion, and make this a Plea for Separation; this is a
plain sign of a Schismatical Dividing Spirit, destitute of that Charity which
disposes good men to seek the Peace of Sion, and to desire the repair of all
its Breaches: If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, (says the Royal Psalmist) let my
right hand forget her cunning; if I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave
to the roof of my mouth, if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy: plainly
intimating, that a public Spirit will sacrifice private Affections and Desires
to the Public Good; and in his pursuit of it, studies not to gratify a
Faction, or to carry on the Interest of some beloved Party, but all Pride and
Prejudice, and Selfish Designs, being submitted to the Honor of God, and the
Good of his Church, his chief endeavor is to follow after those things that
make for Peace, and whereby we may edify one another.

Let every man do his Duty in his Proper Station, observe what the Laws of God
and Man require of him in order to this blessed End; instead of teaching others
how to govern and command, let himself learn to obey, according to the
Apostle's Direction; Let men resolve to be subject to principalities and
powers, to obey magistrates, Tit. 3.1, 2.
to be ready to every good work, to speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers,
but gentle, showing all meekness unto all men. And this is the true way to be
quiet; for as Peace and Concord are best secured by Sobriety and Diligence in
the Works of our particular Callings; so Tumults and Disorders are the Natural
Effects of Idleness and Impertinency; and therefore the Apostle exhorts to
Assiduous Industry, and dissuades from being curiously inquisitive after other
men's Affairs, as the most proper Methods of Quiet and Tranquillity: So that the
latter part of the Verse forbids Curiosity and Idleness, as malignant Vices,
productive of all those Mischiefs which Human Societies are subject to.

The inquisitive and busy Spirit is the offspring of Pride and Envy, argues
the want of Peace and Contentment in the person's own Breast, and a spiteful
endeavor to prevent or disturb them in others: Were men thankful and contented
in the Station which Providence has placed them in, they would study to
conform their Minds to their present Condition, acquiesce in the Dispositions
of a Wise God, and employ their Thoughts to find out how they might best serve
him and their Generations, in the Post they are in.

Thus does the Apostle advise Servants, and those of Low Estate amongst the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 9.20.
to abide in the Calling whereunto they were called: Not but that they might
accept of Liberty, and use it thankfully when they might have it; yet whilst
Providence continued them in meaner circumstances, they ought to be contented,
and not by promising themselves an imaginary Freedom, neglect the real Duties
of their present State.

Whence is it that so many among us intermeddle with things that are above
their Sphere, and far out of their sight? that every ordinary Mechanic
pretends to Politics, shall underrake to form new Schemes of Government, and
prescribe to Superiors what Laws they should enact, and how they should execute
them?

Whence is it that so many ignorant persons, who lack to be taught their
Catechisms, and to be instructed in the First Rudiments of the Christian
Religion, shall yet quarrel with the Constitution of the Church, and find fault
with its Government, Discipline and Worship? I say, whence springs all this
rude Impertinency, but from a proud, ambitious Spirit? they are weary of being
what they are, and so affect to be they know not what: Indeed the secret
Grumblings of their Stomachs are the same with them of Korah and his company;
they have the same Murmurings against Magistrates and all Superiors, as those
had against Moses and Aaron, Numb. 16.3. Ye take too much upon you: and they
fall under the Character which the Apostle Jude gives of filthy Dreamers, Who
despise dominion, Jude 8.
and speak evil of dignities.

It is of ill consequence, and has a tendency to disorder and confusion, when
private men busy themselves with State Affairs; the Story of Phaeton may
convince us of the sad Effects of such forbidden Experiments: It argues
distempered Heads, as well as disaffected Hearts, when men are sick of the
Mercies they enjoy, and formerly, desired; and it is not only a Reflection on
the Governors in being, but a calling the Wisdom of Divine Providence into
question, when men are always uneasy in their present circumstances, and are
for prescribing other ways of governing the World, than the Wisdom of the
Almighty has done. Therefore the Holy one (who is jealous of his Honor) has
in all Ages took that matter into his own hand, and showed more than ordinary
marks of his displeasure against those who would intermeddle with things too
high for them. Thus do we find in the place forecited, The Almighty resents the
seditious clamours of Korah, Dathan and Abiram, against Moses and Aaron, as
against himself, and punished them accordingly; Number. 16.
for ver. 32. The Earth opened, and swallowed both them and their Houses.

It is not honest meaning, a pretended Zeal tor God's Glory, and the Good of
his Church, that will excuse (much less justify) such Bisibodies; for when
private Christians in the Primitive Church, out of a wanton and irregular Zeal
derided the Heathen Idolatry, threw down their Images, and were slain by the
Heathens in the Fact, they fell Sacrifices to their own Folly, and were allowed
no place in the Diptychs of the Church.

The Apostle Peter ranks the (...) (those, who instead of minding their own
Business, were prying into other men's Matters) amongst Thieves and Murderers,
and styles them evildoers, 1 Pet. 4.15.
and accounts the Sufferings they underwent, no other than the Punishment they
deserved.

The crime (of being Busibodies) is of a lower and higher sort, says the
Learned Hammond. The first is Idleness, the second improves it into Sedition
(which is the Sin I am now speaking against) a Fault which at that time was
very remarkable among the Jewish Zealots, who pretending to, and promising
themselves a perpetual immunity from all powers of men (as the only Children of
God, which were not therefore to be under any man, particularly under Heathens)
would force all men to join with them against the Romans, i. e. against the
public Peace, Ham. in 1 Pet. 4.
calling themselves (...), The Great Benefactors, and Saviors of their Nation.

We have had too many Instances in our own days, to parallel that of the Jews;
only with this difference, that they were real Romans, which the Jews conspired
against, but they are (for the most part) imaginary ones, which our Modern
Incendiaries delight to show their Zeal against: It is but giving the Name of
Popish to either Church or State, and then the cry is, Down with it, down with
it, even unto the ground; and yet such Factious persons would be thought the
only men of Zeal for the preservation of Religion and Liberties.

But alas! how far is such a carriage from being either religious, or civil? it
is so far from having any thing of Christianity in it, that it falls short of
Humanity and common prudence; and such men, whilst they affect to be thought
great, and would seem to despise the fooleries of children, themselves become
much more foolish and vain, Having eyes that are lofty, Ps. 131.
and hearts that are haughty, and exercising them in great matters, and in
things too high for them.

But there are other sorts of Busibodies, who if they seem not to be as proud
and ambitious, yet discover no less malice and ill nature than the former, viz.
the Talebearers and Backbiters; Lev. 19.16.
the Levitical Law did forbid men to go up and down as talebearers amongst the
children of God's people. The Hebrew Doctors explain it thus: Who is a
Talebearer? Ainswort. in loc.
Even he who is laden with words, and goes from one to another, and says,
Thus said such a one, or thus have I heard of such a one: Although the thing be
true, yet such a one would fain mar the whole world.

Such busy Sycophants are the bane of all Societies, for they destroy that
mutual confidence, which is necessary to all friendly commerce. Indeed a
pragmatical forward person is deservedly shunned by all wise men, as an unsafe,
dangerous companion: A man's being curiously inquisitive after other men's
concerns, implies some malicious design, or at least (to mollify the
Expression) can suppose no kindness; for I have no reason to think that man
intends to serve me, who forgets himself; or that he will study to promote my
welfare, who neglects his own; therefore the Wiseman describes, the, Talebearer
to be one who reveals Secrets, Prove. 11.13.
and opposes him to a man of a faithful spirit: And it is but natural for him
who has no business of his own that he will mind, to be prying into other men's
Secrets; and whilst he is communicating to one, to learn what he can of his
concerns to carry back to another, and so by suggesting ill things of each
other alternately, to create differences, and beget an ill opinion in
Neighbors of one another, where there was no just cause given on either side:
Therefore the Son of Sirach admonishing to curse the Whisperer and Double
Tongue, because they have destroyed many that were at peace; he elegantly calls
a Backbiting Tongue, a third tongue, that which carries stories from one to
another, Ecclus. 28.14.
and thereby disquieteth many, and overthrows the houses even of great men.

Jam. 3.8.
The Tongue is an unruly Member, as St. James says; and unless men do take care
to store the heart, which is the Fountain whence it is supplied, with Divine
and serious Meditations, or divert its wantonness, by being intent on their
proper business, and industrious in the works of their callings, it will grow
petulant and intemperate; for where it is not thus seasoned or restrained, it
will send out deadly poison.

So then, he that would study to be quiet, must labor to be contented with his
present State, and to be diligent in his own Vocation: which brings me to the
last part of the Apostle's Admonition, That they should work with their own
hands.

Not that he would hereby oblige all men to Manual Crafts, which require Toil
and Labor of the Body, (though indeed such was the condition of the Primitive
Christians, that they were forced to live by the Sweat of their Brows; and St.
Paul himself encouraged them therein by his own Example, as he tells them 2 Thessalonians. 3.8.) but the Words are figuratively spoken; wherein the Apostle
requiring Tradesmen, and such like, to be laborious in their Occupations,
charge also all others of Higher Rank and Stations in the World, to be
diligent to perform those Duties, which God and their Country expect from them
in such places and capacities.

So that the charge reaches the Gentleman as well as the Tradesman; and those
whose Employment lies in the Head, as well as whose labor is that of the Hand,
that they should be sedulous and intent on the Business of their proper
Callings, and not by Idleness and Neglect, court those Temptations which will
lead them to the forementioned Evils.

The mind of man is an active Principle, which will be busying it self about
something or other, and therefore God ordains to every man some particular
Calling, not to dull and destroy that Activity which is in us, but to limit and
confine it, that its Exertions may be useful to our selves and others. He that
is diligent in his own place, and busies hmself within the Bounds of his own
Duty, finds Business enough at home, in his own Employment and Profession, to
exercise both his Thoughts and Senses; he cannot spare time to gad from House
to House, and concern himself with other men's Affairs, but finds it work enough
to discharge (as he ought) the Duties of his own Station. It is the Slothful
Person that is at leisure to plot Mischief, and sow Discord; therefore the
Advice of the Son of Syrach is suitable to our present purpose; Send a man to
labor, that he be not idle, for idleness teaches him much evil.

1 Timothy 5.13.
The Disturbances which the young Widows caused in the Church of Ephesus, were
the Effects of Idleness; they learnt to be idle, wandering from house to house,
and so not only idle, but tattlers also, and busibodies, speaking things which
they ought not. So also St Paul, and Epimenides, their own Poet, ascribe both
that lying habit and cruelty of the Cretians to their Sluggishness; They were
slow and idle, and thence learnt to be liars and evil breasts. Tit 1.12.


And thus have I done with the first thing proposed, to show you the Nature of
the Duties here required by the Apostle, as also of the contrary Vices. I now
pass to the

II. Thing, To show the Obligation which all lie under, to prosecute Peace, and
the Means of it, by being industrious and diligent in their particular
Callings. And that

First, Because it is a Duty they owe to God.

Secondly, to the Country, Town or place which they belong unto.

First, To God; Here in my Text the Apostle inforces these Directions and Rules
of walking, upon the account of the Authority which required it. Do these
things as we have commanded you. We Paul and Silas, who have revealed unto you
the whole Will of God, and require the observance of these Rules, not as of
things indifferent in their own Nature, but as Moral Virtues, and such relative
Duties as are incumbent on you, both as Christians, and Members of Societies.

The Almighty One is a God of peace, and not of confusion; His Son is the
Prince of peace, and his Ministers the Ambassadors of it; and therefore all the
Precepts of his Law, must needs require the sincere prosecution of it. The
Commandmens of the Old Law, tend to the peace and united good of mankind, and
indeed both the Law and the Prophets enjoin men to seek peace, and ensue it. It
were endless to particularise those parts of holy Writ which require it; let it
suffice therefore instead of enumerating the particular Texts for Peace, to
tell you, That the Nature of God, who is a God of infinite goodness and love;
that the Nature and Design of the Christian Religion, which he has given us to
walk by, and which is the best-natur'd Religion in the whole World, do clearly
evince, that it is the Will and Commandment of our great Creator, That all men
should in their several Stations, seek to promote unity and concord, and
strictly observe all those Rules which tend thereunto. So that Variance and
foolish Emulations amongst Neighbors, show the want of Religion, and that such
men instead of being acted by those Principles of Divine Wisdom, Which is first
pure, Jam. 3.17.
then peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated; are hurried on by passion,
and led blindfold by mistaken interests, which are the first causes of all
troubles and disorders; for, as the Apostle forecited says, Whence are wars
and fightings among you? are they not hence, even of your Lusts, Jam. 4.1.
which war in your Members?

All Contentions and Factions come from the Devil, and gratify him, whose
Nature is spiteful and malicious: But God is a God of Peace, he hates
disorders, and requires peaceable and quiet dispositions an all the Professors
of his Religion; and therefore ought we to study, etc. because God commands it.

But Secondly, Not only in point of Duty toward God, but in point of in
Interest also; kindness and Affection to your selves and others should oblige
you to the practice of these Duties; it tends to the better settlement and
improvement of a Society, when its Members are at unity within themselves:
These Virtues have a natural Efficacy to strengthen and enrich Societies; when
people labor quietly in their Callings, and so contribute by united and
regular Endeavors to the Public God; This weakens the Hands of their Enemies,
and commands Kindness and respect; to love one another is the best way to gain
Love; and to apply your selves closely to your own Business, is the truest way
to preserve it. Every kingdom divided against it self, Matt. 12.25.
is brought to desolation; and every city or house divided against it self,
cannot stand, says our Blessed Savior. When Fellow Members of the same Body
backbite and defame one another, it makes persons who have any regard to their
own Reputation, cautious of having any dealing or commerce with them: but there
are those Charms in Unity and Love, which makes the Inhabitants of a Town
flourish in spite of all malicious opposition; these will discourage such as
have Designs of enriching themselves by making Advantages of other men's
Divisions, from coming in to you; and will invite such as are helps and
beneficial to the place they live in, to dwell among you. So that if you have
any concern for the Interest of Your Corporation, you will seek to promote
Peace, study to be quiet, and do your own business; you will add Diligence to a
Peaceable Behavior; and this also has a natural tendency to the Prosperity of
a People.

For private Diligence is a Public Good; and the careful managing of every
man's own Estate and Substance, is advantageous to the whole; This is the
truest way for a man to advance his own Fortune, and of assisting, and being
serviceable to his Neighbor. Prove. 10.4.
He becomes poor, that deals with a slack hand, but the hand of the diligent
makes rich, c. 22.29.
says Solomon. And again, See thou a man diligent in his business? he shall
stand before Kings, he shall not stand before mean men.

He that is laborious and careful to do the Works of his proper Calling (be it
never so mean, whether a Plowman, or any other ordinary Employment) and busies
himself with no Concerns but his own, is much more useful in, and a greater
Benefactor to the town or Country he lives in, than those, who out of a
pretended Zeal for Public Good, are always and in the mean time neglect what
they are called unto. Nay, indeed those men do serve their Generations, and
answer the End of their Creation, but these the contrary. But if any Busibodies
should still suspect the truth of my Assertion, I would desire them (for once)
to submit to the Judgment and Experience of one, who (they must allow) was
something wiser than themselves; I mean king Solomon, and observe the Character
he gives of such persons; Prove. 20.3.
That it is an honor for a man to cease from strife; but they are fools that
will be meddling: And again, Prove. 26.16.
That the sluggard who walks about, and hides his hand in his bosom, is wiser
in his own eyes, than seven men that can render a reason.

Now to make some short Reflections on what has been said: And if it be so; if
Faction, Impertinency and Idleness have such ill, and ( e contra) Peace and
Concord, Contentment and Industry have such benign Influences upon Communities
as well as Single Persons, How highly does it behove all of you to avoid those
ugly ill-natured Vices forementioned, and study to be clothed with those as
well Christian, as Moral Habits, which will be not only your Ornaments, but
Security?

All men (unless they are become altogether brutish) naturally desire the
prosperity of their own Town; but unless men resolve to love one another, and
instead of filling their own Heads with Novelties, or (what is worse) with
Lies, and their Neighbors Ears with Noise and Railery, learn to be meek and
humble, to be gentle and kindly affection'd one to another, and to mind their
own Business at home, instead of looking after some elsewhere; I say, unless
men arrive to this Temper, they are so far from doing good, that they are
Infections, the very Plague of the Place they live in.

How highly incumbent then, in the next and Last place, is it on you who are
entrusted with the Government of this Town, to suppress all Factions and
Disorders, to discountenance busy and impertinent Bablers, who love to do or
speak any thing but what they should? 2 Samuel 20.19.
It is the Honor of a Magistrate to deserve the Character of that Wise Woman
that saved the City, to be one of them that is peaceable in Israel; to be
peaceable himself, and to teach the unruly, or else compel them to be so too:
In order hereunto make no other distinctions between those that are under you,
than according to their Merits; make the disorderly feel your Justice, and
those who are quiet and industrious, the Objects of your Respect and Favor;
encourage these who choose to spend the Vacancies of their Labors in Church, to
pray to God for a Blessing on their Labors, rather than in hunting elsewhere
after News and Lies.

O Let a Principle true Religion excite you to a zealous prosecution of the
Public Weal! that so Mercy and Truth may be sent down from Heaven, and
Righteousness and Peace may kiss each other; if you can but constrain, or
rather persuade people to the practice of Religion, this will secure to you all
those Blessings, and root out all those Evils forementioned.

I dare appeal to them of you, that knew this Town when it was flourishing and
eminent for Trade, and could vye perhaps, with most Places of its Bigness in
the Kingdom, for Wealth and Substance, whether there was not more Peace, and
better agreement; Whether there was not more Diligence, and less Quarrelling
and Impertinency then, than has been since? Let but the Virtues of your
Ancestors be restored, and their Success will follow.

Your Corporation is endowed with many and Great Charities; let Bridewel be
your Hospital for the Lazy, and the Benefactions you have to dispose of, the
Rewards of the Quiet and Laborious.

Seneca de Eenef.
Beneficia sine ullo delectu magis projicimus quam damus; where there is not
Judgment of Discretion, it is not Charity, it is throwing away, but not giving.
So then, let the most Religious, and such as work with their own Hands, and
mind to do their own Business, be preferred in your charitable Distributions.

And left any one should object that to me which I am decrying in others, for
prescribing where I am not concerned? I answer, that the Design of my Subject
justifies me, and shows this Corollary naturally deduced from it: This Apostle
in 2 Epist. to These. 3.10. commands the same thing which I exhort, That they
who will not work, neither should they eat.

And let me add, Archbishop Laud (besides many other Charities) gave 20l.
apiece to Six Maids, who lived honestly for three Years in one Service, to be
disposed every third Year.
The Conditions of the Triennial Charities given by that Great Prelate, (who
too severely felt the Eflects of prevailing Faction) suppose such
Qualifications: For those Servants may be presumed to be neither noisy nor
sluggish, but the contrary, who continue many Years in the same service.

What remains then, but that by these Methods you should endeavor to rid and
deliver your selves from the hand of Strange Children, Whose mouth speaks
vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of falsehood; that so your sons may
be as plants grown up in their youth, that so daughters may be as the polished
corners of the Temple, that your Garners may be full of all manner of store,
and that there be no complaining in your streets.

Happy shall you be when you are in such a case, Yea, happy is the people whose
God is the Lord: And that ye may be thus happy in this World, and eternally so
in the next, God of his Infinite Goodness grant, through Jesus Christ of Lord;
To whom, etc.

FINIS.

