The Grievances Represented by the Estates of Scotland, to the KING'S Majesty,
to be Redressed in Parliament. Together with His Majesty's Instructions to His
Commissioner, for Redressing the same.
Published by Authority.

Instruction 2. 1. THE Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, Do Represent, That
the Committee of Parliament, called the Articles, is a great Grievance to the
Nation, and there ought to be no Committees of Parliament, but such as are
freely Chosen by the Estates, to prepare Motions and Overtures that are first
made in the House.

Instr. 4. 2. That the first Act of Parliament 1669. Is inconsistent with the
Establishment of the Church Government, now desired, and ought to be Abrogate.

Instr. 6. 3. That Forefaultures in prejudice of Vassals, Creditors and Heirs
of Entail, are a great Grievance.

Instr. 10. 4. That the obliging of the Liedges to Depone upon Crimes against
Delinquents, otherwise than when they are Adduced in special Processes, as
Witnesses, is a great Grievance.

Instr. 7. 5. That Assizes of Error are a great Grievance, and that Juries be
considered by Parliament.

Instr. 8. 6. That the eighteenth Act of Parliament 1681. Declaring
Accumulative Jurisdiction, is a Grievance.

Instr. 9. 7. That the Commissariot Courts, as they are now Constitute, are a
Grievance.

Instr. 7. 8. That the Twenty seventh Act of Parliament 1663. Giving to the
King Power to impose Custom at pleasure, upon Foreign Import and Trade, is a
Grievance, and prejudicial to the Trade of the Nation.

Instr. 11. ^. That the not taking an Effectual Course to Repress the
Depredations and Robberies by the Highland Clans is a Grievance.

Instr. 13. 10. That the Banishment by the Council of the greatest part of the
Advocats from Edinburgh, without a Process, was a Grievance.

Instr. 12. 11. That most of the Laws Enacted in the Parliament Anno 1685. are
Impious and Intolerable Grievances.

Instr. 14. 12. That the Marriage of a King or Queen of this Realm to a Papist,
is Dangerous to the Protestant Religion, and ought to be provided against.

Instr. 19 13. That the Levying, or Keeping on Foot a Standing Army in time of
peace, without Consent of Parliament, is a Grievance.

Instr. 15. 14. That all Grievances relating to the Manner and Measure of the
Leidges, their Representation in Parliament be Considered and Redressed in the
first Parliament.

Instr. 16. 15. That the Grievances of the Burrows be Considered and Redressed
in the first Parliament.

Hamilton.

WILLIAM R.
Instructions to Our Right Trusty, and Right Entirely Beloved Cousin and
Councellor, William Duke of Hamilton, Our Commissioner for holding the First
Session of Our next ensuing Parliament of Our Ancient Kingdom of Scotland.
1. YOU are to pass an Act for turning the Meeting of Estates into a
Parliament; and the three Estates are to consist of the Noblemen, Barons, and
Burgesses.

Grievance 1. 2. You are to pass an Act for Regulating the Articles, to consist
of twenty four persons, besides the Officers of State, whereof eight are to be
chosen by the Noblemen, of their Estate; eight by the Barons, and eight by the
Boroughs, of their Estate: And in case of the Decease of any of these persons,
that Estate out of which the person Deceased, shall supply the same: These are
to prepare Matters and Acts for the Parliament, but not to exclude the
Parliament to take any Matters into their Consideration, though it has been
thrown out, or rejected in the Articles; and all former Acts, especially the
first Act, Parliament 1st, Chapter 2, Sess. 3d, inconsistent with this, are to be
Rescinded.

3. You are to pass an Act Recognizing Our, and the Queen's Royal Authority,
and Right of the Crown; Ordaining an Oath of Allegiance to be taken in place of
all former Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, Declarations and Tests.

Griev. 2. 4. You are to pass an Act, Establishing that Church Government,
which is most agreeable to the Inclinations of the People, rescinding the Act
of Parliament 1669, and all other Acts inconsistent therewith.

5. You are to endeavor to pass an Act for raising such a supply, as may be
necessary for securing the Kingdom from the present danger, and Foreign
Invasion.

Griev. 3. 6. You are to pass an Act, that Forfeitures shall only be extended
to such Interest as the Rebel had, and that Innocent Vassals, or Lawful
Creditors for Debts upon Record shall not be prejudged, nor such Heirs of
Entail, whose Rights of Succession are established by a public Infestment.

Griev. 5. 7. You are to pass an Act, either to take away Assizes of Error, or
otherwise, that they shall take Place as well against a Jury that Condemns, as
a Jury that Assoilzies any Pannal.

Griev. 6. 8. You are to pass an Act, rescinding the 18th Act of Parliament
1681. asserting the Prerogative in Point of Jurisdiction.

Griev. 7. 9 You are to pass an Act, regulating the Abuses in the Commissary
Courts, and all other Inferior Courts.

Griev. 4. 10. We are satisfied, that an Act should be past for securing the
Leiges against Inquiries by way of Inquisition, but in Respect of the present
Juncture of Affairs, this matter would be well considered by the Parliament;
and therefore when the Terms of this Act shall be adjusted, you are to transmit
the same to US, that We may give you particular Instructions thereanent.

Griev. 9. 11. You are to endeavor to procure an Act for an Effectual Course
for Redressing the Depredations, and Robberies by the Highland-Clanns, and when
this Matter is digested, you are to transmit the Proposals to US, that you may
get particular Instructions thereanent.

Griev. 11. 12. You are to pass an Act, rescinding such Acts as were made in
Parliament 1685. as are justly grievous to the People.

Griev. 10. 13. You are to pass an Act, that no Person be Banished out of the
Kingdom, or from any part thereof summarly without a Process.

Griev. 12. 14. You are to pass an Act, that the Kings, or Queens of that Realm
shall not Marry with Papists under this Certification, that a Popish Queen
Consort, or the Husband of a Sovereign Queen shall be incapable to enjoy the
Benefit, or, Advantage of any Provisions, or Settlements, which the Law
provides, or particular Contracts, or Agreements may have secured to them.

Griev. 14. 15. You are to pass an Act that the greater Shires of that Kingdom,
such as Lanerk, Air, Perth, Fife, Aberdeen, and Midlothian, or others where it
shall be found convenient, may send three or four Commissioners, to Parliament,
that the Representation may be the more equal.

Griev. 15. 16. You are to pass an Act, ratifying the Privileges of the
Buroughs, and securing their Rights, in Electing of their own Magistrates for
the Future, and that the Buroughs of Glasgow and St. Andrews shall have the
Electing of their own Provosts, Baillies, and Town-Council, as the other Royal
Buroughs of the Kingdom have.

Griev. 8. 17. You are to endeavor to procure an Act, or Acts for the
Encouragement of Trade, and if the 27th Act of Parliament 1663. be found
inconvenient, it may be regulated, or rescinded, and when the Proposals are
adjusted you are to transmit them to US, that you may receive our Instructions
thereanent.

18. You are to pass an Act for regulating the Universities, so as good Order
and Discipline may be preserved, and that Pious and Learned Persons may be
employed and provided.

Griev. 13. 19. You are to pass an Act against a standing Army in time of
Peace, but so as the Guards, Garrisons, and necessary standing Forces may be
continued.

20. You are from time to time to adjourn the Parliament as you shall find
necessary, and in respect the meeting may not be fully conveened upon the 5th
Day of June, which is appointed for the first Diet; Therefore after passing the
first Act of turning them into a Parliament, you are to adjourn them to the
17th Day of the Month.

21. You are empowered to confer the Honor of Knighthood upon such Persons as
you shall find deserving of the same, not exceeding the Number of Six.

You have particular Instructions anent what is represented to US, as
Grievances, if there be any other things that may be necessary for the Good of
that Kingdom to be past into Laws, you are to acquaint U S, from time to time
with such Overtures, that you may be authorized with particular Instructions
thereanent.

Given under Our Royal Hand and Signet, at Our Court at Copt-Hall, the 31th day
of May, 1689. And of our Reign the First Year, By His Majesty's Command,
Melvill.

William R.
An Additional Instruction to Our Right Trusty, and Right entirely beloved
Cousin and Councellor, William Duke of Hamilton, our Commissioner.
YOu are to Nominate Our Right Trusty, and Well beloved Cousin and Councellor,
William Earl of Crawfurd, to be President of the first Session of Parliament,
in regard We have no Chancellor for the time being.

Given under Our Royal Hand and Signet, at Our Court at Copt-Hall, the 31th day
of May, 1689. And of our Reign the First Year. By his Majesty's Command,
Melvill.

WILLIAM R.
Additional Instructions to Our Right Trusty, and Right Entirely beloved Cousin
and Councellor, William Duke of Hamilton, Our Commissioner.
1. BY the Second Article of your Instructions, Dated the 31th of May last, you
was empowered to pass an Act for regulating the Committee, Called the Articles,
which were to consist of Twenty four persons, besides the Officers of State;
Notwithstanding of which, These are to authorize you, to pass an Act for them
to consist of Thirty three Persons, besides the Officers of State; whereof
Eleven to be chosen out of every Estate, according to your former Instructions,
who are to prepare Matters, etc. as is therein expressed, not ^xcluding the
Parliament to take Matters into their Consideration, though it has been
rejected in the Committee, nor to prevent their moving of any thing, and
regulating of it to them, and the said eleven out of every Estate^ to be chosen
Monthly, or oftener, if the Parliament think it fit, and all former Acts
especially the first Act Chapter 2. Sess. 3. inconsistent with this, are to be
Rescinded.

2. You are to pass what Acts shall be proposed for settling the
Church Government, according to your former Instruction.

3. You are to pass an Act, Rescinding all Forfeitures past against any of Our
Subjects, either in Parliament, or Criminal Court, since the first day of
January 1665. which shall be thought fit by the Parliament to be Rescinded:
Likewise you are to consent to what Our Parliament shall propose for
Restitution to be made of Fines, or Compositions for Fines, or Forfeitures,
from those who had the Benefit of them, and you are to Rescind such Acts as
were made in the ye^rs 1681. and 1685. as are justly grievous.

although the first of the above Instructions is not complied with yet, you are
to move the other two, and have them past before any Adjournment.

Given under Our Royal Hand and Signet, at our Court at Hampton Court, the 4th
Day of July, 1689. And of our Reign the First Year. By His Majesty's Command,
Melvill.

WILLIAM R.
Additional Instructions to Our Right Trusty, and Right entirely beloved Cousin
and Councellor, William Duke of Hamilton, Our Commissioner.
1. YOu are to touch the Act already past, abolishing Episcopacy as soon as you
can, and to Rescind all Acts inconsistent therewith.

2. You are to Rescind the Act past in 1685. annexing Forfeitures to the Crown.

3. By the third Article of your Instructions, Dated the 4^h instant, We did
empower you to reduce all Forfeitures past against any of Our Subjects since
January 1665. Now We do Authorize you to pass what Acts shall be proposed for
reducing Forfeitures, etc. since the year 1660, if the Parliament desire it,
and to consent to what shall be proposed for making restitution of Fines, or
Compositions for Fines or Forfeitures, as is expressed in the forementioned
Article, and you are to touch what Acts passes conform to this.

4. You are to recommend to the Parliament to raise a Supply of Money for
paying the Army, and supporting the Government, according to your first
Instructions.

5. You are to allow the Parliament to choose Committees for the three
foregoing Instructions notwithstanding the Committee of the Articles be not
appointed, as also for what concerns Church Government.

Given under Our Royal Hand and Signet, at Our Court at Whitehall, the 17th day
of July 1689. And of Our Reign the First Year. By His Majesty's Command,
Melvill.

Printed at London, and Reprinted at Edinburgh, 1689.


