Master Grimstons ARGUMENT Concerning Bishops: With Mr. Seldens Answer. Also
several Orders newly made in Parliament concerning CHVRCH GOVERNMENT.

Printed 1641.

Master GRIMSTONS Argument concerning Bishops.
1. THat Bishops are Iure Divino is a question.

2. That Archbishops are not Iure Divino is out of question.

3. That Ministers are Iure Divino there is no question.

Now if Bishops which are questioned whether Iure Divino, and Archbishops
which out of question are not Jure Divino, should suspend Ministers that are
Iure Divino, I leave it to you Master Speaker.

Master Seldens Answer.

1. That the Convocation is Iure Divino is a question.

2. That Parliaments are not Iure Divino is out of question.

3. That Religion is Jure Divino there is no question.

Now Master Speaker, that the Convocation which is questioned whether Iure
Divino, and Parliaments which out of question are not Iure Divino, should
meddle with Religion, which questionless is Iure Divino, I leave to you Master
Speaker.

Master Grimstons Reply.

But Archbishops are no Bishops.

Master Seldens Answer.

That Is no otherwise true then that the Judges are not Lawyers, and Aldermen
are not Citizens.

Several Orders concerning Church Government.
1. Every several Shiere of England and Wales to be a several Circute or
Diocese for the Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction excepting Yorkshiere, which is to
be divided into three. 2. A constant Presbitry of twelve choice Divines, to be
selected in every Shiere or Diocese. 3. A constant President to be
established as a Bishop over this Presbitry. 4. This Bishop in each Diocese to
ordain, suspend, deprive, degrade, and excommunicate by and with the consent
and assistance of seven Divines of his Presbitry, then present and not else.
5. The times of Ordination throughout the Land to be four times in the year,
viz. 1. May 1. August 1. November, 1. February. 6. Every Bishop constantly to
reside within his Diocese, in some one prime or chief City or Town within
his Diocese as in Particular. 7. Every Bishop to have one special particular
Congregation to be chosen, out of the most convenient place for distance from
his chief residence, and the richest in value that may be had, where he shall
duly Preach, unless he be lawfully hindered, and then shall take care his Cure
be well supplied by an other. 8. No Bishop shall romove, or be translated from
the Bishopric which he shall first undertake. 9. Upon every death, or other
avoydance of a Bishop, the King to grant a Conge De Cleire to the whole Clergy
of the whole Diocese, and they to present three of the Presbitry aforesaid,
and the King to choose and nominate whom he pleases of them. 10. The first
Presbiters of every Shiere to be named by the Parliament, and afterward upon
the death or other avoydance of any Presbiter, the remaining Presbiters to
choose one other out of the parish Ministers of that Shiere, and this to be
done within one month next after such death or avoydance. 11. No Bishop or
Clergy man to exercise or have any temporal Office, or Seculer employment but
only for the present to hold and keep the probate of Wills, until the
Parliament shall otherwise resolve. 12. The Bishop once a year ( at Midsomer)
to summon a Diocesan Synod, there to hear, and (by general Vote) to determine
all such matters of scandal in life, and Doctrines amongst Clergy men, as
shall be presented unto them. 13. Every three years a National Synod to be,
which (for persons) shall consist of all the Bishops in the Land, and of two
Presbiters to be chosen by the rest out of each Presbitry, and of two Clerks
to be chosen out of every Diocese by the Clergy thereof. 14. This National
Synod to make and ordain Cannons, for the government of the Church, but they
not to bind until they be confirmed by Parliament. 15. Every Bishop to have
over and above the Benefice aforesaid, a certain constant Rent allowed, and
allotted proportional to the Diocese wherein he is to Officiate. That is to
say -- 16. Every Presbiter to have a constant yearly profit above his
Benefice.
As for the Revenew of the Bishops, Deanes, and Chapters, etc. a strict survey
to be taken of all their Rents and profits, and the same to be represented at
the beginning of our next convencion, and in the mean time no Lease to be
renewed, nor Timber to be felled.

FINIS.

