A true and perfect RELATION OF THE WHOLE TRANSACTION CONCERNING The PETITION
of the Six Counties of South Wales, and the County of Monmouth, formerly
presented to the Parliament of the Commonwealth, of ENGLAND, For a supply of
Godly Ministers, And an Account of Ecclesiastical Revenues therein: With the
PARLIAMENTS Resolves, and Proceedings thereupon. Now humbly Represented to his
Highness the Lord PROTECTOR'S Consideration.

Published by A. G.

LONDON Printed by J. G. for Math. Ekins, at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1654.

To his most Excellent Highness, OLIVER Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging.
May it please your Highness,
THe Nation of Wales, being described to the former Parliament to be overspread
with Ignorance and Prophanenes. Was by the Members thereof, Taken into
consideration, And passed an Act for the better Propagation, and Preaching of
the Gospel in Wales; For the putting whereof in execution diverse Commissioners
were Authorized, and empowered to Amove and Eject those of the Ministry, whom
they conceived to be unworthy: And persons were Nominated to Recommend, and
approve, such men, as they should judge fit for the advancement of the Gospel
in those Countries. The Commissioners according to their Authority, proceeded
in the work; So that in a short space, the Ancient Clergy were (for the most
part) indiscriminally ejected, The Tithes Sequestered, The Parishes left
unsupplied, The blessed Ordinance of Christ taken away from the Inhabitants,
And they wholly debarred from any spiritual comfort to their precious Souls,
by any Power or dispensation of Gospel- Ministry, but what they must receive
from some few Itinerants in their uncertain meetings. This (out of a
Soule-saving necessity) stirred up the spirits of many of the conscientious
Inhabitants to present that pious Petition of South Wales to the Honorable
House. But the Petitioners their Council, and Sollicitors have been prejudiced
in their Reputation, for discharging their duty therein to God, and their
native Country, and rendered thereby incapable of serving the same; And have
been traduced to have failed to prove, and make good the Matters exhibited in
the Petition; Which constraines me to publish this Narrative of the whole
Transaction and Proceedings of the Parliament, with their Resolves in Referring
the same to the Committee for Plundered Ministers; As also to make truly evident
unto public view the Petitioners particular charge, the Commionssiers Answer,
with the Petitioners Reply thereunto, as they were lodged with the Clerk for
the Committee, according to their several Original Copies, Orders and
Reports, Protesting, that I have not the least thought out of malice, or
selfe-ends to asperse or calumniate any man's Person; But only to set down
matters of fact for the manifestation of Truth, to vindicate the Petitioners,
their Council, and Sollicitors from all malignant design in promoting the
Petition, Either to discourage the godly, or to bring into Authority any
Malignant or ill-affected persons, Or re-investing unworthy, and scandalous
Ministers.

All which I have made bold in the fear of God, and power of his Grace, to
spread most humbly before your Highness. That seeing the Promises of good
things do already shine both in Church and State by your Highness his
Protection and Government; Why should the poor Inhabitanes of Wales despair to
make known their grievances, and Represent their sad spiritual Condition
before your Christian-Eys, who (perhaps) have not had as yet a full discovery
thereof? Who knows, But that the Lord (who had hid these things from such as
were formerly in Authority) Has reserved the same for your Highness Care,
That the People may have Cause to praise and bless God for you, whom he has
designed to Perform so glorious a Work, as to Restore the Comfort of the
Blessed Ordinances of Christ's Gospel unto their Nation again.

You are now become not only Petra, a Foundation, whereon the People must
rest: In vos domus omnis Inclinata Recumbit. but also Pastor Israelis, a
Shepherd to provide Pastures for the People, The Lord in his Mercy direct you
to Act what is conducible to his Glory, the peace of your own Conscience, and
the good and welfare of the People under your Protection, prays,

Your Highness most humbly in all Christian Services to be Commanded, Alex.
Griffith.
March. 23. 1653.
The PETITION of the Six Counties of South Wales, and the County of Monmouth,
with a Narrative of the Parliament Resolves thereupon; And the Proceedings
before the Committee for Plundered Ministers, to whom it was Referred by the
Honorable House; faithfully transcribed, and herein expressed according to the
several Original Orders.
The tenth of March, 1651. Col. Edward Freeman Attorney General for the
Commonwealth in South Wales (as Council, and at the request of the
Petitioners) attended with several of the Petitioners did present a Petition
to the then Supreme Authority, The Parliament of the Commonwealth of England,
Entitled The humble Petition of several of the Inhabitants of the Six
Counties of South Wales, and County of Monmouth, well-affected to the
Parliament, and present Government, on the behalf of themselves and the rest
of the Inhabitants there, in these words following, ( viz.)

SHOWS*
THat your Petitioners cannot but with all humbleness acknowledge your Honors
constant care, 1. The Petition divided into 9. Heads.
in providing for the supply of their spiritual necessities, and the
advancement of the Gospel of Christ, and particularly in passing the Act of
the 22 of February 1649. Entitled an Act for the Propagation of the Gospel in
Wales, so much really intended by your Honors, which filled the hearts of your
Petitioners, and all the Inhabitants of Wales with joy and gladness in hopes
to find the fruits thereof accordingly: Nevertheless your Petitioners humbly
show,

That since the passing of the said Act, all or most of the Ministers South
wales and County of Monmouth, have been and stand Ejected from their
Benefices, and but few or none of the said respective Counties have been
supplied with any competent Teachers, to officiate in the Rooms of the outed
Ministers.

Neither has there been provided any conventient number Honors, and the true
purport of the said Act, as they humbly conceive there being not above four or
five Itinerary Teachers in some of the said Counties, appointed and approved of
to teach the Gospel. Whereas some of the said Counties do consist of above six
score Parishes, and the least of fifty or threescore, many whereof have at
least two thousand Souls.

That some persons deriving Authority from the said Act, have for these two
years last past received and disposed of all the profits of the Tithes of
Church Livings, and all other Benefices and Impropriations sequestered, within
the said six Counties of South Wales and County of Monmouth, which are annually
worth twenty thousand pound or thereabouts; Out of which little has
Propagation of the Gospel, or accounted for to the State.

That for want of the due Execution of the said Act, your Petitioners together
with the said Inhabitants endure a Famine of the Word of God; Children are not
bred up in the Instruction and Lord; The vast revenues of the outed Ministers
are set out at extraordinary undervalues. The Churches are in most places shut
up, and the Fabric thereof ready to fall Honors Acts, Edicts and
Proclamations (wherein the public Welfare, the Liberty and Safety of their
Teachers in each County to publish the same.

Your Petitioners therefore out of their duty to God, the preservation of the
Souls of the Inhabitants of their Country, the Commonwealths interest, and
the earnest desire they have that your Honors most pious intentions expressed
in the said Act, may be accordingly observed; Do hold themselves bound in
conscience, out of Christian and Soule-saving necessity, to present the
premises to your Honors consideration. Earnestly beseeching your Honors in
pursuance of your wonted zeal, and unfeigned Affection to Gods Glory, and the
Increase of true Religion, Learning and Piety, to take such a course for the
future supply of their respective Counties, with such convenient number of
Godly able Teachers, and for Provisions of Schools and Nurseries of Learning
and Religion there; As also to call to account such persons as have received
the profits of the said Tithes, Church Livings and Prebends, and the Sequestered
Impropriations as to your Honors grave wisdom shall seem meet.

And your Petitioners shall as in duty bound most humbly pray, etc.

2. The presenting thereof to the Parliament, by Col. Freeman, and his Speech.
At the presenting of the Petition, Col. Freeman being come to the Bar, did
deliver at the request of the Petitioners, the true sense and meaning of the
Petition and Petitioners, and the sum of their desires, for a more clear
demonstration of their real intentions therein, in these words, (viz.)

Mr. SPEAKER,
IT was the desire of many well-affected Gentry, and other Inhabitants of
South Wales, That I should present to your Grave consideration this Petition,
and withal humbly to beg you will be pleased to believe they desire not to
bring in any scandalous ejected Ministers (as some out of prejudice to the
Petitioners do suggest) but such as this Honorable House shall approve of, and
only such shall be most gratefully entertained by them: A Soule-saving
necessity has constrained them to this humble address, who for above two
years last past have lived in darkness, the light of the Gospel being almost
extinguished, shining only in some few corners of the Country, and engrossed
into particular distinct Congregations, which are not above four or five in
most Counties in Southwales, and how four or five Itineraryes can supply a
whole County, (most of the Counties consisting of eighty, or a hundred
Parishes) is humbly left to your Honors grave consideration. The Inhabitants
of Southwales are not only destitute of a convenient number of Ministers, but
also of able Schoolmasters, to the decay of Religion, and Learning. And
nevertheless the vast Revenue of the outed Clergy and all Sequestered Tithes,
Impropriations, Gleabs* and other Ecclesiastical Livings (amounting to a great
value) is received by persons deriving Authority from the Act of the 22 of
Febru. 1649 which was really intended by this Honorable House, for the true
propagation of the Gospel, who do let and set out the same to Friends,
Creatures, and Alliance of their own at extraordinary undervalues, to the
prejudice of the State, and the gain of private persons. (Mr. Speaker) This
innocent Petition has no design in it against the Common wealth, or any
particular persons; All that the Petitioners crave from this Honorable house,
is a convenient number of able godly Teachers, and Schoolmasters, such as you
shall approve of, and an account for the profits and Revenues of the Churches
received for these two last years. As we aim herein, at the Glory of God, and
the public good, so let God bless us, and give a gracious issue to our humble
desires.


The Petitioners being with-drawne, the said Petition was read, and taken into
consideration, and thereupon the Parliament passed the ensuing Resolves, viz.

3. The Resolution of the Parliament.
The 10 of March 1651.
1. Resolved by the Parliament, that it be referred to the Committee for
plundered Ministers to examine this business, and to state matters of fact, and
Report their opinions therein to the Parliament, with power for the same
Committee to send for Persons, Papers, and Witnesses. 2. Resolved, That the
same Committee have power to examine upon Oath, and to authorize such
Commissioners in the Country as they shall think fit to examine witnesses upon
Oath, touching any the matters contained in the Petition, and to return those
examinations to the said Committee.

4. The tran^mitting of the Petition, an^ Resolves to the Committee for
plundered M^nisters.
And the same day the said Petition and Resolves were transmitted to the
Honorable Committee for plundered Ministers,to whom the same was referred. And
it was then Ordered* That the same should be taken into consideration on the 16
of March following, on which day several of the Petitioners with their
Counselors and Solliciters did attend the said Committee with Commissioners
Names, 5 The Petitioners with Council, and Solliciters attend the Committee,
16 Martii.
which they offered and prayed a Commission, directed to those Gentlemen, or
such other persons as the Honorable Committee should think fit, to examine the
matters contained in the said Petition in the Country, where the witnesses
resided, and matters of fact did rise, according to the said Resolves of
Parliament.

6. Major Gen Harrison excepts against the generality of the Petition,
requiring a particular charge, and the Sollicitors Answer.
At which time some of the Committee, especially Major General Harrison, one of
the Commissioners for Propagation in Wales, did insist that the Petition was to
general, and demanded a particular charge; Unto which the Petitioners
Sollicitors gave answer, that they were only Sollicitors for the Petitioners,
and had no more yet in charge for their Clients (the Petitioners) then the
preservation of the Petition, and doubted not but to exhibit particulars if
required; and the Petitioners have convenient time for that purpose: yet
nevertheless, conceived that the Petitioners by the aforesaid Resolves of
Parliament, were not directed to exhibit any new charge, or particulars other
then the Petition it self, which was all that was referred to the
consideration of that Honorable Committee, and all that the Petitioners were
to prove and make good, which they were ready to do according to these
Resolves, which gave that Committee no power, or direction (as they humbly
conceived) to demand or receive any new charge or particulars.

7. The Petitioners are denied a Commission. A Letter to be first sent to the
Commissioners for propagation, to send an account by the 18. of May, 1652.
But the Petitioners could not then obtain a Commission to prove their
Petition; It being then thought fit, and ordered that first before any
Commission issued, a Letter should be written by Major General Harrison, Col.
Sydney, and Mr. Henry Herbert Members of Parliament, the Commissioners for
Propagation of the Gospel in Southwales and County of Monmouth, together with a
Copy of the said Petition, desiring them by the 18. of May, 1652 (being two
months time) to give a particular account to the said Committee to the said
Petition and matters therein in contained. Whether the said Letter was sent or
no, is best known to those worthy Gentlemen, to whom the care thereof was
referred.

^ The Petition ^i^h the Commissioners An^wer, read May ^8. 1652.
However the Petitioners with their Counselors and Solicitors did attend the
said Honorable Committee on the 18 of May: At which time the Petition, and also
a general Answer was read, purporting the Answer of the Commissioners for the
propagation of the Gospel, etc.

9. The Petitioners Councels, ^xcept against ^he Commissioners Answer.
Unto which the Petitioners Council replied, That the same did altogether
consist of Generals; And in regard it was impossible for them (being strangers
to the matters of fact) nor yet for their Clients the Petitioners to offer any
thing there at the Bar by way of Reply, 10. They pray for a Copy of the
Commissioners Answer, which is denied.
or Exceptions to the said Answer before they had a Copy thereof, and time to
consider of the same, they prayed to have a Copy of the said Answer for that
purpose, which they could not obtain; but the Petitioners were then Ordered by
Friday the 21. of May (being two days after) to exhibit such particulars
contained in their Petition, upon which they would insist, 11. The Committees
Order of May 18. 1652. which the Petitioners could not obtain, or a Copy
thereof, until the day before they were to answer it.
and desire to examine witnesses. The Petitioners Agents attended the Clerk of
that Committee for the said Order, but could not obtain the same, or a Copy
thereof, until Wednesday at six a clock in the Evening, so that the
Petitioners had but one days time to answer the expectation of the Committee
in relation to the said Order: who (finding the same to be ambiguously and
uncertainly drawn, bearing several interpretations) did demand of Master
Phelpes, the Clerk attending the said Committee, what was meant by the
Particulars mentioned in the said Order? 12. The Order of May 18. ambiguously
drawn.
who either would not, or could not satisfy them therein, (though present at
the making of the Order, whilst the Petitioners were withdrawn:) whereupon
they Addressed themselves to Members of Parliament, that sat at the Committee,
when the said Order was made, and took advise of Council; And upon the whole
they did apprehend the meaning of the Order to be only thus; That the
Petitioners should declare what part, or particulars of their Petition they
would insist to prove (it containing many particulars;) not conceiving that the
Committee should require a particular charge against the proceedings and
transactions of the Commissioners for Propagation in the seven Counties for
above two years, and to have the same drawn up and exhibited in two days,
which was a work of impossibility, much less to be done in one day; which if
they meant, it behoved their Clerk to have expressed the same in the Order by
clear and intelligible words.

The Petitioners in obedience to the said Order in full Answer to what was
required, thereby so far as the words, 13. May 21. The Petitioners offer to
prove the truth of their Petition, in every particular, and desire a Commission
for that purpose, And pray that this their tender may be Recorded.
and the very Letter of the Order did purport, did appear on the said 21 of
May, and by their Council did affirm, that they did insist on all the
particulars contained in their Petition: And would prove the truth of the
Petition in every particular, And prayed again a Commission into the Country,
according to the Resolves of Parliament to prove the same; Whereupon Major
General Harrison did ask the Petitioners Council, if they had any thing else
to offer to the Committee at that time, unto which answer was given by the
Petitioners Council, that they had delivered the Answer of the Petitioners, in
obedience to the said Order, and prayed that the same might be recorded.

And prayed also that they would Order their Clerk to deliver the Petitioners a
Copy of the Commissioners Answer to the Petition, 14. They move again for a
Copy of the Commissioners Answer, which was not granted.
whereby the Petitioners might be enabled either to except or reply unto the
same, and proceed to issue according to the usual course, practice and
proceedings in all Courts of Justice, and Committees, And even of that
Honorable Committee in all other causes; The Petitioners conceiving that the
Commissioners did not send up their Answer with an intention to conceal the
same from the knowledge of the Petitioners, or were unwilling that the same
should be exposed to public view. May 21. 1652. 15. An Order for a
Sub-committee to report matter of fact upon the Petition, before a Copy of the
Commissioners Answer granted, issue joined, or witnesses examined.


Nevertheless the Petitioners could not obtain an Order for a Copy thereof
(being commanded to withdraw, before the Committee did explain the said Order,
or give any further time for the Petitioners to satisfy the expectation of the
Committee in reference to the same, and before the Petitioners or their
Council were called in, or were again heard) who had somewhat more to offer
to the consideration of that Committee.

It was Ordered that Col. Bennet, Mr. Robinson, Col. Sydney, Mr. Strickland,
Alderman Allen, Lieut. Genesis Fleetwood, Mr. Smith and Col. Fenwick, or any three
or more of them do examine the matter of fact, as it then lay before the said
Committee upon the said Petition of the six Counties of South Wales, and County
of Monmouth, to the said Committee referred by the Parliament, and report the
same to the said Committee, in order to a Report of the whole case to the
Parliament.

16. The Petitioners prepare particulars con^eyned in their Petition, in the
nature of a charge.
The Petitioners afterward understanding the sense of the Committee in relation
to the said Order of the 18 of May, and that by particulars contained in the
Petition, they did mean a particular charge: The Petitioners did with all
convenient speed prepare particulars contained in the general heads of the
Petition in the nature of a Charge, and did instance several miscarriages
acted and done by color of the said Act for Propagation of the Gospel, as by
the particulars annexed will more fully appear.

17. Which particulars are annexed to a Petition presented July 16. 1652.
And the Petitioners did the 16. of July 1652. annex the same to a Petition,
directed to the said Honorable Committee, wherein they did signify that by the
said Order of the 18. of May, they did not then understand the meaning of the
Committee, not conceiving their Honors did require thereby a particular
charge, especially to be exhibited within two days (which was a work of
impossibility) being never before ordered so to do, nor required by the
Resolves of Parliament to exhibit or prove any other thing then the Petition
it self, and the matters therein contained; And having prepared the
particulars annexed they prayed them to accept of the same (though for the
reasons aforesaid they failed in strictness of time given them by the said
Order.)

18. The Petitioners are again denied a Commission according to the Resolves
of Parliament.
And likewise prayed that the Honorable Committee would grant a Commission to
the Countries, according to the said Resolves to prove the same, which Petition
and Particulars being read for the Reasons in the said Petition contained, and
upon the reading and serious debate, and consideration had of the former Orders
and Proceedings of the Committee in that Cause, 19 Ordered by the Committee,
that the particulars should be reported to the Parliament.


It was Ordered, that the said particulars be admitted, and added to the Report
of the matters to be Reported to the Parliament. At which time the Petitioners,
Sollicitors and Agents, informed the Committee, 20. A Copy of the Commissioners
Answer, denied to the Petitioners from the 18 of May, to the 16. of July 1652.
that their Clerk denied them a Copy of the Commissioners Answer, who from the
18 of May to that day, being the 16 of July 1652. could not obtain a Copy
thereof (although they used all possible means, and endeavors therein)
Whereupon

It was Ordered that the Petitioners should have Copies of the Answer of the
Commissioners for Propagation of the Gospel in Wales, 21. Ordered, that the
Petitioners should have Copies of the Commissioners Answer.
and of all other Papers and Proceedings remaining with the said Committee.

And accordingly the Petitioners having Copies of the Commissioners Answer, did
prepare a Reply to the same (which was impossible for them sooner to do.) And
(having annexed the said Reply to a Petition) did the 20 of August 1652. 22.
Upon obtaining the Answer, a Reply is prepared,
Present the same to the said Honorable Committee, praying them to accept of
the said Reply, and likewise the fourth time prayed a Commission, to prove the
Petition, as also their Particulars and Reply. 23. And annexed to a Petition
presented to the Committ. Aug 23. 1652.
And did likewise inform the Committee that on perusal of a Report drawn up
by the Subcommittee, they did find therein mentioned the said Book of
Account, containing sixty Sheets of Paper, and conceiving it of dangerous
consequence, 24. The Petitioners pray for a Commission the fourth time.
and very prejudicial, as well to the Petitioners as to the State, in case the
said Book of Account should be Reported, before it was lodged with that
Committee, 25. And that the Commissioners Book of account might be lodged with
the Committee and a copy thereof granted the Petitioners.
and the Petitioners have a Copy thereof, and liberty to surcharge the same,
without which the State might be defrauded many thousand pounds by an undue
Account, they prayed that the said Book of Account might be brought in, and
lodged with the Committee; And the Petitioners might have a Copy thereof, and
liberty to surcharge the same; And that in the mean time the same should not
be reported to the Parliament (their Clerk having declared that the said Book
was only produced by Major General Harrison, 26. The Book of account
produced, and afterward taken away. Aug. 20. 1652.
before the Sub-committee, when they were drawing up the Report, and then by
him (or others attending him) taken away and never read, examined or lodged
with the Clerk of the said Committee.

Whereupon the 20 of August 1652. 27. The Sub-Committee Ordered to bring in the
Book of Account the 27 of August. 1652. or show cause why they would not.
It was Ordered that the Sub-committee appointed by Order of the 21 of May
last, should bring in to the said Committee, the said Book of Account of the
Commissioners for Propagation of the Gospel in Wales, containing about
threescore Sheets of paper in their Report mentioned; Or satisfy the Committee
to the contrary on that day seven-night, being the time when the said
Honorable Committee did appoint to take into consideration the said Petition
and Reply.) And the care of bringing in the said Account was referred to Col.
Bennet. But the Clerk attending the said Committee, did contrary to the
express Declaration of the Committee, insert in the said Order, the third of
September, to be the time for bringing in the said Account; And for
consideration of the Petition and Reply: Which day being a Fast day, 28. The
Clarke contrary to the Committees Order inserts the 3. of Sep. which was a
Fast Day.
set apart by the Honorable Members of Parliament, for their Service and
Worship of God, no Committee Sat.

The day following the Fast, the Petitioners Council and Solliciters did
attend the Committee to know their pleasures, if they would then take the Reply
into consideration, 29. As appears by M. Hancocks Affidavit
or appoint another time, informing them, that their Clerk had misnamed the
day in the Order, contrary to the Declaration and Order of the Committee, 30.
The Clerk answering that the next day was inserted in the paper of causes,
being 5. of Sep
and as by the Affidavit of Mr. Hancock, and the Petitioners Agent and
Solicitor may appear.

But the Clerk did openly give Answer, that the same was put down in the Paper
of causes for the second day following the Fast (being the 5. of Sep.) 31. The
Petitioners Council and Solicitor, attending the 5. day. The Clark had not
entered the same into the Paper of causes.


And thereupon the Petitioners Council, and Sollicitors with the leave of the
Committee did depart to their other occasions, and did attend there the next
day, according to the public intimation and information of the Clerk. But the
Clerk not having entered the same in the paper of causes, it was not called on,
nor taken into consideration that day.

But on the 8 of September, in the absence of the Petitioners, 32. But without
the privity of the Petitioners Council, or Sollicitors, it was Ordered the 8.
of Sep. 1652.
their Council and Sollicitors; All persons being withdrawn, 1. All Orders
since the 29 of June, to be discharged.
It was Ordered, that all Orders since the 29 of June, be discharged, 2. The
Report without mention of particulars, or Reply.
and the said Report as it was then drawn up and Ordered, should be reported
to the Parliament; 3. Without any examination of witnesses.
In which report there was no mention made of the said Particulars and Reply,
herein after recited; 4. Without any Copy of the Book of Account to be
Reported to the Parliament.
And the said Report was likewise made and drawn up before any one witness was
examined in the cause, and before any Copy had, or examination made of the said
Book of Account, 5. No further proceedings before that Committee.
that was never brought in, or lodged with the Committee for that purpose. And
it was then likewise Ordered and Declared by the Honorable persons then
sitting as a Committee, that they would make no further proceeding in the said
Cause, until the further pleasure of the Parliament be declared, upon the said
Report to be made unto them.

At the drawing up of which Order, one Richard Creed servant to the said Major
General Harrison, 33. Rich. Creed (servant to) M. G. Harrison dictating the
Order to Langly, (one of the Clarks) discocovered.
and an Agent against the said Petitioners was dictating the words of the said
Order to Mr. Langley one of the Clerks to the said Committee; who was taken
therein and discovered by Mr. Hancock, one of the Petitioners Agents, whereupon
the said Langley, for prevention of the discovery of this his undue carriage in
this business against the Petitioners, wished the said Creed to be silent,
when he saw the said Hancock, 34. As appears by M. Hancocks Affidavit.
and informed Creed that Hancocks was Agent for the Petitioners, as by the
Affidavit of the said Mr. Hancock, may more at large appear.

And Major General Harrison was as active, 35. Ma. Genesis Harrison, acting as
one of the Committee though a Commissioner in the Act of Propagation.
and sedulous in this matter, that on most days appointed for the hearing
thereof, he did sit and vote as one of the Grand Committee* And in a special
manner did likewise sit with the Sub-committee at the drawing up of their
Report, and was chief instrument therein, and subscribed the same, though he
was not appointed at all to be one of the Sub-committee by the Order of the 21.
of May 1652. But was one of the Commissioners appointed in the Act for the
Propagation of the Gospel in Wales; And thereby equally entrusted, and
concerned with the rest of the Commissioners therein named.

36. The Petitioners being ordered from further prosecution.
The Petitioners by the said Order of the 8 of September, being wholly debarred
of any further proceedings before the said Committee, until the further
pleasure of the Parliament should be known therein, did patiently wait in
expectation of what the Lord would be pleased to direct them to do therein.

37. And the Report suppressed from the 29. Jun. 1652. to the 25. May. 1653.
But so it fell out, that the said Report was privately kept from the
Cognizance of the Parliament, from the 29 of June 1652. until the 25 of March
1653. (being 9 Months,) To what end, and upon what account the same was so
long suppressed, is best known to Colonel Bennet, and others, who had the
carriage thereof, and were entrusted by the said Order of 29 Junii. 1652. to
Report the same to the Parliament.

38. The Petitioners, their Council, Sollicitors and Agents are menaced,
troubled, and imprisoned as follows
In the mean time, what strange and unusual ways have been used to suppress
the said Petition it self, you will find herein briefly declared.

1. The Petitioners and their Agents were menaced, and threatened by the
Itnerants, and Sequestrators to be Sequestered, and ruined, which was
accordingly in part executed.

2. 39. The Petitioners are put out of Commission.
Diverse Gentlemen that bore public Offices of trust under the Parliament in
those parts, and of approved faithfulness unto them, were discountenanced and
put out of their Places and Offices merely for subscribing the said Petition,
and owning the truth thereof.

40 The Petitioners Sollicitors, are tampered with by Creed, and Mr. Rogers.
3. That one Richard Creed, servant to Major General Harrison, and Agent for
the propagators, and one Hugh Rogers (formerly a Cavalier in Arms against the
Parliament, yet one of the Welsh Itinerants) having an evil purpose and
design to corrupt the said John Gunter, the Petitioners Solliciter, and to
draw him to violate and falsify the great trust reposed in him, by the
Petitioners, did partly by threats, and partly by fair promises and
persuasions endeavor to disingage him, from the further prosecution and
solicitation of the said Petition.

41. Mr. Gunter denying their solicitation, and tampering, is together with
Col. Freeman, prosecuted.
But the said John Gunter, abhorring with his Soul to condescend thereunto, and
the said Richard Creed, and Hugh Rogers, finding their endeavors therein
fruitless.

The said Richard Creed in August 1652. (being then a servant to Major General
Harrison) upon his own single information obtained a Warrant for the
apprehending and bringing before the (then) Council, Col. Edward Freeman, the
Petitioners Council, and the said John Gunter the Petitioners Sollicitour; In
pursuance whereof the said Col. Ed Freeman, 42. Col. Freeman apprehended, as he
was going to Court in Preisteigne Sessions being States Attorney
whilst he was discharging his duty in the great Sessions held at Presteigne,
in the County of Radnor, as Attorney General of South wales, was most
disgracefully Arrested by the Counsels Messengers, as he was going into the
Court to plead for the State, and his own particular Clients. And imediately
brought up a Prisoner to the (then) Council, where he continued above sixteen
weeks as a Prisoner, daily attending and petitioning for a charge, or
discharge, (the Commonwealth and his own particular Clients in the mean time
suffering great prejudice by his absence.)

At last a false and scandalous charge was brought in against him by Richard
Creed, in the Name of John Morgan, 43. A charge produced by Creed, in John
Morgans Name against Col. Freeman.
one of the Sequestrators of the Church Revenues in South Wales, (being a man
of a very mean Trade and Condition, before he was entrusted with the managing
of the Sequestered Estates.) And the said Creed being demanded to prove the
charge so by him exhibited, could not make good any one particular thereof; 44.
And for want of proof Col. Freeman is discharged.
whereupon Col. Freeman was honorably discharged from his Restraint, and
Attendance, in reference to the said charge.

Nevertheless he received no reparation to this day for all these Wrongs and
Sufferings; (though really damnified by this false Accusation of Creed, 45.
The Col. is not yet repaired though damnified 1000 l.
and his Accomplices) above 1000 l.

And afterward upon the dissolution of the former Parliament, Col. Freeman by
an Order of the (then) Council (where Major Genesis 46. But by Order of the
(then) council is discharged of his place of Attorney Genesis without any more
charge, or proofs against him.
Harrison had then the Honor to sit) was in his absence (without any crime
laid to his charge) discharged of his place of Attorney General for South
wales; Although he had in that place (as also with the ^o^e of his blood in
the Field) given signal Testimonies of his Fidelity and Affection to the
Parliament and Commonwealth of England.

And Mr. Edm. Jones, (a compounded Delinquent on Record) was appointed Attorney
General in his stead, who continues in that place to this day, 37. And M.
Edmond Jones, put in his place.
notwithstanding the several Acts and Ordinances of Parliament, disabling him
from the execution thereof.

48. Mr. Gunter understanding of the Warrant against him, does voluntarily
render himself into the hands of the Sergeant at Arms.
And the said John Gunter being gone into Wales to attend his civil employments
in the great Sessions for Carmarthen, Pembroke, and Cardigan, and understanding
that the Warrant was issued out against him, did with all possible speed
repair to London, and voluntarily rendered himself to the Sergeant at Arms
attending the Council, and as a Prisoner attended 15. weeks, earnestly
Petitioning for a Charge or Discharge.

In the mean time, such was the violence of his Prosecutors, that to disable
him to attend his calling, and the solicitation of the said Petition about Jan.
49. Attends the Council as a Prisoner the space of fifteen weeks.
1652. before any Charge brought agianst him, he was kept a close Prisoner in
the Messengers custody two days and one night, by the means of Major Gen:
Harrison, who moved at the Council against the Sergeant at Arms for suffering
Mr. Gunter to have liberty, though he daily attended the Council as a
Prisoner. 50. A Charge exhibited by Creed, brought in by Major Genesis Harrison
his Master, 9. Feb. 1652.
But the Council being informed of the state of his present case, would make
no Order for his Restraint.

At last a malicious and impertinent Charge was brought in by the said Richard
Creed the Informer, and ushered in to the Council by Major Gen: Harrison his
(then) Master, 9. Feb. 1652. (about seven months after the issuing forth of
the Warrant against him) wherein the matters suggested by Creed merely related
to John Gunter as Soliciter for the Petitioners. 51. The matter suggested of a
12. months standing merely for acting or soliciting, and 7. months from the
date of the Warrant to the exhibiting of the Charge.


Unto which Charge, John Gunter 5. Apr. 1653. did likewise voluntarily put in a
full and satisfactory Answer.

The Petitioners and their Agents being thus dealt withal and discouraged, and
the Report of the said Committee lying dormant for about nine months, Col:
Bennet and others who had the carriage of the Report, did make choice of the
23. of March, 1652. as a most fit and convenient time to bring in the same to
the Parliament.

52. M. Gunter voluntarily pure in his Answer 5. April. 1653.
The Petitioners with their Council and Solliciters being then out of Town,
and many worthy Members of Parliament absent, (who by their frequent sitting at
the Committee on several debates touching the said Petition, were deeply
sensible of the sad truths therein contained.) 53. The Report lying dormant 9.
months, 54. Brought in by Col: Bennet 28. Mar. 1652. whilst the Petitioners,
their Counselors and Soliciters were absent.


But the debate of that business being providentially put off until the
Friday following (being the 25. of March) The Pet. Agents returning
unexpectedly to Town, 55. The debate of the Report, providentially put off
till 25. Mar.
upon Thursday the 24. of March, and understanding this great business was to
be taken into consideration in Parliament the next day, did as much as in them
lay prepare an Address to the Parliament suitable to the shortness of the
time, and the weight and nature of the cause wherewith they were entrusted by
their Country. And for that purpose, A Petition was presented unto the
Parliament, 56. Mr. Charles Roberts Pet. with particulars and Reply, put in the
25. of March.
the said 25. of March, with a copy of the particulars and Reply herein after
recited, by Mr. Charles Roberts, one of the Pet. Soliciters, in these words,
viz.

To the Supreme Authority, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND.
The humble Petition of CHARLES ROBERTS of Grayes-Inne Gent'.
SHOWS,
THat your Honors having appointed this day to take into consideration your
Honors Act of the 23. of February 1649. Entitled, An Act for the better
propagation of the Gospel in Wales, and some Petitions and Proceedings relating
thereunto; Your Petitioner out of his duty to God, and his Native Country, and
for and on the behalf of the Petitioners of the six Counties of South Wales,
and County of Monmouth, (by whom he is entrusted amongst others as their Agent
and Soliciter) Humbly to offer to your Honors consideration the Particulars
and Reply hereunto annexed (The Original whereof has been long since lodged
with the Honorable Committee for Plundered Ministers, And by their Honors
Order of 16. July and 20. August last, hereunto likewise annexed, admitted in
order to a Report thereof to your Honors, which nevertheless (as your
Petitioner is informed) are omitted out of the Report of the said Honorable
Committee: In respect whereof your Petitioner is enforced to this humble
address to your Honors,

Earnestly beseeching your Honors on the behalf of the said Petitioners, to
take the whole into your serious consideration, in order to a future redress
of their grievances, partly contained in the said Petition, Particulars, and
Reply, in such way as to your Honors grave wisdoms shall seem meet,

57. The Resolve of Parliament, 25 May 1653.
For which not only your Petitioner, but many thousands of the Inhabitants of
Wales will have cause to pray, etc.


Whereupon, 58. The Petitioners Agents attend the Committee with the Resolves,
and move for a Commission.
and on consideration, and debate had of the Report brought in by Colonel
Bennet, and of the whole matter as it then lay before the Parliament, they
passed this ensuing Resolve.

Resolved by the Parliament, that this Report be re-committed with power to the
Committee to examine the whole matter of Fact, 59. The Petiti. delayed until
Thursday, and the Parliament dissolved the wednesday before, and the Committee
could not act any longer.
and to Report it to the Parliament.

Afterward the Petitioners Council, and Sollicitors did attend the said
Committee with the said Resolve; And several times moved them in pursuance
thereof, and of the former Resolve of Parliament, of the 10 of March 1651. To
grant Commissions to the Country, to examine the truth of the Petition,
Particulars and Reply; whereby the said Committee might be enabled to Report
the whole matter of Fact to the Parlia. But the said Committee did put it off
until Thursday 21 Apr. 1653. 60. The Petitiones intend to revive their
Petition before the last Parliament.


And the Parliament being dissolved the Wednesday before, the said Committee,
became consequently dissolved, and no further proceedings could be had before
them on the said Petition and Resolves.

The Petitioners intending to revive their Petition, 61. Mr. Gunter their
Solicitor was the second time imprisoned by order of an absolute Warrant, and
Order of Maj. Genesis Harrison.
and Complaint before the late Parliament, and the noise thereof coming to the
ears of some persons concerned, The said John Gunter the Petitioners
Solliciter, became the second time a prisoner, being apprehended by Edmond
Dendy Esquire, Sergeant at Ames to the (then) Council, and by him committed to
the custody of Mr. Humphrey Holden, one of the Messengers attending the same
Council, where he then remained two days, 50. Mr. Gunter demands the cause of
his imprisonment.
and one night, who demanding by whose Warrant and Authority he was restrained
of the liberty held forth by the Law of the Land, to the free People of this
Nation, was answered; That he was detained by virtue of a Warrant issued forth
in August. 1652. and the special directions of Major Genesis Harrison.

The said John Gunter having obtained a Copy of the said Order, and seriously
considering of the same, 51. The Answer given him therein.
did find the tenor thereof to be merely for bringing in his person to
appear, and answer before the former Council, to such things as should be
then and there objected against him. And in regard he had satisfied that Order
by his voluntary appearance and answer, and finding no Order for his restraint,
but the very Council it self dissolved, he did conceive that he ought not to
be restrained of his liberty by color of the said Order, or any other verbal
Command or Directions; Whereupon he was plainly told that he must remain a
Prisoner, until he did obtain an Order of discharge from the (then Council)
or from Major General Harrison; who being thus straightened, and not at all
Committed by any Order of the then Council; did direct a Letter to Major
General Harrison, To this effect, 52. M. Gunters Letter to Major General
Harrison, touching his Restrained.
viz. That he had been exposed to extraordinary expense, and loss of time,
and was much damnified by the causeless prosecution of his servant Richard
Creed,unto whose charge he had long before put in a full and satisfactory
Answer, before the former Council, whereby their Order was fulfilled, and
themselves sufficiently satisfied of his Innocence. And desired his Honor to
consider how unusual and destructive a course it was to the free People of
this Nation, to be deprived of their just Liberties by verbal commands, or
otherwise on bare information, before a legal Trial, and Conviction; And
therefore hoped he should not be made the first president of that nature,
since the establishment of that Government; But that his Honor and all other
in Authority would be pleased to protect him, whilst he behaved himself
inoffensive toward their Government. 53. Mr. Gunter afterward discharged by
Ma. General Harrisons direction.
Whereupon Major General Harrison, taking the Premises into consideration,
was pleased to give Order and Directions to the Serjent at Arms to discharge
the said John Gunter, from his restraint and punishment.

34. Mr. Gunter received no Reparation, thought damified above 1000 l.
Which being performed, notwithstanding though Mr. Gunter being of known
integrity to the Commonwealth, yet by color of this false Accusation (without
proof made against him, or any Trial or Conviction) was debarred of the
benefit of his Profession, in the execution of several places, and employments
wherein he was entrusted; And has not to this day Received any Reparation for
his losses and damages thereby sustained, though he has been damnified
every way above a thousand pound.

Having given you the true Relation of the whole Transaction concerning the
Petition, with the Parliament Resolves, and several Orders and Reports by the
Committee for Plundered Ministers and others thereupon, with the manifold
Obstructions in the Prosecution thereof, both by several miscarriages of
Clerks and other Agents. And the grievous Restraynment of the Petitioners
Council, and Sollicitors from their Liberties. I pass on to the Particular
Heads of the Charge put in by the Petitioners.

II. The Particular CHARGE.
The General Heads of the PETITION of the Six Counties of South Wales, and
County of Monmouth, together with the particulars therein contained; Whereupon
the Petitioners desire to have liberty to examine Witnesses in the Country by
Commission, where matter of Act arises, and the Witnesses reside, according to
the Resolves of Parliament of the 10 of March last, humbly presented to the
Honorable Committee for plundered Ministers.

The First General HEAD.
1. THat all or most of the Ministers of the Six Counties of South Wales, and
County of Monmouth, have been ejected from their respective Benefices.]

More paticularly, Monmouth, 53. In the County of Monmouth 53. and upwards,
whereof 28. Masters of Arts, 15 Batchelors of Divinity, 10 Preaching Graduates,
and University-men, besides all those Curats and Stipendaries that were
employed to Preach and Officiate for Pluralists and Impropriators. Glamorgan,
40. Ministers ejected 40. and upwards. Whereof two Doctors of Divinity, three
Batchelors of Divinity, 16 Masters of art, 19 preaching Graduats and
Universitymen, besides Curats and Stipendaries employed to preach, and
officiate for Pluralists and Impropriators. Brecknock, 32. Minister ejected 32.
Whereof one Doctor of Divinity, three Batchelors of Divinity, 18 Masters of
Art, 10 Graduats and Universitymen, besides Curats and Stipendaries employed to
preach and officiate for Pluralists and Impropriators. Radnor, 30. Ministers
ejected 30 and upwards. Whereof one Doctor of Divinity, two Batchelers of
Divinity, six Masters of Art, besides other Graduats, Curats, and Stipendaries,
employed to preach, and officiate in other Churches and Chappells, and to
supply the places of Pluralists and Impropriators. Co^rmarthen 30. Ministers
ejected 30 upwards. Besides Curats and Stipendaries and other Graduates, and
Universitymen employed to preach, and officiate for Pluralities, and
Improperties. Cardigan, 20. Ministers ejected 20 and upwards. Besides Curats
and Stipendaries employed to preach, and officiate for Pluralists and
Impropriators. Pembrok. 32. Ministers ejected thirty two, and upwards.
Consisting most of them, of able Preachers and Universitymen. and other
Graduates, besides Curats, and Stipendaries employed and Stipended to Preach
and officiate for Pluralists, and Impropriators.


The Second General HEAD.
That few or none of the said Countries have been supplied, with a competent
number of Godly able Teachers to officiate in the rooms of the outed
Ministers, there being not above four or five Itinerary Teachers, in some of
the said Counties appointed, and approved of to Preach the Gospel; whereas
some of the said Counties consist of 120. Parishes, and the least thereof
consisting of 50. many whereof have therein above 2000 Souls.]

More particularly. Monmouth not above 20. That the County of Monmouth has in
it 140 odd Parishes, to supply which Parishes, there are now of approved
Othodox Godly able Teachers and Ministers, resident, stipended and allowed of
to preach and officiate, according to the Act of Parliament of the 22 of Feb.
1649 not above 20. Glamorgan not above 20, That the County of Glamorgan has in
it 151 Parishes, to supply which Parishes, there are now of approved Orthodox
Godly able Teachers and Ministers resident, stipended and allowed of to preach
and officiate, according to the Actor of Parliament, of the 22 of Feb. 1649.
not above twenty. Brecknock not above 4, That the County of Brecon has in it
60 odd Parishes, to supply which there are now of approved Orthodox godly able
Teachers and Ministers resident, stipended, and allowed to Preach and Officiate
according to the said Act, not above 4. Radnor not above 8: That the County of
Radnor has in it 50 Parishes, to supply which Parishes there are now of
approved Orthodox godly able Teachers and Ministers Stipended, allowed and
approved of to preach and officiate, according to the said Act, not above 8.
Carmarthen not above 7 That the County of Carmarthen has in it 81 Parishes, to
supply which Parishes, there are now of approved Oxthodox godly able Teachers
and Ministers resident, stipended, allowed and approved of to preach and
officiate, according to the said Act, not above 7. Cardigan not above 12 That
the County of Cardigan has in it 60 odd Parishes, to supply which Parishes,
there are now of approved Ministers qualified as aforesaid, not above 12.
Pembroke not above 30, That the County of Pembroke has in it 140 odd Parishes,
to supply which Parishes, there are now of approved Orthodox godly able
Teachers and Ministers resident, stipended and approved of to Preach and
officiate, according to the said Act not above 30.


The Third General HEAD.
Shcoole-Masters.
That there has not been provided such a convenient number of good Schools,
for the education of Children, and advancement of Learning as was intended by
the Parliament, and the true purport of the said Act.]

More particularly, Monmouth not above 3. That in the County of Monmouth there
are not above three Godly able Schoolmasters stipended, qualified, allowed,
and approved of, according to the said Act, having therein 140 odd Parishes as
aforesaid. Glamorgan not above 4, Not above four, having therein 151 Parishes
as aforesaid. Brecknock not above 3, Not above three, having therein 60 odd
Parishes as aforesaid. Radnor not above 3, Radnor not above three, having
therein 50 Parishes as aforesaid. Carmarthen not above 2, Not above two, having
therein 81 Parishes as aforesaid. Penbrook not above 3, Not above three, having
therein 140 odd Parishes as aforesaid. Cardigan not above 3. Not above three,
having therein 60 odd Parishes as aforesaid.


The fourth general Head.
That some persons deriving authority from the said Act, have for above two
years last past received and disposed of the Tithes, Glebes, Impropriations,
Tenths, Portions of tithes, Rents reserved, College Pensions, and other
Benefices and Ecclesiastical Livings and Promotions whatsoever within the six
Counties of South Wales and County of Monmouth annually worth 20000. l. or
thereabout.] viz.

That Col: Thomas Harrison, Col: Philip Jones, Col: John Jones, Sir John Trevar
Knight, Henry Herbert Esquire Will: Herbert, Will: Parker, Will: Blethin,
Christopher Katchmay, and the rest of the Commissioners named in the said Act,
to execute the several powers therein contained, ware thereby empowered and
entrusted by themselves and others deriving authority from them, to receive and
dispose of all and singular the Rents, Issues of all and every the Rectories,
Vicaridges, Donatives sine Curis, Portions of Tenths, and other Ecclesiastical
Livings, which all the time of passing the said Act then were or then after
should be in the disposing of the Parliament, or any others deriving authority
from them. As also to receive and dispose of the Rents, Issues and Profits of
all Impropriations and Glebe-lands within the said Counties, which then were or
then after should be under Sequestration, or in the disposal of the Parliament
by virtue of any former Statute, or any Act or Ordinance of this present
Parliament. The particular valuations of the said respective Tithes and
premises within the said respective Counties are as follows, viz. Monmouth:
The Tithes, Tenths, Portions of tithes, Glebes, Impropriations, Rents reserved,
College Pensions, and other Ecclesiastical Livings, Procurations, Promotions,
etc. in the county of Monmouth, annually worth 14500 l. Glamorgan: The Tithes
and premises annually worth 4500 l. Brecknock: The Tithes and Premises
annually worth 2500 l. Radnor: The Tithes and Premises annually worth 2000 l.
Carmarthen: The Tithes and Premises annually worth 2000 l. Cardigan: The
Tithes and Premises annually worth 1000 l. Pembroke: The Tithes and Premises
annually worth 3500 l.
Which in the whole comes to the entire sum of 20000 l. per ann.

And the better to satisfy your Honors of the real valuations of the said
Tithes and premises, the Petitioners are so far from overvaluing the same,
that they shall and will be ready, and do hereby offer your Honors to give
good security for the said Tithes and premises within the said seven counties
20000 l. per ann. so as they may have, collect and enjoy the same with the same
power and authority, and in the same beneficial manner as the said
Commissioners and their Agents have received, made or raised, or might have
received, made or raised the same, and the respective Inhabitants, etc. will be
well contented to farm their own respective Tithes, and other the premises
proportionably according to this offer and valuation made by the Petitioners.
The said offer of the Petitioners being 20000 l. more in two years, then the
Commissioners account in their general answer.

The fifth general Head.


The Petitioners will make this evident,

1. That no Account it all was given or rendered the Parliament of the said
Tithes and premises, until the Petition was preferred.

2. That the account given in by the Commissioners in answer to the Petition is
only in general, not expressing in particular what profit of the Tithes and
premises they received, nor out of what, nor how disposed, save only an
acknowledgement of the receipt of 20000 l. or thereabouts, which the
Petitioners humbly pray they may do. And the Petitioners having a copy
thereof, and convenient time, are ready to exhibit a particular surcharge, the
Petitioners having not yet obtained a copy of the general answer and account
brought in to the Clerk of the said Honorable Committee, although the
Petitioners by their Agents used their endeavor therein, Master Phelps having
answered the Petitioners Agents, that the said Answer was sealed up, and order
given him, that no copy thereof should be given the Petitioners or their Agents.

3. The Petitioners will also make it apparent, that little of the said Tithes
and premises have been converted to the propagation of the Gospel, or
accounted for to the State.

By these few qualified stipended Teachers, Ministers, and Schoolmasters
employed and stipended to teach and officiate.

4. By the small Stipends and Salaries allowed them out of the Tithes and
Premises, whereof some have sadly complained.

5. By the small allowances for 5ts paid to the ejected Ministers wives, though
allowed according to the full value by the Act of Parliament.

The Sixth General HEAD.
6. That the Tithes and Premises for the two last years have been set out at
undervalues, to the prejudice of the State.]

1. The Petitioners will make good, That not one Vicaridge, Rectory, or other
of the Impropriat Tithes and Premises, but have been let out at undervalues in
every particular Parish. But because the Petitioners are desirous to give your
Honors a more particular satisfaction therein, they do for instance name, and
particularize,

That the Rectory of Lanavon Vawre, in the County of Brecon, being valued by
apprizers upon Oath at 100 l. per annum, yet set out at 55 l. per annum, though
80 l. per annum has been offered for it, and sufficient security for payment
of the Rent, out of which the 5 ts and contribution being deducted the State
will have but a small proportion out of the same.

The Gleabe is worth 4 l. 10 s. per annum, and so much would have been given
for it, yet set out at 40 s. per annum.

The Vicaridge of Glasbury, in the County of Brecon, and Radnor being worth 100
l. per ann. upwards, is set out at 50 l. per an. Though 80 l. per annum was
offered to be paid for the same, and once assented unto, and security offered
for payment of the Rent, and to include the fifths within the 80 l. so that the
fifths and contributions being deducted out of the Rent now paid for the same,
the State will have the least proportion thereof.

That the Vicaridge of Devynnog is worth 120 l. per annum, and upwards, yet set
out at 60 l. per annum, and contributions thereout paid.

That the Vicaridge of Lliwell is worth 50 l. per annum, yet set out at 15 l.
per annum.

That John Rice offered for the Tiths of Llangunur 30 l. per annum, yet the
same has been let by John Hughes the Sequestrator, to his own brother at 15
l. and thereout the fifths and contributions deducted, whereby the State is
defrauded.

That the Impropriate Churches of Chirckhowell Llangeney, Llangattock,
Llanelley, Cumdy, etc. situate in the County of Brecon, Sequestered for the
Delinquency of Edward earl of Worcester are worth 350 l. per annum, and 300 l.
would have been given for it, yet let out for 150 l. per ann.

That the Rectory of Llanelley, Llawdeneylogg, Llangendirne Llannon and
Pembrey, with the Chappells annexed, situate in the County of Carmarthen,
parcel of the estate of the Lord Percy, let out to Henry Vaughan Esquire, late
Sir Henry Vaughan Knight, a Delinquent, at 60 l. per annum, well worth 800 l.
per annum and upwards, and so much would be given for the same.

The Tyths of Sleynton, worth 50 l. per annum, set out at 25 l. per ann.

The Tyths of Hubbarston are worth 70 l. per annum, let out for 25 l.

The Tyths of Llangam worth 60 l. per annum, set out at 30 let per annum.

The Tiths of Twynnells, worth 28 l. per annum, set out at 8 l. per annum to
Mr. White a near Kinsman to the sequestrator.

The Tyths of Hodston, worth 50 l. per annum, set out at 28 l. per annum.

The Vicaridge of Muncton worth 30 l. per annum, set out unto M. John Lort,
brother to Sampson Lort, one of the Commissioners for Propagation at 10 l. per
ann.

The Tyths of Warren worth 80 l. per annum, and set out to the said John Lort
at 35 l. per ann.

The Tyths of Castle Martin, worth 50 l. per annum, set out unto the said Roger
White at 24 l. per ann.

Rhayadar worth 40 l. per annum, set out at 25 l.

St. Harmon, worth 50 l. per annum, set out at 24 l.

Hyopp, worth 50 l. per annum, set out at 25 per ann.

Llangunllo, worth 32 l. per annum, set out at 21 l. per annum.

Kevenleere, worth 80 l. per annum, and set out at 60 l. per annum.

Llanbadarn Vawre, worth 80 l. per annum, set out at 60 l. per annum.

Witten, worth 30 l. per annum, set out at 15 l. per ann.

Blethvach worth 80 l. per annum, set out at 35 l. per ann.

Cascob worth 40 l. per annum, set out 25 l. per ann.

New Radnor worth 80 l. per annum, set out at 50 l. per ann.

Bochrwd, and Llamb^der worth 120 l. per annum, set out at 80 l.

Glandestrey worth 70 l. per annum, set out at 40 l. per ann.

Bryngwyn worth 70 l. per annum, set out at 40 l. per annum.

New Church, worth 28 l. per annum, set out at 14 l. per annum.

Disserth and Bettus, worth 80 l. per annum, set at 35 l.

Aberedowe, worth 120 l. per annum, set out at 80 l. per ann.

The Tyths of Cherrington, in the County of Glamorgan, worth 100 l. per annum,
and upwards, set out by Col. Jones servant to Mr. William Basset at 35 l. per
annum, and contributions, and fifths thereout deducted, whereof the State is
defrauded 75 l. per ann.

The Tyths of Bishopston, in the said County, worth 120 l. per annum and
upwards, and 60 l. offered for it, yet let at 45 l. per ann. and contributions
thereout, deducted, whereby the State has the least part thereof.

Lambeder Vicaridge in the County of Pembroke, worth 140 l. per annum, set out
at 60 l. per annum, to M. John Ellyott, and Morris Bateman.

Llandisillio Vicaridge (for so much of it as lies in the County of Pembroke)
worth 6 l. 6 s. 8 d. set out to Morris Morgan at 3 l: 10 s.

Llanvalteg Castle Deren in the County of Carmarthen, worth 100 l. per annum,
let out at 40 l. per annum, and Taxations thereout allowed.

The Vicaridge of Llanuthull, worth 40 l. per annum, and upwards, set out at 22
l. per ann.

The Vicaridge of Llangamarch, worth 60 l. per annum, set out at 34 l. per ann.

The Vicaridge of Llawrenny, worth 80 l. per annum, and upward; set out at 30
l. per annum, and contributions thereout paid, and the Parishioners could not
Farm the same though they offered for it 44 l. and to pay all Taxations, and
Contributions.

Lanbeder in the County of Cardigan, worth 50 l. a year, set out at 30 l. per
ann.

Nantgwulle worth 20 l. per annum, set out 10 l. per annum, and contributions
thereout paid, and the Parishoners could not have the same, though they offered
15 l. for the same, and to pay contributions besides.

The Tithe of the Parish of Trednock valued at 60 l. per annum, and so much
offered, with good security for payment thereof, yet let out at 28 l. per ann.

The Impropriate Tithe of Llandilio Groseny (late the Earl of Worcesters) worth
100 l. per annum, set out to Nich. Symons at 60 l. per annum, although the
Petitioners offered 95 l. per ann. paying contributions.

The Tithe of Llanvetherine, worth 100 l. per annum, and the Parishioners
offered 80 l. per annum for it, yet let out at 60 l. per annum to one Charles
Godard, his wife being Mr. Cradocks near Kinswoman.

The Tithe of Gresmont worth 100 l. per annum, and so offered by the
Parishoners, but let out to a brother of one of the Commissioners for
Propagation at 10 l. per annum, and so for the rest and residue for all
Parishes within the said Counties, being every where set out at undervalues.

Petitioners will prove that the said Tithes and Premises have not been posted
up, and publicly exposed to Farm to the Parishoners, and particular owners
and others that would have given most for the same, as is usual in Improving
and advancing other Rents and public Revenues, disposable by the Parliament,
and others Authorized by them.

3. By letting the same to Friends, Kindred, Creatures and alliance of the
Sequestrators and others entrusted, with the letting thereof as some have been
before particularly instanced by name, and diverse others that might be named.

The Seventh General HEAD.
7. That for want of the due Execution of the said Act, the Petitioners
together with the Inhabitants endure a famine of the Word of God.]

More Particularly,

1. By the scarsity of the persons stipended, allowed and appointed to preach
and officiate.

2. By allowing persons to preach and officiate that have borne actual Arms
against the Parliament, and other ill affected persons to the Parliament, (viz.)

One Hugh Rogers of the County of Monmouth, who has been in actual Arms
against the Parliament, and so continued whilst the late King had any visible
strength or interest in the Nation to protect him, and others of his
Confederates of the same Principles; The said Hugh Rogers being one that did
formerly revile and vilify the Parliament, and Army, and all the godly party
and their proceedings.

That Robert Prichard Parson of Neverne, has during the late Wars deserted
his habitation, joined with the enemy, and acted with Captain Edward Lloyd his
Father in Law in Kidwelley Castle against the Parliament, and as it is
generally believed has not yet subscribed the Engagement, yet allowed and
beneficed.

That one Hughes of the County of Carmarthen, being a person disaffected to the
Parliament, and present Government, and one that joined with the enemy in the
late Rebellion of Poyer, etc. against the Parliament, is permitted and allowed
to preach and officiate, and holds one or two Benefices; whereas diverse others
that never bore Arms against the Parliament are ejected on very slender
account, particularly Mr Nicholson, M. Evans, Mr. Thomas, Mr. Powell, Mr.
Hatley, Doctor Edwards, Mr. Griffith, and others.

That one Thomas Price of the County of Cardigan was settled by the Bishop since
the reducing of that County to the obedience of the Parl. and one that has
kept an Alehouse, and a great frequenter of Alehouses.

3. The Inhabitants endure a famine of the Word of God, by reason several
other persons now employed and stipended to preach and officiate that are
deboyst, drunken persons, scandalous in their lives and conversations.]

More particularly,

Thomas Field of the County of Penbroke, John Phillips of the same, David Evans
of the County of Cardigan, William Jones of the County of Brecon, William Jones
of the County of Monmouth, and several others that might be instanced,
insomuch that the Inhabitants are much discouraged to repair to their meetings
and exercises.

4. The Inhabitants endure a Famine of the Word of God by reason of several
illiterate persons that are of different opinions, that do teach and
officiate, causing great rents and divisions among their Auditories, and
several contestations and disturbances, to the endangering the peace of the
County.

More particularly,

At Myniddv-stayne on Monday in Easter week last; at Bedways on Low-Easter
Sunday; at Swanzey, at Merthir, and other places: at some of which differences
and disturbances there have been several swords drawn, and some hurt, and the
Inhabitants put to a great fear, lest these differences do grow wider, to the
endangering of the public peace of the Country.

By which means the Inhabitants are very much disheartened and discouraged from
coming to their Meetings, which are so remote and uncertain, that the aged,
lame, impotent, and poorer sort that are not provided with horses, cannot, and
many thousands know not where or how to come to those places where they
exercise their meetings, being sometimes ten, sometimes twenty miles, and
sometimes more from some parts of a County, and one while in one County and
another while in another County, and but very few in any one place constant: So
that a man on a Lords day may ride twenty miles through a county, and not see a
Church door open, supplied with a constant, able, godly Minister.

More particularly,

In the county of Brecon, there are above fifty Parish Churches (besides
Chapels) that for above this twelve moneeh have not been supplied with a
constant preaching Minister, and at this very time on most Lords days there
are above fifty Churches that are shut up and unsupplyed.

5. That in the Parishes of Llanvihangell Nantbrane, Llandilervane, Tralloigne,
the College of Brecon. (where formerly there was a Lecture once a fortnight)
and many other Churches, the Word of God has not been taught these two years.

That the Town of Brecon. being one of the chiefest Corporations, and most
populous in South wales, the Town of Crickhowell, the Town of the Hay and
Buielt, being all Market towns in the said County, there have not been any one
constant able Teacher or Minister for two years last past. And diverse other
towns and parishes in South Wales which might be instanced, whereby the people
are much exposed, and the greater opportunity offered them to profane the Lords
day, and spend the same in Alehouses, and other lewd places, to the great
dishonouring of God, and endangering the souls and consciences of the
Inhabitants thereof.

6. That the persons named and entrusted for Approvers by the said Act of Febr.
1649. do live very remote one from another, some in North Wales, some in
South Wales, and one of them in London, who being also Itinerant Teachers,
which makes their residence unconstant, they do meet but seldom to receive,
entertain, and encourage others to come in and offer themselves to supply the
rooms of the ejected Ministers, without whose approbation none can be admitted.
Whereas the Commissioners in order to ejecting of the Ministers, and disposing
of the Tithes and premises, do sit frequently by five, but by twelve for
Appeals but very seldom.

The Eight general Head.
8. That Children are not bred and educated in the Instruction and information
of the Lord.]

The Petitioners will make that good. 1. By reason of few Oxthodox godly able
Teachers and Ministers are employed to preach and officiate in each County. 2.
Because the good work of Catechizing Children, and Instructing them in the
information of the Lord is wholly laid aside in all, or most Parishes and
Counties. 3. By reason so few godly Schoolmasters are allowed, and stipended
for that purpose, and some of those employed and allowed of, are unfit for to
undergo, or be employed in so great and weighty a business.


More particularly, One Phillip William, That is a young man of no competent
learning for a Schoolmasters, yet nevertheless appointed head Schoolmasters,
in the College of Brecon, being one of the chiefest Towns in South Wales, and
that one Hugh Powell is his Usher or Assistant (who indeed is the only able
man for learning) being a known Papist, and one that has formerly bred up many
Children in Popery, to the grief and discomforture of their Parents, yet in
the face of Town and Country allowed to officiate there. That one David Evans
a stipended allowed Schoolmasters, at New Radnor (being the Shire Town of
that County) is a drunken deboyst man. Hugh Jones of the County of Glamorgan
the like. Besides diverse others that might be instanced, whereby the
Inhabitants are kept back, from sending their Children to be trained up in
Religion and Learning, by such ill qualified Tutors.


The Ninth General HEAD.
9. That the Inhabitants cannot take notice of the Parliaments Acts, Edicts,
and Proclamations, wherein their public welfare, the liberty and safety of
their persons and estates are concerned.] viz.

1. For want of a convenient number of Ministers in the respective Counties, by
whom the same ought to be read and published to the respective Parishioners and
Inhabitants.

2. By reason that some of the Itinerants are so ignorant, that they cannot
read the Act of Parliament (for instance.) When the Act of Parliament for
public Thanksgiving for the Victory obtained at Worcester, against the late
King of Scots, was sent down to the County of Glamorgan, to be publicly read
in all Churches and Chappells, to the Inhabitants, the Act being delivered to
one Walter Williams to be read on that day, the said Walter Williams answered
that he could not read the same.

An Abstract of the Particulars.
1. MInisters ejected in the seven Counties; 237 and upwards. Besides Curats
and Stipendaries, employed to preach and officiate for Pluralists and
Impropriators Chappells of case, etc. 2. The number of the Parishes within the
said seven Counties. 700 and odd. 3. The number of the present Stipended, Not
above 100. allowed Ministers to supply those Parishes.
So that there are 600 Parishes unsupplied. 4. The number of the present
allowed, Not above 18. Stipended Schoolmasters. 5. The value of the Tithes,
etc. received for the maintenance of Ministers and Schoolmasters. 20000 l.
per annum, and upwards. 6. That several of the Ministers and Schoolmasters
now Stipended, are drunken deboyst persons, some illiterate, others that are
Malignant, and bore Arms against the Parliament. 7. The Tithes, etc.
undervalued in all Parishes within the 7. Counties and the Commissioners
account only for two years but of -- 19000 l. or there abouts.
Which is less than the Petitioners Charge and Offer by -- 20000 l. or
thereabouts.

These were the Particulars faithfully transcribed, and Copied out of the
Original; which were put in and lodged with the Committee.

And because there is discovered an effectual Letter, under Mr. William
Watkin's own hand (being Register to the Commissioners in Brecknock-shire, and
Radnor-shire, Clerk of the Peace under Major Genesis Harrison, within the said
County of Brecknock, And lately servant to Colonel Phillip Jones, who wrote all
the Commissioners Orders; And had special influence upon the Sequestrators and
their Agents, Received the Tithes of Bochwrd to his own use, and set out the
Vicaridge of Glasbury, being worth a 100 l. a year to his Carpenter for 50 l.
a year,) which he wrote to Mr. Jenkins Jones, one of the Itinerants in
Brecknock-shire; I could not pretermit to insert the same to common view.

A Copy of Mr. William Watkins LETTER, to Mr. Jenkin Jones.
Dear SIR,
THe twelve pound may be thus got. The Sequestrators is to take them up from
Mr. Lewis, and when the money is Received, you may safely pay them, where you
please, because it is such an Arrere that the Treasurer knows not of, for it
lies not in Charge before him.

If Mr. Lewis denies what he confessed, Let the Sequestrator show him the
enclosed Note.

8. November. 1651.

For Mr. William Jones, and Captain Morgan Sequestrators.
IT is concieved that there is three or four years Rent due, upon Meredeth
Lewis Esquire for the Prebendary of Llanvthul, He confessed to be due for one
year, and told so to me about a month since,

Your Servant, William Watkins.


And this was added in the Perclause of the Letter to Mr. Jenkins Jones. IF
that will not do, then let the Sequestrators demand a sight of his
Acquittances since the year 1642. And then you shall find him out,

Your Servant, Will. Watkins.
8. November. 1651.



Here is Mr. William Watkins his Directions to Mr. Jenken Jones, to get Twelve
pounds] and that he dispose of it as he please] being an Arrere, which the
Treasurer knew not of; And he gives the Reason for it, For it lay not in
charge before him.] And left Mr. Jews should any way escape the payment, he
betrays the Gentleman's confession to him, and guides the Sequestrators to
find him out by former Acquittances.

Here is a pretty Trick indeed, who could wish a neater contrivance to find
out Mr. William Watkins, or a more evident Demonstration, to descry to public
view, How a man bearing such Offices, and so specially entrusted in the Common
wealth, does thus notoriously betray the trust committed unto him? But ( Ex
ungu^ Leonem) I leave to the judgment of all conscientious Men to understand
how plain the State has been defrauded by such Plots; And what secret
Correspondencies there are between Captain Jenkin Jones, and his Lieutenant,
Mr. William Watkins to advance their Estates in the way of gain-full
godliness, appears by their business in the County, and City of Gloucester,
where above a 100 Horse and Arms were raised (at the late coming in of the
King of Scots to Worcester) which they both mounted with their own Men, and
though they promised to restore the same again upon their return to the
owners, yet they carried Horse and Arms to Brecknockshire, and never restored
them back, which is worth his Highness consideration.

And so I proceed to the last part, which is, The Commissioners Answer, and the
Petitioners Reply.

III. The ANSWER of Col. Phillipp Jones. Bushy Mansell. John Price. Rowland
Dawkins. Edward Stradling. John Nicholas. James Phillips. Thomas Watkins.
Robert Jones. Sampson Lort. Jenkin Francklyn. Rich. King. Rice Williams.
William Blethin. John Daniell. John Herbert. John Bowen. Christopher Catchmay,
Esquires. Commissioners for Propagation of the Gospel in Wales, and the Reply
of the Petitioners of the Six Counties of South Wales, and County of Monmouth
thereunto, lodged with the Committee for Plundered Ministers the 20 of August.
1652. and there Remaining of Record.
The Commissioners Answer to the Petitioners particular Heads.
1. Ans.
THat there were none ejected, but in obedience to the Act, and upon clear
grounds, and those that conceaved themselves unjustly dealt with had their free
course of appeal to this Committee, wheather came one from Monmouthshire, but
had the judgment against him affirmed, though he were in our opinion as meet
for favor as any we proceeded against.

1. Rep.
THat there were diverse ejected contrary to the Act without due summons, and
examination of Witnesses, and Copies of Orders, Depositions, Papers and other
proceedings denied them, whereby they were barred of their free course for
appeal to this Honorable Committee; And if the Commissioners showed so little
favor unto the one that did appeal (who is namelesse) though he in their own
judgment and opinion was as meet for favor as almost any they proceeded
against (as by their Answer appears) what could the rest expect? And therefore
no marvel if they appealed not to 12, where 5 of those that first gave
judgment against them, sit to confirm the same. And so much the rather,
because some of the Commissioners have publicly declared against the very
calling and function of the Ministry.

2. Answer
There are yet remaining unejected (127) and upwards of the old Ministers.

2. Reply.
That there are not unejected of the old Ministers, the number of one hundred
twenty seven as by the Answer is alleged: And that many of those that are
left unjected, have been greater Delinquents against the Parliament, and more
scandalous in their lives and conversations, then many of those Ejected.

Comomis. Ans. to the 2. Head. 1. Ans.
That we have not refused nor been wanting to give encouragement to any godly
man fitted for the Ministry that was tendered unto us.

Pet. Reply.
The Petitioners humbly conceive that the Commissioners have not discharged
their duties (in not refusing, and not being wanting to give encouragement to
any godly man fitted for the Ministry that was tendered them) (admitting that
to be true.) But rather it was their duty to provide such godly able men, as
well as to ^^t those that were unworthy, according to the trust in them reposed
by the Parliament. And the Petitioners do affirm that the Commssioners have
refused and rejected some that have been approved by this Honorable Committee
particularly Mr. Collier, Mr. Bywater and others; And the persons named for
approved in the Act (being Itinerants, and living remote one from another) meet
but very seldom to entertain and encourage godly men to tender themselves
unto them; Wherers all possible diligence is used in ejection of the Ministers,
and disposing of the Tithes, And have silenced Mr. Matthew Williams a godly
able man, that preached gratis and had so done for many years before, not
expecting any temporal reward, the Commissioners having no proofs of
Delinquency or scandal against him, so that it is more then apparent their
design tends to the extirpation both of the Ministers and Ministry.

2 Answer.
That we have by special Messengers, Letters, and by all other means labored
with the Churches of Christ in New England, London, and the Universities, for a
supply, and through the goodness of God have already procured seaventy five:
besides the (127) above mentioned left unejected) approved able Ministers to
preach the Gospel in those parts, that are most English, besides about (60)
godly gifted men, that by the advice of the Ministers, named in the Act are
appointed to preach to the Welsh. And there are about (80) more with us, which
go about preaching the Gospel with great success in the Welsh Tongue. But
taking no maintenance from the tithes we forbear to mention them. And though
there are not as many able Teachers as we could wish, and are in a hopeful
way of procuring, yet we may with safety say, the least County has many more
then by the Petition is suggested.

2 Reply.
That the Petitioners humbly conceive that the Commissioners (had they been so
pleased) might have found diverse persons better qualified, and more fit for the
work of the Ministry, then many of those by them employed not only in New
England, London, and the Universities, but nearer home, but that the Tithes and
Premises were of no small advantage to the Commissioners Agents, and the
Farmers thereof. And as for the (75) 60) and 80) Ministers and Teachers
alleged to be now employed, and stipended, besides the (127) pretended to be
unejected, which in all make (342) The Petitioners do Av^rre, and will make it
appear, if it please this Honorable Committee to give way, that there are not
above (100) orthodox godly able Ministers (if half so many) stipended, allowed
and approved of according to the Act, to supply the 7 Counties, consisting of
(700) Parishes, And as for the Commissioners hopes of further supply of
Ministers for the future, The Petitioners have little cause to hope, or believe
any better performance for the time to come; since their proceedings for nigh
(3) years has taken so small effect.

The Commissioners 3 Ans.
That we have endeavored all we could to procure godly Schoolmasters from
the University, etc. and have settled, and do maintain (29) which with those
before in being make up (50) And are disposed into Market Towns, and other
places most convenient within the said Counties.

The Petitioners 3. Reply.
That whereas the Commissioners pretend there are (50) godly Schoolmasters
settled and maintained by them in the seven Counties; The Petitioners do
aver and will make it appear there are not above (18) godly able
Schoolmasters stipended, allowed, and approved of, according to the Act
within the said 7 Counties, and several others drunken deboist persons,
scandalous in their lives and conversations, and one of them a Papist if not a
Jesuit employed assistant or Usher in the Town of Brecon, and others ill
affected persons to the Parliament, and present Government, as by their
particulars more fully appears; And that several Market Towns in the
respective Counties are unsupplied with able Schoolmasters, to the decay of
Religion and Learning, viz. Chrickhowell, Hay, Builte, Carmarthen, and other
places.

The Commissioners 4. Ans.
That there are above 478 Parishes impropriated Parsonsonages and Vicaridges
within in the said Counties unsequestred (2.) That for those that have been
sequestered we have been exceeding careful to choose and entrust for each
year honest, and reasonable men for Collectors in each County, and one
Treasurer for the whole, that the accounts might be in the clearest way to be
delivered upon the determination of the Act, or sooner if called for: As to the
value in the Petition mentioned, though we took great care to appoint honest
able men Agents, for the letting and setting in each County. We find they
could not raise the whole Revenue of the Sequestered Tithes of the seven
Counties to, but (9518 l.) ( 5 s.) 8 d.) for the year (1650.) And for the
year 1651.) but (10418) 5 s.) 2 d.) And humbly conceive that more thereof
could not be then made, out of which there is paid to Ministers,
Schoolmasters, and others, according to the intent of the Act for Propagating
of the Gospel, in the year 1650 the sum of (7923 l.) 13 s.) 5 d.) And for the
year 1651 in part the sum of (5894 l.) 9 s.) 10 d.) the remainder whereof
being for the year 1650: the sum of ( 1594 l.) 12 s.) 3 d.) and for the year
1651) 4523 l.) 15 s.) 4 d) rests in the Tenants hands, so that the Ministers
Probationers are not paid up their full sailares, for the year 1651. Nor some
for the year 1650. And the Fifts and Contributions not fully known, nor
allowed.

Petitioners 4 Reply.
The Petitioners do deny there are 478 Parishes impropriated, etc.
unsequestred, as by the Commissioners answer is aledged; But acknowledge the
Commissioners have been careful in employing Collectors, Treasurers and other
Agents, in the respective Counties to let, set, receive and dispose of the
Tithes and Premises, who have since their employments, improved their own
Estates so well, that in so short a time many of them have become great
purchasers; And it appears by the Commissioners own Answer, that they make
account to the Parliament but for (19936 l.) 10 s) 10 d) for the years 1650,
and 1651, although the Petitioners do affirm that the Tithes, and Premises
within the said 7 Counties are annually worth 20000 l. and have, and do hereby
offer so much for the same, and what has been paid out of the Premises to
Ministers, and Schoolmasters, will more fully appear by the Commissioners
particular account, which the Petitioners have not yet seen, but pray a sight
and Copy thereof, and liberty to surcharge the same. And for the sum of 1594 l.
12 s. 3 d) for the year 1650. and 4523 l. 15 s. 4 d. for 1651. that rests
(as they say) in the Tenants hands in arreare. The Petitioners do aver, that
if any be unpaid, it rests in the hands of such as are friends to the
Commissioners, or their Agents, who for reasons best known to themselves, did
not use their wonted rigidnesse in Collecting, and Receiving the same, as has
been shown to others of further Relation; who have been forced to pay the
treble values of their Tithes, and how well the Commissioners have disposed of
the vast revenue aforesaid, may appear by their Answer annexed, wherein they
complain of want of moneys to pay the Ministers approbationers; who are not
paid up their full Salaries for the year 1650. nor some for the year 1651.
though on due examination it will appear, that some of the Itinerants have not
above 10 or 20 l. per annum. And the fifts and contributions not fully known,
or allowed as by the Commissioners Answer is ingeniously confessed; Whereas one
of the Commissioners, Major General Harrison, not long since openly confessed
before your Honors, that there was a Bank of money in South Wales; And when
the Fifts and Contributions are paid, and allowed what will accrue to the State
is left to your Honors consideration. And what hope the Petitioners have of a
future supply of Ministers and Schools-Masters, for the 600 Parishes that are
all destiture of Ministers, according to the Commissioners promise in their
precedent Answer Particular (2) when in this particular part of their Answer,
relating to accounts, they complain of wanting Moneys to pay these few, and
inconsiderate number of Ministers, and Schoolmasters now employed, especially
when the Fifts and Contributions are paid and allowed; By all which it may
appear to this Honorable Committee, the truth of the Petition, in relation to
the aforesaid Charge.

The Commissioners 5. Answer.
To say nothing of the 127 unejected, we have taken care to disperse the
Ministers above mentioned, paid out of the Treasury over the Counties as
equally, and conveniently as we might with due respect had to the carrying on
the work of God, and the particular inclination of the Peoples spirits, and
through singular mercy to the Word of of God* has in these last years been
more frequently, and with more success preached then in many Ages before,
whereunto we doubt not but those that have lately traveled through this poor
Country, will bear witness.

The Petitioners 5. Reply.
That they have so dispersed them, that a man may ride 20 miles together on the
Lords day, and not find one door open, supplied with a constant able godly
Minister, and how the Work and Word of God has been propagated in those
parts the two last years, the Petitioners do appeal to all indifferent
unbiassed Men, and especially to the Judges and other public Officers, who
are and have been employed by the State there, and can give a further relation
of the sad condition of those Countries, and what rents, divisions, and
disturbances of the public peace have been made in those parts, since the
Itinanaries were employed there to the distraction of the minds, and
consciences of the people.

The Commissioners 6. Answer.
We have been very careful that it might not be so, but where it otherwise
happened it was upon some of these ensuing reasons.

1. That most part of the year 1650. and in some places much of the year
1651. was spent and most of the profits raised by the scandalous pretended
Ministers before they were ejected.

2. For better satisfaction of the Country and carrying on the Work of the
Lord without offense to the people, we took order that the Sequestered Tithes
etc. should be let to the Parishioners, that every man might enjoy what came
from his own Lands, at somewhat a lower rate, in case they would take it, then
to any particular Farmour.

3. In some cases where the ejected Minister was much in debt, and had a great
family, and no other Estate, and had Fifts due to his Wife, he or some of them
was admitted Tennant at somewhat an undervalue, to answer these considerations.

4. Vicaridges that were heretofore in respect of Easter-booke offering, etc.
received of the Papists considerable are now little worth.

5. The considerations had to Taxes, Reparations, and other incident charges,
besides the general disgust against Tithes, and the disturbance put upon our
Country by malignants at home, at the least Invasion of the Enemy, and since
by the promoters of the Petition, by reason of all which we have found it no
small difficulty, to bring them to the rate they are at.

The Petitioners 6. Reply.
1. How careful they have been therein appears by the particulars preferred
to your Honors by the Petitioners, which they are ready to prove, who do
further affirm that a great number of the Ministers were ejected by the
Committees of Sequestration, in the respective Counties in the years (1647)
1648. and part of 1649. which lay under Sequestration, when the Commissioners
for propagation were empowered by the said Act, who acted so vigorusly in the
year 1650. that all or most of the Tithes and Premises of the value aforesaid
were Sequestered in that year, who have or might have received the same.

2. To this the Petitioners say, That since the exhibiting of their Petition,
the Commissioners have made a formal Order, that the Inhabitants should farm
their own Tithes for the ensuing harvest, thinking thereby to pacify the
people for the former indirect carriages, and to prevent their prosecution of
the Petition; But how well ever this new salver has wrought, and been persued
can be testified by thousands of the poor Inhabitants, who have received
little or no benefit thereby, the Commissioners Agents still farming their
Tithes to their Friends, and Creatures at their former undervallues.

3. That neither the Ministers debts, nor yet the charge of Children, nor
Family would induce the Commissioners, and their Agents to grant reasonable
bargains to them, nor yet their Fifts according to the Act: unless to such of
them that were especially befriended: and some could not have their Fifts,
except they engaged to forbear the execution of their Ministry, and some had
special allowance for not preaching.

4. That although the Inhabitants have little encouragement, or any reason to
pay any Tithes, or any Offerings at all save only in Obedience to the
Parliaments Authority, having so little spiritual comfort administered to them
for their Tithes and Offerings, yet the Commissioners Agents have not been
wanting in the exact gathering of the Tithes and Offerings, not omitting the
very Tithe Eggs.

5. That the Commissioners, or their Agents have hitherto taken little or no
care in repairing of Churches and Schools, diverse of which are fallen to great
decay, and what they allowed toward Contributions, may partly appear by their
own showing particular 4. where the Commissioners ingeniously confessed, that
the Fifts and Contributions are not fully known, nor allowed, and what
disturbances the Petitioners brought on the Commissioners by their humble and
modest address to the Parliament, setting forth their grievances, and craving
redress thereof; Having neither themselves denied to pay their Tithes, nor
persuaded, advised, or obstructed others from paying the same, the Tithes being
most strictly and punctually paid then ever the Ministers received it, is
humbly left to your Honors consideration.

And if there have been any disturbance at all, as indeed there has been too
much, the same has been done, committed, and occasioned by the Itineraries and
Commissioners Agents, by their threats, railing and invective carriages, and
expressions against the Petitioners, threatening them with Sequestration and
ruin, for petitioning the Parliament, which carriages of theirs the
Petitioners humbly conceive to be contrary to the known Rights, Liberties and
Freedoms of this Nation. And to what difficulty the Commissioners have been
put unto, in raising less then 10000 l. per annum out of the Tithes and
Premises, when as the Petitioners do offer 20000 l. per annum, for the same is
humbly left to your Honors grave considerations.

The Commissionrs 7. Answer.
That we fully know the contrary, as to places of any largeness, to which a
considerable number of people belong; But there may be some few Chappells shut
up, and decayed in the time of the Wars, which the Inhabitants adjacent,
having a more large and convenient place near to attend the worship of God do
neglect, besides the Reparation thereof is always to be at their particular
charge, whereto they have received no hinderance or discouragement from us.

The Petitioners 7. Reply.
That as for those few Churches that are standing, and in reparation, the
Petitioners have cause to bless the Lord, for the care of the Parliament, in
making an Act to enable Justices of the Peace, to raise Taxations toward the
Reparation of Churches, amongst whom the Lord has been pleased to raise a few
that desire the public worship of his Name. But as for the Commissioners care
therein, who are many of them Justices of the Peace, they showed but small
affections to support Churches, having contributed little or nothing toward so
pious a work out of the vast Revenue of the Tithes, etc. which they ought to
have at least wise so far as it formerly concerned Tithes, whether
Impropriate or Presentatives, since the Commissioners and their Agents received
the profits, chargeable with such reparations. The Petitioners humbly conceived
them bound in conscience, and according to the trust in them reposed, not only
to repair and uphold the Churches, which is the least part of their duty, but
also the worship, and glory of God therein; And what encouragement the
Parishioners have to repair, and uphold Churches at their own particular
charge, when they cannot get Ministers to Preach the Word of God therein, and
perform those other spiritual Rights and duties, which appertain to the
Church and Ministry of God is humbly left to your Honors pious consideration.

The Petitioners further averting th^^ since this Itinerary way of propagating
the Gospel has been set on foot in those parts, the Pastors and their
particular Auditors take more delight in Teaching and Expounding the Word of
God, etc. in private Houses and other places, then the public Worship of God
in public Churches, where the Inhabitants may have timely, and certain
notice to resort to the same.

And of this sad truth, and all other their Assertions. The Petitirners call
upon the Great God of Heaven, who knows all the ways and secrets of man to
bear witness, the matter by them set forth and averred being such visible
public and known truths, that they do admire at the ways of these that
gainesay, and go about to suppress the same; And the Petitioners next to the
Lord do appeal to all indifferent unbiassed Strangers, Travelers, Judges,
Magistrates, that know those parts, and to all other Inhabitants there, other
then the Commissioners, and Tithes gatherers and persons concerned to give
evidence of the truth of what the Petitioners affirm.

The Commissioners 8. Answer.
That the Sheriffs and Civil Magistrates take care to have them proclaimed at
their Country Courts, and other public meetings, and to post them up in all
markept Towns, and the Ministers (where required) are not wanting therein. And
we humbly hope those that formerly know our County, and now take notice of the
alteration, wrought amongst them through the special kindness, and power of
God going along with the Gospel, will not easily believe they suffer much
themselves or the public from them by any fault therein.

The Petitioners 8 Reply.
That the Parliament have not only thought fit to command all public
Officers in England, to proclaim, and make known all their Acts, Edicts and
Commands to the Inhabitants, but have also thought it fit, and necessary to
command all Ministers, and Pastors within their respective Congregations to
publish and make known the same; To the end none may be ignorant thereof. And
that none of the^ poor Inhabitants may suffer the penalties of these Acts, for
transgressing against the same, when they neither heard or saw the same, or
were made privy therewith (there being a great distance betwixt Westminster
Hall and Wales.) And therefore the Petitioners do well hope that the same
commendable course, commandded, and observed in England, ought to be also
Practiced in Wales, being part of the same Commonwealth, subject to the same
Law, and Authority, and not independent or distant from the supreme Power of
the Parliament. The Petitioners acknowledging the goodness, and favor of the
Parliament, to have been all along equally distributed to them in their Acts,
Orders and Edicts as well as to other parts of the Nation. But the Petitioners
with grief, and sadness of heart cannot but complain for want of the due
examination, and observance thereof.

And whereas the said Commissioners, or at least wise those that have put in
their said Answer, under a show of Humanity, do uncharitably conceive, and
give forth that the Promoters of the Petition are persons well known to be
pretenders of the Work of God, thereby to carry on other designs, branding
them abroad, and before this Honorable Committee by way of Recrimination,
with the Name of Malignants, Delinquents, and all affected persons, and such as
have a design to bring in power Malignants and to re-invest scandalous
Malignant unpreaching Ministers, and Curats, notwithstanding their Petition and
Prosecution thereof speaks the contrary, The Petitioners and Promoters thereof
dare appeal (as touching the sincerity of their thoughts and affections to the
Parliament, and the truth of the Petition) to the Righteous God, that judges
righteously, and tries the Heart, and Reins, before whose Judgment Seat they
doubt not but to appear as innocent, from those things laid to their charge,
as most of their Accusers, who as they fear do judge before their time, and
are wise above what is Revealed. The Lord only knows who are his, and who are
only pretenders of true Religion, and who not, and who they are that drive and
carry at self interest, under fair and specious pretenses, and count gain
godliness, making too great have to grow rich (which true Believers dare not
do.) The Petitioners therefore not regarding the judgment of men, dare trust
their Good and Gracious God in all Conditions, And do humbly Acquiesce in his
most Righteous Judgments.

Earnestly beseeching your Honors, Seriously, Piously, and Christianly to
weigh and consider the Premises, and the Particulars exhibited by the
Petitioners. And as it was impossible for the Petitioners to prepare the
particulars of the seven Counties in two Days time, much less in one, so it
was impossible to Reply to the Commissioners Answer, until they saw the same,
and had a Copy thereof; Especially not understanding the meaning of the Order,
until it was explained. And as your Honors favorably entertained, and
received their particulars, though the Petitioners for the reason aforesaid
failed in strictness of time; So they likewise pray your Honors to accept of
this their Reply, the Petitioners having not obtained a Copy of their Answer,
until your Honors by the Order of the 16th of July. did command, and Order
the same, though your Petitioners ever since the 10. of May since it was lodged
with this Committee, used their endeavors therein, which until July the 16th
proved fruitless; And the Petitioners pray this Reply may be added, and
annexed to their particulars, to be reported to the Parliament, that Command
may issue fourth to the Country according to the Resolves of Parliament, to
examine Witnesses for discovery, and manifestation of the truth of the premises.

And the Petitioners likewise pray the particular Book of Account, mentioned
in the Report of the Sub-Committee, may be produced, and the Petitioners have a
Copy thereof, with time and liberty to sur-charge the same.

And that your Honors would favorably consider of all the grievances in Order
to a settlement, of a convenient number of Godly able Ministers, and
Schoolmasters, such as the Parliament and your Honors shall approve of, and
an account for the profits of the Tithes, etc. Received since the Commissioners
were empowered.

And that in Order to a future supply of such Ministers, and Schoolmasters,
and improving, and advancing the Tithes and Revenues aforesaid; The Parliament
will be pleased to take such course therein, as they shall think meet; for
where is no vision the People perish: And so having done our best endeavors
therein, and discharged our Consciences, we shall say no more at this time, but
patiently wait on our God, who in his One time without doubt will bear
Witness of the Truth by the Petitioners Averred in the Petition. In which they
aim at nothing more than the Glory of God, the good of His Church and People,
The true Propagation of his glorious Gospel; The safety and welfare of their
Country in particular, and this Commonwealth in general, waiting in hope and
Expectation of a blessing, and success accordnigly.

Mr. Tho Lewis, Mr. Tho. Powell, and Mr. Griffith Hatley, their Letter to Mr.
Jenk. Jones.
MR. Jones, we desire to be resolved by you whether the ejected Ministers of
this Country, who have been silenced and suspended (now this long time) ab
officio and beneficio may at last have the door of utterance opened, and be
permitted to preach the Gospel freely among those that do much want it, and do
as earnestly call for it, as the parched Earth after the dew and Rain of
Heaven. The reason why we put this business to the question is: because about
the last spring, some of our fellow Ministers, taking the boldness to preach the
word of God, (were some of them) sent prisoners to Chepsto Garrison, others
pulled out of the Pulpit, and all the rest were threatened to have the same
measure meted unto them, if they should make the same attempts: and therefore
we desire to know whether we are under the same restraint still, or are at
liberty: we doubt not but that you can resolve us herein, as well as any other
in this County, and we hope you will be pleased to satisfy our civil request
herein, and vouchsafe a line of answer, which you may direct to either of the
subscribers, who are

Sir Your friends, as far as you are a friend to Christ, and his ways Tho.
Lewis. Tho. Powell. Griffith Hatley.
Feb. 6. 1653
Mr. Jenk. Jones Letter in Answer to the former.
Gentlemen,
YOur Letter dated Feb. 6. 1653. I received the first of March. And in answer
to what you propose therein, I shall only put you in mind that you are still,
and (more) than like to be in the same condition, with those in the last
Spring; And tell you that you are to expect the same measure from the Sea the
Government, or the Articles signed by the Lord Protector.
present Power (whose connivance you seem (at least) to fancy to your selves.)
As your brethren had the last Spring from the (then) powers; And also that you
need not pretend your being pressed as from pity to water the parched earth,
there being more Sermons Preached (now) in one month, then were formerly in
twelve, and with very much (though I dare not say with a greater blessing;
consider the restraint-fearing-Spirit that is in you,

Your friend, and servant, Jen. Jones.
March 2. 1653.
Mr. Lewis, Mr. Powel, and Mr. Ha^lies Reply to Mr. Jenkin Jones Answer.
MR. Jones, we thank you for your Letter: wherein you have fully resolved us,
what we must expect, if we Preach the Gospel in this poor Country; nothing
but bonds and imprisonment (if you divine aright) abide us. If we be silent,
and do not Preach, we are reproached, and if we do Preach we are menaced. A
hard dilemma. Sir, notwithstanding your pains in preaching (which nevertheless
is much abated of what it was, since you have caught the f^^h that you looked
for) there are many dry and thirsty souls in this Country that are very seldom
refreshed with the dew of Heavenly Doctrine, and for want thereof do daily
relapse to Popery, and that in no small number; we could name above 20 Parish
churches in this County, in many whereof there have not been above two Sermons
this 12 month, and in most of them none at all: yet the Inhabitants pay their
Tithes still as formerly. Their complaints have filled the ears of men long
since, and have (no doubt e're this) ascended up to the ears of the Lord of
Saboth We shall therefore (in compassion to these poor souls) adventure to
bestow our pains among them, and put our selves upon the candor and clemency
of our present Governor, from whom we do expect (and doubt not to find) better
measure then you forbad us; or then our fellow Ministers received (the last
Spring) when other powers swayed, to wit, your own.

That there are more Sermons preached (now) in a month then was formerly in 12.
will hardly find credit, with any that knows this Country, and is such a
story that men will admire to have proceeded from your Pen: since that we do
not know of above two Itinerant Preachers, resident in the Country (and one of
the two hardly worth the name of a Preacher) whereas formerly there was a
preaching Minister (almost) in every parish (some Impropriations except) and
most of them graduated in the Universities, and able and painful men in their
callings. Consider better of that passage of your Letter, and consider what
spirit you are of; for the Spirit of God is a spirit of truth, Nec mendax est,
nec mordax.

Your loving friends Tho. Lewis, Tho. Pow. Gr. Hatly.
March 6. 1653.
And thus you have a full Narration of the Petition, the Petitioners charge,
The Commissioners Answer, and the Reply thereunto, which makes evident to all
Christian souls, the deplorable Condition of the Inhabitants of Wales
concerning their Souls we fare, wherein they continue to this very day:
enduring a Famine of the Word, and the Bread of life, being tendered unto them,
is forbidden; As may appear by these Letters sent unto me from 3 Reverend and
Orthodox Ministers, and Batchelors of Divinity, within the County of Brecknock,
directed to Capt Jenk Jones, one of the Itineraries, with his unchristian, and
insolent Answer thereunto.

FINIS.

