NEWS FROM Londonderry IN IRELAND: OR, A true and sad Relation of the
deplorable and lamentable estate of Londonderry, Which is much distressed by
reason of the Rebels near approaches unto it, and the menaces and threats they
daily send unto them, to make them deliver up their City. Also how they burnt
the Town of Strabam, with many people in it. Related in a Letter from one Mr
William Griffin, to one Mr James Humphry of Stuke in Berkshire, Gent. Febr. 20.
1641.

LONDON, Printed for William Ley 1642.

NEWS FROM Londonderry IN IRELAND; OR, A true and sad Relation of the
deplorable and lamentable estate of Londonderry.
My beloved Cosen,
I Hope my last Letters of January 14. sent by a Scotch Gentleman, are come in
safety unto your hands; for I perceive that by means of our sending into
Scotland, and from thence by Post or such assured speedy conveyance unto
London, (if life and safety here permit,) you may sometimes understand the
passages here. By my last Letters, I intimated my being here in Londonderry,
and that I have been here since December; And I mentioned unto you the most
inhumane cruelty and bloody practices that the Rebels have inflicted upon the
poor Protestants here; how they have dealt with our Ministers, worse than the
Turks do by their Mutes and Eunuchs; how barbarously they have dealt with
Ladies and modest Gentlewomen, as others of that sex; how many children they
have burnt, taken by the heels and dashed out their brains: And of that
Diabolical and unchristian-like practice, when they have by menacing
persuasions prevailed upon the weakness of some Protestants, to go to their
Mass and partake of their Sacrament, and then cause that they be hanged with
scoffings, that they are fitted and prepa^ed for death.

I did also let you know the present distress that we then were in, and yet
are, here within this City of Londonderry; You shall understand that within
these walls are above four thousand persons, which never heretofore endured
such misery and hardness; sweet dispositioned virtuous Ladies, and Gentlewomen
of singular quality, many of them ready to famish, some without clothes, all
without money, and what is necessary for their sustenance, but that we share
in common upon hopes of relief from England, if we be not wholly forsaken
(as the Rebels say we are.) This is a very strong City, and may hold out for
our safety and the good of all this Kingdom, if it be speedily supplied as is
necessary, with victuals, men, Arms and Ammunition; without which we have no
hopes to subsist, but must be made a prey to the merciless Rebels. O, that
England would lay it to heart and consider our distress! although we are a
particular, yet very considerable, as well for the general good as for the
preservation of us miserable abjects; (if not objects of pity:) we had not
been exposed to this misery, had not that divellish invention defeated the City
of London from their just possessions, or surely we had ere this been
comforted in some measure: O, as I said formerly, we are wholly deserted and
left, as a people not worthy the mentioning; and in truth if it hold thus for a
while longer, you may be assured of our utter destruction; for the Rebels have
vowed, and by their messages threatened, that unless we render unto them, they
will not spare either man, woman or child: and truly for us to accept their
conditions is as dangerous; for they hold no faith with any. They show
themselves of an infinite number upon a hill over against the Ferry, and have
possessed themselves of all the boats from a place called Ballakelley, to
Strabam, burnt the town of Strabam, where they destroyed many in the fire, and
took from us there one great piece of Ordnance; and they have another, which
they got further in the Country, with which and their force they may beat
down all the houses in this town; for we have in strength of men and arms
to oppose them now, but four pieces of Ordnance great and small; this Town
does need at least twenty pieces of Ordnance, and a thousand men. Good Cosen
proclaim our distresses far and near. We have sent to Dublin twice, and no
remedy, but our last messengers return with this; that our former are gone for
England, but what they do there, God knows; we can hear of no comfort or
relief from thence. O-Neale, Mac-Guyrr, Mac-Gennes, and O-Gallows are joined
in one body of at least a thousand men, to assail us: Connaught has advanced
above so many more to their assistance: we expect them every day to assault us,
and we are in admiration that they show themselves, and no way as yet assault
us, although very near unto us. I did formerly write of the great loss at
Garvagley, above two hundred of our men were stain, in which Master Rayley and
Master Canning were lost: great men are in this Rebellion; the Irish, make new
Laws and Statutes amongst themselves, and yet they say they are true and
loyal Subjects: they plough and seem to be absolute and secure amongst
themselves, and vow never to suffer the English again amongst them. In this
little City are many Families, some famished, others grievously pined and
annoyed; so that as I believe the Rebels policy is, that without blows the
place must be forsaken although the people be exposed to death or more
barbarous cruelty. Are we not of England very flesh and very bone, and shall we
thus suffer for want of help! We hear that that Arch-Rebell Mac-Maghon is
taken, and O-Relly hanged at Dublin: But all Lemster is so strong of Rebels,
that Dublin, Droghedaugh and Youghall is in aparent danger: All Vlster is lost,
excepting Londonderry, Colraine and Carric-Fergus. I shall not be more
tedious at this present, pray for us all, amongst which you cannot forget

Your distressed poor Kinsman, WILL. GRIFFIN.
February, 20. 1641.
FINIS.

