Arthritology: OR, A DISCOURSE OF THE GOUT. Written by JOHN GROENEVELT, M. D.
One of the College of Physicians.

LONDON: Printed for the Author. MDCXCI.

TO THE READER.
ALL improvements in arts have ever been alike obnoxious, to the fate of either
being slighted by the injudicious, or frowned upon by the censorious; till
being crowned with success, their manifest advantages have forced mankind to a
liking of, and compliance with the undertaking.

And though Physic is more than the rest capable of improvement, as its daily
advance does sufficiently manifest: yet being likewise daily sullied by the
vain pretenses of the ignorant, it is no wonder, if even the judicious
themselves look somewhat strangely upon what is beyond the common method of
practice.

But every thing that seems new ought not therefore to be rejected; since, if
it be verified by experience, it bears date with time and truth it self: the
limits of art and nature not being of so narrow a compass as our present
knowledge. And though it be far from me to imagine my skill and judgment to be
above that of other Physicians, however my university, and collegiate
qualifications, will (I hope) sufficiently exempt me, from being accounted only
a pretender to what I profess.

Yet having (besides the other parts of Physic) chiefly employed my time and
studies, in order to the cure of the Stone; wherein what success I have had,
both by inward remedies and manual operation, this famous city can sufficiently
evidence; and finding the Gout to be equally tormenting, if not as pernicious a
disease, and altogether of the same origin, it is no wonder if the proximity of
the subject bent my endeavors that way.

Now having by the blessing of GOD attained, to a seldom failing method for the
cure of, and preservation from that disease: I submit my endeavors to your
candid reception, referring you for your further satisfaction, to the ensuing
treatise, and a continued success by experience.

Arthritology: OR, A DISCOURSE OF THE GOUT.
THE body of man contains in it blood, phlegm, and a twofold bile, to wit,
yellow and black, of which the nature of this body is constituted, upon account
whereof also it is sick, and enjoys health, Hipp. de Natura Hominis, Text xix,
and sequ. Yet not these humors alone do affect the body, but the qualities of
the humors are in a possibility to affect it; such as, a bitter, a salt, an
acid, and other things both within a man, and out of a man; and these qualities
indeed through a mixtion, and mutual temperament among themselves, are neither
discerned, nor create any man trouble: but when any one of these is divided or
separated from the rest, and exists by itself, then it is clear and plainly
evident, how great trouble and pain it creates a man.

The salt in our body, the salt, I say, and acrid, which was diuted with a thin
insipid, or water, as soon as ever it is separated, and falls upon the sensible
parts about the joints, there it presently excites pain, first of all by
twitching and pricking them, and not long after by pressing and distending them
with its abundance. As this salt likewise is more or less sharp or vehement,
the pains also do much vary, that is, do increase or abate. And this salt is
lodged in the serum, which that it is acid, or that an acid adheres to it,
cannot be denied.

There is moreover in the serum of our body a certain thicker matter, which we
may call the terrene faeculency, of which nodes are chiefly generated. This one
thing also we do over and above maintain, that there is something of a thicker
salt in the serum itself, which joined by some of the terrene blood out of the
rest of the mass, will much alter the nature of the Gout, in respect of pain,
heat, and duration, as to degree, or violence, or gentleness. Besides, this
salt serum is contained about the extremities of the muscles, tendons,
ligaments, periostea, and the other nervous parts of the joints, in which
places also nodes and stones are usually bred.

Moreover, as long as the use of things non natural is moderate, all goes well;
but when the body is pampered with more plenty than is needful, the particles
of the blood are not so exactly mixed with the rest of the mass, but are blended
and confounded as heterogeneous; whereupon, sanguification once vitiated, the
blood is usually corrupted by diverse humors, and the non-natural heat grows so
high, that it is forced to undergo a fermentation, like new beer, and it works
so much more than usual, that it seems to boil: then it forces those sharp and
foreign juyces, together with part of the serum, by what way it finds; what
gets into the guts is evacuated by a watery looseness; what into the kidneys,
by plenty of urine; what into the habit of the body, by the pores of the skin:
but what falls upon the joints, pierces into the inmost recesses and
interstices of the nervous parts, which being beset round with dense and cold
parts, use to stop and retain the serum. This Serum at first is very small, but
thin and sharp, producing pain only deep within, and a swelling without; yet
the violence of the pain continuing, greater store of serum, and very often a
flood of other humors with it, supervenes, so that at last the swelling
appears, which in a plethorick body by its redness, heat, and throbbing pain
resembles an angry boil: and when this humor is spent, that fit of the Gout is
at an end.

And the nature of this disease is such, that when it has once seized a man
(unless by the care and industry of Physicians prevented, especially by such as
are well experienced in this affair) scarce any one can look so well to
himself, but that at certain seasons and distances of time it will return, when
the matter is increased afresh, and gathered to the joints again; which
distances in the beginning are longer, and when the mass of blood is vitiated,
and the joints weakened, become shorter, so that they confine some people
perpetually to their bed, and render the joints stiff and knotty.

It remains now to enquire, what the causes of the serous matter in the blood
are, and then what moves it first, and causes the fit; the first our Schools
call Antecedent, the latter, Procatarctick causes. Hippocrates in his Book de
prisca Medicina teaches, how that Salts, Acids, Sweets, and abundance of other
such things, which are in us, have diverse faculties according to their plenty
and power; but do no way molest us, when they are mixed and mutually tempered
one with another.

This mixture and temper is often dissolved in the mass of blood, when the
humors are augmented in plenty or power, or in both. Omitting other humors, in
the foregoing discourse, we have only mentioned the serum, to which in the
further disquisition hereof we will confine our selves, and do say, that
sometimes the evacuation of this serum is hindered, and sometimes too great
plenty of serum is bred. The necessary evacuation of the serum is hindered, when
some vicious matter is impacted in the very glands, whence it comes to pass,
that either the sensible or insensible transpiration of our body is
insufficient, as it happens in idleness, melancholy, stopping of sweat, and
over-cooling the body.

Moreover the necessary evacaution of this serum is hindered, when people are
costive, and make but a little urine and thin, such as contains not in itself
enough of salt and sediment.

For the alimentary and sweet portion of what we eat and drink, cannot be
wholly converted into the substance of our body, but even this has some
excrements: So that the Succus (...), the imperfect and violent juice, which is
the other part of our aliment, (according to Hippocrates) ought not to be
wholly mixed with the blood, but the greatest share of it should be purged out
by stool and urine (whence it may be drawn by destillation). Now if for the
causes aforesaid the evacuation of the sharp serum be checked, as it increases
first in plenty, and then in power, it is separated from the other parts; and
so it affords matter for the Gout.

Now we proceed to the second, that is, to the more plentiful generation of
serum; here we do not mean the supply of the watery part, but of the acrid and
salt, or a certain hereditary inclination to the Gout, (derived from the seed
and maternal blood) which seems to consist in a weakness of the joints, and
especially in some innate fault of the blood. Then there is an adscititious
disposition of the body, induced partly by the frequent invasion of the fit
partly by the manner of living, such as is in them, who though they use their
utmost diligence, cannot guard themselves from the return of this grief.

Which indeed happens for diverse causes, hereafter to be mentioned, namely,
through the weakness of the parts about the joints; through pains, whereby many
fibers of the nervous parts are broke; from a frequent influx of humors,
whereby the parts are relaxed and softened; through unreasonable heat or cold;
from violent motion, as it happens in Venery; and finally, when a vicious
sanguification is contracted, whereby the acrid matter is continually bred in
the blood.

Such meats and drink should be taken notice of, as have in them a sharp matter
in such plenty and power, as not being to be conquered with the other juices in
our body, it can neither be sufficiently separated nor discharged, nor can it
be exactly mixed or tempered with the other juyces.

Such as are generous Wines, which have much Tartar in them; for not only that
Tartar, but the spirit also breeds the Gout, which consists of an oil, an acid
and a volatile salt, from whence the Wine receives all its strength.

Moreover, gluttony and drunkenness contribute much to the breeding of this
humor; all intemperance likewise in dainty meat and drink, over hard study,
especially in the night, which in this case is the most dangerous; and
afflicting cares; all these hinder sanguification, so that the sharp part in
the aliment is either not well mixed, or not well separated; and above all
immoderate Venus is the most dangerous and hurtful.

But if any doubt arise, and the question be, what way it hurts, it may
properly be replied, that Hippocrates his assertion is of undoubted truth;
there is in us a salt and a sharp: Now I think this is rendered more efficacious
by the use of Venery, so that at first it is augmented not so much in plenty as
in power; for what is sweet or fat in the blood, is consumed partly with the
spirits, partly with the seed, and what remains is more and more exasperated,
and so existing more apart, it acquires strength and does harm.

This matter being augmented and gathered by the foresaid causes, is moved, not
always by the proper impulse of nature, but often as it is stimulated by
several evident causes; such as are able either to impress an impulse on the
blood, or to quicken its internal motion or fermentation, violent passions of
the mind, especially anger and fear, sudden cold and heat, retention of
accustomed sweat, some seasons of the year, especially Spring and Autumn, and
as we said before, gluttony and Venery.

The causes of this disease being now explained, we lay down this definition of
the Gout:

The Gout is a violent pain of the parts about the joints, caused by a serous
and sharp humor, suddenly coming out of the Vessels.

Sometimes wandering pains foretell the Gout to be coming, especially in the
joints of the feet or hands: that it is at hand, stretching, yawning, painful
weariness, catarrhs, wandering pains in the limbs and joints, and sometimes a
heaviness in the head do show: a kind of feverish heat, a pricking pain in the
joint, with inability to move, and after that a swelling usually red, which are
attended by diverse other things, as watching, loss of strength, and several
other complaints familiar to gouty persons, show it to be present.

The Gout ends either in the translation of the matter to a more ignoble part,
or in the discussion of it, or when, being changed into corruption, it breaks
through the skin, or when, tarrying long there, it turns knotty: All which come
to pass, sometimes by the assistance of nature, sometimes of art.

For there is a twofold design in the artificial cure; First, to remove that
which aggravates the paroxysm; Secondly, to preserve the patient from the
return of it. In the fit three things are urgent, pain, the swelling and
inability to move; of all which since an humor is the cause, partly still
coming in, partly got in already; so the whole method of cure consists in two
things; first in hindering the influx of the humor; secondly in expelling the
humor that is got in.

Which method of cure is often interrupted by some grievous pain or by some
other urgent symptom.

The influx may be checked by repelling the humor from the joint, or by
stopping its motion, or by expelling it out of the Body.

Repulsion, whereby the humor is driven from the part affected, may be made
either by strong ligatures, or by application of coolers and astringents.

The Repulsion of this humor in the beginning is very dangerous, because the
repulsed humor may run either into another joint, or into some more noble part,
or being impacted into the inner recesses of the parts about the joint, it may
increase the pain.

The motion of the humor, which depends upon a certain inevitable agitation of
the heterogenous humors, cannot of itself be stopped; yet it may be abated by
evacuating some part of the mass of blood (if nothing hinder) by venaesection;
whereupon the quantity of the humors being lessened, the heat of the blood, and
the violence of the peccant matter, may both be stopped in some measure.

The evacuation of the humor, which does offend, (if this humor could
altogether be evacuated,) would prove a most effectual remedy against its
running into the joints.

Now this evacuation is made by vomits and sweats. Vomits and purges may either
follow blood-letting, or they may serve instead of it, without any previous
preparatives or alterations. Diuretics and sudorificks do very often give much
relief; the reason is, because nothing in a manner besides are so able to
extirpate the very root of the disease, that is, the salt and tartar: for we
have known several, who have been recovered by virtue of these, taken either
separately or together: such as are antimonial medicines, antimonium
diaphoreticum, Cinnabar of Antimony, etc. Volatile Salts, as volatile Salt of
hartshorn, greater burdock-root, a decoction of germander, and several things
called antipodagricks.

To remove the humor, when it is fallen upon the joint, there is a necessity
for discutients, wherewith sometimes something of a repellent is to be mixed. Fat
and oily things are carefully to be avoided, whereby the pores are shut up.
Remedies composed of salts, either fixed or volatile, are the safest of all; the
reason is, because they vehemently discuss the impacted humors, and corroborate
the weakened parts. There are some also, who use to apply spirit of salt, mixed
or allayed with some other Liquor.

In the mean time we must attend with our utmost diligence and caution, to
things which either relieve or do prejudice; because the salt humors may be
various, and may be mixed with various ichors. If the matter, when the thinner
parts are discussed, do congele, and degenerate into chalky knots, stronger
emollients, together with discutients, are convenient; such as gum Ammoniack,
and several sorts of gums, to which if the node gives not way, the skin must be
broke, and the chalky stones taken out.

As to the diet, in the fit it must be altogether spare and thin, small wine
may be drunk moderately, sharp and salt food must wholly be avoided, the cold
air is to be kept off, and sweating must be indulged.

A Pindarick ODE On the Discourse of the Gout.
O GOUT! thou cruel Jailer of Mankind,
That fetter'st All,
Both Great and Small,
Of every kind!
O thou tormenting Gout, the worst of things,
Thou spar'st no Scholar of the Gown,
Nor any Artist of the Town,
Thou tyrannizest over Kings!
Other Diseases in respect of Thee
Arc health and rest, you are pain and misery!
Thou art the King of Terrors in thy strife,
A living Death, and yet a dying Life.
Pandora's Box no Fable is, but true;
For why, it is plainly verified in you.
From these great Evils when thou sets us free,
Greenfield, thou shall our Guardian-Angel be.
Sic Cecinit, F. F. T.

A Copy of a Letter.
Huntington, October. 5. 1960. Honored Doctor, SIR,
AFter I had made use of your directions, I thought fit to give you an account
thereof: I bless God, I am well rid of my pain, so that I am able to do any
thing about the House, to the admiration of all my Neighbors. I could not have
made a bed within this three months, if I might have had the wait of it in
gold, to have done it, my pains were so great, and my strength so little in my
joints, etc. which is all from your Servant, who shall ever own you for my
Doctor and Restorer of my health under God.

Catherine Ashton.

Another.
Bellow near Alford, March 20. 1690/1. Worthy SIR,
YOur medicines, though not so timely brought by the Carrier, yet came to my
hands at last. I consulted Dr. Gibbons, my Friend at Oxford, who is against
violent precipitating medicines, for fear they should wake, as be calls it, the
sleeping Lion.

(Now the case of this Gentleman who writes this Letter to the Author of this
Treatise, was the Gout and Stone in the Kidneys, the Doctor's speech relates to
the latter).

I like your medicines well, because they prevent the Gout, and increase Urine
gently, etc.

Your affectionate Friend and Servant, John Morrel.

FINIS.
Postscript.
SEveral Persons having applied themselves to the Author, since this Treatise
was made public, enquiring about the Success of the Author's Method, he has
thought it not amiss for their convenience and ease to himself, to publish the
Names and places of Abode of some of those he has cured of the Gout, that so
any that are inquisitive, may receive a further satisfaction, and does not
doubt but they will be convinced, that what he has asserted, is not merely
rational, but verified by Practice.

Frances Stracy, at the Corner House of Cole-Stairs in Shadwel, who keeps a
Slopshop, says, That some Years ago she her self was violently seized with the
Gout over all her Limbs so that she could not stir her self without Crutches,
was raised and perfectly cured by Dr. Greenfield, and that she has not had
ever since the least sign of any relapse.

Mrs. Law (in Petty-Coat-Lane, in Cobb's Yard) says, That she her self was in
all her Limbs full of the Gout, insomuch that her Husband expected no Cure, but
that she should have been always lame, and gone on Crutches, that she could not
help her self, and was perfectly cured by Dr. Greenfield about a Year ago,
taking now and then something still from the Doctor, to prevent a relapse.

Captain Webber in Foxes-Lane in Shadwel: The Wife and Daughter relate, That
last May was a Twelvemonth, the Captain had the Gout in great extremity, and
was cured by Dr. Greenfield, even to a Miracle, and under God cannot deny to
give the Doctor the Honor of it, for since he has not perceived the least
Relapse.

Mrs. De Vlieger says, That her Husband (in St Martins Le Grand, in the new
Rents against the Coffee-House) was last Winter very much afflicted with the
Gout, and that under God he was raised by Dr. Greenfield, and has kept well
ever since: That the Doctor still followed him with Medicines, to prevent a
Relapse.

Sir John Matthew in Winchester-street, and Sir Robert Holmes, Men of great
Note and Eminency, having made use of the Author's Prescriptions and
Medicaments, have found them very effectual, giving much ease and benefit in a
little time, their Fits being quite removed, their Lamenesses much abated in
respect of what they used to be, and went about with more strength, whereas
they used to be long laid up, and not able to stir.

Mr. John Mulder, in Goldstone Square in White-Chappel.

Mrs. Webb, in St. Olaves-street, against Barnaby-street, were also lately both
cured of the Gout by the Author, and continue well.

Mr. How, a Confectioner in Red-Cross-street, at the Rose and Crown; and

Mr. Sturt, a Mercer in West-Smithfield, the corner of Cloth-Fair, both give an
Honorable Account of what they have received by the Author of this Treatise.

The Author has made a beginning with Captain Edward Bartelet, who has lost
sixty Ounces of Blood in one day, and is now very lame, having a Fit of the
Gout upon him: The Reader may enquire about the Author's Proceedings and
Success: He lives on Stepney-Causey. He began his Course the 18th. of August,
1691.

Thus Mrs. Harrison has also begun, being the Wife of Ralph Harrison (being
under the same Circumstances) Living in Sheeles near Newcastle.

From my House in Throgmorton-street, the next Door but one to Broad-street.
FINIS.

