One come from the Dead, TO AWAKEN DRUNKARDS AND WHOREMONGERS.

BEING A Sober and Severe Testimony against the Sins and the Sinners; In an
Exact Description of the Nature and Danger of these two Soul-destroying Evils.

Together with Proper and Sovereign Remedies.

By Richard Garbut, B. D. who being Dead, yet speaks.

With Epistles to the Reader, by Mr. R. Baxter, and Mr. William Jenkins.

Ephesians. 5. 6. Because of these things comes the Wrath of God. LONDON, Printed
for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle near the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill. Price bound 1 s.

Imprimatur,

C. Smith.

TO THE Truly Honorable, and good Lady, the Lady Barwick, of Toulston in
Yorkshire.
Good Madam,
THough your many former favors Merit an Acknowledgment from me beyond what I
am Capable any way to express; and though nothing more Usual than to take the
Opportunity of Dedications, to L^nch out into Obsequious Encomiums, and
sometimes deserved Praises of Obliging great Persons, yet without the
Consideration of your great averseness to any thing that looks like ^ttery (if
but the Modest and Just mention os real worth,) I had this only Design and
^ope, in ^utting this Treatise into your Wardship and ^atronage (the Author
being long since dead) That your Eminency in Degree, together with your great
Eminency in Piety and known Enmity to Vice, together with your true
Countenancing os Virtues, and Exemplary strictness, in Family Order and
Discipline might Encourage many to the Reading of this most Useful and
Seasonable Treatise; and so through the Grace of God may prove of great
Advantage to them, who otherwise would scarce give a look through the
Title Page: If I am blameworthy in thus doing, it can be no reslection upon
your Honor, since I have done it without consulting you, or asking your
Consent.

I shall add no more but the Recognition of my inward assectiona^e esteem of
your Ladyship, and fervent Prayers for a Blessing from the great God and our
Savior, upon your Person and Right Honorable Offspring, That you may grow in
all Graces, together with that approved Faithsulness to God and Man which runs
in your Veins; and is the Genius of the truly good Family, (The Ancient Family
of the S^ricklands, of Boynton-House, where the Sob^r and Learned Sir Thomas
Strickland now Resi^eth, Nephew to your Ladyship, and Eldest Son to that Worthy
Patriot Sir William Strickland, whose well known Piety and Prudence will
Eternize his Memory;) I subscribe my self

(Good Madam) Your Honors truly Devoted Servant in the Lord Jesus, Thomas
Hardcastle.

A Prefatory Epistle to the Reader, especially to the Inhabitants of the Town
of Leeds, in Yorkshire, with some few Remarques of the Authors Life.
Beloved Friends and Countrymen,
THese Sermons were Preached to your Fathers, and the Printing of them may
prove good preventing Physic to your Children; the Wisdom of God by Solomon,
has thought it meet to spend some Scriptures in precautions, and particular
Descriptions of Pit-falls, that they may be the better avoid^d, Prove. 22. ^4.
and 23. 27. Prove. 20. ^. and 23. 21. Of this Nature are the fol^owing
Treatises, which (...) ^ublished many ^ars ago, ^d ^or that end the Manuscrip^
(being left in the ^ands of ^r. Mans^ield H^sle aster Mr. (...) Death) were
delivered to Who P^inted the Autho^s (...) of the (...), and (...) more if h^
had Liv^d.
Mr. Na. Jackson and my self: After Mr. J^ckson's death the thing lay Buried,
and almost qui^e forgotten, till lately the Lord brought it fresh upon my
Spirit, that something was to be done by me in Order to the fulfilling the Will
of the Dead, that the Desires and Intentions of the Persons abovementioned
might be Answered; besides, I was the more willingly drawn to it upon this
ground, that I have been told by some that lived in those days, that such a
Warning and Testimony as this is as necessary, and may be as Prositable now as
it was then; perhaps, also one rising from the Dead may strike some Terror into
a sensual Generation, and the Fingers of a Man's hand- Writing, Dan. 5, 3, 4, 5,
6. when it comes to be seen and read, may cause more change of Countenances,
and procure more troubled thoughts than any the loudest Reproofs of the Tongue
Preaching. This for the Publication:

As for the Author, I never knew him, I was not come into the world when he
went out of it; only this true and brief Account of some passages of his Life,
noted by his intimate Friends and Observers, which because the Genius of the
present Age renders Emphatically seasonable, I shall Communicate. That during
his abode in Sidney-Colledge he approved himself an Exemplary Student, a great
Proficient, a ^areful Tutor, and for Conversation unblameable; so^ hi^ Eminent
Worth he was so valued by Dr. Ward, the Master of that College, that he
singled him out to go with him when he went to the Synod of Dort; after his
return thence, when the Colledge-Statutes so required, he commenced Bachelor
in Divinity, and in the Year 1624. he made Solemn Vows in Writing (found since
his Death, in his Study) to this effect; Never to take upon him any higher
Degree than what he already had, to yield up his Fellowship, and never to have
any Commodity of it after December the same Year; to leave the College and
University by such a time, never to give Money directly or indirectly for any
Benefice, never to have two Benefices at once, never to be properly a
Non-resident, that is (as his words were) to absent himself from his proper
Cure, and Live Ordi^arily else where upon Pleasure sor Inter^st, Ambition, or
(...) like. According to his Vow he (...) up his Fellowship, and left (...),
being not then pro^ (...) ^y place of Employment (...) yield him a Livelihood:
(...) he was first bound to go (...) Country, Yorkshire, and hav^ng been Tutor
to a Grandchild of Tobit Matthews, then Archbishop of York, he found
Entertainment with him, till he was recommended by him as an Assistant to Mr.
Alex. Cook, Vicar of Leeds, who was grown Aged, and not able (...) P^each ^wice
a day; Mr. Cook having made trial of Mr. Garbutt's Abilities, found him every
way to his liking, and told him, if he would be content with Fifty pounds per
Annu^, he might come to his Assistance; to whom Mr. Garbutt Replied, it is
enough: He came to Leeds about the beginning of 1625. where till near the time
of his Marriage he was Entertained by Mr. John Harrison, a Person very Rich in
good Works. The Matter of his Preaching (as also of his Conversation) was very
Pious and strict. The Manner of his Preaching at his first coming was too
Academical for the Community of his Auditors, whereupon diverse of them
Requested him to Preach in the Method they had been used to, and conceived
might be most Useful; namely, by Doctrine, Reason, and Use; to which he readily
condescended, as aiming at their Profiting more than his own Praise: He was
Observed to be very Temperate in his Diet, and sparing in his Recreation; he
was a hard Student, early and late at it, where the Bible was the Center of his
Library, out of which his Sermons were well Studied, and Penned almost Verbatim
before he Offered them in the Pulpit. At one time, upon an Apprehension that
his Ministry was slighted, and likewise unsuccessful, and that he did no good
among them, he resolved to leave them, and go Preach elsewhere; upon which
some of the meaner and poorer sort came to him, and one of them spoke these
words to him: If you will indeed go, I will give you one word, which is this;
If you have been an Instrument to begin any good Work of Grace in the Heart of
any one of the Congregation, and that one Soul miscarry through your departure,
the blood of that Soul God will require at your Hands, I charge you therefore
not to go: Whereupon he resolved to stay till his dying day, and after this the
Fruit of his Ministry appeared to him more and more. The year before his Death
he said to some that he doubted his Ministry had not that effect he would have
it, and he feared the cause was because some paid toward his maintenance by
way of Collection for him; I am resolved therefore I will not have a penny
Collected for me, but will depend upon God, for I know that thos^ that get good
by my pains will not see me want Nec^ssaries; and for the rest that get no
good, I will have none of their Mon^es: For the manner of his Delivery, he was
painful in it, his Matter came from him with much Gravity, Earnestness,
Seriousness, and Weigh^iness of Spirit (as some yet alive can Witness, who
retain the savor of his good Doctrine) for with the vehemence of s^tting on
his matter, he at length broke a Vein within his Breast, and spitted Blood in
such abundance, that it brought him to a hasty Consumption; he being in this
condition, was advis^d by his Physicians not to come into the Pulpit any more,
yet again venturing (remembering that a Minister should die Preaching) it set
him on fresh a bleeding, wh^reof he soon after died, in the year 1630. A little
before his Death he did in the Pr^nce of diverse with thankfulness to God,
acknowledge the sweet Refreshment which he received from Gods bearing Witness
to his Industry, and to his Fidelity, in that to the best of his Knowledge and
Judgment he had never delivered any thing but the Council of God.

The Reader in these Sermons will meet with some uncouth Expressions and Words,
which he is desired to ascribe to the Dialect of his Country, where they have
their proper Use and full Significancy.

And now, beloved Friends, having this fair Opportunity, give me leave in pure
Love and Faithfulness to you, to recommend a few plain, but weighty and
necessary things to your serious consid^tion and practice.

First, look upon the saving knowledge of a Cruci^ied 1 Cor. 2. 2. Phil. 3. 8.
(...). John 6. 29. 1 J^hn 3. 23. and 5. 13. 1 John 2. 1* 2. Ephesians. 4. 15. M^. 4.
4. Romans 1. 17.
Christ to be the best, the most needful, and most excellent knowledge; study
to believe Phil. 1. 27. and 3. 16. Romans 8. 14. Col. 4. 6. 2 Pet. ^. 11. 1 Cor.
2. 9. Romans 12. 2. J^r. 10. 3. 1 John 2. 16. 2 Cor. 2. 12. Prove. 20 21. Z^h. 12.
1.
in him, to be found in him, let him be your Propitiation and Advocate, learn
what Union with him, engrafting into him, growing up in him, and Living upon
him, mean.

Secondly, Maintain a Conversation suitable to the Gospel, make it appear that
the Word is your Rule, the Spirit your Leading-Principle, that Grace Commands
you, that you Live under the power of things Future and Invisible; and that you
are not conformed to the World, nor led by its Customs, nor captivated with
present things, nor guided by the stirrings and motions of prevailing and
inordinate desires.

Thirdly, Be f^ithful to your own Consciences, the most upright Christian is he
who walks up most to his Light, and is most tender of Oss^nding here; because
some have set them in the place of Christ, others have run into an extr^am of
not allowing them their ^eputy-ship and Vice-gerency, not su^ring them to be a
Rule Ruled. The Debauchery of some has giv^n too much occasion to the delu^on
of others; the best way to confute an Error, is not to run into the contrar^
extreme, but to make good all the good Ground that li^ ^ar it as much as may
be. Oh, (...) very Observant of, and (...) to ^our Scripturally enlightened
Cons^iences, every sin against the light of Conscience Wounds terribly; sew
err for want of Light, all are guilty more or less of O^fending against Light.

Fourthly, Be (...) to one a^other^ Consciences; they are the Lords peculiar,
the most excellent Ep^. 4. 32 James 4. 12. Romans 14. 4.
and tender part of Men, and most severely Guarded by the Lord, by his
Precepts, Promises, Threatenings, and Providence, from all manner of
Persecution, Imposition, Judging, Despising, and all Injurious In^ursions
whatsoever.

Fifthly, Recoll^ct the Sabbaths and Serm^ns you have enjoyed; it is good to
bring out of your Treasuri^s things ^w and Old, a word ^own (...) or thirty
years ago may b^ing ^orth Fruit now; you have had Faithful and Painful ^.
Mi^, some of which have spent Months in Premonitions about ^.
Perilous Tim^s, do not think that any thing should be forgotten, which (...)
of ^ecessity be Ac^ ^or.

Sixthly, Walk Expediently, 1 Cor. 10. 23. many things may be Lawful which
Gospel-expediency allows not: He that will go as far as he may, will sometimes
go further than he should; an upright Heart still sets his Watch upon his own
ground of Lawfuls, and not on the disputable Borders of Unlawfuls. The Gospel
is a kind of Chancery to the Summum jus of the Law, as in Respect of the Life
and Righteousness it discovers: So, in regard of the Laws it does declare and
enjoin. There are three special Rules of Gospel-Chancery and Expediency that I
would entreat your careful keeping of. (1.) Do all to the Glory of God, 1 Cor.
10. 31. Will the Lord get Honor by this Action? Will his Name and Religion be
better thought of? (2.) Do all to Edisic^ion, Romans 14. 19. Will this be a
stumbling block and an O^fence to others, or does it tend to Edi^ie, Confirm
and Build up others? Will this be a Conviction or an hardening to the Enemy?
Will this draw and sweeten the Spiri^s of Men to Religion, or comfort them in
it? (3.) Do as you would be done by: See M^t. 7. 12. It seems this is the Law
and the Prophets, and our Saviors command makes it Gospel too; there is more
Religion in Gospel-Morals than most Professors are aware of.

Seventhly, Be very careful about your Spe^ch and Words; let them be few, true,
savoury, Charitable, and seasonable: I think the third of James has much
Gospel in it, and I know not how to get over that James 1. 26. If any Man among
you seem to be Religious, and bridleth not his Tongue, but deceives his own
Heart, This Man's Religion i^ vain; better any thing we meddle with prove vain
than our Religion; there are many in Hell that are tormented because of their
Tongues: consult Scripture-Rules and Reproofs about the Tongue, which are many,
and know, that specious Professors may be damned for Errors and Defects herein;
how many have cause to mourn over the Liberty and lashes of that unruly Member!

Eighthly, Love not the World; I have sometimes looked upon some Texts with
Amazement: Luke 6. 24. and 18. 25. James 4. 4. 1 John 2. 15. 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10.
how many die of receiving their Consolation! What pity is it that any that are
for Purity of Worship should go to Hell for Covetousness, which is Idolatry!
How many are overgrown with this Disease and do not know it? This so deep and
dangerous an Evil, so hard to Discover, that has such plausible pr^tences and
covers, and can carry it with so much Respect to, and allowance of every thing
that belongs to the Form of Godliness; Let it be your constant Prayer, From
inordinate d^sires aft^r, secret delight, and conceited con^idence in any of
the things of this World, Good Lord deliver us.

Ninthly, Be even and propor^ionable Christians, have Respect to all the parts
of Godliness, Psalm. 119. 6. 1 Cor. 1. 13. Luke 11. 12.
be good at all times, and in all places, do not live as if Christ and Religion
were divided, and the weightier and lesser matters of the Law fallen out; God
has joined all the parts of Duty together, and made them subservient each to
other: Let your Heart bear proportion to your Profession, to your present
outward Conditions, and to your future and Glorious Expectations, Titus 2. 13.
1 Cor. 15. 19. Do not think that you can do enough in Religion, so as you need
not do more; the Reality of Grace cannot better be proved, than by its growth,
he that thinks he cannot be better, was never truly good; not to go forward is
to go backward; let your returns bear some proportion to your Receivings, and
manifold means of being made better; every Sermon Mercy and Correction call
loudly upon you for an Increase in true Sanctification and full conformity to
Gods Will to believe, ^e, and walk as he would have you.

Tenthly, Be steadfast and unmovable in your Christian (...), 1 Cor. 15. 58.
^eb. 10. 38. Be not you of them that draw back unto Perdition; I often think of
that word, Will ye also go away? Take heed of that s^ar of Man that brings a
snare; a back* sliding (...) is a Monster in Religion; (...) Gospel never
yields so much swe^ness as when it is (...) for, pr^pare for speedy and sharp
Trials; let not carnal and slavish fear o^ outward losses make you lose all you
have done in the Service of God: your Wisdom will be manifested, and your
Salvation met with by your Enduring to the End, Gal. 1. Mat. 10. 22.

And now, dearly Beloved, if you are pleased to Accept these few hints with the
same candor and Affection they are offered to you, I hope there may be a Mutual
cause of Blessing the Lord, and I shall Reap the benesit of your Prayers, which
are the chief things I aim at in this Under^aking; I subscribe my self

A true Well-willer to, and sincere Endeavourer of the Real Welfare of you all,
T. H.

THE EPISTLE TO THE Reader.
Reader,
I Judge these Sermons worthy to be made Public. 1. Because ^hey speak against
sins which we can hardly say too much against. As they are exceeding
pernicious, so the inclination to them is born so commonly in Humane Nature,
that as they have been the sins of former Ages, so they are like to continue to
the end. Were sin but in men's Opinions, Reason might change them; but when it
is rooted in sensitive inclination, the Temptation is strong, and almost
constant, and Reason it self is born down by the violence of Appeti^e and Lust.
Most Councils called General, have been occasioned by some Heresies, but
Augustine would have had one called for the Suppression of Drunkenness: And
though Heresies be numbered with the Fruits of the Flesh, Bestiality kills its
ten thousands for the thousands that mere (...) kills. Though the Papal Cler^y,
who prefer Carnal Interest before Hon^sty, can b^r with ^en Drunkards or
Fornicators easilier than with one that is but publicly Named a Heretic or a
Schismatic, for being against their Schism, Pride, and Tyranny; yet alas, it
is Sensuality, Sensuality, that in all Ages finds the greatest Work for the
Admonitions, and the Tears of Faithful Teachers; and which carries away the
A^ultitude to Perdition, and often is the Spring of real Heresy it self, while
it must have a Palliate of a Carnal kind of Religion to keep Conscience from
Tormenting them before the Time. Even the Children of Pious ^rents are Born
with a Flesh that Loves pleasant Meats and Drinks, and Idleness, and Sports,
and fil^ Lusts: And if Wise and Godly Education, and Gods Powerful Grace do not
Mortisie these Fleshly Desires, and bring the Appetite under the true
Government of God and Conscience, Beasts will spring out of the Families of
Lords, and Knights, and Gentlemen; yea, and of the most Religious ^arents and
Ministers themselves. The great Warfare in the World, which Heaven or Hell must
be the end of, is between the Flesh and the Spirit. And it is to please some
Beastly Lusts, and that Flesh which must shortly turn to ugly Loathsome
Rottenness, and then to Dust, that most Sinners sell (though they are loath to
believe it) their God, their Redeemer, their Souls, and their Everlasting
Hopes. O Mad and Miserable Bargain! The re-view of which must be their endless
Torment. O that I had ^ound no more resistance of my Ministry by Drunkenness,
Gluttony, Lust^ulness* and other Fleshly Pleasures, and the Love of Pride, and
Plenty to maintain them, than I have found from simple Here^e!

I take it for granted, That Treatises of this Nature will not be like some
Books which I have Written against some ^alse Opinions, which are up this Year
and down the next, and then the Books are like Almanacks out of Date; but they
are like Physic Books, Written for the Cure of such Diseases as will trouble
and kill Men to the end of the World, and therefore never grow out of
Usefulness.

2. And I would I had not another Motive, viz. That the Age and Air that we
Live in, does cry loud for such Remedies. Men Use to Write most of such
Diseases as the Country and Men's present Danger makes them most liable to; As
of the Pes^ilence and Raging Plagues, of the S^urvy or Fever in Countries most
infested with them, and of the Ven^real Po^ a^ng the worse than Brutish
Letch^rs: And by the same Reason an Admonition against Drunkenness and W^redom
is Seasonable, when Men's increased abominable Wickedness does make it more than
Ordinarily Necessary.

And the rather, because as this Learned Author truly tells us, these sins do
Engage Men in an Enmity to the contrary Truths and Practices, and consequently
to the Preachers and Practicers of Piety, Temperance, and Sobriety; and they
that are first made so mad as to Sell their own Souls for an unlawful Cup or
Lust, are not like to be very tender of the Souls, or Lives, or Estates* or
Names of other Men. And a Wicked Life, as it comes from a blinded Judgment,
does blind it more, and betray more to the Sottishest Delusions; and from
Beastiality to Enmity or Malignity is the Ordinary Stage.

Though yet it must be confessed with shame and sorrow, that a Pharisaic^l,
Papal, Worldly Clergy, are usually made Crueller Persecutors by their Carnal
Interest and Superstitious Zeal, than Atheists or Insidels do usually prove,
exc^pt when instigated by them.

3. And I must add, that since I read an Excellent small Treatise of this
Authors, On Christ's Resurrection, I the more Value any thing that is his. And
though these Sermons are fitted to the Vulgar, and have many homely Phrases
proper to those Countries where he Lived, yet are they not the words of an
unskilful weakness, by one that knew not how to speak exactly (such as now the
World is much troubled with;) but like some of Dr. Harris (as his Drunkards
Cup, etc.) Mr. William Fenner's, and some others, who purposely laid by the Use
of their great Learning, and forbore that Accurateness of Style, which is
suitable to that Matter, but not to the Readers or Auditors, and Denied
themselves in preferring a popular Style when the Peoples good required it. For
as we say, That is good which does good: And Augustine tells his Readers, That
He takes that as not yet spoken, which is not Understood. That Sober Readers
may Lend this Book to Drunkards and Fornicators, and persuade them to Read it,
or read it to them, who else would take no Notice of it, is the end of this
Recommendation, By

A Servant of Christ for Men's Repentance and Salvation, Ri. Baxter.
London, August 23. 1675.
TO THE READER.
AS a pernicious Wickedness when it becomes Audacious, justly provokes Holy
Zeal to Oppose it, so that Zealous Opposition as duly deserves our highest
Commendations to Encourage and increase it. The edge of these following
Discourses tends to cut down those two spreading Boughs of Sensuality, Namely,
Drunkenness and Adultery, that so hurt^ully both drop upon the strength, and
darken the Glory of this English Nation. The penurious Praises therefore of a
single Epistle reflect too sl^nder a Respect upon this Usefu^ E^deavour, for
which the great^st grat^tude and acknowledgments of all that love either
Co^cience or Country, are no more than sufficient. Nor is it easy to
determine whether the Subjects of these ensuing Discourses are more Seasonable
and Useful, or the Manner of handling them by the Reverend Author be more
accurate and convincing. Some few years since there was Published an Excellent
Treatise, written by this Author, to Demonstrate the Resurrection of Christ;
The great Acceptance which that Treatise, tending to the Advancement of Christ,
found among the Learned, makes me confident, that this Discourse, which tends
to the depression of sin, will be as grateful as the former, to all Intelligent
and Pious Perusers.

But instead of any further Commendation of this Authors Worth and Abilities,
shown in this Excellent performance, I shall only commend this his Holy
Design, by joining with him in Opposing those Sensual and C^nal Wickednesses,
against which he so seasonably sets himself in these ensuing Treatises. And I
shall propound these two following Directions for helping us to res^t and
subdue ^leshly wickednesses.

The first whereof is, the Duty of Consideration.

The second is, the Duty of Carriage.

For the first, The Duty of Consideration.

1. Consider Carnal ^usts as Deceitful, Ephesians. 4. 22. When they promise pleasure,
they perform nothi^ less. They betray when they ^iss. They c^tice ^y baiting
over a catching killing hook. If it be hard to forbear the Bait, it is much
harder to endure the Hook. Can a short imaginary delight countervail for the
Wounds o^ Body, Estate, Name, Conscience, and the (...) Soul. It Is good to
consider the (...) sens^al pleasures in their bitter Farewell; and to b^hold
their back side and departures, as well as their painted Face, and deccit^ul
approaches. Venenatae deliciae.
In a Scripture Glass they will appear to be but poisoned Delights; i^ their
Trappings be turned up, they only discover Desormity. Their Pleasure, which is
only in their Seeds-time, produces a Crop of pain to an hundredfold
increase. They ^nter with a pleasant perfume, but go out in a Disturbing,
Destructive stink.

2. Consider them as most Uningenuous to Divine Grace and Goodness. Grace is
the great inducement which God uses to draw us to deny Worldly Lusts, Titus 2.
14. The Grace of God (says the Apostle) teaches us to deny them, even that
Grace which brings Salvation. A Grace that denies us nothing but what would
damn us. It gr^nts us the pacifying Blood of Christ, the Ravishing Joys of
Heaven; yea, all the Delights of this Life, so far as they hinder not from that
which is infinitely better. What greater Un-ingenuousness than to despise a
Paradise of all Delights, for one forbidden Apple? To contemn Everlasting Joy
and Sweetness ^or a mere Now, a Moment of painted pleasure? to forget that
Grace, which only requires the Lives of those Lusts, that (if spared) will
damn and undo us; when Justice might have required ev^n our own Lives as ^ due
and deserved Homage?

3. Sensual Lusts, though Carnal, are yet Spiritual Soul- Enemies, 1 Pet. 3.
11. Warring against the Soul; they dead, dull, damp us in Holy Duties; they
over* charge the Soul, weigh it down, (...).
and make it heavy, Luke 21. 34. In Spiritual perform^nces, Service to the Body
is the greatest disservice to the Soul. The Body being much attended, the Soul
is often as much neglected. How unfit is a full Belly ^or Praying, Preaching,
Hearing. It Is our Duty indeed to Eat and Drink (as Isaac did) to be fitted for
Prophecy and Holy* Duties, Genesis 27. 3, 4. But the contrary is frequently seen:
Fasting is the usual means to dis-entangle the wings of the Soul from Sensual
impediments. Lead tied to the Birds Legs hinders it from ^lying upwards;
sensi^ive Enjoyments damp our Endeavors for Heaven.

4. Sensual Lusts are Tyrannical and Domine^ring. Lusts are made the stronger
by seeding and gratisying them. The more you Obey these Tyrants, the more
Authority do they claim: We do but add Oil to the Flames. In being Drunk with
Wine there is Excess, Ephesians. 5. 18. Lusts always Cry, Give, Give. If a strange Dog
be fed he will come again, if beat away he re^rains. I^ Lusts be cher^sh'd,
they will be bold and return with increase.

5. Sensual Lusts are Perishing and Corruptible. All the pleasures of sin and
sins are but for a season. Meats for the Belly, and the Belly for Meats are
both to be Destroyed, 1 Cor. 6. 13. All sensual Objects Perish in the using,
Col. 2. 22. The World passes away, and the Lusts thereof, 1 John 2. 17. Their
Pleas^re slies away, when the Pain and Sting continues.

6. Sensual Lu^ts are De^iling and Corrupt, Ephesians. 4. 22. They defile the Body
with Noisome Diseases; the Swines Mud and the Drunkards Vomit are both Unclean.
The soul of a Glutton or Drunk^rd is as a Taper in a greasy Lanthorn. These
Lusts make the soul dirty and Unclean, and insect it with an impure Nastiness:
as the Covetous wallows in the dust, so the Voluptuous in a sink or slough.

7. Sensual Lusts are Debasing. The sp^nding of our time in filling and
emptying the Belly, is as base an Employment as to fill and empty a Jakes. He
serves but a Dung-hill-god, who Serves his Belly, and makes a god of it. It
degrades a Man from Angelical to Swinish: the Mortifying of sensual Lusts is
our great Honor; it much more Honors us not to Lust for, than to have many
Comforts. The highest of Earthly Potentates is not so high in being absolute
from Men, as is a Christian in being absolute from Things: He is Angelus in
Carne (as it were) an Angel incarnate, who in the midst of earthly com^orts,
Living above those Dung-hill-Delights, Lives on God.

8. Sensual Lusts pursued, discover that Sensual Comforts are our Portion. It Is
poor pay when God gives it us in outward Pleasures. That which is our Pleasure
is our Portion. Present pay in Pleasures for a season is miserable and
penurious; when we are not (...) (...) with them, but se^k bett^r, it is a sig^
God puts us not ^f with them, God never giving a Princ^ple of In^lination to
the b^t Enjoyme^s to disappoint, but to s^tisfie it.

9. Consider Sensual Lusts hinder from drawing others to Heaven and Heavenly
Enjoyments. The (...) will never make another Heavenly: we only bring others
to look after what we our selves regard: Paul had never drawn so many to Christ
and Heaven, had he not been above the World, had he not been Dead to the World,
he had not been so Lively in the Pulpit, and done so much good to Souls. Had he
been Lively in the World he would have been but a Dead Preacher, and very
insuccessful. He will most benefit the World, who lets it see he can Despise
what it Admires.

10. Sensual Lusts Discover an unchanged heart. They are most Opposite to
Godliness. Grace puts us upon Lusting against the Flesh. Religion ties the
heart to God. If we love the World, the love of the Father is not in us, 1 John
2. 15. The Loving o^ God and Pleasures are inconsi^tent. Sensuality Opposes
the Common Nature (...) Godliness, and not one Grace alone, but all Graces. The
Common Nature of Religion is to be Divine. And Heavenly spiritual ^njoyments
are of ^ (...) ki^d from thos^ of sense, and so the very k^nds of (...) and
sensuality di^fer. ^race is a Spiritu^l ^lessing, ^ut Sensuali^y (...) to the
E^rth, and bows us down to i^. A Heart taken off from Sensual (...) Discovers a
Character of Renovati^. The Old Man stoops Earth ward: The Spiritual Principle
looks after a Spiri^al Portion. We are Born again to a lively hope of a
Heavenly Inh^ritance, 1 Pet. 3, 4. None go to Heavenly delights with the love
of sensual. Conversion to God puts us upon a Conversation in Heaven. It Is a
sign we have tasted the sweetness of Spiritual, when Sensual Joys are insipid
and untoothsome; an Earthly Principle never taught any to deny Earthly
pleasures. Naturally we walk by sense, and when we do not so, it is a sign of
more than Nature. As it is given to a Saint to bear the pains, so to sorbear the
pleasures of the World.

It Is a distinguishing Mercy to be above Common delights* It was a sign that
El^jah's Mantle had touched El^sha when he was withdrawn from ^is VVorldly
Employments, and ran after him, 1 Kings 19. 19.

11. Sensual Lusts are commonly the inlets to Apostasy. The Mortifying of
these, Countermines S^tans Temptations. The Flying Bird is hardly shot by the
Fowlers, nor is the Soul upon the wing of Heavenl^ Affection so much endangered
by the Devils Offers. This, this is the Soul that most disappoints the Tempter:
he who counts nothing better than the Comforts of sense, will easily be seduced
by them from Holiness and Faith. It Is not the enjoyment, but the Loving of
sensual Com^orts that takes us o^f from God; the s^rongest Rope could never
draw us, if it were not ^or the Knot whereby it is tied to us, nor would the
Devils strongest Temptations by sensual O^ers withdraw us from God, were it not
for the Knot of our Lov^ to them. A^l these things will I give thee would then
but seem a poor Offer. A Weaned Chi^d is not allured by the Breast, the (...)
Banquet provokes not Appetite (...), ^or do the sweetest (...) a S^ul dead to
the World, from (...). Our Hands easily p^rt with that (...) our Hearts have
parted with before; (...) no pain to have that plucked from us (...) cleaves
not: Morti^ied Paul took pleasure in Necessi^ies, 2 Cor. 10. A Morti^ied Saint
can spend more for God in an hour than a Sensualist can in a year. The Lark
sings sweetest when farthest from the Earth, the place of her Food, and so does
a Soul in her Heavenly Enjoyments, though stripped of the Comsorts of sense. The
Morti^ied to these Com^orts ^inds that welcome, which is unavoidable Death.
It Is the empty Traveller that alone can sing when he meets with a Thie^: A Soul
taken o^f from Enjoym^nts, is only will^ngly (...) from them, he that Lodg^ in
an (...), (...), c^n (...) as e^rly in the (...)* (...) pleas^, w^ch is not
(...) t^ (...) we Lodge in the (...) our (...).

^.

(...), (...), (...) satis^ying o^ (...) is (...) Privil^dges of (...). They
that are C^rists have (...) wi^ the Lusts thereof; by a (...) that Cross that
s^ved (...); the pro^cution o^ Lusts confutes the true (...) of Li^ by the
Cross. It Is vain to t^lk of Chri^s Does for thee, if it have not been (...) in
thee, if the Cross merits thy P^ace, it will be thy Mo^ive to Pu^ty.

Secondly, As to ^y Carri^ge toward sensual Lu^s.

1. In the Motions of Lusts study thy Profession: A (...) be a Sen^, (...),
no^n (...)* A (...) bet^r things the the Obj^cts of (...), an^ ^st look over
(...) look, (...); Thou, O M^n of (...), (...), ^ Tim. 6. 11. T^y (...) is
(...) C^lling, Phil. 3. 14. A Conv^sation in ^eaven agrees not with s^nsuality.

2. Rest not in Ext^rnal (...) to Act the Motions of L^st, but advance to an
intern^l real (...). Outward forbear^nces are good, but not good enough; the
B^rd that ge^s* loose (...) a stone to which it was t^ed by a (...), ^ying with
the string about its leg is hampered in the next bough, and so will a Man be
overcome by Lusts, who ^orsakes the present Pleasure, but Crucifies not the
inward af^ection. Pl^ce not Religion in parting with the Object, but in
Rectifying the Faculty. If a Mole spoil a curious Garden by casting up Hills in
it, the Gardener thinks it not enough to le^el the Molehills with the Ground,
by patting them down with hi^ Sp^de, unless he kills the Mole in the Earth.
External abstentions avail not without inward Renovation.

3. Stifle sensual Lusts in their Conceptio^, let them not gather head; 'twas
the Council (good in its kind) of Achitop^el, to set upon David before he could
gath^r strength. Crush Lust in its first Risings and Motions; the thickest Ice
that (...) bear a Cart begins with a thin ^ilm that will not bear a pebble.
C^st out the first thoughts of a Lustful Temptation with indignation, let not
an impudent Begg^r get over thy threshold if thou would^t d^y him an Alms.

4. Let Moderat^on be one dish in the Richest Banquet of sensual Enjoyments; go
not so far as thou may, for then it is hard not to go further than thou
should: S^tan lies in Ambush behind our Lawfuls, the more pleasant any thing
is, ^he more suspected let it be: Put a Kn^ to ^hy Throat when abundance
entiseth (...); in the midst of sensual Enjoyments keep thy self like the Be,
which Inhabit^, even her Waxen Cell with unsmeared Wings; the Moderate Use
makes us ^njoy the most and sw^etest of the Creatures: If we go deep in sensual
D^lights we draw Dreggs.

5. Pray for a Rectisied Judgment, a Renewed Understanding, Romans 12. 2. A
C^rnal eye se^s only an excellency in C^rnal Obje^ts. A (...) prefers a Lock
of Hay before a B^g of Gold, a Child an hal^-penny Picture before a conveyance
of a thousand pounds per Annum. A skil^ul ^ye only discernes the wo^th of Art;
Nature discernes not things that disser; P^ul had a Renewed Estim^te before he
accounted all Dung for Christ: Pray for the spirit of Wisdom.

6. Labor for a Sanctified improvement of the removal of all the Comforts of
sense, look upon it as Gods breaking down thy Bridges to hinder thee in thy
March after the fulfilling of thy Lusts, and as the flight of Joseph from his
Mistr^ss to damp thy Adulterous Loves, oft^n (...) t^y Lusts with thy Loss^,
think (...) God thought the Company of Com^orts wou^ have ensn^red the
Assection^.

7. Lastly, in all sens^l (...) wisely draw o^ thy soul (...) Objects. Compare
the (...) o^ sensual pleasures with the Cry^ (...) of Eternal Joys; oh (...)
^lights were more (...), (...) o^ (...) Spi^t more than the Excesses of Wine:
H^ w^o* Lives at the Table of a King, despises scraps; and such are all
s^nsual plea^ures ^teemed by him who hat^ t^sted how sweet the Lord i^, this
Glorious Sun puts o^ the Kitchin-Fire of sensuality: In undue lusting after
M^ats and Drinks, think whose Flesh and Blo^d is Me^t and Drink indeed. I^
Lusting after Be^uty consider Christ as white and ruddy, the fairest of ten
thousand. If immoderately thou (...) after Re^t and Ease, study the sweet
quietness that is in God's Bosom, and Peace of Conscience; the Fare of a
Sensualist is gross to that of a Saint, and yet it is Obtained at a far dearer
Rate.

But, Reader, I suspect thee d^tained too long in the Porch, enter therefore
the House; View it within, Observe both its Strength and Excellent Contrivance
in all the Parts and Rooms of every Argument and Instruction; nor enter only
to Contemplate the Artifice of the Authors House, but mo^e to feed upon the
Bounty of his Housekeeping: Fall to with an Holy Hunger. In such ch^st
Delights there is no Excess: And because I would not Clog, but Quicken thy
Stomach, ^'le Offer thee no more; Only that God would give thee both an
Appetite to Feed, and Nourishment by Feeding, is the Prayer

Of that Unworthy Servant of Christ, but true Friend to thy Soul, W. Jenkyn.

One come from the Dead: OR, A sober and severe TESTIMONY against Drunkenness
and Whoredom.
1 SAMUEL I. 16. Count not thine Handmaid a Daughter of Belial.
CHrysostom giving some Reasons why he still used Prefaces or Introductions to
his Text, among others gives this for one, sc. Because there were a great many
of his Auditors still little acquainted with the story of the Bible, and
theresore when his Text was not an entire absolute thing of it self, but only
a parcel of some story or passage, he that should be all to all that he might
gain the more, must of necessity use some Presace sor the sakes o^ the
^gnoranter sort, to explain the Coherence; otherwise, blun^ly to propound such
a Text, and not to show the Coherence, how it depended upon the former matter,
were (says he) all one as to bring a man upon the Stage all covered and hooded
over, that none could know who or what he was; so they, ignorant of the story
of the Bible, have but an hood-man set before them, who have such a Text
propounded to them, without showing the Coherence, that unhoods and uncovers
the Text, that a man may ken it somewhat, who it is as 'twere, and what it
means, That you therefore, even the most ig^orant, (for to the wise and unwise
also are we who speak out of this place Debtors; and it were hard Conscience,
if a man owed a Debt to wise and unwise, to seem to make Conscience of paying
the wise men their Debt, and none of paying the unwise theirs,) that even you
therefore the most ignorant may prosit as well as others, take this-briefly for
Coherence and making way to the Text, that the hooded thing may be unhooded and
uncovered to you, and that you may know the plain meaning of it; There was a
man, one Elkanah a Levite, who had two Wives, Hannah and Peninnah: Hannah was
the ^etter beloved of her Husband, but barren; Peninnah the less beloved, but
fruitful; Hannah being the better beloved, and at their yearly going up before
the Lord, her Husband giving her therefore at that Feast a worthy or double
Portion, better than to Peninnah, Peninnah envied her, and went about to anger
and frett her, casting her in the teeth still with her Barrenness; the good
poor Soul had no other rem^dy than to pour out her soul to God in Prayer, that
he would take away her Reproach, and give her a Man-child, and she would give
him back again all the days of his life to the Lord: And as she continued
praying before the Lord, in the bitterness of her soul, Eli the Priest marking
her odd gesture, and the going of her Lips without any voice heard from her,
thought she had been some drunken woman, overseen now at the Feast with Wine,
and therefore said to her, How long will thou be drunken, etc.

And thus by the Dependence, you see partly the Meaning of the Text; you see
who this Handmaid is, Hannah; who she speaks to, Eli the Priest; and what it is
she would not be accounted by him, under the phrase of a Daughter of Belial;
sc. not accounted a Drunkard by him: a Drunkard were a son or daughter of
Belial indeed.

But what is this, to be a son or daughter of Belial?

In few and plain words, to be a very Child of the Devil, to be so wicked, that
one may seem to be begotten of no other than of the very wicked one: What
concord has Christ with 2 Cor. 6. 15.
Belial? sc. the Devil. A Son or Daughter of Belial therefore in
Scripture Phrase, is one egregiously, notoriously, diabolically naught; so
naught as he may seem to be a very Child of the Devil, spit out of hi^ very
mouth as 'twere, bred of his very Spawn, begot of his very Seed, carrying the
very Image and Picture of the Father in the Face as 'twere, because as the
Father is, so is he: the ^ather wicked, egregiously wicked, so the Child
wicked, egregiously wicked. Thus a Son of ^elial is used 1 Samuel 2. 12. chapter 10.
27. and 25 17. and Judge. 19. 22.

Now for the Observations:

In that Godly Hannah counts that thing, sc. Drunkenness, such a gross and
grievous Sin, that it is enough to denote and call one a Daughter of Belial, a
very Child of the Devil, which the World (if it count it a Sin at all) counts
it but a very venial sin, a very pardonable sin, a very very Peccadillo, a Sin
just and no more; observe hence,

That the Judgment of the Saint, and the Judgment of the World, the Judgment
of the Godly Religious Heart, and the Judgment of the Profane heart, there is
a great deal of difference between them in the matter of Juding about Good and
Evil, Virtue and Vice.

That which the one accounts a very very little Sin, if a sin at all, the other
may count (as having a little better Eyes in his head than the bleer eyed
World) a very gross, a very grievous, a very heinous Sin, a sin enough to make
one a very Son or Daughter of Belial. So Adultery, a sin which I doubt the
World accounts no such great sin; yet Joseph's Godly heart, what a great sin
made he of it! How can I commit this great wickedness, and sin against God? So
single Fornication, a sin much more made nothing of in the world, yet how does
the Apostle Paul's Godly heart aggravate and set it forth for a most grievous
Sin? being highly injurious to our own Body, to a Member of Christ, to a Temple
of the Holy Ghost, etc. So Covetousness, mere and bare and single Covetousness,
so it be not attended with Injustice, etc. not so much as taken notice of to be
a Sin in the world; and yet what a great sin the same Apostles godly Heart took
it for, you may know by this, in that he can scarce mention it without setting
this upon the head of it; Covetousness which is Idolatry. So contentious
Wrangling and going to Law one with another, and not rather (if possible)
laboring to end things by friendly Arbitration of honest men, that the world
takes this for no sin, full Terms and crowded Courts show: and yet what a
scandalous and ungodly thing the Apostles godly Heart took this kind of Lawing
for, you may know by his earnest reasoning against it for almost half a Chapter
together, and then concluding thus; Now therefore there is utterly a fault,
etc. Neither can any man say, that he spoke only against the Christians
contentious Lawing before unjust and unbelieving Judges, for that is but only
a Circumstance aggravating their Law and wrangling, not the whole thing
condemned by him, as appears verse. 6, 7. So Swearing, vain ordinary swearing,
what Fault is it counted? And yet if the Apostle James his godly Heart had not
taken it for a great sin, would he in such strange precise manner have forbid
it? But above all things, my Brethren, swear not, etc. So Ecclesiasticus,
(though no inspired man, yet no doubt an holy man,) what a great matter does
his holy heart make of it, Chap. 23. 9, etc. and 27. 14. So a little Pride of
Heart, to be lifted up for any thing that we have, above what is meet, and to
proceed perhaps to some outward Act expressing it, who counts of it as any
great sin, or matter much to be repented of? Yet what a great sin David's godly
Heart when it awakened and came to it self, made of it, you may know by his
Confession, and setting these two upon the head of it, I have 2 Samuel 24. 10.
sinned greatly, I have done very foolishly. An ordinary Heart would not have
found any such great sin in a little Numbering the People, out of a little
Pride and Conceitedness of heart for the Greatness of their Number; but David's
godly Heart thinks otherwise. So what a great Sin did the Apostle Paul think
Bribery and Corruption to be, who rather than bribe Felix to procure Liberty to
preach the Gospel, (for it cannot be said, it was because he was not able; for
had he been but willing, the Christians no doubt, (says Calvin) would have
made a Purse for him, and found him Money,) he would lie two full years in
Prison to the prejudice of the Gospel: And yet what great sin is Bribery and
Corruption made now adays, though not to procure Liberty to preach the Gospel,
(that they may do Gratis if they will,) but more basely to procure the Means
and Maintenance of the Gospel. So what a great sin did A^stin make that which
ordinarily would be counted but a Boys Trick; sc. Robbing of an Orchard, only
out of an humor and to do an ill turn, not so much ^or any love to the Fruit,
for if a Condimentum ibi saci^us er at.
bit enter into his mouth, the prettiness of the Prank gave the taste and
relish to it: Austins Cons^ss. 2, 4. etc. Thus for Scriptureproof of the Point,
great differ^nce there is between the Judgment of the Saint and of the
Worldling, and the Reason hereof (if we would know) may be double.

First, Because the me^r Worldling or Unregenerate man sees not Sin and Vice in
its own proper Color, and true Nativeness of it, but only in the Picture and
Representation of it as 'twere, and therefore cannot know and acknowledge the
true Ugliness and Loathsomness of it, so as he who sees it in the own proper
Color and true Nativeness of it: As he that sees the Picture of a Toad, cannot
know and conceit the ugliness of that Creature so as he that sees the living
thing crawling before his eyes. No marvel therefore if in this regard the
Judgment of a Saint for a Sin and the true ugliness thereof, be far otherwise
from the Judgment of a Worldling, because the one has enlightened Eyes to see
the Sin in some sort in the own proper Color and true Nativeness of it, the
other glimmers but upon the Picture. Romans 6. 21.
Whereof ye are now ashamed. Now that ye have enlightened Eyes to see the
filthiness of them in the own proper Color, now ashamed of them.

Secondly, The mere Worldling or unregenerate man, that which he sees of the
Filt^iness of Sin, he barely sees it, but he has not within him an Antipathy
and spirit of Hatred and Enmity against the Sin, but the Saint has this
Antipathy also, a spirit of Hatred within him against the Sin, and therefore
thereby knows more of the filthiness, true filthiness of Sin: As he knows
more of the ugliness and filthiness of the forenamed Creature that has ^
rising Antipathy or spirit of hatred against her, than he (if you can suppose
any such) that has no natural Antipathy, or rising hatred against that
Creature. In Morals nothing helps Judgment more than Affection; Love and
Sympathy will make a man see far into the Beauty and Amiableness of a thing
truly amiable, and Hatred and Antipathy will likewise make a man see far into
the contrary Hatefulness and Loathsomness of a thing truly hateful: Nothing
so amiable as Virtue, and there is nothing can see so f^r into this Amiableness
of Virtue, as the true Love of Virtue; and nothing so hateful as Vice, and
nothing there is that can see so far into this hatefulness of Vice, as the true
Hatre^ of Vice.

Use 1. Is there such a broad difference often times between the Judgment of
the Saint and the Judgment of the World in the matter of Good and Evil, Virtue
and Vice, then, First, for Caution, beware how the Course and Practice of the
world prescribe too much upon us in the matter of what is to be done or left
undone: The Course and Practice of the World even going in Crowds and Droves
together, is but an ill Ground to bear our selves upon; nay, rather, Argumentum
pessimum Turba: it is an Argument the thing is worse, when all are for it. Non
tam been cum rebus humanis geritur ut mel^ora pluril us ^laceant. Sen.
The best things do not please the most People: there is not such an Happiness
allotted to Humane matters; Therefore, beware how the Course and Practice of
the World prescribe too much upon us: For why? the world practices as it
judges, and the world judges according to the Power and Principle of Judging
that is in it; but what other Power or Principle in it has the world to judge
1 Cor. 2. 12.
by, but that which is called the Spirit of the world? Now the Spirit of the
World is but an unfit thing to judge of the things of God by: what can blind
men judge of Colors? but the world for many things of God is stark blind; and
for other things very s^nded at least, and but a mere porer. Now who would be
any whit embo^dened to go such a way because he sees a Multitude of Blind men,
or Ephesians. 4 17, 18, 19.
extreme weak sighted, to Ad aliquid invenien^um non pr^dest mul^itudo
caeco^um: Aug.
go stalking on confidently that way; To find out any thing, it matters not how
many Blind men there are; so to find out the Truth, or right way in any thing,
it matters not how many blind Porers there be about it.

Use 2. Is there such a broad Difference, etc. then for Direction this may let
us see who it is safest to resort to for Ghostly Counsel and Advice, in matter
of true Doubt and case of Conscience; not unto those that may seem yet to be
men of the World, men unregenerate and unsanctified, though they be great
Clerks, but rather unto the Saints, and those that may seem to have the Spirit
of the Holy One within them, and to be taught with that Teaching which is
called the Unction of the Holy One; Ye have received an Unction from the Holy
One, etc. The Judgment of one of these in matter of true scruple and doubt of
Conscience what is to be done or not done, especially if it be an experienced
Saint that through longer Use Heb. 5. 14.
has his Senses exercised to disc^rn between Good and Evil.

The Judgment of such an one in matter of true Doubt and Scruple of
Conscience, is worth the Judgment of a whole College of Divines, bare
Speculative Divines, that know deep Mysteries in the Theory, but are strangers
from the Life and Power of Godliness, and want the Unction of the Holy One. A
man of no good Conscience himself can hardly ever give good Counsel for a good
Conscience, especially in more scrupulous and nice matters: Indeed in more
general and gross matters they may hit it, but how souly they may err in more
scrupulous and nice matters, the Fifth of Matthew shows; where the Scribes and
Pharisees, (learned enough no doubt, but such as knew little of that Unction
and Teaching of the Holy One*) for General matters they hit it, but for more
Ni^e matters see Verses ^1, 27, 31, 33, 38, 43.

Use 3. Is there such a broad Difference, etc. Then this may let us see a
Reason why they think so strange, and wonder so at one anoth^rs Courses: The
Worldling thinks it strange that the Saint in many things does as he does, that
he is so s^rait-laced, and can give himself no more Liberty in many things than
he do^s: For Example, They count it str^nge 1 P^t. 4 4.
(says the Apostle) that ye run not with them to ^he same ^xcess of riot. And
the Saint on the contrary thinks it as strange, that the Worldling does in many
things as he does, that he is so loose laced, and gives himself that scope and
liberty in many things as he does; that he can run, (...) run into that Excess
of Riot, in (...), Lusts, Excess of Wine, Revellings, ^anquettings, etc. Thus
the Saint and the Worldling think ^trange at one another^ Courses; and no
marvel, for they are of two di^ferent Judg^ments, they walk by two dissrent
(...), they mind two disserent Ends, they heed two (...) kind of Dangers. Is it
any wonder if one walking on in a green smoo^h Path not knowing of any danger
in it, wonder at another that he shall see turn out of tha^ green, smooth,
easy path, and see go scrambling with much toil and pains in another, rugged,
un^ven* uneasy way? or is it any wonder if this other that goes scrambling in
the rugged, uneven, une^sie way, because he knows the danger that i^ in the
other way, wonder at him whom he sees stalk so considently on in the smoot^ and
green way, wherein he knows he will at last meet with such danger? They have
^wo different informed Judgments, and therefore think strange one at another
Courses.

2 Doct. In that instead of saying, Count not thine Handm^id a Drunk^rd, (...)
barely says not so, but points and paints, and paraphraseth the Drunkard out
with this Description, sc. To be a very Child of Belial; Count not thin^
handmaid a (...) of B^lial. Our Observation hence is ^his:

That a Drunk^d, he or she, is a (...) S^n or Daught^r ^f B^lial; i. e. of ^he
D^vil.

Before we come to show this, we will

First of all explain the Phrase.

Secondly, Enquire who he is whom we may conceive to be a Drunkard; for if to
be a Drunkard be enough to denominate and make one a very Child of the Devil,
pi^y it were to wrong any wi^h that Nam^ who deserve it not, and m^re pity not
to let that man know his Name who deserves it, and who (if he kn^w) happily
would be somewhat afraid to contin^e (...) that state which denominates an^
mak^s (...) a very Chil of the Devil.

^or the first, what it is to be a Son or D^ughter or Child of Beli^l, i. ^. of
the Devil, you may know by considering the contrary, s^. what it is to be a
Child of God; to be a Child os God, is in all conformable ^oliness, (...) and
Goodness so to resemble God himself, that we may seem to be begot o^ no other
than of God himself; born o^ his very Seed, and bearing therefore his very
Image, so that as the Father is, so are we: That this is to be a Child of God,
you may know by these places, Mat. 5. 9, 45. Luke 6. 35. Phil. 2. 15. 1 John 2.
29. and 3. 9. And so on the contrary, to be a Child of the Devil therefore i^
in all like conformable wick^dness and ungodlin^ss so to (...) the Devil
himself, that for (...) m^n may seem to be begot of no other than of the very
wicke^ One, bred of his very Spawn, beg^t of his very Seed, bearing the very
Image and Picture of the Father in the face, so that as the Father is, so in ^
great Resemblenc^ are they: See for this Joh. 8. 44. Acts 13. 10. 1 John 3. 8.

Now though all that in any great (...) resemble for wickedness the very wicked
one, may be said to be the v^ry Children of that wicked one the Devil; yet the
Drunkard of all other, (especially the true true Drun^ard indeed) is one even
of his chopping Children, one of his very firstborn o^es, one of his white
Sons, that he may stroke on the head as his best Darlings.

For the Second thing, Who he is whom we may conceive to be a Drunkard.

First, Distinguish between a E^rius and Ebriojus.
Drunken man, and a Drunkard; Ebrius is he who once perhaps, or twice, or very
rarely may trensgress in drink, as Noah, Let, etc. But Ebriosus is he who
ordinarily and usually does this: Now it is this latter who is properly called
the Child o^ the Devil, and not the former; as he who by a fall or other
accident should get a great Coule in his Forehead, which should stay with him
only for a while; or as he who upon a sudden fit of the Conv^lsion should for a
while writhe his Mouth awry: as neither of these could be said, because the one
resembles him who naturally and constantly has a great Bunch of flesh grow in
his Forehead, and the other him who (...) and constantly has a wry mouth, to
be upon this resemblance as 'twe^e their very Childr^n; but only he who
naturally and constantly should have that Bunch of flesh or wry Mouth, only he
might be said indeed in some sort to be as 'twere that or that man; very Child:
So he is not properly thereupon to be said to be the Child of that wicked One,
who wi^-kedly, perhaps once or twice, or the like, may through accident
transgress in Wine; but he who ordinarily and (...) and ex (...) ten^re.
usually does this, in an ordinary and usual course of wickedness resembling
the wicked one: He that commits 1 John 3. 8.
Sin is of the Devil. That is habitually, and in a constant course.

Secondly, Further, wc must not only distinguish between a drunken man and a
drunkard, but also distinguish of Drunkards themselves; sor Drunkards are not
only they which are such Sots that they would lie in the way till an Iron-bound
Wain or Cart were driven over them, or the like, this is but the
Statute-drunkard: But if we will weigh this Point by Scripture and good Reason,
we shall see that there are many others, who I doubt before God (who is the
Author of all Scripture and good Reason,) shall never be able to claw it off,
but that before him they are Drunkards, even true proper Drunkards.

Consider therefore whither that which I shall now say in this point, s^em
according to Scripture and good Reason; and i^ it do not, the Servants mi^ake
can do you no harm, if you be sure you be clear in the Masters Books. But if it
do seem to be accor^ing to Scripture and good Reason, think whether it be not
^itter to clear the Books, than to quarrel only at him that shows the Debt. The
Drunkard therefore I distinguish thus:

There is the Drunkard dry, and the Drunkard wet.

The Drunk^rd dry is he who because of his Body perhaps, or because of his
Credit or the like, drinks it may be himself but very very little, so that
there is no sensible Change or A^teration of the man, but yet he sits it out
with Good Fellows, as they call them, approving and delighting in their
drunkenish good Fellowship and Excess: Now see whether the Books of God, sc.
the Scripture and good Reason will quit this man from being a very Drunkard.
Does not the Scripture make him to be in any thing as bad, (^y worse too) that
takes pleasure in others that d^e a sin, than him that do^s the (...) himself?
R^m. 1. 32.
They do not only do such (...), b^t take pleasure in them that do them. It
seems to be made a greater ^in to del^ht and take pleasure in others doing
wickedly, than in some sort to do wi^kedly ones self: And the ground (...) is
pl^in; because for them that do (...) themselves, commonly they have some
strong Lust tempting them thereto: but they who delight only and take pleasure
in other men's wickedness, not acting the same themselves; commonly it is
because they have not the same strength of Lust tempting them thereto, but
only delight more simply in wickedness even for Wickedness sake it self,
without the Pleasure attending it, which is the far greater degree of sin. And
not by this Ground of Scripture only, but by another of good Reason also may
it appear that this Drunkard dry in Gods account shall go for a true
Drunkard; for that in Gods account shall every man go for, which his Will and
Mind is fully for, though one way or other he be held from the acting of it.
God, as in Good, so in Evil accounts the Will for the Deed; and therefore must
needs account him for a tr^ Drunkard, who what his Will is he shew^ plainly
enough, by his taking pleasure in them that act that wickedness, t^ough himself
because of his Body, or his Credit, or the like, be held o^f from the acting o^
it. Thus the Old Bawd, whose Body is spent, and is no more s^r the acting of it
herself, yet is in Gods account as very a Whore all her life long, by her
procuring, approving, and delighting in others Uncleanness, as in a manner the
p^rties themselves. Thus the Devil because he is a Spirit, and no Body, he
cannot act bodily Uncleanness it self; yet Uncleanness and all other sin is
truly his in this regard, in regard of his procuring, delighting, and approving
it in others: And thus the Drunkard dry, though he may come perhaps as sober
almost from the Ale-bench, as any true Workman from his Work-bench, as sober
from the Cellar as the Student from his Cell, yet in Gods account he may be a
true Drunkard, and therefore a true Child of Belial.

Secondly, For the Drunkard wet, he is of two sorts:

1. Either the thoroughly steept: Or, 2. The lightly d^pt.
(1) The thoroughly steeped, is the gross, the beastly, the very Statute
drunkard; he that has so steept and soaked himself in Liquor, that he is bec^me
a very Sot and sodden head, and has none or very little Rule and Government of
himself: This Drunkard is he whom the Prophet ^y calls the stagg^ring Dr^,
staggering in his own Vomit; Is^. 19. 14. and 24. 20. and 28. 7, 8.
The recling Drunkard, the Drunkard overcome with wine, swallowed up with Wine,
filling all Tables with vomit and filthiness, etc. This is that Drunkard that
has so lost Limbs and Senses, that Basil likens him to those Idols of the
Heathens that have Eyes and see not, Ears and hear not, Feet and walk not: This
is that drunkard that has so intoxicated his brain, so outed his Wits, so lost
for a time his Reason, that one well calls the Fit and Mood that now Nunquid de
sure^ dubitabis, (...): qu^ n^n (...) minor, sed (...). Sen. (...). 83.
he is in, a little voluntary Madness; Let that Mood last but a few days, and
you wo^ld not doubt but the man was mad: At present he is no l^ than mad, only
it continues not so l^ng Now this is of all Drunkards the (...) Chil^ of (...),
one of his best (...)* one so just the Fathers son for universal resemblance of
wickedness, that should the Devil choose a Body wherein to act that universal
wickedness which is in him, a body he could not choose ^itter than this
Drunkards body: This drunkard who but that he wants the Devil^ cloven Foot and
his Horns, might seem not to be one of the Devils Elves only, but a grand Devil
himself. But besides this kind of Drunkard who is so thoroughly steept, so
soaked in Liquor, that he sweats wine, he rifts wine, touch and B^sil.
squeeze him never so little, you squeeze out wine.

(2) Besides this, there is of Drunkards wet another Drunkard, sc. He that is
not so thoroughly steept, but lightlier dipped, he that is not so full in the
midst of the Clout as the former, but he is about the Clout; Aye, perhaps in a
little nook and out-corner of it; and this is he who though he do not
ordinarily drink till he be forth right intoxicated, till he reel, till he
stagger, till he be overcome of Wine, till he be swallowed up of Wine, till he
fill and ^ile all with Vomit and filth, till in a word he be Statute-drunk; yet
he is continually bibbing, continually sucking, continually tippling and
tippling, till he be (as they say) somewhat ^ine, somewhat brave, somewhat tipped,
somewhat touched, ^omewhat pratty, and many other such pratty N^mes, that the
world calls these pratty C^eatures by, r^ther than by the Name of Drunkards:
But yet that they that ordinarily and continually almost are bibbing, and
lapping, and drinking, and dudling more than is meet, though it be not to the
outing of wits and losing of sense, that these in Gods and the S^ripture
account also are the true drunkards, c^nsider hence*

First, The Drunkard and the Bibber, the (...) uses indisserently and
synonymously, the one for the other. Prove. 23. 20. 21.
Jo^l 1. 5. Awake ye Drunkards, howl all ye W^-bibbers.

Secondly, Because all sinful excess in Scripture, condemned by Scripture, is
referred to Drunkenness, that therefore which is sinful Excess if habitually
practiced, makes a true Drunkard, though a qualified one somewhat, and not of
the debauched and beastlier sort; but there is much sinful Excess in drinking
condemned in Scripture, which is not to the overturning of the Brain (...).
and depriving of the Senses; See Esaias 5. 11, 12. 1 Pet. 4. 3. 1 Timothy 3. 8.
Tit. 2. 3. Given to much Wine.

Thirdly, Because that liberal use of Wine or other strong Drink, even unto
some plain Alteration, though not Alienation of mind, to cheer up and alter,
and exhilerate (...) the mind, though not to alienate an^ besott it, such
liberal use of Wine, which at some times may be very lawful, yet if it be
used unseasonably and ordinarily, for ordinary sensual Pleasure and delight, it
is nothing in Scripture-account but mere Drunkenness: Joseph to welcome his
Brethren made them a Feast, an^ they drank and were merry with Genesis 43. 3. 4.
Et in^h (...) s^t cum eo. Vulg.
him. Were m^rry with him; were drunk with him, says the Hebrew; sc. drunk
with him so largely till their minds were very much cheared, and altered, and
exhilerated up, till they were very merry with him, till indeed they were
somewhat pratty: So give strong dri^k to him that is Pr. 31. 6, 7.
ready to perish, etc. See Neh 8. 10. Now this liberal use of Wine and strong
Drink, which in these cases are lawful enough, yet if it should be
unseasonably and ord^arily used for ordinary sensual pleasure and delight, it
would be nothing but mere Drunkenness; as appears by these Texts. Blessed art
thou, O Eccles. 10. (...).
Land when thy Princes eat in due season, for st^ength and not for drunkenness.
See Is. (...). 5. 11. and 56. 12. (...) 1. 5. Amos 6. 6.

Fourthly, It appears from the ^se of the word (...) Joh. 2. 10. Compared wi^h
Ephesians. 5. 17. When m^n have well drank, and be not Drunk with wine; so the word
(...) 1 Cor. 11. 21. One is Drunken; 1 T^es. 5. 7. They that are Drunk are
Drunk in the night. Also it appears a pari, because that which was Lawful for
the Rich Glutton to have done without imputation of Gluttony at some time,
because he made an ordinary Epicurish practice of it to fare deliciously every
day; that makes him generally to be termed (though not in the text, yet in all
interpreters) the Rich Glutton: not that he glu^ted h^mself with that which was
not Lawful at any day, but which was not Lawful on every d^y.

Now th^se things being thus cleared, let us proceed to explain and show the
truth of the point, sc: That the true and proper Drunkard in any of the
so^enamed kinds, is (though in regard of some of them more, in regard of some
of them less) a true chil^ of the Devil; and because to be a child of the Devil
was in such conformableness of sin and wickedness to resemble the very wicked
one, he might seem to be begot of no other than of Him: bred of his very spawn,
begot of his very seed, bearing the very image and picture of the Father, ill
looking Father in the face as 'twere, and being the right Fathers son in all
conformableness almost unto him up and down; because this was to be a child of
the Devil, therefore in regard of this great conformableness or likeness unto
the Devil, let u^ demonstrate the Drunkard to be the Devils very Child, the
Elfe resembling the Ouncell up and down.

First therefore that Ouncell is a creature or Miscreant rather, composed of
all wickedness, and therefore (...)
called wickedness it self, and the wicked one, Ephesians. 6. 12, 16. because of that
Mass of universal wickedness that is in him. So the Ouncels Elfe, the Drunkard,
is a Creature or Miscreant rather composed also almost of all wickedness, no
sin or wickedness almost but his Miscreant nature is for it. And therefore
first in this regard, he is the right Ouncels Elfe, the Devi^s Child, because
of this resembling him in the Mass of universal wickedness almost.

Secondly, we say in a more especial manner, that such an one is right the
Fathers Son, because of resembling him not only in a general likeness of his
nature, but also and more especially in some more special marks and
properties; As that he has just the fathers wrangling humor and proud spirit,
etc. That he has just the fathers stuttering speech, ju^t his wry-mouth, the
bunch of ^lesh just in the Forehead, the long stroke on the left cheek, the
wart just under the chin, etc. We say in a more special manner, that such an
one is right the Fat^ers Son, because of more special resembling him in some
such more special marks and properties as t^ese. And so we shall see in the
second place that in a more special manner the Drunkard is right the Devils
child, because of more special resembling him in some more special marks and
properties of the Devil.

But first, that he is right the Devils Child, the Ouncels Elfe, because of
resembling his nature in an universal Mass almost of wickedness, that look as
the Devil is a Creature or Miscreant rather (for not his Creation, but his Fall
and Mis-creation rather g^ve him that) a Miscreant composed of all wickedness,
so the Drunkard, etc. And this we will show by considering how manifoldly the
Drunkard by reason of his Drunkenness sins against both Tables; for Drunkenness
(as some think) is not specially forbid in any one of the ten Command^ents,
beca^se it is not the single breach o^ any one, but in (...) the viol^tion of
all, being the (...) 'twere and Inlet to all other sins, so that Drunkenness
comprizes in it all sins; T^erefore against the sirst T^ble consider these sins
of the (...) (...) as in se cul^ (...).
by reason of his Drunkennesses (for it is (...) s^ill the plural, to note the
habit.

1. By reason ther^of, a gen^ral Pros^neness and (...) creeps upon his heart,
to grow sottish of Religion and senseless, aye a very Scorner and Contemner of
it; They have l^ft osf to tak^ heed unto the Lord, i. e. they are grown
generally profane and irreligious; and what is rendered immediately as the
reason? Hos. 4. 10. 11. Whoredom and Wine, and new Wine ta^e away the heart;
i. e. makes them Sots and Senseless ones, Prof^nishly insensible of Relig on.
Nay thi^ Wine and n^w Wine, this drinking of Liquor upon Liquor, it carrie^ the
parties in time even unto the Profaneness of Scorning and contemning of
Religion. In the day of our King, the Princes have m^de ^im si^k wi^h Bottles
of Wine, with Vessel after Vessel, Cup aster Cup, and what then follows? ^e
stretched out ^is hand wi^h (...). He becam^ as one of them that made a mock
and jest of all Religion, the word being the same us^d Psalm. 1. 1. And those
mockers Jude 18. are they that walk aft^r their own ungo^ly lusts, that is, in
the Pleasures of the slesh and Epicurish eating and drinking. And m^rk abroad
in the world, who especially are they that prophanishly m^ke a mock of Religion
and the Professors thereof; Nick-naming them Precisians, Puritans, Separatists,
and many other such nam^s of scorn, (which neither Godliness wo^ld object, nor
Wisdom cares for maintaining being objected;) who I say are these especially
that thus do, but only these Sensu^l men carried after their sensual Pleasures
and Delights? Jude 19. These are they (...) who s^parate not themselves, but
rather others in scornsully calling and accoun^ing others Separatists,
Puritans, and Precisians, and many other such odd names of Separatisme and
Singularity. These are dur^ verba
the hard Speeches, Jude 15.

Secondly, Another Sin against the first Table that Drunkenness ( i. e.
ordinary and habitual drinkings) are apt to breed in the parties, is Atheism
and Infidelity; not to believ^ verily an^ indeed the truth of Christian Faith,
as the Resurrection of the Body, the D^y of J^dgement, ^he After-State of the
D^mned or (...) So^ls, etc. Nothing so apt to breed this Atheism and
Infidelity as (...): i. e. givin^ a man's self over to these (...) and Delights.
For (...) a man l^ves thus by Sense, he is (...) and pr^judiced against Faith;
and nothing ag^in so ap^ to increase this Sensu^lity as (...). S^nsuality
breeds Atheism, and (...) it then increases (...). See both these from ground^
of S^ripture.

For the first, that t^is Sensuali^y (...), Is not that sor it in A^s 17. 18.
^n that when Paul Preached (...) an^ (...) Resurrection, w^o are they that
(...) him? Then (...) Philosoph^ of the (...), and of the Stoi^ks, (...) him,
etc. The (...), (...) Sens^al Epicureans, given over to th^se (...) Pleasures,
were the first that oppos^d the Doctrine of Jesus and the (...). So the Apostle
brings ^n (...) Sensual me^ walking in (...), (...)* Excess ^f Wine,
Revellings, D^inkings (...) P^. 4 3 4. Brings in them thinking it (...) that
Believe^s run not with them to the same excess of Riot. And why think they it
strange that B^lievers run not with them, to the same Sensuality? sc. because
their Sensuality will not let them see that which the (...) sees; sc. that for
those (...) they shall on^ day give account to (...) w^o is (...) to judge ^oth
Q^ick and Dead. S^ those (...) walk^ng aster their own (...), Sensual Lusts,
are those w^o a^e brought in (...) (...) prom^se of his (...), 2 Pet. 3. 4. And
though some that (...) up (...) in a Sensual (...) of Riotou^ (...) and (...),
may retain yet the (...) of Fai^, yet how parlous this Sensu^l Epicurishness
is, to Rob and Be^eave them of the power of Faith, that (...) Epicu^es c^se she
was Luke 16. who living in such S^nsuality, co^nted those sensual good things
to be his chief good things; ver. 25. he had no thoughts of ^eaven or ^ell: a
secret heartAthiest he wa^, see ver. 30. 31. This Sensuality how apt is it to
breed Atheism!

2. Atheism is then apt to increase S^nsuality, Let us eat and drink for to
(...) we shall dye, 1 Cor. 15. 32. sc. (...) so as we look sor no Resurrection,
for it is spoken in the n^me of those who believed not the Resurrection; and
therefore no marvel, if they should give themselves over to Sensuality of all
intempera^e and riotous Eating and Drinking. So they, Wisd. 2. We are born at
all adventure, etc. Come on (...) let ^s enjoy the good things that (...), etc.

Third^y, (...) sin ag^nst the first Ta^le is gross (...), or Contempt of Gods
Word. whom shall he teach knowled^? etc. Isa. ^8. 8, 9. having begun the
Chapter with an invective against Pride and Drunkenness, and the verse next
before, All Tables are full of Vomit, etc. Whom shall ^e teach know edge? such
unc^pable sots were not fit for it; new wea^d Children will under^and as much
as (...) so they go into captivity, because they h^e no knowledge, Isa. 5. 11,
12, 13. and that they are such sots without knowledge, t^ former verses seem to
intimate, that it arises from their Drunkenish humor.

Fourthly, Another sin against the (...) Table is great Security, and
inconsider^ion or contempt of Gods Ju^gements. And in that day, sc. in that day
that God as an offended God began to reveal his Judgments from Heaven against
them; Isa. 22. 12. In that d^y did the Lord God of Hosts call to weeping, etc.
but behold drinking wine, etc. and what a great sin this gross inconsideration
and contempt of Gods Judgments is, the next verse shows: Surely this iniquity
shall not be purged from you ^ll you dye. So what but Drinking wine in Bowls,
and other such like sensuality reckoned up there, is intim^ted that made them
put far from them the evil day; i.e. made them never reckon and consider (or
which is worse) contemn Gods Ju^gements. And in particular this makes m^n
senseless and inconsiderate of the let Judgment; so that servant who shall
begin to eat and d^ink with the drunken, the Lord of that Servant shall come in
a day when he looks not for him, etc. his drunkenishness shall cast him into
a deep sleep, and inconsideration of the day of J^dgement, so that it shall
take him tard^, coming upon him never looked for, Luke 21. 34.

Fifthly, Another sin against the first Table is Idolatry, either that Idol^try
to make ones Belly ones God; whose God is their belly whose glory is in their
sham^ etc. Ph^l. 3. 19. What but a very god does the Glutton and the Drunk^rd
m^ke their bellies? continually serving this God with continual meat-off^rings
and drink (...), and that of the best, of the (...) of the one, and of the
sweetest of the other; either ^ dr^k and ros^ up to play; s^. in honor of that
Idol the Go^den C^ls, to si^g and dance before it, as David before the Ark; so,
who look to other Cods and love slagons of (...), ^os. 3. 1. And they drank
win^, i. e. healthed and c^roused it ap^ce: and what th^n sollow^? and pr^ised
the gols of Gold. And what is that which ushers in, and m^kes way for all those
abominable (...)? what but Lacivionsness, Lusts, excess of Wine, etc. 1 P^t. 4.
3. The sensual man that once has made his belly his God, will soon be apt to
make a stock or a stone his God, and to fall into all abominable Idolatries;
and the Prophet Hosea gives us to guess at the reason, when he says wine, and
new wine take away the heart, makes men sots: and then pres^ntly adds, My
People ask council at their stocks, and their staff declares unto them, Hos.
4. 11, 12. And if this sin guide or rather misguide so into Idolatry, being so
apt to m^ke way for it; what do we think of this age, this Voluptuou^ Sensual
age? If some son of Neb^t should set up the golden calf ag^in, which the
Zealous Moses's heretofore have stamped to powder; would not many of them think
we be ready to sit down to eat and drink and rise up to play? be ready to cry,
great is Diana, not of Ephes^ but of Rome; w^n wine and new wine have taken
away their hearts.

Sixthly, Another sin against the first Table is dishonouring God in the
p^osanation of his n^me. Holy and (...) ((...) the (...)) is thy name, but how
unholily and irreverently these men use Gods name, in all horrible and
a^ominable swearing; I appeal unto t^em who more ordinarily may be in the
company of this Hellish crew than I thank God I my self am; speak if every
third word almost that these stutterers, these (...) can g^t forth be not an
Oath, a bloody Oath; surely if the talk of him that (...) much, makes the hair
stand upright; it is especially the talk of the Pot-swearer, that swears in the
midst of his Pots and Cups. What voll^s of Oath^, thumping Oaths does he then
discharge and let fly against the face of Heaven? What peals and ch^nges of
Oaths does he ring, in the ears of God and man? What Creatures of God are
there, what Attributes of God, what Titles of God, what Parts of God, Body,
Blood, Wounds, Heart, etc. but he swears them almost over and over again?
Surely such a notable swearer is this pot-swearer, that were I to choose a
villain to swear for my life, (...) would choose no other than this pot^; ^his
p^t-^wearer, whose oaths, bloody o^the, are so great and many, (...) in the
(...) of his pots and cups, (...) we^e (...) but by with pen and ink to note
them down and present them to him again in his sober (...), I am persuaded
there are not many of ^hese villains but in the^r sober Moods they would be
somewhat ^eared and ^alf afraid to read over the note of the fearful o^thes
that they swore in their unsober and drunkenish Moods. And the reason why this
vice of drunkenness draws unto such prosanation of Gods name, in all
irrevere^t intemperate swearing, is, because it first makes the heart sotti^h
an^ senseless of God and the awful Majesty of God, and no marvel if when the
he^rt is grown profane, the tongue grow profane too; no marvel if when the
heart is not awed with any due reverence of God, the tongue want this due
reverence too.

Sevently, Another sin against the first Table is dishonouring God in the
profanation of his Sabbath and Worship. Who are such prophaners of Gods
Sabbaths, and (...) or irreverent performers of of his Worship as these sons of
(...) this needs not be proved out of Pulpits, Churchwardens and Constables
and other Officers if they wo^ld ^ut now and then see a search made into bli^d
Alehouses, would make this plain eno^gh. How many do we think they might find,
(...) of learning sobriety in the Church of God, practicing intemperance in
those S^ies and Chapels of the Devil! How many instead of coming hither to
Wisdoms house, to eat of the Bread and drink of the Wine that she has
mingled; Come ^at of my Bread, etc. Prove. 9. 5. sit there in those h^uses of
folly and madness, with no other text than that in their mouths; Isa. 56. 12.
Come let us fetch wine, let us fill our selves with strong drink, and to morrow
shall be as this day, and much more abundant! But if Churchwardens and Officers
will not by their pains help to prove this truth, these men they bewray
themselves. They that are in Authority know, or may know and observe, that of
all Brables almost that for mere matter of peace come before them, two parts of
three arise from drink; and of those, more than two parts in three from that
Excess in drink, which is either on Market*dayes or Sabbath-dayes. Who greater
Profaners therefore of Gods Sabbaths and Neglecters of his Worship than these
kind of men? Or if they seem not altogether to Neglect it, yet who more
irreverent performers of it when they come to Church? Either they come somewhat
touched and half pratty to the Church, and so are fitter for two hours ^leep
than one hours Sermon; fitter for a Pillow to lay their ear to tha^, than a
Preacher to lend an ear to him: Or if for a Preacher, it must be some of those
that sow pillows under all Elbowes, Ez^k. 13. 18. Or else if they come sober
to Church, yet as the Sow dreams of her drasfe, so they of their drink; and
they think all time tedious till they be removed from the Church-bench to the
Alebench; and till Gods door is shut, that the Devils blind wickets may the
more freely open; and so if Sabbatum come of Sabbas a name of Bacchus, Plutar^h.
they are the best Sabbatizers.

Eighthly, Another sin against the first Table, is Dishonouring God in the abuse
of his Creatures. Judge but in your selves whether ye can think that God has
made his Creatures to be vainly, and contemptuously used to Riot and Excess.
Will not a wise Father when he sees his Son play the vain wanton with his meat,
stuffing and cramming himself unnecessarily with it; or when he sees him
playing the like vain wanton with his drink, bibbing unnecessarily, or only to
squirt or sputter it out again, will he not be offended? and pluck the good
meat out of his mouth, and the good drink from his Nose, as knowing they are
too good to be so vainly abused by him? will not a wise Father do this? and
will not the wise God, the Father of all Living much more ^e offended; and take
it ill then that his good Creatures should be so abused unto such vanity and
excess? His good C^eatures that how many Hungry and Thirsty S^ints souls might
be refreshed, by that which their intemperancies vainly and contemptuously
abuse? Does not the Guests abusing of their entertainment, as if after they had
eaten a while so much as was sufficient, and drank a while so much as was
needful, they should cast the rest of their meat to Dogs, or trample it under
foot; and give the rest of their drink to the Swine, or pour it down Channel:
Does not this redound to the Hosts or Inviters dishonor? well, better were it
that men should cast the superfluity of their Basket and store to the very Dogs
or trample it under foot; better also they should give the superfluity of their
Vessel and Cup running over, to the very Swine, or pour it down channel, than
vainly and unecessarily abuse the same unto surseiting and drunkenness, the
former way it did not that good it (...), (...) way it did harm; must not the^
(...) Gods entertainment (...) and vanity of Riot an^ (...)* must it not highly
redonnd (...) or Entertainers dishono^r?

(...), (...) against the sirst Table is (...) our selves and our own Bodies,
and that these t^ree ways.

1. As we are the image of God. 2. As our Bodies are the Members of Christ. 3.
As they are the Temple of the ^oly Ghost.
First, As we are the Image of God. Man is the Image of God many ways.

1. In regard of a Divine Majesty and Stateliness above all other Creatures,
even of Body and outward person; a kind of Divine Majesty above all other
^reatures, and awsull to all other creatures, being ev^n enstamped upon the
Body and outward person of man; but when the drunkard Swine-like lies wallowing
in his own filth, or sprawling in his own vomit, or by his continual drinkings
has deformedhi^s Body, and made it more like a monster through deformities
than like a man; where is then any of this divine stateliness and majesty, even
in his body and outward person above all other creatures?

2. Man is the Image of God in regard of Sovereignty, of Rule and Dominion;
that as God is simply Sovereign in regard of Rule and Dominion over all things,
so he made man as it were a petty God, putting all things in subjection under
his feet: but when the Drunkard is laid under foot himself, sor all the
Creatures that will to trample upon him, when he cannot well rule one member of
his own Body, or passion os his own mind, wheredoes any Sovereignty o^ this
divine-like Rule and dominion appear? if I would see the very image, not of the
Lord, but of a very vassal and abject slave, not fit to govern the veriest dumb
Creature, even the silliest of them that goes on all four; I could not see it
more lively than in the Drunkard.

3. Man is the Im^ge of God in regard of a Divine like reason and understanding
wherein he excels all other creatures; but when the drink is in and wit out, as
they say, when that intoxicating thing has bereaved him of wit and
understanding, (as young Cyrus thought it was plain Toxicum poison, it bereaved
them so of sense and understanding;) when it is thus with man wh^re is any
divine l^ke Reason and Understanding in him? how is he in this (...) the image
of God, and not rat^er the image of an Ass, a blo^kish Ass?

4. Man is the image of God in rega^d of a Divine-like Holy and Pure Nature;
but when such a deal of impu^ity and (...) does appear even in the outward man,
much more when the Drunkards heart by reason of drunkenn^ss is nothing but a
cage of unclean and (...) thoughts, where is (...) ^his Divine-l^ke holy and
pure nature? and how is he then the image o^ God, that (...) and Holy Spirit;
and not rather the (...) o^ him who is that Un^lean and (...) Spirit?

(...), By Drunk^nness we dishon^ur God, in (...) ^odies which are (...) o^
Christ. Kn^w ye not ((...) the (...), (...) of one speci^ (...), sc.
Forn^cation) that o^r (...) of (...) ^ shall I (...) Christ, etc. So (...)
another special sin o^ the (...) we may say; Know ye not, etc. (...) ^ke the
Members of Chri^, the (...) ^ll (...), and make them (...) o^ (...) that
drunken (...); (...) Sow, those swilling (...)? Sur^ly God sorbid. Would not
the King take it indignly as a dishonor to him, if one of you should hang out
his (...), one part whereo^ should have the (...) o^ (...) Mon^r, another of
that? S^ll not (...) much more take it indignly as a d^shonour to him, if they
that would go ^or members of Christ, appear (...) to be memb^rs os Hog and Sow
thos^ swilling and drunken creatures? Who could well endure it that Christ's
very picture should be so di^honourably paint^d? How should he then well end^re
it that his v^ry body should be thought to ^e made up o^ ^uch dishonorable
members?

Thirdl^, ^y Drunkenness we dishonor God in abusing our Bodies ^s they are the
Temples o^ the Holy Gho^t; Kn^w ye not (say^s the Apostle, speaking against the
^ore-named vice of the Body, sc. Fornicati^n) that ^our Bodies are the Temples
of the ^oly-Ghost, and therefor as he intim^tes should be kept in a^l honor
and holin^ss, ^ree from such a silthy de^iling sin as Fornication. So for
Drunkenness, Know ye not that our bodi^s are Temples, etc? Were it not an
odious thing if the Drunkard should come and lay his filthy stomach in the
Temple of God? Filthiness and Nas^iness does not become the very material
Temples of God, how much more odious and dishonourabl^ a ^ing is it that by his
b^tly (...) he so (...) the living Temple of God? for not that which comes out
(that I may invert our Saviors speech) does so defile the m^terial Temple, as
that which goes into the Drunkards Belly defiles the living Temple; And what
says the Apostle? If any m^n desile the Temple of God, him shall God (...):
for the T^mple of God is holy, which Templ^ ye are. 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17.

For fins against the second Table, which the Drunkard by reason of his
Drunke^ness is subject and very incident unto; consider these.

First, Against the fi^th Commandment, Honor thy Father, etc. Wherein are set
down the duties of Children to Parents, and Parents to Children, and in
g^nerall of all Inferiors to Superiors, and Superiors to Inferiors, against
this commandment how the Drunkard by reason of his drunkennesses sins it is
plain.

1. How disobedient, incorrigibly disobedient does this make Children to
parents, that they will not be admonished, nor hear the voice of Father, or
voice of Mother which, what a dishonor is it to them? In Deuteronomy. 21. 20. The
disobedient son is brought in, or rather brought ^orth to be stoned for his
incorrigi^le (...), and what is alleged for me ground of his d^sobedience? He
is a (...) and a Drunkard: For this is not added as a part for which he was
^oned, that was his contumacy and (...). v. 18. If a man have a Stubbo^n and
Rebellious son, etc. Perhaps also the Wise man would intimate this, when
presently after he had said Be not among Wine-bibbers, etc, He adds. Hearken
unto thy Father that begat thee, and despise not thy Mother when she is old,
Prove. 23. 20, 21, 22.

As if he would intimate thus much, that if he should ordinarily be among
wine-bibbers and so turn drunkard, he would soon grow heedless of hearkening to
his Father that begat him, or of despising his Mother when she is old; and to
say no more of this, How dis-obedient this vice makes Children to Parents, many
a Parents bleeding heart will witness it without any further proof; who to no
small gries of their hearts know how heady and unruly this heady and unruly
drink have made their own children unto them. Not accused of riot; And what
immediately follows? not unruly, Tit. 1. 6.

Secondly, T^is Vice m^kes Parents wrong their Ch^ldren too; wrong them

1. In Transfusi^g and Propagating oftentimes unto them this Drunken vice.
There are two sins, sc. Drunkenness and Whoredom, which being more properly
sins of the Body, are by Bodily propagation derived from Parents to their
Children.

The Drunken Father seldom begets a Sober Son, nor the Drabbing Mother a Chaste
Daughter; but as the Mother is, so is the Daughter, as is the Father so is the
Son. This the Philosopher intimated when he saw a young man much in drink; Thy
Father surely (says he) begot thee being in drink. And perhaps also (besides a
mystical Reason) this natural Reason may be aimed at by the Angel, why he would
not have Manoah (being to bear Sampson) drink all that time either wine or
strong drink, Judge. 13. 7. Behold thou shall conceive and bear a Son, but drink
no wine or strong drink, etc.

2. Ag^in this Vice makes Parents exceedingly wrong their Children by their
Drunken Example. Example easily smites, but especially Domestic and
House-Example, and especially of Parents; how can they ever rightly hate and
abhor that Vice when from the v^ry (...) they see it in those whom they must
needs love so dearly? How should they ever p^ove patterns of Sobriety abroad,
when they are before corrupted so with such ill Patterns and Examples of
Drunkenn^ss at home.

3. Again this Vice o^tentimes makes Parents exceedingly wrong their Children
in ^he point of Good Education and providing for them, how wi^kedly careless
and improvident does this make many how their Children are brought up and how
provided ^or. Indeed I will not d^ny but some kind of Drunkards there are ( sc.
The Mungrell or Compounded Drunkards, who are not pure Drunkards, but make
their Drunkenness serve their Covetuousness; they make the best bargains and
strike up the best matches in their pots) I will not deny but these Mungrell
Compounded D^unkards may be provident enough for their Children; but the pure
Drunkard how careless commonly is he, how Children are brought up and how
provided for? So he may have drink he cares not though they want bread; so he
may sing and whistle on the Ale-bench, he cares not though they cry and go and
whistle it on the Beggars-bench. And as Drunkenness thus is apt to overturn the
Duties of Children to Parents, ^ c contra, so likewise o^ all inseriours to
Superiors, etc contra; of Subjects to Mag^rates who are civil Fathers; of
People to Ministers, who are Ghostly Fathers, etc c^ntra.

Of Subjects to Magi^trates. The men of Sechem having gathered their Vineyards,
and trod their Grapes, and making Merry Judge. 9. They ^at and drank; and what
then? and cursed Abimelech. So he that wrote that wine is the strongest, 1
Esdr^s 3. 21. Among other reasons to prove it, this is one, It ma^th ^very
heart rich, i.e. brave, brisk, flesh, gallant, etc. and what then? So that a
man remembereth neither King nor Governor, and causes to speak all things by
Talents; that is, Huge and Mighty and Big swelling words, words os great
contempt and dis-^espect; vilifying and making clouts of men in Authority: So
on the contrary this makes Magi^trates fail in their duties, it makes him that
bears the sword that he can sometimes put no great difference between the
innoceat and the offender, and so makes him err in Judgment. It is not for
Kings, O Lemuel, to drink wine, nor for Princes strong drink, least they drink
and forget the Law, and pervert the judgment of any of the (...), Prove. 31. 4,
5. And hereupon is that Woe, and that Blessing, Eccl. 16. 17. Woe to the O Land
when thy King is a Child, and thy Princes eat in the M^rning; Blessed art thou
O Land, etc. And after the P^ophct (...) had said, Woe unto them that are mighty
to drink wine, Is^. 5. 22. 23. what immediately sollows? Which justisic the
wicked for a reward, etc. it makes Magistrates fail in their Duties. And
whereas one special thing of a Magistrate is to resorm abuses, and one special
abuse, the ground and make-way for many others is Drunkenness; If the
Magistrate himself be much guilty this way, how shall he ever be hoped to do
any great good in reforming this abuse? will not his own conscio^s
self-condemning heart shut his eye that he will not see, stop his mouth that he
dares not say, and dry up and wither his hand, that hand that should execute
justice, that he dares not do or act much against osfenders this way? Is not
that a very natural ground to take off any from proceeding in Judgment against
another; That which took off ^udah from proceeding in judgment against Tamar,
to burn her with ^ire as a Whore, She is more righteous than I? But if an
osfending Magistrate should notwithstanding proceed to punish osfenders in the
same kind, what hope that he should (...), that he (...) do any g^od ther^by?
^s it ^ot n^tural for every one wi^h great ind^gnation and ^ising (...) to sa^,
(...), sir^ heal thy self, (...) searc^ (...) me own wound, (...) thine (...);
and wh^ (...) thou that Judg^st (...) and (...) the (...) things? Romans 2. 1.
and thou that sa^ (...) a m^n (...) not (...), (...) thou ^teal? thou that
(...) anoth^r, (...) thou (...)? thou that sor (...) s^ttest (...) by the
heels, (...) through (...) trip up thy own he^ls? and therefore though such an
one should (...) to pun^sh (...), (...) h^pe he should (...)? and (...) as
(...) wise Emp^rour sa^d in the (...) of (...), when they (...) (...)* ism.
have b^gun reforma^ion (...) po^r ^rancisc (...) and Minorit^s, (...) will
never do good, (says he) (...) be begun a Majoritis. So ^or (...) of (...),
unl^ss (...) be begun a M^joritis, from May^rs, ^dermen, Burgesses, mea in
Anthorit^, and ^. Th^re c^n never be ^xpected any kindly Reformation in the
Minorites and ^aseriours. Ag^in for them that are (...) Superiors and
Inseriours, Pastors and People, this sin m^kes them sail in their Duties one to
another, It is a great indangering occasion to m^ke the Pas^ours (...) in their
Duty. D^es (...) the (...) of God (...) th^s ^y (...) g^ven to Aaron? Levit.
10. 9. Do (...) w^ne ^r (...) dri^k. and (...) (...) plainly (...) i^ (...) of
Pa^tors and Pro^hets (...) and Duty? (...) 28. They (...) throu^h wine, the
(...) have erred through st^ong ^rink, etc. And what especially but this, does
the (...) aim at, in requiring so expressly that a Bishop or Mini^ter should not
be given to much wine? 1 Timothy 3. 3. One that uses to be overseen in drink, Tit.
1. 3. (...)
He that uses t^ be overse^n this way* will never be a good (...)
overseer in the (...) Pau^s sense. And for the People, (...) of their
honoring their Go^ly and P^insull minis^ers (or hold suc^ ^n (...)) what
contempt doe^ thi^ (...)
c^use tow^rds their Persons? Phil. 2. 19. It is the most ^ikely that those
contem^ers o^ the Apo^tle (...), ^or a mere B^bler, What will this Babl^r (...)
17. 18. that they we^e ^f (...) of (...) seas^al Epicur^ans who pl^ce their
(...) in sensu^l (...) and drinking, (...) in the some ver^e. And the (...)
scossing Butcher o^ (...) fl^ld go^s not ^ doubt alone, w^o hav^ng ^rd the
Minister inveigh against (...), asterwards at his cups fe^l a (...) and
scos^ing at the Purita^ M^r and his S^rmon*s; I doubt I say he goes not a^, but
has Butchers, and better men too, too many, sharing with him in his sin,
though perhaps they partake not with him presently in the same Temporal
Judgment: for as that Pro^ane, Scoffing wretch (s^yes my Author) was drinking,
the drink or somewhat in it qu^ckled him, and stuck so in his Thro^t that it
would neither up nor down but presently strangled him.

Secondly, Against the next Commandment, Thou shall not kill. Wherein is
Commanded all things that make for the Lise, Safety, and Bodi^y welfare of our
Neighbor. Against this the Drunkard by reason of his Drunkenness sins these
ways.

1. Directly, by falling into quarrels and bloody frayes oftentimes by reason
of this Sin. Wine is a mo^r (says the wise man) Prove. 20. 1. i. e. makes them
that are given to it mo^k and ab^se one another; and what then thereupon
fol^owes? strong drink is raging; s^. breeds tumults and ^

^ from off the Poor, etc. Micah 3. 3. The P^ophet s^ms to ^imate that they
were Sensual, voluptuous m^n, given to wine and strong drink, Ch^p. 2. 11. S^
(...) her that is Filthy, or G^s; m^ only for s^y and Ep^cu is^e of E^ing and
Dri^, like the Craw, the Birds Craw: and Heb. Craw.
what th^n follow^s? To the Op^ssing City, Zeph. 3. 1. and 2. 11. T^us a second
wa^.

3. Against this, Thou shall not kill, the Drunkards dr^ causes him to ossend,
^cause it dis^oseth and hardens his bowels to great unmerci^ness toward the
poor, le^ing them almost rath^r p^ish then r^ving him in his wants; There are
none commonly so unsensible of the em^ty and ye^rning ^owels of others, as they
that have their own ^owels oppressed and surcharged still with surpluffage and
a^undance of meats and drinks; do not the^e examples m^ke this good.

1. Of N^bal, who being as ap^ears v. 36. a sensual man, given to (...) of meat
and drink, was insensible of D^vids and his companions mis^ries, rating his
servants with soul wo^ds, Who is D^vid? etc. 1 Samuel 25. 10 sent them away
empty. 2. The Examp^e of Sodom, Ezekiel. 16. 49. where (...)* o^ B^d (wh^by
f^lness of d^ink also is (...) under^tood) is intimat^d a^ (...) why she did
not as it follows, i. e s^n the hands of the poor and (...). 3. The Example of
him who faring deli^sly everyd^y, he and his servants living in such sensua^ity
(...).
were (...) of p^or (...) his m^sery lying at his g^te and ready to dye o^
Hunger as it is likely he afterward did, Luke 16. 19.
4. Ag^ this, Thou shall not (...), The Drunkards drunkenn^sse causes him to
osfend; because it takes away brothe^ly compassions and fellow-feeling of
others mis^ries. Others that are perhaps in Bondage, in Captivities, in hard
usage under the Enemy, whose cause lies a ^leeding, whose souls a languishing,
and whose necks on the very block; and to want compassions and fellow-seeling
in this kind, is a kind of bloodiness and killing cr^lty; but drunkenness and
sensuality, nothing apter than it to (...) the same. The King and H^man sat
down to drink, but the City Shushan was p^rplexed, Esther 3. This sitting down
to drink, to drink sensually and voluptuously made the King and Haman ^

5. (...) this, T^ shall (...) kill; T^ Dr^ds drunkenness^ c^h him (...) oss^d,
(...) it is ^pt to breed (...) killing cr^lty, sc. wick^d (...) po^r so^t in
(...); which w^oso do^s is a man os blood, and ther^by h^th his hands in blood;
Ye h^ve condemned and killed the just, sc. he whose cause was just, him have ye
in wrong Judgment condemned, and so killed; hi^, not in person but in estate,
undoing him by wrong judgment, and he does not resist you, James 5. 5, 6. And
who are they that thus do? ye have lived in Pleasure on Earth. So for a
Parall^l place; Amos 2. 8. They drink the wine of the Condemned in the horse of
their God. i. e. They condemned not ^n their Persons but their E^ates, by wrong
judgment. And besides this killing of others thus by drunkenness, I might show
also how the Drunkard has of o^n h^nds (by reason of that vice) in his own
B^ood; and that not only in reg^rd of bre^k-necks, and other fatal mishaps that
befall him often in his drunk^n Mood; but al^o in regard of filling his body
commonly with Deathhasting sicknesses and diseases, through his intemperances
and disorders. These men though they pretend He^lths, Heal^hs, yet who commonly
after a while (except it be in some special Iron-sides) has such diseased
bodies, and so ^ull of in^irmities as they? and those ver^ Iron sides that last
a reasonable time not withstanding all their di^lempers, h^d they lived (...)
l^ke other men, might in all l^kelihood h^ve survive^ and f^r (...) other men,
and (...) that (...) ^he (...) s^. That the ^ly ^n she ^t live (...) half ^s
^s, (...) as (...) s^d o^ him that sn^ks the (...) of the V^, as (...) that
thirsts (...) blood (...) vein, that neither of the^ com^only shall live out
their full days.

Thirdl^. (...) the next C^mmandement, Thou sh^lt not commit (...); Wherein is
for^idden all L^ of unc^nnes; and poss^ssing our Vessels in S^nctisication an^
Hono^r required at our hands: (...) this how the Dr^nkard by reason of his
Drunk^nnesses is apt, and very apt to sin, there n^eds no proving of it.

1. Experience is for it. Where almo^t is the p^rty who is noted for one of
these vices, that is not noted sor the other als^? Where the p^rty that is
(...) for a m^n of lu^t, but he is no^ed for a m^n of drink too? and it will go
pr^tily the other way too, where (...) i^ the ^rty that is noted os (...) in
Drink, ^ut he is noted of (...) in L^ too? an^ (...) marvel, f^r

2. R^ (...) t^. Reason that intemper^nce in drink (...) br^d ^rance in (...)
too, (...) ((...)) ^ and (...) and ^ ^
seek ^soon (...) and (...) spum^e Lust. And t^re I am m^re ^.
th^n (...) ^f that ^s mind; I will never think a (...) to be a (...) m^n for
t^ough he man (...) sometimes (...) ^om the act* yet he has alwa^es wi^h him
the inc^tive, the ma^ter, (...) provocation to Lu^t. And as Experi^nce and
Reason, so

3. S^ipture; h^w plain is it for this same truth too; after (...) upon the
wine when it is Red, ^ollows next ^erse but one, looking upon the strange
wo^an, Prove. 23. 31, 33. And what does the A^ostle make to u^her in Chambering
and Wantonness, but Rioting and Drunkenness? If Rioting and drunkenness go
before, in all likelihood Chambering and Wantonness will follow. and therefore
David, what art or trick did he use, the likeliest as in his Judgment to make
Uriah go and lie with his wife? why he made him drunk, 2 Samuel 11. 13. And Lots
D^ughters that they might preserve s^ed of their Father, made their Father
dru^k. They remembered what the Sodomites practiced, a People of all unbridled
Lust and uncleanness; Ephesians. 5. 18. Jer. 5. 7. Ezekiel. 16. 49. 2 Pet. 2. 13. 14.
sc. Fullness of bread, whereby fullness of drink is understood also; and
therefore they doubted not if the Sodomites drunkenness went before, the
Sodomites Lust would follow after.

Fourthly, Against the next Commandment, Thou shall not steal; The Drunk^rd by
reason of his Drunkennesses sins,

1. By stealing from the state and Commonwealth. For the glutton and the
d^unkard are very State-Robbers, impoverishing the State, and Robbing as it
were from the Common store, and causing (through their Riots and Excess)
Dearths and Famines; but for these State-Robbers the commonwealth would
commonly have wealth and store enough for supply and nourishment of all; these
are like the drone Bees that getting into the Hive over-eat themselves, and
st^rve the other B^s before the winter be over: but for these over-eaters,
these belly-bu^sten d^ones that steal from the rest, there would be meat enough
for the whole Hive.

2. They steal from the poor. That which their intemp^rance and belly
bur^tenship drinks and devours, how many hungry and thirsty Souls of the needy
would it h^ve refreshed, aye and by due ought it also to have refreshed! for,
withhold not good from whom it is due, when it is in the power of thine hand to
do it, Prove. 3. 27. And therefore in their intemperance they are but very
stealers from the Tua super s^ua pauper is necessaria.
poor; Thy superstuous things are but the poor man's (...) things.

3. They steal, and most wickedly of all steal, from Wi^e and Children,
suffering her, whom if they had but two bits in the world they should seed with
one; and them whom if they had but one bit in the world they should give them
half of it, su^ering both her and them to ^amish at home, whilst they lavish
and mis-spend it abroad; and this is the worst stealth and robbery of all, to
steal thus from Wise and Children; and if any Highway Robber deserve a Rope,
there is none of these that steal from Wife and Children but they deserve two;
For as the Wiseman has it, Whosoever robs his Father and Mother and says it is
no Transgression, the same is the companion of a destroyer. He is the worst
Robber, the worst offender of all, so he that Robs Wi^e and Children. It is
well observed by Aristotle, that it is the worst the^t of all, which takes from
the seed, because it is a The^t that Robs us not only of so much quantity, but
whatsoever by Multiplication would come of that seed. So the Drunkard that Robs
from his child in prejudicing his Education, and hindering the groundwork
laying then of a (...) means of li^ing is the worst the^t of all, because he
deprives him not only of so much good as here is in quantity, but whatsoever
also might come of that good. And thus by the Drunkards sinning so mani^oldly
against both Tables by reason of his Drunkenn^sses, does not the first part of
the demonstration sufficiently appear, that is, that the Drunkard is right the
Devils Child, the Ouncels Else, because of resembling him in an universal Mass
of Wickedness almost? Now,

Secondly, Because we say in a more especial manner, that such an one is right
the Fathers Son because of resembling him, not only in a general likeness of his
Nature, bu^ also, and more especially, in some more special marks and
properties; as that he hat^ just the fathers ^uttering speech, etc. so let us
now demon^rate how the Drunkard in this more sp^cial manner is right the Devils
child because of more special resembling him in some more sp^cial marks and
properties of the Devil. And

1. In this special property, that as the devil is obstinately and incorrigibly
naught, hardened and habituated in evil; (for the Devil sins from the beg^nning)
that is, obstinately and incorrigibly as hardened and habituated in sin,
without any hope of reclaiming him; so among the most hopeless and
unreclaimable sinners of all is the habituate Drunkard. When Belials and
Belzebubs and wicked spirits turn holy Angels, then almost and not before, may
it be expected that these sons of Belial, these habituated Drunkards should
turn Saints. Does not the Spirit of God that knows well enough their Spirits,
bring the habituated Drunkards in, saying thus? They have stricken me, i. e.
they have used all reproof, admonition and counsel to him, such as might fetch
blood and make him sensible, if he had not a very seared, a very cauterized
flesh, but he remains senseless of all, (...) i^ not (...) nor tro^bled upon
any of those reproo^s, ^e seels none of the (...) and (...) ^ (...); but a^
all, what s^yes th^s in^orrigible Drunkard? when ^ll I a^e? I will seek it yet
(...): to it ^ain, and that so soon as he is awak^; ^ay (...) t^inks i^ ^g ^ill
^xt morning, when (...) I (...)? L^ here is all the amend^, ^o (...) me ^n ^s
to d^y, ^y wo^ ^o; so great hope i^ there of any (...) m^ing. Come (^ayes they)
I w^ll (...) wi^, and we will ^ll our s^lves with s^rong drink, and to morrow
shall be as t^is d^ and much more abun^nt. If we ^ve d^unk s^oopes to day, we
will drink whole ^andes to morrow. If we have whi^d it a little to day, we will
^sh it to morrow. If we have drunk ^lly-^lls to d^y, we will drink skin (...)
to morrow; till the u^ part, the very (...) ends be (...) to cr^ck with (...):
To morrow s^ as this d^y, an^ (...) ^re abun^t. ^o here is all (...) of ^e
Drunkard, to morrow t^ (...) man as to day, and w^ ^o.

Obj. Ay^ but may not some Drunk^ds ^ven (...) Drunkards turn and repent? And
(...) were so^e of you, b^ ye (...), etc. Theref^re may not ^e by the grace of
God turn and repent?

A^s. It is not denied but some may turn and (...), But as David says, I have
been (...) and now am old, etc. So for those that ^ve been young and now are
old, let (...) consider how many they can remem^r in all their lives, that of
Drunkards, (...) Drunk^ds have afterward (...) proved sober and temperate men,
live (...) in health, and in su^iciency of m^ns, and out of pure Conscience,
not by ends, ^ing an^ breaking o^f that Vice; of such m^n I would know how many
(...) can remember. O^en have I been asked, and often have I enquired but never
could I meet with an insta^ce of t^is kind but one or two at the most.

S^ndly, Consider therefore that so rare are these Ex^mples, that well may we
apply the word^ ^f the Psalmist to such an example: This is the Lords doing,
his strong and mighty doing, and it is m^rvellous in our eyes. So mavelous,
That is Saul among the Prophets, was no such marvel, as is such and such a
Drunkard now among the Saints? So mavelous, that the Father had good reason
to say what he said, when hearing of his Sons Gaming, of his Prodigality, yea
of ^is very Whoring, said, yet there was hope; but heari^g afterward of his
(...) ^rned (...), he gave him ov^r ^r d^d, for desperate, for one that ^e
(...) as good as no hope at all thereof. (...) that for my own part, of all
sins ((...) I should know ^e to have sinned the v^ry sin (...) the Holy Ghost)
of all that I (...) have least hope to work upon, the Drunk^rd, the old
ha^ituate (...) i^ ^e man, the ^tane Ague f^r the in^ness of it ^y any Physic
is said to be (...) ^hame of the Physit^n. The Quoti^ian Dru^kard may (...) to
^e the shame of the Divine, (...) of all Moral (...), sc. counsel, r. proof,
admonition, etc.

Thirdly, The qu^on is not what the Gr^ of God may do upon a Dru^rd, but what
the justice of God upon Dru^kards uses to do. The ju^ice of God which uses to
give over some kind of sinners, ^rious sinners to ^inal (...); where can it
find a sinner composed so of all notoriousness almost, and all transgression
against both Tables to show this Judgment upon, as the old inured habitua^e
dru^? more over besides this Judgment o^ God to make the drunkard (...), there
is that; Wine and new wine the away the heart. Make them sots, incapable,
morally uncap^le of any right consideration; al^o (...) cause inherent in the
temper and body, that is, through conti^ dri^ to ^ve the State and Temper of
the ^y so (...) and corrupted that it (...) propends and inclincs to the same
(...), and (...) a drunkennish droopish humor upon it ^r strong (...), j^t
(...) the natural Dropsy for Ordin^ry and Weaker drinks. By reason of all
which, it comes sometimes to pass, that a m^n ^ll meet sometimes with some kind
of Drunk^rd who may be^ his case, cry o^ o^ the (...) of this (...), inveigh
(...) company, melt under the persuasion of Friends, protest and serio^y ^ow
against the sin ^r afterward, and yet this hold good no longer than till he
meet his Companion, and fall into the next Temptation.

Fourthly, For the more full satisfying the two instances made in the
Objection, consider, that for some hope of turning and repenting there is a
great difference between the Night Drunkard and the Day Drunkard; The Night
Drunkard is he who in the night of Paganish Ignorance and Unbelief, not knowing
the V^leness of the Sin, nor the Richness of the Grace of God, cont^nues in
this Sin; and of this night D^runkard there is more hope than of the other, of
which kind it is most likely those mentioned by Austin were, and it is plain
those men io^ed by the Apostle Paul were, 1 Cor. 6. But sor the day Drunkard,
who against a plain knowledge of the Vileness of the Sin; and of the Grace of
God, continues in the S^n; for this day Drunkard, there maybe some possibility
os his tuining, but Hope none at all; the Power os the Grace of God may do
much, but the ju^tness of Gods Judgments us^th to do little, very little in
this case. How desperate and in the case of utter perishing does the Scripture
leave those day Drunkards, these that count it Pleasure to riot in the day
time; These as natural brute beasts made to be taken and destroyed; and indeed
of all sinners any whereof does attain to He^ven there are I am persuaded the
fewest of these Drunkards, especially these day Drunkards there.

2. Another specially property of the Devil is to be a Satan, i. e. a very
Enemy and utter adversary to all Goodness and all good Men; and they that so
are, in special manner are his Children. O thou Child of the Devil, thou enemy
to all righteousness. And they that are enemies to all good men, are not they
therefore called the seed of the Serpent? Genesis 3. But who such S^tans, such
enemi^s unto all goodness and all good men as the ord^nary ^abituate Drunk^rds
are; who could sooner wish that all Religion, all Civility, all good Honest
Laws were tr^mpled down and laid under soot than these irreligious uncivil
lawless Creatures? who sooner wish there were no Preaching but only Preaching
over a pot; no meetof a Paul but only where they met him Acts 28. 15. sc. at
the three Taverns; So for their Satanship and utter Enemi^ship to all good men,
is not that of the second of Wisdom for it? Come say the Drunkards, let us
enjoy the good things that are present; and then what go they on unto? Let us
oppress the poor Righteous man. And who but the Drunkards were they that made
Songs, spightsul Songs of good David? The D^unkards make Songs ^f me. Psalm. 69.
12. And indeed who are they that could even eat the Godly with Salt, but they
that are still drinking the Sack with the Sugar? Who are they that are ready if
they could to drink the v^y destruction of the Godly, but they who are drinking
still the healthes the drunken healthes of others.

3. Another special Property of the Devil, is to be a Tempter, to Tempt others
unto Sin and Wickedness, and therefore called the Temp^er; and in this property
this piece of the Devils Cloven^footship how just is the Drunkard the Fathers
Son. Other Sinners can be content most of them to be Sinners alone; the
Covetous to be Covetous alone, he cares not though all his Neighbors else were
Spend-thrifts. The Proud and Ambitious, to be Ambitious alone; he cares not
though all the rest of his Neighbors were such humble Creatures that they
wou^d be content to lie in the way for mere stepping-stones for his Greatness
to step upon; But the Drunkard Devil-like is a Sinner who cannot be content to
be wicked alone; but he must needs Tempt others unto the same Wickedness also.
Do not Healths and whole ones, and putting the cup to the Nose, and down the
Throat or down the Neck, look for it, and will you not do me right? and what no
Metal, no Manhood? and drink or a Challenge; do not these and many such
tempting provocations witness this? Thus was not this the humor of that
Drunk^rd, H^b. 2. 5. His own drunkenness is there spoken of, and in verse the
15 his Tempting others, and putting his Bottle to their Nose. Woe unto him that
gives ^is Neighbor drink. So this is the humor also os t^ose Drunk^rds, Amos
2. 8. their own drunkenish ship, and in ver 11. their tempting others, aye even
the very Nazarites thereunto is set sorth; Ye gave the Naz ^rites wine to drink.

4. Another special Property of the Devil is to be a Rejoycer in Evil: to Jeer,
and Sucer, and Laugh with himself as 'twere, when he has prevailed with any in
tempting them to Evil. As the good A^gels rejoice at the conversion of a
sinner, so the bad Angels at the perversion of any. And how just is the
Drunkard the Devils Child in this property, in rejoyeing in evil, and at the
perversion if he can work it of any? What a Joy and Triumph is it to him if his
Manhood, or Devil-hood rather can but lay others under^foot; how he Sneers and
Laughs with himself if he can but tempt and toll on others to be somewhat
overseen in this Vice, especially if it be a Saint and one that makes
prosession, if he can but prevail with such an one, this fats and pleafeth him
as much as it does the Devil when he can but overcome a Monk, as they were wont
to say of old; this Devilish rejoicing of the Drunkards in another evil, when
they can see or make others drunk also, to look on their Nakedness, i. e. their
weakness and shame; is not this ma^e the humor of the (...) ed (...), Hab. 2.
That put (...) bottic t^ him* an^ (...) him Drunk (...) that thou m^yest
look (rejoyeingly and with heart* content look) on his (...). ness.

5. Another special property of the Devil is to be a sl^nderer, a traducer, a
false accuser, a liar and (...) (...)
of all; J^h. 8. 44. Rev. 12. 10. Now the D^unkard how just the Fat^er; Son is
he in this respect? who such a Devil as he, i. e. a Sl^nderer, a Traducer,
false Accuser, a Liar and Belier of all; being apt in his drink when that
u^ruly thing his Tongue runs wild, apt then to lay Sl^nders and false
C^lumnies, and imputations and lying reviling speeches upon all; well does the
Apostle couple the Drunkard and the Railer or Evil speaker; In the sir^t place
naming the Fruit first and then the Stalk, In the second the Stalk and then
the Fruit, 1 Cor. 5. 11. and 6 10. b^t howsoever intimating that if there be
such fruit, it com^s osten of such a Stalk; and if such a stalk, it brings
oftentimes forth such Fruit. So 1 Timothy 3. 11. Not Slanderers. And what
presently adds he? Sober. The unsober ones are commonly Sl^nderers; and (...)
2. 3. Not false Accusers. And wh^t (...) adds he? Not given to much wine.)
They that are given to much wine, odds is it they will be Devils, Slanderers,
false accusers. And as the Drunkard is a slanderer, so especially upon the
Saints, like the Beast that spoke great Blasphemies against the name of God,
and his Tabernacle, and them that dwelt in Heaven, Rev. 13. 6. They that walked
in Lasciviousness, Lusts, Excess of Wine, Revellings, Drinkings, were they that
slandered and spoke ill of the Saints that would not so do 1 Pet. 4. 4.

6. Another special Property of the Devil is to be a Lucifer; a Proud and Big
and high Conceited creature; this Pride and Bigness of conceit is the Devils
proper sin; Now how Proud and Big and high Conceited ones the Drunkards in
their drink are, 1 Timothy 3. 6.

1. The common Phrase shows, do not we say of such when they are prettily tipped
and touched with drink, that they are brave and fine, and g^llant? 2.
Experience shows it, for how brave, and fine, and gallant people, do those in
that condition think themselves to be? some Drunkards we may see, who otherwise
may secm to be but of base and abject s^irits; who yet in drink how will the^
stand upon it, what brags and vaunts will they make? what he is and some-bodies
and great Magnificoes will they take themselves to be, vilifying and scorning
all others with their heels, when the drink is in their head? 3. That text
shows it; Yea also because he transgresses by wine, he is a proud man, Hab. 2.
5. The Fu^nace proves the edge in the tempering; so does wine the hearts of
the proud by drunkenness.
7. Another special Property of the Devil is, that he is an Impure Unclean
Spirit; called the unclean Spirit and Belzebnb the God of dung as Deus
stercoris.
some read (...). Now w^o such an impure, unclean, dirty, ^asty sinner, as the
Drunk^rd? wh^t n^stiness in his very outward? nastiness of Person, nastiness
of speech, speaking such impure words, as if his mouth were a very sink-hole;
nastiness of ^ehaviour, in filling and filing all things with filth and vomit?
what Nastiness and much more, if they could be peeped into, in his inwards;
such impure unclean and beastly though^s lodging there: in a word, such an
impure unclean nasty creature that no presenter remedy almost to make a sound
man a^er that Vice for ever, than well to (...) the nastiness of it. As the
Lacedemonian^ made their Servants drunk, and then showed them their Children to
make them abhor that filthy and nasty Vice for ever. And so by these special
marks and Properties of the Devil, does it not appear in the second place, how
just the Drunkard is the Devils Child, because of such just and jump resembling
of him in these more special marks and properties, as if it were in his very
cloven Feet, and Horns?

Use 1. Is the Drunkard, (he or she) no other than a very Son or Daughter of
Belial, a very Child of the Devil? Then how great reason have we to be dehorted
from this Vice, which makes us no other than the very Children of the Devil?
And what worse thing had the Scripture to call those wicked inhabitants of
Gibeah by, that committed such villainy with the Levites concubine, and would
have committed wor^e with himself: what worse thing to call them by, than
Children of Belial? Judge. 19. 22. what worse thing had our Savior to say of
those wicked Jews that would have murdered him then this, Ye are of your Father
the Devil? Joh. 8. 44. What worse thing had the Apostle Paul to call that
wicked Elimas by, one full of all mischief and Enemy of all Righteousness, than
this? Thou child of the Devil, Acts 13. 13. And if any know not what a fearful
thing it is to be, and be called a Child of the Devil, let him know that it
casheers him quite from being the Child of God. 1 John 3. 10. In this the
Children of God are manif^st and the Children of the Devil. The Children of God
you see, and the Children of the Devil are made so opposite, that as
contradistinct members they cannot stand together; how great reason have they
th^n that can tremble at being a child os the Devil, to shun and avoid
Drunkenness that makes all that are given to it the very Sons and Daughters of
the Devil. But because in things to be done it is good to show, not only what
we In saciendis non quo eundum sed qua.
are to do, but also the way how we may do it, sc. how to avoid drunkenness,
let us consider. And

First, That we may avoid Drunkenness, that is good counsel which in this case
the Father gives the Son, Prove. 23. 20. Be not among wine bibbers. He that is
still among wine bibbers, a bibber himself is soon like to prove; the old
Gand^r they say, soon teaches the young Gos^in to drink. And so the old Soaker
will soon teach the young beginner the way for the cup to the Nose; and he that
would see the bottom were there a mile to it, will soon teach the towardly
beginner to leave but a little snuff in the Cup. The Phrase of the Gospel is
Remarkable, where to Eat and Drink with the drunken is put for an undoubted
presumption that that party proves intemperate himself. Mat. 24. 49. Company in
any kind is a Tempter; Augustine confessing his former sins, speaks of one S^us
eg^ illud ^on facerem, non facerem omnino solus, sed cum dicitur e^nus,
faciamus, pudet non esse impudenten. Conf. 1. q.
sin that he would never have done alone but sor Company; Company in any kind
therefore is a Tempter, but especially in this Vice of drunk^nness, which is
even it self called sociableness or good fellowship; and scarce (I am
persuaded) one of a thousand that prove Drunkards, wo^ld ever prove drunk^rds
alone but that good fellowship tempts, and not many more also I am persuaded
than one of a thousand that cas^: them selves much upon this temptation, but
Drunkards, pratty drunkards in good time they prove. All have not the
resolution of the Rechabites, to stand firm against being overcome, when pots
full of wine and cups are set before them, and when it is said unto them, and
much said; Drink ye wine, Jeremiah 35. 5. This is a temptation that all have
not a resolution to withstand.

Secondly, That we may avoid drunkenness, consider another remedy in the
forenamed Prove. 23. 31. not to look upon the wine when it is Red, when it
gives the color in the cup, when it moves it self aright. Not to please a
man's self and his appetite to much in his fancying, and conceiting the
Nobleness, the Sparkness, the pleasantness of the Liquor; and how merrily such
Noble and Spark and Pleasant Liquor will go down. He whose fancy works thus,
whose mouth waters thus, will not long be a temperate man; he will soon prove
sor the wet, what Eve proved for the dry; when she let but her Appetite once
begin to work, and her mouth to wa^er in fa^cying the Forbidden Fruit, how go^d
it was to the Taste, and how Pleasant to the Ey^s, it was not long out of her
mouth, but she took thereof, and she did ^at, Genesis 3. 6. So they that sor their
Liquor let their app^tites begin thus to work, it will not be long out of their
Mouths, but they will take thereof and they will drink; Look not upon the
wine, etc. but rather consider that go it down never so merrily, how long will
that pleasure last? surely were it a cup the most deliciously tempered that the
world could afford, yet the Pleasure in the merry going down thereof would last
no longer than a man could hold his Breath, and how short a time is that?
surely so short a time, that were it a cup of Nepenthe that dainty drink of the
Gods, nay were it a cup out of those Rivers of Pleasure at Gods right hand; yet
to last no longer than a man could hold his breath, what so great (...) in it?
how much more when it is but a draught of that which let it be best that Grape
or Barley can afford, yet to a cup of those Rivers of Pleasures it is but swill
and swash!

Thirdly, That we may avoid drunkenness, consider yet another good remedy out
of Prove. 23. 32. sc. to consider the latter End or Farewell of this
Merry-godown; The latter end of it, (or farewell) is, that at the last it bites
like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder. That thing which gives his color
in the Cup, and moves it it self aright, that spark, and pleasant and Noble
thing may have a Merry-godown, but at last it bites like an Adder* Some of this
Adders stinging, and some of this Serpents Venomous biting is pointed at ver.
29. Who has woe, who has redness of Eyes, etc. We use to say of a Drunkard in
drink, that he is well bit; and it is true indeed, he is Serpent-bit, he is b^t
with that biting that bites wealth out of his Purse, for the Drunkard and the
Glut^on shall come to poverty, Proverbs 23. 21. Which bites Health out of his
body, for who within a while have commonly less Health, than they that still
are drinking Healths? Which bites Wit and natural Parts out of the Head; For
Wine is a mocker, and whoever is deceived thereby shall not be wise, Prove. 20.
1. Which bites Grace and Gods Spirit out of the heart; Be not drunk with Wine
but be filled with the Spirit, Ephesians. 5. 18. To be filled with the Spirit of wine
and with the Holy Spirit are made opposites, and such as cannot stand together;
he is therefore bit indeed, Serpentbit in this manner as you have heard; and
therefore what hold thou in thy hand, thou Drunkard, what hold thou in
thy hand? Is not the Glass oftentimes thou drinkest in born up with a couple,
and sometimes with a cluster of Snakes or Serpents? Let the Serpent on the
outside put thee in mind of the Serpent within; the Serpents without are
toothless Serpents, and cannot bite; but the Serpent within is a toothed, and a
venom-toothed Serpent, bites, and bites deadly, deriving poison to the state of
thy Wealth, to the state of thy Health, to the s^ate of thy Naturals, impairing
Wit and Endowments Natural; and to the state most of all of thy supernat^rals,
leaving thy heart as empty of grace as thou the Cup of Liquor, or at most but
some very snusss in it.

Fourthly, That we may avoid Drunkenness, let us avoid Drinkings, srequent and
needless Drinkings, though moderately enough at first, and to no great Excess;
these frequent and needless Drinkings, it is great danger, they will bring on
Drunkenness at last: All mischief commonly begins modestly, and from Omne malum
a minimis.
very Minnims and least matters; but then afterward that commonly proves true;
he that despises small things, shall fall by little and little: What says
Augustine of his Mother Monica? How The three Outs; Drink out of the Pot, Wit
out of the Pate, Wealth out of the Purse.
this Drunkenish humor stole upon her; her Parents taking her sor a very Sober
Girl, caused her still to draw their Wine, and she in wantonness, no^ h^ving
any desire to the Wine, N^n p^terat amplius sensu recusan^e.
used still as she drew for her Parents, to sip a little, or touch it even with
her Lips; but this sipping an^ touching a little with her Lips, what afterward
proved it to? By sipping a little continually, and every day more and mo^e, she
was brought to that custom, that she would even drink off whole Cups: The
greatest Drunkard, what commonly was he at first, but only a frequent needless
Drinker? at first he did but sip i^t, and afterward he turned to sup, and now
he swoops it; at first he was but for kissing the Cup, after he learned to
settle it half way, but now he can sink it, and see the bottom of it, were
there a Mile to it: at first by his continual Drinkings, he did but Learn the
Cup the way to the Nose, but now he cannot Learn his Nose the way from the Cup,
but it dwells there; and as Ducks and Waterfowl pull not up their Bills from
dudling there in the water, till their breath give over, and then they pull up
Bill a while, but e're long down again; not his Nose from the Cup, till Beer
ath give over, and after breathing a Nose is where it was again, as the ill in
the water again.

Fifthly, That we may avoid Drunkenness, let us look upon two Cups:

First, The Cup of the Lord, and then think what Fellowship has this Cup of
blessing with the other Cup of Cursing; Cup of Cursing I call it, because who
but Cursed ones use it, and wh^t but Cursings are used over it? Think what
s^llowship has the Cup of the S^n of God wi^h the Cup of the Sons of B^lial?
One of you is hungry, and another is drunk, said the Apostle, counting it
absurd, and a great abuse of the Cup of the Lord, that they who partook of the
Cup of the Lord, should partake of the Cup of Drunkenness; either therefore
tremble to meddle with the Cup of the Sons of Belial, or dar not to meddle with
the Cup of the Son of God; let the one Cup shake the other out of the hand, let
the right use of the blood of Christ, the Cup of (...)* Correct the abuse of
the blood of the Grape in the Cup of Cursing.

Secondly, ^ook upon another Cup, the Cup of Gods Fury and Judgment due unto
sinners; In the hand of the Lord there is a Cup, as for the Dregs thereof, all
the ungodly of the Earth shall drink them, and suck them out; the Wine is red,
and it is full of mixture, Psalm. 75. 8. Let them that are still sucking the
other Cup, think of sucking the dregs of this Cup: In the 13th. of Jeremiah,
there are Bottles of Wine, and Bottles of Wine; v. 12. but the one is the Wine
of Fury and Astonishment; let them that think so of those Bottles of wine, that
wine that makes glad the heart of Man, think also of those other Bottles of
wine, that wine that is the wine of Fury and Astonishment, dashing them
together, v. 14. And let them, whose custom it is to drink and be drunken, and
spue, and fall, and rise, perhaps, again, think of that, Jer. 25. 27. Drink ye,
and be drunken, and spue, and fall, and never rise more. See Hab. 2. 15, 16.

Sixthly, That we may avoid Drunkenness, consider the Apostle's Remedy, or
means against it; sc. To put on the Lord Jesus Christ; But put ye on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and make not Provision for the flesh, to fulfill it in the Lust
thereof, Romans 13. 14. sc. In the things immediately forenamed, as Rioting and
Drunkenness; as if he should say, if you would but consider that you Christians
have in part put on, and should still more and more put on the Lord Jesus
Christ, he who was a pattern of all Sobriety and Temperance, and made no such
Provision for the Flesh, to pamper any ways and fulfill the Lusts thereof; how
could ye but shake off Rioting and Drunkenness, considering that ye had put on
him that was the pattern of all Soberness and Temperance: why should any that
have put on Christ, the sober God, so live as if they had put on Bacchus the
Drunken God? why should any that have put on Christ, who made no such provision
for the Flesh, so live as if they had put on Epicurus, or him in the Gospel,
whose whole purveying and provision was about eat and drink, and take thine
ease: what an indecorum and unseemliness were it, if he that should act and
Personate a King, should live and behave himself altogether as a Scullion? what
an indecorum and unseem^iness much more, if they that should Act Christ, should
live as mere Hogs and Sows, those Drunken and swilling Creatures?

Seventhly, That we may avoid Drunkenness, consider another Remedy of the
Apostle, sc. Ephesians. 5. 18. to be filled with the Spirit: And be not Drunk with
Wine, wherein is Excess, but be si^led with the Spirit: As if he should say,
take heed of this Beastly sin of Drunkenness, and that you may avoid it, that
you may not be Drunk with wine, Labor to be filled and Drunk with the Spirit:
why do Men commonly give themselves to wine and strong Drink, but only that
they may be Merry, that they may be Jovial, that they may drive away sorrow,
and dumps, and discontents? well, to do that, Be ye filled with the Spirit, and
the Spirit of Comfort shall assord more Comfort, and help better to drive out
dumps than all the Spirit of wine can. One drop o^ it makes l^ghter hearts th^n
the ^ull Presses, and whole Vintages of the other can; therefore, as Augustine
has it, Let no Man be Drunk, yea, rather let every Man be Drunk; but let him
s^e with what it is, sc. that is, with the Spirit: This will make you break
forth more into singing and rejoicing, in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual
Songs, (as it follows) than wine, and all the Spirits of wine can make the
Drunkards break forth into their singing and rejoicing in their Foolish and
Profane Songs: Therefore be ye filled, be ye drunk, but see with what; with the
Spirit, with that inebriating Cup, Eat, O Friends, Drink, yea, Drink
abundant^y, O Beloved, Cant. 5. 1.

Secondly, Are Drunkards the very Children of the Devil? Then Drunkards look to
it, the Devil (and there is good right and Reason ^or it) will have his own,
will one day go away with those that are his: will not every Beggar contend for
their own Brats, and not lose one of them, but Hosse and be gone? will not the
Devil also, think you, contend for his Brats, and not lose one of them, but
Hosse and be gone? Hosse and be gone with them to their Fathers House, to the
Devils place of abode, and judge where it is: Drunkards look to it, you are the
Devils Children, and the Devil certainly will one day have his own, nor will
God ever go about to hinder him of his right, to hinder him of any one that is
his; nay, he will never suffer any one of the Devils Children to be laid at his
Door, to step within his Threshold; see how he thrusts and packs them out of
his House and Kingdom. Be not deceived, neither Fornicators nor Drunkards, 1
Cor. 6. 9. The Drunkards are among those that shall never come into Gods House,
never Inherit his Kingdom: Drunkards (I say it the third time) look to it, as
surely as the Devil shall never go away with any of Gods Children, so neither
will God be troubled with any one of his; Shall I take the Childrens Bread and
cast it unto Dogs? Much more shall God take the Childrens Inheritance, and give
it unto Devils, and Children of Devils, such as Drunkards, you Drunkards are.

Thirdly, Are Drunkards the very Children of the Devil? Then Magistrates look
to it, how ye may suppress and hinder this breed; these Children o^ Bclial,
they breed as Laban's Flocks did at the wateringtroughs when they came thither
to Drink, Genesis 30. 38. So these, they breed and gender at the watering troughs,
at the Drinking places, at blind, supersluous, by-corner Alehouses, that are
in by-obscure Corners, there this Brood breeds, as Serpents, and Dragons, and
hurtful Beasts they breed still in Holes and Dens, and bycoverts, that they may
be the freest and most out of the way, not to be hindered in their breed; if the
breed therefore of these so hurtful creatures, these Sons and Daughters of
Belial would be hindered, their holes, their Dens, their by-coverts where they
breed, sc. blind, superfluous by-corner Alehouses must be looked into. These
are the Devils very Nurseries, and breeding-places for his Brats to be Nursed
and brought up in; and ^o long as he has such convenient Nurseries, and
Breeding-places allowed him, no marvel if the world (as it is) be full of his
Brats; therefore they that are in place, I would they would be pleased to let
enquiry be made into such blind by-corner Alehouses, the very Nurseries and
seminaries for the Devil to breed and bring up his Brats there: They talk of
Dutch men's draining our English Fens and overslown grounds, and how commodious
it would be to the Country; but is by these and other good means the English
would seek to dram the Dutch drinking that overslows all among us, how much
more commod^ous a thing would that be to the Country? Is it not better to have
a little ground drowned among us, than our selves? And therefore is it not
better to drain that overflowing that overflows our selves, than that which
overflows our Ground?

Fourthly, Are Drunkards the very Children of the Devil? Then Hostesses and
Good Ale-wives had need look to it, how they skink and draw too much out to
them that they see ready to run into intemperance and excess; for why, they
help to the begetting of Sons and Daughters to the Devil; and if the Devil be
the Father of these, the Hostess, in a manner, is the Mother, and he begets
them of her; at least if some other thing, sc. their own intemperance and
drunkenish Lu^t be the Mother, yet the Hostess is the Midwife, and without her
h^lp they could never be brought forth; but it is not good either to be Mother
or Midwife to the Devils Brats,

Fifthly, Are Drunkards the very Children of the Devil? Then you that are ^ons
and Daughters of God, look ye to it, how ye have too much Fellowship and
Commumunion with these Sons and Daughters of Belial, especially how ye make
Matches and Marriages with them; if we knew any that were bodily begot of the
Devil, as they talk that some have been, who would endure to Match with such an
one? Well, if there were any that were even Bodily begot of the Devil, yet were
they not so properly his Sons and Daughters, as they that are begot of his
Spirit and Spiritual Generation; because in that Generation he does but beget
them, d^ alieno, i. e. ^umano semine rep^rto and s^rvato; but in this he
^egets, de proprio. It is condemned as a fault, and reckoned up as a thing of
great Incongruity, That the Sons of God should Marry with the Daught^rs of M^n,
Genesis 6. 2. B^t how far more Incongruous and unfitting, that the Sons and
Daughters of God should Marry with the Sons and Daughters of B^lial? Ezra 9. 2.
and 1 Cor. 6. 14.

Heb. XIII. 4. But Whoremongers and Adulterers God will Judge.
IN the former part of this Verse is set down the Honor of Marriage, with an
implied invitation thereto of those who Naturally and justly do find themselves
to stand in need thereof; as likewise the purity and undefiledness that should
be in that state: Marriage is honorable in all, and the Bed und^siled. In this
latter part is set down Gods Judgments upon those, who either in single Life,
when God has provided Marriage an holy and honorable Remedy against
Incontinency, do rather choose, because of the cares and encumbrances, and many
pre-conceived irksomnesses in Marriage, rather chose to be made one Flesh with
a Whore, the Devil being the Priest to couple together, than one with a Lawful
Espoused Wife, God being he that ties the Knot: either thu^ in single Life or
M^rried (...), when they might d^ink (...) o^t o^ t^eir own C^stern, thirst and
se^k ^r ^ollen w^ters, ^or (...) and un ^th (...) like some ^rangely
Dist^mpered and diso^dered throat, that no (...) out of their own Cell^r will
please and quen^h their thirst, but only Foreign Drinks sought for from house
to house from others G^ile-sats; f^r th^se, the one being the VVhoremonger,
w^rein the Whore or Drab also i^ implied; and the other the Ad^lterer, where^n
the (...) ^lso is implied, for these; But (...), says the l^tter p^t of the
vers^, and Adulter^rs God will (...). And goo^ Reason, says Chrysostom, for
when G^d has S^nctified and indulged M^rriage unto them ^or a Reme^y of all
Incontinency, well may he Judge the VVhoremong^r and Adul^erer, who will needs
be m^dling with ^orbidden Fruit, when there is permitted Fruit enough to taste
of; will needs be ranging and casting up Nose abroad, and scenting after
forbidden bits, when he might cut Bread off his own Trencher: It was that
whereby the Spirit of God, under the Parable o^ the Rich Man, who had many
Flocks of his own, and yet spared to kill of his own Flock ^or the Traveller
^hen he came, and took and Dressed the Poor man's only EwLamb for the Traveller;
that whereby the Spirit of God aggravated David's Adultery, that having Wives
enough o^ his own, ^ike the Rich M^n that had his Flocks, none but the poor
man's only Ewe-Lamb, Uriab's Bathsheba, would serve the t^rn to satisfy his
Lust, when that Traveller came; well therefore may the close of that verse be,
But Whoremongers and Adulterers, etc. the beginning whereof is, Marriage is
honorable. Well may the punishment be severe, where the Remedy is easy and
o^fered a^ hand: So for Context.

For Text it self, there needs no great expounding it; the difference between
Whoredom or Fornication and Adultery, appears by what is already spoken, sc.
that the first properly is between single couples, when both the Parties are
single Folk; the second, when either one, or both the Par^ies are Married
People, and so make either single or double Adultery; this properly, although
the use of the word is sometimes extended to (...).
comprehend Adultery also under it, as Mat. 5. 32. Whosoever shall put away,
saving for the cause of Fornication. Aye, and (...) Adu^tery too, 1 Cor. 5. 1.

Now for the handling of the word^, the drift of them is b^ proposing God a
severe (...) against these two (...) and (...), Whoredom and Adul^ry, thereby
to deter and (...) there^rom, and therefore the dri^t of my speech shall be
the same, sc. by argum^nts included in these words, to d^terre and ^isswade
from these two abomina^ions; and the A^guments may be three.

First, From consideration of the Judge, who shall take the scanning,
examining, and adjudging of these two Sins into his own hands, being no other
than God himself.

Secondly, From consideration of the Judgments which he shall, what here, what
hereafter inflict upon Offenders in them, implied indefinitely in the word
Judicabit, he will Judge.

Thirdly, From ^onsideration of the grievousness of the sins themselves,
impli^d also in the Judgment; for the grievousness of Judgments imply
grievousness of Sins; God he proportions Judgment to S^n; he doe^ not let them
feel the weight of his full (...) who are but less (...), nor them t^ tip of
his little finger only, that are gross (...).

Now, according ^o the^e three Arguments, we will h^ndle th^ee Propositions.

Proposition the F^st.
That Whoredom and Adul^ry is to be avoid^d, because God will be ^he Judge of
(...) and (...). God, with whom there is no (...) it out with (...) and
concealment; God, with whom (...) is no buyi^g it out with Bribery and
Corruption; Go^, with whom there is no ^aring it out with po^er and greatness;
for what thinks the F^rnicator or Adul^erer to animate them to their un^? but
^ither they shall carry that wo^k of darkness in such darkness and concealment,
that who shall know them? or if their filthiness ^e discovered, they will lay
on such load, (and they half know the Corr^ption and commut^ments of the Co^rt)
that they will Bribe o^f all shame and punishment: Or pe^haps, they are such
great ones, such Noli-me-tangere's, that they think who dare meddle with them;
well, but let them consider whether they be such great ones, that God dare not
meddle with them; whether they can lay on such load, as to bribe off his
Justice; whether they c^n c^rry it in such a Cloud and clos^ness as to bleer
his Eyes: Whoredom and Adultery is to be avoided, because God will be the
Judge. God, with whom,

First, There is no boulstering it out with closeness and concealment, this is
a sin of any other that hates the Light, that walks in Dark^ess, that creeps in
Corners, that makes many doubles and squats, fits as close as it can; and then
they think all i^ well, if they can, with the Adulterous Woman, Eat, and wipe
their mouths, and say, they have done no Wickedness, Prove. 30. 20. If they can
in such secrecy comm^t their lewdness, as not to be suspected o^ the world; the
Phrase being taken from those that munch it in private, or wi^h head in the
Amry, and then wipe all clean, and come simpering forth, as though they had not
eaten at all. But do they consider that for all their clean wiping of their
mouths, there is one that sees all their munching in private, and with head in
the Amry, all their eating of their Bread of Secrecies, as Adultery is called,
Prove. 9. 17. one that sees all this and will Judge them ^or it. The Psalmist
(Psalm. 50. 18, etc.) reckons up some close-carried sins, and and among them
Adultery, and brings in the Lord the k^ower and avenger of them; when thou
s^west a Thief, thou consentedst with him, and have been partaker with
Adulterers, etc. But I will Reprove thee, and set before thee the things which
thou have done, ver. 21, 22. O consider this, sc. that I see wel^ enough, and
will avenge such secret, close-carried sins, sins with such a veil and Curtain
drawn between them and the (...) Eye; and among the secreter and cunninger
carried sins too that the Lord threatens that he will come a swift witn^ss
against them for, Mal. 3. 5. Adultery is one. The world cannot, perhaps, much
witness against them for these secreter, and cunninger carried sins, but I will
come near you in Judgment. And hence when the M^n was Jealous of his Wife, and
no manifest conviction could be had of it, the Judgment was devolved and turned
over to the Lord, and the bitter water then was to try her, Numb. 5. She might
deceive her Husband, but this bitter water would find her out, would make her
Thigh to rot, and her Belly swell; ^f this Trial were yet a foot, and some such
trial ^or us men also, may it not be doubted what would become of some Thighs
and some Bellies? well, beloved, he that tried and Judged the Guilty by the
bitter water, then he knows as well the Guilty now, and will surely Judge them
one day by the fire, that he Judges not now by the wat^r: Christ told the
Samaritan woman all her p^anks and tricks, John 4.

Use 1. Of Correction: will God, with whom there is no bolstering out with
closeness, be the Judge of all Who^mongers and Adulterers? Then wha^ profits it
any to eat and wipe their mouths, and say, they have done no wickedness? What
profits the Adulterer to wait for the twilight? Job 24. What profits the
Whorish Woman or her Guests to call them in thus unto her, S^olen Wat^rs are
swe^t, Prove. 9. 17. It is said by some, that that which our Savior writ on the
ground, when the Scrib^s and Pharis^es were accusing the Woman taken in
Adul^ery, before him, that it was their own sins, their own gros^ Adulteries,
and that they ashamed and convicted in Conscience, went sliving and slinki^g
away th^eat one by one: Well; beloved, if he that writ their sins then on the
ground, should send forth the fingers of an hand, to write over the like sins
(if any of us be Guilty) on the next Pillar over against us, for all to stare
and g^ze on, how would we i^k and be ashamed, and slive and slink ^ut as soon
as we could! Wel^, consider therefor what ^t will be when he that now f^es and
says nothing, shall Reprove u^, and set before us and all the World one day the
things, the hidden things of dishones^y that we have done, and shall bring us
^orth upon the Stage, wi^h B^hold the Man and his Work^.

Secondly, Of I^struction: Will God be the Judge, etc? Then hearken to
Solomon's Instruction, Why wilt thou, my Son, ^e Ravished with a strange Woman,
Prove. 5? Thus Joseph, when his Mistress tempted him to lie with her, How can ^,
says he, commit this great wickedness, and so sin against God? Genesis 39. 10.
Against God, who, though I may wipe my mouth, and stand before my Mister as an
hone^t Man, yet God ^nows how mealy mo^thed I am. And thus Job upon this ground
he made a Co^ with his Eyes, that he would not look, dishonestly look upon a
Maid; Does not he see my ways? Job 31. 4.

2. A Second Branch of the (...), That Wh^redom and Adult^ry is to be avoided,
because God will be the Judge, with whom there is no buying it out with bribery
and corruption. If in ^eed we were only to be Judged by Man's Judgment, then
that which (...) s^w in h^s days ^or Corruption of Courts, I saw under the Sun
the place of Judgment, that (...) was there, Eccl. 3. 16. That perhaps, might
be found in our days, but (...) and Adulter^rs God will Judge; God, of whom the
Psalmist says, Righteousness and Salvation is the Habitation of thy Seat, Psalm.
97. 2. God, of whom the Psalmist says again, The Heavens shall declare his
Righteousness, for God is Judge himself, Psalm. 50. 6. And therefore though thou
may buy out thy white sheet, and escape thy penance here, yet there will be
no buying out thy black she^t, I mean, that blackness of outward Da^kness to
envelop and enclose thee, nor escaping thy punishment there; though thou may^st
buy out that weeping that should be in the Penitents place, the Seat where
penance is done; yet thou shall not buy ou^ that w^ping and wailing and
gnashing of Teeth, that will be in the Damneds place, where the Impenitents be;
consider therefore, that Whoremongers and Adulterers God will Judge; God, that
Righteousness and Judgment is the Habitation o^ his Seat; God, that has
pronounced a woe to the Corrupt Judges, incorrupt therefore himself surely will
be. Woe unto them that call evil good, Isa. 5. God, who when he begins to lay
Judgment to the Rule, and Righteousness to the B^lance, then a great (...)
shall not Re^eem thee; Will h^ esteem thy Riches? no, not Gold, Job 36. 19.

For the third Branch, God will be Judge, with whom there is no be^ring it out
with Power and Greatness. I may be such a Powerful and Awous M^n in the pl^ce
wh^re I Live, of so great Might, and so great Authority, and such a p^rlous
Nolime-tang^re, that few d^re meddle with me, few dare s^y unto me so much as
bl^ck is mine eye; but consider how he that spoke out of the whirlwind
derided all Power and Greatness, when it should cope and have to do with him;
Gird up thy Loins now like a M^n, have thou an Arm like God? Job 40. 1, etc.
The Mountains quake at him, Nahum 1. This is that God that will Judge
Whore-mongers and Adulterers. Hence Abimelech, though a King, was so awed with
that, B^hold, thou art but a dead Man, for the Woman which thou have taken, for
she is a Man's Wife, Genesis 20. 3. That he forth with restored her, and untouched:
Abraham he was but a poor stranger, un^ble to revenge the wrong, but Abimelech
knew the dread and terror of him who had s^id, Behold, thou art but a dead Man.
Hence David also the King, who had committed Adultery with the wif^ of Uriah,
he, though a King, was smit, and humbled full low, when he understood the
Prophet Nathan's Parable i^ the Lords Name, and it got that from him in his
Penitential Psalm, Against thee, thee only have I sinned, Psalm. 51. 4. And
hence, when Paul, though but a Prisoner, Disputed before Felix the Governor,
about Righteousness, and Temp^rance, and the Judgment to come, F^lix tremb^d.
Act. 24. 26. For why, he was a corrupt M^n for Justice, as appears by his
exp^cting a Bribe; and an (...) man of Body, his Wife Drus^lla being anot^er
man's Wife, one Azizus, King of (...), whom he had enveigled and (...) away from
her former Husband; and therefore though he were a Governor, and Paul but a
Prisoner before him, yet this Judgment to come, or the power of my Text, made
my Intempe^ate, Adult^rous Felix to tremble. And hence, lastly, (...) Baptist,
though but in Camels hair, snub^ed King Herod in his S^lks and soft Garments,
snubbed him with, It is not Lawful for thee to have thy Brothers Wife. All one,
as if he had said, Whoremong^rs and (...) God will Judge. And hence, to add one
more, Holy La^imer presented to King Henry the Eight, whose fault with Wom^n
was well known, presented to him the new Testament with this inscription
embossed upon the Cov^r; For^catores and Adulteros Judicabit D^us; he knew not
how better to deal with a great Prince, but greatly, though subject to his
Lust. Well, if Abimeleches, if Davides, if Faelixes, if H^rodes, if Heneryes
have been awed with this text, how should this awe and terrify such s^ly
sneakes as the best of us are! think therefore when thou go over thine own
th^eshold about such a wickedness as this, that thou (...) there written upon
the door posts within, Whormong^rs etc. Think when thy foot is entering into
the house of the strange woman, that thou see there also written upon the
door-posts without, Whormong^rs and Adulterers, etc. Think when she that hunts
after the precious life of a man has brought thee into her chamber of folly,
think that walls, and window, and curtain, and canopy, and the very face and
forehead of her or him thou should be naught with, all have this written upon
them, Fornicatores and Adulteros judicabit Deus. Finally think whiles thou
meditatest and go about that wicked act, that every whisper, every murmur,
every least noise sounds nothing in thy fearful ears, but Whor^mongers and
Adulterers God will judge. Think thus and if this will not serve to re^rain
thee, and make thee chaste for the Kingdom of ^eaven, it were not a bad word,
nor I think an ^dle word, to say, Lord h^ve M^rcy on thee, more than three
p^rts of four of thee are (...) Hell. And God, that works wond^s, can indeed,
if he would, pull thee back by a very hair; but he or she is m^re th^n
desperate, that put their Salvation so to a very hair, and to odds more (on my
C^nscience) than a thousand to one.

Second P^oposition.
That Whoredom and Adultery is to be avoided, consid^ring the Judgments, that
what h^re, what hereaf^r shall be (...) upon Offenders after th^se
Abominations.

The Judgments that the just Providence inflicts, or lets come upon them here,
are partly Spiritual, upon the Soul; p^rtly Temporal, upon their Body, upon
their Goods, upon their good N^me, upon their Childr^n or Posterity; Spiritual
upon their Soul, God gives them over,

First, to a spiritu^l Coecity and sottishness, not to be capable, not to be
sensible of any Council, of any consideration that might reclaim them; Whoredom
and W^e, and New Wine take away the Heart, Hos. 4. 11. These two sins make very
sots; make them that are any wh^t sar gone in them, insensible of the vil^ness
of the sins, of the fearfulness and undoubt^dness of the Judgments, of any
considerations that should reclaim them from those sins; They consider not in
their Hearts, that I remember all their wickedness, Hos. 7. 2. Who are those
sots that are so inconsiderate^ Why, the Whorish and Adulterous Sots, v. 4, 5.
They are all Adulterers, etc. who being past f^ling (says the Apostle) have
given (...) over to Lasciviousness, Ephesians. 4. 19. A sign they are past fe^ling,
when they give themselves over to Lasciviousness, and giving themselves over to
Lasciviousness, a means to make themselves more past feeling: And therefore
well might Ecclesiasticus, speaking of an Old Adulterer, one that has got a
haunt and habit in his Adultery, add this Epithet, An Old Adulterer that dote^,
Eccles. 25. 2.

Secondly, which sollows upon the former, God gives them commonly over to final
impenitency and perishing in their sins without ever being reclaimed: That
which Z^phar says, Job 20. His Bones are ful^ of the sins of his Youth, which
shall lie down wi^h him in the Dust. This sin of Youth, which in Gods ju^t
Judgment lies down with a Man in the Dust, i. e. which he dies in, unrepented
of, this ^n most likelihood is the sin of incontinency, the sin of uncleanness,
which begins in younger and (...) years, and holds so long as there is any
M^rrow in their Bones, and th^n when M^rrow and Moisture is spent, and nothing
but Rottenness in his Bones, his bones are full of the sin of his Youth.
Solomon also is express for this Judgment of final Impenitency, None that go in
to her return again, neither take they bold of the Paths of Life, Prove. 2. 19.
And therefore in his disswasions from this sin, he leaves them that are once
taken with it as mere perdues and lo^t Men, and Lodging in the Chambers of
Death, and the Guests Vesti^ia nulla ^etrorsum.
of the depths of hell, Prove. 5. 22, 23. and 7. 27. 9. 18. And therefore also
in his such plenty of (...) in this M^tter he directs none to the ent^ngled, to
them that are in the snare already, to rid and reclaim them out of it (little
hope he has of that) but to the supposed free to keep them out of i^; no more
have I any great hope to work upon any that are old in Adulteries, old in
H^rlotry and Whoredom, Ezekiel. 23. 43. few of these ever return ag^in, but prove
the G^ests of the depths of Hell: But my aim and hope only is by this and other
Arguments to do some good upon them that are free from Debauchedness in that
sin, from whence commonly, as from Hell, there is no Redemption.
Ecclesiasticu^, though not out of special Inspira^on, yet out of special
Experience and Observation he spoke it; All Bread is sw^et to an Whoremonger,
he will not leave off till he die, Eccles. 23. And no marvel, for the very
state of the Body is so poisoned and Co^rupted with the Habit of this sin, that
Naturally it propends and inclines to the like; b^ing nothing but a very
seminary of Lust, and the state of the Mind also so Poisoned, that the Fancy
and Imagination works nothing but impure Thoughts, Aye, ev^n when the Body is
d^cayed and Impotent, the Mind yet most Lustful and Libidinous, as may appear
by the Bawdry speeches (able to make modest Ears to glow) of Old writhen (...),
and Old worn out Fornicators; their filthy speech^s nothing but the boiling and
bubling up of the Poison and Puddle at Heart; what hope therefore of their
Recovery, that have such Poisoned Bodies and Minds?

Object. Aye, but are there not diverse as Rahab the Harlot, the Woman a sinner,
sc. a common W^ore, Luke 7. The Prodigal Son that wasted all his Substance
among Harlots, Luke 15. The Woman taken in Adultery, John 8. Those, such were
some of you, 1 Cor. 6. Augustine and Ambrose his, Ego non sum ego, that have
Recovered?

Answ. It is not denied that some of these the extraordinary Grace of God may
Recover, as some some of them that have the Plague (but oh how few)
extraordinarily recover; but for all that, some some extraordinarily recover of
the Plague; would it not scare any wise man from entering into a Pesthouse,
where he should be sure to take the Plague? God he sometimes, though it be but
seldom, works a Miracle in Nature, so sometimes too, but it is but seldom, he
works a Miracle in Grace; as I count this, to Conv^rt one haunted, and Old in
Fornications and Adulteries, as far above the Ordinary course of Grace I count
it to Convert such, and Cure them of their Flux, as above the Ordinary course
of Nature it was to Cure the Woman in the Gospel of her Flux, her Bloody Flux;
and therefore for the Woman the sinner, for her taken in Adultery, sor the
Samaritan Woman, sor them, 1 Cor. 6, etc. No marvel, if when Miracles in Nature
then were so srequent, Miracles in Grace also to conve^t such as th^se were so
srequent. Again, ^or the Obj^cted in^tances, consi^er how great means was used
to their Conversion, they had the ben^fit either of extraordinary Miracles,
Miracles wrought by Christ and his Apostles; M^racles, such, as if he that
speaks the word now a days could work the works, perhaps, he might strike some
of our verie^t Harlots and Whoremasters; or the benefit of Extraordinary
Humiliation and A^ction, as the Prodigal brought so low, that he desired the
Swines Husks, and could not have them; or the ben^sit of a most powerful,
prepotent, importunate Grace, as A^gustine; and yet oh what a long and hard
scuffle, and conflict with his Corruption before over^me, as his own miserable
Complaint shows: How long, ^ow long? To Morr^w, an^ to Morrow, why Q^amdiu,
Quamdiu? Cras and cras, quare non modo, quare non hac (...) sinis (...) meae,
Consess. q. 12.
not now, why not this hour should there be an end of my uncle^nness?

Thirdly, God give^ them over also to an universal Profaneness, and
Irreligiousness, and wretchlesness in all naughtiness, to grow ^ark naught
every way; so that un^versal Profaneness and naughtiness of the O^d World, for
which the Flood was brought upon it, what begun it in, but in inordinate unruly
Lust? They took themselv^s Wives, (many Wives that were before God no better
than Whores) of all which they choose, Genesis 6. 3. and then what follows? v. 5.
God saw that the (...) of Man was great. So it is not for naught that in that
universal unrighteousness that the wi^ked World was given over to, Fornication
leads the Van; Being filled with all Unrighteousness, Fornication, Romans 1. And
in Reckoning up the works of the Flesh, Adultery, For^ication, and such
Uncleanness, leads the Rank too, Gal. 5. And the Profane Person presently
sollows the Fornicator, Heb. 12. 16. as all Profaneness being next at hand,
when the sin of Uncleanness goes before: Give me but a Man or Woman once given
over to that sin, and a P^osane he or she, I will write them in their
Foreheads; that makes no great Conscience of of any Duty, either to God or Man,
except so far as some outward public shame, and publi^k Law may, perhaps, work
upon them. The Heathen Moral man could Ob^rve, that Voluptuousness and
Intemperate Lust cracks the Practick Judgment for any good (...).
Moral Duty to be done; so that once a Voluptuous E^hic. Nicom. 6. 5.
Man, an Universal evil M^n also: And these are the Spiritual Judgments which
the Just Providence of God in^icts upon Offenders in this kind; and if these be
fearful Judgments (I speak to them that have not as yet through Debauchedness
in these sins lost all sense and Spiritual feeling) as for them that are gone
in Debauchedness in these sins, I look but ^or a privy sneer from them in
scorn, or a privy grin in Anger: but for the other* if Whoredom and Wine, and
New Wine take away the Heart, make very sots, which is the first: I^ none
commonly of them that go unto her return again, nor take hold of the paths of
Life, which is the second: If they be given over also by little and little to
an Universal Profaneness, etc. Th^n upon peril take heed of that which gives
over to a Spiritual Caecity, etc* which draws final impenitency, which plunges
into an Universal profaneness.

A Second sort of Judgments upon (...) here in this Life, a^e Temporal; and,

(...), upon t^eir (...), God (...) sin with many, and (...), and (...)
Diseas^s (...), a^ P^x and (...), and (...), and unnatural, (...) Go^ts (the
^ssue ost^ntimes, s^y the Learned, os I (...) in VVi^e and Women) together
(...) with shortness of days, ^ing untimely cut osf by Reason of those Dis^ases
got by th^s inte^perance; or if they live any time, with hudles of Insirmities
in their Old Age; no body such a very spittle of Infirmities in elder years, as
the Intemperate Luxurious Body; and therefore some think that Solomon's l^st
Chapt^r of Ecclesiastes, wherein he describes a most weak i^ firm state of Old
Age, That the Keep^rs of the (...) Tr^ble, and the strong M^n b^w (...), etc.
That that has (...) to his own s^ls, and the ^uddle ^s Insirmities, that his
great intemperance with Wom^n brought his Old crazed Body in^o: And (...)'s
spee^h hits upon this; ^is (...) are full of the sin ^f his Youth. And (...)
(...), Prove. 5. Lest thou mourn when thy Flesh and Bo^y are (...). Mo^s, or
rottenness and Worm^ shall (...) ^o Heritage, (...) 19. (...) ^fore would
thou have (...) to t^y ^vil, and M^rrow to thy (...), P^v 3. and would thou
Live long, and see good days? Then avoid that sin that will be Lang^shing to
thy Navil, and rottenness to thy Bones, and which will either make thy Old Body
to be but a Diseased spittle, or untimely make thee but a Heritage for Moth and
Worms.

Secondly, Upon their Goods; God Judges this sin with letting it bring a
Consumption oftentimes, and wasting of the Estate. How many goodly Estates
have our own Eyes (if we would Observe) see consumed, especially by this sin;
what through the Costliness of it (for no such drainer and soaker of an Estate
as the whorish Woman) and what through Gods Curse following upon this sin; By
means of a Whorish Woman a Man is brought to a piece of Bread, Prove. 6. Aye,
lower too, for the Prodigal he spent all his Substance so upon Harlots, that as
the Parable sets him forth, he longed for the very Swines husks, and could not
have them; and most just with God it is that they who through fullness of bread
(for that commonly is the Occasion) fall upon that sin, through that sin should
be brought to a piece of bread: They that through Riotous Intemperate Living,
as did the Prodigal, fall upon Harlots, through Harlots should be ^rought to
penurious and miserable Living (...); (...), in purging himsels, That (...) had
not been (...) with a Woman, and that (...) had not (...) wait at his (...)
Door, sc. to have been naught with (...) Neighbors Wife, he uses this
Argument; that h^d ^e done thus, he (...) w^ll (...), th^s, as Gods just (...),
(...) have be^n ^ fire, to have (...) ^o (...) (sc. his Estate) and to (...)
out all his Increas^, Job 31. 12. And (...) love ye your Goods? Love ye them?
Aye, that is to be fea^d too well; and would ye leave a (...) upon them? Then
take h^d o^ that sin (...) will bring to a Mors^l os Br^ad, and will (...) a
Fire from God, p^aps, (...) a slack Fire, but a sur^, to (...) to (...), and
roo^ out all (...) Incr^ase.

(...), U^n (...) Good Name; God brands this si^ (...) all (...) a ^rand of
(...) Reproach; what a^e t^y and their (...), though Musks and Swe^t-Ball^ t^y
may carry about with them, what (...) ^ (...) the Nostrils of all (...) M^n
(...) Women? A bywo^d and common talk, more than they think (excep^ t^eir Ears
glow very (...)) in every ones mouth? And ju^t it is with God, that they who
dishonor and m^ke themselves vile in this (...), (...) they should again be
dishonour^d (...) held but vile in the Repute os the World; a wound ( sc. to
his Name) and dishono^r shall he (or she) g^t, and his Reproa^h shall not be
wiped away, Prove. 1. 6. And what Reproach this sin is, (...)'s (...) shows, Let
her take it (sc. his S^gnet an^ Bracelets) to her, lest we be ashamed, Genesis 38.
And what but to hide the common ^hame, was that which made David, after he had
committed Adulte^y with Uriah's Wise, made him send, first, for Uriah home out
os the C^mp, to lie with his Wife; and when that would not do it, made him
drunk the second Night, that he might go and lie with his Wi^e, and so Father
the Child; and when that neither would do it, made him write to Joab, to place
Uriah in such a place of the Battle where he might be stain, and so David might
Ma^ry (...), and so save his Credit, in being hone^tly reputed the Father of
the Child; and to fay no more, what a brand of In^amy God has set upon this
sin, see it but hence, know ye any (for I know them not) that are too too
presumed Osfenders in this, only they have had a little better hap, than to be
taken as she, John 8. in the very Fact; look but now full in their Faces, stare
on them, point toward (...).
them, and see if these very In (...) v^ry (...).
impudent ones blush not for shame, and hang down Heads; and therefore have ye
any Respect to your Credits, would you not be vile in the eyes of all M^n,
would you not have your Names to be a very stink in men's Nostrils? But rather
like J^siah's; the remembrance of Josiah is like the Composition of the Perfume
made by the Art of the Apoth^ary, Ecclesiasticus 49. take heed of that sin,
which who so commits, a Wound and Dishonor shall he get, and his Reproach
shall not be wiped away.

Fourthly, God punishes them in regard of Children and Posterity, and that two
ways; sometimes in depriving them of Posterity, sometimes in laying a Curse
upon Posterity:

1. In depriving them; so upon Abimelech's (...) S^rah, Ab^aham's Wife unto
him; God fa^t closed up the wombs of all the House of Abime^ch, that they
Conceived not, nor bear him any Children, till Sarah being restored, Abraham
prayed for him, Genesis 20. And so, they shall commit Whoredom, and shall not
Increase, Hos. 4. The latter being the Judgment upon the ^ormer; their not
Incre^sing, s^. their being without Po^rity, the Ju^gment upon their committing
W^dom; and a just Judgment that their own Field should be barren, that mar
others Fi^lds with ^owing strange Seed in them; a just Judgment that their own
(...) should put forth no Plants, that set others stocks with Bastardslips,
Wisd. 4. 3.

2. In laying a Curse commonly upon Posterity, if they have P^atum seminis
punietur in semine.
any; the common saying is, The sin of the Seed shall be punished in the Seed;
and most just it is, that the Sin of the Body should be punished in the Fruit
of the B^dy; the s^ of propagation in the Posterity it sel^, or propagation,
the sin of the Womb in the Child of the Womb; I will not have M^rcy upon her
Childr^n, ^r they be the Children of Whoredoms, (...). 2. A whore and a Harlot
their Mother wa^, and (...) no Mercy will I have o^ her C^n; it is spoken
indeed directly of Spiritual Whoredom, sc. Idolat^; ^t it bea^ it self upon
the suppos^d Truth, as (...) known of God^ (...) VVhor^ in (...) ^, to (...)
the Child (...) ju^t the (...) Son, ^r the Mothers (...), i. e. to follow their
steps in vileness and uncle^nness, to hunt the Fle^h the Father loved, and to
h^nt the Oven the Mother was hid in; Thou art thy Mothers Daughter, s^id the
Lord to her that was so by kind, Ezekiel. 16. And I will not punish your Daughters
when they commit Whoredom, Ho^. 4. 14. Who (...) therefore that desires the
blessing of C^ldren, and blessed Children, which is more? Let them take heed of
that sin which caused all the VVombs in Abimelech's House to be fast closed up;
or which, if the Fruit of the Womb be granted, may cause that denunciation to
be he^rd, I will not have Mercy upon their Children, for they be the Children
of Whoredoms.

Fifthly, God often punishes this sin if it be in a Married Party, by sending
a great deal of uncomfortablenes^ in the Marriagestate, through J^ and
Jealousies of the contrary p^rty, and (...) it is, that they who sin against
the (...)-state, should be punished by the Marriage-state; just, that she that
fors^kes the Guide of her Youth, Prove. 2. or he that de^ls treacherously
against the Wife of his Youth, Mal. 2. that they should ^d the punishment
there, and at that P^rty's hand, against whom the Trespass is committed: Thus
if it be in a Married Party, by sending uncomsortableness; or else by punishing
the sa^ltiness of the one Party with letting the other party p^y him or her in
their own Coin; le^g the Woman prove a Queen where the Man is once a Knave; or
^ contra, Because thou have taken the Wife of Uriah, I will take thy Wives, and
give them to thy Neighbor, 2 Samuel 12. And if my Heart has been deceived with
a Woman, then let (...) Wife grind unto another, Job 31. Job's Imprecation is
but according to the Ordinary t^nor of Gods Judgment, that where the Husband
lays wait at the Neighbour^* Door, there the Wife commonly grinds unto
another: and in the ^ore-named Hosca 4. Your Daughters shall commit Whoredom,
and your Spouses shall commit Adultery. Desire ye therefore to find Comfort in
a Married estate? Or desire ye Faithfulness in Consort or Yoak-fellow,
forsaking all others to keep only to your selves, so long as you both shall
Live? Then take heed of that sin which God punishes oftentimes with great
uncom^ortableness in Marriage-state, sowing bitter dissent^on there where
com^ortable Love and Con^ord should be, or punish^th with letting the VVi^e
grind to another, whose Husband waits at his Neighbors Doors.

Sixt^ly, This also may be considered, that God appointed Death to be the doom
and J^dgment of Adulterers at the Civil (...); The Man that commits Adultery
with another Man's Wife, the Adulterer and A^ss shall die the death, Exodus 20.
10. And indeed if the Thief deserve a Rope, there is no Adulterer but he
deserves two, nor Adulteress; for judge but in your selves, and put it your own
cases; if the wrong be not more two to one, to be wronged and Robbed o^ your
Body, whereof the Apostle, The Wife has not (...) ow^r over her Body, but the
Husband, etc. than to be wronged and Robbed of the best Goods and Chattels you
have ^esides; Men do not despise a Thief, if he steal to (...) his Soul,
because he is h^ngry, Prove. 6. 30. And it is not for naught, but to show the
great di^ference between the sin and sin, that Naturally the Rage of a Man is
far more against him that wrongs him in his VVi^e, in that Ewe-Lamb that ^ats
of his own Meat, and lies in his own Bo^om, 2 Samuel 12. than in all the Flocks
and Herds besides that feed and lie on Mountains and Valleys; neither let any
body s^y, that this was Mosaical, and special to the Jews only for special
Reasons, to have Adultery punished with death; for ^oth before Mos^s, and out
of the Jewish Commonwealth, where Moses's Law was not on foot, even by the Law
and Light of Nature they thought Adul^ery worthy to be punished with Death; as
that speech of Judah's abo^t his Daughter-inLaw Tamar, Espoused to his So^
Shelah, and so accounted hi^ Wi^e (...) Espousals, his speech about her being
sound with Child before the Solemnizing of the Marriage, shows, ^ng her ^orth,
(...) let her be burnt, Genesis 38. And Job's speech, This is an heinous Crime, De
Muliere sep^es ict^. H^on. Ep.
and an Iniquity to be punished by the Judges, Job 31. And further, the
Judgment of the King of Babylon upon two Adulterers, Zedekiah and Ahab,
Roasting them in the fire, is alleged by some, Jer. 29. 22. Further, in
(...)'s time Adultery by Christian Laws was punished with Death, as may appear
by that which he says, That for all that daily some were Qu^ p^ssit illi^ esse
(...) ubi ^ibunalia, ubi accusation^s, ubi (...) i^ a, ubi gladius etc. (...),
etc.
put to Death for Adultery, yet Adultery ceased not. And at Geneva yet Adultery
is punished with Death: And what more equal than Bishop L^timer's Motion in a
Sermon before King Edward; That Adultery the first time, if the Innocent party
would speak for the Nocent, should be par^oned, but the second time the
Adulterer or Adultress should to the Pot: Well, it being plain by a Man's own
Reason, by the Law of Moses, by the Law of Nature before Moses, that the right
doom of Adultery is Death (Aye, if a Thief deserve a Rope, no Adulterer but
deserves two) let them know therefor that please themselves with the impunity
of this sin, that where the Law of Man is remiss, the Law of God will be
severe; and they escape the Roasting in the King of Babylon's fire, yet there is
another fire they shall not escape, a fire that shall nev^r be quenched, and
they themselves nev^r consumed: And so I come to the third sort of Judgments.

The third sort of Judgments upon whoremongers and Adulterers are hereafter,
and,

First, They shall be sure to have no part in the K^ngdom o^ God, such uncle^
Creatures shall never put Foot over Thre^ld there, where no unclean Ephesians. 5. 6.
N (...) errare. 1 Cor. 6 9.
thing (...) in; and be^ they are apt to think, and ^o (...) dreams, (...) with
a Be not (...); (...) not deceived, neither Fornicators nor Adulterers.
Fornicators and Adulterers, these with the first, and these with a Be not
deceived, are sure not to Inherit the Kingdom of God, Gal. 5. 21. And if one
single Asservation will not serve the turn, he tells them once and again, that
they shall Reckon of it as a Truth; of the which I tell you before as I have
told you in times past: And because this only to be deprived of the Kingdom of
God, might seem no such great matter to Men blinde^ and violently carried away
with their Lusts and Pleasures, if so be there were no sensible punishment to
follow; therefore unto the loss of the Kingdom of God, the sustaining the wrath
of God for such sinners is ^dded, Ephesians. 5. 5, 6. and among them that are to be
(...) into the Lake burning with Fire and Brimstone, Whoremongers are not
forgot, to be sure they shall be of the Number, Rev. 21. 8. Well therefore if
Whoremongers and Adulterers be sure to have no part in the Kingdom of God, and
be sure to have a part, a peppering part in the wrath of God, and in the
boiling Lake; then let us so long as we cannot blot out these Texts, ( Be not
deceived, and let no man deceive you with vain words) out of the Book of God;
let us take heed of those sins which will blot out our Names out of the Book of
Life, and give us our Portions in the boiling Lake, which is the second Death;
the Proverb is, He poyseth ill that counterpoiseth not, that sets not one thing
against (...), that puts all in one Seak, and counterpoiseth not by putting
some weight in the other Scale; will not light Wares, and a very Feather
almost, weigh down Scales where one is empty? Thou theresore that do est upon
thy Brutish Carnal Pleasure, p^ise not so as not to counterpoise, consider what
thou gettest, and what thou losest; thou gettest a little Brutes pleasure, but
thou losest Angels Joy and Pleasure, for they never Marry. Thou drinkest a
li^le of those stolen Waters which seem sweet, Prove. 9. and thou losest those
Rivers of Pleasures at Gods right hand for evermore; thou solacest thy self in
the bosom of a strange Woman, and thou losest the solace and comfort that is in
Abraham's bosom; thou feedest thine Eye with the Beauty of her that e^re while
shall fall into Dust and Ashes, an^ thou losest the glorious and blessed Vision
of him who is Eternity of Days; thou art made one with her that is but a very
Fiend in the shape of flesh and blood, and thou losest thy being made partaker
of that Divine Nature which he that has escaped the Corruption that is in the
World through Lust shall be made partaker of, 2 Pet. 2. 20. And theresore Basil
being asked, what might be a Sovereign Remedy of Lu^? Answered, Desires and
Thoughts upon better things; so think but pausingly and soberly of these better
things, and how can thou then let a Brutes pleasure deprive thee of Angels
pleasure? Let the solace in the Bosom of a strange Woman, etc. Let the base
Slavery in the thraldom of Lust deprive thee of the blessed Liberty in the
Kingdom of God? Here is juster place for an, I will not buy Repentance at so N^
emo tanti penitere.
dear a rate; than it was when Demosthenes said it upon the Corinthian (...)
asking him ten thousand Drachmes for one Nig^t: Ten thousand Drachmes! Aye, ten
t^ousand World^ to be lo^t for the purchasing of this pleasure will not cause
such bitter R^pentance, as, Be not deceived, neither Fornicators nor
Adulterers, etc. B^t if the punishment of loss will not wo^k upon the
sottishness of this sin, the punishment of smart and sense let ^t be
consi^ered, and let one sire be a Remedy against another sire, the fire of Hell
against the sire of Lust; as when one has scorched or burnt his finger (...)
the fire, he holds it again to the fire, that (...) take o^t ^re; so the fire
of Lust if it (...) and (...), let us set our selves a little nearer, (...)
within the scorch of the fire of Hell, and sire will take out fire: Some w^
read (a^ ^dict) for the subduing of their lu^t, tumbled their Naked Bodies
among (...) Thorns and Briars: Some (as Francis) run Naked into freezing Pon^,
some have used one Remedy, and some another; but no such Remedy, if there be
but even as much Faith as a Grain of Mustard Seed to believe it, as that of our
Saviors, Mat. 5. Where sp^aking even against so much as looking upon a Woman
to lust aster her in his h^rt, this is his Argument, If thy right Eye Oss^nd,
etc. Better that one of thy memb^rs p^sh, than that thy whole Body be cast ^to
H^ll, v. 29, 30. Thus that chaste Matron, when she was solicited to Folly by a
Young Man, called for a Chafing dish of Coals, and Requested the Young Man
first to hold his Hand in that Fire for a quarter os an hour sor her sake,
which he refusing as an unkind Request; His (replied the M^ron) was far
unkinder, who requir^d that at her hands, for which not hands, but whole body
should, not for a short ^uarter of an hour, but for long and long Eternity burn
and broil in a far worse fire; and so another, one of the Old Hermits being
tempted to this sin, said to himself, that they who do such things go into
everlasting sire; prove thy self by this, if thou can endure eternal Fire, he
put his fingers to the Candle, and burnt all his fingers; and when that proved
so exream and unsufferable to him, have to do with that sin he durst not, which
would put him to a far more extreme and unsufferable torment: Therefore if
either depriving of the Kingdom of God, or sustaining the wrath of God; if
either throwing out of the Palace, or throwing into the Dungeon; if either the
loss of the singing and rejoicing of the Saints in Heaven, or the Cross of the
weeping and wailing of the Damned in Hell will move, then let us avoid this sin*

Third Proposition.
That Whoredom and Adultery is to be avoided, considering the grievousness of
the sins themselves: when Abimelech, by Abraham's dissembling, as if Sarah, who
was his Wife, had been but his Sister, had like to have lien with another man's
Wife, what said Abimelech a King, Abimelech a Philistine? What have I Offended
thee, that thou have brought on Peccatum Grande. Gen: 20. 9. and 39. 10.
me, and on my Kingdom a great sin? Not a Venial sin, a pidling peccadillo,
Ingens flagitium,
but a grand sin; And how can I commit this great wickedness and sin against
God? And so great and grievous a sin did the Saints of Old count this sin, that
the villainy of the persecuting Tyrants choosed rather to condemn some to the
tempting Bawd, rather Ad Lenonem qu^m ad Leonem. Tertul.
than to the devouring Lion; As knowing that the Holy Saints had rather have
their Bodies ravined and defiled by the foaming Teeth of Wild and S^vage
Beasts, than Ravished and desiled by the silthy foamy Lust of Savage Men: Now,
the greatness and grievousness of the sin, we may hence take a scantling of it,
because it is a great sin,

1. Against God. 2. Against our selves, 3. Against others,
First, A great sin against God, in dishonouring the Image of God in us, in
dishonouring the Member of Christ, in dishonouring the Temple of the Holy
Ghost: We dishonor by this sin the Image of God in us as it consists in
Ruledom and Dominion, and a Glorious Divine-like Majesty, to be a Servant to
nothing under God hims^ls; we dishonor this part os Gods Image in us by this
sin, because by this s^ of all others we become the basest Slaves to the basest
Lust; there are two kinds of Siavish sinners, the Covetous, and the Libidinous;
of which a Man can hardly tell whether is the verier Slave; but a man may
easily tell which is the baser Slave, sc. the baser slave is he that serves the
baser Lust; for though two ye know be equal slaves, in regard of hardness of
Servitude, yet he is the base slave that serves the same hard Service to the
baser Master; now, the baser Master is Carnal Lust above Covetous Lust, as the
more sneaking ashamedness to be espied going about, or taken in the Service of
the one rather than the other, shows, thus we dishonor this part of Gods Image
in us; as, what a dishonor were it if the King should make a Viceroy in
Principality and Royal Majesty to be next unto himself, and give him Ensigns of
his ViceRoy-ship, a Coronet on his Head, and a Robe of Majesty on his Back;
what a dishonor this to the King, if he bearing the Kings Image with a Coronet
on the Head, and Robe on the Back, should basely subject himself to all scu^
and Varletry, and basest of Men? Again, the Im^ge of God as it consi^ts in a
right Reason, ^d a Divine-like Understanding to ^now for Practicks, what is to
be d^ne, and w^t not to be done: we disho our this part of Gods Image in us, by
this sin of all other sins we blind and bore out the Eye of Reason, and disable
our selves from all soundness of practick Judgment; Judgment we may have,
though debauched, and Drowned in all Intemperance, for Mechan^cks,
M^thematicks, Physics, etc. but soundness of Practical Judgment for Morals,
this sin quite depraves it; as the foggy smoke that came out of the bottomless
Pit obscured and darkened the Sun and Air; or as the foggy breath cast upon the
Glass Obscures the Face and Image that appeared in it; so does this foggy sin
to the Image of God, and the Sun and light of right Reason, it quite obscures
and darkens it; so that by this sin we dishonor God much, what as he that
should take a bright burning light lightened by and from the Sun to shine in a
dark place as the Image of it self in Heaven, much what, I say, as he should
dishonor the Sun (supposing the Sun to be a Reasonable living Creature work^ng
upon Counsel) who should take that Light and run it up to the head in a filthy
dunghill or dirty puddle, and so quench that light kindled for the nonce from
and by the Sun, to be a represent and Image of it self on earth; Lastly the
image of God as it consists in holiness and purity and sanctity both of Body
and Spirit; we dishonor this part of Gods image in us by this sin, because
this is the most defiling contaminat^ng sin, called theresore signanter the sin
of Unc^eanness, and they that commit it in our language, Filihs; and that most
rightly: and so opposite to purity and (...) that the prime and singular thing
(...) singularly opposite to (...) is immediately Fornication 1 Thessalonians. 4* 3.
For (...) is the will of God even your (...), that ye should abstain from
Fornication. And keeping the body pu^e and (...) is called poss^ssing ones
(...) in Sanc^ion ver. 4. This is a great sin (...) God in dishono^ng the image
of God in us, which how i^dignely God will t^ke, judge Au^ust.
but by that Emperors sact ^ho made a law for ^vere punishing them whosoever
should ^rry (...) o^ im^e, (...) but in (...) a ring, into (...) places, as
(...), etc. And bv (...) fact os that other Emperor Theodosius, who threatened
to race the whole City of Antioch, for their rasing and defacing or marring his
Image or Statue there.

2. A great sin in dishonouring the member of Christ, this is one of the
arguments with great indignation used by the Apostle to set out the (...)
abominable, abhorrefull nature of ^his sin, 1 Cor. 6. 15. Know ye not that your
bodies are the members of Christ? (...) I then take the Members of (...) and
m^ke them the m^mbers of an (...)? God fo^bid: spoken with great ind^tion. It
is not so odious, (and yet w^o can hear it without some horror and ha^f
spitting at it) not so odious, so abominable, so abhorfull, to see a Kings
Daughter carnally coupled with a dog, as a M^mber of Christ with an Harlot; and
therefore well might the Apostle say, Know ye not? As if he should s^y, you
forget surely what you are, consider not that you are the Members of Christ;
did ye, how co^ld you take the Members os Christ and m^ke them the Members of
an Harlot? and though some be far enough from being any Members of Christ truly
spiritually and mystically; yet by outward profession they are the Members of
Christ; they partake of that profession which makes them in outward
denomination and account within the compass of that, Now ye are the Body of
Christ, and Members in particular, 1 Cor. 12. and themselves would go for the
very Members of Christ, and how hainously would they take it, the worst of
them, if one should tell them they are no Members of Christ, but Limb^ of
Satan? well therefore all one in a manner for the indignity offered to Christ,
whether they that make themselves one Body with an Harlot, be ^ruly Spiritually
and Mystically the v^ry Members of Christ or no; they reckon themselves Members
os Christ, and so would do no less were they indeed very Members, and in
outward profession and Denomination go for Members of Christ; all one, I say,
as such an one supposed is indeed not such an ones Son, being of his own very
Flesh and Blood, but he is a by-chop; yet he goes for his Son, he calls him
Father; any indign dishonorable carriage of such a supposed Son, would it not
redound to the dishonor of the supposed Father, as if he were his true Son
indeed, of his very Flesh and Blood? thus the Children of Isra^l, when indeed
they had made themselves none of Gods Children, of Gods People, yet usually in
Scripture he aggravates their sin as the sin of his Children, of his People.

Thirdly, A great sin against God, in dishonouring the Temple of the Holy
Gho^t: This is one of the special Arguments too wherewith the Apostle sets out
with great earnestness, (as his interrogatory form shows) the indignity and
vileness of this sin; What, know ye not that your ^ody is the Temple of the
Holy Ghost, which is in you? 1 Cor. 6. 19. And what a vile indignity to
conspur^ate and defile, and make nothing but a bea^tly Sty of that Sanctum
Sanctorum, which should be an Habitation of so Holy a Majesty? You have made my
Fath^rs House an House of Merchandise, said our Savior in great Zeal against
their desiling Gods Material Temple with Buying and Selling in it; they that
defile Gods living Temples, which themselves should be, by m^king Gods House a
Brothel-house and as Stews, is not their sin far greater? Not a whip of small
Cords shall serve their turn, an Iron whip that shall bite to the bone, and
make Yethers like Furrows let them look sor; Who so d^fileth the Temple of God,
him shall God destroy, 1 Cor. 3. 17. Take heed therefore of this sin which is
so great a sin against God himself, etc.

Secondly, A great sin against our selves, Philosophy and glimmering twilight
Reason says, that a Man cannot injure or sin against himself; but Divinity, and
Noonday Light of Scripture teaches otherwise, teaches that God has not given
us Body and Goods, etc. to be used and abused as we list without any sin
against our selves, therefore Whoredom and Adultery ar^ great sins, in regard
of our B^dy, of our Goods, of our good Name: In regard of our Body, so the
Apostle teaches, Every sin that a Man does is without the Body, but he that
commits Fornication sins against his own Body, 1 Cor. 6. 18. Against his
own body, sc. against the Health of his Body, bringing often many, and
grievous, and loa^hsom Diseases upon it, with shortness of days; against the
Honor of his Body, dishonouring thereby that otherwise most sweet and
gracious, and Noblest Cre^ture that ever was made of Mold, dishonouring it, as
if you should tie a sweet and gracious, and sound excellent Body with a
stinki^g, loathsome, Leprous, Dis^ased Body; no sin sets that Note of dishonor
upon the very body as this sin of Uncleanness; the Note and Brand that the hot
Iron sets upon the Malesactors body is not so infamous, as the Note and Brand
of dishonor that this sin sets upon the Fornicators body; God gave them up to
uncleanness, through the Lusts of their ow^ Hearts to dishonor their own
Bodies, To. 1. And that every one kn^w how to possess his Vessel in (...) and
Honor, 1 These. 4. 4

Again, In regard of our Goods; what a waste and dilapidation does this sin
often make of great Estates? He that keeps Company with Harlots spends his
Substance, Prove. 29. 3. Thus the Prodigal quickly spent all his Patrimony among
Harlots, and the wickeder is the waste the worst Creatures it is bestowed upon,
bestowed upon them that deserve less than the Dogs under our Table; the Dogs
better deserve the Manchet than they the brown-breadcrust; This might have been
Sold for much, and giv^n to the Poor, M^t. 26. 8. said they in the Gospel,
concerning an imagin^d was^e, and too much cost, as they thought, bes^owed by
that Pious Woman upon our (...)* own body. But that which is bes^owed upon the
common (...) Bodies of Whor^s and (...), how much might tha^ be sold sor, and
how much better to (...) given ^o ^he Poor, those prec^ou (...) that are the
very Members o^ Christ; they (...)* says Plutarch, like those Wild Fig Trees
that grow upon high and inaccessi^e Rocks and Clisss, whose Fruit filthy Ravens
and Vultures only seed upon, but cannot be at^ained to by Man. Ag^in, in
regard of our good Name, what a wrong and injury do we to that? Jos^ph knew
this, who would not therefore make her a public Example, he saw nothing in her
in the general but Modest and Honest Carriage, what Frailty and Temptation
might draw her ^o, for one single slip, though otherwise a virtuous Maid he
could not tell, and theresore m^ke her a public Example he would not, a^
knowing that then she were shamed sor ever; and the Text is plain, A Wound and
dishonor shall he get, Prove. 6. And if any think what great sin in this to
neglect our own Names, and not care how we are spoken os; These, let them know,
that Paul made a Conscience of it, how he should (...) spoken of, or thought
of; Providing for honest things, not only in the sight of the Lord, but in the
sight of Men, 2 Cor. 8. 21. and 5. 11. And he gave it in Precept to the
Philippians, That whatsoever things are os good Report, etc. Ph^l. 4. (...).
And to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. 12. And to (...), Let no m^n despise thee, Titus 2.
(...). (...) ^ndeed there is none but either the Fool or the Knave, that is
regard^ess of Credit: The Fool, because he wants wit to know the worth of a
Good Name; the Knave, beca^se he wants Honesty, and will not buy it at the rate.

Thirdly, A great sin against others; against (1.) The Child to be ^orn,
against the Life of it sometimes, again^ the g^od Name of it, against the
Education; against the Lise of it, to kill it sometimes by (...) Drugs in the
Conception; sometimes to cause Abortion after Conception, sometimes even after
Birth it self, to be Barbarously cruel to it, pre^nding to be a Still born,
whereas it cry^d, perhaps, so lou^, that Heaven (...) the cry of it, and will
all in good time Revenge the Blood of it; and because the (...) the Child in
the Conception, or aster Conception by Abortion is the sr^quentest, and scarce
made any Reckoning at all of sor a sin, therefore hear what the Fath^rs of Old
e^teemed of it; (...), says A^henagoras, in his Apology for Christians, we that
^ake it Ho^icidy to distu^b Conception, h^w should we kill Infants born and
brought sorth into the World? Answering a slander against (...) ^st (...).
Ch^istians arising especially upon the Sacrament. And (...) (...) the same
slander of the Christians, To hind^r the Birth is a h^stning of Manslaughter.
And Minutius, (...), (...), in (...).
sp^aking os this ha^tened ^omicid; They commit Murd^r before they ^ring forth.
And the (...) os the Ancyran Council ( Anno 314.) ^hought ti so h^inous a sin,
that they ^ppointed t^n Years penance sor such as did (...). Cod. Univ. 41. And
how vehement is Chrysostom against this (...) quae ad Pue^ram (...) data est,
ad re^is (...) instru^, Chrysostom. See (...). 21. 22.
sin; Hom. ad Romans 25! What great disf^rence were it between (...) your Tree,
by striking down all the Fruit, or striking it down only in the bloom and
blossom, or newly set; they may consider this, who think it no such pi^cular
Crime to keep a Q^ean, and then to get a Knave to Minister Drugs either to
disturb and hinder Conception, or to make Abortion after Conception when it is
but an Embrio: What do they but only kill the Fruit when it is newly set, or
in the bud and blossom? And what is this but hastened homicid? and yet what
more common in prosessed Harlotry than this? So that hence Vatablus thinks that
those two that strove before Solomon about the live Child were not Harlots, but
Hoslesses, as the word also signifies, because (...) use not to bear Children,
but to corrupt the Fruit in the Womb. Again, a sin ag^st the Child, in regard
of the Good Name of it, even God ^mself, that P^rents might know what wrong
they do their Children this way, would have the Child, though no sault of it^,
carry a mark of Reproach upon it, even to the tenth G^neration, for being begot
of unlawful Bed, Deuteronomy. 23. 2. And indeed be it that the Child som^times proves
Ignominiosus ^n D^mo, I^nominiosus in (...), (...) in ^ro, etc. Chrysostom.
Fathers better, yet how irks it, how ha^gs it down the Head, how is it
discountenanced at the Objecting the Reproach of the Birth? And how would it
purchase, were it a thing possible to be born again, pur^hase Legitimation and
honest Birth, as he did his Freedom, Acts 22. with a great sum of money?
Jepthah was a mighty Man of Valor, the Son (but the Son) of an Harlot, Judg^s
11. 1. As Naaman was a mighty Man of Valor, but a Leper, 2 Kings 5. 1. it puts
a but and blemish, does baseness of Birth to other No^lest qualities in any.
Again, in regard of Education and Providing ^or; Children of unlawful Beds how
are they neglected for any Education and providing for, what r^gard is had os
them? that which is spoken in a good sense of Levi, That he knew not his own
Children, Deuteronomy. 33. in a wicked sense is true of Parents of Children unlawfully
begot, they will not know their own Children; Aye, if one were in their very
bosoms, should not a Man find that secret wish there? Why died they not in the
Womb, or why did not they give up the Ghost when they came out of the B^lly?
Why did the Knees (...) them, or the Breast that they should (...)? Job 3. 11,
12. But seeing this, they did not die in the Womb, etc. therefore own them they
will not, to have any care of them for Education and providing for them, for
why, they are ashamed of them; they are walking Arguments of their Par^nts
Incontinency, they are witness^s of wickedness against their Parents; and their
own Brethren will be ready to deal with them, as J^pthah's ^rethren with him;
They thr^st out Jepthah, saying, thou sh^lt no^ I^herit in our Fathers House,
for thou art the Son of a strange Woman.

Secondly, A great sin against the Consort, or other M^rried P^rty; a greater
^ong spare lise it self, (...) ^e done to the Consort than to break the
Marriag^-Ring, i. e. the Vow and Cov^nt of Tro^h and Fidelity one to the other,
whereof (says the Book) the Ring g^ven and received is a Token and Pledge. T^
break the M^rriage-Ring is a wrong of all wrongs, and how great a wrong the
vehemence and unappeaseableness of that affection of Jealousy shows; Jealousy
is the Rage of a Man, Prove. 6. Aye, so great a wrong this, that the Jealous M^n
who had some presumptions, but no manifest proof; God in the Old Law afforded
him a Miraculous Trial, that Trial by the bitter Water, Number. 5. And though God
afforded not the Jealous woman the like Trial for her suspected Husband, yet
the Equity you know is the like, and the sin therefore on the one and the other
p^rt alike; and this case may the r^ther be Observed, because we may here see
what an high wrong (even in the Judgmen^ of God himself) presumptio^s to breed
J^lousie are, though the P^rty happily in^d may be innocent: God would never
h^ve offered such an Extr^ordinary Miraculou^ Trial to free from the Spirit of
Jealousy, if it were not a most vexing tormenting thing, n^ing but a slow fire
in the very Bones, and therefore an high wrong to put Matter to this fire to
make it burn, to minister Occasion to thi^ Spirit of Jealousy, to make it
rise; Does not the Apostle Paul say, spe^king not only of what is done in the
M^rried-state, but what should be done, that he who is Married cares how to
please his Wife, etc. But to (...) ju^t Occasion of Jealousi^, than which what
more displeasing and discontenting thing in the World! is this to care how to
please the Wise? etc. God, who was a Jealous God was (...), and could not
endure that those whom he had Espo^ to himself in a Spirit^l Wedlock should
come into the Harlots House, as the Scripture calls the Temple of Ido^s. Should
not cast up their Eyes, Amorous Eyes to those fair decked H^rlots. Beauteous
Idol^; should not dandle upon the knees, as 'twere, and toy, and play, and
sport, an^ use any spiritual dalliance toward them: this the Jealousy of God
was offended at, and could not endure, though they committed no Actual
spiritual Fornication with them in very Worshipping and Adoring them; so a
pari, there is the like Reason with respect to Corporal Fornication, to go into
Harlots Houses, etc.

Thirdly, A great sin against the very Kingdom and Place where we Live; because
this sin of Adultery growing common and unpunished, is one of the special sins
for which God brings fe^rful public Judgments upon a place; When I fed them to
the sull, th^n they committed Adultery; shall I not visit for th^se things, and
shall not my Soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? Jer. 5. 7, 8, 9. And
they are all Adulterers, as an Oven heated by the Baker, Ezekiel. 22. 11. is one
of the chief sins sor which God denouncing Judgm^nt against them, says, that he
remembers all their wickedness, Hos. 7. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc. And Abimelech's
speech is for this, What have I offended thee, that thou have brought on me,
and on my Kingdom a great sin? Genesis 20. 9. And David's Prayer, Praying in the
latter end of that 51 Psalm, a Penitential Psalm for his Adultery, Praying that
God would do good to Sion, shows no less, Sion and Jerusalem, the Church and
the Kingdom ( Sion being the place where the Temple was built, and Jerusalem
the chief City of the Kingdom) may feel heavy Judgments for Adulterers and
Adultery: and I pray God this be not a sin with some others among our selves at
this day, that may make the Patience of God at this day break out against us,
with a Shall I not visit for these things? If Confession were now a foot, it
may be Erasmus his Confessor might be so blabbish, and so Foolish, as to say it
in some public invective Sermon against Adultery, that were now stoning to
death a Law against Adulterers, the Rocky Mountain hard by would soon be spent,
Adultery, said he, that knew it by Confession, was grown so common. Whoredom
and Adu^tery therefore are to be avoided, considering the grievousness of the
sin it self.

Use 1. Are Whoredom and Adultery such grievous sins, and such Judgments also
attending them? then this may let us see the full meaning and evident Reason of
those two Texts, The mouth of the strange Woman is a deep Pit, he that is
abhorred of the Lord shall fall th^rein, Prove. 22. 14. And I find more bitter
than Death a Woman whose Heart is Snares and Nets, and her Hands as Bands, who
so (...) God shall escape from her, but the sinner shall be taken by her,
Eccles. 7. 26.

Secondly, This may teach Mothers to imitate that good Mother, Prove. 31. sc. to
be careful to teach their Children that which she, Imprimis, and first of all
was careful to teach her Son Lemuel. What (sc. what shall I say) my Son, and
what the Son of my Womb, etc. Give not thy strength to Women, nor thy ways to
that which destroys Kings. And so the Wise Man intimates that Parents Care
and Instructi^ about their Children, one point chiefly should be about
Discipline and Instruction against this sin; My Son, keep thy Fath^rs
Commandment, sor the Commandment is a Lamp, and the Law is Light, and Reprooss
of Instruction are the way of Life; to k^p th^e from the strange Woman, from
the Flattery of the tongue of the evil Woman, Prove. 6. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, etc.

Thirdly, This may let us see that it was Material and main Divinity enough,
and so would go sor no less among the Papists, but that Fornication is counted
for so slight and venial a sin among them; material and main Divinity enough, I
say, which the Apostle Paul taught, 1 Cor. 7. 2. Nevertheless, to avoid
Fornication, let every Man have his own Wife, and let every Woman h^ve her own
Husband. If Fornication were counted the sin, which it is, this Ghostly Couns^l
of his would not be counted such a poor rag of Divinity, but material and main
Divinity enough; and it may be considerable that there is not such a
particular, punctual passage again in all the Scripture, where the Holy Ghost
is so particular, and so punctual in applying it to ev^ry M^n, and every Woman;
and to the Hus^d, and to the Wife, and vice vers^ the Holy Ghost knew a Natural
Modesty and ashamedness toward this Remedy of Fornication, even in them,
perhaps, who stand in need of it, and therefore, perhaps, was so particular and
punctual therein.

Fourthly, Let it make us more Circumspect and Watchsul against these sins, if
they be such great sins, and such great Judgments att^nding them; and that we
may watch against them, let us know there are some things which dispose
thereunto in Gods Judgment, and some in the Nature of the things, again^ both
whereof heed and watchfulness must be had, a^ we desire the avoiding the sins
themselves; In Gods Judgment.

First, Pride disposes unto these sins, for just it is with God, that they who
are so possessed with Pride, that they think all Honor too little for them,
that would be half gods upon Earth, and not M^n, and not have their Names
mentioned without Admiration, and half-worshipping of them, just that God
should let these Men fall into thi^ sin, that is the most dishonou^ing sin,
abasing and aviling them in the sight of all, and bringing them into open
Contempt and Disgrace; thu^ Pride was one of the things that led So^ to that
dishonouring sin of unnatural Uncleanness; This was the Iniquity of Sodom,
Pri^, etc. Ez^k 16. 49. Not that these were the great sins of Sodom, but the
make-ways for that great sin of unnatural Uncleanness; and more especially in
Gods just Judgment, their Pride; they were haughty, and committed Abomination.
And thus for them that have a secret Spiritual Pride in them to be vainly
puffed up by Reason of Spiritual Excellencies.

And they that think the Apostle Paul's Thorn in Nonnunquam d^jicit D^s hanc
occultam me^is super^iam per manifestam Carnis Luxuriam. Aug. Ep.
the Flesh (2 Cor. 12.) was some molestful strivings with Temptations of the
Flesh, they agree hereunto, for that Thorn in the Flesh was given him, lest he
should be extolled above measure by Reason of his so many Revelations; and no
presenter Remedy of being sick with Spiritual Pride, than to be humbled and
buffetted with Molestations from this dishonouring sin.

Secondly, Profaning Gods Honor by Spiritual Fornication disposes unto
Corporal Fornication; for just it is that God should let them dishonor
themselves Corporally, who dishonor him Spiritually: Thus having related in
the 17 and 18 of Judges, when things were all out of Order in Israel; having
related Examples of Spiritual Fornication or Idolatry, in the 19th. Chapter he
relates an Example of Abominable Corporal Uncle^nness with the L^vites
Concubine, and aimed to have be^n at himself too, v. 22. 1 Kings 14. 23, 24.
and 2 Kings 23. 7. And (...) they changed the Glory of the Incorruptible God,
etc. Therefore ^od also gave them up unto Uncleanness, Romans 1. And that great
Whore, the Mother of Harlots, (...) Babylon, that commits Fornication,
Spiritual Fornication with every stock and stone; what abominable filthiness
and uncleanness, (Corporal also) God has given her over to, the stink of their
public t^lerated Stews, to help his Unholy Holiness's Coffers; the stink os
their impure Cloisters, of their impure Clergies Caelibate, (which made the
World long ag^ cry Foh at these things) shows,

Thirdly, Depressing and Disparaging too much the Honor of Marriage, and
Tyrannical rash imposing Necessity of single Life upon some conditions of Men,
without considerations had os our Saviors Equity, He that c^n receive it, let
him receive it* Thi^, in Gods j^st J^dgment, disposes unto the sin o^ (...);
for just it is with God to let them ^ll into (...) sin which shall dishonor
(...), who go about to dishonor his (...); jus^ to let their own Frailties
shame and confute them, who are so rigid and inconsiderate of ot^ers ^railties.
Thus Hierom, who spoke so hardly o^ Marriage, that he did every where at Rome,
male audire for it; none, even by his own Confession, more tempted with Lust
than he, none that felt more of the Apostle Paul's U^ion or Burning.

Thus the story of Cardinal Cremensis is not un^nown. U^i de ^ncubinis (...)
esse (...) de l^tere sur^re (...) is ad (...) c^m (...) ill^ (...), (...) fuit
in (...), ^es (...) n^n pet^it, dam (...) d^us in su^mum dede^us (...). Matt.
(...). Anno. 1125.
He in a Synod (...) London called the Wives of the Priests Concubines, after
the Popes late begun urging of single ^fe upon them, hence asserting it to be
the highest Crime, to rise from the side of a Concubine to make and consecrate
the Body of Christ; But he himself the Night after he had been Employed in the
Priests work of Consecr^tion, was taken in the committing of Uncleanness; the
thing was Notoriously Evident, and did turn, as good Reason it should, to his
great Disgrace and pepetual Infamy. Thus the Notorious Uncleanness that the
Popish constrained single Life in Gods just Judgment occasioned; every Pasquil
and Pamphlet in our Forefathers days spoke of it; and the French have their
Proverb, That he that would have a clean House, let him neither have Priest nor
Pigeon in it, both were such defiling Creatures: aye, unto what, not only
Reprobate practice, but R^probate Judgment also has God given over the severe
Caelibate-mongers? as some of them to wri^e, that it is better to have an
hundred Whores than one Wife; according to B. Bonner's answer, I pray God it be
no worse; when a Priest accused for having secretly a Wife; No, said he, she is
not my Wife, she is but my Concubine: Some others, (as Johannes a Casa
Archiepisc. Reneventamus) in an Italian Poem to desc^ibe the Praises of Sodom;
aye some (says Erasmus, Prefat. in milit. Christ.) publicly to Publicitus
asseverare leviorem esse culpam, si mulier habeat rem cum bruta pecude quam cum
sacerdote.
a^irm, that it is a less sin for a Woman to have to do with a Brute ^east than
with a Priest.

Secondly, In the Nature of the things themselves, these dispose unto the sin
of Uncleanness.

First, That which the Prophet calls fullness of Bread, under which also by a
Figure, fullness of Drink is employed; the Iniquity of Sodom was Pride, fullness
of Bread. When I had ^ed them to the full, then they committed Adult^ry, Ezekiel.
16. 49. They were as ^d Horses in the Morning, Jer. 5. 7, 8. and alter Rioting
and Drunk^nness, what sollows present^y but (...) and (...)? Romans 13. and eyes
^ull of ^dultery ^ollows pres^ntly, 2 Pet. 2. 13, 14. having spok^n of some
that co^nt it pleasure to Riot; and after looking upon the Wine when it is red,
sollows looking upon strange Women, Prove. 23. Naturally fullness o^ Bread and
Drink makes the Body rank and proud, and prone to Lust, filling it full of
super ^luous Spirits and Humors.

2. That which immediately follows Sine Cerere and (...) friget Venus.
in the next (...) Egisthus quare sit (...)?
place, in that Ezekiel* 16. sc. In (...) ratio est, (...).
Abundance of Idlen^ss; why was Egisthus an Adulterer? The Reason is apparent,
he was a Person addicted to Idleness and Laziness. So it is demand^d, why David
fell upon Adultery, 2 S^m. 11. 2. And it came to pass ^n an Evening-tide that
David arose from o^f ^is Bed. Whereby the Holy Ghost purposely would intimate
the Occasion of his falling into Adultery; he (...) Idle at home while Israel
and Joab was in the Field; aye, he had been newly snorting and stretching
himself idle upon his Bed; Labor and Exercise help ^o wast rank superfluous
humors, whereas Idleness ^ets them grow into nothing ^ut matter and seminary
of Lust; as a standing slank that wants motion, genders nothing because of the
abundance of Moisture, but silthy slimy matter and Toad-stools, and the like;
so nothing but sliminess of Lust, and such filthiness from Idleness, from a
standing slanking Body.

Thirdly, The immediate next Occasions, as too much Familiar Company and
Converse, Foolish Dalliance, light talk, wantonness of Eye, etc. these
immediately dispose unto this sin; and they that say they will use these
things, and yet be safe, they are more bold than wise; there is none long safe,
that will not Nemo diu tutus est (...) pro^imus, Cypr. Ep. 62.
keep aloof off, but still stand too near a danger; odds there is of slipping
in for him that will needs be treading still too near the Pits brink; and
danger there is of being pulled over (for Childrens sports may sometimes be
Grave and Sage Men's Lessons) sor him that will needs be as ^ar as he may go;
and therefore Observa^le it is, that o^ Joseph it is (...) He hearkened not
unto her to (...) by her or to be with her, Genesis 39. 11. And the Wi^e M^ns
Counsel in this case, Remove thy way far from her, and come not n^r the Door of
her House, Prove. 5. He that will needs be walking too n^ar the Beasts Den, may
happily become the Beasts Prey, As that Young Man void of Understanding, who
passing through the street near her Corner, near the Beasts Den, behold there
m^t him a Woman in the Attire of an Harlot (out comes the Beast) and she caught
him, Prove. 7. How much more he who will needs venture into the Den it self to
play with the Beast; and for other Occasions also, Job he made a Covenant with
his Eyes, Job 31. and good Reason, for Death comes by the Windows in this
sense: See Genesis 6. 2. 2 Samuel 11. 2.

FINIS.

