THE Catholic Doctor AND HIS SPIRITUAL CATHOLICON To CURE Our SINFUL SOULS.

A COMMUNION-SERMON Preached to the Right Honorable Sr. ROBERT FOSTER Lord
Chief Justice of the KINGS BENCH, and the rest of the Reverend Judges, and
Sergeants at LAW, in SERJEANTS-Inne in Fleetstreet, On Sunday May the 26th.
1661.

BY MATTHEW GRIFFITH, D. D.

London, Printed by W. Godbid for John Playford in the Inner Temple. 1661.

To the Right Honorable EDWARD EARL of CLARENDON Lord Chancellor of ENGLAND,
etc.
MY LORD,
IT may seem a Paradox, though it be true, that this Communion Sermon was
preached in a small Congregation, viz. the Chapel in Serjeants-Inne in
Fleet Street; yet to a great and grave Auditory, for the reverend Judges, and
Sergeants at Law, were pleased there to honor me with their attention and
approbation. And as it is the only staff of my age, and chief comfort of my
life, that I am a servant to the truly Honorable Societies of the Temple, of
which the said Judges and Sergeants not long since were a considerable part: so
that I might not die altogether a stranger to your Lordship (whom all knowing
men look upon as the Quintessence, and highest Extraction of those noble
Societies) I have assumed the confidence (being overentreated to print this
Sermon) to recommend herein to your Lordship a Physician, in whose care and
custody you may safely venture both body and soul; in which respect as he is
every way worthy of your Lordships cordial entertainment: so my hope is that
Your accustomed goodness will not only pardon this presumption in one, whose
yet suffering condition can give no better evidence, and assurance of his real
reverence, and sincere desire to serve Your Lordship: but also freely permit
him to publish this piece of devotion under your Lordships name unto the
people: for your native Candor, and supernatural Clemency, have made you (as
the Historian styles Titus) their darling and delight: Among whom not only
your Lordships countenance, but connivance is enough to candy any person, or
action; and to gain them both authority and acceptance. Your Lordships
infallible prudence in counselling, and irresistible power in persuading
outshine all humane presidents; and whosoever would now advance himself like
an Orator, he must first sit a while in silence at Your Lordships feet, and
learn of you (who are only able) to speak with as much grace, and gravity, as
both Nestor, and Gamaliel. His Sacred Majesty (who is under God the fountain of
honor) could not possibly do himself more right, then by advancing you; who
are observed to discharge the high and weighty place of Lord Chancellor, with
so much ability, and satisfaction, that the Dignity it self is preferred in
being conferred upon Your Lordship; all whose Injunctions, and Decrees, are
tempered not only Ad Justitiam, but Ad pondus aequale: so that though but one
side can prevail, yet the other has not the least color to complain of any
thing but the demerits of his Cause. And however the incredible extent, and
irreparable expense of some Suites in Chancery have formerly turned both parts
into Plaintiffs at last, when though one seemed to get the better, yet in truth
both were worsted: yet now Your Lordships integrity and dexterity in
determining causes, render all Commencers in that Honorable Court, as happy as
any that go to Law (which is a kind of waging war) can in reason hope to be,
Cita mors, aut Victoria laeta. We need no other arguments to prove, or
inducements to believe, that His Sacred Majesty has at this day that
extraordinary gift, which the Apostle called, The Spirit of discerning; but
only this, that he singled out Your Lordship as One fit, and worthy to be
nearest Himself. If Moses in his time had been blessed with such a Counselor,
sure Jethro would never have diminished his Greatness by Advising him to call
in so many Assistants. Your Lordships wisdom is sole-sufficient to govern the
vastest Empire; which irrefragable truth no man can deny without the guilt and
censure of gross ignorance, Envy, and heresy. And were we not generally
ungrateful, if not stupid, we would professedly congratulate our own happiness
in the accumulation of your Honors; and wish them in all respects as
transcendent as your Merits. But though some others, (like the nine Leapers
that were healed) return not thanks, yet for my part the Psalmist has taught
me to say, Good luck have you with your Honor: Ride on, till your christian
progress center in perfection: in order whereunto you carry your self with so
much sobriety, and sweetness, that those few who malign your fortune, yet
cannot but love your person; and all the rest think it their happiness to be
commanded by your Lordship. In whom (as it is said of Daniel 5. 14.) the Spirit
of the Holy Gods, light, and understanding, and excellent wisdom is found: and
consequently your Lordship deserves that Eulogie in the North, which the Queen
of the South gave to Solomon himself; Happy are thy servants that stand always
in thy presence to hear thy wisdom: This is all the ambition of him, who here
in all humility craves your Lordships patronage, and vow's himself

The humblest of Your Lordships Servants, and truest Honourers, Matthew
Griffith.

The CATHOLIC DOCTOR AND His SPIRITVAL CATHOLICON TO Cure Our SINFUL SOULS.
1 JOHN 1. 7. The Blood of Jesus Christ, his Son, cleanses us from all Sin.
THE sum of all knowledge is Divinity, the sum of all Divinity is the
Scripture; the sum of all the Scripture is the Gospel; the sum of all the
Gospel is my Text; and the sum of my Text is in the Verb, (...), Cleanses;
which Verb is a Metaphor taken from the learned, and necessary profession of
Physic, in which there be so many sorts of purging and cleansing medicines.

And (if you will give me leave to follow this Metaphor in dividing my Text) it
will fairly, and without the least straining, lead your Christian devotion
into the serious consideration

First of a Physician, who is here described not only by his proper name,
Jesus; and his Appellative name, Christ; but also by somewhat that is Relative,
His Son; viz. The Son of God, spoken of in the Context,

Secondly, Of the Physic here administr'd, viz. Blood: The Blood of Jesus, etc.

Thirdly, Of the Operation of this Blood, which is the Physic in the Text,
(...), It cleanses.

Fourthly, Of the Patients on whom this Physic works, viz. (...), Us.

Fifthly, Of the sickness which so much endangers us, (...), Sin.

Sixthly, Of the Extent of this mortal disease, insinuated in the Collective,
All, all Sin.

In the first you may note the transcendent diginity of this Physician; for it
is neither Galen, nor Hipocrates, nor any other mere man; nor Aesculapius,
Apollo, or any fictitious Diety; nor Menecrates who affected to be styled
Menecrates Jupiter: but it is Jesus Christ the Son of God.

In the second note the excellency of this Physic, for it is no ordinary
English simple, or Indian drugge; but it is blood; and not any blood neither,
as the blood of the Levitical Sacrifices; but by way of singularity, it is
(...), The blood; even the blood of the Physician himself; The blood of Jesus
Christ his Son.

In the third note the admirable efficacy, and operation of this blood; for it
is not only (...), but also Catholicon, an Universal cleanser.

In the fourth note the extreme misery of mankind since the fall, expressed in
the parable of the wounded Travailer: and here implied in this Us, which I
properly call The Patient.

In the fifth Note the extraordinary malignity of the deplorable, and almost
desperate malady, which is here called Sin. For this Sin is such a sickness as
can not possibly be cured by any other means, then Blood; nor by any other
blood, then that of Jesus Christ, the Physician in the Text.

In the sixth and last, Note the vast extent, and latitude of this disease;
expressed in this Collective, All; and so St. John's meaning is to assure us
for our comfort that the blood of Christ cures all our sickness, when he says
here, that it cleanses us from all Sin. These six are the parts; of all which
in this order with so much brevity, as can any way stand with perspicuity: and
I begin with him, who deserves to be our first consideration, viz. Jesus
Christ, his Son.

Of whom that I may speak more distinctly, let your attention, intention, and
retention, keep pace with me through these two considerations: The one is of
our Saviors Person; and the other of his Profession, which in the regular
prosecution of this allegory continued in the Text, I call A Physician. Again
in opening the former consideration, viz. that of our Saviors Person, I shall
take just occasion to speak somewhat both of his names, Jesus, Christ: and also
of his natures; the divine, and the humane; one of which is clearly expressed,
and the other necessarily implied in these two terms; His Son. A word of
each; and first of his proper name, Jesus; This signifies a Savior, it is a
broken Hebrew word, (as Critics observe) and it is our Physicians proper name;
and indeed it is not improper for any Physician to be styled a Savior, because
his principal aim and end is to save his Patients, that is, to keep them safe
and sound; so that by the help and benefit of Physic, They may have what all
men do, or should pray, and labor for, viz. Mentem sanam in corpore sano. But
the Physician in my Text is a Savior (...); for at the very imposition of his
name, the Angel ( Matthew. 1. 21.) made this the Exposition of the same, Thou
shall call his name Jesus; for he shall save his people from their sins. Then a
Physician he was, yet with this difference; Other Physicians cure our bodies,
He our Souls; they our sickness, He our Sins. This Jesus was a Savior; yet not
like Joseph, Josua, Jepthah; Gedeon, Othoniel, and some others, who in
Scripture are called Saviors, too, in their kind; but they were only typical,
and temporary Saviors; they saved the people among whom they lived, only from
temporal evils, and enemies: but this Jesus was the truth of all those types;
and justified to be a Savior under Gods broad Seal; as having power thereby to
save his people both from Sin, the root; and miseries, the branches; from
death, I mean eternal, which St. John calls the second death; and the Devil,
who is said to have the power of death; and the curse of the Law, and the wrath
of God; from all which none could save us, but this Jesus in the Text. Of which
sweet and saving name St. Bernard descants thus, Nomen Jesus lux, cibus,
medicina est: The name Jesus is both our light, our meat, and our medicine:
lucet praedicatum, says he, pascit recogitatum, sanat invocatum. And elsewhere
in his devotions he calls this Jesus Mel in ore, melos in aure, jubilus in
cord. This Jesus (say others) is the sick man's salve, and the Soldiers
shield, he solaceth the Patient, and supports the deficient, and encourages
the proficient, and crowns the perseverant.

I may call this name Jesus, Angelical; for (in the second Chapter of St. Luke,
at the twenty first verse) I find him called Jesus by the Angel, before he was
conceived in the womb. His name Christ is prophetical; for the Prophets still
call him in Hebrew, The Messiah; which in Greek signifies The Christ, And if,
with St. John in the Text, we put the two names together, then we have his name
Evangelical: for (John 20. 31.) These things were written, that you might
believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing you might
have life.

He is Jesus in Hebrew, to show that he is a Savior to the Jews; and he is
called Christ in Greek, to show that he is a Savior to the Gentiles also: And
both these names are commonly given him in holy writ, to show that he is the
Common Savior of both: and St. John has coupled them in the Text, to signify
that the wall of separation is now broken down, and so no difference between
his Patients; as the Apostle ( Gal. 3. 28.) speaks plainly, There is neither
Jew nor Greek, neither bond nor free, neither male or female; for ye are all
one in Christ Jesus.

Christ signifies Anointed; (...) nomen verbale a (...), ungo, say Critics.
And this which I call his Appellative, shows him to be a Physician, too: for he
was Anointed himself that he might anoint us: yea he was anointed the rather
that he might as a Physician be the more successful; which I take to be the
meaning of that prophecy in the 61 chap. of Isaiah; which our Savior applies
to himself in the 4th chap. of St. Luke, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me,
therefore has the Lord anointed me; he has sent me to preach good tidings to
the poor, to bind up the broken hearted, etc. Never such a Physician as this;
none can bind up, and heal the broken hearted, but He: never such Physic as
this Blood in the Text, which he administered only as he was anointed. Yea he
is not only Anointed in himself, but he is our Ointment too; in the second
Chapter of the first Epistle of St. John, at the twenty seventh Verse; and such
annointment as is transient from him, and immanent in us; for that ointment
which you have received from him, as Christians, dwells in you, says St. John:
and this inhabitation makes you to be, as well as to be called, Christians. And
as the precious ointment which was poured on Aarons head, ran down his beard,
says the Psalmist, and thence to the skirts of his clothing: so Christ was
not so much anointed for himself, who is the head of all principalities and
powers, says the Apostle, and in whom dwelt the fullness of the Godhead, even
bodily: as for us; that so from him as our head, the grace and virtue of his
Anointing might descend upon us, who are so many real, though inferior
members of his mystical body, or rather but the skirts of his clothing.
Briefly, The fathers out of the Scripture affirming that in him all fullness
dwelt, enlarge themselves thus, There was in Christ fullness of favor,
fullness of prerogative, fullness of influence, fullness of grace, etc. And of
his fullness (says St. John 1. 16.) we have all received, and grace for grace;
grace in our proportion, though not in his perfection.

Now, it is observable that as Kings and Priests in times past were ordinarily
anointed, and the Prophet Elizeus extraordinarily: So in this Christ all these
Three Offices met. For,

First, A Priest he was, and a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchizedek,
in the 110. Psalm, at the the 4. Verse. I have sworn, and will not repent, thou
art a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedek. Not after the Order of
Aaron; for his Priesthood was Levitical and Typical; and so ceased when the
Fulness of time was come: but after the Order of Melchizedek; who was both
King of Salem (Heb. 7. 1.) and also Priest of the most High God? Yea he was the
true Melchizedek; without Father as he was Man; without Mother as he was God.

Secondly, A Prophet he was; and that Prophet which Moses speaks of ( Deuteronomy. 18.
18.) A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you from among your
Brethren, like unto me. And though in some things Christ was but like to Moses,
yet in most things he excelled even Moses himself, who might have justly said
as John the Baptist does, He that comes after meis preferred before me, Joh. 3.

Thirdly, A King he was to save his people, Jeremiah the 23. and the 6. yea he
was not only a King; but the King proclaimed in the 9. of Zechary at the 9.
Verse. Behold the King comes to thee, etc. Yea he was the King of Kings. Apoc.
19. 16. Briefly this Christ was David's priest; and Moses his prophet; and
Ieremies King.

These Offices had formerly met double; I find two of them in some others: For
Melchizedek was King and priest; Samuel was priest and prophet; David was
prophet, and King: yet all the three never met in any one save this Christ
alone; and consequently no perfect Christ but he; but he, was all, and so
all-perfect. Yea he was not only a Christ, but even (...), The Christ, for so
the Term is both propounded and expounded ( Ioh. 1. 22.) we have found the
Messiah, which is by Interpretation, The Christ, not only Christus Domini
(says St. Augustine) but even Christus Dominus.

And thus having opened his two names, Jesus Christ: I come now to touch with a
light pencil his two natures; the one employed, the other expressed in the two
next words, His Son. The Blood of Jesus Christ his Son, etc.

This Jesus Christ is the Son of God; yet his Son he is, neither by creation as
are the Angels of Heaven; nor yet by adoption, as are the Saints on Earth, but
by Generation; for so says God by his prophet ( Psalm. 2. 7.) Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee? Thee including Christ: and so much the
apostolic Writer in his first Chapter to the Hebrews, at the Fifth Verse,
applies unto Christ Antonomastice, excluding the Creatures; for to which of
them said God at any time, Thou art my Son, etc.

And this Jesus Christ does ordinarily in the Gospel style himself, The Son of
man: So that there were two Natures in him, The Divine and the Humane; and he
was one of both Natures, not two in both: One and the same without time,
begotten of the Father, the Son of God without Mother, and in time begotten of
the Virgin Mary, the Son of Man without Father; the true, natural, real and
consubstantial Son of both. Thus was he the Son of God, and Man; yet not by
confusion of Substance but by Unity of person. And this Union of the Divine and
Humane nature in him, is called by the Schoolmen a Personal Conjunction, yet
not of persons; and it is of two Natures, yet not natural: for as The Word
because of the Flesh is man, so the Flesh because of the Word is God; and yet
neither is the humane Nature coextended with the Divine, nor the Divine nature
concluded in the humane.

In the creation we read that God made man like himself, Genesis 1. 26. but in the
Redemption it is plain, that God made himself like man: and as at first man was
like God in nothing but Holiness; (for so the Apostle ( Ephesians. 4. 24.)
expounds Gods Image) so at last God was like man in all things but Sin: He
became that which he was not, yet still remained that which he was; being at
one and the same time both perfect in his own nature, and true in ours: That
there might be as great Humility in the Redeemer, as there was pride in the
Praevaricatour; and as there was at first so great pride, that Man would be as
God. Genesis 3. 6. So there was at last so great Humility, that God would become
man; even of a reasonable Soul, and humane flesh subsisting; as in the
Athanasian Creed. Thus he that was the Son of God from everlasting, was born in
the fullness of time, as the Son of man; and he that was born as the Son of
man, wrought miracles as the Son of God; and he that wrought miracles as the
Son of God, dyed as the Son of man; and he that died as the Son of man, rose
again from the dead as he was the Son of God.

O wonder at this, all you that wonder at nothing else; for this is admirably
singular, and singularly to be admired: This was such a work, such a wonder;
that I must needs say (with St. Hierome) that which nature had not, which use
knew not, which reason was ignorant of, which the mind of man was incapable
of, which the Angels themselves (till revealed) understood not; and which all
the powers of created nature stood amazed at, came to pass, when the Son of God
in the Text became the Son of man; taking the divine and humane nature into the
unity of his person, that so he might bring God and man into the unity of
affection.

It is confessed that only the humane nature that Sinned, ought to have made
satisfaction, but that alone could not; for by Sin an infinite Majesty was
offended, and therefore infinite satisfaction was to be made; but mere man
being a finite creature could not possibly make infinite satisfaction: and it
cannot be denied but that the Divine nature could have satisfied, and that
alone for Sin, but that alone ought not; for man had Sinned, and therefore man
must suffer: Now, in this Jesus Christ both these natures met; for he was the
Son both of God, and man; and as he was the Son of man, he was truly liable to
the debt of Sin; and as he was the Son of God, he was fully able to discharge
it: and so as the Son of man, he suffered; as he was the Son of God, he
satisfied; and as he was the Son of both, he saved us.

And thus having showed his Person; I stand now bound by a debt of promise to
speak somewhat of his Profession; for if we look upon the words of my Text, as
a continued allegory, as you may remember we did when we took it in pieces;
then this Jesus Christ as he is the Son of God and man in the Text, does
personate a Physician; and indeed whilst he was incarnate, he seemed to delight
in no one title more then this of a Physician; as you may observe both in the
ninth Chapter of St. Matthew. at the twelfth Verse: where (apologizing for his
frequenting the company of publicans, and sinners) he does it under this
parable, The whole have no need of the Physician, but the sick. His meaning
was, that as Sin is a sickness, so he was a Physician; and as Physicians for
the most part are taken up in visiting their patients, so was he: and as the
sound need not the Physician, so the Pharisees, who were so many Justiciaries,
and trusted in their own righteousness, never thought that they stood in need
of Christ, etc. And also in the fourth Chap. of St. Luke, at the 23d., Verse,
ye will say unto me, according to the proverb, Physician heal thy self. In both
which, and diverse other places, and passages of Scripture, he assumes the
habit, and profession of a Physician; and well he might, for as in some things
he was like other Physicians; so in many things he did exceed, and excel them.
I say again that in some things Christ was like other Physicians; for

First as a Physician must be thoroughly skilled in the Theory of all Diseases,
that so he may know how to proportion, and apply his medicines to the radical
humor of every malady that ill affects his patients: so in Christ were hid all
the treasures of wisdom, and knowledge, says the Apostle; and therefore he
could not be ignorant of the cause, or cure of any Evil that befalls us; he
knows whereof we are made, says the Psalmist; yea all our lurking distempers,
and secret sins are naked, and open before him, whose eyes are a thousand times
brighter then the Sun.

Secondly, As a Physician carefully and compassionately visits his sick
patients, and abhors not their persons, though their diseases be never so
loathsome: so for us men, and for our Salvation Christ descended from the
bosom of his heavenly Father into the womb of his Virgin Mother: and in the
days of his flesh he was so far from abhorring our natural uncleaness, and
even unnatural lusts, that he took upon him all our poenal infirmities, (as the
Schoolmen speak) though not our sinful: and he was tempted in all things like
unto us, sin only excepted, as we read in the second to the Hebrews, at the
17. Verse; that so he might the better sympathize in all our Sufferings, and
heal our sins.

Thirdly, As it is the praise of a Physician that he will visit the poor though
they be not solvant, and he will not protract his cures beyond the Rules of
Art, though he might thereby much enrich himself: So Christ did freely
administer all his Spiritual potions: and he cured all such as had long
languished, speedily: Yea, he not only healed all that came; but he invited
them to come unto him, as in the 11. Chapter of St. Matthew and the 28. Verse,
Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will refresh you: and
when they were so wearyed with the load of Sin, that they were not able to come
unto him, he vouchsafed to come unto them; and he soughtout opportunities to be
doing of good.

Fourthly, As a Physician seldom administers Physic, but where he finds both
a capacity and velleity in the Patients to take it* so Christ commonly gives
his spiritual Medicines to none but such as are poor in Spirit, which makes them
capable; and tonone but such as hunger and thirst after righteousness, which
argues an eager appetite, and velleity to become safe and sound. You know how
he began his cure upon the Cripple (John 5. 6.) that had layen so long at the
Pool of Bethesda, vis sanus fieri? will thou be made whole? and as soon as he
had professed his willingness, but only that he wanted a man to help him; then
Christ as a Physician said, and his word had a deed in it: Ecce sanus factus
es! Behold thou art made whole? and he is constant to this method in all his
cures.

Fifthly, As a Physician often cures by contraries, as a Surfeit by Fasting,
etc. So Christ by his obedience did cure our disobedience; by his humility our
pride; by his bounty our avarice, etc. briefly his poverty was our riches; his
death our life; his cross our crown. Thus, as the Apostle speaks in the first
Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, at the Thirty Verse, Christ
was made unto us of God, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and
redemption: That by his Wisdom he might cure our Folly; by his Righteousness
our Iniquity; by his Sanctification our profaneness; by his Redemption our
Spiritual bondage.

Sixthly, As when a Physician has cured his patient of a dangerous Disease, he
prescribes him a Diet for fear of a Relapse, which is ever dangerous and
sometimes deadly: So Christ when he has converted a Sinner (which is a
Spiritual Cure) he ever prescribes him a Diet to prevent Relapsing: as to the
Cripple (in the 5. chap. of St. John verse 14.) Behold thou art made whole: Sin
no more, least a worse thing fall unto thee. In which method of our Savior we
may observe, first the commemoration of a benefit received, Behold thou art
made whole. Secondly, a caution to be duly observed, Sin no more. Thirdly, the
commination of a judgment to be avoided, lest a worse thing fall unto thee. As
if he had said; no Sin goes unpunished; and what ere thou have suffered for thy
former fins, yet if thou go on, a worse thing may befall thee in this Life; and
if not here, then I tremble to think on, and am altogether unwilling to
prognosticate, what (if thou dye in thy Sins) will be thy portion in the Life
to come. And as in all these respects Christ resembles other Physicians: So in
diverse others he exceeds and excells them all, as I come now to show; For,

First, All other Physicians are fain to make use of the ordinary means, such
as are Roots, Herbs, and Flowers in the Galenical way; and of Minerals in the
Paracelsian: but this Physician cured most of his Patients only by his Word:
and either he made no use of the means, or he wrought his cures even against
the means, for being the first cause, the whole Series of the Creatures were
subordinate and subservient to his absolute will and command.

Secondly, However other Physicians may cure some diseases, yet they cannot
cure all, some maladies being in their own nature incurable; but nothing was
impossible to Christ, he could cure all Comers. And therefore St. John Baptist
pointed at him, and painted him to the Life, with an En and Ecce, Behold the
Lamb of God that takes away the Sin of the World, Joh. 1. 29. Sin is the
procreating cause of all Sickness, in the Third of the Lamentations at the
Thirty ninth Verse. Man suffers for his Sins. And this Physician taking away
the cause, the cure must needs follow.

Thirdly, Though other physicians may sometimes be instrumental to hasten
health, yet never could any of them prevent death; Contra vim mortis non est
medicamen in hortis. Their Cure is at most but a Reprieve, no Jail-delivery,
Interdum medica plus valet art malum; but this Physician in the Text, is not
only Morbifugus, but also Mortifugus. He alone Tryumphs over Death and the
Grave, as in the prophet, O death I will be thy death! O grave I will be thy
Victory! Christ by his Death has both taken out, and taken away the sting of
Death; so that now, like a Serpent without a sting, Deaths Malice is
Toothlesse. The Death of the Saints in Scripture is called but a dissolution, a
departure, a sleep, a resting in hope, till Christ (who is the Resurrection,
and the Life) shall awake them.

Fourthly, Other Physicians can only cure our bodies, which are but one
constituting part of man, and the worst of the two; but Christ both heals and
saves the whole man, yea all mankind, if they will take his potions, and live
according to his prescriptions; which must be observed and strictly too, upon
pain not only of Death but of Damnation.

Lastly, Other Physicians use Phlebotomy, and let their patient blood to cure
them, but Christ himself was let blood to save us: So malignant and
pestilential was the burning Fever of our sins, that if our Physician had not
bled to Death, we could not possibly have lived, either the Life of Grace on
Earth, or the Life of Glory in the Heavens.

And so I have done with the first main part, viz. The Physician, in the
consideration of whom, because I have so enlarged my self, I will handle all
the rest with Laconick brevity.

The second thing considerable here is the Physic which this Physician
administers; and this says St. John here, is Blood; for so stand the Words,
The Blood of Jesus, etc.

The ancient Physicians had an excellent Receipt, which they called (...),
because it was a mixture of many bloods: but why was this wast? why such a
mixture, and of so many bloods? when as (...), This Blood in the Text, is
(...), and (...), a sovereign Medicine for every Malady: Nam cum me pulsat
turpis aliqua cogitatio (says St. Augustine) when any unclean thought assaults
me, I straight recul to the wounds of my Savior; when I stumble and fall foul
through any strong infirmity, the Meditation of my Saviors wounds raises me
up; yea when the Devil either openly like a roaring Lion; or privily like a
subtle Serpent lies in wait to devour me, I both fly to, and hide me in the
holes of the Rock, my Saviors wounds, and I am safe. Briefly, there is none so
catholic a remedy as the Blood of Christ; for this contains in it vertually
all the parts of Physic, such as are Sweatings, Vomits, Unctions, Minutions,
Potions, Diets, Watchings, Exercises, Clysters, Cauterizings, etc.

The spiritual Sweatings are sharp Agonies, breathed out in brinish tears of
true Compunction.

The Vomits are civil and religious, public and private; general and
particular confessions.

The Unctions are powerful and sweet smelling prayers.

The Minutions are Contributions to the necessity of the Saints.

The Potions are self-denyals, and bearing Christ's Cross, with many the like
bitter potions.

The Dyets are religious fasts keeping under the Body, and bringing it into
subjection.

The Watchings are preparations against allurements to Sin, and the Temptations
of Satan.

The Exercises are the practice of piety, and the conscionable labors of men
in their Callings, Civil and Christian.

The Clysters are meekness, longanimity, and easiness to pardon injuries and
indignities.

The Cauterizings are Stigmata Jesu, to bear in our bodies the marks of the
Lord Jesus; and all kind of persecution for Righteousness Sake.

All these are called and counted Sovereign remedies in their kind; and yet I
must tell you that they are neither sovereign, nor remedies, any farther then
they derive their virtue and energy from the Blood of Christ, which alone makes
all our christian endeavors sweet and acceptable to God, as God himself
testifies in the 3. chap. of St. Matthew at the 17 verse, This is my beloved
Son in whom I am well pleased: As if he had said, This, singularly; is,
eternally; my, substantially; son, naturally; beloved, transcendently; in whom,
as in a common man; I, whom it once repented that I had made man; am now well
pleased with all men.

But we usually judge of the goodness of Physic by its operation, and
therefore I hasten to speak something of that; yet that I may not make more
have then good speed, let me sweeten your mouths after your taking this purge,
with that pious ejaculation of St. Augustine, Inspice vulnera Christi
pendentis; etc. Oh see the Wounds of Christ hanging on the Cross! the blood of
him dying, the price of him redeeming: Caput habet inclinatum in Cruce ad
osculandum, etc. His head is inclined on the Cross to salute us; his arms are
stretched abroad to embrace us; and his whole body is there exposed to redeem
us.

And thus from the consideration of this Physician, Jesus Christ his Son; and
his physic, Blood: I come now to enquire how this his physic works; and this
St. John shows in the very next word (...), cleanses; It is purging Physic,
for it cleanses; which is our next consideration.

The Epigrammatist wittily jeers a Patient that had taken such Pills as did not
work, Cepisti pilulas hodie sed non operantur; and he tells him withal that he
might safely take such Pills on the Lords day; they would not break the Sabbath
sure, because they would do no manner of work: And as it is their sin who
commonly take Physic on the Lords day; so they were justly punished if the
Physic so taken should not work. But however bodily Physic sometimes works
not kindly, and sometimes not at all, when God blesses not the means because
we abuse them: yet the blood of Christ, this Physic in the Text, is wondrous
operative; it has many and sundry admirable effects, for it is Unguentum
nostrae aegrotationis (say the Fathers) ornamentum nostrae conditionis,
munimentum protegens contra tentationes, fulcimentum stabiliens in bonas
operationes, etc.

Saint Peter styles Christ's blood the fountain of our election; St. Paul, the
laver of regeneration; St. John, the price of our redemption: In the 12. to the
Hebrews, it is an Advocate to plead for us: and in the 12. of the Revelation it
is a champion to fight for us; and in the 9. of the Hebrews it is a Chamberlain
to open the Holy of Holies unto us: and because nothing that is either
imperfect or impure shall ever enter there; therefore in the 13. to the
Hebrews, the blood of Christ is said to make us perfect in every good work: and
in my Text it purges us from every evil work; for here it cleanses us from
all-Sin.

Yea it not only cleanses, but whitens too; as St. John shows in the 7. of the
Apocalypse, (...), etc. They washed their Robes, and made them white in the
blood of the Lamb. Many things are washed, and washed clean, which yet are not
white: more then ordinary laver, and labor must go to whitening. And yet it is
remarkable that the Saints not only washed but whitened their Robes in the
blood of Christ, there, by a Metaphor called the Lamb.

But stay; does not the Philosopher say that Quicquid sanguis attingit,
inficit, and foedat. What ever blood touches it pollutes, and defiles. It is
true that he says so; and he says that which is true: then may not some
Embrio in the Faith, both scruple and question, How can blood cleanse us,
seeing that it pollutes all things else?

To this hard Question, the Answer is easy; for the blood of Christ does not
cleanse Physically, but meritoriously: we must distinguish (say the Schoolmen)
inter sanguinem corporis Christi, and crucis Christi: The blood of Christ's
body, like that which runs in our Veins, did naturally stain, else it had not
been true blood: but when that true blood of his natural body was powered out on
the Cross, and offered as a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God, for
the sins of the World; this the Apostle (in the first to the Colossians at the
Twentieth Verse) calls the blood of his Cross; and this blood of Christ's
Cross is of infinite merit; and this merit of his Blood, is only that, which
in the Text is said to cleanse Us.

And it cleanses us every way: for whereas Blood in Scripture is sometimes put
for the guilt of sin, as in the 51. Psalm, at the 14. Verse, Libera me de
sanguinibus, as it is read out of the Hebrew, Deliver me from
Blood-guiltinesse, O God, etc. And sometimes for the punishment of Sin, as in
the 27. chap. of St. Matthew at the 25. Verse, where the Blood-sucking and
Blood-thirsty Jews cried out, the better to encourage staggering Pilate to
sentence Christ to death, His blood be upon us and our Children: It is very
remarkable that this Blood cleanses us both from the guilt of Sin, as our
reconciliation; and also from the punishment of the same, as our satisfaction:
In this blood note the singularity of the Medicine; in the extent, from all
sin, note the Universality of the malady; The first insinuates the
sole-sufficiency of Christ's merit; and the second, the all sufficiency of the
same. Haec unica medicina contra omnes morbos.

Then though the Roman, like the Assyrian Leaper, dote to this day on the
Abanah and Pharphar of humane Inventions, such as are their holy water, holy
oil, spittle, cream, salt, and sundry other purging devices; yet nobis non
licet esse tam disertis; the holy Scripture allows us to acknowledge no other
purgatory but the blood of Christ. This our Jordan is better then all the
Rivers of their Damascus; which are indeed but so many standing ponds and
stinking puddles, compared with Christ's Side; that one living fountain
discovered by the Prophet Zechary, which God has set open on the Cross to
Judah and Jerusalem, to bath in for sin, and for uncleanness.

And the Physic being thus prepared; the next thing that I am to do, is to
take a serious view of the Patients on whom it works, and those St. John here
calls (...), us; we our selves are the Patients in the Text, for, The blood of
Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us.

It is a Question much controverted in the Schools, An Christus aliquid pro se
meruerit? whether Christ merited any thing for himself? but St. John here puts
it out of Question, that Christ's blood cleanses us; as I take it, in
opposition, if not exclusively to some others whom it does not cleanse; Such as
are,

First Christ himself; Indeed God expressly required the Levitical High Priest
to offer sacrifice first for his own sins; and then for the sins of the people;
but out Evangelical High Priest, Christ Jesus sacrificed himself, yet not for
his own sins but for the sins of the people. He suffered not as a sinner, but
as a Savior, and shed his blood, non ex indigentia sui, sed ex indulgentia
nostri. I say then, that Christ's blood, does not cleanse himself; for he was
conceived by the Holy Ghost, that is, say the Learned, by the manufacture, and
by the operation; by the overshadowing of the Holy Ghost, says the Angel. He
was conceived not by generation, but by benediction, says Gab. Biel, and his
Virgin Mother conceived him, not by spermatical effusion, but by the Spirit. He
was begotten without carnal copulation, and brought forth, without mortal
corruption; so that he was not leaprous in the principles of nature, he was no
way imaginable taincted with original Sin. And in the whole course of his life
he was a Nathaniel, a true Israelite, in whom there was no guile; his
conversation was as sinlesse, as his coat was seemlesse; and being so free from
original and actual sin, no man could say unto him (as it is in the proverb,
Luke 4.) Physician heal thy self: for he had no sickness, no sin; and
consequently his blood in the Text cleansed not himself.

Secondly, His blood cleansed not the good Angels; for though they had a
possibility to fall, yet it was never reduced into Act; and therefore they
needed not the blood of Christ to cleanse them from sin, but only to confirm
them in grace.

Thirdly, His blood cleanses not the evil Angels; they are irrecoverably
fallen, both because they fell nullo suggerente, and also because they are
inveterate, and obdurate in their pride, and malice; and therefore that
dangerous opinion of Origin, who held that the damned Spirits shall be saved at
last, as it comes for ought I can see without any Warrant from God, so let it
pass without reverence from man.

Fourthly, The brute Beasts as they are not capable of faith, so they reap no
benefit by Christ's bloodshed. And thus you see that the blood of Christ did
not cleanse himself, nor the good Angels, nor the evil Angels, nor the brute
Beasts; and if you ask, whom then? St. John answers flat and plain in the Text;
Us.

First us, and only us; for all that the Son of God incarnate did, or said, or
suffered, was for us men, and our Salvation; Christ was not born for himself,
for unto Us a Child is born, says the Prophet Isaiah, and unto Us a Son is
given, given to Us, given for Us, He did not live for himself, for the Text
says, that he went about doing good, and hearing evil; and regium est audire
male, cum been feceris. Neither did he dye for himself; for he was smitten for
our sins, says the same Isaiah, and bruised for our Transgressions; The
Chastisement of our peace was laid upon him. And therefore being dead, justly
was he buried in an others Sepulcher; who dved for the sins of others. He was a
Jesus, a Savior, not for himself but Us: he was The Christ, anointed a King,
a Priest, and a Prophet, and all and only for us; a King to protect and govern
us; a Priest to pray, bless, and offer sacrifice for us; a Prophet to direct
and instruct us; whose redemption was in his passion; our absolution was in his
condemnation; our release from the curse was in his Cross; our satisfaction
for sin was in his sacrifice; our cleansing was in his blood; our mortification
of the flesh was in his burial; our reconciliation was in his descention; our
newness of Life was in his Resurrection, our immortality in his conquest; and
the fullness of our joy in his Kingdom.

Sic vos non vobis mellificatis apes. Thus this Master-Bee, made Honey not for
himself, but Us.

Sic vos non vobis nidificates aves. Thus this Bird of Paradise, prepared his
Nest, a rest not for himself, but Us.

Sic vos non vobis fertis aratra boves. Thus this Red Heyser (the truth of that
in the Type) bare the Yoke not for himself, but Us.

Sic vos non vobis vellera fertis oves. Thus this Lamb of God was led to the
slaughter, where he was not only fleic'd but flead, yet not for himself, but
us, and us only.

And as for us, and only us; so in the next place let me tell you, that the
blood of Christ cleanses us, and us indefinitely, all of us: for St. John the
Baptist proclaims that he took away the sins of the World, Joh. 1. 29. and lest
any straight laced consistorian Schismatics should restringe the words to
their own beleiving faction, St. John (in the 2. chap. of his first Epistle
General, at the 2. verse) explains himself, If any man (whosoever) sin (any sin
whatsoever) we have an Advocate with the Father, even Christ Jesus the
Righteous, who is a propitiation for all our sins, and not for our sins only,
but for the sins of the whole World. And totum est extra quod nihil est. And to
evince this Truth, St. Paul in the second chapter of his second Epistle to the
Corinthians, at the 15. verse, says in express terms that Christ dyed for
all. And in Heb. 2. 9. we read that He tasted Death for every man. And in this
latitude St. Augustine took the meaning of God himself to be; for (glossing
upon those words of St. Peter in the 10. chap. of the Acts, at the 34. Verse)
he asserts, Apud Deum nulla personarum acceptio, qui seipsum excipit, seipsum
decipit. And to the same effect St. Bernard cries out, devoutly as he is wont,
Non horruisti, Domine, peccatricem Lachrymantem, non Chananaeam supplicantem,
non Publicanum exorantem, non Latronem confitentem, non mulierem in adulterio,
non Davidem in homicidio, non sedentem in telonio, non discipulum negantem, non
discipulorum persecutorem. And of this judgment in effect were all the
Ancients.

Then to draw all these scattered lines to their Center, The blood of Christ
here cleanses, yet neither himself, nor the good Angels, nor the evil Angels,
nor the brute Beasts; but us; and only Us; and all of us: and yet for close of
this point, I add one thing not to be omitted, viz. That as in this us, we
cannot but observe the Communion of Saints ( Omnes enim summi, medii, infimi,
in peccato pariter nati, codem sanguine purgati) so in this Nos, Us, we must
not forget the particularity of the benefit; which all and every of us must
apply to himself, with St. Paul in the first chapter of his first Epistle to
Timothy at the 15. Verse, This is a faithful saying, and by all means worthy to
be received, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, Quorum ego
primus, says he, of whom I am chief: and each of us must in this kind be of
the Quorum. Yea every of us must (with St. Thomas) have the finger of his
particular faith in the hole of Christ's side; crying as he did, My God and my
Lord, for no Deus without meus; This particular application (says Martin
Luther) is sanguis fidei; The Lifeblood of Faith; This blood in the Text is
Physic, as I told you ere while; and now I tell you again, that this, like all
other Physic, benefits none but such as take it; and they that take it must be
sure they keep it; for it is a purge, not a Vomit: if they cast it up again; if
they digest it not by the fervor of their devotion; yea, if they disperse it
not, as by so many Veins, through the whole body of their conversation: then do
they spill Christ's precious blood, like water on the earth, and they shall be
severely censured at last among those professed Enemies of the Cross of
Christ, that trampled the blood of the New Testament under their Feet.

And thus from the consideration of this Physician, and his Physic, and the
operation thereof, and the Patients on whom it works; I hasten now to say
somewhat of our Disease, which St. John here calls sin; which though it be a
shameful, painful, and loathsome Disease, yet are we not left as men,
altogether without hope of help, since the knowledge of the Disease is the
first step to the cure; and we know what sin is in the general; we know it to
be radically all kinds of evil; a Cameleon that assumes the shape of what ever
is next it; fiet enim subito sus horridus, atraque Tigris, squammosusqne Draco,
etc. a mere Sphinx for Riddles, and impostures: and because sin is a general
notion, and Dolosus versatur circa universalia, sath the Philosopher; therefore
that I might the better continue the ^llegory here; and you might more
distinctly conceive what sin is: I presume to call it a Sickness; and that you
will so count it in three respects, viz. in respect of the Cause; of the
progress, and of the Cure. I say,

First, Sickness and Sin are caused alike; for Physicians desine sickness to
be an indisposition through some distemper of the body; as a Windy Cholick, or
a Watery Dropsy; or a Fiery Ague, or an earthly Melancholy, etc. And by the
same rule, and reason, Divines (who are so many spiritual Physicians) define
sin to be an indisposition through some distemper of the soul; as the Timpany
of Pride; the Leprosy of Lust, the Lethargy of Sloth, the Dropsy of
Coveteousnesse, the Surfeit of Gluttony, the Consumption of Envy, the Burning
Fever of Anger, the cold Ague Fit of Fear, etc.

Secondly Sickness and Sin are alike in their progress; for as the Lingering
of any Sickness inseebles the body, and so infatuates the appetite, that it
cannot relish any thing as it is in it self, but as it seems best to the palate
corrupted: In like manner he that goes on in the custom of any sin, does not
only weaken the powers and faculties of his Soul; but so inverts and perverts
the right order of the same, that they cannot possibly exercise their due
functions; and hence it comes at last, that the habituated sinner does quite
lose his spiritual palate, savouring only earthly things; he hears all that
tends to his Recovery with a sinister respect, as if (with Malchus) his right
ear were cut off; he is sensible of nothing beyond his senses, plus oculo quam
oraculo credit, he must see and feel, or he will not believe, and he
understands not the things which belongs to his peace.

Thirdly, Sickness and Sin are alike in their cure; for what one way, or
course can any Physician take to cure our bodily Sickness; which in a
qualified sense, is not appliable to a Sin-sick soul?

Galen (in his method Medendi) has his Attrahentia, Repellentia, Apozemata,
Alexipharmaca, Diuretica, Dia-catholica, etc. And so in the Gospel (which is
but a System of spiritual Medicaments) Jesus Christ who is our Physician in the
Text, has several sorts of Physic, which he still applies according to the
quality of the persons, which are his Patients, and the inequality of their
disorders and diseases. For,

Sometimes he uses Attractives, as in the 11. of St. Math. Come unto me all
you, etc.

Otherwhiles Reprocussives, as in the 13. of St. Luke, Tell Herod that Fox, etc.

Sometimes Attenuatives, as in the 23. of St. Luke, Father forgive them, for
they know not, etc.

Sometimes opening Physic, as in tbe 16. of the Acts, when he opened the heart
of Lydia.

Otherwhiles he applies obstipantia, as in the 9. of the Acts, when he stopped
Saul in the heat of his career, breathing out Threatening and Slaughter.

Sometimes he evacuates, as in the 20. of St. Matthew, where seeing his
Disciples contest for priority; he said, Whosoever will be the chief among you,
let him be your Servant.

Otherwhiles he restores, as in the 5. of St. John, Behold thou art made whole;
and withal he prescribes the convert Cripple a diet, Sin no more, least, etc.

Sometimes he administers a Cordial, as in the 9. of St. Matthew, Son be of
goad cheer, thy Sins be forgiven thee.

And where he meets with proud flesh, to take that down, he sometimes claps to
a Corasive; as in the 19. of St. Matthew when the youngster gloried of his
having kept the whole Law, etc. Then it was high time to prick the bladder, and
so to let out the tumor; and accordingly our Physician cooled his courage,
Vade vende, etc. Go and sell all thou have, and give it to the poor, etc. Noe
such Cordolium as this; for he went away sorrowful, says the Text, for he had
great possessions, and he was as unwilling to part with them as Cardinal
Burbonius professed on his Death bed, that if he might have his wish, he would
not leave his part in Paris, for a part in Paradise.

Thus Jesus Christ the Physician here, has his attractive, and repercussive
physic, his opening and stopping physic, his evacuating and restoring
physic, his Corasives and his Cordials. Briefly, the blood of Christ is merely
in, and of it self, a Medicine for every malady: There is no Soul so wounded,
inflamed, exulcerated, and impostumated, but this Balm of Gilead, the blood of
Christ, can both supple, cleanse, and heal it. And yet he were not only fond
but frantic, who (like some indigent and desperate Emperick) would try
conclusions upon his own soul; because here he has such a Catholicon, as, if
rightly applied, will infallibly cure all diseases; for though St. John's term
in the Text, be only in the singular number, sin, yet it is joined with the
Collective, all; (all sin) which as the Learned well observe, signifies as much
as all sins; and so I am happily fallen upon the sixth, and it is the last
thing considerable in the Text, viz. The Extent and Latitude of our Sickness;
here necessarily employed in all sin. The blood of Jesus Christ, etc.

Blood (in Scripture) is sometimes used synecdochically, for the whole Passion
of Christ; say diverse of the best Interpreters; and that speculation being
elsewhere true, it may very well hold in the Text; for St. John here opposing
Christ's blood to all sin, sure his meaning is to show that Christ's sufferings
were proportionable to our sins; for (as the moral Divines observe) we sinned
in our first Parents, by casting a wanton eye upon the forbidden fruit, and
therefore Christ was blindfolded. They sinned by giving ear to the Serpents
suggestions, and therefore Christ's ears were vexed with Blasphemies and
Crucifigies. They sinned by pleasing themselves in the sweet odor of the
forbidden fruit, and therefore Christ suffered in Golgotha a place of ordure
and stink. They sinned by going to, and taking of the forbidden fruit, and
therefore Christ was nailed to the Cross in his hands and feet. They sinned by
tasting of the forbidden fruit; and therefore Christ had Vinegar and Gall given
him to drink. They sinned by desiring the forbidden fruit, and therefore Christ
was peirced with a spear to the heart, which is the Fountain of Desires. Add to
this; that for our shameful sins, Christ suffered a shameful punishment; for
our strange and unnatural sins, Christ suffered a strange and unnatural
punishment; even a bloody sweat in a frosty night. For our execrable and cursed
sins, Christ suffered an execrable and cursed death; a Mors autem, as the
Apostle calls it; even the most painful, shameful, and accursed death of the
Cross; painful to his person, shameful to his office; reproachful to his
estimation. It was mors lenta, violenta, sanguinolenta, maledicta; a death
appointed by the Romans for none but slaves; tedeous and lingering, yet sharp
and vehement. Briefly, our sins as a Leprosy, had spread over all the parts,
powers, and faculties both of soul and body; and Christ's sufferings were as
general; for he paid our transgression of every Commandment. For,

We had forsaken the true God, against the First Commandment; and for this,
Christ (as forsaken for the time of his Father) cried out My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me?

We had bowed the knees to Idols and Images, against the Second Commandment,
and for this Christ on the Cross, had some that bowed the knee in derision of
him.

We had taken the Lords name in vain, against the Third Commandment, and for
this Christ's holy name was so used in vain, yea so blasphemed, that his Divine
works were ascribed to Beelzebub the Prince of Devils.

We had profaned the Sabbath against the Fourth Commandment; and for this
Christ was fettered in the bonds of Golgotha all the Sabbath long.

We had dishonored our Father and Mother against the Fifth Commandment, and
for this Christ (to whom all honor is due) was villified beyond compare.

We had committed Murder, against the Sixth Commandment, and Christ's blood in
the Text was shed for it.

We had committed Adultery, against the Seventh Commandment, and for this,
Christ as an unclean person was spit upon.

We had stolen, against the Eighth Commandment, and Christ was hanged not only
with, but between two Theifes for it, as if he had been the greatest Malefactor.

We had born false witness against the Ninth Commandment, and Christ had
false Witnesses rose up against him, which laid to his charge things that he
knew not, says the Psalmist, prophesying of Christ.

We had coveted our Neighbors goods, against the Tenth Commandment, and
Christ in his Passion so emptied himself, that there was nothing left in him to
be coveted. Thus we sinned, and thus Christ suffered, and in suffering
satisfied; and since all sin is either directly or reducibly against one or
other of the Ten Commandments; St. John says well in the Text, The blood of
Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses us from all Sin: and so the whole Law of God
was satisfied; though not rigore, in the extreme rigor; yet vigore, in the
full and perfect vigor thereof: Christ was our surety, and if a surety pay the
debt, the principal is discharged: But Christ in our stead, and for our behoof,
fulfilled the Law both actively and passively; for first, by his active
obedience he did for us all that we should do; and then by his passive
obedience he suffered for us, all that we should suffer, and so much St. John
insinuates here, where he assures us, for our unspeakable comfort, that The
blood of Jesus, etc.

Yea it is worth noting that Christ shed his blood seven several times, on
purpose (as it may be conceived) to cleanse us from those seven, which are
commonly called deadly Sins: For

First, In his Circumcision he bled, to cleanse us from the impurity of Lust,
which is predominant in that part.

Secondly, In his Agony in the Garden, he was cast into a bloody Sweat, that so
he might breath out our ill humors contracted by Gluttony.

Thirdly, In his Flagellation, when he was whipped, he bled, to cleanse us from
Envy, the cruellest scourge in the World: Invidia siculi non invenere Tyranni
majus tormentum.

Fourthly, In his Coronation, when they crowned him with Thorns, he bled, to
aswage our pride: then let not us crown our heads with Rose-buds, since Christ
for our Sakes was crowned with Thorns, ingenious malice, crown to delude him,
Thorns to torment him.

Fifthly, In his Crucifiction, when they nailed his hands to the Cross, he
bled, to cleanse us from Covetousness: and as ( Albertus Magnus well observes)
his hands were then extended open, and perforated, and consequently could not
then retain any thing, to teach us that (if God has enabled us, we must give
(as he has commanded) liberally, totally universally.

Sixthly, In his Crucifiction, when they also nailed his feet to the Cross, he
bled; to cleanse us from the Scurvy of Idleness, and so to quicken our pace in
the Paths of Gods Commandments.

Lastly, when the Soldier peirced his side with a spear, he bled, to give vent
to our anger. The Philosopher in his first Book De Anima, calls Anger the
Boiling of the Blood about the Heart, and accordingly St. John appositely notes
( John 19. 34.) that as soon as Christ's side was opened, there forthwith issued
out of the wound, both water and blood, the two Sacraments and Seals of the New
Testament, says Gregory Nyssen.

Exiit aqua (says St. Hierome) ad abluendum fideles, sanguis ad damnandum
incredulos. There came out Water for our ablution, and Blood for our absolution.

Water (says St. Chrysostom) ut (...) to rense us, and blood ut (...) to
redeem us, for without blood there is no redemption.

Water to cleanse us from original Guiltiness; and Blood to wash away our
actual filthiness.

Ex aqua frigida, and sanguine calido, aegrotis balneum temperavit, says
Gaspar Melo: of cold water, and warm blood, our great Physician in the Text,
tempered an excellent bath for his sin-sick-patients: Water to cool our
inordinate fervor in the pursuit of all earthly things, and Blood to inflame
our hearts with the love of the heavenly. Briefly,

That Water and Blood showed a right noble temper in him, and withal they teach
us, that if we sincerely desire Christ's blood should effectually cleanse us,
then we must with the men of Mizpeh, draw water too; we must do our endeavor
thoroughly to wash our souls in penitential tears, from all those sins which
Christ has purged away by the merit of h^s bloodshed. He that at first made
us, without us, will not at last, save us, without us: for to his merit we must
join our endeavor: This Physic in the Text never works more kindly, then when
it is applied by the faithful with some of their own Eyebright Water.

Moses at his departure out of Egypt, would not leave to Pharaoh, ne ungulum
quidem, not so much as an hoof: and shall Christ be less faithful, less
powerful, then his servant Moses? It cannot be, and therefore sure he will not
leave the hoof of any one sinful affection in the soul, which he cleanses with
his blood: St. John here witnesses that he cleanses us from all sin: whether
it be original or actual sin, mortal or venial sin, sin of omission or
commission, sin of ignorance or knowledge, sin of weakness or wilfulness,
etc. as there is no sin so small, but the pure eyes of God the Father can see
it, so I will be bold to say, that there is no sin so great, but the pure blood
of God the Son can cleanse us from it: for The blood of Jesus Christ his Son,
cleanses us from all sin.

And it makes very well for the peace of the Church, that this universal
particle All, is here expressed, it may be useful at this day.

First, against all such Consistorian Schismatiques, who (as if they were of
Gods Cabinet counsel) do so peremptorily preach, and press a fatal, and
inevitable decree of reprobation; whereby they drive many a poor soul into
despair, for which Christ dyed, and damn so many of their Congregation, as are
not of their faction: fain would I know of these Sons of Thunder, whether they
believe the beloved Disciple St. John, who was both an Evangelist, a Prophet,
and an Apostle? (in his Gospel an Evangelist, in his Apocalypse a Prophet, and
in his Epistles an Apostle) if they dare say, they believe him not, then have
they both a Prophet, an Evangelist, and an Apostle in the Text, in express
terms refuting them; for he says, that the blood of Christ cleanses us from
all sin; and if so, then there is no man's case whatsoever so desperate, but if
he take this spiritual Catholicon it will cure him.

Secondly, This Collective, All, is comfortable against the Enormity of Sin,
for if Christ's blood cleanses us from all sin, then there is no sin whatsoever,
in its own nature unpardonable: and if any shall object that our Savior
(speaking of the sin against the Holy Ghost, in the 12. of St. Matthew) says
it shall never be forgiven, neither in this World, nor in the World to come! I
answer with the Ancients, that this impossibility of pardon, is not exparte
gratiae Divinae, but pervicaciae humanae, proculcantis sanguinem Jesu, and
sanari renuentis. When Cain had murdered his Brother Ibel (who was both a
Virgin, and a Martyr, and a Type of Christ) in the consciousnesse of so horrid
a fact, he cried out, My sin is greater then can be forgiven: but St. Augustine
in an holy impatience, was so transported with the consideration of Cains
desperate conclusion; that he gave him the Lie; Mentiris Cain; says he, Cain
thou lie, thy sin is not greater then can be forgiven; for God wants not
mercy enough to forgive thee, had thou but grace enough to beg forgiveness.
If thou perish it is thy own fault; who by wilfully rejecting the Medicine that
should heal thee* do obstruct thy own mercies.

The Apostle speaking of all obstinate, obdurate, and impenitent sinners, calls
them Vessels of dishonor; and it is with them, as with an empty vessel cast
into the Sea; where though there be water enough to fill it; yet it still
remains empty, because it has not a capacity for want of a vent, or hole to
take the water in at.

Thirdly this Collective, All; plainly discovers that there is no need at all
of humane purgations, and satisfactions; for if Christ's blood cleanses us from
all sin; then there is nothing left for Masses, Diriges, Trentals, purgatory,
and the like goulden-tail'd doctrines, to do; and by consequence down falls the
Dagon of Popish puppets, and the trinkets of their indulgence-mongers, which
like so many Laplanders, do in truth sell nothing but wind: The Pope sends
them forth for filthy lucres Sake, to make merchandise of men's souls.

Lastly, this Collective, All; refells and refutes the dangerous error of the
Donatists, and Novatians; qui negarunt lapsis paenitenti^m, and salutem: for if
Christ's blood cleanses from all Sin, then without question those sins are
necessarily included, which men commit after regeneration, and conversion. The
good Samaritan, I mean this Physician in the Text, does not deal with our sins,
as the unjust Steward in the Gospel, did with his sums; when the bill is an
hundred, to set down fifty; for we are not solvant; even fifty would as utterly
undo us, as if they were ten thousand talents. St. John here speaks fully,
saithfully, and satisfactorily to all troubled, and trembling consciences, The
blood of Jesus Christ, his Son, cleanses us from all Sin: yet take heed that
out of these sweet, and saving premises, you draw not a fond, and false
conclusion; They that presume to sin, because h^re they have such a salve as
will cure all sores, ^a spe fr^^^, says St. Bernard, sperando percunt. They
are not Bees, but of a Spider like nature, who suck that poison, out of these
saving flowers: That one dead Fly, is enough to infect this whole box of so
precious ointment. Shall we Sin, and Sin, (heaping Peleon upon Ossa) that grace
may abound? God forbid, says St. Paul. Romans 6. 2. There Is no reason (says
Tertullian) that Man should be the worse, because God is better.

Martials Fly played so long under a tree, till at last it was wrapped in Amber;
and so congealed in the drops, that fell from the boughs; Sic modo quae f^ vita
contempta manente, funeribus facta est nunc pretiosa suis. I close with the
moral, The best men on earth are but worms, says the Princely Prophet in the
22 Psalm, at the sixth, and we see by experience, that some kind of worms do
turn Flies: then let us who are but worms by nature; learn, by grace, to
imitate his Fly: let us, Oh let us be ever hovering about the tree of Christ's
Cross; till we be wrapped, and embalmed and entombed in the precious amber of
his fresh-bleeding wounds; who (as our Physician) bled himself to death, that
we his Sin sick patients might live, the life of grace here; and the life of
glory in the Heavens: and this he grant us, who has so dearly bought us, even
Jesus Christ the righteous. To whom with God the Father, and the thrice blessed
Spirit, be ascribed (as most due is) all glory, power, and praise, now and for
ever.

FINIS.
Sermons and other Pieces of Divinity, Printed and Sold by JOHN PLAYFORD at his
Shop in the Temple.
THE Great Work of Redemption; Delivered in four Excellent Sermons, Preached at
St. Paul's, and at the Spittle, in the year 1641. First by Dr. Soames on Good
Friday; Second by Bishop Morton on Easter Day; the Third by Dr. Potter, Bishop
of Carlisle, on Easter Monday; Fourth by Dr. Westfield Bishop of Bristol, on
Easter Tuesday.

St. Paul's Thanksgiving; A Sermon Preached in the Abbey Church of Westminster
before the House of Peers, By James Buck D. D.

A Sermon Preached on the 30. Day of January (being the Day on which his Sacred
Majesty King Charles the First was murdered) the Text Lam. 4. 20. By John King
Dean of Tuam in Ireland.

The Martyrdom of King Charles the First, or his Conformity with Christ in his
Sufferings; In a Sermon Preached at Bredah, before his Sacred Majesty King
Charles the Second; By the Right Reverend John Lord Bishop of Down.

Considerations touching the Liturgy of the Church of England. In Reference to
his Majesty's late Gracious Declaration concerning the same; By the Right
Reverend John Gauden D. D. and now Lord Bishop of Exeter.

Souls Life, or Pious Meditations for Devout Christians; Written by the
Religious and Harmonious Richard Portman, Chief Organist of His Late Majesty's
Royal Chapel; to which is added his Pious Meditation on the Divine use of
Music.


