THE Royal Favorite CLEARED: WITH AN ADMONITION TO THE Roman Catholics. AND
AN ADDRESS TO HIS Royal Highness, JAMES, Duke of York. etc.

By a Barrister of the Inner Temple.

London, Printed for James Vade, at the Cock and Sugar Loaf, near St.
Dunstan's- Church, in Fleet Street, 1682.

An Epistle Dedicatory. TO THE Right Honorable Sir John Moore, Lord Mayor of
London.
May it please Your Lordship,
I Hope it will not create Your Wonder, that an unknown Hand should Dedicate
these few Sheets to Your Lordship's Patronage; whilst your Own Loyalty is
eminently expressed in the daily Service of Your King and Country. And, as Your
Lordship's Place is Great, so is Your Care and Prudence: A remarkable Instance
of which we lately had, when the Picture of His Royal Highness, the Duke of
York, was rudely defaced by the Assassination of a Wicked Person, wherein Your
Lordship's Endeavors did so readily appear, and Your Zeal to have the
Barbarous Act discovered; that there seemed nothing wanting in Your Lordship,
to satisfy the King, and Kingdom of Your utter Abhorrence of so foul a Deed.

Therefore, to Your Lordship I bring this little Treatise, that You may, with
Your Acceptance, vindicate the Reputation, as well as Person, of This most
Illustrious Prince, in whom all things center, that are Good.

And if I have wronged His Royal Highness, or Your Lordship, by rudely
expressing my honest Meaning herein declared; I shall need no other Satyr, than
a Self-reflection, or Punishment, then what I shall be ready to inflict upon my
Self. But whatever happens to me for my own Unworthiness, my greatest Happiness
will be to have Truth appear, tho through a Cloud; and Slander punished, tho
Justice Triumph in the Overthrow of my Imperfections. I am,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Humble Servant, J. G.

TO THE READER.
I Should Appologize for my self, for Writing against so many Men, and for
encountering so many Loads of Paper with a few single Sheets, were I convinced
they had any Authority for what they say, or write; who have Nicknamed His
Royal Highness, the Duke of York, TRAITOR, or PAPIST: But since I have no other
Cause to believe the Discourse, than the fickle, and unthinking Humor of those
who have followed the Dictates of a discontented Party; and would, at the same
time, have misnamed the Government, had it not been wary of their Proceedings
and, on the sudden, arraigned their Actions; I know no reason, why I should
not speak my Opinion, as well as such Whirlygig-State-Projectors; especially,
since the sense of what I here Write, is signified to us by such Authorities,
that we have no need to question the Truth of them.

Therefore, Judicious Reader, I shall recommend this little Treatise to your
serious Consideration, and I hope it may prove good Physic this Spring Time,
to our Sir Politick-Would-be's, who ever rejoice when the Government is at a
default, though the Blot be for their Advantage: And then if any Wicked
Statesman will but Hound them on, O what a noise will they make! though not
half so well well coupled, as an indifferent Pack of Beagles; and it is their
eager pursuit, generally, that makes them loose their Credit. But this is not
sufficient: I may be ask't, What I have to do to concern my self with the
Duke's Religion, or Loyalty? To the Candid Reader, I hope, this will be a full
Answer: Ever since I was Eleven Years Old, I have lived under this Government,
as it is now Established; and my Heart has hitherto Blessed the King, and I
have wished Him Success in all His undertakings; and I have had good Cause to
do so, since His Majesty's Laws are a Delight, and need not be grievous to any
of His Subjects: On this bottom I justify my self, in Writing upon this Subject
concerning the Duke, who, by all Loyal Men, is looked upon to be a good Subject,
a Dutiful Brother to the King, and One that seeks the Interest of the Nation:
Whereas those who say the contrary, and give him the Name of PAPIST, and
TRAITOR, do generally show themselves to be of Disloyal Principles, and such as
the Nation have little reason to credit. And from hence I infer, That those who
are obedient to His Majesty, will love the Duke of York; because the Duke's
Principles are (as all good Subjects ought to be) to Serve God, and Honor the
King: And therefore, his being slandered with the Name of PAPIST, TRAITOR,
Enemy to the KING, and Kingdom, or any other Name, that the giddy heads of
these idle People can imagine, can make no other impression in the Hearts of
wise Men, than to raise a just indignation against their Malice, and a Heart
endeavor to prevent the danger that may ensu^ from such ungodly Proceedings;
which ought to be the endeavor of every good Christian, and every Loyal
Subject.

THE Royal Favorite CLEARED.
THere was a Time (in the Year 1680.) when this Illustrious Prince, James Duke
of York, seemed to the morose, and ruder sort of People, to lie under a Cloud;
And the Factious, at that Time, seemed to Eclipse His Glory: And then to assert
His Royal Highness to be a good Subject to His Majesty, and that there were no
reasonable Arguments ever brought to prove him a Papist, was all one to them,
as to have affirmed, That the Pope was Infallible, or that the Real Presence
was in the Elements of Bread and Wine after Consecration, and as little it
would have been believed.

Yet some there were, even in that Time, (whereof one was my intimate
Acquaintance) that had the Courage, and the Honesty, to justify the Dukes
Loyalty, and to beat back all the Arguments then used to prove Him a Roman
Catholic.

I shall therefore take his method, and introduce my Discourse with those
Reasonable Arguments that make most to my purpose, and cannot without impudence
be denied.

For, What can be more Demonstrably plain to prove the Duke a Protestant, than
the Words of the Act of Parliament, 25 Car. 2. To throw Popish Recusants out of
all Offices, and Places of Trust, and to Displace them from the Household,
Service or Employment of His Majesty, or of His Royal Highness, the Duke of
York.

Is here not the King, and His Brother, wisely considered by this Act? does it
not fence them about, and guard them from Jesuitical approaches, that might
slyly insinuate themselves into Courts and Employments, without a Test? Now,
since God and Nature has provided so well for Us, as to give Us so wise a King,
and so Illustrious a Prince; Both springing from the Loins of that Most
Glorious Martyr, Charles the First, our Late King, who dyed for the Protestant
Religion: Can we exercise our jealousies over again, and dodge with the
Government with pitiful scruples, and Wrestings of such generous expressions,
and Confidence the then Parliament had of the Duke, at the Time of making that
Act? Against so plain an Exception of His Person, the direct words of which can
never allow him to be in the penalty of that Law; though, at that Time, the
Duke might see occasion to lay down several of His great Offices, which might
make some sort of Men conjecture it was done for that end and purpose; As if it
were not sufficient to belie one Prince to His Grave, but we must endeavor a
Second time to do so in his Issue; And as if the malice of one Age were not
enough to make a Nation miserable, but that it must be Intailed upon their
Posterity, to render it utterly destroyed in the next.

Were it not that the Eyes of the greatest part of the Nation are opened by
these, and the like Observations, twere probable, we might once more suffer
under the like Circumstances: But, thanks be to God, who has put it in the
Heart of our King, to guide us in the ways of Peace, and to bear with the
Infirmities of those who have been grievously infected with Anti-Monarchick,
and Destructive Principles.

And, What can the Parliament mean, when they made an Act in the Thirtieth Year
of Car. 2d. To disable every Person from Sitting in the House of Parliament,
that would not take the Test? To make a Proviso, That it should not extend to
the Duke of York; were it not that they valeued him as a Person of that Honor,
and Generosity that they could do no less than distinguish him from the rest of
His Majesty's Subjects, especially since He is so nearly Related to the Crown,
has so well deserved of the King, and has been so often thankt for His good
Services by themselves: This is so plain, and the Character of a Papist fixed
upon the Duke so malicious, that it needs no Vindication, were it not to
undeceive a Generation of Men whose Fathers having sucked in the Poison of
Rebellion in the Last Age, have made it their utmost endeavor, to introduce it
in this.

Can any thing give us more Assurance of His Royal Highness, than the Words of
the best of Kings, who in a Speech to His Parliament on the 6th. of March, in
the 31 Year of His Reign, told Them, He had Commanded His Brother to absent
Himself from Him, because He would not leave the most malicious Men room to
say, He had not removed all Causes, which could be pretended to influence Him
toward Popish Councels. Is here not a Reflection on the King himself by the
most malicious, which the King is pleased to take* Notice of? And, when He
Commands His Brothers Absence, is it not to stop the mouths of the malicious?
And, their spiteful calling of the Duke, PAPIST, Or His inclining the King
toward Popish Councels, called by His Majesty, any thing else than a Pretense?
what then shall be said to such malicious pretenders, if even Their own Request
granted, though never so unreasonable, will not give them satisfaction? it
behooves therefore His Majesty's good Subjects, to be more unanimous, and Hearty
to one another, that so it may break the Hearts of all Malicious Pretenders,
who, under the mask of Liberty, Property, and Religion, endeavor the
Destruction, and Ruin of the King, and Kingdom: who can hence forward be so
blind, and sottish, to credit a correspondence between the Pope, and the Duke
of York, for the bringing in of the Roman Catholic Religion, as has been
pretended? And, who can, for the time to come, imagine Letters and Intreagues
of that nature, when the utmost of the Design that has hitherto appeared,
supposing those Letters to be the Duke's, can reach no farther than a Civil
Behavior, which is due to the Turk, Mogul, or King of Morocco? We are obliged
to Trade in those Countries; yet we cannot, with safety and security, without a
Correspondence: And, who are so proper to transact such Affairs, as the prime
Ministers of State?

From what has been said, it is Monstrous to raise a Belief of the Duke's
Recusancy, from the King's Speech, which clearly explains its self; or from the
afore-recited Acts of Parliament, which many would interpret to the prejudice
of His Royal Highness, though the Nemine Contradicente of the House of Commons,
on Sunday April 1679. does even then credit its own Report, with no other
Reasons than what may seem to the Judicious Reader, to be here fully Answered:
And it must the rather be thought so, when the Triple Vote of the House of
Commons was afterward incountred with the Opinion of the House of Lords, who
rejected the Bill against the Duke, because They were not so satisfied.

Now having delivered to you the Glorious condition of a Happy Favorite,
seated on the Right Hand of Majesty, as well by His own Merit, as His Princes
choice; who was Honored and esteemed by good Men, and was a Terror only to
the Bad:

Let Us trace Him from White Hall, driven by the Impetuosity of his Enemies,
from the Presence of the King, and luster of a Court, into a solitary
Banishment: Let us observe Him leaving our shore, and rendering himself to the
unconstant Ocean, which is not yet so unsettled, as the Land from which He
parted: And, though many Waves lifted up their Voices against Him: yet, by the
greater number, let us consider Him (though among Enemies) Wafted into a Safe
Harbor: For, being a Noble Foe, He could Fear no danger in His Misfortunes,
when in His Triumphs He could not insult over His Adversaries amongst
Foreigners, His Cardinal Virtues (so much slighted by Us) made Him more
Honored, than He was Here, with the Addition of His Guards, and Dignities:
There, amongst the most zealous Papist, He was looked upon as an injured
Protestant Prince, bearing the Figure of His Father's goodness and constancy:
There, He propagated Our Protestant Doctrine, whilst Here He was falsely
surmised to endeavor its Destruction: Whilst He was There, with those who
would have been glad of any Opportunity to affront our Nation, He manifested so
much Duty and Loyalty, so much Love and Respect for His King and Country; That
He made faithful Friends and Ally's, of Those that might otherwise have been
our Mortal Enemies, and would have trampled upon our Religion, and made Their
will Their Law: So that the malice of a Banishment intended by his Adversaries,
could not prevent the Charactar of a Peacemaker, a worthy Patriot, a grand
Politician, a Friend (as well as Brother) to the King, a Joseph, a Preserver of
those that dispitefully used Him, and Traitorously sought his Ruin.

Thus are the false Achitophels mistaken, and, against their Wills, are saved
from the danger they would avoid by Him, whom They intended to destroy.

But now, it is Time to consider of His Return: Our Vigilant King sitting at
the Helm; and carefully watching every Motion of the Government, found it
necessary so prudent a Statesman should not always lie under Hatches: He no
sooner spoke, than all who Loved the King had Their Eyes upon the shore, and
Their Daily Prayers for the Duke were, That the Seas and Winds might render His
Voyage pleasant and delightful; and that each gentle Gale might direct Him into
the Harbor of our Hearts and Arms, that we might deliver Him safe into the
Embraces of his King and Brother.

Behold Him come, His Sails filled with Honor and Renown; Though surly
Nereus, dreading His own Overthrow, had laid an Ambush behind a Mountainous
Wave, to encounter Him: But He was not to be overcome in those Seas, on which
He had Victoriously rode High Admiral: To Him, Neptune must Bow, though armed
with His Trident, and mounted on the Leviathan.

And one would guess, 'twas in pursuance of this League Marine, that he so
lately sent in his High and Mighty Floods to invade the Low Countries, lest
himself should be again controuled by that dreadful Power he never could
withstand.

Therefore in vain do you strive, you handful of discontented
Common-wealths-men, in vain do you set yourselves against this Hero, you shall
be forced to contribute to his Greatness, whom all the World admires, even your
Meritorious sufferings shall add to his Glory.

And now (Kind Reader) take one view more, and then farewell: Behold the King
like Solomon, in the midst of the Multitude of his Counselors, consulting the
safety of himself, and of his Kingdoms, dispencing his gentle Influences every
where, and like a Deity, warming the coldest corners of the Land: And then cast
your Eyes on a Rebellious, and stiff-necked Nation, such as Israel was of Old,
wanton with ease and plenty, froward and discontented; Who would never serve
their God, but only as they pleased, nor obey their Prince in any of his just
Commands. And after this prospect Review our Hero, whose Virtues are a Task for
the whole World to imitate. And see him in Obedience to his Kings Commands,
making an easy Progress into the Hearts of these untameable People; though the
way that leads to their Hearts, as well to as their Country, is naturally
Subject to many difficulties: See him Settling, Confirming, and giving a Luster
to that Religion that here we would exclude him from, together with his
Birthright, and make him wander for a God, as well as for a Country.

Behold him encouraging the Kings Loyal and good Subjects, and reducing the
unsettled minds of a discontented Party into their due Obedience.

Thus, our High Commissioner has God and the King, Religion, and Loyalty to
justify his proceedings; whilst those who Damn him, with their pretended God
with Us, are like to suffer Heavens Vengeance for their Presumption, if God
gives them not the Grace of Repentance.

Now, from these and several other Reasons that may be given, I hope there is
none that will be so foolish, or obstinately wicked, as to persist in the
Opinion of the Duke's separating himself from the Interest of the King, and
Kingdom, after so many instances to evince the contrary: But if any sort of Men
can be so Crazy, or Mad, to continue in so palpable an error; the World must
conclude them busy bodies, and Medlers in what they have nothing to do;
Common-wealths-men, Traiterous Associators, and such as would disturb the
present Government, and for a livelihood would wish our Waters as much
disturbed, or more then the Hollanders were, by their late Inundation: And
whilst these Incendiaries remain, Faction cannot be thought strange, or
Rebellion quite out of Fashion.

Especially, when His Royal Highness, King's only Brother, shall be
Assassinated in Effigy, for want of a fitter opportunity to exercise their
Malice upon His Person: It Is against the Duke they lay their Seige, against the
Duke they engage a Party: But the Government is not so unwary, as not to
provide against their dangerous approaches, knowing their Squint-Eyed Revenge
carries with it a Malicious intent against the Person of His Sacred Majesty.

But to conclude, were I to give my Opinion what remedy might best serve to
Cure this King's Evil, it should be to be Touched, were it not so Universal that
it would prove the greater evil of the two, in bringing a Consumption upon the
Kings Exchequer, which none can so well remedy, as a Loyal, Grateful
Parliament, by making a bountiful return to their most Gracious King and
Governor: I shall say no more, who am but a Wellwisher to the King, and
Kingdom: Only, may Heaven preserve His Majesty, and this Government, as now
Established; And may His Majesty have a long and happy Reign; And when He has
finished His Days, may his Memory be renowned to future Ages, as His Clemency
and Goodness has been manifested to Us, and the rest of the World, in This.

AN ADMONITION TO THE Roman Catholics.
I Am sensible, whatever you hold of the Infallibility of the Pope, that you,
who are of that Persuasion are not Infallible; otherways, you would not have
insinuated an Opinion of the Duke of Yorks being a Papist amongst the King's
Liege People, and at last, suffer your selves to be mistaken; Notwithstanding,
at that time, you had drawn so great a Party of the King's Subjects into your
confederacy. It was a Malevolent Conjunction, and had an ill Aspect on the
Government; and rendered it unstable, and tottering, even in the Opinion of
those who guided the great Affairs of State under His Majesty. It was therefore
your very good Luck to lay hold on the Horns of the Altar, to seek the Mercy of
the King, whom you have highly offended; such Mercy, and such Goodness, you
could never expect in any other Age: The Justice of the Kingdom cried alowd
for Vengeance against your Plots, and Designs against the Life of the King, His
Royal Brother, and Friends: Yet, you see, those very Lives which were
Traitorously intended to be taken away, are now interposing between you and
Danger: and the Second Person in the Kingdom, is here Mediating with the King
of England, to remember Mercy in Justice, and to spare those who have no reason
to expect any Favor, since They have so highly offended: Therefore May it now
happen to you, as when our Savior gave that Kind Admonition to His Criminal:
Go, Sin no more, lest a worse thing happen to you. For in vain you persuade the
Ignorant and simple People, that our Princes are Papists, and our Ministry and
Gentry Popishly Affected: When their Pious Resolutions, as well as Interest,
are never to return again to the slavery of the Papal-See, upon any Opportunity
whatsoever. Therefore let me advise you as a Friend, join not with those
Dissenters, which your selves have made; Assist not in their Meetings; fill not
their Congregations, neither Reconcile them to Rome, nor draw them from their
Allegiance; but suffer them rather, with your selves, to be converted to the
Communion of the Church of England, and to the Government of the King,
Renouncing all Foreign Powers, and Jurisdictions, which may alianate your
Affections and Obligations to our present Government, as by Law Established,
either in Church, or State.

This is the Way, walk in it; and those who bold out to the end, shall be
Happy.

AN ADDRESS TO HIS Royal Highness JAMES, Duke of York, etc.
WElcome, Great Prince, thrice wel-come to a Land,
Where even your Foes stretch out your Command;
And make You fitter to assist the Crown,
Whilst, at their charge, You purchase in Renown:
This they perceived, and spitefully seemed good,
Though now their wicked Plots are understood:
It Is they, who sought to undermine the Throne,
Who called you Traitor, and would prove you one
In Hell they laid their Scene, and their Consult
Was a Packt Juncto; Treason, their Result.
But You run Counter to their deep Designs,
And Ferret them about with Counter-mines.
No Poisonous Vapors from the Shades below,
Nor sullen Treasons from vile Men can s^^w:
No State Disease, or Foreign evils sell,
But You exhale, or wisely can expel.
Your strickt Example is a Virtuous spell,
To better Good, and make the Bad do well.
Thus, whilst to Duty You do show the way,
In different Orbs we constantly obey:
Making Great Charles sit safely in his Wain,
And Rule the World with a soft gentle Reign
O Happy King! O Happy we! that can
Trust in a Prince, Rest in so just a Man!
FINIS.
Some Books lately Printed for, and are to be Sold by James Vade, at the Cock
and Sugar Loaf, near St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street, 1682.
THe Nations Interest, in Relation to the pretentions of His Royal Highness
James Duke of York, Discoursed at large in a Letter to a Friend.

The Grand Inquest; or a full and perfect Answer to several Reasons, by which
it is pretended His Royal Highness, the Duke of York, may be proved to be a
Roman Catholic.

The (...) and Method of His Majesty's Happy Restauraration said open to
Public view, by John Price, D. D. one of the Late Duke of Albemarl's
Chaplains, and privy to all the Secret Passages, and Particularities of that
Glorious Revolution.

A (...) Memento both to King and People, upon this Critical Juncture of
Affairs.

These Books following are Printing for James Vade, and will speedily be
Published.
THe History of the Western Empires Decay, since Charles the Great, concerning
the Regalia, now in Dispute between the King of France, and the Pope: Written
in French by Father Lewis Maimbourgh, and Translated into English by an Eminent
Gentleman.

The Life of King Almansor; Or, The Complete Model of a Good Prince. Written by
the Virtuous Capt. Ali Abencufian, Viceroy and Governor of the Provinces of
Dacque in Arabia. First Written in Spanish, and Translated into French by
Monsieur Dobeilh; and Turned into English by A. P. Gent.


