Groans from Newgate; OR, AN ELEGY UPON Edward Dun Esquire: The Cities Common
Hangman, who Dyed Naturally in his bed, the 11th. of September, 1663.

Inter pone tuis interdum gaudia curis.

Written by a Person of quality. And Liscenced according to Order.

Cromwell. Ireton. Bradshaw.



London, Printed by Edward Crowch, dwelling on Snowhill. 1663.

An Elegy upon Edward Dun Esquire, the Cities Common Hangman.
COme Newgate Muse and let us agree
To antipothize an Elegy,
And let each drop that dares to run
From barren eyes fill twice three Tun,
That so we may soon drown our fears,
And deluge grief in her own tears:
Let Us think but how he did the feat,
And then conclude the loss is great.
But oh! it adds unto our dread,
He di'd untimely in his bed.
The valiant Soldier's loath to yield
To Death, except it be in Field;
And who is he that would not die
According to his quality?
It was (oh Death!) an unjust thing.
Thou should deny him his own swing;
Sure, sure, thou had some great design
Or else thou'adst took him under-line;
How can our griefs be unreveal'd,
When so much virtue di'd concealed?
Who does not hear how every stone
In Newgate cries. O hone, O hone,
Whilst all the Prisoners sadly run
And cry, The Devil rides on Dun?
Nay more, each tenderhearted Louse,
Belonging to that Mansion House,
Do strive in Sable robes to crawl,
Like Mourners to his Funeral.
The noble Hemp its grief does show,
And scorched with sorrow cannot grow;
The Ax, the Block, the Knife, in brief,
Each Tool is rusty now with grief.
One thing I had almost forgot,
Tyburn with grief is grown a Sot;
And that which breeds her greatest harms,
Is that he di'd not in her arms:
He Is gone, she cries, that often stood
More then knuckle deep in blood.
Oh with what a dextrous art
He would pull out a Traytor's heart!
Never did Music please him well,
Except it were St. Pulchers Bell.
I was his Altar and his Spouse
To whom he often paid his vows.
The Altars of the Heathen Gods
Were not so good as mine by ods;
Because their Priests were not so wise
To offer Men for Sacrifice:
But my brave Priest did plenty bring,
Of such as murdered their own King,
He Would offer them at my high Altar,
And thought no incense like the Halter:
But he is now quite void of breath,
And had no incense at his Death.
His EPITAPH.
Underneath this place does lie
The Miracle of Cruelty;
I Will tell thee now I have begun,
Then know, kind Reader, all is but Dun:
FUNIS.

