Mr GRYMSTONS SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT UPON The Accusation and Impeachment OF
WILLIAM LAUD Archbishop of Canterbury, upon high Treason

Declaring his wicked proceedings, and exorbitant power, both in Church and
Commonwealth.

Printed in the Year, 1641.

Mr. GRYMSTONS SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT, Upon the Accusation and Impeachment of
WILLIAM LAVD Archbishop of Canterbury, of high Treason.
Mr. Speaker, there has been presented to the House, a most faithful and
exact Report of the Conference we had with the LORDS yesterday, together with
the opinion of the Committees, that were employed in that service.

That they conceived it fit the Archbishop of Canterbury should be sequestered.

I must second the motion, and with the favor of the House, I shall be bold to
offer my Reasons, why I conceive it more necessary, we should proceed a little
further, then the desire of a bare sequestration only.

Mr. Speaker, Long Introductions, are not suitable to weighty business, we are
f^lle^ upon the gteat Man, the A^ch-Bishop of Canterbury, look upon him as he
is in his highness, and he is the stye of all Pestilent filth, that has
infected the State, and Government of the Church and Commonwealth, look upon
him in his dependancies, and he is the man, the only man that has raised and
advanced all those (that together with himself) have bin the Authors and
Causers of all the Ruins Miseries, and Calamities, we now groan under.

Who is it, but he only, that has brought the Earl of Strafford to all his
great places, and employments, a fit Instrument, and Spirit, to act and execute
all his wicked and bloody Designs in these Kingdoms?

Who is it, but he only, that brought in Secretary Windebanck, into the place
of Secretary and trust, The very Broker and Pander to the Whore of Babylon?

Who is it, Mr. Speaker, but he only, that has advanced all Popish Bishops? I
shall name some of them; Bishop Manwairing, the Bishop of Bathe and Wells, the
Bishop of Oxford, and Bishop Wren, (the least of all) but the most unclean one.

These are Men that should have fed CHRIST'S flock, but they are the Wolves
that devoured them; the Sheep should have fed upon the Mountains, but the
mountains have eaten up the Sheep. It was the happiness of our Church, when
the zeal of Gods house did eat up the Bishops; glorious and brave Martyrs
that went to the Stake, in defense of the Protestants Religion; but the zeal
of these Bishops, have been to eat up and persecute the Church.

Who is it, Mr. Speaker but the great Archbishop of Canterbury, that has sit
at the Helm to guide and steer them to all the managing of their Projects,
that have been set on foot in this Kingdom these ten years last past, and
rather then he would stand out, he has most unworthily trucked and chaffered
in the meanest of them As for instance, that of Tobacco, wherein thousands of
poor people have been stripped and turned out of their Trades for which they
have served as Apprentises, we all know he was the Compounder and Contractor
with them for the Licenses, putting them to pay Fines, and fee and farmeRents
to use their Trades.

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, he might have spent his time better (and more for his
grace) in the Pulpit; then thus sharking and raking in the Tobacco-shop.

Mr. Speaker, we all know what he has been charged withal here in this
House, Crimes of a dangerous consequence, and of Transcendent nature, no less
then the subversion of the Government of this Kingdom, and the Alteration of
the Protestant Religion, and thi^ not upon bare information only, but much of
it comes before us already, upon clear and manifest proofs, and there is
scarce any Business, Grievances, or Complaints, come before us in this place,
wherein we do not find him intermingled, and as it were twisted into it, like
a bus^e and angry Waspe, his sting in the tail of every thing.

We have this day heard the report of the Conference yesterday, and in it the
Accusations which the Scottish Nation has charged him withal, And we do all
know, he is guilty of the same (if not more) in this Kingdom.

Mr. Speaker, he has been and is, the common Enemy to all goodness and good
men, and it is not safe, that such a Viper should be near his Majesty's
person, to distill his poison into his Sacred ears, nor is it safe for the
Commonwealth, that he should sit in so eminent a place of Government, being
thus accused, we know what we did in the Earl of Straffords case. This man is
the corrupt Fountain that has infected all the streams, and till the
fountain be purged, we cannot expect to have any clear Channels. I shall be
bold therefore to offer my opinion, and if I err, it is the error of my
judgment, and not my want of zeal and affection to the public good.

I conceive it most necessary and fit, that we should now take up a Resolution
to do somewhat, to strike whilst the Iron is hot; And go up to the Lords in
the name of the Commons of this House, and in the name of the Commons of
England; and to accuse him of high Treason, and to desire their Lordships, his
person may be sequestered, and that in convenient time they may bring up the
Charge.

FINIS.

