A VINDICATION OF A National-Fishery: Wherein is Asserted, That the GLORY,
WEALTH, STRENGTH, SAFETY, and HAPPINESS of this KINGDOM; with the Flourishing
of TRADE, and Growth of NAVIGATION: As also the Employing the POOR of this
Realm, does depend (under GOD) upon A National-Fishery. And all the General,
Vulgar, (though Erroneous) Objections against Encouraging the Fishery of England,
Answered, and Confuted. To which is added, The SOVEREIGNTY of the BRITISH-SEAS.

England's a Perfect World;
'T has Indies two:
Correct your Maps; The
Fishery* is Peru.
LONDON: Printed for F. Coggan, in the Inner Temple Lane. MDCXCIX.

To the most Noble AND Mighty PRINCE, THOMAS Duke of LEEDS, MARQVESS of
CARMARTHEN, EARL of DANBY, Viscount Latimore, Baron Osbourne of Kiveton, Lord
President of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council; Lord Lieutenant of
Yorkshire, Governor of Kingston upon Hull, AND KNIGHT OF THE Most Noble Order
OF THE GARTER.
May it please Your Grace,
THE Great Applause you have so deservedly meritted, has encouraged me to
Dedicate this small Epitomy to Your Honor; and not knowing any Man, that can
with more lively Colors represent this Important Affair to the Wisdom of the
Nation, I lay it at Your Lordship's Feet, as an UNDERTAKING, (which if Your
Grace be pleased to Espouse, for the Good of the Kingdom) you will thereby add
another Trophy to your former Achievements; and the Glory of the Action will
be Recorded to all Posterity: For upon a National-Fishery, under God, does
depend the Safety, Honor, and Happiness of this Kingdom, the Flourishing of
Trade, and the Supporting of Credit, as in the Sequel of my Discourse, I hope,
I have made appear.

My Lord, this Age gives us too many Examples, of Discouraging Ingenuity; many
Excellent Qualities lying often hid under humble Looks, and mean Habits, which
soon are discountenanced, and suppressed by Insulting Greatness and Popular
Opulancy: But You have showed by the constant Example of Your Actions, that You
have Agreed with Seneca, in his Renowned Maxim; that sola virtus vera
Nobilitas, When so many others, are blinded with their absurd Vanity and airy
Greatness. But you have rendered your self a true Patriot to your Country; and
therefore I most humbly implore this Book may be sheltred under the wings of
Your Graces Protection: who am, Right Honorable and Renowned

Sir, Your Graces most humble And most obedient Servant, Joseph Gander.

TO THE BARONS OF THE Cinque Ports, And the Members of Parliament for the
Coasting-Towns and Buroughs of the Kingdom of England.
Honored and Worthy Senators,
THE Cinque Ports of this Kingdom, having signalized their Loyalty and Valor
by Sea, in several Expeditions, for the Glory of the King's, Honor of their
Country, and Safety of the Realm, our preceding Kings confirmed several
Dignities on them, and amongst the rest, made their Members of Parliament
Barons, as an Encouragement to Navigation, and their Prowess.

And gave them the Honor of Supporting the Canopy over his Head at his
Coronation; as is supposed by way of Similitude: That whereas they had
Defended, Supported, and Maintained his Honor by their Courage against his
Enemies by Sea, he gave them the Honor to support the Canopy over his Head; as
a Mark of Honor to them, and his Acknowledgement of the Greatness of their
Service.

And many Coasting-Towns and Buroughs, have from time to time, been endowed
with great Privileges, some of them remaining to this day; as a mark of
Honor, by several Kings, to Encourage Navigation; from whence originally, we
have beyond all Dispute, arrived to the Knowledge we are now attained to in
Marine Affairs*

But now most of those Towns and Buroughs (that formerly flourished by their
Fishing) are reduced to miserable Poverty, and Thousands of Families ruined for
want of the Fishery.

And the Gentlemen who have Estates in those Places, or near the Coast, are
exceedingly impaired.

Of which Calamity, King Henry the 8th had undoubtedly a foresight of, as
appears by the Sratute of 33 of his Reign, it is there thus inserted; because
the English Fishermen dwelling on the Sea Coasts, did leave off their Trade of
Fishing in our Seas, and went the half Seas over; and thereupon they did buy
Fish of Pickards, Flemmings, Normands and Zealanders, by reason whereof, many
Incommodities did grow to the Realm, viz. The Decay of the Wealth and
Prosperity, as well of the Cinque Ports, and Members of the same, as of other
Coasting-Towns by the Seaside, which were builded, and inhabited by great
Multitudes of People, by reason of Using, and Exercising the Feat, and Craft of
Fishing.

Secondly, The decay of a great Number of Boats and Ships.

And thirdly, the decay of many good Mariners, both able in Body, by their
Diligence, Labor, and continual Exercise of Fishing; and Expert by reason
thereof, in the Knowledge of our Seacoasts, as well within the Realm, as in
other Parts beyond the Seas.

It was therefore Enacted, That no manner of Persons, English Denizons, or
Strangers, at that time, or any time after, should buy any Fish of any
Foreigners in the said Ports of Flanders, zealand, Pickardy, or France, or upon
the Sea between Shore and Shore.

This shows what great Care our former Kings, and Parliaments have taken to
Preserve the Nursery for Seafaring Men, for the Defense of the Kingdom, and
for the Preservation of our Coasting Towns, etc.

And, have therefore thought fit in all Humility to Dedicate this Book to you,
as beforementioned. If my sincere Intentions to serve the Kingdom, have its
desired Success, I have my wish, who am

Your most humble And most obedient Servant, J. Gander.

A VINDICATION OF A National Fishery, etc.
BY the Benign Goodness of God, and by the Wise Conduct of our King, and the
Admirable Wisdom, and prudent Care of our Sage Senators at Home:

England, after a tedious and Chargeable War, has obtained an Honorable Peace.

And the Sword being now Sheathed; His Majesty in his most Gracious Speech to
both Houses of Parliament, has declared His Royal Inclination, for the
Preservation of the Saftety, Honor, and Happiness of the Kingdom, etc.

So that it is not to be doubted but that the Genius of our Government, will
make it the Chiefest of their Care, to Settle the Affairs of Trade, upon the
most firmest Foundation, for the public Good of our Nation. For the most
destructive Consumption that can happen to a Kingdom, and the only Nurse of
Idleness and Beggary, is Want of Trade; whereas on the contrary, Increase of
Trade, encourages Labor, Art and Invention, and enricheth the Commonweal.

And beyond all Dispute, the Fishery of England, is the Main Trade of this
Kingdom, rightly Managed; The good Patriots of our Country are to weigh the
Matter: And it is so comprehensive a Blessing, that were those Advantages but
Industriously improved, that Providence has bestowed on this Island, we might
consequently be the most Flourishing People in the whole World, both by Sea and
Land.

And seeing by the Decay of the Fishing Trade, we have lain open to France, and
Holland, by neglecting our own Preservation, and ill Management of the Fishery
amongst our selves, it may be supposed, it is high time to look to it. But
whether this Great Loss to the Kingdom has been occasioned by our Wilful, or
inadvertised Neglect: I shall not determine; and hope it will speedily be taken
into the Consideration of the most Judicious Patriots of our Country. And then
we shall draw back the Trade from Foreign Nations, and Employ our own People.

The Great and Weighty Question upon this Point of Trade to be considered, is:
Whether it is not the General Interest of England, to Revive and Encourage a
National Fishery, it being the Main Pillar of the Trade of this Nation; And
humbly offer my weak Opinion of the Necessity of it; For England being Situated
in the very Jaws of Neptune, by her commodious Harbors, Rivers and Bays, etc.
must be Defended by Shipping; and she is the best accommodated with Seaports
of any Place in Christendom, and stands fairest to be Lords of the Sea of any
People in the World.

This Kingdom being an Island comparatively, were it, not for that Isthmus or
Neck of Land to the North, that joins it to Scotland. It must be universally
allowed, that her Floating Castles must defend her from all Foreign Invasions
or Incursions.

And since she is obliged to defend her self by Naval-Force. It should be
considered how that must be maintained and preserved: For, without those
Bul-Warks, the Kingdom, and consequently the rest of the Dominions must be in a
few years, in a very deplorable Condition.

And nothing is more certain than, that it is the Sea enricheth the Land, which
is confirmed by the great Advantages of getting Treasure, by Navigation both at
home and abroad; as is manifested by the Grandeur that Merchants generally live
in, in England, Holland, France, etc. History gives a very Satisfactory Account
of this Truth; How the Venetians have arrived to that Greatness they now live
in by Navigation, and by their Naval Force, claim a Prerogative of the
Adriatic Sea.

And also, to what Greatness has the French King attained to by Navigation in
a few years, that he gives Laws in the Mediteranean Sea.

And the Hollanders by their Navigation are grown, as Opulent (almost) if not
altogether, as any People in the World.

But in Queen Elizabeth's Reign of Blessed Memory, England gave so Fatal an
Overthrow to the Spanish Armado in Anno 1588, that she was the Terror of the
Whole Universe, by being so Potent by Sea; and after Her Majesty's Success of
that Famous Victory, she was as much Aggrandized by Foreign Princes, for Her
Conquest, as she would undoubtedly have been despised, had she been overcome.

But how England has declined since Her Reign, for want of the Fishery for
Nursery for Seafaring Men, is obvious to the whole World.

Woeful Experience tells us, how much our Neighbors have grown upon us; by this
Neglect of ours, by the Wealth they have got within this forty or fifty years;
and also by their daily Increase of of Shipping.

And for want of true Telescope to see clearly how this National Fishery may be
preserved and maintained, we are and have been many years, in the dark.

It is not only the Fish that we loose, and the impoverishing the Coasting
Towns, and Buroughs, the only Loss that this Nation sustains; But for want of
a prudent Method to Manage this Fishery. We have only the Color for a Nursery
for Seamen, which will not breed a tenth part of the Men we have occasion for
in time War, as we are an Island.

Further, the Hollanders and French, finds these Advantages (by Encouraging of
the Fishery's, that they do not only get Wealth, but it inures their Men to the
Hardship of the Sea, and makes them Skilful in Handling their Tackling in
Pilotage and Navigation.) So that they know our own Coasts, Shoals and
Harbors, better than we do.

But the Ancient Britains permitted none to Fish on our Coasts, Vid* Seld. Mare
Clausum. 138.
or in our Seas, nor any to Sail into the Island, without their Leave, and
those only Merchants; nor would not permit any Foreigner to View or Sound their
Seacoasts,

Which was undoubedly a great Security to them, and Encouragement to their
Pilots; but now, it is observable, that the Hollanders seldom make use of
English Pilots, to come into any of our Harbors; and if they have Occasion to
Man out a Fleet of Men of War, it is but making a Draught out of the Fishery,
and they are put on Board their own Climate.

Whereas, to the great Detriment of this Nation, and Loss of our Men; when we
have occasion to Man the Royal Navy, we are forced to press Tag, Rag, and
Bob-Tail, a parcel of Lowsy Vagrants and Vagabonds, that have not Prowess to
make them Soldiers, nor Genius to make them Mariners; and while they are in
Harbor, Eat up the Nations Provision: And when they come to be Rolled and
Tossed by the Waves at Sea, they are as sick as so many Dogs, and infect great
Numbers of Sea-Faring-Men, And many dies.
by which great Inconveniecy, renders them more fit for an Hospital, than a
Fighting Navy; as is seen in time of War, and our Sea Commanders the daily
Witness of this Calamity.

And it cannot be denied, but that it was the Fishery of England, that supplied
Queen Elizabeth's Navy with Seamen, and made her so Potent, to give so Fatal an
Overthrow to the Spaniards, That, that one Blow was so Great a Loss, that they
will never Retrieve it, nor be able to oppose us either by Sea or Land.

And Her Clemency to the Hollanders, in giving them Permission to Fish on our
Coasts, was the very first Foundation that they laid, to raise themselves to
their present Grandeur, and by the Wealth they have got, and Shipping, by their
Breeding of Seafaring Men, they are rendered very Formidable at Sea.

It is worth the while, says the Reverend Mr. Cambden, to observe what an
extraordinary Gain the Hollanders, and Zealanders, do make by Fishing on the
English Seas, Rich. 2. Fitz Herbert. Tit. Protection. 46.
having first obtained Leave from the Castle of Scarbourough; For the English
have ever granted them Leave to Fish, reserving always the Honor and the
Privilege to themselves; but through Negligence resigning the Profit unto
Strangers, it is almost incredible, says he, what a vast Sum of Money the
Hollanders do make by this Fishing upon our Coast.

And in Edward the Fourth's Reign, Rob. Belknap, An Eminent Judge in his tim.
affirmed, ^ That the Sea is subject to the King, as a part of this Kingdom, or
of the Patrimony of the Crown.
He ordered Commanders with a Naval Power, to protect and Guard the Fishermen
upon the Coasts of Norfolk, and Suffolk, and the Charges of the Guard were
defrayed by the Fishermen; The English Nation were ever in past Ages Renowned
for Sea-Affairs, in all Countries near the Seas; and they had also a Numerous
Navy, that the People of all Countries Esteemed, and called the King of
England, King and Sovereign of the Seas.

And why England should not now insist upon the Sovereignty of the British
Seas,
as in former times, Object.
seems very Wonderful!

But some People may say, that in case this Fishery were Encouraged, it may be
a Means to prevent Eating so much Flesh, as we do now in England: and so
consequently, be very prejudicial to our Landed-Men, and bring the Rents of the
Farms lower.

But this with Submission, is a very Erroneous Notion.

For Example: The Fish that may or should be Caught in the British Seas, is not
intended to be eat in England, and perhaps not one Huudredth part of it, but to
be sold at foreign Markets; as in due time shall be observed.

And to make it appear, that if a National Fishery be encouraged, it will cause
a greater Consumption of Flesh than is now in England,
and consequently, rather increase than diminish the Rents of our Landed
Gentlemen, and in few Years might double the Rents, as the Fishery flourished,
and our Trade increase both at home, and abroad.

I Humbly Offer these Reasons;

First, Our Coasting Towns, Bouroughs and Villages Adjacent, that formerly had
their dependence on the Fishery, are reduced to so great Poverty, for want of
being Employed, that they are now constrained to feed upon Coarse-Bread,
Butter, Cheese, Milk, Turnips, Carrots, or on such Roots and Herbs, as they can
get:

Whereas if they were Employed in this Fishery, they would then have Money to
go to Market, and buy Flesh, as their Ancestors did before them, for
themselves, and Families: And I suppose there is not any Man, but what is
sensible that the English naturally loving Flesh, the meanest Man or Woman in
the Kingdom would have Roast and boiled Meat for themselves and Families, as
well as their Landlords, if their Purses would bear it.

So that then there would be a greater Consumption of Flesh than there is now,
not only in our Coasting Towns, etc. but in all probability, through the whole
Kingdom, when once we flourish in this Fishery.

This Great and Glorious Undertaking will not only enrich us, but Employ
thousands of People that are now so miserable Poor, that they gradually Starve
for want of having this Encouragement.

And what is worthy your particular Notice,
it would prevent abundance of Seafaring Men from going into Foreign Service
in times of Peace, for want of Employment at home; many of them leaving their
Wives and Children to be maintained by the Parish, which undoubtedly is a great
Grievance to the respective Parishes, and a Burden to the Inhabitants. And
this Fishery would not only preserve thousands of Families from Starving, but
then they would wear better Clothes, and promote our Woollen Manufactury; For
it is only Poverty makes People wear Rags; and being disheartened, it oftentimes
prevents their Devotion.

And it will also prevent a great many Inconveniences, that now attend this
Nation, for want of being Employed.

For Example: There would not be so many Vagrants and Vagabonds, nor so many
People that take illegal Courses; as Thieving, Robbing, etc. to the Ruin of
themselves and others. Nor so many Export our Corn, nor carry our Wool
unwrought out of the Kingdom, if they were employed another way.

This Fishery would also employ abundance at Land, so well as by Sea; as
Clerks, Accomptants, Warehouse and Storekeepers, and the like, and great
Numbers of Artists and Tradesmen: So that then there would be Provision for a
great many Men, that go Crawling about the Streets, like so many Snails, for
want of Employ, that have been well Educated.

Besides, it is an Universal Maxim, That Idleness is the Root of all Evil; and a
great many People fear Starving more than Hanging, as is seen almost every
Session, or Assizes; For let the Judge enquire of the Criminals, what induced
them to take the lewd Courses they are Indicted, or Arraigned for, the General
Reply, is Want.

Further, it is supposed by all that have traveled, in the Low Countries, that
where one Male-factor is Executed in Holland or in France, there is above One
hundred in England; and the only Reason that can be given, why there are so few
in Holland and France, and so many executed in England, is, That they take care
to employ their Subjects; and those that are incapable by Age, or any other
Infirmity for Labor, are provided for, by allowing them a Competent
Maintenance to live on; (but it is the Fishery of England, that employs and
enricheth them.) And the Hollanders themselves will boast, that God blesses
them in their Tradring, and defends them from their Enemies, for being so good
to the Poor. And it is a Confirmation of the Sacred Writ, That he that
Considers the Indigent, the Lord will remember him in the day of his
Tribulation.

And what a great Glory will it be to the King and Kingdom, to preserve so many
thousand Subjects, that are now involved in such miserable Necessity, that in
all probability they must perish, if this Method be not speedily taken.

And since His Majesty has been Instrumental in Delivering these Kingdoms from
Slavery, and Popery, etc. it is to be supposed that he will also make it his
Chiefest Care, to preserve his Subjects from Destruction (that have so Bravely
Ventured their Lives, both by Sea and Land; and have paid their Money with so
much Cheerfulness to carry on the War. And have so long languished under their
Afflictions.)

And He The King
having Maugred all Opposition, both at Home and Abroad, it now remains, that
he attacks Himself, that His Goodness and Greatness, may vye with each other,
by enquiring, The Kingdom would promote Trade
what is to be done to retrieve them from their withering Calamity.

And it is believed by all well-wishers to the Welfare of these Kingdoms, that
His Majesty will Sign all those Acts, that shall be for His Glory, the
Senators Honor, and the preserving so well as enriching of his Subjects. When
he shall be Advised to it by his Parliament, in whom he has so great
Confidence, as he has often declared for the Good of his People, in His most
Gracious Speech to both Houses of Parliament, which are too tedious here to
insert.

And having made the proud Lillies of France stoop to him, and Recovered the
Principality of Orange,
he will now Assume his Trident. And to Emulate his Royal Predecessor, William
the I. Conqueror of England, who, after being possessed of the Kingdom, took a
View of it in a Royal Progress, and then did see there was an incumbent
Necessity to defend this Realm by Shipping (although he set fire of his own Fleet
at his Landing, to let his Men know his Intentions: Aut Caesar aut Nullus.)
Whereupon he demolished several Villages in Hampshire, and there planted a
large Forest of Oaks, All intended for Building Men of War, as a Guard to the
Kingdom.
which to this day is called New Forest, it being above two and twenty Miles
in length, and eleven Miles over.

This shows what Care our Ancestors from time to time, have taken to secure
this Island by Navigation, and for providing Ships of Force, as well as for
Commerce; the one to Enrich, the other to defend, as well our Trading by Sea)
as the Island from Invasion. And if we had the Mines of Mexico and Peru, in
this Kingdom, unless they were secured by Force of Arms, they would undoubtedly
lie open to any that would invade us.


For there is no Dominion that can expect to flourish in Trade, or be enriched
by Commerce, if they do not secure themselves by Force, either by Sea or Land,
as Opportunity offers, or the Necessity requires.

It Is undoubtedly the Interest of the Nation to stand as well upon their Guard
in times of Peace, as in War; that they may give no Opportunity to an Enemy to
Surprise us, by Sea, or Land.

And since there is so great a Necessity for the Defense of the Nation, to
support our Navgation by this Fishery, certainly our Senators will take Care
that the Grandeur of these Glorious Kingdoms shall not be ecclipsed by the
growing Greatness of our Neighbors, who have, and still do encroach upon the
Sovereignty of the British Seas, which is the only Diadem of the Imperial Crown
of these Dominions; and the Port Cullizes and Guard of the Realm.

But the Fishery, if encouraged, will be for the Good of the Kingdom in
General, from the King to the Peasant (or meanest Subject) and in some measure
take off the Burden of the Taxes this Nation has so long struggled under; and
not only make the Exchequer the Greatest Bank in the World, but oblige the
Treasure of the East and West Indies, comparatively, to meet in our Streets;
And also preserve a perpetual Union amongst the Subjects of England, let them
be never so Retrogade in their Opinion, as to their Profession of Religion.

And this happy Union will prevent all Intestine Commotions; and bid Defiance
to all Foreign Invasions, or Incursions.

And it cannot be denied, but that England had formerly the richest Fishery in
the World; when we maintained the Sovereignty of the British Seas; and by
Computation, had above 800 Fishing Ships; and had it been Encouraged, by a
reasonable. Increase, we must have had now, between 2 and 3000 Fishing Ships;
And nothing can be more true, than that the Fishery of England, is the Main
Pillar of the Trade and Defense of this Nation. And it will not only raise the
Naval Force of England, but by its Growth and Flourishing, be a Curb, to keep
under the growing Power of the French and Hollanders, and bring in Great
Treasure to the Kingdom, as aforesaid.

And further, if this Nursery for Seamen were Encouraged, the Merchants would
never want Men to carry their Ships to Sea, nor be in danger of having their
Men pressed in time of War (which is a great Detriment to our Trade, and Loss
to the King and Kingdom) for then we should have Seafaring Men, and Mariners
enough, to serve the Kingdom.

And in regard that some people may say that there will not be constant Employ
for our Seamen in the Fishery in times of Peace; and so prevent their going
into Foreign Service for want of Employ at Home: I have particularized the
respective Seasons for Fishing, throughout the Year, in the British Seas.

Of the Miraculous Treasure of the British Seas.
THE Coast of Great Britain does produce a continual Harvest of Profit and
Benefit to all that do Fish there; and such Shoals and Multitude of Fishes are
offered to the Takers, that it makes an Admiration to those that are employed
among them.

The Summer* Fishing for Herrings, begins about Midsummer, lasts some part
of August.

The Winter Fishing for Herring, from September, to the middle of November;
both which extend from Bonghoness in Scotland, to the River Thames Mouth, being
a Run of above a hundred Leagues.

The Fishing for Cod, at Alum by, Whirlington, and White-Haven, near the Coast
of Lancashire, from Easter till Whitsuntide.

The Fishing for Hake, at Aberdenie, Abveswitch, and other places between Wales
and Ireland, from Whitsuntide, to St. James-Tide.

The Fishing for Cod and Ling, about Padstow, within the Land; and of Severn,
from Christmas to Midlent.

The Fishing for Cod on the West part of Ireland, frequented by those of
Biscay, and Portugal, from the beginning of April until the end of June.

The Fishing for Cod and Ling on the North and North-East of Ireland, from
Michaelmas to Christmas.

The Fishing for Pilchers on the West-coast of England, from St. James tide
until Michaelmas.

The Fishing for Cod and Ling, upon the North East of England, from Easter to
Midsummer.

The Fishing of great Staple-Ling, and many other Sorts of Fish lying about the
Island of Scotland, and in the several parts of the British Seas all the Year
long.

In September, not many years since, upon the Coast of Devonshire near Minegal,
five hundred Tun of Fish were taken in one day. And about the same time, three
thousand pounds worth of Fish, in one day were taken at St. Ives in Cornwall, by
small Boats.

Our five Men Boats and Cobles,
adventuring in a Calm, to Launch out amongst the Hollands Busses, not far from
Robinhood's Bay, returned to Whitby, full freighted with Herrings, and reported
that they had seen some of those Busses take ten, twenty, and twenty four Lasts
at a Draught of Herring, and returned into their own Country with forty, fifty,
and a hundred Lastes of Herring in one Buss.

Our Fleet of Colliers,
not many years since, returning from Newcastle, laden with Coals, about the
Wells, near Flamborough Head, and Scarborough, met with such Multitudes of Cod,
Ling, and Herring, that one among the rest, with certain Ship Hooks, and other
like Instruments, drew up as much Cod, and Ling, in a little time, as sold for
well nigh as much as her whole Lading of Coals.

And many hundred of Ships might have been laden in two Days, and two Nights.

Now what great Inconveniency and Detriment is this to the English Nation;
That we do not Encourage a National Fishery, that we may retrieve those Great
Advantages, that we have so long taken no Notice of, in regard we can Employ
our Seamen throughout the whole Annual?

And out of which wonderful Affluence and Abundance of Fish, swarming in our
Seas; that we may the better perceive the Infinite Gain, which Foreign Nations
make:

I will especially insist upon the Fishing of the Hollanders on our Coasts; and
thereby show, how by this Means principally they have risen, to the Greatness
of their present Grandeur: 1. In Shipping. 2. In Mariners. 3. In Trade, at home
and abroad. 4. In Towns and Fortifications. 5. In Power at home and abroad. 6.
In Public Revenue. 7. In Private Wealth. 8. In all manner of Provisions, and
Stores of Things Necessary for the Preservation of Mankind, and Munitions of
War.


Increase Shipping.
Besides seven hundred Strand Boats,
four hundred Evars, and four hundred Sullits, Drivers, and Tod-Boats,
wherewith the Hollanders Fish upon our Coasts, every one of these employing
another Ship, to fetch Salt, and carry the Fish into other Countries, being in
all three thousand Sail* maintaining and setting on Work, at least twelve
thousand persons; Fishers, Tradesmen, Women and Children. They have above (as
it is supposed) one hundred Doyer-Boats, of one hundred and fifty Tuns apiece,
or thereabouts, seven hundred Pinks and Well-Boats, from sixty to one hundred
Tuns Burden, which altogether Fish upon the Coast of England, and Scotland,
for Cod and Ling only.

And each of these Employ another Vessel,
for providing Salt, and Transporting of their Fish, making in all, one
thousand six hundred Ships; which Maintain and Employ persons of all Sorts,
four thousand at least* For the Herring Season, they have one thousand six
hundred Busses at the least, all of them Fishing only on our Coast, from
Bonghoness in Scotland, to the mouth of the Thames.

And every One makes work for three other Ships, to attend her; the one to
bring Salt from Foreign parts; another to carry the said Salt and Cask to the
Busses, and to bring back their Herring, and the Third to Transport the Herring
into Foreign Markets; So that the Total Number of Ships and Busses, plying the
Herring-Fare, is six Thousand four hundred Ships; where every Buss, one with
another, Employs forty Men, Mariners and Fishers within her own Hold; and rest,
ten Men apiece, which amounts to One hundred twelve thousand Fishers and
Mariners. All which maintain double, if not treble so many Tradesmen, Women,
and Children by Land.

Besides, they have generally four hundred Vessels at least, that take Herring
at Yarmouth, and there sell them for Ready-Money; so that the Hollanders
(besides three hundred Ships, beforementioned, Fising upon their own Coasts or
Shoars: have at least four thousand eight hundred Ships, only maintained by
the Seas of Great Britain. And to this Number, they undoubtedly add every day;
although their Country neither affords Victuals, nor Materials, nor
Merchandise to set them forth.

Yet by the Great Advantages that they have got by Fishing on our Coast, they
abound in every Thing that is fit for the Use of Mankind.

Increase of Mariners.
The Number of Ships, Fishing on our Coasts, as being aforesaid, four thousand
eight hundred, if we allow but twenty persons to every Ship, one with another,
the Total of Mariners and Fishers amounts to One hundred sixty eight
Thousand, out of which number they daily furnish their Ships, to the East and
West Indies, to the Meditereanean, and for their Grand Fleet of Men of War; for
by this means they are not only enabled to brook the Seas and know the Use of
their Tackles and Compass, but are likewise instructed in the knowledge of
Navigation and Pilotage, insomuch, that from hence their greatest Navigators
have had their Educations and Knowledge of the Seas.

Increase of TRADE. Observe.

By reason of those Multitude of Ships and Mariners, they have extended their
Trade to all Parts of the World, Exporting for the most part, in all their
Voyages, our Herrings, and other Fish, which they Catch upon our Coasts, or in
the British Seas, for the Maintenance of the same. Note, That we might make the
same advantages of our Fish abroad, did we encourage this National-Fishery.


In Exchange whereof they return these several Commodities from other
Countries: From the Southern Parts, as France, Spain, and Portugal; for our
Herrings, and other Fish, they return Oils, Wines, Pruens, Honey, Woolls,
Leather, with Store of Coin in Specie.

From the Streights; Velvets, Sattins, and all Sorts of Silks, Aloms, Currants,
Oils, and all Grocery-Ware, with much Money.

From the East-Countries for our Herrings, and other French, and Italian
Commodities, before returned, they bring Home Corn, Wax, Flax, Hemp, Pitch,
Tarr, Soap-Ashes, Iron, Copper, Steel, Clap-board, Wain-scot, Timber,
Deal-board, Dollars, etc.

From Germany, for Herrings and other Salt Fish, Iron, Millstones,
Rhenish-Wines, Plate-Buttons for Armor, with other Munition, too tedious to
insert; Silks, Velvets and Rushes Fustians, Baratees, and such like Frankford
Commodities; with Store of Rix Dollars.

From Brabant and Flanders: they return for the most part Ready-Money, with
some Tapestries, and some other Commodities; and some of our Herrings are
carried so far as Brassil.

And that which is more strange, and to our great dishonor, they have
generally four hundred Ships, which Fish in sight of Yarmouth, and vend the
Herrings in England, and make us pay Ready-Money for our own Fish.

Sir Josiah Child in his Discourse of Trade, in the end of his Preface, is
pleased to say, That he has exposed his Conceptions to the Public Censure,
with an Assurance, that they will be received and Honored with a Public
Sanction, and past into Laws; and thus begins his Book.

The Prodigious Increase of the Netherlands in their Domestic and Foreign
Trade, Riches, and Multitude of Shipping, is the envy of the Present, and may
be the Wonder of future Generations.

Here he sets out the Riches of Holland, and backs it on with an Addition, in
several subsequent Expressions in his Book: They are Sampsons, and Goliah's, in
Trade: Sons of Anach; Men of Renown, Masters of the field; like a Prevailing
Army that Scorns to build Castles and Fortresses, to secure themselves as we do
by Act of our Navigation; And to Advance their Glory herein, he tells us, that
we are but Dwarfs, and Pigmies, in Stocks and Experience, etc.

But he takes no Notice that they have attained to their Greatness by Fishing
on our Coasts; and that we were the Sampson's and Goliah's in Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, and they the Pigmies, as shall be made appear more at large.

And the Honored Author goes further on in his Preface, and tells us, that
were they freed from the French Fears, they would be Worse than Taskmasters
over us in Trade, considering their Treasure.

That the Trade of the English Nation is in a very bad Circumstances, is
plainly seen by all thinking Men; And since it is Practical among Kings and
Princes, and Sates, to Join one with another (or enter into a Confederacy) to
oppose a King, or Prince, that is Growing too great, that if they do not
endeavor to Suppress him, it may be a Means to lie open to them whenever he
intends to make an Invasion or Incursion into their Dominions, or Invade their
Territories.

And whether it is not now high time, considering those vast Improvements of
the Hollanders and French, to depress the Growing Greatness of our Neighbors,
must be left to the Great Wisdom of our Senators; And also, whether a longer
Continuance of their Fishing on our Coasts will not be a further Encouragement
to their Encroachments, and our own Title, as to the ancient Sovereignty of the
British Seas?

By this their large Extent of Trade, they are become Citizens of the whole
World, whereby they have so enlarged their Towns, that most of them within this
Hundred Years, are full as big again as they were before; as Amsterdam,
Rotterdam, Dort, Middleburgh, etc. having been twice enlarged, their Streets
and Buildings are orderly set forth, that for Beauty and Strength, they may
Compare with any other Cities in the World; upon which they bestow infinite
Sums of Money; All this Originally flowing from the Bounty of the British Seas,
from whence by their Labor and Industry, they derive the beginning of all that
Wealth and Greatness; and particularly for the Havens of the aforesaid Towns,
whereof some of them Cost Forty, Fifty, or an Hundred thousand pounds: their
Fortifications, both for Number and Strength, (upon which they have bestowed
innumerable Sums of Money) as well upon their Frontiers, as Ports, and may Vye
with any People in the World.

Increase of Power abroad.
Such being the Number of the Ships and Mariners,
and so great their Trade, Occasioned Principally by their Fishing, they have
not only Strengthened, and Fortified themselves at Home, and to Repel all
Foreign Invasions; But have likewise Stretched their Power to the East and West
Indies, and in many Places thereof, they are Lords of the Seacoasts; and have
likewise Fortified upon the Main: And more than this, all the Neighboring
Princes, in their differences by reason of this their Greatness at Sea, are
glad to have them of their Party, as was exemplified, when the Wars were
between the Danes and the Swedes, the Hollanders were for the King of Denmark,
and Lent him Vantrump to be his Admiral, who had the Success of Sinking the
Swedish Admiral, and overthrew the Swedish Fleet.

This is a Confirmation how much they are in Esteem for their Strength at Sea,
and that one would think ought to be a President for England, to Preserve our
Naval-Force.

Increase of Public Revenue.
Moreover; Note, if this National Fishery were encouraged, there would
undoubtedly acrue to the Crown, above 400000l* per Annum.
how mightily the Public Revenue, and Custom of that State is increased by
their Fishing on our Coasts, may appear in this; that above forty years since,
over and above the Customs of other Merchandise, Excises, Licenses, Waftage and
Lastage, there was paid to the States for Custom of Herring, and other Salt
Fish, above five hundred thousand pounds in one year, besides the tenth Fish,
and Cask paid, and for Waftage, which comes to at least as much more, among
the Hollanders only: Whereto the tenth of other Nations being added, it
amounts to a far greater Sum.

We are likewise to understand that great part of their Fish that they take out
of our Seas upon our Coasts, is sold in other Countries for Ready Money, and
they generally Import from Foreign Countries, of the finest Gold and Silver;
coming home, Recoin it of a baser Allay under their own Stamp, by which means
they exceedingly Augment their Public Treasure.

Observation.
So that if England would encourage this National Fishery, we should Heap the
same Advantages; (the Allay of the Coin only excepted,) which we cannot permit
in England.

Increase of Private Wealth.
As touching their Private Wealth; if we Consider the abounding Stores of
Herrings, and other Fish by them taken on our Coasts, and the usual Prices that
they are sold for; as also the Multitude of Tradesmen and Handicrafts Men, that
by reason of this their Fishing, are daily set on work, we must needs conclude,
that the Gain and Profit thereof, made by Private Men, must of Necessity be
exceeding Great; As by Observing the particulars following, will appear;

By Dunkirk Spoiling and Burning the Busses of Holland, and setting Great
Ransom upon their Fishermen, Enforced them to compound for great Sums of Money;
that they might Fish quietly for one year; whereupon the next year after the
Fishermen agreed amongst themselves to pay to the States of Holland a Dollar,
for every Last of Herring, toward the Maintenance of Certain Ships of War, to
secure them in their Fishing on our Coasts, they having obtained Liberty from
England for the same; By Reason whereof there was a Record kept of the several
Lasts of Herrings that year, and it appeared thereby, that in one Half year
they had taken thirty thousand Lasts of Herrings, which at twenty pound per
Last, amounts to three Millions Six hundred thousand pounds, at sixteen,
twenty, and thirty, pounds a Last, as they are Ordinarily sold (according as
they Pick them) and then transported into other Countries, it comes at least
to five Millions, whereunto, if we add the Herrings taken by other Nations; As
France, Lubeck, Hamborough, Bremen, Biscay, Portugal, Spain, etc. which for the
most part Fish in our Seas; together with Cod, Ling, Hake, and other Fish, and
taken by the Hollanders upon the British Coasts, all the year long, the Total
will Modestly and Evidently arise to above ten Millions. per Annum.

But Admit it did amount to but five Millions; what a vast Loss is it for our
Nation to sustain?

The great Trade of Fishing, Employing so many Ships at Sea, must likewise
maintain an innumerable number of Tradesmen and Artists by Land; As Spinners,
Hemp-Winders to Cables, Cordage, Yarn, Twine for Nets and Lines; Weavers, to
make Sail-Cloths, Cesive, Packers, Tollers, Dressers, and Cowchers, to sort and
make the Herrings lawful Merchandise; Tanners, to Tan their Sails and Nets;
Coopers, to make Cask, Block, and Boultmakers for Ships, Keelmen, and Laborers
for carrying and removing their Fish: Sawyers for Planks, Carpenters,
Shipwrights, Smiths, Carmen, Boatmen, Brewers, Bakers, and a great Number of
others, whereof many are maimed Persons, and unfit to be otherwise Employed,
Children and Families;
And further, every Man and Maidservant having any poor Stock, may venture the
same in their Fishing-Voyages, which affords them Ordinarily, Great Increase,
and is duly paid according to the Proportion of their Gain.

Increase of Provision. Observe.

And further it is well known, that Holland it self, only does afford a few
Hops, Madders, Butter and Cheese, and yet abounds in a very bountiful Manner,
(by Reason of this Art of Fishing) in all kind of Provision, so well for Life
as Commerce; As in Beef, Mutton, Veal, Corn, etc. In Cloths and Leather, and
Wines, Silks, Spices; and for to Defend themselves by Sea, they have Pitch,
Tarr, Cordage, and Timber, Iron, Steel, Cannon, and all Manner of Small Arms,
for the Service of their Land Forces.

Of all which they have not only Enough to Supply themselves, but from their
Magazines, are able to furnish their Neighboring Countries.

And if this Fishery is not encouraged, it must certainly redound to the
Ignominy of the English Nation, to permit Strangers to Fish on our Seas, and
Impoverish our Selves to make them Rich; Insomuch that for want of Encouraging
this Fishery, above two Hundred Towns, Buroughs and Villages are Ruined (that
formerly were enriched by Fishing) and the Inhabitants reduced to Miserable
Want.

Whereas on the Contrary, by our Sedulous endeavoring to make use of this
Great Blessing, we might in a few years, Repair the decayed Towns, and the
Losses of this Kingdom; and not only prevent the Destruction of Thousands of
Families, and grow so Potent by Sea, that none durst oppose us.

And beyond all Dispute, had our Ancestors (in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth)
been told that either the French or Hollanders, should ever have been so
Powerful by Sea, as to appear with that Naval Force as they have done on our
Seas, they would have thought they had been the greatest Liars and Impostors in
the World, which is now too manifestly known, not only to this Kingdom, but to
the whole Universe.

And how can it be supposed, that we shall be able to Defend our selves against
any Invasion or Incursion, that a Foreign Enemy may make, unless we Preserve
the Foundation of those Floating Castles that must secure the Island?

Which without Controversy is a National-Fishery.
When it is daily visible that the French and Hollanders had never attained to
that Force by Sea, they are now arrived to, if it had not been Encouraged by
this Neglect of ours; which in all Probability may prove the giving the Sword
out of our own Power, and to the last Degree prove Fatal to the English Nation,
if not speedily prevented.

And since God and Nature has Offered so great a Treasure, and lays it at our
own Doors; should we not be exceedingly to Blame, if we do not accept of such a
Wonderful Blessing, which no People in the World but our selves can boast of,
to enjoy in so Bountiful a manner as this is Bestowed on us?

The Right Method to be taken to Retrieve and Secure our Privileges, ought to
be the Great and Speedy Care of the best Patriot of our Country; I might give
here many Reasons for defending the Right of the Fishery to our own Subjects,
as upon the Reason of Justice, Prudence and Interest, and the Right of our
Sovereignty of the British Seas, admits of no Dispute.

Some Men may say, that it is not a proper time to insist upon, or Dispute the
Sovereignty of the British Seas.

For these Reasons.
First,
the King is a Hollander Born.

Secondly, that He has an Estate and Revenues in Holland.

Thirdly, if the States of Holland had not Assisted his Majesty with their Navy
and Army, in his Expedition against King James, he would not have Succeeded in
his Design.

Fourthly, That the States of Holland may insist, that if they had not Assisted
England in the Distress they were involved in King James's Reign, they had not
been Delivered from Tyranny and Popery, etc.

In Answer to these Objections, I Humbly Offer these Considerations.
As to the First, It is true, the King was Born in Holland, and by the Mothers
side English, but now His Majesty is Espoused to England by his Coronation
Oath, and therefore, according to the Sacred Writ, will (no doubt) cleave unto
his Wife.

And let some Men's mistakes be what they will* He must undoubtedly have a
Greater Esteem for the English and for England, that has Crowned him with the
Imperial Diadem of these Kingdoms and Dominions, than for the Hollanders, if
once they should oppose the Sovereignty of the British Seas, which is now his
Right, as has been acknowledged by Hugo Grotius, upon the Innaugaration of
King James the First of England, He renders this Magnificent Character of him.

Tria Sceptra Profundi in Magne Cojere Ducem; Hugo Grotius Lib. 1. Lib. 2.
which is, that the Rights of English, Scottish, and Irish Seas, are united
under one Scepter, neither is he Satisfied with this bare Profession, but he
goes on, Sum animos a Rege tuo, Quis det Jura Mari; which is, Take Courage
from the King, who gives Laws to the Sea: And in the same Book, in
contemplation of so great a Power, he Concludeeth. Finis Hic est qui Fine
caret, etc. that is, This is an End beyond an End, a Bound that knows no
Bound; a Bound which even the Wind and the Waves must submit unto; This is the
Acknowledgment of Hugo Grotius himself, that before he had disowned the
Sovereignty of the British Seas in his Mare Liberum.

As to the Second Objection.
The King is not unsensible, that his Revenues in England does far exceed those
of Holland, and the only way to Secure his Interest there, must be by dint of
Sword, for without that, he had never Regained the Principality of Orange; And
it cannot be supposed that his Majesty should value these Kingdoms and Dominons
at so slender a Rate, as to lie open to a Foreign Enemy for want of Encouraging
a National-Fishery, which will be for his Glory, the Honor of the Kingdom, and
the Public Good in General; when he is convinced it is to be done, and thereby
Secures the Interest and safety of his Dominions, both at Home and Abroad.

As to the Third Objection.
It Is allowed, the States of Holland did Assist His Majesty with their Navy and
Army; and in Answer to this, the King knows it may be proved from undeniable
Record; That if Queen Elizabeth (of Blessed Memory) had not Assisted the States
both by Sea and Land, when they First Revolted from the King of Spain, they
would never been freed from the Spanish Yoke, nor a free State; And further,
for Her Majesty's Assistance, Offered Her the Sovereignty of the Netherlands,
in Consiederation of Her Royal Bounty, and Goodness to them, after she had sent
Threescore thousand pounds, upon on the Account of Sir Thomas Gresham, in Anno,
one Thousand five Hundred Seventy and two; so that it is supposed that not only
the King but all Christendom knows, that the Hollanders owe their Ab-Origine,
and the Greatness they are now attained to, from England: So this is but one
Service done for another.

As to the Fourth Objection.
Beyond all Dispute the King and Kingdom has taken Care to Pay the Hollanders,
all the Charges they were at for the Navy and Army.

But it cannot be supposed that they would quit their Pretensions to the
Sovereignty of the British Seas, which is the Main Pillar of the Nation.

As in the Preamble, of an Act of Parliament made in the 14. year of the Reign
of King Charles the Second, it is thus inserted.

That the Wealth, Honor and Safety of this Realm; as well for the Maintenance
of Trade, and Encouragement of Navigation, as in many other Respects, does in a
High Degree depend on the Fishery.

And should God Almighty, out of his Infinite Mercy and Goodness, Inspire the
King and Senators, to Revive and Promote this National-Fishery; It would be
such a Comfort in Danger to this Nation, as the Honey Sampson found in the
Lions Jaws: And not only the Coasting Towns, Buroughs and adjacent villages,
be Enriched thereby; but the King and Kingdom in General, would find the
Sweetness of it.

For did we but Secure the Sovereignty of the British Seas, it would not only
make the whole World stand in awe of us, but Court us to buy our Fish.

For without, it is Impossible the East and Northern Countries should subsist,
and in many other Places, Herrings are every days Meat, Winter and Summer, as
well to draw on drink, as to satisfy Hunger and in many Places, the Greatest
part of the year, they are Scarce to be had; for soon after Michaelmas, the
Sound is Frozen, so that no Herrings can be Transported thither; And France,
Spain, Italy, and the Rest of the Catholic Countries, could not keep Lent
(without our Fish) which next to their own Salvation, they Tender most Dear, in
Obedience to the Command of the Church of Rome.

It Is Observable, that the Hollanders make it their Business to infect the
People of England, that we cannot make the Advantage of the Fishery as they do;
and therefore it will be convenient to remove all the Vulgar Objections: Some
will have it that we want Men, and others, that our Men will never take to it.

As to the First, I Answer, That we have Men Enough, but they are Idle and live
upon the Public, without making any Return of their Labor, but let these
People be Employed in the Fishery, and they Protected by an Act of Parliament,
we shall soon have enough, and to spare; and it is a Great Happiness to this
Kingdom, that we can Employ our Seafaring Men in times of Peace, and it is so
great a Blessing, that no Nation in the World has the like Opportunity of
Employing and enriching themselves.

The Second (Exception or) Objection is; That the Genius of this Nation will
never endure the Hardships of this Employment.

To which I Answer, That the English do run greater Hazards, and suffer greater
Hardships in their long, tedious, and unhealthy Voyages; as to the East and the
West Indies, and the Turkey Voyages, where many Men are lost, by reason of the
Heat of the Climate, want of Provisions and Water, which in the Fishery, there
is none of these Inconveniences to attend them, they being so often in and out
of Port; and as to Labor, the working of a Mine is far beyond that of Fishing,
where the Men sometimes Work up to the Middle in Water. -- But to come nearer
to the Point, the English is so far from having an Aversion against Fishing,
that they apply themselves to it; for Example, after Harvest is in, and the
Herring-Season comes on, the Country Fellows and Boys do go to the Coasting
Towns, to be Hired into the Fishery; and do Generally take such a liking to it,
that after 2 or 3 Voyages they very rarely return to their Rural Employment,
but take to the Sea altogether.

And further, I cannot imagine what Hardships the Hollanders can undergo in the
Fishing, more than the English are willing to do; this is another Objection.

But this, beyond all dispute, is a very Erroneous Notion; for the Herring
Fishing in the English Seas begins in June, and goes out in November; and that
for the first four Months, it is the best time for Profit, Pleasure, and
Fair-Weather; for we seldom look out after the Herring Fishing till September,
and so continue to the end of November, which is the most Tempestuous Season in
the Whole Annual; and then in January, we fit out for the North Seas, and spend
the remaining part of Winter in all Extremities of Cold and Hardship; This is
enough to Satisfy, that we are able to undergo as much Hardships as the
Hollanders.

But however, I Will strain this point a little further; Suppose that the Winter
Fishing would be too Hard for us, what Excuse can we have for not making our
Improvements on the Summer Fishing, which is more advantageous abundantly;

Another Objection is, That the Hollanders can fare Harder than the English, in
their course feeding, and Great Stress is laid upon this; and that an English
Man will never be able to live on so sparing a Diet as they do.

Now if it were so, and that an English Diet could not be had, and that a Dutch
Diet would not serve us; but that is not our Condition: for he that cannot
brook with the one may have the other; And I am induced to believe that Pork,
Pease, and Beef, are much better and more Strengthening, than Roots and
Cabbage, for the Hollanders Victualling is the same with ours, for Beer,
Biscuite, Butter, Cheese; all which we can provide our selves with, much
Cheaper than they: And to make Good the Defect of their Ordinary Provisions,
they drink a great deal more Brandy than the English do; so then to take one
thing with another, we Victual with Good Provisions, as Cheap or Cheaper than
they do.

But besides the very suggestion of leaving a Good Diet, to go to a bad, is a
very Great Error; for the Country Men that enter themselves on board the
Fishery, fare far better at Sea than they did at Land; for besides their
General Victualling, which they carry with them to Sea, they feed upon the Fish
they Catch, which for Variety, being Fresh taken, is a Treat, to what a Person
of Quality has at his Table a Shore; and of pitiful weak Men at Land, in a
Voyage or two, become Stout, Hearty, and Healthful Men.

There are two more Wolves in the way; First, that our Herrings are in no
esteem abroad, because we have not the right way to cure them.

Secondly, we shall never make nothing on it, for the Hollanders will under-sell
us, for Freighting Cheaper, and consequently beat us out of the Trade.

In answer to which; First, there are two ways of curing the Herrings, the one
at Sea, where they are Gipp'd, immediately upon their taking, and Barrell'd;
the other at Land, where they are Gipp'd, and Packed some days after they are
taken; These we call Shoar-made-Herrings, and we know very well, that one
Barrel of the other for Goodness, is worth one Hundred of these; and that they
will never take their Pickle kindly, unless their Throats be Cut, as soon as
they are Caught; so that it is a great Error to take a Shoar-made-Herring, for
a Trial of Skill in curing; But for those that are made at Sea, they are made
as Good, and as much in Esteem abroad as any of the Hollanders Herrings, and
they have been frequently Sold in the East-Country for four pounds a Barrel;
and I could wish we were no more to blame, for not taking them than curing
them; But admit we did not know how to Cure them; I hope it is not impossible
for the English to learn.

Secondly, the other Notion is, That the Hollanders will beat us off of our
Trade; this is as Erroneous as the rest, and of no force at all against the
Fishery, or it is much more Force against the Merchant, and the Newcastle
Trade; for this lies under our Noses, and more in our convenience than any
Body's else.

And to Neglect our Fishing upon this Consideration, is to Quit all Navigation,
and leave our selves to the Mercy of the Hollanders, or to be made a Prey to
any that will attack us.

And then to fear we shall want Vent, is to imagine that the People will leave
off Eating, and a Great part of the Tradeing World is yet unserv'd with Fish,
and it never could be made appear that our Herrings lay upon our Hands for want
of a Market.

And since all these Objections are sufficiently answered, there is nothing
wanting, but assuming our Ancient Right, and taking Possession of the Fishery.

And notwithstanding it is so apparently made appear, that this National
Fishery will redound so much to the Glory of the King, Honor of our Senators
Assembled in Parliament, and Welfare of the Kingdom in General.

We will suppose for Argument sake it is all but Wast-Paper.
But here is the Question to be put to the King and Kingdom in General, if the
growing Greatness of the French and Hollanders, has so much Increased within
this thirty or forty years last past, and still continue in the increasing of
Seafaring Men, Mariners, and their Naval Force; what will become of England in
Ten or twenty years; when in all probability, they may be so Potent (unless a
speedy Check is put to their Carrier) that we shall not be able to oppose them?

And it is an Universal Maxim, that the Forces of Potentates at Sea: Sont des
Marquis de Grandeur d'Estat, says a French Author; Whosoever Commands the Sea,
Commands the Trade of the World: He that Commands the Trade, Commands the
Wealth of the World, and consequently the World it self.

Again; as he that is Master of a Field, is said to be Master of every Town,
when it shall please him; so he that is Master of the Sea, may in some sort, be
said, to be Master of every Country, at least of such as are bordering on the
Sea; For he is* at liberty to begin, and end War where, when, and upon what
Terms he pleases, and extend his Conquests even to the Antipodes.

And England being encompassed with the Sea, as aforesaid, and abounding in
Commodious and Excellent Havens Bays and Ports, it excels for Safety and
Security (which is no small Praise) all the Neighboring Countries in Europe,
if not all in the World, and needs not fear any Neighboring Nation, but only
that which grows Potent in Shipping; for they only can deprive us of our Main
Security; And if an Island can make us as the Continent.

And if this Nation is once over power'd at Sea, we must expect to be the most
miserable People in the Universe, having for so many Generations last past,
Lorded it over the whole World by Sea; that the very Name of the English struck
a Terror into all those that durst oppose them.

When William the First, subdued the Realm, Conqueror of England that was an
easy Fall; it proving only prejudicial to some particular Families; And he
Residing in the Kingdom, took all the care imaginable to preserve this Nation,
as already has been said, by his Planting of a New-Forrest with Oaks, to his
perpetual Glory.

But if once the Naval Power of England be overcome by the French or
Hollanders; (According to all Human Probability) it must prove a Fatal
overthrow, so far as they can reach with Fire and Sword, being Spurred on by
Ambition, and Avarice, Revenge and Interest; and then we should find the
English saying to be too True; That the French and Hollanders are like Fire and
Water; Good Servants but bad Masters.

And it is most certain, that there is no other way to Maintain the Glory and
Grandeur of this Kingdom but by Raising a National-Fishery; which rightly
understood, is the Primum Mobile of the Nation; it is the only Palladium of this
Realm, without which, it is impossible to preserve, or revive the former Glory
of our Ancestors, and Secure the Sovereignty of the British Seas, and enrich
the Kingdom by Navigation.

THE SOVEREIGNTY OF THE British-Seas, ASSERTED.
ENgland has claimed a Prerogative of the British Seas time out of Mind; and
amongst our former and Ancient Kings, King Edgar was very Potent, Guil.
Malmesb. lib. 2. Cap. 8.
who possessing an Absolute Dominion of the Seas, Sailed Round about it every
Year, and secured it with a constant Guard, as it is Recorded; and what
Dominion King Edgar had, as absolute Lord of the Sea, appears in these Words; I
Edgar King of England, and of all the Islands, and of the Ocean lying round
about Britain, and of all the Nations that are included within the Circuit
thereof, Supreme Lord and Governor; do render Thanks to Almighty God my King,
who has enlarged my Empire, and Exalted it above the Royal Estate of my
Progenitors, who although they arrived to the Monarchy of all England; ever since
Athelstan, yet the Divine Goodness has favored me to subdue all the Kings of
the Islands, in the Ocean, with their most Stout and Mighty Kings, even as far
as Norway, and the Greatest Part of Ireland; together with their most Famous
City of Dublin. So far Edgar.

And after him, King Conutus left a Testimony of his Sovereignty over the Sea;
In this Expression; Thou O Sea art mine, etc. And from the Testimony of the
Saxons, and the Danes, we shall descend to the Government of the Normans,
whereby many Notable and Clear Proofs we shall find, as may be gathered out of
that Breviary of England, called Doomsday: Rot. Par. 48 Hen. 3. 22. Edw. 1. 2.
Rich. 2. The Tribute called Danegelt, was paid in the time of the English
Saxons, which amounted to four Shillings upon every Hide of Land, Am. 26 part.
page 276.
for the Defending the Dominion by Sea. Roger Hoverden asserteth it was paid
until the Reign of King Stephen; and in the Parliament Records of King Richard
the Second, it is Observable that a Custom was Imposed upon every thing that
passed through the Northern Admiralty; that is, from the, Thames along the
Eastern-Shoar of England, toward the North-East, for the Maintaining a Guard
for the Seas.

And this was not imposed only upon the English, but also upon all the Ships of
Foreigners, paying at the Rate of Six pence a Tun that passed by; such Ships
only excepted that brought Merchandise out of Flanders to London. Rot. Par. 2
Rich. 2. part 2. Act 38. Seld. Mare Clausum, page 334. Rot. Fran. 5. Hen. 4.
Rot. Fran. 38. Hen. 6. Rot. Par. 23 Edw. And it appears by Public Records,
containing diverse main points, touching which, the Judges of the Land were to
be consulted for the Good of the Common Wealth; That the Kings Sea Dominion*
which they called, the Ancient Superiority of the Sea, Vide Edw. Coke, part 5.
fol. 108. and in Con* Littleton* Sect. 439. fol. 260.
was a Matter beyond all Contradiction amongst all Lawyers of that Age, and
asserted by the Determinations and Customs of the Law of the Land; and by
Express Words of the Writs and Forms of the Actions themselves.

And this Truth was not only comfirmed by the Laws, but by our Medals: There
has been a Piece of Gold very often Coined by our Kings, called a Rose Noble,
which was Stamped on the one Side of it, a Ship Floating in the Sea, and a King
Armed with a Sword and a Shield, Sitting in the Ship it self, as in a Throne;
to set forth the Representation of the English King by Sea.

The first Author hereof, was Edward the Third; when he Guarded his own Seas
with a Potent Navy, consisting of Eleven Hundred Ships, at which time as at
others, he Marched Victoriously through France. Note, p. 38. Remark.


But of all that has been said, there can hardly be alleged a more convincing
Argument to prove the Truth of all that hitherto has been spoken, than the
acknowledgment of the Sea Dominion of the Kings of England; When the Agreement
was made by Edward the first of England, and Phillip the Fair of France; Reyner
Grimhald was then Admiral of the French Navy, Rot. Par. 31. Edw. 1. Membran. 16.
Intercepted and spoiled on the English Seas, The Goods of many Merchants that
were Sailing to Flanders, as well English as others, and was not contented with
the depredation of their Goods, but he Imprisoned their Persons, and delivered
them up to the Officers of the King of France.

And in a very Insolent manner, Justified his Actions in Writing, as done by
Authority of the King his Master's Commission.

This being alleged to be done to the great Damage and prejudice of the King
of England; the Prelates, Peers, and the rest of the Nation, Exhibited a Bill
against Reyner Grimbald, and managed by the Procurators on the behalf of the
Prelates, Peers, and of the Cities and Towns through out England; and also of
the whole Kingdom of England in General; and by and with the Authority, as is
supposed, of the Estates assembled in Parliament; with those were joined
Procurators of most Nations Bordering upon the Sea, throughout Europe, viz.

The Genoeses. The Catalonians. The Spainards. The Almayns. The Zealanders. The
Hollanders. The Freezlanders. The Danes. The Norwegians. The Hamburghers
And all these instituted a complaint against Reyner Grimbald, who was Admiral
of the French Navy, in the time of the War, between Philip King of France, and
Guy Earl of Flanders; And all these Complainants in their Bill, do jointly
affirm, That the King of England and his Predecessors, have time out of mind,
and without controversy, enjoyed the Sovereignty and Dominion of the English
Seas, and the Isles belonging to the same, by Right of the Realm of England;
that is to say, by prescribing Laws, Statutes, and Prohibition of Arms and of
Ships, otherwise Furnished, than with such Necessaries and Commodities as
belong to Merchants, etc. Also, That they have had, and have the Sovereign
Guard hereof, with all manner of Cognizance and Jurisdiction, doing right and
Justice, according to the said Laws, Ordinances, and Prohibitions; and in all
other Matters which may concern the Exercise of Sovereign Dominion in the said
Places.

This is the Declarations of the Nations aforementioned, and they did declare
he was Lord of the Sea, etc.

This is Cited out of the Parliament Records; and they did declare an
Acknowledgment of the Sea Dominion of our Kings, made by those Foreign and
Neighbor Nations, who were most concerned in the Business, to the Glory of our
Kings of England.

Mr. Hitchcock,
in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, presented a Book to the Parliament,
concerning the Commodity of Fishing; That the Hollanders, and Zealanders, every
year toward the latter end of Summer, do send out four or five Hundred
Vessels, called Busses, to Fish for Herrings in our Eastern Seas; but before
they Fish, they ask leave of Starbourough; these were the Words: Care was also
taken in King James the first of Englands Reign; That no Foreigner should Fish
on the English or Irish Seas, without leave first obtained; and every year at
the least, this leave was renewed from Commissioners, for that purpose,
appointed at London.

And the Kings of France have desired leave of the Kings of England, for a
certain time to Fish on our Seas, only for Fish for his Household, and obliged
themselves in Articles, That none of the Fish, that was taken in the British
Seas should be exposed to sale in any Market.

In the Seventh year of the Reign of King James the first, the Sovereignty of
the British Seas was Strenuously asserted by Proclamation; and all Persons
excluded from the use of the Seas upon our Coasts, without particular License;
the Grounds whereof, you have here set down in the Proclamation it self.

A PROCLAMATION. Touching Fishing.
JAMES by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith, etc. To all and Singular Persons to whom it may appertain,
Greeting. Although we do sufficiently know by our Experience, in the Office of
Regal Dignity (in which by the Favor of Almighty God we have been Placed and
Exercised these many years) as also by the Observation, which we have made of
other Christian Princes exemplary Actions how far the Absoluteness of Sovereign
Power extends it self; and that in Regard thereof, we need not yield Account
to any Person (under God,) for any Action of ours, which is Lawfully Grounded
upon that Just Prerogative; yet such has ever been and shall be our Care and
Desire, to give satisfaction to our Neighbor Princes and Friends in any Action
which may have the least Relation to their Subjects and Estates; as we have
thought Good (by way of Premonition) to declare to them, and to whomsoever it
may appertain, as follows.

Whereas we have been contented since our coming to the Crown, to tolerate an
Indifferent and Promiscuous kind of Liberty to all our Friends whatsoever, to
Fish within our Streams, and upon any of our Coasts of Great Britain, Ireland,
and other adjacent Islands, so far forth, as the Permission or use thereof
might not redound to the Impeachment of our Prerogative Royal, nor to the Hurt
and Damage of our loving Subjects; whose Preservation and Flourishing Estate we
hold our self Principally bound to Advance before all worldly Respects: so
finding that our Continuance therein has not only given occasion of overgreat
Encroachments upon our Regalities, or rather questioning our Right; but has
been a means of daily wrongs to our own People that exercise the Trade of
Fishing, as (either by the Multitude of Strangers, which do pre-ocupy those
Places, or by the Injuries that they receive Commonly at their Hands.) Our
Subjects are constrained to abandon their Fishing, or at least, are become so
discouraged in the same, as they hold it better for them to betake themselves
to some other course of Living; whereby, not only diverse of our Coast Towns are
much decayed, but the Number of Mariners daily diminish, which is a Matter of
Great consequence to our Estates, considering how much the Strength thereof
consists in the Power of Shipping, and use of Navigation; We have thought it
now both Just and Necessary (in Respect that we are now by Gods Favor Linealy
and Lawfully Possessed as well of the Islands of Great Britain and Ireland, and
the rest of the Isles adjacent) to bethink our selves of good lawful Means to
prevent those Inconveniences, and many others depending upon the same. In
consideration whereof, as we are desirous that the World may take notice, that
we have no intention to deny our Neighbors the Allies those Fruits and
Benefits of Peace and Friendship, which may justly be expected at our hands in
Honor and Reason, or are afforded by other Princes in the point of Commerce,
and Exchange of those things which may not prove prejudicial to them: So,
because some such convenient Order may be taken in this Matter, as may
sufficiently provide for these Important Considerations, which do depend
thereupon; We have resolved first, to give Notice to all the World, that our
Express pleasure is, That from the beginning of the Month of August next
coming, no Person of what Nation or Quality soever, being not our Natural Born
Subjects* be permitted to Fish on any of our Coasts and Seas, of Great Britain,
Ireland* and the rest of the Isles adjacent, where most usually heretofore any
Fishing has been, until they have orderly demanded and obtained Licenses from
Us, or such of Our Commissioners as We have Authorized in that behalf, viz. At
London, for Our Realms of England and Ireland; and at Edinburgh* for our Realm
of Scotland; which Licenses Our Intention is, shall be yearly demanded, for so
many Vessels and Ships, and the Tunnage thereof, as shall intend to Fish for
that whole Year, or any part thereof, upon any of our Coasts and Seas, as
aforesaid, upon the pain of such Chastisement as shall be fit to be inflicted
on such Offenders.

Given at our Palace at Westminster, the 6th of May, in the 7th Year of Our
Reign of Great Britain, Anno Dom' 1609.
Notwithstanding this Proclamation, the Netherlanders still proceeded in the
way of their Encroachment upon the Seas, through the whole Reign of King James,
and were at length so bold as to contest with him, and Quarrel His Majesty out
of His Rights, pretending (because of the long Connivance of Queen Elizabeth)
that they had of their own a Right, of Immemorial Possession.

And in King Charles the I's Reign, a Proclamation was published, for Restraint
of Fishing upon His Seas and Coasts, without License, dated the 10th day of
May, in the 12th Year of his Reign. This Proclamation being set forth in the
Year 1636, served to speak the Intent of those Naval Preparations, made in the
Year 1635; which were so numerous and well provided, that our Netherland
Neighbors, were apprehensive of some Great Design in hand, for the Interest of
England by Sea.

As I might show at large (if it were requisite) by certain Papers of a public
Character yet in Being.

But there is one which may serve instead of all; and it is a very Ingenious
Letter of Secretary Cokes, that was written to Sir William Boswell, the King's
Resident, then at the Hague; the Original whereof is still reserved among the
Public Papers: In which Letter he sets forth, the Grounds and Reason of
Preparing that Royal and Gallant Navy; with the King's Resolution to Maintain
the Right derived from his Royal Progenitors, in the Dominion of the British
Seas; and therefore I here render a True Copy of it, so far as concerns this
Business, as most pertinent to our Purpose.

SIR,
BY your Letters, and otherwise, I perceive many Jealousies and Discourses are
raised upon the Preparations of His Majesty's Fleet, which is now in such
forwardness, that we doubt not but within this Month, it will appear at Sea. It
is therefore expedient, both for your Satisfaction and Direction, to inform you
particularly, what was the Occasion, and what is His Majesty's Intention in
this Affair:

First,
we hold it a Principle, not to be denied (as it may be proved from undeniable
Record) That the King of Great Britain, is a Monarch at Land and Sea, to the
full extent of His Dominions; and that it concerns Him, as much to maintain
His Sovereignty in theBritish Seas, as within His Three Kingdoms; because
without *
That, these cannot be kept safe; nor He preserve His Honor and due Respect
with other Nations. But Commanding the Sea, he may cause his Neighbors, and
all Countries, to stand upon their Guard, whenever he thinks fit.

And this cannot be doubted,
that whosoever will encroach upon him by Sea, will do it also by Land, when
they see their time. To such Presumption, Mare Liberum, gave the first
Warning-piece, which must be answered with a Defense of Mare Clausum; not so
much by Discourse, as by the louder Language of a Powerful Navy; To be better
understood, when over-strain'd Patience sees no hope of preserving her Right
by other Means.

The degrees by which His Majesty's Dominion at Sea, has of latter Years been
impeached, and then questioned, are as Considerable as Notorious.

First, to cherish, and as it were, to nourish our unthankful Neighbors, we
gave them Leave to gather Wealth and Strength upon our Coasts, in our Ports, by
our Trade, and by our People: Then they were glad to invite our Merchants
Residence, with what privileges they would desire. Then they offered us the
Sovereignty of their Estates; and then they su'd for License to Fish upon our
Coasts, and obtained it under the Great Seal of Scotland, which now they
suppress.

And when thus by Leave, or by Connivance, they had possessed themselves of our
Fishings, not only in Scotland, but in Ireland and England; and by our Staple,
had raised a great Stock of Trade, by these Means they so increased their
Shipping and Power at Sea, that now they endure not to be kept at any distance:
Nay, they are grown to that Confidence, to keep Guards upon our Seas, and then
project an Office and Company of Assurance, for the Advancement of Trade; and
withal prohibit us free Commerce within our Seas, and take our Ships and Goods,
if we conform not to their Placarts. What Insolences and Cruelties they have
committed against us heretofore in Ireland, in Greenland, and in the Indies, is
too well known to all the World.

In all which, though our Sufferings, and their Wrongs, may seem forgotten; yet
the great Interest of His Majesty's Honor, is still the same, and will refesh
their Memories, as there shall be Cause. For though Charity must remit wrongs
done to private Men; yet the Reflection upon the Public may make it a greater
Charity to do Justice on crying Crimes. All this notwithstanding, you are to
conceive, that the Work of this Fleet, is Revenge, or Execution of Justice for
these great Offenses past, but Chiefly for the future, to stop the violent
Current of that Presumption, whereby the Men of War, and Free-booters of all
Nations (abusing the Favor of His Majesty's peaceable and most gracious
Government) whereby he has permitted all his Friends and Allies, to make use
of his Seaports, at a reasonable and free Manner, according to his Treaties)
have taken upon them the Boldness, not only to come confidently at all times
into all his Ports and Rivers, but to convey their Merchant Ships so high as
his Chief City, and then to cast Anchor close upon his Magazines; and to
contemn the Commands of his Officers, when they have required a further
distance.

But which is more intolarable, have assaulted and taken one another within His
Majesty's The Downs.
Chamber, and within his Rivers; to the Scorn and Contempt of his Dominon and
Power; and this being of late years an Ordinary Practice, which we have
endeavored in vain to Reform by the way of Justice and Treaties, the World, I
think, will be satisfied, that we have Reason to look about us.

And no Wise Man will doubt, but it is high time to put our selves in this
Equipage upon the Seas; and not to suffer that Stage of Action to be taken from
us, for want of our Appearance.

So you see the General Ground upon which our Counsel Stands; In particular,
you may take Notice, and Publish as cause requires; That His Majesty by his
Fleet intends not a Rupture with any Prince or State, nor to Infringe any
Point of his Treaties, but resolves to continue, and Maintain that Happy Peace
wherewith God has Blessed his Kingdom, and to which all his Actions and
Negotiations have hitherto tended, as by your own Instructions, you may finally
understand.

But withal considering, that Peace must be maintained by the Arm of Power,
which only keeps down War by keeping up Dominion; His Majesty thus provoked,
finds it Necessary for his own Defense and safety, to reassume and keep his
Ancient and undoubted Right, in the Dominion of these Seas, and to suffer no
other Prince or State to encroach upon him, thereby assuming to themselves or
their Admirals any Sovereign Command; but to force them to perform due Homage
to his Admirals and Ships, and to pay them Acknowledgments, as in former times
they did.

He will also set open* and protect the free Trade, both of his Subjects, and
Allies, and give them such safe Conducts and Convoy, as they shall reasonably
require.

He will suffer no other Fleets, nor Men of War, to keep any Guard upon these
Seas, or there to offer Violence, to take Prizes, or Booties, or to give
Interruption to any Lawful intercourse.

In a Word; His Majesty is resolved, as to do no Wrong, so to do Justice both
to his Subjects and Friends, within the Limits of his Seas.

And this is the Real and Royal design of his Fleet, whereof you may give
Notice, as you find Occasion, to our good Neighbors in those parts, that no
Vmbrage may be taken of any Hostile Act, or purpose to their Prejudice in any
Kind; So wishing you all Health and Happiness, I Rest

Your assured Friend and Servant. White Hall, 16 April. 1635. our Style.
JOHN COKE.


So what has been said is sufficient to prove the undisputable Titles of the
Kings of England's Sovereignty over the British Seas; and the Necessity of
Maintaining and Defending it:

The CONCLUSION.
TO Conclude, that by which has been undeniably Asserted, it does evidently
appear, That the Kings of England (by Immemorable Prescription, continual Usage
and Possession; and also by the Acknowledgment of all the Kings, Princes, and
States of Christendom, and the Laws of this Kingdom,) have always held the
Sovereign Propriety of the British Seas. -- And His Majesty by Right of his
Sovereignty has Supreme Commands, and Jurisdiction over the Passage of his
Seas, and Fishing therein beyond all Contradiction.

And for these Reasons, stand the fairest of any People in the World, to be
Lords of the Seas, and give: Laws to the whole World by our Naval-Force*
And considering the Nutural Sight of these our Seas, that interpose themselves
between the Great Northern Commerce, and that of the whole World; And also,
that of the East, West and Southern Climates; and with all, the vast Treasure
that is got by Fishing in them daily.

It cannot therefore be doubted but His Majesty, by reason of his Great Wisdom
and Virtue, and his Admirable Valor; And the Diligent Care of his Faithful and
Loyal Subjects, may without injustice to any Prince or State, be made the
Greatest Monarch for Wealth and Command in the World; and his People the most
Opulent Flourishing of any in the Universe.

And the Sovereignty of the Seas being the most Precious Jewel of his Imperial
Crown; (and next under God) the Principal Means of our Wealth, and Safety; all
true English Men, are bound by all Possible Means of Honor and Industry, to
preserve it with the utmost Hazard of their Lives and Fortunes.

Thus you see, what Wonderful Advantages may redound to the Felicity and Glory
of this Nation, if God gives us Hearts and Resolutions to Vindicate those
Rights which are most Impiously and Injuriously Invaded by our Neighbors.

FINIS.

