AN Astrological Judgment TOUCHING THEFT, Wherein is demonstrated most
Incomparable Secrets according to the best Rules in Art.

First how to find out or discover Theft or Thieves, too much used in this
Nation, to the great damage of many People.

Secondly to discover Fugitives and Beasts Lost or Strayed etc.

Compendiously set forth for the good of all people especially to those that
are not enemies to this Noble Art.

A Piece not before Extant.

By Anthony Griffin, Stud. in Astrology.

Ex Astris optimae est haurienda Scientia. London, Printed by Peter Lillicrap,
1665.

TO His much Honored Friend Mr. CHARLES CHIP, The Author wishes all happiness
in this world, and Eternal felicity in the world to come.
SIR,
I Made bold to Dedicate this small piece to you, though somewhat a stranger to
you at present, yet being desired by a faithful friend of yours: who informed
me of the great respect you owe to Art, I could do no less; therefore good Sir,
let me Crave your pardon in this my presumption, and let me desire you to pass
by my imbecilities, which I do not fear but that you will, when you have
seriously consider my Minority, and how hard a matter it is to comprehend the
profundity of this most sublime Science: and now to let you understand what
moved me here to make my self public, is the true love that I owe to my
Country, and I hope most will receive benefit by those my weak endeavors, and
upon this account only, I have presumed to make known to the world this little
tract of Astrology touching Theft, knowing it must pass the Censure of various
capacities, and from the unskilful I expect blots, but from the Judicious a
friendly Correction, and if at last it may be crowned with your Protection, my
expectation is fully answered: who faithfully desires to subscribe himself,

Sir, your devoted servant for ever to Command, Anthony Griffin.

To the Judicious READER
Reader,
WHen I did seriously Consider what mischief is done by Thieves and Cheates, I
could do no less but make public this Little Treatise touching Theft, etc.
Wherein Astrologically is plainly laid down some very excellent Rules of Art
Experimentally amplyfied, easy to be understood by the meanest capacity, and
certainly will be of much advantage, not only to those who are well versed in
this most sublime Science: But to most others that are desirous to be
instructed therein: and for the better understanding I have here showed you
whether the Figure at the time of the question is Radical or not: that you may
not deceive your selves nor the querent: but certainly direct him how to find
the Theif or goods stolen, etc. and sometimes it does so happen that many
things are mislaid, and not out of the querents house, but he judges it stole
because theft is so much practiced by servants, etc. Therefore I have
demonstrated to thy view, whether it be stole or remain in the house (if so) in
what part thereof it may probably be found. But if the goods are stolen, I have
showed thee the best Rules how to describe the Thief or Thieves, which way they
live, strangers or familiars, etc. Likewise concerning Beasts, if they are
stole or strayed, and Fugitives with many other matters very useful and
benificial, to all that are studients in this Art, viz. Judicial Astrology: So
Courtious Reader, let me desire thee to pardon my imbecilities, and if God
permit me with Life and health, I shall furnish thee with another Piece
Treating of the judgments of all horary questions, more particular then any
yet extant: and to all carping Critics and fantastical sencerers I thus make
them an answer, Vt Ignam Caves
Omnibus ignotis,
Allatrant ita barbari;
Quicquid non intelligunt
Carpunt at damnant.


Thine Anthony Griffin.

AN Astrological Judgment Touching THEFT etc
First to know whether the Figure be radical or not.
IF the Lord of the Ascendant and the Lord of the hour be both of one
Triplicity the Figure is radical and Judgment may safely be given.

Example.

If Aries ascends and Mars be Lord of the hour the Figure is radical, the same
if Cancer Scorpio or Pisces ascends Mars governing that Triplicity: if that
Sagitarius or Pisces ascends and Jupiter be Lord of the hour the Figure is
Radical, and thus observe of all the rest: which by your own discretion you may
easily find out.

When the latter degrees of a sign ascends it is not safe to give Judgment
unless the Age Corprature and Complexion of the Querent does agree with the
degrees ascending.

Also when the Second Third Fourth or Fifth degrees of a sign ascends, chiefly
in signs of short ascension, it is not safe to give judgment unless the
Querent be young and short of stature.

Likewise if the Moon be in the first degrees of a sign or else in the Latter,
give no Judgment, for the Querent comes to try thee and likewise for deceit.

Likewise if the Moon be unfortunate or be void of course, or if Scorpio do
ascendor if the Dragons-tail be in the first or seventh house, or if that the
fortunes and infortunes be of equal strength, all these do signify errors in
Judgment, and an unlucky end of the question.

Narrowly observe whether the seventh House or his Lord be aflicted, for then
it is an Argument that the Artist shall not gain Credit by the question, for
the seventh House signifies the Artist himself.

Now I shall begin concerning Theft or any other thing lost.
When a Question is propounded concerning Theft, it is very convenient to
examine the Figure and see whether the thing enquired after be stolen or not,
or whether it be in the Querents house or not, which may be discerned several
ways; as thus:

Choice tokens that the Goods are not stolen.
If neither the Lord of the House of the Moon, or the Lord of the House of the
Second separate not themselves one from another, nor any Planet from, then the
thing enquired after is in its own place.

If that the disposer of the Moon, and the Lord of the Ascendant be in
Conjunction, then is the thing missing in the house of the Querent.

If that the Lord of the Ascendant did separate from Jupiter, or from the Lord
of the Second, then did the Querent lay it down and forget it.

If that the Lord of the Hour be in the Ascendant, the thing wanting is not
stolen but in the Querents house.

If that Cancer Ascends and the Moon be in the fourth, and the Lord of the
second be in the seventh, or in the sign of the eight, at a Sextile or Trine to
the Moon, then the things enquired after is not stolen, but taken away in Jest.

If that the Moon be in the seventh, in the sign of the Lord of the Hour, the
Lord of the hour being Lord of the seventh, the Goods are not taken away, but
over looked and mistaken.

If that the Lord of the Ascendant and the Lord of the hour be in Conjunction,
the thing enquired after is not stolen.

If the Lord of the hour, the Lord of the fourth, and Planet in the fourth, the
Moon of her dispositer, any of these significators being joined near together,
does argue that the goods are not stolen but near the Querent.

Having found whether the Goods be in the house or not, now I shall show you in
what part of the house you may discover them in, First I shall show what places
every Sign does represent.

Aries, a place where small beast are kept, as Sheep and such like. In houses
the Roof Plaistering or covering of the house, Kitching slaughter-houses
back-houses houses of office Chimneys fire-places distilling house, brew house
or a place where Iron is wrought on.

Taurus, a Stable of great beasts and places where Implements of Cattle are
laid up, low grounds and Cellars, and ground newly taken in, pastures and sowed
lands.

Geminy, uper Rooms Chests Trunks walls and plasterings of the house
storehouses hay-lofts and Barns Hills and Mountains.

Cancer, Wells Cellars Trenches Cisterns, a place where water is kept, or does
stand great waters, Rivers Marshy grounds, ditches with Rushes and all kind of
moist and slabby places.

Leo, Fire places as Chimneys Stoves Furnaces Ovens, many times a place where a
dog is kept, a Stable, a Park or Forest or ground newly taken in.

Virgo, Studdies, Closets Coffers Chests Trunks Cupboards Dayry-houses, a
resting place for women, Warehouses, a place of great Cattle as Horses Oxen
Calves, etc.

Libra, Grounds near Windmils out houses sides of Hills tops of Mountains a
place of Hawking or Hunting, in houses high Chambers garrets, one Chamber
within another.

Scorpio, Sinks Kitchins Washouses, a place of creeping venomous Beasts, quaggy
and stinking grounds, Ruinous houses Caves and Prisons, and likewise Gardens
Orchards and Vine-yards.

Sagitarius, A Stable of great beasts, as Horses Cows Oxen, and in houses upper
rooms where fire is or has been kept.

Capricornus, A place where old tools for husbandry are laid up, dark places in
houses near the ground or threshold.

Aquaries, Roofs or Eves in houses hilly grounds newly dug, a place of
running waters full of pits, and grounds where no house is nigh them.

Pisces, Watery grounds Springs Rivers, Water-mills moats about houses Wells
Pumps Cisterns Cunduits, and places where water is kept. Note if the Moon be
significator and in Pises the the thing is hidden in a Well.

To know in what part of the house the thing missing is in.
First consider the sign Ascending, and the sign the Lord of the Ascendant is
in and in what quarter, secondly the sign the Lord of the second is in, thirdly
the sign of the fourth, and the sign the Lord of the fourth is in, and the
Planet in the fourth, fourthly the sign the Moon is in, fifthly the sign where
the part of fotrune is, sixthly the sign the Lord of the hour is in, and Collect
all these testimonies together, and according to the Major testimony so Judge.

Example.

If that the Major part of these Testimonies be Aerie signs, it is in some
Chamber Garret or Eves of the house or in some Hay-loft, and so Judge of all
the rest.

If that the principal significator of the Major part of these be dropping
betwixt two signs, the thing missing is fallen down betwixt two Rooms or
between the Wainscoat and walls, or dropped between some flit or hole or the like.

Note that earthy Signs signify near the Earth, low places in houses, Cellars
low rooms storehouses for Corn and Hay, places where old tools for husbandry
are laid up, dark places or the ground near the threshold or the like.

In fiery Signs where fire is kept.

If watrey Signs where water is kept a finke or some moist place, or a place
near some Cistern, or where water does constantly stand.

East. S. by E. W. by S. North. E. by N. S. by W. West. N. by. E. E. by S.
South. W. by N. N. by W.

This Table does show what part every sign does signify, and by it you may
know in what part of the house the Goods are in, likewise it may direct the
Querent to what part the Thief is gone, which afterward will be described more
at large.

That the Goods are stolen.
If the Lord of the House of the Moon, or the Lord of the Second do separate
from any Planet it is stolen.

If a Perigrine Planet give virtue to the Moon, or the Moon to him it is stolen.

If the Lord of the Ascendant do give virtue to the significator of the Thief
it is stolen.

If that the Significator of the Thief be Perigrine it is stolen.

If the significator of the Thief be in Conjunction, or Aspect the Lord of the
Ascendant by Quartile or Opposition it is stolen.

If the significator of the Thief behold the Moon by Quartile or Conjunction it
is stolen.

If any Planet be in the Ascendant and give virtue to the significator of the
Thief it is stolen.

If a Perigrine Planet be in the Ascendant or Second House it is stolen.

If that the part of fortune or his Lord be unfortunate it is stolen.

If none of these aforesaid Testimonies be it is not stolen.

But nevertheless in your Figure exactly observe and compare the testimonies,
for not stolen, and these testimonies for stolen and see which is most
weightiest and according give Judgment.

How to find out the significator of the Thief.
The significator of the Theif, is a Planet perigrine in any of the four Angles
or second house, if not take the Lord of the seventh for he is the significator
of the Thief.

A description of the Thief by Saturn in any of the 12 Signs.
Saturn in Aries.
The Theif has a hoarse voice, high forehead, great and full face almost black
eyes, small hair on his Chin but thick on his head.

Saturn in Taurus.
A large great forehead, an ill favored countenance, and looking downwards
very sad and Melancholy, and an inconstant person having a thick nose.

Saturn in Gemini.
The Thief is moderate in his manners, betwixt wickedness and gentleness to
them that are in his company, one of a fair voice and a very well spoken
person, and gives good Council and he esteems much of himself broad shoulders
a small wast his beard of the Common fashion and he has but little hair on his
head.

Saturn in Cancer.
Black eyes a small face a broad great forehead a great space betwixt his eyes
and one that is an unconstant person.

Saturn in Leo.
A lean face hollow eyes, a thick neck great Arms broad shoulders and looking
downwards, one that is very forgetful.

Saturn in Virgo.
A great head, and his hands very hairy one of a profound Judgment yet
unconstant in mind.

Saturn in Libra.
A great and a large forehead, long neck, black hair, his nose stretches our
and often the nails of his hands goes off and he is one well descended.

Saturn in Scorpio.
A long and narrow forehead, fowl great shoulders and feet, a high stiff neck,
the whole body in general but mean, generally in the sign he has much hair
upon his head.

Saturn in Sagitarius.
An indifferent great body and straight, a great nose, and a great Countenance,
his neck thick and hairy, likewise a great mocker.

Saturn in Capricornus.
A long face and yellowish, a sharp voice, a straight forehead thick feet and
hands, and likewise very rough and hairy and a stammering in his speech.

Saturn in Aquaries.
A great head, round eyes a thine face toward his Chin, and his employment
most in moistness, as a Dyer, Shipwright or a fisherman, etc.

Saturn in Pisces.
Being strong and fortunate by good Aspects, he is a man of a good descent, and
a noble Gentleman born, though Saturn be evil of himself, yet in this sign he
has the similitude of good manners, great eyes, unequal teeth, one of little
speech drawing his words as though it were with his tongue and swift of body.

A short description of the other Planets Jupiter, Mars, Sol Venus and Mercury.
Furthermore if the significator be Jupiter, and in the place of Saturn, it
does signify a white mixed with yellow, if a man he has a round Beard, if
either man or woman they have some darker sight then ordinary, one of some
Gentility.

If Mars be significator in the place of Jupiter, the Thief shall be of a
yellowish complexion drawing to redness a round face, a long and a sharp Chin,
his brows bent like a bow or horn of the Moon, whose end does reach to his
nose, a thin beard, light and swift of going about his own matters, one of a
sharp wit and very bold, and confident.

If the Sun be significator and in the place of Mars, the Thief is of a whitish
brown, a very round face, a singer, a Tailor or a bocher.

If Venus be significator in the place of the Sun, he or she is white, and void
of all blots or marks, and has an honest and a comely countenance, and very
comely eyed, wonderful gentle loving and tender.

If Mercury be in the place of Venus and significator, it signifies a thin
beard, little hair, of a sandy complexion, somewhat long visaged, full of
speech and chattering, without reason or discretion. but very ingenious and
witty.

A description of the Theif by the Moon being in any of the 12 signs.
The Moon significator of the Theif and in the first half of Aries, gives a
mean stature, a thick ruddish coulloured hair in the lust half of Aries mean
stature and lean, a great head, high forehead, great eyes, long visiage, a long
neck, and straight shoulders etc.

The Moon in the first half of Taurus, gives the body to be gross: but in the
last half, lean and mean, a fair stature black hair, and rough like a thornbush.

The Moon in the first half of Gemini, gives the body to be mean and lean, but
in the last half gross and thick, a round face, little mouth, long nose, a fair
voice, and one of a good Council.

The Moon in the first half of Cancer, gives a mean stature and lean, but in
the last half some what gross and tall, yet somewhat crooked, black eyes
somewhat impedited, crooked teeth, and thehar inclining to a dark brown or
quite black.

The Moon in the first half of Leo, gives a stature and thick in the last half
tall and lean smooth hair, a smooth face, a little head, yet great eyes, short
neck, one that is very rash and of great strength, and likewise a great voice.

The Moon in the first half of Virgo, the body is inclinable to groasness, in
the last half, to leanness, small eyes, indifferent long visaged, a long neck,
much hair and of a brownish color.

The Moon in the first half of Libra, gives the body to be gross, in the last
half lean, a mean stature, a long face, long legs, a fair voice, of a laughing
countenance, a lover of women, and beloved of women.

The Moon in the first half of Scorpio gives a mean tall stature, somewhat
lean* but in the last half gross a small face, little mouth, broad thick lips,
and very long legs and of at alborn colored hair.

The Moon in the first half of Sagitarius, gives a tall stature, somewhat lean,
but in the last half gross, a fair stature, a long face, a great flat nose, and
sometimes Canker eaten, a sandy colored hair, and one that delights much in
Riding, and has been hurt by some four footed beast, or else by Iron, chiefly
if the Moon be unfortunate.

The Moon in the first half of Capricornus, gives a mean stature and lean, but
in the last half semewhat gross, a brownish colored hair, a narrow forehead,
thick lips, broad nose, great hands; and his body looks as if it were withered,
and one that is very wrathful.

The Moon in the first half of Aquaries, gives a short mean stature, in the
last half mean and lean, one that much uses the water, and has one leg
shorter then the other, and if the Moon be unfortunate, has been either hurt
by Iron, or else has had a brand in the hand.

The Moon in the first half of Pisces, gives a mean stature somewhat gross, but
in the last half mean, a great head, round eyes, and a great nose.

The Marks of the Thief.
Look to the Moon, and if she be significator, and in Scorpio, and unfortunate
by Saturn or Mars, and Venus have any Aspect by the Moon, the party is hurt in
the privy parts, by some woman, A Winchester Goose, generally if that the Moon
behold the significator of the Thief or have any dignities where he is.

If the Moon be significator of the Thief, and she unfortunate, it shows some
defect in the parties eyesight, chiefly if she be in the Ascendant afflicted
by Saturn Mars or the Sun.

If Mercury be significator, and in Quartile or Opposition of Saturn, it notes
the Thief to have some impediment in his speech.

If Venus be significator and in any the signs of Mars, it notes a woman
infamous for whoredom, Venus significator and in Quartile or Oposition to Mars
signifies the like.

Venus significator of the Thief, and in Leo, or with the Dragons-tail, denotes
the Thief to have a Copper nose.

Saturn or Mars in Opposition to the significator of the Thief shows that the
Thief is sick or will be shortly.

Venus significator and void of course gives a Mark in the face, or a gogle eye
or a Wart, but if slow of motion, then she gives a hollow Mould.

If that the Moon have any dignities where a Perigrine Planet is, then there is
a Mark where the Moon is, or where that Perigine Planet is, the sign will
discover in what part of the body it is in.

If that the Moon be in Quartile, or Opposition to the significator of the
Thief in the second house, it notes a Mark in the neck, if in the third house
in the Arms and shoulders and so in order etc.

If that the Moon be weak or in Quartile or Opposition to Saturn or Mars, it
denotes a mark to be in the sign where the Moon is.

If that the Lord of the sixth be unfortunate, there is a Mark in the sign
where he is, and likewise in the sign of the cuspe of the sixth.

Also observe the same Method by the sign Ascending, and by the sign that the
Lord of the Ascendant is in. If the Lord of the Ascendant be unfortunate then
it is certain.

If Saturn be unfortunate in the ascendant, gives a bruise or the like in the
head or face, Mars unfortunate in the Ascendant signifies a cut in the head or
face, or else damnified by Iron.

If that the Sun be significator and in fiery signs and unfortunate, it does
note a bald head and short curled hair. But unfortunate in watery signs, it
signifies the Thief to have a scaled head:

Whether the Thief be of the family of the Querent or not
If that the Lord of the Ascendant be in the Ascendant in his own sign* then is
the querent robbed by himself* probatum est.

If that a Planet be in the first house and his sign be on the second, then was
the querent robbed by his own council.

If a Planet be in the first house, and that Planets sign be on the third
house, and that sign be feminine, say he was robbed by his sister or some
Kinswoman or some neighbor near him, and so in order of the rest of the houses.

If that both the Luminaries behold the Ascendant, the Thief is one of the
family.

The Lord of the seventh in the Ascendant the same.

If that the Sun and Moon be both in their own houses, it is one of the family.

But if only one of the lights does behold the Ascendant, the Thief is one that
is a familiar in the house but does not dwell there.

If the Lord of the Ascendant be joined with a Planet near the Ascendant, notes
the Thief to be a private Thief in the house.

If the Lord of the Ascendant be in the second or sixth, it is one of the
household servants.

If the Lord of the sixth be in the second, or in the Ascendant, it is a
servant belonging to the house.

If the Lord of the seventh be in the sixth or eight from his own house, it is
a servant, but if in his own house, then some Jolly fellow of great name and
fame in the house.

Which of the house may be suspested for the Theft.
If the Sun be significator, it signifies the Father, Uncle, Grandfather or
Master.

The Moon the Mother, Sister or Nurse, or otherwise some Tankerd-bearer, or a
Water-woman; a Chairwoman or the like.

If Venus, the Wife or Mistress, chiefly in the tenth or seventh house.

Saturn in the fourth accuses the Father, or some old serving man or woman.

Jupiter significator, accuses some Gentleman of a good family that has
stained the reputation of his kindred, a great wanderer, and is not suspected
and probably may be a guest in the house, and of a Sanguine complexion.

Mars Significator denotes a Brother or a Prentice, a Son or a Daughter of the
Querent.

If Mercury it is some familiar friend, if he be in the eleventh house,
otherwise some runner of Errands, or some by servant of the house.

Whether the Thief be of the kindred of the Querent, or some neighbor friend
or stranger.

If the Sun be in Opposition to the Ascendant, it is an overthwart neighbor.

If the Lord of the seventh behold the Ascendant by Trine or Sextile, it is an
neighbor.

If the Sun and Moon be both in their Triplicities it is a neighbor.

If the significator of the Thief be in the house or exaltation of the Lord of
the Ascendant, the Thief is of the kindred of the Querent.

The Lord of the Ascendant being in the house or exaltation of the Thief, it
denotes Kindred.

The Sun and Moon beholding each other by a Trine Aspect it denotes kindred.

The Lord of the third or fifth in the Ascendant, or applying to the Lord of
the Ascendant denote kindred.

The Sun and Moon both in their faces, the Thief does call the Querent Cozen.

The Lord of the Ascendant in the second or sixth, the Thief is one of the
hushold Servants.

The significator of the Thief in the ninth house it is a stranger.

The significator of the Thief in a moveable sign Aspected of the Moon or
Mercury, or in their houses, or in any of their dignities it is a stranger.

If that the significator be in an Angle in the terms of Jupiter or the Sun the
Thief is more noble then the Querent.

If that the Sun and Moon be both in the second, third, fourth, fifth, ninth,
tenth, or eleventh house, it is signified that one of the house committed the
fact.

When you find the Thief to be one of the household, behold the significator and
so Judge as I described before.

Note that the significator of the Thief, is a Planet perigrine in any of the
four Angles, but if none be there, then take the Lord of the seventh, he is the
significator of the Thief.

To know how many Thieves there are.
The significator of the Thief being in a fruitful sign it notes more then one
Thief.

The significator of the Thief in a double bodied sign the same.

If that the Sun and Moon do behold each other, it signifies the same.

If that the significator of the Thief be in a sign, where there is more then
one Perigrine Planet, it notes more Thieves then one.

The Moon being in the fourth house in a common sign, there is more then one
Thief.

If that the Moon and Mercury be in equal signs it notes more Thieves then one.

So many Peregrine Planets that there is but chiefly in the second or seventh
houses so many Thieves there are.

If that the significator of the Thief be in a fixed sign it signifies but one
Thief and no more.

If that the Moon be in any Angle in a fixed sign, it notes only one Thief.

If that the Moon and Mercury be in unequal signs then there is only one
Theif.

To know whether the Thief be a man or woman.
If that the Ascendant be a Masculine sign and the Lord of the hour a Masculine
Planet the Thief is a man.

If otherwise they be feminine it notes a woman

If that one be Masculine and the other feminine, it shows two Thieves, viz. a
man and a woman.

Also if that the significator of the Thief be in a Masculine sign and the Moon
in a Masculine sign it denotes a man.

If in faeminine signs then a woman, According to the major part of testimonies
give judgment.

How to know the Age of the Thief.
If that the Sun be significator of the Theif and he betwixt the Ascendant and
the tenth house but chiefly in Aries, Taurus or Gemini, it notes the Thief very
young almost in Childhood.

From the tenth house, to the seventh house, but chiefly in Cancer, Leo or
Virgo, it signifies youthful years.

From the seventh to the fourth house, chiefly in Libra, Scorpio or Sagitarius
it signifies the Thief is of a middle age.

If the significator of the Theif be between the fourth house and the Ascendant
it signifies old age.

If that the signifitator of the Thief be in the house of Saturn or Aspected of
him or in the latter degrees of a sign it signifies age.

If that the signifitator of the Theif be direct and a heavy planet, or joined
with a heavy Planet, it signifies good Age, but if Retrograde then old.

If that the significator of the Thief be joined to a Planet that is Retrograde
it signifies old age.

Mars notes middle age, but not so much as Jupiter, nor Jupiter so much as
Saturn.

The Moon or a Perigrine Planet in the first degrees of a sign, notes youth in
the middle of a sign, Riper years in the latter degrees of the Moon old age.

If that Mars, Venus or Mercury be significators of the Thief, according as
posited in the four quarters of the signs, so give judgment as before directed.

The Moon increasing the Thief is young, the Moon decreasing the Thief is old.

The Moon in the beginning of the month notes young, in the middle of the
month middle age, in the end of the month it signifies old age.

Two Perigrine Planets that are significators in Quartile or Opposition of one
another, especially from the first to the seventh house, it signifies that one
Thief will accuse another, probatum est.

To know whether the Thief be in town or not.
Behold the significator of the Thief, and if that you find him in the end of a
sign direct or separating from combustion, or applying to a Planet in a Cadent
house, say that he is gone or going out of town.

Also if the Lord of the Ascendant be in one quarter, and the Moon with the
significator of the Thief be in another above 90 degrees asunder. It denotes
the Thief is out of Town a pretty large distance from the querent.

But if they be in Angles and applying to Planets in Angles, then say that the
Thief is no large distance from the Querent, more especially if that the Sun
and Moon be both in one quarter of heaven.

If that you find the significator of the Thief going out of one sign into
another, the Thief is either gone or going out of town.

Say the same if you find the significator of the Thief departing from the Sun
beams.

And according to the place and quarter that the significator of the Thief is
in, and likewise the sign that he is in, judge that way he is gone.

If that the significator of the Thief, or one of them be in Angles, he is not
gone out of Town as yet but is near the Querent.

If in succedant houses not far from him, and chiefly if that the Lord of the
Ascendant and the Moon be both in one quarter.

If the significator of the Theif be in a Cadent house then he is gone far,
especially if that the Lord, the Ascendant and the Moon, be more then 90
degrees asunder.

If that the Lord of the seventh be in Angles with the Lord of the second, the
Thief is not out of the Town and Parish of the Querent.

Whether the goods be with or near the Querent.
The Lord of the Ascendant in an Angle, the goods are in his hands.

If that the Lord of the Ascendant and the Lord of the hour be both in Angles,
she goods are in the querents hands probatum est.

If that the Lord of the Ascendant and the Lord of the house of the Moon be
both in Angles, the goods are in the querents hands and are moveable.

If that any of these Lords be in Angles, and in Trine or Sextile to the Lord
of the Ascendant, the goods shall be had again.

If that the Lord of the Ascendant, and the Lord of the hour be both in
succedant houses, the goods are about the owner.

If that the Lord of the second be in the Ascendant, they shall be found and
not known from whence they come.

If that the Lord of the house of the Moon be moveable, they are about the
owner.

If that the Lord of the term of the Moon or the Lord of the second house be
in succedant houses, they are not far from the owner.

To know which way the Thief dwells from the Querent.
Look in what sign and quarter the significator of the Thief and the Moon is
in, and accordingly judge which way the Thief dwells from the Querent.

Tokens of the Thiefs house.
If that the Moon be in Conjunction Quartile or Opposition of Saturn, the door
or gate of the Thief is broken or black.

In Trine or Sextile to Saturn mended again.

The Moon in Opposition Quartile or Opposition of Mars, the door or gate of the
Thieves house is burnt or damnified by Iron.

In Trine or Sextile to Mars, mended again.

If that the Moon is unfortunate the Door is either Cracked or broken.

If that the Moon be increasing in light or in a fixed sign, his gate or door
is part under the earth, or the house stands under a banck side.

The Moon in fixed or moveable signs he has but one door.

The Moon in common signs more then one door.

The Moon in a moveable sign the gate or door is above the earth, viz. a step
or two to go up to it.

Note in what part of heaven the Moon in is, and in that part of the house the
door opens.

Of the distance of place.
Behold how many degrees are betwixt the significator of the Thief and the
Moon, and narrowly observe whether the signs are fixed moveable or Common.

If in fixed signs account for every degree a mile, if in moveable signs so
many Rods.

If in Common signs, so many tens of miles.

Or look what distance there is betwixt the Ascendant and his Lord, such is the
distance between the thing lost and the place.

Or look how many degrees the significator is in his sign, so many miles are
the cattle lost or strayed, and the place where the Lord of the fourthis, there
is the place signified.

Likewise note how many degrees are betwixt the Lord of the hour and the Lord
of the seventh house, so many miles the Thief is gone.

If that the Moon be within 30 degrees of the Lord of the Ascendant the Thief
is near the looser of the goods.

If the significator of the Thief or the Moon be within 70 degrees of the Lord
of the Ascendant, then he is within the town or Parish of him that lost the
goods.

If 90 degrees from the Lord of the Ascendant, then the Thief is out of town.

If that the Lord of the seventh be in a strong Angle, he is not out of the
town where the Theft was done.

Whether the Thief shall be known or not.
Most Planets in Cadent houses, the Thief shall be openly known.

The Sun in Quartile or Opposition to the significator of the Thief openly
known.

The Sun in Quartile or Trine, then hidden or cloak't.

Whether the Thief has the goods in his own keeping or to whom he has
delivered them.
If the Moon behold the significator of the Thief by Trine or Sextile, the
goods are in the Thiefes hands.

If the Lord of the house of the Moon does behold the significator of the
Thief, by Quartile or Opposition, then the Thief shall loose them again.

If the Lord of the term of the Moon does so behold him; the same.

If the significator of the Thief gives virtue to no Planet, then he has the
goods still in his own keeping.

If That any Planet be in Conjunction with the significator of the Thief, or
behold him by any Aspect, and that Planet has more dignities in the sign where
the significator of the Thief is then the significator of the Thief, then the
Thief has delivered them to another.

If that the Lord of the house of the Moon, or the Moon be with the
significator of the Thief, then he has the goods still in his own hands.

But by Quartile or Opposition the goods are stopped from the Thief.

If that the Lord of the term of the Moon, or Lord of the second be with the
significator, of the Thief or Aspect him by Sextile or Trine, then the Thief
has them still, but with Quartile or Opposition they are stopped from him.

If that the Moon give virtue to the significator of the Thief, then one Thief
steals from another.

If that the Lord of the Ascendant or any Planet in the Ascendant do give
virtue to the significator of the Thief, Then the owner of the goods has
Voluntary given them to the suspected Thief.

If that the significator of the Thief keep his own virtue to himself, he has
the goods in his own hand.

But if the significator of the Thief part with his virtue to any other Planet
he has delivered them out of his possession.

If the significator of the Thief give his virtue to the Lord of the Ascendant
he will give them again to the owner either in part or the whole, according to
the dignity or virtue he gives to the Lord of the Ascendant.

If to the Lord of the third, to a brother kindred or neighbor of the owner
etc.

And so of all the twelve houses you may easily know to whom he has delivered
them.

Whether the Thief shall be taken or not?
If the Lord of the Ascendant follow after the significator of the Thief he
shall be taken.

If the significator of the Thief be unfortunate by Mars he shall be taken.

If the Lord of the Ascendant be in his own house the Thief shall be taken.

If the significator of the Thief be in she twelfth house he shall be Committed
to prison.

If unfortunate lie long, or dye there.

If the significator of the Thief be unfortunate, the Thief shall be taken.

Whether the suspected Party be guilty or not.
If that the significator of the Thief be in Quartile or Opposition, to the
Lord of the Ascendant the querent does suspect the Thief, as many Planets as be
in the sign so many Thieves does the querent suspect.

If that the Cusp of the 4 Angles be all fixed It siginfies that the Party
suspected is guilty. If the Moon be joined to an evil Planet or in an evil
sign the party suspected is guilty.

If the Moon be evilly aspected the party suspected is guilty.

If the Lord of the hour be in Oppsition, to Scorpio, or Capricornus, the
suspected party is guilty.

If that the Lord of the hour be in a South sign, and a night house the
suspected is guilty.

But if he be in an Occidental sign as Gemini, Libra, Aquaries, or in the
Center of the earth, the suspected is no Thief, but the Thief dwells in the
town where the goods are lost.

That the party suspected is not guilty.
If the Moon be joined to Jupiter, Venus or the Part of Fortune, the party
suspected is not guilty.

If the Lord of the Ascendant be in a Cadent house, and not joined to a Planet
in an Angle that receives him, the suspected is not guilty.

If that the Ascendant be a moveable sign as Aries, Cancer, Libra, or
Capricorn, and so much the more if that Saturn or Mars have any Aspect to the
Ascendant, or if that the Dragons-tail be in the Ascendant, the party suspected
is not guilty and the report is false.

If the Moon be joined to a Planet in a Cadent house, the party is not guilty.

If the Lord of the Ascendant be in an Angle and joined to a Planet Cadent, the
party suspected, has an evil report undeserved.

If the Moon be impedited in an Angle the party suspected is not guilty.

If the Lord of the eighth be in the fifth or the eleventh house, or if the
Moon be void of course, the party suspected is not guilty.

Tokens that the goods lost shall be recovered.
If the significator of the Thief, do apply to the Lord of the Ascendant, by
Trine or Sextile they shall be had again.

If the Moon apply to the Lord of the second house by Trine or Sextile, the
goods stolen shall be recovered.

If the Lord of the Ascendant be in his own house, the owner shall recover the
goods himself.

If the Lord of the term of the Moon be in Trine or Sextile to the Lord of the
Ascendant, the owner shall have the goods again.

If the Lord of the second apply to the Lord of the Ascendant it denotes
recovery.

If the Moon apply to any Planet by Trine or Sextile, and the application be in
moveable signs, look how many degrees it is till they come to their perfect
Aspect, and in so many days it shall be recovered, and if the Sun be in the
Ascendant he like wise takes the Thief.

If the Lord of the Ascendant apply to the Lord of the seventh, or he be in the
seventh house they shall be had again by the care and diligence of the querent.

If the Lord of the Ascendant be in the tenth house, it denotes recovery but
with a great deal of care and labor of the querent.

If the Lord of the second house be strong, and behold the Ascendant, and Lord
thereof by Trine or Sextile, the goods shall be had a gain.

If the Lord of the second house, be in the second house, or behold the second
by Trine or Sextile, part of the goods may be had again, according to the
strength or weakness of the Lord of the second give Judgment.

If the Lord of the Ascendant be fortunate in the Diamiter of the firmament,
then the Thief shall bring again the thing from whence he stole it.

If the Lord of the Ascendant and fourth house, be in the first house, and the
Lord of the first, and Lord of the hour, be in the fourth house, the goods
stolen or lost shall be had again.

If the Lord of the Ascendant and the Lord of the hour be both in the
Ascendant, it shall be found near or about him that stole it.

If the Lord of the Ascendant and Lord of the hour, or one of them be in the
seventh house, it shall be found in few days.

If the Lord of the Ascendant, or Lord of the hour, have a good Aspect to the
Sun the thing lost shall be had again.

If the Moon behold the Sun by Opposition, the Thief shall be found, but the
goods not to be had by any means.

If the Lord of the second be bodily joined to the Lord of the eighth or by
Aspect, the querent shall have his goods again, or satisfaction for them of the
thief.

If the Lord of the second, does apply luckily to the part of fortune, and the
part of fortune be in the first, second, seventh or tenth houses, it gives
knowledge of the goods, and the Thief that stole them.

The Lord of the second and the Lord of the tenth, both in one house, it notes
discovery, and does give good hopes of finding it again.

If the Lord of the second be joined by Sextile or Trine to any planet in the
second it notes reovery.

If the Lord of the hour be fortunately placed and strongly aspecting the Lord
of the first or second, it notes recovery.

If the Lord of the second be fortunate in the first, or the Lord of the first
fortunate in the second, it signifies recovery.

If the Moon Jupiter or Venus, be fortunate in the second or first, it shows
good hopes of recovery, if the Moon applies to her disposer, or to the Lord of
the term she is in by Conjunction, Trine or Sextile, it notes recovery.

If the Moon gives virtue to the Lord of the fifth, or Lord of the eleventh
house, it notes recovery.

If the Lord of the second be in the second, or behold the Sun by Trine or
Sextile, it notes recovery.

If the Lord of the second and Mercury be in Conjunction, it notes recovery,
but with a great deal of grief and contention.

If the Moon be in the Ascendant with any of the fortunes, it notes recovery.

Yet nevertheless you must in giving Judgment go by the major part of
Testimonies whether the goods shall be had or not, and in so doing you cannot
err.

The time when the goods stolen or missing shall be found.
The Moon beholding her own house by Trine or Sextile, it shall be had within
three days.

If the Lord of the Ascendant and the Moon, be both in the Ascendant and the
Sun behold them by Trine or Sextile, it shall be found the same day it was
lost, but if that he behold them by a Quartile it signifies a week, if by
Opposition a month.

The application of the Moon to any Planet by Trine or Sextile, if the
application be in moveable signs, look how many degrees they want of their
Aspect, and so many days it shall be before it shall be recovered.

And if that the Sun be in the Ascendant it discovers the thief.

Likewise, behold the two Planets that be applying and you may know by their
application, the recovery of the goods stolen, and number how many degrees they
are one from the others Aspect, and so judge of hours days weeks or months.

If that the two applying Planets be in moveable signs, the degrees betwixt
them will signify weeks or months, yet sometimes days, Judge that according
to the swiftness or slowness of their motion.

If in fixed signs, then months or years.

If that these significators be in Cadent houses, then it does signify they
will quickly be recovered.

If the two significators be in Angles it shall be long first.

Look to the Sun and Moon, and if that they be parted from the part of fortune,
or be both or either of them joined to the part of fortune, if not see then
which is nighest the part of fortune, the Sun or Moon, and he that is nighest
the part of fortune, either by application or separation, shall signify the
time, viz. how many degrees the nearest is to him. If that the part of fortune
be in an Angle, it shall be so many days or weeks as is degrees between them.

If the part of fortune be in a succedant house, then so many weeks or months.

If the part of fortune be in a Cadent house then so many months or years.

Note that the finding of the things by the Sun is sooner then by the Moon.

Choice tokens that the Goods stolen shall not be recovered.
If the Lord of the Ascendant be in Quartile or Opposition to the Lord of the
seventh, then the goods will be stopped from the owner.

If the Moon be in Quartile or Opposition to the Lord of the seventh, it
signifies the same.

If the Lord of the term of the Moon be in Quartile or Opposition to the Lord
of the Ascendant, Idem.

If that Saturn, Mars or the Dragons-tail be in the eighth or second houses it
shows small hopes of recovery.

If the Lord of the second be Retorgrade or Combust. Idem.

If the Moon be Combust or under the beams of the Sun the same.

If the Lord of the term of the Moon, and the Lord of the house of the Moon,
be both diminishing motion and number and infortunes beholding them both, it is
not to be Recovered.

If the Lord of the eighth be in the Ascendant and the Lord of the Ascendant in
the eighth, it is not to be Recovered.

If the Sun and Moon be going to a Conjunction under the earth at the time of
the Loosing the goods, neither goods nor Thief shall ever be heard of.

If that the Sun and Moon be going to a Conjunction or Opposition, the goods
lost will not by any means be recovered.

Likewise if both the Luminaries be under the earth, the goods lost will hardly
ever be heard of again.

Also the Lord of the second in the eighth house no recovery.

Of friendship and hatred between the querent and the thief.
If that the Lord of the Ascendant and significator of the Thief, do behold
each other by Trine or Sextile, then is friendship between them, and so much
the more if there be reception.

But if they do behold each other by Quartile or Opposition, then do they hate
one another.

But if there be no Aspect between them, then they do neither love nor hate one
another.

Whether the Thief be beloved of his neighbors or not.
If that the disposer of the Moon does behold the Moon by Trine or Sextile, it
is one that all his neighbors loves well, and he is very pleasant to them.

If that the disposer of the Moon does behold the Moon by a Quartile, he is
neither much loved, nor much hated, some men speak well of him but the most
part speaks ill of him.

If that the disposer of the Moon does behold the Moon by Opposition, it is one
that all men speaks evil of and all his Neighbors does hate him.

If that the disposer of the Moon be in Conjunction with the Moon either above
or under the earth the Thief is a buisy fellow in all matters and troubled in
mind, yet cannot have his will.

That the Querent is Thief himself.
If that Mars be significator and in the tenth house the querent is the Thief
himself.

If that the significator of the Thief be in the Ascendant the Querent is
Thief; the more sure it is if the sign Ascending and the significator of the
Querent does agree with his Complexion.

That the Theif and querent be both in one house
If that the Lord of the sixth house and the Lord of the Ascendent be both
together in an Angle, or if that the Lord of the house be with the Lord of the
Ascendant in an angle: then the owner and the Thief be both in one house and
the goods ready for the owner: proved many times.

Whether the Thief be married or not.
If the Lord of the seventh house be in an Angle he is married, if in a
succedant house toward marraige, If in a Cadent then nether married nor like
to be.

A Scheam erected concerning a house Robbed in the Minories of thirty
pounds-worth of Clothes the 29 th of September 1663.
29 Septem. 1663 30 in. P. Mer' ab ad Diae Lunae. Hora Mercurij.


Judgment upon the foregoing figure.
This figure is more difficult then ordinary in giving judgment by reason that
all the four quarters are concerned in it, therefore I shall according to my
Judgment give you the perfect discovery of it.

First I find the sign of the seventh house a western sign.

Seconly Mercury Lord of the seventh house and Lord of the hour in a northern
sign, but in the south quarter.

Thirdly the part of fortune in a easterly sign, yet in a northern quarter.

Fourthly Mars Lord of the fourth and disposer of the part of fortune in an
northeren sign, but in the western quarter.

Fifthly the Moon being in Quartile with the Sun he being in a westerly sign.

Sixthly, the Dragons-tail being in a Westerly sign, but in the North quarter,
the which does signify the devoiding, and the sale of the goods to be
north-west from the querent, notwithstanding the greatest part of the goods
went to the South-east, but yet where after that they were devoided.

Because that that the Moon was in a South sign, but in the East quarter next
applying to Venus, she entering an East sign, and in an Easterly quarter, but
this I shall describe more at large hereafter. Therefore according to the
aforesaid testimonies, I sent the querent to Cow-Cross, or about the lower end
of Long-lane London, which it did so appear after discovery that they were
devoided in an Alley near Cow-cross, and by this means did I discover it.

First, I find the Moon in the first house, and she applying to Venus, she
having exaltation in the third, and entering the sign ascending, she being Lady
of the tenth house, which is the house of discovery.

Also Venus being a feminine Planet and the sign of the third a feminine sign,
where Venus has exaltation, and the part of fortune being in the third, I told
the querent that the goods would be discovered, and that by a sister of hers,
or some kinswoman that dwelt that way, and so it was for it was discovered by
her own sister after this manner.

One of the Thiefs sent a woman to sell the Clothes at the querents sisters
house, and her sister knew the goods by which means they were all taken.

The querent had some part of satisfaction, but not all, as the Dragons-tail in
the second does show.

But there was grand testimony of discovery, because the Moon was in the first
house.

Secondly Saturn Lord of the second in the ascendant with Jupiter Lord thereof.

Thirdly the Moon in application to Venus, she being a fortune, and Lord of the
tenth, which notes discovery.

Concerning the distance I thus judged.
Finding the Sun and Moon casting their Aspects to the part of fortune, and
within 5 degrees of the true Aspect and both of them newly separated and in
moveable signs, I did judge it to be some five or six furlongs North-west, and
so it was.

Likewise I found three thieves by the figure, two women and one man.

First I find Mercury Lord of the seventh, in the tenth a sign feminine and
likewise the house feminine, which does signify one woman.

Secondly, the Moon in Capricorn a feminine sign perigrine, and applying to
Venus a feminine Planet, I did discover another woman.

Also finding the Sun in Opposition to the part of fortune, I did discover
another which was a man and this was true, for the man made his escape, the two
women was taken and Committed to Newgate and both of them were condemned to dye
yet one was Repreved and the other was hanged.

Concerning beasts or any living thing lost or strayed.
First the beast are not stolen but strayed
First of all if that the Lord of the second, or Lord of the sixth, or Lord of
the house of the Moon, do separate from any Planet then strayed, but if that
any Planet separate from them then led away.

If that the Moon give virtue to Saturn or Mars, or to the Lord of the eighth,
or to any Planet in a Cadent house, especially by Trine or Sextile, the beast
are strayed of themselves.

Note that the separation herein named, is that when one Planet separates from
another by and no otherwise.

If that the Lord of the house of the Moon, or the Lord of the second, do
separate from any Planet, or from their own houses, if the signs be fixed then
stolen, but if moveable fled of themselves.

That the Cattle are driven away or stolen.
If that any planet does separate from the Lord of the house of the Moon, they
are driven away or stolen.

If that any Planet does separate from the Lord of the second house they are
stolen or driven away, If that none of these things be the beast are not far
from the place they first went from.

Where the Beasts are.
If that the Lord of the sixth be in fiery signs they are Eastward in woods
where are bushes or brambles or where fire has been.

But if in Angles in fiery signs then in a close pound or under a lock.

If in earthly signs then south in Grounds.

But if in an Angle close pounded in succedant houses, in Closes on the Right
hand of the Querent.

If in Cadent houses on the left hand of the querent.

If in Aerie signs then are they westward in marshy Grounds.

In an Angle the beasts are housed or pounded.

In succedant houses west on the right hand of the querent.

If in Cadent houses on the left hand of the querent in a Common going away.

If that the Lord of the sixth be in watery signs North, in a low place.

If in an Angle, in a close or pound northward.

If in a Cadent house, on the left hand of the querent northward going awayward.

If that the Lord of the sixth be in moveable signs, they are in hilly grounds.

If the Lord of the sixth be in fixed signs, they are in mrrshy grounds where
new buildings are.

If in Common signs, then they are in grounds where ditches and water is, and
where Rushes grow.

If that the Lord of the term of the Moon, be in fixed signs, they be in
places newly taken in, or near some new buildings.

If in moveable signs, in a place full of hills.

If in Common signs in watery places or Marshy grounds nigh ditches or pits.

Whether the Beasts be in the pound or no.
If the Lord of the sixth be in the twelfth house, then are the Beast in the
pound.

If the Lord of the sixth, or the Moon be unfortunate, they shall be pounded.

If the Lord of the sixth or twelfth be in the tenth or nineth, they are in the
custody of some Justice or Officer, or under lock.

If the Lord of the twelfth do apply to the Lord of the Ascendant, or the
Ascendant unto the Lord of the 12th, and either one or both of them be
unfortunate the beasts will be pounded.

If the significator of the beast be unfortunate in the eighth house the beast
will die in the pound.

If Mars does Aspect the Moon in the twelfth by Conjunction Quartile or
Opposition, they will be killed in the pound.

Whether the beast be dead or a live.
If the Moon does apply to the Lord of the eighth house dead.

If the Moon does apply to the eighth house or the disposer of the Moon does
apply to the eighth house or his Lord, dead or will be speedily.

If the Moon does apply to the Lord of the eighth house, from the place where
she is, then dead.

To know if the beasts be lost.
If the Lord of the sixth be unfortunate by Saturn or Mars, then the beasts are
lost.

Chiefly if the Lord of a Cadent house.

If that the Lord of the sixth does behold the Lord of the Ascendant by
Quartile or Opposition, they are like to be stopped from the owner.

If the Lord of the sixth does so behold the Lord of the Term of the Moon the
same.

If the Moon and the Lord of the house of the Moon, does behold one another, by
Quartile or Opposition, they will be stopped from the owner.

Whether the beasts shall be had again or not.
If the significator of the sixth house be fortunated by Jupiter or Venus, and
they or either of them be in the second fifth or eleventh houses, the beasts
shall be had again.

If the Lord of the Term of the Moon, or the Lord of the fourth house be with
the Lord of the Ascendant, or with his Almuten, the owner shall have his goods
again.

The Moon in Trine or Sextile to the Lord of the Ascendant they will be found.

The Moon in Trine or Sextile to the Sun, then they may be found.

The Sun in the Ascendant except in Libra or Aquaries the goods will be found.

The Lord of the Ascendant, or the Lord of the second house, in the house of
the significator fortunate, they shall be found.

As you have the explanation of small beasts by the sixth house and his Lord,
after the same manner Judge by the twelfth house and his Lord for great beasts.

Concerning Fugitives.
How to find out the significator of a Fugitive.
If that a question be proposed concerning one that dwelt in the house with the
Querent, then take the Planet in the Ascendant not being the Lord thereof. But
if none be there then take the Planet that is in the sign or house where the
Lord of the Ascendant is, if that none be there, then take the Moon, she shall
be the significator of the Fugitive.

But if that he enquires for his servant then take the sixth house and his
Lord, if for his brother or sister then the third house, if for his child then
the fifth house.

If for his acquaintance his public enemy or for his wife or sweet heart,
then take the seventh house, if for his friend, then take the eleventh house,
and so be sure to take the right significator.

Whether the Fugitive will be found or come again.
If the significator of the Fugitive be in the Ascendant he comes of his own
accord.

If the Moon be separated from the Lord of the Ascendant, and then immediately
does apply to the significator of the Fugitive, you shall hear news of the
party fled, for some or other will tell you where he is.

If the significator of the Fugitive be Combust, or entering into combustion,
the Fugitive shall be found though he hide himself secretly, this has been
often proved.

If that the Moon does separate from the significator of the Fugitive, and then
does immediately apply to the Lord of the Ascendant, then the Fugitive is sorry
that he went away, and will send one to treat that he may come again.

If that the Moon be joined to ill Planets, as Saturn or Mars, or the Dragons
tail, or to a Planet Retrograde he shall be found, or come again of his own
accord.

If that the Lord of the Ascendant does behold an evil Planet from the house
signifying the Fugitive, the querent shall then find the party fled.

If that the Moon do separate from Jupiter or Venus, he shall come back again,
or a thing lost shall be quickly found.

If that the Moon does behold her own house, by Sextile or Trine the Fugitive
shall return in three days.

The Moon being in Virgo, he that flies shall soon return.

If that the Lord of the Ascendant be joined to the significator of the
Fugitive or applying to them, the Fugitive or applying to it, taken.

The Lord of the Ascendant in his own house, he shall be taken.

The significator of the Fugitive unfortunate by Saturn or Mars then taken.

The Moon in the Ascendant with Jupiter or Venus he comes again.

The Lord of the Ascendant and the Moon applying to the Lord of the tenth, or
to the Lord of the house of the Moon, the Fugitive shall be found the Moon
unfortunate he shall be taken, but chiefly when she is unfortunate in the tenth
house.

The Moon and Lord of the Ascendant in the Ascendant, and the Sun beholding
them by a Trine or Sextile, the Fugitive shall be found the same day, but with
a Quartile Aspect in a week, with an Opposition in a month.

When the significator of the Fugitive comes into the house of the Lord of the
Ascendant, then comes the Fugitive into the hands of the querent.

If that the Moon be in evil terms, and with Saturn or Mars, or either of,
them be in the house where the Moon is, he is with some poor strange people who
will bring him again.

Where the Fugitive is.
If that the Moon give virtue to Saturn or Mars, or be in any of their houses,
then he is with some kinsman as evil as himself.

If the significator of the Fugitive be in the seventh house, he is hid in the
house of him that knows him well.

If his significator be in an angle he is in a house, if in Ascendant house he
is in a close or street, if in a Cadent house he is in a Common, an indfferent
large distance off.

If that significator of the Fugitive or the Moon, be in a strong Angle within
three degrees of the Ascendant or his Lord, it notes the Fugitive to be in the
Town or Parish of the querent and very near him.

If that he be within seventy degrees of the Ascendant or his Lord, he is yet
in Town but chiefly if that he be in an Angle but if that he be above seventy
degrees and in a Cadent house, then he is gone far.

If that the significator of the Fugitive be in the fourth six or tenth houses,
he is gone but a little way, but if he be in the third or nineth houses then he
is gone far.

If you find any Planet that has dignities where the significator of the
Fugitive is, if that Planet does separate from the Lord of the Ascendent; And
apply to any Planet in the sixth eight or twelf house, he is then out of town,
if that the significator of the Fugitive be going out of one sign into another
then he is new gone out of town.

If that significator of the Fugitive does behold the Lord of the Ascendant
with a Quartile aspect he is gone out of Town.

If that the significator of the Fugitive be departing from the Sun he is gone
out of Town.

The significator of the Fugitive separating from the Lord of the Ascendant,
especially if he have any dignities in the place where the significator of the
Fugitive is, and he applying to any Planet in the sixth, eight or 12 th houses
he is gone out of town.

To know the distance between the Querent and the Fugitive.
If that the significators of the Fugitive and the Lord of the Ascendant be in
fixed signs, account for every degree between him and the Lord of the Ascendant
three miles.

If in common signs one mile.

If that the significator of the Fugitive be in the fourth sixth or tenth
houses, he then is gone but a little way, but in the third or nineth houses he
then is gone far.

Another distance.
Mind the distance of the aspect that the Moon has from the sign or Cusp of
the significator of the Fugitive or from the Fugitive himself.

And for one degree in a Common sign give five paces, and for one degree in a
moveable sign give seventeen paces.

And for one degree in a fixed sign give 1000 paces.

Note that one mile gives 1056 paces.

Consider likewise whether the Fugitive be in town or not, then give distance
accordingly and so observing thy distances aright you cannot err.

For which way the Fugitive is gone you must note that the Moon has a grand
significator for Fugitives, therefore look to the significator of the Fugitive
and to the Moon, and according to the strongest of them judge, and in the sign
and quarter that the strongest is in, say that way the Fugitive is gone.

A Table of the Escential dignities of the Planets according to Ptolemy.
Signs Planets Houses Exaltion. Triplic. Ds. No. The ^^^mes of the Planets. the
faces of the Planets. Detr. Fall. D 19 6 14 21 26 30 1 20 30 N 3 8 15 22 26 30
10 26 30 D 3 7 14 21 25 30 10 20 30 N / D 15 6 13 20 27 30 10 20 30 N / D 6 13
19 25 30 10 20 30 N 15 7 13 18 24 30 10 20 ^ 30 N 21 6 11 19 14 30 10 20 30 D 6
14 21 27 30 10 20 30 D ^ 3 8 14 9 25 30 10 20 30 N 28 6 12 19 25 30 10 20 30 D
6 12 20 25 30 10 20 ^ 30 N 27 ^ 14 20 26 30 ^0 20 30

The Contents.
FIrst to know whether the Figure be Radical or not. Page 1.

Concerning Theft or any other thing loft. p. 3.

Choice Tokens that the Goods are not stolen. p. 4.

To know in what part of the house the things missing are in. p. 8.

That the Goods are stolen. p. 11.

How to find out the significator of the Thief. p. 12.

A description of the Thief by Saturn in any of the 12 Signs. p. 13.

A short description of the other Planets Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus and
Mercury. p. 17.

A description of the Thief by the Moon being in any of the 12 signs. p. 18.

The Marks of the Thief. p. 22.

Whether the Thief be of the family of the Querent or not. p. 25.

Which of the houses may be suspected for the Theft. p. 27.

To know how many Thieves there are. p. 31.

To know whether the Thief be a man or a woman. p. 32.

How to know the Age of the Thief. p. 33.

To know whether the Thief be in Town or not. p. 35.

Whether the goods be with or near the querent. p. 37.

To know which way the thief dwells from the querent. p. 39.

Tokens of the thiefs house. p. 39.

Of the distance of place. p. 41.

Whether the Thief shall be known or not. p. 42

Whether the Thief has the goods in his own keeping, or to whom he has
delivered them. p. 43.

Whether the Thief shall be taken or not. p. 46.

Whether the suspected party be guilty or not. p. 46.

That the party suspected is not guilty. p. 48.

Tokens that the goods lost shall be recovered. p. 49.

The time when the goods stolen or missing shall be found. p. 54.

Choice tokens that the Goods stolen shall not be recovered. p. 57.

Of friendship and hatred between the querent and the Thief. p. 59.

Whether the Thief be beloved of his neighbors or not. p. 60.

That the querent is thief himself. p. 61.

That the Thief and querent be both in one house. p. 61.

Whether the Thief be married or not. p. 62.

A Scheam erected concerning a house robbed in the Minories. p. 63.

Judgment upon the foregoing Figure. p. 64.

Concerning the distance. p. 67.

Concerning Beasts or any living thing lost or strayed. p. 68.

That the Cattle are driven away or stolen. p. 69.

Where the Beasts are. p. 70.

Whether the Beasts be in the pound or no. p. 72.

Whether the Beast be dead or a live. p. 73.

To know if the beasts be lost p. 74.

Whether the beasts shall be had again or not. p. 75.

How to Find out the significator of a Fugitive. p. 76.

Whether ^he Fugitive will be found or come again. p. 77.

Where the Fugitive is. p. 80.

To know the distance between the querent and the Fugitive. p. 83.

A Table of the Escentiall dignities of the Planets. p. 85.

FINIS.

