GLEANINGS: OR, A Collection of some Memorable passages, BOTH Ancient and
Modern* Many in relation to the late WAR.

Varietas delectat.

LONDON Printed by R I. and to be sold by William Raybould at the Unicorn in
Paul's Churchyard near the little North Door. 1651.

To the Reader.
Reader,
THe Heart of man is unconfined in all its sublunary objects, and it is like to
His Understanding, which cannot be satisfied. The more the Heart possesses,
the more by Nature it desires: And the more we understand, the greater is our
endeavor to increase that Understanding. That which only gives most
satisfaction either to the Heart or to the Understanding, is Variety: The
variety of Objects does delight the Eye, and the variety of Knowledge does
transport the Mind, and in the contemplation of it, does nobly affect it,
though it can no way absolutely content it.

I have therefore endeavored in this Book, to give thee abundance of Delight,
by giving thee abundance of Variety. Thou shall find in one piece a Collection
of the most acute sayings of all variety of men, from the Scepter to the spade.
And that not taken from the repeated Traditions of outworn Antiquity, but the
greatest part collected from several passages even in our Age, and Memory,
where thou shall find many of them to be Divine, many Moral, some Satyricall,
but all Remarkable, Witty, and Profitable, and which is presumed will give thee
far better satisfaction both in the Novelty, and the choycenesse of it, then
any Book which in this nature has hitherto been extant.

Robert Groves.

GLEANINGS: OR, A Collection of some memorable passages.
Neither prosperity nor adversity should make us to deny CHRIST.
THeodoret reports of one Hormisda a Noble man in the King of Persia's Court,
who because he would not deny Christ, he was put into ragged clothes, deprived
of his honors, and set to keep the Camels: After a long time, the King seeing
him in that base condition, and remembering his former fortunes, he pityed him,
and caused him to be brought into the Palace, and to be clothed again like a
Nobleman, and then persuades him to deny Christ; whereupon, the Christian
presently rends his silken clothes, and says, If for these you think to have
me deny my faith, take them again; and so he was cast out with scorn.

Death to be much remembered.
The Egyptians in the midst of their Feasts, used to have the Anatomy of a
dead man set before them, as a memorandum to the guests, of their mortality.
And therefore are Churchyards, and places of burial, adjoined to Churches,
and the most public places, that men, women and children, by the continual
beholding of skuls, bones, graves, and burialls, might be put in mind of their
end.

A brave act of Clemency.
Augustus Caesar understanding of a conspiracy, that L. Cinna plotted against
him, which was to murder him as he was at Sacrifice; Augustus sent for him, and
before all his friends expostulated the matter with him; but Cinna having
nothing to say for himself, the Emperor said thus to him, That life which
once I gave thee as an Enemy, I now give thee as a Traitor and Parricide; let
true friendship from this day be between us; and let us strive which of us two
have the better faith, and whether I have given thee life, or thou received it
with greater confidence.

A good Law against Projectors.
The Thurians had a Law, That whosoever went about to abolish an old Law, or
establish a new, should present himself with a rope about his neck before the
people, that if his invention were not approved, he might presently be
strangled.

The glory of the World a mere Fable.
When Augustus Caesar (who had been Emperor fifty years, and lived in much
pomp and glory) was to dye, he saw, all that he had enjoyed to be but a mere
Fable; for thus he said to them that were about him, Have not I seemed to have
acted my part sufficiently in this Fable of the World? Annon personam meam in
hoc mundi Fabula satis commode egisse videor? valete ergo and plaudite.

Justice how to be qualified.
The Graecians placed Justice betwixt Leo and Libra, to signify, That as there
must be indifferency in determining, so there ought to be courage in executing.
And the Egyptians resembled Justice to a blind man without hands; blind, that
he might not respect the person of any man; and without hands, that he should
not receive bribes.

An example of excellent Justice.
A Citizen of Comun in the Dukedom of Farrara, being cast into prison upon
suspicion of Murder, his wife could get no promise of his deliverance, unless
she would give the Captain, whose prisoner he was, 200. Ducats, and yield
her body to his pleasure; which, with the consent of her husband, she did; but
after the Captain had his desire, he notwithstanding put him to death: The Duke
Gonzala hearing of it, commanded the Captain to restore the 200. Ducats to the
Widow, with an addition of 700 Crowns; then he enjoined him to marry her
presently. And lastly, before he could enjoy his new wife, the Duke caused him
to be hanged for his Treachery.

The rare piety of the young L. Harington.
It is recorded of that young, but truly Noble Lord Harington, that he prayed
not only twice a day in secret, but twice with his servants likewise in his
chamber, besides the joining at the appointed times of Prayer in the Family;
he meditated every day upon such Sermons as he had lateliest heard; every
Lords day morning he would repeat the Sermons that he had heard the Sabbath
before, and at night, those he heard that day.

Two learned Friars.
Two Friars disputing how many Worlds God made? One of them affirmed, that
there were ten worlds, quoting that Text in Luke, Annon december facti sunt mundi?
The other, looking into the Text, replied, Sed ubi sunt novem?

The Devil rebukes sin.
Seneca in his Writings inveighs very bitterly against covetous desires, and
worldly-mindednesse, and yet in the space of four years, he gathered together
so many millions of Sesterces, that they amounted to the sum of 2343750. 1. of
our money, as Mr. Brierwood has cast it up.

But three Kings in Christendom.
Maximilian the Emperor was wont to say, that there were but three Kings in
his time; first, the King of Spain, who was a King of men, because he used his
Subjects as men, not like beasts: Secondly, the King of France, who was King of
Asses, for the immoderate exactions he took of them: And thirdly, himself,
who was a King of Kings, because his people would do what they listed.

Basils brave resolution.
When Valens the Emperor sent his Officer to Basilius, seeking to turn him
from the Faith, he first offered him great preferments, but Basil rejected them
with scorn; Offer these things, says he, to children: Then he falls to
grievous threatenings: Threaten, says he, your purple Gallants, that give
themselves to their pleasures.

False work, false wages.
The Emperor, Charles the Fourth, making war against the Duke of Austria,
and finding himself too weak, sends privately for three of the Dukes chief
Gentlemen, promising them great sums of money, if they would persuade the
Duke to return home; which they undertook, and so prevailed with the Duke,
that he gave over the war for that time. Shortly after, the Gentlemen came
to the Emperor, for the money he had promised: The Emperor gave them great
bags full of golden Ducats, but all counterfeit, whereof they afterward
complained to the Emperor, who bade them be gone like knaves; saying, That
false work, must have false wages.

Ajust reward of Treason.
Solomon the Turkish Emperor, employing a Christian to betray the Rhodes,
promised to give him his Daughter to wife, if he did the business: The service
being done, the Traitor demanded what was promised; the Turk commanded his
Daughter to be brought forth in stately manner, as if she were to be
married, saying to him, Forasmuch as thou art a Christian, and my daughter a
Mahumitan, you cannot so live quietly or comfortably together, and I am loath
to have a son that is not a Muselman both without and within; and therefore,
it is not enough that thou abjure Christianity, (as many of you will do upon
lesser occasion) but you must pull off your skin, which is baptized and
uncircumcised; which he commanded to be done, and then promised him, that if
there came a Mahumitan skin in room of the Christian, he should have his
Daughter, but not before.

Too much prosperity dangerous.
St. Ambrose coming into a rich man's house who boasted that he had never felt
any adversity in all his life, said to his friends, we must not stay here, left
we perish with this man: They were no sooner out of doors, but the earth
opened and swallowed up the house, Master and all.

The uncertainty of worldly prosperity.
Croesus was so puffed up with his great riches and outward glory, that he
boasted himself to be the happiest man that lived; but Solon told him, That no
man was to be accounted happy before death: Croesus little regarded what Solon
had said unto him, until he came by miserable experience to find the
uncertainty of his riches and worldly glory, which, before, he would not
believe; for when he was taken by King Cyrus, and condemned to be burnt, and
saw the fire preparing for him, then he cried out, O Solon, Solon; Cyrus asking
him the cause of that outcry, he answered, that now he remembered what Solon
had told him in his prosperity, Nemo ante obitum foelix, That no man was to be
counted happy before death.

A noble act of faithful Courtiers.
Lewis the eleventh of France, going about to establish some unjust edicts,
when some of his chief Courtiers perceived his drift, they went all together
to him in red Gowns; The King asked them what they would? The President La
Vacqueri answers, We are come with a full purpose to lose our lives every one
of us, rather then by our connivency any unjust Ordinance should take place:
The King being amazed at this answer, and at the constancy and resolution of
those Peers, gave them gracious entertainment, and commanded, that all the
former Edicts should be forthwith cancelled in his presence.

Lavish vows are but slightly performed.
A Mariner in a great storm prayed to the Virgin to deliver him, and vowed to
give her a wax Candle as big as his Mast; but when the danger was over, he told
his Companions, that now one of eight in the pound should serve her turn.

A Soldier of a pious and public spirit.
'Twas a Noble Spirit that acted in one Terentius, a Captain of the Emperor
Valens, who being returned out of Armenia with a great Victory, the Emperor
bad him ask a reward; he asked only that he would be pleased to grant to
those of the Christian Religion, one public Church in Antioch, and although
the Emperor were angry, and tore his Petition, bidding him ask something
else, yet he persisted in this, and refused any other reward for all the
service he had done.

Height of Malice.
One having gotten his enemy at an advantage, first caused him to speak
blasphemy in hope of life, and then stabbed him, boasting when he had done, that
he had made his enemy lose both-body and soul.

A fit reward for Treason.
Camillus having besieged the Falerians, the Schoolmasters trained all the
youth of the City, as far as the Roman Watch, of purpose to betray them to the
Romans their enemies; the Schoolmaster being taken with his Scholars, and
brought before Camillus, received this answer, That a worthy Captain should
seek victory by trusting to his own valor, and not by another villainy; and
so commanded him to be stripped, and his hands bound behind him; his Scholars
were sent back to their parents, with rods in their hands, whipping their
Master before them; for which noble act, the Falerians submitted themselves to
the Romans.

He that has no children, thinks all fond Parents fools.
Agesilaus did use to play with his children when they were little, as to ride
on Hobbyhorses, etc. A friend of his taking him in the manner, rebuked him; But
Agesilaus entreated him to say nothing, till he had children of his own.

Our late Bishops were true Prophets.
When King James came first into England, he was much petitioned to abolish the
Ceremonies used in the Church, whereto he seemed indifferently inclined: But
the Bishops lay at him continually, by no means to hearken to the Puritans,
often harping upon this string, No Ceremony, no Bishop; No Bishop, no King;
which (blessed be God) is now come to pass.

The Clergy of Rome bad good cause to be angry with Luther.
A German Prince asked Erasmus, what he thought of the Doctrine of Martin
Luther: Erasmus answered, That the Doctrine was good enough, but that it pincht
too much upon the Monks bellies, and the Popes prerogative.

A sad Story.
A Friar preaching upon these words, Vinum non babent, i. e. They have no wine;
he divides the Text into two parts: First, here is Vinum, ibi optimus liquor.
Secondly, Non habent, ibi pessimus clamor; of the first part, he spoke very
largely; but when he came to the second, he brake off abruptly.

Gods Mercy to England, since it was a Commonwealth.
From the first of King James, to the last of King Charles, England was seldom
free from the Plague, but now (God be praised) the Land is free from that
judgment, and our London Bills of Mortality have given in of the Plague none,
for many weeks together.

Prosperity needs ballancing with some Adversity.
News being brought to Philip of Macedon, all in one day, of many good
successes, as first that he had got a prize at the Olympian Games; next, that
his General Parmenio had overcome the Dardonians: Thirdly, that his wife
Olympia was delivered of a Son; lifting up his hands to Heaven, he said, O
ye Gods send me some moderate misfortune to countervaile so great prosperity.

The sword of the Soldier knows not the goods of their friends, from the goods
of their enemies.
When the Citizens of Papia in Italy were at dissension, by reason of the
Faction between the Guelphs and the Gibellines, the Gibellines procured a
favourer of theirs, called Facinas Cajus, to assist them, covenanting that he
should have the goods of Guelphes for his labor; but he being once come into
the City, and prevailing, he spared the goods of neither of them; whereupon the
Gibellines complained, saying, that their goods were also spoiled; he answered
them, that indeed they themselves were Gibellines, and should be safe, but
their goods were Guelphes, and so belonged to the Soldiers. And so it may fall
out to them who have bin unfaithful to God, Religion, and their Country, though
they themselves may prove to be Catholics, yet their goods and places of
preferment may be counted Heretics.

Labor good both for body and soul.
The Heavens move, and are pure; the earth stands still, and is full of dregs;
the industrious man has no leisure to sin; the idle man has neither leisure
nor power to avoid sin; Labor then is as wholesome for the soul, as it is
profitable for the body.

Live-well and Dye-well are Twins.
Living and Dying well are Twins, daughters of grace, like Lea and Rachel; and
therefore, as Jacob could not enjoy his Rachel, till he had married Leah; So
all must first live well, which is tedious and unpleasant, before they can dye
well, which is beautiful and fair. Thus the two Temples in Rome of Honor and
Virtue, were so contiguously built, that no man could go into the Temple of
Honor, before he went into the Temple of Virtue.

Apenance for Drunkenness.
A Monk of Prague that had lived all his time in a Cloister, knowing little of
the fashions of the world, was at length appointed by his Superior, to receive
Confessions; which he did of all such as came to him, and he enjoined penance
according to the nature of the sins that were confessed: amongst the rest, there
came one which made confession, that he was guilty of Drunkenness. The Friar
asked the Penitent, what kind of sin that was? The man told him that it was
drinking too much strong drink; but the Friar, having no experience of it, put
off the man's penance to another time, and in the interim he gate a good
quantity of strong Liquor into his chamber, where he so handled the matter,
that he stole himself drunk, which (he being but a novice that way) made him
very sick for a time: when the man came to him again for his penance; the Friar
enjoined him to be drunk again; and so, ever after he appointed all that
confessed drunkenness, no other penance, but to be drunk again; supposing, that
to be drunk had punishment enough in it self.

The power of Preaching.
As the walls of Jerico fell down by the Trumpets of the Priests, so the
strong holds of Satan are overthrown by the Ministry of the Word.

A fit Emblem for overcurious women.
Mercury being to make a garment for the Moon, could never fit her, but either
it would be too big, or too little, by reason she was always increasing, or
decreasing. This may be the Emblem of some women, whose curiosity, about their
clothes, can hardly be satisfied.

To speak well, a hard lesson.
One coming to a Holy man, desired him to learn him some good Lesson; the
good man bade him endeavor to speak well, and when he had learned that, to
come to him again, and he would give him another Lesson: The Holy man meeting
afterward with his Scholar, asked him, if he had learned his Lesson? He
answered, no; saying, it was so difficult, that he knew not when he should
learn it.

They that spend their estate in Luxury, deserve no pity.
It is reported of Alphonsus King of Arragon, that when a Knight of his had
consumed a great patrimony by lust and luxury, and besides ran into debt, and
being to be cast into prison by his Creditors, his friends petitioned the King
for him: The King answered, that, if he had spent so much money in the service
of his Prince, or for the good of his Country, or in relieving his kindred, I
would have hearkened to you, but seeing he has spent so much upon his body,
it is fit his body should smart for it: So when we look up to God for mercy in
our distress, and the comfort of the creatures have forsaken us, he may justly
answer; If you had spent that abundance of the creature which I afforded you,
in my service, or for the good of my people, I would have heard you, but now it
is just you should be left in your distress; and that so much pleasure as you
have had, so much misery should follow; according to Abraham's speech to the
rich Glutton, Luke 16. 25.

The Sermon is not done until it be practiced.
A Lady that was not her self at Church that day, seeing her man come home,
asked him, if Sermon were done? He answered no. Why then, said she, do you come
away* He answered, that though the Preacher had done speaking, yet the Sermon
was not done, till the hearers had practiced it.

Tyrants are Gods Rods, which he casts into the fire when he has done with
them.
Caesar having bathed his sword in the blood of the Senate, and his own
Contrymen, is after a while, miserably murdered in the Senate by his own
friends Caessius and Brutus; to show unto Tyrants, that the highest step of
their greatness is tied to a halter; and that they are but the scourges and
rods of the Almighty, which he will cast into the fire, as soon as he has done
with them.

Though Kings Crowns sit light upon their heads, yet oftentimes they lie heavy
upon their Consciences.
Philip the third of Spain, whose life was free from gross evils, professing
that he would rather lose all his Kingdoms, then offend God willingly; yet
being in the Agony of death, and considering more thoroughly of his account he
was to give to God, fear struck into him, and these words brake from him; Oh,
would to God I had never reigned! Oh, that those years I have spent in my
Kingdom, I had lived a private life in the wilderness! Oh, that I had lived a
solitary life with God! how much more securely should I now have dyed? how much
more confidently should I have gone to the Throne of God? what does all my
glory profit me? but that I have so much the more torment in my death.

Christians lives should answer Christ's rules.
Ponormitan having read the 5, 6, and 7. Chapters of Matthew, and comparing the
lives of people with those Rules of Christ, said, that either that was no
Gospel, or the people no Christians.

A triumphant Conqueror becomes a patient sufferer for Jesus Christ.
Trojane the Emperor had sent Eustochius, one of his chief Captains, against
the Barbarians, who having vanquished them, returned home: The Emperor being
very joyful at this news, goes to meet him, and brings him gloriously into
the City: Now was a time for Eustochius to enjoy the Emperors favor, and what
he could desire; but at this time, this very day, refusing to sacrifice, with
the Emperor to Apollo, he suffers the Martyrdom of himself, his wife, and
his children; even now denies all his present pomp and glory, for Christ.

Awitty Answer of Aquinas to the Pope.
Thomas Aquinas coming before Pope Innocent the third, in whose presence a
great quantity of gold was telling; The Pope said to him, Thou see Thomas,
the Church cannot say now, as at the beginning, Silver and Gold have I none; To
which Aquinas replied, True, Holy Father, nor can the Church say now, as it did
then to the Cripple, Rise up and walk.

The world will be sure to keep Christ poor enough.
The Church of Canterbury, before the dissolution of Abbeys, had three several
Shrines, or Altars, one dedicated to Christ, another to the Virgin Mary, and a
third to Thomas a Becket; when these things were abolished, there was found in
the Ledger book of that Church, the yearly oblations made to those several
Shrines; As thus: Item, the Oblations offered to the Virgin, this year, 63. l.
5. s. 6. d. Item, to the Shrine of St. Thomas Becket, 832. 12. 3. ob. Item, to
our Saviors Shrine the same year, 3. 2. 2. o. Item, the next year, to the
blessed Virgin, 4. 1. 8. q. Item, the same year, to Saint Thomas, 954. 6. 3.
o. Item, to our Savior, pro hoc anno o. o. o.


So that, if that world had continued but a little longer St. Thomas a Becket
would have undone both Mother and Son.

They that slight Christ, ought to be lightly esteemed.
Amphilochius a Bishop, coming into the presence of the Emperor Archadius and
his son, who was then partner with his father in the Empire, saluted the father
with all reverence, but slighted the son; whereat the father taking great
displeasure, demanded the reason why he so slighted his son? The Bishop
answered, because he has neglected the eternal Son of God, (he being at
that time a professed Arrian) whereupon the Emperor received the Bishop again
into favor, and banished all Arrians out of his Dominions.

Policy safer then flattery and plain-dealing.
The Lion being charged with a stinking breath, and meeting with an Ass, would
know his opinion, who plainly told him that it stunck abominably; whereupon the
Lion tears him in pieces for being so bold: next, he meets with a Spaniell, of
whom he demands the like, who said, he never smelt a sweeter breath in all his
life; the Lion presently tears him in pieces for his flattery: Lastly, he
meets with a Fox, whose opinion being likewise demanded, he said, that he had
got such a cold that he could not smell; and so Reynold escaped. Great men
seldom like plaine-dealing, and wise men never love flattery.

The best Sacrifice.
When the Athenians would know of the Oracle the cause of their often
unprosperous successes in Battle against the Lacedaemonians, seeing they
offered the choysest things they could get, in Sacrifice to the Gods, which
their enemies did not; the Oracle gave them this answer, That the Gods were
better pleased with their inward Supplication, without ambition, then with all
their outward pomp in costly Sacrifices.

Cardinal Woolseys Father was a Butcher of Ipswich.
Will Summers, that was first Cardinal Woolseys fool, hearing that his Master
was like to be Pope, came running to the Cardinal, and with great expressions
of joy, told him what he had heard; Why art thou so overjoyed at this news,
said Woolsey, to his Fool? Marry, quoth Will, because I hope that when you are
Pope, you will do as St. Peter did when he was Pope; what was that, said the
Cardinal? why, St. Peter, when he was Pope he brought in Lent, and all the
Fasting days, because his father and brothers were Fishermen; and I hope,
when you are Pope, you will put them all down, because your father and brothers
were Butchers.

Some can better rule then be ruled.
Complaint being made to Henry the 8. of the Earl of Kildare, that he was so
troublesome, that all Ireland could not rule him: No, said the King, then shall
he rule all Ireland; and so made him L. Deputy of that Kingdom.

The Church stood in need of a Luther.
Charles the Emperor was wont to say, That if the Popes Priests were such as
they ought to have been, they had not stood in need of a Luther.

Three dogs to be kept out of the Pulpit.
Luther was wont to say, that a Preacher should beware of bringing three dogs
into the Pulpit with him, Pride, Covetousness, and Envy.

Luther would not be satisfied with a temporal reward.
Luther being at one time, in some wants, it happened that a good sum of money
was unexpectedly sent him, by a Noble man of Germany; at which, being something
amazed, he said; I fear, that God will give me my reward here; but I protest,
that I will not be so satisfied.

Mutability of Fortune.
Sesostris having taken many of his neighbor Kings prisoners, made them to draw
his Chariot by turns; it happened that one of these Royal Slaves, as he was
drawing in the Chariot, had his eye, almost, continually fixed on the wheels,
which Sesostris observing, asked him why he looked so seriously upon the
wheels? He answered, that the falling of that spoke lowest which was even now
highest, put him in mind of the instability of Fortune; Sesostris duly weighing
the Parable, would never be drawn so again.

An Indian would not go to Heaven, because he heard that the Spaniards went
thither.
An Indian Prince, being persuaded by the Spanish Friars to be baptized, and
become a Christian, demanded first, what place was appointed after this life,
for such as were baptized? They told him, Heaven. Then he asked them, whither
such went that were not baptized? They answered him, to Hell. Then he would
know, to which of these places the Spaniards went, when they dyed? They said,
to Heaven: Then said the Indian, let me go to Hell, if the Spaniards go to
Heaven; for I desire not to come where such cruel people be. And indeed the
Spaniards cruelty toward the poor Indians, was most intolerable.

Continual happiness, is the greatest unhappiness.
Nihil eo in faelicius cui nihil infoelix contigit; to be always in felicity,
is the greatest infelicity; for (besides that continual pleasures glut the
senses) he wants many improvements of his wisdom, many trials of his
faith, many exercises of his patience, many incentives of his zeal, many
preservatives against sin, and many arguments of Gods love.

Christ weeping over Jerusalem.
Christ wept over Jerusalem; so did Titus; and so did Marcellus over Syracuse;
so also did Scipio over Carthage: But they shed tears for them whose blood
they were to shed, but Christ for them who were to shed his blood.

Magistrates and Physicians must not kill too many.
Seneca advises Magistrates to let the clap fright all, but the Thunderbolt to
strike but a few; for (said he) it is as great a shame for a Magistrate, as for
a Physician, to have many dye under his hand.

Ingratitude.
Ingratum si dixeris omnia dixisti; for what is Religion, but gratitude to God?
What is piety, but gratitude to Parents? What is loyalty, but gratitude to
Princes? What is Charity and friendship, but gratitude to our Neighbors?

Affections infectious.
Our vicious Affections are so many dangerous infections of the mind; for
anger is a fit of phrenfie; fear, a shaking Fever; Ambition, a wind-Collick;
Malice, an Impostume; Faction, a Convulsion; Envy, a Consumption; Security, a
dead Palsy; Lust, an impure itch, etc.

Many are spiritually sick, and know it not.
As a man may take infection, or receive some bruise inwardly, or spring a
vein, and yet know not of it, till it be too late: So a man, that makes great
show of Religion, carries a great appearance of Sanctity, both in public and
private, and feels no inward grief of conscience, yet may have taken some
infection of Heresy, or have in him some passion of malice, or bruise of
faction, or rupture of Schism, or corrupt humors of Luxury, may daily decay
in grace, and be in a spiritual consumption, and yet perceive it not.

Satan's greatest advantages against us, are from our selves.
Satan ever works upon advantages, sails with the wind, and bows us that way
we incline of our selves; for if our knowledge be weak, he tempts us to error;
if our Consciences be tender, to scrupulosity, and too much preciseness; if
our Consciences be large, to carnal security; If we be bold-spirited, to
presumption; If timorous, to desperation; If flexible, to inconstancy; If
stiff, to Heresy, Schism, or Rebellion.

Humanity a good help to Divinity.
Abraham did first company with Hagar, before he could have issue by Sarah:
Hagar (says Philo) is secular and humane Learning, with which, we must have to
do before we can expect fruit from Sarah, that is, the study of Divinity: Thus
Cyprian by his Rhethorick, Tertullian by the Civil Law, Justin Martyr and
Origin by Philosophy, Basil by Physic, Augustine by Logic, Eusebius by
History, Prudentius by Poetry, Greg. Nazianzen, Jerome, and others, by their
exquisite skill in Arts and Languages, mightily improved their sacred Talent of
Scripture knowledge.

This Scholar deserved a cup of Wine to his Fish.
A young and pregnant Scholar, who was Nephew to M. Archbishop of Canterbury;
the Bishop sent him, from his own Table, a dish of Fish, and bade that he
should make him a pair of Verses, extempore, upon that subject, which the
Scholar presently did in this manner.

Mittitur in disco mihi piscis ab Archiepisco Po non-ponatur, quia potus non
mihi datur. The Archbishop, and they that were at Table with him, laughed
heartily at the conceit; but one Gentleman, who understood not Latin, wished it
had been in English, that he might have laughed with them; whereupon, the paper
was sent back to the Scholar, that he should turn it into English, which he
did thus: There was sent me fish, in a dish, from the Arch-Bish
Hop was not here, because be sent no Beer.


Dangerous sinning against Conscience.
Learned Doctor Willet in his Comment upon Leviticus, relates a story of one
Richard Turvin, of Tickill in Yorkshire, Mercer, a man of good estate, who
being indebted to Master Edward Wright, since Alderman of London, the sum of
seventy nine pound, eleven shillings, and three pence, gave a Bill of his hand
for the payment thereof, to Mr. George Hadley of London, Grocer, who was then a
dealer for Mr. Wright; this Bill being negligently cast by, was fraudulently
caught up by Turvin, who after came at the time, and to the place, in the Bill
mentioned, but tendered no money. This debt was afterward demanded of him, but
he pretended payment made, and his Bill re-delivered thereupon; and so
persisting, a suit was commenced against him, and tried before Sir Nicholas
Hide, Lord Chief Justice of England, in the Guildhall of London, in Trinity
Term, 1629. where two sons of Belial, by name Holbeck and Rogers, Porters of
Gainesborough in Lincolnshire, were produced, who deposed that they saw the
money paid, and so the day was Turvins: Since which time, Mr. Hadley often
meeting him, and charging him with this notorious fraud, his manner was, with
oaths and fearful imprecations, to face it out; but Mr. Hadley replying,
that his conscience called him liar and perjured wretch; presently, upon the
name of Conscience, he would flee from him; but (alas poor man) this his
conscience he could neither fugere, nor fugare, flee, nor put to flight. It
pleased God, now lately, to lay his hanc. upon him by sickness, and withal to
touch his galled conscience; then follow fearful terrors, anguish of mind,
and horrible affrights; he cries out, that he saw the Devil stand before him,
threatening to tear him in pieces, with other desperate and doleful words; and
amidst this perplexity, he confessed the whole passage of this business, with
all the circumstances; with some other of this kind; saying, that there can be
no peace nor safety for him, till restitution be made to every one whom he had
wronged; and thereupon he took order, that full satisfaction should be given,
both for the debt and charges of suit.

A Wounded Conscience who can bear?
The same Author, in the same Book, relates of a friend of his, who had a
Prentice that proved false to him, and at last ran away from him: But some
three or four and twenty years after (being all that time terrified in
Conscience, as himself told this relator) he came a great Journey, to find
his Master, and give him satisfaction.

A contest about our modern Languages.
Sir Tho. Moore, sometimes L. Chancellor of England, being at an Emperial Diet
in Germany, where most of the Princes of Christendom at that time had their
Ambassadors; It happened that one night they were altogether entertained at a
great supper; at which, a discourse arose about the Language of their several
Countries, which of them should be the best; The Spanish Ambassador contended
hard for his, as being the most lofty: The French pleaded strongly for the
French Tongue; and so did every one of the rest, according as his affection to
his native country led him; among whom, Sir Thomas Moore was not wanting to
advance the credit of the English Tongue, but at last the business grew to
this result, by a general consent, that that language which was hardest to
pronounce, was the best; then every one began to propound the hardest words of
their several Countries, which Sir Tho. Moore, being a general Linguist,
could easily pronounce; then it came to his turn to propound some English
word, to try the rest of the Ambassadors, which was Thwick Thwack, where with
they were all gravelled, one cried Twick Twack, another Tick Tack, a third
Whick Whack, but not one of them could pronounce Thwick Thwack; and so Sir
Thomas carried it hard, born for the English.

Sinful fruits never last long.
Cressus did not long enjoy the fruit of his Covetousness, for being slain in
war, melted gold was poured down his throat, by the Parthians. Julius Caesar
enjoyed not long the fruit of his Ambition, for he had 25. wounds given him in
the Senate, whereof he instantly dyed. Heliogabalus enjoyed not long the fruit
of his pleasure, for he was slain, and thrown into a Jakes. Dionysius did not
long enjoy the fruit of his Sacrilege and Tyranny, for he was glad to change
his Scepter into a Feruler, and turn Schoolmaster for his maintenance. Achan
spent not his wedge of gold, nor wore his Babylonish garment, but was soon
stripped of both. Ahah and Jezabell purchased a Vineyard with the blood of the
owner, but they presently watered it with their own blood. Belshazzar had
scarcely swallowed down the Wine he carrowsed in the bowls of the Sanctuary,
when he saw his doom written on the wall. The rich man in the Gospel had no
sooner said, Soul eat and drink and be merry, but he heard a voice, saying,
Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be required. The rich Glutton fared
delicately, and went bravely every day, but the next news you hear from him,
is of his being in Hell, crying out that he is miserably tormented: And Judas
fitted a halter to hang himself, with the same hands he took the money for
betraying his Master.

How to pacify Gods Wrath.
Themistocles understanding that King Admetus was highly displeased with him,
he gate up the Kings young son in his arms, and so treated with the Father,
and thereby pacified his wrath: So should we come to the King of Heaven, with
his Son Christ in our arms.

The Devils cunning in leaving Jobs wife.
Gregory observes, that the Devil taking from Job, his children, servants,
Cattle, etc. yet left him his wife, which was not out of his forgetfulness,
carelessness, or any love or pity to Job, but only to vex and plague him, and
drive him to impatience, and, if it might be, to despair; Calide cuncto
diripuit, calidius adjutricem reservavit. And as another says, Cor malier is
est tanquam, gradus ad cor hominis.

Why Jupiter is preferred before the rest of the Gods.
In the days of old, when all the Estates of the world, were about to choose
some one of the Gods to be chief Ruler over all men: The Priests, would choose
Apollo for his wisdom: The Soldiers, Mars, for his valor: The Merchants,
Mercury, for his negotiating: The Physicians, Esculapius, for his cures: But at
last, they all agreed to choose Jupiter, because he was the God that came down
into the world, in a shower of Gold.

Godly men leave a blessing to their posterity.
Master Samuel Herne, famous for his living, preaching, and writing; rich only
in goodness and children; as he lay upon his deathbed, his wife made great
moan and lamentation, saying, what should become of her little ones, if God
took her husband? Peace, Sweetheart (said he) That God who feeds the Ravens,
will not starve the Hernes: which speech of his proved prophetical, for his
children were all well provided for, through Gods providence.

Of one that said the Crosse-row instead of a Prayer.
A devout (but very ignorant) Spaniard, conceived that he ought to use other
prayers, in his private devotions, besides the Pater-nosters and Ave-Maries;
but so simple was he, that he knew not how to pray otherwise; only every
morning he would kneel down, and lifting up his eyes and hands to Heaven,
deliberately repeat all the Letters of the Alphabet, which having done, he
added; And now O good God (said he) put these Letters together, that they may
spell syllables, that the syllables may make words, and the words so joined, as
that they may become such sense, as may be most to thy glory and my good.

Dangerous delaying of Repentance.
Constantine had a conceit, that (because Baptism washed away all sins) he
would not be baptized till his deathbed, that so his soul might never lose
the purity thereof, but immediately mount to Heaven; but sudden death
preventing him, he was not baptized at all, as some say, or only by an Arrian
Bishop, as others affirm. If any shall erroneously, upon the same supposition,
put off their repentance to the last, let them take heed, lest it either prove
none at all, or none in effect.

Balaams wish.
One being asked whether he had rather be Croesus, who was the richest, but
most vicious man in the world; or Socrates, who was one of the poorest, but
most honest? answered, that in his life he would choose to be Croesus, but in
his death Socrates.

Most men are best in a low condition.
Pope Martin reported of himself, that whilst he was a Monk, and lived in the
Cloister, he had some evidences for Heaven; when he was a Cardinal, he began
to fear and doubt; but after he came to be Pope, he utterly despaired.

How God will try men.
When one was brought before Tyberius, who pretended right and title to a
Crown; and Tyberius upon long examination, could not detect the Imposter, nor
trap him in his tale; at last he began to search the habit and shape of his
body, and not finding there the softnes and delicacy of a Prince, but the
brawninesse and servile fashion of a Mechanic, he so startled the man, with
such an unexpected trial, as made him confess the truth: So God will deal
with those that usurp a title to his Kingdom, and prevaricate his Name; he
will not take them on their bare words, or empty professions, but will examine
their hands, and if he find them hardened in the service of sin, their own
hands shall stop their mouths.

Saint Austines robbing of an Orchard made a heinous sin.
After Saint Austin was converted, be began to be exceedingly troubled about
the robbing of an Orchard, which he did in his Childehood; this act of his he
aggravated against himself by many circumstances: as First, that he was not
provoked to it by any need or want, for (says he) I had better at home;
Secondly, that he did it in mere contempt of Justice, out of a wicked mind;
Thirdly, that it was more for the love of theft then of the fruit; Fourthly,
that it was done at an unseasonable time, in the dead of the night; Fifthly,
that there was abundance of Apples at that time in their own Orchard; Sixthly,
that he drew in other boys to join with him, and so made them guilty with
himself; Lastly, that when they had gotten as many as they could well carry
away, they did not eat them, but threw them away to the Hogs.

A miraculous providence.
In the second year of Queen Mary, at a place in Suffolk, by the Sea side,
all of hard stone and pebble, lying between the Towns of Orford and Alborough,
where never grass grew, nor any earth ever seen, there chanced suddenly to
spring up, without any tillage, or sowing, so great abundance of Pease, that
the poor people thereabouts gathered above an hundred quarters, in the month of
August, yet there remained some ripe, and some blossoming, as many as were
before: This happened in a time of great scarcity.

A pertinent Answer, to an impertinent Question.
Euclides the Philosopher being demanded by one, what kind of things the Gods
were? And what manner of works they most delighted themselves in? Made him this
answer, That he was not very familiar with their persons, nor much acquainted
with their purposes; only so much he understood from them, That above all
things, they hated such polypragmaticall Inquisitors. This is not much unlike
St. Austins answer, to one that would needs know, what God did before the World
was made? Who was answered, That he was preparing Hell for such busy
Questionists.

Of one that would not repent in the beginning of his sickness, lest he should
recover.
Beda tells a story of a certain great man, that was admonished in his
sickness to Repent, who answered, That he would not Repent yet, for if he
should recover, his Companions would laugh at him; but growing sicker, and
sicker, his friends pressed him again to Repent; but then, he told them it
was too late; Quia jam judicatus sum and condemnatus; for now (said he) I am
judged and condemned.

Ridley blames himself for drinking there where the Gospel was refused.
Doctor Ridley coming to the Lady Mary (who was afterward Queen) and offering
himself to preach, was refused; being gone out of her presence, one of her
servants entreated him to drink, which he accepted; but being inwardly checked
for so doing, he cried, I have done amiss, to drink in that place, where Gods
Word being offered, has been refused; whereas, if I had remembered my duty, I
ought to have departed immediately, and have shaken the dust off my shoes, for
a testimony against this house.

Upon Canterbury's great Bell.
OLd Canterbury's great Cathedral Bell,
Never rings out, but gives a fatal knell;
Hes loud, unpleasant, and harsh jarring sound,
The noise of all our well-tuned Bells bath drowned,
She rung so lately out in June, some doubt
She shook great Tom of Lincoln's clapper out.
It is reported by the men of Kent,
She sounds such discord, she gives no content.
But that she is ponderous and so great, the People
Would gladly have her quite out of the Steeple.
She makes such hideous noise with her doom, doom,
As did the Popish Bulls that came from Rome.
But since she is made of naught but Popish dross,
She Will serve to ring Romes Catholics to Mass.
Injustice will be repayed at one time or another.
Richard the second, when he was deposed, and shortly after wounded to death,
said, My great Grandfather Edward the second, was in this manner, Deposed,
imprisoned, and murdered; by which means my Grandfather, Edward the third
obtained the Crown, and now is the punishment of that injury poured upon me
his next Successor; well, this is right for me to suffer.

The Ministry is no idle Calling.
If a Minister had as many eyes as Argus to watch, as many heads as Typheus to
dispose, and as many hands as Briareus to labor, he might find employment
enough for them all.

Peter and Paul pictured blushing.
A Painter who being blamed by a Cardinal, for putting too much red upon the
visages of Peter and Paul, tartly replied, That he painted them so, as
blushing at the lives of those men, who styled themselves their Successors.

Seldom comes the better.
There were three Dionysians that succeeded one another, and each exceeded his
predecessor in Tyranny and wickedness; insomuch, that they were continually
execrated of all men; only one old woman prayed for the life of the last,
because she thought the Devil himself would come next.

Mistress Hutchinson of New England delivered of a strange Monster.
Mistress Hutchinson of Boston in New England, a woman of eminent parts and
seeming piety, falling into many strange and dangerous opinions, which she
pertinaciously held, and had drawn many others to embrace them; when the
Churches of God there (notwithstanding all their endeavors) could not convince
nor reclaim her, but still she persisted in those desperate Errors; it pleased
God to give a token from Heaven of his manifest displeasure against her, and
her opinions, and a warning to all those that did adhere to her in them. The
matter was thus, Mistress Hutchinson being big with child, and drawing near her
time of labor, was, at once, delivered of thirty Monstrous Births, or
thereabouts; some of them bigger, some lesser, some of one shape, some of
another, few of any perfect shape, none at all of them of humane shape; wherein
the wisdom of God mightily appeared, in fitting this judgment to her sin
every way; for, as she had vented misshapen opinions, so she brings forth
deformed Monsters: Secondly, as her errors were about thirty in number, so she
brought forth about thirty Misshapen Births; And as her Errors were public,
and spread abroad in that and other Countries: so this Monster of hers is
famously known in all the New England Churches, and in many other parts of the
world. Though this visible hand from Heaven wrought upon many that had been
seduced by her, yet she her self continued still obstinate in her way, and
leaving that part of the Plantation, went to live, with her Family, near a
place which Seamen and our Maps call Hell-gate, where the Indians fell upon
them, and slew her and all her family, her daughter, and her daughters husband,
with all their children, save only one that escaped.

Mistress Dyers fearful Monster.
To the foresaid Relation, I may add another as strange and remarkable,
happening in the same place, about the same time, and to a woman of the same way
with Mris. Hutchinson. The Story is thus; At Boston in New England, upon the
17. of October, 1637. the wife of one William Dyer, sometime a Citizen and
Millener of London, a very proper and comely young woman, was delivered of a
large woman child, still borne, about two months before her time; the child
having life a few hours before the delivery, but so monstrous, and misshapen,
as the like has not been heard of; it had no head, but a face, which stood so
low upon the breast, as the ears, (which were like an Apes) grew upon the
shoulders; the eyes stood far out, so did the mouth, the nose was hooking
upward, the breast and back was full of sharp prickles like a Thorn-back, the
navell, and all the belly, with the distinction of the Sex, were where the
lower part of the back and hips should have been; and those back parts were on
the side the face stood; the arms and hands, with the thighs and legs, were
as other childrens, but instead of toes, it had upon each foot three claws,
with talons like a young Foul; upon the back, above the belly, it had two
great holes like mouths, and in each of them stuck a piece of flesh; it had no
forehead, but in the place thereof, above the eyes four horns, whereof two
were above an inch long, hard, and sharp, the other two were somewhat shorter;
the father and mother of this monster were of the highest form of our refined
Familists, and very active in maintaining their party, and in reproaching some
of the Elders and others who did oppose their errors. These things are so well
known in New England (both this and the former relation) that the reverend
Teacher of Boston has made use of them in public, and have beeu testified by
so many Letters from thence to friends here, and also published in a printed
large relation, with all the circumstances by Mr. Thomas Welde a worthy
Minister then of New England, now in Old, that the truth of these things is
unquestionable.

Riches bring troubles.
Policrates bestowed five talents for a gift upon one Anacrion, who for two
nights after was so troubled with care how to keep them, and how to bestow
them, as he carried them back again to Policrates, saying, they were not worth
the pains which he had already taken for them.

A just reward of covetousness.
Calipha King of Persia having filled a tower with silver, gold, jewels, and
precious stones, and being in war with Alanus King of the Tartarians, was so
hated of his own people for his covetousness, and base keeping back of their
pay, as that he was taken by Alanus in his own City, and committed to prison in
the aforesaid tower, Alanus speaking thus to him; If thou had not kept this
treasure so covetously, but had distributed it amongst thy soldiers, thou
might have preserved thy self and City, now therefore enjoy it at thine ease,
and eat and drink thy fill, seeing thou have loved it so well: And so he dyed
in the midst of his Riches.

Gods Mercy.
The weapons of Gods Artillery are turned into the Rainbow; a Bow indeed, but
without an Arrow; Bent, but without a string; with the back toward Heaven, as
if we rather shot at God by our sins, then he at us, by his Judgments.

Gods Infiniteness.
God is a Circle, whose Circumference is every where, and whose Center is no
where.

A Prophecy sulfilled.
Whitguift the last Abbot of Wellow in Lincolnshire, would often tell his
friends, that he should live to see the dissolution of Abbeys, and all such
Religious houses, for that he had read the Scripture over, and over, but could
find no foundation for them there; but I find (said he) this in the
Scripture, that whatsoever is not of Gods planting shall be plucked up; which
accordingly came to pass, here in England, in his days.

The different dispositions of men.
A Father that had three Sons, was desirous to try their discretions, which he
did by giving to each of them an apple that had some part of it rotten, the
first eats up his, rotten and all; the second throws all his away, because
some part of it was rotten; the third draws his knife, and picking out the
rotten eats that which was good. This may not unfitly be compared to three
sorts of men in our days, concerning the diversity of opinions in these times,
some swallow all, good, or bad; others cast all away, right, or wrong; the
wisest sort try all things, and keep only that which is good.

Affection marres judgment.
If the Faux of our Concupiscence give fire to the Gunpowder of our Appetite,
'twill blow up the parliament house of our Reason.

Five pound lost for want of faith.
A reverend Minister of this Land that had many Children, whom he would many
times ask what Callings they had most mind to; one of his younger Sons would
always say, that he would be a Merchant; Alas child, replied his Father, I am
a poor man, and shall not be able to give so much money as that Trade requires;
but still the boys mind was to be a Merchant: It happened one day that this
Minister and his Wife were invited to a Knights house to dinner, where there
were some Londoners of the Knights friends the same time; whereof one, as they
sat at dinner; asked if any at the Table knew of ever a hopeful boy, of
honest Parents, that were willing to be a Prentice; the Minister desired to
know what Trade that gentleman was of, who told him that he was a Merchant; O
Sir, said the Minister, you Merchants require so much with your Prentises that
it is not for poor men to think of putting a child to your trade; It Is true,
said the Merchant, we usually have good sums with our Prentises, but for my
part I would take a boy that were religiously bred with a small matter; I pray
Sir, replied the Minister, what do you mean by a small matter? why said the
other, I would take such a child as I have spoken of with twenty pound, though
we seldom take any under seven or eight score pound; well, after dinner this
good Minister singles out his Wife (who had well observed the Merchants offer)
and said to her; La ye wife, here is providence, this Merchant will take our boy
with twenty pound; yea, quoth his wife, you are ever talking of providence,
providence, it is a goodly piece of providence indeed; pray how should we come by
twenty pound? the poor man sneakes away with a flea in his ear, not willing
to tempt his wives patience any further, with his discourse about providence;
toward night the Minister and his wife took their leaves of the company, and
went home; where they found a Serving-man, who desiring to speak privately
with the Minister, delivered him a paper sealed up, with a token in it from his
Master, which the good man opening, found in it fifteen twenty shillings
pieces; he goes immediately to his wife, and shows her what the gentlemen had
sent them, telling her, that she had lost five pound clearly for want of Faith.

To be sensible that we are dead, is a sign of life.
An eminent Minister, who was a famous instrument of converting many Souls to
God, was wont to say, that for his own part, he had no other evidence in
himself of being in the state of Grace, then that he was sensible of his
deadness.

A passage of providence.
There was another very godly Minister whose means were so small that
oftentimes he was in great want of necessaries for his Family; one morning
being Market Day, his wife came to him as he was at his study, and frowardly
enough, ask't him for some money to buy their weekly provision; the poor man
answered, that he had not one penny; she cried out, then you and your children
must starve for ought I know; the Minister replied, that he hoped God would
provide for them, and persuaded his wife to send her maid into the Market;
what to do trow, cried she, except she had money? howsoever let her go, said
her husband; the wife replied, her maid should not go without money; the good
man urged his wife again, and again to let her maid go into the Market with
her hand-basket, as she was wont to do; at which importunity she sent her maid
as formerly, to make their markets, but without one penny of money; the wench to
satisfy her Master, went up and down in the Market a pretty while, till at
length a Countryman came to her, and asked if she were not Master such a ones
maid? who answered, she was; I pray then, said he, commend me to your Master,
and give him this small testimony of my love (which was twenty shillings) and
let him send some body to fetch two bushels of Wheat, which I have set up, at
such a shop for him; and I pray tell your Master, that though he knows me not,
yet I have cause to bless God for the good I have received by his Ministry;
so the maid bought such provision as she was wont to do, and carried home the
rest of the money to her Master and Mistress, and acquainted them with this
strange providence and seasonable mercy.

Between green heads and gray hairs, truth suffers much.
Inter juvenils judicium, and senile prejudieium veritas corrumpiter; What for
herbs in Summer, and tosts in Winter, a man cannot come by what he should have.

Upon a Bishop of Elies Translation to Canterbury.
Laetentur Caeli, transfertur ad Kentum ab Eli, Cujus in adventum, flent in
Kent millia centum

Rich Parsons need not preach.
A Gentleman meeting with a Ministers man of his acquaintance, asked him how
his Master did; Very well Sir, said the man; But Thomas, said the gentleman,
does thy Master preach still, as lustily as he was wont to do? yes Sir,
replied Thomas, he preaches now and then, though God be thanked he need not;
why need he not Thomas, quoth the gentleman? marry Sir, said Thomas, he is rich
enough now, and may give over preaching an't please him.

A Prayer against the Grace of God.
In Edward the Sixt's time there happened a sweating Sickness in England,
whereof multitudes dyed in a short time; the Scots that traded into the
Northern parts of this Kingdom, demanded what disease it was that so many
Englishmen dyed of? the Country people, that had never known any such
sickness before, knew not by what name to call it; but (as it is usual in
strange accidents) said, 'twas by the grace of God; this was presently carried
into Scotland, that the English dyed of a new disease, called, The Grace of
God; whereupon the Clergy assembled together, and composed a Collect, or Prayer
against the Grace of God, which was ordered to be used on Sundaies, and
Holy Days, in all the Churches of that Kingdom; 'twas in Latin thus: Deus,
and Sanctus Kintagernus, Sanctus Romanus, and Sanctus Andreas, libero nos hodie
a Gratia Dei, and a faeda morte qua Angli moriuntur; and in English it was
thus: God and Saint Mango, St. Roman, and St. Andrew shield us this day from
God his Grace, and from the foul death that the Englishmen dyed upon.

Four blessings came into England together.
Greek, Herefie, Turkey-cocks, and Beer,
Came into England all in one year.
Many cannot mind heaven, they are so taken up with the earth.
King Henry the fourth asked the Duke of Alva if he had observed the great
Eclips of the Sun which had lately happened; no (said the Duke) I have so much to
do on earth, that I have no leisure to look up to heaven.

Nothing got by neglecting opportunities.
One that had gathered together many of the Sybils Books, brought them to a
King of the Romans to sell, but demanding too much for them, as the King
thought, they could not agree; whereupon, the man burnt the one half of his
books, and demanded double the price he asked at first, for the remainder,
which the King refusing to give, he burnt half of the remaining part, and
doubled the price of all again; and then the King considering the value of
them, gave him the price. I am afraid, if we forbear to give the prayers that
God asks for the peace of Jerusalem, the time may come that we may be content
to give blood, and our estates too, and yet not do one half quarter so much,
good, as we may now by prayer. This was spoken in a Sermon, by an eminent
Minister of London, not long before our unhappy troubles.

Prayer more prevalent then an Army of men.
Mary Queen of Scots, that was Mother to King James, was wont to say, That she
feared Mr. Knockes Prayers, more then an Army of ten thousand men.

A good trial of bad servants.
Constantius the father of Constantine the great, when he was advanced to
honor, he had about him of his servants, some that were Pagans, and some that
were Christians, he (to discover who were Christians, and who were not) made an
Edict, That all those that were Christians, and would not worship the Heathen
Gods, should immediately depart from the Court; upon this, all the Pagans
flockt about him; And many false-hearted Christians also presented their
service to him; To whom he made this answer; nay, (says he) If you will be
false to your Gods, I will never trust you to be servants to me.

Ambassadors, whether sent from Kings or from God; must not be abused.
It is reported, that Rome was once destroyed to the ground, for some abuses
that were offered to an Ambassador that was sent unto it: And David we know,
never played any such harsh play in all his life, as he did to the Ammonites,
that despightfully used his Ambassadors, which he sent unto them, when they
shaved their beards, and cut their coats: It Is no less dangerous for any, to
abuse the Ministers of Jesus Christ, for they are Gods Ambassadors.

An ignorant Bishop.
When Popery was professed in Scotland, complaint was made to the Bishop of
Dankelden, of one called Deane Thomas, That he preached too often; whereupon
the Bishop sent for him, and charged him with what he had heard; The Deane
answered, that he preached but once upon the Sunday; why man, quoth the Bishop,
if thou that have but a small living, preach once a Sunday, what will the people
say of me, that have a great living, and preach not once a year? But prithee
Deane Thomas tell me what thou preachest so often upon? My Lord (said he) I
preach sometimes upon the Epistle, and sometimes upon the Gospel appointed for
the day, as it hits; Tush man (said the Bishop) thou art a fool; I Will tell thee
what thou shall do; when thou meetest with a good Pistle, or a good Ghospel,
which makes for the privilege of holy Kirk, preach that, and let the rest be;
My Lord (said the Deane) I have read both the old Law and the new, and I can
find none but good Pistles and Gospels in the Book of God, if you can show me
any that are bad, I will let them be: Now fie upon thee Deane Thomas (replied
the Bishop) what do thou mean to trouble thy self so with the Scriptures?
And clapping himself upon his breast, he swore, that for his part, he never
knew Old Law nor New: whereupon, it grew into a Proverb in Scotland (when they
would express a very ignorant man) you are like the Bishop of Dunkelden, that
knew neither old Law nor new.

A Knight that durst appear for a persecuted Truth and man.
One Douglas, a Scottish Knight, having heard Master Wiseheart preach some
things contrary to the corrupt Doctrine of those times, said, I know the
Governor and Cardinal shall hear of it; But say unto them (said the Knight)
I will avow it, and not only maintain the Doctrine, but also the person of
the Teacher, to the uttermost of my power.

Christians must learn self-denial.
Antoninus Pius when he undertook the Title of Emperor, said, he did then
forgo the property and interest of a private person: so when we take upon us
the Name of CHRIST, we should forgo all selfish and private respects.

A covetous King, and an ungrateful Guest.
Our Henry the seventh, with his whole Retinue, were Royally entertained by the
Earl of Oxford for three days together, at Henningham Castle in Essex; when
the King was to depart, the Earl had caused three hundred of his Servants,
Retayners, and Tenants, to stand in ranckes on either side the long Cawsey from
the Castle; when the King came to the end of the ranckes, and had taken notice
of so many proper men, all in one Livery, he turned to the Earl, and asked him
if all those men were his household servants: No, Sir, answered the Earl, it is
not for my ease, to keep so many in my house, saying, That most of them were
Reteyners: Well my Lord (quoth the King) I thank you for my good entertainment,
but I must not see my Laws broken before my face, my Attorney must speak with
you about this business: The King was as good as his word, for it cost the
Earl of Oxford 14000. Marks for his Composition, upon the penal Statute of
Reteyners.

Who is the most Fool?
A Cardinal that had a very fine staff, his fool was importunate, that he
would bestow it upon him; which the Cardinal did, upon condition, that he
should not part with it, but to one that was more fool then himself: The
Fool lays up his staff very carefully, till one day the Cardinal being sick,
and like to dye, the Fool came to him and asked him, if he were willing to dye:
O no, said the Cardinal, I am afraid to dye, because I do not know whether I
shall go, to Heaven or to Hell; The Fool hearing his Master say so, runs
presently and fetches the Staff, and gives it to the Cardinal again, saying
he had met with one now that was more fool then himself; For (says the
fool) you have spent your time so much in pomp and luxury, neglecting the
good of your soul, that now you are afraid to dye; Take your staff again, for
I know none that deserves it better.

It Is enough to repent the day before ones death.
A Jewish Rabby pressing the practice of repentance upon his Disciples,
exhorted them to be sure to repent the day before they dyed; one of them
replied, that the day of any man's death was very uncertain; Repent therefore
every day (said the Rabbin) and then you shall be sure to Repent the day
before you dye.

Mean Parentage no disparagement to virtuous men.
Seneca writing to a Knight of Rome, who was preferred for his valor, but yet
of mean parentage, for which he seemed to be troubled, Seneca cites him this
notable saying of Plato; That there is no King but is raised from those which
were servants; and that there is no servant but had some of his Ancestors
Kings; Though gold comes from the earth, none despises it; and although dross
comes from the gold, none regards it; A virtuous man coming from mean
Parentage, is truly honorable; and a vicious man coming from Noble
parentage, is justly contemptible.

Loving Wives.
Conradus, the third Emperor of that name, having besieged Guelph, Duke of
Bavaria; would yield to no other condition, but only to suffer such
Gentlewoman as were in the City, to come out of the Town, on foot, with such
things as they could carry about them: The Ladies and Gentlewomen resolved
(neglecting all other Riches) to carry their husbands, children, and the Duke
himself, on their backs: The Emperor perceiving the quaintness of their
device, took such pleasure at it, as weeping for joy, presently turned his
former inexorable rage and hatred to the Duke, into special love and favor.

Some sorrows are not to be expressed.
Psamneticus King of Egypt, being prisoner to Cambyses King of Persia, seeing
his own daughter passing before him in base array, being sent to draw water,
at which sight his friends about him wept, but himself could not be moved to
utter one word; presently after his son was carried to execution before his
face; neither did this move him to show any passion; but afterward, when a
friend of his was to suffer, then he tare his hair, and showed great sorrow;
being demanded the reason of this his carriage, he answered, That the loss of
a Friend might be expressed, but not the grief for the loss of a child.

Ingentes stupent,
A Painter being to represent the grief of the standers by at the Sacrifice of
Iphigenia, according to the interest and affection every one did bear to so
fair, so young, and so innocent a Lady; when he came to her Father (as if no
countenance were able to expresfe his sorrow) he drew him with a veyle over
his face. Cure leves loquuntur, ingentes stupent. Hence comes the Fiction of
Niobe, who having lost seven sons, and seven daughters, is feigned to be turned
into a stone.

Valor scorns any kind of base tricks.
Alexander being persuaded to make use of an advantage, which the darkness of
the night afforded him, to fall upon Darius; No, no, said he, it pleases me
not to hunt after night stolen Victories; Malo me fortunae poeniieat, quam
Victoriae pudeat; I had rather repent of my bad fortune, then be ashamed of an
ill gotten Victory.

Christian Fortitude.
The Tripartite History tells us of one Sames a Noble man, who had and
maintained a thousand servants of his own, yet was deprived of all his estate
by the King of Persia, and was compelled to serve one of the most abject and
basest of his own servants, to whom the King also gave his wife, that by this
means he might cause him to deny his faith: But he not at all moved, kept his
Faith entire, willingly suffering all this wrong and indignity for Christ.

Tyrants requests are commands.
A poor man of Sevill in Spain, having a fair and fruitful Peare-Tree, one
of the Fathers of the Inquisition desired some of the Fruit thereof: The poor
man, not out of gladness to gratify, but fear to offend, as if it were a sin
for him to have better fruit then his betters (suspecting that on his denial
the Tree might be made his own Rod, if not his Gallows) plucked up the Tree,
roots and all, and gave it to the Inquisitor.

A piece of Policy.
A stranger gave out, that he could teach Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracuse, a
way to discover any plot or practice that should be made against him, if
Dionysius would but bestow a good sum of money upon him: The Tyrant being
desirous to understand the truth of so necessary an art for his preservation,
sent for him; who told him, that there was no other skill in his Art, but that
he should deliver him a Talent, and then boast, that he had learned the use of
so unvaluable a secret; Dyonisius liking the invention gave him the Talent, and
by that means kept his enemies in awe.

An Usurers last Will and Testament.
One that had been a great and griping Usurer being near his end, was with
much ado overcome to make his Will, which he dictated to the Scrivener after
this manner: First, I bequeath my own Soul to the Devil, for being so greedy
of the muck of this world. Item, Next, I give my Wives Soul to the Devil, for
persuading me to this course of life. Item, I give the Parson of our Parishes
Soul to the Devil, because he did not show me the danger I lived in, nor
reprove me for it.

An admirable example of a selfedenying Christian.
Marcus Galeacius was a Courtier to the Emperor Charles the fifth, Nephew to
Pop^ Paul the fourth, and Marquess of Vico, which is one of the Paradises or
Naples, Naples the paradise of Italy, Italy of Europe, and Europe of the whole
earth; his Father was not only a Marquess, but in such favor with the
Emperor, as he was joined equally in Commission with the Viceroy of Naples,
to sway the Scepter of that Kingdom; his Mother of honorable Parentage, and
Sister to Paul the fourth; his Lady was Daughter to the Duke of Niceria, one of
the principal Peers of Italy; This Marquess Galeacius being brought to hear
a Sermon of Peter Martyrs, God was pleased so to work upon his spirit, that he
began to enter into serious thoughts whether his way were right or no, he being
at that time a professed Papist; then he began to take up a constant exercise
of reading the Scriptures, and to change his former company, and to make choice
of better; his Father was much moved against him, using him with sharpness;
his Lady wrought what she could by tears, complaints, and entreaties to take
him off from that way; the most part of the Noblemen in, and about Naples,
being either his kindred, or familiar friends, they continually resorted to
take him off, and to follow their old pleasures together, yet at last having
further light let into his Soul, to see not only the necessity of some truths
that he understood not before, but likewise of deli^ering himself from that
Idolatry that he apprehended himself defiled with; therefore his resolutions
were strong to leave the Court, and his father, and honors, yea and his
inheritance, to join himself to a true Church of God, and according to this
resolution he went away; much means were used to call him back, great offers
of riches and preferments to draw him; his children hung about him with
doleful cries, his friends standing about him with watery eyes, which so
wrought upon his tender heart (he being of a most loving and sweet disposition)
that, as he has often said, he thought that all his bowels rolled about within
him, and that his heart would presently have burst, and he should there have
instantly dyed; but he denied himself in all, and chose rather to live in a
mean condition where he might enjoy God, and the peace of his conscience, then
to have the riches, glory, pleasures of Italy, and of the Emperors Court.

A Judgment upon perjury.
Vladislaus King of Hungary having concluded a peace with Amurath the Turkish
Emperor, which was confirmed by a solemn oath on both sides; afterward by
the persuasion of some Cardinals, Vladislaus brake his engagement, and suddenly
made war upon the Turk; in the first set Battle the Turkish Army had the
worst, for a great part of the day; at which Amurath pulling the Articles of
the peace out of his bosom, and lifting up his eyes to heaven, said, O Jesus
Christ, if thou be a God, as these Christians say thou art, Revenge this
injury offered to thee and me, and punish these Truce Breakers; which words
were no sooner spoken, but the battle and courage of the Christians began to
abate, Vladislaus himself was slain, and all his Army discomfited.

A text well improved.
One preaching upon Number. 22. 30. Am not I thine Ass, etc. raised these four
solid and profitable Doctrines.

1 That the silliest, and simplest, being wronged, may justly speak in their
own defense.

2 That the worst men have a good title to their own goods, for though Balaam
was a Sorcerer, yet the Ass confesses twice that he was his.

3 That they who have done many good offices, and fail in one, are often not
only unrewarded for former services, but punished for that one offense.

4 That when the Creatures, formerly officious to serve us, start from their
former obedience, man ought to reflect on his own sin as the sole cause
thereof.

Delight in sinning.
Plutarch reports of one who would not be resolved of his doubts, because he
would not lose the pleasure in seeking for resolution; like to him that would
not have his Physician to remove the thirst he felt in his Ague, because he
would not lose the pleasure of drinking; and like those that would not be freed
from their sins, because they would not lose the pleasure of sinning.

A wise answer to a foolish people.
When the Thracians told Agesilaus that they had Canonized him for a God, Have
you power (says he) to make Gods of whom you please? If you have, pray make a
god of one of your selves, and when I see what good he has thereby, I will
thank you for your kindness.

A notable act of charity.
Our King Richard the first being wounded in the arm with an Arrow, whereof he
dyed within a few days; finding himself past recovery, he caused the party
that had wounded him, to be brought into his presence, who being asked what
moved him to do this fact? answered, That King Richard had killed his Father,
and two of his Brothers with his own hand, and therefore would do it, if it
were to be done again; upon this insolent answer, every one looked the King
should have censured him to some terrible punishment, when contrary to their
expectations, in a high degree of charity, he not only freely forgave him, but
gave a special charge he should be set at liberty, and that no man should dare
to do him the least hurt, commanding besides, that a hundred shillings should
be given him; an act that well showed he had been at the holy Land, or rather
indeed that he was going to it.

A good speech of Constantine.
When Constantine the Emperor was told that there was no means to cure his
Leprosy, but by bathing his body in the blood of Infants, answered; Malo
semper aegrotare quam tali remedio convalescere; I had rather not be cured,
then use such a remedy.

Men of great estates and eminency brought to great wants and extremity
The victorious Emperor Henry the fourth, who had fought two and fifty pitched
Battles, fell to that poverty before he dyed, that he was forced to petition to
be a Prebend in the Church of Spire, to maintain him in his old age; and
Procopius reports of King Guillimer, who was sometimes a potent King of the
Vandals, that he was so low brought, as to entreat his friend to send him a
Sponge, a loaf of Bread, and a Harp; a Sponge to dry up his tears; a loaf of
Bread to maintain his life; and a Harp to solace himself in his misery; and
Philip de Comines reports of a Duke of Exeter, who though he had married Edward
the fourths Sister, yet he saw him in the Low Countries begging barefoot. So
also Bellisarius, the only man living in his time for glorious victories,
riches, and renown, having his eyes put out, was led at last in a string,
crying, Date obulum Bellisario, Give a half penny to poor Bellisarius.

A censure of a curious woman.
Socrates writes of one Pambo, who seeing a woman curiously dressed and
adorned, burst forth into tears, because she took so much pains to go to
Hell; and was more careful of her face to please men, then of her heart to
please the Lord.

Prosperity is subject to pride.
Gregory Nazianzen reports of himself, that when any thing fell out
prosperously to him, he used to read the Lamentations of Jeremiah, to keep his
mind humble.

A happy strife.
Zerxes making war upon the Athenians, and Themistocles, and Aristides,
Citizens of Athens, being at mortal enmity, yet when Themistocles was chosen
General, Aristides went to him, saying; That it was now time for them to leave
their strife, and to strive which of them should do best in saving their
Country, whether you in ruling and commanding, or I in counselling and obeying;
to which Themistocles replied: Since Aristides you have the honor in beginning
so commendable a strife betwixt us, I will endeavor to exceed you in the
continuance of it.

God usually pays sinners with their own coin.
Hatto Archbishop of Ments, having assembled a great number of poor people in
a time of Dearth into diverse Barnes, under pretense of releeving them, caused
the Barnes to be set on fire, saying, they were the Rats that eat up the food
of the Land; but within a while, he himself was eaten up of Rats, from whom by
no means he could defend himself.

The noble and Christian courage of Agrippa.
Josephus has a relation of Agrippa, how upon a time he invited Cajus the
Emperor to a Supper, and gave the Emperor so great content in his
entertainment, that he bade him ask what he would of him; Agrippa (though he
knew it was to the hazard of his life and fortunes) made this request; I
beseech you Sir, give commandment that the Statue which you have charged
Petronius to erect in the Temple of the Jews, may never be set up there. Many
Christians would hardly go so far in venturing themselves, either for Church
or Commonwealth, as Agrippa here did for the Jews.

Hostility converted into courtesy.
Alexander coming with his Army into India, Taxiles an Indian King met him,
and saluted him after this manner: Alexander, why should we strive one with
another, except it be for water, or such necessary commodities as we cannot
live without? if it be for money that thou come, if I be richer then thou, I
am ready to give to thee; if thou have more then I, I will not think scorn to
receive from thee; Alexander being much pleased with his speech, embracing him
said, Think thou this meeting of ours can be without fighting? No, no; for l
will fight and contend with thee in honesty and courtesy, because thou shall
not exceed me in bounty and liberality.

A word fitly spoken.
A company of near friends dining together one Sabbath day, one that was at
Table (to prevent impertinent discourse) said, That it was a question whether
we should all go to Heaven or no; which struck them all into a dump, and
caused every one to enter into a serious consideration with themselves; one
thought, if any of this company go to Hell it must be I, and so thought
another, and another, and indeed so thought almost every one then present, as
well servants that waited, as those that sat at table, as it was afterward
acknowledged; and (through the mercy and blessing of God) this speech so wrought
upon the spirits of most of them, that it proved the first isntrumental means
of their conversion.

A true Nobleman.
Eusebius tells of a Nobleman called Vetius Epagathus, who appearing in the
cause of Christians, not being able to bear the unjust dealings he saw against
the Christians, he demanded that he might be heard in defense of the Brethren;
but all that sat at the Tribunal being against it, because he was a
Nobleman, the President asking him, if he were a Christian, he plainly and
publikly confessed it, and so was taken in amongst the Martyrs, being afterward
called the Christians Advocate.

A just reward of tyranny.
The Governor of Transsilvania used to hang his Cap upon a Pole, which was set
up on the top of a Castle, commanding all that passed by to worship it; which
one Tellius refusing, the Governor commanded his Son to be tied to a stake,
and an apple to be set upon his head, enjoining his father to shoot at the
apple with an arrow, threatening him, that if he either hit his Son, or missed
the apple, he should dye for it; the poor man (by providence) hit the apple,
and so was free; the Governor asked him why he brought two arrows being to
use but one; who answered, that if he had mist the mark with the one, he
intended to have shot at him with the other, which he did afterward, and slew
him.

Nine Arguments against toleration of all Religions.
A worthy Gentleman of these times has given nine Arguments against Toleration
of all Religions, which are as follows:

1 If liberty be given to Error, it will beget licentiousness in erring. 2
This liberty is not the Magistrates to give. 3 The Rule of Truth must not be
bent. 4 If Laws be made for Errors, 'twill increase them. 5 To make unlawful
things lawful, savours of Popish Dispensations. 6 Toleration of Errors by
Law, makes personal errors become National Sins, and then the next is
National Judgments. 7 The Magistrate ought to be as tender of Truth, as men
are of their Consciences. 8 This Toleration of all Opinions, is a charitable
Impiety, and an impious Charity. 9 To be bound to Truth, is the greatest
Liberty, and to be free from it, is the greatest slavery.
Silence in Gods cause dangerous.
Luther professed, That he had rather be accounted any thing, then be accused
of wicked silence in Gods cause; let me be accounted, says he, proud,
covetous, yea a murderer, yea guilty of all vices, so I be not proved to be
guilty of wicked silence, while the Lord and his cause do suffer.

A good Conscience preferred before worldly glory.
Flavianus Clemens one of Domitians Courtiers, was so much in favor with that
Emperor, as he intended to make his Son his Successor in the Empire, but this
good Flavianus, rather then he would break the Peace of his Conscience in the
matter of his Religion, he was content to bear the turning of this great love
the Emperor bore him into as great hatred, so as he hated him to death, and
oppressed his whole House.

Honors change manners.
Two Scholars that were long brought up together, agreed, that which of them
came first to preferment should help the other; one of them came afterward to
be a Bishop, the other seeing himself forgotten, or at least neglected, came
to the Bishop, desiring him to remember his promise; the Bishop made as if he
knew him not: not know me, replied the other! I am such a one; Oa said the
Bishop, it is no marvel I should not knowyou, for to tell you true, I scarce
know my self.

A good help for the Pope at a dead lift.
A Friar Minorite wrote a Book to prove that the Pope might be Excommunicate,
as well as any other man; to which purpose he used this Dilemma; either the
Pope is a Brother, or he is not a Brother; if he be a Brother, then it is
certain he may be Excommunicate by a Brother; if he be not a Brother, why does
he say, Our Father? at which the Pope was very much troubled; but a merry
Courtier that waited on him said, That it was an easy matter to avoid the
Friars Dilemma; the Pope desired to know how; Why Sir, said the Courtier Vos
nunquam dicite Pater Noster, and solutum est argumentum; Let your Holiness
never say the Lords Prayer, and there is an end of an old Song.

The sinful examples of great men, are of dangerous consequence in the world.
Austin in his Confessions, speaking of Poetical Fictions, says, that the
Devil drew men on cunningly to wickedness by them; for whereas the Poets
feigned such and such men who were sometimes famous in the world, to be gods,
and did cry them up for Deities, and attributed to them filthy lusts, and
wicked uncleanness, it came to pass, that such as delighted in such ways,
would bless themselves in this, that they did not imitate base men, but the
celestial gods; Thus the Devil gets Sin countenanced in the world, by the
examples of great ones; the meaner sort thinking themselves safe, if they have
but men of eminency for their pattern.

A fit Meditation for every man.
Franciscus Xaverius writing to John the third King of Portugal, gave him this
wholesome counsel; That he would every day, for a quarter of an hour, meditate
upon that Divine sentence; Wbat shall it profit a man to win the world, and
lose his own soul? And that he would seek of God the right understanding of
it; and that he would make it the close of all his prayers, the repetition of
these words, What shall it profit a man, etc.

A Miracle in our days.
Mistress Hony-wood of Kent, an ancient and religious Gentlewoman, being in
great distress of Conscience for want of assurance, often crying out, that she
was certainly damned; one day, as she was in conference with some godly
Divines, who labored what they could to comfort her, and satisfy her spirit,
she still persisted in her dispairing expressions; when the Ministers were
about to depart, she called for a cup of Wine for them, which being brought,
she drank to one of them a Glass of the Wine, and as soon as she had done,
in an extreme passion she threw the Venice Glass against the ground, saying,
As sure as this Glass will break, so surely am I damned; the Glass rebounded
from the ground without any harm, which one of the Ministers suddenly caught
in his hand, and said, Behold a Miracle from Heaven to confute your unbeleefe,
tempt God no more, tempt God no more; both the Gentlewoman, and all the company
were mightily amazed at this strange accident; and all glorified God for what
was done, and the Gentlewoman, through the Grace of God, received much comfort,
and lived and dyed full of peace and assurance. This happened in King James his
time, and the whole Story was related to him in a Sermon, immediately after it
was done; and so also was it related by another Preacher at Paul's Cross.

Kings never want Laws to do what they list.
Cambyses desirous to marry his own sister, asked his Magi, whether it were
lawful or no for him to do so? They answered, that indeed they had no Law for
the Brother to marry the Sister; but they had another Law, whereby it was
lawful for the Kings of Persia to do what they listed.

The Churches treasure.
Saint Laurence the Martyr being demanded by Galienus the Tyrant, where he had
bestowed the Treasure of the Church? he told him that within three days he
would resolve him; in the mean time he gathered together a great number of
poor Christians, saying, that these were the riches of the Church.

He that serves God by a Proxy, shall go to Heaven by an Atturny.
There was a Merchant that seldom or never went to Church himself, but used
to send his Wife to pray for them both; it happened that they both dyed much
about the same time, and coming to Heaven Gates, Saint Peter let the Woman
only in, saying, That as she went to Church for both, so she should be received
into Heaven for both.

A sinful life followed with a woeful death.
One Hermanus a great Courtier in the Kingdom of Bohemia, being at point of
death did most lamentably cry out; That he had spent more time in the Palace
then in the Temple, and that he had added to the ryotousnesse and vices of the
Court, which he should have sought to have reformed; and so dyed, to the
horror of those that were about him.

A Bishops blessing not worth a half penny.
There was a poor blind man that sat begging by the Highway, who hearing
that a Bishop was coming, the old man bestirred himself with great expectation
of a bountiful reward from his Lordship, crying, Good my Lord, good my Lord,
bestow some small piece of silver upon this poor blind man; for Gods sake, my
Lord, one half penny, to this blind man; but, on rode the Bishop, and not a
farthing could the poor man get; who perceiving that the Bishop was past, he
cried to him, that if he would give him no money, he would yet give him his
blessing; (the Bishops blessing in old time was a goodly matter) which the
Bishop hearing, turned his Horse and went back to the blind man, bidding him
kneel down, and he would give him his blessing (which was, to lay his hand
upon his head, and pray God to bless him) the blind man fell upon his knees,
but instantly starts up again, and said; 'Twas no great matter whether he did
bless him or no, for he knew if it were worth a half penny, his Lordship
would not part with it.

Remarkable Circumstances about the Kings death.
King Charles was beheaded in that very place where the first blood was shed in
the beginning of our late troubles, for a company of Citizens returning from
Westminster, where they had been quietly petitioning for Justice, were set upon
by some of the Court, as they past by White Hall; in which tumult diverse were
hurt, and one or more slain, just by the Banqueting House, in the place where
the Scaffold stood on which he suffered; It Is further remarkable, that he
should end his days in a Tragedy at the Banqueting House, where he had seen,
and caused many a Comedy to be acted upon the Lords Day.

Men of public spirits would not outlive their Countries prosperity.
When Titus had taken and sacked Jerusalem, the Priests came to him and begged
their Lives; that merciful Prince, and darling of Mankind, caused them to be
slain, as degewretches, that would desire to outlive their Temple and Religion.

One good turn requires another.
Augustus Caesar being requested by an old Soldier of his, to be present at
the hearing of a cause he had; Augustus answered, That he would send one in his
room; the Soldier replied, O Emperor, I sent no Deputy to fight in thy
quarrel at Philippi, but went my self; whereat Augustus blushing, yielded to
his request.

The lively picture of our times.
When God raised up Luther, Melancthon, Zwinglius, and diverse other Worthies to
be the Reformers of his Church; At the same time, the enemy of Mankind raised
up the Anabaptists, to be the disturbers of his Church; And the more active
Luther and the rest were, in laboring a Reformation, according to the Gospel;
the more violent were, Thomas Muntzer, Storch, Knipper Dolling, and the rest of
that Phanicall frenzy crew, in raising tumults and confusions, and disgraceing
those worthy instruments of God, railing upon them, and upon whatsoever they
did, toward the work of Reformation; crying out, that Luther was worse then
the Pope, and that he and his Party savoured nothing but the flesh; and because
these madheaded Anabaptists could find nothing in the written Word, to defend
their Errors, and the tumults which they raised, they fly to Revelations, and
Inspirations; hereupon every Fish-monger begins to boast of the Spirit, feign
revelations after the example of Storch, and Muntzer, and the Pulpit is open to
every Cobbler and Tinker; they scoffed at the public Sermons of the reformed,
inveighed against the Lutheran Faith, as being void of good works; Muntzer,
the chief trumpet of these uproares, proclaims openly, that he was raised up
by the command of God, for the punishment of wicked Princes, and altering of
politic Government; his usual subscriptions to his Letters was, Thomas
Muntzer, the Servant of God against the ungodly.

Nine Pillars for the supporting of Faith.
David has couched nine several Arguments in one Verse, for the strengthening
of his faith in God; as we may see, Psalm. 18. 2. 1 Jehovah, 2 My Rock, 3 My
Fortress, 4 My Deliverer. 5 My God. 6 My strength. 7 My Buckler. 8 The Horn
of my salvation. 9 My high Tower.

The undaunted spirit of Ignatius.
Ignatius, when he was in his enemies hands, and ready to suffer Martyrdom, he
used this notable speech; I care (says he) for nothing visible, or invisible,
so I may get Christ; let fire, the Cross, the letting out of wild beasts upon
me, breaking of my bones, the tearing of my members, the grinding of my whole
body, and the torments of the Devil come upon me, so be it I may get Christ.

More Devils in the Country then in the City.
A Holy man traveling to a great and populous Town, spyed a great company of
Devils in every field, and about every house in the Country as he went; but
coming to the City, he found only one Devil there, who sat on the pinnacle of
the highest Church; this Holy man conjuring him down, demanded of him the
reason why there were so many Devils in the Country, and but one in the City?
He answered, That one was enough in the City, because there was so much
wickedness in it, that they were all his own already, and he only kept watch
least there should be any alteration amongst them; but in the Country, the
people were so poor, industrious, and honest, that they were enforced to
employ their greatest numbers and pains to gain them.

Confess and be saved.
The Duke of Roan visiting his Common Goal, demands of the first Prisoner he
saw, wherefore he lay there? he answered, for no offense that ever he had
committed, but upon malice; the like answer made the second, and the third, and
so all the rest; but coming to the last, he answered; That he lay there for
his offenses of Felony, and Murder, expecting death, as he had deserved. The
Duke liking his humble confession, bade the Jailer take away that wicked fellow
from those holy and innocent men, saying, He was enough to infect them all; by
which means he only escaped.

No matter by whom, so Gods work be done.
Matthew Langi Archbishop of Salzburg said, 'Twas true, that many things were
greatly amiss in the Church of Rome, and that the whole Clergy stood in need
of Reformation; but that such a Rascally Monk as Martin Luther should be the
Author of such a work, was intolerable.

A good use of a wooden god.
Diagoras having something to boil, and wanting other fuel, he took his
wooden god Hercules, saying, It is now the time of Hercules; that as thou have
served Euristheus in twelve Labors, so thou should serve me in the
thirteenth; and so threw him into the fire, as a piece of wood.

Three good questions for every man to ask himself every night.
Seneca reports of one Sexius, who every night when he should take his rest,
would ask himself three questions; 1 What evil have thou healed this day? 2
What vice have thou stood against? 3 In what part art thou bettered?

It Is not Blood, but Faith that makes men noble.
Romanus the Martyr, who was borne of Noble Parentage, entreated his
Persecutors that they would not favor him for his Nobility; for it is not
(said he) the blood of my Ancestors, but my Christian Faith that makes me noble.

An EPITAPH upon Duke Hamilton.
HE that three Kingdoms made one flame,
Blasted their beauty, burnt the frame,
Himself now here in ashes lies,
A part of this great Sacrifice
Here all of Hamilton remains,
Save what the other world contains.
But (Reader) it is hard to tell,
Whether that world be Heaven, or Hell;
A Scotch-man enters Hell at's birth,
And scapes it when he goes to earth,
Assured no worse a Hell can come,
Then that which he enjoyed at home.
How did the Royal workman botch,
This Duke half English, and half Scotch,
A Scot an English Earldome fits,
As purple does your Marmuzets;
Yet might he thus disguised (no less)
Have slipped to Heaven in's English dress,
But that he, in hope of life, became
All Scot, and quit his English claim.
This mystic Proteus too, as well
Might cheat the Devil, escape his Hell,
Since to those pranks he pleased to play,
Religion ever paved the way;
Which he did to a Faction tie,
Not to reform, but crucify:
'Twas he that first Alarmed the Kirk,
To this preposterous bloody work,
Upon the King, to place Christ's Throne,
A step and footstool to his own;
Taught zeal a hundred tumbling tricks,
And Scriptures twined with Politics;
The Pulpit made a Juglers Box,
Set Law and Gospel in the Stocks,
As did old Buchanon, and Knox,
In those days when (at once the Pox
And) Presbyters a way did find
Into the world, to plague Mankind;
'Twas he patcht up the new Divine,
Part Calvine, and part Cataline;
Could too, transform (without a Spel)
Satan into a Gabriel;
Just like those Pictures, which we paint,
On this side Fiend, on that side Saint:
Both this, and that, and every thing
He was, for, and against the King;
Rather then he his ends would miss,
B^tray'd his Master with a Kiss,
And buried in one common Fate,
The glory of our Church, and State;
The Crown too, levelled on the ground;
And having rook'd all parties round,
Faith it was time then to be gone,
Since he had all his business done:
Next on the fatal Block expired,
He to this Marble-Cell retired;
Where all of Hamilton remains,
But what Eternity contains.
The old Cardinal did not like the new way of choosing Popes.
An old Sicilian Cardinal, after long absence, coming to the election of a
new Pope, and expecting that incessant Prayers, as of old, should have been
made to God for the directing of the choice of Christ's Vicar; and finding now,
naught but canvasing, promising, an^ threatenings for Voices; Ad hunc modum
(faith he) fiunt Romani Pontifices? Are the Popes of Rome chosen after this
manner? He would stay no longer in the Conclave, but away he went, and never
saw Rome after.

The Low Countries compared to a Cow.
The State of the Low Countries has been resembled to a Cow, the King of
Spain spurring her; the Queen of England feeding her; the Prince of Orange
milking her; the Duke of Anjoy pulling her back by the tail, but she befoul'd
his fingers.

The Counsel of Constance.
At the Counsel of Constance, Anno 1414. were assembled Sigismund the
Emperor, four Patriarchs, twenty nine Cardinals, three hundred forty six
Archbishops, and Bishops; five hundred sixty four Abbots, and Doctors; six
hundred Secular Princes, and Noblemen; four hundred and fifty common Harlots;
six hundred Barbers; three hundred and twenty Minstrils, and Jesters.

Of one that had never troubled God with his prayers before that time.
A man being sick, and afraid of death, fell to his prayers, and to move God,
to hear him; told him, that he was no common Beggar, and that he had never
troubled him with his prayers before, and if he would but hear him at that
time, he would never trouble him again.

England and Scotland seldom long at peace.
That which Vellejus said of the Romans and Carthaginians, may as truly be said
of the English and Scotch; That almost for three hundred years, there was,
either Bellum inter eos, aut belli preparatio, aut infida pax: Either War, or
preparation to War, or a false Peace between them.

What to do in time of danger.
The Duke of Saxony preparing an Army against the Bishop of Magdenburg, which
he hearing of, he fell to prayer, reforming his Church, and amending what was
amiss; which one of his friends perceiving, and saw that he made no
preparation for his defense, asked him, if he did not hear what the Duke
intended? yea, said he, I do hear it well enough; Sed ego sanabo Ecclesiam
meam, and Deus pugnabit pro me; I will reform my Church, and then God will
fight for me.

A Rule for Kings.
Theopompus being demanded by what means a King might safely keep his Kingdom,
answered, by giving his friends free liberty o^ speech.

Riches the bane of the Church.
Bishop Jewel records out of Joannis Parisensis and others, that when
Constantine the Great advanced Bishops, and endowed the Church with Lands, and
great temporal Possessions, there was a voice of Angels heard in the air,
saying, Hodie venenum funditur in Ecclesiam; This day is poison poured out upon
the Church.

Germany baned by three things.
Luther Prophesied that there were three things which would be the bane of
Christian Religion in Germany; First, Forgetfulness of Gods great blessing in
restoring the Gospel again to them; Secondly, Security, which, said he,
already reigns every where; Thirdly, Worldly wisdom, which would bring all
things into good order, and undertake to cure the public distempers, with
wicked Counsels.

Learning too low for Noble-mens Sons.
A great Peer of this Land (not guilty of ^uch Learning, nor any great friend
to it) ^^id, it was enough for Noble-mens Sons to wind their Horn, and carry
their Hawke ^^ire, and that Study and Learning was for Children of meaner
rank; to whom it was justly replied, That then Noblemen must be content that
their Children may wind their Horns, and carry their Hawks, while meaner
men's Sons do weild the affairs of State.

The Earl of Castle-havens miserable Comforters.
When the Earl of Castle-haven was to be beheaded, there were sent two great
learned Deanes and Doctors of Divinity to his Lodgeing, to pray with him before
his death; who calling for a Common Prayer-booke, they read over the Letany to
him, which was all the Prayers they used with him; the Earl much grieved and
discontented therewith, brake forth into these speeches: Alas, what do these
Doctors mean to trouble themselves, or me, in praying to God to deliver me
from Lightning and Tempest, from Plague, Pestilence, and Famine, from Battle
and Murder, and from sudden death; who am now presently to dye, and lose my
head? Or what does their praying, to preserve all that travel by Land or by
Water, all Women laboring with Child, all sick Persons, and young children*
concern either me, or my present condition, who am now ready to perish and b^
destroyed miserable Comforters are they. This he spoke with tears in his eyes,
and thereupon desired the Company that was with him to go into another room
from these Deanes, where he made such an heavenly fervent extemporary Prayer,
pertinent to his present dying condition, as ravished all the Auditors.

An Imposture handsomely discovered.
The Duke of Gloucester being with Henry the Sixth at Saint Albans, there was a
great brute up and down the Town of a famous Miracle wrought at that very
time, upon a poor man, by virtue of St. Albans Shrine; which was the restoring
of fight to this poor man, who, as he said, was born blind, the Miracle was
so noysed in the Town, and in every man's mouth, that the Duke desired to see
the man that was thus cured of his blindness; who being brought to him, he
asked him if he were borne blind? who answered him, that he was; and can you
now see (said the Duke) yea, I thank God, and St. Alban, says the beggar,
Then tell me, says the Duke, what color is my Gown of? the beggar readily
told him the color; and what color is such a man's Gown? the beggar told him
presently, and so also of many others. Then said the Duke, go you counterfeit
Knave, if you had been borne blind, and could never see till now, how come you
so suddenly to know this difference of colors? and thereupon, instead of an
Alms, he caused him to be whipped openly up and down the Town.

Jesuitical juggeling.
When the House at Blackfriars in London fell, and had killed about a hundred
Persons, and wounded above as many more, who were Roman Catholics met there to
hear a Popish Priest preach, which was in the year 1623. upon a Sabbath day,
and the fifth of November (the Powder Treason day) according to the Romish
account; the Jesuits presently published a Book, wherein they set forth this
accident, with all the Circumstances, as a Judgment of God fallen upon a
company of Heretical Protestants and Puritans, as they were met together in a
Conventicle; All this was, that the poor deluded people might not come to the
knowledge of this remarkable Judgment, lest it should startle them in their
profession of Popery, and that it might confirm them in their indignation
against the Protestant Religion; and thus they make lies their refuge.

A remarkable Judgment upon a wicked Counselor.
It was a very remarkable piece of Divine Justice which befell the Lord
Hastings, by whose advice Richard the third put to death the Earl of Rivers,
and Gray, with others at Pomfret in the North, without either trial of Law, or
any offense given; It pleased God, that this very Hastings, who counseled the
Tyrant to take away the heads of these Noblemen thus unjustly, lost his own
head, the very same day and hour, in the Tower of London, in the same lawless
manner, and by the command of the same lawless monster.

What cast Lucifer out of Heaven, and Adam out of Paradise.
God (says one) had three Sons, Lucifer Adam, and Christ; The first aspired to
be like God in power, and was therefore thrown down from Heaven; The second,
to be like him in knowledge, and was therefore deservedly driven out of Eden;
The third did altogether imitate, and follow him in his mercy, and by so doing
obtained an everlasting inhe^itance.

The worlds Hypocrisy.
Omnia religiosa nun^ ridentur; He that makes Conscience of his ways, is
accounted one of God Almighties Fools; we are all (in effect) become Comedians
in Religion, and while we act in gesture, and voice Theological virtues, in
all the courses of our lives, we renounce our persons, and the parts we play.

Stay the Bells, the man is alive yet, and like to plague you worse.
While Martin Luther was yet living, some Popish Priests published a Book in
Italian, relating the strange and fearful manner of his death; thus the story
lies. A stupendous and rare Miracle which God, ever to be praised, showed
about the filthy death of Martin Luther, a man damned both in body and soul,
so that it conduced to the glory of Jesus Christ, and the amendment and comfort
of godly men. When Martin Luther was sick, he desired the Lords Body to be
communicated to him, which he receiving, dyed presently; when he saw that he
must dye, he requested that his body might be set upon the Altar, and be adored
with Divine worship; but God, to put an end to his horrible errors, by a great
Miracle warned the people to abstain from that impiety which Luther invented;
for when his body was laid in the Grave, suddenly so great a stir and terror
arose, as if the foundations of the earth were shaken together; whereupon all
the Funeral trembling, were astonished, and after a while lifting up their
eyes, beheld the sacred Host appearing in the air; wherefore with great
devotion of heart, they placed the most sacred Host upon the holy Altar,
whereupon the fearful noise ceased; but in the night following a loud noise,
and rattling, much shriller then the former, was heard about Luthers Sepulcher,
which awaked all the City, terrified them, and almost killed them with
astonishment; In the morning, when they opened the Sepulcher, they found
neither his body, nor the bones, nor any of the clothes; but there came a
sulphurous stink out thereof, which almost over-came the standers by. By this
Miracle many were so amazed, that they amended their lives, for the honor of
the Christian Faith, and the glory of Jesus Christ.

A fair confutation of a foul Lie.
When this Lie came printed into Germany, Luther confuted it with his own
hand, after this manner. I Martin Luther do profess and witness under my
own hand, that I on the one and twentieth day of March received this Figment,
full of anger and fury concerning my death, and that I read it with a joyful
mind, and cheerful countenance; and but that I detest the Blasphemy, which
ascribes an impudent Lie to the Divine Majesty; for the other passages, I
cannot but with great joy of heart laugh at Satan's, the Popes, and their
accomplices hatred against me; God turn their hearts from their Diabolical
maliciousness; but if God decree not to hear my prayers for their sin unto
death, the Lord grant that they may fill up the measure of their sins, and
solace themselves to the full with their Libells, full fraught with such like
Lies.

God is not always alike present with his most faithful Servants.
A very eminent Preacher of this Land being on a time at a Noble-mans house in
the Country, was entreated to preach on a week day at a Lecture, then kept at
that place, which he did; but was so extremely bound and straightened in his
spirit, that he had almost no utterance, nor enlargement at all, wherewith he
was exceedingly dejected; in the afternoon he rode away from that place to
another Town not far off, in company with an eminent Divine, who had heard
him that day; all the way as they rode, he did nothing but complain of Gods
hand in straitning him that day more then ever; but preaching the same Sermon
the next day, God so assisted him, that he never had more enlargement.

Upon a Gentlewoman that well deserved it.
She that now takes her rest within this Tomb,
Had Rachels face, and Leahs fruitful womb,
Abigals wisdom, Lidya's faithful heart,
With Martha's care, and Mary's better part.
Luthers constancy to the Truth.
Martin Luther was ever constant in known truth, from the confession whereof
he could never be removed with threats or promises, so that when upon a time
one Papist demanded of another, Why do you not stop the man's mouth with Gold
and Silver? the other answered, This German beast cares not for money.

Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning.
There lived lately at Tilbury in Essex, one Master Vere* elder Brother to the
late Lord Vere; this Gentleman fell into great trouble of mind, yea he grew to
such a degree of despair, as that he rejected all the comforts, that many
godly Ministers, and other Christian friends endeavored to apply to him; nay
he would not permit them to pray with him, nor in his Family; neither would he
suffer either, Reading, Singing, or praying to be used in his house for a long
time, though formerly he had both liked and used all such Christian exercises;
and that which is most strange, he sent to all the godly Ministers and
Christians that dwelt near him; to desire them for Gods sake, that they would
not pray for him, saying, that it would but increase his torments in Hell; in
this sad condition he continued a long time, till walking one day in his
chamber alone, he happened unawares to sing a line or two of a Psalm to
himself; at which instant he began to feel some inward refreshing in his
spirit, and by little and little he grew abundantly filled with heavenly
comforts, in such a measure (as he told all that came to him) that it was
impossible for any tongue to utter, or heart to imagine, that did not feel
them; Thus he continued about three quarters of a year, enjoying heaven upon
earth, and then he dyed in the arms of Jesus Christ.

Virtue and valor is the best nobility.
One Verdugo a Spanish Commander in Frizeland, of very mean birth, but an
excellent Soldier; being at a great Feast with certain of the Spanish
Nobility, and sitting uppermost at Table, as it belonged to him there, being
Governor of that Country; some of them began to murmr that he took the
place before them, to which he thus replied; Gentlemen (quoth he) question not
my birth, nor who my father was, I am the Son of my own desert and fortune; if
any man dares do as much as I have done, let him come and take the Tables end
with all my heart.

Want of learning in Noblemen to be lam^nted.
Sigismond King of the Romans greatly complained at the Counsel of Constance
of his Princes and Nobility, that there was not one of them that could answer
an Ambassador who made a speech in Latin; whereat Lodowick the Elector
Palatine took such a deep disdain in himself, that with tears he lamented
his want of learning, and presently returning home, began (though very old) to
learn his Latin tongue.

The means Julian used to destroy Christian Religion.
The Apo^^ate Julian, who made it his business to destroy Christian Religion,
betook himself to the use of two principal means; the one whereof was
obstructing the ways of liberal Education, by putting down Schools of
Learning, that Christians being kept in ignorance might sooner be cheated of
their Faith, and less able to resist the Heathens Sophistry. The other was,
Indulgence to all kind of Sects and Heresies, in hope by countenancing them,
to create such a distraction amongst Christians, as should bring speedy
destruction, not only upon the Orthodox party, but upon the very profession of
Christianity.

Christ only inlightens the soul.
Were it not for the Sun it would be perpetual night in the world,
notwithstanding all the Torches that could be lighted; yea notwithstanding all
the light of the Moon and Stars; it is neither the Torch-light of Natural
parts, and Creature comforts, nor the Starlight of civil honesty, and common
gifts; nor the Moonlight of temporary faith, and formal profession, that can
make it day in the soul, till the Sun of righteousness arise and shine there.

In war policy is better then valor.
The Oracle of Apollo at Delphos, being demanded the reason why Jupiter should
be the chief of gods, since Mars was the best Soldier, made this answer; Mars
indeed is the most valiant amongst the gods, but Jupiter is the most wise,
concluding by this answer; That policy is of more force in Military affairs
then valor: Parui sunt arma for is, nisi sit consilium domi.

The qualities of a good Servant.
The first duty of a Servant, is willingness to learn whatsoever is
necessary; the second, faithfulness, in performing truly whatsoever belongs to
his duty; the third, carfulness, in seeking all honest means to profit his
Master; the fourth, silence in tongue, in not replying to his Masters speeches.

Men are easily drawn to vice, but hardly to virtue.
Calistes the Harlot said, she excelled Socrates, because when she was
disposed, she could draw away his Auditors from him; no marvel (says
Socrates) for thou allurest them to dishonesty, to which the way is ready; but
I do exhort them to virtue, whose way is hard to find.

The wonderful power of Prayer, even in our days.
At the beginning of our New England Plantation, our Countrymen were driven
into great streights, and one time especially above the rest; for the wind held
so contrary, that the long expected Ships, which should bring them necessaries
out of Old England, could not come to them, whereby they were brought almost to
extremity; And besides, it had not rained by the space of eleven weeks, which
made them despair of receiving any relief from the seed that they had sown:
In this sad condition, they kept a day of seeking the Lord by Prayer, and of
solemn humbling of themselves before him. Now mark the event; before they had
fully ended the business of the day, it pleased God to send them a gracious
rain, which so refreshed the parched earth, that they had a plentiful crop
from it; and the next morning three English Ships came into the Bay, which
abundantly supplied their wants.

Christ is All, and in All.
We have all things in Christ, and Christ is all things to a Christian; If we
be sick, he is a Physician: If we thirst, he is a Fountain: If our sins
trouble us, he is Righteousness; if we stand in need of help, he is mighty to
save; if we fear death, he is Life; if we be in darkness, he is Light; if we
desire Heaven, he is the Way; if we hunger, he is Bread.

Queen Elizabeth's godly answer about Tollerating of Popery.
The Emperor and almost all the Popish Princes of Christendom, interceding
with Queen Elizabeth, in the beginning of her reign, to Tolerate the Popish
Religion in her Dominions, and that she would suffer the Papists to have
Churches in Towns by the Protestants; she answered, That to let them have
Churches by the others, she could not, with the safety of the Commonwealth,
and without wounding of her honor and conscience; neither had she reason to
do it, seeing that England embraced no new Religion, nor any other then that
which Jesus Christ has commanded, that the Primitive and Catholic Church has
exercised, and the ancient Fathers have always with one voice, and one mind
approved. And to allow them to have diverse Churches, and diverse manners of
service; besides that, it is directly oppugnant to the Laws established by the
authority of the Parliament, it were to breed one religion out of another, and
draw the spirits of honest people into varieties; to nourish the designs of
the factious, to trouble Religion and the Commonwealth, and to confound humane
things with Divine, which would be ill in effect, and worse in example;
pernicious to her Subjects, and not assured at all to those to whom it should
be allowed.

An excellent custom amongst the Athenians.
Amongst the Athenians, when the Magistrates had ended their Government, which
lasted but a year, open Proclamation was made throughout the City, after this
manner: Whosoever can accuse the Magistrate of any unjust act committed, let
him come forth, for they have ended their Magistracy; upon this Proclamation,
every Accuser that could make just proof of offense, had his free admission.

A Murder strangely discovered.
A company of Villains as they were murdering one whom they had robbed, to
which purpose they drew him into a Field remote from the Highway; whilst they
were committing this bloody act, it happened that a flock of Cranes flew over
the Field, to whom the dying man cried out aloud, saying; You Cranes shall
bear witness what they do unto me; this murder lay hid for a long time, and
no knowledge could be got of the murderers, until a certain day, when a
public Solemnity being made in the same Field, whereat two of them who had
committed the murder happened to be present; suddenly a great noise of Cranes
was heard above in the air, which one of them perceiving, scoffingly said to
his fellow (not thinking that any body heard him) Hark fellow, these are the
witnesses that Ibicus when we killed him said should disclose his death; This
being overheard by one that stood nigh them, they began to be had in
suspicion; whereupon they were called into question by the Magistrate, and upon
strict examination, at length they confessed the Fact, and Justice was executed
upon them accordingly.

A strange accident at Oxford Assizes.
At an Assizes holden in Oxford, 1577. one Robert Jenke a Stationer, and an
impudent Fellow,, was there accused and brought to Trial, for speaking words
against the Queen; it happened in the very instant while he was Arraigned, that
there arose such a Damp, and poisonous smell, that the most part of the company
there present, dyed in a short space after, the contagion spreading no further
then to those that were upon the place; amongst others Robert Bell, chief
Baron of the Exchequer, Mr. Barham a famous Lawyer, some of the Nobility and
chief Gentry, most of those that served upon the several Juries, and about
three hundred more dyed there.

Manna is a perfect resemblance of Jesus Christ.
Christ is signified by the Manna, which the Israelites did eat in the
Wilderness, in many respects;

First, as Manna was a meat prepared of God, without the labor of the
Israelites, so is Christ given unto men, not out of any work or merit of
theirs, but of the free gift and goodness of God.

2 As Manna came from Heaven besides the ordinary course of Nature, so Christ's
birth was wonderful, and different from other men.

3 Manna was distributed to all alike, even so Christ communicates himself to
all alike without respect of persons, for in him is neither male nor female,
bond or free.

4 Manna when it came first was an unknown thing, so Christ was unknown when
he came into the world.

5 Manna was food, and a plentiful food, there was enough for every body, so
is Christ the Food and Bread of our Souls, and sufficient to feed many, yea
even the whole world.

6 Manna was of a most sweet and pleasing taste, and so is Christ unto that
Soul which can truly relish him.

7 Manna was white and pure, even so is Christ also white and pure, he has not
the least stain of sin.

8 Manna before it was eaten was brayed in a Mortar, or broken in a Mill; so
was Christ bruised in the Garden, and broken upon the Cross, that he might
nourish our souls to eternal life.

9 As Manna was given only in the Wilderness, and ceased as soon as they came
into the Land of promise; so is Christ our Spiritual food in the Eucharist, so
long as we travel in the wilderness of this world, but when we shall arrive
in the heavenly Canaan we shall have no more need of Sacraments.

Men much in debt seldom sleep soundly.
When a Gentleman of Rome that had concealed his broken estate dyed, and his
goods were set to open sale for his Creditors satisfaction, Augustus himself
sent to buy that bed for his own use, wherein the man, so far in debt, could
possibly take his rest.

Our high Gallants have not for the poor.
A poor man were as good go beg of an Image, or Monument, as of those
gorgeous Idols, which represent nothing but apparel; They have not for them,
they say, when their superfluities might supply his necessities.

The most carnal Religion is best pleasing to carnal men.
Mahumitanisme has raised it self to the height it is now at, by these four
advantages, First, by permitting much carnal liberty to the Professors (as
having many Wives) and no wonder if they get Fish enough, that use that bait.
Secondly, by promising a Paradise of sensual pleasure hereafter, wherewith
flesh and blood is more affected, then with hope of spiritual delights.
Thirdly, by prohibiting Disputes, and suppressing of all Learning; and thus
Mahomet made his shop dark on purpose, that he might vent any thing. Lastly,
this Religion had never made her own passage so fast and so far, if the
sword had not cut the way before her, as commonly the conquered follow, for the
most part, the religion of the Conquerours.

Ignorance of other men's condition a cause of uncomfortablenesse in many
Christians.
A godly Minister in Germany, that was much troubled in his mind, fearing that
his condition was not good, because he was so pestered with inward lusts and
corruptions, was desirous to advise with Martin Luther, and to acquaint him
with his trouble; coming to him, he relates to Luther, how he was continually
haunted with temptations to pride and vainglory; and that he could never pray,
nor preach, but that his heart was poisoned with thoughts of vainglory and
selfe-seeking; Lut^er hearing this good man's complain^ against himself, burst
out into tears, and taking the Minister by the hand, said; O Brother, I bless
God, that I have lived to meet with one that is troubled with my Disease; for I
thought that no man had been troubled with such a temptation, in the Pu^pit,
but my self; and as this godly Minist^^ case afforded comfort to Luther, so
Luthers free acknowledgement of his being in the same condition, was no less
satisfaction to him.

A brave Cupboard of Glasses well broken, and the story better applied.
One Pollio a famous Roman, had a most stately Cupboard of curious Glasses,
whereof he made very great account, giving charge to all his Servants (with
severe threatenings) that they should beware of breaking any of his Glasses; one
day, Pollio having invited many of his friends to Dinner, the Glasses were
brought forth, and set upon the Cupboard; and as Pollio was walking up and
down the room, before his friends came, considering his fine Glasses, he
began to think what a fear his Servants lived in, by reason of those Glasses,
saying to himself; that they were but brittle toys, and if any of them happened
to be broken, it would disquiet him more then they were all worth; saying
further, that if he brake them himself, it would both prevent his being angry
with his Servants, and free them from a great deal of fear; hereupon he gives
the Cup board^loath a twitch, down came all the ^^lasses, and were shattered
to pieces. This Story was related in a Sermon before King James, by Doctor
Burges of Ipswich, and thus applied; Sir, (speaking to the King) the Ceremonies
of the Church of England, are pretty specious things, but very brittle, and
subject to breaking; and your Majesty has given strict charge to your
Servants, with severe threatenings, that they break none of them; your Subjects
live in great fear of incurring your displeasure, if by chance they should
break any of them, and it is likely you will be very angry if any of them be
broken, I most humbly beseech your Highness, in the behalf of your good
Servants, who fear to displease you; that you would play the part of wise
Pollio, and break these Glasses your self; abolish these brittle Ceremonies,
your self, that so your faithful subjects may be freed from their continual
fear, and the occasion of your Majesty's displeasure removed. King James was
much taken with this handsome passage, countenanced the Doctor, and seemed
inclinable to the motion; till the Bishops about him had changed his mind,
which they did, by buzzing into his head their old principle, of no Ceremony,
no Bishop; no Bishop, no King; and so cunningly did they play their Game, that
they had suddenly incensed the Kings mind so against him, for that audacious
passage in his Sermon, as they termed it, that the Doctor was clapped up in the
Tower, whence he could not be delivered, till he past his promise to leave the
Kingdom; which accordingly he did, and went over into Holland, where he
remained for many years, preacher at the Hague.

The Churches security.
That Ship cannot be cast away wherein Christ is the Pilot, the Scripture the
Card, his Cross the maine Mast, his Promises the Anchors, his Spirit the
Wind; J^ctatur, nunquam mergitur ista ratis; it may be ^ost, but never
shipwrack't.

No Jesuits in Hell.
A Jesuit preaching at the great Church in Padua, toward the end of his
Sermon, he fell into a large commendation of the Order of the Jesuits,
ex^olling it above all the Religious Orders that then were, or ever had been in
the world, giving God thanks, that he had the happiness to be of that Order;
and in the close of his Discourse, he told his Auditory that he would acquaint
them with a Vision which he had lately seen; The other night (said he) I
dreamed that I was in Hell, where me thought I saw Popes, Emperors, Kings,
Queens, Cardinals, Bishops, Abbots, Monks, Friars, and some of all sorts of men
both Ecclesiastical and Secular, but not one Jesuit amongst them all; which
made me to bless God that ever I was borne to be of so blessed a Society;
which, though it had sent so many thousands of that holy Order to the Grave,
yet never any of them went to Hell; and so he concluded his Sermon, with a
fresh encomium of the Society of Jesuits. The next Sunday after, a Dominican
Friar preached in the same Church, and he also, toward the end of his Sermon
fell upon the high praises of the Order of the Jesuits; repeating much of the
Jesuits Sermon, the day before, and bewayling himself, that it was not his
fortune to be of that holy Order; whereof none ever went to Hell, as the
reverend Father had told them the day before; at last he told the people, that
he also had seen a Vision, and dreamed likewise one night that he was in Hell,
where he saw Popes, Emperors, Kings, Cardinals, and all sorts of Orders, as
the Jesuit had notably showed them, the day before; but not a Jesuit (said
the Friar) could be seen amongst them all; then thought I to ^y self, O what a
blessed Order is this! O that I had been a Jesuit, and not a Dominican; and
still I cast my eyes all over He, but could not find so much as a piece of a
Jesuit there, but store of all other religious Orders; yea, even of
Dominicans, my own Order, I saw great store; at last me thought I beckned a
little Devil to me, and asked softly in his care, whether there were any
Jesuits in that place or no? he answered, That there were none there, but that
they were kept in a Hell by themselves, which is a great room under this,
where (said the little Devil) there be abundance of them, and they come hither
so fast, that my master Lucifer scarce knows where to bestow them; and
besides, they are so unruly, that if they were not kept by themselves, every
body would be soon weary of this place. He further told me (me thoughts) that
his master durst not let them have any Gunpowder, for fear lest they should
blow up this place.

A worthy example of gratitude.
Thomas Cromwell, who was borne of mean Parentage, became Earl of Essex, and
Lord Chancellor of England; when he was a young man he had a desire to see the
world, his first adventure was into France, whether he went as a Page to a
Soldier to carry his Knap-sack, but that Army being over-throwne, Cromwell
wandered up and down till he came to Florence, where his necessities made him
beg up and down the streets; it happened that one Francis Frescobald (a Merchant
of that City, and one that had traded much in England) meeting with this young
tattered stripling, and finding him to be an English youth, he carried him home
to his house, and there bestowed a new suit of apparel upon him, entertaining
him with all courtesy, till he was minded to return home into his Country;
when Frescobald perceived Cromwels desire to be going homewards, he provided
him a Horse, which he bestowed upon him, and sixteen Ducats of Gold in his
purse. Now it pleased God, after a long time, that as Cromwell was advanced to
high preferment, so Frescobald was brought low in his estate, through many
misfortunes and losses; insomuch that he was forced to come over into England,
to get up some moneys, which some Merchants of this Nation were indebted to
him; being here, and following his business in London, it happened that Cromwell
(who was then Lord Chancellor) as he was riding in the street toward Court,
espied this Italian, and guessing who he was by his habit, he called him to
him, asking his name; who answered, that his name was Francis Frescobald;
Cromwell expressing much gladness to see him, caused one of his Servants to
carry him home to his house, there to stay till his return; Frescobald all
this while knowing not what this meant, nor who it was that showed him this
courtesy, having quite forgotten his former kindness to Cromwell, not knowing
what was become of him; well, at Dinnertime my L. Chancellor came home,
bringing with him the Lord Admiral, and some other Noblemen to dine with him,
and in the presence of them all, he fell to embracing this Stranger, and
expressed exceeding much gladness to see him, and holding him fast by the hand,
he turned to the Lords, telling them, the extraordinary favor that this
Italian had showed him in his extreme necessity, and so relates the whole
story to the Lords; at dinner Cromwell placed this his friend next him at the
Table, and after dinner, when the Lords were gone) he falls to inquire of him
the occasion of his coming into England; who truly tells him how it was, that
he was much decayed in his estate, and that his coming hither was to get in
some debts owing to him here, which were about fifteen thousand Ducats; after
many expressions of thankfulness, and condoling with Frescobald for his
misfortunes, he carried him into an inner chamber, where opening a Chest he
took out a bag of Gold; and first of all he gave him sixteen Crowns,
saying, there was that which he lent him at his coming from Florence; next, he
gave him ten Crowns more, saying, so much the Suite of Apparel cost, which
you gave me; then he gives him other ten Crowns, saying, that you bestowed so
much upon the Horse I rode away on; but considering you are a Merchant, said
Cromwell, it seems to me not honest to return you your money without some
consideration for the long detayning of it; Take you therefore these four
Baggs, and in every of them is four hundred Ducats, these you shall receive
and enjoy from the hand of your assured friend. This done, he caused Frescobald
to give him the names of his Debtors, and what every one ought him, appointing
one of his Officers to cause his Debtors to make present payment of what they
ought; the Officer plied the business so well, that he had quickly procured
all Frescobalds Debts; whom Cromwell entertained in his house all the while,
and would have had him to continue with him his whole life, promising him the
loan of threescore thousand Ducats for four years, if he would continue and
trade here in England; but Frescobald, who desired to return into his own
Country, and there quietly to continue the rest of his life, with the great
favor of the Lord Cromwell, after many thanks for his high and noble
entertainment, departed toward his desired home; where richly arriving, he
gave himself quietly to live: But his wealth he small time enjoyed, for in the
first year of his return he dyed.

The absurdity of Sooth-saying, or judicial Astrology.
The absurdity and imposture of Divination, or Sooth-saying, is ingeniously
observed by Cicero; in Pompey the great, Croessus, and Julius Caesar; to whom
all the Chaldees and Wisards, not only promised prosperous and long lives, but
assured them of timely and peaceable ends; yet of their tumultuous employments
in the passage of their time upon earth, and of their wretched and miserable
deaths, Histories make ample and frequent mention.

Where humane help fails, we may expect Divine.
Philo with other Jews being accused to Cajus Caligula (by one Appion) that
they had refused to give Divine honor unto Caesar; and for that cause were
commanded from the Court; he said to the rest of the Jews, his companions in
that adversity; Be of good comfort, O my friends and Countrymen, against whom
Caesar is thus grievously incensed; because of necessity, Divine aid must be
present, where humane help is absent.

Eight Rules to know false Doctrines by.
They that would not be corrupted with the Errors and Heresies of these times,
must carefully reject all erroneous and heretical Doctrines; to which purpose
these general rules may be very useful.

First, whatsoever Doctrine is contrary to godliness, and opens a door to
Libertinisme, and profaneness, must be rejected as Soulepoyson; such are
Doctrines against the Sabbath, Family duties, and public Ordinances; and such
is the Doctrine of an Universal Tolleration of all Religions.

Secondly, such Doctrines must be rejected, as hold forth a strictness above
what is written; many Doctrines in Popery are of this sort, as Selfe-whippings;
voluntary Poverty, and Vows of Continency.

Thirdly, whatsoever Doctrine tends to the lifting up of nature corrupted, to
the exalting of unsanctified Reason, and gives Free Will in supernatural
things to a man unconverted, is a Doctrine contrary to the Gospel. This Rule
will preserve us against all Arminian Tenets.

Fourthly, all Doctrines that set up our own righteousness, whether of
Morality, or Sanctification, in the room of Christ's Righteousness; that place
good works in the Throne of Christ, are Doctrines of Antichrist, and not of
Christ.

Fifthly, All Doctrines that do so set up Christ and his Righteousness, as to
decry all works of Sanctification, and to deny them to be fruits and evidences
of our Justification, are to be avoided and abhorred. This Rule will keep us
from most of the errors of the Antinomians.

Sixthly, That Doctrine that lesseneth the privileges of Believers under the
New Testament, and makes their Infants in a worse condition, then they were in
under the Old Testament, cannot be the Doctrine of the Gospel; for the Gospcl
tells us, That Jesus Christ was made a Surety of a better Testament,
established upon better promises. This Rule will preserve us against the poison
of Anabaptisme.

Seventhly, That Doctrine that cries up purity to the ruin of unity, is
contrary to the Doctrine of the Gospel; for the Gospel calls for unity, as
well as purity. Ephesians. 4. 3, 4, 5, 6. This Rule will teach us what to judge of
the Congregationall way, and of Tollerating different Religions, which tends
much to the breach of Spiritual love and unity, and cannot be the Government
of Christ.

Lastly, whatsoever Doctrine is contrary to the rule of Faith, or to any duty
required in the ten Commandments, or to any Petition of the Lords Prayer, is
not a Doctrine of Christ, and therefore to be rejected.

A good argument for the immortality of the Soul.
When Frederick the Emperor was told of the death of a great Nobleman, who
had lived ninety years in all voluptuousness and pleasure, yet was never
known to be either diseased in body, or disquieted in mind, by any temporal
affliction whatsoever; this being related to the Emperor as a strange thing,
he made answer; Even hence (said he) we may ground, that the Souls of men be
immortal; for if there be a God, who first created, and since governs the
world, (as both Divines and Philosophers teach) and that there is none so
stupid as to deny him to be just in all his proceedings; there must then of
necessity be other places provided, to which the Souls of men must remove
after death; since in this life we neither see rewards conferred upon those
that are good and honest, nor punishments condign inflicted upon the impious
and wicked.

Great men are only happy by report.
Great Persons had need to borrow other men's opinions to think themselves
happy; for if they judge by their own feeling they cannot find it; they are
happy only by report.

Nero's overthrow.
Vespati^n the Emperor asked Apo^onius what was Nero's overthrow? who
answered, that Nero could touch and tune a Harp well; but in Government,
sometimes he used to wind the pins too high, and sometimes to let them down
too low.

Not good to be too Satyricall.
He that has a Satyricall vain, as he may make others afraid of his wit, so
he had need be afraid of others memory.

An Episcopal character.
It Is reported of one Ralph Bishop of Durham, that he was witty only in
d^^ising, or speaking, or doing evil, but to honesty and virtue his heart was
as a lump of Lead; he was counted the principal infamy of that Age, living
without love, and dying without pity; saying of those who thought it pity he
lived so long.

A fine way to get preferment.
Guymund Chaplain to Henry the first, perceiving that the worst Clerks were
advanced to the best Dignities; one day, as he was reading Divine Service, he
happened upon James, the fifth Chapter, where coming to the seventeenth Verse,
he read thus; It rained not upon the earth one, one, one years and five one
months, instead of three years and six months; the King observed it, and
rebuked him for it; he answered, that he did it of purpose, for that he saw
such Readers were soonest preferred.

A man to be trusted.
Some men are no more to be credited then a Greek, whose unfaithfulness
became Proverbiall, and was commonly called, Graeca fides; for though a
Creditor has ten Bonds, ten Seals, and ten Sureties (as usually he has) yet
the Borrower will not keep his credit.

What is, and what is not the work of a Minister.
Our work is to make men Christians, not Critics; to bring them unto Faith,
and not to doubtful Disputations; to feed their Souls, and to guide their
Consciences; not to dazzle their eyes, nor to puzzle their judgments, nor to
perplex their conceits, nor to please their humors, nor to tickle their
fancies, nor to foment their jealousies, and censures of things and persons, by
novell, specious, and unpractised curiosities.

Calvin's sweet temper.
It was a good temper of Calvin, who (being told how Luther rayled on him)
professed, that though Luther should call him Devil, yet he would still
acknowledge him for an excellent Servant of God.

A merry Epitaph upon a Singing-man.
This Musical Epitaph made upon the Chanter of Langres in France, was very
fitly applied to the busy Viccar of Grantham, who was bred a Singing-man, and
one of the first that turned the Communion Tables Altarwise.

Well quoth he, climb the scale of Gammuth Ar^,
Till leaving Quire, and of a Mood to marry,
In this imperfect Time, and uneven Nochets;
His house with Minums stored, his head with Crochets:
Then prowles a Long, the Country for relief,
Looked for a Large, but lighted on a Brief;
And from the white Long, and the Sacred Altar,
Deserving Dupla's, reapt but a Sesqui alter:
Base was his part, yet his neighbors say,
He sung the Truble till his dying day.
For Counter-points, and Discords, much enquest
He made, till here he found his Pause, and Rest;
Time perfect had he had, and more prolation,
He quite had changd the Plain-song of the Nation.
Several Laws and Customs, of several States and Commonwealths.
Ptolomeus King of Egypt feasting one day, seven Ambassadors, at his request
every one of them showed unto him three of their principal Laws and Customs;
and first, the Ambassador of Rome said; We have the Temple in great reverence,
we are very obedient to our Governors, and we do punish wicked men, and
evill-livers severely. The Carthaginian Ambassador said, In the Commonwealth
of Carthage, the Nobility never cease fighting, nor the common People and
Artif^cers laboring, nor the Philosophers teaching. The Cicilian said; In our
Commonwealth, Justice is exactly kept, Merchandi^e exercised with truth, and
all men account themselves equal. The Rhodians Ambassador said; At Rhodes old
men are honest, young men shame-fac'd, and Women solitary and of few words. The
Athenian Ambassador said; In our Commonwealth, rich men are not divided into
Factions, poor men are not idle, the Governors are not ignorant. The
Lacedemonian Ambassador said; In Sparta envy reigns not, for all men are
equal; nor Covetousness, for all goods are common; nor Sloth, for all men
labor. The Ambassador of the Sicyonians said; We permit none to travel, lest
they should bring home new Fashions, Physicians are not suffered, least they
should kill the sound; nor Lawyers, least they should maintain Suits and
Controversies.

The virtue of Christians prayers.
The Emperor Marcus Antonius being in Almany with his Army, was enclosed in a
dry Country by his enemies, who so stopped all the passages, that he and h^s
Army were like to perish for want of water; the Emperors Lieutenant seeing him
^o distressed, told him, that he had heard, that the Christians could obtain
any thing of their God, by their prayers; whereupon the Emperor, having a
Legion of Christians in his Army, desired them to pray to their God for his and
the Armies delivery out of that danger; which they presently did, and
incontinent a great Thunder fell amongst the enemies, and abundance of water
upon the Romans, whereby their thirst was quenched, and the enemies
over-throwne without any fight.

A smart Satyr.
It was a smart invention of him, that having placed the Emperor and the Pope,
a^ reconciled, in their Majestic Thrones, he brought the States of the world
before them; First comes a Counselor of State with this Motto, I advise you
two; then a Courtier, I flatter you three; then a Husbandman with this Motto,
I feed you four; then a Merchant, I cosen you five; then a Lawyer, I rob you
six; then a Soldier, I fight for you seven; then a Physician, I kill you
eight; Lastly, a Priest, I absolve you all nine.

If the Devil take the Prince, what will become of the Bishop?
A certain German Clown, or Boar (as they term him) seeing the Bishop of
Colen ride in state, with a great Train of Horsemen before and after him,
stood gaping on the Bishop as he passed by, and smiled to himself; the Bishop
perceiving it, made a stand, and demanded of the Boar why he thus smiled,
bidding him speak the truth freely without fear, for he should sustain no
damage; whereupon the Boar replied; That he smiled to think with himself,
whether Saint Martin (Patron, and first Bishop of Colen) ever rode in such
state as he did now; the Bishop hereunto answered; That he was an ignorant
silly Fellow, for he did not ride in his state, as he was Archbishop of Colen,
but as he was the chief Prince Elector of Germany; whereupon the Clown
wittily retorred; Suppose (said he) my Lord* the Devil should come and fetch
away the Prince Elector, I pray what would become of the Bishop? I fear me he
would to Hell too; at which the Bishop being confounded went his way.

Bishop Wrens unsufferable insolency.
When Wren was Bishop of Norwich, and had put down all afternoon Sermons on
Lords days in his Diocese, it happened that the Earls of Bedford and
Doncaster, with three or four Lords more, were invited to the Baptizing of the
Lord Brooks Child, at Dallam in Suffolk, which was to be in the afternoon
on the Lords day; the Noblemen earnestly desired Master Ash (Household
Chaplain to the Lord Brcoks) to preach, which through great importunity he
did; this presently coming to the Bishops ears, he sends his Apparitor with a
Citation for Master Ash to appear before him, with whom the Lord Brooks went
along to the Bishop, whom they found sitting in state like a great Lord, or
Demi Pope; they desired to know his Lordships pleasure, to which the Bishop
answered; That his Chaplain had openly affronted him in his Diocese, in
daring to preach therein without his special License, and that on the Lords
day afternoon, when he had expressly prohibited all Sermons within his
Jurisdiction; telling Master Ash, that he would make him an example to all
others; my Lord Brooks told the Bishop, That it was by the earnest entreaty of
those Lords, and his own command, that his Chaplain then preached, and that
he hoped there was no cause of offense in the matter; to which the Bishop
replied: That my Lord Brook did very ill to offer to maintain his Chaplain in
this, saying, that no Lord in England should affront him in his Diocese in
such a manner, if he did, his Majesty should know of it, and that he would make
his Chaplain an example. Hereupon he presently proceeds against Master Ash
in his own Court with all violence, no mediation of Lords o^ friends could
pacify him, till at last the Earl of Don^aster told him, That he would
complain of him to the King, if he would not cease prosecuting Master Ash,
since he preached by the Lord Brooks command, and at his, and other Lords
entreaty; hereupon the Bishop leaving the Chaplain, falls upon the
Churchwardens, fines them forty shillings a man, injoynes them public Penance
in the Church, to ask God and the Bishop forgiveness, and to confess that
their penance was just; O pride! O tyranny.

The Doctor could not pray without b^oke.
When the Religious Lord Vere was suddenly struck with deaths arrow, at Sir
Henry Vanes Table at White Hall, as he sat at Dinn^r, and carried from thence
into a Withdrawing Chamber, where he dyed; a Grand Doctor of Divinity, (one of
the Kings Chaplains) being there present, was upon this unexpected occasion
desired to kneel down and pray with the Company; the Doctor hereupon calls
for a Common Prayer Book, and answer being made that there was none present,
he replied, that he could not pray without a Book; whereupon a Knight there
present took him by the Gown, and forced him to kneel down, telling him,
that my Lord was dying, and he must needs say some Prayer or other; upon this
he begins, Our Father which art in heaven, for other prayer could he say none;
which the Knight hearing, bade him hold his peace, for my Lord was dead, and he
was but a dead Divine, who knew not how to pray.

He that stopped other men's mouths, had at last his own ^^pt with a vengeance.
Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury, a grievous persecutor of Gods
people, and a great suspender and silencer of his Ministers; who occupying his
tongue, brains, and Episcopal power, to stop the mouths, and tie up the
tongues of Gods Ministers, and hinder the preaching and course of Gods Word,
was by Gods just Judgment so s^^icken in his tongue, that it swelled so big,
he could neither swallow, nor speak for some days before his death; and so he
was starved, choked, and killed by this strange tumor of his tongue.

A true Slave.
There was, not long since, in the Town of Ipswich an old man, who was so
extremely base and miserable, that he lived in a most sordid manner, not
allowing himself convenient necessaries, either for back or belly, but would
walk Horses at Innes, beg his victuals up and down the Town, and wear
such old rotten Canvase Jackets, and Breeches, as the Seamen threw away; when
this wretch was dead, his two Sons, who were newly come from Sea (knowing
that their Father had money, though he would never part with a farthing to
them) fell a ransaking the house, and at last they found what they looked for,
though the quantity far exceeded their expectation; the neighbors that came
into the house with them stood amazed to see so much money in such a man's
house, the two Sons leapt up and down for joy, and one clapping the other on
the back, said; Faith sirrah, was not this a true Slave?

Cardinal Pools answer to a Figure-f^inger
One that pretended skill in judicial Astrology, came to Cardinal Poole,
telling him, that he had been calculating of his Nativity; the Cardinal asked
him, What he meant by his nativity? The Astrologer answered, his Birth, under
what Planet he was borne, and what Fortunes would befall him, which he said, he
had gathered from the Stars, and Celestial houses; Tush, replied the
Cardinal, I have been borne again since then.

How to deal with crafty sinners.
The Lot when it was directed against Achan, first it fell upon the Tribe;
secondly, it fell upon the Family; Thirdly, upon the Household; and lastly, upon
the person of Achan; he hid his sin ever till it lighted upon him. So, the
crafty sinner is not moved, when the threatening is given out generally against
the Nation; neither when it is given out against the City where he dwells; nor
when it comes to his Family, till in particular it come to his Person, and till
it be said to him, Thou art the man. Sin is a shameless thing, ye may spit
seven times in the face of it, before it blush.

A covetous man is like a Christmas Box.
The covetous man is like a Christmas Box, whatsoever is put into it cannot be
taken out, till it be broken; he soaketh up the waters of riches like a Sponge,
and till death does come and squeeze him with his Iron graspe, he will not
yield one drop of that which he has received.

It Is hard to know a man's disposition till he be out of check.
It Is said of Tiberius, that whilst August^^ ruled, he was no ways tainted in
his reputation; and that whiles Drusus and Germanicus were alive, he feigned
those virtues which he had not, to maintain a good opinion of himself, in the
hearts of the people; but after he had got himself out of the reach of
contradiction and controulment, there was no fact in which he was not faulty,
no crime to which he was not accessory,

Love me a little and love me long.
'Twas a witty reason of Diogenes: why he asked a half penny of the thrifty man,
and a pound of the prodigal; the first he said, might give him often, but the
other, ere long, would have none to give.

Cursed Cowes have short horns.
Foelix Earl of Wartemberg, sitting at supper with many of his friends, it
happened that some at the Table fell into discourse of Luther, and the peoples
general receiving of his Doctrine; upon which the Earl swore a great Oath,
that ere he dyed, he would ride up to the spurs in the blood of the Lutherans;
but the very same night God stretched out his hand so against him, that he was
choked with his own blood.

Martin Luther the famous Instrument of Gods glory, lived and dyed a very poor
man.
Luther being very sick, and expecting death, (though it pleased God he
recovered that fit) he made his Will concerning his Wife and Children, after
this manner; Lord God I thank thee, that thou would have me live a poor and
indigent person upon earth, I have neither house, nor lands, nor possessions,
nor money to leave; thou have given me Wife, and Children, them I give back unto
thee; nourish, teach, and keep them (O thou the Father of Orphants, and Judge
of the Widow) as thou have done unto me, so do unto them.

Rulers should ever be at leisure to do Justice.
An old Woman complaining to Adrian the Emperor of some wrongs done to her,
the Emperor answered, he was not at leisure to hear her; to whom she replied,
That then he ought not to be at leisure to be Emperor; wherewith Adrian was
so affected, that he not only righted her wrongs presently, but also ever after
was more diligent to hear his subjects Causes.

Luthers Epitaph by Theodorus Beza.
Rome tamed the world, the Pope tamed Rome so great,
Rome ruled by power, the Pope by deep deceit;
But how more large, than Theirs, was Luthers fame,
Who with one pen, both Pope, and Rome did tame?
Go, fixious Greece, go tell Alcides, then,
His Club is nothing to great Luthers P^n.
A Prophecy accomplished most exactly forty years after it was attered.
Spotswood Archbishop of Glasgow, having procured the imprisonment and
condemnation of one Mr. Welsch, and other godly Ministers in Scotland, Anno
16^5. Master Welsch writes, out of prison, a Letter to the Lord Levinston of
Kilsyth, wherein he Prophesies, not only the utter abolishing of Episcopacy,
but the downfall and ruin of that great Prelate and his Family, in these
words; Sir, I am far from bitterness, but here I denounce the wrath of an
everlasting God against him (meaning Spotswood) which assuredly shall fall,
except it be prevented; Sir, Dagon shall not stand before the Ark of the Lord,
and those names of Blasphemy that he wears of Lord-Bishop, and Archbishop,
will have a fearful end. Not one word of this is fallen to the ground, for
Episcopacy is now abolished there, as all men know; and for that part of the
Prophecy which concerns Spotswood himself; even in the top of all his
honors, when he had come up to be Archbishop of St. Andrews, and Chancellor
of the Kingdom, he was cast out of Scotland, and dyed a poor miserable man at
London, having not a sixpence of his own to buy bread, while he lived, nor to
bury him when he was dead, but as it was begged at Court. The evident hand of
God lighted on his Posterity; his Lands of Darfie (all the conquesse he was
able to make to his eldest Son Sir John Spotswood) is ready to be sold, and
that branch of his posterity to go a beging; his second Son, Sir Robert
Spotswood, President of the College of Justice, for his Treason against
Scotland, did dye miserably upon a Scaffold at St. Andrews, an obdurate
impenitent man; his Brother, the Bishop of Clogher, was cast out of his great
estates in Ireland, and in his extreme old age, forced to teach Children in
Scotland for his bread; but being unfit for that employment, he went to London,
where he was long a Suitor for the meanest place in the Ministry, that he might
be kept from starving, but could not obtain it.

Learning is to be preferred before Honor.
The Emperor Sigismond having Knighted a Doctor of the Civil Law, this new
Knight presently leaves the society of his old fellow Doctors, and keeps
company altogether with the Knights; which the Emperor observing, called him
fool, for preferring Knighthood before Learning, saying; That he could make a
thousand Knights in one day, but not a Doctor in a thousand years.

The ingenuity of a Scotch Colonel.
A Scotch-man newly come over to Utrecht, and presenting himself to Colonel
Edmunds his Countryman, told him, That my Lord his Father, and such and such
Knights and Gentlemen his Cousens were all in good health; the Colonel turning
to the Gentlemen that were in company with him at that time, said, Gentlemen,
believe not one word he says, my Father is but a poor Baker of Edenborough,
and works hard for his living, whom this Knave would make a Lord, to curry
favor with me, and make you believe I am a great man borne.

Truth and Error elegantly compared to Tamars two twins, Genesis 38. in a Sermon
before the Parliament.
The different judgments of Professors throughout the Land, show that our
Church has Twins in her womb; so much of Truth as has been already owned by
the Parliament, Zarah-like has put forth the hand; none can say, but this came
out first, for you have marked it with the scarlet thread of a Civil Sanction;
yet is there a Pharez, a Division, or Separation (as the word properly
signifies) whose breakings out are notoriously known, as also his challenge of
Primogen^ture: Our hopes are, that Zarah will in due time be fully borne,
notwithstanding this interposition; and that you will say to the Party that
separates in Doctrinall Principles, by maintaining opinions that are
destructive, and prey upon the vital spirits of Religion, as the Mid-wise then
did to Pharez; upon thee be this breach, and not upon us; may it never come to
be upon you, may you never come to be partakers of other men's sins in so high a
degree. Hitherto the damnable He^esies; and daring Blasphemies which have been
vented every where, may be thought to stand on the private account of such as
^ent them; but if representative England (which God forbid) should espouse
their Crimes, by overmuch connivence at them, the guilt would then become
National, and too heavy for us to bear.

A comfort for poor faithful Ministers.
As Christ, and all his Apostles were poor, in respect of worldly goods; so
for the most part, the most eminent Ministers of the Gospel have been men of
mean conditions, as to worldly estates; Martin Luther had neither lands, nor
houses, nor money to leave his Wife and Children when he dyed; Calvin's Inventory
(Library and all) came not to six score pound; Mr. Perkins dyed a very poor
man, Mr. Ainsworth (even while he wrote his excellent commentary upon the
Pentateuch) had but nine-pence a week to live on; Mr. Samuel Herne, when he
dyed, left a Wife, and many small Children, without any means to maintain
them, Mr. Dod, for many years together, had nothing to live on but providence;
whether this were from their neglect of worldly incombrances; or from the
worlds not favoring such men; or from the wisdom of God, that the world should
not charge them with Covetousness; or, for that God would have them live by
faith; or to teach, that the Servant is not above his Master; o^ to show that
Gods love is not to be measured by worldly dispensations; or, lastly, That they
might not be ensnared with the things of this life; whether (I say) it be for
these, or some other reasons, that God is pleased to keep his most faithful
Servants upon such short commons, feeding them (as it were) from hand to mouth,
keeping them shorter then many others, that do him far less service, is
hard to say.

They that have money, and will not employ it, deserve to have it taken from
them.
Dionysius the elder, being advertised of one that had hidden great store of
money, commands him upon pain of death to bring it to him; which he did, but
not all; but with the remainder he went and dwelt in another Country, where he
bought an Inheritance, and fell upon some employment; which when Dionysius
heard, he sent him his money again, which he had taken from him, saying, Now
thou know how to use riches, take that I had from thee.

A Luxurious Nation will soon overthrow it self.
Philip King of Macedon making war upon the Persians, understood that they were
a people which abounded in all manner of delicate Wines, and other wastfull
expenses; whereupon he presently withdrew his army, saying, It was needless
to make war upon them, who would shortly overthrow themselves.

A speedy return of prayer.
Upon the first of August, 1649. a general day of Humiliation for Ireland was
appointed to be kept thoroughout England; at that time the Enemy was master of
all Ireland, excepting Londonderry, and Dublin, both which places were
straightly besieged, and almost brought to the last cast; it pleased God, the
very next day after our Fast, to give our fmall Forces there such a miraculous
Victory, and the Rebels such a shameful defeat, that the like (by so unlikely
means) has scarce been known. God was seen in the Mount, and his peoples
extremity was his opportunity.

A pretty device to cosen Conscience.
Many Ships of several Countries lay long wind-bound at Alexandria, at last
the wind came fair, upon a Saturday morning, which made the Seamen hoyse up
sails and away; amongst the rest there was a Jew who was Master of a Ship, but
he durst not stir that day, because it was the Jews Sabbath; yet loath he
was to miss such an opportunity, and to lose the company of his consorts;
wherefore he hires a couple of Janissaries to beat him a shipboard, and to
force him out of the Harbor with the rest of the Fleet, that so he might
pretend an unavoydable necessity.

A witty trick of a blind man.
A blind man that by long begging had gotten a good quantity of money, which
he changed into Gold, and fearing least he might be cousened if he kept it
about him, intended to hide it somewhere in the ground; To which purpose he
acquainted a near Kinsman of his with his riches and intendment, desiring both
his secrecy and assistance, who promised him both; so one night they went and
hid the Gold in a convenient place, where the blind man might easily of
himself find it when he pleased; a while after the poor man goes in the
night time, to feel if his Treasure were safe, but coming to the place, and
opening the hole, he found that the Gold was gone; he presently conceits that
his Kinsman had deceived him, to whom going the next day, instead of
complaining of his loss, or challenging him for his money, he told him, that
he had some more Gold, which he thought best to put to the other, and hide all
together in the same place, desiring him to go with him at night for that
purpose; which his Cosen promised to do; but before the hour appointed, his
Cosen carries the bag back to the place where it was formerly hidden, and
leaves it there as at first, supposing that he should have it again with
advantage; so when night came, away they went to the place, the Kinsman opens
the hole, and taking out the purse gives it to the blind man, who, by counting
the pieces, finds his just quantity he had put in, and instead of putting in
the other Gold, as he pretended, he puts the purse up into his pocket, saying,
he would dispose of it in some other place; and thus this blind man cousened
his Cosen.

The industriousnesse of Peter Ramus.
Peter Ramus from his youth to his dying day, never used, by his good will, any
other bedding then Straw, and in his Studies so watchful he was, that if he
heard in the morning the Smiths, or Carpenters, or any other Artisans at work
before he were stirring, he would blame himself of negligence and
sloathfulnesse, that they should prevent him, and be more diligent in their
Mechanical Trades, then he in the study of the Liberal Sciences.

An impregnable place taken by a fine Stratagem.
The Island of Sarke joining to Garnefie, and of that Government, was surprised
by the French, and could never have been recovered again by strong hand,
having Come and Cattle enough upon the place, to feed so many men as would
serve to defend it; and being every way so unaccessable, as it might be held
against the great Turk; yet by the industry of a Gentleman of the Netherlands
(in Queen Mary's time) it was in this sort re-gained. He Anchored in the Road
with one ship of small burden, and pretending the death of his Merchant,
besought the French, being some thirty in number that held the place, that they
might bury their Merchant in hallowed ground, and in the Chapel of that Isle,
offering a Present to the French, of such things as they had aboard; whereto
(with condition that they should not come a shore with any Weapon, no not so
much as with a Knife) the Frenchmen yielded; then did the Flemings put a Coffin
into their Boat, not filled with a dead Carcass, but with Swords, Targets,
and Harquebuffes; the French received them at their Landing, and searching
every of them so narrowly as they could not hide a Penknife, gave them leave to
draw their Coffin up the Rocks with great difficulty; some part of the French
took the Flemish Boat and rowed aboard the ship to fetch the commodities
promised, and what else they pleased; but being entered they were taken and
bound; the Flemings on the Land, when they had carried the Coffin into the
Chapel, shut the door to them, and taking their Weapons out of the Coffin,
set upon the French; they run to the Cliffe, and cried to their company aboard
the Fleming, to come to succor them, but finding the Boat charged with
Flemings, yielded themselves and the place.

The Service-booke and Ceremonies pleasing to Papists.
When Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown, bloody Bonner Bishop of London was
deposed, and clapped up in prison; a friend of his coming one day to visit him,
he asked how the world went abroad, and what kind of Service the Protestants
used in Paul's, and other Churches? his friend told him, that they had the Mass
still (meaning, the Book of Common Prayer) and Organs, and Coaps, and
Surplices, and Singing-men, and the like; nay (said Bonner) if they taste of
our Broth, I doubt not but ere long they will eat of our Beef.

A Butcher of Norwich Churched.
A Butcher of Norwich being dangerously goared in his bowels by a Bull, lay a
long time before he could be recovered; but being at length cured, he sent to
the Minister of his Parish, to desire that thanks might be given to God, in
the Congregation, for his great deliverance; the Minister was so devout an
observer of the Book of Common Prayer, and of Bishop Wrens injunctions, that
he would not use any other prayer then what that Book afforded; and so, when
the man was come into the Church, he turns to the form of Thanksgiving for
Women's deliverance from the pain and peril of Childebirth, which he made to
serve the turn for that time; and so the Butcher was sufficiently Churched.

A gracious providence.
A Minister seeing some of his Parishioners shooting at Buts upon a Lords day,
went to admonish them to forbear, telling them the danger of prophaining that
day* some of them cried out, That the King had granted liberty for that, and
other Sports, and they would take it; the Minister replied, that though the
King dispensed with it, yet the Law of God forbids it, saying, that we ought to
obey God rather then man; shortly after, many Articles of Inconformity were
exhibited into the Necclefiasticall Court against this Minister; and amongst
the rest, that he said, He cared not for the Kings Laws; and this was
subscribed under the hands of two of those principal Archers. Upon this a
Commission was sent down, with Commissioners, Proctors, an^ a Notary to
examine Witnesses, upon the place, about these Articles; some few days before
the speeding of this Commission, one of the forementioned Archers lying upon
h^s Deathbed, and much troubled in mind, could not be satisfied till he had
spoken with the Minister, who coming to him, he desired pardon of him, for the
great wrong he had done him, in setting his hand to a false accusation, saying,
in the presence of many Neighbors, that he was so threatened by the Apparator,
and others, that he was forced (though against his Conscience) to do as he
did; but the other Witness that had subscribed this dangerous Article (as
'twas made, and possibly in those times might have proved so) he stands to what
he had done, and said, he would swear it upon all the books in England; but
when the Commissioners were come to Town, and ready to fall upon the
business, his heart began to smite him, and taking an honest neighbor with
him, came to the Minister, cried him mercy, and denied that ever he had heard
him speak such words; this being known to the Prosecutors and Commissioners,
they put up their Pipes, and away they went like Knaves as they came.

A pretty waggish trick.
Three Cambridge Scholars sitting up late one night at Cards, in their
chamber, he who had won the others money, began to complain that it was late,
and time for them to give over; his Companions urged him to play still, but he
pretending to be very weary, would play no more, but goes away to bed; his
fellows continued playing still, hand to hand; who when they perceived the
other Scholar to be fast asleep, they put out the Candle, drawing the window
curtains so close that no light at all could be seen; and on they went with
their Game, sometimes wrangling, and sometimes chafing so loud, that they wak't
him that was at bed; who looking up, and perceiving no light, asked them if they
were mad to play in the dark? but they were so earnest in their play, that
they seemed not to mind him; whereupon he sits up in his bed, asking them
seriously, whether they could see to play or no? and desired them for Gods
sake, to tell him, whether there were any light in the chamber? being thus
earnest, they answered him, and said, that though he had won their money, he
needed not to jeere them; he protested that he did not jeere, but was in good
earnest, and that, if they had any light he was blind, vowing that he could
not see one bit; whereupon they rose from the Table, and came to the bed side,
one of them asking him, if he did not see them now, nor the candle in his hand?
no truly, said he, I can see nothing at all; then said the other Scholar, his
eyes to see too are as clear and good as any of ours; at which words the poor
Scholar burst out a weeping, saying, that he was stone blind, and what shall
become of me? This is a Judgment of God upon me for spending my time in play,
as I have done, and for being so covetous to win other men's money; then he
prayed one of his Chamber-fellowes to reach him his breeches, which having, he
put his hand into his pocket, and gave them all the money which he had won of
them; the other Scholars seeing their plot had taken so well, thought good to
keep their companion no longer in blindness, but lighting their candle again
with the Tinder-box, the young man forthwith recovered his sight.

Some men's sins go beforehand to Judgment.
One Mr. W. was very busy in prosecuting an Indictment against his Minister at
a Quarter Sessions, for omitting the Cross in Baptism; and being a man in
high favor. with the Justices, he made no question of prevayling; at night
(according to his usual manner) he falls to drinking, till he was so extreme
drunk that he was feign to be carried home; in the morning his Wife began,
mildly to blame him for his acting against the Minister the day before; at
which he, with fearful Oaths swore, that he would soon rid the Town of
the Puritan; but behold the hand of God! This wretched man, as he was about to
rise, and having put one arm in his Dublet (even as the Oaths were uttering)
he was taken speechless, yea and senseless, and so instantly dyed.

Lilly a grand Imposter.
Mr. William Lilly, whom the Fools of this Generation so much flock to, did in
his Prognostication of 1644. positively say, that Prince Rupert should not live
beyond the 28th. year of his age; which he pretends to know by the Stars, and
affirms with as much confidence as if he meant to be his Executioner; but
Rupert is now above thirty, and herein Lillies wit-craft fayl'd him; he that
will observe his cunning Predictions, and note how of the fails, shall find
him a most notorious Juggeler, and deceiver of the people, even to the shame of
our Nation, and the scandal of Religion. The Learned Spanhemius says truly of
such kind of men; That they do extremely offend against the Divine providence
of God; against the tranquillity of Commonwealths; against the Liberty, Quiet,
and Consciences of men; and therefore ought to be banished out of all
Commonwealths, and Christian Societies: To which may be added the Judgment of
Saint Austin (in his excellent Book, De civitate Dei) who says, That
Christians ought chiefly to beware of such Astrologers, as Prognosticate things
that come to pass; for when such Predictions fall out truly, it is a figne
that they which utter them, are in confederacy with some evil Spirits, by
whose help they foretell future events, and not by Art, or any thing found in
the Stars, as they pretend.

The fruit of Covetousness.
When Baldwine King of Jerusalem besieged Askelon, he promised the spoil of
that City to the Knights Templers, whereof a part of his Army then consisted;
an assaultable breach being made, the Templers first entered, who conceiving
they had enough to weeld the work, and master the place, set a Guard at the
breach, that no more of their fellow Christians should come in to be sharers
with them in the booty; but their Covetousness cost them their lives; for the
Turks contemning their few number, put them all to the Sword; yet at last the
City was taken, though with much difficulty.

A right Counselor rare to find.
Alphonsus King of Spain coming very young to the Crown, some advised that
seven Counselors might be joined to govern with him, who should be men
fearing God, lovers of Justice, free from filthy Lusts, and such as would not
take bribes; to which Alphonsus replied; If you can find out seven such men,
nay, bring me but one so qualified, and I will not only admit him to govern
with me, but shall willingly resign the Kingdom it self to him.

Courtiers are usually Flatterers.
Aristippus the Philosopher, seeing Diogenes washing of Herbs for his Dinner,
said, If Diogenes knew how to make use of Kings, he need not live upon raw
Herbs as he does; to which Diogenes replied, That if Aristippus could content
himself with Herbs, he needed not to turn Spaniell, or to flatter King
Dionysius for a meals meat.

The peoples rage, and Gods just hand against a wicked Tyrant.
Leander in his description of Italy, says, That in Spoleto (the chief City
of Umbria) there was a strange Tyrant, who in the time of his prosperity
contemned all men, and forbear to injure none that came within his claws,
esteeming himself sure enough for ever being called to account in this life,
and for the next he cared little; but God upon the sudden turned upside down
the wheel of his felicity, and cast him into the peoples hands; who took him
and bound his naked body upon a planck in the Marketplace, with a Fire, and
Iron Tongs by him, and then made Proclamation; That seeing this man was not
otherwise able to make satisfaction for the public injuries he had done,
every private person injured by him, should come in order, and with the hot
burning Tongs there ready, should take off his Flesh, so much as was
correspondent to the injury received, as indeed they did, until the miserable
man gave up the Ghost.

A wonderful Earthquake.
In the year one thousand five hundred seventy one, there happened a most
terrible Earthquake in the County of Hereford, near the Town of Kinaston,
which Master Cambden relates after this manner; Upon the twelfth of March,
about six of the Clock in the evening, the earth opened, and a Mountain, with
a Rock, upon which it was sciuated, after a hideous noise, and strange crash,
that it was heard by the Neighbors a great way off, raised up it self, as if
it had awakened out of a profound sleep, and forsaking his deep bed below,
mounted up into a higher place, carrying with it the Trees which were rooted
thereupon, the Shepherds Tents, and the flocks of Sheep feeding thereon; some
Trees were almost quite covered with earth, as if they had but newly taken
ro^te there; it left in the place from whence it departed an overture of forty
foot wide, and eighty else long, the whole field was about twenty Acres; it
over-threw a little Chapel near unto it, carried from the East into the
West, a Yew-tree, which was planted in the Churchyard, and with its violence,
drove up before it Highways, with Shepherds Caves, with Plants and Trees that
were thereon; it made Mountains level, and arable grounds mountainous, as if
then they had took their beginnings. And thus from Saturday night, until
monday noone following, it rested not, till at last, as if it were then tired
with the long way, and wearied with its weighty burden, it settled and became
quiet.

Great Thieves condemn little Thieves.
A poor Sea Captain brought before Great Alexander for Piracy, confessed his
fault, and said; Indeed I am a Pirate, because I preyed upon some poor
Fishermen in a Cockboat; but if I had scoured the Seas as thou have done, and
robbed all the world with a Navy and an Army, I had been no Pirate, I had been
and Emperor.

The foundations of Religion are not to be removed.
Almcrick King of Jerusalem, demanded of William Archbishop of Tire, how the
Resurrection of the Body might be proved by reason? hereat the good Bishop was
much displeased, as counting it a dangerous question, where with one removes a
foundation stone in Divinity, though with intent to lay it in the place again.
But the King presently protested, That he demanded it not out of any diffidence
in himself about that Article, but in case one should meet with a sturdy man,
who would not trust Faith on her single Bond, except he have Reason joined for
security with her. Hereupon the Archbishop alleged many strong arguments to
prove it, and both rested well satisfied.

Rich men should belp their poor Kindred in their calling, but not take them
from their profession.
When one, being an Husbandman, claimed Kindred of Robert Grosthead Bishop of
Lincoln, and thereupon requested favor of him, to bestow an Office upon him;
Cosen (quoth the Bishop) if your Cart be broken, i will mend it; if your Plow be
old, i will give you a new one, and Seed to sow your Land; but an Husbandman I
found you, and an Husbandman i will leave you.

A mannerly answer of a young Gentleman.
King James asking a young Gentleman what kin he was to such a Lord of the same
name, the Gentleman answered; That his elder brother was his Cosen German.

Of one that preach^d well, but lived ill.
It was said of one that was an excellent Preacher, but a very bad liver, That
when he was out of the Pulpit it was pity he should ever go into it; and when
he was in the Pulpit, it was pity he should ever come out of it. And of
another of the same kind it was said; That they who did not know him, would
think he were in good earnest, when they heard him preach.

Martial Discipline is very strict.
There was a French Soldier that mounted a Bulworke of a Fort which was
besieged, by whose valiant example the Fort was taken, for which piece of good
service Marshall De Thermes the French General Knighted him, but within an
hour after he hanged him, because he did it without command.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 19. line 6. read Trajane, p. 53. l. 5. r. Libera, p. 140. l. 11. r.
uttered.

The Table.
NEither prosperity nor adversity should make us to deny Christ. page 1. Death
to be much remembered, p. 2. A brave act of Clemency. ibid. A good Law against
Projectors. p. 3 The glory of the World a mere Fable ibid. Justice how to be
qualified. ibid. An example of excellent Justice. p. 4. The rare piety of the
young L. Harington. ibid. Two learned Friars. p. 5. The Devil rebukes sin.
ibid. But three Kings in Christendom. ibid: Basils brave resolution. p 6. False
work, false wages. ib. A just reward of Treason. p. 7. Too much prosperity
dangerous. ib. The uncertainty of worldly prosperity. p. 8. A noble act of
faithful Courtiers. ib. Lavish vows are but slightly performed. p. 9. A
Soldier of a pious and public spirit. ib* Height of malice. p. 10. A fit
reward for Treason, ib. He that has no children, thinks all fond Parents
fools. p. 11. Our late Bishops were true Prophets. ib. The Clergy of Rome had
good cause to be angry with Luther. ib. A sad story. p. 12. Gods Mercy to
England since it was a Commonwealth. ib. prosperity needs ballancing with some
Adversity. ib. The sword of the Soldier knows not the goods of their friends,
from the goods of their enemies. p, 13. Labor good both for body and soul, p.
14. Live-well and Dye-well are Twins. ib. A penance for drunkenness. ib. The
power of Preaching. p. 15. A fit Emblem for overcurious women. ib. To speak
well, a hard Lesson. p. 16. They that spend their estate in Luxury, deserve no
pity. ib. The Sermon is not done before it be practiced. p. 17. Tyrants are
Gods Rods, which he casts into the fire when he has done with them. ib. Though
Kings Crowns sit light upon their heads, yet oftentimes they lie heavy upon
their Consciences. p. 18. Christians lives should answer Christ's rules. ib. A
triumphant Conqueror becomes a patient sufferer for Jesus Christ. p. 19. A
witty Answer of Aquinas to the Pope. ib. The world will be sure to keep Christ
poor enough. p, 20 They that slight Christ ought to be lightly esteemed p, 21
policy ^afer then flattery and plain-dealing. ib. The best Sacrifice. p. 22
Cardinal Woolseys Father was a Butcher in Ipswich. ib. Some can better rule
then be ruled. p. 23 The Church stood in need of a Luther. ib. Three dogs to be
kept out of the pulpit. ib. Luther would not be satisfied with a temporal
reward. ib. Mutability of Fortune. p* 24 An Indian would not go to Heaven,
because he heard that the Spaniards went thither. ib. Continual happiness, is
the greatest unhappiness. p. 25 Christ weeping over Jerusalem. ib. Magistrates
and Physicians must not kill ^oo many. ib. Ingratitude. p. 26 A^^ections
infectious. ib. Many are spiritually sick, and know it not. ib. Satan's greatest
advantages against us, are from our selves. p. 27 Humanity a good help to
Divinity. ib. This Scholar deserved a cup of Wine to his Fish* p. 28 Dangerous
sinning against Conscience. ib. A wounded Conscience who can bear? p. 30 A
contest about our modern Languages. p. 31 Sinful fruits never last long. p. 32
How to pacify Gods wrath. p* 33 The Devils cunning in leaving Jobs Wife. ib.
Why Jupiter is preferred before the rest of the Gods. p. 34 Godly men leave a
blessing to their posterity. ib. Of one that said the Crosse-row instead of a
prayer. p. 35 Dangerous delaying of Repentance. ib. Balaams wish. p. 36 Most
men are best in a l^w condition. ib. How God will try men. ib. Saint Austines
robbing of an Orchard, made a haino us sin. p. 37 A miraculous Providence. p.
38 A pertinent Answer to an impertinent Question. ib. Of one that would not
repent in the beginning of his sinknesse, lest he should recover. p. 39 Ridley
blames himself for drinking there where the Gospel was refused, ib. Upon
Canterburies great bell. p* 40 Injustice will be repayed at one time or
another. ib. The Ministry is no idle calling. p. 41 Peter and Paul pictured
blushing. ib. Seldom comes the better. ib. Mistress Hutchinson of New England
delivered of a strange Monster. p. 42 Mistress Dyers fearful Monster. p. 43
Riches bring troubles. p. 45 A just reward of covetousness. ib. Gods Mercy. p.
46 Gods Infiniteness ib. A Prophecy fulfilled. ib. The different dispositions
of men. p. 47 Affection marres Judgment. ib. Five pound lost for want of
faith. ib. To be sensible that we are dead, is a sign of life. p. 49 A passage
of Providence. p. 50 Between green heads and gray hairs, truth suffers much.
p. 51 Upon the Bishop of Elies translation to Canterbury. ib. Rich Parsons need
not preach. p. 52 A prayer against the Grace of God. ib. Four blessings came
into England together. p. 53 Many cannot mind heaven; they are so taken up with
the earth. ib. Nothing got by neglecting opportunities. ib. prayer more
prevalent then an Army of men. p. 54 A good trial of bad servants. ib.
Ambassadors, whether sent from Kings or from God, must not be abused, p. 55 An
ignorant Bishop. ib. A Knight that durst appear for a persecuted Truth and
man. p. 57 Christians must learn self-denial. ib. A covetous King, and an
ungrateful Guest. p. 58 Who is the most Fool? p. 59 It Is enough to repent the
day before our death. ib. Mean Parentage no disparagement to virtuous men. p.
60 Loving Wives. ib. Some sorrows are not to be expressed. p. 61 Ingentes
stupent. p. 62 Valor scorns any kind of base tricks. ib. Christian Fortitude,
ib. Tyrants requests are commands. p. 63 A pe^ce of policy. ib. An Usurers last
Will and Testament. p 64 An admirable example of a selfe-denying Christian. ib.
A Judgment upon perjury. p. 66 A text well improved. p. 67 Delight in sinning.
p. 68 A wise answer to a foolish people. ib. A notable act of charity. ib. A
good speech of Constantine. p. 69 Men of great estates and eminency, brought to
great wants and extremity. ib. A censure of a curious woman. p. 70 prosperity
is subject to pride. ib. A happy strife. p. 71 God usually pays sinners with
their own coin. ib. The noble and Christian courage of Agrippa. p. 72 Hostility
converted into courtesy. ib. A word fitly spoken. p. 73 A true Nobleman. ib.
A just reward of tyranny p. 74 Nine Arguments against toleration of all
Religions. p. 75 Silence in Gods cause dangerous. ib. A good conscience
preferred before werldly glory. p. 76 Honors change manners. ib. A good help
for the Pope at a dead lift. p. 77 The sinful examples of great men are of
dangerous consequence to the world. ib. A fit Meditation for every man. p. 78 A
miracle in our days. ib. Kings never want Laws to do what they list. p 79 The
Churches treasure. p. 80 He that serves God by a Proxy, shall go to Heaven by
an Atturny. ib. A sinful life followed with a woeful death, ib. A Bishops
blessing not worth a half penny. p. 81 Remarkable Circumstances about the
Kings death. p, 82 Men of public spirits would not out live their Countries
prosperity, ib. One good turn requires another. p. 83 The lively picture of our
times. ib. Nine Pillars for the supporting of Faith. p. 84 The undaunted spirit
of Ignatius. p. 85 More Devils in the Country then in the City. ib. Confess
and be saved. p 86 No matter by whom, so Gods work be done. ib. A good use of
a wooaen god. p. 87 Three good questions for every man to ask himself every
night ib. It Is not Blood, but Faith that makes men noble. ib. An Epitaph upon
Duke Hamilton. p. 88 The old Cardin^ll did not like the new way of choosing
Popes. p 90 The Low Countries compared to a Cow. p. 91 The Counsel of
Constance. ib. Of one that had never troubled God with his prayers before that
time. ib. England and Scotland seldom long at peace. p 92 What to do in time
of danger. ib. A Rule for Kings. ib. Riches the bane of the Church. p, 93
Germany bane^ by three things. ib. Learning too low for Noble-mens Sons. ib.
The Earl of Castlehavens miserable Comforters. p 94 An Impostor h^ndsomely
discovered. p. 95 Jesuitical juggeling. p. 96 A remarkable Judgment upon a
wicked Counselor. p. 97 What cast Lucifer out of Heaven and Adam out of
Paraaice. ib. The worlds Hypocrisy. p 98 Stay the Bells the man is alive yet,
and like to plague you worse. ib. A fair confutation of a foul lie. p. 99 God
is not always alike present with his most faithful Servants. p, 100 Upon a
Gentlewoman that well deserved it. p. 101 Luthers constancy to the Truth. ib.
Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning. ib. Vertus
and valor is the best nobility. p. 103 Want of learning in Noblemen to be
lam^nted. ib. The means Julian used to destroy Christian Religion. p. 104
Christ only inlightens the soul, ib. In war policy is better then valor. p.
105 The qualities of a good Servant. ib. Men are ^asily drawn to vice, but
hardly to virtue, ib The wonderful power of Prayer, even in our days. p. 106
Christ is all, and in all. p. 107 Queen Elizabeth's godly answer about
Tollerating of popery. ib. An excellent custom amongst the Athenians. p. 108 A
Murder strangely discovered. ib. A strange accident at Oxford Assizes. p. 109
Ma^^^ is a perfect resemblance of Jesus Christ. p. 110 Men much in debt seldom
sleep soundly. p. 112 Our high galants have not for the poor. ib. The most
carnal Religion, is best pleasing to carnal men. ib. Ignorance of other men's
condition a cause of uncomfortablenesse in many Christians. p. 113 A brave
Cupboard of Glasses well broken, and the story better applied. p. 114 The
Churches security. p. 116 No Jesuits in Hell. ib. A worthy example of
gratitude. p. 118 The absurdity of South-saying, or judicial Astrology. p. 122
Where humane help fails, we may expect Divine. ib. Eight Rules to know false
doctrines by. p. 123 A good argument for the immartality of the Soul. p. 125
Great men are only happy by report. p, 126 Nero's overthrow. ib. Not good to be
too Satyricall. ib. An Episcopal character. ib. A fine way to get preserment.
p. 127 A man to be trusted. ib. What is, and what is not the work of a
Minister. p. 128 Calvin's sweet temper. ib. A merry Epitaph upon a Singing-man.
ib. Several Laws, and Customs, of several States and Commonwealths. p. 129
The virtue of Christian prayers. p. 130 A smart Satyr. p. 131. If the Devil
take the Prince what will become of the Bishop? ib. Bishop Wrens unsufferable
insolency. p. 132 The Doctor could not pray without book. p. 134 He that stopped
other men's mouths, had at last his own stopped with a vengeance. p. 135 A true
Slave. p. 136 Cardinal Pools answer to a Figure-flinger. ib. How to deal with
crafty sinners. p. 137 A covetous man is like a Christmas Box. ib. It Is hard to
know a man's disposition till he be out of check. p. 138 Love me a little and
love me long. ib. Cursed Cowes have sh^rt horns. ib. Martin Luther the famous
Instrument of Gods glory lived and dyed a very poor man. p. 139 Rulers should
ever be at leisure to do Justice. ib. Luthers Epitaph by Theodorus Beza. p. 140
A Prophecy accomplished most exactly forty years after it was uttered. ib.
Learning is to be preferred before Honor. p. 142 The ingenuity of a Scotch
Colonel. ib. Truth and Error elegantly compared to Ta^urs two twins, Genesis 38.
in a Sermon before the Parliament. p. 143. A comfort for poor faithful
Ministers. p. 144 They that have money, and will not employ, it, deserve to have
it taken from them. p. 145 A Luxurious Nation will soon overthrow it self. ib. A
speedy return of prayer. p. 146 A pretty device to cosen Conscience. ib. A
witty trick of a blind man. p. 147 The industriousnesse of Peter Ramus. p.
14^ An impregnable place taken by a fine stratagem. p. 149 The Service Book and
Ceremonies pleasing to Papists p. 150 A Butcher of Norwich Churched. p. 151 A
gracious Providence. ib. A pretty waggish trick. p. 153 Some men's sins go
beforehand to Judgment. p. 15^ Lilly a grand Imposter. p. 156 The fruit of
Covetousness p. 157. A right Counselor rare to find. ib. Courtiers are
usually flatterers. p. 158 The peoples rage and Gods just hand against a wicked
Tyrant. ib. A wonderful Earthquake. p. 159 Great Thieves cond^mn little
Thieves. p. 160 The foundations of Religion are not to be removed. p. 161 Rich
men should help their poor kindred in their callings but not took them from
their Profession. ib. A mannerly answer of a young Gentleman. p. 162 Of one
that preached well, but lived ill. ib. Martial discipline is very strict. p.
163

FINIS.

