HVGO GROTIVS HIS Consolatory ORATION TO HIS FATHER.

Translated out of the Latin Verse, and Prose.

With EPITAPHS etc. By F: G.

LONDON, Printed by W. H. and are to be sold by John Hardesty at the
Black-spred-Eagle in Duck-lane.

To His Honored Friend and Kinsman, ARTHUR HERRIS Of Lincolnes Inn, Esquire
Sir,
THe happiness, that Jacob had, to find Joseph again, and in so glorious a
condition; may not unfitly be fancied a Type of having our decea^ed children
restored to us at the Resurrection. Every good Christian Parent therefore may
be comforted with this hope: to which I here add a Consolatory Discourse, made
in his younger years, by ^he (even then) learned Grotius. I am sorry I have so
seasonable and sad occasion ^f applying it to your self, who have ^tely lost a
beloved, and only Daughter. Your Dudley Herris had in her lifetime some
acquaintance with my Sophompaneas, and a desire to have seen Him in Public.
But her chaste and pious soul (whose Lamp was so well trimmed with oil of
Spiritual Graces) is gone to mee^ the Heavenly Bridegroom; and the door are
now shut against any mixture o^ Earthly Cogitations. Nevertheless, man her
Name and Memory, if these my papers have a Genius, live here in Them and (thus
at least) may she still dwe^ with

Your affectionate Cousin and Servant, Francis Goldsmit^

HVGO GROTIVS HIS Consolatory Oration to his Father, Upon the death of his
Brother FRANCIS.
A Youth's sad obsequies, our College Hall
In mourning pomp, thy solemn funeral
I saw, O Brother* I thee, this last one
Office I could, of blood and love have done.
I and a child chiefe-mourners were, but he
A child, and therein happy did not see
The fiery feaverraging in each vein,
And frantic fits of thy distempered brain.
Nor when he did thy breathless limbs and cold,
And thy so much changed eyes and face behold,
Wept he; nor did perceive his Brother gone.
Nor, when the bell rung out and sadly on
The biere thy corpse were laid, did he forgo
^ child's praerogative, grief not to know.
But when thy body was put in the ground,
And from our eyes quite hid, O then he found
A loss so manifest, from his young years
His Brother to be seen no more drew tears.
Nor did, about the grave, the company
There standing round their tears and sighs deny,
When a child's cheeks were wet: the force was such,
It did even strangers hearts with pity touch.
At this funeral, I say, I with our little William was chief mourner. And
who, then I, had better right? For if in mourning we weigh the loss of
friendship, my parents degree of inequality, my sisters sex; my brothers tender
age kept them at a greater distance from the deceased. But I joined unto him in
an equal familiarity of kindred, how little wanted I of being a twin with him!
The same studies too gave occasion of mutual offices. And he might even in
this respect be no less dear unto me, then in that he was a brother. I say
thus least, when I comfort you, you may think, a sound man gives counsel to a
sick. You have one a partner with you in sorrow; yea who contends in mourning,
and ye^ is bold not only to comfort himself, but to communicate unto others
the experiment of that, which he has found to be good against his own grief.
First therefore let me see, whether I ought not to fear, least I may rub wound
too fresh, and as yet not closed up with a scarre whilst I run to apply
overhasty remedies. I suppose not. For I speak both unto a man, and a father,
whom the very custom of our Country forbids to prolong hi^ mourning beyond the
burial. Surely parents have no^ so great cause, as the common people think,
to grieve as not to grieve; and even in this, that they have begotten Children,
find comfort. It was much, but it came from nature, of him, who said: I knew I
had begot a mortal. We deceive our selves, if we do not daily think, that
they shall not always be* who without us had never been. See how great the
perverseness of man's disposition is. To lack children is not grievous, but to
those who have had them. And yet Bachelors are no less childlesse then others;
but they mourn not. Why then should we not lose without tears what without
tears we could have wanted? Many are the pleas for vice; and not only
covetousness, and ambition, and luxury come under this name, but also excessive
and unreasonable grief: I could have wished he had survived me according to
the course of Nature; I grieve that having had proof of his piety, I might no
longer use and enjoy it: I have lost him, whose help might have bin both to
the service of his Country, and comfort of my self. These are the words of
them that favor their own misery, this is witty calamity.

Apples downfall, and the surviving Tree
Does her dead fruit, but with a dry bark* see.
Nor is unhappy called, that she lives then.
False arguments of grief please wretched men.
Whose eyes in tears, at his sons death, shall swim,
He weeps because his son weeps not for him.
You have lost a good son: It is better then to have had an ill. You have
lost your pains in his education: I may object unto you a recompense of joy,
which you took in his towardness. But this also is now gone, and it troubles
you. If you be wise, account it gain that you have had it, rather then damage
that you have lost it. You are sure of the fruit of a past good: this can
neither be taken away, nor cease at any time; and is only beyond the envy of
fate. It is not the part of the same man, to grieve that it has not befalne
him long, yet not to rejoice, that it has happened at all. See therefore, how
much happier you are then those who never had a son* and yet they mourn not.
But if we account children goods, and certainly they are the chiefest, it is
better not to have had them long, then never. For, even when they are taken
from us, the remembrance of them remains still; a great delight to a grateful
mind. You see then, parents have very little cause to grieve, if we weigh
grief not according to the vulgar opinion, but right reason: Besides, that the
majesty of a parents authority, and that sacred dominion of nature
unbecommingly stoopes so low, as to bewail him dead, of whose life your self
were the author; and to submit your passions to him, whose passions you are
commanded to rule over. Have a care, you do nothing misbeseeming the high
dignity of a parents name, in which God and Nature have placed you; and yet
upon her we list to lay the fault of our impatiency: neither is any defense so
ready, even of womanish lamentation, as that it proceeds from Nature. But we
are guilty of manifest calumny, in imputing our crime to her. We all give way
to grief, yea most of us enforce it; so pleasing it is, then which yet nothing
is more unpleasing. No man is more miserable then he thinks himself; and
grief no less, then other things, is upheld by opinion. We deserve therefore
to be oppressed with grief, if we will not suppress it.

The lowing dam her lost calfe to lament
Is heard; yet her dumb griefe's in one day spent.
Nor the swift Mare, through woods and fields to run,
Tossing her main, is seen by next days sun,
Though of her foal bereaved. When the wild Bear
Robbed of her whelps goes ranging every where
Through pathlesse deserts; often comes back again,
And her forsaken den sees often in vain,
Her grief and rage with the first night is gone.
About her empty nest a bird make moan
I have beheld, and often her young brood call,
Yet to her wonted flights again soon fall.
Only man huggs his woe, his sorrow he
Provokes by favoring: our selves wretched we
By thinking make: yet grief not all men finds
Alike, nor equal sway holds in our minds.
In them, who know least, it takes up most room:
The barbarous Queen with a stupendous Tomb
Fondly to honor her dead spouse contrives,
Whilst of her self a maimed part she survives.
Not so those Nations by right reason taught,
Whose hearts with truth are and Religion fraught.
Women their bosoms beat with their weak arms:
And with their fists give sorrow fresh alarms:
Mothers their bare breasts tear, in showers their eyes
Dissolve; they tremble with astonished cries.
Grief is more staid in men: this difference
The sex makes, take at Nature no offense,
Who under the same law all people keeps.
Then length of Time dries up the eye that weeps,
Nature yields not to Time. If longer day
Can make a quiet mind, scorn thou delay:
A wise man's his own Time; shall grief be quelled
Against my will, and I to joy compelled?
Among those reasons which dissuade from lamenting for the dead, this is even a
chief, that we must forbear a grief which is in vain, which may add us to
them, cannot bring back them to us. Let that sorrow cease, which if it cease
not, nothing availes. We shall sooner want tears then matter for tears,
which this Universe continually suggests: and whereas therefore nothing ought
to be more precious, nor are they rashly to be shed, of which there is so much
use: on the contrary, we are of nothing so prodigal; and indeed, when we have
least cause. Many are the evils which surprise a man unawares. But, then the
death of him and his, nothing is more certain. We must not weep for that done,
which, that it would come to pass, we were not ignorant of. What do the so
frequent sounds of passing bells signify, but that no body is Natures
favorite? Others mischances daily admonish us, that they are common: and yet
when so many funerals pass before our eyes, when we follow so many to
burial, we dare begin hopes of long life; as if priviledg'd from that
aeternall law, and not placed in the same slippery condition with the whole
world. And hence it is, that these strokes more hurt us, because they are
less foreseen. Why cease we not then to complain of the iniquity of sat, who
know well enough that some are daily stricken, but that all are aimed at? If,
as we ought, we did often think on what we always see, the force of present
evils would be abated, whilst we consider future. What marvel is it that he
is dead, whom so many have gone before, and all shall follow? I could here
bring in many examples of them, and indeed of great personages, who have lost
their Children: but in this empire of fortune it would be a much harder task
to find out a House or Family not remarkable for some affliction, or that has
stood entire and unshaken to the end. I find also that the Ancients have used
this kind of consolation; that we go the way of all the world, and of the
Nature of things: That nothing is aeternall. That all things are born on this
condition, that whatsoever had a beginning, must have an ending: and that one
family cannot without impotent arrogance think to escape from that ruin which
the whole world expects. That whatsoever we call miracles, even most famous
Cities which yet are longer lived then men, have perished. This indeed is
something, not to be willing to challenge privately to himself a grief,
whose cause is public; and to submit his sorrow to common mortality: but we
have far greater comforts given us in the Souls immortality, which we attain
by an assured faith. He is not taken away from us, but taken again by God,
whom he had granted us during his own pleasure, and did but lend him. Your son
had one, whose he was more then yours. God gave you him to bring up, not a
freehold in him. Restore what was committed to your trust: you know how the
bargain was: there was a condition, that, when it seemed good unto him, you
should surrender him: nor were you to have the use of him, until you were
satisfied, but during his divine determination. A good Householder has that
money always ready, for the payment of which no certain day was set. What
debtor is so ungrateful as to rail on his creditor, and take it ill he may
have no longer use of what was lent upon courtesy, and on no other condition
then that it should at length return, whence it came? Which I say also, least
your grief find this starting hole, that he is not at a more mature age
demanded of you. He requires him not too soon, who might have not given him at
all: and if we look upon him you mourn for, it skils not how long he lived, but
how well. Now of that matter we are witnesses. He must needs have lived well,
who dies so. He must needs die well, who lived so. We all count others years,
whereas we should take thankfully what are given us, and not look upon those,
which appertain not to us. He might have lived longer. No, he could not. This
was his old age. Only so many years he had: More he received not: Why
complain we? It is our fault, who are never content with time past, and
reckon but upon the present, that is, a moment. It is all one at this day, to
have lived your years about fifty and his of eighteen. If we regard the
swiftness of time, no man lives long, if the misery, none but lives too long.
That this life is a pilgrimage, even the Philosophers have taught; Let us
gratulate him, who has been showed a shorter way to his journies end.

In Thrace, by the sea shore, a creature lives,
A^istot, Animal. l 5. c. 19.
(Old History such information gives,
And has these wonders put in her Records,)
Which on its birth day dies. Nature affords
But one days life; which with the morning light
Begins, the day star chasing away Night.
And when the Sun has halfe-way Westward gone,
The Beast of middle age is, but old grown,
When Day as yet not fully gives Night place;
Thus short the course is, thus ends the swift race.
Now could what in the morning dies have spoke,
It might complain, life's thread was too soon broke.
That, which at midday death shall overtake,
Would grudgingly cross over the Stygian Lake.
But what in the evening dies, more willingness
Perhaps might show, and its old age confess.
Not that twelve hours so great a number are,
But that our selves with others we compare.
The Raven give her no more years then man,
Would cry, her Ell was shortened to a Span.
We, never pleased at home, are looking on
Our neighbor: were none happy, wretched none
Will think himself. It would great wisdom be,
What others have, as not our own, to see.
Who knows from what evil that provident Parent has withdrawn your son?
How quite contrary to the hopes, which they had raised, has the disposition of
many been perverted! how many vices are abroad at this day, what corruptions!
Although God forbid I should make this augury of him, yet we may be glad, that
he is not only past danger, but beyond fear. He had his, almost daily,
tormentor, the Collicke; which not content always to torture, would at length
have killed him. If he had gone with the army, what hazards had he been liable
to! A wise saying was that of Syrus: What may happen to one man, may happen to
every one. Imagine before your eyes maym'd men and buried already in a part of
them; the butchery of Chirurgions, who pick the bones of the living: all which
who would not abhor worse then death? But let us suppose the least. Yet he had
dyed far from the sight of his most dear mother. We should neither have heard
of his sickness, nor of his death: we could not have prepared our hearts for
the loss: nor have bin a help or a comfort to him. We should have doubted
still, with what mind he took his death, which I suppose to be a chief
matter. These are the evils, which our first thoughts suggest to us: But we
are sottishly ignorant, if not yet taught even by our own example, how many,
and much more grievous those evils be, which come upon us so much as dreaming
on them. Many, Father, many discommodities is he delivered from by a timely
death; and if from no other, certainly from old age. See this also, how many
comforts his very death may afford you: He died in a slippery age; and not of a
sudden, but slow disease, so, that for a long while he might perceive himself
to die: Which you perhaps may think a part of his misery, I, of his felicity:
Especially whereas the pain was not extreme. For so it comes to pass, that not
only the body it self is tamed, but also by how much it decays, so much the
soul improves; there follows a loathing of life, and a desire of eternal
happiness. Would to God you indeed had seen him, and heard, with how great a
fortitude he did challenge death. The despairing of that health, which we
wished him, made him to be assured of a better. I will say more: God has
called him to himself not without a miracle. He was taken with a frenzy, and
the contagion of his sick body had also infected his mind. Yet as often as
he was admonished of death, salvation, God, as if this only concerned him, he
so answered, as that in every word he showed a good understanding. But of the
things of this present life he was nothing at all sensible. O unhappy we if
good health had in this case surpised him! Yet once there did appear I know
not what hope thereof; which, as you confess, does the more trouble you.
Surely God made made an experiment in him, whether so indeed he would still be
out of love with life. But the pious youth submitted himself wholly to his
will, being prepared on either side. How great a benefit is it, that God has
called us to be witness the^eof! that we saw him blaming the delay of death,
and with an unconquered breast proclaming as it were this very Verse: I Have
lived, and run the race, which God me gave.

But death it self, you will say, is grievous; and that of the Ancients not
altogether true: That it is natural, and therefore not painful. First,
whatsoever it is, it is now past. He seeks for sorrow where it is not, who
grieves that his have bin miserable: Nothing is more agreeable unto Nature,
then to rejoice at the end of evil. But what? What if to die be indeed no
evil? And this has been believed even by the Philosophers. We Christians go
further, and dare with Paul to say: I desire to be dissolved and to be with
Christ. This is the only gate to eternal life: This is that, over which He
the first fruits of the dead has triumphed; we therefore hear the Apostle to
contemn his sting. For our healths sake we take poison in potions, and what
soever else is loathsome to nature: what should we not undergo to enjoy a
perpetual and unchangeable health? Valiantly then, valiantly let us endure,
both death and the loss of our friends! Christians have no color for
mourning, unless that we mourn for our selves, who have lost, yea rather who
have but sent them before us. And how foul and misbecomming is this very
sorrow! Who is he, that is so much a selfe-seeker, and so envious of his
friends happiness, as to call back them, who are blessed, to take part with
him in misery? If you would do any thing for your sons sake, if there be any
respect to be had to his ghost, do what you think he would have you do, if
he has any care at all of humane affairs. Surely he would take it ill, you
should be afflicted for his sake, who being placed above the mockeries of
fortune, looks down from aloft on the business of mortals.

Him wondering at his glorious house of Rest,
Heaven holds for ever: no more now oppressed
With public, nor with private sorrow, he
From hopes and fears* from sin and pain is free.
Who filled with true light smiles at mists below,
And that but empty names of things we know.
And thus much indeed I have said in general, There are also very many other
reasons you may suggest unto your self in private. See Sulpitius writing to
Tully: Think in what manner hitherto fortune has dealt with us: that those
things are taken away from us, which ought unto men to be no less dear then
children. Add but this one evil, and how can grief be raised higher? or what
mind exercised in these calamities ought not to grow insensible, and to esteem
more lightly of all things?

So many miseries are lost, if we
Are not by suffering hardened, nor to be
Wretched yet learn. Hence also comes relief,
It Is good to have been familiar with grief.
An Epitaph ON Mrs DUDLEY HERRIS.
WHose Mind was, than her face, more fair,
Though both were good; her Fathers heir,
And (for which men should choose a wife)
Of a devout and harmless life:
A Virgin has us left in woe,
The Lamb, wherever he shall go,
To follow: let us then no more
Say, she is lost, but gone before.

