THE GROUNDS OF Infant Baptism Briefly EXPLAINED.
GOD's Word plainly declares, That it is sufficient Qualification for Baptism,
if Persons be Believers: If thou believe withal thine heart, thou may be
baptized, Act. 8. 36, 37. Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to
every creature. He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved, Mark 16.15,
16. Now the Infants of Christian Parents are either Believers, or Unbelievers;
or neither Believers nor Unbelievers, but a third kind, middle between both. A
third kind of Persons, who are neither Believers nor Unbelievers, but middle
between both, cannot be, the Scripture knows none such, it is contrary to the
Tenor of God's Word, and to the Grounds of Religion, and to the Common Belief
of Christendom, and will Ubi ponis parvulos baptizatos? Profecto in numero
credentium August. de Verbis Apostoli Ser. 14.
infer one of these two impious Absurdities; either that Infants are bruit
Beasts, or that dying in Infancy, they are neither saved not damned, but remain
in a Third State, middle, between Heaven and Hell, for ever. If you suppose the
Infants of Christian Parents to be Unbelievers, then in reason you must
suppose, that they be all so, and dying in Infancy Unbelievers, they must needs
be damned. For Christ plainly says, That he which believes not, shall be
damned, he is condemned already, he shall not see life, but the wrath of God
abides on him, Mark 16. 16. John 3. 18, 36. And if all the Infants of
Christian Parents, dying in Infancy, are damned Unbelievers, we have much more
reason to conclude, that all the Infants of Heathen Parents dying in Infancy
are so too. But, sure, that Doctrine cannot be true, which adjudgeth all
Infants taken away in Infancy to inevitable Damnation for ever. It remains
then, that the Infants of Christian Parents are Believers, and therefore
baptizable.

II. Though Infants are not capable of actual Faith, after the similitude of
vigilant grown Men, yet they are capable of the inward Seed and Root thereof,
after the similitude of grown Men in their Sleep, while their Sleep 1 John 3.
9. Luke 1. 15, 35. Jer. 1. 5.
lasts, and as Jeremy and John Baptist were sanctified from the Womb, and as
the Infant Jesus was holy, and as David was made to hope when he was upon his
Psalm. 22. 9.
mothers breasts. The Soul of each Infant is a Spiritual Substance, and being
so, it must needs be immortal, and some way or other in act, from the time that
it is put into the Body, and while it is in the Body, it does animate and
quicken the Body, and is the Life thereof, and is always upon its way to
Eternity without 1 Cor. 7. 14.
all stop or stay, and either it is by supernatural Grace inwardly holy in the
sight of God, and so in the way to Heaven: or it is destitute of supernatural
Grace, and then it is inwardly unholy and unclean in the sight of God, and so
in the way to Hell. Our Brethren, the Opposers of Infant Baptism confess, That
from Their Confession of Faith, p. 24.
Adam and Eve, the Common Parents of us all, corrupted Nature was conveyed to
all their Posterity, descending from them by ordinary Generation, being now
conceived in Sin, and by Nature Children of Wrath, the Servants of Sin, the
Subjects of Death, and all other Miseries, Spiritual, Temporal, and Eternal,
unless the Lord Jesus set them free. Now Infants being inwardly infected and
defiled with Sin and Corruption, as the Great Disease of lapsed Humane Nature,
they must needs be by Divine Grace capable of Cure and Remedy, which Cure and
Remedy cannot be without super natural Regeneration, whereby their Souls are
inwardly renewed and made Partakers of the Divine and Godly Nature, conformably
to the Image of the Infant Jesus, whose Soul, while he was an Infant, did
overflow 2 Pet. 1. 4. H b. 1. 9. and 2. 11, 12. Romans 8. 29. Joh. 20. 17. Luke
1. 35. and 2.40. Joh. 3. 3, 5, 6.
with the Seed of Divine Faith, Hope, Love, Meekness, Piety, and all other
Celestial Graces, a degree and measure whereof God works in all Elect
Infants, in respect whereof the Infant Jesus, and they are Brethren and
Fellows, there is spiritual similitude between them. The Infant Jesus is
considerable two ways: First, In respect of the Natural Substance of his Soul
and Body; and so there is similitude between him and all other Infants: for
they also have Souls and Bodies, no less than the Infant Jesus: this similitude
is natural and common. Secondly, In the Infant Jesus, besides the natural
Substance of his Soul and Body, there is by supernatural Grace, and gracious
Donation and Endowment, the Seed and Root of all Divine and Heavenly Virtues,
which are the Life of the Soul, like as the Soul is the Life of the Body; these
Divine and Heavenly Virtues did emidently shine forth in the Life of Christ,
when grown up. Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God
and man. The Seed and Luke 2. 52.
Root of all Heavenly Virtues was by supernatural Grace in his Soul, while he
was in the Virgin's Womb, and as soon as he was born of her, but did not appear
till he was arrived to some maturity. When he was grown to Man's Estate, he did
use to take his Rest in Sleep; and while be slept, the inward Heavenly Virtues
and Graces of his Mind did not appear, but the Seed and Root thereof lay hid in
his Soul. Now between such Infants as Jeremy and John Baptist, who are by
supernatural Grace born of God, and holy from the Womb, and the Infant Jesus,
there is spiritual and special similitude. But between Infants unregenerate and
unholy, and the Infant Jesus, there is no spiritual and special similitude;
Genesis 3. 15. Isa. 42. 1. Romans 9 8.
but contrariety, as between the Seed of the Serpent, and the Seed of the
Woman, between Non-Elect and Elect. No reason can be rendered, why the Infants
of Christian Parents, should not be as truly capable of being Believers, as the
Infant Jesus was of being a Savior. Unto you is born this day, in the city of
Luke 2. 11. Mat. 1. 21.
David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. She shall bring forth a Son, and
thou shall call his name Jesus: for he shall save his people from their sins.
As if you suppose the Infant Jesus Christ not to be the Savior of Souls, it
cannot be declared, when he comes to be the Savior of Souls. So if you suppose
the Infants of Believing Parents not to be a kind of Believers, it cannot be
declared when the Children born of Believing Parents, come to be in the Number
of Believers, in what Year of their Lives. If the Infancy of Jesus Christ could
not bar him from being Jesus Christ, the Mediator between God and Men, the
Head of the Church, and the Savior thereof, when he sucked his Mother's
Breasts. By the same reason the state of Infancy cannot hinder the Children of
Believing Parents from being a kind of Bellevers and Members of the Church,
when they suck their Mother's Breasts. Christ plainly says, Whosoever shall
offend one Mat. 18.6. Luke 18. 15. Mark 9. 36.
of these little ones which believe in me, etc. And by comparing the
Evangelists it will appear, that by these lettle ones which believe in Christ,
he means Infants, such as Christ took in his arms; at least, he does not
exclude Infants.

III. The Adversaries of Infant Baptism express their Doctrine in these words:
Those who do actually profess Repentance toward God, Faith in, and Obedience
to, Their Confession of Faith, p. 97.
our Lord Jesus, are the only proper Subjects of Baptism: And for proof hereof,
they refer us to two Scriptures in the Margin, namely, Mar. 16. 16. Act. 8. 36,
37. Now from these very Scriptures it is already proved, That it is enough for
Baptism that Persons be Believers, and that the Infants of Believing Parents
are a kind of Believers, and therefore proper Subjects of Baptism. But no
Scripture declares, that those only who actually profess Belief, are the proper
Subjects of Baptism, this is plainly an addition to God's Word, and therefore
to be rejected.

IV. Christ's Commission to his Apostles is, Go ye, and teach all Nations,
baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost: Mat. 28. 19.
That is, Go ye, and Christianize all Nations, make all Nations Christians,
Saints, Believers, Disciples of Christ, get them into Covenant with God,
through Christ, and then Baptize them, and solemnly enter them into the Church
of Christ, by the Rite of Baptism: For like as Jesus made and baptized
Disciples; first made, and then baptized Disciples; so we may reasonably think,
that Joh. 4. 1, 2.
Christ's Commission to his Apostles was, That they should first make all
Nations Christians, Saints, Believers, Disciples, and get them into Covenant
with God through Christ, and then baptize them. At the time when Christ gave
forth this Commission, the whole World was either Jews or Gentiles. The
generality of the Gentiles were, for the present, Worshippers of Idols, under
the Power Acts 26. 17, 18. Ephesians. 2. 12.
of Satan, drowned in Ignorance, Infidelity, and false Religion. The Jews had
been long used to Circumcision, the Passover, and the rest of the Old
Testament-Ministry and Pedagogy: too many of them were Unregenerate, though
Worshippers of the true God: the rest, who were truly Godly, did yet need
Instruction concerning the true Messiah, and that this same Jesus whom we
Preach, is the Christ of God, the Savior of the World, the sole Mediator
between God and Men, foretold by the Prophets, and prefigured in ancient Types
and Sacrifices, and that all the Old Testament-way of Worship was now to cease,
and give place to the New. Therefore the scope and true meaning of Christ's
Commission may well be thought to be this: Go ye, my Apostles and Ministers,
into all the World, and Preach the Gospel to every Person capable thereof;
reduce them from their Ungodliness and State of Damnation, to a State of Grace
and Salvation; make them Christians, Saints, Disciples, Believers, Members of
the Church; get all, both Parents and Children, into Covenant with the true
God, through Jesus Christ; throw down the Middle Wall of Partition between Jew
and Gentile, and make both One Holy Society in Christ: and having so done,
Baptize them, and let Baptism be the Token, Sign, and Seal of the Covenant,
between God in Christ and them. If then the Infants of Christian Parents be a
kind of Christians, Saints, Believers, Disciples, Members of the Church, in
Covenant with God, through Christ, (all which for substance denote the same
thing, and are convertible) then by the Tenor of Christ's Commission they are
to be Baptized. Now the Opposers of Infant Baptism own and declare, that Their
Confession of Faith, p. 115, 116.
the Infants of Believing Parents under the Old Testament, were in Covenant
with God: and therefore they must needs own and agree, That the Infants of
Believing Parents under the New Testament, are no less in Covenant with God;
unless they can prove that God's way is not equal; which they never can: For
certainly his way is equal, as himself declares; but the ways of Sinners are
Ez. k. 18. 25.
unequal.

V. It is plain from Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, 12, 13. that Little Ones, together with
their Parents, did enter into Covenant with the God of Israel: And from the
time of Abraham God ordained, that all his Male-Seed, successively in their
Generations, should be Circumcised the Eighth Day; by that Rite a Divine Bond
and Engagement was laid upon the Infants Circumcised, to be the Lord's faithful
Acts 7. 8. Genesis 17.9, 10, 11.
Servants all their days, it was a token of the Covenant between God and them.
And long before Circumcision, even from the Beginning, there were by Divine
Appointment Sacrifices, which were typical and symbolical of Eternal
Redemption, through Faith in the Death of Christ, as future. In those
Sacrifices Believing Parents did Covenant with God: Gather my saints together
unto me: those Psalm. 50. 5.
that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice. They did also inter their
Infants into Covenant with God, they did first devote and consecrate themselves
to the Service of the true God, and engage* Themselves to him, and then their
Infants; the resolution of every pious Parent being the same with Joshua's: As
for me and Jos. 24. 15.
my house, we will serve the Lord. The mutual Oath and Covenant between the
Nation of Israel, and the Gibeonites, did bind their whole Offspring and
Posterity; Jos. 9. 2 Samuel 21.
which because King Saul, some Hundreds of Years after, did presume to violate,
therefore God did severely revenge the Breach thereof, by Three Years Famine,
in the Reign of King David, and would not be pacified but by the Death of Seven
of Readiness Sons, the Gibeonites so desiring. From all which it is plain, that
Parents may by Authority from God, lay a Divine Bond, Oath, and Covenant, upon
the Souls of their Infants, which when grown up, they are bound inviolably to
observe.

VI. There was a Covenant between God and Christ considered as Man, That he
should be obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross, and be therefore
Rewarded and Crowned with supereminent Joy and Glory in Heaven for ever: The
Foundation and Cornerstone of this Covenant was laid in Christ's Incarnation,
according to the Eternal Purpose and Foreknowledge of God, the Father, and the
Son, and the Holy Ghost. And hereupon the Infant Jesus was Circumcised the
Eighth Day, in Token of the foresaid Covenant between God and that blessed
Babe: And about the Thirtieth Year of his Age he was Baptized by John in
Jordan, which was another Token and Confirmation of the same Covenant. And,
look, as Moses bore up his Heart in all his Sufferings, by having respect unto
the recompense of the reward: so the Man Christ Jesus for the H^b. 11. 26. H^b.
12. 2. Isa. 49 4 and 53.11. Phil. 2. 8, 9.
joy that was set before him, endured the cross, despising the shame, and is
set down at the right hand of the throne of God; according to the Covenant
between God and him. Now the Covenant between God and the Man Christ Jesus, is
for substance the same with the Covenant between God and all godly Christians,
they are specifically but one everlasting Covenant, because Christ considered
as Man, Heb. 1. 9. and 2. 11, 12. Romans 8. 29. Joh. 20. 17. Col. 1. 18.
and all godly Christians are Brethren and Fellows, only he in all things has
the pre-eminence, as being the Firstborn among many Brethren, and anointed
with the Oil of Gladness above his Fellows.

VII. What advaniage then has the Jew? or what profit is there of
circumcision? Romans 3. 1, 2.
Much every way. Certainly the Christian now has not less advantage then the
Jew anciently had, and there is not less profit now by Baptism, then was of old
by Circumcision. Christian Parents and their Seed, are not Losers, but rather
Gainers by the Coming of Christ, and the New Testament in his Blood: because he
is a surety of a better testament, the mediator of a better covenant. But this
cannot be, if the Infants of Christian Parents be not admittable to Baptism.
Heb. 7.22. and 8 6.
For how can that be a better Covenant and Testament, which abolisheth
Circumcision, whereby there was much Profit and Advantage to the Infants of
Believing Parents anciently, and gives them nothing in lieu thereof, but
excludes them from Baptism coming in the room thereof?

VIII. That Baptism comes in the place of Circumcision is evident: for the Heb.
7. 12.
Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the Law.
For tho the Law for Circumcision was in force some Hundreds of Years before the
Institution of the Levitical Priesthood, yet were they both but temporary
Institutions, designed to last but for a time, until the time of Reformation;
which being come, Heb. 9. 10.
they cease and have an end, and in their room comes Baptism, and the
Priesthood of Christ, and the New Covenant in his Blood: Plain it is, that as
there is a change of the Levitical Priesthood, so is there also of
Circumcision: If ye be Gal. 5. 2.
circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. Now there cannot be a change of
Circumcision, but there must needs be another Sign and Token of God's gracious
Covenant in its room: for therein consists the nature of a change, and the
change here must needs be for the better, because Christ is the Mediator of a
better Covenant; and the time of the New Testament is the time of Reformation,
more glorious than the time of the Old Testament. Accordingly Baptism 2 Cor. 3.
10, ^^.
is better then Circumcision, as better suiting with the State of the Church
under the New Testament: 1. It is more easy, Circumcision was bloody and
painful. 2. It is more plain and significative of our Communion and Fellowship
with Christ in his Death and Resurrection, and of the washing away of all our
sins in his Blood. 3. It is equally applicable to Males and Females. 4. It is
not limited to the Eighth Day. 5. It is enjoined to all Believers, both Jews
and Gentiles, throughout the World. 6. It is to continue to the End of the
World. 7. It is to be done by none but a Valid Minister of Christ. 8. It is to
be done publicly in the Assembly of God's People, if it may be. Look then, as
we have the Lord's Supper in the room of the Passover, and the Lord's Day in
the room of the Seventh Day Sabbath, and the Priesthood of Christ in the room
of the Levitical Priesthood, and the New Testament in Christ's Blood in the
room of the Old Testament in the Blood of Beasts: So we have Baptism in the
room of Circumcision a change every way for the better. Either Circumcision is
changed for Baptism, or for nothing: for no other thing imaginable comes in its
room. But a change there must needs be, otherwise the Scripture will be found
erroneous in saying: The Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a
change also of the Law.

IX. The Opposers of Infant Baptism deny Baptism to be the Seal of God's
Covenant with every Believer, and affirm, That the Scriptures are altogether
silent thereof, and conceive the Seal of that Covenant, is the Indwelling of
the Spirit of Their Confession of Faith, p. 117,
Christ, in the particular and individual Persons in whom he resides, and
nothing else. But this is a manifest Error: for before Abraham was Circumcised,
he was a true Believer, in Covenant with God, and sealed with the Spirit of
Christ: afterward he received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the
righteousness of the faith, which he had yet being uncircumcised. So that
besides the Indwelling of the Romans 4. 11.
Spirit, there was then clearly another Seal of God's Covenant, namely,
Circumcision. The difference between these two Seals stood in this: the
Indwelling of the Spirit is an internal Seal, peculiar to the Elect, of
absolute Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. and 4, 30. 2 Cor. 1. 22.
necessity to the Salvation of each Person from the Fall of Adam, to the end of
the World; but Circumcision was an external Seal, common to Isaac and Ishmael,
to Jacob and Esau, to Elect and Non-Elect Persons, not ordained before
Abraham's time, neither to all then, but to some only, and to no Infant before
the Eighth Day, and upon special Reasons dispensed with or omitted for Forty
Years in the Wilderness, and never esteemed by God of equal excellency and
necessity with Regeneration. Moreover, it is undeniably plain, that
Circumcision was a token of the covenant between God and Abraham, together with
his seed after him, in their generations. And being so, it was a Seal thereof:
Genesis 17, 9, 10, 11.
for a Token of God's Covenant, and a Seal thereof, for substance, denote the
same thing. This Covenant did assure the earthly Canaan to Abraham and all his
Natural Seed in common by Sarah, and the heavenly Canaan to Abraham and all his
Spiritual Seed. Those of Abraham's Seed who rested in the Letter of
Circumcision without the Spirit, in the Circumcision of the Flesh without the
Circumcision of the Heart, and minded the earthly more than the heavenly
Canaan, were Abraham's degenerate Seed, Children of the Devil, born after the
Flesh and not after the Spirit, ungodly, and liable to eternal Damnation. But
such as together with the Circumcision of the Flesh, had the inward
Circumcision of the Heart, and by supernatural Grace and Regeneration were
truly holy before God, these were Abraham's Spiritual Seed, Elect in Christ,
Children of God, and Christians really, though not so called, and unto them
Circumcision was principally a Seal and Token of God's everlasting gracious
Covenant, and of pardon of Sin, Justification, Adoption, and Eternal Life, as
an absolute and free Gift in Christ: And though only the Male-Infants were
Circumcised, yet as to all Fundamental Blessings of the Covenant, the case of
Males and Females was the same. And though Circumcision be long since
abolished, yet the Doctrine thereof is not abolished, it is truly Evangelical,
and of perpetual use to the Church Militant unto the end of the 1 Pet. 3. 21.
World. Again, it is plain that Baptism is a Figure: The like figure whereunto,
even baptism, does also now save us. This is equivalent to a Sign, Seal, and
Token of Salvation, according to the New Covenant in Christ's Blood: For it is
certain, that the Salvation of Souls is not save by the New Covenant in
Christ's Blood. Now seeing that Baptism is a Divine Figure, such as does save
the Soul, it must needs be a Sign, Seal, and Token of God's everlasting
Covenant in Christ with every Believer, whereby is Salvation. And Christ's
Commission to his Apostles, as is before showed, being to get all Persons into
Covenant with God through Christ, and then to baptize them, and it being
manifest that the Infants of Christian Parents are in Covenant with God through
Christ, it follows unavoidably that they are to be Baptized, and admitted to
Baptism as the Seal and Token of God's Covenant coming in the room of
Circumcision.

X. The Adversaries of Infant Baptism, from Dr. Lightfoot, allege, That Their
Confession of Faith, p. 118, etc.
the forecited Scripture, Romans 4. 11. is not exactly translated, and conceive
the Sense of it to be this: And he received the Sign of Circumcision, a Seal of
the Righteousness of Faith, which was to be in the Uncircumcision. Which was to
be, (I say) not which had been, not that which Abraham had whilst he was yet
Uncircumcised, but that which his Uncircumcised Seed should have; that is, the
Gentiles, who in time to come should imitate the Faith of Abraham. This they
earnestly desire may be seriously ^^ighed. Now supposing, but not granting this
Sense of the words, it overthrows their forenamed Position, that nothing but
the Indwelling of the Spirit is the Seal of God's Covenant with every Believer:
for here they plainly grant another Seal, viz. Circumcision a Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith in us Gentiles, and consequently of God's Covenant with
us. But the truth is, that the foresaid Sense of the words from Dr. Lightfoot
contradicts itself and the Grounds of Religion: For it supposes Believing
Gentiles to be Imitators of the Faith of Abraham, and yet saving Faith in us
Gentiles to differ in kind from the Faith of Abraham: which is very Absurd and
Atheological. For how can we imitate the Faith of Abraham, if his Faith and
ours be two contrary kinds? There may be degrees of saving Faith, but two kinds
of saving Faith there cannot be, from the Fall of Adam to the End of the World.
Abraham was saved by the Grace of Christ, as purposed to be Mediator through
Faith: and the Saints now are saved by the Grace of Christ, as already Mediator
through the same kind of Faith. So that if Circumcision was a Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith in time to be in us Gentiles, of necessity it could not
but be a Seal of the Righteousness of the Faith which Abraham had before he was
Circumcised; because his Faith then, and our Faith now, as to Eternal
Salvation, are for substance one and the same kind. Hence he is styled the
Father of all them that believe, though Romans 4. 11.
they be not circumcised.

XI. The Wisdom of God speaking by the Apostle Peter, thought this abundantly
sufficient to silence and stop the Mouths of all Gainsayers: Can any man
forbid water that these should not be baptized, which have received the Act.
10. 47.
holy Ghost as well as we? Now though receiving the Holy Ghost may include both
principal and subservient Gifts and Blessings, yet it cannot be thought to
exclude those which are principal and supreme, but rather they above all other
are included as most excellent and necessary, viz. Pardon of Sin,
Justification, Adoption, Regeneration, a State of Salvation. The foresaid
Interrogation does plainly declare this to be the Mind and Will of Christ, and
the true meaning of that Grand Commission, Go and teach all Nations, baptizing
them, etc. that none be excluded from Baptism, that have received the Holy
Ghost so as to be in a State of Salvation: And therefore if according to the
Rules of wise and conscientious Charity, in the due mean between too much
Rigor and too much Laxness, we have just grounds to judge, that the Infants of
Christian Parents be in a State of Salvation, we may apply the foresaid
Interrogation concerning them: Can any Man forbid Water that these Infants of
Christian Parents should not be Baptized, who in the judgment of Charity are
beloved of God, Pardoned, Adopted, Regenerate, Partakers of the Holy Ghost, so
as to be in a State of Salvation as well as their Parents and grown Bellevers?

XII. It cannot be thought that we should be bound infallibly to know the
Hearts of others: for if we must not baptize but upon those grounds, we must
baptize none at all; not grown Persons themselves. Of necessity there must be a
Standard of Admission to Baptism, and it must be plain, universal, serving for
all Persons, in all Places, at all Times, immovably fixed by God, otherwise
there will be endless Dispute, Uncertainty, and Contention about it. Infallible
insight into, and knowledge of others Hearts and Consciences inwardly, belongs
only to God, and is to us impossible, and altogether unnecessary. Therefore
Christian Charity in the Breasts of God's Ministers, avoiding the two extremes
of Rigor and Licentiousness, is appointed by Christ to judge, discern, decide,
and determine who are, and who are not to be reputed Saints, Christians in
Covenant with God through Christ, in a State of Salvation, and consequently fit
for Baptism, and to be washed in the Laver of Regeneration: For can any man
forbid water, that all such should not be baptized? This Standard is plainly
Divine; if you go from it, you know not where to fix.

XIII. That well known place in the Gospel, Mark 10. 13. etc. is abundantly
enough for the Regulation of our charitable Judgment, and judicious Charity in
this point being so full, clear, and pregnant: For Christ readily received such
Infants as were brought unto him for his Blessing, was much displeased with
those that would have hindered them from being brought unto him, he took them
up in his Arms, that his Hands upon them, and blessed them, and commanded,
saying, Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not: for of
such is the Kingdom of God. Now though Christ be not corporally present on
Earth, as sometime he was, for to have Infants brought unto him for his
Blessing, Grace, and Favor, yet he is spiritually present in the Assemblies of
his Saints, and with his Ministers in the right Dispensation of Baptism,
according to his Word always, Rev. 2. 1. Mat. 18. 20. and 28. 19, 20.
even unto the end of the World. But Christian Charity binds us to judge all
the Infants of Christian Parents, whilst they are Infants, to be in a State of
Salvation, till being grown up they manifest the contrary. Who can doubt but
that the Infants of godly Parents are as dear to God, as beloved by Christ, as
holy, as fit for Heaven, as much in a State of Salvation, as Simon Magus, as
multitudes more such grown Persons baptized by the Apostles, and as many
baptized by the Opposers of Infant Baptism? Can any Man forbid Water that the
Infants of pious Parents should not be baptized, which belong to the Kingdom of
God, as well as their Parents?

XIV. There is difference between the Doctrine of Baptism, and Baptism Heb. 6.
1, 2. 1 Cor. 1. 17. 1 Pet. 3.21.
itself, as between Morals and Rituals, between Substance and Ceremony, between
Mercy and Sacrifice, between Principal and Appendix: For Christ sent me not to
baptize, but to preach the gospel. The Doctrine of Baptism is the Doctrine of
the New Covenant, of which Baptism is a Divine Sign, Seal, and Token* The Sum
of it is this, That all Men are reducible to Two, the First and the Second
Adam, and all such as descend from the First Adam by Natural Generation: are
conceived and born in Sin, 1 Cor. 15 45.47. Joh. 3 3 5. Gal. 3. 21. Act. 4. 12.
Romans 8. 29. 1 Pet. 1. 2.
from the Guilt whereof they cannot be saved and set free, without supernatural
Regeneration through the Grace of Christ, the Second Adam and all such as God
from everlasting did foreknow, would by his special Grace in Christ be
Regenerate, and have Spiritual Life in their Souls, them he did predestinate to
eternal Salvation. This Doctrine of Baptism is the Foundation of true Religion,
the Marrow of the Scripture, the Sum of Practical Truth, and the Compendium of
Divinity. But Baptism as distinct from the Doctrine thereof, is but a Divine
Figure, Ceremony, or Token annexed to the Gospel or New Covenant, a Ritual
Ordinance, the Contempt whereof is perllous, but Infants are not capable of
contemning it.

XV. There are Three sorts of Blessings and Favors vouchsafed by God to Fallen
Man; some common to Christians and Heathens; some not common to us and
Heathens, and yet common to good and bad Christians; some peculiar to God's
Elect. Of the First sort are Rain and fruitful Seasons, having our Hearts
filled with Food and Gladness, Magistracy, Civil Order, and the necessary
Supports of Humane Society, whereby the worst on Earth are in better case than
the Devils and damned Ones in Hell, and are capable of being saved by God's
Grace, in such sort as our first Parents, and the Angels which fell, were
capable of Perseverance. Of the Second sort are the Word and Sacraments, being
born of Christian Parents, Education in the Christian Religion, and Communion
in external Ordinances, and Privileges common to Isaac and Ishmael, to Jacob
and Esau, to Peter and Judas, to Paul and Simon Magus, to Elect and Non-Elect
Christians, suitably to their Age and Capacities. Of the Third sort are
Regeneration, Adoption, Pardon of Sin, Justification, Perseverance, Eternal
Life; these are peculiar to God's Elect, and not common to them and others. And
then does God Elect Persons in Christ, when according to his own Eternal
Purpose and Foreknowledge, he does for the sake of Christ, and his meritorious
Cross and Intercession, without all precedent Merit of their own, by his
Gospel-work in them, Divine Faith, and thereby pardons their Sins, and seals
them with his Holy Spirit, and so sets them apart for himself, and of Dead in
Sin, the Slaves of Satan, and Reprobate to every Good Work, makes them alive
unto Righteousness, the Children of God, his Elect Ones, a peculiar People to
himself. Thus the Death of Christ is the meritorious cause of our Election to
Salvation, but not of God's Eternal Purpose to Elect us; for Divine Purpose to
Elect, and Election itself, are clearly distinct as Cause and Effect, as
Antecedent and Consequent, and may in no wise be confounded.

XVI. I conceive, that all the Three forementioned sorts of Blessings and
Favors are proper Fruits and Effects of Christ's meritorious Cross and
Passion, though they are not all equally so, but most eminently and principally
the Third sort, peculiar to the Elect, and the other as subservient: For Christ
is the Savior of all men, especially of those that believe: and whom he saves,
he saves by the merit of his Cross. God does not now Govern the 1 Timothy 4. 10. 2
Pet. 2. 1. Heb. 2.9.
World barely as Creator, before Adam's Fall, but as Redeemer in and through
Christ, unto whom all Power is given in Heaven and Earth, and his Kingdom
rules over all, both Angels and Men, for the everlasting Good of all Militant
Saints, and in order to carrying on the Great Work of Redemption by Faith, in
all such as belong to the Election of Grace. And therefore whatsoever Blessings
and Mercies, whether common or special, any of fallen Mankind partake of
subsequently to Creation and Permission of Original Sin, they are proper Fruits
and Effects of Christ's Death. And wherein Col. 1. 20. Ephesians. 1. ^0, 21.22, 23.
Phil. 2. 8 9 10. (...). 28. 18* 19. J^m 5* ^2. 23 2^. H^b. 9. 1^. Rev. 5. 9 1^,
13.
any Intellectual Creatures, whether Angels or Men, are capable of being
serviceable to God, and to Christ our Mediator, in promoting the Work of
Redemption, they are bound to serve to the utmost of their power, and Christ
may be said to have purchased their Service with his Blood, and to have right
thereto by the Merit of his Cross: For in purchasing Eternal Redemption, which
is the principal end, he must needs be supposed inclusively to purchase all the
necessary helps and means requisite and conducing thereto, Et qui adimit medium
dirimit finem.

XVII. Concerning Heathen Parents the Scripture plainly declares, That for the
present they are without Christ, being aliens from the Commonwealth Ephesians. 2. 12.
of Israel, and strangers from the Covenants of Promise, having no hope, and
without God in the world. We cannot think that the Infants of such are in
Covenant with God. As of old it was rightly said, Salvation is of the Jews: so
now it is rightly said, That Salvation is of the Christians. Joh. 4. 22.
The Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved. But we cannot say,
that the Infants of Heathen Parents are added to the Church. Act. 2. 47.
While the Jews continued in the Faith of Abraham, their Infants were the
natural branches, and partaked of the root and fatniss of the Olive Tree; Gal.
2. 15. Romans 9.4. and 11. from 16. to 25. Act. 2. 39. Isa. 44. 3.
to them and their Children pertained the adoption, and the glory, and the
Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the Promises.
But they by Unbelief breaking themselves and their Children off from the God of
Abraham, and his true Religion, this gave occasion for the calling of the
Gentiles, who were wild by Nature, and Branches of the wild Olive Tree: but
being by supernatural Grace and Regeneration united to Christ, endued with the
Faith of Abraham, and so graffed contrary to Nature into a good Olive Tree: Now
the Infants of Believing Gentiles are become the Natural Branches, and together
with the Infants of believing Jews, partake of the root and fatness of the
olive tree, and consequently of Baptism, as coming in the room of Circumcision.
By this good Olive Tree, I understand Christ, the Savior of all Men, specially
of those that believe, who has with his own Blood purchased Temporal Mercies
for all Men in general, and Eternal Mercies for the Elect in special, and
Baptism in common for all Christian Parents and their Infants.

XVIII. As they are not all Israel, which are of Israel: so they are not all
Romans 9. 6.
the Church, which are of the Church, nor all internally in Covenant with God,
that are externally in Covenant with him. And yet all that are of the Church,
and externally in Covenant with God may be admitted to such external
Privileges, as do in common pertain to Isaac and Ishmael, to Jacob and Esau,
to Simon Peter, and Simon Magus, to visible Christians and their Seed, suitably
to their Age and Capacity.

XIX. Baptism in its own nature is the Laver of Regeneration, a saving Tit. 3.
21. 1 Pet. 3. 21. Romans 4. 11. Act. 22. 16.
Figure, a divine Sign, Seal and Token of Pardon of Sin, Adoption,
Justification, and Eternal Life, according to God's gracious Covenant in
Christ. But as one and the same Sun does harden Clay and soften Wax, and as one
and the same Gospel is to some, through God's special Grace in Christ, the
Savor of Life unto Life, and unto others, through their own Sin, the Savor of
Death unto Death, so is Baptism. In receiving Baptism, Persons receive 2 Cor.
2. 16, 17. 2 Cor. 6, 1.
the Grace of God; but too many receive the grace of God in vaih: and so what
in its own nature is the Laver of Regeneration, a saving Figure, a divine Sign,
Token, and Seal of the greatest Blessings and Favors, is not so to such as
receive it unworthily and in vain.

XX. The Papists generally, and many Protestants, hold, That the Sacraments
confer Grace, Non ponentibus obicem, to such as do not put in a bar. Roffens.
Cont. Luther, Art. 1. Le Blane These. Theol. de usu and efficacia Sacram. Novi
Testam.
Luther, in the beginning of the Reformation, did censure and oppose this
Sentence and Opinion as Heretical. Certain it is, that there cannot be a
Sacrament without Faith: For all sound Divines unanimously approve that
excellent Saying of St. Augustine's, Accedit verbum ad Elementum, and fit
Sacramentum: The Word comes to the Element, and it is made a Sacrament. This
Saying is grounded upon these and the like Scriptures, Romans 4. 11. 1 Pet. 3.
21. So that without the Word of Divine Institution, there is no Sacrament, no
Baptism, no Lord's Supper. But the Word of Institution cannot be without Faith,
either common or special: For the Word of Institution and Faith are related as
principal and Instrumental, and as related they are by Nature together, and do
mutually prove and infer each other. There may be Words and Washing without
Faith, but not Christian Baptism. Common Faith, such as Simon Magus had, is
sufficient to the Validity of Baptism, and for entering the Person baptized into
the Lord's Oath and Covenant, and into the Number and Society of visible
Christians, as to external Fellowship and Communion; but it is not sufficient
to Pardon of Sin, and a State of Salvation; for this there is an absolute
necessity of special Faith, even the Faith of God's Elect as to the Adult, and
the Divine Seed thereof as to Infants. No Christian Faith, no Church, no
Sacrament, no Gospel Ministry, no Difference between us and Heathens, nothing
but Practical Atheism, and the Kingdom of the Devil, and Eternal Despair.

XXI. Many hold that God's Promises are of two sorts, Absolute and Conditional,
and that Baptism is but a Seal of his Conditional Promises, and that the
eternal Salvation of Infants is not absolutely and entirely by the Grace of God
in Christ, but partly by it, and partly by somewhat else as a condition
thereof, or cause, Sine qua non, without which Infants cannot be saved. But the
Scripture has no such Doctrine, and therefore it may not be received. 1. We
read, That all the Promises of God in Christ, are Yea, and in him, Amen. And
that godliness is profitable unto 2 Cor. 1. 20.
all things, having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to
come. But of two sorts of Divine Promises, some absolute, and some conditional,
1 Timothy, 4.8.
we read nothing at all. 2. The Sum of all the Blessings and Good Things
contained in God's Promises, is Eternal Life, as begun on Earth and perfected
in Heaven: In hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie; promised before
the world began, Tit. 1. 2. And this is the promise that he has promised us,
even eternal life, 1 John 2. 25. Now Eternal Life is God's own Life, even the
Life of God. But the Life of God cannot Ephesians. 4. 18.
be conditional for if it be conditional, then God himself must needs be
conditional, uncertain of his own Life, an impotent, and precarious God,
dependent upon Men for his very Life, and it is at their courtesy whether he
shall be God or no. 3. If the Eternal Salvation of Infants, from first to last,
be not absolutely and entirely by God's Grace in Christ, then we must be bound
to pray for Infants after this manner: Lord, do not save them, but almost save
them; the matter is divided into certain parts, part belongs to thee, and part
belongs to some other; Lord, do thine own part, it pertains not to thee to do
more, and therefore we may beg no more, thou art but a half Savior, an
imperfect Savior, there be others coequal and coordinate with thee in this
matter. But this kind of praying is rather blaspheming than praying. 4. If
Infants eternal Salvation, from first to last, be not absolutely and entirely
by God's free Grace in Christ, then it must needs be wholly of Debt, and not of
Grace, and so Infants shall have ground of glorying against God after this
manner, and to this effect: We thank God indeed for making us Infants, and for
bare universal Grace in common with Cain, Judas, and the rest of damned Men in
Hell, when they were upon Earth; but for our Eternal Salvation as begun on
Earth, and perfected in Heaven, we owe God no thanks at all; but he is beholden
to us by our Parents, or by our Nominal God-Parents, or by our selves, for our
good Merits and Deservings, and not we at all to him, for any special and
differencing Grace. Which Doctrine is the same with Pelagianisin, plainly
repugnant to Faith in God: For God is not God, unless he be absolutely Romans 11.
35. 36. 1 Cor. 4. 7.
and entirely the Author of all Good to his Creatures, whether it be natural or
supernatural corporal or spiritual, common or special, temporal or eternal, it
is all from God of Grace, and not of Debt, whether they be Infants or Adult
Ones who partake of it. 5. Though God make use of Instruments and Means, and
there can be no pardon of Sin without foregoing Divine Faith in the Adult, and
the Seed thereof in Infants, yet Means ard Instruments, 1 Cor. 12. 6. and 15.
28. Psalm. 145. 17 18. Isa. 40. 17, 18. Ephesians. 1. 11.
and subordinate Causes and Agents, add no Perfection to God, he is truly all
in all, and works all in all; but so that he is no way the Author of Sin, but
the just Avenger of it; the Author of all Good, holy in all his Ways and
righteous in all his Works, working all things after the Counsel of his own
Will, and the whole Creation abstracted from, compared with, and set against
God, is as nothing; yea, less then nothing, and vanity. 6. In such sort as God
in Scripture is said to repent, by way of Anthropopathy and condescension to
our weakness: so he may be said to have conditional Promises, and to promise
Eternal Life, upon condition of Faith and Repentance; but no otherwise: For
like as the Scripture assures us, and all agree, that God is not a Man that he
should repent: so by the same reason God is not a Man that he should be bound,
and Debtor, and promise Eternal Life conditionally. 1 Samuel 15. 11 29. Numb. 23.
19. Genesis 6. 6. Hilar. de Trinit. lib. 10.
For it is a Maxim in Divinity, taken from St. Hilary, and grounded upon the
deepest Reasons and Foundations of supernatural Religion, that, In absoluto
nobis and facili est aeternitas: Eternal Life cannot consist in uncertainty,
wavering, suspense, and dubitation; which necessarily it must, and cannot be
avoided, if it be but conditional. For what is Eternal Life, but God himself as
enjoyed in Eternal Blessedness? Consequently to say, that Eternal Life is not
absolutely certain, but conditional, is in effect to say, that God is but
conditionally God, uncertain of his own Life, and so is not true and very God,
but an Idol, a Figment of Man's Invention.

XXII. Excepting the Infant Jesus, who was absolutely holy and sinless, every
other Infant does suffer what it suffers for its own sin, its own inward
pravity and corruption, is the sole meritorious Cause of all the Nullus unquam
ita somniando deliravit, ut magnum istum defectum, quo Natura humana primi
hominis praevaricatione vitiata est, ex aliquo Dei pacto cum parentibus initio,
vel ex positiva Dei lege aut voluntate propagari arbitretur. Jansen, de Statu
Naturae lapsae, l. 1. c. 17.
punishment laid upon it by God, and the Sin of Adam is but the occasion.
Original Sin in Infants, is the Consequent, but not the Effect of Adam's Sin.
His eating of the forbidden Fruit was his own Personal Sin, and yet the Sin of
all Mankind; because he in that instant was all Mankind, there being no other
Man then in being. But God gave him Repentance and Pardon of that and all his
other Sins, and therefore his eating of the forbidden Fruit is not impured to
us, no Man's Conscience does smite him for it; but all the Sin imputed by God
to Infants, is only that inward Corruption that is latent in their Souls, which
the Sin of Adam has occasioned, but not caused: For though he was truly
penitent and pardoned, and so also was our first Mother Eve, in the instant of
their Natural Coition, and Conjugal Act, yet there did then cleave to their
Souls inordinate Lust and Concupiscence, and this Ex Natura rei, from the
nature of the thing, did by God's most righteous Judgment and Permission,
unsearchably occasion, but not cause Original Sin, and sinful Contagion, in all
their Natural Offspring. This Distinction of the Cause and Occasion, if well
heeded, both fully acquitteth God's Justice, and abundantly reconcileth the
seeming Contradictions of Scripture in this Argument of punishing Children for
Parents Sin, says B. Sanderson, in his Third Sermon, Ad Populum, p. 180. Edit.
6. First God made Adam holy, next he permitted his Sin, then he gave him
Repentance and Pardon, through Faith in Christ, the promised Seed: afterward he
made him a Common Head and Root to all his Natural Offspring by Natural
Generation, according to his own Eternal Purpose, to his own Children
immediately, to the rest of the World remotely, as I humbly conceive.

XXIII. Christian Parents are the fittest to present their own Children to
Baptism, and to undertake for their good Education; they indeed are their
proper God Parents, because they are so by Divine Institution, Nature makes
them Parents, and Christian Faith makes them Godly Parents, and so they are by
Divine Ordination God's Agents, Servants, Sureties, and Trustees, to see to the
Baptism and good bringing up of their Children, and are accountable to him.
Whereas those who are commonly called God-Parents, properly are not so, they
are but nominally so; because they are, what they are not by Divine, but by
Humane unnecessary Institution. And therefore, where by the 29th Canon of the
Church of England, touching Baptism, it is ordained, That no Parent shall be
urged to be present, nor be admitted to answer as Godfather for his own Child:
It should rather be ordained, That except in case of Sickness, or other the
like impediment, each Christian Parent shall be urged to be present at the
Baptism of his own Child, and undertake for its good Education, and, under
Christ, be reputed the most proper Godfather; and the forenamed Canon should be
abolished, as contrary to Christian Meekness and Equity, and savouring of
Unchristian Rigor.

XXIV. Though Christian Parents are the next Instruments of presenting their
Children to Baptism, and procuring this favor for them; yet it is the
Offeruntur parvuli ad percipiendum Spiritualem gratiam, non tam ab eis quorum
gestantur manibus, quamvis and ab ipsis, si and ipsi boni and fideles sunt,
quam ab universa Societate Sanctorum atque fidelium. Ab omnibus namque offeri
recte intelliguntur, quibus placet quod offeruntur, and quorum Sancta atque
individua Charitate ad Communicationem Sancti Spiritus adjuvantur. Tota ergo
hoc matter, quae in Sanctis est, facit: quia tota omnes tota singulos parit.
August. Epistol. 22.
whole Society of Godly Christians upon Earth, who under God, and the Lord
Jesus, are the most Noble and Eminent Instruments of all Spiritual Good to the
Souls of Infants, not excluding, but rather including their Parents, if they be
truly godly, them especially; for thus we read: But Jerusalem which is above is
free, which is the mother of us all, Gal. 4. 26. This Jerusalem, the Holy
Catholic Church, the blessed Company of all faithful People, is the Mother of
us all, and consequently of all such Infants as belong to the Election of
Grace. And we have great reason to think, that all such Infants as God's Word
binds us to baptize, dying in Infancy with the Seal and Token of God's gracious
Covenant upon them, are elect and saved, especially if they be the Infants of
godly Parents, they are, Cives Ecclesiae, Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem,
she is spiritual Mother to them all, and every one: For by one Spirit are we
all baptized into one Body, 1 Cor. 12. 13.

XXV. We may admit the Infant to Baptism, and yet not admit his Parents to the
Lord's Supper; because it may be wholesome Penalty to deny them the Lord's
Supper, till they have reformed their profane and wicked Lives; and yet it may
be too much Rigoun to debar their Infant from Baptism. Not seldom the Children
of wicked Christian Parents, when grown up, prove godly, and are saved: and too
many Children of godly Parents, when grown up, prove wicked, and perish. As God
may by his common Grace move the Heart of a carnal Christian Parent to pray, to
join in Prayer, to hear the Word, to give an Alms, to devote part of his Estate
to pious and charitable Uses, and by God's common Grace, he may be instrumental
for Temporal and Eternal Good to others, though himself prove a Castaway. So
by the same common Grace he may be instrumental in God's hands, for bringing
his Child to Baptism, and procuring it solemnly entered into his Holy Covenant,
and may devote it to his Service, and be useful to its Temporal and Eternal
Good, though himself be ungodly and perish. Under the Law, the Infants of good
and bad Parents were promisouously admitted to Circumcision by Divine Warrant;
and good and bad Israelites did in common contribute toward the Building of
the Tabernacle first, and afterward of the Temple. Whom we can, we are to amend
by the Word and holy Discipline; and whom we cannot, we are to mourn for and
tolerate. Where the Tares cannot be plucked up without endangering the Wheat,
they are to be let alone, and both are to grow together till the Harvest. There
are two kinds of sincerity, common and special: with the former, the generality
of ungodly Christian* Parents, in the Parishes of England desire Baptism for
their Children, they desire it sincerely, seriously, and without dissembling:
this is not no sincerity, it is better then none, and yet it is not divine,
heavenly, and spiritual. But Children born in manifest Whoredom and Adultery,
should not be baptized, unless the Father or the Mother, one, or both, will, at
the Baptism of the Child, penitentlally confess the Sin. And the Ecclesiastical
Judge should not for filthy Lucre exempt infamous and notoriously scandalous
Sinners from such wholesome Penance; so to do is very sinful and scandalous, and
God's Blessing cannot be thought to go along with that Gain which is taken Jos.
7. 19. Prove. 28. 13. 1 Timothy 5. 20.
to free Sinners from giving Glory to God, by wholesome Confession of Sin.

XXVI. By Infant Baptism a Divine Bond and Engagement is laid upon the Parents
to teach, and upon the Children to learn, as soon as they shall be capable
God's true Religion: This Divine Bond and Engagement does very much tend to
Godliness, and shunning Sin, by aweing the Consciences of Parents, and
Children, when grown. But the denial of Infant Baptism by erroneous freeing
Parents and Children from this Divine Bond and Engagement, does too much tend
too Looseness and carnal Liberty, and profane Conversation.

XXVII. Infant Baptism is greatly useful to keep up the Doctrine of Original
Sin in Infants, and the necessity of supernatural Regeneration, and Eternal
Redemption by the Grace of Christ, and so it is greatly useful to our Faith.
But the way of those who are against Infant Baptism, does very much tend to
weaken our Faith herein, and make all Men think that there is no such thing as
Original Sin in Infants, that they have no need of Regeneration and Eternal
Redemption by Christ, and that they are no less holy and pure then the Infant
Jesus, who was after an extraordinary and miraculous manner conceived by the
Holy Ghost in the Womb of a Virgin, and born of her: which is a great and
dangerous Error.

XXVIII. Moreover, their way tends to harden the Jews in their Infidelity:
because the Gospel obliges them to believe, that if they will become
Christians not only themselves, but their Infants also shall become great
Gainers, and be under a better Covenant then that of Circumcision; which upon
the Principles of those who oppose Infant Baptism, cannot be, and so the Jews
are scandalized, and a Stumbling Block is cast in their way to hinder their
Conversion.

XXIX. The Apostles did rightly in baptizing those with the Baptism of August.
Enchirid. cap. 49. Bedae respons ad qu. 5. in fine lib. Retract. in Act.
Apostol.
Christ, who had been before baptized with the Baptism of John. Act. 19.
because John's Baptism gave no Remission of Sins, save through Faith in the
Death of Christ as future, and so it pertained to the Old Testament
Dispensation, which stood in force till after the Death of Christ the Testator
and Surety of the New Testament: by whose Death, and the Institution of the New
Testament in his Blood, the whole Old Testament Dispensation, and John's
preparatory Baptism, as included in, or joined with the same, is to cease and
have an end; and now Christ as Mediator of the New Covenant, ordains a new way
for all Nations, that they be made Disciples, and baptized in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; this is clearly a new way and
kind of Baptism differing from John's. But this will no way warrant the
Doctrine and Practice of those among us, who re-baptize grown Christians, who
had been lawfully baptized in their Infancy with Christ's Baptism, how they
will avoid the Charge of Anabaptism, and sinful re-baptizing, I see not. And it
may seem strange, that they can find Evidence in the New Testament for the
Divine Appointment of the Lord's Day, and that from the Resurrection of Christ
the last Day of the Week was changed into the first Day of the Week; as in
their Confession of Faith themselves declare, p. 77. and yet cannot find like
Evidence for the change of Circumcision for Baptism, and the Baptism of Infants
as the consequent thereof.

XXX. They tell us, That all instituted Worship receives its Sanction from
Their Confession of Faith, p. 115, p. 116.
the Precept, and is to be thereby governed in all the necessary Circumstances
thereof. -- And that it depends purely upon the Will of the Lawgiver to
determine what shall be the Sign of his Covenant, unto whom, at what season,
and upon what terms, it shall be affixed. Now though much more might be said in
this Argument, yet necessitated brevity will not permit more, and I think I
have said enough to prove, that it is the Will of Christ that we baptize the
Infants of Christian Parents, that in so doing we proceed according to his
Precept and Commission to his Apostles, to teach and baptize all Nations. So
has been the Practice of the Universal Church to our times, God's Blessing
has gone along with it, and Christ according to his gracious Promise, will not
fall to be with his Ministers in the dispensing of it unto the end of the
World, Mat. 28. 20.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed for J. Lawrence, at the Angel in the Poultrey. 1693.


