A Guide to Young Communicants: Or, The Whole Duty of the Sacrament, Fitted for
those that Desire to be WORTHY RECEIVERS OF THE Lords Supper: With Suitable
PRAYERS, For Morning and Evening.

Also Directions for a Holy Living and Dying.

A Dialogue between a Divine and a Beggar.

And a Description of CHRIST'S Person when on Earth.

To which is added, Bishop USHER's Prophecy.

The Fourth Edition.

London, Printed for G. C. at the Ring in Little-Britain. Price 2 d.

Reader,
THis little Book was printed for the Use of an Honorable Lady, and was wrote
(as I was informed by Dr. J. Bishop of L -- n. It has found a kind Reception,
and many of them have been distributed among the Poor. It contains what is
necessary to be known on this Occasion, sufficiently explaining what the
Communion or Sacrament of the New Testament is, and what is meant thereby;
showing plainly what is to be done at, before, and after Receiving. Indeed that
which makes all People Worthy Communicants, or truly prepares for this Duty, is
a Holy Life; it does not require so much Head-Knowledge, as a sincere Heart
devoted to God. A God-like or Christ-like Life is the best Qualification: True
Repentance, or forsaking Sins past, and hearty Obedience to what God manifests
or discovers in the inward of thy Heart, to be thy Duty: This must be done by
thee, whoever thou art, that would come rightly prepared to Receive the Lord's
Supper. For thy Assistance herein, I recommend to thee this little Book.

ADVERTISEMENT.
A Guide to young Communicants, with Meditations for every Day of the Week; to
which is added, a History of Riches, Poverty, Godliness, Labor, and Content.
Bp Usher's Prophecy; an Account of Popish Persecutions, with other matters. Pr.
stitcht 4 d. bd 6 d.

A Guide to the Altar, with Prayers for Morning and Evening, and other
Occasions; to which is added, The Practice of the Faithful. 1 s.

A Spark from the Altar; or, Preparation for the Sacrament: Pr. 6 d. A Bundle
of Myrrh. Pr. 1 d.

The pious Man's Directions, showing how to walk with God all his Days, etc.
Pr. 6 d.

The Child's Weeks-work, and Father's Blessing, 6 d.

England's Reformation, against Drunkenness, Gluttony, Whoredom, Fornication,
Cursing, Swearing, etc. with Examples of God's Judgments on such as use them.
Pr. 1 d.

The Trial and Execution of Joan Perry and her two Sons, in Gloucestershire;
very strange and true. Pr. 2 d.

A Week's Preparation for a Worthy Communicant.
Quest. 1. WHAT is the Communion?

Answ. It is the second Sacrament of the New Testament, wherein (by the outward
Receiving the Bread and Wine) is signified the inward and spiritual Receiving
of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ; that is, of all the Benefits of his
Incarnation and Sufferings.

Q 2. Why do we Receive the Communion?

A. For four Reasons especially.

1. Because Christ, in the Institution of it, did expressly command it, Do this
in remembrance of me, Luke 22.19. which is also repeated and enjoined by St.
Paul in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, chap. 11, from the 2^d to the
29th verse.

2. To testify our unfeigned Love to GOD, and Charity to all Men.

3. To show our thankful Hearts for God's unspeakable Mercy in it. Abraham
reckoned himself unworthy to speak with God: Moses thought himself unfit to be
sent to Pharaoh: And behold! God himself entertains us as Guests at a Holy
Feast of the richest and most costly Dainties, provided by himself for us. And
what can be sufficient for sinful Creatures to return in Gratitude for such
endearing Love and Condescension!

4. Because of the great Advantage and Benefit we receive by taking of it
worthily.

The Benefit we receive in this Sacrament does chiefly consist in these four
Particulars.

1. We are by this Sacrament united to Christ, and made one with him: for as
the Bread and Wine becomes one with our Bodies, so by this Sacrament we become
one with Christ.

2. To strengthen and increase our Faith and Repentance; for in this Sacrament
we do, as it were, see Christ Crucified before our Eyes, Gal. 3.1. When the
Bread is Broken, it puts me in mind how the Blessed Body of my Savior was Torn
and Wounded before Pontius Pilate, upon the Cross: and when the Wine is poured
forth into the Cup, it shows how the precious Blood of Jesus Christ was
abundantly shed for our Sins: And when the Minister reaches me the Bread and
Wine, it shows me his beloved Son is to be received and embraced by me, and
that through his Merits and Intercession we are reconciled unto him.

3. By this Sacrament, we become united to our Christian Brethren: for it is a
Feast of Love, where we profess hearty Affection to all the People of God;
sincerely desiring and seeking the Welfare of his Church, putting up our
devoutest Prayers for our Fellow Christians, and forgiving, if we have ought
against any of them, as God, for Christ's sake, has forgiven us. And,

4. We hereby receive the Assurance of Pardon and Remission for all our past
Transgressions, and a Confirmation and Increase of all Christian Graces: for
this Sacrament is a Seal of our Covenant with God, assuring and sealing to us
(upon the Conditions of true and hearty Repentance, etc.) the Pardon of all our
Sins, and a comfortable Assurance of Eternal Life and Salvation, and it is an
Instrument or Means whereby we receive Grace and Strength to serve God more
freely and cheerfully ever after. In a word, it gives us a Title and Interest
to all the Blessings obtained by Christ Jesus.

The very Names given to the Sacrament in the New Testament declare unto us the
Nature of it, and the Blessing we receive by it, which are these six:

1. It Is called the Communion, or Communication of the Body and Blood of
Christ; that is, (as was said before) of all the Benefits of his Life and
Sufferings, 1 Cor. 10.26.

2. It is called, The Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.20. as our Lord instituted it
after he supt with his Disciples.

3. It is called The Lord's Table on the same account, 1 Cor. 10.21.

4. It is called Breaking of Bread, Acts 2.40. to denote Charity.

5. It is called The Last Will of Christ, or The New Testament, Mat. 26.28.
viz. wherein he bequeaths to us Life and Salvation.

6. It is called The Cup of Blessing; that is, of Praise and Thanksgiving, 1
Cor. 10.16. It is also called the Eucharist, which signifies the same thing.

Q. 3. What is required of a Christian, that he may become a Worthy Communicant?

A. Three sorts of Duties: 1. Somewhat to be done before we receive the
Communion. 2. Our Duties at Receiving. And, 3. Our Duties afterward.

Q. 4. What is expected before we receive the Communion?

A. To examine and prepare ourselves beforehand; this God has commanded: And we
cannot be assured that without such Examination we shall be welcome Guests at
the Lord's Table. See to this purpose 1 Cor. 11.28, 29. For though a true
Christian ought always to be fitted for the performance of so holy a Duty to
God, which is called Habitual Preparation, yet in regard of our daily Errors
and Miscarriages, we should prepare and examine our selves in a stricter way,
whenever we intend to receive: And this is called Actual Preparation; which is
a serious Trial and Examination of our State, how we stand affected toward GOD
and Man.

Q. 5. Wherein must we examine our selves?

A. In these Five Things, viz. Knowledge, Faith, Repentance, Charity, and
Obedience.

Q. 6. How must I examine my Knowledge?

A. I must try, 1. Whether I understand the Nature of this Sacrament, and the
Necessity of Receiving it. The Knowledge here required is plain and easy, and
may be learnt from the Answers to the first and second Questions. 2. I must
examine how much I have profited and grown in Grace and Knowledge; and if I have
not profited, Whether, 3. I am sorry for my want of Knowledge, or Faith, or
other Heavenly Graces.

Q. 7. How must I examine my Faith?

A. I must try, 1. Whether I rely on Christ alone for Salvation; yet so, as not
to neglect my Endeavors: and, Whether I depend on him only in time of internal
or external Temptation. 2. Whether I believe that God, on my Repentance, will
freely (for Christ's sake) forgive and blot out all my Sins. 3. Whether I long
for such a strong and lively Faith, such a firm Belief of God's Word, as may
influence my Heart and Practice, and transform me into the Image of Him, who is
the Author and Finisher of our Faith.

Q. 8. How must I examine my Repentance?

A. I must try, 1. Whether I am sorry for my Sins past. 2. Whether I am willing
in good earnest to forsake 'em, and live a better Life for the future, aiming
at the Life and Power of Religion. 3. Whether I am willing to make Restitution
for the Injuries I have done, and for whatever I have unjustly taken from any,
because without this there can be no True Repentance. 4. Whether I like those
Sermons which reach to my Conscience, and bring me to the sight of my Sins.

Q. 9. How must I examine my Charity?

A. I must try, 1. Whether I forgive every one, and bear no Malice nor Hatred
in my Heart, but wish my Enemies Repentance and Salvation. 2. Whether I labor
for Peace, and neither seek nor give Occasion of Contention. 3. Whether I love
Good Men because they are Good.

Q. 10. How must I examine my Obedience?

A. I must try, 1. Whether I make God's Word my Rule, and frame my Life
thereafter. 2. Whether I am ready to obey all the Laws and Commands of God,
without keeping any darling Sin or Lust in my Soul.

Q. 11. What is required of me at Receiving?

A. 1. To carry my self decently, humbly, and reverently. 2. To fix my Heart
and Thoughts on this Sacred Ordinance and the bitter Passion and Sufferings of
Christ, there represented to us. 3. According to my Ability, to give somewhat
toward the Relief of the poor Members of Christ.

Q. 12. What is required of me after my Receiving?

A. 1. To examine whether I receive Comfort by it. 2. To be joyful and thankful
to God, for affording this blessed Opportunity of receiving, Ps. 116.13. 3. To
remember that I have now renewed that Vow which, at first in Baptism, I made to
God by my Sureties. 4. To be careful to pay to GOD and Man what I have so
vowed. 5. To show my Love and Thankfulness to God, by holiness of Life and
Conversation; by loving his Word, i. e. by duly reading and meditating on it;
by a strict Observation of the Lord's Day, spending it in Devotion, especially
attending on public Prayer and Preaching; being careful to remember, of every
Sermon I hear, somewhat either for my Information or Reproof, or that tends to
the promoting Piety toward GOD, or Charity to Men. And because we are not able
of our selves to perform the least of these Duties here prescribed, we ought
therefore now and then to abstain from a Meals Meat, and by Fasting, Prayer,
and Humiliation to implore the Grace and Assistance of God's Holy Spirit, to
enable us to perform these Duties, and keep us in the constant Practice thereof.

At such time of Abstinence it may be convenient to read and meditate on Psalms
25, 39, 130. Isaiah 55. Matthew. 5. John. 6. and 15. Romans 8. and Hebrews 12.

Thus I have done with the First Part that respects Knowledge, or what we ought
to know of this Duty. Next follows what you are to practice.

On Sunday Morning get up betimes, and Read a Chapter; on your Knees wait or
sit silent a little time, casting all worldly Thoughts out of your Mind. Then
say this Preparatory Prayer, for Sunday Morning, at home:

MOST Great and Incomprehensible Lord God! Thou art worthy of all Praise, and
infinitely to be admired for thy Grace and Mercy in the Redemption of the
World, by the Body and Blood of thy Son, whom thou have given to be Meat and
Drink to them that Fear and Obey Thee. O Lord, I design this Morning to receive
of that Bread, and Drink of that Cup that nourishes the Soul of all true
Penitents. Lord, let the Inward and Spiritual Grace accompany the Bread and
Wine, that so my Body may not only be Refreshed, but my Soul also Refreshed,
Comfortcd, and Strengthened; that I may evermore continue Obedient to thee,
Blessed Jesus. O Lord, I beseech thee, send forth thy Light and thy Truth, to
Guide and Direct me. O Establish me with thy free Spirit, that thou give
freely to them that ask in Faith, that Blessed Spirit that makes our
Meditations of Thee to be sweet, yea, sweeter than Honey: It makes the Soul to
rejoice more than in plenty of Corn, Wine, and Oil. This is that that made
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego embrace a Fiery Furnace; Daniel a Lyon's Den;
St. Peter a Crucifixion; and John a Kettle of Boiling Oil: St. Bartholomew to
be Flead; St. Bernard to cry out, Hold, hold, for my Heart is not able to
cantain these Joys which thou do so liberally pour out upon me. Blessed God,
let my Heart be thus tuned, and then shall I receive Strength and Nourishment
of Soul to Everlasting Life. All which I beg through the Merits of Jesus
Christ, to whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit, be all Glory and Praise,
now and evermore. Amen.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.
Then repair to Church, etc. And after Sermon is ended, say this Prayer before
the Sacrament:

MOST merciful and gracious Lord, who did Institute this Feast of Love for us
vile and miserable Sinners, utterly unworthy of the least of thy Favors, be
pleased to help me to approach it with that Devotion, Reverence, and Humility
that befits a worthy Communicant at thy Table. Lord I come, out of a Sense of
my want of that Food from Heaven, to which thou most graciously do invite me.
I come in Obedience to thy Commands, to testify my Faith in Thee, and to
commemorate thy unspeakable Love in accomplishing the work of my Redemption, by
a most Shameful and Bitter Death. I come to renounce and cast off my Sins and
Transgressions, and to renew my Baptismal Covenant, which I have often and
perversely broken. O do thou for thy Mercy sake accept me, though an unworthy
Guest: Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant, for in thy Sight shall no Man
living be justified. If thou, Lord, should be extreme to mark what I have
done amiss, I must suffer all the Vials of thy Wrath; I must undergo all the
Curses of thy Law; I must stand exposed to all the Judgments and Terrors of
this Life, and to the intolerable Torments of Hell in another. So far should I
be in this Case from receiving any manner of Advantage from these Holy
Mysteries, that I should eat and drink my own Damnation. Miserable wretched
Creature that I am, that I should so eagerly pursue the Paths that lead to
Death and Misery! that I should so continually offend thee, my most tender and
indulgent Father! that I should trample under foot the Son of God, and repay
that wonderful Love, and those unknown Sufferings of His on my behalf, with
those Sins which at first Crucified him, and still continue to Crucify him
afresh, and put him to an open Shame! that I should grieve that good Spirit of
God, which so earnestly wooes and entreats to accept of Life and Salvation!
that I should be guilty of so much Pride, Hypocrisy, Indevotion, and Deadness
in my Prayers; of so much Injustice, Passion, and Malice, of so much
Impenitency, Uncleanness, Intemperance, etc. [Here reckon up the particular
Sins thou have been guilty of] whereby I have wickedly departed from Thee, the
Lord of Life and Glory, the Fountain and Spring of all Happiness! Lord, I fly
into the Arms of Thy Mercy: O save me or I perish. Hide me under the Clefts of
thy Wounds until thy Father's Indignation be overpast. O thou that delightest
not in the Death of a Sinner, but rather that he should turn and be saved,
receive me to thy Favor, for the Merits and Satisfaction of my Blessed
Redeemer, in whom alone thou art well pleased. His Blood was shed to make
Atonement for my Sins: His Body was bruised and beaten with Stripes, that through
them I might be healed. Lord grant, that in this Blessed Sacrament, I may
effectually receive these Benefits of his Death and Passion; grant that I may
have my Pardon sealed, my Weakness repaired, my Graces strengthened, and my
Soul raised to Heaven in Flames of devoutest Affection and Adoration. O do thou
nourish my Soul by this immortal Food, to live the Life of Grace and Holiness,
and enable it to make some Returns of Love to Thee, the infinite Lover of
Souls: But oh! What Returns can be sufficient, what Transports of Love and
Praise can be enough for Him, who died a most painful and ignominious Death, to
deliver us from inevitable Ruin and Misery, when we were his bitter Enemies,
and at open Defiance and Rebellion against him? Oh the Riches of thy Goodness,
how unutterable are thy Mercies, and how unconceivable is thy Love! Grant I
pray thee, that though I am utterly unable to make a true estimation thereof, yet
I may love Thee to the utmost capacity of a frail Creature, and show it by
living in all holy Obedience and Conformity to thy Laws and Precepts. Grant
that I may always desire and endeavor to please thee; and be very tender and
fearful of offending Thee; keeping a strict Watch over my Heart and Ways, that
no Temptations prevail against me, or make me fall from my own Stedfastness:
But that being effectually Sanctified here, I may in the end be eternally Blessed
in the Kingdom of Glory.

Lord, pity and commiserate my Frailty, and graciously supply all my Wants and
Necessities; for thy Mercy and Compassion's sake. Amen.

Our Father, etc.
Now repair to the Communion Table, and being placed conveniently, lift up your
Heart toward Heaven, and say,

O Lamb of God that did offer thy self a Sacrifice for the Sins of the whole
World, have Mercy upon me miserable Sinner. I am here ready to renew the
Covenant I made with thee in Baptism, and once more to take those solemn
Engagements upon my self: O do thou give me the Assistance of thy Grace and
Holy Spirit, that I may be enabled to perform them; that I may henceforth
renounce the Devil and all his Works, all the Pomps and Vanities of the World,
and the sinful Lusts of the Flesh; that I may steadfastly persist in the true
Faith of thy most Holy Religion, and live in sincere Obedience to thy Laws, all
the Days of my Life.

Amen.
Just before Receiving, a Prayer.

GRant, O Lord, I beseech thee, that the Wine that makes glad, and the Bread of
Life may infuse new Strength and Vigor into my Soul, and into the Souls of all
that Communicate with me; that we may daily grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; and that (according to his Command) we
may be united in Holy Love and Fellowship with one another, and with the Church
of God; and at last obtain that glorious Fellowship with thy self in Heaven,
which thou have promised to all that love and fear thee, through the same Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Amen.
When you receive the Bread, say,

GRant me, Blessed Lord, so to eat the Flesh of thy dear Son Jesus Christ, and
so to drink his Blood, that my sinful Body may be made clean by his most holy
Body, and my Soul washed in his most precious Blood, that I may evermore dwell
in him, and he in me.

Amen.
After you have received the Bread, say,

O That the Bread which I have now eaten may be the Bread which came down from
Heaven, and gives Life unto the World. O that I may now feel ^s Efficacy,
inflaming my Soul with the Heavenly Ardours of Divine Love; having all my
Affections fet on things Above, and not on things Below. May this Bread be to
my Soul the staff of Strength, whereby I may vanquish all the Assaults of the
Devil, the World, and the Flesh, and continue my Lord's faithful Servant to my
Life's end.

Amen.
At the receiving the Cup, say,

THe Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was shed for me, preserve my Body
and Soul unto Everlasting Life: I drink this in Remembrance that Christ's Blood
was shed for me, and am thankful.

After you have received the Cup, say,

O That this precious Blood of my dear Redeemer may be now both the
Purification and Nourishment of my Soul, the Seal of my Pardon, and Peace with
God, and the Pledge of mine Inheritance in Heaven.

Amen.
Then return to your Pew or Seat, and say, on your Knees, this Thanksgiving
after the Sacrament:

BLessing, Honor, and Glory be given to thee, O Lord, for thy Love this Day
discovered to me; and for all the Benefits received at thy Table. What is Man
that thou art mindful of him, or Son of Man that thou should so regard him,
as to suffer such bitter things for his sake; to be Scourged and Bruised for
his Transgressions, and to bear upon thy Shoulders the Sins of a whole World? O
the depth of the Riches of thy Mercy and Goodness! We have sinned against thee,
and thou thy self have undergone the Punishment! We have perversely run in the
Paths that lead to Death and Damnation, and thou have undeservedly merited Life
and Salvation for us, and do woo and entreat us to accept of it, and have
ordained this Sacrament to assure us of the Reality of thy gracious Intentions
toward us: Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me praise his
Holy Name! Praise the Lord, O Soul, and forget not all his Benefits; who
forgiveth all thy Sin, and heals all thine Infirmities; who saves thy Life
from Destruction, and crowns thee with Mercy and loving Kindness! Lord, grant
that this unspeakable Love of thine may make me more and more a bound in Love
to thee: Grant that it may constrain me to Obedience and good Living, and to a
diligent Performance of all those solemn Engagements I have now made unto thee.
And since thou have purchased me with the inestimable Price of thy Blood, grant
that I may continue wholly thine, and glorify thee both in Body and Spirit, by
giving up my self to thy Service, and by walking before thee in Holiness and
Righteousness all my days. Thou have in infinite Mercy vouchsafed to unite thy
self to me miserable and unworthy Creature, thereby becoming the Strength,
Life, and Support of my Soul: O grant that I may never dissolve this Sacred
Union, nor suffer any sinful Lust or unlawful Passion to take me out of thy
Hand. And grant that (according to the Profession of Charity I have made at thy
Table) I may henceforward be Compassionate, and ready to forgive all Wrongs and
Injuries, supply the Wants and Necessities of the Poor; that so in all things I
may adorn the Gospel of God my Savior, and finally attain that Glorious Crown
of Bliss and Immortality, which thou have prepared for thy Saints in Heaven.

Pardon, O my God, all my Sins and Failings, and perfect whatever Good Work
thou have begun in me unto the Day of Christ. Direct, sanctify, and govern both
my Heart and Body in the ways of thy Laws, and in the Works of thy
Commandments, that through thy most Mighty Protection both here and ever, I may
be preserved both in Body and Soul, through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Amen.

Our Father, etc.
Then return home with a cheerful Heart, and let a Holy Life be thy Care ever
after.

Directions for Holy Living and Dying.
1. Directions how to Live well.
IN the Morning awake with God, and offer up unto Him thy Morning-Sacrifice of
Prayer: First, Give hearty Thanks for all his Mercies Spiritual and Temporal;
and for thy Preservation in the Night. Secondly, Make an humble Confession of
thy Sins, and desire Pardon. Thirdly, Ask such Necessaries as are requisite for
thy Soul and Body, with fervent Request to be relieved in them; and desire his
Blessing upon thy Labor in thy Calling. Always think that thou art before the
Living God, and let the Remembrance hereof make thee afraid to Sin.

Make Conscience of Idle, Vain, Dishonest, and Ungodly Thoughts; for these are
the Seeds and Beginnings of actual Sin, in Word and Deed.

Have a special Care to avoid those Sins which thou find thy Nature most
prone unto, and eschew those Provocations which were wont most to prevail
against thee.

Follow with Faithfulness and Diligence thy Lawful Calling.

Think thy present State and Condition to be the best State for thee.

Look well to thy Carriage in Company, that thou do no hurt by Word or Example;
nor take any thing from others, but endeavor rather to do good.

Use Honesty toward all Men: A good Conscience and good Manners go together.

If at any time thou art overtaken with any Sin, lie not in it, but speedily
recover thy self by Repentance.

When any good Desire, Motion, or Affection does arise in thine Heart, suffer
it not to pass away, but feed it by Reading, Meditating, or Praying.

Esteem every Day as the Day of thy Death; and therefore live now, even as
though thou were now Dying; and do those good Duties every Day, which thou
would do if this were thy Dying Day.

At the end of the Day, before thou sleep, call to mind how thou have spent
the Day past: Thy Misdoings repent, and praise God for assisting thee with his
Grace in the Duties which thou have performed.

Sleep not, at Night, before thou have commended thy self by Prayer into the
Hands of God; for thou know not whether (fallen asleep) thou shall rise
again to live here.

Let Prayer be the Key to open the Morning, and the Bar to shut in the Evening.
Walk as the Children of Light.

II. Directions how to Die well.
THink that the greatest Work thou have to do in this World, is to Die well.
They which Die well, Die not to Die, but to Live Eternally.

Be every Day ready to leave this Life. That Man does finish his Days best,
that every Day esteems the last Day of his Life to be present and at hand.

Endeavor before Death come to pull out his Sting, and take from him his Power
and Strength, by humbling thy self in the time present for all thy Sins past,
and by turning unto God for the time to come. That Man can never die ill, that
takes care to live well.

Innure thy self by little and little to Die, before thou come to that Point
that thou must needs Die. He that leaves the World before the World leaves him,
gives Death the Hand like a welcome Messenger, and departs in Peace.

When thou art Visited with Sickness, or Old Age, think either of these are
Warnings for thee ever long to appear before the Great Judge of all the World:
Therefore now prepare to set all things in good order, and make thine Accounts
ready.

Make a new Examination of thy Life and Conversation passed. Make a Confession
unto God of thy new and particular Sins: As God sends new Corrections and
Chastisements, make new Prayers, and more earnest than ever before, for Pardon
of thy Sins, and Reconciliation with God in Christ; by all means avoid those
Sins which thou find and feel increase the Wrath of God against thee.

Be reconciled to thy Neighbor, freely forgiving them that have offended thee,
and earnestly desire to be forgiven of all that thou have offended. Set thine
House and Family in order, by disposing of thy Worldly Goods in thy Will and
Testament; thereby thou shall Die not the more quickly, but the more quietly,
and prevent the Brawls and Jars that otherwise (when thou art gone) may arise
from thine Heirs. Thou partest with Earthly Possessions, and art going to take
Possession of Heavenly.

In the last Agony of Death, when all things in and of the World do fail and
forsake thee, rest thy self by Faith on the Favor and Mercy of God in Christ,
and comfort thy self in the Lord thy God. What shall separate from the Love of
God in Christ? Not Life nor Death.

Let thine Heart and Tongue be still employed in Prayer to the Lord: First, For
Patience in thy Trouble. Secondly, For Comfort in thine Affliction. Thirdly,
For Strength in Weakness. Fourthly, For Deliverance at his Pleasure. Yea,
endeavor to Die Praying. When thou art in the depth of Miseries, and at the
Gates of Death, there is a depth of God's Mercy, which is ready to hear and
help thee. Misery must Call upon Mercy.

Be willing and ready to depart out of this World without murmuring or
repining, whenever, wheresoever, or howsoever it shall please the Lord to
call thee. For why should thou unwillingly suffer a short Death that will
bring thee to the Fruition of Eternal Joys: Persuade thy self, that if thou
Live, by the Mercy of God, thou shall do well; but if thou Die, doubt not but
thou shall do better.

Lastly, when thou feel Death approaching, commend thy Soul unto God: He
gave it, to Him surrender it again. So laying thy self down to sleep and rest,
God shall make thee to dwell in everlasting Safety. A^ Death leaves thee, so
shall Judgment find thee.

To preserve thy Body in Cleanness.
Often meditate of God and good things. Carefully watch over thine Eyes and
Ears. Be always doing something that is good.
To preserve thy Tongue from Sin.
Forethink whether it be lawful and fit to be spoken. Avoid all superfluity of
Words. Affirm the Truth.
To keep thy Life in Holiness.
Do all things as in God's Sight. Eschew ill Company. Think daily of thy Death.
A Dialogue between a BEGGAR and a DIVINE.
THere was a certain Divine, famous in Learning and Piety, that did earnestly
importune God, by Prayer, for some time together, thinking he had not the true
Knowledge of the Ways of God (notwithstanding his much Learning) begging that
God would give him to know more of Him and himself, and direct him to some that
would teach him the way of Truth: And being inflamed at a certain time with
vehemence of Desire, a Voice, as was supposed, spoke thus to him: Go forth into
the Churchyard, and there thou may find a Man that can Teach thee the way.
And going forth, he found there a certain Beggar, with patched and torn
Apparel, and filthy dirty Feet, whose Clothes were not worth Three-half-pence,
whom he spoke thus unto:

Divine. God give thee a good Morning.


Beggar, Sir, I do not remember I ever had an evil one.


Div. God make thee fortunate and prosperous: Why speak thou in this manner?


Beg. Neither was I unprosperous, neither was I ever unhappy.


Div. God save thee; speak now plainly.


Beg. Truly Sir, I will do it willingly: Sir, thou did wish me a prosperous
and good Morning, and I answered I never had an evil one; for when I am pinched
with Hunger, I praise God; if I suffer Cold, if it Snow, Hail, or Rain; be the
Weather fair or foul, I praise God; and therefore there never happened any sad or
evil Morning unto me. Thou did likewise wish that I might be fortunate: I
said I was never unfortunate, because whatever God gave me, I suffered; or
whatever happened to me, whether it were agreeable, sweet or bitter to me, I
gladly received it at his Hands, as the best; and therefore I was never
unfortunate. Thou said moreover, That God would be pleased to make me happy;
whereunto I likewise answered, That I never had been unhappy; for I am fully
resolved (through his Grace) to adhere and cleave to the Will of God; and for
this Cause, as I said, I was never unhappy, in that I cleave to his Will only,
and have wholly resigned mine own.


Div. This is very strange! But what, I pray thee, would thou do, if the
Lord of Majesty should cast thee into the bottomless Pit? Could thou be
content with his Will?


Beg. Drown me in the bottomless Pit! Why, certainly, if he should, I have two
Arms, by which I would still embrace him; the one is true Humility, and that I
lay under him, and by him I am united to his Sacred Humanity; the other, and
that is the Right one (which is Love) is united to his Divinity; and by his
Love from himself, I hold him so fast, that he would go down to Hell with me;
and it is much better for me to be in Hell with God, than in Heaven without him.

By this the Divine learnt that the most compendious way to God is true
Resignation, with profound Humility. Hereupon the Divine spoke again to the
Beggar, and asked him,


Div. Whence come thou?


Beg. From God.


Div. Where found'st thou God?


Beg. Even where I left all the Creatures.


Div. I pray thee, Friend, who art thou?


Beg. Who am I? Truly, I am a King; and Jesus himself crowned me with Peace,
Power, and Rest.


Div. A King! Where is thy Kingdom?


Beg. The Kingdom of Heaven is in me, that is, in my Soul; and I can now, and
do, by his Power (not my own) in me, so govern and command all my inward Parts
and Senses, that all the Affections and Powers of the Old Man in my Soul, are
conquered, and are in subjection to me; which Kingdom no Man can doubt but is
better than all the Kingdoms and Glories in the World.


Div. What brought thee to this Perfection?


Beg. My sublime Meditations, and Union with that great God of Peace, and
Improvement of Mercies to his Glory, and by growing in Grace, adding one Grace
unto another; and I could rest in nothing less than an Assurance of God's Love,
and this I have found: I have forsaken the unquiet World, and in him I have
Peace of Conscience, and therein I rest.


A Description of Christ's Person, according to Publ. Lentulus's News to the
Senate of Rome.
IN the Days of Tiberius Caesar, as the Governors of sundry Provinces under
the Senate and People of Rome used to advertise the Senate of such News as
happened in diverse Countries, Publius Lentulus being at that time President in
Judea, wrote an Epistle to the Senate and People of Rome, the words these:

There appeared, in these our Days, a Man of great Virtue, named Jesus Christ,
who is yet living among us, and of the Gentiles is accepted as a Prophet of
Truth, but his own Disciples call him the Son of God. He raises the Dead, and
cures all sorts of Diseases; a Man of stature somewhat tall, and comely, with a
very reverend Countenance, such as the Beholders may both love and fear; his
Hair is of the color of a Philbert full ripe, and plain almost down to his
Ears, but thence downwards somewhat curled, and more orient of color, wavering
about his Shoulders; in the midst of it goes a Seam or Partition, after the
manner of the Nazarites; his Forehead plain and smooth; his Face without spot
or wrinkle, beautified with a comely red; his Nose and Mouth so formed, as
nothing can be reprehended; his Beard pretty thick, agreeable in color to the
Hair of his Head, not of any great length, but forked in the midst; of an
innocent and mature Look, his Eyes gray, clear, and quick. In reproving he is
terrible; in admonishing, courteous and fair spoken; pleasant in Speech, mixed
with Gravity. It cannot be remembered that any have seen him laugh, but

Of the Persecution in Queen Mary's Reign.
BIshop Jewel writes, That in the 5 years Reign of Q. Mary was martyred 277
Persons, viz. 5 Bishops, 8 Gentlemen, 21 Ministers, 84 Tradesmen, 100
Husbandmen, Laborers, and Servants, 20 Widows, 26 Wives, 9 Virgins, 2 Boys, 2
Infants, one sprung from the Womb as its Mother was burning at the Stake, so
flung into the Fire at the very Birth; 64 were also persecuted for their
Religion, 7 of 'em whipped, 16 died in Prison, 12 buried in Dunghils, and many
lay in Captivity till the Reign of Q. Elizabeth. In the Year 1572, 30000
Protestants were massacred by Papists in France, etc. In the Year 1642, above
100000 Protestants were massacred in Ireland. Many more Cruelties our
Historians mention, which here is not room to insert.

Bishop Usher's Prophecy.
THis pious Man had, at several times, many things impressed on his Mind
concerning future Events, and with that warmness, that he could not keep 'em
secret. He (by the Holy Spirit) foretold the Irish Rebellion 40 Years before it
came, and the time it would break out. From this Prophetic Spirit he foresaw
the Miseries of England in Church and State, and gave mournful Intimations of
the Death of King Charles I. From this Spirit he foresaw his own Poverty, as to
Worldly Things: From this Spirit he predicted the Divisions and Confusions in
England about Religion, and the sad Consequences of it; some whereof we have
seen fulfilled, and I pray God the rest may not be accomplished. And lastly,
From this Spirit he foretold, that the greatest Stroke upon the Reformed
Christians was yet to come, and the time of the utter Ruin of Rome should be
when she thought her self most secure.

His Opinion of Sanctification, that is, of the New Creature, which God forms
by his Spirit in every Soul which he does truly regenerate. I find (says he) so
little of it wrought in my self, that I can speak of it only as Parrots, by
rote, and without the Knowledge and Understanding of what I might have
expressed, and therefore I durst not presume to proceed any farther upon it. I
must tell you (says he) we do not well understand what Sanctification and the
New Creature are: It is no less than for a Man to be brought to an entire
Resignation of his Will to the Will of GOD, and to live in the offering up of
his Soul continually in Flames of Love, as a whole Burnt-Offering to Christ.
And how little (continues he) are many of those who profess Christianity
experimentally acquainted with this Work on their Souls!

I asked him then, what his present Apprehensions were concerning a great
Persecution which should fall on the Church of God in England, Scotland, and
Ireland, which he had spoke of many Years before, when we were in Peace? and,
Whether they were past, or to come? He told me they were to come, and that this
sad Persecution would fall on all the Protestant Churches in Europe. He was
told, that it was hoped it might be past as to these Nations; instancing the
Judgments that had befallen us, though not so great as we deserved. He answered,
(the Power of God seeming to be upon him, to constrain him to speak, which Mr.
B. says he could easily discern much to differ from the Countenance wherewith
he usually spoke to him) Fool not yourself with such Hopes, for I tell you, all
that you have yet seen, are but the beginning of Sorrows, to what is yet to
come on the Protestant Churches of Christ, who will ever long fall under a
sharper Persecution than ever yet has fell upon them: And therefore, said he,
look you be not found in the outward Court, but a Worshipper in the Temple
before the Altar, for Christ will rescue all those that profess his Name, and
call themselves his People; but the outward Worshippers he will leave out to be
trodden down by the Gentiles.

The outward Court (says he) is the formal Christian, whose Religion lies in
performing outside Duties of Christianity, without having an inward Life, and
Power of Faith and Love, uniting them to Christ; and these God will leave to be
trodden down, and swept away by the Gentiles: But the Worshippers within the
Temple, and before the Altar, are those who do indeed worship GOD in Spirit and
in Truth, whose Souls are made his Temples, and He is honored and adored in
the most inward Thoughts of their Hearts, and they sacrifice their Lusts and
vile Affections, yea, and their own Wills to him; and these God will hide in
the hollow of his Hand, and under the shadow of his Wings. And this, said he,
shall be one great Difference between the last, and all the other preceding
Persecutions; for in the former, the most eminent Spiritual Christians did
generally suffer most, but in this last Persecution, these shall be preserved
by GOD as a Seed to partake of the Glory that shall immediately follow, and
come upon the Church, as soon as ever this Storm shall be over; for as this
shall be the sharpest, so shall it be the shortest Persecution of them all, and
shall only take away the gross Hypocrites, and formal Professors; but the true
Believers shall be preserved till the Calamity be over-past. Mr. B. then asked
him, By whom; He said, By the Papists, and in a way of sudden Massacre, and
that the Pope should be the chief Instrument of it.

He then added, That the Papists were (in his Opinion) the Gentiles spoken of
in Revelat. 11. to whom the outward Court should be left, that they might tread
it under foot, they having received the Gentiles Worship, in their adoring
Images, and Saints departed, and in taking to themselves many Mediators: And
this (said he) the Papists are now designing among themselves, and therefore be
you ready.

This is the Substance, says Mr. B. of what he spoke to me, and he repeated the
same (in Substance) to the Lady Tyrel, and the Lady ^yss^.

An Account of the Spanish Invasion.
IN the 31st Year of Queen Elizabeth, 1588, Philip the Second, King of Spain,
set forth a mighty Fleet, which, for its mighty Greatness, they called it, The
Invincible Armado. It consisted of 150 tall Ships, in which was 20000 Soldiers.
The Duke of Parma also was designed to bring out of Flanders Fifty-thousand
more to join them; it had likewise 8600 Mariners, 2080 Gally-Slaves, 2630 Great
Guns, and abundance of Boats and Tenders beside, with Provisions. The Pope,
it is said also, contributed a Million of Money. All these were to Land at the
Thames Mouth. The Queen hearing of it, provided two Guards, one for the Sea,
and another for the Land; that by Land was divided into Two Armies, one of
Twenty-two thousand two hundred Foot, and One thousand Horse, Commanded by the
Earl of Leicester, at Tilbury, where the Queen came and viewed her Army, to the
great Encouragement of Her Soldiers, both by Her Presence and Speech to them.
Her Guard at Sea were, in number, One hundred and Forty Ships, divided into
Three Squadrons, Commanded by Admiral Howard, Vice Admiral Drake, and
Rear-Admiral Seymour. The Spaniards having entered our Seas, the Queen
commanded the Lord-Admiral to prepare Eight of Her worst Ships for Fireships,
which, in the dead of the Night were sent down the Wind among the Spanish
Fleet, which so surpised and alarmed them, not understanding the Invention,
that they immediately cut their Cables, and weighed Anchor, and put to Sea;
upon which the Queen's Fleet, under the Command of Sir Francis Drake and
others, took some of them, drove others on the Sands, others were tossed to and
fro, and mangled and racked: So that more than one half of them were lost,
returning home with Shame and Dishonor: And of the English were lost only One
Ship of small Value. So that this Fleet, that was Three Years preparing, was in
a Month's Time overthrown, with the Loss of a Multitude of Spaniards.

FINIS.

