depiction of peace portrait of Hugo Grotius The Most Excellent Hugo Grotius

portrait of William Evats The Reverend W: Evats B: D: Aetat: Suae 77.



embodiments of peace and war The Most Excellt: HUGO GROTIUs OF the rights of
Peace and War Translated into English by the Reverend William Evats B:D:

Printed for Ralph Smith under the Piazza of ye Royal Exch: in Cornhill.

T. Cross Senior Sculpsit.
depiction of war

THE MOST EXCELLENT HUGO GROTIUS HIS THREE BOOKS Treating of the RIGHTS OF WAR
and PEACE.

In the First is handled, Whether any War be Just.

In the Second is showed, The Causes of War, both Just and Unjust.

In the Third is declared, What in War is Lawful; that is, Unpunishable.

With the ANNOTATIONS digested into the Body of every CHAPTER.

Translated into ENGLISH by WILLIAM EVATS, B. D.

LONDON, Printed by M. W. for Thomas Basset at the George in Fleetstreet, and
Ralph Smith at the Bible under the Piazza of the Royal Exchange in Cornhill.
MDCLXXXII.

THE PREFACE.
THE Civil Law, whether that, proper to the Romans, or that appertaining to any
other people, many have endeavored either to expound by large Commentaries, or
to expose to present view by Epitomies: But of that Law, which governs most
Nations, and the Rulers of diverse People, whether it arise from Nature, or be
Instituted by Divine Authority, or whether it be introduced by Custom or
Tacit Consent, few have hitherto treated; and none at all either Universally
or Methodically: The usefulness of this Treatise.
though such a Treatise would highly conduce to the Benefit of Mankind. The
Excellency of this Science, says Seneca, is seen in Leagues, Covenants,
Articles of Agreement, and Conditions made between diverse free people, and
between Kings of Foreign Nations, and in all the Rights of War and Peace.
Insomuch, that Euripides prefers it before all other knowledge of things either
Divine or Humane; saying, It Is vain, of Things, of Gods, or Men, to boast,
Past or to come: unless what is Just thou know.
And indeed, such a Treatise would be so much the more necessary, The Vulgar
Error concerning the Rights of War.
by how much we find many as well in this, as in former Ages, contemning this
part of Justice, as if there were nothing in it but an Empty Name. There is
nothing more frequent in every man's mouth, than that of Euphemus in Thucydides,
To Kings and Cities Imperial, there is nothing Unjust, that is Profitable. Lib.
6.
And that also which the Athenians (being then the most Potent Party in all
Greece) told the Metians, To humane reason, those things are Just, which an
Equal Necessity on both sides imposes: otherwise, whatsoever the stronger
Party can and will do, the weaker Party must suffer. As if it were in the power
of Fortune to make Oppression just; or, that no Commonwealth could be well
governed without Injustice. Whereunto they usually add, That the Sword is the
Common Judge or Arbiter of all differences arising between Kings and Foreign
Nations. Neither is this the opinion of the Vulgar only, That all Laws are
silenced by War; but some such like sayings do often fall from Men otherwise
Learned and Prudent, whereby this Opinion gathers strength. There being nothing
more frequently opposed one to another, than Law and Arms: Thus we find them
opposed in Enneus, -- to gain their Right,
Not at the Law, but with their Arms, they fight.
The like we find in Horace, who speaking of Achilles, says, Nothing by Law,
but All, by Arms, he claims. Old Antigonus laughed at him, who beholding him
busied in battering the Forts and Cities of his Enemy, Alber. Gent.
presented him with some Commentaries of Justice. Marius was wont to say, That
he could not hear the Cry of the Laws, for the Clashing of Arms. Lysander in
Plutarch, laying his hand upon his Sword said, Plut. Lys.
He that knows how to use This, is the best Judge of the Bounds of Empires. To
the same purpose was that of Caesar, Non est Idem tempus Armorum, quod Legum;
Arms and Laws do never flourish at one and the same time. Kings, says Seneca,
grant many things blindfold, especially in times of War: for no one man, though
Just, can possibly satisfy the desires of so many Armed Men; neither can any
one man at the same time perform the Office of a Good Man, and of a Good
General. Nay, even Pompey himself, though otherwise very Modest, yet would say,
Armatus ut Leges cogitem? What do ye tell me of Laws, that am in Arms? Or as
Plutarch frames his Answer to the Mamertines, What, will ye never cease to
upbraid us with your Laws, whom ye see begirt with Swords? Lib. 9.
So easily, says Curtius, does War pervert and destroy even the very Laws of
Nature. Even among Christian Authors, we find many such like sayings: That of
Tertullian shall suffice instead of the rest, Dolus, Asperitas, Injustitia,
propria sunt Praeliorum negotia; Fraud, Cruelty and Oppression are the proper
Employments of War. Now they that favor this Opinion, will doubtless object
against me, that of the Comoedian, If Things uncertain, thou with certain Rules
Wilt Guide, thou wilt undertake a Task as Bad,
As he that would with Reason run stark Mad.
Seeing then it would be to no purpose to treat of Right, if there be no such
thing; It will very much concern us, to commend and defend this ensuing
Discourse, by a brief, but sound Confutation of this Error.

But that we may avoid Confusion in disputing with a Multitude, This Error
confuted.
let us allow them an Advocate; and who fitter than Carneades, who arrived at
that height and perfection of Eloquence, that he could plead as strongly for
Error, as for Truth: This man having undertaken to decry Justice, especially
that part of it which we now defend, could find no Argument more forceable,
than this, Men, says he, Carneades his Argument against Justice.
have ordained unto themselves Laws for Profits sake, various, according to
their several manners, which also they often change with the Times: whereas
indeed, there is no Natural Law or Right at all. For all, both Men and other
living Creatures, are by the mere Guidance of Nature, led to such things, as to
themselves are profitable: Wherefore there is either no Justice at all; or if
there be any, it is extreme folly, because it robs it self to enrich others.
But what the Philosopoer here says, and the Poet after him: What Is Just, or
Unjust, Nature cannot discern. must by no means be admitted: For man indeed, is
a living body, but far more excellent than all others, and much more differing
from the rest, than they do one from another; as may easily be demonstrated by
many actions, Man differs from all other Creatures, and how.
which are proper only to mankind. Amongst which, this is one, that he greedily
affects Society, that is, Community; yet not any but that which is peaceable,
and according to the Model of his Understanding, Regular, with those of his own
kind; which the Stoics term (...), Familiarity. Men, says Chrysostom, with
men have Society naturally; and why not, seeing that Beasts with Beasts have
the same. And in another place he tells us, That Nature has instilled into our
minds the very seeds of Virtue. This also M. Antoninus (that Emperor who was
so highly famed for his Philosophy) thus testifies, That we were born for
Communion, was long since apparent: For, Is it not plain, says he, That Nature
frames all things in order, when we see the worser things made for the better,
and the better things one for another? That therefore which Carneades affirms,
That every Creature is by Natural Instinct led to such things, as are to it
self only profitable, if universally taken, is not to be granted: for some of
the rest are content to abate somewhat of their own profit, partly to their
young ones, and partly to others of their own kind: The Proverb intimates as
much, when it says, Canis Caninam non est; One Dog will not eat another. And
the Poet confirms it, Tigers, though fierce, at Peace with Tigers are: Juveral.

And every Beast will its own Kindred spare.
It was therefore Philo's advice, Let men, says he, Upon the Fifth Commandment.
learn Gratitude from Dumb Beasts: The Dog will defend his Masters house that
feeds him, and oft-times will expose himself even to death for him, upon the
approach of any Danger that threatens him. Is it not then the greatest of all
shames, that a Dog should be more thankful than a Man? And that a Creature
naturally Fierce and Ravenous, should in Gratitude excel the Mildest and
Meekest of all Creatures? But if we scorn to learn our duty from Creatures
Terrestrial, let us yet observe the Nature of Birds, those Aereal Travelers:
The Stork being Feeble through Age, and not able to fly abroad, rests in her
Nest, whilst her young ones traveling over Sea and Land, seek for Food for
their aged Parents, who being worn and spent with Age and Travel, deservedly
enjoy ease, plenty of necessaries, nay, of delicates; whereas their young ones
comfort themselves with this, That they have conscientiously performed that
duty, which Piety exacted from them, together with an expectation of the like
to be paid unto them hereafter, when they also shall grow old, and through age,
feeble. Thus do they in due time discharge a necessary debt, by restoring that,
to their Parents in their old Age, which in their Infancy they received from
them. Now from whence think ye, do they learn this duty of fostering their
young, but from Nature; being in the same manner fostered themselves when they
are young? And how can they hear this, says Philo, and not hide their heads
for shame, that take no care of their aged Parents, but wilfully neglect them,
whom either alone or before all others they ought to sustain? Especially
considering, that in so doing, they cannot be said properly to give, but only
to repay what they owe them: For Children have nothing of their own, but what
they derive from their Parents, who either gave it them, out of what was
theirs, or by some means or other enabled them to get it.

Whence this proceeds.
Now in Beasts, this care of their young, proceeds (as I conceive) from some
Extrinsick Intelligent Principle, Because as to other Acts, not more difficult
than these, the same Intelligence does not appear in them. The like may be said
of Infants, In whom, as Plutarch well observes, there is a Natural Propensity
to do good unto others, even before they are capable of Instruction, and whom
Nature it self teaches to be Compassionate. Man only has the faculty of
Speech.
But in a man of perfect Age, when knowingly he does the same in like cases,
having withal an exceeding great desire after Society, whereof he alone of all
other Creatures has the proper Organ, I mean, Speech: In him, I say, it is fit
that we should admit a Faculty of knowing and doing things according to some
General Rules, And of knowledge by General Rules.
whereunto whatsoever is agreeable, is not so to all living creatures, but
peculiarly to mankind only. Homo ad id natus est, Lib. 9.
been ut aliis faciat, etc. Man, says M. Antoninus, was born for this end, to
do good unto others. And again, Sooner may we find Bodies Terrestrial not
tending to the Earth, than a sound and perfect man, not affecting the society
of men. For as he speaks in another place, Quod ratione utitur necessario
Coetum appetit; Whatsoever has the Faculty of Reason, must necessarily affect
Society. To the same purpose is that also of Nicetas Coniates, Lib. 10.
Nature her self has insculpt and ingenerated in us, See Aug. de Doctr.
Christ. lib. 3. c. 14.
a mind easily consenting and agreeing with those of our own kind. Neither can
I here omit that excellent saying of Seneca, That thou may understand, how
desiderable a thing of it self it is, to have a thankful mind; and how odious a
thing Ingratitude is: Know that there is nothing sooner dissolves and disjoints
Humane Society, than this Vice of Unthankfulness. For wherein otherwise
consists our security, if not in those mutual good offices, that we do one to
another, by which Commerce and Exchange of Courtesies only, our lives are
strongly guarded and fortified against all violent Incursions whatsoever. Take
us singly, and what are we but a prey to all other creatures; and as so many
sacrifices, to appease the hunger or rage of ravenous beasts? No Blood so vile,
none so easily purchased as ours. All other creatures are sufficiently guarded
against all violence. Whatsoever is born wild and unsociable, comes into the
world armed; only man comes naked and infirm, having neither Hoofs, Horns,
Claws nor Teeth, to make him to appear terrible to the rest; only two things
Nature has given him, whereby both to offend others, and to defend himself,
namely, Reason and Society. By these, he that being single, is weakest of all,
becomes Lord and Master of all: It is Society that gives him the dominion over
all other creatures; it is Society that transfers Empire from one Nation to
another, extending it self over the Seas also; it is this that mitigates the
violence of Diseases; it is this that yields Comfort to old age; this asswageth
grief and pain; this makes us strong, valiant, nay, invincible: For as much as
we may lawfully crave its assistance, even against Fortune her self. Take away
this, and you break asunder that Unity that there is between mankind, whereby
our lives are sustained: And it is certainly taken away, if Ingratitude be not
in it self odious. Thus far Seneca.

Now this very conservation of Society, Concerning the great care that Doves
have over their young, see Porphy^y de non esu l. 3. Society the foundation of
Law. 1. Of Nature strictly taken.
as it is agreeable to humane understanding, though but crudely here expressed,
is the foundation of that which is properly called Right. From whence arises
our abstinence from that which is another, and our restoring of that which we
have detained, together with the full profits we have made of it: As also our
obligation to perform our promises, our satisfaction for damages done unto
others through our default, and the merit of punishment among men. For Justice
is by Porphyry thus described, Ut abstineretur alienis, De non esu l. 3.
neque noceatur non nocentibus; To abstain from what is another, and not to
harm them that are harmless.

From this signification of the word Right, 2. More largely.
there flows another of a larger extent. For seeing that man above all other
living bodies, has not only such a laudable Faculty as is described, but
Judgment also to discern, as well what is pleasant and delightful, as what is
hurtful unto it self: And that not only at present, but for the future, and
what may lead unto either. Is is therefore agreeable most to humane Nature,
according to the measure of humane understanding, to be guided in those things
by a Judgment rightly informed; I mean, such a Judgment, as is not misled,
either by vain fear, or by the sweetness of some instant pleasure; nor yet
violently carried away by any Inconsiderate Rashness. For what is manifestly
repugnant unto such a Judgment is also understood to be contrary to the Law of
Humane Nature. And hereunto also appertains that Prudent dispensation in the
distribution of such things as properly belong to every person or Society,
which sometimes prefers the wise before the Ignorant, a neighbor before a
stranger, and sometimes the poor before the rich, so far forth as every man's
Acts, and the nature of the thing will bear: Which many of old reckoned as a
part of Right, properly and strictly so called; whereas notwithstanding that
Right, properly so named, may have a far different nature, namely in this, That
those things which are now one man's, may be permitted to, or accomplished by
another.

Of the Divine Law.
Now these things which we have already said would hold true, though we should
grant, what without great wickedness we cannot, That there is no God, or that
he takes no care of humane affairs. But since we are instructed to the
contrary, partly by reason, and partly by perpetual and universal Tradition,
and are therein also confirmed by so many Irrefragable Arguguments and
miracles, attested by and through all ages: It now follows, That we ought to
obey God in all things without exception, as our Sovereign Lord and Maker, to
whom we owe both our selves, and all we have; especially since he has many
ways showed himself to be the best, and most powerful of all beings. So that he
is both most able, and most willing to reward our obedience with the greatest
Rewards, even with such as are like unto himself, Eternal; especially, since he
has confirmed it, and bound himself thereunto by his Word and Promise; as we
Christians being so convinced by Infallible Testimonies, do strongly believe.

From whence springs up another Law beside that which is Natural, namely, from
the Free Will and Pleasure of God, whereunto (as our own understandings direct
us, we must be subject: And therefore we may conclude with M. Antoninus, Lib. 9.
Qui Injuste agit Impius est; He that is Unjust is also Impious. The Law of
Nature in some sense the Law of God.
But even that Law of Nature, whereof we have already treated, Whether it be
that which springs from Society, or that which is of a larger extent, although
it flow from principles internal as to man, yet may deservedly be ascribed unto
God. Because it was originally his will, that such principles should be
instilled into us. Chrysostom. de Diis lib. 3.
So Chrysostom understood it, Cum Naturam dico, Deum dico, ipse enim Naturae
Artifex; When I say Nature, I mean God, who is the Author of Nature. Neither
can we (say Chrysippus and the Stoics) derive Justice from any other Root than
from Jove himself. From which Word Jove, the Latin word Jus was very probably
at first derived; Unless happily we had rather deduce it from Jussum, by cutting
off the last Syllable, as of Ossum anciently is now made Os.

Moreover, God by the express Laws that he has given us, And explained by the
Laws given by God.
has made those very principles yet more conspicuous to them that are of weak
understanding, restraining the wandering and otherwise exorbitant passions of
those who consult their own, or the safety of others, by curbing those that are
most violent with a stronger Rein, and keeping them within his own bounds, both
in respect of the manner and of the end. Besides, All mankind of one stock.
even the very Sacred History (setting aside what consists in Precepts) does
not a little provoke us to Mutual Love, by teaching us that we are all of us
born of the same first Parents. In which sense, what Florentinus says, is
every true, That Nature has constituted all mankind of one stock or Kindred;
whence it follows, That for one man to betray or defraud another, is Impiety.
Therefore our Parents are as Gods, (...), Earthy Gods, as Hierocles calls them,
conspicuous and visible Gods, who do imitate the invisible and unbegotten God,
in giving life unto others. De Leg. 9.
And therefore Plato calls Parents Gods Images or Representatives. To whom we
owe our Reverence as to the Gods themselves, says Aristotle; Nic. l. 9. c. 11
yet not such an obedience as is infinite and unlimited.

Again, The Civil Law from whence it arises.
Seeing that it is a Dictate of the Law of Nature to fulfill all Covenants and
Agreements, (for it is necessary that there should be some means of obliging
men among themselves, nor can there be any other means found that is Natural;)
from this very spring flow all Civil Laws. For they that lifted themselves into
any Society, or otherwise subjected themselves to any one man, or to any
Society of men: These have also either expressly promised, or from the very
nature of the thing it self, ought so to be understood, as if they had tacitly
promised to observe and fulfill whatsoever the major part of that Society, or
they unto whom their power was transferred, had constituted or ordained for the
general good. What therefore, not Carneades only, Carneades confuted, who held
that all was lawful that was profitable.
but others also have said, What Is Just and Equal does from Profit spring, if
spoken properly is not true; For the Law of Nature is the product of Humane
Nature it self: Which although we should want nothing, yet would, of it self,
carry us to a desire of Humane Society. The Civil Law then acknowledges no
other Mother, than that very obligation which arises from Consent, which
because it derives its Authority from the Law of Nature; Therefore may Nature
be said to be (as it were Grandmother to this Law. But even from the very Law
of Nature there arises some profit; For God who is the Author of Nature, was
willing that every man in himself singly considered, should be infirm and
defective of many things conducing to a good life, the more strictly to engage
us to affect Society. But it was common profit, I grant, that occasioned the
Civil Law: For that very Consociation or Subjection (whereof we have spoken)
was first instituted for some utility: yea, and they that prescribe Laws unto
others, either do, or should propose something of profit even therein. But as
the Municipal Laws of every City do mainly regard the benefit of that City,
even so among all, or at least the most Cities, there may, nay certainly are,
some Laws by common consent agreed on, which respect the benefit not of those
particular Cities, The Law of Nations.
but of all in general. And this that we call the Law of Nations, so often as
we distinguish that Law from the Law of Nature, which in that Partition
Carneades made of all Laws into Natural and Civil only, was omitted. Whereas
notwithstanding being to treat of that Right which was between Nations (for he
subjected his discourse to War and things got by War) he ought most especially
to have mentioned this Law. But whereas he traduceth Justice, To neglect our
own profit in obedience to the Laws of Nature of Nations, is Wisdom.
by calling it folly, he does ill. For as by his own Confession, That Citizen
is no Fool who observes the Civil Laws of the City he lives in, although he
(for the reverence he bears unto those Laws) omits some things that would be
profitable to himself: So neither is that a foolish people who have not so
great an esteem for their own private gain, as for it, to trample upon the Laws
Common to all, or to most Nations: There being the same reason for both. For as
he that for his present profit, shall violate the Laws of the Country he lives
in, does as much as in him lies, but destroy that, which should perpetually
defend both him and his, in whatsoever he has or shall acquire; so also a
people in violating the Laws of Nature and Nations, do but pull down those
Bulwarks, that should thenceforth secure their own peace and safety. And why.
Lib. 9.
For as M. Antoninus well observes, Whatsoever Action it is, that aims not,
either directly or mediately at the good of the Commonwealth, takes away the
life of it, by dissolving the connection of all its parts, and is no less
seditious than he that Heads a Party separate from the body of the people: For
one man separated from another, cannot but be separated from mankind in
general. For, Quod examini expedit idem and Api; As what is good for the Hive,
is good for the Be; so what is profitable to the Commonwealth, is so likewise
to every Citizen. So then, Although by our Conformity to the Law, we could
expect no profit at all to our selves, yet would it be a point of wisdom rather
than folly, to suffer our selves to be carried thither, whither we may perceive
our selves to be led by the manuduction of Nature. Wherefore neither is that
altogether true, For fear of wrongs, good Laws invented were. As if men were
enforced to be just for fear of punishment only; for this belongs to such Laws
and Constitutions, as are found out to be most expedient for the better
execution of this Law. Coercive Laws invented for mutual defense.
As when a multitude of men, finding themselves singly and apart, unable to
defend themselves, shall unite and conspire with their common and joint forces,
to institute and to defend such Laws and Courts of Judicature, as should punish
those who should attempt to oppress them; so that what they cannot do singly,
they may be able to do with an united force. And in this sense that may very
well be understood, which is usually said, That is just which pleases the most
powerful party. Jus est illud quod validiori placuit. Laws without power to
defend them are fruitless.
Whereby we may understand, that the Law it self without a power to defend it,
loses its external force, and so becomes fruitless: which made Solon to boast
what gallant things he had done, By coupling Might, in equal yoke, with Right.
But yet neither is the Law, though it want a force sufficient to abett it,
Externally.
altogether fruitless; because it begets Peace and Tranquillity of Conscience:
Not Internally.
whereas on the contrary, Injustice does wound and torment it, as Plato
instanceth in those of Tyrants. Besides, Justice is approved of and Injustice
condemned by the consent of all good men, yea, and what is the greatest comfort
of all, This, has God for its Avenger, That, God for its Patron, who so
reserves his Judgments after this life, that he ofttimes gives a taste af them,
even in this; as we are taught by many examples in Histories. The Law of
Nations how beneficial.
But whereas there are many that think it superfluous, to require that Justice
from a free people or their Governors, which they exact daily from private men;
the ground of this error is this, Because these men respect nothing in the Law,
but the profit that arises from it, which in Private Persons, being single and
unable to defend themselves, is plain and evident: but for great Cities that
seem to have within themselves, all things necessary for their own well-being,
it does not so plainly appear, that they have any need of that virtue (called
Justice) which respects Strangers. But not to insist upon what has been
already said, namely, That all Laws were not ordained for Profit only, there is
no City so strong and of it self sufficient, but may sometimes stand in need of
Foreign Aid, either by way of Commerce or to defend it self, against the united
forces of many Foreign Nations confederate against it: Therefore we see, that
the most potent Princes and States, have always been desirous of Leagues, which
would be of little use or force were all Laws and Justice confined within the
bounds of any one City only.

Most true it is, That as soon as we recede from the Law, No Community can
subsist without Laws.
there is nothing that we can certainly call ours: If no Community can possibly
subsist without Laws (which Aristotle proves by that notable example of
Thieves) surely, that which knits together either all mankind, or diverse
Nations among themselves, had need of some Law to preserve it; which he well
knew, who held that a man ought not to do a wicked act, no not for his Country.
Ad Ephesians. 4.
But some may say (says Chrysostom) How comes it to pass then that Thieves
live in peace? But when? I pray tell me, says he; No not of Thieves.
Surely when they cease to act as Thieves: For when they observe not the Rules
of Justice in dividing the spoil, in not giving to every one his equal share,
thou shall quickly see them engaged in War and Combats among themselves.
Plutarch reciting that Saying of King Pyrrhus, That he would leave his Kingdom
to that Son who had the sharpest Sword; says, That it was so said, only to
excite them to enrich his House with Blood and Rapine: Whereupon he breaks out
into this exclamation, Adeo insociabile, ferinumque est propositum plus suo
habendi; So wild and unsociable a thing is Covetousness. Aristotle seems
exceedingly to blame them, who though they are not willing to admit of any
King, or Governor, over themselves, but him that has the true Right; yet
regard neither Right nor Wrong in the Government of Foreigners. The
Lacedaemonians (says Plutarch) place the greatest part of Honesty in their
Country's profit: Jus aliud nec norunt, Plut. Ag^s.
nec discunt, quam unde Spartam putant posse augeri; They will neither know or
learn any other Law, than how to enlarge their Territories. The like Character
do the Athenians give of them in Thucydides, That among themselves, and to
their own Civil Laws, The Lacedaemonians prefer public profit before honesty.
they were very just; but as to Strangers, they esteemed exery thing honest
that was pleasant, and every thing just that was profitable. But yet when one
of the Spartan Kings pronounced that Commonwealth happy, Which Pompey reproves.
which was bounded by the Sword and the Spear; Pompey correcting him, said, Yea
rather that Commonwealth is truly happy, that is on every side bounded with
Justice. For which he might also have produced the Authority of another Spartan
King, who preferred Justice even before Military Prowess. Upon this very
ground, because all Martial Power ought to be regulated by Justice, for in case
all men were just, there would be no need of valor.

Justice preferred before fortitude.
Even Fortitude it self is by the Stoics thus defined, to be Valor contending
for Justice: When Agesilaus in Plutarch heard the Persian King styled Great, He
demanded, Quomodo me major, nisi sit and justior? How is he greater than my
self, unless he be more just? Themistius in his Oration that he made to the
Emperor Valens, elegantly discoursing how Kings should be qualified, And to be
extended to all Nations.
if Wisdom were to choose them, says, Not such as should think themselves
entrusted with the care of one single Nation only, but of all mankind; neither
should he profess himself to be a Friend to the Macedonians only, or to the
Romans, but to all Men and all Nations whatsoever. As M. Antoninus sometimes
said of himself, Civitas and Patria mihi est, ut Antonino, Roma; ut Homini,
Mundus: As I am Antoninus, De non esu Animal. l. 3.
Rome is my Country; as I am a Man, the World. So also Porphyry, He that is
guided by reason carries himself inoffensively toward his own Subjects, yea
and toward Strangers, yea and toward all men. See Cyril against Julian, l. 6.
Quanto ratione praestans, tanto Divinior; The more he partakes of Reason, the
more he partakes of the Divine Nature. The very Name of Minos was odious to
Posterity, for no other reason, but, because he extended his Justice no farther
than his Dominions: Each Country groaned under Minos Yoke.

That even in War some Laws are in force.
Now what some have fansied, namely, That, Inter Arma cessant Leges, In War all
Laws lie asleep, is so far from truth, that no War ought to be undertaken, but
for the prosecution of a man's Right; nor any that is undertaken, managed beyond
the bounds of Justice and Faithfulness: It was very well said of Demosthenes,
That War might justly be made against those, who cannot be compelled to do us
right in a judicial way. Now against such as are sensible of their own
weakness, Judgments are forceable enough, and so no need of War: But against
such as are, or think themselves of equal strength, if they will not do right,
War may be justly undertaken, which also that (they may be altogether
righteous) must be managed with as much Conscience, as judgments are usually
passed. Admit then that Laws may sleep in the midst of Wars, yet they must be
those only that are Civil and Judicial; But such only as are Civil and Judicia^.
such I mean as are proper to peace, but not such as are perpetual and fitted
unto all times. It was very well said therefore by Dion Prusaeensis, That
written Laws are of no force amongst Enemies, but such as are unwritten: That
is, Such as Nature her self dictates, or the consent of Nations constitutes,
are in force even in the midst of Arms. There are Laws in the midst of Arms.
When one asked King Alphonsus, Whether he thought himself most indebted to
Books or Arms; he readily answered, That he was beholding to his Books, both
for the knowledge of his Arms, and also for his knowledge of the Laws of Arms.
So also Plutarch, Sunt apud bonos viros quaedam and belli jura; Amongst good
men there are some Laws to be observed, even in War: Neither are we so to
prosecute Victory, as to enrich our selves by base and dishonest gain. Eas res
puro pioque duello quaerendas censeo.
This appears by that ancient form of the Romans, These things I judge ought to
be acquired by a just and pious War. These very ancient Romans (as Varro notes)
were very slow in making War, and not very licentious when they did make it,
because they approved of no War but what was pious. Camillus was wont to say,
That War was to be waged with no less Justice than Valor. The like Testimony
does Scipio the African give of the People of Rome in his time, namely, that
they always began and finished their Wars justly: And another Author tells us,
That there are Laws for War as well as for Peace. A third admires Fabritius for
a gallant Soldier, but principally for that which in War was very rarely found,
namely, his Innocence; as believing that some things usually done against an
Enemy were impious: What great power and efficacy the justness of a Cause has,
Historians do every where declare, The goodness of a Cause is of great efficacy
in war. Proverbial Sayings.
whilst they ofttimes ascribe the Victory to this, as to its principal cause.
From whence arise these Proverbial Sayings, The Courage of Soldiers do either
rise or fall, according to the equity of their Cause. He seldom returns in
safety, that willingly engages himself in an unjust War. A good Cause is never
unattended with hopes. Thus Pompey in Appian cheers up the Spirits of his
Soldiers, We, says he, must place all our confidence in the Gods, and in the
goodness of our Cause; as having entered into this War upon honest and just
grounds, for the defense of the Commonwealth. Thus likewise does Cassius
encourage his Soldiers by telling them, That the greatest hopes were always,
where there was the best Cause. The like we may read in Josephus, Antiq. hist.
lib. 15.
Abs quo stat Jus, ab eo Deus; Where the Right is not, God is not. Many such
like sayings we find in Procopius: As that of Belisarius upon his expedition
into Africa, where he tells his Army, That Valor never gets the Victory,
unless accompanied with Justice. And in another Speech of his, before the
Battle fought near Carthage, We appeal, says he, to God for witness, the
smallest Atome of whose Power is able to overballance all humane strength: He,
as we believe, weighing Justly the Causes of the War, will give successes to
this Battle that are due to both Parties. The truth of which saying, the
Admirable Event of that Fight, did presently after undoubtedly prove. Thus
likewise Totilas bespeaks his Goths, It cannot be, says he, it cannot possibly
be, I say, that they that use Violence and Injustice, should gain Honor in
Battle. Sed prout vita cuique est, Lib. 2.
ita ei obtingit belli fortuna; But according to every man's Life, so is his
fortune in the War. It was therefore well advised by Agathias, Injustice and
the Contempt of God is at all times to be abhorred as dangerous; but then most,
when the Fortune of the War is to be determined by a Battle. The good success
of wicked designs should not discourage us.
Neither should any man be discouraged by reason of the prosperous successes of
some wicked designs: For it suffices. That the righteousness of the Cause, has
a very great efficacy to excite Valor, and stir up to Action, although that
Power (as it often falls out in humane affairs) be sometimes hindered and
frustrated in its effects by the intervention, or opposition of some other
Causes. Besides the Opinion that men have, that the War is neither rashly
begun, nor unjustly managed, is very prevalent to contract Friendship, whereby
as private men, so Nations and Kingdoms reap infinite advantages. For no man
will willingly associate himself with those, The Justice of our Cause sometimes
begets friends
who have no regard to Justice, to Piety, to Fidelity.

Now upon the Reasons above recited, concluding with my self, that there was a
certain Law common among Nations, guiding them as well to, as in the Wars, The
Authors motives to undertake this work.
I had many, and those very weighty motives, that induced me to compile this
Treatise of it. For I very well saw throughout the Christian World so great a
license of making War, and of running into Arms upon every light cause, and
sometimes upon none at all, that even the Barbarians would have been ashamed to
have owned it. 1. A general license in making War;
And also, that Arms being once taken up, there was no reverence at all had to
Laws, either Divine or Humane; but just as if some Fury had been sent out to
kill and destroy: and in managing it without restraint.
so War, being begun, a general license was granted to work all manner of
Mischief whatsoever. The consideration of which barbarous Cruelty, gave
occasion to many men, not evil, to teach, That it is not lawful for a Christian
(whose Religion principally consists in promoting Love and Charity amongst all
men) to take Arms: With whom Ferus and our Countryman Erasmus seem sometimes
to accord; both of them being great Lovers of Peace, Erasmus and Jo. Ferus.
Ecclesiastical and Civil. But, as I suppose, with that intent only as we
usually have, when we bend a stick, in it self crooked, so far to the other
side, as may probably upon its return make it straight. But this very design of
too much contradiction, is so far from doing good, that it does much hurt;
because that we may easily perceive, that their urging of these things too far,
does detract from their Authority in other things, though happily true. We ought
therefore to moderate between these two, as well, that all things may not be
admitted to be lawful in War, as that nothing.

Moreover, another design I had, namely, 2. Motive, To promote learning,
especially in the Laws.
that being unworthily banished mine own Country, which with so many of my
Labors I have honored, I might promote now by my private Studies, the
knowledge of the Laws, which heretofore I practiced in public Offices, with as
much Integrity as I possibly could. Many have endeavored heretofore, to reduce
this into the form of an Art; but none, as yet, have done it. Neither indeed
can it be done, unless (what no man has yet taken sufficient care of) those
Laws which are established by Humane Authority, be rightly separated from those
that are Natural. For the Laws of Nature being always the same, may easily be
collected into an Art: But those that arise by Constitution, seeing that they
are both often changed, and are also diverse in diverse Nations, are put
without Art, as the Collections of such things as are singular. But if the
Doctors of true Justice, would but undertake to treat of the parts of Natural
and Perpetual Jurisprudence, setting aside what has its rise from the Freedom
of the Will; so that one would treat of Laws, another of Tributes, another of
the Office of a Judge, another of the Conjecture of Wills; and another, of the
proofs of Matters of Fact. Then by a Collection of all these parts, a Body may
be composed.

But what Method we thought fit to use, The Author's Method.
we have showed rather in deeds than words, in this Treatise, which contains
that part of Jurisprudence, which is by far the most Noble. For in the first
Book, The Subject of the First Book.
having discovered the Original of Right; we have handled this General
Question, Whether there be any War that is Lawful? And next, to the end that
the difference between a public and private War, may be the more easily
discovered, we thought fit to explain the Just Rights of the Supreme Power,
what People may have it, and what Kings: and which of these have it, either
fully, or in part only. And again, which of them may have it with a Power of
Alienation, and which otherwise: And then we were to speak of the Duty of
Subjects toward their Lawful Prince, or to their Superiors.

Our second Book, Of the Second.
undertaking to expound all the Causes from whence a War may arise, shows at
large, what things are common, and what private; what Right persons may have
over persons; what obligation arises from Dominion; by what Rule Kingly
succession is guided; what Right arises from Covenants and Contracts; what
Interpretation is to be made of Leagues; what Force, and what Interpretation is
to be made of Oaths, both public and private; what may be due for damages
done; what Sanctimony is due to Ambassadors; what Right to bury the dead; and
what the nature of punishments are, and the like.

Our third Book, treating of that which is in War lawful, Of the Third.
and having distinguished between that which is not punishable, or that which
among foreign Nations is defended as lawful, and between that which is
altogether blameless, descends afterward to the several kinds of Peace; and to
all Covenants or Agreements made in War, which appears for this reason to be
worth our pains, because (as I have said) no man has ever yet treated upon
this subject; and they that have handled the parts of it, have left very much
to other men's Industry. There is nothing of this subject extant from the old
Philosophers, neither of the Graecians, (among whom, Aristotle indeed, had
composed a Book, Entitled (...), The Rights of War): nor among the Christians,
which yet, is a work very desiderable. Nay, of those Books wrote by the Ancient
Romans concerning their Fecial Laws, there is nothing traduced unto us, but the
bare Name. They that collected the sums of such Cases as they call Cases of
Conscience; have, as of other things, so also of War, of Promises, of Oaths,
and of Reprizals wrote whole Chapters. I have also seen some special Books
written of the Rights of War, partly by Divines, as by Franciscus de Victoria,
Henricus Gorichemus, Willielmus Mathaeus, Johannes de Carthagena; and partly by
Doctors of the Law, as by Johannes Lupus, Franciscus Arius, Johannes de
Lignano, and Martinus Laudensis. But on so Copious an Argument, they all of
them said but very little: And most of them so, that they have confounded
things due by the Law of Nature, things appertaining to the Divine Law, things
due by the Law of Nations, and things due by the Civil and Canon Laws, mixing
them altogether, without either order or distinction. But what all these were
most defective in, namely, the Light of Histories, the most Learned Faber, in
some Chapters of his Semestria (but so far only, as conduced to his purpose,
and alleging Testimonies only) has endeavoued to supply. So also, did
Balthazar Ayala, but somewhat more fully: and Albertus Gentilis yet more fully
than Ayala, whose Labors, as I know they may be helpful to others, and confess
have been to me; so what may be wanting in him, either in the way of Teaching,
or in his Method, or in distinguishing of questions, and of the kinds of
diverse Laws, I leave to the Readers Judgment. This only I shall say, That in
his decision of Controversies, he usually follows either some few examples, not
altogether to be allowed; or he is led by the Authority of some Modern Lawyers
in their Answers; many whereof, were framed in favor to their Clients, more
than to the Nature of Justice and Equity.

The Causes that render a War either Just or Unjust, are not by Ayala so much
as touched: Gentilis has indeed described some general Heads, in such a way as
pleases himself. But many places of such Controversies, as are both Noble and
very frequent, he has not so much as glanced at. Now lest any such should
escape us, we have adventured to discover the very foundation, whereupon we may
build our judgment, so that it may be easy to decide any such question, as
shall happen by us, to be omitted.

The Law of Nature how proved, and how distinguished from other Laws.
It remains now, that we briefly declare, by whose assistance, and with what
care we undertook this Work. And in the first place, My care was, to refer the
proof of such things as belong to the Law of Nature, to such Notions as are so
certain and undoubtedly true, that no man without wronging his own judgment,
can deny them. For the principles of that Law, if rightly observed, are as
plain and evident of themselves almost as those we discern with our outward
Senses, which if our Organs be rightly disposed, and other things (thereunto
necessary) not wanting, cannot deceive us: Therefore Euripides brings in
Polynices asserting the righteousness of his own Cause, thus.

These things being plain and regularly due,
Both Learned and Unlearned must confess are true.
Whereunto he presently adds the Judgment of the Chorus (which after the manner
of the Barbarians, consisted all of Women) acknowledging the truth of what
Polynices had said. The same Author in another place brings in Hermione saying,
-- We live not like Barbarians here, I trow. Whereunto Andromache answers, Yet
what with them is ill, with us is so. For the proof also of this Law, I have
likewise produced the Testimonies of Philosophers, Historians, Poets, and in
the last place Orators: Not that they are all either equally, or rashly to be
believed, for they speak many things in favor to their own Sect, and to the
Argument or Cause they undertake to defend; but that which many wise men,
living in several Ages and in several places, do all of them affirm to be true
and certain; that, I say, ought to be referred to some universal cause, which
in these Questions brought by us, can be no other than either some inference
directly drawn from the very Principles of Nature, or from the common consent
of all Nations. The former shows the Law of Nature, the latter the Law of
Nations. The difference between these is not to be understood by the
Testimonies themselves, The Laws of Nature and Nations how distinguished.
(for the Laws of Nature and Nations are every where by Writers promiscuously
used) but by the quality of the matter; for that which cannot be deduced from
certain Principles, by certain and concluding Arguments, and yet every where
appears to be observed, we may conclude has its rise or beginning from the
freedom of the Will: And therefore I alone have endeavored to distinguish
these two, not only one from another, but both of them from the Civil Law. So
also in the Law of Nations, In the Law of Nations that which is perfectly
right, distinguished from that which has some effects of right.
I have distinguished that which is truly, and in every respect Right, from
that which has only got a certain outward effect like unto that of Primitive
Right, namely, that it may not lawfully be resisted, or, that it ought every
where to be defended even by public force, either by reason of some profit, or
that some greater inconveniences may be eschewed; which how necessarily it is
to be observed, will appear in the contexture of this ensuing Treatise. Nor
have I been less careful to distinguish between those things that are Right,
strictly and properly taken, whence arises the obligation to Restitution: And
those things that are so accounted; because to do otherwise would be repugnant
to some other dictate of Right Reason; of which diversity of Right, we have
said somewhat already both here and above.

Aristotle commended.
Among Philosophers, Aristotle deservedly claims the Pre-eminence, whether we
consider the order of his Treatise, his acute distinctions, or the strength and
weight of his Reasons. Only I wish that this Principality of his, had not for
some Ages past, degenerated into Tyranny; so that Truth (for the discovery
whereof Aristotle took so great pains) finds no greater Oppressor than the very
Name of Aristotle.

I, as well here as elsewhere, do challenge to my self the liberty of the
ancient Christians, who would espouse no Sect of Philosophers: Not that they
were of their Opinion, who held, That nothing could be known, (than which
nothing can be more absurd) but that there was no Sect that could discern all
Truth, nor any but what held something that was true: Wherefore to collect
Truth thus scattered, and through so many Sects dispersed into one Body, this,
they conceived to be nothing else, but to deliver a Doctrine truly Christian.
Thus thought Justin Martyr, as appears by the first of his Apologeticks, The
Doctrines of Plato were not much different from those of Christ, nor were they
altogether the same: So neither were the opinions of the Stoics, Poets, or
Historians; for every one of them having some impress of Reason, saw in part,
what was consentaneous thereunto, and so far they said what was right. For
those very manners, Ep. 96. De ver. rel. c. 3.
says St. Augustine, which Cicero and other Philosophers so highly commended,
are both taught and learned in all our Churches now flourishing through the
world. And in another place speaking of the Platonists, De Conf. l. 7. c. 9.
lib. 8. c. 11.
he says, That some few things being corrected, they might pass for Christians.

It was not without cause that some of the Platonists, and ancient Christians
dissented from Aristotle in this, That he placed the very nature of Virtue in a
mediocrity of Affections and Actions, which being thus placed, drove him to
this, That he compacted two several virtues, namely, Liberality and Parsimony,
into one: And gave unto Truth two Opposites, not equally distant from it,
namely, Vain-boasting and Dissimulation; and imposed the name of Vice upon some
Things, either not existing, or which of themselves are no vices, as the
contempt of Pleasure and Honor, and a vacuity of Anger against men. But that
this foundation of his, if taken universally, is not rightly laid, will appear
even from Justice it self, whose opposites (being too much or too little) when
he could not find in the affections and their subsequent Actions, he was
enforced to seek for both in the very things themselves, about which Justice
was conversant. Which very thing is in the first place to leap from one Genus
to another, which he deservedly blames in others: And in the next place, To
receive less than what is our due, may have somewhat of Vice adhering unto it
as Circumstances may happen. For it may be, that what any man so abates, he may
owe to the relief of either himself, or of his Relations. But certainly it
cannot be repugnant to Justice, which wholly consists in abstaining from what
is another man's: Such another fallacy is this, that he would not have Adultery
proceeding from Lust, and Murder proceeding from Anger, to belong properly to
Injustice; whereas notwithstanding Injustice is nothing else but the detention
of another man's Right, whether out of Lust or out of Anger, or out of an
unadvised Charity, or out of an Ambition or Vainglory (from whence the
greatest injuries do usually arise) it matters not. For to trample upon all
temptations whatsoever, rather than to dissolve Humane Society, this truly is
the proper work of Justice.

But to return from whence we came, True it is that to some virtues, Some
virtues require the moderation of our affections.
it falls out so, that the affections must be moderated, but not because it is
proper and perpetual to all virtues that they should be so; but because Right
Reason, whereupon Virtue always and every where attends, does in some prescribe
a measure to be followed, Others not.
whereas in others it excites to the highest degree of what we can do. It was
well said of Agathias, Lib. 5.
Of the motions of the Mind, those are simply and altogether to be embraced, in
which that which is agreeable to our duty, and worthy our choice, is sound and
sincere. But in those which may happily decline unto evil, we must not simply and
absolutely follow, but so far only as is convenient: Prudence is a pure and
uncorrupted good, which none will deny. In Anger, that which stirs us up to
action is commendable, but that which exceeds moderation, to be avoided as
being damagable. Love God too much we cannot; for Superstition sins not in
this, that it worships God too much, but in that it worships him perversely:
Neither can we be said excessively to desire things that are good, and that are
eternal, or excessively to fear those torments which are everlasting, nor too
much to hate sin: It was therefore truly said of Gellius, Some things there are
of so vast extent, that they will admit of no bounds or moderation, and that
are so much the more praiseworthy as they are greater and larger. Lactantius
when he had largely discoursed of the Affections, said, Non in his moderandis
sapientiae ratio versatur, etc. True Wisdom consists not in the moderation of
these, but in the causes of them; because these are moved by some things that
are without us: Neither should a restraint be put principally upon them,
because they may be but small in the greatest crime, and they may be very great
without any crime.

Our purpose is to magnify Aristotle, Histories have a twofold use in this
Treatise.
but with the same freedom as he himself took against his Masters in favor to
Truth: Histories have a double use as to the matter in hand; for it supplies us
with examples and Judgments in most cases. As for examples, The better the
Times and the People were, the greater was their Authority; for which reason we
make choice of the ancient Grecians and Romans, rather than of others: Neither
do I despise their judgments, especially when they agree: For the Law of Nature
(as we have said) is in some measure from hence proved; but the Law of Nations
cannot be proved otherwise. The Opinions and Sentences of Poets and Orators,
are not of so great Authority; but yet we sometimes make use of them, not so
much because we count them Authentic or Authoritative, but rather as Ornaments
to Confirm what otherwise we do prove. The holy scriptures.
Of the authority of such Books, as holy men by the afflate of Gods Spirit,
have written or approved, we often make use, yet with some difference between
the Old and New Testament: The former is by some quoted for the very Law of
Nature, but without doubt erroneously, for many things therein do proceed from
the free will and pleasure of God, Not repugnant to the Law of Nature.
which notwithstanding is no whit repugnant to the truth of the Law of Nature;
and so far Arguments may be rightly drawn from thence, so that we carefully
distinguish that Law of God, which God by men does sometimes execute, and that
which men execute among themselves. We have, as nearly as we could, avoided
both this error and another contrary unto it, which is, The Old Testament not
useless since the New was published.
that after the times of the new Covenant, there is no use at all to be made of
the Old. As to this we are of a contrary Judgment, as well for what we have
already said, as because such is the Nature of the New Law, that whatsoever is
commanded in the Old, appertaining to Virtue and good manners, the same or much
greater is commanded in the New. And after this manner do the ancient Christian
Writers make use of the Testimonies drawn from the Old Testament. But to the
right understanding of the sense of the Books of the Old Testament, we have no
small help from the Hebrew Writers, especially those who were thoroughly
instructed in the language and manners of their own Country. The New Testament
I do also make use of, to instruct Christians in what is lawful for them to do,
which cannot be elsewhere learned; which notwithstanding (contrary to what some
have done) I have distinguished from the Law of Nature: A greater sanctity
required by the Gospel th^n by the Law of Nature.

Precepts distinguished from Counsels.


Being most assured that in that most holy Law, a greater sanctity is
commanded, than that which the Law of Nature does of it self require. Neither
have I omitted to observe, what is rather commended unto us than commanded,
that so we may understand that to do contrary to that which is commanded, is
impiety, and renders us liable to punishment; but eagerly to aspire to that
which is most excellent, as it argues a noble and generous mind, so shall it
not want its due reward.

Canons Ecclesiastical.
Synodical Canons if they be right, are nothing but Collections drawn from the
general sayings of the Divine Law, and fitted to particular cases which do
usually happen: These also do either point out what the Divine Law does enjoin,
or exhort us to that which God commends unto us: And this is the office of the
true Christian Church, faithfully to traduce unto others what God has
delivered unto her, and after the same manner as they were delivered. But even
the Customs used among those ancient Christians, and that were worthy of that
Great Name, being either generally received, or praised, are deservedly to be
ranked with the Canons.

The Fathers.
After these, the second Authority is of those who were in their times famous
among Christians, for either their pious lives or doctrines, and were as yet
never noted for any great error. For even these men also ought to be had in
good esteem, as to what, with great asseveration, they affirm, and have found
out to be true in the interpretation of such places of Scripture as seem to be
obscure: And the more, by how much both their consent is the greater, and they
draw nearer to the times of the first purity, long before any Supremacy was
usurped, or any Sects or Factions known to adulterate the Primitive Truth.

The Schoolmen that succeeded to these, The Schoolmen.
do often show the strength of their Wits; But they happened to live in very
unhappy times, being altogether ignorant of good Arts: No marvel then, if
amongst many things which are in their Writings Commendable, there are some
that are Pardonable. And yet when they agree in matters of Morality, they
seldom err, being very quick-sighted to discern what in the sayings of other
men was to be reproved: And yet, even in this very endeavor of theirs to
defend their diverse opinions, they furnish us with great examples of Modesty,
whilst they contend among themselves with Reasons and Arguments; and not, as
the Custom now begins, to deface our Books with Reproaches, the spurious issue
of weak and effeminate minds.

There are three sorts of those that profess the knowledge of the Roman Laws:
The first are they whose pains appear in the Pandect, The sorts of Lawyers. 1.
The Pandect. 2. Codes. 3. Novel Constitutions.

the Codes of Theodosius and Justinian, and in the Novel Constitutions. The
Second sort are they who succeeded to Irnerius; as Acursius, Bartolus, and many
more, who at that time governed the Courts of Justice. The Third sort are of
those who joined Humane Learning, with the study of the Laws. To the first I
confess I owe much, as well for the solidity of their Arguments to prove that
which appertains to the Law of Nature; as also for the Testimonies they often
give, both to that Law, and not much less to that of Nations: yet so, that even
they, as well as others, do often use these names promiscuously, misapplying
that to the Law of Nations which is in force, but among some people only; and
that not by any Consent or Agreement, but because they take it one from another
by Imitation or by Chance: Yea, and even those things that belong truly to the
Law of Nations, they oft-times handle confusedly and indiscreetly, with those
that belong to the Roman Laws, as appears by the Chapters of Captives and
Postliminy. To distinguish these I have taken great pains.

The Second sort, Second sort.
regardless of the Divine Law and Ancient Histories, endeavor to determine all
Controversies between Kings or People out of the Roman Laws, assuming some
things from the Ecclesiastical Canons. But these also were often frustrated by
the infelicity of the times, so that they could never attain to the right
understanding of those Laws, although otherwise acute enough, to search into
the Nature of what was Good and Right: Whereby they often became good
Lawmakers, though not so good Expositors of Laws already made. These,
therefore, are then to be hearkened unto, when they give Testimony to such a
Custom as now passes for the Law of Nations.

Third sort.
But of those of the Third Form, who confine themselves wholly within the bounds
of the Roman Laws, and never, or at least very seldom, expatiate into that Law
that is common, there is but very little use to be made to our purpose: These
men having joined their School-subtilties with the knowledge of the Laws and
Canons, abstain not from the deciding of all Controversies between Kings and
People. Amongst whom are two Spaniards, namely, Covarruvia and Vasquius: This
latter using great Boldness; the former much more Modesty, and not without
sound Judgment. The French choose rather to intersert History with the study of
the Laws: The chief whereof are Bodine and Hottoman: The former in a continued
Treatise; the latter in some scattered Questions; whose Judgments and Reasons
will often supply us with matter to find out the Truth.

Three things the Author proposes to himself especially.
In this whole Treatise I chiefly propose to my self Three things: First, To
make the Reasons of my Definitions as evident as I can. Secondly, To dispose
the things I am to treat of, into a certain Order and Method. And Thirdly,
Clearly to distinguish those things which seem to be the same, but are not. I
have purposely abstained from that which belongs to another Treatise: As from
those things which teach us what is of Common use to be done; because these
have an Art peculiar to themselves, to wit, the Politics; which Aristotle
rightly so handled by it self, that he mixed nothing of any other Art with it;
whereas Bodine on the contrary, confounds that Art with this of ours. Yet in
many places, I have glanced at that which is profitable: But on the by, and
only that I may the more clearly distinguish it from that which is just.
Whosoever thinks that I have any regard to the Controversies of this age,
either those already on foot, or those that may be easily foreseen, will arise,
do me wrong. For I confess truly, That as Mathematicians consider Forms
abstracted from Bodies; so I, in treating of Right, have withdrawn my mind from
all singular facts. As to the Style, His Style.
I was unwilling to oppress my Reader with a multitude of Words, added to a
multitude of Things, to be treated of, whom my purpose is only to Instruct.
Therefore I chose rather to express my self in as plain and concise a way as I
could, as being most convenient for him that would Teach others: That so, they
that are to transact Public Affairs, may at one view, see both what kind of
Controversies do usually arise, and by what principles, their Judgments may be
guided to determine them: Which once known, it will be no difficult thing to
fit their Discourses to the subject matter, and to enlarge themselves upon it
as they please. I have also brought in the Ancients sometimes speaking their
own words, wheresoever they seem to be spoken, either with some Gravity, or
with some singular Elegancy: Which I have also sometimes done the Greeks; But
then especially, when the Sentence was either brief, or when I could not so
gracefully translate it into Latin: Which notwithstanding I have always
subjoined, for the benefit of those who are not expert in that Dialect. The
same Liberty that I have herein taken, in judging of the Sentences and Writings
of others, the very same, I say, do I heartily beg and entreat all, into whose
hands this Book of mine shall come, to take in judging of me, and mine. They
shall not be more ready to Admonish me of mine Errors, than I shall be to
Retract them, and to follow their Advice. And even now at this present, If
there have fallen from me in this Treatise, any thing that is dissonant to
Piety, to Good Manners, to the Holy Scriptures, if any thing disagreeing from
the consent of the Catholic Church, or from any Truth whatsoever, I wish, with
all mine Heart, it had never been spoken.

Hugo Grotius.

THE CHAPTERS Of the First BOOK.
I. WHat War is, and what Right, page 1 II. Whether it be lawful at any time to
make War, page 11 III. War divided into Public and Private; The Supreme Power
explained, page 31 IV. Of War made by Subjects against their Superiors, page
53 V. Who may lawfully make War, page 66
The Chapters of the Second BOOK.
I. OF the Causes of War; And first of War made in our own Defense, page 69 II.
Of such things, wherein Men have a Right in Common, page 78 III. Of Originary
Acquisition of Things: Of the Sea and Rivers, page 88 IV. Of a Presumed
Dereliction, and the Occupancy following: And wherein it differs from
Prescription and Vsucapion, page 97 V. How a Right over Persons was Originally
gained: Of the Right of Parents over their Children: Of Matrimony, Colleges or
Societies: Of the Right of Kings over Subjects, of Masters over Servants, page
103 VI. Of that Right that is derivatively acquired by the voluntary fact of a
Man; wherein is handled the Right of the Alienation of Empires, and the things
thereunto belonging. page 118 VII. Of that Right that is acquired by Law, and
of Succession from an Intestate, page 121 VIII. Of Dominion vulgarly said to be
acquired by the Law of Nations, page 134 IX. How Empire and Dominion may cease,
page 141 X. What Obligation arises from Dominion, page 146 XI. Of Promises,
page 150 XII. Of Contracts, page 157 XIII. Of Oaths, page 166 XIV. Of the
Promises, Contracts and Oaths of Sovereign Princes. page 176 XV. Of Leagues and
Sponsions, page 181 XVI. Of the Interpretation of Leagues, etc. page 236 XVII.
Of the Damage done to one man through the default of another: And of the
obligation thence arising, page 200 XVIII. Of the Right of Embassages, page 205
XIX. Of the Right of Burial, page 213 XX. Of Punishments, page 361 XXI. Of the
Communication of Punishments, page 393 XXII. Of Unjust Causes of War, page 404
XXIII. Of the Causes of War that are doubtful, page 410 XXIV. War though Just,
not to be undertaken rashly, page 416 XXV. For what Causes War may be
undertaken for Others, page 422 XXVI. How War may be Justly waged by such as
are subject to another Command, page 427
The Chapters of the Third BOOK.
I. CErtain General Rules, showing what by the Law of Nature may be lawful in
War, where also of Fraud and Lying, page 433 II. How by the Law of Nations the
Goods of Subjects may be obliged for the Debt of their Governors: Where also
of Reprizals, page 446 III. Of a Just or solemn War according to the Law of
Nations, and of its Denominations, page 450 IV. Of the Right of killing Enemies
in a Solemn War, and of other force on the body, page 455 V. Of Spoil and
Rapine committed in War, page 465 VI. Of the Right to things taken in War, page
468 VII. Of the Right over Captives taken in War, page 481 VIII. Of Empire over
the Vanquished, page 485 IX. Of Postliminy or the Right of such as return out
of Captivity, page 487 X. Admonitions concerning Things taken in an Unjust War,
page 494 XI. Moderation to be used in the killing of Men in a Just War, page
497 XII. Moderation to be used in the Spoiling of an Enemies Country, page 511
XIII. Moderation concerning Things taken in War, page 517 XIV. Moderation
concerning Captives, page 519 XV. Moderation in the Acquiring of Empire, page
524 XVI. Moderation concerning Things that by the Law of Nations, want te
benefit of Postliminy, page 528 XVII. Of Neuters in War, page 531 XVIII.
Concerning things Privately done in a Public War, page 534 XIX. Concerning
Faith to be kept with Enemies, page 536 XX. Concerning the Public Faith,
Treaties, Lots, Set Combats, Arbitriments, Surrenders, Hostages, Pledges, page
543 XXI. Of Faith during War; of Truces, Passes, Safe Conduct and Redemption of
Prisoners, page 557 XXII. Concerning Faith given by Inferior Commanders in
War, page 563 XXIII. Of Faith given in War by Private Men, page 566 XXIV. Of
Faith tacitly given, page 569 XXV. The Conclusion, with Admonition to keep
Faith and Peace, page 571
Places of SCRIPTURE in this TREATISE either Explained, Examined, or Amended.
Genesis.
Genesis Chapter 1 Ver. 29 Man's Right. p 78 Genesis Chapter 2 Ver. 17 The Tree of Knowledge
of Good and Evil. p 79 Genesis Chapter 4 Ver. 14 24 Whosoever shall find me, shall
kill me. p 15 Genesis Chapter 6 Ver. 4 Giants. p 79 Genesis Chapter 9 Ver. 5, 6 The blood of
your lives will I require. p 14 Genesis Chapter 14 Ver. 16 Brought back all those
things. p 529 Genesis Ver. 20 Tithes of all. ibid. Genesis Ver. 21 Give me the
persons, and take the goods. ibid. Genesis Chapter 18 Ver. 23 Destroy the righteous
with the wicked. p 435 Genesis Chapter 20 Ver. 12 Abraham of Sara she is my Sister. p
438 Genesis Chapter 25 Ver. 6 Children by Concubines what portion. p 125 Genesis Chapter 31
Ver. 20 26 27 Steal away the Heart. p 441 Genesis Chapter 34 Ver. 30 Ye have made to
stink. p 468 Genesis Chapter 38 Ver. 24 Bring her forth and let her be burnt. p 15
Genesis Ver. 20 Sent her the Kid which he had promised. p 154 Genesis Chapter 48 Ver. 22
Which I took with my Sword. p 468 Genesis Chapter 49 Ver. 6 In their anger they slew a
man. ibid.
Exodus.
Exodus Chapter 7 Ver. 5 Idols to be abolished, and why. p 466 Exodus Chapter 12 Ver. 23
City set up strange Gods. p 389 Exodus Chapter 13 Ver. 16 A Prince or Prophet seduce
others. ibid. Exodus Chapter 17 Ver. 14 God approves Abraham's War with Ameleck. p 13
Exodus Chapter 20 Ver. 2 The four first Commandments explained. p 387 Exodus Ver. 17
Thou shall not Covet. p 383 Exodus Chapter 21 Ver. 14 Sanctuary for the unfortunate.
p 397 Exodus Ver. 26 Liberty due for an Eye or a Tooth. p 521 Exodus Chapter 22 Ver.
1, 9 Sheep or Oxen stolen, restore five-fold, or double. p 381 Exodus Ver. 2 The
Night Thief may be killed. p 32 Exodus Ver. 28 Nor curse the ruler of thy
people. p 60 Exodus Chapter 23 Ver. 3 Regard the poor in Judgment. p 4
Leviticus.
Levit. Chapter 18 The degrees of affinity. p 109 Levit. Chapter 19 Ver. 18 Love thy
Neighbor as thy self. p 17 Levit. Ver. 15 Regard the poor in Judgment. p 4
Levit. Chapter 21 Ver. 7 Priests not marry a divorced woman. p 105 Levit. Chapter 24
Ver. 20 Eye for Eye, Tooth for Tooth. p 370, 371
Numbers.
Numb. Chapter 14 Ver. 30 Gods Oath to Joshua. p 168 Numb. Chapter 20 Ver. 21 Innocent
passage denied. p 83 Numb. Chapter 25 Ver. 4 Hanged on a Tree. p 217
Deuteronomy.
Deuteronomy. Chapter 8 Ver. 21. The Right of Kings. p 54 Deuteronomy. Chapter 15 Ver. 13 Thou shall
not let him go empty handed. p 523 Deuteronomy. Chapter 17 Ver. 7 The hands of the
witnesses shall be first. p 431 Deuteronomy. Chapter 19 Ver. 19 Do unto him as he thought
to have done unto his brother. p 381 Deuteronomy. Chapter 20 Ver. 10 Come to a City,
proclaim Peace. p 13 Deuteronomy. Ver. 19 Thou shall not destroy the Trees. p 460
Deuteronomy. Chapter 22 Ver. 1 Thou shall not see thy Brothers Ox go astray. p 184 Deuteronomy.
Ver. 26 The Ravisher shall dye, but not the Damsel. p 501 Deuteronomy. Chapter 23 Ver. 6
Thou shall not seek their Peace. p 185
Joshua.
Joshua Chapter 8 Ver. 15 His feigned flight. p 439 Joshua Chapter 9 Ver. 15 His Oath
to the Gibeonites. p 168
Judges.
Judges Chapter 3 Ver. 15 Ehud's Fact. p 66
1 Samuel.
1 Samuel Chapter 8 Ver. 2 The Right of Kings. p 54 1 Samuel Chapter 10 Ver. 5, 10 Priests
to be spared. p 506 1 Samuel Chapter 11 Ver. 10 To morrow we will come out to you. p
443 1 Samuel Chapter 15 Ver. 30 The duty of the Peers to a wicked King. p 59 1 Samuel
Chapter 19 Ver. 16 Michal's Image. p 438 1 Samuel Chapter 22 Ver. 2 David's Guards. p 60
1 Samuel Ver. 17 Readiness Servants would not fall upon the Priests. p 431 1 Samuel
Chapter 25 Ver. 33 David spares Nabal, whom he swear to kill. p 170 1 Samuel Chapter 26
Ver. 9 None innocent that stretch out their hand against. p 60 1 Samuel Chapter 31
Ver. 4 Readiness Death and Repentance. p 219
2 Samuel.
2 Samuel Chapter 24 Ver. 17 The people punished for their King. p 41
2 Kings.
2 King. Chapter 3 Ver. 19 Fell every good Tree. p 513 2 King. Chapter 6 Ver. 19
Elisha's Lie. p 443 2 King. Ver. 22 Captives to be spared. p 507 2 King. Chapter 8
Ver. 10 Thou may recover, but shall surely dye. p 443 2 King. Chapter 16 Ver. 12
Asa reproved for his League, and why. p 185 2 King. Chapter 18 Rabshekah though an
Ambassador, not admitted, and why. p 207 2 King. Ver. 7, 14 His satisfaction
for breaking his League. p 77
1 Chronicles.
1 Chronicles. Chapter 26 Ver. 32 Judges in the affairs of God and the King. p 47
2 Chronicles.
2 Chronicles. Chapter 16 Ver. 27 Ahaziah forsook God. p 185 2 Chronicles. Chapter 19 Ver. 2
Jehoshaphat's League with Ahab. p 185 2 Chronicles. Ver. 6, 8 Judge not for man, but
God. p 47 2 Chronicles. Chapter 25 Ver. 7 Let not the Army of Israel go with thee. p 185
Job.
Job Chapter 31 Ver. 26 27 Worship the Sun and Moon. p 389
Psalms.
Psalm. Chapter 2 Ver. 10 11 Be wise, O Kings, serve the Lord with fear. p 17 Psalm.
Chapter 15 Ver. 4 Having sworn to his own hurt. p 173 Psalm. Chapter 19 Ver. 8 The Law
is holy and just. p 10 Psalm. Chapter 51 Ver. 4 Against thee only have I sinned. p
47
Proverbs.
Prove. Chapter 1 Ver. 26 God punishes in Revenge. p 364 Prove. Chapter 16 Ver. 4 The
wicked for himself. ibid.
Eclesiasticus.
Eccles. Chapter 12 Ver. 7 Dust to Earth. p 214
Isaiah.
Isaiah Chapter 1 Ver. 24 Ah, I will ease me. p 364 Isaiah Chapter 2 Ver. 4 Swords into
Plough-shares. p 20 Isaiah Chapter 58 Ver. 5, 6 Restitution. p 495
Jeremiah.
Jer. Chapter 25 Ver. 12 God judges Kings. p 40 Jer. Chapter 38 Ver. 5 He is in your
power. p 48 Jer. Ver. 26 The truth concealed. p 4^8
Ezechiel.
Ezech. Chapter 17 Ver. 12 13 14 Kings of Israel reproved for not keeping their
faith with the King of Babylon.
Matthew.
Mat. Chapter 3 Ver. 2 Repent for the Kingdom p 18 Mat. Chapter 4 Ver. 17 The Kingdom
of Heaven. ibid. Mat. Chapter 5 Ver. 17 Destroy the Law, but p 19 Mat. Ver. 21 Ye
have heard it said to them. p 16 Mat. Ver. 34 Swear not at all. p 174 Mat. Ver.
38 Eye for Eye. p 21 Mat. Ver. 39 Resist not evil. p 21, 32, 33 Mat. Ver. 40
Sue thee. ibid. Mat. Ver. 41 Go a mile. ibid. Mat. Ver. 44 Do good to all. p
370 Mat. Ver. 45 Causes the Sun to shine. p 186 Mat. Chapter 6 Ver. 14 15 Forgive
all men. p 371 Mat. Ver. 33 Seek ye first the Kingdom. p 186 Mat. Chapter 7 Ver. 1
Judge not. p 373 Mat. Chapter 10 Ver. 39 Loses his life. p 63 Mat. Chapter 11 Ver. 12
13 Kingdom suffers violence, the Law continues till John. p 18 Mat. Chapter 13 Ver.
29 Suffer the Tares. p 434 Mat. Chapter 15 Ver. 5 Corban. p 170, 171 Mat. Chapter 22
Ver. 20 Tribute to Caesar. p 66, 214, 215 Mat. Chapter 23 Ver. 21 Swears by the
Temple. p 170 Mat. Chapter 26 Ver. 52 Put up thy Sword. p 32 Mat. They that take
the Sword shall perish by the p 34 Mat. Chapter 24 Ver. 51 Hypocrites. p 174 Mat.
Chapter 26 Ver. 25 Twelve Thrones. p 441
Mark.
Mark Chapter 6 Ver. 45 He constrained his Disciples. p 390 Mark Ver. 48 Made as if
he would have gone. p 439 Mark Chapter 14 Ver. 21 It had been better. p 366
Luke.
Luke Chapter 2 Ver. 1 All the world. p 407 Luke Chapter 3 Ver. 14 Be content with your
wages. p 23, 53 Luke Chapter 13 Ver. 33 A Prophet perish out of Jerusalem. p 48
Luke Chapter 14 Ver. 23 Compel them to come in. p 390 Luke Chapter 17 Ver. 3 Forgive if
he repent. p 371 Luke Chapter 18 Ver. 7, 8 Shall not God revenge. p 33 Luke Chapter 22
Ver. 30 Destroy this Temple. p 441 Luke Ver. 36 Buy a Sword. p 33 Luke Chapter 24
Ver. 28 Made as if he would have gone. p 438
John.
John Chapter 4 Ver. 9 Water of the woman of Samaria. p 185 John Chapter 8 Ver. 7 Cast
the first stone. p 363 John Chapter 11 Ver. 11 Lazarus sleeps. p 440 John Chapter 33
Ver. 21 Destroy this Temple. p 441 John Chapter 18 Ver. 8.9 Suffer these to go. p
33 John Ver. 36 My Kingdom is not of this. p 408
Acts.
Acts Chapter 10 Ver. 2 Cornelius. p 8 Acts Chapter 13 Ver. 2 Sergius Paulus. p 20 Acts
Chapter 16 Ver. 3 Paul circumciseth Timothy, and why. p 439 Acts Chapter 17 Ver. 4
Pious Grecians. p 8 Acts Chapter 25 Ver. 11 I refuse not to dye. p 21 Acts Chapter 26
King Agrippa. p 18 Acts Chapter 28 Ver. 18 They found no cause of death in me. p 20
Romans.
Romans Chapter 2 Ver. 14 By nature the things of the Law. p 9 Romans Chapter 3 Ver. 27 The
Law of works. p 17 Romans Chapter 5 Ver. 12 Judge those that are without. p 408 Romans
Chapter 7 Ver. 12 The Law is holy and just. p 10 Romans Ver. 14 Spiritual Law. p 17,
18 Romans Chapter 10 Ver. 5 The Law leads unto Christ. p 10 Romans Chapter 12 Ver. 19
Avenge not your selves. p 31, 33 Romans Chapter 13 Ver. 1 Let every Soul. p 18, 24,
59 Romans Ver. 2 Subject, not resist. p 55 Romans Ver. 4 For Conscience sake. p 33
Romans Ver. 5 He is the Minister of God, etc. ib. Romans Ver. 6 Tribute. p 20 Romans
Chapter 14 Ver. 23 Whatsoever is not of Faith is sin. p 411
1 Corinthians.
1 Cor. Chapter 4. Ver. 6 p 439 1 Cor. Ver. 4, 5 6, 7 Christians not to go to Law.
p 21 1 Cor. Chapter 6 Ver. 17 All things are lawful. p 456 1 Cor. Ver. 10 Who
without repentance. p 49 1 Cor. Chapter 7 Ver. 21 Servants be content. p 407 1 Cor.
Ver. 25 No Commandment from the Lord. p 109 1 Cor. Ver. 36 Virgins not to choose
for themselves. p 107 1 Cor. Chapter 11 Ver. 14 Men not to wear long hair. p 165
2 Corinthians.
2 Cor. Chapter 2 Ver. 20 Yea, and Amen. p 174 2 Cor. Chapter 6 Ver. 14 What fellowship
has Christ with Belial. p 186 2 Cor. Chapter 10 Ver. 34 The Weapons of our
Warfare. p 24 2 Cor. Chapter 12 Ver. 14 But Parents for their children. p 124
Galatians.
Gal. Chapter 3 Ver. 25 The Law is our guide. p 10 Gal. Chapter 4 Ver. 1 The Pupil
during nonage. p 89 Gal. Chapter 6 Ver. 5 Servants not to fly. p 116
Ephesians.
Ephesians. Chapter 2 Ver. 3 By nature children of wrath. p 165 Ephesians. Ver. 14 The
Partition wall. p 9, 20 Ephesians. Chapter 6 Ver. 12 Wrestle not against flesh. p 24
Philippians.
Phil. Chapter 4 Ver. 8 All honesty and virtue. p 21
Colossians.
Colos. Chapter 3 Ver. 22 Servants to please their Masters. p 117
1 Thessalonians.
1 Thessalonians. Chapter 1 Ver. 15 Equally yoked with unbelievers. p 186
1 Timothy.
1 Timothy Chapter 2 Ver. 1, 2, 3 Prayer for Kings. p 17 1 Timothy Chapter 5 Ver. 3, 17 To
honor is to do good. p 170
Titus.
Tit. Chapter 2 Ver. 9 Servants not to fly from their Masters p 116, 117
Hebrews.
Heb. Chapter 4 Ver. 17 By which it is impossible that God should lie. p 168 Heb.
Chapter 7 Ver. 4 The Tenth of the spoil. p 468 Heb. Ver. 16 The Law of a carnal
Commandment. p 17 Heb. Ver. 19 The Law imperfect. p 10 Heb. Chapter 8 Ver. 7 Had
the first Covenant been blameless. ibid. Heb. Chapter 11 Ver. 6 Religion an access
unto God. p 388 Heb. Ver. 34 By Faith. p 13
James.
James Chapter 4 Ver. 1 Whence comes War. p 24 James Chapter 5 Ver. 12 Above all
things swear not. p 174
1 Peter.
1 Pet. Chapter 2 Ver. 1 To Kings as supreme, to Magistrates as subordinate. p 58,
59 1 Pet. Ver. 17, 18 Honor the King, servants be subject. p 57
1 John.
1 John Chapter 2 Ver. 16 The lust of the flesh, of the eyes. p 379 1 John Chapter 3
Ver. 16 Lay down our lives for our brethren. p 34 1 John Chapter 5 Ver. 16 Sin unto
death. p 366
THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
THE Author of this Translation was by Profession a Divine, Eminent for
Learning, and well skilled in the Civil Laws. He was a great Admirer of the
Works of Hugo Grotius, an^ valued him particularly upon this Treatise of the
Rights of War and Peace; wherein finding matter fit for a general
communication, he thought it well worth his time to Translate. It was the
Labor, or rather Pastime of the last Seven Years of his Life to perfect it;
which he intended to Print during his Life: And so we found it in his Study
after his death. And although it added nothing to the value of his Estate; yet
we (to whom he committed the care of all the rest) thought it our duty to make
this Public, believing it would prove a more durable Monument to preserve his
Memory, than any other we could raise unto him.

Whilst it was in the Original, it was a Jewel, but hid from Vulgar
Capacities; it is no less a Jewel now it is made intelligible to every Capacity.

We shall not enlarge this Epistle in Praise either of the Work or the Author,
the Translation being sufficient for both, if thou will take the pains to Read
it.

John Nelham. Thomas Whitfield.

Nov. 1681.
Hugh Grotius OF THE RIGHTS OF PEACE and WAR. BOOK I.
CHAP. I. What War is, And what Right is.
I. The order of the whole Treatise. II. The Definition of War, and the
original of the word, Bellum. III. Right, as it is Attributed to Action,
defined, and divided into that which concerns Governors, and that which
concerns Equals. IV. Right taken for a Quality, divided into Faculty and
Aptitude or fitness. V. Faculty strictly taken divided into Power, Dominion and
Credit. VI. Another division of Faculty into that which is vulgar, and that
which is High and Eminent. VII. Aptitude what. VIII. Of Expletive and
Attributive Justice, not rightly distinguished by Geometrical and Arithmetical
proportions, nor in that this is conversant about things common, that about
things private. IX. Right as taken for a Law, how defined and divided into
Natural and Voluntary. X. The Law of Nature defined, divided, and distinguished
from such as are not properly so called. XI. That Natural Instinct, either
common with other living Creatures, or proper to men, does not constitute
another distinct Law. XII. How the Law of Nature may be proved. XIII. The
Voluntary Law divided into that which is Humane and that which is Divine. XIV.
Humane Law divided into that which is Civil, that which is more strict than
Civil, and that which is more large, which is also called the Law of Nations,
how explained, and how proved. XV. The Divine Law divided into that which is
Universal, and that which was peculiarly given to one only Nation. XVI. That
the Law peculiarly given to the Hebrews did not oblige strangers. XVII. What
Arguments Christians may draw from the Hebrew Law, and how.
I. The order of this whole Treatise.
ALL Controversies between such as are not associated under one Civil Law, as
between those who never yet entered into any Civil Society, or that are among
themselves of several Nations, whether they are private Subjects, or such as
are invested with Sovereign Power, whether Kings, Nobles, or Free people; All
such Controversies, I say, are to be referred to the times, either of Peace, or
War. But because the end of War is Peace, and that there is no such
Controversy but may produce War, therefore what differences soever do arise by
the occasion of the Rights of War, shall in the first place be exactly
discussed: That so War it self, being duly prosecuted, may lead us unto Peace,
as to its proper end.

II. War defined
Being therefore to treat of the Rights of War, it concerns us in the first
place to know what that War is, whereof we are to treat, and then, what that
Right is that we search for. War (as Cicero defines it) is Certatio per vim, a
Debate by force: But custom has Translated the signification of the word, from
the Act it self, to the state and condition of those that make War; for as
Philo well observes: They only are not Enemies that are actually engaged in
Battle whether at Sea, or Land, but they also, that raise Forts, plant
Ordnances, or such like Engines of War on their Walls, or Ports, though at
present they fight not. Servius upon those words of Virgil, concerning Aeneas,
In War and Arms None greater was than He, makes this distinction, By War we
understand all consultations and Preparations for War: but by Arms only the use
or exercise of them. Therefore in another place he concludes, that all that may
be reckoned a time of War, wherein either things necessary for fight are
preparing, or the fight it self last; so that War may be defined to be the
State or Condition of those that contend by force as such: Which general
acception of the word comprehends all the kinds of War whereof we are to treat,
not excluding that which sometimes happens between private persons as Duels or
single Combats, which certainly are precedent to those Wars that are public,
and being of the same nature, may well be comprised under the same proper name.
Which sense the Original word will very well bear, for from the Old word
Duellum is made this new word Bellum, as of Duonus is made Bonus, and of Duis,
Bis. Now Duellum signifies a contest between two, in the like sense as we
express Peace by Unity, or as the Greeks do War by (...), in respect of the
Multitude of people that are engaged in it; as also they sometimes do by the
words (...) and (...), in respect of those direful effects that attend it. Now
as the Original of the word will justify this large signification, so will the
common use thereof bear it. But if it be objected, that this word is taken
generally for that contest by force of Arms, that is public, I answer, that
this argues not that single Combats may not be also so called; For most certain
it is that the name of the Genus does often peculiarly adhere unto that of its
Species, which is most excellent. As to Justice, I do not admit of it in this
definition, because it is the Subject of this whole Treatise to enquire,
Whether any War be Just, and what War is so. But that which we seek, must be
distinguished from that concerning which we seek.

III. Right, as it relates to Action, defined and divided.
Whereas the subject of this whole Treatise is The Right of War, we are in the
first place to understand, (what we said just now) whether any War be just? And
in the next place, what it is in War that is just? For we understand in this
place by the word, Right, that which is just: And that also, rather in the
Negative, than in the positive sense, so as we here term that just, which is
not unjust. Now that we account unjust which is repugnant to the Nature of a
Rational Society: As for example, to rob another to enrich our selves, De off.
l. 3.
is (as Cicero observes) contrary to Nature, which he thus proves; If this,
says he, were allowed, all Society and Communion between men, would quickly be
dissolved. So for one man to betray or deceive another is unjust, as
Florentinus proves, because it breaks that bond of Alliance, wherein Nature
has linkt together all mankind for mutual defense. De Ira l. 2. c. 32.
Which Seneca thus Illustrates: Just as all the members of the body ought to be
equally solicitous one for another, because in the preservation of each part,
consists the welfare of the whole; so ought all men to forbear each other,
because they are born for Society. For it is not possible for any Society long
to stand, unless every part thereof be cherished and defended by the whole. Ep.
48.
So in another place: That Society is Faithfully and religiously to be
preserved, which so Unites us one to another, that we all agree in this, That
there is somewhat whereunto all mankind has a Common Right. But as of
Societies, some consist of Persons that are equal, as that of Brothers, of
Citizens, of Friends and Allies: and some consist of Persons that are unequal,
(and these also vary according to their degrees of Excellency) as that of
Parents and Children, of Masters and Servants, of Kings and their Subjects,
Numa.
God and Man (for such a Society there is, if Philo and Plutarch deceive us
not.) Even so things may be said to be just or unjust respectively; for one
thing may be just in respect of those that live together being Equals, and
another one thing may be just in respect of the persons Governing, and the
persons Governed as such; whereof this shall be said to be the Right of Rulers,
and that the Right of Equals.

IV. Right as it is a quality divided into faculty and fitness.
There is also another signification of the word, Right, which though different
from this, does notwithstanding arise from it, and respects the qualification
of the person; in which sense it signifies a moral Quality in any person,
sufficient to enable him justly to have or to do something. Now this Right
appertains to the Person, though it be sometimes but in relation to the thing
he holds, as services for Land held of a chief Lord, and these are called real
Rights, comparatively to those that are merely personal not because even these
belong not to the person, but because they belong to no other but to him that
enjoyes the thing whereunto that service is annexed. This moral Quality, if
perfect, we call Faculty; If imperfect, an Aptitude or fitness only: Answerable
whereunto in things Natural are, to That, an Act done; to This, a Power to do
it.

V. Faculty divided into Power, Dominion and Credit.
Which Faculty Civilians call that Right which a man has of his own; but we
henceforth call it Right properly and strictly taken: Under which are
comprehended, First, a Power over our selves, which we call Liberty; Then a
Power over others, such as Fathers have over their Children, Lords over their
slaves: Secondly, Dominion, and that either full and Absolute, or Limited: As
that which a Tenant has in the profits of his Farm, for his Rent; the Right
that a man has to a thing Pawned. And Credits, to which are opposed Debts.

VI. This Right is twofold, either Common or Eminent.
Now this Faculty is also twofold, that is to say, either vulgar, as that which
every man has over his Goods, to dispose of them as he pleases; or that which
is more eminent, being superior to that which is vulgar, as that which every
Society has over the persons and Estates of all its members, so far as
conduces to the preservation of the whole. Thus does Regal Power comprehend as
well that of a Father, as that of a Master; so that a King, as he is a King,
has a greater Right in the Goods of his Subjects, so far as is necessary for
the public safety, than any private Subject has in his own. Of this opinion
was Philo the Jew, Surely both the Silver, and the Gold, This is grounded on
the Law of Nature, which makes that to be just, which is necessary for the
preservation of Humane Society, which our blessed Savior takes as granted; and
therefore speaking of Taxes, he says not, Offer or give as of a thing
Arbitrary, which was in our Power either to do or not to do: But render, as of
a thing that we owe or are trusted with for the benefit of another, which we
are bound to restore whenever we are thereunto required. And such indeed is
that portion of every man's Goods, which is necessary for the defense of the
Commonwealth, not ours, but Caesar's. St. Paul calls these Debts, which being
joined with the word, Render, makes it as clear as the Sun, that our Taxes are
not Donatives, but just Debts: Nay they are the Greatest of Debts, due upon the
strictest account, and therefore justly to be preferred before all other Debts,
and in the first place to be discharged; And good reason, for the Non-payment
of this Debt, may occasion the loss of the whole Estate, not private only, but
public.
and whatsoever else is held dear and precious to Subjects, are more in the
Power of those that govern, than of those that possess them: Of the same mind
also was Pliny, as appears by his Panegyric, where speaking of a King he
says: Cujus est quicquid est omnium, what all men have, is his. And again: Is
there any thing that Caesar can see, that is not his? that is, whenever the
Commonwealth does necessarily require it.

VII. Aptness what it is.
That which before I called Aptitude or Fitness, Aristotle expresses by the
word, Worthiness, Michael Ephesius by another word implying Fitness or
convenience. As for example, If a Question should be put To whom in duty we
stand most obliged? The Answer, De offic. l. 1.
says Cicero, should be, to our Prince, to our Country, to our Parents;
Because from them we receive the greatest Blessings we enjoy; next to those, we
stand engaged to our Children, to whole Families, whose dependence is upon us
alone: Then to our nearest relations, who for the most part do claim a share in
our fortunes. Wherefore all these we are bound to relieve with all things
necessary for life, but especially those above named: But to Eat, to Drink, See
Book 2. chapter 7. s. 9, 10. Sen. de Ira lib. 4. c. 2.
to Converse with, to exhort, to advise, to comfort and sometimes to reprove,
these are the proper Offices of Friendship. So being to make our will, we
consider who has best deserved of us, Quaerimus dignissimos quibus nostra
tradamus, we seek out such as are most worthy to whom to bequeath our Estates.

VIII. Of Expletive and Attributive Justice.
Expletive Justice, which has now gotten the name of Justice strictly taken,
has a respect to that which is our own, which Justice, Aristotle by too narrow
and pincht a word, calls Commutative Justice; For that he that is possessed of
what is mine, should restore it to me, is not by Commutation, and yet it
belongs to this Branch of Justice: (...).
And therefore in another place he finds out a more apt and pertinent word to
express it by, calling it (...), A Justice that makes the balance even, or
that repairs and restores to the full. Attributive Justice, which is called by
Aristotle, (...)
Distributive Justice, has a respect to aptness, worthiness or convenience,
and is usually the Concomitant- of such Virtues as are beneficial to others, as
mercy, liberality, and State Providence But whereas the same Aristotle says,
that Expletive or Commutative Justice has respect unto a simple and
Arithmetical proportion; but Atributive, to a Comparative, which he calls a
Geometrical proportion, as being the only proportion owned by Mathematicians;
and which Cassiodore calls the comparing of men's habits or dispositions, and
not unfitly by Homer described in this verse, Things best to best, he gave,
mean things to mean. This may hold in some cases, but not in all; neither does
Expletive Justice of it self differ from Attributive in such use of
Proportions, but in the matter whereabout it is Conversant, as is before
showed. Therefore as in all Elections made by Societies, if there be several
Competitors the Choice is made by a Comparative Proportion, for Datur digniori;
the worthiest is chosen: so if there be no Competitor, and one only be found
worthy of such a public office, it is Attributed to him by a simple
proportion. Neither is that more true which some affirm, that Attributive
Justice is Conversant only about things Common, but Expletive about things
private, that is, appertaining to particular men. For on the contrary, If a man
shall go about to bequeath his Estate by Will, he does it by Attributive
Justice, dispensing it according to the worthiness of the persons that are to
receive it: And a City which renders out of that which is Common, what some of
her Citiziens have bestowed in public, does it by the Rule of Expletive
Justice, not regarding the worthiness of the persons, but the bare Right of him
that ought to receive it. This young Cyrus learnt of his Tutor in this case:
There were two boys that had two Coats, Aulus Gill.
both of different Dimensions, the bigger Boy had the lesser Coat, and the
lesser Boy had the bigger Coat, which the bigger Boy took from him, being fit
for himself, leaving him the lesser Coat, which also was fit for him; whereof
Cyrus being made Judge, Cyrus his mistake.
and regarding more what was fit and convenient, than what was just and Right;
adjudged the greater Coat to the bigger Boy, and the little Coat to the lesser
Boy: But his Tutor told him, That he had done amiss: For had he been to judge
what was fittest, he had done well: But being to judge, whose each Coat was, he
was to regard who had the best right to it, he that by force took the great
Coat away, or be that made it, Exodus 23.3. Levit. 19.15.
or bought it. This is it that Moses in his Law forbids, saying: Thou shall not
regard the Poor in judgment, but shall judge thy Neighbor with Righteousness.
Which cannot be done, unless we do (as Philo advises) A personis litig antibus
res abstrahere, Consider the matter, without regarding the parties contending.

IX. Right as taken for a rule or Law defined.
There is also a Third signification of the word Jus, or Right, whch makes it
Equivalent to the word, Lex, that is Law, when taken in its largest sense; that
is to say, as it is a rule to Moral Actions, obliging us to do that which is
right: In which sense it was that Horace took it where he says, For fear of
wrong, strict Laws invented were. So in another place: Jura neget sibi data; He
may deny that Laws for him were made. Which the Scholiast thus expounds: He was
a man that despised all Laws. In which Definition we say first that it must
oblige, and herein it differs from Counsels and other prescriptions, which
though honest, yet fall not under this Notion of Law. And as for permission, to
speak properly, it is not the Action of Law, but the denial or Restriction of
that Action, unless it be, as it obliges another not to give him to whom such
permission is granted, any let or impediment. Besides, it must oblige us to
that which is Right, and not simply to what is just, because Right in this
sense, does not belong to Justice alone, (such I mean, as we have heretofore
explained) but unto the matter of other Virtues: For many things may be just
according to the letter of the Law, which notwithstanding are not Right.
Neither is it possible that any Lawgiver should foresee all the defects of his
own Law: So that that which being a greeable to the Law strictly taken, may
s^em just, is not so safe a Rule to walk by, as that which is just in this
larger sense, that is, Righteous and honest.
An example whereof we have in that Law made by Zeleucus, who ordained a
punishment to be inflicted upon him who contrary to the advice of his Physician
presumed to drink Wine. And therefore that Right which this Rule guides us
unto, must needs be of a larger signification than that which is simply just.
Of this Right so taken, the best partition is that of Aristotle's, into that
which is Natural, and that which is Voluntary, or as he there calls it
Legitimate; (...).
the word Law being taken in the stricter sense; which difference is
acknowledged both by the Hebrews, and the Grecians, who when they would speak
properly, distinguish them by their proper names.

X. This Law of nature defined and distinguished from that which is not properly
so.
That which we call natural Right, or the Law of Nature, is the dictate of
Right reason, showing the Moral Malignity, or the Moral Necessity that there is
in any Act, by either the Repugnancy, or Congruity, it has to Rational Nature
it self, and consequently, that such an Act is either commanded or forbidden by
God, who is the very Author of Nature. Or as Tit. omnem virum bonum esse
liberum.
Philo describes it: Right reason is a Law that cannot lie, it is not Mortal,
nor given by any thing that is Mortal, it is not liveless, nor written in
Paper, or insculpt on Pillars that are liveless, but it is an immutable and
immortal Law, being engraven by an immortal hand, on a mind that is immortal.
Cicero, as Lib. 6. c. 8.
Lactantius quotes him, gives this excellent description of it: Right reason is
a perfect Law that will not lie, it is most agreeable to humane Nature, and
Universally diffused throughout all mankind: It is incorruptible, immortal,
which summons us to our duty by commanding it, and drives us from all fraud by
forbidding it; neither are its Injunctions or prohibitions in vain to the
Righteous: though with the wicked they prevail not. To this Law nothing must be
added, nor any part thereof detracted; and wholly to abrogate it, is
impossible. It is not in the power either of the Senate or the people to
absolve us from our obedience to this Law, neither need we to seek after any
other Expositor than the Law it self: Neither is it one Law at Athens, and
another at Rome, one now, and another hereafter: But this one Law, being both
Eternal and Immutable, shall bind all Nations and in all Ages: As there will
ever be one Common Lord and Governor of all, which is God. He is the sole
inventour, judge and giver of this Law, which he that refuses to obey, must
fly from (and so unman) himself, and although he may fly from, and happily avoid
all other (which are thought) punishments; yet for the wilful contempt of this
only, he shall be severely punished. Now the Acts whereupon Right reason gives
her Dictates, are such as are either good or evil, lawful or unlawful, simply
and of themselves, and therefore must necessarily be understood to be either
commanded or forbidden by God himself: And herein, the Law of Nature is
different not from humane Laws only, but from the Voluntary Divine, for they do
not command or forbid such things as are of themselves, and in their own Nature
either due or unlawful; But by commanding them, they make them the one, and by
forbidding them, the other. But for our better understanding of this Law of
Nature, we must observe, That some things are said to belong unto the Law of
Nature, not properly, or immediately, but (as the Schoolmen love to speak) by
way of reduction, that is, Some things belong to the Law of Nature by way of
Reduction.
for as much as the Law of Nature does not prohibit them: As some things are
said to be just, because they have nothing in them of injustice. And somethings
are said to be lawful, which the Laws do neither prohibit nor punish. And
sometimes by the abuse of the word, those things which our Reason approves to
be honest, or at least, are so Comparatively to those that are opposed unto
them, though they are not enjoined us, yet are said to be due by this Natural
Law: Moreover we must observe, that this Natural Law does not determine of such
things only, as have no dependence upon Man's will, but of many things also
which the Common consent of mankind has already molded (as it were) into a
Law. Thus was Dominion, as now in use, by Common consent, introduced as by a
Law: But being introduced, this very Law of Nature does instruct us, that to
take away from any man that which is his own without his consent, is Impious;
And from hence it is that Paulus the Lawyer concludes Theft to be prohibited by
the Law of Nature; and V^pian, that it is dishonest; And Julian tells us, That
after that which concerns the Worship of God, there is a Second Law in its own
Nature holy, Julian.
and of Divine Extraction, that enjoins us at all times, and in all places, to
abstain from Theft and Rapine; and that forbids us either in word, in deed, or
in our most retired thoughts to mix or confound each others Properties.. De
off. l. 3.
For as Cicero out of Chrysippus well observes: For any man to gain to himself
what is necessary for his own lively hood, is not unjust; but to take it away
by force from any other, is not Right. Euripides also condemns this as hateful
to God himself: Namque odit ipse vim Deus: Nec divites
Nos esse rapto, sed probe partis cupit;
Spernenda, si non pure veniat, Copia est.
Communis Ether hominibus, Tellus quoque
In qua Ampliare cuique sic fas est domum,
Vt ab alienis rebus, ac vi temperet.
For God himself hates force, nor would that we
Grow rich by fraud, but Goods got honestly;
Riches unjustly gained, we should disdain:
The Earth, the Air, and eke the Ocean main,
Stand free to all, each may his House maintain
By these, so that from Rapine he abstain.


The Law of Nature is so Immutable, that God himself cannot alter it; God
himself cannot alter the Law of Nature.
for though the power of God be Immense, yet may somethings be said, whereunto
this great power does not extend it self, because what are so said, are said
only, but have no sense which can express the thing, but they must contradict
themselves. As therefore that twice two should not be four, God himself cannot
effect; so neither can he, that what is intrinsecally evil, should not be evil.
For as the being of things after they are, and as they are, depends not upon
any other; so do the proprieties that necessarily follow that being: But such
is the Malignity of some acts, compared with Nature as it is guided by Right
reason. And therefore does God himself suffer himself to be judged of according
to this Rule, as appears by that of Abraham to God: Genesis 18.25.
Shall not the Judge of all the world do Right? Such a contradiction it is to
say, that he that is the judge of the whole Earth should not do Right, that
though it may be spoken, yet do the words though spoken bear no sense, but
rather imply a manifest contradiction. The like we may find in other places of
the holy Scriptures; Es. 5.3. Ez. 18.25. ^er. 2.19. Mich. 6.2. Romans 2.6, 3, 6.
it sometimes notwithwstanding so falls out, that in these acts concerning
which the Law of Nature has determined something, there is some show or
appearance of change, which may easily deceive the unwary, whereas indeed the
change is not in that Law which (as I have already said) is immutable, but in
the things about which that Law is conversant; As for example, If he to whom I
owe a just Debt, shall freely discharge me of it, I am not bound to pay it; not
that the Law of Nature does cease to command me to pay what I owe; but because
that which I did owe, cease to be my Debt being so discharged. For as
Arrianus in Epictetus rightly argues, To make a just Debt it is not enough,
that the money was lent, but it is required that the Obligation remains
uncancelled. So when God commands any man to be put to death, or his Goods to
be taken from him, Murder and Theft do not thereby become lawful, for these
very words do imply sin; and no sin can be lawful. But those acts will not
amount to Murder or Theft, which are done by the express command of him who is
the Sovereign Lord both of our Lives and Fortunes. Lastly there are somethings
justifiable by the Law of Nature, not simply, but so long as the condition of
affairs stand thus: So till dominion was introduced the use of things was
Naturally common; so before Laws and Courts of Judicature were established, by
the Law of Nature, it was Lawful to recover by force what was our own, but not
since.

XI. Natural instinct.
That distinction which we may read of in the books of the Roman Laws, is,
namely that this immutable Law is either that which is common to men with
beasts, which they call the Law of Nature in the stricter sense; and that which
is peculiar unto men only which they sometimes call the Law of Nations, is of
very little use. For nothing is properly capable of a Law, but that Nature that
is capable of making use of General precepts, which was well observed by
Hesiod, when he said: To men has God given Laws to be ruled by:
But Fish, and Beasts, and Fowls that soar on high,
Having no Law, do on each other prey;
But in good Laws does all our safety lay.
We say not of Horses and Lions, Off. lib. 1. Vita. Cat. M.
says Cicero, that they are just; neither as Plutarch observes, do we by
Nature make use of Law or justice against any other Creatures but man. Among
all other Creatures not endued with reason, says Lactantius, Nature is
permitted to be her own Carver, Lib. 5.
Nocent aliis, ut sibi prosint; They destroy others to preserve themselves: And
in so doing they are ignorant, that they do amiss. But man who has a faculty
to discern good from evil, wisely abstains from hurting others, though thereby
he sometimes incommodate himself. Lib. 6.
Polybius having declared upon what grounds men at first entered into Society,
adds, That when the rest saw some men abusing their own Parents, and others
behaving themselves injuriously toward their Benefactors; they could not choose
but grieve at it, whereof he gives this Reason: For mankind, says he, being
endued with understanding and reason above all other Creatures, it is not
credible, that they should behold acts so abhorrent from Nature without
expressing some sign of discontent. So likewise Chrysostom, This we learn from
Nature herself, ^e statuis. 13.
that when we see one man abusing another, we cannot but sympathize with the
injured Person, and swell with indignation against the injurer: although those
injuries do not the least touch us. And the greater the wrong is, the greater
is our indignation against him that did it. No man is equally incensed against
him that cuts a purse only, as he is against him that commits a Murder. But if
at any time Justice be attributed to Brute Beasts, it is improperly, and only
by reason of some Analogy or Resemblance that it has to Humane Justice: Pliny
l. 8. c. 5.
As was that of the 30 Elephants recorded by Pliny, who could not by any means
be provoked to be instrumental to the Cruelty of King Bacchus in worrying 30
other Elephants which he had bound to so many Trees on purpose to have them
destroyed. Lib. 10.
And that also of the Aspe, recorded by the same Pliny, who having been sed
daily at a man's table, killed one of her own young ones for killing the man's
son, by whom he had been so fed; and would never afterward come into the same
house. These are said to be just acts, not properly, but only as they have some
faint resemblance of Justice, and some light impressions of Reason. De ira l.
5. c. 3.
Seneca therefore denies that Dumb Beasts partake any thing of Humane passions;
yet he acknowledges that they have somewhat that is like unto them: They
cannot properly be said to be angry, yet have they some violent impulses like
unto anger. Non vitia sed vitiorum simulachra; they have no vices, but somewhat
like unto Humane vices, as Origin pleads against Celsus. But whether the act it
self whereupon the Law of Nature has decreed, be common to us with other
living creatures, as the education of our Issue, etc. or proper unto us only,
as that God should be Worshipped; does nothing appertain to the very Nature of
Right.

XII. The Law of Nature how proved.
But that any thing may be due by the Law of Nature, is usually proved two
ways, either by Arguments drawn a priori, or by such as are drawn a
posteriori: Whereof the former sort are more convincing; the latter more vulgar
and plausible: the proof by the former way is by showing the necessary
convenience or repugnancy that there is in any thing, with rational and Social
Nature; for whatsoever can be proved to be necessary to the conservation of
Humane Nature, and Humane society, must needs be instituted as a Law by the
author of Nature, who is the God of order. That proof which is a postoriori is,
when we can though not demonstratively, yet with very great probability,
collect and conclude that to be a Dictate of the Law of Nature, which is
unanimously believed to be so by all, or at least, by the most Civilized of all
Nations. For if the effect be Universal the cause must needs be so to: But of
so Universal a persuasion there can be no other cause probabily given, than
that sense it self which is called common: That of Hesiod has been highly
celebrated by many; What Nations have avowed,
Ought not by private men be disallowed.
Quae communiter ita videntur fida sunt; that which to most men seems true, may
be believed, says Heraclitus. For we can have no stronger proof, or evidence
of the truth of any thing that cannot be demonstrated, than the general consent
of the wisest in all Nations that it is so. This Aristotle took to be of all
others, the most powerful and convincing proof: Si in id quod dicimus omnes
consentiunt; If to what we say all men give their consents. Of the same mind
was Cicero, Whatsoever all Nations do grant must, needs be the voice of Nature:
1 Tusc. Ep. 117. Nic. l. 10. 11.
So Seneca also, What appears the same to all men, must undoubtedly be true. He
that derogates from this faith can never expect to be believed himself, says
Aristotle: so likewise Tertullian, Quod apud multos unum invenitur, non est
erratum, sed traditum; What is approved of by the most, is not error but
Tradition. I said before that that must needs be a Dictate of Nature that was
acknowledged to be so by all, or at least, by the most Civilized Nations, and
deservedly; for some people are so fierce and savage that they have hardly any
humanity among them, as Prophyrie rightly observed. Now no man of sound
judgment surely, will impute this as a general reproach to all mankind: Surely
this Law of Nature is immutable, and the same with all mankind that are of
sound and perfect mind: Andr. Rhod.
But if it appear otherwise to such are of distempered and perverse spirits, or
have been so corrupted through an evil Education, that they have lost even
common sense, and all natural Notions, it does not in the least weaken the
authority of this Law, no more than it would evince, That Honey is not sweet,
because it does not seem so to such as are sick, or of distempered Pallates.
Not much discrepant from this is that of Plutarch in the life of Pompey, There
neither is, nor ever was, any man, by Nature wild and unsociable; many have
indeed been made so by accustoming themselves to live like Beasts, beyond the
bounds of Natures Laws; and yet even these, by changing their manner of life,
or the place of their abode, are easily reduced to become gentle, and sociable.
And therefore Aristotle in the description that he gives of man, makes this as
it were his proper passion, That he is by Nature a Creature mild and Tractable;
Top. l. 5. c. 3.
Especially if we judge of him, according to that general rule, that the same
Aristotle lays down, Quid natural sit, spectandum in his quae been secundum
naturam se habent, non in depravatis; Pol. l. 1. 5.
What is the true nature of any thing, is best known by those that are perfect
in their own kind, and not by those that are depraved and corrupted. For if we
steer our judgments by this Rule, we cannot but acknowledge man to be in his
own nature, the most meek, gentle, and peaceable creature of all others: as
having nothing, by nature given him, whereby either to offend others or to
defend himself: Besides as Nature has made him the gentlest of all other
living Creatures; So (as Philo observes) has she made him sociable, nay greedy
of Society, and has also fitted him thereunto by giving him that excellent
Ornament of speech, wherewith his Passions, though never so fierce and raging,
are suddenly, as if by some spell or incantation, becalmed.

XIII. Voluntary Laws.
Another species of jus, as taken for a Law, there is, which we call voluntary,
because it is derived from the will; which is either Divine or humane.

XIV. Humane Laws divided.
We shall begin with that which is humane; because it is more generally known,
and this is either Civil, or that which is more extended, or that which is more
contracted than Civil. The Civil Law is that which arises from the Civil
power. The Civil power is that which governs any City: Now a City is a complete
company of freemen, associated for the defense of their own Rights, and for
their common profit. That Law that is of lesser extent, and arises not from
the Civil Power, though subject unto it, is various, comprehending under it
that of a Father over his Children, that of a Master over his Servants, and the
like. That Law which is more extensive than that which is Civil, is that of
Nations, which derives its authority from the joint consent of all, or, at
least, of many Nations: I say of many, because there is hardly any Law besides
that of Nature (which also is usually called the Law of Nations) that is common
to all Nations; yea oft-times that which is accounted the Law of Nations in one
part of the world, in another is not, as we shall show hereafter, when we treat
of Captivity and Postliminy. Now the Law of Nations is proved in the same
manner as the unwritten Civil Law is, namely by continual use, and the
testimony of men skilful in the Laws; and therefore Dio Chrysostom calls it
the daughter of time and experience, and to this purpose are the Annals of
former ages of singular use.

XV. The Divine voluntary Law divided.
The divine voluntary Law is that which is warranted by the express will of
God, (as may be understood by the very word it self) whereby it is differenced
from the natural Law, which in some sense may be termed Divine also. And here
that which was said by Anaxarchus in Plutarch (though somewhat confusedly) may
take place, namely, That God does not will things because they are just; but
things are therefore just, that is, rightly due, because he wi^s them. Now this
Law was given by God either to all mankind, or to one Nation; to all mankind we
find that God gave Laws th^i^e. That this voluntary Divine Law was as obliging
before the writing of it in ^ooks or Tables, as it was or is since, is clear;
for first, if the obliging power were only from the time when it was written by
Moses, they that lived before Moses were no ways obliged by it, because till
then it was not written. Secondly, then the obligation must needs extend it
self to all the parts of the Law so written, and so to every circumstance of
the Judaical Sabbath, as well as to the acknowledgement of the only true God.
Neither is it sufficient to say, it was written in the times of Adam and Noah,
it being uncertain unto us now, whether there were so Ancient a Record or not,
much more, * whether that which was written, were as the Tables of the Law,
written by the finger of God. * Dr. Hammond.

The Six Laws given by God to Adam and Noah, as First, that against strange and
false worship. Secondly that of blessing the name of God, (that is, of adoring,
invocating and praising God) Thirdly, that of judgment, (that is) of erecting
of Magistrates and requiring administration of Justice. Fourthly, That of
disclosing Nakedness (i. e.) setting bounds to lust and prohibiting Marriages,
within such degrees. Fifthly, That of shedding blood against Homicides. And
Sixthly, That against Theft and Rapine, and of doing to all as they would be
done unto, are no where recorded in holy Writ, yet were they as obliging to the
J^ws that knew them, as any of the written Laws of Moses; we shall find them
touched at Act. 15.20. ^ut so surely, that had it not been for those writings of
the Jews that were never within their Canons, nor in ours; we of these times
had never known to what that reference belonged. And as all the Laws that were
given to Adam, Noah and the rest of the Patriarchs, although not committed to
writing, nor traduced to us, yet lost nothing of their obliging power to them,
to whom they were given: so in the times of the new Law, although Christ
revealed much of his Fathers will in Sermons, and other occasional discourses,
very few whereof are written, and those that are, were not so written, until
many years after his Resurrection; yet will no man say, that because they were
not left written, therefore they did not oblige his Auditors.


First, Immediately after the Creation of man. Secondly, in the Restoration of
mankind after the Flood; and Thirdly, in that more perfect reparation by
Christ. T^ese three Laws do doubtless oblige all mankind, as soon as, and as
far forth, as men arrive at the knowledge of them.

XVI. The Law given to the Jews did not oblige strangers.
Of all the Nations of the Earth there was but one to whom God vouchsafed to
give Laws peculiar to themselves, which was that of the Jews: What Nation,
says Moses, so great to whom God has given Statutes and judgments, so
righteous, as this whole Law? Deuteronomy. 4.7. So likewise Davia, The Lord has showed
his word unto Jacob, his Statutes and ordinances unto Israel: Non ita fecit
genti ulli; He has not done so to any Nation, neither have the Heathen
knowledge of his Laws. Psalm 147.
Doubtless then those Jews (and among them Tryphon himself in his disceptations
against Justine) do grossly err, who hold, That even Foreigners, if they would
be saved, must submit to the yoke of the Mosaical Law. For that Law binds none
but those to whom it was given, and who these are, the Preface to the Law it
self will plainly declare; Audi Israel, Hear O Israel, says the Text: And
every where we read, that the Covenant was made with them, and that they were
chosen to be the peculiar people of God; which Maimonides acknowledges to be
true, and proves it out of Deuteronomy. 33.4. But even amongst the Jews, there always
lived some Foreigners being holy men, and such as feared God, as the
Syrophoenician Woman, Mat. 15.22. Cornelius, Acts 10.2. The Grecians mentioned
Acts 18.4. whom they called the pious among the Gentiles; such as are termed
strangers, Lev. 22.25. and a sojourner, Lev. 25.47. whom the Chaldee Paraphrast
calls an inhabitant that is uncircumcised, whereof we may read, Exodus 12.45.
who was distinguished from a Proselyte; who, though a Foreigner, yet was
circumcised, as appears b^ comparing this place with that of Numb. 9.14. These
uncircumcised Sojourners Maimonides admits may be partakers of the blessings of
the life to come. St. Chrysostom upon the second to the Romans, Romans 2.9, 10.
where St Paul mentions the Jew, and Gentile, wr^tes thus: What Jew, and what
Gentile does St. Paul here mean? surely those, says he, that lived before
Christ, as Job, the Ninevites, Melchisedeck, Cornelius, etc. And what Graecians
does he discourse of? Surely not such as were Idolaters, but such as worshipped
God according to the Law of Nature, who setting aside the Jewish Ceremonies,
religiously observed all things that appertained to an holy life. And again,
The Grecian he calls, not him that worshipped Idols, but him that was pious
and devout, though be submitted not to the Jewish Rites. And thus likewise does
he expound that of St. Paul: To him that is without Law, as being free from the
Law. And in another place, A Greek he calls not him, that was given to Idols,
but him that invoked the true God, Orat. 2. de statuis.
and yet observed not the Jewish Ceremonies, as their Sabbaths, their
Circumcision, their ablutions and the like; but yet endeavored to steer the
whole course of his life, according to the Rules of wisdom and true piety. Now
these, as the Hebrew Doctors themselves testify, were bound to live in
conformity to the Laws given to Adam and Noah, abstaining from Idols and Blood,
and from other things hereafter expressed, but not to the Laws peculiar to the
Jews; and therefore, whereas it was not lawful for the Jews to eat the flesh of
any thing that dyed of it self, yet it was lawful for the stranger living among
them so to do, Deuteronomy. 14.21. unless it were to some particular Laws wherein it
was expressly provided that as well the stranger as the home born was bound to
observe them. For we read that it was lawful to the stranger, that never
submitted to the Mosaical Law, to worship God even in the Temple at Jerusalem;
yet so, that he stood in a particular place by himself, separate from that of
the Hebrews, as you may read 1 Kings 8.41. Jo. 12.20. Act. 8.27. Neither did
Elisha enjoin Naaman, nor Jonas the Ninevites, nor Daniel Nebuchadnezzar, nor
the other Prophets persuade the Syrians, Moabites, or Egyptians, unto whom
they wrote, that there was any necessity at all for them to submit to the yoke
of the Jewish Law. And what I say here of the whole Law is true also of
Circumcision, which was as it were, the introduction unto it, with this only
difference, That to the whole Law of Moses, the Israelites only were bound, but
to that of Circumcision all the posterity of Abraham: And from hence it was,
that the Idumeans being the offspring of Esau, Ismael, or Cetura, were
compelled by the Israelites to be circumcised as both the Jewish, and Grecian
Histories inform us. Besides of all other Nations, Romans 2.14.
that of St. Paul holds true, Seeing that the Gentiles who have not the Law, do
by Nature, the things of the Law; (that is, by their own manners and Customs,
flowing from the original fountain of reason) (unless any man had rather referr
the word, Nature, to the words foregoing, thereby opposing the Gentiles to the
Jews, who as soon as they were born had their Law instilled into them), these
having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves, as showing the work of the Law
written in their hearts, their thoughts and Consciences mutually accusing or
excusing themselves. And that also in the 26th verse of the same Chapter, If
the uncircumcision keep the Law, shall not his uncircumcision be accounted for
Circumcision. Thus does Chrysostom expound that place of St. Paul before
cited, The Gentiles by Nature, that is, by the very Dictates of Right reason:
And presently after in this, says he, are they to be admired, That they stood
in no need of the Law to guide them. And that instead thereof, they were guided
only by the use of reason and the light of their own Consciences. Thus also
does Tertullian argue against the Jews of his age; Long, says he, before Moses
wrote the Law in the Tables of stone, there was (as I will justify) a Law
naturally understood and observed by the Patriarchs. Ant. lib. 20. c. 2.
And therefore Ananias the Jew in Josephus did rightly inform Izates Adiabenus,
That God might be duly worshipped and well pleased with us, Although we were
not circumcised. And Triphon himself grants this to Justin, That there was some
hopes left him of a better condition, though he did persist in the way of his
own Philosophy. Now the reasons why so many strangers among the Jews were
circumcised, and thereby obliged to keep the Law, (as St. Paul expounds it)
were, The reason why strangers were circumcised. Gal. 5.3.
partly that they might partake of the privileges of the Jewish Commonwealth,
for Proselytes enjoyed the same Rights with the Israelites, as may be gathered
out of Numb. 15. and is plainly asserted Exodus 12.27. And partly, that thereby
they might be made capable of those Promises which were not common to all
Nations, but peculiar to the Jews only: Although I cannot deny but that there
grew up afterward an erroneous opinion, affirming that without the pale of the
Jewish Church there could be no Salvation. From hence then we may collect; that
we Gentiles stand obliged to no part of the Mosaical Law, as a Law properly so
called, because all obligation beyond that which arises from the Law of
Nature, is derived from the will of the Lawgiver. But that it was the will of
God, that any other Nation besides the Jews should be bound by that Law, cannot
be made out by any solid arguments; we need not therefore, as to our selves,
prove the abrogation of that Law, because it cannot be said to be abrogated as
to them, whom it never bound: yea even to the Jews themselves the obliging
power was abolished, as to the Ceremonial Law, as soon as the Evangelical Law
began to be promulgated; which was plainly revealed to St. Peter, Acts 10.15.
Acts 10.15.
And as to the rest, after that people ceased to be a people by the destruction
of their City, and that general desolation that succeeded, without any hopes of
restitution; but we who are strangers are not freed from that Law, by the
advent of Christ, but by Christ we who before had nothing but a faint and
obscure hope, placed only in the goodness of God, are now strengthened by a
clear and firm Covenant, assuring us that we also may grow up together with the
Jews, (being the sons of the Patriarchs) into one Church, the Judaical Law,
(which was that Partition Wall that kept us asunder) being now taken away, as
St Paul testifies to the Ephesians. Ephesians. 2.14.


XVII. What Christians may learn from the Mosaical Law.
Since the Mosaical Law cannot directly oblige us (as has been already proved)
let us now see of what other use it will be to us, as well in this case of War,
as in the li^e doubtful cases; the knowledge of this being very necessary for
the clearing of diverse cases: For in the first place, from hence we may be
assured, that what was heretofore commanded in that Law, is not repugnant to
the Law of Nature. For since the Law of Nature is (as I have already said)
perpetual, and immutable, nothing can be commanded us by God contrary to this
Law, because God can never be unjust. Psalm. 19.8. Romans 7.12.
Besides the Law of Moses is (as the Psalmist speaks) pure and right, and as
the Apostle says, Holy just and good; which places are to be understood of the
precepts of the Law only. But as to the permissions of the Law we must speak of
them more distinctly: Now legal permission (for that which respects the bare
fact and signifies the removal of impediments only, I shall not here meddle
with) is either full and perfect, which gives us a right to do somethings
altogether lawfully; or less full and imperfect, which gives us only an
impunity with men, and a Right that no man shall give us any lawful let, or
impediment in the doing of it. Concerning the former of these, the same may be
said as is of positive precepts, namely, That what the Law thus permits, cannot
be contrary to the Law of Nature, but of what is permitted in the latter sense,
Vid. Chrys^^t. ad 7 ad Romans jaxta finem.
the case may be otherwise: but this collection takes place very rar^ly.
Because where the words permitting are ambiguous, it is much more convenient
for us to judge of whether of these two Permissions, it is to be understood by
the Law of Nature, Christian Princes may frame their Laws according to those of
Moses, unless in three cases.
than by arguing from the manner of the permission, to proceed to judge of the
Law of Nature: In the next place, Sovereign Princes, being Christians, may from
hence learn, to form their Laws according to those given by Moses; unless it
appear that those Laws were such as did wholly relate either to the coming of
Christ, or to the Evangelical Law not then revealed; or that such Laws are
contrary to what Christ did, either in general, or particularly, command. For
excepting these three cases, no other can be imagined, why what Moses commanded
shall now be unlawful. Again we may hence learn, that whatsoever was enjoined
by Moses, which may serve to the improvement of those virtues which Christ
exacted from his Disciples, ought now to be as strictly (if not more) observed
by us than heretofore it was by them: The reason whereof is this, because what
virtues soever Christ requires of us, as humility, patience, love, etc. are to
be performed in an higher degree, than they were under the state of the Jewish
Law: And not without good reason, because of those Celestial promises that are
held forth unto us in the Gospel, which are more clear than under the Law. De
Pudicitia.
Our Christian liberty, says Tertullian, is no way injurious unto innocence,
for the whole Law as to piety, truth, constancy, chastity, justice, De
Virginitate 94. On the first of St. Mat.
mercy, benevolence, and modesty, stands yet unrepealed. Nay, a larger
proportion of these (says Chrysostom) is expected from us, because the graces
of the spirit are more plentifully poured down upon us, than they were upon
them. Athanasius also tells us, That Christ makes the precepts of the Law to be
of a larger extent than Moses did: For Moses said only Thou shall not kill; but
Christ says, Thou shall not be angry unadvisedly: Moses said, Thou shall not
commit Adultery; but Christ says, Thou shall not look to lust after a woman.
Heb. 7.19.8.4. Romans 1^.5. Gal. 3 25.
And therefore the Old Law in comparison to the New is said to be weak, and not
without blemish. And Christ is said to be the end of the Law. But the Law, our
School Mistress, or our guide to lead us unto Christ, Gal. 3.25. So the Law of
the Sabbath, and that of Tithes, do oblige us Christians, not to yield a lesser
proportion of time for the worship of God, than a seventh day, nor a lesser
proportion of the fruits of the Earth for the Priests Alimony, and other the
like sacred uses, than the tenth part.

CHAP. II. Whether it be lawful at any time to make War.
I. That to make War, is not repugnant to the Law of Nature, proved by reason.
II. By Histories. III. By consent. IV. That it is not repugnant to the Law of
Nations. V. That the voluntary Divine Law, before Christ, was not against it,
proved; and the objections to the contrary, answered. VI. Certain precautions
concerning this question: whether War be repugnant to the Law of the Gospel?
VII. Arguments for the negative opinion out of the holy Scriptures. VIII. The
arguments out of Scripture for the Affirmative, answered. XI. The consent of
the primitive Christians concerning this, examined.
I. The Law of Nature is not against it.
HAving thus taken a view of the springs from whence all Rights flow, let us
now begin with the most general Question, Whether any War be just, or whether
it be lawful at any time to make War? But this very question with others that
follow are to be dscust in the first place by the Law of Nature. Cicero in
several places very learnedly proves, out of the books of some Stoics, That
there are some principles instilled into us by Nature her helf, as soon as we
are born; as to love our selves, and to hold nothing dearer unto us, than our
selves; and in order to the conservation of that being, that she has given us,
to love and rejoice in those things which conduce to the safety of the whole
body, and of every member thereof: and to abhor those things that tend to its
destruction. Hence it comes, that there is no man but being left to his own
choice, had rather that all his members should be proportionable and entire,
than by use broken or crooked. Therefore our first duty (according to Natures
instinct) is to desire those things most, that are most agreeable to our own
Nature, and to avoid those that are destructive unto it. But these things thus
known, and reason beginning to sprout forth from her latent seeds, then our
second duty is to follow such things as are agreeable to reason it self, which
is ever more to be preferred before those that are convenient to the body; and
consequently to embrace those things that accord with justice and honesty,
rather than those whereunto we are led by sense and appetite; because the
Principles of our Nature do chiefly commend us to right reason, as to our best
guide and protectrix. For as Nature in all other things never produces her
best and choicest, fruits until she arrives at maturity; Right reason is
Natures best guide. Sen. Ep. 124. Ep. 76.121.128.
so neither does humane nature her self produce her best operations, until
reason grows up to perfection. And therefore should Reason it self be much
dearer unto us, than those things whereby we arrive unto it. Now these things
being undeniably true, and without any farther demonstration by all men of
sound judgment granted; it follows that in examining the Law of Nature, we find
out, what is agreeable to those beginnings or first principles of Nature: and
then that we proceed to that, which though in order of time later, yet is much
more worthy to be followed; and that not as accepted only, if it may be
granted; but as that, which by all means is to be required. Moreover that which
we call, honest, according to the diversity of the matter, is sometimes taken
strictly, Honesty considered two ways strictly, as in a point, or largely. For
whatsoever may be commendably done, and yet may be blamlesly undone.
so as to consist (as I may say) in a very point, from which if a man deviate
on either side, he falls into vice; and some times largely, for that which may
be commendably done, and yet blamelesly either left undone, or done otherwise.
Now concerning things honest in this latter sense, are all Laws, both divine
and humane, conversant, making those things due Debts, which of themselves are
commendable only. Above, when we treated of the Law of Nature, it was
questioned whether any thing might be done, not unjustly: But that we
understood to be unjust, which had a necessary repugnancy to rational and
social Nature. Now amongst the first principles of Nature we do not find any
thing repugnant to War; nay all things seem highly to favor it, for both the
ends of War (being the conservation both of our lives and Limbs, and the
acquiring or retaining of what does necessarily conduce thereunto) are most
agreeable to Natural instinct. And to do this by force, if necessity require
it, is a like natural; for why else has nature given unto every Creature
strength, to help and to defend it self? All sorts of Annimals, says Xenophon,
are expert in some kind of War, having no other instructor than Nature.

Each, both its enemy, and preserver knows;
She weapons gives, and how to use them shows.
So likewise Horace: Who taught the Woolf to bite, the Ox to gore,
The Horse to kick? all is set on Natures score.
But Lucretius yet more fully: All beasts, their power to hurt, full well can
tell;
Calves, ere they sprout, know'ng where their Horns should dwell;
With angry Brows, their urging foes repel.
To the like purpose is that of Martial: The Calfe with unhorn'd brows to fight
prepares.

De non esu. Animal.
Every living creature, says Porphyry, is taught by Nature wherein its
strength, and wherein in its weakness lies: and accordingly to expose the one;
to defend the other: the Libard makes use of his teeth, the Lion of his claws
and teeth; the Horse defends himself with his Hoofes, and the Ox with his
Horns. Wherewith accords that of Galen, We see every living Creature making use
of that part for its own defense, wherein it conceives it self strongest; the
young Colt will kick with his Hoofs before they be hardened; and the Calfe
threaten with its head, De usu partium.
though it have no Horns. And in his book of the use of the members, he tells
us, That man is a creature, fitted by Nature either for War, or peace; for
although he be born unarmed, yet has Nature given him hands apt to provide,
and to make use of Arms: which Infants, we see, do of their own accord without
instruction. It was well observed of St. Chrysostom, De statuis. 11.
That to all Creatures who want the use of reason, Nature has affixed Arms to
their bodies, as to the Ox horns, to the Boar Tusks, to the Lion claws: But to
me, says he, has God assigned Arms not affixt to my body, but without it,
hereby showing that he intended man for a gentle creature, and that it was not
lawful for me at all times to make use of such Arms. For as I often lay them
aside, so I sometimes assume them, that therefore I may be the more free and at
liberty, and not always compelled to go armed; God though he has given me
Arms, yet has placed them without me. Aristotle also tells us, That hands were
given unto man instead of a Sword, a Spear, or any other weapon; because he can
thereby make use of all. Hence then we may conclude, That in the first
principles of Nature, there is nothing that is repugnant to War. But if we will
examine the Lawfulness of War by right reason, and the Nature of humane
Society, which is the second and most perfect rule to judge by; we shall
plainly perceive that all manner of force is not thereby forbidden, but that
only which is repugnant to humane Society, that is, which invades another man's
Right: for the main end whereunto such Societies were at first entered into, was
that the whole should engage it self, that each part thereof should freely
enjoy its own, which without much difficulty may be presumed to have been in
force; although that which we now call Dominion had not been introduced.
Because our lives, our limbs, and our liberties, had even then been our own,
and could not without manifest injury have been invaded, or taken from us. So
likewise, to have made use of such things as were then in common, and to have
consumed as much of them, as was necessary to sustain Nature, To rob another is
more against Nature than sickness, imprisonment, or than death.
had been even then the right of the Occupant. But since Dominion has been
either by Law, or custom established, this is much easier to be admitted and
understood, which I shall take leave to express in Cicero's own words De offic.
l. 3.
: To purloyn from another that which is his, or to enrich our selves by the
spoil of others, is more repugnant to Nature, than sickness, poverty,
imprisonment, banishment, yea than death it self: For it dissolves that
Contignation that there is, or should be betwixt mankind; for if this be
admitted, it must necessarily disjoynt, and break in pieces, that sweet
consociation that there is between man and man; than which nothing can be more
agreeable to humane Nature. If every member of the body should be possessed with
this opinion, That it should enjoy better health, if it could attract unto it
self the nourishment of the member next unto it, and should thereupon do it,
would not the whole body languish presently and die? So if it were permitted
that what one man sows, another should reap, that what one man planted,
another should receive the fruits of, or that one man should enrich himself by
the spoils of another; it is impossible that that Society should long stand.
For as it is most natural for every man to love himself best, and to feed and
support himself rather than another, with what is his own; so there can be
nothing more unnatural, or abhorring from right reason, than for a man to take
away from his neighbor that wherewith he should sustain himself; or to improve
his own Estate by the ruin of his Neighbors. Neither is this more agreeable to
the Laws of Nature and Nations, than it is to the municipal Laws of every City;
for to this point do they all steer, at this they chiefly collime, this they
all of them strictly command and enjojn, That every member of that Society
should freely enjoy his own without fear or disturbance: For by this means is
that excellent conjunction and Confederation between them preserved sound and
entire. And he that willingly breaks this Golden Chain of humane Society, is by
the general consent and astipulation of all people, adjudged as unworthy of
humane Society: and therefore like some noxious beast is deservedly prosecuted
to Banishment, bonds, imprisonment, yea and even to death it self. This then
being agreeable to the Laws of Nature, and Nations, and being the end of all
municipal Laws, must needs be the Dictate of right reason, and so the voice of
God himself: whereunto whosoever willingly conforms himself, will certainly so
moderate his desires, that he will never covet what is not his own; nor either
by force or fraud impoverish others for his own private gain; than which
nothing can be more unnatural, nothing more unreasonable, nothing more
destructive to humane Society. Neither is it against the Nature of humane
Society, for a man to provide for himself so as he do not damnifie his
Neighbor; and by consequence that force which does not violate another man's
right is not unjust: which the same Cicero thus expresses, Since there are but
two sorts of decertations, the one by arguments, the other by plain force: the
former being proper to men, the other to beasts, we ought to make the latter
our refuge, when by the former we cannot prevail. And in another place, Quid
est, quod contra vim fieri sine vi posset? Ep. Fam. l. 12. ep. 3.
What remedy can we have against force, but by force? So Vulpian, To repel
force with force, is a right that Nature ordains for all creatures.

Arms against Arms, all Nations do allow. Ovid.
II. This proved by Histories.
What I have already laid down, namely, that it is not every War that is
repugnant to the Law of Nature, may be farther justified out of the Sacred
Story. For God by his High Priest Melchisedeck, did approve of the War made by
Abraham, and his Confederates, upon those four Kings that came to plunder
Sodom. Yea and Melchisedeck blesses God for the Victory; Blessed, says he, be
the most high God who has delivered thine enemies into thine hand, Genesis 14.20.
And yet had Abraham no special Commission from God for it; but was excited and
persuaded thereunto by the mere Law of Nature, being himself a man not only
exceedingly holy, but very wise, according to the Testimony that Berosus and
Orpheus give of him. The War made by the Israelites upon the seven Nations whom
God delivered up unto them, I purposely omit; because they had a special
warrant from God to make War upon that people, who had highly provoked him: and
therefore those Wars are in holy Writ called The Wars of the Lord, being
undertaken by Divine not humane authority. More to our purpose was that War
made by the Israelites under the conduct of Moses and Joshua against the
Amalekites, who had forceably opposed them in their passage toward Canaan;
which though it was not commanded to be done, yet being done was approved of by
God, Exodus 17. Exodus 17.14.
Nay farther God himself prescribed unto Moses certain general and lasting
Rules and Ordinances how he should make War, whereby he sufficiently testified,
That War might sometimes be just, Deuteronomy. 20.10.15.
though we have no special command from God to make this or that War; for there
Moses makes a manifest difference between the case of the seven Nations, and
the case of other people: For these they might receive to mercy, but not them.
And seeing he does not prescribe, for what particular causes they might make a
just War, it may reasonably be presumed, that those causes may easily be
discerned by the very light of Nature: such was the cause of the War that
Jephtha made against the Ammonites, for the defense of their boundaries, Judge.
11. And that which David was enforced upon, against those who had violated the
rights of his Ambassadors, 2 Samuel 10. And it is worthy to be observed what the
Author to the Hebrews records, concerning those pious Heroes, Gideon, Baruck,
Sampson, Jephtha, David, Samuel, etc. That by faith, they subdued Kingdoms, and
put whole Armies of the aliens to flight, Heb. 11.34. Where under the notion of
faith, Heb. 11.34.
is included a full assurance they had, that what they then did, was acceptable
to God. And upon this presumtion also it was, that David is said, by a wise
woman, to fight the Lords battle, and made a pious and just War, 1 Samuel 25.28.
which could not be if all manner of War had been utterly unlawful.

III. By examples.
To the authority of Sacred Story, we may add for greater confirmation, the
universal consent of all, or at least, of the wisest of all Nations, concerning
that force whereby our lives are defended. Cicero gives us the Testimony of
Nature it self, Est haec, non scripta sed nata lex; This, says he, is no
written Law, but a Law that is born with us, Pro Milo^e.
that if our lives be endangered, either through force, or Treachery; all means
we can use for our safety are just and honest. And again, This, the learned are
taught by reason; the unlearned by necessity; the Nations by custom, and the
very beasts themselves by natural instinct, to repel by all means whatsoever,
all force and violence that shall be offered us whereby our bodies, our
members, or our lives shall be endangered. So Cajus the Lawyer, Against all
imminent dangers, De Bello Jud. l. 3. c. 25.
natural reason teaches us to defend our selves. And Florentinus, Whatsoever
any man does in his own defense is just and lawful. Josephus also informs us,
That to preserve life is a Law that Nature her self has imprinted in all
living Creatures. And for this cause it is, that they who endeavor to dispoil
us of our lives, are justly accounted our enemies. Which indeed has so much of
natural equity, that even amongst beasts, who (as I have said already) have
nothing of Justice or Law among them, more than a faint shadow or resemblance
of it, we distinguish between that beast, which of his own accord assaults us,
and that which assaults us in its own defense. And Vlpian notwithstanding that
he had said before, That Beasts wanting the use of reason, could not be said
properly to do wrong; yet he presently subjoyns, that when Rams or Bulls fight
and kill each other, by the Law of Qu. Mutius, they were to distinguish between
them, so, that if he perished, that was the aggressor, the action was null; but
if he perished, that was provoked, the action was good. The ground of which Law
is set down by Pliny, Because, says he, there is no sensible Creature, but
what is impatient of an injury, and being assaulted, will assault again. For as
he well observes, Lions will not prey upon Lions, nor Serpents bite or sting
Serpents: yet if any violence be offered them; there are none but will express
somewhat that is like unto anger: none so stupid but being hurt, will to his
utmost power defend himself, so that in all contests that which is defensive is
the most just, because Natura potior est salus nostra, quam adversarii
pernities Quintil. l. 7. c. 2. See Philo in the Pref^ce upon the fifth
Commandment.
; Our own preservation is more agreeable to Nature, than the destruction of an
enemy.

IV. That War is not repugnant to the Law of Nations.
By the Law of Nature then, (which may likewise be called the Law of Nations)
it is evident, that all War is not to be condemned; nor yet by the voluntary
Law of Nations, as Histories will sufficiently instruct us, wherein the Laws,
Customs, and manners of all people are faithfully recorded. Nay by the very Law
of Nations were Wars introduced, says Hermogenianus; so he that wrote the
lives of men, famous in their several ages, in that of the life of
Themistocles, tells us, That he acknowledged that it was by his advice, that
the Athenians surrounded their City with Walls; which notwithstanding by the
common right of all Nations they might do, whereby to defend their public and
private Gods from the sury of their enemies. Yet whereas I said before, that by
the Law of Nations War was at the first introduced, the words will as I
conceive, admit of a better sense, than what at the first view they seem to
import; as namely, that there are some certain forms and Ceremonies introduced
by the Law of Nations, which by the consent of Nations do give such and such
peculiar effects to such Wars as have them: whence arises that distinction
whereof we shall hereafter make use; between a War that is solemn by the Law of
Nations (which also is said to be just, that is, full and absolute) and a War
that is not solemn, yet cease not therefore to be just, that is, congruous to
Right: for even other Wars (so as the cause be good) the Law of Nations does
neither approve of, nor yet impugn, as shall be showed more at large
hereafter. It is ordained as a Law amongst all Nations, Lib. 43.
says Livy, that Arms may be repelled with Arms. With whom agrees Florentinus,
It is generally consented unto by all Nations, that we may forceably drive away
all violence and wrongs offered unto us, whereby our lives are endangered.
Which justifies all Wars that are merely defensive; for as much as Nature is
much better pleased with its own preservation, than with the destruction of
enemies.

V. Nor to the Voluntary divine law before Christ.
But the main question is, Whether it be agreeable to the divine voluntary Law
to make War? And here if any shall object, that the Law of Nature being
immutable, nothing can be decreed by God himself contrary to it. I answer, that
this is true in such things as the Law of Nature does expressly either command,
or forbid: But not in such things as by the Law of Nature are only lawful,
only, that is, tolerated: for such as these, because they belong not properly
to the Law of Nature, but are without its jurisdiction, Noah and his posterity,
Genesis 9.5, 6. Genesis ^.5, 6.
Where God speaks thus: Surely the blood of your lives will I require, at the
hands of every beast will I require it; and at the hands of man, at the hand of
every man's brother will I require the life of man. Whosoever shed man's blood,
by man shall his blood be shed: for in the image of God made he man. Some there
are that would have the former words of requiring blood, understood in the
largest sense; and the latter words of shedding blood, they would have to be a
commination, and not an approbation; but I like neither. For the prohibition to
shed blood is of no larger extent, than that in the Moral Law, Thou shall not
kill: which does neither prohibit a Magistrate, from putting to death an
obstinate Malefactor, nor does it forbid a lawful war. Neither does the one or
the other so much enjoin any new thing, as revive and proclaim that old Law of
Nature, which through evil custom had been almost defaced, where by killing and
shedding of blood, we are to understand such a manner of putting a man to
death, as implies some vice: As by the word Homicide or Murder, we understand
not every putting a man to death, but the wilful destroying of an innocent
person. But that which follows concerning the shedding of blood for blood, is
to be understood (as I conceive) not so much of the bare fact, as of the right
to do it, which I thus explain; That every man should suffer as much evil from
others, as he has done unto others, is not naturally unjust, according to that
old Rhadamanthaean Law, To suffer as we do, is just and right.

That Phalaris should be tormented in his own Bull, That he that intended
mischief to another, should suffer the same mischief from another, is
justissima patiendi norma, as Seneca speaks; The most equal rule of sufferance
that can be ordained. Out of a deep sense of this natural Equity it was, that
Cain (his hands yet reeking in his brothers blood) past this sentence upon
himself; And it shall come to pass, that whosoever finds me, shall kill me.
Genesis 4.14.
But God in the infancy of the world, either by reason of the scarcity of men,
or because this sin was rarely practiced, and so the less need of exemplary
punishments to deter them, did by an Edict repress that which seemed naturally
to have been lawful, and adjudged the Homicide to wander as a vagabond,
forbidding all men to have any commerce, or to make any contract with him, yet
would he not have his life taken from him. Thus also did Plato ordain among his
Laws; and that this punishment was much used among the ancient Greeks,
Euripides testifies in these words: How wisely did our Ancestors decree,
That he that guilty was of blood, should flee
Far from Commerce, or sight of men, that he
Punished by flight, rather than death, might be?


To the same purpose is that of Thucydides: It is very probable that anciently
small punishments were awarded to great crimes; but at length those being
slighted, they proceeded to death. Servius upon the first book of Virgil,
descanting upon these two words, Solvetis, Luetis, says: That these words were
derived from the payment of money, Antiquorum enim poenae omnes pecuniariae
fuere: For among the Ancients all punishments were pecuniary. The like we find
in Lactantius, Hitherto it was accounted impious to put men to death, though
never so wicked; grounding their conjecture upon that one notable example of
Cain, That it was not the will of God that Homicides should be so punished,
whereupon it grew at length into a Law; so that Lamech not long after having
committed the like sin (or rather (if he did commit the like) for Moses his
words will bear this sense) yet by this one example promised to himself the
same impunity, Genesis 4.24. Nevertheless, though before the Flood, in the age of
the Giants, through the remisness of punishments men grew savage and
outrageous, killing each other like beasts; yet when after the flood, the earth
was fully stockt with men, lest the same license should again increase, God
thought fit to restrain it by a more severe punishment: So that correcting the
lenity of the former age, what nature before judged not unjust, he himself
permitted to be done, namely, that he that sheds man's blood, should himself be
put to death, and that he that killed an Homicide, should be held innocent. But
afterward Tribunals being erected, this power for many weighty reasons was
transferred to Judges only; yet so, that some prints of that ancient custom
were to be seen, even after Moses his law was given (whereof more shall be said
anon) as may appear by that right which was granted unto him that was next of
kin unto him that had been slain: We have Abraham's practice to justify this
gloss, who though he very well knew the Law that God gave unto Noah, Genesis 9.6.
yet took Arms against the four Kings, presuming on that principle of Nature,
that to destroy the destroyer, was not displeasing to the God of Nature: Thus
Moses commanded the Israelites to fight the Amalekites, who with Arms opposed
their passage into Canaan, having no other warrant for so doing, than the bare
Law of Nature: For it appears not that in this, as in other like cases, he
consulted with God at all, Exodus 17.9. Exodus 17.9.
Whereunto we may likewise add, that Capital punishments were executed not
against murder only, but against other great crimes; and that not amongst the
Gentiles only, but even among the Patriarchs, as the story of Judah and Thamar
does clearly evince, Genesis 38.14. Genesis 38.14.
rationally conjecturing by an Argument drawn from like to like, that it was
agreeable to Gods will, that the punishment ordained against Homicides, might
justly be inflicted on such as were notoriously criminous. For some things
there are that we equally value, as we do our lives, such are our Honor, our
Virgin Chastity, our Matrimonial Faith, and such things without which our lives
cannot be well secured; as our reverence to our Prince, without which no
society can be preserved. Now they that offend against any of these, are no
better than Homicides, and are therefore to be equally punished with them.
Hence arises that ancient Tradition among the Hebrews, that God gave more laws
to Noah than were recorded by Moses, who thought it sufficient to insert them
among those laws which God gave to the Hebrews by himself. Incestuous marriages
forbidden before Moses.
Incestuous Marriages were certainly forbidden by some Law before Moses his
time, for which God is said to visit the Heathen, and to cast them out; for it
had not been accounted as a sin, and so not punishable by desolation had there
been no law to forbid it; and yet we do not find it in any place expressly
prohibited, until Moses records it as punished, Lev. 18. Among those things
that were commanded by God to the Sons of Noah, they reckon this, that not only
Murder, but Adultery, Incest, and violent Rapes were to be punished with
death, which seems to be confirmed as well by the story of Abimelech, Genesis
20.6. Genesis 20.6.
as by the words of holy Job, Job 31.11. Job 31.11.
But the law given by Moses adds the reasons of these Capital punishments which
were no less in force among the Gentiles, than among his own people, Psalm.
101.5. Prove. 20.8.
as it is most apparent, Lev. 18.24, 25. and the 27, and 28. verse. And
elsewhere he tells us, that the Land being defiled with blood, could not be
cleansed but by the blood of him that shed it, Numb. 35.31, 33. And it were
unreasonable to think, that God should indulge this favor to the Jews only,
that they might defend themselves by war and punish malefactors with death, and
at the same time forbid it to other Nations: Neither does it appear that the
Prophets were at any time sent by God, to admonish or reprove either Kings or
People for either inflicting Capital punishments on Malefactors, or for
undertaking a war, merely, as war, as they were to reprove other sins. But on
the contrary, who would not think but that seeing Moses's judicial laws were
observed to carry the stamp of the divine Law, those Nations did wisely and
piously, who formed their laws according to that original? As questionless the
Greeks, especially the Atticks did, and from them the Romans in their Laws of
the twelve Tables. But let this suffice to prove that the laws of Noah are not
so to be understood as they conceive, who by them would evince all wars to be
unlawful.

VI. Cautions, concerning the lawfulness of war by the Gospel law.
But much more specious are those Arguments which are drawn out of the New
Testament against war: In the examination whereof I shall not take that as
granted which some do, that there is nothing in the New Testament commanded
(except matters of Faith and the Sacraments) but what is commanded by the Law
of Nature: For this, in that sense wherein they take it, I cannot admit it. But
this I willingly grant, that there Jerome, Aliae sunt leges Caesaris, alia
Christi, aliud Papinianus, aliud Paulus noster praecipit: The laws of Caesar
are one, and the Laws of Christ another, it is one thing that Papinian
prescribes unto us, and another what St. Paul commands. It Is true, th^se are
such as ^ight reason tells us, to abstain from, is more agreeable to the rules
of honesty; but not such as are in themselves impious, but only as they are by
the Divine Law forbidden. But as to that which the Christian Law enjoins us,
namely, That we should lay down our lives one for another, John 3.16.
who can say that we are obliged thereunto by the Law of Nature: It is for
those that do not yet believe the Gospel, Ad Lena^.
to be guided by the Law of Nature, says Justin of which opinion likewise was
Origin. Neither can I assent unto those who hold that Christ in his Sermon on
the Mount, did only interpret, and (as it were) embowel the Law of Moses: For
those words so often repeated, (Ye have heard that it has been said to them of
old; But I say unto you:) do plainly signify another thing, yea and the
Syriack and other Translations do clearly show, that by veteribus is understood
not by, but to them of old; as in the opposite word, vobis, is not meant by,
but to you. But those of old were none other, but such as lived in Moses his
time, and those sayings that are there rehearsed, as spoken to them of old,
were meant as spoken by Moses himself, not by the Lawyers either in the same
words, Exodus 20.13. L^vit. 20.21. Exodus 20.14. Deuteronomy. 24.1. Exodus 20.^. Lev.
24.20.19.18. Exodus 34.2. Deuteronomy. 7.1. Exodus 27.19.
or to that sense; as Thou shall not kill, whosoever kills shall be in danger
of judgment; Thou shall not commit adultery, whosoever shall put away his Wife,
let him give her a Writing of Divorcement: Thou shall not forswear thy self,
thou shall perform unto the Lord thine oaths: An eye for an eye, and a tooth
for a tooth, (that is, thou may exact this in judgment) so thou shall love
thy Neighbor (that is an Israelite) and hate thine enemy; that is, those seven
Nations with whom they were forbidden to contract friendship, or to whom they
ought to show no mercy; unto whom we may add the Amalekites, with whom they
were bound to have a perpetual war, Deuteronomy. 25.19. Now the better to understand
the words of Christ, we must necessarily understand that the Law given by Moses
will admit of a twofold construction, either in such a sense, A twofold sense
of Moses his Law. Carnal.
as is common with all humane Laws, namely as it restrains men from gross sins
by the fear of public punishments, Heb. 2.2. And so it was given by Moses to
restrain the Hebrews in the state of a Civil Government, Heb. 7.16. Where it is
called the Law of a carnal. Commandment, as it is also in another place called
the Law of Works, Romans 3.27. Romans 3.27.
Or it is taken in a sense. more proper to a Divine Law, namely, as it requires
also the purity of the mind, and such duties, the omission whereof, no humane
Laws do punish. In which sense, it is called a spiritual Law, Romans 7.14.
Spiritual.
Comforting the soul, Psalm. 19.9. (which the Latins make the 18th.) The
Pharisees and Lawyers contenting themselves with the Carnal part of the Law,
wholly neglected the spiritual as superfluous; and therefore never instructed
the people therein, as not our own writers only, but Josephus and many of their
own Doctors do testify against them. But as to the spiritual part also we must
know, That those virtues which are required from us Christians, were either
commanded or commended unto the Hebrews also, although not in that degree and
Latitude, as they are unto us, which we have already proved. For a more perfect
and exact obedience is now required from us, Supra. chapter ^,. ult.
than was formerly from the Jews; because the coming of Christ does heighten
our hopes, by far more precious promises. And the graces of his spirit which
descended unto them but as a little dew upon the Herbs, falls on us as showers
on the Grass. Chrysostom. de virg. c. 44.
Under the Law God did not bind us up to so great a measure of virtue as h^^ow
does under the Gospel; then it was permitted to take some revenge for injuries
done, as to revile them that reviled us; we might exact an eye for an eye, a
tooth for a tooth; it was then permitted unto us to swear, though not to for
swear, and to hate our enemies: It was not as yet forbidden to be angry, to put
away a Wife that offended us, or to marry another; nay, nor to have diverse at
the same time. Great was the Indulgence of the Old Law in these and the like
cases. But since the coming of Christ, the way to heaven is made much straiter,
and narrower than before, both by the addition of many new precepts not given
in the old Law, and also by straining up those that were so given, to a much
higher Key. Christ therefore opposes his own doctrine to the doctrine of the
ancients, in both these senses; first because his own took not hold of the
outward man only, to restrain it by pure negatives, as other Laws did; but
restrained the inward man also obliging to positive duties, whose omission was
not punishable by Moses his Law. But also in the second place because it
enjoined spiritual duties, in that height of degree, that neither Moses, nor
any other Lawgiver, did ever reach; whence it is plain, that what Christ
delivered, was not a bare interpretation of Moses his Law, as some would have
it. But yet that these things should be known, is not only pertinent to the
matter in hand, but to many other purposes, lest we should attribute greater
authority to Moses his Law than indeed is fit or due unto it.

VII. That it is not repugnant to the Gospel to make War.
Omitting such arguments as are less convincing, the first and principal
Testimony whereby it may easily be proved that all right of making War is not
fully taken away by the Evangelical Law, is that of St. Paul to Timothy: I
exhort you, says St. Paul, that above all things, Prayers, and suplications,
Intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all men, for Kings and such as
are in authority; 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3.
that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all Godliness, and honesty, for
this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, who would have all
men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth. From whence these
three things are to be learned; first, that it is acceptable unto God that
Kings be made Christians: Justin Martyr thus expresses, We pray, says he,
that Kings and Princes may together with their Regal Power, retain a sound and
perfect mind. And this also in the third place we may learn, that Christian
Kings should use their utmost endeavors, That other Christians may lead under
them godly and Christian lives. But you will happily say, How? Surely the same
Apostle explains himself elsewhere thus, He is the Minister of God for thy
good, and if thou do ill then fear: The right of the Sword.
Non enim frustra gladium gerit; For he bears not the sword in vain, for he
is Gods Minister, an avenger to execute wrath upon them that do evil. Under the
right of the Sword, is comprehended all manner of restraining or coercive
authority, and so it is also sometimes understood by Lawyers; yet so, that the
chief and principal part, that is, the true and proper use of the Sword is not
excluded. Psalm 2.
The Second Psalm does very much conduce to the understanding of this power,
which Psalm, though verified of David, yet was much fuller and clearer
understood of Christ, as we may collect out of Acts 4.25. and Acts 13.33. and
out of Heb. 5.5. Now that Psalm exhorts all Kings to kiss the Son of God with
reverence, How Kings serve God as Kings.
that is, to express themselves his servants as they are Kings; for so St. Aug.
rightly expounds that place, whose very words as being pertinent to our
purpose, sound thus, Herein, says he, do Kings serve God according to his
command, as Kings, when they encourage virtue, and depress vice not only in
things appertaining to humane Society, but in things appertaining also to the
worship of God. And so in another place: How, says he, do Kings serve the Lord
in fear, Ad Bonif. Ep. 50.
unless it be in prohibiting, and by a Religious austerity punishing all manner
of impiety? For to serve God as a man, is one thing, but to serve him as a King
is another. And a little after, Herein do Kings serve God, as Kings, when in
zeal to his service, they do those things which none can do but Kings.

Paul before cited in the 13th to the Romans, Romans 13.
where it is said, That the highest powers, and such are those of Kings, are
ordained of God, and that power is therefore called Gods ordinance. Kingly
Government. asserted by St. Paul.
From whence we infer the necessity of our subjection, together with that
honor and reverence we owe unto them, and that, not so much out of fear,
regarding the power they have to hurt, and punish; as out of Conscience, as it
is Gods ordinance, and out of a strong persuasion, that in resisting it, we
resist God himself. Now if the thing understood by the word, Ordinance, were
only that which God permits, and will not hinder, as all actions that are
vicious, then would there follow no obligation of honor or obedience,
especially that extended to the Conscience; and therefore the Apostles whole
Argument, would instantly fall to nothing, whose main scope was to extol this
Regal power, which if wicked, he could never do, but by the same Argument he
might as well have commended Theft, and Robbery. It must necessarily follow
then, that by this ordained power, we understand such a power, as God does
especially approve (...); and then we may safely infer, That seeing that God
cannot will things contrary to ^^mself, that this power is no ways repugnant to
that will of God, which is revealed in the Gospel, and which obliges all men
to honor and obedience: neither does it at all weaken the force of this
Argument, That at that time, when St. Paul wrote, all Kings and Princes were
strangers to the Christian Faith. For in the first place, this is not
Universally true; for even at that time Sergius Paulus being Propraetor of
Cyprus had given up his name to Christ long before, Acts. 13.12. Act. 13.12.
Besides, this dispute is not concerning persons, whether pious, or impious,
but concerning the Kingly function, whether it be ordained of God, or usurped
by men, which St. Paul seems here to determine, plainly asserting, That
ordinance to be from God: and thereupon concludes, That it ought to be honored
and obeyed, and that, not outwardly, only for fear, but even in the inmost
recesses of the mind, where God alone does properly reign. Nero and Agrippa,
though they had received this faith, yet had still remained, the one an
Emperor, the other a King; which necessarily inferrs the power of the Sword.
For as under the Law, the Sacrifices were reputed holy, See Chrysostom. in locum
supra citatum.
though offered by Hophni and Phineas, Priests unholy: so Pia res est imperium,
quamvis ab impio teneatur; The Function is Sacre^ (...) though the person be
never so wicked: Saul was anointed King, as well as David.

John the Baptist, who being demanded by the Jewish Soldiers, what they should
do to flee from the Wrath to come, did not command them presently to lay down
their Arms, and desert their calling, though they fought then under the Roman
Banners, as in all probability they would have done, had it been contrary to
the Christian Law to make War: but allowing their calling, he only labors to
reform the abuses of it, exhorting them to abstain from acts of unlawful
violence, and from false accusing, and to rest content with their wages, Luke
3.14. Luke 3.14.
But here, some object, That there was so great a difference between the
precepts of Christ, and the prescriptions of the Baptist, that the Baptist
seems to preach one Doctrine, and Christ another; but this we cannot admit,
first because both of them declare the sum and substance of the Doctrine they
intended to preach, in the same words, Repent for the Kingdom of Heaven is at
hand; so begins the Baptist, Mat. 3.2. And so Christ, Mat. 4.17. And Christ
himself says, The Kingdom of Heaven, that is, the new Law (for it is the
manner of the Hebrews, The Jews call their Law, Kingdom.
to call their Law by the name of Kingdom) began to suffer violence from the
days of John the Baptist, Mat. 11.12. John is said to preach repentance for
the remission of sins, Mark 1.4. So did the Apostles in the name of Christ,
Acts 2.38. John required fruits worthy of repentance, and threatens destruction
to those that do not produce them, Matthew. 3.8, 10. He requires also works of
Charity beyond the Law, Luke 3.11. The Law also is said to continue till the
days of John, that is, until the new and more perfect Law should with him
begin, Mat. 11.13. And for this cause it is that John is said to be Prophetis
major, Greater than the Prophets, Mat. 11.9. Luke 7.26. and that he was sent to
give knowledge of Salvation unto the people, Luke 2.77. and to preach the
Gospel, Acts 19.4. Joh. 1.29. Mat. 3.11. Mat. 1.8. Luke 3.16.
Luke 2.18. Neither did John ever distinguish Jesus from himself, by any
difference that there was in their Doctrines, (but only, thus, that what John
declared generally and confusedly, was more distinctly delivered by Christ, who
was the true light) but by this, That Jesus was the Messiah that was promised,
the King of an heavenly Kingdom, who should give the power of the holy Ghost to
those who should believe on him.

The Fourth Argument, and which seems to me of no small force is this, That if
by the An A^gument ^^^^r ^^om (...) con^^ou^^ (...) t^^t ^ou ^ foll^w.
together with that of the Sword, to defend their Subjects from Thieves and
Robbers: how soon would the Christian world be overrun with Rapin and
violence, and what a Deluge of wickedness, of all sorts would break in upon us?
That this must needs be the consequence, we shall easily grant; if we either
remember what sad effe^ts this remisness brought upon the old world; or if we
do but observe, how hardly these sins of Rapin, Cruelty, and the like are
restrained now, even by capital punishments: For the suppressing whereof
Tribunals, Laws, and so many kinds and degrees of punishments: are invented,
says Chrysostom. in sermon ad Patrem fidelem Wherefore if Christ had intended to
have introduced a new, and never before heard of form of Government; without
doubt he would have declared it in such distinct terms, and in such a plain
dress of words, as should have been liable to no misprision; as, Let no man
hereafter adjudge Malefactors to death, Let no man take Arms to defend himself,
or the like, which we no where read that ever he did: but whatsoever words are
wrested from the Scriptures to this purpose, are either very general, or very
obscure. But equity it self, and common reason will instruct us thus much, That
in publishing new Laws we are to restrain words too general, and to explain
terms too ambiguous; and rather to decline a little from the common acception
of the words, than to admit of such a sense of them, as may introduce so many
mischiefs and inconveniences with it.

The Fifth Argument is this, That it cannot be concluded by any probable
argument, Moses was ever abolished, till their City Jerusalem was burnt, and
with it, not the form only, but the very hopes of a Commonwealth did utterly
vanish. For neither does Moses prefix any term or period to this Law, nor does
Christ or his Apostles any where declare the surceasing of it; unless as it
seems to be comprehended in the destruction of the Commonwealth: yea rather on
the contrary, St. Paul says, That the High Priest was constituted, that he
might judge according to the Law of Moses, Acts, 24.3. And Christ in the
Preface to his pecepts, Mat. 5. says, Mat. 5.17.
That he came to fulfill the Law, and not to destroy it; which words if we
referr to the Ceremonial Law, are not difficult to be understood: for when the
Picture is finished, what need we the foul draught? The Ceremonial Law was
fulfilled in him, it consisting in Types and shadows, whereof the substance was
Christ; but how could Christ be said to fulfill the Judicial Law, if (as some
hold) he took it away? And if the Jews were obliged by the Judicial Law, till
the dissolution of their Commonwealth, it will follow, That the Jews, though
Christianized, in case they had been called to be Magistrates, could neither
have avoided it, nor have judged otherwise, than as Moses had prescribed. I,
truly, having thoroughly weighed all that can be said, can find no ground at
all, why any pious man should expound those words of Christ in any other sense:
This I acknowledge, that many things were tolerated among the Jews before the
coming of Christ, (whether as to outward impunity, or in respect of inward
purity also, I shall not now determine) which Christ would not permit in his
Disciples, as for a man to put away his Wife for every offense, and for a man
injured, to require revenge by way of Retaliation: but yet between Christ's
precepts, and Moses his permission, there may be some difference, but no
repugnancy; for, under the Law, if a man did retain his Wife, or if he did
remit revenge privately due, he could not be said to break the Law, but to do
that which the Law did chiefly require of him. But it is far otherwise in a
Judge, whom the Law does not permit, but enjoin to punish a Murderer with
death; which if he do not, he himself shall be found guilty before God. Now if
Christ had commanded such a Judge, that he should not adjudge any Malefactor to
death, this being contrary to Law, he had dissolved, and not fulfilled it.

The Sixth Argument is drawn from Cornelius the Centurion, who received the
Holy Ghost From the example of Cornelius.
and was baptized into the name of Christ by St. Peter; yet do we no where read
that he laid down his Commission, or that he was admonished by St. Peter so to
do. But some may say, That being instructed by St. Peter in the Christian
Religion, it may be presumed, that at the same time he did resolve to desert
his calling: whereunto I answer, That if it could be any where found amongst
the precepts of Christ, or infallibly proved, that Christ did forbid to make
War, then what they say were to the purpose. But seeing no such precept is
extant; certainly it is much more probable, that in this case of Cornelius,
somewhat would have been said against it, if it had been held unlawful, that so
in after ages, men of that profession might not have pleaded ignorance of the
danger incident to that function. Neither is it likely that in case the
Centurion had then renounced his Military profession, St. Luke would have
omitted the recording of it, as usually he did in like cases, as will appear by
several places, but especially. Acts 19.19.

Sergius Paulus, of whom after his conversion there is not the least-mention
made of his renouncing his Propraetorship, And of Sergius Paulus.
or of any admonition given him by St. Paul to do it: that which is not
recorded, (being most expedient to have been so) may be presumed not to have
been done at all.

Paul, who understanding that the Jews had laid wait to kill him, And of St.
Pa^^.
acquainted the chief Captain therewith, who sent him a strong guard of
Soldiers to secure his person; which St. Paul did not refuse, nor did he
admonish either the chief Captain, or the Soldiers. that it was not acceptable
to God to repel force with force, which he had been apt enough to have done,
had he believed it to have been unlawful.

Paul's precept, for paying tribute for conscience sake. From Tribute which was
to have been paid. Romans 13.6.
for of every thing that is honest and just, its proper end must needs be so:
now the properend of paying of Tribute, is to maintain the power of the Sword,
whereby the innocent are protected, and the nocent corrected or cut off. But
that we render unto Princes their Tribute due, is a precept of the new Law, and
binds the Conscience, as St. Paul testifies to the Romans; therefore it
follows, that by the precepts of Christianity, the power of the Sword in the
hands of the chief Magistrate is honest and just: very pertinent to this
purpose, Hist. l. 4. lib. 22. contra Faustum c. 74.
is that of Tacitus, There can be no peace amongst Nations without Arms, no
Arms without pay, nor pay without taxes. So St. Aug. For this cause pay we
Tribute, that Soldiers may have their wages to buy necessaries.

Paul's speech, Acts 25. Acts 25.
If I have wronged any man, or if I have done any thing worthy of death, I
refuse not to die. So Act. 28.18. Act. 28.18.
They found no cause of death in me, Act. 28.18.
says St. Paul: Whereupon Justine Martyr thus glosseth, If there be any
amongst us that live not conformably to those precepts, being only in name
Christians, that such should be punished, and that, by you, is our desire, as
well as yours. From whence we may collect, that it was St. Paul's opinion, even
after the Gospel was published, that there were some crimes which in common
equity deserved death: which very thing is granted by St. Peter also, 1 Pet.
2.19, 20. But if it had been Gods will that no Capital punishment should have
been executed after Christ's coming, St. Paul might have purged himself; but he
thought it not convenient to instill such principles into the minds of his
hearers, as though it had not been as lawful then, as formerly, to punish
Criminals with death; wherefore he waveth this Plea, and submits to the ancient
Law, If I have done any thing worthy of death, I refuse not to die. Now, having
thus proved, that after the Christian Law was given, it was lawful to punish
obstinate Malefactors with death; I take it to be sufficiently proved that it
is Lawful for Princes to make War, namely against such a multitude of
offenders, as shall by force of Arms infest a Nation, who unless they be by
force subdued will never acknowledge their own guilt. For though the power of
these offenders, and their obstinate resolution may be a prudent consideration
to persuade Princes sometimes not to execute it; yet certainly, it diminishes
nothing of their right so to punish.

Moses only, that did separate the Gentiles from the Jews, Ephesians. 2.14. But those
things which have the reputation of being honest either by the Law of Nature,
or by the unanimous consent of all Civilized Nations, the Christian Law is so
far from taking away, that it comprehends them under that general precept of
all honesty and virtue, Phil. 4.8. 1 Cor. 11.14. And as to the Capital
punishments of Malefactors, and the repelling of injuries by force, these may
be ranked among things laudable, and may well be referred unto those two
excellent virtues, Justice and beneficence. But here, on the by, we are not to
omit the error of some, who wholly attribute the lawfulness of the Jewish Wars
against the seven Nations to the grant, that God made unto them long before of
the Land of Canaan: whereas this, indeed, may be one, but not the only cause.
For as well before, as after the possession of that Land, many pious and just
men did make War, by the guidance of mere natural reason upon several other
occasions. As King David did, for the affronts offered unto his Ambassadors;
neither are those things which every man enjoys by the right of humane Laws
less his own, than that which is given him by God himself, nor is that right
either lessened or taken away by the Christian Law.

VIII. The Arguments for the adverse opinion answered.
Esaias 2.4. Orat. Christian esse Deum. Eusebius. de praep. lib. 1. c. 10.
Now by poising these arguments with those brought on the adverse part, the
judicious may easily find whether of them are weightiest. And in the first
place, they urge that of Esaias, And it shall come to pass, that the people shall
break their Swords into Ploughshares, and their Spears into pruning hooks,
Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation, neither shall they learn War any
more. Which words of Esaias, St. Chrysostom applies unto that universal peace
that the world enjoyed under the Roman Empire; Neither was it foretold only,
says he, that this new Religion should be firm, stable and unshaken; but that
therewith there should come peace to the whole earth. But this Prophecy of Esaias
(as I take it) is to be understood, either under some condition as many others
are, as that such should be the state of affairs, in case all Nations should
submit to the yoke of Christ, and live according to his Law, whereunto there
shall nothing be defective on Gods part: for most certain it is, that if all
were Christians, or all that call themselves so, would live after the rules of
Christ; there would be no occasion for Capital punishments, and consequently no
use at all of the Sword. So Justin writes of the Christians in his time, Non
pug namus in hosts, We, says he, fight not against enemies: and thus Philo
testifies of the Esseni, There is none among them, that make either Javelins,
Arrows, Swords, Helmets, or any other instruments of War. So Chrysostom, Si
esset inter homines qualis oportet dilectio, nullas fore poenas capitales; If
there were that perfect love among men that there should be, there would be no
need at all of Capital punishments. Then also as Arnobius speaks, would Iron
and Steel be converted into more innocent and profitable instruments, than for
men therewith to kill and destroy each other. Or this place of Esaias is to be
understood simply and purely, as the words import; and then it is apparent that
this prophecy is not as yet accomplished, but the fulfilling thereof, as that
of the general conversion of the Jews, is yet to be hoped for; but take it, as
we please, in either sense nothing can be from thence concluded against the
lawfulness of War, so long as they that heartily endeavor to live in peace,
are not suffered to enjoy it: Or as the Psalmist has it, whilst some are
endeavoring after peace, others are preparing themselves for battle. Mat. 5.
expounded
Many arguments are usually drawn from the fifth of St. Matthew. For the
resolving whereof, it is convenient that we should remember what a little
before was said, that had our great Law giver intended to have abolished all
Capital punishments, and this Right of making War, he would certainly have done
it in most plain and express terms, the matter being so weighty, and so new;
and the rather, because none of the Jews could conceive or imagine but they were
obliged to Moses his judicial Laws, so long as their Commonwealth should stand.
This being thus premised, let us orderly examine what plain and concluding
power, these places of Scripture have to evince the thing they are brought for.
Ye have heard it said, an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth; but I say
unto you, do not resist him that does thee an injury, but if any man strike
thee on the one cheek, turn to him the other also. From hence some do infer,
That it is unlawful either to repel, or to avenge an injury, whether publicly
or privately. But this cannot be enforced from the words of Christ, who does
not there address his discourse to the Magistrate, but to the person injured;
neither does he there speak of every injury, but of such slight ones, as a box
on the ear, and the like: the precept following seems to restrain the words
preceding, as if they were too general, If any man will sue thee at the Law,
Lib. de patientia.
to take away thy Coat, let him have thy Cloak also; which words Cyprian thus
expounds, What is taken away from thee unjustly, seek not to recover. And so
likewise Irenaeus, Lib. 4. c. 2^.
If any man shall take away thy Coat, do not grieve, as if thou were deprived
of it against thy will; but rather rejoice, as if thou had given it
voluntarily. And if any man shall compel thee to go with him a mile, go with
him not grudgingly but willingly, not following him as a servant, but going
before him as a guide. It is not every contest in Law that is therefore
forbidden, as St. Paul seems to interpret that place in 1 Cor. 6.4, 5, 6, 7.
But he forbids Christians to go to Law for every trifle, or to convent their
brethren before the Tribunals of the Heathen, contrary to the custom of the
Jews, amongst whom it was a received opinion, Qui adducit negotia Israelitica
ad extraneos, polluet nomen Dei; He that makes a stranger Judge of any
controversy between Israelites, pollutes the name of God: but Christ to
exercise the patience of his disciples would not have them cavil in judgment
for things easily recoverable, as for a Coat or Cloak. For though they might do
it Optimo jure, with the greatest Right, yet was it much more acceptable to God
rather to suffer such losses with patience, than to prosecute the Law for them.
Apollonius Tyanaeus denies it to be the part of a wiseman, to sue for a little
money. There is no judge, says Vlpian, Philost. 2, 15.
that can disapprove of that man, who sets so little by his loss, as not to vex
himself for it with many suits, for that man's disposition that hates
contention, is no ways to be disallowed. What Vlpian there says is approved
of by all good men, and is no more than what Christ there commands, collecting
the sum and substance of his precepts out of these things that are most honest
and virtuous. But yet, thou can not hence well conclude, that for a Parent or
a Tutor to defend, or recover by Law, that which his Child or Pupil has been
wrongfully deprived of, and without which he cannot subsist, being thereunto
compelled, is any violation of this precept of Christ. For it is one thing to
contend for a Coat which happily we may spare, and another thing to contend for
that, without which we cannot live. In the Constitutions of Clement, it is said
concerning a Christian, If he have a suit at Law, let him endeavor as soon as
he can to end it, though it be to his loss. What therefore is usually said of
moral duties, may also be said of these precepts, that they consist not in a
point, like the negative precepts of the Law, from which we cannot deviate in
the least without sin; for these have their huc usque, their certain Latitudes,
wherein we may walk safely. So, in that precept that follows, If any man shall
compel thee to go with him a mile, go with him two. He says not, For trifles
it is better to suffer than to ^ontend.
he that compels thee to go with him one hundred miles, this had been hard,
because happily it would draw us too far from our own necessary concernments, and
so the injury or damage done would be greater to our selves, than the benefit
to him: But he mentions a mile or two only, which cannot much endamage us. The
sense of the words then must needs be this: In such things as are not very
damageable to our selves, we are not too strictly to insist upon our own right,
but rather to grant more than is required from us, that our patience and
readiness to do good may be known unto all. Thus Justin Martyr expounds these
words, What Christ there said, tends only to this, that we should behave our
selves toward all men patiently, obligingly, and not prone to anger. But it
sollows, Give unto him that asks, and from him that would borrow turn not away:
Than which words, if not understood with some limitation, nothing sound
harsher. He that takes no care for his Family, says St. Paul, is worse than an
Infidel: Let St. Paul himself be Judge who was best able to expound his Masters
Law, and who exhorting the Corinthians to extend their liberality to the poor
at Jerusalem, says, Not that others should be eased and you burdened, but that
by an equality, your abundance should supply their wants: that is, (to borrow
the words of Livy, in a case not unlike to this) that out of your store ye may
relieve the necessities of others. Dabo egenti, sed and ipse non egeam, I will
give to the poor, but so, as that thereby I make not my self poor, says
Seneca. So also Chrysostom, God requires those things of us that are in our
power to give: According to what a man has, says St. Paul, and not according
to what a man has not. And he commends the Thessalonians, that they gave above
what they were able; but yet he does not exact the same from the Achaians: To
the like purpose is that of Cyrus in Xenophon, What I find superabundant in
mine own estate, will be sufficient to relieve the wants of my friends. By all
which we may conclude, The indulgence of the Hebrew Law.
That this precept of our Saviors (as all the rest which follow in this
Chapter) are to be understood with some equitable limitation, and not barely as
the words import: The Hebrew law to prevent the cruelty of Husbands to their
Wives, did indulge unto them the liberty of Divorce; and to prevent private
revenge, whereunto that Nation was too much addicted, gave liberty to the
injured person to avenge himself, not by his own hand, but by requiring it from
the Judges, according to the Rule of Retaliation; which Law was so pleasing to
the Romans, Which Christ reforms.
that they inserted it among those in the 12 Tables, Si membrum rupit talio
esto, He that breaks a limb shall suffer the like. But Christ being Master of
much more patience, was so far from approving this Law, that he would not
permit his disciples to repel some injuries either by force or judgment.

But what injuries were these? Surely such as might easily be born, not that
patience was not commendable even in the greatest, but that he was content with
somewhat a more limited patience: And therefore he instanceth only in a box on
the Ear, which neither endangers ^se nor limb, but implies only a slighting or
contemning of us, which does not at all damnifie us. Seneca in his Book
entitled, Of a wise man's Constancy, distinguishes between an injury and a
reproach: The former, says he, is naturally more grievous; the latter more
light, and to such only as are nicely bred, troublesome: Qua non laeduntur, sed
offenduntur; whereby they are offended, but not hurt. Such is the weakness and
vanity of men's minds, that they esteem nothing worse than a reproach; so we may
find some servants, that had rather be beaten with stripes, than to take a box
on the Ear. So in another place, A reproach (says he) is much less than an
injury, which we rather complain of than revenge, there being no punishment
assigned unto it by the Law So he in Pacuvius, Patior facile injuriam, si absit
contumelia; An injury I can easily digest, provided that it be without
contumely. To the same purpose also is that of Demosthenes, The Tongue wounds
deeper than the Sword, and stripes though grievous, yet are more easily born,
if not accompanied with reproaches. And the same Seneca a little after tells
us, That grief arising from reproach, is an affection or passion occasioned by
the humbleness of a mind contracting it self, by reason of some word or deed
tending to our disparagement. Against all these passions which seem to invade
the tranquillity of the mind, Christ fortifies his disciples only with
patience; so that in case the wrong offered us either in word or deed, do not
much hurt us, it is more magnanimous to overcome them with sufferance and
patience, than to seek revenge either by force or Law. And lest we should be
discouraged by that vulgar saying, Veterem ferendo injuriam invitas novam; By
over calmly bearing an old injury, we do but invite a new: Our blessed Savior
adds, that even the second is rather to be endured, than the first either
repelled or revenged; De Statuis 1.
because such kind of injuries leave no evil Characters behind them, besides
what consists in our own foolish conceits. For what St. Chrysostom observes is
very true, Contumelia non ab inferentis animo sed ex judicio eorum qui
patiuntur, aut sit aut perit; A reproach does either vex or vanish, not
according to his intention that inferred it, but according to the apprehension
of him that suffers it. To offer the Cheek is an Hebrew phrase, implying the
bearing of a thing patiently, as may be collected from Esaias 30.6. and from
Jeremy 3.3. Tacitus hist. 3.
whence the Latins borrowed it, as appears by that Phrase so often used by
Tacitus, Terence, and others, Praebere os contumeliis, is, To bear reproaches
patiently. Ter. Adelph.


The third Objection is taken from the words following, Ye have heard that it
has been Matthew. 5.43.
There are some that think that these duties of Dilection and Beneficence to
our enemies, are directly opposite to War and Capital punishments: But this
objection will easily vanish, if we do but understand the very words of the
Hebrew Law; for the Jews were commanded to love their Neighbors, that is Jews
or Hebrews (equal unto whom were Proselytes; but those laws which forbad them
to do hurt, reached even unto those Strangers that lived among them, being
uncircumcised, Whereof before, chapter 1.. 16.
as the Talmudists note) for in this sense is the word Neighbor there taken,
as appears Levit. 19.17. being compared with the Verse there following. And yet
notwithstanding were the Magistrates commanded to inflict Capital punishments
upon Homicides, seducers of the people to Idolatry, and other heinous and
obstinate Malefactors: So notwithstanding this precept of loving their
Neighbors, the 11 Tribes did justly make war against the Tribe of Benjamin,
for their more than barbarous inhumanity, Judge. 21. so notwithstanding this
Precept, did David, who is said to fight the Lords battles, by force of Arms
recover the Kingdom (being promised to him) from Ishbosheth. But admit that the
word, Neighbor, does now extend it self to all mankind, for as much as all are
now fellow Denizens, all received into the Covenant of Grace, and no one people
accursed from God; yet what was heretofore lawful for the Israelites, will be
as lawful for us, both being obliged to the same duties of Love and
Beneficence. But you may happily say, That the Evangelical Law requires an higher
degree of love than the Mosaical Law did: Even this also I grant with this
allowance, that all are not equally to be beloved, our Parents and our Children
are certainly to be preferred before Strangers, and our Neighbo^^s before our
Enemies. It Is true, Adv. Pelag. dialog. 1.
says St. Hierom, I am commanded to love mine enemies, and to pray for my
persecutors; but yet is it just that I should love them equally as I do my
Neighbors and kinsmen? Is it equal that I should make no difference between my
Friends and mine Adversaries? There are degrees of Dilection.
Surely the Laws of a well ordered Affection do command me to prefer the
Righteous before the wicked, and the public safety before the safety of any
private person. Now out of the very love we bear to the righteous do we put the
wicked to death; and out of our care to the public peace, do we make war upon
those that disturb it: If therefore our Saviors precepts do admit of degrees,
and if the greater obligation do tie us to the stricter duty; then are we not
bound to preserve the nocent, when in so doing we endanger, if not destroy the
innocent. That of Seneca is very well known, Tam omnibus ignoscere crudelitas
est, quam nulli; Lib. 1. de clem.
It is as great a cruelty to pardon all, as to pardon none. Chrysostom speaking
of such humane punishments as are inflicted on the obstinate, says, that they
proceed not from cruelty, but from goodness. And St. Augustine affirms, That as
there is sometimes crudelitas parcens, a cruelty in pardoning, so there is
sometimes misericordia puniens, mercy in punishing. Those protections,
therefore, that ripen sin by giving too great encouragement to sinners, are to
be removed: For as Totilas in Procopius speaks, Peccare, See Bo. 2. chapter 2^.. 2.
and prohibere poenas peccantium in pari pono: He that commits a crime, and he
that hinders a Criminal from due punishment, are alike faulty. Besides we are
commanded to love our Enemies by the example of God himself, who causes the
Sun to shine and the Rain to fall, as well on the Evil as on the Good: And yet
does the same God put a manifest difference between them, visiting the sins of
such as are incorrigible with heavy judgments in this life, and yet reserving
much heavier for them to be inflicted in the life to come. And thus are all
those Objections drawn from those precepts, enjoining Christians to mercy,
lenity, beneficence, against war and Capital punishments; easily answered. For
Almighty God though he pleased to make himself known unto us principally by
these Attributes of Gentleness, Long sufferance, Gods patience does not hinder
his justice.
and Patience, John 4.2. Exodus 34.6. yet do the holy Scriptures almost in every
page set forth, and declare his indignation and wrath against obstinate and
contumacious sinners, as Numb. 14.18. Romans 2.8. whereof the Magistrate is
designed to be the Minister, Romans 13.4. Moses was highly celebrated for his
meekness and gentleness, yet did he punish Malefactors with death; and Christ
himself the most absolute pattern and mirror of meekness and patience, being
provoked by the obstinacy of the Jews ingratitude, is said by a Parable to send
out his Armies to burn up their City, and to destroy her Citizens, Mat. 22.7.
the like we may read Mat. 21.44. and Luke 19.12, 14, 27. And although the Roman
Army were (as Chrysostom observes) the Axes and the Hammers, Chrysostom. in 1 Cor.
4.21.
yet was it Christ himself that brought these calamities upon them, according
to his own predictions, as well by Parables, as plainly and expressly. Nearest
unto their Master, came the Apostles themselves in imitation of his meekness
and gentleness, Aug. Ser. Dom. in mont l. 1. Great. c. 23. q. 8.
who notwithstanding made use of the power given them from above, in the
punishment of incorrigible sinners, as is plain, 1 Cor. 4.21. 1 Cor. 5.5. 1 Timothy 1.20.

Romans 12.17. Romans 12.17.
Render unto no man evil for evil, provide things honest in the sight of all
men: If it be possible, as much as in you lies, live peaceably with all men:
Dearly Beloved, The vulgar Interpretation is, Defend not your selves: But this
word is often put by Christian Authors, in this sense of Avenging: Aug.
expounds this place very well, where he says Resist not evil, lest ye delight
in revenge, which feeds the mind fat with other men's misfortunes. Vide infra
Bo. 2. chapter 20. 5. and 10.
avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath: For it is written,
Vengeance is mine, I will repay it says the Lord: Therefore if thine enemy
hunger feed him, of he thirst give him drink; for in so doing thou shall heap
coals of fire upon his head: Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with
good. But here also the same answer will serve, as was given to the former: For
at the very same time when God impropriated to himself the Sword of Vengeance
as his prerogative, saying Vengeance is mine; at the self same time were
Malefactors put to death by the Magistrate, and laws prescribed for making of
war, and yet it was at the same time enjoined to the Jews to do good to their
enemies (if their own Countrymen) as Exodus 23.4, 5. which notwithstanding did
no ways diminish either the right of making a just war, or the execution of
incorrigible malefactors, wherefore neither can these or the like Precepts now
(though never so much enlarged) be wrested to such a sense; much less if we
consider, that the dividing the Scriptures into Chapters and Verses, was not
done by the Apostles, nor in their age, but long after, for the more easy
quotation of the Text when fit to be brought for confirmation: so that what
begins the 13th to the Romans, The first verse of Romans 13. was annexed to the
precepts in the Chapter foregoing against taking revenge.
Let every Soul be subject to the higher powers; and what there follows, was
annexed to those precepts foregoing, against taking revenge. But in this
dissertation, St. Paul says expressly, that the higher powers are constituted
Gods Ministers, and the executioners of his wrath (that is as to punishments)
upon those that do ill; thereby clearly distinguishing between that revenge,
which the Magistrate instead of God exacts for the public good, being a part
of his prerogative; and that which every private man takes upon his enemy with
his own hands, merely to gratify his own passion, which the Apostle had a
little before interdicted. For if we include in that negative precept, that
Revenge that is taken by the Magistrate for the public good, what can be more
absurd than after he had charged the Romans, not at all to execute capital
punishments, to have immediately subjoyned, that to this very end God had
ordained the higher powers, that they in his stead, should execute even Capital
Judgments upon Malefactors? for so the power of the Sword must needs signify,
if any thing.

Cor. 10.3. Although we walk in the flesh, 2 Cor. 10.3. expounded.
we do not war according to the flesh; for the weapons of our warfare are not
carnal, but mighty, through God, to the pulling down of strong holds. Where by
the way, we must understand that by carnal weapons, are meant Riches, Glory,
Power, Eloquence, and such like (as Chrysostom expounds that place) in which
sense, this place is quoted to little purpose, for both the words preceding and
subsequent do plainly show, that St. Paul by the word Flesh understood his mean
appearance as to the outward, which rendered him to those who looked no further
contemptible. Whereunto St. Paul opposes his own weapons, that is, the power
committed to him as an Apostle, to compel such as were obstinate and
refractory, which power he exercised on Elymas the Sorcerer, on the incestuous
Corinthians, and on Hymenaeus and Alexander the Coppersmith. This power he
denies to be carnal, that is, weak, nay rather he asserts it to be most strong
and forceable. Now what does this belong to the rights of War or Capital
punishments? yea rather on the contrary, because the Church of Christ was at
that time utterly destitute of all manner of tutelage or protection from the
public powers: therefore did God for a while supply this defect by that
prodigious power which began to cease, almost as soon as the Church had gained
the protection of Christian Emperors; even as Manna then began to cease, so
soon as he had brought his people out of the barren Wilderness into a fruitful
Country.

Ephesians. 6.12. Put ye on the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to stand
against the wiles of the Devil; out of Ephesians. 6.12. expounded.
for ye wrestle not against flesh and blood (only) as the Hebrews understand
it, but against Principalities, etc. In which place the Apostle discourses
only of that spiritual warfare, which Christians, as Christians, have with
their spiritual enemies, and not that which Christians as men may make against
men upon just grounds.

James, From whence are Wars and Fightings among you? from James 4.1.
Come they not hence, even from your Lusts that war in your members? Ye lust
and have not, ye kill and desire to have, and cannot obtain; ye fight and war,
yet ye have not because ye ask not; ye ask and receive not, because ye ask
amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts. But in these words there is
nothing universal, for St. James here condemns only those unnatural wars which
the dispersed Jews then had among themselves, whereby they were miserably
shattered and torn in pieces, (some part whereof is recorded by Josephus) which
arose from no other causes but what were unjust: the like we may see among
Christians in these days, though not without remorse; whereof Tibullus, This is
the vice of Gold, no Wars were then,
When naught at Feasts but Beechen Bowls were seen.


So we often read in Strabo, how innocently they lived who contented themselves
with a single and simple diet; wherewith agrees that of Lucan, -- O Luxury, of
things the wast,
That not contented art with mean repast;
Ambitious hunger, which for to appease,
Both Lands and Seas are sought for rarities:
Learn with how little Life sustained may be,
And what by Nature's due. --


Whereunto we may add that of Plutarch, There is no War among men, In Stoicor.
contradictionibus.
but what arises from some vice; some through inordinate lust, others from
covetousness, some through ambition, and immoderate love of Glory. Justin
commending the manners of the Scythians says, Just. de Scy. this.
They affect not Gold and Silver as other Nations do: And presently after he
adds, This Contentation of theirs begat in them so much justice, that they
coveted nothing that was not their own; for there only are riches inordinately
sought after, where they serve for inordinate uses. Memorable is that saying of
Taxiles the Scythian to Alexander, What necessity is there that we, O
Alexander, should make War one upon another, seeing that thou come not to
abridge us of our Water, or of our necessary sustenance; in the defense of
which things only, men endued with reason make War? Much to the same purpose
was that of Diogenes, Thieves and Incendiaries to Was, are never found among
such as are contented with homely fare. For as Porphyry observes, That which is
easily got and at small charge, much conduces to the perpetual Piety, even of
all. De non edendis animal. l. 2. Hieron. adv. Jov. l. 2.
Whereas Tyrants and such as devast Kingdoms, do not raise Wars either Foreign
or Civil, to feed coursely on Herbs, Roots, or Apples; but to pamper themselves
with Flesh, Fowl, and such like delicious Fare. Therefore Chrysostom speaking
of such as were rich and opulent, says, Ad Patrem fidelem.
Do not Seditions, Wars, Combats, Bondage, Slavery, Captivity, Murders, and
innumerable other such like mischiefs and inconveniences commonly arise from
these men? I may conclude these and many other such wise sayings of the best
men, with that one of Polybius, Animus necessariis contentus alio ad sapiendum
magistro non eget; That mind which can be contented with necessaries only,
needs no other Tutor to learn wisdom. Our wish therefore shall be the same with
Justin's, who having commended the Scythians for their temperance, wishes the
like moderation among all Nations: Then might we hope that that Prophecy of
Esaias would soon be fulfilled, that our Swords should be turned into Coulters,
and our Spears into Pruning Hooks; Nation would not then rise against Nation,
neither should we learn war any more. For what is it that fills the world so
full of blood and rapine, that the Sword devours more than those that dye by
natural deaths, but only our exorbitant Lusts, whereby we are violently hurried
to things unjust and dishonest. Now that which Christ sometimes said to St.
Peter, He that takes the Sword shall perish by the Sword, not properly
belonging unto War in its vulgar acception, but to private quarrels (for Christ
himself gives this as a sufficient reason, why we should neglect our own
defense, rather than study revenge; because his Kingdom was not of this world,
Jo. 13.36.) shall be more fully handled in its proper place.

IX. What the Primitive Christians held as to this.
When there arises any doubt concerning the sense of things written, we have
two main helps, namely, the common practice of that Age, and the authority of
the most prudent men, both which are of singular use for the right
understanding of the holy Scriptures: According to that ancient rule, Sanctorum
praxis, optimus est praeceptorum interpres; The practice of the Saints, is the
best interpreter of our Saviors precepts. For it is not probable, that the
Apostles did commit all things so clearly to Writing, that might or did concern
the Economy of the Church; but that some things were delivered by words only:
Neither is it probable, that all the Churches by them established, Concerning
the ancient Fathers, three things observable.
should quickly forget what was so delivered unto them and practiced by them.
Now they that dispute against the lawfulness of War, do usually justify
themselves by the opinions of some of the ancient Christians, against whom I
have these things to urge: First, That from their sayings, nothing can be
concluded more than that it was the opinion of some private men, but not
ordinary) to cloth their own Fancies with that generous Notion of an
Apostolical Tradition, Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 7.
as may be observed by Origin, and Tertullian: (so Clemens Alexandrinus says,
That it was delivered by a certain secret Tradition from the Apostles, That it
was not lawful for Christians to go to Law, either before the Saints, or before
the Gentiles: or for a perfect Christian to swear: Origin. Tertullian.
) yet are not these Fathers constant to what they say; for Origin brings in
Bees, as a Document, That it was lawful for Christians to make a just and well
ordered War, as often as necessity required. And the very same Tertullian, who
in another place seems to disapprove of Capital punishments, yet says, None
can deny, but that it much conduces to the public safety, Di Anima.
that Malefactors should be punished. And again, Who, says he, would not
rather prefer humane Justice (than see a Righteous man oppressed) which as the
Apostle testifies, is not begirt with the Sword in vain, and which even in
persecuting is Religious. So also to the Proconsul Scapula, We (says he) do
not terrify others, neither are we terrified by others. But as we would have
all men saved by admonishing them not to fight against God: So thou may both
faithfully perform the duty that belongs to thy jurisdiction, and yet not be
unmindful of that, of humanity, especially considering that ye also are under
the power of the sword. And as concerning the lawfulness of War he speaks
doubtfully; For in his book concerning Idolatry, De Coron. Militis.
he says, It is much questioned whether Christians may take arms, or whether
Soldiers may be admitted to Christianity: and in that place he seems to favor
the Negative; but in another place, after he had a while disputed against the
lawfulness of War, he at length distinguishes between him that entered into
Arms before he was baptized, and him that listed himself after Baptism. For
says he, Their condition is plainly otherwise, who being first Soldiers were
afterward converted to the faith, as theirs whom St. John admitted to his
Baptism; or that faithful Centurion's whom Christ approved of, and whom St.
Peter instructed: Provided that having once embraced the Christian Faith, and
being sealed up thereunto by Baptism, they either renounce the War presently,
as some have done; or take special care that they do nothing therein that may
offend God. Whereby it is evident, That some Christians did, or at least might
continue in Arms after Baptism, which certainly would not have been permitted,
had Warfare been by Christ absolutely forbidden; no more than Southsayers,
Magicians, and the professors of such like prohibited Arts, were permitted
after Baptism to persist in their Diabolical Professions. Tertullian tells us,
That they who professed such Arts as the Christian Discipline did not allow of,
were not to be admitted into the Church of Christ. De Idol. De fide and op. Ep.
65.
And St. Aug. instances, amongst others, in common Whores, Bauds, and Stage
Plaiers, none whereof until they had removed their professions Of the same
opinion also was St. Cyprian.

War declined not as in it self unlawful, but to avoid Acts. repugnant to
Christianity. As the Jews did.
Secondly, We may observe, that in the Primitive times, Christians did either
disapprove or avoid the Wars, not because it was in it self unlawful, but in
respect of some circumstances incident to those times, which would not admit of
the exercise of War without the doing of some acts which were repugnant to
Christian Religion. Thus Tertullian forbids a Christian to go to War, not that
it was unlawful, but because the Discipline of War did sometimes enjoin such
acts, as the Discipline of Christ could not allow of: In the Epistle of
Dolobella to the Ephesians, as it is recorded by Josephus, the Jews desire to
be exempted from all military expeditions, not simply as being unlawful, but
that being mixed with strangers, they could not sufficiently perform the Rites
and Ceremonies of their own Law, nor would their Religion permit them to make
long marches, or to perform acts of Hostility on the Sabbath day: and the same
Josephus tells us that for these very reasons, the Jews got leave of L.
Lentulus to be discharged the Army: The same Historian also relates, that the
Jews being banished Rome, some betook themselves to the Wars, others were
punished for refusing to take Arms in reverence to their Country Laws, and for
the reasons above mentioned; whereunto they sometimes added a third, namely,
Because they thought it a sin to make War against their own Counrty-men,
especially being persecuted for observing their own Country Laws. Jos. Ant. l.
11. Lib. de Idol.
But being freed from these inconveniences they refused not to take Arms, and
that under foreign Kings, but still under condition, that they might enjoy
their own Laws, and worship God after the manner of their Forefathers. Unto
these dangers that the Wars exposed them unto may be added, that which
Tertullian objects, That they were sometimes commanded to swear by the Gods of
the Gentiles, De Coron Militis.
Mars, Jupiter, etc. Which unto Christians was a very great scandal, as well as
to the Jews. Whereupon the same Tertullian, in another place thus Apologizeth
for them, Shall, says he, a Christian watch to guard the Temples of those gods
whom he has renonunced? Shall he sup there where he is forbidden to eat? Shall
he defend those spirits by night which he exorciseth by day? And a little
after, How many other great offenses may be seen in military duties, which
cannot be otherwise interpreted, but as breaches of our Christian Laws.

The Fathers gave it as their Counsel but not as Christ's precept.
that they oft-times embraced the Godly Counsels of wisemen, with the same
fervor of devotion, as if they had been the commands of Christ. Christians,
says Anaxagoras, will not contend in judgment with those that rob them. And
Salvianus was of opinion, that it was the command of Christ, that we should
rather yield up our own right, than prosecute the Law for it. But this, if
taken generally, may be embraced as good and Fatherly Counsel tending to
Evangelical perfection, but was never digested into a Christian precept. In
like manner the Fourth Council of Carthage decreed That a Bishop though
provoked, should never sue for things transitory. Vid Amb. de Off. lib. 2. c.
21. Greg. M. l. 2. Judict. 11. ep. 58.
So most of the ancient Fathers condemned all Oaths, as unlawful, without any
exceptions; whereas St. Paul himself to gain belief in a serious matter, did
swear. A Christian in Tatian, refused the Praetorship; and Tertullian tells us
that a Christian should not affect Magistracy. Lactantius Lib. 5. c. 18.
also denies that a just man (and such he would have a Christian to be) ought
to make War; but denies also that he should navigate the Seas. How many of the
ancient Fathers do dissuade Christians from Second Marriages? yet no wise man
will from thence conclude, that any of these are in themselves unlawful: for
though they are all of them excellent Ornaments to our Christian profession,
and very acceptable to God; yet are they not imposed on us by the necessity of
any Law. (Nay farther, admit that there were some places of Scripture which did
seemingly restrain the political use of the Sword, yet since it has been
accounted by all good men a means sufficient for the avoiding of personal
inconveniences, (as mutilation, etc.) to admit of any sense rather than the
literal, as of the plucking out of the right eye, the cutting off, of the right
hand, etc. Much rather should those places of Scripture, that are urged against
the power of the Sword, admit of any sense; than that it should be thought,
that Christianity should destroy that, which is the chiefest instrument of
justice, the only curb to vice, and one of the main pillars of humane Society.
For if it be granted, that the World cannot subsist without Government, nor any
Government without Laws, and that the Laws themselves signify but little
without Coercion: then it is as certain that that Religion cannot be good, that
holds forth such doctrine whose consequence will destroy all Government; and
therefore such a doctrine is to be suppressed with all care and prudence, as the
greatest pest and nuisance to a Commonwealth: and those very men that did first
intend by this doctrine to exauctorate Princes and Magistrates, would (it is to
be feared) be the very first, that would take up Arms to abett and establish
their own wild and exorbitant fancies: And those Princes who suffer themselves
to be deluded by them, will quickly find the consequences to be inconsistent
with Government; when being disarmed, they shall be disabled to defend
themselves against their Neighbors, to suppress mutinies and seditions at
home, or to give that protection unto their own subjects against rapine and
violence, which in honor and Conscience is due unto them. But let these
suffice to dissolve those objections that are usually brought out of holy Writ
against the lawfulness of War; and now let us see what may be brought to
confirm our opinion, namely, That all War is not unlawful.

And here in the first place, we may allege many Authors and those more
ancient, Arguments proving some Wars lawful
who hold, That Christians may lawfuly put to death incorrigible Malefactors,
and consequently may make a just War; of which Clemens Alexandrinus shall lead
the van, A Christian, says he, being called to be a Supreme Magistrate, as was
Moses, is to be unto his Subjects a living Law, encouraging the just with
rewards, and restraining the unjust by severe punishments. And in another place
describing the habit of a Christian, he says, Invitis pedibus.
That it would become him to be unshod unless he be a Soldier. In those
Constitutions, that are fathered upon Clemens Romanus, we read, That every
putting of men to death is not unlawful: but that only which destroys an
innocent person, yet so notwithstanding that the Magistrate alone is to
determine who are innocent. But setting aside these private authorities, let us
proceed to those that are public, that is, of the Church, which in this case
is of greatest moment. And this I affirm, That no man was ever rejected from
Baptism, or Excommunicated the Church because he was a Soldier; which
certainly ought to have been done, had War been in consistent with the precepts
of the new Law. Constable. l. 8. c. 32.
The same Author elsewhere sets down, who anciently were to be admitted to, and
who were to be rejected from Baptism; Let the Soldier, says he, that desires
Baptism be instructed, to abstain from wrong doing, and from oppression, and to
content himself with his pay: If he be willing to obey, let him be admitted.
Tertullian in his Apology, speaking in the person of Christians, says,
Navigamus and nos, vobiscum, and militamus; We both sail and fight together
with you in the same Fleet. A little before he had said, We, though strangers,
do notwithstanding supply all your places and Offices, we fill your Cities,
Islands, Castles, Towns, Councils, yea, and your very Camps. And in the same
book, he tells the Emperor M. Aurelius, That the prayers of his Christian
Soldiers had procured from God, Rain in the time of Drought. And in his book,
De Corona, he commends the Gallantry and Magnanimity of that Soldier, before
all his brethren, that had thrown away the Garland when he had won it;
intimating unto the said Emperor, that he had many other such Christian
Soldiers. Whereunto we may add, That some Soldiers there were that endured
Torments even to death for the Christian Faith; and were therefore worthily
admitted by the Church to the same honor with other Martyrs, amongst whom he
makes mention of three of Paul's Companions, one Cerealis under Decian, Marinus
under the Emperor Valerian, 50 Soldiers under Aurelian, Victor, Maurus, and
Valentinus with diverse others. Cyprian concerning Laurentinus and Ignatius,
both African Soldiers, writes thus, They were once Soldiers fighting under
secular Princes, but they were also true Soldiers of God when by the
confession of their faith in Christ, they vanquished the Devil, and by their
invincible patience under the Cross were ennobled with the Crown of Martyrdom.
Whereby it is plain what esteem the Primitive Christians had of Soldiers, even
before any of their Emperors under whom they served, became Christians. And if
the Christians of those times did express an unwillingness to be spectators at
the execution of Capital punishments; it is not to be wondered at, considering
that those punishments were but too frequently executed upon their fellow
Christians: especially if we add thereunto some grains of allowance, for that
the Roman Laws were far more severe and cruel, than would consist with
Christian Lenity: As sufficiently appears by that one Silanian Decree of the
Senate; the Rigor whereof was somewhat mitigated by the Emperor Adrian, as
Spartianus Spartianus.
records it. Amongst which severe Laws we may place that which forbad the
Testimony of any servant to be taken unless he were tortured. But after that
Constantine the Great began not only to approve of, but to advance
Christianity, even then also were Capital punishments frequently executed. For
even Constantine himself (amongst many others) enacted this Law of sowing up of
Paracides Paracides.
in a sack, which is yet extant in the Code, under the Title of Murderers of
their own Parents or Children; though he was otherwise so remiss in punishing,
that by several Historians, it was imputed unto him as a Blemish. Yet Zonaras
gives this Testimony of him, That he was very merciful to such as reformed
their evil lives: for he would often say, Abscindendum est membrum aegrotans ac
putridum, ne sana contagio corrumpat, non id, quod aut sanatum jam sit, aut
sanescat; That member that is putrid and incurable is to be cut off, lest the
sound should be infected, but not that which is either healed, or healing.
Besides Constantine had a multitude of Christians in his Army, and (as
Historians tell us) had the name of Christ embroydered on his Banners, and from
him it was that the Military Oath was changed into that form extant in
Vigetius, namely, By God, by Christ, and the Holy Ghost, and by the Majesty of
the Emperor, who according to Gods Ordinance is to be beloved, and reverenced
by all mankind. Neither was there at that time any one Bishop (that we read of
among so many that were great sufferers for Religion) that did ever reprove
Constantine for putting Malefactors to death, or for making of War; or that did
upon the account of Religion, deterr Soldiers from their Military duties,
though many of them were severe Disciplinarians, sparing neither Prince nor
people, that were defective in their duties. Such was in the Reign of
Theodosius the Emperor St. Ambrose, Sermon. 7.
who thus declares his opinion concerning War, Non Militare Delictum est, sed
propter praedam Militare, Simply to go to War: is no sin, but to fight for
spoil and plunder is wicked. So likewise in his Offices, That force whereby
either our Country is defended from our enemies by War, or the weak and
innocent defended at home, or our Associates from Pirates and Robbers, is
perfect Justice. This Argument is of so great force, that I shall need no
other. And yet I am not ignorant that sometimes Bishops and other good
Christians have often by their Intercession turned Capital punishments, into
Pecuniary Mulcts, or some lesser punishments not reaching to life: Officium
sacerdotis est intervenire pro reis; It is the duty of a Priest to interceed
for the guilty, says Aug. And there is a right introduced by Custom, That they
that flee to the Altar for Sanctuary, are not to be delivered up until faith be
given for the saving of their lives; and that such as were for misdemeanors
delivered to Prison, should at Easter be freely released; but he that thoroughly
perpends these and such like Customs, shall find, That they proceed rather from
minds full fraught with Christian Charity, which watches all opportunities and
occasions to do good, than from minds quarrelling at the equity of Capital
punishments: whence it was that the privileges of those times and places, yea
and the very intercessions themselves were moderated with some exceptions, as
we may learn by Cassiodore. But here some will object against us the 12th.
Canon of the Council of Nice, Lib. 11. c. 40. 12 Can. of Nicen Council.
which sounds to this sense, If any being by the grace of God called, shall
first express their faith by deserting the War, and afterward returning to
their vomit shall by money or favor, seek to be readmitted into the War; these
after the three years allowed them to hear the word, shall remain among the
Penitentials for ten years. But in this case a strict observation must be
taken, how such persons stand affected, and what fruits of Repentance they
bring forth; for whosoever among them shall show forth their sincere conversion
by fear, by tears, by Patience and good works without dissimulation, these
fulfilling their three years of hearing shall at length communicate in prayers,
and afterward it shall be lawful for the Bishop to deal more tenderly with
them. But if any of them shall bear it but indifferently, and shall think that
their very entrance into the Church is sufficient, these shall fulfill their
whole time. Whereunto I answer, that by the time of 13 years Penance we may
collect, That the sin was neither small nor dubious; for so great a punishment
must needs be inflicted for some Crimes that were both to God abominable, and
to all good men scandalous, which without question was Idolatry. For the words
preceding in the elventh Canon do manifestly referr us to the times of
Licinius, which gives a very great light to the understanding of the sense of
this Canon. This Licinius as Eusebius relates, in his War against Constantine,
Hist. Eccl. ^. 10. c. 8.
first turned all Christians out of their houses, and made sale of their goods;
then drew out all the Christian Soldiers and Officers both out of his Armies
and Cities from the rest: and then commanded, That unless they would of their
own accord sacrifice to Devils, they should all of them be cashiered from their
Offices. (Which fact of his was afterward imitated by Julian,) whereupon many
renounced their commands, and among them, one Victricius; so did 1104 more in
Armenia under Dioclesian, concerning whom, there is honorable mention made in
our Martyrologies: and so in Egypt did Menna, and Hesychius. So also in the
times of Liciuius, did many renounce their Commands, amongst whom was Arsacius,
mentioned among the Confessors, and one Auxentius afterward made Bishop of
Mopsuestia. Now they, that out of tenderness of Conscience had formerly
renounced their Commands, had no possible means to be readmitted under
Licinius, but by a public Abjuration of the Christian Faith: wherefore as they
that were so admitted, committed much the greater sin (being against knowledge
and Consci^^ce) so they deserved a much greater punishment, than those
menti^^ed in the foregoing words of the Canon, namely, that without any danger
either of life or goods had renounced their Christianity. But to interpret this
Canon so generally, as if it comprehended all manner of going to War, is
infinitely against reason. For the same Historian testifies, That many of them
that under Licinius had laid down their Arms, and whilst Licinius Reigned, did
never reassume them, because they would not abjure their faith in Christ, being
by Constantine left to their own choice, were upon their request, readmitted.
There are likewise, that urge against us the Epistle of Pope Leo, where it is
said to be against the Ecclesiastical Canons to return into a Secular War,
after the Act of Repentance. But here we must understand, That from
Penitentiaries as well as from Priests and Monks, there was required a more
strict, and austere course of life, than what was required from other
Christians: That they might be as great examples to others, of Contrition and
Humiliation; as they had been before, of prevarication. For as Leo well
observes, Illicitorum veniam postulantem, oportet etiam multis licitis
abstinere; It is but just that he that begs pardon for his unlawful acts,
should abstain from some things otherwise lawful. So in an Epistle wrote by
some Bishops to King Lewis we read, Quilibet tanto a se licita debet
abscindere, quanto se meminit and illicita perpetrasse; Every man ought so far
to abridge himself of things lawful, by how much he remembers that he has
committed some things unlawful. So in those ancient Customs of the Church which
to gain the greater reverence are commended unto us under the name of the
Apostles Canons, It is decreed that no Bishop, Priest or Deacon should addict
himself to the War, so as to retain the dignity of both Functions, both Civil
and Sacerdotal; But leaving unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, they
should give unto God, the things that are Gods. Whereby it appears that they
who were not thought worthy to be admitted to Ecclesiastical dignities, were
not interdicted those that were Military: with this also, That none who after
Baptism had obtained any Office Civil or Military, could be admitted into the
Clergy. As may also be collected from the several Epistles of Syncius,
Innocentius, and from the Toletan Council. For Clergy men were not chosen out
of any sort of Christians, but out of such as were likely to be exemplary unto
others in austerity of life and manners. Besides upon Military Officers, as
also upon some Civil Magistrates, there lies a perpetual obligation: But such
as put themselves into Holy Orders, ought not to be entangled with any other
care, nor diverted by any other daily Labor. For which cause, it was provided
by the 6th Canon, That no Bishop, Priest or Deacon should take upon them, any
secular employment, nor thrust themselves into any publiclk Office. And by the
6th. Canon of the African Council, Can. Apost. 6.8. Vid Ep. Hier. ad nepot.
They were forbidden to be Sollicitors of other men's affairs, or to defend
other men's causes. But that which gives the greatest reputation to our opinion
is, the judgment of the Church which we have set down in the third Canon of
the first Council of Arles which was held under Constantine: The words sound
thus, Concerning those that cast away their Arms in the time of peace, it
pleases the Synod, that they should be debared from the Communion: that is,
They that lay aside their Arms when there is no persecution that threatens
them, for by the word, Peace, the Primitive Christians understood only a
vacancy from persecution, as appears by Cyprian and others; Nostrae paci, quod
est bellum quam persecutio? As to the peace of the Church, What greater War can
there be than persecution? Tertul.
So St. Cyprian, Cyprian.
when God began to give peace unto his Church; That is, when he freed it from
Persecution. Next we have the example of Julians Soldiers, who were no mean
proficients in the School of Christianity; for they were ready to testify
their faith in Christ by the effusion of their blood, of whom St. Ambrose
speaks thus, The Emperor Julian though an Apostate, yet had many Christians
that fought under his Banner; to whom when command was given to march against
the enemy in defense of their Country, they readily obeyed: But being commanded
to march against the Christians, then they acknowledged no Emperor but the King
of Heaven. Such also were long before them the Thebaean Legion, which in the
Reign of the Emperor Dioclesian was converted to the Christian Faith, by Zabda
the Thirtieth Bishop of Jerusalem, which Legion did afterward leave behind
them a singular pattern to all future Generations of Christian patience and
constancy; whereof I shall have occasion to speak more at large hereafter. It
shall suffice in this place to rehearse that excellent speech they made to the
Emperor, which does both solidly, and summarily represent unto us the Duty of a
Christian Soldier: Against any Foreign Power we freely offer our hands, which
yet we dare not embrew in the blood of Innocents. Our Arms which have been long
practiced in suppressing vice, and in vanquishing Foes, never yet knew how to
oppress the Righteous, or to cut the Throats of our Neighbors and
fellow-Citizens. When first we engaged in War we remember, it was to protect
and not to destroy them: we have hitherto fought for Justice, for Piety, for
the defense of Innocence: For these prizes we have slighted all dangers, we
have fought for the defense of our faith; which should we have broke with God,
How can thou, O Emperor, expect that we should keep with thee? Basil also
gives this Testimony of the Primitive Christians, That their Ancestors never
accounted that execution that was done in War as Murder; but always held them
excused, that fought for the defense of Chastity and of Piety.

CHAP. III. War divided into Public and private. The Supreme Power explained.
I. War divided into Public and Private. II. That by the Law of Nature, even
after Tribunals were erected, all Private War was not unlawful: proved. III. No
nor by the Evangelical Law: The Objections answered. IV. Public War divided
into that which is solemn, and that which is less than solemn. V. Whether a War
made by the Authority of a Magistrate not having Supreme Power, be Public and
when. VI. Wherein the Civil Power consists. VII. What Power is Supreme. VIII.
The opinion that the Supreme Power is ever in the people, refuted, and the
Arguments answered. IX. As also, that the subjection between King and people,
is mutual. X. Cautions for the right understanding of this Question; whereof
the first is to distinguish between the likeness of words, in things that are
unlike. XI. The second is to distinguish between the Right and the manner of
holding that Right. XII. That some Empires are held fully, that is, with a
Power to alienate them. XIII. That others are held not so fully. XIV. That
some, though not Supreme, yet are held fully, that is, with a Power to alienate
them. XV. The said distinction appears by the differences in assigning
Protectors in Kingdoms. XVI. That the Power cease not to be Supreme, by a
promise even of that which is not due by the Laws, of either Natural, or
Divine. XVII. The Sovereign power is sometimes divided into parts subjective
and potential. XVIII. Yet it cannot be well concluded, that the power is not
Supreme, because Kings will not have their Acts to be firm, unless approved of
by some Assembly. XIX. Some other examples not to be drawn hither. XX. True
examples of the Supreme Power divided. XXI. He that is tied up by a League on
terms unequal, may, yet, retain the Supreme Power. XXII. So may he that pays
Tribute. XXIII. So may he that holds it from another in Fief. XXIV. A man's
right may be distinguished from the exercise of that Right, with several
examples.
I. War divided.
THE first and most necessary division of War is this, That some are Public,
and some Private, and some mixed. Public is that which is made by public
Authority; and Private is that when the Authority is so; and mixed when it is in
part Public, and in part Private: and First, Let us treat of that which is
Private, as being most ancient, That by the Law of Nature some Private War may
lawfully be waged is, as I suppose, sufficiently proved by what has been
already said, where it was showed, That to repel force with force, was no ways
repugnant to Natural equity. But the Question will be, Whethersince the
erection of Courts of Justice, it be now lawful to repel force with force?
Whereunto I answer, That although Courts of Judicature were not instituted by
Nature, but by humane Authority: yet does natural reason, and Common equity
instruct us, That it is more agreeable to common Honesty, and to the
conservation of peace and tranquillity amongst men, that all differences should
be publicly scanned, and determined by persons that are unconcerned; rather
than by them, who being blinded with self-love, do oft-times mistake right for
wrong, and will do that only which seems good in their own eyes: Non est
singulis concedendum quod per magistratum public possit fieri, Paulus Juris.
cons.
ne occasio sit majoris tumultus faciendi; That is not to be granted to every
private man, that may be done publicly by a Magistrate, lest for every petty
injury men run into Tumults. And hence it is, Cassiod. l, 4, Var. Ep. 4.
says King Theodorick, That so great a reverence is due to the Law, that no
man ought to revenge himself with his own hand, or by the suggestion of his own
passions. For if all differences may be determined by plan force, wherein would
a calm peace differ from the tumults of War? And therefore the Laws call that
Force, When any man takes that which is his due with his own hands, without the
determination of a Judge.

II. That Tribunals being erected, all war is not unlawful.
Most certain it is, That the License which before Tribunals were established
publicly, was permitted, is since much restrained: And yet in some places the
same License still remains, namely, where Judgment cannot be had against
offenders. For the Law in prohibiting a man to take his own, unless it be
judicially, does tacitly imply that it be in such a place, and at such a time
where an ordinary course of Justice may be had.

Now Judgment cease either for a while only, or for continuance: For a while,
when the Judge cannot be so long waited for without certain danger and damage.
Servius upon these words of Virgil, Injicere manum parcae, The Fates have
snatched him hence, tells us, That the Poet makes use of a Phrase borrowed from
the Law: for it is called Injectio manus, the snatching away of a thing, as it
were by force, when without attending the warrant of Authority, we suddenly
seize upon something that is our due, which is usually done when the Laws do
for a while cease, And sometimes there is a total and continued cessation of
Judgment, and that either by Right or in Fact. By Right, as in places that are
desert and unoccupied, on the Seas and in Islands not inhabited, and in any
other such places wherein are not civil Societies. In Fact, as when Subjects do
not regard the Sentence of the Judge, or the Judge publicly refuses to examine
the case. Now what we said before, namely, that since public Judicatories were
established, all Private Wars are not repugnant to the Law of Nature; is
clearly evinced by the Law given to the Jews, Exodus 22.2.
where God gives this charge by Moses, If a Thief be found breaking up (i. e.
by night) and be smitten that he dye, there shall be no blood shed for him; but
if the Sun be risen upon him, there shall be blood shed for him. Certainly this
Law so accurately distinguishing of the time when the offense was committed,
seems not only to induce an impunity, but serves to explain even the Law of
Nature; being not so much grounded on any one particular Divine Precept, as
indeed upon common equity, which guided other Nations also to do the like.
Solon's Law.
The old Attick Law was this, If any man shall steal in the day time, to above
the value of fifty Drachmaes, let him be tried by eleven men: But if a man
shall steal to the smallest value in the night, he may lawfully be killed. This
ancient Law of Solon doubtless occasioned that of the twelve Tables among the
Romans. Si nox furtum faxit, Vide infra Bo. 2. chapter 12.
si furem aliquis occisit, jure caesus esto; If any man shall kill a Thief
robbing in the night, he shall be held innocent. So by the Laws of all Nations
that as yet we have known, He that by Arms shall defend himself against him
that attempts to take away his life, is accounted guiltless; which so plain a
consent does evidently assure us, that there is nothing in it repugnant to the
Law of Nature.

III. Neither is it repugnant to the Evangelical Law.
But whether this private war be justifiable by the more perfect Law of the
Gospel, is somewhat more doubtful: I dare not but grant that Almighty God, who
has a much greater power over lives than we have, might have imposed upon us
such an unlimited patience, that even privately, in a case of imminent danger,
we ought rather to be killed than to kill. But whether it be his pleasure thus
strictly to tie us up, is the thing in question. There are two places of
Scripture that seem to favor the Affirmative, which we quoted above when we
handled the general question: The former was that in the fifth of Mat. v. 39.
Mat. 5.39.
Resist not him that does thee an injury: And the latter that in the twelfth to
the Romans v. 19. Dearly Beloved, Avenge not your selves; which the Latin
Translation renders, Defend not your selves. But a third may be added, namely
that of Christ to Peter, Mat. 26.52.
Put up thy Sword into the Sheath, for they that take the Sword shall perish by
the Sword. Some there are likewise that urge the example of Christ himself, who
dyed for his enemies, Romans 5.8, 10. Neither are there wanting among the
Ancients, some, who although they do not disallow of public War, yet believed
that all private, even that which is defensive was forbidden. Some places out
of St. Ambrose for war we alleged above, but many more and much clearer, and
more generally known, may be produced out of St. Augustine: In Luc. 10.
But yet the same Ambrose in another place says, That happily therefore Christ
said unto Peter, when he showed him two Swords, It is enough: As if till the
Gospel came it had been lawful, that so there might be, as in the Law the
doctrine of Equity, so in the Gospel the doctrine of Verity. De off. l. 3. c. 3.
And in another place he tells us: That a Christian though assaulted by
Robbers, ought not to strike again; Ne dum salutem defendit, pietatem
contaminet: Lest whilst he seeks to preserve his own safety, Lib. 1. de lib.
Arb. 15.
he sin against piety. And St. Augustine himself speaking of Thieves and
Robbers, says, Legem quidem non reprehendo, qua tales permittit interfici, sed
quomodo istos qui intersiciunt, defendam, non invenio. The Law that adjudgeth
these men to death, Ep. 154. ad Publ. Cap. 43. and 55.
I disallow not; but how to justify the Executioners, I find not. And in
another place, But as to them that give advice, that some men are to be put to
death, lest others by them should be destroyed, I cannot subscribe, unless he
that kills him be either a Soldier or a public Executioner, who does it not by
his own, but by public Authority. And of the same opinion was Basil, as
appears in his second Epistle to Amphilochius, whereunto we may add the last
Canon of the Council of Orleans, C. 13. q. 2.
cited by Gratian. But the opposite opinion, as it is more Catholic, so it
seems to be more agreeable to truth, namely, That Christians are not obliged to
such an height of patience: We are indeed commanded by the Christian Law, to
love our Neighbors as our selves, but not above our selves; so that when we
are both of us involved in the same, or in equal danger, we are no where forbid
to preser our own safety before another; as we have already proved by the
Rules St. Paul gives to Christian Beneficence, and which Cassiodore in the
duties or offices of Friendship likewise confirms. There is, says he, neither
Law nor Reason, Cass. de Anicitia.
that can oblige us to redeem another man's soul with the loss of our own; or to
procure the preservation of his body (setting aside our hopes of eternal
salvation) with the certainty of our own ruin. But if any man should object,
that we are bound to prefer our selves before others in dangers that are equal,
but not in such as are unequal; and therefore I ought rather to give up mine
own life, than to suffer him that invades me to fall into eternal damnation. To
this we answer, That it is probable that he that is assaulted may stand in as
much need of time to repent in; and that the Aggressor may also have space
sufficient before he dye, to do the same. Besides, That danger into which a man
wilfully casts himself, and out of which he may (if he please) redeem himself,
seems not in any Moral Judgment to be much esteemed. Some of the Apostles in
Christ's presence traveled with Swords.
Certain it is, That some of the Apostles even to the last time, and in the
presence and in the very sight of Christ, seemed to travel begirt with Swords;
and so also did other Galilaeans journeying out of their own Country toward
Jerusalem, (the Highways being much infested with Thieves, as Josephus informs
us;) So also did the Essenes, the most harmless of all men, as the same
Historian records it. And hence it came, That when Christ told his Disciples
that the time was at hand, when they should sell their Vests to buy themselves
Swords, Luke 22.36. some of the Apostles readily made answer, Luke 22.36.
That there were in their company two Swords: But at that time there were none
in that company but the Apostles; so that it must needs follow that some of
them did go, even in Christ's own presence, armed with Swords. Besides, what
Christ then said, although in truth it was not a Precept but a Prophecy,
foretelling those many dangers that were then at hand, (as appears by that
opposition which these words have unto those in the 35th verse, which speaks of
the first times which were secure and prosperous times, wherein they needed
neither Money nor Swords, whereas in these later times that were approaching,
they should have need of both) yet was it such, as seems to be taken from that
which was then wont to be done, and which the Apostles might lawfully do. It
was well said of Cicero, Gladios habere certe non liceret si uti illis nullo
pacto liceret; Surely it were utterly unlawful for Christians to have Swords,
if it were altogether unlawful for them to use them.

But as to the other Objection taken from Mat. 5.39. namely, Mat. 5.39. expl.
That we resist not him that does us an injury; It is no more of universal
obligation than that which follows, Give unto every man that asks: Both which
do certainly admit of some exceptions, otherwise we should too far neglect our
selves: Nay that precept of giving to every one that asks, has nothing
subjoyned unto it to restrain it, but is left to the judgment of common equity;
whereas this of non-resistance, Private war in our own defense lawful.
seems to be both explained and restrained by the subsequent instance of a Box
on the Ear; that we may understand that that precept does then oblige us, when
the injury done us is but slight and easily born, such as is a blow on the
Cheek, or somewhat that is like unto it; which rather argues a contempt in the
striker, than infers any considerable damage to him that is struck: For
otherwise it had been much better to have said, Resist not him that injures
thee, no though he should attempt to kill thee. And as to those words of St.
Paul to the Romans, Romans 12.19. expl.
Avenge not your selves, the word (...) there used, does not properly signify
to defend, as the Latin Translation renders it, but to revenge, as appears by
other places where the same word is used: As Luke 18.7, 8. And shall not God
avenge his own Elect? So also, Luke 21.22. These be the days of Vengeance: The
like we find 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. 1 Pet. 2.14. Romans 13.4. 1 Thessalonians. 4. ^.
And this the connection of the words will plainly show, for the words
preceding are these, Requite no man evil for evil: which is the proper
description of Revenge, but not of Defense. Besides, St. Paul strengthens this
advice with that place of Deuteronomy. Vengeance is mine, I will repay it: which must
necessarily be understood of returning injury for injury: For neither can the
Hebrew word there used be in propriety of speech, nor the congruity of the
Sentence in that place possibly understood of a bare Defense.

Now as to that which was said to St. Peter, Put up thy Sword, etc. Put up thy
Sword, expl.
It does indeed prohibit the use of the Sword at that time for revenge, but not
at other times in cases of necessary defense: Neither indeed had Peter at that
time any need of Defense; for Christ had already interceded for his Disciples,
saying, Suffer these to go away, Jo. 18.8, 9. Nor had Christ himself any need
of St. Peter's Sword: For think thou, says he, that I cannot now pray to my
Father, and he shall send me more than ten Legions of Angels? Neither would he
then be defended, for he thus infers, Shall I not drink of the Cup that my
Father has given me? ver. 11. And so in Mat. How then shall the Scriptures be
fulfilled, that thus it must be? Whence we may conclude, That St. Peter was at
that time transported with an eager desire of Revenge, (being very hot and
zealous) and not of Defense only: Whereunto we may add, That Peter did make use
of his Sword against those that came armed against Christ with public
Authority. Now whether any case will justify our resistance of those that are
thus armed, is a peculiar question hereafter to be particularly handled: And
whereas Christ adds these words, They that take the Sword shall perish by the
Sword; it was either Proverbially spoken, to show that blood requires blood,
and consequently that the use of Arms was never without peril; or rather as
Origin, Patience to be preferred before Revenge.
Theophylact, and others interpret the place, it shows that we should not be
too rash in taking the Sword of Vengeance out of Gods hands, who will certainly
in his own time reply blood with blood. And in this sense it is expressly said,
Apoc. 13.10. He that leads into Captivity, shall go into Captivity; He that
kills with the Sword, shall be killed by the Sword; Here is the patience and
faith of the Saints; very consonant whereunto is that of Tertullian, So fit is
God to be trusted with thy patience; that if thou shall commit thy sufferings
unto him, he will be thine Avenger: If thy grief and pain, he will be thy
Physician; If thou trust him with thy Death, he will raise thee up again: O how
great a power has patience, that is able to make God himself to become our
Debtor! Besides, In these words of Christ, there seems to be coucht a Prophecy
of those punishments, which God would take of the blood thirsty Jews by the
Sword of the Romans. But as to the example of Christ's dying for his enemies, it
may be thus answered: Though all Christ's actions upon Earth were full of virtue
and goodness, and such as may be (so far forth as humane frailty will permit)
laudably imitated by us, and that cannot want their reward; yet were they not
all such as were done, either in obedience to any Law; or being done, are
obliging, as a Law unto us. For that Christ dyed for the wicked, and for his
enemies, was not by the Command of any Law, but by a special agreement and
Covenant with the Father, who had promised that for his so doing, He would not
only exalt him in glory, far above all Principalities and Powers in Heaven or
Earth; but that he would build him also a Church, an holy Seed, that should
endure for ever, Esaias 53.10. But this fact of Christ was otherwise singular,
and not to be paralleled, as St. Paul testifies, Romans 5.7. And Christ indeed
bids us to expose our lives to peril, yet not for every man, but only for the
Brethren, that is, for those that profess the same Faith with our selves, 1 Jo.
3.16.

The Objections out of the Fathers answered.
And as to those Sentences that are quoted out of the Fathers, they were partly
good Fatherly Counsels, and Exhortations to an holy life, tending to perfection
rather than any strict precepts to oblige us; and partly their own private
opinions, rather than the doctrine of the whole Church: Can. 45.
For in those ancient Canons called the Apostles, He was to have been
excommunicated, that in a Fray had slain his Adversary at the first blow for
his too much heat or rashness. And St. Augustine himself whom we before quoted
in the defense of the contrary opinion, seems notwithstanding to approve of
this in his 84th question upon Exodus: Christians may bear Arms for Defense,
not for Revenge.
So also does St. Ambrose, O Lord, says he, Why do thou command me to buy a
Sword, if thou forbiddest me to strike? Why do thou bid me to have one, if
having it, I may not use it? Unless perhaps thou would have us to be armed
for defense, but not for revenge.

IV. Solemn War what it is.
Of public Wars some are solemn according to the Law of Nations, and some are
less solemn: That which I here call solemn, is usually and for the most part
called just, in the same sense as a Testament is being opposed to a Codicil; or
as a solemn Marriage between such as are free, compared to a Clandestine
between such as were bond: Not that it was not lawful to bequeath Goods by a
Codicil, or for a Servant to have his married woman with him in the same house;
(for even among Freemen there are some marriages not just, Paul. Sent. l. 2. c.
74. tit. 19. L. si uxor D. ad l. Juliam de Adult.
and some children not just, as Paulus the Lawyer notes, and some liberty not
just, as Seneca observes:) But that a solemn Testament and a solemn Marriage,
has by the Civil Law some Rights and Effects peculiar to themselves, which
others have not; which is very useful to be observed: For that many
misunderstanding the word just, condemn all wars as unrighteous and unlawful,
Sen. de vit. beat. c. 24. S^et. Octav. c. 40.
that are not solemn. Now that a war be solemn according to the Law of Nations,
two things are requisite: First, That it be on both sides made by the Authority
of those who in their respective Cities have the Sovereign power: And next,
That it be waged with such Rites and Formalities as the Law of Nations
requires, whereof we shall discourse in its proper place. And because these are
jointly requisite, therefore the one without the other is not sufficient: That
public war which we call less solemn, Less Solemn.
may be both defective in these rites, and also be made against private men,
and that by the Authory of any Magistrate. And truly if we consider the thing
it self without regard to the Civil Law, every Magistrate as he is entrusted
with the peoples safety, so (in case any violence be offered) is he entrusted
with the exercise of that power and jurisdiction, and consequently has a power
to make war. But because by war the whole City is endangered, therefore it is
provided by the Laws of almost all Nations, That no war be made but by the
Authority of him who has the supreme power in that City. De legibus ult.
Such a Law we find extant in Plato, and by the Roman Laws, whosoever should
presume to make War, list Soldiers, or Muster an Army, He that lusts Soldiers,
or Musters an Army without warrant from his Prince, is a Traitor.
without special warrant from the Prince, was held guilty of Treason: Or as the
Cornelian Law, instituted by L. Cornelius Sylla, says, without warrant from
the people, placing the Sovereign Power in them only. There is an ancient
Constitution extant in the Code of Justinian, made by Valentinianus and Valens,
which runs thus: Let no man presume to raise an Army without special warrant,
or to make War without our knowledge and advice. Pertinent whereunto is that of
St. Augustine, That Natural Order which is best accommodated to the preservation
of humane peace, requires that the Counsel and determination of raising of War,
should remain in the power of Princes. Now as all other Rules, be they never so
general, must admit of equity to be their Interpreter, so must this Law. First
then, It cannot well be doubted, but that it is lawful for him to whom the
Lieutenancy of any City is committed, to reduce into obedience, by his
Officers, some few Rebels; so as it require not any great force to do it, nor
much endangers the City wherein he presides. Or in case the danger threatening
the City be very great, and so imminent that it will not admit of so much time
as to consult the Supreme Magistrate, pure necessity will plead strongly for
exemption. Upon the presumption of this Right it was, that L. Pinarius Governor
of Enna, a Garrison in Sicily, being certainly informed that the Townsmen had
designed to revolt to the Carthaginians; preserved the said Town, by putting to
death the chief Conspirators. Nay even beyond these cases of Necessity, If a
King do neglect to revenge the injuries of his Subjects, Franciscus de Victoria
is so bold as to transfer the right of making War upon the Citizens: But herein
he walks by himself, for by all judicious Writers this opinion is rejected as
dangerous.

V. Whether a War waged by a Magistrate, that has not an Authority from the
Supreme power, be public? And when?
But by what event soever it happens, that the power of making war is
manifestly in inferior Magistrates, whether such a War may be said to be
public, Lawyers agree not: For some affirm it, and some deny it: Surely if by
public we understand nothing else but what is done by the right of a
Magistrate, such Wars are public: And therefore he that in such a case shall
set himself in opposition to the Magistrate, incurs the punishment due unto
those who behave themselves contumaciously against such as are set over them.
But if we take the word Public in the better fence, for that which is solemn,
as without question it is usually taken; then are not such wars public: For to
the legitimating of such a War there must go, as well the judgment of the
Supreme Authority, as other Rites and Ceremonies which the Law of Nations have
made necessary. Neither does it at all stagger me that even in such wars, the
goods of such as make resistance are lawful prize, and given to encourage the
Soldiers; for this does not so peculiarly belong to a solemn war, but that the
same may be done in any other. No Inferior Magistrate can make a Solemn War,
without special warrant.
Besides, It frequently happens that in Empires of large extent, the
Lieutenants of Provinces are empowered by their Prince to begin a War; which if
so, then it is all one as if the Supreme Magistrate had immediately done it:
Quod faciendi jus quis alii dat, ejus ipse auctor censetur; Look, What right
any man gives to another to do, that he himself is reputed the Author of. But
that which admits of a larger dispute is, Whether in case no such power be
given, the subordinate Magistrate by conjecturing at the will of his Prince,
may make War. But this I cannot admit of, for it suffices not to foresee what
the will of the Prince would be, in case he were consulted withal; but we are
to consider, what a Prince would have a Magistrate to do without advising with
him, in case the matter be important, and will admit of time enough for a
serious debate, if a general Law were to be made thereupon. For though the
reason that moves a Princes will, being particularly inspected, may in some
particular fact cease; yet the reason universally taken, cease not, which is,
That all dangers should be timely prevented: which could not possibly be, if
every inferior Magistrate should assume unto himself the Right of making War.
On. Manlius was not therefore unjustly accused by his Lieutenants, Live. 48.
that without order of the people of Rome he had made war against the
Gallo-Graecians. For although there were certain Legions of the Gauls in
Antiochus his Army, yet having concluded a League with Antiochus, whether that
injury were to have been revenged on the Gallo-Graecians, was not in the choice
of Cn. Manlius, but of the people of Rome: Cato's opinion was, That Caesar
should be delivered up to the Germans, for making a War against them without
order: But (as I believe) not so much regarding the equity of the thing, as
indeed to free the City of the fear they had of so potent a Master; for the
Germans had given assistance to the Gauls, being then enemies to the Romans;
and therefore had no reason to complain of any wrong done them, in case that
war with the Romans against the Gauls were just. But Caesar should have been
contented to have beaten the Germans out of Gallia, which was the Province
allotted to him, and not have prosecuted the War into Germany, without first
consulting the people of Rome; especially considering that there was no danger
then imminent: The Germans therefore could have no right to demand Caesar,
considering that they had given the Romans just cause to make War upon them;
but the Romans had just cause to punish Caesar for transgressing his
Commission; as the Carthaginian Ambassador told the Romans plainly, in the very
like case, I do not think it fit for you, says he, to enquire whether Saguntum
were besieged by the public Edict of the City of Carthage, or by the private
Authority of our General; but whether it were done justly or unjustly? Live. l.
31.
For it concerns us only to call our own Subject to an account, by whose order
he did it. The only dispute between us and you is, Whether it might be done
without breach of our League with you or not? Cicero defends the fact both of
Octavius and of Decimus Brutus, who upon their own private judgments made war
upon Anthony: But although it had been as clear as the Sun, that Anthony had
deserved it, yet should they have consulted the Senate and the people of Rome,
before they had begun it. For although it were granted, that the affront given,
did manifestly deserve an hostile invasion; yet ought they to have expected the
judgment of the Senate and People of Rome, whether it had not been more
expedient for the Commonwealth, Though a just cause of War be given, yet
should it be left to the Superiors to judge, whether it were safer at that time
to have dissembled, or to have revenged it. Historians not always to be
approved.
at that time, to have dissembled it, than to have revenged it; to have treated
with him about Articles of Peace, than to have rushed presently into Arms: For
no man ought to be compelled to pursue his own Right, when it cannot be done
without fear of a greater loss. Besides, Suppose that Anthony had been declared
an enemy, yet ought the Senate and People of Rome to have had their free
choice, under whose conduct that War should he carried on. Thus the Rhodians
answered Cassius, demanding Agdes of them according to their League, That they
were ready to send them if the Senate should command them. By this and the like
examples (for many such we shall meet with) we may learn, not to approve of
every thing that Historians (though of never so good fame) seem to commend unto
us: For sometimes they are awed by fear, sometimes biased by affection;
sitting their Stories to their own occasions: wherefore in such cases we should
endeavor to be guided by our own uncorrupted Judgments, and not rashly to make
those Actions our Precedents, which deserve rather to be excused than
applauded; whereby we may be drawn into pernicious errors. Now whereas it has
been said, That a public War cannot justly be undertaken without the Authority
of the Supreme Magistrate; it will be necessary for the better understanding as
well of this Question, and of that of a Solemn War, as of diverse others, to
enquire what that Supreme Power is, and in whom it rests: And the rather,
because the Learned of this Age, do not so well determine it; for whilst each
of them pursues this Argument, rather according to present use and custom, than
according to truth; they have rendered that which, of it self, was not very
easy, much more dark and obscure than it was before.

VI. The Civil Power, what?
That Moral Power whereby Commonwealths are governed, which Thucydides calls
the Civil Power, he describes by three things; where he calls a City, that is
truly so, (...), that is, 1. That it should have a power to make or abolish
Laws. 2. That it should have a power to pass Judgments. And 3. To create
Magistrates, or which the word will likewise bear, to raise Taxes; for every
Commonwealth ought to have a Moral Power in these things. Pol. l. 4.
Aristotle divides the administration of this power into three parts: The first
is, The consultation about things common; as about Peace, War, Leagues to be
either made or broken. The second is, The choice of fit Persons for
Magistrates. And the third is, A power to determine all Controversies.
Dionysius Halicarnassensis makes the Civil Power to consist in these three
things: 1. The Creation of Magistrates, 2. The Legislative Power, And 3. The
power of concluding either Peace or War. And elsewhere he adds this fourth,
namely, A power to determine all differences, by passing definitive Sentences;
and by and by he adds, The care of settling Religion, and the power of calling
Assemblies. But he that would rightly divide this power, so that nothing be
either defective or redundant, may do it thus: He that rules in any
Commonwealth, does it partly by himself, and partly by others. What he does by
himself concerns either Universals or Particulars: what concerns Universals,
are the making of Laws or the abrogating of them; and these are either sacred
(so far forth as concerns the Civil State) or profane. This Aristotle calls
the Art of building up a City: Those singulars about which this power is
conversant, are either things directly Public, or Private, yet such as are in
order to Public. Those that are directly Public, are either Actions, as
Peace, War, Leagues; or Things, as Taxes, Customs, Tributes, and such like:
Wherein also is comprehended that eminent Dominion, that every Commonwealth
has over the Persons and Goods of its own Subjects, so far as concerns the
public safety: And this Art Aristotle terms by its general name, Political,
that is Civil, or the Art of Counselling and well Advising. Or (as I said) they
are things private; namely, things controverted between singular persons, the
determination whereof does much conduce to public peace and safety; and this
Art Aristotle terms judicial. But those things which he dispatcheth by another,
he does either by Magistrates or by Procurators, among whom we are to place
Ambassadors, and Envoyes. And in these things do principally consist the Civil
Power.

VII. Power Supreme what it is?
That we call the Supreme Power, whose Acts are not subject to the power of
another, nor can by any Humane Authority be made void; when, I say, by another,
I exclude him who has this Supreme Power, in whose power it is to change his
own Will; so also I exclude his Successor who has the same right, and so the
same power and no other. This therefore is that which we call the Supreme
Power: In whom it is.
Now let us see in whom it rests, the Subject wherein this Sovereign Power
remains, is either common or proper: As the common Subject wherein Sight rests
is the Body, the proper Subject is the Eye; so of this Supreme Power, the
common Subject is the City or Commonwealth, which, as I said before, is a
perfect company or society of men. Hence then we exclude those who have given
themselves up to the power of another people, as those Nations that were
conquered by the Romans, were no longer called Kingdoms, but Roman Provinces:
For such a people cannot be called a City, in that sense wherein we now take
the word, but the unworthy Members of that City that conquered them, as
Servants are the meanest Members of a Family. Again, It sometimes happens, that
of diverse people there is but one and the same head, and yet every one of these
people do constitute one perfect Society; for it is not so in the Moral, as it
is in the Natural Body, where it is not possible that one Head should govern
two Bodies: For in the Moral, one and the same person diversely considered, may
be the head of diverse and distinct Bodies, whereof this is a most infallible
sign; for whenever the Regal Family of him in whom the Sovereign power over
diverse Nations was united, shall be extinct; the power it self separates, and
each reverts to its own people. So it may fall out, that many Cities may be
linkt in so strait a confederacy, that (as Strabo speaks) they may constitute
but one well governed Body; and yet does each of them still retain the state of
a perfect City; as is well observed both by others, and also by Aristotle in
diverse places; so then the common Subject wherein this power resides, is a City
so understood as I have already expressed. But the proper Subject of this power
is either one person or many, according to the several Laws, Customs, and
Manners of every Nation.

VIII. Not in the people.
And here first we must disclaim their opinion, who affirm the Supreme Power to
be (every where, and without any exception) in the People; and that so fully
that it is in their power, either to enforce or to punish their King, if he
govern amiss: What great mischiefs this opinion, being once fixed in the minds
of the Rabble, already has, and hereafter may introduce, there is no wise man
but may easily discover. This proved.
For confutation of which opinion, we offer these Arguments to the more
ingenious Reader. By all the Laws both of the Hebrews and Romans, it will
appear; Exodus 21.6. Gell. l. 21. c. 7.
that it is lawful for every man that has power over himself, to bind himself
as a Servant, or an Apprentice to whom he pleases. And why then should it not
be as lawful, for any people naturally free, to give themselves up to any one
person or Society to be governed wholly by them, without retaining any part of
their liberty to themselves? Neither will it suffice to say, this is not to be
presumed; for the question is not what in a doubtful case is to be presumed,
but what by Right may be done; and it is as vain and frivolous to urge the
inconveniences that may arise from hence: No form of Government without some
Inconvenience.
For there is no form of Government whatsoever, be it never so well fansied and
framed in the Brain, but upon the exercise of it will produce some
inconveniences and some dangers with it; so that we must, do what we can,
resolve to take the advice of the Comedian, Aut haec cum illis sunt habenda,
aut illa cum his mittenda sunt; either to accept of the inconveniences with the
conveniences, or to renounce both; and so live like Beasts without Government,
which is the greatest inconvenience of all. As there are several kinds of
Trades or Callings for men to live by, some better, some worse, and every man
is permitted to choose which he pleases; so there being several sorts of
Government, it is in the peoples choice which of them they will be governed by:
Neither is the right to Govern to be measured by the excellency of the Form,
whereof diverse men judge diversely, but by the freedom of their own will: What
Cato sometimes said of Laws, may as well be said of Governments; There are none
so perfect, but have some defects. But what the same Cato observed is very
true, It is sufficient to commend any Government, that it produces good
effects in the general, and profits the greater part of mankind. Now, as
Cicero speaks, De leg. 3.
To reckon up all the inconveniences only in any Government, and to pass over
with silence all the conveniences is unjust, because the good that we seek for
we cannot obtain, without the evil which we would avoid. But of these several
kinds of Government our choice being made, and the right thereby transferred to
another, to reassume it at our pleasure upon what pretense soever is unjust.
Many causes there may be for which a people may be induced to renounce, and
yield up unto others all right of Government: As namely, Many reasons there may
be, why a people may yield up themselves to be Governed by another.
when they shall be reduced into so great danger of their Lives, that no other
way can be found whereby to defend themselves; or when they shall be oppressed
with so much want, as that they cannot otherwise sustain themselves. Thus the
Israelites being distressed by the Ammonites, sent for Jephtha, and rather then
be oppressed by a Foreign enemy, they transferred the Government upon him, whom
before they had banished, Judges 11. This also was the condition of the
Campanes, when they surrendered themselves unto the Romans, in this Form; We,
say their Ambassadors, in the name of all the people of Campania, do freely
surrender and give up our selves, our City Capua, our Fields, Temples, together
with all that we have, both divine and humane, into your power, O Conscript
Fathers. And some people we may read of, who have offered themselves to the
Romans upon condition of protection only, and have been rejected: App. Live.
lib. 5. lib. 8.
as the Falisci, and the Samnites. And if so; what then should hinder, but that
some people may in like manner surrender all power and right over themselves to
some one man, by whose wisdom and power, they expect protection? Also it may so
happen, that a man having vast possessions, will not admit of any to inhabit
his Country, but under condition to submit to his Jurisdiction: or, It is
possible, that a man having large Territories, and a multitude of servants, may
manumit them, giving to each a proportion of Land, on condition, that they
yield him their subjection with some kind of Tribute. Precedents of this nature
we want not; Tacitus speaking of the Germans, says, That every servant has
his several house, and peculiar estate, and governs his own Family: his Lord
imposing upon him what proportion of Corn, Cattle and Garments he pleases,
which he readily pays, and as a servant, hitherto, obeys. Add hereunto what
Aristotle observed, That some men are naturally servants; Some people naturally
servile.
that is, so apt for servitude, as if Nature had made them for no other use:
and so are some people too of so servile a disposition, that they know better
how to obey, than how to govern; such were the Cappadocians, who told the
Romans plainly, Strab. lib. 12.
when they offered them Freedom, that they could not live without a King. Just.
l. 38.
So Philostratus in the Life of Apollonius, It is but solly to set at liberty
the Thracians, Mysians and Getes, for they value it not. Besides, there were
not a few people who have been persuaded to admit of Kingly Government by the
example of other Nations, who for many Ages have been observed to live very
happily under it. Seneca speaking of Brutus, says, Though he were in other
matters a gallant man, yet in this he seemed to me to err, Lib. 2. de Benef.
Not to have behaved himself like a Stoic: That he was either affrighted at
the Name of a King, when the best Form of Government is that which is under a
good King: Or hoped for Liberty there, where the rewards due to Empire and
Subjection were so great: Or that he could believe it possible to recall the
Primitive Government, The best Government is under a good King.
unless he could restore the Citizens to their ancient Manners: or that he
could reduce them to an equality of Civil Rights, and put in force their
ancient Laws, when he saw so many thousands of men to fight, Non utrum
servirent sed utri, Not whether they should obey or not, but whom they should
obey. Some Cities, says Livy, were so well pleased with the Government of
Eumenes, that they would not have changed their condition with the Freest
Cities in the world. The like is recorded by Isocrates, That many deserted the
Free Cities of Greece, to live in Salamina a City in Cyprus, under the Mild
Government of Evagoras. Again, such may be the condition of a City, that there
remains no probable hopes of safety, unless they put themselves under the
Dominion of one single person. Such was the state of the City of Rome, which
most wise men thought could not have been preserved, had not Augustus Caesar
assumed to himself the sole Government of the whole Empire. Such cases, I say,
not only may, but do usually happen, as Cicero observes in the second of his
Offices: But (as has been already said) like as private Dominion may by a Just
War be lawfully acquired, so also may Civil Dominion, or the right of Empire,
if it depend not upon some other. Nor would I be thought to speak this of
Monarchical Government only, where that is received; but the same Arguments
will hold for the acquiring of an Oligarchical Government, where the Nobles
have excluded the Commons, and assumed the Government upon themselves. What,
that there is any Commonwealth so popular, wherein some, as the poor, the
stranger, women and youths are not excluded from public Counsels? Even now
there are some people also that have others truckling under them, and who are
no less subject unto them, than they could be unto Kings. Live. lib. 1.
Whence arises that Question in Livy, Are the Collatine people under their own
Jurisdiction, or have they any power that is their own? And the Campanes when
they surrendered themselves unto the Romans, Lib. 7.
are said to be under the Jurisdiction of the Romans. Acarnania as also
Amphilochia are said to be subject to the Aetolians: so are Peraea and Caunus
to the Dominion of the Rhodians. The Emperor Otho gave all the Cities of the
Moors to the Province of Granado in Spain, as Tacitus testifies: So did Philip
the City Pydna to the Olynthians. Some Kings are so absolute, that they are not
subject to the whole body of the people.
Many other examples are here produced, all which were absolutely Null, if it
be granted, That the Right of Government be at the disposal of them that are
governed. Again, some Kings there are, that are not subject to the whole body
of the people, as Histories both Sacred and Profane do testify. If thou shall
say, says God to the Israelites, I will set a King supra me, above me, Deuteronomy.
17.14. Deuteronomy. 17.14.
And unto Samuel says God, Show them the right or manner of the King that
shall reign over them, 1 Samuel 8.4. The like we may read, 1 Samuel 9.16. and 1 Samuel 10 1. still it is super eos; not under my people, but over them: not under
them, to serve them; but over them, to save, defend and deliver them. Thus
David and Solomon are said to be anointed over the people, over the Lords
anointed, and over Israel. And David gives thanks, 2 Samuel 5.2. 1 Kings 4.1.
Psalm. 144.2.
that God had subdued his people under him. Christ also declares as much, where
he says, The Kings of the Gentiles exercise dominion over you, Luke 22.25.

The Power of Kings over Subjects is their own: Horace.

But none can Kings command, but God alone.
The three Forms of Government are by Seneca thus described: Ep. 14.
Sometimes the people are most to be feared; sometimes, if the Government be
such, those most in favor with the Senate; and sometimes, those particular
persons upon whom the whole power of the people, and over the people is
devolved. For such, says Plutarch, have power to govern, not only according to
the Laws, but even the Laws themselves for the public good. Flam.
Thus Otanes in Herodotus describes a King, That he may do even what he will,
without being accountable to any. So does Dion Prusaeensis, That he may so
rule, as not to render an account to any. Pausanias to the Messenians, opposes
Kingly Government to that which is liable to give an account of his Acts to
others. Aristotle affirms, That there are some Kings who are invested with as
much power as elsewhere a whole Nation has over it self, or whatsoever it
has. So, as soon as the Roman Generals began to assume unto themselves Regal
power, Uno minor Jove, That Kings Inferior to God alone, is no less Christian,
than Ethnic Philosophy. For in this, and in nothing more, are Kings like unto
God, that they depend upon none: He whom God has placed in his Throne, is
accountable to none, but unto him who placed him there. He is Solutus Legibus,
above the lash of humane Laws: He judges all, but is judged of none. When
Herod was accused to M. Anthony for the Murder of Aristobulus, Anthony makes
this Apology for him, It was neither Just nor Equitable, to require an account
from Kings for what they do as Kings: For if that were permitted, they could be
no longer Kings. Kingly Power then must needs be the highest, because there
lies no Appeal from him, or against him, but unto God. And as it is subject to
no other power; so it is bounded by no humane Law, as other powers are. It Is
granted, that Moses indeed seems to prescribe Laws unto Kings, and tells them
what they should do, And good Princes will say with the Emperor Theodosius,
Tantum mihi licet, quantum per Leges licet; That only is lawful for me to do,
which the Laws account so. But as Moses teaches us what a King should do, so
Samuel tells us what a King may do: Moses tells us his duty, Samuel his power.
The Law consists of two distinct parts, the one Direct, the other Coercive: the
former points at the rationability of the Law; the latter at the danger we run
into, if we break the Law. Now Laws serve to direct Kings, because they mind
them of their duty: But they have no power to force them to that duty, much
less to Un-King them if they do it not.
the people are said to confer upon them all their power and authority over
themselves, as Theophilus expounds it. Hence is that excellent saying of M.
Antoninus, None but God himself is the Judge of Kings.

Dion Prusaensis speaking of such a King, says, He is free and absolute in
power, both over himself, and over the Laws; what he will, he does; and what he
will not, he does not. Such anciently in Greece was the Kingdom of the
Inachidae at Argis, whom Moses terms the Anakims, Deuteronomy. 2.10. For the Argives
in Aeschylus thus bespeak their King; Our State and City is in thee, The
Lacedaemonians in the Story of the Macchabites, claim to be of Kin to Abraham:
they had two Kings; but Magis Nomine quam Imperio, More in Name than Power, as
Cora, Nepos testifies.

Thou need'st not fear Laws Tyranny;
Sacred as Altar, is thy Throne,
For all are Ruled by thee alone.
Much different from what Theseus himself, though a King, speaks in Euripides,
concerning the Commonwealth of Athens, -- Athens being Free,
Enslaved by any one disdains to be;
The People there are Kings, who Annually
The Government to this, or that decree.


For Theseus, as Plutarch informs us, was not their King, but their General in
War, and the Guardian of their Laws in peace, in other matters he was but equal
with the rest of the Citizens. Hence it comes, That those Kings that are
accountable to the people, Lib. 3. Vit. Cleom. Vit. Ages.
as those after Lycurgus; but especially as the Ephori were to the
Lacedaemonians, are by Polybius, Plutarch and others, said to be Kings in Name
only, but not in Power: which example of the Lacedaemonians, notwithstanding
most of the Grecian Cities followed. Pausanius to the Corinthians, thus
testifies of the Argives, Corinthiacis. Kings in name only, not in power.
That they were so far addicted to parity and liberty, that at length they
reduced the power of their Kings to almost nothing; for to the Sons and
Posterity of Cisus, they left not any thing, but the bare Name and Title of a
Kingdom. And therefore Aristotle denies, that such Kingdoms do constitute any
special Form of Government, allowing them but as parts, either of Optimacy or
Democracy. Nay, even among such people as were not perpetually governed by
Kings, Some have for awhile the power, but not the name.
we may find some footsteps of a Temporary Monarchy, not at all subject unto
the People. M. Livius Solinator in his Censorship disfranchised all the Tribes
but one in Rome for their Ingratitude; thereby showing his power over the whole
body of the people. And such was the power of the Dictators in Rome, from whom
there was no Appeal, no not unto the People; whence it came to pass, that as
Livy informs us, An Edict from the Dictator was as Authoritative as an Oracle
from God: Dictators in Rome temporary Kings. 1. Arg. answered.

The Thing that constitutes, not always greater than the thing constituted.


Neither was there any safety at all but in obedience. For though Kings were
banished, yet was the Regal Power comprehended in the Dictatorship.

The Arguments produced for the contrary opinion, are easily answered: For in
the first place, Whereas they say, the Thing that constitutes is greater than
the Thing constituted; and therefore the people that make the King, must needs
be greater than the King they have made: I answer, That it is true, where the
Authority of the thing constituted does always depend on the will of the
Constitutors; but not where the Authority once freely given, does ever after
fully remain in the person that received it. As for example, A woman being
free, may choose whom she will for her Husband; but having once chosen, the
woman is perpetually bound to obedience: (So he that resolves to put himself as
an Apprentice, has a freedom to choose his own Master; but having chosen,
cannot free himself when he pleases. The wise Answer of Val^ntinian.
) It was well said of Valentinian, who being first chosen Emperor by the Army,
and afterward denying them a request, which seemed unto him unreasonable, told
them, That it was indeed in their power to have chosen, or not to have chosen
him; Theodoret lib. 4. c. 5.
but being chosen, what ye demand is in my power to grant, but not in yours to
exact: It is your duty to obey, and mine, being your Emperor, to consider what
conduces to the General Safety. Neither is it altogether true, what they seem
to take as granted, that all Kings are constituted by the people; as may easily
be proved, as well by some Fathers of Families, who admit of Strangers under
the condition of Subjection, as of some Nations conquered by the Sword.

2. Arg.
Another Argument they draw from that maxim of Philosophers, That all Government
is granted for the benefit of the people, and not of the Governors; and
therefore the end being more noble than the means, they for whose good Rulers
are constituted, are above the Rulers themselves. But neither is this
universally true, That Government is for the good of the persons governed; for
some are for the sole use of the Governors, as that of a Master over his
Servant, is chiefly and principally for the good of the Master; but the good of
the Servant is but extrinsecal and adventitious, as the Physicians gain is but
accidental to the Physic he gives. There are also some Governments that are
for the mutual benefit of both parties, as that of an Husband over his Wife: So
of Empires, some are gained by the Sword, and those doubtless are for the
benefit of the Conqueror; neither is it therefore to be accounted tyrannical,
which word (as now taken) implies somewhat of injustice: And some Empires are
for the mutual good, both of him that governs, as of them that are governed; as
when Jephtha was made King to defend the oppressed Gileadites. Yet
notwithstanding I cannot deny, but that in most Empires, what was long since
said by Hesiod, Herodotus, and Cicero, is very true, That Kings are constituted
to administer Justice to their people. But to infer from thence, that the
people are above their King, will be no good consequence; for the Guardian is
appointed for the good of his Pupil, and yet has he a right and a power over
him. But you will farther say, That in case a Guardian perform not his duty he
may be removed, and why then may not a King? Whereunto I answer, That the case
is not the same, for a Guardian has a power above him, by whom he may be
judged, but so has not a King; for that there may be certain bounds set to all
humane power, it is necessary that we admit of one to be Supreme; and That one
must be either a single Person or an Assembly, unto whom are referred the last
Appeals; whose faults because they have no Superior upon earth, Jer. 25.12.
God himself is said to punish: And if he do not, yet is that very toleration
intended, either as a punishment or as a Trial of the People. It was excellent
advice that Tacitus gives in this case, The extravagancies of Princes are to be
born with patience.
The Luxury and Covetousness of Princes, are to be endured with the self same
necessary patience, as we do storms and tempests at Sea, or drought and
scarcity by Land, or the like natural inconveniences which are not to be
avoided: For vices there will be as long as there be men; but this is our
comfort, that as they are not perpetual, so they are sometimes recompensed with
great advantages. It was well said of M. Aurelius, That if private persons
offended, the Magistrate is to judge; If the Magistrate offend, the Prince: But
of Princes God alone is the proper Judge. Thus does Vitigis (being himself a
King) plead in Cassiodore, in the behalf of Kings, Causa Regiae potestatis
supernis est applicanda Judiciis quandoquidem illa e coelo petita est, and soli
coelo debet innocentiam; The miscarriages of Princes are to be referred to Gods
Tribunal, for receiving their power from Heaven, to Heaven alone they owe their
innocence. And presently after he subjoyns, Neither can we be accountable to
any other, because upon Earth we have no Judge, nor within our Dominions any
Peers. Another notable place we have in Gregory Turonensis, where he (being a
Bishop) thus bespeaks the King of France, If any Subject deal unjustly with us,
it is in thy power, O King, to punish him: But if thou oppress us, who shall
judge thee? We may complain unto thee, and if thou will, thou may hear us;
but if not who, shall condemn thee, but he only that is Justice it self? Among
other opinions of the Essenes, Porphyry commemorates this, Lib. 5.
That Empires fall not to any man by chance, but by the special Providence of
God. Cujus jussu homines nascuntur, hujus jussi reges constituuntur, apti iis
qui in illis temporibus ab ipsis regnantur; Look, says Ireneus, Ireneaus. It
is Gods providence that fits Kings to such times, and to such a people.
by whose providence it is that men are born, by the same it is that Kings are
ordained: Not by chance or peradventure, but by Gods special appointment; as
being fitted for such times, in which, and for such persons, over whom they are
to rule, (according as it does best advance those great designs of Gods Wisdom
and Counsels, whose instruments they are.) Thus is he said to raise up Pharaoh
to manifest his power in him, Exodus 9.16. Romans 9.17. These were the sober
thoughts of the Egyptians themselves, as Diodorus observed, Existimant non sine
divina providentia pervenisse Reges ad summam omnium potestatem; They are
persuaded, that it is not without a divine providence, that Kings ascend to the
highest power. De Civit. Dei lib. 5. c. 21.
So St. Augustine, He that gave the Roman Empire to Augustus, gave it
afterward to that monster of men, Nero: He that settled the same Empire in
Vespasian and his Son Titus, did afterward transfer it on Domitian. That
Constitution of Clement is very pertinent to this purpose, Lib. 7. c. 17.
Regem timebis gnarus a domino electum; Thou shall fear the King, knowing that
his choice is from God: Neither will it avail to say, 1 Kin. 4.16. 2 Kin.
10.17. 2 Samuel 24.17.
that we read of some people who have been punished for the sins of their
Kings; for this happens, not because the people do not restrain and punish
their Kings, but because they tacitly consent to their vices: Or happily without
regard to this, It is one and the same God that sets up one and pulls down
another, and that transfers Crowns and Scepters from one Nation to another
People, and that rules the People by whom he pleases. Now to such as
judicially peruse the Writings of the Prophets, they will appear most evident;
for they do not only foretell the Counsels of God: but the very Kings and
Princes, by whom God intends to bring about his secret purposes, are therein
described, yea and sometimes named, long before they were born, as Josias by
name, 1 Kin. 13.2. Cyrus by name, Es. 45.3. Which plainly argues, that God does
not only foresee what will come to pass, but pre-ordains such and such persons,
by whom he intends to effect his purposes; yea and fits them with habits and
graces accordingly.
he makes use of that supereminent power that he has over the lives of every
of his Creatures, whereby to punish those Kings by taking away their Subjects,
it being the proper punishment of Kings to be thus weakened The proper
punishment of Kings is to be deprived of their Subjects.
.

IX. Mutual Subjection refuted.
Others there are that seem to fancy to themselves mutual subjection, as in
case the King shall govern well, then the whole body of people should obey; but
in case he govern ill, then he ought to be subject unto the people. Now if what
they say do amount to no more than this, That our obedience to Kings binds us
not to do any thing that is manifestly wicked; they say no more than what all
sober men will grant: Yet does not this imply any compulsion or any right of
Empire that is in the people. But in case they had a purpose to divide the
Government with the King (whereof we shall have occasion hereafter to speak
somewhat) they ought to assign bounds and limits to the power of either party,
which may easily be done by making distinction of either Places, Persons, or
Affairs. But the well or ill management, especially of Civil Affairs; being apt
to admit of great debates, are not so sit to distinguish the parts; for great
confusions must necessarily arise, where the right of power is to be judged of
by the pretensions of good or evil acts, some judging of these Acts in favor
to the King, others in savor to the people; which confusion no people, that I
as yet know, were ever so imprudent as to introduce.

X. Cautions in judging of the Supreme Power.
These errors being thus refuted, It remains that we set down some Cautions,
which may guide us to give a right judgment, to whom in every Nation the
Supreme Power belongs; whereof the first is this, That we suffer not our
selves to be deceived by such names as are ambiguous in sense, nor with the
show of outward things. As for example, Although amongst the Latins, a Kingdom
and a Principality are usually opposites; as when Caesar said, the Father of
Vercingetorigis having got the principality of Gallia, Kingdoms and
Principalities promiscuously used.
was slain for his affecting the Kingdom: And when Piso in Tacitus said, that
Germanicus was indeed the Son of a Prince of the Romans, but not of the King of
the Parthians. And when Suetonius said that Caligula wanted but a little of
changing his Principality into a Kingdom; yet we find these Titles of times
promiscuously used. For both the Lacedaemonian Generals, who derived themselves
from Hercules, Lib. 1.
though afterward they were subjected to the Ephori, yet were still called
Kings. And some ancient Kings of Germany there were (as Tacitus relates) who
Reigned, magis suadendi, quam jubendi potestate; more by persuasions, than by
power. And as Livy speaks of King Evander, Lib. 15.
that he governed rather as a prudent Magistrate, than as a King. Thus Solinus
calls Hanno the King of the Carthaginians: And he that wrote the Life of
Hannibal says, That as the Romans chose every year two Consuls, so the
Carthaginians chose two Kings, (meaning their Suffetes or Judges.) Among these
Kings, improperly so called, we may likewise reckon their Sons, whom their
Fathers were pleased to honor with the Title of Kings, though they reserved
unto themselves the Regal Power. Such was that Darius, whom his Father
Artaxerxes commanded to be killed, being first condemned for plotting his
Fathers death, as Plutarch relates the Story. So on the contrary, The Roman
Emperors, Plut. A^tax^ ad fin^m.
after they had openly assumed unto themselves Regal Power, contented
themselves with the Names and titles of Generals or Princes. Nay, the Ensigns
of Regal Power are in some Free Cities usually given to Princes. But now the
assembly of States, that is, of those that represent the whole body of the
people, digested, as Gunther speaks, into three orders; namely, Parliaments why
called.
Prelates, Nobles, and the principal Burgesses of Cities, do in some places
indeed serve to this end only, to be the Kings Greater Council, whereby the
grievances of the people, which are oft-times concealed by his Privy Council,
may come to the Kings knowledge, who have also power to determine them, as it
shall seem good unto them, according to Custom. But in other places they have
power to call into question the Actions of the Prince, and also to prescribe
Laws which shall be binding even to the Prince himself. There are many also
that place the difference between the Supreme and the Lesser Powers, in the
translation of the Empire by Election or Succession: Attributing the Supreme
Power to this latter, but not unto the former. But this holds not universally
true: For Succession assigns not the Form of Government, but the Continuation
of a Form in the same Family. For the right which began in the Election of such
a Family is by Succession continued. Among the Lacedaemonians the Kingdom, even
after the Ephori were constituted, was hereditary: And of such a Kingdom or
Principality it is that Aristotle speaks, where he says, That some pass by the
right of Blood, and some by Election. And such in the time of the Ancient
Heroes were most of the Kingdoms of Greece, I mean successive; as both
Aristotle and Thucydides observed; so does Dionysius Halicarnassensis. Whereas
on the contrary, the Roman Empire, even after all power was taken as well from
the Senate as people, was always transferred by Election.

XI. The Second Caution.
A Second Caution shall be this, It is one thing to enquire concerning the
thing, and another to enquire concerning the manner of holding it, which holds
good not in things Corporeal only, but in things Incorporeal. For as a Field is
a Thing, so also is a Passage, The thing it self distinguished from the manner
of holding it.
an Act, or Way. But these some may have by a full right of propriety, others
by a right usufructuary (as a Farmer has a right to his Farm,) and some others
by a Temporary Right: As the Roman Dictator the Sovereignty but by a Temporary
Right. So Kings, as well those that are first Elected, as also those that
succeed to them in a right line, hold their Kingdoms by an Usufructuary right;
(that is, they hold them as to all the rights and profits, but not to alienate
them.) But others hold their Kingdoms by a full Right of Propriety, as they
that by a just War have conquered them: Or he to whom any people, to prevent
greater mischiefs, have yielded themselves Subjects for protection, so as they
reserve nothing unto themselves. Neither do I agree with those who hold that
the Roman Dictator during his time could not have Supreme Power, because it was
not perpetual. For the Nature of all Moral things are best known by their
operations: Wherefore those powers that have the same effects are to be called
by the same name. But a Dictator during his time, exercises all Rights that a
King does, who holds his Kingdom by a full right. Neither can any Act of his be
made void by any other, as may appear by the Case of Fabius Rutilianus, whom
when the people would have preserved, they could deal with the Dictator by no
other means but by Petition: Whence we may conclude, That he had the same
supreme power. Now the Duration or Continuation of a thing, alters not the
nature of it; yet if question be made concerning the dignity which is usually
called, Majesty: doubtless, he that has it perpetuated unto him has the
greater Majesty, than he that has it for a time limited only; because the
manner of holding it adds much to the Dignity of him that holds it. Now what
has been said of Kings, Protectors have absolute power during their time.
may also be said of such as are, either during the Minority of Kings, or
during their Captivity, or Lunacy, appointed Protectors: For neither are those
subject unto the people, nor is their power revocable before the time come,
appointed by the Laws. But it is otherwise with those who have a Right which is
at any time revocable: Some Kingdoms held during the pl^asure of the people.
Procop. Vand. lib. 1.
As they who reign only during the pleasure of others, such was the Kingdom of
the Vandals in Africa, and of the Goths in Spain, who were as often deposed as
they displeased the people. And every act of theirs might be made void, because
they who gave them that power, gave it under condition of Revocation: And
therefore not having the same effect, they could not be said to have the same
Right.

XII. Some Sovereign powers are held fully, with a right of alienation.
Against what I have before said, That some Kingdoms are held in full right of
propriety, that is, as Patrimonial: There are very learned men that make this
objection, That Men being free, are not to be traffickt away from one to
another, (as things that are bought and sold:) But as the power of a Master is
different from that of a King; so is personal liberty from that which is Civil:
And the freedom of singular persons, from the freedom of States. The Stoics
themselves confess, That there is a kind of servivitude in subjection, Hottom.
Cont. illust. q^ae i. 1. Diog. La^^t. 1 Samuel 22.28. 2 Samuel 10.2. 1 King 9.22.
Live. Lib. 1. Lib. 2.
and the Subjects of Kings are sometimes in Holy Writ called their Servants: As
personal liberty excludes the power of a Master, so also does civil liberty
that of Empire, and all manner of Sovereignty properly so called. Livy thus
opposes them, Before men had tasted the sweetness of liberty, they desired a
King. And again, What a shame is it for the people of Rome, who when they
served under Kings, were never straightened by War, nor besieged by an enemy, Lib.
45.
being now a free people to be besieged by the Hetruscans. And in another
place, The people of Rome live not now under Kingly Government, but in liberty.
And elsewhere he opposes those Nations that were free, unto those that lived
under Kings. So also Seneca the Father, S^as. 1.
We ought not to give our opinions in a Free state, in the same manner as we
did under Kings. Yea, and Cicero, Either we did not well to expel Kings, or we
ought to restore the people to liberty, De leg. 3. Ann. l. 1.
not in words only, but in deeds. After these comes Tacitus, The City of Rome,
says he, was at first governed by Kings, but it was L. Brutus that instituted
Liberty and Consular Authority. And to be short, every where among the Roman
Laws, when they treat of War and recuperatory Judgments, all Foreigners are
distinguished into Kings and Free people. The question then here put, respects
not personal, but civil subjection. In which sense, some Nations are said not
to have power over themselves. Hence is that in Livy, Which Cities, Fields, and
Men were sometimes under the power of the Aetolians. And that also, Are the
people of Collatia a free people? (i. e.) have they any power over themselves?
Nevertheless, to speak properly, when any people are said to be alienated, When
a Kingdom is alienated, it is not the people, but the right of governing them
that is alienated.
it is not the men, but the perpetual right of governing themselves, as they
are a people, that is alienated. As vain and frivolous is that Inference, which
concludes, That because Kings conquer Nations by the blood and sweat of their
Citizens, therefore what is so conquered, ought of right to belong rather to
them than to him: For possible it is, That that King may pay his Army out of
his own private estate; as M. Anthony did in his Bohemian Wars, who when the
Roman Treasury was exhausted, being unwilling to impose any more Taxes upon the
people, brought into Trajans Court, and made sale of all his Vessels of Gold,
Silver, Crystal and Myrrh, together with his own and his wives Robes of Silk
and Gold, and all other their Ornaments and Jewels for the maintenance of the
War. Or he may pay his Army out of the rents and profits of that patrimony
which attends the Principality: And therefore Ferdinando claimed to himself all
that part of the Kingdom of Granada which he had gained, with the rents and
profits he had raised out of Castile, during the time of his Marriage, as
Mariana testifies. Lib. 28. Hist. Hispan.
For although a King have but the mean profits arising out of that Patrimony,
in the same manner as he has the right of governing the people who have
elected him, yet are those profits properly his own. As it is also in the Civil
Law, where though the Inheritance be judged to be restored, yet the profits are
not, because they are perceived, not from the inheritance, but from the thing
it self. Possible therefore it is, that a King may be so possessed of the
Government over some people in his own proper right, that it is in his own
power to alienate it. As it was granted to Baldwin, by those that accompanied
him in his expedition to the Holy Land, That the half of all the Cities,
Provinces, Tributes and Prizes that should be taken in that War, should be his.
Strabo tells us, Lib. 8.
That the Isle Cythara lying against Tenarus did belong to Euryclis, one of the
Lacedaemonian Princes, in his own Right. So we read that Solomon gave Hiram of
Tire twenty Cities, not of those that belonged to the Hebrews: 1 Kings 19.
For Cabul (which was the name imposed on those Cities) was seated without the
Hebrew bounds, Jos. 19.27. But out of those, which the people that were enemies
to the Jews, 1 King. 9.6, 12.
had held till the days of Solomon, and were partly conquered by the King of
Egypt, and given unto Solomon in dowry with his daughter, and partly conquered
by Solomon himself. For that these Cities were not at that time possessed by the
Hebrews is evident from this, 1 Chronicles. 8.14.
That as soon as King Hiram had restored them to Solomon, he then planted in
them a Colony of the Jews. Diod. l. 4.
So we read that Hercules gave the Kingdom of Sparta which he had conquered by
arms, unto Tindareus, on this condition, That if Hercules should have any
children of his own, she should restore it to them: And having conquered the
Epirots, he gave them to Apollo. So we read that Aegimus King of Doris, Serve.
ad 4. Aenead. Apollod.
having called to his assistance Hercules, in his War against the Lapithae,
gave him a part of that Kingdom as his reward. Cychreus King of Salamine,
having no children, left his Kingdom by his Testament unto Teucrus. Amphipolis
was given in a Marriage dowry to Acamantes, the Son of Theseus. And in Homer,
Agamemnon promises to give unto Achilles seven Cities. So King Anaxagoras
freely bestowed two parts of his Kingdom upon Melampus. Vid. Serve. ad 6. Eclog.
So again in Homer, we read that Jobates gave his daughter to Bellerophon, with
a part of his Kingdom in Dowry. And Justin tells us, Lib. 5.
That Darius bequeathed by his Testament his Kingdom to Artaxerxes, but the
Cities whereof he was governor only, to Cyrus. And probable it is, That the
successors of Alexander every one for his part, did succeed him in that full
Right of Governing the Nations, which were either formerly under the Persian
Empire, or which they afterward gained, by the right of their own Conquests.
And therefore it is not to be wondered at, that they claimed unto themselves the
Right of Alienation. So when King Attalus the Son of Eumenes, had by his
Testament made the people of Rome heir to all his goods, they under the name of
goods, possessed themselves of his Kingdom, whereof L. Florus speaks thus, The
Word, Heir, implying an Inheritance, Lib. 2. Epit. Live. 58.
the people of Rome held his Kingdom as a Province, and not as gained by War or
by force of Arms: But by what, was yet more righteous, by a Testamentary Right.
So when afterward Nicomedes (the King of Bithynia dying) made the Romans his
heir. They presently reduced his Kingdom into the form of a Province: Orat. 2.
In Rullum.
Whereof Cicero thus, We have added to our Inheritance the Kingdom of Bithynia.
So that part of Libia, wherein the Cities Berenice, Ptolomais and Cyrene stood,
was by King Appio given by Testament to the same people. And Tacitus makes
mention of some Fields, Epitom. Livy l. 43. Ann. l. 41.
which belonging formerly to King Appio, were by him left together with his
Kingdom, to the people of Rome. Procopius likewise tells us, That King Arsaces
by his Testament divided the Kingdom of Armenia, leaving the greater Armenia to
Arsaces, and the lesser to Tigranes. And hence it was, That King Herod having
obtained from Aug. Caesar a Power to leave his Kingdom to which of his Sons he
pleased, Josephus.
was so often observed to alter his Testament. This custom also was much in use
amongst the Goths and Vandals, Procopius.
in those Kingdoms which they held by Conquest. The same we may observe much
practiced among the Turks: Sultan Aladine bequeathed by his Will many Cities to
Osman: Leunclavius lib. 2.
Bajazet also gave diverse of the Cities of Servia to Stephanus, in favor to
his own Wife, being Sister to Stephanus. Sultan Mahomet bequeathed his Kingdom
by his Testament to Sultan Morat: Idem, lib. 4.
and Mahomet the Turk intended to have divided his Empire, and to have left the
Asian Empire to Mustapha, and the European to Amurat. This also was frequently
used in many other Nations. To rehearse them all would be no less troublesome
to me, than it would be tedious to the Reader. But these may suffice to prove,
That where Kingdoms are held by a full and absolute Right, they may be
alienated: Yet so, That though the Right of Empire may be transferred, yet does
every singular person enjoy his own Liberty.

XIII. Some are held not so fully.
But in those Kingdoms wherein the people have any power, by way of Election or
Confirmation, I confess it cannot be presumed, That it was ever their Mind to
suffer the King to alienate his Kingdom. Wherefore what Crantzius observed, in
Vnguinus, as an Act without any Precedent, That he had by his Testament given
away Norway, we ought not to disapprove: For happily he regarded only the Customs
of the Germans, amongst whom there was no such Right permitted, as to bequeath
Kingdoms. For as Vopis^us in Tacitus says, Empires cannot be bequeathed, as
goods and bondslaves may. Nor can a King, as Salvian observes, by his
Testament, bequeath the people whom he has governed, to the poor. Now whereas
Charles the Great, Lewis the Good, and others afterward among the Vandals and
Hungarians, are said to dispose of Kingdoms by their Testaments: These afforded
rather matter of praise among the people, than argued the force of a true
Alienation: And as to that of Charles, Ado makes special mention, that he
desired his Testament might be confirmed by the Peers of France. The like we
find in Livy, concerning Philip King of Macedon, who endeavoring to expel
Persis out of his Kingdom, and settle Antigonus his own Brothers son in it,
went throughout the Cities of Macedon soliciting the Princes on his behalf.
Neither is it to the purpose to object, That the same Lewis restored the City
of Rome to Pope Paschal: Considering that the French having before received the
Sovereignty over that City from the people, might very well restore it back
again to the same people, in the person of the Pope, being their chief Citizen,
and a Prince of the first order.

XIV. Some power not Supreme, yet fully held.
What we have hitherto admonisht, namely, That we are carefully to distinguish
between the supreme power it self, and the manner of holding, it is so true,
That as many Sovereign Empires are not held by a fast and absolute Right; so
there are many that are not supreme, that are fully and completely held:
whereby it falls out that Marquisates and Earldoms are much more easily either
sold or bequeathed by Testaments, than Kingdoms are.

XV. This appears by the assigning Tutors and Protectors in Kingdoms.
There is also another m^rk whereby this distinction may be seen, namely, in
the Tut^lage or Protection of Ki^^^oms, when Kings and Princes are hindered or
disabled either by some disease, or th^^^gh old age, or the like, from
performing their duty. For where the Kingdom is not P^trimonial, the
Protectorship is theirs to whom the public Laws, or if they are silent, the
people shall consign it. But if the Kingdom be Patrimonial, then to them whom
the Father, or the nearest of kin shall choose. Thus did Ptolomy King of Egypt,
appoint by his Testament the people of Rome as Guardians to his Son, who to
perform that trust sent M. Aemilius Lepidus who was their Chief Priest, Val.
Mar. lib. 6. Tit. 6. c. 1.
and had been twice Consul, unto Alexandria to take care of the Government, and
of the Child's Education: By whose care, not only the Kingdom was preserved, but
the Child in his youth so well disciplined, that it was hard to judge whether
he received more glory by his Fathers great fortunes, or by the Majesty of his
Guardian. So we read that in the Kingdom of Epirus, which first depended on the
suffrages of the people, Tutors were publicly assigned unto their young King
Ariba: The like was done by the Nobility of Macedon to the Posthumous son of
the Great Alexander. But in Asia the Lesser which was gained by the Sword, King
Eumenes dying, appointed his Brother Protector to his young son Attalus. So did
Hiero King of Sicily, by his Testament constitute unto his son Hieronymus what
Tutors he pleased. But whether the King be also in his own private right Lord
of the soil, as the Kings of Egypt were after the times of Joseph; or as the
Kings of the In^ians were, as Diodorus and Strabo testify; or whether they are
not, it makes no diffe^ence. For these are extrinsick to the Empire, and
therefore can neither constitute another kind of Government, nor alter any
thing as to the manner of holding it.

XVI. Sovereignty not lost by any promise made of any things which belong not
to either the Law of God or Nature.
The Third observation shall be this, That an Empire cease not to be supreme,
though he that is to govern do by promise oblige himself either to his Subjects
or to God, unto such things as do properly appertain unto his manner of
Government. I mean not h^re, such things as appertain to the Laws of God,
Nature, or Nations: For unto these every Prince stands obliged, though he
promise not: But I mean though he do promise to confine his own power within
certain Laws and Rules, whereunto nothing can bind him but his oath or promise.
The Emperor Trajan did solemnly imprecate vengeance on his own head and right
hand, in case he knowingly failed in what he had promised. And the Emperor
Adrian swear, that ye would never punish a Senator without a decree of the
Senate. Anastasius bound himself by oath to observe the decrees of the Synod of
Chalcedon. And all the Greek Emperors did likewise oblige themselves to
observe the Canons and Constitutions of the Church. But by none of these Oaths
or Promises does the Power of an Emperor cease to be supreme. This may clearly
be illustrated by comparing the power of a King with that of a Master in his
own Family: For although a Master do promise to observe such orders as he
conceives to be most conducing to the welfare of it; yet does he not thereby
cease to be supreme in his own Family. Nor does a husband cease to have power
over his wife, though he have obliged himself to the contrary by some promises
that he has made to her: yet I must acknowledge that where such Oaths and
Promises are made, the sovereignty is thereby somewhat straitened; whether the
obligation do only restrain the exercise of the Act, as that of Adrian's
abovementioned, or the very power it self. If it restrain the exercise only,
then the act that is done contrary to promise, is s^id to be unjust; because as
we shall show anon, every promise gives a right to him to whom it was made. But
if it restrain the faculty it self, then the Act will be void, for w^nt of a
Right or Faculty to do it. And yet will it not necessarily follow, that he th^^
^^us promises has any power superior to himself; for his Act is not made
void by any power above him, but by very right. Among the Persians no man can
say but that their Kings were supreme and absolute in power, and not liable to
give an account, as Plutarch testifies: Nay their Kings were adored as Gods own
Image; and as Justin tells us, were never changed but by Death. He was a King
indeed, that said to the Nobles of Persia, Ne viderer meo tantummodo usus
consilio, vos contraxi; caeterum, mementote parendum vobis, magis quam
suadendum: Val. Max. lib. 9. c. 5.
Lest I should be thought to govern by mine own counsels only, I have called
you together, but otherwise remember, that it is your duty rather to obey, than
to persuade. And yet did this very King at his Coronation swear not to alter
the Laws of that Kingdom made after such a form, as both Xenophon and Diodorus
testify: and as the Histories of Daniel, and Plutarch in the life of
Themistocles inform us. Chapter 6, 8, 13, 15. Pers. l. 1.
So Josephus tells us, That Vashti could not be reconciled to the King because
the Royal Decree was gone out, which could not be broken. And long after them,
Procopius confirms as much, where we may read a notable example to this
purpose. The very same does Diodorus Siculus relate of the Kings of Aethiopia
and Egypt, who without doubt, as all other Eastern Kings, had in their
respective Kingdoms absolute Power; and yet were they all at their admission
obliged to many things by Oaths or Promises: Which if they performed not,
though whilst they lived, they could not be questioned; yet being dead, their
memories might be accused, and being condemned, their carc^sses might be denied
solemn Funeral. This Apion records, Civiliam 3.
Leges Tyrannorum Corpora insepulta extra fines projici jubent; The Laws, says
he, command the bodies of Tyrants to be cast out of their Territories unburied.
In obedience to the like Law, the Emperor Andronicus deprived his own Father
Michael of Christian Burial, Gregoras l. 6.
because he followed the Faith of the Latin Churches. And such another Law
there seemed to be amongst the Hebrews, who would not permit the dead bodies of
their wicked Kings to be interred among their good Kings. The like we may find
in Josephus concerning the two Jorams, 2 Chr. 24.25. and Chapter 28. 27. Jos. Art.
l. 8. c. 3.5.
the one King of Juda, the other King of Israel. By which excellent temperament
of reverence and justice, they both preserved the Majesty of their Kings
inviolable whilst they lived, and also deterred them from breaking their oaths
and promises by the fear of a dishonorable Interrment being dead. The Kings of
Epirus were wont to make oath, That they would rule according to the Laws: And
their Subjects likewise bound themselves by Oaths to defend both him and the
Kingdom according to the same Laws; as Plutarch informs us in the life of
Pyrrhus. Nay further, suppose a King should accept of his Kingdom upon these
terms, That in case he should falsify his promise, he should lose his Kingdom;
yet were his power supreme only, the manner of holding it would be so much
impaired by such a condition, as would make that Government not much better
than that which is Temporary. It was said by Agatharchides, concerning a King
of the Sabaeans, That he was not liable to give any account of his Actions as
King, and yet if ever he were seen out of his own Palace, he might be stoned to
death justly: Which Strabo also notes out of Artemidorus. So that Land which is
held upon condition of some Trust to be performed, is held as sully during the
performance of that Trust, as that which is held absolutely. But yet it is
possible that it may be lost, and such a conditional Law may be added, not only
in conferring of a Kingdom, but in any other Contract. For some Leagues with
our Neighbor Princes we see entered into under such penalties. As in case a
King being at his admission sworn, shall break his Articles of Agreement, his
Subjects shall not help him, no nor obey him. So Crommerus testifies in his
Treatise concerning the affairs of Poland, Chapter 19, and 21.

XVII. It may sometimes be divided.
The Fourth thing is this, That though the Sovereign Power be but one, and of
it self indivisible, consisting of those parts above mentioned, adding
thereunto Supremacy; that is, the being accountable to none: Yet it may so fall
out, that sometime it may be divided, either by Parts which they call
Potential, or by Parts which they term Subjective. As though the Roman Empire
were but one entire thing, yet it so sell out sometimes that one held the
Eastern, and another the Western part of it, or that three sometimes divided
the whole between them. So also it may fall out, that the People electing a
King may reserve some Acts to themselves, and transfer others to their King to
be held in full Right: Which notwithstanding is not done (as I showed before)
whenever the King shall oblige himself by some promise: But then only when
either the Partition is expressly made; as in the time of the Emperor Probus,
when it was agreed, That the Senate should confirm the Princes Laws, Vid. Gail.
lib. 2. Obs. 157.
and that they might take cognizance of Appeals, appoint Proconsuls, and give
Legates unto the Consuls: Or when the people, being as yet free, shall require
it from him whom they choose to be their King, by way of a permanent Law or
Precept: Or if some such thing be added, whereby it may plainly be understood,
that their King may be compelled or punished if he refuse. To command argues a
superior, but not to compel.
For a Precept or Command is commonly from a Superior, at least in that which
is commanded; but to compel, does not always argue a superior: For naturally
every man has power to compel his Debtor to do him justice, but it is
repugnant to the nature of an Inferior. And therefore from Compulsion there
must naturally follow at least a parity, and consequently a division of the
Sovereign Power. Many Allegations are usually brought against this bipartite
state. But as we have already said, In civilibus nihil est, quod omni ex part
incommodis caret, and Jus, non quod optimum est huic, aut illi, videtur, sed ex
voluntate ejus, unde jus oritur, metiendum est; In Civil matters it is not
possible to provide against all Inconvenience (no one Law can exactly fit every
man's case, no more than any one Shoe can fit every man's Foot) neither is any
thing accounted Right, by seeming so, to this or that person, but by the will
of him who was the Lawmakers. An excellent example of this is brought by Plato
in the third Book of his Laws: For when the Heraclidae had built Argus,
Lacedaemon, and Messena, they obliged their Kings to govern them according to
Laws prescribed them; which whilst they did, the people also were obliged to
continue their Kingdoms unto them and to their posterity, and not to suffer any
man to take them from them: And for the better assurance of this Agreement, not
only the Kings bound themselves by Oath to their Subjects, and the Subjects to
their King; but the Kings bound themselves each to other, and the people of
their respective Kings one to another, and the Kings gave their faith to their
neighboring people, and those people to their neighboring Kings, each King
and people promising their mutual aid and assistance in defense of the
Government established amongst them. Many examples of this kind may be
collected out of the Histories of our Northern Nations, as in Johannes Magnus
his History of Sweden, and in Crantzius of the Swedes, and Pontanus of the
Danes.

XVIII. Which is ill collected from this, That some Princes will have their
Acts confirmed by the Senate.
True it is, that some Kings will not permit that some Acts of theirs shall be
of force, until they are confirmed by the Senate or some other Commissioners.
Yet he that shall hence infer, That there is a Partition of power, will be
mistaken: For whatsoever Acts are thus rescinded, ought to be understood as
though they were made void by the King himself, who by this means provides,
that nothing fraudulently gained from him shall pass to his disadvantage. This
was the scope of that Rescript sent by Antiochus the Third to his Magistrates,
That in case he commanded them to do any thing contrary to Law, they should not
obey him: And of that of Constantine to his, That Widows and Orphans should not
be compelled to come for Judgment to the Court of the Emperor, although the
Emperors own Letters should be produced for it. This is very like unto those
Testaments unto which this clause is added, That no Testament hereafter to be
made shall be of force: For such a Clause would have it believed, that the
latter Testament proceeded not from the will of the Testator. But as that
clause in the Will, so the first Act of a Prince may by any after-Act of his,
or by any special Indication of his later Will, be easily rescinded.

XIX. Some other examples hither ill drawn.
Neither am I at all swayed by the authority of Polybius, who would fain have
the Romans to be a mixed Commonwealth; which if we regard not so much the Acts
themselves, as the Power whereby they were done, was doubtless at that time,
merely popular: For as well the Authority of the Senate which he refers to
Optimacy, as that of the Consuls, which he refers to Monarchy, were both of
them subject to the power of the people. Now the self same may be said, in
answer to all other the Opinions of those that write of Politics, who happily
think it more agreeable to their purpose, to gaze on the extern face and daily
administration of the Sovereignty, than unto the very Right of it, it self.

XX. True examples.
Much more pertinent to the matter, is that of Aristotle, who says, That
between a full and absolute Monarchy, and that like unto the Laconian, being
but a mere Principality, there are some of a Mixed kind; whereof we have an
example, as I conceive, in the Is^aelitish Kings, who doubtless in most things
governed by a full power. Mixed Governments.
For such a King the people required, as their Neighbor Nations had:
Supposing, as Josephus testifies, That if they were governed like unto their
neighbors, they should suffer no Inconveniences: not considering, that all
the Eastern Nations, except themselves, were under a Slavish Government. So
Atossa in Aeschylus, speaking to the Persians of their King, says, That he is
not accountable to the City for what he did. That of Virgil is well known, --
Nor Egypt, nor vast Lydia,
Nor Medes, nor Parthians, thus their Kings obey.


Livy gives this Character of the Syrians, and all the Asian people, That they
were a kind of men born to be Slaves. Not much unlike is that of Apollonius in
Philostratus, The Assyrians and Medes do adore their Kings: nor that of
Aristotle, Pol. l. 3. c. 14.
All the Asians do patiently submit to Monarchy. And to the same sense is that
Civilis Batavus to the Gauls in Tacitus, The Syrians and Asians might well
serve, Hist. l. 4.
because all the Oriental people were accustomed to be governed by Absolute
Monarchs. Not but that there were even at that time Kings also both in Germany
and France; but as the same Tacitus there observes, All the Asian Kings
Absolute.
They were such as governed for the most part in a Precarious way: or as I said
before, more by a Persuasive, than by a Coercive Power. We observed before,
that the whole body of the people of Israel was under their King. And Samuel
describing the Government of Kings sufficiently proves, That against the
Injuries done by them, there remained no power at all in the people, either to
resist, or revenge. Which the Ancients did rightly gather from those words of
King David, Tibi soli peccavi, Unto thee only have I sinned; because as St.
Hierom upon that place glosseth, David being a King, stood in fear of none but
God, as having no other Judge but him: So likewise St. Ambrose, David was a
King, and so subject to no Laws; For Kings are Free from those shackles,
wherewith their Subjects crimes do entangle them: They Fear no punishments,
being secured by the power of the Empire. To Man therefore he sinned not,
because to him, he was not accountable for his Actions. Apposite to this, is
that of Vitiges in Cassiodore, Causa regiae potestatis supernis est applicanda
judiciis, quandoquidem illa coelo petita est, ita soli coelo debet Innocentiam:
The cause of a King is to be referred to Gods Tribunal; for from whence he
derives his power, to him only he owes his Innocence. And in cases of such
oppressions, God himself prescribes the only Remedy that the people can have
against their Kings, namely, Prayers and Tears; And ye shall cry out in that
day, because of the King whom ye have chosen, 1 Samuel 8.18. (He does not
encourage them to Rebel, nor does he prescribe any Legal way of proceeding
against them; only they may cry unto the Lord, and if he heard them not, they
must suffer with patience. Nor does Samuel insinuate this to the Jews as if it
were nudum factum: that is, That Kings abusing their power would do so; but as
if it were Jus Regium, a Right proper to Kingly Government to do so.) The Jews
themselves grant, that if their Kings did transgress those Laws which Moses
prescribed unto them, they were to be beaten with Rods. But this was no
reproach unto them, neither was it by compulsion, but by a voluntary
susception, as a sign of their penitence: Nor was it done by any public
Officer; but as he imposed it upon himself freely, so he chose whom he pleased
to do it; and prescribed both the manner and measure of his own punishment. But
from all Coercive punishment their Kings were so free, that even that Law of
Excalciation, Deuteronomy. 25.9. because it was not without some reproach, was not in
force against them. Yet notwithstanding all this, there were some Cases whereof
their Kings had no Right at all to judge, but they were reserved to the Great
Sanhedrim, or Council of the 70. Elders; which being Instituted by Moses at
Gods special Command, continued by a perpetual supply of Election, until the
days of Herod: For which cause, Deuteronomy. 1.17. P^al. 82.1, 6.
they are by Moses and David frequently called Gods, and their Judgment, Gods
Judgment. And those Judges are likewise said, to judge not for man, but for
God, 2 Chronicles. 19.6, 8. Nay, there is a plain distinction made between the
things of God, and the things of the King, 2 Chronicles. 19.11. where by the matters
of the Lord (as the most Learned among the Jews do interpret it) are meant, the
Administering of Judgment according to the Laws of God. That the Kings of Judah
did by themselves sometimes inflict Capital punishments, I cannot deny: wherein
Maimonides prefers those Kings before the Kings of Israel: which is
sufficiently cleared by many examples both in Holy Writ, and also in other
Hebrew Authors. But yet the Cognizance of some Causes was not permitted unto
them, as that of the Tribes, that of the High Priests, that of a Prophet. For
it cannot be (says our Savior) that a Prophet perish out of Jerusalem, Luke
13.33. And this is evident by the story of Jeremy, whom when the Princes
demanded to death, the King answered them, Behold he is in your power; for
against you, the King can do nothing, Jer. 38.5. Jer. 38.5.
Yea, and in another place, he that was condemned by the Sanhedrim, could not
be released by the King himself. And therefore Hircanus, Jos. Ant. l. 14. c.
17. In Criminal Cases the King of Macedon's power availed nothing. Curt. lib.
4. Curtius lib. 6.
when he saw he could not hinder the Sanhedrim from passing Sentence against
Herod, advised him by Flight to secure himself. In Macedonia, they that der^ved
their Pedigree from Caranus, as Calisthenes in Arianus reports, obtained the
Government not by Force, but by Law. Now the Macedonians though they were
accustomed to Regal Government, yet had a greater smack of liberty than other
Nations. For it was not in the power of the King himself to take away the life
of any Citizen. It was the Ancient custom of the Macedonians in criminal
matters to be judged by the Army; but in times of peace by the People: The
Kings power availed nothing farther than his Authority reached. There is in
another place of the same Author another sign of the same mixture mentioned,
namely this, The Macedonians, Curt. lib. 8.
says he, ordained that according to the custom of their Nation, Their King
should never hunt on Foot, but in the company of some of his select Friends or
Princes. The like does Tacitus write of the Gothones, That they were under a
stricter Government than others of the German Nation, yet not altogether
without liberty. For whereas he had before described a Principality thus, That
it governed rather by a Persuasive than Coercive Power. He now describes a
Kingdom in these words, When, says he, One person rules without any limitation
or exception; and that not by entreaty, but by absolute command. Eustathius
upon the Sixth of Homer's Odysses, describing the Commonwealth of Corcyra,
says, That it was a kind of mixed Government, having something of Kingly, and
something of an Aristocratical Government. Laonicus Chalcocondylas makes
mention of the like Government in Hungary and in England, in Arragon and in
Navarr, where the Magistrates are not created by the King; nor are any
Garrisons imposed on them against their will, nor any thing commanded them by
their King contrary to their Laws and Customs. Not much different was the
Government of the Romans in the time of their Kings: For although almost all
public affairs were then transacted by the Regal Power. Romulus, says
Tacitus, governed us as he pleased. And it is plain, That in the Infancy of
their City, all power was in the King, says Pomponius; yet even at this very
time, were some few fragments of that power reserved in the people, if we may
give credit to Dionysius Halicarnassensis: but if we had rather believe the
Romans, in some Cases, Appeals might be made from the King unto the people, Ep.
100
as Seneca collects out of Cicero's Books de Rep. as also out of some
Pontifical Books, and Fenestella. By and by after Servius Tullius being
advanced to the Empire, not so much by Right, as by popular Favor, did much
more impair the Majesty of the Kingdom. For to gratify the people for their
kindness, he ordained some Laws, Ta^it. l. 3.
whereunto the Kings themselves stood obliged. No marvel then, if Livy puts
this only difference between the power of the first Consuls and of Kings, that
it was but Annual. The like mixture of Popular and Aristocratical Power there
was in Rome i^ the Vacancy of their Kings, Vi^. Camilli.
and in the times of their first Consuls. For in some things, and those of
moment, what ever the people commanded was established as a Law, if the Fathers
were made the Authors. lib. 5.
But as Plutarch observes, The People had no Right, either to make a Law, or to
command any other thing, unless proposed by the Authority of the Senate. The
like Mixture of Government Chalcocondylas notes to have been in the
Commonwealth of Genoua in his time. But afterward in Rome, the power of the
people increasing, though the Fathers began and proposed, as anciently they
were wont to do; yet as Livy and Dionysius observe, the people would decree
what they pleased. But yet even after this, there remained some of this
Mixture, whilst (as the same Livy speaks) the Sovereign Power was in the
Patricians, that is, the Senate; and the Auxiliary power in the Tribunes, i. e.
the Plebeians, who had a Right to either forbid or intercede when they pleased.
And of this mixed Government, between Democracy and Aristocracy, Isocrates would
have the Commonwealth of Athens to consist in the time of Solon. Now these
things being premised, let us examine some doubtful Questions which do
frequently arise about this matter.

XXI. A Confederate on unequal terms may have the Supreme Power.
The first thing that falls under dispute, is this, Whether that Nation can be
said to have Supreme Power that is in League with another Nation upon terms
unequal? Where, by Unequal, I do not mean, where the Confederate Nations are of
Unequal power; as when the City Thebes made a League with the Persian Monarch
in the time of Pelopidas, or the Romans with the Massilians, and afterward
with Massanissa. Neither do I mean such a League, as implies some one transient
Act that seems dishonorable; as when an Enemy paying the Charges of the War,
or performing some such thing, is reconciled, and becomes a Confederate. But
where by the express Articles of the League there is some permanent and lasting
Prelation given from one to the other. As when one Nation is bound to maintain
the honor of another; as in that League between the Aetolians and the Romans,
whereby the Aetolians were bound to use their endeavors, to preserve as well
the dignity, as the safety of the Roman Empire: which dignity is sometimes
called the Majesty, and by Tacitus, the Reverence of the Empire; which he thus
expresses: Though they are separate from us in place, and live within their
own bounds, Li^. 4.
yet in their minds and understanding they act with us. So likewise Florus, As
for the rest of the Nations though free, yet perceiving the vastness of their
Empire, they did highly reverence the people of Rome, being Conquerors of so
many Nations. Whereunto we may also refer some Rights due to them that
undertake the Patronage and defense of others. And those Rights, the Mother
Cities have over smaller Cities and Colonies amongst the Graecians. For such
Colonies, says Thucydides, enjoy the same Right of Liberty as their Mother
Cities do: Colonies.
But yet they owe a Reverence to their Mother City, and ought to send her
presents, as an acknowledgement of the honor they have for her. Livy
concerning that ancient League of the Romans, who had received all the Rights
of Alba, and of that which the Latins derived from Alba, says, In that League
the Roman State was superior. Andronious Rhodius following Aristotle, did well
observe, that in contracting amity between Nations of equal power, Nic. 9.18.
The weaker should give the greater honor, and the stronger the greater
succors.
It was but reasoble, that the weaker should give the greater honor, and the
stronger afford the greater succors. Proculus in his Answer to this Question
we very well know, namely, That that is a Free Nation, which is not subject to
the power of another, although it be comprehended in the League, that that
Nation shall faithfully uphold the Majesty of the other. If therefore a Nation
bound by such a Covenant, do yet remain free, and not subject to the power of
another. It follows, that that Nation does yet retain its Sovereignty; the like
may be said of a King. For of a free-people, and of a King that is truly so,
there is the same reason. Proculus adds further, that such a Clause is added in
the League, to declare, that one Nation is superior to another; and not to
declare that the other is not free. By superior, we understand not in power,
(for he had said before, that a free Nation should not be subject to the power
of another) but in Authority and Dignity: which the words following by a very
fit Simile do clearly illustrate; Some Nations are equal in liberty, though not
in dignity with others.
For as we know our Clients to be free, though neither in Dignity, nor in
Authority, nor in all Right our equals: so they that are obliged faithfully to
uphold our Majesty, are notwithstanding to be understood our equals in liberty.
Clients are free, though under the defense of their Patrons or Advocates; so is
an Inferior people free, though in League with a people superior unto them in
dignity. For they may be under their protection, though not under their
jurisdiction, as Sylla speaks in Appian. An example we have in the Dilimnites,
Ap. Mithridat.
who as Agathias tells us, were (...), Free to live by their own Law^, though
they served the Persian in his Wars. This was the design of the Empress Irene,
so to divide the Empire among the Sons of her Husband, that the younger Sons
should be Inferior to the Eldest in dignity; but otherwise they should be
Independent and Absolute in Power. De Off. l. 2.
Cicero speaking of that Golden Age of the Roman Empire, says, Patrocinium
Sociorum penes eos esse, non Imperium; The Romans gave protection to their
Friends and Allies, but claimed no dominion over them. Live. l. 26.
With whom agrees that of Scipio Africanus, The People of Rome had rather
oblige their Neighbors unto them by Courtesies, than by Fear; and to win
foreign Nations unto them by Faith and Friendship, than to subject them to an
ungrateful bondage. And what Strabo reports of the Lacedaemonians, after the
arrival of the Romans in Greece, saying, They enjoyed their own Freedom,
contributing nothing unto the Romans, but the mutual offices of love and
friendship. As private Protection takes not away personal Liberty, Protection.
so neither does public take away Civil, which without Sovereign Power cannot
consist. And therefore Livy wisely opposes to be under protection unto, to be
under Jurisdiction. Augustus Caesar (as Josephus relates) threatened Syllaeus
King of Arabia, that if he abstained not from injuring his neighbors, he would
quickly make him, of a Friend, a Subject; which was the condition of the Kings
of Armenia, who being under the Roman ^urisdiction, retained only the Title of
Kings, but not the Power: As did also the Kings of Cyprus and some others,
though in name Kings, yet were they Subjects to the Persian Monarchy, as
Diodorus calls them. But here it may be objected what Proculus adds, Lib. 16.
Four kinds of differences usually arise between Confederates.
But some who belong to our Confederate Cities, are with us found guilty, whom
being condemned we may punish. But that we may understand these words, we must
know, that there are four kinds of differences that usually arise among
Confederates. As in the first place, If the Subjects of the King or State under
protection, are said to have done any thing against the League: Secondly, If
the King or States themselves are accused: Thirdly, If the Associates that are
under the protection of the same King, do quarrel one with another: Lastly, If
Subjects complain of Injuries done them, by those under whose Jurisdiction they
are. If the Controversies be of the first kind, the King or State are obliged
either to punish, or to deliver up the Offender to the person injured. And this
ought to be done, not only between unequal Confederates, but between equals,
even between such as are not linked together by any League, as shall be showed
anon. Nay farther, He is obliged to endeavor that satisfaction be made to the
injured person, which in Rome was called the Recuperators office: For the Law
(says Aelius Gallus in Festus) does determine between King and People, Nations
and Foreign Cities, how things by the Recuperator may be restored, and how they
may be received, and how private men's cases may be prosecuted in each Nation.
For one of the Confederates can have no right directly to apprehend or to
punish the Subjects of the other Confederate; and therefore Decius Magius, a
Campane, being apprehended and bound by Hannibal, and so conveyed to Cyrene,
and from thence sent to Alexandria; pleaded, that he was bound by Hannibal,
contrary to the Articles of the League, whereupon he was presently set at
liberty. As to the second kind of Controversies, One of the Kings or People
Confederate has power to compel the other to keep the Articles of the League,
and in case of refusal to punish him; but neither is this peculiar to a League
that is unequal, but may be done in one that is equal: For it is enough to
justify any man for seeking a revenge against him that has wronged him, that
he is not subject unto him, as shall be proved anon; wherefore this is also in
force even among such people as are not confederated. The third sort of
Controversies are amongst such as are equally confederated, and these are
usually referred to a Diet or Convention of the States associated, yet not
therein concerned: For so the Greeks, the Latins, and the Germans were wont to
do, or otherwise referred to Arbiters, or even to the Prince of the League as
to a common Arbiter. So in an unequal League it is usually agreed, that the
things in controversy shall be discust in that Nation which is superior in the
League, wherefore neither does this argue a superiority in power; for even
Kings themselves refuse not to have their own causes sometimes tried before
such Judges, as even themselves have constituted. But of the last kind of
Controversies, Associates have no right at all to judge; and therefore when
Herod did vehemently accuse his two Sons before Augustus Caesar for conspiring
against his life, they took it as a favor he had done them: Jos. Ant. lib. 16.
c. 7, 8.
Poteras de nobis Supplicium sumere tuo jure, tum qua pater, turn qua Rex; Thou
might have inflicted what punishment upon us thou would by thine own
Right, both as a Father and as a King. And when Hannibal was accused at Rome by
some Carthaginians, for stirring up Sedition amongst the Citizens, Val. Max.
lib. 4. c. 1. Pol. lib. 1. c. 9.
Scipio told the Senate, That it did not become them to intermeddle with that
which properly belonged to the City of Carthage. And herein it is that
Aristotle puts a difference between a Society and a City, for it concerns
confederate Societies to take care, that no injuries be committed against them;
but not that the Citizens of any one of the Confederates do not injure one
another. But here again it may be objected, That in unequal Leagues, he that is
superior in the League is sometimes said to command, and he that is inferior to
obey; but neither should this move us: for this is when the things in
controversy concern either the common good of both parties confederate, or the
private profit of him that is superior in that League. As to the things of
common concernment, Dan. 11.22.
the Assembly not sitting, He that was the Prince of the League (though it were
an equal League) did usually command his Associates, as Agamemnon in the Trojan
Expedition, did the Grecian Princes, and as afterward the Lacedaemonians did
the Graecians, and after them the Athenians. Thucydides in that Oration made by
the Corinthians, says, It very well becomes the Prince of the League, in
private matters to deal equally; but in public to be more than ordinarily
sollicitous. Isocrates commending that excellent conduct of the ancient
Athenians, in the managing of their social Wars, says, That they took care for
all, without intrenching upon the liberty of any. And in another place he
allows them, to Command, but not to Domineer. It is well worth our observation,
that what the Latins express by the word Imperare, to command, the Greeks more
modestly express by the word (...), to dispose or set in order. The Athenians,
to whom the conduct of the War against the Persians was committed, (...), says
Thucydides, did order which City should contribute Money, and which Ships: And
they that were sent from Rome into Greece, Plinii ep. lib. 8. c. 24.
are said to be sent to give orders for the well governing of the free Cities.
Now if he that is the principal party in an equal League do thus, it is not to
be wondered at, if he that in an unequal League is superior in honor and
dignity, do the same: For the word Imperium, that is, Empire, taken in this
sense as it signifies only an Ordinance and Appointment, equally conducing to
the common good, does not at all imply the loss of the others liberty. Livy l.
37.
The Rhodians, in their Oration to the Roman Senate, thus bespake them, The
Gracians were wont to defend their Empire with their own forces: But their
Empire where now it is, they wish that it may remain for ever: They are now
well contented to defend their liberties with your Arms, Lib. 15.
being no longer able to do it with their own. So Diodorus tells us, that after
the taking of the Cadmean Fort by the Thebans, many of the Grecian Cities met
and agreed among themselves, That every City in Greece should enjoy its own
freedom, yet the conduct of the War should be given to the Athenians. And yet
Dion Prusaeensis speaking of those very Athenians, in the times of Philip of
Macedon, says, That having at that time lost their command in the War, they
retained only their own liberty. So those people which Caesar reckoned to be
under the command of the Suevians, he by and by calls his Confederates. But in
such things as appertain to his own particular profit, the request of him that
is Superior in the League, are usually taken for Commands; not that they are so
indeed, but that they are in respect of their usual effects, equivalent to
Commands; for he needs no force, who knows himself to be feared. Armatae sunt
Regum praeces; The Requests of Kings have the same power as Commands. And a
denial how just soever, shall be by them as ill digested as an injury. It was
never heard of, says Livy, before Caius Posthumous, that any Consul was either
chargeable or burdensome to our Associates in any thing; and therefore were our
Magistrates supplied abundantly with Mules, Pavilions, and all other
Instruments of War, that so they might not require them from our Associates. In
the mean time, it sometimes so falls out, The weaker Associates sometimes
reduced unto subjection.
That if he that is superior in the League, be much more potent than the rest
of the Confederates, he may by degrees at length usurp the Sovereignty over
them; especially if the League be perpetual, and that he has thereby a right
to place Garrisons in any of their strong Towns, as the Athenians sometimes
did, when they suffered themselves to be appealed unto from their Associates,
Hal. l. 6. Livy l. 34.
which by the Lacedaemonians was never done: wherefore Isocrates equals the
Government that the Athenians exercised in those days over their Associates,
with that of Kings and absolute Princes. So the Latins in Livy complain
against the Romans, that under the specious Title of being Associates in War,
they were reduced into a mere Subjection; which Society in Arms, Plutarch in
the Life of Aratus, calls a Gentle Slavery. Hist. 4.
So Festus Rufus in Tacitus, concerning the Rhodians, At first they lived in
great freedom, till afterward the Romans gently urging them, they were brought
by little and little into an habit of Subjection. So the Aetolians likewise
complained, That they had nothing left them but the bare shadow and empty name
of Liberty. So likewise afterward the Achaians complain, That they had indeed
a League in appearance, but were at length brought into a Precarious Servitude.
The like complaint Civilis Batavus in Tacitus, makes against the same Romans,
That they used them not as formerly, like Companions, but usurped and insulted
over them as mere Slaves. And in another place, they falsely called that peace,
which was indeed but a miserable Slavery. Thus Eumenes also in Livy, concerning
the Confederates of the Rhodians, that they were their Associates in Name, but
their Vassals indeed. Thus also Magnetes in Polybius says, That Demetrias was
in show free, but in effect all things were done there at the will of the
Romans. The Thessalians likewise were in appearance free, but indeed under the
dominion of the Macedonians, as the same Polybius testifies. Now when these
things are done, and so done as by patient endurance they may by mistake be
said to be rightly done, (whereof we shall elsewhere discourse more fully;)
then either of Companions they are made Subjects, or certainly there must be a
partition of the Supremacy, which (as I have said before) may sometimes happen.

XXII. Of such as pay Tribute.
They that pay any thing either in satisfaction of wrongs past, or to be
protected against injuries to come, are by Thucydides called tributary
Associates, such were the Kings of the Hebrews, and of their Neighbor Nations
after the time of M. Anthony, free; though under a certain tribute: Nor do I
see any cause to doubt but that they that Reigned so, had Supreme Power within
their respective Dominions, and had a full right to punish delinquents,
according to their own Laws. Thus M. Anthony defends King Herod, being accused
for murdering Aristobulus, That it was neither just nor right to call a King
to an account for what he does as a King; for if so, he could not be a King:
For common equity requires that they that gave him that honor, should permit
him the free use of that Sovereign Power, which was appendent unto it. So
Chrysostom, When the Empire of the Jews began to decline, and they made
Tributaries to the Romans; They neither enjoyed that full liberty which they
did formerly; nor were they in that pure subjection as now they are: But were
indeed honored with the Title of Associates, yet they paid Tribute to their
Kings, and received Governors from them. Moreover, they had the free use of
their own Laws, so that if any of their Countrymen offended, they themselves
punished them by their own Laws. And yet I deny not but even this very
acknowledgment of their own weakness and insufficiency, does somewhat abate and
detract from the Majesty of their Empire.

XXIII. Of such as hold their dominions in Feud.
But that which seems to some to be more difficultly to be answered, is, when
one Prince holds his Dominion from another, as being Lord of the Fief; which
yet may be sufficiently answered by what has been said before. For in this
Contract (which is peculiar to the German Nation, and no where found but where
they have planted themselves) two things are especially to be observed. 1. The
personal Obligation. 2. The Right in the Thing so held. The Personal Obligation
is the same, whether a man possesses the very Right of Sovereignty, or any
thing else though lying elsewhere, by virtue of the Fief: but such an
Obligation as it takes not from a private man the right of Personal Liberty; so
neither does it diminish any thing in a King or State of the Sovereignty, which
is Civil Liberty; which is easily to be understood by those Lands which are
called Free-holds, which consist in Personal Obligations only, but gives no
right in the thing so held: for these are no other than a species of that
unequal League whereof we have discoursed before, wherein the one promises
Fealty, and the other safeguard or protection. But admit they do swear Faith
and Allegiance against all men, yet would this detract nothing from the Right
of Sovereignty over their own Subjects. Not at all in this place to mention,
that there are ever reserved in these Oaths, a tacit Condition that the War be
just, whereof we shall treat elsewhere. But as to the Right in the thihg so
held, it may be such, that the very Right of Governing, if held in the right of
the Fief or Fee, may be lost, and so return unto him that gave it; as well in
case the Family be extinct, as also for some notorious crimes; and yet
notwithstanding in the mean time, it cease not to be the Supreme Power: For
as I said before the thing it self is one thing, and the manner of holding it
is another. And by this Right I find many Kings constituted by the Romans, so
that the Royal Family failing, the Empire did escheat unto themselves, as
Strabo observes of Paphligonia and some others. Lib. 12.


XXIV. A man's right distinguished from the exercise of that right.
Lastly, We must also distinguish as in Private Dominion, so in Empire, between
the Right it self, and the exercise of that Right; or between the first act and
the second. For as a King (though an Infant) has a Right to govern, but is not
permitted to exercise that Right; so he that is mad, or a Prisoner, or that so
lives in a Foreign Country, that he is not permitted freely to act in such
matters, as concern the good of that Empire that is remote from him: Vide Bo.
3. chapter 20.. 3.
For in all such cases, they have their Lieutenants or Viceroys to act for
them; wherefore Demetrius living under restraint with Seleucus, did forbid any
credit to be given to his Letters or unto his Seal; Plut. Demetr.
but commanded that all things should be so governed as if he were dead.

CHAP. IV. Of a War made by Subjects against their Superiors.
I. The Question stated. II. War against Superiors, as such, ordinarily
unlawful: This proved by the Law of Nature. III. By the Hebrew Law. IV. By the
Gospel Law; proved by Scriptures. V. By the Practice of the Primitive
Christians. VI. For Inferior Magistrates to make War against the Supreme,
unlawful: Proved by Reasons and Scriptures. VII. What is to be done in a case
of extreme and inevitable Necessity. VIII. That a free People may make War
against their Prince, if he be accountable unto them. IX. And against a King
who has renounced his Kingdom. X. Or who is about to alienate it, as to the
delivery of it only. XI. Or if a King do manifestly carry himself as a
professed enemy against the whole Body of his people. XII. Or shall forfeit his
Kingdom by a wilful breach of that condition upon which he was admitted unto
the Empire. XIII. Or, if having but one part of the Supreme Power, he shall
invade the other. XIV. Or if any such liberty of resistance be, in such a case,
reserved unto the people at his admission. XV. How far forth Obedience is due
to him that usurps another man's dominions. XVI. An Usurper may be killed, the
War continuing; If no Faith nor Agreement be given or made to the contrary.
XVII. Or if License be given by an Antecedent Law. XVIII. Or by warrant from
him, who has Right to the Empire. XIX. Why an Usurper is not to be killed, but
in these cases. XX. In a controverted Right, Private men are not to be Judges.
I. The Question stated.
PRivate Men may without doubt make war against private men, as the Traveller
against the Thief or Robber; so may Sovereign Princes and States against
Sovereign Princes, as David against the King of the Ammonites: Private men may
make war against Princes, if not their own, as Abraham against the King of
Babylon and his Neighbors; so may Sovereign Princes against Private Men,
whether they be their own Subjects, as David against Ishbosheth and his party;
or Strangers, as the Romans against Pirates. The only doubt is, whether any
person or persons, public or private, can make a lawful war against those that
are set over them, whether as supreme or as subordinate unto them. And in the
first place, It is on all hands granted, That they that are commissionated by
the highest powers, may make war against their Inferiors; as Nehemiah did
against Tobia and Sanballat, by the Authority of Artaxerxes. But whether it be
lawful for Subjects to make war against those who have the Supreme Power over
them, or against such as act by and according to their Authority, is the thing
in question. It is also by all good men acknowledged, That if the Commands of a
Prince shall manifestly contradict either the Law of Nature, or the Divine
Precepts, they are not to be obeyed; for the Apostles when they urged that
Maxim, Deo magis quam hominibus obediendum, That God is rather to be obeyed
than man; Act. 4.
unto such as forbad them to Preach in the name of Jesus, did but appeal to a
Principle of right reason, which Nature had insculpt in every man's breast, and
which Plato expresses in almost the very same words. But yet if either for
this, or for any other cause, any injury be offered unto us, because it so
please him that has the Sovereign Power, it ought rather to be patiently
tolerated, than by force resisted: For although we do not owe an active
obedience to such Commands of Princes, yet we do owe a passive: though we ought
not to violate the laws of God or of Nature, to fulfill the will of the greatest
Monarch; yet ought we rather patiently to submit to whatsoever he shall inflict
upon us for not obeying, than by resistance to violate our Countries peace: The
best and safest course we can steer in such a case, is either by Flight to
preserve our selves, or resolvedly to undergo whatsoever shall be imposed on us.

II. War against Superiors as such, unlawful.
And naturally all men have a right to repel Injuries from themselves by
resisting them, (as we have already said.) But Civil Societies being once
instituted for the preservation of Peace, there presently succeeded unto that
Commonwealth a certain greater Right over us and ours, so far forth as was
necessary for that end: And therefore that promiscuous Right that Nature gave
us to resist the Commonwealth, for the maintaining of good order and the
public peace has a right to prohibit, which without all doubt it does, seeing
that otherwise it cannot obtain the end it proposes to it self. For in case
that promiscuous Right of forceable resistance should be tolerated, it would be
no longer a Commonwealth, that is, a Sanctuary against Oppression, but a
confused Rabble, such as that of the Cyclops, whereof the Poet thus: -- Where
every Ass
May on his Wife and Children Judgment pass.
A dissolute Company where all are speakers and no hearers: Like unto that
which Valerius records of the Bebricii -- -- Who all Leagues and Laws disdain,
And Justice, which men's minds in peace retain.
Salust makes mention of a wild and savage people, living like Beasts in Woods
and Mountains without Laws and without Government, whom he calls Aborigines:
And in another place of the Getuli, who had neither Laws, good Customs, nor any
Princes to govern them. But Cities cannot subsist without these, Generale
pactum est societatis humanae regibus obedire; All humane Societies, says St.
Augustine, unanimously agree in this, to obey Kings: So Aeschylus, Kings live
by their own Laws, subject to none. And Sophocles, They Princes are, obey we
must, what not? To the same Tune sings Euripides, Folly in Kings must be with
patience born. Whereunto agrees that of Tacitus, Principi summum rerum
arbitrium Dii dederunt, etc. Subditis obsequii gloria relicta est; God has
invested a Prince with Sovereign Power, leaving nothing to Subjects but the
glory of Obedience. And here also, Sen.
Things base seem Noble, when by Princes done;
What they Impose, bear thou, be it right or wrong.
Wherewith agrees that of Salust, Impune quid vis facere, hoc est Regem esse,
To do anything without fear of punishment, is peculiar to Kings; for as Mark
Anthony urged in Herod's case, If he were accountable for what he has done as
a King, he could not be a King. Hence it is, that the Majesty of such as have
Sovereign Power, whether in one or more, is senced with so many and so severe
Laws, and the licentiousness of Subjects restrained with such sharp and
exquisite torments; which were unreasonable, if to resist them were lawful. If
a Soldier resist his Captain that strikes him, An Officer striking must not be
struck again.
and but lay hold on his Partisan, he shall be cashiered; but if he either
break it, or offer to strike again, he shall be put to death: for as Aristotle
observes, If he that is an Officer strike, he shall not be struck again.

III. The unlawfulness of making war against our Superiors proved by the Jewish
Law.
By the Hebrew Law, He that behaved himself contumaciously against either the
High Priest, or against him who was extraordinarily by God ordained to govern
his people, was to be put to death; and that which in the eighth Chapter of the
first Book of Samuel, is spoken of the right of Kings, to him that thoroughly
inspects it, is neither to be understood of their true and just rights, that
is, of what they may do justly and honestly (for the duty of Kings is much
otherwise described, Deuteronomy. 8.11.) nor is it to be understood barely, of what he
will do: for then it had signified nothing that was singular or extraordinary,
Jos. 1.18. 1 Samuel 8.11. Deuteronomy. 17.14.
for private men do the same to private men: But it is to be understood of such
a fact, as usurps or carries with it the privilege of what is right, that is,
that it must not be resisted although it be not right; for Kings have a Right
peculiar to themselves, and what in others is punishable, in them is not. That
old Saying, Summum jus, summa injuria, Extreme right is extreme wrong, is best
fitted to the case of Kings, whose absolute power mak^s that seem right, which
strictly taken is not so. There is a main difference between Right in this
sense taken, Right differenced from Just.
and Just; for in the former sense, it comprehends whatsoever may be done
without fear of punishment: but Just, respects only things lawful and honest.
And though some Kings there be, who are (what Servius in Cicero's Philippicks
is commanded to be) magis Justitiae quam Juris Consulti; More regardful of
their honor and duty, than of their power and prerogatives: Yet this does not
diminish their Sovereign Right; because if they will, they may do otherwise
without the danger of being resisted. And therefore it is added in that place
of Samuel before cited, That when the people should at any time be thus
oppressed by their Kings, as if there were no remedy to be expected from men,
they should invoke his help who is the Supreme Judge of the whole Earth. So
that whatsoever a King does, though the same done by an inferior person would
be an Injury, yet being done by him is Right. As a Judge is said Jus reddere,
to do right, though the sentence he gives be unrighteous.

IV. By the Gospel Law.
When Christ in the New Testament commanded, to give Caesar his due, doubtless
he intended, that his Disciples should yield as great, if not a greater
obedience, as well active as passive, unto the higher Power, than what was due
from the Jews to their Kings: which (St. Paul, who was best able to Interpret
his Masters words) expounding Romans 13. does at large describe the duty of
Subjects; Romans 13.2.
charging those that resist the power of Kings, with no less Crime than
Rebellion against Gods Ordinance; and with a Judgment as great as their sin.
For says he, They that do so resist, shall receive unto themselves damnation.
And a little after, he urges the necessity of our subjection, Not altogether
for fear, but for Conscience, as knowing, that He is the Minister of God for
our good. Now if there be a necessity of our subjection, then there is the same
necessity for our not resisting; because, he that resists is not subject.
Neither did the Apostle mean such a necessity of subjection as arises from an
apprehension of some worse inconvenience that might follow upon our resistance:
But such as proceeds from the sense of some benefit that we receive by it,
whereby we stand obliged in duty, not unto man only, but unto God; (so that he
that resists the power of the Supreme Magistrate, incurs a double punishment,
says Plato, First, From God, for breaking that good order which he has
constituted amongst men: and Secondly, From the Commonwealth, whose righteous
Laws, made for the preservation of the public peace, are by resistance
weakened, and the Commonwealth thereby endangered. For can thou believe,
says Plato, that any City or Kingdom can long stand, when the public Decrees
of the Senate shall be wilfully broken, and trampled upon by the over-swelling
power of some private men; who in struggling against the execution of the Laws,
do as much as in them lies, dissolve the Commonwealth, and consequently bring
all into confusion. The Apostle therefore fortifies this necessity of public
subjection to Princes with two main Reasons: First, Because God had constituted
and approved of this Order of Commanding and Obeying; and that not only under
the Jewish, but under the Christian Law: wherefore the Powers that are set over
us are to be observed (not servilely, superstitiously or out of fear, but with
free, rational and generous Spirits) tanquam a Diis datae, as being given by
the Gods, says Plato: or as St. Paul) tanquam a Deo ordinatae, as if ordained
by God himself. Which order, as it is originally Gods, so by giving it a Civil
Sanction, it becomes ours also; for thereby we add as much authority unto it as
we can give. The other reason is drawn ab utili, from profit: Because this
order is constituted for our good, and therefore in Conscience is to be obeyed
and not resisted. But here some men may say, That to bear Injuries, is not at
all profitable unto us, whereunto some men (happily more truly, than appositely,
to the meaning of the Apostle) give this answer, That patiently to bear
Injuries, conduces much to our benefit; because it entitles us to a reward far
transcending our sufferings, as St. Paul testifies. But though this also be
true, yet is it not (as I conceive) the proper and genuine sense of the
Apostles words, which doubtless have respect to that universal Good, whereunto
this order was at first instituted, as to its proper end; which was the public
Peace, wherein every particular man, is as much concerned, if not much more
than in his private. (For what protection can good Laws give, if Subjects may
refuse to yield their obedience to them; whereas by the constant observance of
good Laws, all estates, both public and private do grow up and flourish
together. Plato.
) And certainly these are the good Fruits that we receive from the Supreme
Powers, for which in Conscience we owe them obedience. For no man did ever yet
wish ill to himself. (But he that resists the power of the Magistrate, and
wilfully violates the Laws established, does in effect (as far as in him is)
dissolve his Countries peace, Plato.
and will in the end bury himself also in the ruins of it.) Besides, the Glory
of Kings consists in the prosperity of their Subjects. When Sylla had by his
Cruelty, almost depopulated, Plut. Florus. Aug. de Civ. Dei, lib. 3. c. 28.
not Rome only, but all Italy, one seasonably admonisht him, Sinendos esse
aliquos vivere, ut essent, quibus imperet; That some should be permitted to
live, over whom he might rule as a King. It was a common Proverb among the
Hebrews, Nisi potestas publica esset, alter alterum vivum deglutiret; Were it
not for the Sovereign Powers, every Kingdom would be like a great Pond wherein
the greater Fish would always devour the lesser. Agreeable whereunto is that
of Chrysostom, Unless there were a power over us to restrain our Inordinate
Lusts, men would be more fierce and cruel than Lions and Tigers, not only
biting, but eating and devouring one another. Take away Tribunals of Justice,
and you take away all Right, Property and Dominion: No man can say, this is
mine House, this my Land, these my Goods, or my Servants: Chrysostom. de Statuis 6.
Ad Ephesians. 5.
but Omnia erunt fortiorum, the longest Sword would take all. The mighty man
could be no longer secure of his Estate, than until a mightier than he came to
dispossess him; the weaker must always give place to the stronger; and where
the strength was equal, the loss would be so too. And this would at length
introduce a general Ataxy, which would be far more perilous than a perfect
Slavery. Wherefore seeing that God has established, and humane reason upon
trial, approved of Sovereign Empire, as the best preservative of humane
Societies, that every man should yield obedience thereunto, is most rational.
For without Subjection, there can be no Protection. But here it will be
objected, That the Commands of Princes do not always tend to the public good,
and therefore when they decline from that end for which they were ordained,
they ought not to be obeyed. To which I answer, That though the Supreme
Magistrate does sometimes, either through Fear, Anger, Lust, Covetousness, or
such like inordinate passions, baulk the ordinary path of Justice and Equity;
yet are these, (happening but seldom) to be passed over as personal blemishes,
which (as Tacitus rightly observes) are abundantly recompensed by the more
frequent example of better Princes. (Besides, the Lives of Princes are to be
considered with some grains of allowance, in respect of those many provocations
and opportunities they have to offend, which private men have not: All men have
their Failings, we our selves have ours; and in case we will admit of none in
Kings, we must not rank them amongst men, Kings to be censured with some favor.
but Gods. The Moon has her spots, Venus her Mole; and if we can find nothing
under the Sun without blemish, Why should we expect perfection in Kings? He is
very uncharitable, that judges of Rulers by some few of their Evil deeds,
passing over many of their Good ones. Seeing therefore, that there is in all
men's lives, as in our best Coin, an Intermixture of Good and Evil, it is
sufficient to denominate a Prince Good, if his Virtues excel his Errors.
Besides, to charge the Vices of Princes upon the Government, as they usually do
who affect Innovation, is but a cheat: For what is this, but to condemn the Law
for the Corruption of some Lawyers: Or Agriculture, because some Husbandmen do
curse God for a Storm? Si mentiar, ego mentior, non negotium; If I do lie,
(says the Merchant in St. Augustine) it is I that am to be blamed, not my
Calling. And if some Princes do prevaricate in some things, they and not their
Function are to be blamed.) But as to Laws, though they cannot be so made, as
to fit every man's Case, yet it suffices to denominate them good, if they
obviate such disorders as are frequently practiced, and so do good to the
generality of the people. But as to such cases, which, because they rarely
happen, cannot so easily be provided against by particular Laws, even these
also are understood to be restrained by general Rules. For, though the reason
of the Law being particularly applied to that special Case, hold not; yet in
the general, under which special cases may lawfully be comprehended, it may.
And much better is it so to do, than to live without Law, or to permit every
man to be a Law to himself. Lib. 7. de bene^. cap. 16.
Very apposite to this purpose, is that of Seneca, Better it is not to admit of
some excuses, though just, from a Few, than that All should be permitted to
make whatsoever they please. Memorable is that of Pericles in Thucydides,
Better it is for Private men, that the Commonwealth flourish, Lib. 2.
though they thrive not in it, than that they should abound and grow rich in
their own private estates, and the Commonwealth pine and wither. For if the
whole be ruined, In the general safety each particular is included.
every private man's Fortunes must needs be ruined with it: But if the
Commonwealth flourish, every private man's estate, though in it self weak, may
in time be repaired. Wherefore since the State, if well ordered, can easily
support any private man's fortunes; but a private man's estate, though never so
well ordered, cannot repair the loss of the Public State: Why do ye not rather
Contribute your utmost care to advance the Public, than (as ye now do) seek to
build your own private Fortunes upon the public Ruins? Wherewith agrees that
of Ambrose, Eadem est singulorum utilitas, De Off. lib. 3.
quae universorum; The Profit which the Commonwealth receives, redounds to
every private man. And that also in the Law, Semper non quod privatim interest
uni ex sociis, sed quod communi societati expedit, servari debet; Evermore, not
that which particularly avails any one party, but that which conduces to the
benefit of the Common society is to be observed. (When the common people in
Rome began to Mutinee by reason of some Taxes extraordinarily imposed on them,
Live. l. 26.
Laevinus the Consul exhorted the Senate, to encourage the people by their own
example: And to that very end advised every Senator to bring into the
Senate House all the Gold, Silver and Brass money he had, that it might be
delivered to the Triumviri for the public service: adding this Reason, If our
City overcome, no man needs to fear his own estate; but if it fall, let no man
think to preserve his own.) For as Plato rightly observes, What is common
strengthens a City; but what enricheth Private Families only, weakens and
dissolves it: And therefore it concerns both Princes and Subjects, to prefer
the affairs of the Commonwealth, before their own private, (either pleasure or
profit.) It is a very true Observation of Xenophon's, He that in an Army
behaves himself seditiously against his General, sins against his own life. And
no less true is that of Jamblicus, No man should think himself a Loser by what
the Commonwealth gains; for every private man's loss is sufficiently
recompensed in the Public Profit. For as in the Natural body, so doubtless in
the Civil, In totius Salute, Salus est partium; The well being of every part
consists in the safety of the whole. But without doubt, among those things that
are public, The General safety consists chiefly in well commanding and well
obeying.
the chief and principal is that aforesaid Order of well Commanding and well
Obeying; which cannot consist where private Subjects assume that License of
resisting the public Magistrate: which is excellently described by Dion
Cassius, whose words sound much to this sense, I cannot conceive it seemly for
a Prince to submit to his Subjects; for there can be no safety, where the Feet
are advanced above the Head, or where they undertake to govern whose duty it is
to be governed. What a dismal confusion would it introduce in a Family if
Children should be permitted to despise their Parents, or Servants to dispute
the commands of their Masters? In what a desperate condition is that patient,
that will not be ruled in all things by his Physician? And what hopes can there
be of that Ship, where the Mariners refuse to obey their Pilot? Surely God
has ordained, and humane reason upon trial has found it necessary, that for
the preservation of humane Society some should Command, and some Obey. To the
Testimony of St. Paul, we shall add that of St. Peter, whose words are these, 1
Pet. 2.17, 18, 19.
Honor the King. Servants be ye subject to your Masters with all Fear, and not
only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward: For this is Thank-worthy
if a man for Conscience toward God endure grief, suffering wrongfully. For
what glory is it, if when ye be buffetted for your faults ye take it patiently?
But if when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is
acceptable with God. And this he by and by confirms by Christ's own example.
Which Clemens also in his Constitutions thus expresses, The servant that
fears God, says he, will serve his Master also with all faithfulness, yea,
though he be impious and unjust. Whence we may observe two things: First, That
under the subjection that servants are in, even to hard Masters, is also
couched that of Subjects unto Kings, though Tyrannical. And therefore, as a
little before, he commanded subjection to every humane ordinance; that is, to
the Laws and Constitutions of Princes without distinction, (for when that
Epistle was written, there were very few Princes that were not Idolaters,) yet
submit we must, says St. Peter, for all that, and that Propter Dominum, For
the Lords sake. So what follows in the same Chapter being built upon the same
Foundation, respects the duty as well of Subjects as of Servants. And so
requires the same Obedience, as well Passive as Active; Such as we usually pay
to our Parents, according to that of the Poet, Thy Parents Love if Good: If
Bad, yet bear. And that also of Terence, To bear with Parents, Piety commands.
And that likewise of Cicero, in his Oration for Cluentius, Men ought not only
to conceal the Injuries done unto them by their Parents, but to bear them with
patience. A young man of Eretria, that had been long educated under Zeno, being
demanded, What he had learned? Answered, Meekly to bear his Fathers wrath. So
Justin relates of Lysimachus, Lib. 15. Lib. 27.
That he endured the reproaches of the King with the same calmness of Spirit,
as if he had been his Father. Ferenda sunt Renum Ingenia, The humors of Kings
must be endured, says Tacitus: And in another place he tells us, That good
Emperors are to be wished for, Ann. 16. Hist. 6.
but whatsoever they are, they must be obeyed. So also Livy, As the rage of our
Parents, so the cruelty of our Country are no ways to be becalmed, but by
patience and sufferance: For which Claudian highly extols the Persians, who
obeyed all their Kings equally, though never so cruel.

V. The practice of the Primitive Christians.
Neither did the Practice of the Primitive Christians swerve from this Law of
God, which is an undeniable argument that they so understood it. For though the
Roman Emperors were sometimes the very worst of men, and deadly enemies to the
Christian Faith; yea, though there wanted not such under their Government, who
under the specious pretense of freeing the Commonwealth from Tyranny and
Oppression, took Arms against them, yet could they never persuade the
Christians to join with them. In the Constitutions of Clemens we read, Regiae
potestati resistere nefas; To resist the power of a King is Impious. Tertullian
in his Apology writes thus, What was that Cassius that conspired against the
life of Julius Caesar? What was that Poscennius Niger that in love to his own
Country, took Arms in Syria, as Clodius Albinus did in France and Britain,
against that bloody Emperor Septimius Severus? Or what was that Plautianus,
who to set the Common wealth free from Tyranny attempted the life of the same
Emperor in his own Palace? What was that Aelius Laetus, who having first
poisoned that Infamous Emperor Commodus, fearing it should not take that
effect which he desired, did afterward hire Narcissus, a strong Wrestler, to
strangle him? Or what was that Parthenius ( whose fact Tertullian does so much
detest,) who being Chamberlain to that execrable Tyrant Domitian, yet killed
him in his own Chamber? What (says Tertullian) were all these? Surely not
Christians, but Romans: Nay so abominated they were by Christians, that
Tertullian seems to glory in this, That though Christians were every where
reproached as Enemies, nay Traitors to the Imperial Crown, yet could they never
find any of them either stained with that crime, or so much as favoring those
Treasonable practices of either Cassius, Niger, or Albinius. When St. Ambrose
was commanded by the Emperor Valentinus to give up his Church to be Garrisoned
by Soldiers, See Gratian c. 23. q. 8.
though he took it to be an Injury done, not only to himself, and to his
Congregation, but even unto Christ himself; yet would be not take any advantage
of the commotions that it made among the people, to make resistance. If the
Emperor, says he, had commanded what was in my power to give, were it mine
House, Land, Goods, Gold or Silver, how readily should I obey; whatsoever is
mine I would willingly offer: But the Temple of God I cannot give away, nor can
I yield it up to any man: Cum ad custodiendum non ad tradendum illud acceperim,
Since it was committed unto me to defend and to keep, but not to betray. And
whereas the people being enraged thereby, did offer their assistance to repel
the Soldiers, he refused it, saying, Lib. 5. orat. in Anxen.
Coactus repugnare non novi; Though provoked and compelled thereunto, yet
withstand or resist I cannot: Grieve, and weep, and mourn I can: Against Arms,
Soldiers, and Goths, I have no other Weapons but Tears: For these are the only
Forts and Muniments of a Priest: Aliter nec debeo nec possum resistere,
otherwise I neither ought, nor can resist. And presently after, being commanded
to appease the Tumult, he replied, That not to excite them was in his power;
but being exasperated and enraged, to appease them was in the sole power of
him, who when he pleased, could still the ragings of the Seas, and the madness
of the people. And in another place he writes thus, Epist. 33.
Will ye hale me to prison, or cast me into chains, I am willing to suffer,
neither shall I guard my self with multitudes of people who offer themselves to
defend me. Neither would he make use of the Forces of Maximus when offered
against the Emperor, though an Arian, and a grievous persecutor of the Church.
In imitation of whom, Greg. l. 6. Ep. 1. Theodoret. Hist. Eccl. lib. 5. c. 4.
Naz. Orat. 1. in Julian.
Gregory the Great in one of his Epistles confesses, That if he would have
engaged himself in the death of the Lumbards, that Nation had at that day had
neither King, Dukes nor Earls; but had been reduced into extreme confusion.
Nazianzen informs us, That Julian the Apostate was diverted from some bloody
designs he intended against the Church, by the tears of Christians: Adding
withal, That these are our best preservatives against Persecutions. And because
a great part of his Army were Christians, therefore his cruelty toward them
would have been not injurious to the Church of Christ only, but would at that
time have much endangered the Commonwealth: Unto all which we may also add that
of St. Augustine, where expounding those places of St. Paul, he says, Even for
the preservation of our own lives, Prop. 74.
we ought to submit to the Supreme power, and not to resist them, in whatsoever
they shall take away from us.

VI. Inferior Magistrates ought not to resist the Supreme.
Some very learned men there are even in this age, who accomodating themselves
too servilely to the times and places wherein they live, do persuade themselves
first, and then others, That though this License of resisting the Supreme Power
be inconsistent with the condition of private men, yet it may agree with the
Rights of Inferior Magistrates; nay further, that they sin in case they do it
not: which opinion is to be exploded, as Seditious. For as in Logic there is a
Genus which is called Subalterne, which though it be comprehensive of all that
is under it, as a living creature comprehends both man and beast; yet has it a
Genus above it, in respect whereof it is but a species: As a living creature is
to a body, which comprehends all sorts of bodies, both animate, and inanimate.
The like we may say of Magistrates, some are Supreme, who rule all and are
ruled by none; others are subordinate, who in respect of private men are
public persons, governing like Princes: But in respect of the Supreme
Magistrate are but private men, and are commanded as Subjects. For the power or
faculty of Governing as it is derived from the supreme power, so it is subject
unto it, and whatsoever is done, by the Inferior Magistrate, contrary to the
will of the Supreme is null, and reputed but as a private act, for want of the
stamp of public Authority. All order (say Philosophers) does necessarily
relate to somewhat, that is first and highest, (from whence it takes its rise,
or beginning. Now they that are of this opinion, that Inferior Magistrates may
resist the Supreme, seem to introduce such a state of things, as the Poets
fansied to have been in Heaven before Majesty was thought on, when the lesser
Gods denied the Prerogative of Jupiter. But this order or Subordination of one
to another is not only approved of by common experience, as in every Family the
Father is the head, next unto him the Mother, then the Children, and after them
the Servants, and such as are under them: So in every Kingdom, Each power under
higher powers are -- And, All Governors are under Government -- To which
purpose is that notable saying of St. Augustine, Great. c. 11. ^. 3. Qui
resistit.
Observe, says he, the degrees of all humane things: if thy Tutor enjoin thee
any thing, thou must do it; yet not, in case the Proconsul command the
contrary: Neither must thou obey the Consul, if thy Prince command otherwise.
For in so doing thou can not be said to contemn Authority, but thou chusest
to obey that which is highest: Neither ought the lesser powers to be offended
that the greater is preferred before them, (For God is the God of order.) And
that also of the same Father concerning Pilate, Ad Johan.
Because, says he, God had Invested him with such a Power as was it self
subordinate to that of Caesar' s. But it is also approved of by Divine
Authority: 1 Ep. 2.1.
For St. Peter enjoins us to be subject unto Kings otherwise, than unto
Magistrates: To Kings as Supreme, that is, absolutely, without exceptions to
any other commands than those directly from God; who is so far from justifying
our resistance, that he commands our passive obedience: But unto Magistrates,
as they are deputed by Kings, and as they derive their Authority from them.
Romans 13.
And when St. Paul subjects every soul to the higher Powers, doubtless he
exempts not Inferior Magistrates. Neither do we find amongst the Hebrews
(where there were so many Kings utterly regardless of the Laws both of God and
Men) any Inferior Magistrates, among whom some without all question there were
both Pious and Valiant, that ever arrogated unto themselves this Right of
resisting by force the Power of their Kings, without an express command from
God, who alone has an unlimited power and jurisdiction over them. But on the
contrary, what duties Inferior Magistrates owe unto their Kings though wicked,
Samuel will Instruct us by his own example, who though he knew that Saul had
corrupted himself, 1 Samuel 15.3^.
and that God also had rejected him from being King, yet before the people, and
before the Elders of Israel, he gives him that reverence and respect that was
due unto him. And so likewise the state of Religion publicly professed, did
never depend upon any other humane Authority, but on that of the King and
Sanhedrim. For in that after the King, the Magistrates with the people, engaged
themselves to the true worship and service of God, it ought to be understood,
so far forth as it should be in the power of every one of them. Nay, the very
Images of their False Gods which were publicly erected, (and therefore could
not but be scandalous to such as were truly Religious) yet were they never
demolished, so far as we can read of, but at the special command either of the
people, when the Government was Popular; or of Kings, when the Government was
Kingly. And if the Scriptures do make mention of any violence sometimes offered
unto Kings, it is not to justify the fact, but to show the equity of the
Divine Providence in permitting it. And whereas they of the contrary persuasion
do frequently urge that excellent saying of Trajan the Emperor, who delivering
a Sword to a Captain of the Praetorian Band, said, Hoc pro me utere, si recte
impero; si male, contra me: Use this Sword for me, if I govern well; but if
otherwise, against me. We must know, That Trajan (as appears by Pliny's
Panegyric) was not willing to assume unto himself Regal power, but rather to
behave himself as a good Prince, who was willing to submit to the Judgment of
the Senate and people; whose decrees he would have that Captain to execute,
though it were against himself. Whose example both Pertinax and Macrinus did
afterward follow, whose excellent Speeches to this purpose are recorded by
Herodian. The like we read of M. Anthony, who refused to touch the public
Treasure, without the consent of the Roman Senate.

VII. Of resistance in case of inevitable necessity.
But the Case will yet be more difficult, whether this law of not resisting do
oblige us when the dangers that threaten us be extreme, and otherwise
inevitable. For some of the Laws of God himself, though they sound absolutely,
yet seem to admit of some tacit exceptio^s in cases of extreme necessity: For
so it was, by the wisest of the Jewish Doctors, expressly determined concerning
the Law of their Sabbath, in the times of the Hasamonaeans: Whence arose that
famous saying among them, Periculum animae impellit Sabbatum, The danger of a
man's life drives away the Sabbath. When the Jew in Synesius, was accused for
the breach of the Sabbath, he excuses himself by another Law, and that more
forcible, saying, We were in manifest jeopardy of our lives. When Bacchides had
brought the Army of the Jews into a great strait on their Sabbath day, placing
his Army before them and behind them, the River Jordan being on both sides;
Jonathan thus bespake his Soldiers, Let us go up now and fight for our lives,
for it stands not with us to day, as in times past. 1 Macc. 9.43, 44, 45.
Which case of necessity is approved of even by Christ himself, as well in this
Law of the Sabbath, as in that of not eating the Shewbread. And the Hebrew
Doctors pretending the authority of an Ancient Tradition, do rightly Interpret
their Laws made against the eating of meats forbidden, with this tacit
exception; Not that it was not just with God to have obliged us even unto
death, but that some Laws of his are conversant about such matters as it cannot
easily be believed that they were intended to have been prosecuted with so much
Rigor as to reduce us to such an extremity, as to dye rather than to disobey
them, which in humane Laws does yet further proceed. I deny not but that some
acts of virtue are so strictly enjoined, that if we perform them not, we may
justly be put to death: As for a Sentinel to forsake his station. But neither
is this to be rashly understood to be the Will of the Lawgiver. Nor do men
assume so much Right over either themselves or others, unless it be when, and
so far forth, as extreme necessity requires it. For all humane Laws are so
constituted, or so to be understood as that there should be some allowance for
humane frailty. The right understanding of this Law,
of resisting or not resisting the highest Powers in cases of inevitable
necessity, seems much to depend upon the Intention of those who first entered
into Civil Society, from whom the right of Government is devolved upon the
persons Governing: Who had they been demanded,
Whether they would have imposed such a yoke upon all Mankind as death it self,
rather than in any case by force to repel the Insolences of their Superiors;
I much question, whether they would have granted it, unless it had heen in such
a case, where such resistance could not be made without great commotions in the
Commonwealth, or the certain destruction of many Innocents; for what Charity
commends in such a case to be done, may, I doubt not, pass for an humane Law.
But some may say, that this rigid obligation to dye, rather than at any time to
resist injuries done by our Superiors, is not imposed on us by any humane, but
by the Divine Law. But we must observe, That men did not at first unite
themselves in Civil Society, by any special Command from God, but voluntarily
out of a sense they had of their own impotency, to repel force and violence
whilst they lived solitarily, and in Families apart; whence the Civil Power
takes its rise: For which cause it is, that St. Peter calls it an humane
ordinance, although it be elsewhere called a Divine Ordinance, because this
wholesome constitution of men was approved of by God himself. But God in
approving an humane Law, may be thought to approve of it as an humane Law,
Barkley Lib. 3. contra Monarchomach. c. 8.
and after an humane manner. Barkley (who was the stoutest Champion in
defending Kingly Power) does notwithstanding thus far allow, That the People or
the nobler part of them, have a right to defend themselves against cruel
Tyranny, and yet he confesses that the whole body of the people is subject
unto the King. Now this I shall easily admit, That the more we desire to secure
any thing by Law, the more express and peremptory should that Law be, and the
fewer exceptions there should be from it; (for they that have a mind to violate
that Law, will presently seek shelter, and think themselves privileged by
those exceptions, though their cases be far different;) Yet dare I not condemn
indifferently either every private man, or every, though lesser, part of the
people, who as their last refuge, in cases of extreme necessity, have anciently
made use of their Arms to defend themselves, yet with respect had to the common
good. For David, David's example.
who (saving in some particular Facts) was so celebrated for his integrity, did
yet entertain first four hundred, and afterward more armed men; to what end,
unless for the safeguard of his own person, against any violence that should be
offered him? But this also we must note, That David did not this until he had
been assured, both by Jonathan, and by many other infallible Arguments, that
Saul sought his life; and that even then, he neither invaded any City, nor made
an Offensive War against any, but lurked only for his own security, sometimes
in Mountains, sometimes in Caves, and such like devious places, and sometimes
in Foreign Nations, with this resolution, to decline all occasions of annoying
his own Countrymen. A Fact parallel to this of David's, we may read of in the
Maccabees: The Maccabees.
For whereas some seek to defend the Wars of the Maccabees upon this ground,
That Antiochus was not a King, but an Usurper; this I account but frivolous:
For in the whole Story of the Maccabees, we shall never find Antiochus
mentioned by any of their own party, by any other Title than by that of King;
and deservedly: For the Hebrews had long before submitted to the Macedonian
Empire, in whose Right Antiochus succeeded. And whereas the Hebrew Laws forbad
a Stranger to be set over them, this was to be understood by a voluntary
Election, and not by an involuntary Compulsion, through the necessity of the
times. And whereas others say, That the Maccabees did act by the peoples right,
to whom belonged the Right of Governing themselves by their own Laws, neither
is this probable: For the Jews being first conquered by Nebuchadonosor, were by
the right of War subject unto him, and afterward became by the same Law,
subject to the Medes and Persians as Successors to the Chaldeans, whose whole
Empire did at length devolve upon the Macedonians. And hence it is, that the
Jews, in Tacitus, are termed The most servile of all the Eastern Nations;
neither did they require any Covenants or Conditions from Alexander or his
Successors, but yielded themselves freely- without any limitations or
exceptions, The Jews a conquered Nation.
as before they had done unto Darius. And though they were permitted sometimes
to use their own rites, and publicly to exercise their own Laws, yet was not
this due unto them by any Law that was added unto the Empire, but only by a
precarious Right, that was indulged unto them by the favor of their Kings.
There was nothing then that could justify the Maccabees in their taking of
Arms, but that invincible Law of extreme necessity, which might do it so long
as they contained themselves within the bounds of self-preservation, and in
imitation of David, betook themselves to secret places, in order to their own
security; never offering to make use of their Arms unless violently assaulted.
The Kings Person to be spared in the defense of our selves. 1 Samuel 26.9.
In the mean time, Great care is to be taken, that even when we are thus
enforced to defend our selves in cases of certain and extreme danger, we spare
the Person of the King; for they that conceive the carriage of David toward
Saul, to proceed not so much from the necessity of duty, as out of some deeper
consideration, are mistaken. For David himself declares, that no man can be
innocent that stretches forth his hand against the Lords anointed: Because he
very well knew that it was written in the Law, Exodus 22.28.
Thou shall not revile the Gods, that is, the Supreme Judges: Thou shall not
curse the Rulers of thy people. In which Law, special mention being made of the
Supreme Power, it evidently shows that some special duty toward them is
required of us: Wherefore Optatus Milevitanus speaking of this fact of David,
Lib. 2.
says, That Gods special command coming fresh into his memory, did so restrain
him, that he could not hurt Saul, though his mortal enemy. Wherefore he brings
in David thus reasoning with himself, Volebam hostem vincere, sed prius est
divina praecepta observare; Willingly I would overcome mine enemy, but I dare
not transgress the Commands of God. And Josephus speaking of David, after he
had cut off Saul's Garment, says, That his Heart smote him: So that he confessed,
Injustum facinus erat Regem suum occidere, It was a wicked act to kill his
Sovereign. And presently after, Horrendum Regem quamvis malum occidere, Poenam
enim id facienti imminere constat, ab eo qui Regem dedit; It is an horrid act
to kill a King, though wicked; for certainly he, by whose Providence all Kings
reign, will pursue the Regicide with vengeance inevitably. To reproach any
private man falsely is forbidden by the Law, but of a King, Kings must not be
reviled, much less killed, though wicked.
we must not speak evil though he deserve it; because as he that wrote the
Problems (fathered upon Aristotle) says, He that speaks evil of the
Governor, scandalizeth the whole City. So Joab concludes concerning Shimei, as
Josephus testifies, Shall thou not dye, who presumest to curse him whom God
has placed in the Throne of the Kingdom? The Laws (says Julian) are very
severe on the behalf of Princes, for he that is injurious unto them, does
wilfully trample upon the Laws themselves. Misopogoris.
Now if we must not speak evil of Kings, much less must we do evil against
them: David repented but for offering violence to Readiness Garments, so great was
the Reverence that he bare to his Person, and deservedly; for since their
Sovereign Power cannot but expose them to the general hatred, therefore it is
fit, that their security should especially be provided for. This, says
Quintilian, is the fate of such as sit at the Stern of Government, that they
cannot discharge their duty faithfully, nor provide for the public safety,
without the envy of many. The Laws are severe in the defense of Kings.
(And for this cause are the persons of Kings guarded with such severe Laws,
which seem, like Draco's, to be wrote in blood,) As may appear by those enacted
by the Romans, for the security of their Tribunes, whereby their persons became
inviolable. Amongst other wise Sayings of the Esseni, this was one, That the
persons of Kings should be held as sacred. And that of Homer was as notable,
His chiefest care was for the King,
That nothing should endanger him.
And no marvel: For as St. Chrysostom well observes, If any man kill a Sheep, 1 Timothy 1. And why.
he but lessens the number of them; but if he kill the Shepherd, he dissipates
the whole Flock. The very name of a King, as Curtius tells us, among such
Nations as were Governed by Kings, was as venerable as that of God: So
Artabanus the Persian, Plut. Them.
Amongst many and those most excellent Laws we have, this seems to be the best,
which commands us to adore our Kings as the very Image of God, who is the
Savior of all. And therefore as Plutarch speaks, Nec fas, nec licitum est
Regis corpori manus infer, It is not permitted by the Laws of God or Man, to
offer violence to the person of a King. But as the same Plutarch in another
place tells us, The principal part of valor is, to save him that saves all. If
the Eye observe a blow threatening the Head, the Hand, being instructed by
Nature, interposeth it self, as preferring the safety of the Head (whereupon
all the other members depend) before their own: Wherefore, as Cassiodore notes,
De Amicitia.
He that with the loss of his own life, redeems the life of his Prince, does
well; We are to prefer his life before our own.
if in so doing he propose to himself the freeing of his own soul, rather than
that of another man's body: for as Conscience teaches him to express his
fidelity to his Sovereign; so does right reason instruct him to prefer the life
of his Prince, before the safety of his own body. But here a more difficult
question arises; as namely, whether what was lawful for David and the
Maccabees, Whether David's example and the Maccabees, be sufficient to justify
Christians in like cases. 1 Pet. 4.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Christ's advice is to
flee, where the duties of our calling will permit, but beyond that nothing.
be likewise lawful for us Christians? Or whether Christ who so often enjoins
us, to take up our Cross, do not require from us a greater measure of patience?
Surely, where our Superiors threaten us with death upon the account of
Religion, our Savior advised such as are not obliged by the necessary duties
of their calling to reside in any one place, to flee, but beyond this, nothing.
St. Peter tells us, That Christ in suffering left us an ensample, who though he
knew no sin, nor had any guile found in his mouth, yet being reviled he reviled
not again; when he suffered, he threatened not, but remitted his cause to him
that judges righteously. Nay he advises us to give thanks unto God, and to
rejoice when we suffer persecution for our Religion: And we may read how
mightily Christian Religion has grown and been advanced, by this admirable
gift of patience, wherefore how injurious to those ancient Christians, (who
(living in or near the times of either the Apostles themselves, or men truly
Apostolical) must needs be well instructed in their Discipline, and
consequently walked more exactly according to their rules, yet suffered death
for their Faith;) how injurious I say, to these men, are they, who hold that
they wanted not a will to resist, but rather a power to defend themselves at
the approach of death? Surely Tertullian had never been so imprudent, nay
impudent, as so confidently to have affirmed such an untruth, So Tertullian.
whereof he knew the Emperor could not be ignorant, when he wrote thus unto
him, If we had a will to take our private revenge, or to act as public
Enemies, could we want either numbers of Men, or stores of warlike Provisions?
Are the Moors, Germans, Parthians, or the People of any one Nation, more than
those of the whole World? We, though Strangers, yet do fill all places in your
Dominions, your Cities, Islands, Castles, Forts, Assemblies, your very Camps,
Tribes, Courts, Palaces, Senates; only your Temples we leave to your selves:
For what war have not we always declared our selves fit and ready, though in
numbers of men we have sometimes been very unequal? How comes it then to pass,
that we suffer death so meekly, so patiently, but that we are instructed by our
Religion, that it is much better to be killed than to kill? Cyprian also
treading in his Masters steps, openly declares, That it was from the Principles
of their Religion, that Christians being apprehended made no resistance, nor
attempted any revenge for injuries unjustly done them, though they wanted
neither numbers of men, nor other means to have resisted: But it was their
confidence of some Divine Vengeance that would fall upon their Persecutors,
that made them thus patient; Lib. 5.
and that persuaded the Innocent to give way to the Nocent. So Lactantius, We
are willing to confide in the Majesty of God, who is able as well to revenge
the contempt done to himself, as the injuries and hardships done unto us:
Wherefore though our sufferings be such as cannot be expressed, yet do we not
mutter a word of discontent, but refer our selves wholly to him who judges
righteously. Lib. 6. Qu. 10. in Joshua.
And to the same Tune sings St. Augustine, When Princes err, they presently make
Laws to legitimate their errors, and by those very Laws they judge the Innocent
who are at length Crowned with Martyrdom. Ep. 166.
And in another place, Tyrants are so to be endured by their Subjects, and hard
Masters by their Servants, that both their temporal lives (if possible) may be
preserved, and yet their eternal safety carefully provided for: Which he
illustrates by the examples of the Primitive Christians, Who though they then
sojourned upon earth as Pilgrims, and had infinite numbers of Nations to assist
them, yet chose rather patiently to suffer all manner of torments, than
forcibly to resist their Persecutors: Neither would they fight ^o preserve
their temporal lives, but chose rather not to fight, that so they might ensure
unto themselves an eternal. For they endured Bonds, Stripes, Imprisonment, the
Rack, the Fire, the Cross; they were flayed alive, killed, and quartered, and
yet they multiplied; they esteemed this life not worth the fighting for, so
that with the loss of it they might purchase what so eagerly they panted after,
a better. Of the same opinion was Cyril, as may appear by many notable sayings
of his upon that place of St. John, where he treats of Peter's Sword. The
Thebean Legion, The Thebean Legion.
we read, consisted of six thousand, six hundred, sixty six Soldiers, and all
Christians, who when the Emperor Maximianus would have compelled the whole Army
to sacrifice to Idols, first removed their Station to Agaunus; and when, upon
fresh orders sent after them, they refused to come, Maximianus commanded his
Officers to put every tenth man to death, which was easily done, no man
offering to resist: At which time, Mauritius (who had the chief command in that
Legion, and from whom the Town Agaunus in Switzerland was afterward called St.
Mauritz, as Eucherius, Bishop of Lions, records) thus bespake his Fellow
Soldiers, How fearful was I lest any of you under the pretense of defending
your selves (as was easy for men armed as ye are to have done) should have
attempted by force to have rescued from death those blessed Martyrs? Which had
you done, I was sufficiently instructed by Christ's own example to have
forbidden it, who expressly remanded that Sword into its sheath, that was but
drawn in his own defense; thereby teaching us that our Christian Faith is much
more prevalent than all other Arms. This Tragic Act being past, the Emperor
commanding the same thing to the Survivors, as he had done before to the whole
Legion, they unanimously returned this answer, Tui quidam, Caesar, Milites
sumus, etc. We are thy Soldiers, O Caesar, we took Arms for the defense of the
Roman Empire; we never yet deserted the War, nor betrayed the trust reposed in
us; we were never yet branded with fear or cowardice, but have always observed
thy commands, until being otherwise instructed by our Christian Laws, we refuse
to worship the Devil, or to approach those Altars that are always polluted with
blood. We find by thy Commands, that thou resolvest either to draw us into
Idolatry, or to affright us by putting every tenth man of us to death: Make no
farther search after those that are willing to lie concealed; but know that we
are all of us Christians; all our Bodies thou have indeed under thy power, but
our Souls are subject only to Christ our Redeemer. Then Exuperius being the
Standard Bearer to that Legion, thus bespake them, Hitherto, Fellow Soldiers, I
have carried the Standard before you in this secular War, but it is not unto
these Arms that I now invite you, it is not unto these Wars that I am now to
excite your valor, for now we are to practice another kind of warfare; for
with these weapons ye can never enforce your way into the Kingdom of Heaven.
And by and by he sends this message to the Emperor, Against thee, O Caesar,
Desparation it self (which usually makes even Cowards valiant) cannot prevail
with us to take Arms. Behold we have our weapons fixed, yet will we not resist;
because we choose rather to be killed by thee than to overcome thee, and to dye
innocents, than to live Rebels to either God or thee. And a little after he
adds, Tela projicimus, etc. We abandon our Arms, O Emperor, and will meet thy
Messengers of Death with naked breasts, yet with hearts strongly munited with
Christian Faith. And presently after followed that General Massacre of the
Thebean Band, whereof Eutherius gives this Narrative, It was neither their
Innocence, nor their Numbers, that could exempt them from death, whereas in
other more dangerous tumults, a multitude though offending, are rarely
punished. The same story in the old Martyrology we find thus recorded, They
were every where wounded with Swords, yet they cried not out; but disdaining
the use of their Arms, they exposed their Breasts naked to their persecutors:
It was neither their numbers, nor their experience in War, that could persuade
them to assert the Equity of their cause by their Swords, but placing his
example always before them, who was led to the slaughter dumb, and li^e a Lamb
to be Sacrificed, opened not his mouth; they also in imitation of him, like the
Innocent Flock of Christ suffered themselves to be worried and torn in pieces
by an herd of Persecuting Wolves. Thus also do the Jews of Alexandria testify
their Innocence before Haccus, We are, as then see, unarmed, and yet we are
accused unto thee as public enemies to the State. These hands which nature
has given us for our defense, we have caused to be pinnacled behind us, where
they are of little use, and our breasts we expose naked to every man, that has
a mind to kill us. And when the Emperor Valens cruelly Persecuted those
Christians, which according to the Holy Scriptures, and the Traditions of the
Ancient Fathers, professed Christ to be (...), that is, Co essential with the
Father; though there were every where great multitudes of them, yet did they
never attempt by Arms to secure themselves. Surely, 1 Pet. 2.21.
wheresoever patience in times of persecution is commended unto us, there we
find Christ's own example held out unto us (as we read it was to the Thebean
Legion) for our Imitation. Mat. 10.39.
As therefore his Patience, so ours, should have no bounds nor limits but death
it self. Luke 12.33.
And he that thus loses his life, is truly said by Christ himself to find it.
Thus having sufficiently proved, That he that is invested with the Supreme
Power ought not to be resisted. Now I must admonish our Reader of some things,
wherein he may mistake, by judging that those men do dash their Feet against
this stone, who indeed do not.

VIII. That a free people may make War against their Prince.
In the first place therefore, Those Princes that are under the body of a
people, whether they originally retained such a power, or by some after
contract or agreement made with them, as in Lacedaemon; if they do violate the
Laws, or wrong the Commonwealth, may not only be by force resisted, but if it
be necessary, may be punished with death: As it befell Pausanias King of the
Lacedaemonians, of whom Plutarch thus, The Spartans taking to heart the death
of Lysander, sentenced their King to death, Plut. vit. Lysand.
because leaving Lysander out of Cowardice, whom he was sent to relieve, he had
fled for safety to Tegra. The like he records in the life of Sylla, The
Spartans, says he, deposed some of their Kings, as being unfit for Government,
because they were of low and abject Spirits: Yea, and of Agis he reports, That
being their King, yet was condemned, though unjustly. Now seeing that there
were in Italy diverse such Kingdoms, it is no marvel that Virgil, having first
recorded those many wicked Acts done by Mezentius, adds, The Hetrur'ans
therefore, all in a just rage,
To bring their Kings to Judgment do engage.
Of whom an old Hetrurian South-sayer, spoke thus, -- Whom their just Woe
Arms, as against a Foe.


IX. Or against King that has renounced his Kingdom.
Secondly, If a King or any other shall renounce his Empire, or manifestly
forsake it; against such a Prince or King, after that time, any thing is
lawful, that may be done to a private man. But this then we must observe, That
he that is careless and negligent only in his Government, cannot thereby only
be judged to have forsaken it.

X. Or against a King that would alienate his Kingdom.
Thirdly, It was the opinion of Barkley, That if a King would alienate his
Kingdom, or subject it to another, he lost it. But here I make a stand, For if
the Kingdom be Elective, or descend by succession, such an Act of Alienation is
in it self null. And whatsoever is in it self null can have no effects of a
just Right. Wherefore, as also of that Kingdom that is barely usufructuary,
whereunto I have likened such a King, the opinion of the Civilians is to me
more probable, That in yielding up his Kingdom to a stranger he confers
nothing: And whereas it is said that the fruits and profits revert to the Lord
of the propriety; It is to be understood, after such a time as is prefixed by
the Law. Yet notwithstanding, if a King shall really endeavor to deliver up,
or subject his Kingdom to another, I doubt not but that in this case he may be
resisted: For Empire is one thing, and the manner of holding that Empire
another. The alteration whereof the people may hinder; for that is not
comprehended under the notion of Empire. Whereunto may that of Seneca be not
unfitly applied: Although our Father be in all things to be obeyed, yet not in
those things wherein he cease to be a Father.

XI. Or a King that Invades the whole body of the people in an hostile way.
Fourthly, as the same Barkley observes, If a King shall endeavor, with a mind
truly hostile, the destruction of the whole body of the Nation over which he is
set to govern, he loses his Kingdom and may be resisted: Which I grant. For
the end of all Government being for mutual conservation, he that wilfully
resolves to destroy, can have no right to Govern. Wherefore he that openly,
either in word or deed, professes himself an enemy to the whole Nation, is in
that very act presumed to abjure and renounce the Government of it. When Scylla
had depopulated not Rome only, but almost all Italy, one seriously advised him,
that it was fit to spare some, that he might have some to govern; Vt essent
quibus Imperassent. But this case can hardly be found in any King that is of
sound mind, and that governs one only Nation. But in case he govern more than
one, it may so happen, that in favor to one, he may endeavor to destroy the
other, that so he may plant it with new Colonies. Plut. vit. lib. Grac.
Gracchus his Arguments are very Ingenious, whereby he proves, that a Tribune
of the people (being therefore accounted sacred and Inviolable, because he is
consecrated by the people to defend them) in case he shall endeavor to oppress
them, to diminish their power, and to take from them their rights of suffrage;
does thereby actually degrade himself, in not performing that for which that
honor was conferred on him. For to admit (says Gracchus) that the Tribunes of
the people may in some cases imprison their Consul; and yet to deny that the
people have a power to take away the Tribunitial power from him that abuses
it, even against those from whom he received it, seeing that both the Consul
and the Tribune were by the people created; would be very absurd. The like we
find asserted by Johannes Major, namely, That a people cannot abdicate their
power of deserting their Prince, in such cases as tend to their manifest
destruction. Both which may be very well expounded by what has been herein
already delivered.

XII. And against him who breaks the condition upon which he was admitted.
Fifthly, In case a Kingdom be confiscate either by Felony committed against
him whose the Fief is, or by any clause or condition expressly made and agreed
on at his admission to the Kingdom. As in case the King shall do this or that,
his Subjects shall then stand absolved from all obligation of duty and
obedience unto him Vid. Marian. de regno Arragon.
. In this case also a King may recede into the condition of a private person.

XIII. And against him who havlng but one part of the Sovereign power, Invades
the other.
Sixthly, If a King having but one part of the Sovereign power, and the Senate
or people the other, if such a King shall Invade that part which is not his
own, he may justly be by force resisted, because in that part he has not the
Sovereign power: Which I believe may take place, although it be said, That the
power of making War is in the King. For this is to be understood of a Foreign
War; since otherwise, whosoever has any part of the Supreme power, cannot be
denied a Right to defend his own even by force, which when it happens, even the
King himself may justly by the Right of War, lose even his own part of the said
Empire.

XIV. And against him, who grants such a License in certain cases.
Seventhly, If in the Translation of the Empire it be expressly said, That upon
some certain events that may happen it may be lawful to make resistance. For
although it could not then be conceived that by that agreement any part of the
Sovereign power was intended to have been retained; yet certainly it may be
conceived, that some kind of natural Liberty was thereby understood to have
been reserved to the people, and exempted from the power of the King Thuan. l.
131. in anno 1604. Id. l. 133. an. 1605. de H^ngaria.
. For possible it is for him that alienates his own Right, to diminish and
decurt the Right that he gives by certain clauses or Articles of Agreements,
whereof we may find in Histories many examples Meierum in anno 1339. de Flandr.
and Brab and^.
.

XV. An Usurper how far to be obeyed. The Acts of an Usurper binding, and why.
We have hitherto treated of him who has or had a Right to Govern; now
something we must say of him that Invades or Usurps the Government, not after
he has either by long possession, or by Consent or Agreement obtained a Right
unto it, but so long as the cause of his unjust acquisition continues. And
certainly during the time that he possesses the Empire, his Acts may have
power to bind: But yet, not as they are his, for Right to command he has none,
but upon this presumption, That he who of Right should govern, whether King,
People or Senate, had rather that his Laws for that time should be binding,
than that the people should live altogether without Laws, and without
Judgments, which must necessarily introduce the greatest disorder and
confusion. Cicero condemns Sylla's Laws as too cruel against the children of
those that were proscribed, in making them incapable of suing for Honors; yet
he thought fit, that those Laws should be observed: Affirming (as Quintilian
tells us) that the state of the Commonwealth was so contained in those Laws,
that if they were not kept, the Commonwealth at that time could not have
subsisted. Florus also concerning the Acts of the same Sylla, says thus,
Lepidus went about to rescind the Acts of this so great a man, and indeed not
without cause, if at least, he could have done it, without the ruin of the
Commonwealth. And by and by, It was expedient for the Commonwealth, being
then sick and wounded, to be governed by any Laws whatsoever, rather than to
fret and scarrifie her Wounds by attempting an untimely Cure. Yet
notwithstanding at such times, and in such Cases wherein our obedience is not
so exquisitely necessary, and yet may help to confirm the Usurper in his unjust
possession; If by our disobedience we incur no great danger, we must not obey.
But whether it be lawful for the people by force of Arms to deject him that
shall thus usurp the Sovereign power, or to kill him, is disputable.

XVI. An Usurper may be killed, during the War, if no contract be made with him.
And in the first place, If he that usurps another man's dominion have not
gained it by a Just War, that is, by such a War as has all the Rights required
by the Law of Nations; nor by any contract or agreement made with him, or Faith
given to him, but that he holds his possession by force only: The Right of War
seems in this case to continue; By the Right of the War continued.
and therefore what may lawfully be done against an enemy may lawfully be done
against him, whom any private man that has not given his Faith to him, may
lawfully kill. In reos Majestatis, and publicos hosts omnis homo miles est;
Against Traitors and public Enemies every private man, says Tertullian, is a
Soldier. So against such as desert their Colors in the time of War, Tertul.
Apolog.
it is indulged unto every man to take public revenge in order to the common
safety.

XVII. Or by virtue of some antecedent Law.
The same may be said if before such an Invasion there were extant any such
Law, authorizing any private man to kill him who dares in his presence commit
such or such a fact. As for example, If being but a private man he shall go
with a guard about him, or if he shall attempt a Fort, or kill a Citizen
uncondemned, or illegally condemned, or if any man shall presume to create a
Magistrate without just suffrages. Many such Laws we may read of to have been
in force among the Cities of Greece, with whom it was also thought lawful to
kill such Tyrants. Such was that Law of Solon in Athens, renewed after his
return from Piraeeus, against such as had abolished Popular Government, or that
after such abolition had born any office. The like Law there was also in Rome,
called the Valerian Law, against any man that should assume the office of a
Magistrate without the peoples consent, making it lawful for any man to kill
such a man uncondemned, Plut. Public.
as Plutarch relates, where he thus distinguishes Solon's Law from that of
Publicola's: Solon would have such a man legally convicted; but Publicola
permitted any man to kill him that usurped the office of a Magistrate without
any formal Process. And such was the Consular Law, immediately after the
Decemviral Government, That no man should dare to create a Magistrate without
an Appeal; and he that created such, might by the Laws both of God and Man be
killed.

XVIII. By his Commission who has Right to the Empire.
No less lawful it is for him to kill an Usurper, that has an express Warrant
so to do from him to whom the just Right of Government belongs, whether it be
in the King, the People, or the Senate. Amongst whom likewise we may place the
Protectors or Guardians of Kings during their nonage: Such as was Jehojada's to
King Joas, at whose command Athalia was deprived at once both of her Life and
Kingdom, 2 Chronicles. 23.

XIX. Why an Usurper may not be killed, but in one of these cases.
Now unless it be in one of these Cases, I cannot perceive how it should be
lawful for any private man by force either to deject, or to destroy him that
usurps the Imperial Dignity: Because possible it is, that he who has the true
Right had rather prefer the peace and tranquillity of his Subjects, though
under the Usurpers power, than embroil his Country in blood, or to vex his
Subjects with Civil War, which are the sad and bloody effects and consequences
that attend the Murder or Expulsion of Kings, especially if his quarrel be
espoused, by either a strong Faction at home, or powerful Friends abroad: Or
because it is at least doubtful, Whether that King, People, or Senate, in whom
the Right of Empire is, are willing that the matter should be brought to so
desperate an issue. And without the precise knowledge of this, all violence of
this kind is unjust. It is very true, what Favonius in Plutarch observes, Pejus
est Bellum Civil Dominatu Illegitimo; Vita Bruti.
An Intestine War is more destructive than any Tyranny. For though the Rage of
Incensed Tyrants may produce more Tragical effects upon some particular
Families,
yet the Deluge of a Civil War spreads farther, continues longer, and leaves
more dreadful prints behind it, than any Tyranny. Give me any peace, says
Cicero, rather than a Civil War. Titus Quintus told the Lacedaemonians, Live. 34.
That it would be much better for them to bear with the Tyranny of Nabis, than
by endeavoring by Arms to recover their lost Liberty, to make the Tyrants
Grave in the ruins of their City. And to this purpose was that prudent advice
of Aristophanes, Leo in Civitate non est alendus; si alitus sit, ferendus est:
Either not to nourish a Lion, or being nourisht, not to provoke him. It is
indeed a very difficult case, and will admit of a strong debate, Whether Peace
or liberty be most acceptable: Whether Peace or Liberty be most eligible.
Cicero makes this question, the most difficult of all others in the Politics
to be resolved, Whether our Country being oppressed by Tyranny, we may attempt
to redeem it, although with the danger of its desolation. But it is not for
private men to determine what the Common Judgment of the people would be in
this case, but this we abominate as being grossly unjust: to make our Countries
Liberty a cloak for our own Ambition; and to pretend to deliver her, when we
intend to inslave her. Sylla being demanded, App. Civit. 1.
Why he marched into his own Country so strongly Armed: answered, Vt eam a
Tyrannis liberem; To deliver it from Tyrants: When he that pretended so to do,
was himself the greatest Tyrant. Plut. Catent Major.
So Antiochus brought a Mighty Army into Greece, alleging that he came to set
Greece at Liberty, when indeed it wanted none. His pretense, was Liberty, but
his Intent, Tyranny. Crudelitatem Damnat and crudelitatem init; By condemning
Tyranny, he trapans them into it: Cicero Ep. Fam. l. 1. No alterations of
Government without violent commotions.
It was much better Counsel, that Plato gave to Perdiccas, which Plato thus
renders, That he should attempt no more in the Commonwealth, than he could
justify to his Subjects: For that nothing savouring of force or violence
should be obtruded upon either our Parents or our Country. To the same sense
is that of Salust, Though thou could govern thy Country or thy Parents by
force, and correct at thy pleasure every small offense, yet would it seem harsh
and troublesome, especially considering that no violent thing can be permanent,
Bello Jug.
nor any Mutations of Government, without violent Commotions, War, Rapine, and
such like acts of hostility. Not much different from this is that of Statius in
Plutarch, Vita Brut.
It becomes not a wise or a prudent man to endanger himself in Popular Tumults,
amongst either Fools or Knaves. Whereunto we may also not impertinently refer
that of St. Ambrose, To deliver the poor from oppression, so it be without
raising Tumults or Sedition, is commendable.
This also will highly advance thy Credit and Reputation, if thou can rescue
the poor out of the hands of the Oppressors, and deliver him that is wrongfully
condemned to dye; so that thou do it without raising Tumults or moving
Sedition: Lest otherwise thou should seem to do it rather out of an
affectation of Popularity and Vain glory, than out of Pity and Commiseration,
and so consequently make those wounds deeper which thou should heal. It was
the opinion of Aquinas, That the pulling down of Government though Tyrannical,
was sometimes Seditious. Neither are we much moved to the contrary, by that
fact of Ehud to Eglon King of the Moabites. For the Scriptures plainly tell us,
Judge. 3.15.
That God raised up Ehud to deliver Israel: What Ehud did was done by the
special Warrant of God himself. Neither does it appear, That this King of the
Moabites had by Agreement no right of Sovereignty. Nehem. 9.27.
For God we read did execute his Judgments even against other Kings by such
Instruments, as he himself was pleased to raise up to that purpose, as may be
collected by Jehu against Joram, 2 Kin. 9.

XX. No private man to be Judge in this case.
But it is especially to be noted, That no private person ought to determine
Controversies of this nature, but should rather obey the present possessor. As
Christ commanded to pay Tribute to Caesar Mat. 22.20.
, because his Image made the Money current; which was a convincing argument
that he was in full possession of the Empire at that time: For the Coining of
Money was ever the most certain sign of the Possession of the Empire.

CHAP. V. Who may lawfully make War.
I. The Efficient Causes of War are either the Principals in their own cause:
II. Or in the Cause of another. III. Or Instrumental as Servants and Subjects.
IV. By the Law of Nature none are prohibited from War.
I. The principal efficient Cause.
AS in all other things, so in Actions that are voluntary there are three sorts
of Causes efficient, that is to say, Principal, Auxiliary, and Instrumental.
The Principal efficient cause in a War is for the most part he whose the
quarrel is: In a private War, any private person: In a public, he that has
the public Power, especially if it be Supreme. Whether a War may be justly
undertaken in the behalf of another, not making War, shall be discust
hereafter. In the mean time this is most certain, That naturally every man has
a Right to revenge his own quarrel, and for this cause were hands given unto us.

II. Auxiliary.
Neither have we a Right to vindicate our own quarrels only, but we may both
lawfully and laudably improve our Right to the vindication of other men's also.
They that treat of Offices say truly, Nihil utilius homini homine altero.
That there is nothing so usuful and profitable unto man, as another man. There
are several obligations, wherein we stand bound to one another for mutual help
and assistance; For kinsmen do usually combine to help one another: So one
Neighbor being oppressed invokes the help of another: So also do Citizens the
aid of their fellow-Citizens. Aristotle thought it a duty incumbent to every
man to assume Arms, either to defend himself, in case an injury were offered
him; or to assist his Kinsmen, his Benefactors, or his Companions, in cases of
oppression. And in Solon's esteem, That was the best Commonwealth, wherein
every man was as sensible of Injuries offered to another, It was well said of
Menander:
as if they had been offered to themselves: ^^juriarum si Improbis Auctoribus
Reponeremus ultionem singuli,
N^b^ pu^antes fieri, quod sit alteri,
Inter nos juncti, Conspiratis viribus,
Non praevaleret Innocentiae Impetus
Audax Malorum: Qui custoditi undique
Jussique poenas quas merentur pe^^^e,
Aut nulli penitus essent, aut pa^ci admodum.

Hence is that of Plautus, Praetorquete Injuriae prius Collum quam ad vos
perveniat: Break the Neck of an Injury before it comes at us. But though all
other obligations should fail, yet it is sufficient that we are linkt together
in the common stock of humanity. For, ab homine nihil humani alienum; Nothing
that is incident to humane nature, should be to any man strange. Democritus
tells us, That it is a duty incumbent upon every man, so far as he is able, to
succor all that are oppressed with wrong, and not at all to neglect it: For
this, says he, is both just and honest: Which Lactantius thus expresses, God,
says he, who denied to all other creatures Wisdom, furnished them with such
natural Muniments, as were sufficient to defend them from violent incursions
and sudden dangers: But unto man, being sent into the world naked and unarmed;
the better to instruct him in Wisdom, has God, besides other endowments, given
him Natural affection, whereby we are taught to love, cherish, and defend each
other, and readily to give and receive aid and assistance one to, and from
another, against all outward assaults and dangers whatsoever.

III. Or Instrumental, as Servants, etc.
By Instruments here, we mean not Arms or such like, wherewith we either offend
others, or defend our selves: But such voluntary Agents, as are contented to
receive directions from others. Such as a Son is to his Father, being a part of
himself naturally; or as a Servant to his Master, of whom he is legally a part.
For as a part does not only refer to the whole in the same relation, as the
whole is the whole of the part; but this very thing That it is, is the whole:
So Possession is said to be something of him that possesses it. And Servants,
says Democritus, are to be used as we do the members of our body, some to one
purpose and some to another. Now what Servants are to a Family, the same are
Subjects to a Commonwealth, and so are as Instruments to him who has the
Supreme power.

IV. Naturally no man excused from War.
Without doubt, Naturally all that are Subjects may be employed in the War,
though some special Laws may excuse some; as heretofore Servants among the
Romans, and now every where the Clergy: As the Levites among the Jews were not
liable to the duties of War (as Josephus testifies) which Law notwithstanding,
as all others of that nature, must admit of the exception of extreme necessity.
And let this suffice to be spoken in general concerning Subjects and Servants:
For what more especially concerns them, shall be handled in their proper places.

Hugo Grotius OF THE RIGHTS OF PEACE and WAR. BOOK II.
CHAP. I. Of the Causes of War, And, First, of War made in our own defense.
I. What Causes may be said to justify a War. II. That they arise either from
our own defense, or from requiring what is our own, or is due to us, or from
punishment. III. War made for the defense of our Lives, lawful. IV. Against the
Aggressor only. V. In such dangers as are imminent and certain, not in such as
are opinionative only. VI. War made in defense of our Limbs, lawful. VII.
Especially in defense of Chastity. VIII. War made in defense of our selves, may
sometimes be omitted. IX. Our defense made against a Person publicly very
profitable, sometimes unlawful by the Law of Charity. X. To kill a man for a
box on the ear, or for some such reproach, or rather than flee; not lawful for
a Christian. XI. To kill a man in defending our Goods, by the Law of Nature not
unlawful. XII. How far permitted by the Law of Moses. XIII. Whether, and how
far permitted by the Evangelical Law. XIV. Whether the Civil Law, permitting a
man to kill another in defense of himself, do give a right so to do, or only an
impunity, explained by a distinction. XV. When Duelling may be lawful. XVI. Of
defense in a War that is public. XVII. If only to weaken the growing power of
a Neighbor Prince, the War be to be reputed unlawful. XVIII. The defense of
him who has given just cause of a War, is likewise unlawful.
I.
LET Us now proceed to the Causes of War: I mean those that justify a War; for
there are others that excite men to War under the notion of Profit, which are
sometimes distinct from those which excite upon the account of Justice; which
as well between themselves, as from the beginnings of War, (such as was the
Heart in the War between Turnus and Aeneas) Polybius does accurately
distinguish. 3 Hist.
And though the difference between these are manifest, yet are the terms
usually confounded: For even these causes which we call justifying, Livy, in
the Oration of the Rhodians, calls the beginnings of the War; Lib. 45.
Surely ye (say the Rhodians) are those very Romans, who pretend that your Wars
are therefore successful, because they are just; and that glory, not in the
event, that ye can conquer, but in the beginnings, that ye never make War but
upon just cause. And indeed there was hardly ever any Nation that did so long
pride themselves in the justice of their Quarrels, as the Romans did. The
Romans, says Polybius, took very great care not to begin a war with their
Neighbors; and would have all men believe that they never made war but to
repel Injuries. This Dion testifies in that notable comparison he makes between
the Romans, and Philip of Macedon, and Antiochus. And elsewhere he tells us,
That the Romans took special care that their Wars should be just, nor did they
ever decree a War rashly, or without just cause. In the same sense does Aelian
call the Causes of War, Lib. 12. c. 53.
the beginnings of War: And Diodorus discoursing of the war between the
Lacedaemonians and the Aelians, makes the pretenses and the beginnings of the
War to be the same. These justifying Causes of War are the proper Argument of
our present discourse, Lib. 8.
whereunto that of Coriolanus in Halicarnassensis is pertinent, Let your first
and principal care be, that the ground of all your Wars be pious and just. So
is that likewise of Demosthenes, O^y^th. 2.
As in the building of houses, Ships, and such like, the Foundation or
Groundwork should be firm and lasting, (otherwise the Superstructures will
soon decay and totter:) So in all our Enterprises, Justice and Truth should lay
(as it were) the first stone, Lib. 12.
if we expect that the success should be honorable. No less pertinent to this
purpose is that also of Dion Cassius, In all our Wars let our chief regard be
to Justice; for if she lead up the Van, true valor may bid fair for the
victory: But if she be wanting, though our first attempts flatter us, De rep.
l. 3.
yet will the end prove inglorious. And that also of Cicero, Those wars are
unjust that are undertaken without cause. And therefore in another place he
sharply reproves Cassius for passing with his Army over Euphrates, when there
was no just cause of War given, which holds true no less in public wars than
it does in private. Hence arises that complaint of Seneca, Do we restrain
Homicides, and punish Murderers, and yet esteem the depopulation of whole
Nations glorious? Covetousness and Cruelty know no moderation, Commissions are
every day sent out by the Senate and People to execute Acts of Cruelty, and
what we privately forbid, we publicly commend. Homicidium cum admittant
singuli, crimen est; virtus vocatur, cum public geritur; When a private man
commits a murder he is punished as a Criminal, but when thousands are publicly
taken away and destroyed, it is instantly canonized for virtue and valor. It
is true indeed, That War being undertaken by public Authority, like the
definitive Sentence of a Judge, has some effects of R^ght (whereof more anon:)
But yet are they not altogether blameless, unless there be a just cause to
warrant it. Thus was Alexander for invading the Persians and other Nations
without cause given, deservedly censured by the Scythians in Curtius, and
elsewhere by Seneca, for a Robber, and by Lucan for a Thief, by the wise men of
India as a Scourge to all Nations, and the common pest of mankind; and before
that by a Pirate, for the greater Pirate of the two. So Justin speaking of his
Father Philip, says, That two Kings of Thrace were thrust out, and deprived of
their Kingdoms through the fraud and villainy of a Thief: Whereunto we may
likewise refer that of St. Augustine, Remota Justitia, quid sunt Regna nisi
magna Latrocinia; Take away Justice, and what are Kingdoms but great Robberies.
With whom accords that of Lactantius, Inanis gloriae specie capti, sceleribus
suis virtutis nomen imponunt, Being blinded with self-love and vain glory, they
miscal all their vices virtues. Nor was Justin Martyr much amiss, when he said,
What Thieves do in desert places, the very same do such Princes who prefer
Opinion before Truth. Now other just causes of making war there can be none,
but injuries: So St. Augustine, The wrongs done on the one side, make the war
done on the other side just. So also says the Roman Herald, I do testify and
declare, that such a people are unjust and have not done us right; thereby
intimating, that the people of Rome might justly make war upon them.

II. War made, 1. For Defense. 2. For Redemption. 3. For Punishment, lawful.
Now look how many causes there are of civil Actions, so many there are of a
just war; for Vbi desinunt Judicia, incipit Bellum; Where Judgments cease, War
begins. Now at the Law, Suits arise either for prevention of Injuries not yet
done, as when Cautions and Securities are required, that no acts of violence
shall be offered, nor any damages done us; or for injuries already done, as
namely, that they may be recompensed, or the person injuring punished. But as
to that which comes under the notion of Reparation, it refers either to that
which is, or was ours, from whence arise vindications and some personal
Actions; or to something that is owing and justly due unto us, whether by some
contract or agreement, or for some hurt done unto us, or by the Law, whither
also we are to refer those things, which are said to arise, as if they were due
by contract or by some wrong done unto us; from which heads arise the other
condictions: That which concerns Facts to be punished, requires, First, An
Accusation, Secondly, Courts of Judgment. Most men assign three just causes of
a War, namely, for Defense, for recovery of what is ours, and for punishment:
which three we shall find summed up by Camillus in his denouncing War against
the Gauls, Omnia quae defendi, repetique and ulcisci fas sit; All which may
lawfully be defended, recovered, and revenged. In which enumeration, unless we
take the word, Recovered, in its larger signification, it will not include the
exacting of that which is due unto us; which was not omitted by Plato, when he
said, That war might be justly made, not only when a man is oppressed by
violence, or when he is pillaged, but when he is fraudulently dealt with, and
so deceived of what is his due. Wherewith accords that of Seneca, Aequissima
vox est, and jus Gentium pr^ se ferens, Read quod debes; (...) h^r^s. (...) 4.
T^^ is a righteous saying, and consonant to the Law of Nations, Pay what thou
^^^st. And (...) a clause always inserted in that form used by the Roman
Heralds, ^
Quas ^ec (...) solverunt, nec fecerunt, quas dari, fieri, solvi oportu^^, That
they neither gave, (...) what they ought to have given, paid, and done. So
likewise S^lust in his History, ^
^^re (...) tium res repeto, According to the Law of Nations, I require what is
mine own. A^ (...).
Serv^^s (...) Virgils Aeneads tells us, That When the King of the Heralds was
sent to denounce war, (...) to the borders of the enemies Country; and after
some ceremonies, cried out with a loud voice, T^^^ he denounced War against
them for such or such causes; either because they had wronged their A^sociates,
or because they had not restored something unjustly taken away, or that they
had not delivered up offenders to be punished. And when St. Augustine says, 10
Quest. upon J^s.
That just Wars are usu^lly thus defined, Quae ulciscuntur injurias, Which
revengeth injuries: He takes the word [to revenge] in its general
signification, for that which includes also, To take away; as may ^ppear by the
words following, which do not express an enumeration of parts, but an
illustration by examples. So That Nation (says he) or City may by Arms be
assaulted, which shall neglect either to punish their own Subjects for injuries
by them done, or to r store that which by force was taken away. And by this
light of Nature it was, War d^fensive.
that the King of the In^^e^ (...) Diodorus relates) accused Semiramis for the
breach of the Law of Nations for ^^king war upon him, without any injury at all
done her. For, as Josephus says, A^^ l. 17.
They that (...) to them that live peaceably, do but enforce them into Arms to
defend themselves. Li^^ l. 5.
^^^s do the Romans plead with the Senones, that they ought not to have invaded
them, i^^^^ no w^ys wronged them: For men, says Aristotle, do not usually make
war, but upon them w^o ^^v^ ^^st injured them. As Curtius testifies of the
Abian Scythians, Lib. 2.
the most innocen^ of all the ^^rbarians, Armis abstinebant nisi lacessiti,
They never made wa^, unless highly p^o^^^^^. And Plutarch of Hercules, That
being thoroughly provoked, he subdued all in his own defense. The first cause
then of a just war are injuries not yet done, that threatens immi^^^^ d^^ger to
our Persons or our Estates.

III. War in defense of our selves lawful.
That it is lawful for us to destroy him by war, that would otherwise destroy
u^, o^ ^t least draw us into imminent peril of our lives, has already been
proved. Now it is to be observed, That this right of defending our selves does
principally and primarily arise, not from the malicious attempt of the
Aggressor, but from the right that Nature gives unto every creature to preserve
it self: So that although he by whom our lives are so endangered be without
blame, as the Soldier in doing but his duty, or happily a man mistaking me for
another, or being mad, or in a dream (as we have read of some to whom it has
thus happened) yet shall not my right to defend my self be thereby taken away.
For to justify me it suffices that I am not bound to suffer that which he
attempts to do against me, no more than if a wild beast should attempt to worry
me.

IV. Yet against the Aggressor only.
But what if some innocent persons are so interposed, that I cannot preserve
mine own life either by flight or just defense, unless I either kill or trample
upon them, may I justly do it? There are some (even among Divines) that hold I
may Cajet. 2. 2. Art. 6, 7, q. 2.
: And certainly if we hearken to the dictates of Nature alone, she will
persuade us to prefer our own safety before our respect to society. But the Law
of Charity, especially the Evangelical Law, which commands us to love our
Neighbor as our selves, does not permit it: It was notwithstanding very well
said of Aquinas, if it be rightly understood, 2. 2. q. 64. Art. ^.
that in a true defensive war, we do not intentionally kill others; not but
that it may sometimes be lawful, if all other means of safety fail to do that
purposely whereby the Aggressor may die. But that this death was not our
choice, nor intended primarily (as in capital punishments) but our last and
only refuge, there being no other visible means then left to preserve our own
lives, but by killing him that seeks to kill us; nay and even then, he that is
thus violently assaulted ought to wish rather that some other thing would
happen, whereby the Aggressor might be either affrighted or some ways disabled,
than that he should be killed.

V. And where the dangers are certain, and imminent, and not opinionative only.
It is also here required, that the danger be present and ready instantly to
fall upon us^ As when a man shall furiously assault another with a drawn Sword,
or snatch up any weapon with a manifest purpose to kill him, I confess that in
this case he may lawfully, by way of prevention, kill him. Thus Phrynichus in
Thucydides pleads T^^cydides l. 8.
, He must needs be void of malice, who being reduced by them into so great
jeopardy, did attempt this, or that, or any way to free himself, rather than
suffer himself to be destroyed by those malicious men: For as well in Morals as
Naturals, it is not possible to find a point without some latitude; but they
are much mistaken, and so apt to mislead others, who think their own fears, how
ever occasioned, sufficient to justify the killing of any man by way of
pre-occupation, as though it were in their own defense. For it was well said of
Cicero, De off. lib. 1.
That many inconveniences do usually arise from vain and idle fears, and much
mischief we oft-times do unto others, whilst we fancy that the like was
intended against us. So Clearchus in Xenophon, I have known many so far
transported, either through calumny or suspicion, against those they f^ared,
that choosing rather to prevent dangers than to undergo them, they have most
miserably afflicted those who never intended them hurt, nor entertained a
thought of evil against them. To the same purpose is that of Cato in his
Oration for the Rhodians, What we object that they intended to have done
against us, shall we by way of Anticipation do against them? It was notably
said by Aulus Gellius, To Gladiators preparing for fight, this was the
condition proposed; either to kill his Adversary or to be killed by him: But
the life of man, says he, is not beset with such hard and unavoidable
necessities, as that thou must either do, or suffer wrong inevitably. For as
the same Cicero speaks in another place, Who did ever enact such a Law, or what
Commonwealth could ever without manifest danger to it self, so much as
tolerate so great an inconvenience, as that one man might lawfully kill
another, and then justify the fact by his own unnecessary fears, as namely,
lest otherwise he should have been killed by him? Very apposite whereunto is
that of Thucydides, Lib. 1.
What is to come is as yet in the Clouds, uncertain whether it will fall or
not; neither ought any man to be so far incensed thereby, as to undertake a
present and certain war, for that which is as yet future, and so uncertain. And
in another place elegantly describing the many inconveniences that were likely
to ensue upon those seditions which then began to vex the Grecian Cities, adds
this as one, That they strove which of them should first commit those
villainies, Lib. 3.
which they feared another would do before them. Caesar when he had possessed
himself of the Commonwealth, pleaded in his own defense, That it was the fear
of his Adversaries that had enforced him thereunto. Cavendo ne metuant homines
metuendos ultro se efficient, etc. says Livy, Lib. 3.
Pretending to free themselves and their Country from the fear of other men,
they voluntarily made themselves formidable; and as if there had been a
necessity of either doing, or suffering wrong, we ease our selves of our
burdens but oppress others. But against these, that saying of Vibius Crispius,
so much celebrated by Quintilian, may be well applied: Quis te sic timere
permisit? Who permitted thee thus to fear? Or that of Livia in Dion, Infamiam
eos non effugere, qui facinus quod timent occupant, They can never wipe off the
stain from their honors, who commit that wickedness which they fear another
would act before them. But what if the dangers that threaten us be not
imminent, but future, by conspiracy, or by treachery, as by poison, or false
accusation, or by false witnesses to procure an unjust Sentence, or the like; I
deny that in such cases it is lawful to kill any man, that is, if either the
danger may by any other means be avoided, or that it be not sufficiently clear,
that it cannot otherways be avoided: For commonly delays afford us many
remedies, and produce many accidents which are unexpected, whereby these
dangers may be avoided: Inter os and offam, as it were, between the Cup and the
Lip. Although there be many, I know, both Lawyers and Divines, that give a
larger Indulgence in these cases, yet this other opinion does not want the
defense of good Authors, as being indeed the better and safer of the two.

VI. Or for the defense of our Limbs.
But what if the danger threaten the maiming of our limbs only? Surely since
the loss of a limb, especially if it be any of the principals, is very grievous
and equivalent to the loss of life it self, and such also as may bring us into
the danger of death, if it cannot be otherwise avoided, he that shall certainly
endanger it may lawfully be killed.

VII. Or for the defense of our Chastity.
And without doubt the same may be done in defense of our chastity, seeing that
not only in the general repute of the world, but by the Law of God himself,
Chastity is aequiballanced with life. The Law (says St. Augustine) gives power
to the Traveller to kill the Thief, who would otherwise kill him; and to a man
or woman to kill him that shall attempt to ravish them, Aug. lib. 1. de lib.
Arb.
or after the Rape is committed if they can. So Paulus the Lawyer, He that
shall slay a Thief or a Ravisher, ought not to be punished, for by a public
and heroic Act, the one defends his Life the other her Chastity. Amongst women
that have thus defended their Chastity with the death of him that attempted it,
Heliodorus records the noble act of Heraclea, which he calls a Just defense of
her honor. Another amongst men we have recorded by Plutarch, Plut. vit. Marii.
of one Trebonius, who slew C. Lusius a Tribune of the Soldiers, and Marius
his own Sisters Son, for attempting to bugger him; for which fact he was by
Marius honored with a Crown.

VIII. Yet may this defense sometimes be laudably omitted.
Although (as we have said) it be lawful to kill him that is ready to kill me,
yet is it more commendable to choose rather to be killed than to kill, which
some grant; yet so that it be with this limitation, that it excepts that person
upon whom the safety of many does much depend. But I cannot judge it safe to
impose this so contrary a Law to patience upon all those whose lives are
beneficial unto others; and therefore I think it more convenient to restrain
the exceptions to such only, whose office and duty it is to defend others from
violence. As to those whom we have contracted with as our Guards, to defend us
in our Journeys either by Sea or Land, and to such as are public Governors,
unto whom that of Lucan may not unfitly be applied.

Cum tot ab hac anima populorum vita salusque
Pendeat, and tantus caput hoc sibi fecerit orbis,
Saevitia est voluisse mori:
Since on thy life so many lives depend,
And wast made Head the Members to defend,
To wish to dye were madness.
As also that of Curtius, Whilst thou unadvisedly exposest thy life to so many
perils, Lib. 10.
thou do not remember how many of thy Subjects lives thou endangerest, which
thou ought to defend.

IX. Our defense against a person publicly useful, unlawful by the Rule of
Charity.
On the contrary, It may so fall out, That the life of him that endangers ours,
is so beneficial to others, that he cannot without sin be killed; and that not
only because it is forbidden by Gods Law both in the Old and New Testament,
which we have already proved, where we showed that the Person of a King is
sacred, but by the very Law of Nature: For the Right of Nature as it signifies
a Law, does not only respect those things which are agreeable to that which we
call Expletive Justice, but it comprehends also the Acts of Fortitude,
Temperance and Prudence, as being in some certain circumstances, not only
honest and laudable, but strictly due. But unto this that we have said we stand
obliged by Charity. Neither am I at all startled from this opinion of mine by
what Vasquius urges, That the Prince that shall Insult over an Innocent
person, does ipso facto cease to be a Prince; than which, nothing can be said
less true, or more dangerous. For as Right and Property, so Sovereignty is not
lost by mis-government, Sovereignty not lost by mis-government.
unless some Law does so determine it. But by what Law was it ever yet decreed,
that Kings should lose their Sovereignty, by an offense committed against a
private person? Surely there was no such Law ever yet found, nor I believe ever
will be: For the condition of Princes would then be very slippery, and the
Commonwealth soon fall into Confusion. And as to that which Vasquius lays as
his ground work, The errors of Vasquius confuted.
whereupon he erects this and many other such dangerous conclusions; as namely,
that all Sovereignty was granted, for the benefit of the Subjects, and not of
the King; were it universally true, yet were it nothing to the purpose: For the
thing it self does not then wholly cease, although the benefit or profit
thereof does in some part cease. And whereas he adds, That every man wishes
well to the Commonwealth for his own sake, and therefore every man should
prefer his own safety, before that of the Commonwealth, it does not follow.
For although we do wish the preservation of the Commonwealth for our own
sakes, because our own safety is included in it; yet do we not wish it only for
our own sakes, but for the good of others also. For the opinion of those
Philosophers, who hold, that true friendship does arise out of some Indigency
or Insufficiency, is rejected as false and pernicious, seeing that Man, being a
creature naturally sociable, is promptly and of its own nature inclined unto
it. But that I should prefer the common safety before mine own, Charity does
sometimes persuade, and sometimes command me. Plutarch will tell us, Vita Pelop.
That the principal part of Valor is, to defend our Defender. And Cassiodore
illustrates this, by a very fit comparison, If the hand, says he, by its
intelligence from the eye, perceive a blow threatening the head, without regard
to its own safety, it will interpose it self between it and danger: From whence
he infers, That they who to redeem their Prince his life, hazard, nay lose
their own, do but the same in the Politics, which the hand by Instinct does in
the body Natural. It is no marvel, says Seneca, if Kings and Princes being the
Guardians of public States, be dearer unto us than our own Relations: For if
in the Judgment of the Wise, Lib. 1. de Clem. c. 4.
the Public Good be to be preferred before any private man's; It will easily
follow, That he that is the Father of our Country, deserves to be dearer unto
us than the Father of any one Family. Or as St. Ambrose speaks, He that
delivers a Nation from desolation, merits more love, De Off. l. 3. c. 3
than he that delivers us from particular dangers. And therefore the same
Seneca does highly commend Calistratus and Rutilius, the one an Athenian, the
other, a Roman, who refused to have their own estates restored unto themselves
by the public ruins: Lib. 6. de B^n. c. 17.
esteeming it much better to perish by themselves, than to redeem their own
lives and fortunes with the destruction of their Country.

X. To kill any man for a slight injury not lawful for Christians.
There are also, that hold it lawful to defend our selves from any slight
Injuries, as a box on the ear or the like, even by killing him that attempts
it. But respect being herein had to Justice merely Expletive, I cannot dissent
from them. For although the Inequality be very great between a box on the ear
and death, yet he that shall attempt to injure me, does therein give me a
Right, that is, a kind of Moral power to oppose him without any limitation, so
far forth as I cannot otherwise repel or avoid the Evil intended against me.
Neither does Charity by it self seem to restrain us herein, in favor to the
Nocent; Linus the Musician, provoking his Disciple Hercules with a slight blow,
had his brains beaten out by Hercules with his own Harp: and being by some
arraigned for the Murder, appeals for his Indemp^ity to that Law of Rhadamant,
whereby he that wounded another, being by him first assaulted, was declared
Innocent. But the Christian Law does clearly forbid it: and Christ himself does
expressly charge his Disciples patiently to suffer any such slight injury though
reiterated, rath^r than to hurt our adversary: How much more does he forbid
them to kill him, to avoid a box on the ear? By which particular Instance, we
are sufficiently cautioned against that of Covarruvias, That Man's understanding
being well Instructed in what is naturally Right, will not endure, that any
thing should in natural reason be permitted, that is not also permitted by God,
who is very Nature it self. For God, who is so the Author of Nature, that he
sometimes acts Freely above Nature, has a right to bound and to limit us by
Laws, even in such things as are in their own nature, Free and Indefinite; much
more has he power to oblige us to that which is naturally honest, though not
due. But a wonder it is, That since Gods will is in this point so expressly
declared in the Gospel, Navarr. c 15. 4 Henr. de Irregul. c. 11. Vict. de Jure
Be l^, n. 5.
there should yet be found so many Christians, yea, and those Divines, who
maintain, not only that for the avoiding of a box on the ear, or such like
slight Injury, we may lawfully kill our adversary: But that in case he that
has smitten us do fly, yet may we pursue him even to death, for the
vindication of our own honor, which seems to be as equidistant from natural
reason, Honor, what?
as from Christian piety. For, Honor est opinio de excellentia, Seen more in
patience, than an overhasty revenge.
Honor is an opinion of some Excellency in the person honored. But he that
can bear such an Injury, does express himself eminently patient, and by that
means does rather magnify than diminish his own honor. Neither is it much
material, That some men of corrupt Judgments do reproach this Virtue by the
name of Cowardice. For those shallow heads can neither alter the thing it self,
nor lessen the reputation of it. Neither was this the Judgment of the
Primitive Christians only, but of the Ancient Philosophers also, who ever
accounted it an argument of a weak and pusillanimous Spirit, Not to be able to
digest an Injury, To kill a man for a slight Injury, though naturally lawful, yet
is contrary to the Laws of God, and of Charity.
as we have elsewhere showed. And from hence we may collect, how deservedly
their Opinion is to be exploded, who hold it lawful by even Divine Right, (for
that it may be so by the Right of Nature I deny not) to defend our selves even
from mean and slight Injuries by even the death of the person Injuring,
although we may without any danger avoid him by Flight, or otherwise; Because
it is accounted dishonorable in a Person of Quality so to do: whereas indeed,
the scandal is not justly given, but by a popular misprision unjustly taken,
and by all those who understand wherein true Wisdom and Valor do consist, to
be contemned. And it does not a little rejoice me, that herein I have the
concurrent opinion of that Excellent Lawyer Charles Moline amongst others to
abett me. In addit. ad Alex. Cons. 119.
Now what is said of a blow on the cheek, and of Flight, the very same may also
be said in all such cases wherein our honor or reputation is not greatly
wounded. But what if a man shall speak that of us, which being believed, may
blast our credit and esteem with men? Some there are that would persuade us,
that we may lawfully kill him also, Pet. Navar. l. 2. c. 3. n. 376.
but very erroneously, and against the Law of Nature: For this is no fit means
whereby we may hope to clear our Fame, or to repair our good Name being sullied.

XI. To kill any man in defense of our goods, by the Law of Nature not unlawful.
Let us now proceed to those Injuries, whereby we are damnified in our Goods or
Estates. And if we respect Expletive Justice only, I shall not deny, but that
for the conservation of them, the Robber, if need be, may be killed: For as
there is some Inequality between a righteous man and a Thief; so in the
judgment of the Law, the Goods of the Innocent are evenly balanced with the
Life of the Nocent: Whence it follows, That if we respect this Right only, a
Thief flying away with stolen Goods, if those Goods cannot otherwise be
recovered, may be killed. So Demosthenes in his Oration against Aristocrates,
Is it not, says he, a very sad Case, and contrary to all Law and Equity, that
I should not be permitted to use violence against him, who by violence has
dispossessed me of my Goods? Neither does common charity (setting aside the Laws
of God and men) hinder me by way of precept, unless it be for things of so
small value, as deserve rather to be slighted, than with such eagerness to be
prosecuted; which is an exception that some Writers do admit of.

XII. How far lawful by the Law of Moses.
Let us now see in what sense the Mosaical Law is to be understood, whereunto
that old Law of Solon was parallel, which Demosthenes commemorates against
Timocrates, from whence was taken the Law of the 12. Tables; and that of Plato
also in his Ninth de Legibus. All which Laws do agree in this, That they put a
great difference between a Night, and a Day-Thief. But concerning the reason of
this Law there is some question; Some are of opinion, The Day-Thief and the
Night-Thief distinguished.
that the only reason of this Law is, because by Night it cannot well be
discerned, whether he that breaks into an house, be a Thief or a Murderer; and
therefore to prevent the worst, he may be killed as a Murderer. Others place
the difference in this, That in the night a Thief cannot be known, and
consequently the Goods stolen cannot be recovered, and therefore he may be
killed. But in mine opinion, the Lawmakers had no regard to either of these
properly; but rather, that none ought to be killed for stealing of Goods
directly; yet, that in some cases, the Goods stolen might occasion the death of
him that stole them; namely, when the Goods stolen cannot otherwise be
recovered, but by killing him who is flying away with them. But if I my self in
pursuing after my Goods, shall be brought into danger of my life, then it may
be lawful for me to redeem mine own life out of danger, though with the hazard
or loss of another man's: Neither can it be justly objected against me, that I
brought my self into that danger, because I proposed nothing to my self, but
either to defend or recover what was mine own, or to take the Thief, which to
me is lawful: nor do I injure any in the use of lawful means to a lawful end.
But the difference between a Nocturnal and a Diurnal Thief consists in this,
That in the Night there can hardly be found witnesses sufficient to testify
the matter of Fact. Therefore in case a Thief be found slain, we do easily give
credit to him, In the Night Witnesses cannot prove the Theft.
who shall confess that he slew him in his own defense; especially if the slain
Thief be found with any offensive weapon by him. For this is by the Hebrew Law
required, That the Nocturnal Thief was found digging through an house, as some
have translated the Hebrew word; or as others better, with a digging Instrument
about him; as the most Learned of them have expounded that place of Jer. 2.34.
I am the more easily guided to this Exposition by the Law of the Twelve Tables,
A Nocturnal Thief may be killed, if he have any Weapons about him.
whereby it is forbidden to kill a Thief that robs by day, with this exception,
Unless he shall defend himself with some weapon. Now it is to be presumed, that
a Thief that robs by Night, has weapons about him to defend himself. By
Weapons the Lawyer Cajus understands, either Iron, a Club or a Stone: on the
contrary, it is the opinion of Vlpian, That whereas it is provided by the Law,
that he that kills a Thief by Night shall be indempnified, it ought to be
understood, in case, that in defending his Goods, he could not otherwise free
himself from danger. There is therefore (as I said) a strong presumption for
him that kills a Nocturnal Thief: But if there were sufficient witnesses to
prove, that he that killed such a Thief, was in no such danger, then the
presumption would instantly cease, and he that should kill the said Thief,
should be held guilty of Homicide. It is likewise provided by the Law of the
Twelve Tables, That he that apprehends a Thief, whether by Day or Night, should
publish it with an Outcry (as Cajus instructs us:) that so, A No^turnal Thief
must be assaulted with an Outcry.
if it might be, both the Magistrate and the people may be called in to assist,
and give testimony to the matter of Fact. But because such a Concourse cannot
so easily be procured in the Night, as in the Day, therefore is more credit
given unto him that shall affirm, that he killed the Nocturnal Thief in his own
defense. Not unlike is that Hebrew Law in the case of Ravishment, which if
committed in the Field, the person ravished was to have been believed; but not
so, if in the City: Because there she both might and ought by her clamor, to
have called in the Neighbors to her assistance. Not that the Case of
Ravishment is always to be determined by this Rule, as Philo well expounds
this place: A Rape committed in the Field, and in the City, differenced.
For possible it is, that such a fact may be committed in a City without
clamor, by stopping the mouth: and that in the Field, it may be done with
Consent (as in his Book of Special Laws he affirms). But that this Rule is to
guide us in ordinary cases of Ravishment, moreover admitting the dangers to be
equal, yet in the Night, because we cannot so well descry what the dangers are,
either for Quality or Quantity, therefore though the dangers may be less, yet
the terror must needs be more. Let this also be observed, that both the Hebrew
and Roman Laws, though they appear severe, yet are they usually addulced by
Charity. For they would not willingly punish Theft with death; there being so
great a disproportion between Life and Goods, unless the Injured person in
striving to recover his Goods, shall be brought in jeopardy of his Life. And
Moses Maimonides has left this Charitable Rule for our Guide, whilst he gives
no private man power to take away the life of another, unless it be in the
defense of that, which being lost, is irreparable; such as are Life and
Chastity.

XIII. How far forth Lawful by the Evangelical Law.
But the Question is, Whether the Evangelical Law, being more Sublime and
Spiritual, than either the Jewish or Roman Laws, do not require a more strict
and perfect obedience, than those Laws do? And clearly it does. For if our
Blessed Savior do enjoin us to part with our Coat and our Cloaks, and if St.
Paul admonish us to suffer our selves to be dispoiled of our Goods, rather than
contend in Law for them, which is a kind of unbloody strife: How much more does
that Law expect, that we should rather forbear and forego things though of a
greater value, than embrew our hands in our Neighbors blood, he being Gods own
Image, and of the same nature with our selves? Wherefore if our Goods, being
stolen, may be recovered or defended without the danger of bloodshed, we do well
so to do: But if not, we ought rather willingly to lose them, than to stain our
hands with the blood of him that robs us: unless the things stolen, be such as
are necessary for the sustentation of our selves or our families, and which
cannot by any Courts of Justice be recovered; because happily the Thief is not
known, and that there is some fear, Forte quia fur sit ignotus, and Spes si^
aliq^a sine caede rem abituram.
that without bloodshed, the thing will be gone. And although almost all both
Divines and Lawyers, do at this day maintain, That to kill him that shall
attempt to rob us of our Goods is lawful, even beyond those limited bounds,
wherein the Jewish and Roman Laws permitted it; as namely, in case the Thief
being possessed of our Goods do fly; yet that this was the sense of the Holy
Scriptures in the Primitive Times, I cannot doubt. De lib. Arb. l. 1.
Neither did St. Augustine think otherwise, as may appear by these his own
words, Quomodo apud divinam providentiam a peccato liberi sunt, qui pro his
rebus, quas contemni oportet, humana caede polluti sunt? How can they appear
Innocent before Gods Tribunal, who for things not worthy a Christians care, can
pollute themselves with humane blood? But doubtless in this, as in many other
things of the like nature, Cum tempore laxata est disciplina; The ancient
discipline of the Church is through age grown feeble; and by little and little,
instead of fitting our lives to the strict Rules of the Gospel, we expound
those Evangelical Precepts, in favor to the Corruptions of the Age we live in.
This ancient discipline although almost forgotten among the Laity,
yet was wont heretofore to be strictly observed by the Clergy; but now it is
almost, if not altogether laid aside by these also. Thus St. Jerome complains in
the Life of Malchus 4 Vid. c. s^scepimus, de ho^icid voluntario: and Canon. de
his Did. 1.
, After the Church of Christ began to be governed by Christian Princes, she
grew outwardly indeed, more Splendid, but inwardly, less virtuous.

XIV. Whether the Civil Law does permit only, or approve of this kind of
Intersection.
It is questioned by some, Whether the Law, at least the Civil Law, as it has
power of life and death, in such cases wherein it suffers a private person to
kill a Thief, does so far legitimate the Fact, as to make it altogether
blameless? But this I cannot grant. For in the first place, The Law it self
has not the power of death over all its subjects for every offense; but for
such Crimes only as deserve death. And very probable is the opinion of Scotus,
That it is not lawful to adjudge any man to death, unless it be for such
Crimes, as the Mosaical Law punished with death; with this addition only, or
for such Crimes, as may be equally emballanced with them. Neither does the
knowledge of the will of God, which alone can satisfy the mind, concerning
this so great and weighty a matter, so plainly elsewhere appear, as it does in
that Law of Moses, whereby the Thief is not adjudged unto death. Besides, the
Law neither ought, nor usually does give unto any man a Right to put a
Malefactor to death privately, though he deserve it, unless it be for some
great and horrible Crime. Otherwise the Authority of Magistrates and Courts of
Judicature would soon dwindle to nothing. Wherefore when the Law licentiates a
man to kill a Thief, it is to be understood, that it rather tolerates, than
approves of the Fact; and that it acquits him only of the punishment, but not
that it gives him a Right to do it.

XV. Single Combats when lawful.
From what has been already said, we may collect, that in two cases single
Combats may be undertaken by private men without sin. In the first place, If
the Challenger shall grant his adversary a license to sight, and otherwise
threatens to kill him immediately in case he refuse. In the next place, when a
King or a Magistrate shall give license to two Malefactors equally deserving
death, to try it out by Combat, whether of them shall live: And he that does
so, does not so rightly perform his duty as he might: For it were much better,
if he intended to satisfy himself with the death of one only, to determine,
which of them shall dye by Lot.

XVI. Of Defense in a public War.
What we have hitherto said concerning the Right we have to defend our Persons
and Goods, belongs principally to private War, yet so, as it ought also to be
applied to a public, some respect being had to the difference that is between
them. So says Ammianus, To all that are Invaded by a Foreign Power, Lib. 23.
Lib. 5.
there is but one Law, and that perpetual; namely, by all possible means to
defend their own safety, notwithstanding the force of any Custom. For as
Al^x^nder in Herodotus told his Soldiers, He that is the Aggressor, has no
colorable excuse for his Injustice: But he that defends himself only, gathers
Courage from a good Conscience, and fortifies his hopes in this, that he does
not infer an injury, but repel one. Now in a private War, this Right of killing
another, is but momentany, and determines as soon as the matter may be brought
before a Judge. But in a public War, which begins not, till Justice and
Judgment cease, there this Right lasts long, being fomented and perpetuated by
such accidents, damages and wrongs, as are every day renewed in the prosecution
of the War. Besides, in a private War, we have scarce any other end, than our
own defense: But the Supreme Powers have a Right, not only to defend
themselves, but to be avenged on others, whence it is likewise lawful for them;
not only to resist certain and present dangers, but to prevent such as seem to
threaten afar off: Not directly, for that (as I have already said) were
Injustice; but indirectly, by revenging such wrongs as are already begun,
although not ^u^ly ^^ns^mma^e; concerning which, we shall have cause to speak
anon.

XVII. When only to curb the power of a Neighbor Prince unlawful.
Neither can we approve of that which some Authors do affirm for truth; namely,
That by the Law of Nations, it is a sufficient ground of a Just War, to
suppress the over-swelling Power of some ambitious Prince, who if let alone,
may exceedingly annoy us. That in our ordinary Councils of War, Alb. Gent. lib.
1. c. 14.
this usually comes in debate, I grant. But not so much under this Notion,
because it is Just, but as it is profitable: So that in case the War for other
causes be Just; for this cause it may prudentially be undertaken: And this is
all that the Authors before cited do in effect say. But from a mere
possibility, that we may hereafter suffer wrong, to conclude a present Right,
or a necessity of doing wrong, will prove no good Inference in a Court of
Equity. Bal. lib. 3. de rer. divis.
For all humane affairs are obnoxious to so many contingencies, that no security
can be expected in this life. Against all uncertain and Ignote dangers, our
safety consists not in our Arms, but in our Innoxious prudence, co operating
with the Divine Providence.

XVIII. Defense in such as have given just cause of War unlawful.
Nor less unsatisfied am I with their Reasons, who affirm, That their Defense
is Just, who have given an occasion of a Just War. Because, say they, There are
very few that will be contented with such a measure of revenge, as is
proportionable to the Injuries they have received. For this very Fear of what
is to come, being uncertain cannot justify us, in the defense of Injuries
already done. For so, the malefactor may justify his resistance of the public
Ministers of Justice, by his fear, that they will inflict a greater punishment
upon him, than his Crime deserves. But he that gives just cause of offense,
ought in the first place to tender such satisfaction, as in the judgment of
unbyassed men, is equivalent to the wrong done; which if refused, then is his
defense Just. 2 Kings 18.7, 14. etc. 19.
Thus did Hezekiah, who for breaking the League which his Ancestors had made
with the Kings of Assyria, being threatened with War, confessed his fault, and
promised to pay whatsoever the said King should impose upon him; which being
done, when notwithstanding he was afterward Invaded with a powerful Army,
trusting to the Justice of his Cause, he made his defense, and had the Most
High God for his Protector. Pontius Samnis after he had made restitution to the
Romans of their Goods, and delivered up the Authors of the War, pleads thus
with them, We have I hope appeased the just wrath of Heaven against us for our
breach of the League, and am confident that the same Incensed Deities, who have
constrained me to make full restitution of whatsoever we have formerly taken
away from the Romans, will also plague the Romans for despising the expiation
we offer, for the breach of so Insolent a League. And by and by after, What
more, O ye Romans, do I owe to you, or to your League, or to the Gods, that are
the Impartial Arbiters of Leagues? To whom shall I appeal? Whom will ye accept
of to judge of the Causes of your Anger, and of the measures of my sufferings?
I refuse no people, no person. So when the Thebans had offered to the
Lacedaemonians, all the satisfaction that in equity they could require, and
were by them rejected; Aristides told them, That the Justness of the War was
thereby translated from the Lacedaemonians to the Thebans. The like we read of
the Switzers, who in revenge for a Load of Sheepskins taken from a Merchant of
theirs, by the Earl of Romont, having spoiled his Country, did afterward
(being threatened by the Duke of Burgundy) offer to restore all they had taken
from the said Earl, and to give what further satisfaction the said Duke should
require: The refusal of which offer, cost the Duke his life, and the loss of
almost all his Jewels and Treasure, as Comines testifies. Lib. 5. chapter 1.


CHAP. II. Of such things wherein Men have a Right in Common.
I. The division of that which we call Ours. II. The Rise and Progress of
Propriety. III. That some things will not admit of Propriety, as the Sea, taken
universally, or as to its principal parts, and why. IV. Places ^ot Inhabited
are the first occupiers; unless in the generality it belong to some one people.
V. That Beasts, Birds, and Fish are the first occupiers, unless by some Law
restrained. VI. That there remains a Right in Common to the use of things
properly our own, in times of necessity, and whence this arises. VII. But not,
in case that necessity be otherwise avoidable. VIII. Nor if there be the like
necessity in the possessour. IX. The things so used, to be restored as soon as
we are able. X. An Example of this Right in War. XI. In things properly ours,
there may be a Common Right, if those things bring profit unto others, without
any detriment to our selves. XII. Hence arises a Right in Common to a running
Water, which if not used, is lost. XIII. That there is a Right to pass either
by Land, or through Rivers. This explained. XIV. Whether Taxes or Tolls may be
imposed on Merchandises carried from place to place. XV. That there is a Right
to stay or sojourn in any place for a while. XVI. That there is a Right of
habitation appertaining to such as are banished their own Country, submitting
to the present Government. XVII. A Right to inhabit desert places, how to be
understood. XVIII. A Right to such acts or things, without which men cannot
conveniently live. XIX. A Right to buy things necessary. XX. But not, to sell
their Commodities. XXI. A Right to contract Marriages: Explained. XXII. A Right
to do such things as are permitted to all strangers promiscuously. XXIII. Which
is to be understood, of such things as are permitted by the Law of Nature, but
not of such things as are permitted out of Grace and Favor only. XXIV. Whether
it be lawful for one, people to contract with another, That they shall not sell
their Commodities to any other Nations, but themselves only.
I. The division of what we call Ours.
THat War may be undertaken for Injuries not done, we have seen proved. Now it
follows, that according to the order we proposed, we discourse of the Second
Branch of the causes justifying a War, namely, for Injuries actually done. And
herein, first of Injuries done against that which is ours: Now of that which is
ours, Some things are ours by a Right common with all Mankind, and some things
are ours, in our own particular Right. We shall begin with that which is ours
in common with others. This Common Right is either directly in some Corporeal
thing, or to some Acts. Things Corporeal are either such as do admit of no
propriety, or such as properly belong to some persons. Of things whereof there
is as yet no propriety, some there are that cannot be impropriated, and some
there are that may. Now that this may be rightly understood, we must search
into the rise or beginning of propriety, which Lawyers call Dominion.

II. The original and growth of Propriety.
Almighty God, as soon as he had created the World, did immediately confer a
Right generally to all mankind in things of this Inferior Nature. And so again
when he had renewed the world after the Flood, as may be seen Genesis 1.29, 30.
and Genesis 9.2. Genesis 1.29, 30.9.2.
All things at first (says Justin) were promiscuously common and undivided to
all, and as it were one entire Patrimony bequeathed unto all. Whence it came to
pass, that every man did catch whatsoever he would to his own use, and consume
what could be consumed. And the free exercise of this Universal Right was then
instead of Propriety: For whatsoever any man did thus catch unto himself, no
man could take from him without injury. This may be very fitly illustrated by
that Simile which we find in Cicero concerning a Theater, De s^^ibus l. 3.
which we know is a public place, and common to all that come; yet may that
particular place which I possess be rightly called mine. There are Seats that
are common to all Roman Knights, but that amongst them is mine own, De benefic.
l. 7. c. 12.
says Seneca, which I actually possess. Which state of things might very well
have lasted, had men either persisted in the same inoffensive simplicity, or
could they have embraced each other with the same mutual endearments of
charity. An experiment of the former we have in some people of America, A
Community of all things.
who have continued in that happy Communion for many ages, with admirable
simplicity: And for those that lived in the like Communion, through Charity, we
have the like precedents in the Esseni, and in the Primitive Christians at
Jerusalem, and their followers, the Pythagoreans; Gell. l. 1. c. 9. ad finem.
Porphyr. Diog. Laert.
and now also in not a few, who lead lives purely Monastical. The nakedness
wherein our first Parents were created, did sufficiently evidence their
simplicity, which consisted rather in their Ignorance of Vice, than in their
knowledge of Virtue: As Trogus testifies of the Scythian. The men of the first
age (says Tacitus) were free from inordinate affections, The Simplicity of the
first age, wherein it consisted. Ep. 90.
untainted with wickedness, clear from any thing that might occasion reproach;
and consequently without restraint or punishment. Thus Seneca also testifies of
them, They were, says he, ignorantly Innocent: And afterward, speaking of the
four Cardinal virtues, he adds, Some resemblances of all these, there were in
that plain and simple life they led: As having their minds distracted with no
manner of Cares: As Josephus testifies, And to the same purpose writes
Macrobius, At the first the Conversation of men was with such an Innocent
Simplicity, as had no commixture at all of evil in it, being altogother
unacquainted with that guile and subtilty that now rages in the World. The
Wise man terms it Sincerity; (...). Wisd. 3.24. (...).
and so does St. Paul, Ephesians. 6.24. and sometimes it is called singleness, which
is opposed to craft and subtilty. They then made the worship of God their only
care, which was symbolized by the Tree of Life or Divine Wisdom, Prove. 3.18. As
Philo, Arbor vitae.
and the learned among the Jew^ explain it; with whom agrees St. John, Apoc.
22.2. Their diet was as simple as their lives; for they fed on nothing but what
Nature liberally afforded them, See Ecclus. 40.17. And of the four Rivers.
Ecclus. 24.55. The Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, what it signified. Eccl.
7.29.
without Cultivation. But in this Innocent Simplicity they continued not long,
but wandering in devious paths, and making every day new experiments, they
became by degrees acquainted with Sin, which stands Emblem'd out in Scripture
by the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, that is, of those things which they
had power to use well or ill: which Philo calls (...), an Intermediate
Prudence; or a Prudence which is conversant about things in themselves
Indifferent. Whereunto Solomon had respect, when he tells us, That God made man
upright, that is, Simple, but he has found out many Inventions: Which Philo
expounds, Many subtle Devices; Which, as Dion Prusaeensis observes, were no
whit to those that succeeded to our first Parents, advantageous as to Life; For
they made use of their Sagacity not so much to fortify themselves with Justice
and Temperance, as to corrupt themselves by voluptuousness. Those most ancient
Arts, as the Tilling of the Earth, and the depasturing of Cattle were first
exercised by the first brethren, not without some kind of distribution of the
Fruits. This diversity of Arts begat a kind of Emulation, and this ended in
Murder. And afterward, when by Conversation the bad infected the good, there
grew up a Race of men, who for their violence and oppression, The Age of the
Giants.
were called Giants; which the Greeks called (...), because they observed no
other rule of Justice but their own strength, and therefore thought all to be
their own, which they could conquer. But the World being cleansed from blood
and rapine by the Deluge; Lust, inflamed with Wine, succeeded to Cruelty, and
brought forth Incest, and such like unnatural Coitions. But that which
especially blew the Coals of discord among Princes and Nations, was that
Heroic Sin of Ambition, Ambition. Genesis 13.
whose Emblem was the Tower of Babylon; whence the division of Tongues caused
their dispersion into several Countries; some possessing one part of the Earth,
and some another. But yet still among Neighbors there remained a Communion not
of Cattle, but of Pasturage; for so large a proportion of ground (being but
thinly peopled) might without any Inconvenience, sufficiently supply all their
necessities.

To mark their own, Virg. Georg. 1.
and trench out others Land
Was not yet Lawful.
Until at length, the numbers both of Men and Cattle increasing, the Land also
became sub-divided, not into Nations and Provinces as before, but into single
Families. Genesis 13. Genesis 21.
And whereas in dry and sandy regions, Springs though very necessary, yet were
not able to supply a multitude; Therefore did every man strive by taking the
first possession of them to make them his own. All these things we may trace
out of the Sacred story, whereunto we might add the concurrent Testimonies both
of Philosophers and Poets, who have treated of the first state of things held
in common, and of the subsequent distribution of them, but that I have done it
elsewhere. Mari libero^ c. 15.
From hence we learn the true cause why men departed from that Primitive
Community of things, first of movables, and afterward of immovables: Namely,
because repining to be at Natures bare allowance, that is, to feed on Roots and
Herbs, to make their habitations in Caves, to go naked, or clad with barks of
Trees, or Skins of Beasts (as the Scritefinni described by Procopius did) they
made choice of a more delicate kind of living, which would roquire industry,
Got. 2.
which every particular man was in every thing to use for himself. Now that the
Fruits of the Earth could not be conveniently laid up or disposed of in common,
will easily be granted; First, by reason of the vast distance of the places
inhabited, the one from the other. And Secondly, because of the great defect of
Love and Charity among men: By reason whereof, no due equality could be
observed, either of Labor in their Acquisition, or of Temperance in their
Consumption. And from hence we may further learn, for what causes things were
reduced into Propriety: Not by the sole act of the Mind; for no one man could
possibly know what another would have to be his own, See as to this matter what
the honor of the English Nation, Seldom has traduced unto us out of the
Gemara and the Al^oran, in his Thalassocratico.
that he might forbear it. Besides, possible it is, that diverse men might be
competitors for one and the same thing. But things became proper by compact or
agreement, and that either express, or by partition; or tacit, as by present
occupancy: But as soon as experience had taught them the inconveniences of
holding things in common, and yet before Division was first instituted, it is
very probable, that they unanimously agreed, That what every man possessed at
that time should be his own. Thus Cicero, To the end that of what nature had
made common, each man might call something his, it was agreed, That look what
every man had in possession, he might hold as his own. And in another place De
sinib. l. 3.
, It is generally granted, says he, neither does nature her self envy it, That
as to things appertaining to life, Quisque sibi malit quam alteri acquiri;
Every man had rather enjoy them himself, than that another should have them.
Whereunto we may add that of Quintilian, If this be the state and condition of
things, That whatsoever is useful to Men, belongs properly to him that
possesses it; then surely whatsoever is justly ours, cannot justly be taken
from us. Which very thing Cicero illustrates by a Similitude borrowed from
Chrysippus of a race, Vbi currendo licet adversarium vincere, non detrudendo;
Wherein a man might overcome his adversary by running, but not by detrusion.
This was wise Solon's wish, Riches I fain would have, but if ill got
(Let them be never so great) I wish them not.
And when the Ancients styled Ceres the Lawgiver, and called her holy
Mysteries Thefmophoria, they doubtless insinuated that the division of the
Earth into Cornfieldsd, was as it were, the Creation of a new Right. For as an
house or field unoccupied is common, but if possessed, the possessors. So the
Earth is divided into several parcels, that each man may till, and hold his own.

III. That some things will not admit of Propriety; as the Sea, taken
Universally.
Now these things being admitted, we say, That the Sea, considered either
Universally, or as to its principal parts, cannot be held in propriety by any:
This, because granted by some, as to private persons only, but not unto people
or nations, I shall endeavor to prove, first, by moral reason. For the cause
that moved men to decline their tenure of Lands in common, does not at all hold
in the Sea, which being so vast and boundless, and Ships and Men thereon
employed, so few, must needs be abundantly sufficient to all nations, and for
all uses; whether for Water, Fishing, or Navigation. The very same may be said
of the air, if any such use could be made thereof; whereunto the use of the
Earth under it were not necessary; as in the sport of Hawking, and in the Right
of Habitation; both which do receive Laws from him who is the Lord of the Soil:
For as Pomponius observes, Tam Soli quam Coeli mensura facienda est: And again
Cajus, Cujus est Solum ejus est usque ad Coelum; Whose is the Soil, his is all
that is above it, even unto Heaven. The very same may be said of Shelves and
Quicksands, where nothing can be made to grow, and whereof there can be made
no other use, but to ballast Ships, The Ocean not bounded.
and whereof there is such store, that it cannot possibly be exhausted. There
is also a Natural reason, why the Sea so taken, cannot be held in propriety:
because Occupatio non procedit nisi in re terminata; Nothing can be said to be
possessed, that is not bounded. Hence it is that Thucydides calls Land
unoccupied, Lands unbounded: And Isocrates, Paneg.
of some Land occupied by the Athenians, says, That that Land is by us bounded
and limited. De gener. l. 2. c. 2.
Now Aristotle tells us, That Liquid things cannot be contained within their
own bounds. And if so, then they cannot be possessed, unless they be contained in
somewhat that is solid and comprehensive of them; as Ponds, Lakes, and Rivers
are theirs properly whose the Land is, wherewith they are embanked. Now the Sea
cannot properly be said to be contained in the earth, being equal to it, Nay
greater than the Earth, Greater than the Earth.
as Jarchas in Philostratus thought of the Ocean: And therefore the Ancients
held that the Sea did contain the Earth. Lib. 3. c. 11.
What (says Gellius) can be said to be about the Ocean, when the Ocean does
every where circumscribe, and encompass the Earth? And a little after, Since
that every where, and in all manner of ways it flows about the Earth, nothing
can be said to be about it: But all regions being entrenched and environed with
its Waves, whatsoever is enclosed w^thin the brinks of the Ocean, are in the
midst of it. So likewise speaks Livy of the Ocean, Q^i orbem terraram amplexu
finit; Which encircles with its Waves the terrestrial globe. Seneca calls the
Ocean, Vinculum totius orbis, custodiaque terrarum; The bond or ligament of the
earth, and the safeguard of the Nations. Neither is a division of that vast
body of Waters to be imagined: For when at the first, Lands were divided, the
Sea, at least, the greatest part thereof, was unknown; and therefore no means
can possibly be invented whereby the nations so far distant should agree about
the division of that which they know not: wherefore it is probable, that what
then was the Common Right of all, and in the first division was left undivided,
is not now the proper Right of any, either people or person by division, but by
occupancy, neither can be divided until they have first been occupied.

IV. Places not inhabited are his that first possesses them.
Let us now descend unto such things wherein we may have a Right of Propriety,
though as yet we have none: Such are many places which are as yet desert and
unoccupied; Islands in the Sea, Wild Beasts, Fish, and Birds. Concerning which,
two things are observable; First, concerning places unpeopled: There is a
twofold Right of the occupancy of Lands, the one Universal, or of the whole;
the other Partial, as that of Manors and Farms. The former is usually gained
at the charge, and for the benefit of the Commonwealth, or of him who has the
Sovereignty over the people: The other by private Lords or Farmers, which is
done, rather by assignation from the former, than by any free and unlimited
occupancy. But in case there be any part or parcel of that Country or Island,
(so universally occupied) that is not yet assigned to particular persons, it is
not therefore to be reputed as waste, but it is still supposed to be in the
possession of the first occupants, be they King or People. Such are usually
Rivers, Lakes, Ponds, Woods, steep Mountains, and the like.

V. Birds, Beasts and Fish, the first occupiers, unless restrained by Law.
Secondly, As to Wild Beasts, Fish, and Birds, this is to be observed, That he
that has the dominion over the Lands and Waters, may by his Laws interdict
others from taking them; or being taken, from carrying them away: And by this
Law shall strangers also be obliged. The reason whereof is, That to the
Government of the people it is morally necessary, That whosoever shall sojourn
among the people, though but for a while, yet as soon as he shall enter into
their dominions, he shall render himself Conformable to the Laws and Customs
of that people. Neither does it avail to the contrary, to say, That in the
Roman Law we often read, that by the Laws of Nature and Nations, it is free for
any man to hunt such kind of creatures: For this might be, whilst there was no
Civil Law to prohibit it, as indeed there were many other things that were left
free and arbitrary, by the Roman Laws in the Infancy of their Commonwealth,
which the Laws of other Nations did severely restrain. Though the Civil Law can
enjoin nothing that the Law of Nature forbids, yet it may bound that which the
Law of Nature leaves Free.
But when the Civil Law shall otherwise decree it, then the very Law of Nature
does require that we should observe it. For although the Civil Law can enjoin
nothing that the Law of Nature forbids, nor forbid any thing that it commands;
yet notwithstanding it may limit and circumscribe that which the Law of Nature
leaves free, and forbid that which naturally may be lawful. And so the Civil
Law may by interposing her authority, prevent that dominion which naturally
might be acquired.

VI. In times of necessity what is properly ours, may be common to others.
Let us now examine, Whether in what is properly ours, there may yet remain a
Right in Common to others. Which question may by some be thought strange,
considering that Property seems to swallow up all Right, which was at first
held in Common. But it is not so; for our better understanding whereof, we must
look back to the true meaning of those who first introduced particular
dominion: which may be presumed to be such as did (as little as might be)
recede from natural equity. For if even our written Laws oblige us but to a
Quatenus fieri potest; To what in natural equity may be done (as appears by our
frequent Appeals from our Statute, and Common Laws, unto our Courts of
Chancery:) much more may our Customs admit of such an exposition, which are
not fitted to Words and Syllables. Hence then it follows, that in cases of
extreme necessity that ancient Right of using every particular man's goods, as
if they remained yet in Common, stands in force: For as in all humane Laws, so
in this very Law of Dominion, cases of absolute necessity are generally
excepted. Hence it is, that in Navigation, In Navigation.
If the Common stock of Victuals be spent, what every particular man has is
held as Common. So in the case of Fire, In the case of Fire.
If I cannot otherwise avoid it, I may pull down my neighbors house to
preserve mine own: And on the Seas, If my Ship fall foul, or be entangled with
another, I may cut their Cables to free my self. All which are not Introduced,
but expounded by the Civil Law: But this (as Vlpian tells us) never holds,
unless it be in cases of extreme and manifest necessity, where this case is
added of the blowing up of another man's house to save mine own. For even among
Divines, it is a received opinion, That in a time of absolute necessity, if a
man shall take away from another that without which he that takes it cannot
live, he does not commit Theft: Not, as some think, because it is to be
presumed, that the right owner by the rule of Charity, is bound to give it to
him that so wants it; but, that it may be presumed, that the reducing of things
originally Common into private dominion, was to be understood with some grains
of allowance in such Cases. For if they that first divided such things, had
been demanded, What they would to have been done in such a case, they would
certainly have been of this mind. Necessity (says Seneca the Father) being a
most benign Patroness to humane f^ailty, will not be bound up by any Law, i. e.
Humane, or that is made after the manner of Humane Laws. Quicquid coegit,
defendit; Whatsoever it commands, it also defends, says the same Seneca. In a
Storm it disburthens the Ship with the loss of the Goods, in a Fire it
quenches the stone with the ruin of the Fabric: Philip 11.
Necessity is indeed the Law of time. Thus Cicero, Cassius (s^^th he) passed
over into Syria, another man's Province: If men might freely enjoy the benefit
of our written Laws, but these being by Arms suppressed into his own Province by
the Law of Nature. So Curtius, In a common calamity every man must bear his
portion, and be content with the fortune that befalls him.

VII. But not if the necessity be otherwise avoidable.
But some Cautions ought to be admitted, lest this License stray too far, the
first whereof is this, That all ways and means are in the first place to be
tried, whether this necessity may be otherwise avoided, that so it may appear
unto all men that this necessity is extreme: As we should first make our
application to the Magistrate, and try whether he will relieve us; then to the
owner of the Goods, whether we may by entreaty obtain that which we stand in
need of. Plato would not permit any man to require water from another well,
that had not dug for water in his own grounds, usque ad cretam, even till he
came to chalk, but could find none. Solon required that he should dig forty
Cubits in his own Lands, whereunto Plutarch adds, Subveniendum necessitati, non
instruendum pigritiam; It is sit that men's necessities should be relieved, but
not that idleness should be encouraged. And it was Xenophon's plea to the
Sinopenses, Cyr. exped. l. 5.
Wheresoever we are denied the common right of buying necessaries, there,
whether from Graecians or Barbarians, we will take them by force, yet not out
of perverseness but necessity.

VIII. Nor if there be the like necessity in the right owner.
2. This is not to be allowed, if the right owner be pressed by the like
necessity, for when the case it equal, Possidentis melior est conditio Lactant.
l. 5. c. 17.
, The condition of the present Occupant is to be preferred. A wise man will
rather dye (says Lactantius) than be unjust: He will not dispossess the
Shipwrackt of the plank he bestrides, though he might thereby save his own
life; nor unhorse his wounded Comrade, although by betraying his life, he might
save his own. Will not then a wise man (says Cicero) being famished with
hunger, take away meat from him whom he knows to be good for nothing? Off. l. 3.
No surely, for life it self is not dearer unto me, than this resolution of
mine, Nominem ut violem commodi mei gratia, Not to injure another to benefit my
self. So Curtius, Melior est causa suum non tradentis, quam alienum poscentis;
For better is his condition that gives not what is his own, than his that
requires that which is another man's.

IX. Things thus taken are to be restored when we are able.
Thirdly, When the danger incumbent is past, restitution is to be made, if we
are able: Some there are that think otherwise, being swayed by this argument,
because he that uses his own right only, is not obliged to restitution. But to
speak truly, this right is not his own fully and absolutely, but restrained and
clogged with the duty of restitution, when that necessity shall cease; for such
a limited right suffices to preserve natural equity, against the rigor of
absolute dominion.

X. An example of this right in war.
Hence we may collect, By what Right he that wageth a Just War, may lawfully
surprise and hold some strong place in a Country that is at peace with him,
being but weakly guarded; that is to say, if there be no imaginary but a
certain danger that his enemy may possess himself of it, and thereby do him an
irreparable damage, especially if nothing be taken but what is necessary for
his own Security: As namely, the bare custody of the place, lea^ing the
jurisdiction and profits thereof unto the right owner. And lastly, If it be
done with a full purpose to restore even the custody of the place also, as soon
as the necessity of keeping it for his own indemnity shall cease. Livy l. 24.
Enna, says Livy, was detained either by fraud or out of pure necessity: For
whatsoever here does in the smallest degree decline from necessity, is injury.
The Graecians that stood in great danger for want of Ships, by the advice of
Xenophon, De exped. Cyri lib. 5.
seized such as passed by, yet so; that the Goods were preserved entire for the
Owners, and the Seamen well fed and paid. The First Right therefore, that since
propriety was introduced, pleads for exemption, is this of Necessity.

XI. In cases of innocent profit.
The next is, That of Innocent profit. What should hinder us (says Cicero De
off. l. 1. De benef. lib. 4.
from communicating with others, when we may do it without any detriment to our
selves, especially in those things that are profitable to those that receive
them, and not damagable to us that give them? Seneca will not admit of this to
be a courtesy, to kindle a Coal at our Fire, or to light a Torch or a Candle
by ours: Plutarch accounts it an act of impiety, to cast away what we cannot
eat, to seal up a Fountain when we have drank our selves full, to remove Land
or Sea-marks which have been useful unto us: For, says he, in these things
after that we have satisfied our selves, every man has a common Right.

So a River, as it is a River, is the propriety of those people whose the Banks
are, or his, who has the Sovereign Power over them, in whose power it is to
make Dams or Mills in it, and whatsoever is bred in that River is his: But that
River as it is a flowing Stream remains common, every man has a Right to drink
or to draw water out of it, as well as he that owns it.

Quis vetat apposito lumen de lumine sumi?
Atque cavum vastas in mare servet aquas?
Who at his Torch, light to a Torch denies?
And wh'would engross the Seas vast Cavities?
says Ovid, who also brings in Latona thus bespeaking the Lycians: Quid
prohibetis Aquas? usus communis aquarum.
Why water do you deny?
Whose use should common lie.
Where also he reckons water among those public Gifts that Nature bestows upon
all men alike, the word Public being improperly taken, in which sense some
things are said to be public by the Law of Nations: Virgil tells us the water
is open and common to all, as well Strangers as Natives.

XIII. A right to travel by Land or Sea, common to all.
Thus both Lands, Rivers, and such parts of the Sea as are held by any Prince
or People in propriety, ought to lie open and free to all such as have occasion
to pass over them upon any just and lawful cause; as namely, either because
being expelled their own, they seek after some other Country that lies waste,
or because they desire to traffic with some people remote from them; or even
because they seek to recover what is their own by a just war. The reason is the
same here as above, because it is very probable, that dominion was introduced
at the first with this limitation, that such things should remain in common
use, which might be profitable to some and not hurtful to others: And therefore
the first Authors of Propriety are conceived to have thus agreed it. A signal
example whereof we have in the History of Moses, Numb. 20.21. Numb ^^ ^1
who being to march through the borders of the Edomites and Amorites, offers
these Conditions, That he would travel only through their highways, without
trespassing upon any private man's possessions; if he had need of any thing that
was theirs, he would pay the just price of it. Which being rejected, was ground
sufficient for that War which he made against the Amorites: Whence St. Augustine
thus, Li. quaest. 4 sup. Numb. c. 20.
An innocent passage was denied them, which ought by the Laws of humanity to
lie open and free to all who require it. Whereupon St. Augustine concludes, That
the war made by the Israelites against the Amorites, was just. Hercules flew
Amyntor King of the Orchomenians, Apollodor.
because he denied him a free passage: So did the Graecians make War against
Josephus, because he refused to give them leave to pass through the borders of
his Country. Thus also do the Graecians, Scholiast. in Hor. Carmen in Canidiam.
which were under Clearchus, plead; We (say they) are traveling toward our
own Country, peaceably, if none molest us; but if any shall hinder us, we will
endeavor by the assistance of the Gods to force our way. So likewise Agesilaus
returning out of Asia, when he came to Troas, demanded, An ut Amicum se an ut
hostem transire mallent? Plut. Ages.
Whether they desired that he should pass through their Country as a Friend or
as an Enemy? The like demand was made by Lysander to the Boeotians, Rectis se
hastis se transire vellent, an inclinatis? Whether they would have him to pass
in a peaceful or in a warlike posture? Hist. l. 4.
Thus do the Batavians remonstrance to the Bonnenses in Tacitus, If none oppose
us, our march shall be innocent; but if we find resistance, we will force our
passage with our Swords. Cimon carrying Succors to the Lacedaemonians, led
them through the Territories of Corinth; and being blamed by the Corinthians,
Leave to be first asked.
that he had not first acquainted the City with his purpose, (for they that
knock at other men's doors (say they) enter not but by permission) returns this
answer, But ye (says he) have not knocked at the doors of the Cleonaeans and of
the Megarenses, but have broken them open: Censentes omnia potere debere plus
valentibus, Conceiving that all places ought to lie open to the strongest. But
the most moderate opinion is the best: Leave is first to be demanded, according
to that of Aristophanes, Whilst toward Delphos we our Army lead,
First from Boeotians we free passage craved.
But if it be denied, then may our passage be justly forced by Arms: Which if
denied may be forced.
When the Germans and the French made war one against the other for Maranus,
the Venetians gave free passage to them both, whereof when the Germans
complained, they were answered that they could not hinder it but by Arms, which
it was not their custom to use, but against their public Enemies. Agesilaus in
Plutarch returning out of Asia, Paruta lib. 11.
and demanding free passage for his Army through Macedon, was answered by the
King that he would consult about it: Whereunto Agesilaus replied, Consultet nos
interea intrabimus, Let him consult; and we in the mean time will enter.
Neither may it be justly objected, that the multitude of those that are to
pass, may give just cause of fear; for Jus meum metis tuo non tollitur, My
Right is not taken away by thy fear: Remedies against this fear.
And the rather, because there are certain Remedies provided against this fear;
as that they shall march in small parties, that they shall march unarmed, or
that they shall give security to repair all damages that shall be done, which
was required from Isacius for his passage through Germany, (which custom, as
Strabo notes, was anciently observed in the Country of the Aeleans) or that he
through whose Country the Army is to pass, may at the charge of him that
demands leave, hire sufficient Forces to guard his own Subjects; or that
Hostages may be given, which Seleucus required of Demetrius, to suffer him to
stay a while within the borders of his Empire. Many notable Cautions and
Remedies we may read of in Nicetas, Nicetas l. 2.
made and agreed on by Frederick Barbarossa, De bell. Gall. lib. 1.
and Isacius Angelus, concerning the free passage of an Army: Yet Caesar we
read denied the Switzers passage through his Province, because he believed them
to be a people so rapacious that they could not abstain from acts of violence.
So likewise neither is the fear of him, against whom he that craves passage
makes a just War, any sufficient reason to deny passage: Nor is it sufficient
to say he may pass some other way, for so may any other say, and consequently
by that means all right of passage shall be taken away. But it is enough that
without any fraud or ill meaning, passage is demanded the nearest or most
convenient way; yet certainly if he that craves passage do make an unjust war,
or shall lead with him such as are mine enemies, I may deny them; for it is
lawful for me to meet him even in his own Territories, to intercept his passage
into mine: Neither is there only a Right in common due for persons to pass to
and fro about their lawful affairs, but for their merchandises; for to hinder
any one Nation from maintaining commerce and traffic with another that is
remote from them, To hinder traffic with remote Nations is unjust.
is unjust. For that this freedom may be admitted and maintained, is for the
common interest of humane society, neither can it bring damage unto any: For
although a man do sometimes fall short of that gain, which was not due, but
hoped for only, we ought not to register this among the number of our losses.
To these Testimonies which we have already produced to this purpose, In
legatione ad Cajum.
we shall add this one out of Philo, Merchants Ships do sail over the Seas
without danger, with such Goods as Nations, out of a desire to participate of
each others Commodities, do carry for exchange, whilst they mutually relieve
the wants of the one, with the superfluities of the other. And another out of
Plutarch, who concerning the Sea, speaks thus, Our life, which is otherwise
wild and unfit for commerce, this Element perfects and makes sociable,
supplying whatsoever is wanting in one Nation, out of the stores of the other;
and by the exchange of Merchandises, contracting a friendly consociation.
Wherewith accords that of Libanius, God, says he, Has not made any one part
of the World, the Storehouse of all his blessings, but has wisely distributed
them through all Nations, that so each needing another help, he might thereby
lead men to Society: And to this end he discovered unto them the Art of
Merchandising, that so whatsoever any Nation produced, might be communicated
unto others. And therefore Euripides reckons Navigation amongst those things,
which humane reason had found out for a public good: So Theseus speaks very
pertinently, What, to one Nation, Nature does deny,
That, She from others, does by Sea supply.


XIV. Whether Tolls may be imposed on Merchandises.
But a Question will arise, whether upon such Merchandises as are thus
transported either on Land, or in a River, or in some small parts of the Sea,
which may be called Accesses to Land, Tolls may be imposed by him who has the
Sovereign Power in that Land. And doubtless if such Impositions have no respect
to the Goods, there can be no color of equity to impose them on the Goods: As
if a Tax be laid by the Pole upon Subjects, to defray the charges of the
Commonwealth; it cannot be required of Merchants, who pass as Strangers. But
if either for the better securing of their Merchandises, or if for this among
other things, the Prince shall be at any great charge, then to recompense that
charge, Tolls may be imposed upon those goods that shall be thus secured, so
that they be not excessive; 1 Kin. 10.28.12.14.
for hereupon depends the Justice of Taxes and Tributes. Thus we read that King
Solomon received Tolls for Horses and Linen Thread, passing by the Syrian
Isthmus: So Pliny of Frankincense, that it could not be transported by any but
the Gebanites; therefore there was a Toll paid unto the King for them: So the
people of Marselles being exceedingly enriched by a Channel or Trench, which
Marius caused to be made out of the Rhine into the Sea, imposed a Toll for all
Ships importing or exporting any kind of Merchandises, as Strabo notes. Lib. 4.
Lib. 8.
And in another place he tells us, that the Corinthians did by a very ancient
custom, require Toll for all such Goods as were carried over Land from Sea to
Sea, to avoid that dangerous passage of Malea. The like did the Romans receive
for passing the Rhine. Thus did the King of Denmark exact a quarter of an ounce
of Gold, for every Ship passing the Sound, and as much for the Lading, with
some other smaller Sums to mountain Fires, and Barrels to guide Merchants, that
they might avoid Rocks and Shelves, as Mr. Cambden relates. Nay for passing
over Bridges is Toll in some places paid, says Seneca. Yea and for passing
over Rivers, as all our Law Books testify. But these Tolls are sometimes very
excessive, whereof Strabo complains thus, Difficile est ut inter validos and
feroces definiatur modus mercatori non gravis; It is very hard to find amongst
fierce and warlike Nations, such Impositions as are not to the Merchants
grievous.

XV. A right in common to stay for a time.
There is likewise a common Right for all that travel as well by Sea as by
Land, to stay and rest for a while, in any Foreign parts, either for health or
for any other just cause. This being comprehended among things innocently
profitable, and therefore Ilioneus in Virgil being forbidden to stay on the
African Shore, presumed to invoke the Gods as Judges, and the complaint of the
Megarenses against the Athenians for denying them admittance into their Ports,
was allowed by the Graecians to have been just, as being against common Right,
as Plutarch notes. The Shore is his that occupies it, Vit. Perici.
and therefore they must needs be cruel who deny us things that are common.
Hercules slew Laomedon for denying him the benefit of his Port: And the
Lacedaemonians thought no cause of War could be more just, than to be denied
the benefit of the Shore. And consequently it is likewise lawful to erect a
little slight Cottage on the Shore for present shelter, notwithstanding that,
we do grant that shore to be possessed by the people that are Natives: For
whereas Pomponius requires an Order from the People or Praetor, to license any
man to erect any thing upon the common shore or in the Sea, it is to be
understood of such Edifices, as are lasting and permanent; whereunto tends that
of the Poet, Contracta pisces aequora sentiunt,
Jactis in altum molibus.
-- Whilst Hills in Seas are cast,
Fish frighted from their Holds, do stand aghast.


XVI. A right to inhabit for such as are expelled their own Country.
Neither may we justly deny such Strangers as are driven from their own Seats,
a right of perpetual cohabitation, whilst they shall submit to the Government
established, and to other things necessary to avoid Sedition, which was very
well observed by the Poet, where he brings in Aeneas tendering these reasonable
Conditions, -- Socer arma Latinus habeto,
Imperium solenne socer.
And Latinus himself in Halicarnassensis adjudged Aeneas his cause to be just,
Lib. 1.
if being destitute of any other place of habitation, he were enforced thither.
Barbarum est hospites pellere; To drive those from us who come like Friends to
visit us, or to dwell amongst us is barbarous. Lib. 17.
Neither are the Spartans herein to be approved of: So St. Ambrose, De off. l.
3. c. 7. Herod. l. 1. and 4. Paus. l. 7. Oros. l. 7. Diod. l. 5.
Their advice is not to be followed who would not have Strangers to live among
them. Thus did the Graecians receive the Colophonians, the Rhodians Phorbantes
with his Associates, the Lacedaemonia^s the Minyans, as the Cumaeans did others
that came to cohabit with them. But when the same Minyans, being so received,
demanded to share with the Lacedaemonians in their Government, Herodotus justly
condemns them as ungrateful, Lib. 4. c. 6.
for pretending to that whereunto they could have no Right; whereby (as
Valerius Maximus observes) that was turned into an injury, which was intended
as a Courtesy.

XVII. Especially places desert, and untilled.
And if there be within the Territories of any Prince or People, any Land that
is desert and incultivated, that also is to be granted unto Strangers if they
request it, or they may lawfully possess it, because that which is not
cultivated is reputed as desert, unless it be in respect of the Sovereignty,
which remains notwithstanding with the people or Prince within whose
Territories it lies. Servius notes, Ad xi. Aen. Orat. 7.
that seven hundred Furlongs of Land being barren and hard, was by the old
Latins granted to the Trojans: And we read in Dionysius Prusaeensis, that
Nihil peccant qui partem terrae incultam colunt, They do no wrong that are
willing to inhabit places desert and unoccupied. Annal. l. 13.
The Ansibarii of old (in Tacitus) cry out against the Romans, for denying them
some grounds that (as they conceived) lay waste. Thus, As the Gods have
reserved Heaven to themselves, so have they given the Earth to Mankind, every
part whereof that lies unoccupied, is common. And then looking up to the Sun,
and the Stars, he thus demands of them, Vellent ne intueri inane solum? Whether
they were willing to behold the Earth to lie desolate, and not rather that the
Sea should overflow it, than to suffer such destroyers of the Earth to engross
it, and to make no use of it? But these general sayings, though true, yet were
ill applied to the matter then in question: For those Lands did not at all lie
waste, but served for the depasturing of all manner of Cattle belonging to the
Soldiers, and might therefore justly be denied them. No less just was that
Query which the ancient Romans made to the Gallisinones, Livy l. 5.
By what Right they exacted Land from the Right owners, and in case of refusal
threatened War?

XVIII. A right to such acts without which men cannot well live.
After the Right that is Common to things, follows that which is Common to some
acts: And this Right is granted either simply, or upon supposition. Simply,
This Right in Common is granted to such Acts, whereby those things may be
acquired, without which we cannot conveniently subsist. I mean not here, such a
necessity as justifies us in the taking away of another man's goods: For we
discourse not here, of things taken away against the will of the right owner,
but of the means how to obtain things convenient, with the consent of the
owner; at least, that no impediment be given either by a public Law, or any
private Conspiracy: For in such things whereof we have spoken, such an
Impediment is repugnant to humane Society. Pericle.
Thus Plutarch concerning the Megarenses, They bitterly complained, The Right
of Traffic common to all. E^. 87.
that contrary to the Law of Nations, they were denied traffic, and driven
from all Ports which were held by the Athenians. What every Country abounds
with, says Seneca, is made known to all Nations, that all men might see the
necessity there was of maintaining commerce among themselves, in case any
Nation did want what another Nation had. And again, Whatsoever any people has,
that does Commerce give to all, and those Countries that are dispersed and
distant from each other, Traffic unites and knits together. I speak not here,
as to things superfluous or voluptuous, but of such only as conduce to the
preservation of our Lives, as Aliment, Vestments, Medicaments, and the like.

XIX. A right of buying necessaries.
To procure those things at an equal rate, every man (we say) has a Common
Right; unless they from whom such things are required, do themselves stand in
need of them: As in the time of a Common dearth we usually forbid the
transportation of Corn; For, Cassiod. l. 1. Ep. 34.
that the Natives should first be fed with the fruits of their own Land is but
reasonable. And yet in so necessitous a time, the strangers whom we have once
admitted, we cannot expel. For, Commune Malum communiter tolerandum; Common
Calamities must be born in Common.

XX. But not always to sell.
But to sell their Commodities, it is not fit to allow every man the same
Right; For every man is free to prescribe what he will buy, and what he will
not. So the Belgians of old would not admit of Wine, and other exotic
Commodities, to be sold amongst them. The like Strabo testifies of the
Arabians, amongst whom some things might be imported, and others not.

XXI. A Right to contract Matrimony.
By this right it is Lawful for the people of one Nation to contract Matrimony
with the people of another; especially, if being driven out of their own
Country, they shall come to inhabit another. For though some men may live
without the use of Women, yet others cannot. They are men of excellent tempers
that can content themselves to lead single lives: And therefore to abridge them
of the liberty of Marriage is an Injury offered to humane Nature. Lib. 1.
Romulus, in Livy, makes it his request to his Neighbors, That they would not
disdain by Interchangable Marriages to mix generations with them. And Canuleius
in the same Author pleads thus, We, says he, require but lawful Wedlock, which
to Neighbor Nations and Foreigners is usually granted. What is unjustly
denied, De Civit. Dei lib. 2. c. 17.
may by the right of War be justly taken, says Aug. Now whereas the Civil Laws
of some people do carefully provide against such Marriages; they seem to be
grounded upon this reason, Because in the times when those Laws were made,
there was hardly any Nation or People but were sufficiently stored with Women,
or that those Laws were not intended to interdict all such Marriages, but such
only as were Legitimate or Just; that is, which should produce some special
effects of a Civil Right.

XXII. A Right to do such acts as were permitted to all strangers.
Among such acts whereunto a Right in Common is given by supposition, we are to
reckon those which a Prince or People do promiscuously permit to all strangers;
for that Nation is injured which is excluded. Thus if it be permitted in any
place for strangers to Hunt, Fish, Hawk, gather Pearls; If it be allowed them
to receive Legacies, to sell Commodities, if (even where there is no scarcity
of Women) to contract Marriages, these cannot be denied to any one people,
unless they have some ways abused their Liberty; for which cause it was, Judge.
20.
that the rest of the Hebrews denied to inter-marry with the Benjamites.

XXIII. I mean such as are permitted by the Right of nature, not out of grace
and favor.
But this is to be understood of such Acts only, as are permitted, as it were,
by virtue of that liberty which nature gives, being restrained or taken away by
no Law: but not of such as are indulged to any Nation as acts of Grace,
dispensing with the Laws; For to deny a Courtesy is no Injury.

XXIV. Whether to engross all the fruits of one kind be lawful.
Another Question is frequently started, which is this, Whether it be lawful
for one Nation to contract with another for all their Fruits of such a kind,
which are no where else to be found, so that they shall sell none to any other
Nation. This in mine opinion may be lawful: If that people that shall so buy
them, be willing to communicate to others at a reasonable price. For it
concerns not other Nations much by whom they are supplied with their Natural
wants, so as they are supplied. And it is lawful for any to anticipate others
in matters of profit, especially if there be any special cause for it; as in
case the people making this Contract, shall undertake the protection of the
other people, and shall for that cause be at some expense or charge. For such
an Engrossing made with such an Intent, as I have said, is no way repugnant to
the Natural Right; although it be sometimes prohibited by the Civil Law, for
the benefit of the Commonwealth.

CHAP. III. Of the Original Acquisition of things; where also of the Sea, and
of Rivers.
I. That things were originally acquired, either by division or occupancy. II.
Other ways refuted as the concession of Right Incorporeal. III. As that also of
Specification. IV. Occupancy twofold, either of Empire, or of Dominion: This
explained. V. That the Right of Occupancy, as to things movable, may by Law be
prevented. VI. The Dominion of Infants and Madmen, by what Right held. VII.
That Rivers may be acquired by Occupancy. VIII. Whether the Sea also may be so.
IX. Anciently in some parts of the Roman Empire, that was not lawful. X. But as
to such parts of the Sea, as are Included by Land on each side, the Law of
Nature does not Impugn it. XI. How such a Right of Occupancy may be made, and
how long it lasts. XII. That such an Occupancy gives no Right to Impede an
Innocent passage of Ships upon them. XIII. That Empire over some part of the
Sea may be gained by Occupancy, and how. XIV. That Toll for certain causes may
be Imposed on such as traffic by Sea. XV. Of Agreements which forbid some
people to sail beyond certain bounds. XVI. A River changing its course, whether
it change the bounds of the territory; explained by a distinction. XVII. What
is to be determined in case a River do manifestly change its course. XVIII.
That the whole River does sometimes pass with the Territory. XIX. That things
clearly deserted become the next Occupants, unless the Propriety be held in
general by some Prince or People.
I. How things become ours originally.
THings may become ours by a particular Right, either by an Originary, or by a
Derivative Acquisition. Originary Acquisition (when men began first to
associate together) might also arise by Division, as we have said; but now by
Occupancy only.

II. Other means refuted.
But some man may happily say, That somewhat of Originary Right may also be
acquired by some service done, or by reason of some Pledge, etc. But to him
that thoroughly weighs the matter, it will appear, That this is no new Right
unless it be in respect of the manner; for it was first virtually in the
dominion of the Lord.

III.
Paulus the Lawyer, to the Causes of Acquisition, adds this, which indeed seems
most natural, if we our selves have given being to that which we claim as ours.
But since nothing can naturally be made without some pre-existing matter: Now
if that be ours, the Species being introduced, the dominion will be continued.
But if the matter pre-existing belong to none, then shall the Right be acquired
by a kind of Occupancy: But if it it belong to another, then that the Right of
Propriety descends not naturally unto us alone, will appear by what follows.

IV. Occupancy twofold, of Empire or Dominion.
Now let us examine, Whether that Occupancy, which after those first times, is
the only natural means of gaining Propriety, be also the Originary. Of things
that properly belong to none, two things are subject to be held in Propriety;
namely, Empire and Dominion, as it is distinguished from Empire: Which Seneca
thus differenceth, Ad Reges potestas omnium pertinet, ad singulos Proprietas;
To Kings appertain the Sovereignty over all, to private men the Propriety or
Dominion of what is theirs. Chapter 5.
And a little after, Rex omnia Imperio possidet, singuli Dominio; Kings hold
all by their Sovereignty, and private men what is theirs by Dominion. And
again, Caesar omnia habet, Fiscus autem privata tantum and sua; Caesar has
all, yet is his Exchequer private only, Lib. 10. Ep. 54.
and his own. So Symmachus concerning Kings, Ye Rule all, but preserve to every
one his own. Of the same mind was Dion Prusaensis, Regio civitatis est, at non
eo minus in ea suum quisque possidet; The whole Country is under the command
of the City, yet in it every man enjoys his own. Paneg.
So says Pliny, The Empire of a Prince is much greater than his private
Patrimony. Now there are commonly two things that are subject to Empire; First,
Persons, which alone sometimes suffices; as in an Army of Men, Women and
Children, seeking new Plantations. Secondly, Lands, which are called
Territories. And although both Empire and Dominion are usually gained by one
and the same Art, yet are they in themselves distinct: So we find in
Apollodorus, That the Lands as well in Arcadia as in Attica were divided, yet
the Empire remained in one only. And therefore although the Dominion or
Property of things do usually pass not to Subjects only, but sometimes to
strangers, yet may the Sovereignty still remain where it was before. Siculus,
in the Book that he wrote concerning the condition of Lands, tells us, That the
Fields belonging to their own Colonies being insufficient, they that took the
care to assign and divide the Land, did apportion to such of their Citizens as
came afterward, such Fields as they had taken out of the Neighboring
Territories; contenting themselves with the bare possession, but leaving the
Jurisdiction over them unto those whose the Territory was. Demosthenes calls
those Fields which lay within their own Territory, Inheritances; but those that
lay in another, Possessions only.

V. That the Right of Possessing things movable may by Law be prevented.
But in a place whose Empire is already possessed, the right of Occupancy, as to
things movable may by the Civil Law be anticipated, as we said above. For this
Right proceeds from the Law of Nature, rather permitting it, than commanding
that it be always lawful: Neither indeed does Humane Society require it. And if
any man should object, That the Law of Nations seems to justify it; I shall
answer, That although in some parts of the World it commonly is, or has been
so received, yet did it never amount to a Compact, or general Argument among
all Nations, that it should be so: but is rather from the Civil Law of many
Nations distributed, which notwithstanding may by any particular Nation be
rejected. As indeed there are many other things which our Civil Lawyers seem to
justify by the Law of Nations, when they treat of the division of things, and
of the manner of acquiring Propriety and Dominion.

VI. Upon what Right the Dominion of Infants and Madmen is grounded.
This also must be observed, That if we respect the Law of Nature only, no
right of Propriety can be admitted to those who have not the use of reason. But
the Law of Nations; for the common good, does indulge this favor unto Infants,
Idiots, and Madmen, that they may lawfully receive and retain the propriety of
things. All Mankind in the mean time favoring, and as it were sustaining their
persons: For humane Laws may constitute many things that are preternatural, but
not any thing that is against nature. And therefore that Right of Dominion
that, in favor to such, is by the unanimous consent of all Civilized Nations
thus introduced, may happily consist with the first act of Dominion, which is a
power to have and to hold things in propriety; but not with the second Act,
which is freely and voluntarily to dispose of them by themselves without a
Guardian. For as to the Right of alienation and the like, because in their own
nature they imply the act of a Will guided with reason, which Infants and
Madmen have not: Therefore does not the Law permit these acts unto them.
Whereunto the Apostle alludes Gal. 4.1. Gal. 4.1.
The Pupil though he be Lord of all the Inheritance, yet during his nonage is
no better than a Servant; that is, as to the use and free exercise of his
Right. We have heretofore begun to treat of the Dominion of the Sea, which we
shall now complete.

VII. That Rivers may be possessed in our own proper Right.
Rivers may be held in Propriety, though neither the Water above nor beneath be
included within our Territories, but do co-here with both, or with a part of
the Sea. It is sufficient to denominate them ours, that their greater part,
that is, their banks on both sides, wherein they are included are ours, and
that that River, in respect of the Land adjoining, is but a small thing.

VIII. Whether the Sea may be so.
But by this it should also appear, that the Sea might have been held possessed
by him that on both sides possesses the shore; yea, although it be open above,
as a Gulf, or both above and below, as a branch of the Sea, so as it be not so
great a part of the Sea, that being compared with the Lands, it cannot
reasonably be thought to be a part or portion of them. Now what is lawful to
any one King or People, may also be lawful to two or three, in case they are
willing to possess the Sea running alike, between them. So we have seen some
great River gliding between two Territories, occupied by both at first, but at
last divided.

IX. Not so of old in some parts of the Roman Empire.
It is granted, That in those parts of the Sea which were subject to the Roman
Empire, from the former ages, till the Reign of the Emperor Justinian, the Law
of Nations did forbid that any one people should challenge any Right peculiar
to themselves in the Sea, though it were only the Right of Fishing. Neither can
we approve of their opinions, who think, That when the Roman Laws do tell us,
That the Sea is the Common Right of all, it is to be understood only of all the
Roman Citizens: For first, the words are so general, that they cannot admit of
such a limitation; For what the Latins render in these words, Omnium Commune;
The Common Right of all: Theophilus expounds by these, (...), Common to all
men. And Vlpian tells us, That the Sea is by nature as open and free for all
men as the Air. And so does Celsus assure us, That the use of the Sea is to all
men alike Common. Besides, Civilians do manifestly distinguish the public
things of the people, among which they reckon Rivers, from those that are
Common to all men: For so we read in the Constitutions, That some things are by
the Law of Nature, Common to all, and some things are Public: By Natural Right
these things are alike Common to all, The Air, Running Water, the Sea, and the
shore adjoining: But all Rivers and Ports are Public. The very same also we
read in Theophilus and others. Concerning the Sea Coasts, Neratius was of
opinion, That they were not so public as those things which are in the
Patrimony of the people; but as those which Nature at the first discovered, but
were never since in the occupancy of any, no not of any one people: Which seems
to contradict that of Celsus, who says, That to what place soever the Roman
Empire did extend it self, there the shoars are, as I conceive, the people's of
Rome: But the Sea, as to the use thereof lies Common to all Men. Which seeming
Contradiction may be thus easily reconciled: The Seas and Shoars how Common,
and how held in Propriety.
Neratius speaking of the Shore, as to the necessary use thereof to Mariners,
and to such as pass by, says, That it is naturally Common; but as to any
benefit or profitable Improvement of it, by erecting Forts, or other durable
Buildings, so, as Celsus well observes, it is peculiar to the People of Rome.
For, as Pomponius likewise informs us, such Buildings could not be erected
without special License from the Praetor, either on the Shore, or in any part
of the Sea, which was contiguous to the Shore, and so reputed as part of it.

X. That the Law of Nature does not hinder, but that part of Sea closed by Land
may be occupied.
Though these things be true, yet does it arise from Custom and Consent, and
not from the Law of Nature, that the Sea, in that sense taken as is before
declared, is not occupied, nor by right could be. So the King of Denmark having
seized and confiscated some Merchants Ships of Hull, for Fishing on the Coasts
of Norway, near Island, without leave, our most wise Queen Elizabeth pleaded,
That the best Lawyers had adjudged the Sea to be free, and by the Law of
Nations, Common to all; nor could be Interdicted by any Prince. And as to
Custom, she answered, That neither his Great Grandfather, nor his
Grandfather, nor his Father had ever exacted it: Camd. Eliz. anno 1600.
But on the contrary, That his Father had granted, That the English abstaining
from Injuries, should have freedom of Fishing without leave. For Rivers also
are public we know, and yet the right of Fishing in some corner or creek of
the same River may properly belong to some private person. Nay, even of the Sea
it self, it is said by Paulus the Civilian, That where it is the proper Right
of some particular person, he may have an Injunction to quiet his possession:
for this is now a private case, for as much as it concerns the Right of
Possession, which properly appertains to private, not public causes; where
doubtless, he treats of some small portion of the Sea let into some private
men's ground: Which we read was usually done among the Romans, as by Lucullus,
and others; And, as Salust testifies, by many private men in his time, who had
subverted many mountains, and made Seas out of dry Land. Whereunto Horace thus
alludes: Whilst Mountains into Seas are cast,
Fish frightened from their holds, do stand aghast.
The like is recorded by Paterculus, We, says he, inject huge hills of earth
into the Sea; and when we have made Mountains hollow, we let in the Sea to fill
up the Concave. Pliny likewise speaking of the earth, says, That it must be
embowelled to let in the Sea. With what great Bulwarks, says Cassiodore, are
the Sea banks decently Invaded? How far does the Earth encroach into the Bowels
of the Sea? So that as Tibullus writes: The untamed Seas with Mountains are
immured,
That Fish from Winters storms may lie secured.
Varro writing of L. Lucullus, says, That having cut through a Mountain near
Naples, and thereby made a passage for the Maritine Rivers into his Ponds, he
had so great plenty and variety of Sea Fish, Vita Luculli.
that Neptune himself had not more. Plutarch also records the same of Lucullus,
That having surrounded his Villages with Trenches and Channels even from the
Sea, and so stored them with Fish; he made his Banqueting House within the Sea
it self. Lib. 9. c. 54.
So does Pliny, That having at a vast charge dugg through a Mountain and let in
the Sea, he was by Pompey the Great, called Xerxem togatum. The very like does
Valerius Maximus record of C. Sergius Orata, Who by letting in the Sea at
Spring-tides, and intercepting its going out, made Seas peculiar to himself.
But the very same we find afterward produced by the Emperor Leo, in
opposition to the opinions of the Ancient Lawyers, about the passages of the
Thracian Bosphorus; namely, That they might be enclosed within certain bounds,
and possessed as a private estate. Now if any part of the Sea may be annexed to a
private man's estate, as being environed by it, and in respect of the Land, so
small in proportion that it may be deemed as a part of it, and that the Law of
Nature did not oppose it; why may not that part of the Sea which is contiguous
to the Shore, be reckoned as a part of his, or their dominions whose the Shoars
are? Especially whilst that part of the Sea being compared with the Territory,
is no greater than a small creek of the Sea, compared with the greatness of a
private man's Land, wherewith it is encompassed. Neither will it much alter the
case, to say, That those Seas are not on all sides surrounded, as may be easily
illustrated by the example of a River, that is not every where begirt with
Banks; or by the example of the Sea, that for convenience of Importation is let
into some Town, adjoining to the Shore. But there are many things indulged unto
us by nature, which the Law of Nations, by common consent do prohibit:
wherefore where this Law is in force, and not by common consent repealed, no
one part of the Sea, though for the most part surrounded by the Shore, And
questionless, though the Seas be naturally free, yet as to any profit that may
arise from that part of the Sea, that is contiguous to the Shore, as by Fishing
or otherwise, it may by custom or consent be possessed by the Prince whose the
Territories are. Whether strangers may fish in those parts of the Sea that join
to the Shore of another Prince.
For the distinct dominion of that part of the Sea bordering on the Territory
of any Prince is best seen by the Taxes and Tributes which those Princes take
of strangers for Fishing, whereof we have many precedents: As in Russia, where
the Tax for Fishing is very great; insomuch that the Hollanders gave the tenth
Fish. Denmark takes great Tribute at Ward-house and in the Sound: As also for
Fishing in the North Sea, and even for Navigating that Sea between the Coasts
of Norway and Island; as the Merchants of Hall lately found by sad experience:
as Sweden also did heretofore when Norway was theirs. All the Princes of Italy
do the like for Fishing on their respective Coasts in the Mediterranean. The
Earls of Orkney in Scotland took the tenth Fish for the Isle of Orcades. So do
the Lords of Manors in the West of England, for Pilchards, Hake and Conger.
The States lay Impositions upon the Fish taken within the Seas and Streams of
other Princes, also on those taken on their own Coasts. Edward the Third of
England took 6 d. per Tun in his time, which is now as much as 18 d. H. 7.
resolved to set up the Fishing Trade in England, considering that it was most
proper for him so to do, in respect of his dominion in the North Sea. Queen
Mary let a Lease of the Fishing of the North parts of Ireland for twenty one
years for a certain Fine, and 1000 l. yearly Rent to be paid into the Treasury
of Ireland. The Hans-towns had liberty of Fishing granted them in those Seas 1
Mar. upon some conditions, as appears by the Rolls of Chancery. And for the
Fishing in the North Seas, Natures Law Merchant.
Licenses were usually granted at Scarborough Castle. King James set out a
Proclamation 1609. to restrain all strangers from Fishing on the Coasts of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, without License to be yearly granted.
can be claimed by any people as their peculiar Right.

XI. How such possession is gained, and how long it lasts.
But this also is to be observed, That where this Law of Nations is not yet
received, or now abolished, the bare possession of the Coasts is not sufficient
to entitle any people to a Right in the Seas adjoining. Nor is it enough for a
Prince to conceive, or to write himself Lord of the Seas, unless by some Overt
Act he proclaim himself to be so. Besides, That Dominion that is acquired by
occupancy may be deserted, and then the Sea returns to its pristine nature; and
is Common to all, as the Shoars are, being destitute of buildings: and as the
Right of Fishing in Creeks of a River, as Pomponius notes.

XII. Such Occapancy hinders not our Right to Traffic innocently by Sea.
But most certain it is, That the Right that is gained by Occupancy, extends
not so far, as to give a Right to Impede any Nation from the benefit of a free
passage; so as it be merely for Innocent Commerce and Traffic, but not for
depredation, or such like acts of Hostility; seeing that even by Land we allow
the like freedom of passage, which usually is less necessary, and more
offensive.

XIII. That the Sovereignty over some parts of the Sea may be possessed, and how.
But that the sole Sovereignty over some parts of the Sea, without any other
Propriety, may be held, may more easily be evinced: Neither (as I suppose) can
the Law of Nations, whereof I have spoken, gainsay it. The Argives charge it
upon the Athenians, as a manifest breach of their League, For that they had
suffered the Spartans, being their enemies, to pass through their Seas
unmolested; whereas it was expressly provided against in the said League, That
neither party should permit the others enemies to pass (...), through any part
of their dominions. Lib. 6.
And (as Thucydides records it) when the Grecians had made a truce for some
years in the Peloponesian War, it was allowed to the Megarenses, That they
might freely and safely pass through their own, and their Confederates Seas. So
likewise Dion Cassius describing some part of the Sea, does it thus, All that
Sea belonging to the Roman Empire. And Themistius also concerning the Roman
Emperor, says, That his dominion reaches over Sea and Land. And to the same
purpose is that of Oppianus to the Emperor, The Seas do know no others Laws
but thine.

Dion Prusaeensis, among the many privileges given by Augustus unto the City
of Tarsis, adds this, That he gave them the dominion over the River Cydnus,
Philip 2.
and over the Sea adjoining thereunto. Demosthenes says, That the
Lacedaemonians governed all, both by Sea and Land: And he that wrote the life
of Timotheus relates, That after such a time, the Lacedaemonians laid down
their long continued claim, and voluntarily yielded unto the Athenians the
Sovereignty over the Sea. Curtius of the City of Tyra, says much to the same
purpose, That she sat as Queen in the midst of the Sea, extending her dominion
not to her Neighboring Seas only, but to all others whithersoever her Fleet
should ride. Philo the Jew, discoursing of Kings, says, That they add to their
possessions Seas infinite in number and extent. So he that penned that Oration
concerning Halonesus, which is inserted amongst those of Demosthenes, speaking
of Philip of Macedon, says, All that he desires of us is, That we would
confess our selves unable to defend the Seas without him, and therefore that we
would put him into the possession of them. And the Emperor Julian speaking of
Alexander, says, That he endeavored by that War to make himself Lord both of
Sea and Land. Now what Alexander endeavored to do, his Successor Antiochus
claimed as his right, as appears by that Speech of his in Gorionides, Nonne
terra and mare mea sunt? Are not both the Sea and the Land ours? So also did
his other Successor Ptolomy, if Theocritus deceive us not: Over many Seas and
Lands his Empire reached. And again, All Lands and Seas, and roaring Rivers, lie
Under the Empire of King Ptolomy.
Now let us us descend to the Romans: Hannibal himself thus bespake Scipio the
Greater, We Carthaginians are confined within the Coasts of Africa, whilst ye
Romans are known to lord it over Foreign Kingdoms, both by Sea and Land. And of
the Lesser Scipio, Claudian writes thus, With Rome's great Power, first in
Revenge, he awes
The Spanish Ocean, under Roman Laws.
All the Roman Historians do every where call the Mediterranean Sea their own:
As Salust, Florus, Mela, and others. But Dionysius Halicarnassensis owns them
as Lords, not of the inland Seas only, which he bounds with Hercules Pillars,
but of the Ocean, as far as it is not impossible for men and Ships to sail. And
Cassius grants, That their Empire extended almost as far as there was either
Sea or Land. Appian describing the vastness of their power, assigns unto them
the Euxine, the Propontis, the Hellespont, the Aegaean, the Pamphilian, and the
Egyptian Sea. And Plutarch makes Pompey Lord of all that Sea that lay within
Hercules Pillars: So does Appian. This also does Philo against Flaccus
acknowledge: Since which, says he, the Family of the Caesar's have got the
Empire both of Sea and Land. Ovid also speaking of Augustus Caesar, says, --
Pontus quoque serviet illi.
-- Even the Seas shall him obey.
And Suetonius likewise records it in honor to the same Augustus, That during
his Reign the Temple of Janus was twice shut up, he having so often made peace
with all Nations both by Sea and Land. And in another place he tells us, That
the same Augustus kept constantly two great Fleets, the one at Misenus, the
other at Ravenna, for the defense of the Upper and the Nether Seas. So also
Valerius Maximus tells Tiberius, That by the unanimous consent of both Gods and
men, the Sovereignty of the Seas was committed to him. The very same does Philo
testify of the said Tiberius, That his Empire comprehended both Sea and Land.
And therefore Josephus styles Vespasian, Terrae Marisque dominum; The Lord of
Sea and Land. The like does Aristides in many places attribute to Antoninus the
Emperor. Procopius tells us of several Statues of the Emperor Justinian
erected in many places, as holding in his hand a Globe, thereby intimating,
That both the Earth and the Sea were subject unto him. And Constantinus
Monomachus is said in History to be Terrae Marisque Imperator and Dominus;
Emperor and Lord both of Land and Sea. Goth. 3. Of the right of the Venetians
to the Sovereignty of the Sea: See Paruta. How it is claimed. Camden 1602.
Thus was the Aegean Sea made a part of the Roman Empire: And yet Procopius
gives the Dominion of the Sea, at and about Marselles to the French. The like
do other Historians give to the Venetians in the Adriatique Sea. Now the
Dominion in any part of the Sea may in the same manner be obtained, as other
Empires are; namely, as is above said, either by the numbers of men, as when
their Fleet (which is nothing else but Exercitus Maritinus, a Sea Army) does
usually ride in such a part of the Sea: Or by reason of their Territory, when
from the Land they can command those parts of the Seas adjoining as fully, as
if it were all dry Land.

XIV. Of the lawfulness of taking Tolls by Sea.
Wherefore it cannot be thought repugnant either to the Laws of Nature or
Nations, for such Princes as shall undergo the Charge of maintaining Fleets, to
secure Passengers from Pirates, or of Sea-Marks or Land-Lights, to guide
Merchants through dangerous places, Plin. l. 19. c. 4. Strabo l. 17.
to impose equal and indifferent Tolls upon such as shall receive benefit by
them. Such was that which the Romans imposed on all Merchants that sailed by
the Red Sea, to compensate the Charge they were at, in sending out every year a
Fleet with certain Bands of Archers to secure them from Pirates that infested
those Seas. And that Toll, which the Byzantines required from those that passed
through their Seas, whereof Herodian makes mention in the Life of the Emperor
Severus. And that also which the Athenians did anciently exact, when they held
Chrysopolis in the same Sea, as Polybius testifies: and that which the same
Athenians required from those that passed the Hellespont, when they had taken
Byzantium, as Demosthenes records. The like does Procopius mention in his
Secret History of the Romans in his time. The Rhodians also exacted Toll from
the Islanders, for securing the Seas from Pirates; yea, and from Pharo at
Alexandria, as we read in Ammianus. The like does Caesar testify of the
Venetians, whose Seas being Tempestuous, and having but few Ports which they
themselves held, they made all that traffickt in those Seas pay Toll. So
likewise Florus concerning the Romans, That having lost the Sovereignty of the
Sea, and the Islands being taken from them, they were ashamed to pay that
Tribute, which they themselves were wont to command. The same Procopius above
mentioned, as well in his Public, as Secret Histories, speaks of an ancient
Tribute paid in the Hellespont, as also of a new Imposition exacted in the
Streights of the Euxine and Byzantine Seas, the one paid at Blackhern, the
other at Abydos, which was called (...), that is the tenth of the Freight,
which was afterward lessened by the Empress Irene, and lastly by the Emperor
Immanuel Comnenus granted unto certain Monasteries, as Balsamo informs us upon
the Fourth Canon of the Council of Chalcedon, and upon the Twelfth Canon of the
Seventh Synod. The Danes in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, required a Rose Noble of
every Ship: and one piece of Money in the hundred, Camden Eliz. Anno 1582. and
1602.
and lastage for securing the English Sailers through their Seas, to Muscovy.
Neither would they permit the English to fish in those Seas, without leave, or
an yearly Toll.

XV. Some people by agreement forbidden to sail beyond such bounds.
Some precedents also we find of Leagues, whereby one Nation is bound to
another, that they will not sail beyond such bounds. So it was of old Articled
between the Kings bordering on the Red Sea and the Egyptians, that the
Egyptians should not come into that Sea with any long Ship, or with above one
Ship of Burden. Philost. de vit. Apol. l. 3. c. 11. Plut. Cymo. Diod. l. 11.
So it was agreed between the Athenians and the Persians in the time of Cymon,
That no Median Ship armed should sail between the Cyanea and the Promontories
of the Mountain Taurus. This was that most honorable Peace mentioned by
Plutarch, wherein it was also agreed, That the Persians should not approach
nearer unto the Sea, than the length of an Horse Race, that is, than forty
Furlongs. And in those Annual Truces of the Peloponesian War, it was Articled,
That the Lacedaemonians should not sail with long Ships, but with other
Vessels, which should not carry above the weight of Five Hundred Talents.
Thucyd. l. 4.
And in the first League which the Romans (immediately after the expulsion of
their Kings) made with the Carthaginians, Polyb.
it was agreed, That neither the Romans, nor their Associates, should sail
beyond the Promontory called Pulchrum; but if at any time they should either by
distress of Weather, or by their Enemies, be driven beyond it, they should
carry nothing from thence but necessaries, and should also depart within five
days. Whereupon Servius upon that of Virgil, -- Littora Littoribus contraria
-- observes, that in that League it was provided, that neither the Romans
should approach the Carthaginian Shore, nor the Carthaginians, the Roman Shore.
Such another League there was made, between the Romans and the Tarentines,
whereby it was provided, that the Romans should not sail beyond the Promontory
Lacinium. So in the second League that was made between the Romans and the
Carthaginians, it was agreed, that the Romans should neither traffic, nor take
any Prizes beyond the said Promontories Pulchrum, Massia, or Tarseium; as also,
that the Romans should not touch upon the Coasts either of Africa or Sardinia,
unless it were to receive safe Conduct, Live. l. 48. c. 59.
or to repair their Ships. And after the Third Punick War, we find the
Carthaginian Senate blamed, for that contrary to their League, they had raised
an Army, and were making Naval Provisions. The like we may read of the Sultan
of Egypt, that by a League made with the Graecians, he had obtained liberty to
send two Ships every year, through the Streights of Bosphorus. But yet were not
all these sufficient to prove, that either the Seas or the Right of Navigating
them, may be held in Propriety by any one or more people. For, Nations as well
as persons, may by contract and agreement among themselves, relinquish not only
what is properly their own, but what belongs unto them in common with all other
Nations, in favor to those who may reap benefit by it. And yet in this case we
say not, that the Seas could lose their freedom; but that the people
contracting and their successor are obliged to perform their contract and
agreement; that so the Law of buying and selling may be preserved. And
therefore both the present Occupants, and they that should succeed in their
Right, stand obliged by that contract.

XVI. Whether a River changeing its course, changes the bounds of the
Territories.
Controversies do frequently arise between neighboring Nations, whose
Territories are separated by the Intervention of some great River, whether so
often as that River shall change its course, the bounds of both Empires do
change with it; and whether, what that River, by altering its course, takes
from the one, does of right belong to the other: which dispute cannot be
determined, without first knowing the nature and the manner of the Tenure.
Surveyors tell us, that Lands are of three several kinds; Jul. Frontin.
some are divided and enclosed with artificial Fences: some again are assigned
by measure in gross, as by hundreds of Acres or Furlongs; and others are called
Arcifinia, because (as Varro has observed) Nature has fenced them with such
bounds as are sufficient to secure them from the Incursions of an Enemy; as
with Mountains, Woods and Rivers. Pliny speaking of the Alps, says, We carry
away such things as Nature ordained for Boundaries to separate Nations. And
such Lands are also called Occupatory, because commonly they are such, as being
waste and desert, or being gained by the Sword, are held by occupancy. In the
two former kinds, although the River do change its course, yet is nothing
changed of the Territory, but what is gained by the River, is the Occupants.
But in those that are Arcifinious, that is, which Nature has thus bounded, the
River in altering by little and little its course, does also alter the Borders
of the Territories. And whatsoever the said River shall cast to the adverse
part, shall be accounted his, to whose Territory it is added: because it is
very credible, that both people did at the first agree, that the midst of that
River should be the Natural Boundary of both Empires. Tacitus accounts the
Channel of the Rhine sufficient to bound the German Empire. But Spartianus
tells Adrian, There are many places wherein the Barbarians are divided, not by
Rivers, but by Landmarks. And Constantine calls the River Phasis, (...), the
common boundary. Diodorus Siculus reciting the Controversy that there was
between the Egesthenes and the Selinuntii, says, That the River parted both
their Territoriies. And Xenophon calls the like River, simply (...), i. e. the
Horizon or Bounderer. The Ancients record it of the River Archelous, that
because it kept no settled or constant course, but sometimes branched it self
into smaller Streams, and sometimes (like a Serpent) running in an oblique or
indented Channel, it gave frequent occasion of War between the Aetolians and
the Acarnanians concerning the Lands adjacent, until Hercules immured it with
Banks: For which service Oenus King of Aetolia gave him his Daughter in
marriage.

XVII. What if the waters do wholly forsake the Channel.
What I have hitherto said holds true, in case the stream do not change its
Channel. For a River as it divides Nations, is not to be understood barely as a
Current of Waters, but as waters running in such a Channel, and included within
such banks. Wherefore though in some particular places, it may gain or lose, on
either side, by reason of the weakness of the banks, or the violence of the
Stream, and thereby beget some small alteration: yet whilst the whole body of
the River retains its wonted form, the River seems to be the same. But if the
whole River do at once change its Channel, then it is another thing. And
therefore as when the old Channel is dammed up with banks of earth, above, and
the waters thereby turned into a new one, which is dugg purposely to receive
them, the old ceasing, it is called a new River: So, if the old Channel shall
be forsaken by reason that the waters have found out a new passage, it is not
the same River that it was; but the old being lost, the River is to be
accounted new. And as a River, though dried up in a time of extreme drought,
yet is each Territory bounded with that mediety of the Channel that is next
unto it; because it may be safely presumed that it was the will and intention
of either people, to be naturally separated by the midst of that River: And
that in case the River should dry up, that either of them should hold what they
held before, so it is likewise, if the water shall wholly forsake the Channel.
When question is made of the bounds of an Empire, those Territories that do
reach unto some great River, are always reckoned to be Arcifinious, (that is)
naturally bounded, because nothing is so fit to bound Nations, as that which
cannot easily be passed over; But that Kingdoms should be bounded by either
Land marks, or by admeasurement is rarely seen; and where they are so, it
cannot be thought to be done by Original acquisition, but by consent.

XVIII. The whole River sometimes belongs to one Territory, and none to the
other.
Although where the bounds of Empires are doubtful, (as I have said) each
Territory is presumed to extend to the midst of the Channel, yet it may and
sometimes does so fall out, that the whole River belongs to one Empire only;
namely, when either the River was preoccupyed, before the Empire on the adverse
bank began; or when the matter was so determined by the consent of both Nations.

XIX. That things clearly deserted become the next occupants.
Neither should it escape our observation to know, That such things as have
been occupied, in case they be deserted by the occupants, and have then no
owner, may be held by him that shall next seize them, as by primary
acquisition; because what no man can claim a right to, returns to its pristine
condition, and are really his, that can first apprehend them. But this also
must be considered, That new discoveries are sometimes so made at the charge of
the Prince or people, That not only the Empire and Sovereignty, (wherein
consists that eminent right whereof we have already discoursed) but the private
and full Dominion thereof, should in the first place be generally vested in
themselves; and after such investiture, then that it may be so distributed by
parcels to private Families, that their Title should still depend upon the
right of the first discoverers, if not as that of a Vassal upon his Patron, nor
as that of a Fee-farmer upon his chief Landlord, yet in some other more mild,
and easy manner, as there are many ways, whereby we may claim a right to a
thing. Amongst which is the right, of a man that has but an estate expectant,
committed to him though but in trust for another. De benef. l. 7. c. 12. and l.
8. c. 12.
Thus Seneca, It follows not, because thou can neither sell, waste or
exchange what thou have, that therefore it is not thine. Tuum enim est, quod
sub certa lege tuum est; For that also is thine, which is but conditionally
thine. And again, Quaedam quorundam sunt sub condition; To some things men may
have a Right, though with some restraint and limitation. To the same sense is
that of Dion Prusaensis, There are many ways and those very discrepant, whereby
things may be called ours; for a right we may have to a thing, although we can
neither alienate it, nor use it at our own pleasure. The like I find in Strabo,
Dominus fuit dempto vendendi jure; It was his by right, yet had he no power to
sell it. now very opposite to what has been here said, De moribus Germ.
is that which Tacitus records of the Germans, Who consigned to such a number
of people, such a proportion of their fields to inhabit, which they presently
divided, apportioning to every man, according to the honor and esteem they had
of him. By which means seeing that every man's Estate depended on the public;
if at any time it should fall out that any part of the whole wanted an owner,
it was not his that could next seize it; but it escheated, either to the people
in general, or to some Superior Lord. And thus we read that in some places,
the goods of such as died without children, were seized to the use of the
people; and that there were certain Magistrates appointed to administer them.
For so Eustathius interprets that of Homer, Partiebanter opes rectores urbis;
The City Rulers did his wealth divide.


Some such Law (as Histories inform us) there was anciently in force in the
Kingdom of Mexico: and happily the Civil Law may have introduced such a kind of
right in some other such like cases, as we have now begun to observe.

CHAP. IV. Of a Presumed Dereliction and the following Occupancy: And wherein
it differs from Prescription and Usucapion.
Note, Usucapion respects things moveable; Prescription, things immovable. The
former must be three years possessed: the latter ten; but if the party be absent,
twenty.

I. Why Vsucapion or Prescription strictly taken, is of no force among diverse
Nations or their Governors. II. Yet among these are usually pleaded, long
Possessions. III. The reason drawn from humane conjectures, and those not from
words only. IV. But from deeds done. V. And from some left undone. VI. How
Time, joined with non possession, and a non-claim is sufficient to ground our
conjectures of a Dereliction. VII. Ordinarily Time out of Mind suffices for
such a conjecture; and what that time is. VIII. An Objection answered. IX. That
setting aside conjectures, even by the Law of Nations, Dominion may seem to be
transferred by possession time out of mind. X. Whether the Right of such as are
unborn, may be thus taken away. XI. That even the Right of Sovereign Power, may
be thus gained by either King or People. XII. Whether the Civil Laws concerning
Vsucapion and Prescription, do bind them that have the Supreme Power, explained
by a distinction. XIII. What Rights do either separably, or communicably adhere
to the Supreme Power, may be either got or lost by Vsucapion or Prescription.
XIV. That Subjects may at any time lawfully assert their own liberty, refuted.
XV. Those Rights that are merely in our own power, no time can take away.
I. Long possession of no force among different Nations.
A Notable Question does here arise concerning a long continued possession; For
seeing it is the Civil Law that gives life and being to this Right, (For Time
in its own nature has no effective power: For nothing is done by time,
although there is nothing that is not done in time Nihil fit a tempore, quamvis
nihil non fit in tempore.
), it can be of no sorce, as Vasquius observes, between two free Nations or
Kings, nor between a King and a Free People, no nor between a King and the
Subject of another Prince, nor yet between two private Subjects of two several
Kings or people. Thus were the English Commissioners answered, demanding Calice
upon the Prescription of Two Hundred and Thirty years, That Prescription of
Time took no place amongst Princes. Camd. An. Reg. Eliz. 10. For as we read
amongst the Laws of the Twelve Tables, Aeterna Authoritas cum host isto; Our
claim against an Enemy, i. e. a foreigner, is everlasting: (So likewise in
things stolen, the right Owner never loses his property. For the word
Authority, in that place signifies the Right of Dominion) which holds true,
unless it be when either the Thing or Act is held, by the Laws of the
Territory. But yet in admitting this, one main inconvenience would ensue;
namely, that Titles to Kingdoms, and Controversies concerning their bounds,
would never be at an end: which would not only procure much trouble and
perturbation of mind among many, and occasion matter for War, but is repugnant
to the common sense of all Nations.

II. Yet it is sometimes pleaded by them.
For, both Jephtha in the Sacred Story defends his Title against the Claim of
the King of the Ammonites, unto all that Land lying between Arnon and Jabock,
and from the Arabian Deserts unto Jordan, by an uninterrupted possession for
three hundred years, and demands of him, why in so long a time, neither he, nor
his Ancestors did ever challenge those Lands. And the Lacedaemonians also in
Isocrates urge it, as a thing most certain and granted by all Nations, That
public possessions as well as private, might by long continuance take so deep
root, and be so strongly confirmed, that they could never be recovered. By
which Right they dismissed those that came to demand Massena. And thus does the
same Isocrates urge it against King Philip, That length of time had rendered the
Title Indisputable. And upon this very account, it was that the latter Philip
told Titus Quintius, That as for those Cities which he had taken by the Sword,
he was willing to set them free: but for those that he had received from his
Ancestors by a just and hereditary right of possession, he would not relinquish
them. Sulpitius pleading against Antiochus, shows, That because, the Graecians
had sometimes served in Asia, therefore to endeavor by War, after so many
years past, to reduce them again into bondage, was very unjust. Tac. Anr. l. 6.
And nothing among Historians is reputed more vain and foolish, (...). De off.
l. 2.
than to require things long out of possession. To the like purpose is that of
Cicero, With what color of Justice, can we deprive him of those Lands, whereof
for so many years, nay, ages past, he has been quietly possessed? And that also
of Florus, Lib. 3. c. 13.
Their Country notwithstanding which their Ancestors had left them, they held
as firmly by prescription, as if it had descended unto them by an hereditary
Right.

III. How things may be said to be forsaken.
What then shall we say? The effects of Right that depend upon the mind, cannot
notwithstanding by the sole acts of the mind be obtained, unless that act be
declared by some overt signs: For to attribute so much of efficacy to the bare
acts of the mind, as to create a Right, had been inconvenient to humane Nature,
which cannot possibly understand them, unless expressed by some outward signs;
whence it is, that those bare internal acts are not subject to Humane Laws. Not
by words only.
But there are no signs that can so clearly demonstrate those inward acts, as
to render us infallible; for a man may dissemble his thoughts, and both mean
and intend otherwise than he either speaks, or by some deeds pretends to do.
And yet will not the nature of humane society admit, that these internal acts
of the mind, being sufficiently expressed, should have no efficacy; wherefore
whatsoever is so sufficiently signified, shall be held for truth, and be
admitted of as a good plea against him, that shall so express his mind, which
if done by words, the case is plain.

IV. But by deeds done.
By deeds that is understood to be forsaken, which is cast away, unless it
appear by some circumstance that it was so cast away only for a time, and with
a mind to require it again. Thus a debt is said to be forgiven, when the bond
is delivered up to be canceled: A man, says Paulus, may renounce his
inheritance, not by words only, but by any other indication of his will; as if
he, who being the right owner of a thing, shall knowingly contract with him
that usurps it from him, he may very well be judged to have released his own
interest in it. And why this should not take place, as well amongst Kings and
free people, as amongst private persons, no reason can be assigned: The like
may be said, when a Prince shall give leave, or command his Subject to do that
which cannot with safety be done, unless he be exempted from the penalty of the
Law; it may be presumed that he is so exempted, for this arises not from the
Civil, but from that natural right which every man has to renounce what is his
own; and from a natural presumption, whereby every man is believed to will
that, which by signs he sufficiently declares. In which sense that of Vlpian
may rightly be understood, Whatsoever is accepted in full of a Debt is a
discharge.
where he says, It is agreeable to the Law of Nations, that whatsoever a man
accepts of in full of his debt, is a good discharge.

V. And deeds not done.
Under things done, are morally comprehended things not done, being considered
with due circumstances; so he that is knowing and present yet is silent, seems
to give his consent, which the Hebrew Law seems likewise to acknowledge, Numb.
30.5, 12. that is, unless by some circumstance it appear, that either fear or
some other accident, did restrain him from speaking; Things given for lost,
cease to be ours.
so is that given for lost, whereof there is no hopes of recovery, as a Lamb in
the paws of a Lion: So if a Merchant suffer shipwreck, his Goods cease to be
his own, though they be afterward driven to shore, yet not immediately (as
Vlpian notes) but when he gives them for lost, and uses no outward means to
recover them: For in case he send out and make enquiry after them, or promise a
reward to those that shall find and restore them, the case is otherwise to be
judged. So he that knows his own things to be by another man detained, and
makes no claim unto them in a long time, unless some cause do manifestly
appear; seems to do it to no other purpose, but to show that he is willing to
renounce them. And this is it that Vlpian elsewhere intends, where he says,
That an house possessed for a long time by another, and no claim made nor rent
demanded for it, Int. money long forborne, presumed to be forgiven.
seems to be deserted by the right owner. To exact Interest long since due,
says that good Emperor, Antoninus, is hardly just; for the not demanding it in
so long a space, makes it probable that thou were willing to remit it; and that
by not so much as demanding it, thy purpose was to make thy self the more
beloved and honored, and thy Debtor the more thankful. Something like unto
this will appear in custom, for even this setting aside the Civil Laws which
are willing to admit it, (though limited to a certain time, and after a certain
manner) may be introduced by a people that are Subjects, being long tolerated
by him who has the Supreme Power. But how long time is required to entitle it
to the effects of a just right, That silence should argue a consent, two things
necessary.

Vide infra Bo. 2. c. 22.. 11.


is not determined, but left Arbitrary; yet so much is required, as is
sufficient to signify a consent. Now that silence should be of so great force,
as to justify our presumption of a Dereliction, two things are requisite:
First, That he that is silent, knows that he has a Right; for him that knows
it not, silence cannot prejudice. Secondly, That his silence be free and
voluntary, and not occasioned by fear or any other such cause, which if it
appear, makes our conjectures at the Will, of no force.

VI. Of what force time without possession is to prove a Dereliction.
That both these therefore may be thought to concur (though other conjectures
may avail) yet is that of time most prevalent: For, in the first place, it is
hardly possible that in a long time, a man should not by some means or other,
arrive to the knowledge of his own Right; time usually administering many
occasions to the discovery of truth. Now if the right owner be present, much
less time suffices to ground our conjectures, than if he be absent, setting
aside what is determined by the Civil Laws: So fear once imprinted, cannot
suddenly be cast off, yet can it not be perpetual; length of time supplying us
with many occasions and remedies, both by our selves and from others against
fear; and for providing for our own safety, even by going out of his dominions
whom we fear: or at least by making our protestation concerning our Right, or
which is better, by offering to refer our cause to indifferent Arbiters.

VII. Time out of mind, what it is.
But because that time which exceeds the memory of man, is in a moral sense,
infinite; therefore if claim be not made within such a time to any thing out of
possession, it is a sufficient presumption that it is forsaken, unless some
very strong reasons be brought to the contrary. And here it is very well
observed by our most prudent Lawyers, That Time out of mind is not altogether
the same with a Century of Years, Time out of mind, not the same with a Century
of years, though not much different from it. Cambd. Eliz. an. 1600.
though it be true that there is not much difference between them: For one
hundred years is commonly reputed the term of a man's life, which does well nigh
make up three Ages or Generations; which the Romans seem to object against
Antiochus, to prove the injustice of his demands, in requiring those Cities,
which neither he, nor his Father, nor his Grandfather, ever enjoyed. Thus Queen
Elizabeth pleaded against the King of Denmark, for the fishing upon the coasts
of Norway, and New Island without leave, That neither his Great Grandfather,
nor his Grandfather, nor his Father, had exacted it; and therefore concluded it
to be unjust: Seeing also that the Sea is free for all by the Law of Nations.

Porphyry accounts thirty years for an Age, and Herodian in the life of
Severus, An Age what.
accounts three Ages for a Century: Philo also reckons in three hundred years,
ten Kings to Reign in Egypt, so Plutarch records fourteen Kings to have Reigned
in Lacedaemon in five hundred years: And therefore the Emperor Justinian wisely
forbad that any Title should be set on foot, that had been discontinued for
four Ages.

VIII. An Objection answered.
But here it may be objected, That seeing that men do naturally love themselves
and whatsoever is theirs, it is not easily to be presumed, that they will cast
away what is their own; and therefore such Negative Acts though long continued,
can be no sufficient ground to conclude a Dereliction. But we ought also to
believe so charitably of men, that they would not suffer one another to live
perpetually in a sin unrepented of, for any thing that is vain and perishable,
which cannot oft-times be avoided, unless we do grant such a dereliction. As
concerning Empires, though they are held in great esteem among men, Cic. pro
Dejot.
yet are they not without their burdens; for if they be not well administered,
they expose the Governor to the wrath of the Supreme Judge: And as the case
were sad, when they that are Tutors and Guardians should waste the Orphans
Estate with needless Suits at Law, about the Right of Tutelage, Lib. 1.
or (to use Plato's similitude to this very purpose) when Mariners in a Storm
shall contend (to the endangering of the Ship) whether of them can best steer
her; so they are not always the best Patriots, who can be content to sacrifice
the public peace to their own private ambition, and not without the vast
expense of innocent blood, dispute, which of them can best provide for the
peoples safety. Highly extolled by our Ancestors was that act of Antiochus, who
being driven out of a great part of his Empire by Scipio, and confined to that
only which lay beyond Mount Taurus, gave hearty thanks to the People of Rome,
for easing him of so great a burden, Val. Max. lib. 4. c. 1.
and for contracting his Dominions within moderate bounds. Of the very same
mind seemed Jonathan to be, willing rather to forego his right to the Crown,
than to destroy his Country with Civil Wars, so that he might be but next unto
David, whom he loved as his own Soul, 1 Samuel 23.17. (It is said of Otho, the
Emperor, that in his life he was as dissolute as Nero, Plut. vit. Othon. ad
finem.
but in his death as honorable as any of the Roman Emperors; for rather than
harass his own Country with intestine wars, he chose to dye resolutely by his
own hands.) Among those many grave Sayings bequeathed unto us by Lucan, this in
mine opinion, is not the least: -- Cantone novorum
Proventu scelerum quaerunt, uter imperet Vrbi?
Vix tanti fuerat, Civilia bella movere
Vt neuter --
-- Shall they my praises have,
Who seek by broils, which shall the State enslave?
'T had scarce been so much worth to expect whether,
As to provide by Civil Wars that neither.
But howsoever seeing that it much conduces to the conservation of humane
society, that Titles to Empires should at length become fixed and undoubted;
Titles to Empir^s should be fixed and certain.
therefore whatsoever proofs (though but conjectural) shall be brought in
reference to that end, must be embraced with some grains of favor: For if
Aratus Sicyonius thought it severe to lose what for fifty years he had quietly
enjoyed; how much more was that of Augustus, who esteemed him for a good man
and a true Citizen, The present state of Government not to be altered.
who would by no means alter the present State of the Commonwealth, but as
Alcibiades in Thucydides speaks, would help to defend that form of Government
which was then in being. Of the same mind was Isocrates, as appears by his
Oration against Calimachus: And so was Cicero, who in his Oration against
Rullus, tells the people of Rome, That it concerned him that would preserve
peace to defend the present state of the Commonwealth, whatsoever it was. And
Livy also who says, Lib. 35.
that every good Subject ought to rejoice in the present Government of public
affairs: But if there be any thing defective in what I have here said, yet
against that presumption whereby it is believed that every man has a will to
preserve that which is his own, there is another more strong, that it is not
credible that any man that would so preserve what is his, should not in so long
a time lay some manifest claim thereunto by some fit signification of his Will.

IX. Dominion has been transferred by possession immemorial.
But here it may be said, and happily not improbably, that this depends not upon
a bare presumption, but that it was a Law introduced by the voluntary Right of
Nations, that an immemorial and an uninterrupted possession without any claim
or appeal made to Arbiters, should be of force to transfer an undoubted
Dominion: And therefore when Phocaea was given to the Elders of Catana by the
Grecian Emperors, Gregoras tells us, That there was a Law added, that every of
their Successors should declare in writing that they held it under the Title of
Administrators, lest by a long continued omission, the right of the Emperor
should be excluded: For it may easily be admitted, that what did so highly
conduce to the public peace and common benefit of mankind, might by the
consent of all Nations pass into a Law. But this must be understood of an
uninterrupted possession, that is, Lib. 35.
as Sulpitius in Livy speaks, Such a possession as is held by one and the same
perpetual form of Right, Lib. 34.
always continued and never intermitted. And as the same Livy in another place
expresses it, A continued possession that was never controverted: For if it be
inconstant and desultory, it avails nothing, as the Numidians sometimes pleaded
against the Carthaginians, That sometimes the Numidian Kings, and sometimes the
Carthaginians, held the possession, as opportunities and advantages offered
themselves to either of them, and at all times he that was strongest held it
longest.

X. Whether the Right of those unborn, may be thus lost.
But a more knotty Question yet remains, namely, Whether the right of such as
are unborn, may by such a dereliction tacitly pass from them? If we say it
cannot, then neither can a long uninterrupted possession, add any certainty to
Dominion or Empire, because there are few of them, but some that are unborn may
pretend a Title to: If we say it may, then will it seem as strong, how silence
can prejudice them that could never speak, as having as yet no existence; or
how the fact of one man may damnifie another. To resolve this, we must know, He
that has no visible being, can have no right.
that he that has no visible being, can have no right; as that which has no
existence can have no accidents: wherefore if the people, from whose will all
right of Sovereignty did originally proceed, may change their will; surely they
cannot be said to injure those that are as yet unborn, seeing they have as yet
no acquired right. But as the people may change their will expressly, so may
they be believed to do it tacitly; and therefore it being granted, that the
people have changed their will, and that the right of those who are as yet
unborn, does not exist, but that the Parents of whom they may be born, and who
had a right in the mean time to have preserved it for them did relinquish it;
what should hinder but that what is thus deserted, may be occupied by another.
Many examples we find in Histories of such Derelictions, Many examples of
Derelictions. Mariana l. 13. c. 18.
the most eminent is that of Lewis the Ninth of France, whom we find renouncing
for himself and his children, all that right which, by his Mother Blanch, he
might have claimed to the Kingdom of Castile. And those renunciations, which
the Infanta's of Spain do usually make, whenever they marry to the Kings of
France, are of force to debar them, and their Children, from all pretensions to
the Crown of Spain. And thus much may suffice to be spoken of that right which
is natural. For by the Civil Law, as many other Fictions, so this also may be
introduced, that the Law may, in the mean time, sustain the persons of such as
are unborn, and may so provide, that nothing shall be possessed by any other, to
their prejudice; as the Civil Law does for the inheritances of Infants and
Idiots: But whether the Law will do it or not, is not rashly to be presumed,
because what thus conduces to the particular benefit of these, may happily much
endanger the Commonwealth. There is no doubt, but that such a right may be
established by the Civil Law, as cannot lawfully be alienated by any one act,
which, notwithstanding, for the avoiding of the uncertainty of Dominion, may by
the neglect of claim in some certain time be lost, yet so, that they that shall
afterward be born, may have their personal Action against those by whose
neglect they have lost their Right, or against their heirs.

XI. That the Title to Empires may be got or lost by Prescription.
By what has been already said, it is plain; that a just Title may be gained
by one King against another, and by one free people against another, not only
by express consent, but by dereliction and the occupancy following it, creating
(as it were) from thence a new Right or Title unto it: For as to that general
maxim, Quae ab initio non valent, ex post facto convalescere non possunt, Those
Titles which were originally naught, cannot by any post fact be made good, is
to be understood with this exception, unless some new cause do intervene,
which, of it self, is apt and able to form a new right: And by this means, that
is, by a manifest dereliction and a long possession, he that is a true King,
may lose his Kingdom and become a Subject to the people, and he that was really
no King, but a Prince, may become an absolute King: And that Sovereign Power
which was once wholly in either King or People, may at length come to be
divided among them.

XII. Whether Kings are obliged by those Civil Laws of Usucapion or
Prescription.
But here it is not altogether unworthy our pains to enquire, Whether the Law
of Usucapion or Prescription, having the stamp of the Sovereign Power, may bind
him also that made it; or whether the very rights of Empires, or their
necessary parts, which we have elsewhere explained, are subject to this Law of
Prescription, and uninterrupted possession. Some Civilians are of opinion that
they are, and those not a few, especially of such as handle questions
concerning Sovereign Empire according to the Civil Law of the Romans. But we,
with some others, are of another opinion; Kings not always bound by their own
Laws directly.
for that a man should be bound up by Laws, it is required, that in the Law
Maker there should be both a power, and a will (at least strongly presumed) so
to do. But no man can properly impose a Law upon himself, as a Superior upon an
Inferior; for then the person commanding and the person commanded, would be one
and the same: And from hence it is, that he that has power to make a Law, has
also a power to change that Law, (and consequently not only to command
according to Law, but to command sometimes the Laws themselves for the general
good.) And yet a King may stand obliged by his own Laws, though not directly,
Though indirectly they may. Vide infra Bo. 2. chapter 20.. 22. Sen. Epist. 85.
yet by reflection, namely, as he is a part of the Body Politic, and so in
natural equity ought to be conformable to the whole, as Saul in the Infancy of
his Reign is said to do, 1 Samuel 14.40. So in a Ship, the Captain sustains two
persons, one common with the rest, being carried also along with them, the
other proper, as he is Governor, both of the Ship and those that are in it. But
here we look at the Lawgiver, not as apart, but as one in whom the power of
the whole is contracted: For in this place we treat of Sovereign Power as such:
Neither is it easily to be believed, that it was the will of the Lawmakers to
comprehend himself under the Law he makes, unless it be where the matter and
reason of the Law is universal, as in the apprising of Commodities, and the
like. For there is not the same reason, that the Sovereign Power should be
bounded and limited by the Law, as other things are, it being in dignity far
above it; (for if we once admit it to be absolute and supreme, we must also
grant it some Privileges and Prerogatives above and before others.) I never
yet found any Civil Law that treated of Prescriptions, that could with any
probability be understood to include the highest powers: Hence then we may
conclude, that neither the time limited by the Civil Law, can suffice to
acquire a Sovereign Empire, or any of its necessary parts, in case these
natural Conjectures, whereof we have here treated, be wanting: Nor is such a
space of time required, if within that time sufficient conjectures of
Dereliction shall appear. Nor lastly, does the Civil Law, which forbids things
to be acquired, No Prescription without strong conjectures of Dereliction can
lie against a King as such.
within such a certain time, at all appertain to the things belonging to the
Supreme Power: Yet might the people in the first Creation of the Empire have
expressed their will, by what means, and in what space of time, the Government by
not using it should be lost, which Will so expressed, ought without doubt to have
been followed: Nor could it then have been infringed by the King himself,
though invested with Supreme Power, because it appertains not to the Empire it
self, but to the manner of holding it, as we have elsewhere explained it.

XIII. What is not inseparable from Sovereignty may be got or lost by
Prescription.
But what things soever are not essential to the Sovereign Power, nor belongs
unto it, as its natural proprieties, but may naturally be either separated from
it, or at least communicated with others, are also subject to the Civil Laws of
every people, which are in force concerning Usucapion and Prescription. So we
read of some Subjects who have gained by Prescription, that it cannot be
appealed from them; yet so that always some appeal may be made from, namely by
Petition, or some such like way: For that there should be no Appeal at all from
any, is not consistent with the condition of a Subject, and therefore must
needs appertain to Sovereignty, or to some essential part of it; nor can it
otherwise be obtained, than according to the Law of Nature, to which the
highest powers themselves are subject.

XIV. That Subjects may at all times assert their own Liberty refuted. Vasquius
refuted.
Hence it is easy to discern, how far forth we may admit of that which
Vasquius and others maintain, namely, that Subjects may at all times endeavor,
if they can, to recover that liberty which belongs to a free people; because
what was by force got may by force be regained: And of that which at first
proceeded from the will, it is lawful to repent and to change the will; for
both that Empire that was at first gained by force, may in time by the tacit
consent of the people, yielding thereunto a willing obedience, receive a firm
and established Right: As also that will, either at the first establishment of
the Empire, or by a postnate fact, might be such as should give such a Right,
as should not afterward depend upon that will. It was an excellent Speech that
Josephus records of King Agrippa, to those Jews, who from their preposterous
endeavors to recover their lost liberty, were called Zealots: Intempestivum
est, nunc libertatem concupiscere, olim ne ea amitteretur certatum oportuit; To
contend now for your liberty is unseasonable, this ye should have done before
ye had lost it. To be enslaved to another is grievous, the miseries of War are
to be preferred before it: But if being by the fortune of the War reduced into
bondage, ye attempt to free your selves, Non amantes libertatis dicendi estis,
sed servi contumaces; Ye will not be thought to affect liberty but rebellion.
So Josephus himself to the same Jews, Honestum est pro patria pugnare, etc. To
fight in defense of our Liberty whilst we have it, is honest, nay honorable;
but having long since lost it, now to endeavor by Arms to recover it, is to
make our condition, which was before tolerable, De Cyri Inst. lib. 3.
now desperate. Thus did Cyrus in Xenophon answer King Armenius, who would fain
have excused his defection by his earnest desire of his lost liberty, yet
notwithstanding I make no question, but that a long continued patience in a
King (as I have above described) may be sufficient for the people to recover
their liberty upon a presumption of a Dereliction.

XV. Things merely in our power are not lost by Prescription.
Neither are those Rights lost by Prescription, that are not exercised
frequently, but may be once at a time convenient; as the right of redemption of
things morgaged or given in pledge: As also those Rights of our free liberty to
do such other acts, whereunto that act already executed is not directly
contrary, but is rather comprehended in it, as a part is in its whole. As in
case a man has entered into an Association with one of his Neighbors only, and
continued the same for an hundred years, whereas he was at liberty to have done
the like with others also within that time; those rights of his liberty, I say,
are not by Prescription lost, until being prohibited to exercise it, or
compelled to forego it, he obeys it, and sufficiently signify his consent
thereunto; which being congruous not only to the Civil Law, but to natural
reason, may also be in force even amongst men of the highest fortunes.

CHAP. V. How a Right over Persons was originally gained: Where also the Rights
of Parents over their Children, of Matrimony, of Colleges or Societies, of
Kings over Subjects, and of Masters over Servants, are discust.
I. What Right Parents have over their Children. II. This Right varyes with
their Age; Of Infants, and what right they have over their Estates. III. Of
their Right over their Children, being past their Infancy, whilst they are in
their Family. IV. What coercive power Parents have over them. V. What right
they have to sell them. VI. What right they have over them when out of their
Infancy and Family. VII. Their power distinguished into Natural and Civil. VIII.
Of the Right of an Husband over his Wife. IX. Whether the tying up of one man
to one woman inseparably, be necessary to marriage by the Law of Nature, or of
the Gospel only. X. By the sole Law of Nature, the want of the consent of
Parents nulls not a marriage. XI. By the Evangelical Law, the marriage of
another Wife or Husband, is ipso facto void. XII. By the Law of Nature, the
marriage of Parents with their Children is void. XIII. So are marriages of
Brothers and Sisters, of the Mother-in-Law with the Son-in-Law, etc. by the
Divine Voluntary Law. XIV. But of Kindred more remote, it does not appear that
by that Law they are unlawful. XV. Some of those Contracts which the Law calls
concubinary, may amount to marriages and be lawful. XVI. Some marriages, though
unlawful to have been done, yet being done, are lawful. XVII. Of the right of
the major part of a Society. XVIII. Where the Votes are equal, which part
carries the Sentence. XIX. What Sentences are to be divided, and what
conjoined. XX. The rights of the Absent are devolved on those that are present.
XXI. What order is used among persons equal, even among Kings. XXII. Where
diverse Societies claim unequal shares in the same thing, their Votes shall be
reckoned according to their respective parts in the thing. XXIII. Of the power
that Cities have over their Citizens. XXIV. Whether Citizens may desert their
City, explained by distinction. XXV. No City has power over her banished
Citizens. XXVI. What power by consent a man has over his adopted Son. XXVII.
Of the right that Lords have over their Servants. XXVIII. How far this right
extends as to life and death. XXIX. What the Law of Nature determines as to
those that are born unto Servants. XXX. Of Servitudes there are diverse kinds.
XXXI. What power by consent one Nation has over another, that freely subjects
it self. XXXII. What right is acquired over persons for some crime committed.
I. The Right of Parents over their Children.
A Kind of Right may be gained over Persons as well as things, and that either
by Generation, by Consent, or by way of Punishment, for some delinquency: By
Generation, so both the Parents have equal right over their Children, yet so,
that if they differ in their Commands, the Father, as being of the more noble
Sex, is to be obeyed before the Mother. Of this mind was St. Chrysostom, 1 Cor.
11.3.
It is expedient, says he, that the Wife should be subject unto her own
Husband, for equality in honor begets quarrels. And St. Augustine also, A Son
born in lawful wedlock, Ep. 191.
is more at the command of his Father than of his Mother.

II. This right differs according to the age and discretion of their Children.
In Children, we must distinguish their three different times: The first is
that of their Infancy, whilst they are of unripe judgment, not able to know
good from evil, not to distinguish truth from error. The second is, When they
grow to ripe judgment, but yet continue in their Fathers Family. The third
period is this, When they are separate from their Fathers and have Families of
their own: During the first of these, all the actions of the Child ought to be
regulated by the Parents; for it is but equal, that he that cannot govern
himself should be governed by another, Vide supra c. 3.. 6.
and naturally there is none so fit to govern the Child as the Parents. And yet
by the Law of Nations, the Child is then capable of inheriting an estate,
though he be justly restrained from managing of it by reason of his immature
judgment. This was Plutarch's observation, where he says, De fort. Alex. lib.
2.
That Children have a Right, (...) but not (...): to the Inheritance, but not
to the use of it. Neither is it from the Law of Nature that all that is the
Child's, should be disposed of by the Parents; but from the Laws of some people,
which do in this case sometimes distinguish the Father from the Mother, as they
do also between their bond, and free children, and between the natural issue
and legitimate: of which distinction the Law of Nature takes no Cognizance,
except only of the privileges of Sexes, where both Parents contend who shall
command the Child.

III. The Second Period. Whilst the Child is a part of the Parents Family.
In the second period, when the Child's Judgment is ripened with his years, yet
abiding in his Fathers house, those actions of the child only are subject to
the commands of his Parents, that are of moment to the well ordering of the
estate of his Father, or of his mothers Family. For it is but reasonable, that
every part should endeavor the welfare of the whole. But in his other actions
he has a moral power to do whatsoever his own judgment shall guide him to,
provided that in all things he endeavor as far as in him lies, to please his
parents. But because this is a debt arising not by virtue of that moral
faculty, as those above, but from the duty of piety, reverence, and gratitude;
it cannot make void those actions of his that are otherwise done, no more than
it will suffice to avoid any grant or gift, given by the right owner, to say,
That it was against the Rules of Parsimony.

IV. Of Parents coercive power.
During both these spaces of time, Parents have a Right not to govern only but
to punish, and to enforce obedience from their children, so far forth, as they
ought to be either compelled to their duty, or to reform what is amiss. But as
to greater punishments, we shall discourse elsewhere.

V. Their power to sell them.
Although the Paternal Right be so inherent in the Fathers person, as that it
can no ways be either taken from him, or transferred to another, yet naturally,
if the Civil Laws do not restrain, the Father has power to pawn, or (if
necessity so require) to sell his son, Hist. Goth.
if he have no other way or means to maintain him: Thus the Goths (as Jornandes
records) solicitous of their Childrens safety, choose rather to preserve their
lives than their liberties; and therefore in Compassion, thought it better to
sell them to be kept and nourished as slaves, than to suffer them to dye in
defense of their freedom. Which Right other Nations seem to have borrowed from
that old Theban Law (recited by Aelian) which also seems to be derived from the
Phoenicians, Lib. 2.
and also from the Hebrews, and by them to the Grecians, as Apollonius observes
in his Epistle to Domitian: For Nature it self is presumed to give us a right
to all that, without which that which she commands, cannot be obtained.

VI. Their power over them when separate from them.
In the Third space or period, that is, when the Children are grown to
maturity, and in another Family by themselves; then they are free to do what
pleases themselves, always paying the duty of piety and reverence to them,
which is an obligation never to be cancelled; whence it follows, that the acts
of Kings are not therefore nulled, because their parents are living.

VII. The Rights of Parents are either Natural or Civil.
What power Parents have over their children more or less than this, they
derive from the positive Laws of men, which in all Nations are not the same. So
by that right that God gave unto the Hebrews, the power of a Father to null the
vows of his Sons and Daughters was not perpetual, but only during their abode
in their Fathers family: As may appear Numb. 30.2, 3, 4, 5 verses. For
otherwise the Son being parted from his Father, had power at thirteen years of
age to bind himself without the consent of his parents. The Roman Citizens,
being Fathers, had a peculiar power over their Sons, though they were heads of
their own Families, The Romans gave as much power over their Sons as over
Slaves. Pyrrhoniorum, 3.
before they were made free: which power they themselves confess that other
people had not over theirs. So says Sextus Empericus, The Roman Lawgivers
gave as much power to parents over their children as over their slaves; for the
goods of the Children were not reputed theirs, but their Parents, until they
were manumitted in the very same manner as their slaves were: Which other
Lawmakers rejected as Tyrannical. The like does Philo record of them, All
manner of power over the Son was by the Romans given to the Father. In
legatione.
The same does Simplicius testify, The Ancient Roman Laws respecting as well
the dignity of the Father, as their great pains and care in the education of
their children, the better to tie them up in the strictest bonds of obedience
without exceptions; yet (as I believe) presuming upon their natural assection,
Et venundandi si vellent, and Impune interficiendi, parentibus jus dederunt;
Gave the Parents absolute power either to sell, or if they would, to kill their
own children. The like Power given to Parents over their Children by the
Persians, Aristotle condemns as Tyrannical: Which I was therefore willing to
insert, that so we might the more exactly distinguish between the Natural and
Civil Rights of Parents over their Children.

VIII. A Right over persons by consent. Of an Husband over his Wife.
The Right that is gained over persons by consent, is gained either by
Consociation, or by Subjection. Of that which arises from Consociation, the
most natural is that of Wedlock, wherein all things are Common: Yet the Right
of Command, which is the Prerogative of the Husband, as being of the nobler
Sex, is not Common. For he is the head of the Wife, as well in Conjugal, as in
household affairs: For the Wife is but a part of the Husbands Family: And
therefore it is the Husbands Right to appoint Laws in his own house. But what
Power soever it is that is given to the Husband beyond this, as by the Hebrew
Law, the Husband had power to make void all the Vows made by his Wife, and by
the Laws of some people, he had power to sell away all his Wives goods: This
arises not from the Law of Nature, but from the voluntary Laws of men. And
here it is requisite that we enquire into the nature and essence of Matrimony.
Matrimony what.
And we find Marriage (taken naturally) to be nothing else, but such a
cohabitation of a man with a woman, as places the Woman, as it were, under the
eye, (that is) under the safeguard of the man. For such a Consociation we may
observe to be among dumb creatures. But because men are governed by reason,
therefore it is required from the Woman that she be faithful and obedient unto
her Husband, (for Subjection is rationally due to Protection.)

IX. Whether the tie of one man to one woman inseparably be, by the Natural or
Evangelical Law only.
Surely Nature seems to require no more to the constitution of Marriage than
Cohabitation and Protection. Neither did the Law of God require more before the
publishing of the Gospel: For diverse holy men before the Law, had several
Wives at the same time. St. Chrysostom speaking of Sarah says, That it was
some comfort against her barrenness, to have children by her husband, though
begotten on her handmaid; Nondum enim talia tunc vetita erant; For such things
were not as yet forbidden. So St. Augustine De Civit. Dei lib. 16. c 38. De
Doct. Christ. lib. 4. c. 12. Deuteronomy. 21.15.17.16, 17. 2 Samuel 14.8.
, There was then no Law given against the having of many Wives for propagation
sake. And in another place, Erat uxorum plurium simul habendarum tunc
inculpabilis consuetudo; The Custom of having many Wives at once, was then
unblameable. And even under the Law we find some Precepts given to those that
should have many Wives at once. And we find it expressly forbidden to their
Kings to be excessive in accumulating either Wives or Horses, wherefore the
Hebrew Doctors upon that place do limit their Kings to eighteen Wives and
Concubines, and no more. And Josephus acknowledges, That to have many Wives at
once was Mos patrius, The Custom of his Country. Therefore God himself seems
to upbraid David, For that he had given him his Masters Wives and Concubines,
Quas just and legitime habere posset; Whom he might justly and lawfully enjoy,
says Josephus. Ant. Hist. l. 17. c. 1. Nor was this knot indissoluble.
Neither was this knot of Marriage under the Law indissoluble as now it is; For
we find a prescript Form to him that was willing to put away his Wife. Neither
was any man forbidden to marry the person repudiated, but he only that put her
away, and the Priest, who also is in the same place forbidden to marry a Widow
or an Harlot. Now whereas Philo, and many modern Interpreters, Lev. 21.7.
do understand this to be meant of the High Priest only, by reason of that
which follows, ver. 10. It is evident by that of Ezekiel. 44.22. That every Priest
was thereby forbidden; as may also be easily collected from the connection of
this seventh verse, with the verses preceding. But yet this liberty that was
thus given to the woman that was repudiated to become another man's Wife, was by
the Law of Nature, restrained to a certain time after her Divorce, to avoid
confusion about her issue. To prevent which, the Jews did require, That there
should be three months interval, Whether a Woman having conceived might marry
before delivery. The Christian Law.
between the Divorce and the second Marriages; whence arose that question in
Tacitus, Whether a Woman having conceived, might be married before her
delivery. But the Christian Law has reduced this, as many other things
besides, to a more perfect rule, whereby both he that puts away his Wife,
unless for the act of Uncleanness, and he that marries her that is put away,
are both pronounced guilty of Adultery. And St. Paul, who was both his Apostle
and Interpreter, does give not only to the Husband the power over his Wives
body, which he had before under the state of Nature, (For he that joins himself
to a Woman in Marriage, in corpus ejus habet dominium; has power over her
body, says Artemidorus) but to the Wife likewise power over the body of her
Husband, thereby making the obligation mutual, and the transgression, on either
part, equal. So Lactantius, The Divine Law does so conjoin two persons in
Matrimony, that is, into one body, Inst. l. 6. c. 23.
on such equal terms, that whosoever shall violate this bond, or cut asunder
this knot, shall be reputed an Adulterer. And therefore he presently subjoyns,
By thine own example thou art to teach thy wife Chastity. Iniquum est, ut id
exigas, quod ipse praestare non possis; It is very unjust to exact that from
her, which thou can not perform thy self. To the same sense, and almost in
the same words, speaks Nazianzene, Being equally bound, Quomodo exigis, quod
non rependis? With what Conscience can thou exact that which thou refusest to
pay? To the same purpose is that of St. Jerome to Oceanus, The Laws of Caesar
are one thing, and the Laws of Christ another; Papinian commands one thing, and
St. Paul another: By the former, the Reins of our unbridled lusts are let
loose; and Adultery only being condemned every where, Men are permitted to
frequent the Stews and Brothel-houses without restraint, Quasi dignitas culpam
faciat, non voluntas; As if it were the Sex that made the crime, not the will.
But with us what is unlawful for women is equally unlawful for men. The same
yoke binds both to the like conditions.

There are some that are of opinion, That our blessed Savior in the forecited
places, Mat. 5.32. and Mat. 19.9. did not ordain a new Law, but only restore
the old: Aledging for themselves the very words of our Savior, which seem to
reduce (...) to the Original Institution, Ab initio non fuit sic; From the
beginning it was not so. Whereunto we may answer, Adam or by Moses, That this
League of Matrimony was so sacred and strict, that the Husband was obliged to
separate himself from his Fathers house, and together with his Wife plant
another family: It was no more than what was said to Pharaoh's daughter, Psalm.
45.11. Forget also thine own people, and thy Fathers house. And although we may
collect from this strong consignation, how acceptable it would be to God that
it should be perpetual, yet it cannot from hence be evinced, That even then it
was commanded that this knot should not be, Lib. 1. c. 14. de Abraham.
for any cause whatsoever, dissolved. St. Ambrose, in the case of Polygamy,
distinguishes that which God commends in Paradise from condemning the
contrary. But Christ forbids any man to separate those, whom God by his first
Institution did conjoyn, making that a matter worthy of his new Law, Great. c.
33. q. 4.
which he knew to be best for men, and most acceptable to God.

Most Nations tolerated Divorce and Polygamy. De moribus Germ. Herodian l. 2.
Certain it is, that most Nations in ancient times did both indulge unto
themselves the liberty of Divorces, and also of enjoying plurality of Wives. Of
all barbarous Nations the Germans were well nigh the only people, recorded by
Tacitus, that were contented with one Wife: But the Persian, Indian, and
Thracian Histories do clearly testify the lawfulness among them both of
Polygamy and Divorces. Amongst the Egyptians their Priests only were
restrained to one Wife. And amongst the Grecians, as Athenaeus tells us,
Cecrops was the first that allowed to one man but one Wife. And yet, that this
was no long-lived practice among the Athenians, we are taught by the example of
Socrates and others. And if happily any people did live more abstemiously, as the
Romans, who never admitted of Bigamy, nor in a long time, of Divorces, they
were certainly highly to be commended, in that they drew near unto that which
was most perfect. And yet will it not hence follow, That they who did otherwise
before the promulgation of the Christian Law did therein sin: For as St.
Augustine rightly observes Contr. Faust. lib. 22 c. 47. Every Nation has its
several qualites wherein they differ no less than in their peculiar Language,
which disagreeing conditions to govern aptly, no one and the same Law can
suffice. The most high God permitted some things in the Israelites for the
hardness of their hearts, which were not consonant to the rules of perfection;
where therefore nature or custom have entertained a vicious, yet not
intolerable habit, with so long and public approbation, that the opposite
virtue would seem as uncouth as it would be to walk naked in England: There may
a wise and upright Lawgiver conceal for a while his inward dislike, till time
make way for a more complete Reformation.

Est aliquid prodire tenus, si non detur ultra. For want of discretion in this
case, the Kingdom of Congo in Africa was unhappily diverted from Christianity,
which it willingly at first embraced; but afterward with great Indignation
rejected, for no other reason, See Rawl. p. 293. See 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19.
History of the Council of Trent, p. 63.
but because Plurality of Wives, was (I know not how necessarily but I am sure)
more contentiously, than seasonably denied unto them. For where a vice cannot
be rooted out, without the ruin of a state, it is acceptable to God, for a
time to connive at it.


, Quando mos erat, crimen non erat; Whilst it was a Custom it was no Crime,
(at least not imputed as so.)

X. What Marriages are justifiable by the Law of Nature.
Now let us see what Marriages are good by the Law of Nature. To direct our
judgments herein we must remember, That not everything that is repugnant to
the Law of Nature, is made void by the Law of Nature; As appears by things
prodigally given away: but those only wherein that principle is wanting, which
should give life and vigor to the act; or in which, all its effects are
vitiated and tainted. Now that principle which gives life to this and all other
humane acts, is that Right which we expounded to be a moral power or faculty to
do it, together with a will sufficiently declared. But what Will may be
sufficient to produce a Right, we shall have occasion to declare more fully
when we shall discourse of promises in general. Whether the consent of Parents
be requisite to a perfect Marriage, by the Law of Nature.
But concerning this moral power, the first question is, Whether the consent of
Parents be by the Law of Nature requisite to a perfect Marriage, which some
affirm. But herein they are mistaken: For all their Arguments do enforce no
more than this, That it is agreeable to the duty they owe to their Parents, to
crave their consents: Which we shall easily grant them, provided that the will
of their Parents be not manifestly unjust. For if Children be to reverence
their Parents in all things, surely they ought to do it most especially in such
things wherein the whole Nation is concerned, as in Marriages. And yet it
cannot hence be inferred, That a Son has not a Moral Right to dispose of
himself, if they consent not. For he that marries, ought to be of mature age
and judgment, and he is to forsake his Fathers house, so that he is herein
exempted from his Fathers domestic discipline. ( And becomes from thence
(...), Master of himself.) And although the duty of love and reverence do
oblige him to ask the good will of his Parents, yet does not the breach of that
duty null the act of his Marriage. That the Romans and such other Nations did
make void such Marriages was not from the Law of Nature, but from the will of
their Lawmakers. For by the same Law, the mother to whom notwithstanding the
children do naturally owe reverence, could not by her descent, make the
Marriage void; no, nor the father of a Freeman: And if the Father himself be
under the power of his own Father, then the consents of both Father and
Grandfather, are required to the Sons Marriage: But to the Marriage of a
Daughter, the Grandfathers consent alone suffices. Which differences being
altogether unknown to the Law of Nature, does evidently prove, that they arise
not from the Natural, but from the Civil Laws.

We find in Sacred story, That many holy men, and much more, Virgins not to
choose Husbands for themselves. 1 Cor. 7.36. Lib. 1. de Abrah. c. ult.
women (who by reason of their modesty and bashfulness ought especially in this
case to be governed by others) have in contracting Marriages submitted
themselves to the authority of their Parents: Non est virginalis pudoris,
eligere maritum; It becomes not a Virgins modesty, says Ambrose Great. c. 32.
q. 2.
, to choose an Husband for her self. And yet was not Esau's Marriage declared
null, nor his Children held as Illegitimate, because in his Marriage he had not
the consent of his Parent: It is true, That as to Daughters, the chief power of
disposing them is in the Father. So in Euripides Hermione, My Nuptial I to
Parents care alone
Commit; for free choice therein have I none.
But as to Sons, If we respect strict and Natural Right, that of Quintilian
will be found true, That if it be lawful for a Son at any time to do things
otherwise unreprovable, without, yea against his Fathers will; surely that
liberty is never more justifiable than in Marriage: For as Cassiodore truly
observes, Durum est, libertatem liberam non habere in Matrimonio, Lib. 7. c. 4.
unde liberi procreantur; To be debarred of our free choice in Matrimony, from
whence our Children should be born, is hard; Ter. Andr. Act. 1. sc. 5.
nothing is more plain than that a Son in his Marriage should please himself.

XI. It is a void Marriage that is contracted with another Wife or Husband.
That Marriage that is contracted with another man's Wife, is doubtless null by
the Law of Nature, unless her former Husband have dismissed her: For so long does
his power last over her, which by the Evangelical Law is not dissolved but by
death. The latter Marriage therefore is null, for want of a moral power in the
woman to dispose of her self, which being lost by her former Marriage does
vitiate all those subsequent effects that attend it; because every Act is but
the invading of another Right. So likewise on the other side by the same Law,
a Marriage contracted with the Husband of another Woman is alike void, by
reason of that power that Christ gives a chaste Wife over the body of her
Husband.

XII. Of Marriages between kindred.
Concerning Marriages between such as are nearly allied, or of the same blood,
many difficult questions arise, which are often with much zeal and animosity
agitated on both sides. Because he that shall undertake to assign certain and
natural reasons, why these Marriages (that are by Law or Custom thus
forbidden) are unlawful, should experimentally find how hard, nay how
impossible, it is to effect it. That alleged by Plutarch in his Roman
Questions, by St. Augustine in his Book De Civitate Dei, by Philo in his
Special Laws, and by St. Chrysostom on 1 Cor. 13.13. as the contracting of new
Friends, and the strengthening our selves with new Alliances, savours more of
Policy than true Piety: Nor are they of that force and energy as to conclude
the contrary Acts to be either unlawful or void. Whereunto may be added, That
some cases there may be, wherein such prohibited Marriages may be more
profitable and politic than others, The Marriage of kindred sometimes
profitable and politic.
as may be collected, not only from that which God himself in his Law given to
the Jews excepts, of raising Seed to a deceased Brother having no issue: But
from that also of a Virgin left by her Father, as sole heir of all his estate,
who by the Grecian and Hebrew Laws, was to be Married to the next of kin, to
preserve the name and Estate in their own Tribe and Family; and from many such
like cases which do, or may occur.

But yet from this general rule, Incestuous Marriages forbid by the Law of
Nature, and why.
we must except the Marriages of Parents with their Children in what degree
soever, the reason whereof is sufficiently evident. For neither can the
Husband, who by the Law of Matrimony, is the head of the Wife, pay that respect
and reverence, that Nature binds him to give to his Mother, nor the Daughter to
her Father: For though she be subordinate to her Husband by Matrimonial Right,
yet does her Marriage allow her so great a Familiarity with her Husband, as is
altogether inconsistent with the duty of a Child. Paulus the Lawyer was in the
right, when having sa^d before, That in contracting Marriages the Law of Nature
and Modesty were chiefly to be regarded; he added, That it was against modesty
for a man to take his own Daughter to be his Wife. And Philo in his Special
Laws condemns it as an execrable wickedness to pollute the bed of his deceased
Father, which as a thing Sacred, ought not to be touched, and without regard to
either the age, or the reverence of a Mothers name, to make himself both Son
and Husband to the same Woman, and to make her both Mother and Wife to the same
Man. Wherefore such Marriages are doubtless not illegal only, but void, by
reason of something that is vicious, which perpetually cleaves to the effects
of it. Neither is that Argument of Diogenes and Chrisippus, which is drawn from
the practice of Cocks, and such like dumb creatures, sufficient to prove, that
such commixtures are not repugnant to the Law of Nature. That is unlawful which
is repugnant to Humane Nature. Lib. 2. Contr. J^^it.
For (as I have already said) it is enough to conclude any thing unlawful, That
it is repugnant though but to humane nature. This is that Incest which the
Lawyers, Paulus and Papinian, wrote to be by the Law of Nations committed,
between the degrees ascendent and descendent. And this is that Law of Nature,
which, as Xenophon notes, is no less a Law, because it was contemned by the
Persians, Medes, Indians and Aethiopians; for which they were punished with
perpetual Wars, Parricides, Fratricides, as Philo first, and after him St.
Hierome observed: For as Michael Ephesius well interprets it, That is Natural,
which is of common use amongst such Nations, as are uncorrupted; And that live
most agreeable unto Nature. And therefore Hippodamus the Pythagorean calls
these incestuous commixtures, inordinate and unnatural lusts, unbridled
passions, and abominable pleasures. Such were those of the Parthians, whereof
Lucan thus complains, -- Epulis vesana, meroque
Regia non ullos exceptos legibus horret
Concubitus --
With Wine and dainty fare, the Court inflamed,
Of their unbridled Lusts are not ashamed.
And a little after, -- Cui fas implere parentem,
Quid reor essenefas? --
Who fears not with his Mother to lie,
To him, what can be Villainy?
The execrable Custom particularly among the Persians, Orat. 20.
Dion Prusaeensis prudently attributes to their evil education. But here we
cannot without wonder pass by that vain conceit of Socrates and Xenophon, who
could find nothing reprovable in these incestuous Marriages, besides the
disparity in age, whence barrenness, or misshapen children must necessarily
follow. For if there were no other reason than this to hinder such Marriages,
surely it could no more invalid these, than the like disparity in years could
render other Marriages unlawful. But that which is much more worthy of our
enquiry is this, Whether among men, unbyassed by an ill education, there be not
(besides that which, as I have said, is conceived in the mind and
understanding) a natural abhorrency, even in our affections to commix, either
with our own parents, or with the children issuing out of our own Loins; Some
Beasts abhor such Coitions. Lib. 5. adv. Gent. Hist. Animal. l. 9. c. 47.
especially when we find the like even in some brute beasts. For so amongst
others, Arnobius testifies, where speaking of the horror of such unnatural
Coitions, he says, Quem non hominibus solis, sed animalibus quoque nonnullis
natura ipsa subjecit, and ingeneratus ille communiter sensus; Which Nature and
common sense have instilled not into men only, but into some beasts. Aristotle
records a notable experiment of this in a Camel, who could not be induced to
cover his own Dam, until his Keeper had covered her head over with an Hood, and
so deceived him, but the Hood falling off whilst he was upon her, though he
did the act; yet remembering what he had done, presently after so tore his
Keeper that he killed him. The like he relates of a generous Colt in Scythia,
which refused to cover his Dam, but being in like manner deceived, brake his
own neck for very horror of the fact. Not. Hist. Lib. 8. c. 42.
The like Stories we read in Pliny, of an Horse that for the same cause killed
himself: and of a Mare that being likewise deluded, worried her Keeper to
death. For, says the Historian, these Beasts are not without some knowledge of
their own kindred. Not much unlike unto this is that of Oppianus, in his first
Book of Hunting; and of Varro in his Second Book and Seventh Chapter de re
rustica: And to the like purpose is that of Seneca in his Hippolitus, Ferae
quoque ipsae Veneris evitant nefas,
Generisque leges Inscius servat pudor.
Even Beasts themselves do from their Dams refrain,
And taught by Nature, chaster Laws maintain.


XIII. The degrees of Affinity and Consanguinity forbidden.
Another Question arises here, concerning the degrees of Affinity and
Consanguinity in the cross line, especially of those mentioned Lev. 18. For
though we should grant, that they are not interdicted by the mere Law of
Nature, yet it is manifest, that they are forbidden by the express Will of God:
And that not only to the Hebrews, but to all mankind, as may be collected from
the very words of God himself, to Moses, Defile not your selves in any of these
things; for in all these things the Nations are defiled, Lev. 18.24, 25, 27.
Incestuous Marriages forbidden by God, to Adam or Noah.
which I cast out before you, and the Land is defiled: Therefore do I visit the
Iniquity thereof upon it; and the Land it self speweth ^ut her Inhabitants.
Incestuous Marriages forbidden by God, to Adam or Noah.
For if the Canaanites and their Neighbors did sin in all these things, and
were punished for so doing; certainly they had a Law given them, which forbad
the doing of them: Which Law, since it was not merely Natural, must needs be
given by God, either peculiarly to them (which is not very probable, nor will
the words bear that sense) or to all mankind, either at the Creation to Adam,
or after the Flood to Noah. Now, such Laws as were given to all mankind, Christ
did no w^ere abrogate, but those only, which as an Hedge or Partition wall, did
separate that Nation from all others. Besides, Ephesians. 2.14. 1 Cor. 7.25.
when St. Paul did so severely censure the Corinthian for marrying his
Mother-in-Law; as he had no peculiar command from Christ so to do, so he uses
no other argument to justify his severity, than this, That it was reputed
unclean even among the profane Gentiles: Witness Carondas his Law, which
branded such Marriages with infamy. And that of Cicero, in a case not much
different from that of the Corinthian: Pro A Cluentio.
For having first laid open the matter of fact, and proved the Marriage of the
Mother-in-law with her Son-in-law, in detestation of so foul a crime, he cries
out, O mulieris incredibile scelus, and praeter hanc unam, in omni vita
inauditum! O the incredible wickedness of a Woman, and but in this never heard
of! When King Seleucus had a mind to give his Wife Stratonice to his Son
Antiochus, Verebatur ne ipsa offenderetur ut re illicita; He was afraid, says
Plutarch, lest she should take offense at it as a thing unlawful. For so it was
in Virgil's account, Thalamos ausum incestare novercae.
His Fathers Bed with Incest durst pollute.
Which general detestation of these Incestuous Marriages, if it derive not its
origin from an immediate dictate of Nature, it must necessarily descend by
ancient tradition from some precept given by God, to Adam, or Noah. The Ancient
Hebrews, who herein were no mean Interpreters of the Divine Law, and
Maimonides, who had read and with sound Judgment weighed all they wrote, do
assign two causes of those Laws concerning Marriages, mentioned Lev. 18. The
first is, The Hebrews assign two reasons of those Laws.
A certain Natural modesty which will not endure that Parents should mix with
their own issue, either by themselves, or by such persons as either in Blood or
Alliance are nearest unto them: The Second is for prevention of Fornications
and Adulteries, which too much Familiarity and daily Conversation, without any
watchful eye to restrain them, may occasion; especially if such wanton
dalliances may be made good by lawful Marriages. Now if we would judiciously
adapt these two causes unto those Divine Laws beforementioned, Lev. 18. it
will easily appear, That in those that are allied in the right line, either
Ascendent or Descendent, (for we do not here mention that of Parents with their
Children, which Natural Reason without any other Law, teaches us to abhor) and
in those the first degree of the oblique line, which because of its immediate
descent from the common stock, is usually accounted the second degree, by
reason of that fresh and lively Image of the Parents in the Children; The
former of the two causes abovementioned is very forceable, as issuing from
that which Nature her self does, if not command, yet at least commend unto us
as the more honest: Of which kind there are many which afford abundance of
matter, for Laws both Divine and Humane. And therefore the Hebrews do not
precisely tie themselves to the degrees of the right line, that are expressed in
the Law, but comprehend under them many degrees, that are not there mentioned
by a manifest parity of reason. The names whereof, with them, are these, The
Mother of his Mother, the Mother of his Mothers Father, his Fathers Mother, the
Mother of his Fathers Father, the Wife of his Fathers Father, the Wife of his
Mothers Father, his Sons Wife, the Wife of his Sons Son, the Wife of his
Daughters Son, the Daughter of his Sons Daughter, the Daughter of his Sons Son,
the Daughter of his Daughters Daughter, the Daughter of his Daughters Son, the
Daughter of his Wives Sons Daughter, the Daughter of his Wives Daughters
Daughter, the Mother of his Wives Fathers Mother, the Mother of his Wives
Mothers Father: That is to say, according to the Roman Dialect, all
Grand-mothers and Great Grand-mothers, the Grand, and Great
Grand-mothers-in-law, the Nephews, and Neeces Daughters, the Daughters of the
Son-in-law, the Nephews Wife, and the Wives Mother and Grand-mothers; because
there is the same reason for the kindred on the Mothers side, as for that on
the Fathers: And so under the first degree is comprehended the second, and
under the second the third. Beyond which it is not likely that any Controversy
should arise, which might otherwise proceed in infinitum.

Now these Laws, together with that which prohibits Brothers and Sisters to
marry one another, the Hebrews reckon among those which God gave unto Adam,
which were these, The six Precepts given by God to Adam and Noah's Sons.
First, That, Enjoining the worship of God. Secondly, That, Commanding the
ordaining of Magistrates, and the administration of Justice. Thirdly, That,
Against the shedding of Innocent Blood. Fourthly, That, Against Images or
Idolworship. Fifthly, That, Against Rapine: And Sixthly, This, against Incest.
Yet so, that this last was not to be in force till the world was well
replenished with mankind, which in the beginning could not be avoided. Neither
do they think it to the purpose to say, That Moses makes no relation of any
such Laws given to Adam, forbidding such Marriages. For he thought it
sufficient tacitly to couch it in the Law it self, wherein he declares, That
the Nations were punished for these very sins: Which they could not justly have
been, had there not been a Law given them, that did forbid them. There being
many things recorded in the Law, not in order of time, but as occasion served
to express them. It will nothing avail then to say, That these Incestuous
Marriages were not sins, because there was no Law against them before Moses;
for no more was there any Law then extant to punish Adultery with death: Genesis
38.24. No Laws extant to punish Incest, Rapes, or Adultery; yet we find these
punished before Moses, in the stories of Tha^ar, Dinah and Reuben. In the
Jewish Law there is neither prius, nor posterius.
yet we find Thamar sentenced to death for it by Judah. So the punishment of
the Sichemites by Simeon and Levi was just for ravishing their Sister Dinah,
though we read of no Law then published against it. And the Incest of Reuben
deserved his Fathers Curse, though the Law forbidding it be not recorded: For
it was sufficiently condemned in this, That the Nations were cast out by God
for these things; whereby it may probably be concluded, That God had given such
Laws to mankind before Moses his time, though they are but obscurely glanced at
by him.

And indeed the Jews have a notable wise saying, which gives some light to
those dark times, namely, that in their Law there is neither Prius nor
Posterius, First nor Last; for many things are recited without order. As
touching the marriage of Brothers and Sisters, the very words of Michael
Ephesius are these, For Brothers and Sisters to lie together, was at the first
indifferent; but when there was a Law that forbad such Coition, then whether
that Law should be observed or not, was not to be questioned. And therefore
Diodorus Siculus notes, Lib. 1.
that to abstain from such Commixtures, was the common custom of all men, the
Egyptians only excepted: though Dion Prusaeensis excepts also the Barbarians.
Seneca wrote thus, We, says he, join the Gods in marriage, but with very
little piety; for we marry together Brothers and Sisters. L. 8. de Leg.
Plato calls such marriages, profane and abominable before God. Whereby we may
discern, how mean an opinion other Nations as well as the Jews, had of these
Incestuous Marriages, which they seldom mention without a Nefas, to testify
their dislike of them. All Brothers and Sisters, as well on the Mothers side,
as on the Fathers side, that is, as well of the half, as whole blood are
comprised within this Law, whether they are educated at home or abroad, as is
manifest by the Chaldee Paraphrast.

XIV. Remote degrees seem not forbidden.
Now these marriages being expressly forbidden, seem to justify, or at the
least to tolerate those in more remote degrees. For to marry an Aunt, that is,
his Fathers Sister, is expressly prohibited: but yet to marry his Brothers
Daughter, which is equal in degree, is not. Such was Sarah to Abraham, as
Josephus thought Hist. l. 12. Jos. Ant. Hist. lib. 12. and lib. 76.
. Nay, there are diverse Precedents for this among the Jews: And after the Law
given, the same Josephus gives us examples in Herod, who married his Brothers
Daughter, and gave his own Daughter to his Brother Pherotas. There are certain
marriages lately contracted (says Tacitus) which to us are strange, though not
so with other Nations, because forbidden by no Law: Namely, that a man should
marry his Brothers Daughter, this was held lawful among the Athenians, as
Isaeus and Plutarch in the Life of Lysias record; whereof the Jews give this
reason, Because young men do daily frequent, and are more usually brought up in
their Grandfathers and Grand-mothers houses amongst their Aunts, than their
Aunts are in their Brothers amongst their Nephews, neither have they there so
much Right. Which if we do admit, as it is indeed very agreeable to reason,
then we must acknowledge, that the Law which Interdicts Marriages with Kindred
in the right degree, and with Sisters (from whence sprung the whole race of
mankind at first) is now perpetual, and obliges all men, being grounded upon
natural honesty: So that whatsoever is done against this Law, may be made Null,
by reason of the Impediment, that is lasting and permanent; but what is done
against other Laws, is not so, as being but cautionary against this, which may
be otherwise provided against. Sure I am, Marriage of two Sisters.
that by the Nineteenth Canon of those that are called the Apostles, they that
marry two Sisters successively, or their Brothers or Sisters Daughters, are
only driven from the Clergy. And as to the sins for which God is said to
extirpate the Canaanites and their Neighbors, the answer is easy. For though
the charge be general, yet it may be restrained to some principal heads in the
charge; as to Sodomy, to Carnal Copulation with Beasts, with Parents, Sisters,
other men's Wives, etc. And that other Laws were added but as Fences and
Retrenchments, to restrain men from violating these Laws, as the Hebrews
thought. Other Marriages forbid to restrain men from contracting these.
For that it was not to be understood of every particular in that charge is
sufficiently proved, in that they were forbidden to have two Sisters, as Wives,
at the same time; which that it was not at the first made to all mankind, the
example and great piety of Jacob will not suffer us to believe; whereunto may
be added that of Amram the Father of Moses, who married his own Aunt, as did
diverse others, both among the Grecians and Romans. And yet I cannot but
commend the great modesty of the Primitive Christians, The Primitive Christians
exceeded the Jews in modesty.
who did not only of their own accord observe those Laws, which were given in
common, to all Nations, but those also which were given to the Jewish Nation
only; yea, and did enlarge the bounds of their modesty, beyond those degrees
forbidden them: that as in other virtues, so in this also, they might be seen
to excel them. And that this was done with a general consent, will appear by
the Canons of the Councils. Common use and practice is of great power, to
commend or discommend any thing to humane sense (says St. Augustine speaking
in disl^ke of the marriage of Brothers and Sisters) which, says he, now by
Custom most Nations, De Civit. Dei. lib. 15. c. 16.
though Heathenish, do abhor. And although those marriages are sometimes
permitted, by some wicked Laws, yet has a better Custom at length introduced
an Abhorrence of them: Now since this Custom has so far prevailed, as to curb
and restrain this License, to endeavor to infringe, or corrupt this Custom,
is little less than Impiety: For if it be unjust, out of covetousness to remove
the Landmarks of our neighbors grounds, how much more unjust is it, out of an
inordinate lust, to subvert so profitable and so laudable a Custom? We have
observed, says St. Augustine, Ibid.
how rare it is to see Brothers and Sisters Children to be joined in marriage
in these times of ours, by reason of their propinquity in blood, being the next
in degree to Brothers and Sisters; which though by the Law is lawful,
Concerning the marriage of Cousin Germans.
because neither Divine nor Humane Laws have yet forbidden it, yet has Custom
introduced such a dislike of it, that it is seldom done. Factum etiam licitum
propter vicinitatem horrebatur Illiciti; That which is in it self lawful, is
prudently avoided for its vicinity to that which is unlawful: whereunto he
presently subjoyns, That though it were the Religious Care of our Forefathers,
after two or three descents, to renew their Allyances, by Interchangeable
marriages, abstaining only, after the world was sufficiently stockt with men,
from that of Brothers with Sisters; yet who can doubt, but that, honestius hoc
tempore etiam consobrinarum prohibita esse conjugia; The marriage of Brothers
and Sisters Children, is now more modestly forbidden. And that, not only for
strengthening our selves with new allyances; but also by reason of a certain
natural and commendable bashfulness, which should restrain us from committing
such libidinous acts with her, (of whom by reason of the nearness of blood, we
should have a reverend esteem) as even conjugal modesty we see does even blush
to own. And therefore Aeschylus calls the marriage of Cousin Germans such a
Conjunction as the Law forbids, because by this means the Stock is corrupted
and tainted. Now this natural Shamefacedness, many Kings and Free People have
by their Laws cherished and upheld. The Emperor Theodosius, as Victor reports,
did so highly esteem of it, that he expressly forbad the marriage of Cousin
Germans, making but little difference between that, and that of Brothers and
Sisters: Which Law St. Ambrose highly commends, as being full of Piety. Such
another Law we find made by Arcadius and Honorius. The like Cassiodore relates
of the Goths, who prudently following this example, did reserve the privilege
of contracting marriages with Cousin Germans to their King only. And yet we
must still remember, Not every thing that is done contrary to Law, is presently
made void. Quod fieri non debuit, factum va^ t. Can. 60.
That not every thing that is forbidden to be done by Humane Laws, being done,
is presently void, unless it be so signified by the Law it self. In the Council
of Agatha, among other prohibited marriages, that of Cousin Germans also is
mentioned; whereunto it is added, That the Council did not at that time, so
prohibit them, as to dissolve those that had been made. So Paulus the Lawyer
says, That marriages without the consent of Parents, was unjust, but yet not
to be dissolved. So in the Eliberine Council it was decreed, That if a man
after the death of his Wife, should marry her Sister, and she be faithful, he
shall be debarred from the Communion five years; thereby showing, that the band
of marriage was to remain undissolved. And by the aforesaid Canon of the
Apostles it was likewise concluded, That if a man did marry two Sisters
successively, or his Brothers Daughter, he was only not to have been admitted
into Sacred Orders, but the marriage was not void.

XV. Some Concubinary Contracts may amount to marriage.
But that we may proceed to other marriages, it is to be observed, That some
Concubinary Contracts may amount to true and authentic marriages: although
they may be deprived of some effects peculiar to marriages by the Civil Law, or
lose some effects that are natural, by reason of some impediment arising from
the Civil Law. As for example, the accompanying of a Bondman with a
Bondwoman, was called by the Romans, Contubernium, a Consociation, and not a
marriage; yet it had nothing wanting requisite to the nature of marriage: And
therefore in the Ancient Canons, it is called by the name of Wedlock. So the
accompanying of a Freeman with a Bondwoman, is not honored with the Title of
Matrimony, but of Wedlock: which by Imitation, is since derived to other
persons that are of unequal Conditions; as that in Athens between a Citizen and
a Stranger. So Servius upon Virgil, calls those Bastards, that are born of
obscure Mothers. And yet even these servile conjunctions were in Greece,
Carthage and Apulia, reckoned as marriages, though the Hebrews would not honor
them by that name, nor legitimate them without the consent of those whose
servants they were. For so they expound that place of Exodus 21. Exodus 21.
where mention is made of marriages. And Cassiodore will inform us, Lib. 7. c.
40.
that they were not to marry any woman of unequal condition to themselves,
without leave obtained from their Prince. But certainly in the state of Nature,
such unequal marriages may be Authentic, if the woman be under the custody and
safeguard of her husband, and have plighted her troth unto him. So also, under
the state of the Evangelical Law, a marriage between two Servants, or between a
Freeman and a Servant, is a firm and lawful marriage; much more that between a
Citizen and a Stranger, a Senator and a Freewoman, if those things which are
necessarily required by the Divine Christian Law, to the accomplishment of a
marriage be added, namely, an indissoluble joining together of one man to one
woman, although some effects properly due by the Civil Law to other marriages,
Concubines.
do not attend these, or which of their own accord would follow these, were
they not by some Law hindered. And thus are the words of the first Tol^tane
Council to be understood, He that has no Wife, but instead of a Wife has a
Concubine, may not be driven from the Communion, so as he content himself with
one woman, whether she be his Wife or Concubine, as he pleases. Concerning
such a Concubine, De fide and oper.
St. Augustine writes thus, If she shall solemnly profess, that she will never
know any other man, although he to whom she is at present subject, should
dismiss her: It may be worthy our pains, Lib. de bono Conjugii.
to enquire whether she should not be admitted to Baptism. So in another place,
A question does often arise, In case a man and a woman being neither husband
nor wife to any other, shall agree to lie together, not for procreation sake,
but only to avoid Incontinency, and shall give faith each to other, never to
enjoy any else, whether that may be be called a marriage or no? And happily
(says he) it may not absurdly be so called, Concerning Concubines, St. Aug.
if they both agree, that this conjunction shall continue until death; and
although the procreation of children were not the main end they proposed to
themselves in their lying together; yet if they do not purposely avoid it, nor
do any wicked act, Genesis 38.9.
to the intent that children should not be born unto them: But if a man have a
Wife, he ought not to keep a Concubine, lest she estrange his heart from his
Wife. Hereunto likewise we may refer, that Theodosius and Valentinianus do call
an unequal marriage a kind of Fornication; and that from thence, an Accusation
of Adultery is said to arise.

XVI. Some marriages though forbid to be done, yet being done are valid.
Though the Laws of men do forbid some certain persons to be joined in
marriage, yet it follows not, that being married, their marriage is void. For
it is one thing to forbid the doing of a thing, and another to make that void
that is done: For the Prohibition may extend it^ force no farther than to some
penalty, either expressed or arbitrary; which sort of Laws Vlpian calls Imperfect
Laws: Quae fieri quid vetant, sed factum non rescindunt; Which prohibit the
doing, but rescind not the fact done. Such was the Cincian Law among the
Romans, Instit. Tit. 1.
that restrained men from giving more than unto such a proportion, Live. lib. 10.
but did not make void that which was given beyond it. The Valerian Law (says
Livy) when it forbad the whipping with Rods, or the killing with the Axe, him
that had provoked or challenged another, imposed no penalty upon the breaker of
the Law, but adjudged it to be improbe factum, dishonestly done (such was the
modesty of those times, when Infamy only was thought a sufficient guard to the
Laws) whereas now, there is scarce any that will so mildly threaten his
servant. Ulpian.
By the Fusian Law, none except some few particular persons was to receive by
way of Legacy more than ten thousand Asses, Mill assum.
(which reduced to our Coin, amount to about one and thirty pounds ten
shillings, reckoning every As to an Half Penny Farthing): Ad Somn. Scip^onis.
See Sect. 14. of this Chapter toward the end.
and he that received more, was to forfeit the Quadruple sum. Amongst those
Laws that were called Imperfect, Macrobius reckons those which had no penalty
annexed to the breach of them. Such was that rescript of D. Marcus, That Heir
who forbad him to perform Funeral Rites, who was thereunto appointed by the
Testator, did not rightly; howbeit he ordered no punishment to be inflicted
upon him that did it. We do acknowledge, that amongst the Romans, it was
afterward introduced by the Theodosian Law, That whatsoever was prohibited
only by the Law, although it was not expressly said, that what was done contrary
unto it should be as null; yet if it proceeded to Judgment, it should be
construed as unprofitable, void, and of no force: But this strained
construction arose not from the force of the bare prohibition, but from the
virtue of the new Law, which other Nations were not obliged to follow. For
sometimes there is greater indecency in the act doing, than there can be in the
effects that proceed from it; and sometimes also the inconveniences which do
follow upon the Recession, or making void of the fact, are more than could
ensue upon the doing of it.

XVII. Of the right of the major part of a Society.
Besides this of marriage (which of all Consociations is the most natural)
there are diverse others as well private as public; and those either over the
people, or of the people: But all of them have this in common, that as to those
things for which such a Society is instituted, the whole, or the major part in
the name of the whole, do oblige every particular in that Society. For it may
well be presumed that it was the mind of those that first entered into that
Society, that the power to determine all matters therein treated, should rest
somewhere. But because it would be apparently unjust, that some few Persons
should impose upon the rest, where every Person has equal power; therefore by
the Right of Nature (setting aside those Orders and Bylaws which do prescribe
a Form or Method to the whole Society, in the handling and discussing of
matters that are brought before them) the major part should have the power of
the whole. So Thucydides, That which the Multitude, or the greater part
thereof, shall decree, is Authoritative. Appianus was of the same mind, As well
in public Elections, as in Courts of Judgment, Lib. 5.
the greater part rules the rest. So also was Dionysius Halicarn. That which
seems best to the most, Quod pluribus visum id valere.
must prevail: that is, Unless it be otherwise provided by some former Law or
Agreement, that of such a number of persons, such and such shall be of the
Quorum, whereof any two or more have power to determine: Yea, though their
judgment be not altogether so righteous as it might be, yet, Eo quod major pars
decrevit, stetur; Curtius l. 10.
Because the major part has decreed it, it must stand. Whereas on the
contrary, -- In paucis jam deficiente caterva,
Nec persona sita est patriae, nec curia constat.
The Assembly being dissolved in two or three,
No face of Country nor of Court can be.
And by and by after, Prudentius.
-- Infirma minoris,
Vox cedat numeri, parvaque in part quiescat.
Of the same Opinion was Xenophon, Who would have all things done according to
the vote of the major part of the Suffragans: And in this sense does, as well
the Chaldee Paraphrast, as the Jewish Rabbis, understand that of Moses, Exodus
23.2. Neither shall thou speak in a cause to decline after many to wrest
Judgment, which the said Paraphrast renders thus, Neither shall thou cease to
speak thine own mind in judgment. Juxta Sententiam plurimorum perfice judicium;
According to the opinion of the most, give Judgment.

XVIII. Which part carries the sentence when the Votes are equal.
But if the Sentences be equally balanced, nothing can be done; because there
is not any thing of moment sufficient to cast the scale: In which case if the
Sentences be equal, the accused shall be held innocent: And this the Greeks
call the suffrage of Minerva, as Aeschylus and Euripides inform us. So where
the Judges are equally divided in opinion, Possessor rem tenet; The Right goes
with the Possession, says Aristotle: And Seneca in one of his Controversies
says the same, One Judge condemns and another absolves: Orestes. Electra.
Arist. Probl. Sect. 29. Non est invidiosa potestas quae misericordia vincit.
Sen.
Where the Judges are equal, and their Judgment so unequal, the milder Sentence
must prevail. Neither is there any reason, says Seneca, that any man should
envy that Power which overcomes only by showing mercy. Nay the Jews go yet
further: For if the condemning Part had but one single Vote more than the
absolving part, it stood for nothing; as may be collected from the Chaldee
Paraphrast, upon that place of Exodus before cited, and by others; for so also
in all Logical Collections, the Inference follows that part which is least
grievous.

XIX. Where the question is not agreed unto, what is to be conjoined and what
divided.
But here another Question arises, namely, when and what sentences are to be
conjoined, and what to be divided? Wherein if we consider the Law of Nature
only, that is, if no Law or Covenant have otherwise determined, we ought to
distinguish between such Opinions or Sentences, as are altogether inconsistent
and differ in the whole, and such as differ only in part, that so these latter
may conjoyn in that wherein they agree, though the former cannot. And therefore
where the Question to be argued wraps up many things together, it is to be
divided and discussed in parts. Thus Seneca, when another man delivers his
opinion in a Question, whereunto I consent in part only, I desire him to divide
that wherein I agree with him from that wherein I disagree, and I shall then
join with him. Where the Question is not assented unto, it is to be disputed in
parts.
As for example, they that adjudge a delinquent to pay twenty pounds, and they
that adjudge him to pay but ten pounds, may unite in the ten against them that
would acquit him. But they that censure a Malefactor to death, and they that
censure him to banishment, cannot be reconciled, because death and banishment
are inconsistent; neither can that part that would absolve him, join with those
that would banish him. For though they both agree that he deserves not death,
yet is not that expressed in the sentence, but deducible from it by consequence:
Lib. 8. Ep. ad Aristonem.
For he that would banish does not absolve. It was therefore well observed by
Pliny, that when there shall happen to be such a diversity of opinions in a
free Assembly, concerning one and the same thing, that they cannot be included
in any one question, they must divide the matter into several and distinct
questions; for it avails but little that two are displeased with the third, if
in nothing they agree between themselves. Polybius justly taxes Posthumous the
Praetor with fraud, when in demanding the Judgment of the Senate, concerning
the Grecian Captives, he joins together those that condemned them, and those
that would have had them detained as Prisoners for a while only, against those
that would have released them. Such a question as this we shall find in
Gellius, Lib. 9. c. 15. Declam. 365.
and another in Quintilian, where it being agreed that of seven Judges, what
punishment the major part should think fit to decree, the Malefactor should
suffer; two adjudged him to Banishment, and two to be branded with Infamy, and
three to Death: And when the Person so adjudged, pleaded, that four of his
Judges agreed that he should live, and three only that he should dye; The
Accuser desired him to recite the Judgment of the four: And when he began to
say, Two sentenced me to Banishment and two to Ignominy; he was presently
answered by his Adversary, That of two Sentences he made but one, and that that
number which being united had preserved him, being divided, destroyed him, and
how can they be united, that so expressly divide themselves?

XX. The Right of the Absent remains with the Present.
Whereunto also we may add this, That in all Assemblies, the Right of those
that either by absence, or any other means, are hindered from making use of
their Right, is devolved on those that are present, yea, sometimes even to one
single person, whose sole act shall be reputed the act of the whole. So says
Seneca, Think thy self to be the common servant, De Coner. l. 3.
yet shall thou serve that Master that is present: Yet herein also, as well as
in that general rule of plurality of Votes, humane Laws do make some
exceptions; as namely, when they require that so many shall be present to make
a Court (as in our House of Commons;) or that the Persons absent, may give
their Vote by their Proxies (as in our House of Peers.)

XXI. What order is to be used among persons equal.
The order of Nature is this, that amongst equals he should be esteemed the
first, that first entered into that Society: For so we find it is among
Brethren, the Eldest always precedes the rest, and after him the second, etc.
Notwithstanding all other qualifications. All Brothers are equal (says
Aristotle) it is only their Age that makes them unequal. Theodosius and Valens,
in designing the order that should be observed among Consuls, say, Of those who
are in the same degree of honor, who should precede, but they that were first
thought worthy of that honor. And the ancient custom among Christian Kings and
States was, that they always preceded in such Councils as were called
concerning Christian affairs, who first professed themselves Christians, as
Aeneas Sylvius records in his History of the Council of Basil.

XXII. Where diverse societies claim unequal shares how Votes are to be reckoned.
But yet so often as the ground and main reason of entering into this Society,
was the preservation of something held by them in common, but not in equal
proportions: As in an Inheritance, or in a Field, wherein one has half,
another a third, another a fourth part. Then not only the order, but the
suffrages of that Assembly shall be, not by the plurality of single Votes, but
by the proportions that they severally have in the thing held in common; which
as it is most agreeable to natural equity, so it is approved of by the Roman
Laws. So Strabo tells us, That when Lybica with three other adjoining Cities,
did unite themselves, as it were, in one Body; it was agreed, that each of the
three was to have one voice, but Lybica, two; because it contributed much more
to the common benefit than the rest: And the same Author tells us, that in
Lycia there were twenty three Cities combined, whereof some had three voices,
some two, and some but one, Fol. l. 3. c. 9.
and accordingly all charges were divided and paid. And this is but just, says
Aristotle, if the defense of their common possessions were the chief cause of
their Consociation.

XXIII. The right of societies over their Citizens.
Of all Societies, that of diverse Masters of Families embodyed in one City or
Nation, as it is the most perfect, so it gives a greater right or power to the
whole over every part thereof, than any other Society whatsoever. Neither is
there any outward act done by any one Citizen, but what either by it self does,
or by circumstance may, refer to the conservation of that Society: For as
Aristotle tells us, The Laws do rule us in things of all sorts.

XXIV. Whether Citizens may desert their City.
And here it may be questioned, whether it be lawful for Citizens to forsake
their City without leave given. There was an ancient Custom, says Servius,
that he that transplanted himself into another Family or Nation, did first
renounce that wherein he formerly dwelt, and then was received. And true it is,
that in some Countries it is not lawful to forsake the City without leave; as
in the City of Mosco: Mariana li^. 28. c. 13.
Neither do I deny that it is possible for a Civil Society to be entered into
under some such Agreements; and that Customs may introduce the force of such an
Agreement. Yet by the latter Roman Laws, it was lawful for any Citizen to
remove his Habitation, yet not so, but that he stood still obliged to execute
such Offices in the City, as should be imposed on him: Neither were these to
depart out of the Roman Territories, and special care was taken by the Law it
self, that they should pay their Contributions. But setting aside these
municipal Laws and Constitutions, let us discuss this question according to
natural Right; and that not of any one part, but of the whole City, though
under the Supreme dominion of one Person. And surely that they cannot recede by
Flocks or great Companies, is easily collected from the necessity of the end,
which in moral things is able to create a Right: For if this should be lawful,
there might instantly follow a dissolution of that Civil Society. Zonoras
speaking of King Lazus, who revolted from the Persians to the Romans, makes it
the cause of a just War between the Persians and the Romans, that the Roman
General had drawn unto himself the Subjects of the Kings of Persia. But as
touching the departure of some particular persons from a City, it is much
otherwise: As it is one thing to draw water out of a River, and another thing
to turn the course of it. Every Citizen (says Triphonius) is free either to
stay in, or to depart from his own City. And Cicero, in his Oration for Baldus,
commends this Law, That no man should be enforced to stay in a City against his
will, and this he lays down as the foundation of Liberty, that every Freeman
has absolute power over himself, To live where we please is the foundation of
liberty.
either to remain in it or to recede from it. And yet herein also we are to
submit to natural equity, which was the Rule that the Romans walked by, in
dissolving private Societies; that it should not be lawful, when the public
was damnified by it: For as Proculus rightly observes, Always not that which is
profitable to some one of a Society, is usually to be observed, but what is
expedient for the whole. But it is expedient for the whole Society, that in
case any great public debt be contracted, no Citizen should forsake the City,
unless he have first paid his proportion of it: Also if upon confidence of the
number of their Citizens, they have begun a War, but especially if they are in
danger to be besieged, no Citizen ought to forsake the City, till he have first
provided a Person as able as himself, to defend the Commonwealth. But unless
it be in these cases only, it is probable enough that the people do give their
consent that any Citizen may freely depart, because even from this liberty,
they may make no less advantages to themselves some other ways.

XXV. A City has no power over her banished.
So likewise no City can have any Right over those whom she has banished, as
we shall show anon *. The Heraclidae being banished Argos by Eurystheus, and
afterward persecuted by him, do thus plead by their Advocate Jolaus: By what
Right does he prosecute us now, whom he banished his City, for now we are no
Subjects of his. And Alcibiades his Son speaking of the times of his Fathers
banishment, tells the Athenians, Lib. 3. c. 20.. 41.
that The welfare of their City did nothing concern his Father. So likewise
Nicetas speaking of Isaac Angelus, says, It is no new thing for any man to
court and flatter his Enemy, that is but sensible that his own Countrymen do
persecute him as their Enemy. But now the consociation of several Nations
(whether by themselves or their Governors) are called Leagues; of the nature
and effects whereof we shall have occasion to speak, when we shall treat of
Obligations which arise from Contracts and Agreements.

XXVI. What Right a man has over his adopted Son.
There are also voluntary subjections, and those either private or public, the
private vary according to the several sorts of Government: that which is most
noble is that of Arrogation or Adoption, whereby a man translates himself into
the Family of another; so as he behaves himself with that duty and reverence,
as a Son of mature Age should do rowards his own Parents. No Father can
possibly transfer his Paternal Right over his Son to another man so fully, as
to be altogether discharged of the duty incumbent on him as a Father: Nature it
self will not admit of such an alienation, but yet he may commit his Son to
another man to be fed and educated by way of Substitution.

XXVII. What power Lords have over their Slaves.
The most ignoble of all Subjections is that, whereby a man gives himself up to
perfect slavery: Such were they among the Germans, of whom Tacitus speaks, That
sold themselves for food and raiment. And of such there were great numbers
among the Graecians, who (as Dion Prusaeensis notes) of Freemen became Slaves,
and performed their service according to Articles of Agreement. Now that we
call perfect Bondage, which ties a man during life to perform all manner of
work, for no other reward but food and clothing; which if it extend it self to
whatsoever conduces to the preservation of Nature, is not much to be grieved
at: For our continual labor is indifferently well recompensed with a constant
supply of things necessary for life, which they that hire out themselves by the
day only, do often want. This the Stoic Possidonius observed out of Histories,
that many in ancient times, conscious of their own weakness to maintain
themselves, voluntarily submitted themselves to be commanded by others,
Constantly performing what they were able, and receiving from their Lords
whatsoever was necessary for them. Like him in Plautus.

If I were free, the charge were mine;
But being bound, that charge is thine.
XXVIII. Whether this power extend to life and death.
No Lord can have absolute power over the life and death of his Slave, if we
respect internal Justice: For no man can take away the life of another, and be
guiltless, unless it be for some capital crime committed; and yet by the Laws
of some Nations, he that shall kill his Slave for what cause soever, is
indemnified, as Kings are in all Nations by reason of their vast and unlimited
power. For as Seneca notes, If a Servant dare not plead with his Master for
fear of suffering the worst of torments, De benef. lib. 3. c. 22.
no more dare Subjects with their Prince, nor Soldiers with their General, who
have all of them equal Right, though under unequal Titles. No Master then has
a just power to injure his Slave, but only as That is sometimes improperly
called Just, which being done, is not punishable. Such a Right did Solon give
to Parents over their own Children, and so did the ancient Roman Laws, witness
that of Sopater, It was lawful for him, being a Father, to kill his own
Children, if they offended; for the Law (presuming upon the Fathers Integrity)
had permitted such a Right unto him: The like power, says Dion, we find
permitted in many Nations famous for wise and wholesome Laws.

XXIX. Of the Children of Slaves that are born and bred in their Masters family.
Vide infra Chapter 8.. 18. Pliny l. 10. c. 34. de columbis. Lex Visigothica. The
Sclavonian Law judges the Children by the Father. The Laws uf England.
Littleton de Villanagio. The Roman Laws. What the Law of Nature is in this
case. If the Parents cannot maintain the Child but at the Lords charge, the
Child is a Slave.
But of the children of Captives, which are born of Slaves in their Lords
Family, there is yet a more difficult question: For by the Laws of the Romans,
and of other Nations, concerning Captives (as we shall elsewhere show) as of
brute Beasts, so of people of a servile condition it holds true, that, Partus
sequitur Ventrem; As is the Mother, so is the Child. But this notwithstanding
is not altogether congruous to the Law of Nature, especially where the Father
of the Child may be sufficiently known: For since even among dumb creatures, as
Pliny observes of Doves, Amor utrique sobolis aequalis; Both Parents are
equally concerned for their own young, thereby acknowledging their common
interest in them. So also had not the Civil Law otherwise determined, the Child
had followed the condition of the Father, no less than that of the Mother: For
if the Son (says the Visigothick Law) be born and created by both Parents, why
should he follow the condition of the Mother only, who without the Father could
not beget him? Among the Sclavonians, as also in some parts of Italy, among the
Lombards and Saxons, the children are accounted either bond or free from their
Father. The Laws of England judge of the Child, not by the Mother, but by the
Father; for the Husband and Wife, being but one person in our Law, and the Wife
marrying a Freeman, by the common Law of England, the Issue is free: Which
Laws, though different from the Roman Civil Law, yet, as Aquinus notes, does
not much deviate from the Law of Nature. And why not, since among the Romans,
by their Mensian Law, if both the Parents were Aliens, the Child born of them
were so too, as Vlpian tells us. Now let us admit that both the Parents are
Slaves, it is worth our pains to know whether naturally the Child be so or not?
And certainly if the Parents have no other means to breed up the Child, but in
their Lords family, or at his charge, they have a power to deliver him up to
the Lord for a Slave. For although the Child were ingenuous and freeborn, yet
in such a case they have power by the Law to sell him: And in case the Parents
were Servants to several Masters, then by the Law of Nature the Children were
to be divided between their respective Lords. But if they had but one Child,
then of right it belonged to him whose Slave the Father was, the Lord of the
Mother being first satisfied for his half part; and yet of the Children of him
that was born in the house of his Lord, two parts did accrue to his Lord, and
but one to the Lord of the Mother, according to the Edict of Theodoric,
Otherwise not.
as Cassiodore records. Now whereas I said before, that the Parents, if they
had not any means to breed up their Children, but at the charge of their Lord,
might deliver them up unto him as his Slaves; it may seem that this Power does
naturally arise from their supplying them with food and other necessaries, and
therefore where there is no such necessity, as where there are other means to
breed them, they have no right to sell them: And so it was adjudged by Charles
the Bald, wherefore the Right that these Lords have in the Children of their
bond-servants, springs from the many years Alimony that is given them by the
Lord, before they could be serviceable to him, which they are to recompense by
their future labor. And for this cause, the Parents cannot dispose of them to
any other man, neither may the Servant flee from his Lord, until full
satisfaction be given unto that Lord for the charge of their education: But if
the Lord be too unmercifully cruel, then that even they who have surrendered
themselves as Slaves, may provide for their own safety by flight, is the most
probable opinion, notwithstanding the charge given by the Apostle, Gal. 6.5.
Tit. 2.9. ^ Pet. ^.16.
and by the ancient Canons, forbidding Servants to flee from their own Masters;
because those Precepts were general, and opposed only to that error which was
then growing, namely, that denied all manner of subjection, whether public or
private, as being inconsistent with Christian Liberty.

XXX. There are diverse kinds of Servitudes.
Besides that slavery which is perfect, there are others imperfect; as those
that are limited to a certain time, or to certain things, or upon conditions:
Of such there were diverse among the Romans, as that of their liberti, nexi,
addicti, asscripti glebae, statu liberi: As also among the Jews, there were
those that served seven years, and that bound themselves until the next
Jubilee, and then were free: And such were the Penestae among the
Thessalonians, and all Mercenaries, amongst whom are to be reckoned our
Apprentices here in England, who for a certain number of years are under so
hard a discipline, as does but little distinguish them from those of a servile
condition, and such like. All which differences do depend, either upon some
Laws or upon some Contracts, his servitude also seems to be naturally
imperfect, who is born of Parents, whereof one of them is bond and the other
free, for the causes aforesaid.

XXXI. Public Subjection by consent.
Public Subjection is, when any one Nation or People do give themselves up to
the power and command of another, either of one man or many, or of another
people or Nation: The form of such a voluntary rendition, we have already set
down in that of Capua: The like is that of the people of Collatia, Do ye give
up unto me, and unto the jurisdiction of the People of Rome, the Collatine
People, with their City, Fields, Water, Bounds, Temples, Vtensils, with all
things else whether Divine or Humane? We do, say they: And I accept thereof.
Whereunto Plautus seems to allude in his Amphitryo. All which the Persians
comprehend under the general names of Earth and Water: This is an absolute
Subjection; but there are some likewise that are not so full and absolute, in
respect either of their manner of holding it, or of that arbitrary power of
command, of the several degrees whereof we have already elsewhere discoursed.
Lib. 1. c. 3.


XXXII. What Right is gained over persons by way of punishment.
There is likewise an involuntary subjection, when by reason of some
delinquency, we forfeit our liberty, and are forcibly reduced into servitude,
by such as have a right to punish us; and who those are we shall show
hereafter. And thus may not only private men be brought into slavery, as at
Rome, Qui ad dilectum non respondebat; He that refused to perform an Office,
being thereunto chosen, and they that were not enrolled or registered in the
number of Citizens; and afterward women, who though otherwise ingenuous, yet
if they married another man's servant, lost their own freedom. But the public
things of a Nation may be thus subjected, for some public injuries done; but
with this difference, that if the State be brought into captivity, it is
perpetual. For, as in the Laurel, though the leaves dye, yet is the Tree always
green; so though every person in that Nation be mortal, yet does Succession
make the people immortal: But in personal bondage, Noxa sequitur caput, The
punishment never exceeds the person offending; but both these servitudes, as
well private as public, being penal, may be either perfect or imperfect,
according to the offense and punishment thereunto due. Now of that servitude,
whether private o^ public, that arises from the voluntary Law of Nations, we
shall have occasion to treat, when we come to the direful effects of War.

CHAP. VI. Of that Right which is derivatively acquired, by the voluntary Fact
of a man, wherein is handled the Right of Alienation of Empires, and Things
thereunto belonging.
I. To make an Alienation valid, what is required from the Giver. II. What is
required from the Receiver. III. That Empires may be alienated, sometimes by
the King, sometimes by the People. IV. That the Government over one part of a
Nation, cannot be alienated by the people, if that part dissent or be
unwilling. V. Neither can one part alienate the Government over themselves,
unless in case of unavoidable necessity. VI. The Causes or Reasons of this.
VII. That the Empire over some place, may be alienated. VIII. That no part of
an Empire may be alienated by the King, either for profit or necessity. IX.
Under this Title of Alienation, all Feoffments and Morgages are comprehended.
X. So under Empires, are all lesser Jurisdictions which cannot be alienated but
by the special consent of the People, or by Custom. XI. No more can the Peoples
Patrimony be alienated by the King. XII. That the fruits and mean profits of
the Patrimony, must be distinguished from the Patrimony it self. XIII. Some
parts of the Peoples Patrimony may be engaged by the King for debts, how far,
and why. XIV. That a man's Testament is a kind of Alienation, and is warranted
by the Law of Nature.
I. What is requisite to a perfect Alienation.
HItherto we have spoken of Original Right: Now we are to treat of that Right
which we derive from another, and this may be done either by the fact of the
Person that gives it, or by some Law that warrants it; for that the right
owners of things should have power to assign their interests, either wholly, or
in part, unto others (propriety being once introduced) is most agreeable to the
Law of Nature: And therefore Aristotle places it in the very definition of
Dominion, As if that only were truly and simply ours, 1 Rhet. 5.
which we have a Right to alienate. Wherein two things only are to be observed,
one in the Donor, the other in the Donee: First in the Donor, the internal act
of the Will only is not sufficient, unless it be declared by some overt act, as
by words, or some other external signs. For of the inward acts of the mind, we
are no competent Judges; neither is it congruous to the nature of humane
society: But that there should be also a public delivery of the thing
transferred, is required by the Civil Law, which being now received by most
Nations, is (though improperly) said to be required by the Law of Nations. So
in some places it is required that every Alienation should be published, either
before the People, or before the Magistrate, and that it should be also
recorded; all which do certainly proceed from the Civil Law. But because every
Alienation of a man's Right ought to be done with sound Judgment, therefore the
acts of the Will, that are expressed by some overt signs, are to be understood
the acts of a mind endued with Reason.

II. What in the Receiver.
So likewise in the Receiver, setting aside the Civil Law, it is naturally
requisite that he should express his willingness to accept of it, by some
outward signs; which though it be usually subsequent to the tender of the
giver, yet may it also precede it: As when a man requires that such a thing
should be given him, in this case it is presumed, that he is willing to receive
it, unless it do appear that he has altered his mind; as to other things
requisite, as well to the transferring, as to the acception of a Right in
things, and how both may be safely done, we shall show more fully, when we
treat of promises; for concerning both these, Nature has prescribed the same
Rules.

III. Empires whether alienable.
As other things, so are Empires alienable by him, in whose dominion they truly
are; that is, as we have said before, by a King whose Kingdom is Patrimonial:
But otherwise by the people, yet not without the Kngs consent, because he has
a kind of Right in it, though but to the present revenue, which cannot without
his own act, be taken from him: Thus it stands with a whole Sovereign Empire.

IV. That the whole cannot alienate the parts that consent not to the
Alienation.
But as to the Alienation of any one part of the whole, it is further requisite
that that part that is to be alienated, consent thereunto. For they that first
entered into that society, did (as may be presumed) contract a firm and immortal
League among themselves, for the defense of all those parts which are called
Integrants: Whence it follows, that these parts are not so under their own
body, as the members of a natural body, which cannot live without the life of
the body; and are therefore for the preservation of the body sometimes justly
cut off. But this body whereof we now speak, is constituted after another
manner, namely, by mutual consent and agreement; and therefore its power over
its parts depends wholly upon the will and intention of them who first
instituted that society, who without doubt would never have granted such a
power to the whole, as to abscind from it self any of its parts, and to give
them up into the power of another.

V. Nor any part over themselves, but in cases of necessity.
Neither is it, on the other side, in the power of any part to recede from the
whole, unless it be evident, that it cannot otherwise subsist: For, as we have
said already, In omnibus quae sunt humani instituti, excepta videtur necessitas
summa, quae rem reducit ad merum jus naturae; All humane constitutions give
place to the Law of Nature, in cas^s of unavoidable necessity. Almost all
Nations (says St. Augustine) are taught by the very voice of Nature, to submit
to the will of the Conqueror, rather than to hazard an utter devastation. And
therefore, as Herodotus notes, In that Oath, wherewith the Grecians bound
themselves to be faithful to the Persians as to the Conqueror, this Salvo was
added, Vide infra c. 24.. 6.
Nisi plane coacti; Unless they were manifestly forced to the contrary. Thus we
read that Anaxilaus was deservedly acquitted by the Spartans, for delivering up
the City Byzantium, being distressed more by famine within, than by the Sword
without. And Xenophon tells us, that the Emperor Anastasius returned thanks to
his Commanders, for their timely surrender of the City Martyropolis, thereby
preventing the unnecessary effusion of blood, since it was impossible to be
defended. Cum fame habitare virtus recusat; Valor will not cohabit with
famine, says Procopius, neither can we expect that Nature should act
vigorously, Goth. l. 4.
when she wants nourishment. So Cephalas (in his Epistle to the Emperor
Alexius) being straightly besieged in Larissa, Yielding to necessity we must
deliver up the Town to those, who not only besiege us, An. Commen. lib. 6.
but maninifestly starve us, (for what can valor do against the force of
Nature?

VI. The causes of this different power.
Now the reason why, in cases of absolute necessity, every part of the society
has more right to defend it self, than the body of that society can have over
its parts, is; because that part that is so necessitated, may use that Right
which Nature gave it, before that society was instituted, which the whole
society cannot: Neither let any man say, that the Right of Empire is in the
whole society, as in its subject, and therefore may be alienated by it as
things held in propriety may; for the Government is indeed in the whole body as
in its adequate Subject, (but not divisibly in many bodies) as the Soul is in
perfect Bodies. But that necessity that enforces us to flee back to the
Original Right of Nature for defense, cannot here have place: For under that
Right the free use of Nature is comprehended, as eating, and detaining what is
ours, which are natural, but so is not the Right of Alienation, which receiving
its authority from humane institution, is from it to receive its bounds.

VII. That the Empire over some place may be alienated.
But as to the Empire over such a place, being a part of the Territory that
lies uninhabited and desert, I cannot discern any reason at all, why it may not
be alienated either by a free people, or by a King with his peoples consent.
For as every part of the people have equally freedom of Will, so have they
equally a Right to gainsay whatsoever any other would have; but the Territory
it self, whether wholly, or in its part, considered, is the peoples Common
undivided, and therefore wholly at their dispose; but as to the sovereignty
over any part of the people, if, as I have said, it cannot be alienated by the
whole body of the people; much less can it be done by a King, who though he
have the full power, yet he has it not fully.

VIII. No part alienable either for profit or necessity by a King alone.
And here I must crave leave to dissent from those Civilians, who hold that no
part of an Empire can be alienated by a King, unless it be for public profit
or out of necessity; unless they understand it in this sense, that where the
profit does equally a^crew, both to the whole Nation, and to that part which is
to be alienated, the consent of both may easily be collected from their
silence, though of no long time, which may much more easily be presumed, if
there appear likewise a necessity for it: But if either part do manifestly
declare against it, there can be no Right to alienate, unless the part be
evidently enforced either to separate from the whole, or suffer themselves
inevitably to be destroyed.

IX. Infeudations and Morgages of the parts of the Empire, unlawful.
Under Alienation is deservedly comprised even Infeudations, under penalty of
confiscation for breach of Faith, given to the Lord of the Feoff; or when the
Family is extinct Sub onere comm^ssae^ felo^ia aut deficiente familia. Vide l.
1. c. 4.. 12.
: For even this is a conditional Alienation, wherefore we often see, that as
those Alienations, so these Infeudations of Kingdoms which Kings have made
without the peoples consent, yea, and the Remission of Homage too, have by many
people been made void. Now the people are said to consent, either when the
whole body of them do meet to express it, as the Germans and Gauls were wont;
or when the several Provinces do it by their Deputies, being thereunto
sufficiently authorized. As in the German Empire, the consent of the Princes
Electors does both by Custom and Covenants, conclude all the orders thereof in
any Alienation: for, Whatsoever we do by another, is reputed our own act; Id
facimus quod per alium facimus. So neither can any part of an Empire be
morgaged, without the like consent; not only because it usually introduces an
Alienation, but for that Kings are bound to their Subjects, to exercise the
Sovereign Power by themselves, and so are the people in general to their
respective parts, to conserve the administration of the Empire entire, this
being the chief end of their Consociation.

X. Inferior Jurisdictions not alienable by the King.
But as to other lesser Civil Functions, I see no reason why the people may
not, by an hereditary right, grant them at their pleasure, because they do not
thereby diminish the entire body of the Empire; yet cannot a King do it without
the consent of the people, if we consine our selves within the bounds of
nature, because the effects of a temporary power, such as Elective, and legally
successive Kingdoms are, can be but temporary; yet may the people, as well by
their express consent, as by their long continued silence, give that Right to
their Kings. For so the Histories of the Medes and Persians do inform us, that
their Kings usurping this Right, did anciently give away whole Towns and
Provinces, to be held by a perpetual right.

XI. Not the peoples patrimony.
That part of the peoples Patrimony (being amongst the ancient Grecians a part
of the common Fields) the fruits whereof were designed for the maintenance
either of the public charge of the Commonwealth, or of the Royal dignity,
cannot either in the whole, or in any the least part thereof, be alienated by
Kings without the consent of the three States, that is, the Clergy, Nobles, and
Commons; because they have no right to any thing more than to the present
profits, no not to the smallest part of it, as I have said: For, Quod meum non
est, ejus nec exiguam partem alienare mihi jus est; Of that which is not mine,
I cannot alienate the smallest part. Yet the people may sooner be presumed to
consent by their knowledge and silence, in such small matters than in greater:
And the like may be presumed in cases of common profit or danger, concerning
the alienation of some parts of the Empire, if it be not of any great moment,
for that Patrimony was at first instituted for the good of the Empire.

XII. The patrimony to be distinguished from the mean profits.
But many are deceived in that they do not rightly distinguish between the
things arising from the Patrimony as its fruits or profits, and the Patrimony
it self. As for example, the washing of the banks of a River is patrimonial,
but the increment which the Flood produces is but the fruits and profits of
it: so the power and right of raising a Tax is patrimonial, but the money so
raised is but the profits of that Right. The right to confiscate is
patrimonial, but the Lands confiscated are but the profits of that right.

XIII. How far forth that part of the peoples patrimony may be pawned by the
King, and why.
Those parts of the peoples patrimony, which are so designed as aforesaid, may
upon just cause be pawned or morgaged by Kings, that have full and absolute
power, that is, that have power upon occasion to raise new Taxes upon their
Subjects: For as Subjects are bound to pay such Taxes, so are they likewise
bound to satisfy that, for which any part of their patrimony is for the
public good pawned, the redemption whereof is some kind of Tribute. For the
very patrimony of the people is a kind of pawn given to the King for the
payment of the public debts, and any thing that is thus pawned to me, I also
have a right to pawn to another: Yet what has hitherto been said is of force,
unless it be where the Laws of the Land do either enlarge or contract the power
either of the Prince or the people.

XIV. Testaments a kind of Alienation.
This also must be observed, That under this Title of Alienation, we comprehend
likewise Testaments: For though Testaments, as some other acts also, are
beholding to the Civil Law for their form, yet is the matter of it nearly
allied to dominion; and it being granted to the Law of Nature. For a man may by
Testament give away his Estate, not only fully, Arist. Pol. l. 2. c. 7.
but under certain conditions, nor irrevocably only, but with a power to
revoke; and yet he may still keep the possession of what he so gives, with a
full right of enjoying it: For a Testament is an Alienation of a man's Estate at
his death, and revocable till then, and yet reserving in himself the full
possession, and absolute fruition during life. Quint. Pater. Vide supra Bo. 1.
chapter 3.. 12.
And therefore Solon, in permitting his Citizens to make their Testaments, Made
them absolute Lords and Proprietors of what they had. Surely our Estates would
be but burthensom unto us, if the power we have in it during life, should be
taken away from us at our deaths. Abraham in pursuance of this Right (had he
dyed childless) had lest, by his Testament, all his Estate to Eliezer, as we
may collect from Genesis 15.2. And the making of Testaments was of frequent use
among the Hebrews, as may appear, Deuteronomy. 21.16. Ecclus. 33.25. But that in some
places it is not permitted to Strangers to make their Wills, is not to be
attributed to the Law of Nations, but to the municipal Laws of some Countries,
and if I mistake not, enacted in such an Age, when all Strangers were accounted
enemies; and therefore amongst the more civilized Nations has long since been
worn out of use.

CHAP. VII. Of that Right that is acquired by Law, and of Succession from an
Intestate.
I. Of the Civil Laws some are unjust, and therefore cannot transfer a Right,
as in things shipwrackt. II. By the Law of Nature, a Right may by gained, in
things taken from another for a just debt; and when. III. How Succession to an
Intestates estate does naturally arise. IV. Whether by the Law of Nature, any
part of the Parents goods be due to their Children, explained by distinction.
V. The Children of the deceased preferred to the Estate before their Parents,
and why. VI. The Original of Representative Succession. VII. Of Abdication and
Exheredation. VIII. Of the Right of Natural Issue. IX. Where are no Children,
nor Will, nor certain Law extant, the ancient Estate shall return from whence
it descended, and to their Children. X. But that which was lately gained to the
nearest in blood. XI. The Laws touching Succession are diverse. XII. How
Succession takes place in Patrimonial Kingdoms. XIII. In Kingdoms Indivisible
the firstborn to be preferred. XIV. That Kingdom, which by the peoples
consent, is hereditary; if in doubt, is presumed indivisible. XV. The
Succession not to last beyond the line of the first King. XVI. Natural Issue
not at all concerned in it. XVII. The Male Issue preferred before the Female,
within the same degree. XVIII. Of the Males, the eldest is to be preferred.
XIX. Whether such a Kingdom be part of an Inheritance. XX. It may be presumed
that the Right of Succession to a Kingdom did agree with that of Succession to
other things at that time when that Kingdom began; whether Absolute: XXI. Or
held of another in Fee. XXII. Of Lineal Suceession to the next in blood,
whether Males or Females; and how the Right is thereby transmitted. XXIII. Of
Lineal Succession to the Male Issue only, called Agnatical Succession. XXIV. Of
that Succession which always respects the nearest to the first King only. XXV.
Whether a Son may be exheredated, so as to bar his Succession to the Crown.
XXVI. Whether a King may for himself and his Children, renounce his Kingdom.
XXVII. Concerning the Right of Succession, the Judgment, to speak properly, is
neither in the King nor People. XXVIII. A Son born before his Father was King,
shall be preferred before him that was postnate: XXIX. Unless it be otherwise
provided by some other Law. XXX. Whether the elder Brother deceased, his Son be
to be preferred before the younger Brother, explained by distinction. XXXI.
Also whether the younger Brother living, be to be preferred before the Kings
elder Brothers Son. XXXII. Whether the Kings Brothers Son be to be preferred
before the Kings Uncle. XXXIII. Whether the Kings Son be to be preferred before
the Kings Daughter. XXXIV. Whether the younger Son of a Kings Son be to be
preferred before the eldest Son of a Daughter. XXXV. Whether the Daughter of
the eldest Son be to be preferred before the younger Son. XXXVI. Whether the
Son of a Sister be to be preferred before the Daughter of a Brother. XXXVII.
Whether the Daughter of an elder Brother be to be preferred before the younger
Brother.
I. Some of the Civil Laws unjust.
HAving thus showed what Right may be derived from another by his Act, now we
are to treat of the Right that is derived from another by Law: And this is,
either by the Law of Nature, or by the voluntary Law of Nations, or from the
Civil Law. It were endless to treat here of the Civil Law, neither are the main
Controversies concerning War thereby determined; and therefore we shall
purposely omit it. Yet is it worth our Observation to know, that some of the
Civil Laws are apparently unjust; as that which adjudgeth goods Shipwrackt unto
the Kings Coffers. For to take away another Right and Propriety without any
preceding cause, that is probable, is a manifest injury. Thus pleads Helen in
Euripides, Helen.
Wreckt, and a Stranger came I in,
Such to despoil, is horrid sin.
For what Right, says Constantine, can the misfortunes of another create to a
King, that he should be enriched by a calamity so much to be pitied. Lib. 1. C.
de Na^f. l. 12.
And therefore Dion Prusaeensis, in an Oration of his concerning Shipwracks,
cries out, Absit, O Jupiter, ut lucrum captemus tale, ex hominum infortunio; Far
be it, O Jupiter, from me to take such advantages by other men's misfortunes.
And yet such a Right do the Laws of Nations very unjustly give; as amongst the
English, the Sicilians: And such an ancient Law Sopater mentions to be in force
in Greece. Christian King of Denmark, upon the abrogating of this Law,
complained, That he lost an hundred thousand Crowns yearly. Nicetas speaking of
this Law, calls it a Custom so barbarous as is not to be named. What then was
Bodines meaning to defend this Law? He, namely, who reprehended Papinian for
choosing rather to dye, than to act against his own Conscience.

II. A man may have a Right to that which he takes from another, and when.
Propriety or Dominion being introduced, it follows, by the Law of Nature, That
things are alienable two ways: First, By commutation; which consists in the
making up of that Right which I want, whereby the balance of Justice may be
made even: or Secondly, By Succession. Now Alienation by way of Commutation or
Expletion is when for something that is, or ought to be mine, which I cannot
receive in kind, I take from him that detains it or somewhat in lieu thereof,
that is, some other thing of equal value. Thus Irenaeus excuses the Hebrews
for robbing the Egyptians of their goods, See Book. 3. chapter 7.. 6.
Which, says he, they might take and keep in compensation of their labor. Now
that Dominion may be thus transferred, is easily proved from the end, which in
moral things is the best proof. For how otherwise can I be said to receive my
full Right, unless I become the right owner of it? Seeing that it is not the
bare detention, but the full power to use and dispose of it at my pleasure,
that makes the Scales of Justice even. An ancient example of this we have in
Diodorus, where Hesionaeus in lieu of those things which being promised to his
Daughter by Ixion, but not given, took away his Horses. For Expletive Justice,
when it cannot recover what is the same, endeavors to get the value of it,
which in a moral estimation is the same. By the Civil Law no man, we know, can
do himself Right: Nay, if any man shall with his own hands take away from
another, though but what is his due, it shall be imputed unto him as Rapine,
and in some Countries, he shall lose his debt. And although the Civil Law did
not diectly forbid this, yet from the very institution of public Tribunals, it
may easily be concluded to be unlawful. But where there are not public Courts
to appeal unto (as on the Seas and in Deserts) there the Law of Nature must be
our guide. So it should sometimes, when the Laws cease but for the present,
that is, if the debt can never be got otherwise: As, if the Debtor be ready to
fly the Country before the Courts can be open; in which case the Creditor may
lawfully have recourse to the Law of Nature: Yet so, that the Judgment of the
Court must afterward be expected, before the Right of Propriety can be
assured, as in the case of Reprizals; as shall be said hereafter. But yet, if
the Right be certain, and it be also morally as certain, That a man cannot by a
Judge receive satisfaction for want of due proof, the best opinion is, That the
Law concerning Judgments cease, and that a man may have recourse to the
ancient Law of Nations.

III. The Estate of an Intestate to whom it naturally descends.
Dominion being once introduced, that which naturally guides the Succession to
the estate of a person dying intestate, setting aside the Civil Law, is our
conjecture at the Will of the deceased. For seeing that the force of Dominion
is such, that it may be transferred at the will of the right owner, unto
another: Therefore in case a man dies possessed of an estate, leaving nothing to
testify his mind after his death; because it is not credible that he would
leave it to him that could next catch it, therefore shall it succeed to him to
whom it is probable he would have left it, had he lived to have declared it.
Defunctorum voluntatem intellexisse, pro jure est, says Pliny Junior; To have
understood the Will of the deceased, is sufficient to create a Right. Now to
the dead this favor is indulged, That in cases that are doubtful, it is
presumed, That every man would do that which is most just and honest; whereof
in the first place is the payment of his just debts, and in the next, that
which, though not due, yet is most agreeable to our duty: And therefore what is
committed to a man's trust may be restored, says Paulus, (the person dying
Intestate that trusted it) to those that succeed him, because it may be
believed, That his Will was freely to leave the lawful Inheritance unto them.

IV. Whether Parents do owe unto their Children any part of their goods.
It is much controverted by Lawyers, Whether Parents may be said to owe their
children Aliment: Some of them hold it to be agreeable to Natural Reason, but
deny it to be a Debt. But we think it fit here to distinguish of the word Debt,
which may be taken either strictly, for that which by Commutative Justice we
are obliged to do; or largely, for that which cannot with honor or honesty be
left undone, as being a duty arising from another spring, but not from that of
Justice. First Reason.
Now Aliment is due to Children (if Humane Laws do not otherwise determine of
it) in this looser sense. In which, I conceive, that of Val. Maximus is to be
understood, Our Parents by nourishing us, h^ve laid this obligation upon us to
nourish our Children. And that also of Plutarch, in that most elegant Oration
of his, concerning the Love of Parents toward their Children, Liberi
haereditatem, ut sibi debitam, expectant; Our Children look for our estates, as
due unto them after our death. So great was the Equity of this, Lib. 2. de vita
cler. and ser. 52. ad frat. in eremo. Gratian. c. 13. q. 2. etc. 17. q. 4. in
fine. Pers. l. 1. Second Reason.
That St. Augustine would not admit that the goods of such as had exheredated
their own Children, should be received by the Church. And as Procopius in his
Persian Wars observes, Though Humane Laws do in other things extremely differ
one from another, yet all Nations, as well Romans as Barbarians, in this agree,
That Children should succeed to their Parents, as the right owners of what they
leave. Again, Qui formam dat, dat quae ad formam sunt necessaria; He that gives
the form gives things necessary to that form, says Aristotle. Therefore he
that gives man his existence, ought, as much as in him lies, to provide for him
all things necessary for a Natural and Social life; for hereunto he was born.
There needs no Law to bind us to this duty; for all other creatures, even by
Natures instinct, do feed their young: As Pliny observes of Swallows, That with
great equity they feed their little ones by turns; (Summa aequitate alternant
cibum.) Hence it is, that the Ancient Civilians do refer the Education of
Children to the Law of Nature. And Euripides comprehends all Creatures under
one and the same Law, Which, says he, is common as well to men among
themselves, as to them, with all other sensible Creatures. For that which
Natural Instinct commends to them, the same does Reason prescribe unto us. Of
such force is Natural affection, that it easily persuades us to nourish our
Children, says Justinian. Nature is an Indulgent Mistress to all living
creatures, equally instructing them how to conserve not only themselves, but
those that are born of them; that so by this successive Charity she may aspire
to make her self immortal. Quintilian brings in the Son claiming a Portion of
his Fathers Estate by the Law of Nations. Partem jure gentium p^to.
And Salust condemns that Testament as impious and unnatural, by which the Son
is excluded from his part of the Inheritance. And because this is a debt that
we owe to Nature, therefore is the Mother bound to nourish the Child that has
no certain Father. The Roman Laws made no provision for Bastards.
And though the Roman Laws made no provision for Children ex damnato legibus
Concubitu, that were illegitimate; and that by Solons Laws it was provided,
That no man should leave any thing to his Natural Issue: yet do the Canons of
our Religion correct the severity of these Laws, by teaching us, That our
Children, however begotten by us, should be a part of our care; and that in
case it be needful, Beyond necessaries no man bound to provide for them.
we ought to leave them enough to preserve that life which we gave them: but
beyond necessaries, is no man bound by the Law of Nature to provide for them.
Neither are we bound to nourish our Sons only, but those also that proceed from
them, yea, even to the third generation, according to Justinian, and that for
humanity sake: Neither should our Charity rest here, but it should extend it
self even unto those who issue out of our Loins, and are born unto us by
strange women, if they cannot otherwise be maintained.

V. In Succession the Children of the deceased are to be preferred before their
Parents, and why.
Children ought also to nourish their Parents; not only in obedience to many
wholesome Laws, but in common gratitude, like the Storks, who when their Parents
are spent with age, feed them, and being faint, receive them on their backs,
and carry them from place to place: And therefore in fostering those, who when
we were Children fostered us, we are Proverbially said, To imitate the Stork
(...). Reverence to Parents, and sustenance to Children. Nic. 8.
. Solon is highly commended for setting a brand of infamy upon those that did
it not: Yet is not this so ordinary as that which we have said of Children.
Because Children when they are born, bring nothing into the world with them
whereby to live; and have probably a longer time to live here than their
Parents have. And as honor and obedience is properly due to Parents, and not
to Children: So is Sustentation due rather to Children than to Parents: And
thus is Lucian to be understood, when he tells us, That it is more agreeable to
the dictates of Nature, for Parents to love their Children, than for Children
their Parents. And that also of Aristotle, That which begets, is always better
affected to the thing begotten, than that which is begotten, can be to the
begetter: For that is properly said to be our own, which derives its being from
us. Whence it comes, That without the favor of the Civil Law, the first
Succession to the goods of the Parents is transmitted to their Children; it
being presumed, That next after themselves, they would that those born of them
(as being part of their own body) should be plentifully supplied with all
things, not only necessary for life, but for a more honest and comfortable
livelihood. Insomuch, that were all humane Laws asleep, yet, as Paulus the
Lawyer observes, would natural Reason, which is as it were a silent Law,
adjudge the Fathers Inheritance unto his Children, and invest them in it, as
their due, by an undoubted Succession. But yet, as Papinianus notes, cannot
Parents claim the estates of their Children, by the same Right as Children do
the Inheritance of their Parents: For Parents are admitted to their Childrens
goods merely out of Commiseration; but Children to the estate of their Parents
by the common vote, that is, both of Nature and of their Parents. Philo in his
third Book of the life of Moses, gives this Reason why Moses made no provision
for Parents out of their Childrens Estate, Because seeing that the Law of
Nature did provide that Children should succeed their Parents in their Estates,
and not Parents their Children; therefore did Moses pass over in silence, what
was contrary to the desires of all Parents, and might prove unlucky. Hence we
may observe, That the Inheritance of Parents descends upon their Children, by a
twofold Right; partly, as a mere debt of Nature; and partly, out of a Natural
Conjecture, That it is the Will of their Parents, that their own Children
should be best provided for. Lib. 5. c. 9.
Sanguini honorem relinquit, says Val. Max. of Quintus Hortensius; His honor
he bequeathed to his Blood. For though he detested the wicked life of his Son,
yet dying, Ne ordinem naturae confunderet, non nepotes, sed filium haeredem
scripsit; To preserve the order of Nature, he made his Son, and not his
Nephews, heir to his Estate: Thinking it en^ugh, that he had declared his
dislike of his Sons ill manners whilst he lived. And therefore dying, Ib.
he left him the honor due to his Blood. The like he records of Fulvius, who
causing his own Son to be apprehended for conspiring his death, did not only
forbear to prosecute him whilst he lived, but dying, Dominum omnium esse
voluit, quem genuerat haeredem i^^^ituens, non quem fuerat expertus; Made him
heir of all he had, regarding his Birth and Blood, and not his Crimes. And to
this purpose is that of St. Paul, Children do not lay up for their Parents, 2
Cor. 12.14.
but Parents for their Children.

VI. Of Representative Succession.
Now because it is thus natural and ordinary for Parents to take care of their
Childrens Education, therefore whilst they live, there lies no obligation upon
the Grand Parents to give them maintenance: Yet in case the Father or the
Mother dye, or be otherwise disabled, then it is a duty, which in all equity
the Parents of the deceased Son or Daughter are obliged unto, to see their
Nephews or Neeces virtuously brought up. And by the same reason, is the same
duty incumbent on the Parents of more remote degrees if these fail. And from
hence arises the Right of the Nephew to inherit the Estate, instead of a
deceased Son, as Vlpian speaks. Which gave occasion to that Hebrew saying,
Filius etiam in Sepulchro succedit; That the Son succeeds, though in his Grave.
Because Filii filiorum sunt quasi filii; The Sons of that dead Son, are reputed
Sons. And as Modestinus speaks, Shall fill up the vacant place of their dead
Father. Justinian thought nothing more unreasonable than this, That the Nephew
should succeed instead of the deceased Father, in the Estate of his
Grandfather in case he dyed Intestate. And this kind of Vice-succession, our
Modern Civilians do affectedly call Representative; when the Sons claim an
Estate, by representing the person of their Father being dead. And that that
manner of Right was approved of amongst the Hebrews, the division of the Land
of Canaan amongst the Children of Israel, does sufficiently demonstrate. As our
Sons and Daughters are nearest unto us in blood, so are those who are born of
either of them, as Demosthenes observes in his Oration against Macartatus.

VII. Abdication or exheredation.
What we have hitherto said concerning the Right of Succession, arising from
our Conjectures at the Will of the Intestate, is of force, if there appear no
certain sign, that he was otherwise minded. Such in the first place was among
the Grecians an Abdication, or a manifest renouncing, or casting off of the
person claiming: And among the Romans an open disinheriting of him; yet so,
that if that person did not by his crime deserve to be put to death, he was to
be allowed sufficient to sustain Nature, for the Reasons aforesaid.

VIII. The Right of Bastards.
And here we may add another exception to this general Rule, that is, If it do
not sufficiently appear that such a Son or Daughter was begotten by him: But
yet we know that of such matters of fact there can be no certain knowledge: But
of such acts as are publicly done before men, there may be some certainty upon
the Testimony of such as beheld them. In which sense the Mother may be certain
that the Child is hers, by those who were present at its Birth and Education;
but thus certain cannot a Father be. Which Homer first, and after him Menander
thus intimates: Know directly no man can
From what stock himself first sprang.
And so in another place he thus distinguishes between the Parents, Fathers do
love their Children, Mothers dote:
She knows them hers; but this he takes by rote.
Therefore some way was thought fit to be found, whereby it might probably
appear, who the Father of every Child was: And this was Marriage taken in its
Natural terms, that is, for such a cohabitation, as places the woman under the
custody or safeguard of the man. But whether by this, or some other way, the
true Father of the Child be known, or that any man does own the Child as his;
by the Law of Nature, that Child, as well as that born in Marriage shall
inherit. Neither is this strange, seeing that we see mere strangers (being
adopted for Sons) to succeed in the Jnheritance, only by conjecture at the
owners will. And the Nephew instead of the Father; as old Jacob adopted Ephraim
and Manasses into the number of his Sons, in the stead of their Father Joseph.
But our Natural Issue is differenced from our Legitimate by Law only. So
Euripides, Bastards, no less than those in Wedlock born,
Are ours, although by Laws they are left forlorn.
And yet may those also be adopted Sons, if the Laws forbid not, as it was
anciently permitted among the Romans, by the Laws of Anastasius: But afterward
in favor to lawful Marriage, there was a more difficult way found, to make
Bastards equal to such as were Legitimate, namely, by the free offer of the
Court (when they say cause) or by the subsequent Marriage of the Mother of the
Child. Thus did old Jacob adopt his Natural Son s, making them equal to his
Legitimate, and giving them equal shares in his Inheritance. But the contrary
may sometimes happen, not only by the prohibition of the Law, but even by
agreement, when it is agreed on by both parties before, That they that are to
be born by that Wedlock shall receive only Aliment, but no part of the Ancient
Inheritance. And such a Marriage the Hebrews call Concubinary, although made
with a Freewoman: Such was that of Abraham with Keturah, called therefore his
Concubine, Genesis 25.6. whose Children, together with Ishmael the Son of Agar his
Bond-maid, are said to have received gifts, that is, Legacies; but no part of
the Ancient Inheritance. So it was anciently among the Mexicans, who gave all
to the eldest son, but nothing to the rest but sustenance only: And not much
better are second Marriages in Brabant, where the Children by the second
Venture, have no Propriety in the Estate which the Father held at the death of
his former Wife. The like Law we find among the ancient Burgundians.

IX. If a man dye Childless and Intestate, to whom shall the Estate descend.
The Fathers Estate to his Relations, the Mothers to hers. The ancient Estate
to be continued in the same Tribe.
If a man dye Childless, and withal Intestate, on whom the Succession should
descend, is not easily to be determined. There being no one thing wherein the
Laws do more differ. All which differences may notwithstanding be reduced under
two Heads, whereof the one has respect to the nearest of kin, the other to the
several Spring-heads from whence it descended: That which came by the Father,
to his Relations; and that which came by the Mother, to hers. But here we must
distinguish between the ancient Inheritance, and that lately purchased: That of
Plato must be understood of the former, Ego Legum conditor, etc. I being a Law
giver, says he, do ordain, That neither your Persons nor Patrimonial Estates
are in your own power fully, but your stock and lineage have a Right thereunto;
as well they that now are, as they that are to come. Whereby it seems that
Plato would have (...), the Ancient Inheritance preserved entire for that Tribe
or Kindred by which it came: Which I would not have so to be understood, as
though it were not naturally lawful to dispose of any goods that descend unto
us, from either Parents or Ancestors otherwise. (For sometimes to relieve the
wants of a Friend, who has well deserved of us, is not only commendable, but
necessary.) But (that in a case ambiguous) it may appear what we ought to
believe the will of the Intestate was. For we take it as granted, That he that
dies has at his death a full Right to dispose of his Estate. But since it is
impossible for him to retain this Right being dead, and that it may be
presumed, That he would not altogether lose that Right, whereby he might
gratify his Friends: It concerns us to enquire in what order this benefit
should naturally descend. Wherein that of Aristotle is most rational, Potius
est gratiam referri ei qui benefecit quam amico confer beneficium; That it is
better to return thanks to our Benefactor, than to oblige new Friends. For as
Cicero says truly, There is no duty so necessary as that of Gratitude: Our
Benefactors are first to be gratified, and then our Friends obliged.
For since Liberality has but two Branches, whereof one is to do good, the
other to repay good; the former we may do if we will, but the latter we must do
if we would be honest, and can do it without injuring any. So St. Ambrose, It
becomes every man to have a greater respect unto him from whom we have received
a Courtesy, than unto others. And presently after, What can be more against
our duty, than not to return what we have received? Now our Gratitude is
expressed either to the living or (...) the dead, as Lisias observes in his
Funeral Oration, It is showed in doing good to their Children, being naturally
the surviving parts of them, and unto whom their parents, if living, would have
been most beneficent. In me conferes quicquid in liberos meos contuleris, says
the Fisherman, in Procopius, Procop. Pers. 1.
who was about to adventure his life against a Dog-fish, to gain a very great
Pearl for the Emperor Cosroe, That is the best Gratitude that is showed to the
dead: For what, O Emperor, thou shall confer on my Children, if I perish, thou
bestowest upon me. And according to this rule did they walk who framed the
Justinian Laws, in that question concerning whole and half Brothers, and in
that concerning Cousins in Blood, and in some others. Brothers, says
Aristotle, do love each other, being born of the same Parents: Ortus communis
ipsos quasi eosdem facit; One common blood whereof they are made, makes them
almost one and the same. Whence frater is quasi fere alter, A Brother is but
almost another, or as one cast in the same mould. For as the highest bond of
Love is deservedly that which Children owe their Parents, Val. Max. lib. 5. c.
5.
from whom they receive the most and the greatest benefits, as their lives and
livelihoods: So the next is that of Brethren to each other, as having received
the same benefits together from the same Parents. And therefore for Brethren
dying Childless and Intestate, to succeed one another, is (according to Justin)
the Common Right of Nations. But in case he, from whom the goods last
descended, be not to be found, nor any of his Children; it remains that the
thanks be paid to them, to whom, though not so much, yet next after him they
are notwithstanding due; namely, to the Parents of the next degree above him,
and to his Children: Especially, seeing by this means it may be continued
between the Kinsmen, both of him whose inheritance it was, and of him from whom
the said goods first descended. So the same Aristotle, Cousin Germans, and the
rest of our Kinsfolks, are linked together by their Parents, as being born of
one common stock; yet so, as some are more nearly allied than others, according
to their respective birth. Thus by the Law of Moses, the Uncle succeeded after
the Brothers, as being nearer unto the first Owner, than the Brothers Children,
Numb. 27.10, 11.

X. An estate lately gained to the next of kin.
But as to that part of the estate that is but lately acquired; because there
lies no obligation of thankfulness to our Ancestors for them, it remains that
the succession should pass to him, that was dearest to the person deceased,
which is presumed to be his nearest Kinsman, who is as it were his own Flesh,
Prove. 11.17. or his Brother, Deuteronomy. 15.11. For our love to our kindred should be
proportionable to the nearness they are unto us in blood, so that after our
Parents, they are best to be provided for, who are by nature in the nearest
relation unto them. And therefore among the Grecians, as Isaeus tells us, The
Goods of the deceased, did always descend unto the next of kin. Whereunto he
adds, What can be more just, than that the estate that was a kinsmans, should
descend unto a kinsman? How well would this conserve Humane Society, says
Cicero, and promote the honor of private Families, if the nearer any man were
allied unto us, so much the more benign and bountiful we would be unto him?
Next unto our children, the same Cicero places our loving kindred, who as they
are nearest, so ought they to be dearest unto us; and to provide for these
especially, is a debt that we owe them, not by Commutative Justice, but by
Distributive, as being most worthy, for the honor that is due unto our own
blood. And therefore the same Cicero, speaking elsewhere of that natural
affection which every man bears to his own Relations, tells us, That from
thence arises the Testaments and Legacies of dying men: It being much more
equitable, to leave our estates to our own kindred, than unto strangers. This
is the Charity that is most acceptable to God, Esaias 58.7. De Off. l. 1. c. 30.
as Esaias tells us, To feed the hungry, to clothe the naked, and that we hide
not our selves from our own flesh. And St. Ambrose highly commends that
liberality that is shown to our brethren and kinsfolks, as being next in blood
to us. Now that succession that thus descends from a person dying Intestate, is
but as it were a silent Testament, which the Laws of Nature and Nations make
Authentic, by guessing at the will of the deceased. Thus Quintilian also, Next
unto them who claim a Right by the Testators Testament, are his kindred in case
he dye Intestate and Childless: not because the Goods of the deceased are in
Justice due unto them, but because being deserted, and as it were left without
any certain Owner, none can pretend so much right to them as they, being the
next of kin. And what has been said of Goods newly purchased by the person
dying Intestate, That they naturally descend to his nearest Relation; may as
truly be said of such Goods as descend unto him from his Father or
Grandfather, in case neither they, from whom they descended, nor any of their
children do survive, to whom in point of Gratitude they should return.

XI. Diversity of Laws as touching succession.
Now though what we have here said, be most agreeable to Natural Conjectures,
yet are they not by the Law of Nature necessary: wherefore, from diverse causes
moving men's wills, successions do usually vary, according to the diversity of
Agreements, Laws or Customs rationally grounded; some whereof will admit of
substitution in some degrees; others not. The Ancient Germans were altogether
ignorant of that kind of succession which we call Representative, even among
their children; as that the Eldest Brothers Son should succeed in the room of
his deceased Father: which Right first took place in France by an Edict of
Childebert; and was first introduced into those parts beyond the Rhine by Otho.
So the Ancient Scottish Right of succession went according to the sole
proximity in blood, Pontanus 7. Danicor.
and not by substitution, it being so decreed by the King of England, who was
chosen as Arbiter, to decide that difference. In some places regard is had to
the first Purchaser; in others, this is neglected. There are some Countries,
where the firstborn carries away the greatest part of the estate, as among the
Hebrews; but in some others, all the Children share alike. In some the kindred
by the Fathers side, only succeed; in others, those by the Mothers, have an
equal portion. In some, regard is had to the Sex; in others, none at all. In
some, the kinsfolks in the next degree only are admitted; in others, they admit
those in degrees more remote. To trace all, would be tedious; neither is it my
purpose so to do. But this we must grant, That where the deceased has declared
nothing of his Will, it must be presumed, that the Estate should pass, as the
Law or Custom of the place does order it; but not so much by the power of the
Empire, as by the force of this Conjecture, which also takes place against
those in whom the Supreme Power resides. For it is very probable, that what
they by their Laws command, or by their Customs approve of in their Subjects,
the same in their own affairs, they hold to be most Equitable, so as no great
damage arises to them by it.

XII. How succession to Kingdoms patrimonial ought to be guided. Daughters
capable to succeed in Egypt and Britain.
As concerning the Succession to Kingdoms, we must distinguish between those
that are Patrimonial, and in a full and absolute manner possessed, and those that
are held in such a manner as pleases the People. The former sort may be
divided even between the Sons and Daughters; as in the Kingdoms of Egypt, as
Lucan testifies, -- Nullo discrimine Sexus
Reginam scit far Pharos.
-- In Aegypts Throne
Difference of Sexes there is none.
The like does Tacitus record of the British Empire. In Asia after Semiramis,
Neque enim Sexum in Imperiis discernunt, Tac.
many Women were permitted to Reign, says Arrianus; as Nitocris in Babylon,
Artimissa in Halicarnassus, and Tomyris amongst the Scythians: yea, and such
Kingdoms may be divided, as in Asia, all the Brothers Reign together, though
one only has a principal Right to the Crown; which Custom the Empress Irene
would without any precedent have introduced into the Constantinopolitan Empire
in the Reign of Andronicus Palaeologus, as Gregoras notes, That, says he,
which is most strange and to be admired, was, That she was not willing, Lib. 7.
that any one should obtain the whole, according to the Ancient Custom of that
Empire, but according to the Examples of the Western Princes, the Cities and
Regions should be divided amongst her Sons, that so each of them might hold his
Kingdom as his Patrimony, just as the estates of private men are divided among
their children; so that each part of the Empire should descend perpetually to
each of her Sons, and to their Heirs after them. For being her self of a
Western Extraction, she endeavored to introduce their Custom without example.
Neither are adopted Sons less capable of Succession, by guessing as the Will of
the Intestate, than true Sons: Thus did Hyllus the Son of Hercules succeed to
Aepalius King of the Locrians by Adoption; Strab. l. 9.
as also did Molossus the Bastard in the Kingdom of Epirus, by the Judgment of
his Father Pyrrhus, having no lawful Issue. Paus. l. 1.
The Tartars make no difference between Bastards and them that are Legitimate.
So Herodotus of the Persians, Mos est illis ut Nothus regnet dum legitimus
aliquis reperitur; Who admit of Bastards, till one that is legitimate may be
found. And we read in Justine of a Treaty between King Atheas and Philip
concerning the Adopting of Philip to succeed him in the Kingdom of Scythia.
Jugurtha, though a Bastard, Salust. bell. Jugurth.
yet succeeded in the Kingdom of Numidia by Adoption. The like we read of those
Kingdoms which the Goths and Lombards conquered, that the succession often
passed by Adoption. Nay, Paul. Diac. l. 6. de gest. Longob.
the succession to the Kingdom shall pass to the nearest of kin to him that
last possessed it, though he were nothing of kin to the first King. If any such
succession be in force in those places: Thus did Mithridates in Justine plead,
That Paphlagonia became his Fathers Inheritance, by the death of all its
domestic Kings.

XIII. In Kingdoms that are Indivisible, the eldest succeeds.
But in case express caution be given, that the Kingdom shall not be divided,
and yet it be not expressed who shall succeed, then the Eldest, whether Son or
Daughter, shall enjoy the Kingdom. So says Nicetas Coniates, Nature indeed
observing her own order, gives the greatest honor to the firstborn; But God
has a Prerogative above Nature, and acts not always by her order. And
speaking of Isaacius, he says, That by his birthright, the succession to the
Kingdom was his. The like is said of Hircanus in Josephus. In the Talmud, under
the Title of Kings, we read, That he that has the best title to an estate of
inheritance, has also the best title to the possession of a Kingdom; and
therefore the eldest Son is always preferred before the younger. Herodotus
makes it the custom of all Nations for the eldest Son to succeed in his
Fathers Throne. And in another place, he terms it, the Law of Kingdoms. Livy
makes mention of two Brethren, Allobrogi, contending for a Kingdom, whereof the
younger had the worst Title, but the greatest Power. Of all Darius his Sons,
Artabazanes being the firstborn claimed the Kingdom as his birthright: Quod
Jus and ordo nascendi and Natura ipsa gentibus dedit; Which Right, says
Justine, both the order of birth, Lib. 2.
and Nature it self has given to Nations: which in another place he calls, the
Law of Nations. Lib. 40.
As Livy also says, It is a privilege due by the order both of Age and
Nature; yet must this be understood with this restriction, unless the Father by
his Testament do otherwise dispose of the succession, as Ptolomy in Justin, did
his Kingdom to his youngest Son. But yet he that shall thus succeed, is bound
to gratify his Brethren for their shares with all respect and honor, if (and
as far forth as) he shall be able to do it.

XIV. A Kingdom by the peoples consent hereditary, if in doubt, is presumed to
be indivisible.
But those Kingdoms that by the Peoples free consent are made hereditary, may
by guessing at the will of the people be transferred. Now, because it may
easily be presumed, that the people will give their consent to that which is
most expedient; therefore in the first place it will follow, That unless some
Law or Custom do otherwise determine, (as in many it has and may do) the
Kingdom should stand entire and undivided; because whilst so, it will be the
better able, both to defend it self, and to conserve the people in peace and
unity. Lib. 21. A Kingdom united is stronger, than when divided.
Of this opinion was Justin, Firmius futurum esse regnum, si penes unum
remansisset, quam si portionibus inter filios divideretur, arbitrabantur; They
judged that the Empire would be more firm, being entirely possessed by one, than
it could possibly be, if divided amongst many Sons.

XV. The succession not to last beyond the line of the first King.
Again, It being granted, that the peoples consent is easily gained to what
shall be most expedient, it will in the next place follow, That the succession
should descend from the first King in a right line: Because that Family was
then electeed, as being thought the most Noble; which Family being extinct, the
Kingdom does return back to the people. Thus Curtius advises Lib. 8.
, That the Sovereign Power be strongly fixed to one Royal Family, which ought to
claim by an hereditary Right. For the people being so accustomed, will not only
reverence his person, but will have the very name of their King in great
esteem: And therefore no man ought to usurp that dignity, but he that was born
unto it.

XVI. Natural Issue not concerned in it.
Thirdly, It will thence likewise follow, That none should be admitted to
succeed in the Royal Throne, but he that is born Legitimate: Not the Natural
Sons, because they are subject to be reproacht, to whose Mother the Father did
never vouchsafe the honor of marriage. And therefore of such, there can be no
certainty, who was the Father. But in the succession to Crowns, the people
ought to have the greatest assurance that in such a case can be given to avoid
Controversies. For which cause it was, that the Macedonians preferred Demetrius
the younger Son to the Throne, rather than Perseus the elder, because he was
born in lawful Wedlock. Not Sons by Adoption, because the people are apt to
conceive greater hopes, and to have their Kings in greater esteem and
veneration, when they know them to be descended from a Royal Stock.

Est in Juvencis, est in equis patrum
Virtus.
In Horse and Ox we may descry
The Syre's Generosity.
XVII. Males preferred before Females in the same degree.
Fourthly, That of those that have equal Title to the Inheritance, either as
being in the same degree, or as succeeding to their Parents who were in the
same degree, the Male Issue be preferred before the Female; because Men are
fitter for War, and to administer other Regal duties, than Women can be.

XVIII. The elder before the younger.
Fifthly, That of Sons, or of Daughters, if there be no Sons, the elder be
preferred before the younger; because it may easily be believed, that as he is
of more years, so he either then is, or may sooner arrive to be of sounder
Judgment than the younger. So Cyrus in Xenophon, Imperium relinquo majori
Natu; I bequeath my Kingdom to my Eldest Son, as being of most experience, and
consequently best knowing how to govern. And because our green years will
sooner ripen, than our Sex change; therefore the prerogative of our Sex is much
to be preferred, before the privilege of our Age. Wherefore Herodotus where he
tells us, Lib. 7.
that Persis the Son of Andromede the Sister of Cepheus did succeed Cepheus in
his Kingdom, gives this as the reason, Because Cepheus had no Male Children.
Lib. 4.
And Diodorus assigns the same reason, why Teuthras left the Kingdom of Misia
unto his Daughter Argiope, Because as to Male Issue he was childless. And
Justin tells us, That the Empire of the Medes did of right belong to the
Daughter of Astyages, because Astyages had no Son. So does Cyaxares in
Xenophon, declare his Daughter Heiress to the Median Empire: For, says he, I
have no Son that is legitimate. So Virgil concerning King Latinus, He had no
Son, no Issue Male was left,
In prime of youth, Both being of Life bereft;
And by one Daughter this vast State possessed.
Homer discoursing of the Kingdom of Crete, Iliad. n.
does very wisely assign the reason why in successions the Elder is commonly
preferred before the younger, namely, first for their priority of Age; Lib. 2.
and secondly, for their greater knowledge and experience. Zozimus also
mentions a Persian Law, which gave their Empire to their Kings eldest Son. Thus
did Periander succeed his Father in the Kingdom of Corinth by order of Birth,
as Damascene testifies. Whence we are given to understand, that although the
Children of deceased Parents in some degrees from them, may succeed in the room
of their Parents; yet is it to be understood with this Proviso, That they are
as capable as the rest, which Bastards are not. Provided also, That of such as
are capable, regard be had first to their Sex, and then to their Age; for the
qualities of Sex and Age (as they are in this case by the people considered)
are so adherent to their persons, that they cannot be plucked asunder.

XIX. Whether such a Kingdom be part of an Inheritance.
But here it may be demanded, Whether a Kingdom thus conveyed, be a part of an
Inheritance: whereunto the most probable Answer is, That it is a kind of an
Inheritance, yet separate from that of other Goods. And therefore Innocent the
Third thought that the succession to such a Kingdom might be lost, if he who
was to succeed, did not fulfill the last Will of the deceased. Such peculiar
and separate Inheritances, we may see in some Fee-Farms and Copyholds,
Fee-Farms and Copy-holds why first given.
(which were originally given for the meliorating of Lands barren and desert,
under some small Rent, which were not to return back to the Donor.) The like
may be seen in the Rights of Patronages and Royalties. Whence it follows, That
a Kingdom may belong to him, who if he will, may be heir to the Goods; yet so,
that if he will, he may also enjoy the Kingdom, and not inherit the Goods, nor
subject himself to the charge that attends them. Now the reason hereof is,
because it is probable, that the Kingdom by the peoples consent, should be
settled on the King, Why the people would have their Kingdoms hereditary.
in the best manner of Right that could be: Neither did they much regard,
whether he would accept of the Inheritance or not, since it was not for this,
that they made choice of an hereditary order, but that the Title to the Kingdom
might be clear; and that their Kings being extracted from a Royal Stem, might
attract the more reverence from the people, who were apt from their High Birth
and Princely Education, to conceive the greater hopes of their Heroic Virtues;
and that the Prince in possession, might receive the greater encouragement to
be careful of the Kingdom, and with the greater Courage and Magnanimity to
defend it; as knowing that he was to leave it to such, as were either in
gratitude or love most endeared unto him.

XX. The succession to Kingdoms is the same as that to other estates. Whether
absolute.
But where the custom of succession to Lands absolutely free, and to Lands
held from another is diverse, if the Kingdom be not held of another, or was not
at first certainly held, (although it do appear, that homage has been since
done for it) yet shall the succession, by the Law go in such manner, as the
succession of Freehold Lands went, at such time when that Kingdom was at the
first Instituted.

XXI. Or held from another.
But in such Kingdoms as were at first given to be held from another, as being
the chief Lord of it, the manner of succession shall by the Law be such as the
succession to Lands held in Fee-Farm within that Kingdom was at such time as
the Investiture into that Kingdom was at first given; and that not always
according to that Law of the Lumbards which we have prescribed. For the Goths,
Vandals, Almains, French, Burgundians, English, Saxons and all the German
Nations, which have by War possessed themselves of the best parts of the Roman
Empire, have every one of them their own Laws and Customs, concerning things
held in Fee, as well as the Lumbards.

XXII. Of a Lineal Cognatical succession, and what manner of transmission of
right is therein.
But there is another kind of succession much used in some Kingdoms, not
hereditary, but as they call it, lineal; wherein is observed not that Right
which is called Representative, but a Right to transmit the future succession,
as though it were already conveyed; the Law, namely, out of an hope, (which
naturally and of it self works nothing) raising a certain true Right, namely,
such a Right as arises from a Conditional Stipulation, which at present gives
only an hope, that it will be due; which very hope they transmit unto the
Children springing from the Loins of the first King, but in an order that is
certain: so that in the first place, the Children of the last possessor of the
first degree, as well of those that live, as of those that are dead are to be
admitted, with regard had as well among the living as the dead, to the Sex
first, and then to the Age. But if this Right descend on the deceased, then
this Right shall pass to such as are descended from them: amongst equals
always observing the like prerogative of Sex, and then of Age, and the
transmitting of the Right of the dead upon the living, and of the living upon
the dead. And in case their children fail, it descends unto those who are,
Cognatical succession.
or if they lived should have been, by the like transmission next unto him; the
same distinction of Sex and Age among equals, being always observed in the
first Line; so that no transition by reason of Sex or Age should be made from
one Line to another, so long as any remain of the first Line, of what Sex or
Age soever. And consequently the Daughter of a Son, shall be preferred before
the Son of a Daughter, and the Daughter of a Brother, See Argentraeus in his
British History, l. 6. c. 4.
before the Son of a Sister; so the Son of an elder Brother, before the younger
Brother. This is the order of succession in the Kingdom of Castile, and of
Norway (as Pontanus testifies in his Danish History): and such is the
succession in many Dutchies, Counties and Baronies that are held by Homage or
Fealty to the chief Lord. This is the succession of the Kingdom of England.
As in the Counties of Artoise, Champane, Tolouse and Brittany: This was the
order of succession prescribed unto the Duchy of Mantua by the Emperor
Sigismund, Anno 1432. and by Charles the Fifth Emperor and King of Spain, to
Philip the Second in his Kingdoms and Principalities. But the proof of this
Lineal Succession, though there were no Law or Example to guide us, may be
taken from the order that is observed in Public Assemblies. For if in that
order, regard be had to lineal descents, it will be a sign that the hopes
conceived of the children of the deceased, was by Law quickened into a Just
Right, so that it may well pass from the dead to the living. This is that
Lineal Cognatical succession, wherein women, and those that are born of them,
are not excluded, but only post-pon'd in the same line. So that recourse is had
unto them, in case the Males that are nearer, or that those born from Males in
an equal line should fail. The ground whereof, as it differs from an hereditary
succession, is the hopes which the people conceive of them who are nearest
related to the Prince in possession, and who have the justest hopes to succeed
him, that they have Educations answerable to their high birth and hopes; such
are the Children of those Parents, who had they lived, must have succeeded.

XXIII. The lineal succession of the Males only Agnatical succession.
There is likewise another lineal succession of Males only which is called
Agnatical, which differs from the Cognatical, in that it excludes Females, and
admits only of Males; which, from the Kingdom of France takes its rise, and is
therefore called the French succession. Though the Kingdom of Israel seems to
have been thus settled, 2 Chronicles. 13.5. And the chief reason of this, is to debar
Strangers from the Crown, by marrying the Kings Daughters. In both these lineal
successions all are admitted that are any ways allied, though in degrees never
so remote from the last possessor, whilst they can derive themselves from the
first King. And in some places where the Agnatical Succession is deficient,
recourse is had to the Cognatical. Nay, and this latter is sometimes preferred
before the former; as in Aethiopia, where the Kings Sisters Son did always
succeed him; which Bid records also of the Picts, where the kindred of the
women were preferred to the succession. The like we read of the Indians; So
Tacitus of the Germans, That their Kings gave the greatest honor to their
Sisters Son, as being nearest in blood to them.

XXIV. A succession that always respects the proximity to the first King.
Livy, lib. 29. Vand. l. 1.
Other manner of successions may be introduced, either by the people, or at the
pleasure of him, who holds the Kingdom in a patrimonial right, so that he may
alienate it. For he may so settle the succession, that they that are next to
himself at all times, may be preferred before others; as it was anciently among
the Numidians, where for the like cause, the Uncle did succeed in the Kingdom,
before the Children of the last King. This Custom was introduced in Africa by
the Testament of Gizerick, wherein amongst many other things, he charge his
Vandals, That they should admit of him only into the Throne, that should be at
any time n^arest unto himself, in a right Masculine line, and of them still the
eldest, and then the next in order, wherein he regarded not the present
possessor, but the first Acquisitor: Which order, whether Gizerick himself
learnt from the Africans, among whom it had been long observed; or whether they
learnt it from some of our Northern Nations, is a question. The like was of old
in use among the happy Arabians, as may be gathered out of Strabo. And the
later Historians report the same of Taurica Chersonesus: Lib. 16.
Neither is it so long since the Kings of Fesse, and Morocco did the like. Livy
speaking of Massinissa, says, That whilst he made War in Spain for the
Carthaginians, his Father dying, the Kingdom fell according to the custom of
the Numidians unto Desalces the deceased Kings Brother. The same Custom is in
force throughout all Mauritania, as Mariana testifies: and in the Kingdom of
Mexico and Peru, as the Histories of those parts record. Now the same if in
doubt, is to be observed in things committed to trust, if it be left to the
Family. And this agrees best with the Roman Laws, though some Interpreters do
wrest it otherwise. These things premised, it will be no hard matter to resolve
all Controversies which do arise, concerning the Right of Kingdoms, which the
different opinions of Lawyers have made so intricate.

XXV. Whether the Son may be so exheredated, that he shall not succeed in his
Fathers Kingdom.
And in the first place, this Question arises, Whether a Father may exheredate
his Son, so that he shall not succeed in his Kingdom? Where we must distinguish
between Patrimonial Kingdoms which are Alienable, and such as are not
Alienable. In the former there is no doubt, but that exheredation is lawful;
for such Kingdoms differ nothing from other Goods: and therefore in such
places, where by Law or Custom Exheredation is in force, it is practicable
even in the case of Kingdoms: yea, though there were no Law or Custom to
warrant it, yet naturally it is lawful for a Father to exclude his Son from all
but bare Alimony; yea, and from that also, if he have committed any Crime
worthy of death, He may, if the Kingdom be Patrimonial.
or have been otherwise notoriously wicked, and have of his own whereby
otherwise to subsist. Thus was Reuben punished by Jacob with the loss of his
Birthright, and Adonija by David with the loss of his Kingdom: For David's
Kingdom was in a manner Patrimonial, though not by the right of War, yet by
special donation from God himself. Now where the Kingdom is Patrimonial, the
King may nominate which of his Sons he will to succeed him, as the Kings of
Mexico now do. Nay, if the eldest Son have provoked his Father by any heinous
crime, and there be no manifest sign that he has forgiven him, he shall be as
one tacitly exheredated. Otherwise in Kingdoms nor alienable.
But it is otherwise in Kingdoms not alienable, though they be hereditary,
because the people are best pleased that the Kingdom shall descend in an
hereditary way, especially from an Intestate. Much less shall it be in the
power of a Father to exheredate his Son where the Kingdom is to pass in a
lineal descent: For there without any imitation of an Inheritance, it was
agreed in its first Institution, That the Kingdom should by the peoples gift
pass to every person of the Royal Family, in such order as was then prescribed.

XXVI. Whether a King may renounce his Kingdom. In a Kingdom merely hereditary
he may, but n^ in a Lineal Succession.
Another Question is this, Whether a King may so abdicate his Kingdom as to
deprive his Son of his Right to succeed, which is resolved by the same
distinction. For in Kingdoms merely hereditary, he that renounceth his Kingdom,
cannot transfer it to his Son. But in lineal descents the Fathers act cannot
null his Sons Right that is born: For as soon as the children begin to exist,
the law makes provision for them; yea, and for those that are to be born so,
because that right which, by the peoples consent is entailed upon them, must in
due time descend upon them. Neither does that which I have already said
concerning transmission, contradict this. For that transmission is Necessary,
as to the Parents, and not Voluntary. But yet a difference there is between
those Children that are born before the Renunciation, and those born after: For
they that are already born, have by the Law a full Right to the Kingdom, though
they that are not permitted to enjoy that Right during the life of their
Parent; but to those not born, there cannot as yet be any Right acquired: and
therefore it may be taken away by the will of the people, if the Parents also
to whom it belongs to transfer that Right unto them, be willing to release it.
And to this purpose is that we have already said concerning dereliction.

XXVII. Whether the King, or the People only, have a Right to judge of the
Succession.
Another Question does sometimes arise, namely, who shall be judge of the Right
of Succession to a Kingdom: Whethet the King then reigning, or the people by
themselves, or by such Judges as they shall appoint. If the Question be put of
such a Judgment as is Authoritative, neither of them have any Right to judge.
For Jurisdiction there cannot be, but in a superior, who should have respect
not barely to the person, but to the matter also, which is to be poised with
its due circumstances. But the case of Succession is not properly under the
jurisdiction of the present King: because he cannot of himself by any Law bind
his Successor. For the Succession to the Empire lies not under the jurisdiction
of the Empire, but remains in the state of Nature, wherein there was no
jurisdiction at all. But yet notwithstanding, if the Right of Succession be
controverted, the pretenders unto it will do very piously and justly, if they
can agree between themselves upon some indifferent persons, to whose
arbitrament they can be contented to refer themselves; whereof we shall
discourse hereafter. But the people have transferred all their Jurisdiction
from themselves into the King and the Royal Family; during which, they cannot
challenge to themselves any relics of it. This I mean of a true Kingdom, and
not of every Principality. But yet, if in the discussing of this Right any
question do arise concerning the primary will and intention of the people at
the first institution of the Kingdom, it were not amiss to take the advice of
the people in present, that is, of all the three States; I mean, of the Nobles,
Clergy, and Commons in Parliament assembled, as is usual in England and
Scotland, as Camden testifies in his History of Queen Elizabeth: 1571, 1572.
For the people in present may be judged to be the same they anciently were. Or
by Delegates purposely chosen, as in the Kingdom of Arragon, unless it do
sufficiently appear, That the people then were clearly of another will, and
that thereupon the Right of Empire was obtained: Plut. de fratrum amore. Paus.
lib. 4. Justin. lib. 2.
Thus did King Euphaes suffer the Messenians diligently to enquire which of the
Royal stock of the Aepytidae had most Right to the Kingdom. But the contest
between Xerxes and Artabazanes was determined by their Uncle Artaphernes, to
whom it was amicably referred, as to a Domestic Judge.

XXVIII. The Son born before his Father was King, to be preferred before him
that was postnate.
But let us proceed to other cases, It has been often controverted which of
the two Sons has the best Right to the Succession: He that was born before the
Father gained the Kingdom, or he that was born after: Whereunto the most
Rational Answer is, That he that was first born, shall first succeed, if the
Kingdom be indivisible, which holds true in every kind of Succession. (Yet did
Henry the First, youngest Brother to Rufus, assume the Crown of England,
whilst his elder Brother Robert was in the Holy Land, upon this pretense, That
he was born to his Father after he was Crowned King of England, whereas his
Brother Robert was born whilst his Father was Duke of Normandy only; yet was
Henry justly branded as an Usurper of his Brothers Right, by Mat. Parisiensis.)
But in case the Kingdom be divisible, without doubt the latter shall have his
share, as well in this as in other goods, concerning which it matters not when
they were got. Now if he that of a divisible Estate may have his share; and in
that which is indivisible, is preferred by the privilege of his birth: Surely
even the Inheritance must follow that Son which was born before his Fathers
first Investiture. But even in a Lineal Succession, a Kingdom is no sooner got,
but the Children which are antenate, do immediately conceive an hopes of
Succession. For admit that there are none born after, surely no man will say,
That those before born are to be excluded. But in this kind of Succession an
hope once conceived begets a Right: Neither does it by any post fact determine,
unless it be in a Cognatical Succession, where it may be for a while suspended,
by reason of the privilege of Sex. Thus was the case decided in Persia,
between Cyrus and Artaxerxes; in Judaea, between Antipater, the Son of Herod
the Great, and his Brethren; In Hungary, when Geissa began his reign; and in
Germany (though not without Blood) between Otto the first, Mariana l. 24.
and Henry; and in Turkey, between Bajazet the antenate, and Gemes the postnate,
to the Empire. And though happily it may be true, that the choice of the Kings of
Persia did much depend upon the suffrages of the people; yet were those
suffrages always limited to the Royal Family: Lib. 23.
For thus much does Mariana testify of the Arsacidae, who being Parthians
reigned in Persia. And the like does Zonaras in Justin, of those Persians that
succeeded those Parthians.

XXIX. Unless otherwise provided by some Law.
But that it was otherwise in Sparta, we attribute to the Laws proper to them
only, which gave the Sons that were postnate the Pre-eminence, for their more
Heroic Education. The like may also happen by some peculiar Law made upon the
first Investiture, If a Sovereign Lord shall give unto his Vassal, and to those
that shall be born of him, an Empire, to be held of him in Fee: upon the
strength of which Argument, Lewis (in the contest that arose between him and
his Brother Galeatius for the Duchy of Millain) did principally rely. For in
Persia, That Xerxes the Postnate Son was preferred before Artabazanes the
Antenate, was more by the power of Atossa his Mother, than by true right, as
Herodotus observes. For in the same Kingdom when the same Controversy
afterward arose between Artaxerxes, Mnemon and Cyrus, the Sons of Darius and
Parisardis, Artaxerxes the firstborn, though begotten by his Father in his
private condition, was notwithstanding saluted King. Unless we take that as
granted, which Ammianus has delivered unto us, That the Succession to that
Monarchy did much depend upon the suffrages of the people, confined only within
the Royal stock.

XXX. Whether the Nephew by the elder Son be to be preferred before the younger
Son.
It is no less disputed both by Wars and single Combats, whether the elder
brothers Son, his Father being dead, should succeed before the second Brother.
But this in a lineal descent will hardly admit of a dispute. For herein are the
dead reckoned as living, in that they are able to transfer a Right to their
Children; therefore the Son of the deceased, shall doubtless in such a
Succession be preferred, without any exception made to his age; yea, and where
the Succession is cognatical, the Daughter of the eldest Brother shall be
preferred before the Uncle: because in such Successions neither Sex nor Age
should make us to decline the right line. But in such Kingdoms as are
hereditary, yet divisible, there shall each have a share, unless it be where
the Right of Representation is not as yet received: as of old among many of the
German Princes: For it is but of late that Nephews have been admitted before
their Uncles. But where it once comes into debate, surely the Nephews case is
to be preferred, as being most pleasing to humane Nature. And where by the
Civil Laws of any Nation, representative Succession is once openly admitted,
there the Son of the deceased Brother shall succeed in the room of his Father;
though in that Law the word Proximus, that is, Next of kin, be only mentioned.
The Reasons that are extracted out of the Roman Laws for this, are but weak; as
is evident to such as inspect them. But this is the best reason, That in
matters that are to be favorably understood, the sense of words must be
extended to all propriety, not only vulgar, but artificial. So that under the
name of Sons, may be comprehended those of Adoption; and under the word Dead,
may in included those that are dead in Law, because the Laws do usually speak
thus. And thus he may deservedly be said to be Proximus, whom the Laws present
in the next degree. But yet in Kingdoms that are hereditary, and withal
individual, and where this Representative Succession is not excluded: Neither
is the Nephew always preferred to the Succession, nor always the second Son,
but as amongst equals; because by an effect of Right, as to degrees that are
adequate, his case is best that is eldest. Diod. l. 6.
For as we have said before, in hereditary Kingdoms, Succession is guided by
the privilege of age. Among the Corinthians, the eldest Son of the deceased
King did succeed in his Fathers Throne. Procop. Vand. lib. 3.
So among the Vandals it was provided, That the next in Blood to the first
King, and the eldest should be declared Heir. So that the second Son, because
of his maturity of years, was preferred before the Son of the eldest Brother.
Vid. sup.. 24.
So in Sicily, Robert, being the Second Son, was advanced to the Throne before
Martell, his elder Brothers Son, not properly for the reason fansied by
Bartolus, because Sicily was held in Fee (as it were) by a Superior Lord; but
because that Kingdom was hereditary. There is in Guntanus an ancient example,
of such a Succession in the Kingdom of the Francks; but that proceeded rather
from the peoples choice, which at that time did not fully cease: But since that
Kingdom ceased to be Elective, and that the line of Agnatical Succession was
there established, the matter admits of no dispute. As anciently among the
Spartans, where as soon as the Kingdom came to the Heraclidae, the same
Agnatical Succession was introduced. And therefore Areus, the Son of the elder
Brother Cleonymus, was preferred to the Crown before his Uncle. But even in a
Lineal Cognatical Succession, the Nephew has been preferred: As in England,
John, the Nephew of King Edward by his eldest Son, was preferred before Hemon
and Thomas: Which also is settled by Law in the Kingdom of Castile.

XXXI. Whether the younger Brother living, be to be preferred before the Kings
elder Brothers Son.
By the same distinction we may resolve another doubt, between the surviving
Brother to the last King, and the Son of the elder Brother: But that we must
know, that in many places, where among children, the living may succeed in the
room of the dead in the right line, they are not permitted so to do in the
transverse. But where the Right is not clear and undoubted, it is most rational
to incline to that part which favors the Child in the Right of his Father;
because we are thereunto guided by natural equity, namely, in that Estate which
descended from his Ancestors. Neither is it any Impediment, that Justinian
calls the Right of Brothers Children, Depredatory: For this he does in relation
to the ancient Roman Laws, but not to natural equity. Let us now proceed to
examine the other cases proposed by Emanuel Costa.

XXXII. Whether the Son of the Brother be to be preferred before the Kings
Uncle.
The Son of the deceased Brother, or even his Daughter, he says is to be
preferred before the Kings Uncle: This is true, not in a Lineal Succession
only, but even in an hereditary, in such Kingdoms where Representative
Succession takes place; but not in such Kingdoms which in express terms do bind
us up to the degrees that are Natural. For there they are to be preferred,
which have the precedence of Sex and Age.

XXXIII. The Nephew by the Son preferred before the Daughter.
He further adds, That the Nephew from the Son is to be preferred before the
Daughter: It is true, By reason of his Sex; yet with this exception, Unless it
be in such a Nation, which even amongst Children respects only the Degree.

XXXIV. The younger Nephew from the Son, before the elder from the Daughter.
He farther adds, That the younger Nephew from the Son is to be preferred
before the elder from the Daughter; which is likewise true, where a Lineal
Cognatical Succession is in use, but not in an hereditary, without the warrant
of some Special Law. Neither do we approve of the Reason alleged, namely,
because the Father of the one, was to be preferred before the Mother of the
other: For that was by reason of his dignity, which was merely personal, and
descended no farther. And yet on the contrary, we read that Ferdinando, the Son
of Berengaria, the younger Sister of King Henry deceased, was preferred to the
Kingdom of Castile before Blanch, the elder Sister of the same King: But this,
as Mariana notes, was done in hatred to the house of France, into which Blanch
married.

^XXV. The Niece from the elder Son preferred before the younger Son.
That which he adds, as seeming to him most probable, namely, That the Niece
from the elder Son excludes the younger Son; cannot hold in hereditary
Kingdoms, although Representative Succession be there in force. For that gives
only a capacity to succeed: But of those that are capable, regard is to be had
to the privilege of the Sex.

XXXVI. The Sisters Son preferred before the Brothers Daughter.
And therefore in the Kingdom of Arragon, the Sisters Son was preferred before
the Brothers Daughter: And as Mariana observes, It is credible, that in that
Kingdom in times long since past, The Kings Brother, and not his Daughter, had
the Right of Succession: But afterward they were so well pleased with a Lineal
Succession, that they preferred the Sisters Son before those that, in a more
remote degree, descended from the Brother. And in another place, speaking of
Alphonsus, he says, That unto the Inheritance of the Kingdom of Arragon, after
his Son Ferdinando, he appointed his Nephews by his Sons; and for want of such,
then the Nephews by his own Daughter were to be preferred before the Daughters
of the said Ferdinando: Whereunto he adds, Sic saepe ad Arbitrium Regum jura
regnandi commutantur; They are Titles to Kingdoms ofttimes fanned about by the
breath of Kings.

XXXVII. Whether the Daughter of the elder Brother be to be preferred before
the younger Brother.
After the same manner, In Kingdoms that are hereditary, the Daughter of the
eldest Son shall give place to the Kings younger Brother.

CHAP. VIII. Of Dominion vulgarly said to be acquired by the Law of Nations.
I. Many things are attributed to the Law of Nations, which to speak properly,
are not thereby due. II. Fish and Deer in Ponds and Parks, are by the Law of
Nature held in Propriety, contrary to what the Roman Laws deliver unto us. III.
That Wild Beasts straying out of Enclosures, cease not to be the first owners,
if they may be known. IV. Whether the possession of them may be gained by
Instruments, as by Nets; and how. V. That such Wild Beasts should be the Kings,
is not contrary to the Law of Nations. VI. How the possession of such things as
have no owner may be gained. VII. Money found, whose it is naturally; and of the
diversity of Laws about this. VIII. That those things which by the Roman Laws
are delivered unto us concerning Islands and Increments, are neither Natural,
nor from the Law of Nations. IX. That Naturally Islands in Rivers, and the
Channel being dried up, are theirs, whose the River or that part of the River
was, that is, the peoples. X. That Naturally the Propriety of a ground is not
lost by an Inundation. XI. That Increments, if in doubt, are the peoples. XII.
But they seem to be granted unto those whose grounds have no other bounds but
the River. XIII. The same may be presumed concerning whatsoever the stream
leaves dry. XIV. What is to be accounted an Increment and what an Island. XV.
When the Increments belong unto Vassals. XVI. The Arguments whereby the Romans
would prove their Law to be as it were Natural, answered. XVII. That a way is
naturally an Impediment to Increments. XVIII. That it is not Natural, That the
Child should follow the condition of the Mother only. XIX. That Naturally a
thing may be made Common, as well by giving a Form to another man's matter, as
by confusion. XX. Yea, though that matter be ill wrought. XXI. It is not
Natural, that the lesser part should yield to the greater, by reason of its
prevalence; where also are observed other Errors of the Roman Lawyers. XXII.
Naturally by planting, sowing, or building upon another ground, there arises
a community to both in the Fruits perceived. XXIII. He that sows another
ground, by mistake, may require his Charges, but not the Fruits. XXIV. Yea,
though he does it knowingly. XXV. That Naturally Tradition is not necessary to
transfer Dominion. XXVI. The use of what has hitherto been said.
I. That many things are said to belong to the Law of Nature that properly do
not.
NOw our Method leads us to treat of that Dominion, which is vulgarly said to
be acquired by the Law of Nations, which being distinct from that gained by the
Law of Nature, we have therefore termed the voluntary Law of Nations. Such is
that Dominion which is got by the Right of War: But of this we shall discourse
better hereafter, where the effects of War: shall be explained. The Roman
Lawyers, where they treat of the gaining of the Dominion of things, do reckon
up many ways whereby it may be acquired, which they seem to justify by the Law
of Nations. But to him that diligently examines them, there is hardly any,
except that gained by War, that will appear to be gained by that Law of Nations
whereof we now speak. But are either such as are to be referred to the Law of
Nature, not that which is merely so, yet to that which follows close upon it,
Dominion, being first introduced, and so antecedes all Civil Law; or they are
such as may be referred to the very Civil Law, not that of the sole people of
Rome, but of many other Nations: Which I rather believe, because this Civil Law
or Custom came originally from the Greeks, whose Institutes, as Dionysius
Halicarnassensis observes, with some others, all Italy and some other adjoining
Nations followed. But this is not the Law of Nations, properly so called. For
it serves not to conglutinate all Nations mutually among themselves; but rather
to preserve peace and tranquillity between the Subjects of every Nation: And
was therefore alterable by any one people without consulting the rest, so that
it may also come to pass, That in other places and in other ages, a far
different common custom; and so, another Law of Nations, improperly so called,
may be introduced: Which we have found really done, as soon as the German
Nation had invaded all Europe. For as of old the Grecian Laws, so then, the
Germans were almost every where received, and do as yet flourish. The first way
of gaining Dominion by the Law of Nations, as the Romans call it, is by the
primary seizure or occupancy of such things as have no owner, which without
doubt is natural in that sense which I have declared, that is, Dominion being
first introduced, and so long as no Law did otherwise determine. For Dominion
may also be gained by the Civil Law.

II. As Fish in Ponds, Deer in Parks.
And hitherto in the first place we may refer the taking of Wild Beasts, Birds
and Fish. But how all these may be said to belong to none, will afford matter
of debate. Nerva the Son was of opinion, That Fish, if in a Pond, were possessed,
but not in a great Lake: And that Wild Beasts, if in a Park or Warren, had an
owner; but ranging in Woods hedged about, not. As though Fish enclosed in a
greater Pond could not be as well owned as in a lesser; and Deer and Conies as
well possessed in a well fenced Wood, as in a Park or Warren: Seeing that there
is no more difference between them, than that in the one they are close
Prisoners, and in the other Prisoners at large. Wherefore in this age of ours,
the contrary opinion is most prevalent, That both Deer in private Woods, and
Fish enclosed in Lakes may be, as possessed, so also held in Propriety.

III. That out-lying Deer cease not be the owners, could they be known.
In Wild Beasts, as soon as they recover their Natural Liberty, we lose our
Property, say the Roman Lawyers. But in all other things the Dominion that is
got by Possession, is not lost with the loss of Possession; nay, it gives us
also a Right to recover our Possession: And whether it be taken away from us by
another, or stray away of it self, as in the case of a Fugitive Servant, it
matters not much. (The Title we may retain though the Possession be lost.)
Wherefore it seems more agreeable to truth, That our Property is not lost
merely because the Beasts that were wild have escaped our custody; but because
it may probably be conjectured, That by reason of the difficulty of recovering
them, we have utterly deserted them; especially when it cannot be known unto
others that they were ours; But this conjecture may easily be wiped away by
other conjectures, as namely, by affixing unto them (...), some things whereby
it may be known whose they are, as is usually done to Hearts, Hawks, and the
like. To acquire a full Dominion in things naturally wild, it is necessary that
we should have a Corporal Possession: It is not enough to entitle our selves to
a Deer, that we have wounded him; but we must catch him too, lest the Proverb
upbraid us with folly, In starting an Hare for another to eat: According to
that of Ovid, Et lepus hic aliis exagitatus erit.

By the Law of the Lumbards, He that killed a Wild Beast, being first Wounded
by another, might take away the Shoulder with the Ribs; the rest belonged to
him that wounded him, if he claimed it within twenty four hours, otherwise not.
For as Ovid well observed, It is one thing to know where a thing is, and
another to find it. Met. 5.


IV. Possession how got by Instruments, as Nets, etc.
Now this Possession may be gained, either by Hands only, or by Engines, as by
Traps, Nets, Snares, Ginns, etc. Provided, first, That those Instruments are
under our own power: And secondly, That the Beast so taken cannot escape. And
thus is the question decided, concerning a Wild Boar that is fallen into a
Snare or Toil.

V. That Wild Beasts should be the Kings. is not against the Law of Nature.
These things are thus to be understood, where no Civil Law intervenes,
wherefore our Modern Lawyers are much mistaken, who think these Rights to be so
Natural, that they cannot be changed: For they are not simply or absolutely so,
but as things at that time were, before the Civil Law did otherwise determine
of them. The people of Germany consulting about some allowances to be given to
their Kings and Princes, whereby to support their Regal Dignities, thought it
prudence to begin with such things as no private man could claim as his own:
Which prudential course the Egyptians also anciently took; where the Kings
Attorney seized on all such things to his Masters use. But the Law of it self
is sufficient to transfer a Propriety in any thing that is not already
occupied. The Whales that are cast upon the Shore, the Portugals give unto
their King.

VI. Possession of things not owned, how gained.
After the same manner as Wild Beasts are possessed, are all other things that
have no owner. For Nature does indifferently adjudge all such things to the
first finder and possessor of them. Thus was the Island Acanthos Plut. Graec.
Qu. 29.
being desert, adjudged to the Inhabitants of Chalcis, who first entered upon
it; and not unto the Andrians, who had first thrown their Darts into it.
Because Possession is taken either by the apprehending of a thing, if movable,
mostly by the hand; or if immovable, as of Land, by setting our feet upon it.
For as the Poet tells us, Scire ubi res est, non est invenire; It is not enough
to know where a thing is, unless we can find it.

VII. Money found whose it is.
Among such things as are (...) without an owner, are Treasures reckoned, that
is, Money, the owner whereof is unknown, For things that appear not, are as if
they were not; wherefore such treasures are naturally his that finds and
apprehends them, yet not so but that Laws and Customs may dispose otherwise of
them. Plato would have the finder to give notice thereof to the Magistrate,
Philostr. D. 15.
or to take advice of an Oracle. Apollonius looked at such treasure, as being
an especial gift of God, and adjudged it to him that was best beloved of him.
Bibliorum Lex.
It is Scripture Law, Quod non posuisti ne tollas; Take not away what thou
did not lay down: The Hebrews gave such treasures to him that was Lord of the
ground wherein it was found, as may be collected from that parable of our
Savior, concerning Treasures hidden in the ground, which being found, he that
found it sold all he had, and bought the Field, Mat. 13.44. So did the Syrians,
as may be gathered out of Philostratus: And it seems that in Plautus his time,
this was approved of by the Romans. The Laws of the Empire do much vary about
this, as may appear partly by their constitutions, Annal l. 16.
and partly by the Histories of Lampridius, Zonoras, Cedrenus, and Tacitus, who
writing of the great Treasures found in Africa, says, Which Nero in his hopes
devoured. The Germans gave such (as also they did all other (...)) to their
Prince, which is now so common every where, that it may well pass for one of
the Laws of Nations: For it is this day observed in Germany, France, England,
Spain, and Denmark. But this very same custom we read of among the Goths, Lib.
4. c. 34.
witness King Theuderick in Cassiodore: Non est cupiditas eripere, quae nullus
se dominus ingemescat amisisse; It cannot be imputed as Covetousness, to take
that which no man has just reason to complain for the loss of. And in another
place, Those riches which having lain so long hid have lost their Masters, by
thy diligent inquisition are now ours: For since we permit every man freely to
enjoy his own, What is no man's is the Kings.
what is no man's ought to be ours. He may well be content to lose what he has
found, who knows that in so doing he loses nothing that is his own.

VIII. Of Islands and Inundations.
Let us now proceed to Inundations or Increments by Rivers, whereof the ancient
Lawyers have written much, but the Modern whole Commentaries: But what they
have written is for the most part grounded not on the Law of Nature, but on the
Laws of some Nations, though to gain the greater authority they oft-times put
them off under that name. Most of their determinations being built upon this
foundation, That the banks of the River are his who possesses the adjoining
soil, and that the Channel, as soon as it is forsaken by the waters, is his
also; and consequently, those Islands which are cast up in the River. There
they distinguish of Inundations, a small one alters not the property of the
ground, but a great one does; yet so that if it come by reason of some sudden
and violent force of waters, and so recede, the ground overflown shall, upon
the return of the waters, as if by postliminy, remain to its right owner: But
if by a continual beating upon it, it wash it away by degrees, it is lost for
ever. Now that all these might be introduced by some Law, to make men more
carefully to defend their own banks, I deny not; but that they be so by a
Natural Right (as they would have it) I cannot grant.

IX. Whose they are naturally.
See above, chapter 3. toward the end.
For if we respect that which mostly happens, the soil is first possessed by the
people, and that, not only under a Sovereign power or Empire, but under
dominion also, before the Fields were distributed among private persons. The
boundaries of the Athenians or Campagnes, says Seneca, are those whereby their
Fields (which before lay in common) are by private agreement between themselves
and their Neighbors, distinguished. So also Cicero, Privata natura nulla sunt;
De benef. l. 7. c. 4. De Off. lib. 1.
There is nothing naturally private, but either by primary possession, as they
that first set footing in a place that is desert; or that which comes by
conquest or by Law, consent, condition, or by Lots; whereby it comes to pass,
that the fields about Arpinum are said to belong to the Inhabitants of Arpinum;
and the Fields of Tusculum, to the Inhabitants of Tusculum: And thus is every
private man's estate described. Or. Rhodiaca.
So Dion Prusaensis, There are many things which a City in general challenges
as her own, though they are divided by parcels amongst private Lords. After the
same manner speaks Tacitus of the Germans, That their Fields were first
occupied by the people in common by Villages, according to the number of the
Inhabitants, and afterward distributed among themselves, according to every
man's reputation and dignity: Wherefore whatsoever was thus originally possessed
by the people, and never afterward distributed, does as yet properly belong
unto the people. And as in private Rivers, those Islands which the waters cast
up, and that part of the Channel which the waters forsake, are properly his who
owns the River; so in public are both of them the peoples, or his, to whom the
people has given them. Now what is here said concerning the Channels, may also
be said of the Banks, which are but the extreme parts of the Channel, wherein
the River naturally runs; and thus it is every where taken. In Holland and the
Countries adjacent, many such disputes did anciently arise, by reason of the
lowness of the ground, the greatness of their Rivers, and their nearness to the
Sea, receiving and casting up by alternate tides, mud and sand: Those that were
Islands, truly so called, were always adjudged to be part of the peoples
patrimony; as also the whole Channel of the Rhine and of the Mase, which the
Waters have left, as it has been frequently determined, and with very good
reason: For as the Roman Lawyers themselves do grant, Of Floating Islands see
Sen his Not. Quest. lib. 3. c. 25. Pliny lib. 2. c. 95.
that the Islands which float in a River, being upheld by the young sprouts
that grow in it, of right belong to the Commonwealth; because, Cujus juris est
flumen, ejus est and insula in flumine nata; Whose the River is, his is the
Island that is in it. And surely there is the same reason for a River, as for
the Channel wherein it runs, not for the reason which they bring, namely,
because the Channel is covered by the River; but for the reason aforesaid,
because it was originally possessed with the River, and was never since
transferred into any private man's dominion. Neither can we admit of that as
true naturally, which they averr, that if the Fields be bounded, the Islands
are the first Occupants; for that indeed were true, in case that neither the
River, nor with it the Channel, were at all possessed by the people: for then
they were like those Islands which are raised in the Seas, his only that did
first seize them.

X. That naturally the Land is not lost because drowned.
Neither is that more to be admitted, which they write of a great Inundation,
namely, that it gives away the property of the Land overflowed, if we respect
only natural reason: For admit we do grant, that the superficies of the Land
may be dissolved into Sand; yet do the lower parts thereof remain firm and
solid, and though somewhat of the quantity be changed, yet is not the substance
changed at all, no more than that part of a Field is, which is devoured by some
Lake, the property whereof (as the Roman Lawyers themselves do rightly
acknowledge) does still remain. Neither is that natural that they write, that
an Inundation performs the office of a Judge or Censor, making that private
which was public, and that public which before was private: as Cassiodore
speaks of a surveyor, More vastissimi fluminis aliis spatia tollit, aliis
concedit; That he was like a great River taking away from some that which of
right was theirs, and giving unto others that wherein they had no right. Much
better were it to follow that which Strabo reports of the Egyptians, To take an
exact survey of the Fields, and so divide unto every man his own by
Admeasurement: Because the River Nilus by her frequent floods and rapid
streams, adding here and taking away there, and changing the form and marks of
the Fields, does so confound their bounds and limits, that it is hard for a man
to distinguish between his own and another man's; therefore are Fields to be
often surveyed. Whereunto agrees that tradition of the Roman Lawyers, Quod
nostrum est, nostrum esse non desinit, nisi facto nostro; That which is ours
cease not to be ours without our own fact, or by some Law. Where the
Invudation is very great and no visible sign that the owner endeavors to
recover what is to be done.
Now under things done are (morally) comprehended things left undone, as we
have said already, that is to say, so far forth as we may thereby guess at the
will of him that should do them. We may therefore grant, that where the
Inundation is very great, and where there are no visible signs of the owners
intention to retain his dominion; it may well be presumed, that he gives his
Land for lost: Now as our conjectures in this case cannot but be naturally
uncertain, by reason of the variety of circumstances, which are herein
considerable, and to be referred to the Judgment of some prudent man; so ought
it to be determined by Civil Laws: As in Holland, That ground is given for lost
which has for ten years been drowned, in case there appear no signs that the
possession is still claimed; which with them is sufficiently done by fishing in
it only, though the Romans do not allow thereof. But among other Princes the
ancient occupants are prescribed a certain time w^erein to drein their Lands,
which if they do not, then are the morgagers of that Land (if engaged)
admonished to do it; but if they delay it, then the Magistrates, either Civil
or Criminal, are to do it; and if they neglect it, then it is forfeited unto
the Prince, who may either drein it at his own charge, or transfer it to some
other, reserving a part of it unto himself.

XI. That the Increments of Rivers if in doubt, are the peoples.
Whatsoever the floods do add to the soil, because it cannot be known from
whence it came, cannot be claimed by any; (for if it could, naturally the
property should not be changed) wherefore it is adjudged to be his whose the
River is, and if the River be the peoples, consequently the increment is so too.

XII. But if granted, then theirs whose fields have no other bounds but the
River.
But it is in the peoples power to grant it, as unto others, so unto those who
enjoy the Lands next adjoyining; and doubtless they are presumed so to do, if
those Lands have no other bounds but the River on that side: And although that
distinction which the Romans make between Lands bounded, and Lands measured, be
of good use; yet have both of them in this case equal right. For what we have
said before concerning the bounds of Empires Chapter 3.. 16.
, is of force here also with this only difference, that the bounds of Kingdoms
(if in doubt) are presumed to be arcifinious, because those are most agreeable
to their nature: But private possessions are rather believed to be set out and
bounded, either by Landmarks or by measure, as being most suitable to theirs.
But yet we deny not but that the people may grant their Land as fully as they
themselves enjoy it, that is, even unto the River; which if they do, then is
the increment of that River theirs also. This was a judged case in Holland, not
many Ages since, of grounds bordering upon the Rivers Izal and Maze; because
both by the deeds of purchase, and by the books of rates, they were always
mentioned as bounded by the River: And although in the sale of these Lands,
somewhat of the measure be expressed, yet shall it retain its own nature, and
have right to whatsoever the River shall add unto it.

XIII. So are the hanks if forsaken by the River and left dry.
What has been said concerning that which the Floods do add to the soil, is
likewise verified of that part of the shore, or of the Channel, which the River
forsakes: For where there is no Occupant, there the next Occupyer has the best
Title; but in Rivers that are possessed, whatsoever is so gained from the Channel
is the peoples or theirs, to whom they have assigned the Lands next adjoining,
as being bounded by the River.

XIV. What is to be held as Increment, and what as an Island.
Now because there is one manner of right proper to Islands, and another to the
increments of Rivers, Controversies do often arise how to distinguish them,
especially when a little rising ground lies near the Fields adjacent, yet is
separated from them by the intervention of a little water that covers the
Plain; as is often seen in the Low Countries where the ground is not level,
where also the customs do somewhat vary: For in Gildria, if a laden Wain can
pass through the Waters interjacent, then is the rising ground judged to belong
to the adjoining Fields; so is it also in the Fields of Puttene, If a man
standing upon the bank, can with his Swords point touch the ground that lies
beyond the water. Thus the German Histories record of Autharis, King of the
Lombards, That sitting on Horseback upon the Shore, and touching with the point
of his Lance a certain Pillar, said, Vsque hic erunt Longobardorum fines;
Hitherto came King Autharis, and this shall be the bounds of Lombardy. The like
story we read of the Emperor Otto, who standing on the bank, threw his Javelin
into the Baltic Sea, assigning that to be the limits of his Empire: But it is
most agreeable to Nature, that if, for the most part, the passage over be by
boat, it should be judged an Island.

XV. When the Increment belongs to the Vassal.
Another Question does no less frequently arise between a Prince that fully
enjoys the peoples right, and his Vassals or Lieutenants, who, under him, are
entrusted with the Government: But it is sufficiently evident, that the bare
grant of the Government does not entitle the Vassal to the increment of Rivers.
But yet we must note, That many that are thus entrusted with these limited
Governments, do together with them receive the profits of all the Universitatem
agrorum.
Lands in general, except such as are in the possession of private men: Upon
this presumption, that those Fields were anciently either the peoples, or the
Princes, or at least drained by the Prince; and if so, then doubtless
whatsoever either the Prince or the people did so enjoy, their Vassals have a
good right unto. Thus we see that in in Zealand, those Vassals that have power
to appoint Judges, though but in civil affairs, do pay a tribute to the State
for their common Fields, whereof every man according to the tenure of his
private possession, bears his proportion. Now that these Vassals have a right
to the increment of the Rivers, there can be no doubt: Others there are to whom
the Rivers themselves are granted, who may therefore justly claim the Islands
thereunto belonging, whether they be of mud heaped up together, or made out of
the Channel, if surrounded by the River. Others again there are, in whose
grants neither the one nor the other is included, and these have but an ill
cause to defend against the public Exchequer, unless either the custom of the
Country do favor them, or a long uninterrupted possession (with such adjuncts
as are requisite) give them a right. But in case the Lands only and not the
Government be granted unto them, then we must look unto the nature of the Land,
as is abovesaid: For if its bounds be arcifinious, then are the Increments
granted with the Land; not so much by any Rig^^ properly belonging to the
Prince, as by the quality of the Land; for in such a case, he that holds the
Fee has the benefit of what the Floods cast up.

XVI. The Arguments whereby the Roman Lawyers would prove their Law to be as it
were the Law of Nature, answered.
The Roman Lawyers, to prove the Laws by them used to be natural, do often
allege this Maxim, That it is most natural, that his should be the profit of
any thing, whose is the disprofit; whereupon they infer, that since the River
wastes a part of my Land, it is but reasonable that of what it adds to mine,
mine should be the benefit. But this rule holds not, unless it be where the
benefit arises from what is mine own, but in this case it arises from the
River which is another: But that that which perishes, should perish to the
owner of it, is natural; besides, neither is that universally true that they
allege, as may appear by the exception of grounds limited, which themselves
admit: Not now to insist upon that which often comes to pass naturally, that
Rivers do sometimes impoverish, and sometimes enrich their Neighbors Fields:
Whence Lucan thus, Illos terra fugit dominos, his rura colonis
Accedunt, Donante Pado:
Old Lords forsook, the Earth does gliding go
New to enrich, thanks to the River Po.


Whereby it appears, that some are enricht and impoverisht by one and the same
River.]

XVII. Whether an Highway do stop the Increment of a River.
But whereas also they say, that a public way does not put a stop to the
increment of a River, it has nothing of natural reason in it, unless it be
where the Field is private, through which such a way ought to pass.

XVIII. That the Child should follow the condition of the Mother only, is not
natural.
Among other means whereby propriety (by that which is called the Law of
Nations) is acquired, one is Procreation, wherein that, which (as well the
Romans as) some other Nations have determined, namely, That the Child should
follow the condition of the Mother only, is not (as we have already said See
chapter 5.. 29. Vid. Gall. l. 2. de s^mine.
) natural, but only as the Father is unknown: For if the Father, by any
probable means could be discovered, why the Child should not as well be reputed
his as hers, no natural reason can be given; since it cannot be denied but that
what is so begotten, is a part of him that did beget it. But whether of them do
contribute most to the production of the Child, Natural Philosophers do not
accord: Whereof notwithstanding Plutarch speaks thus, Nature, says he, does
mix the Seed of both Sexes, and so confounds them; that what is thereby born
should be common to them both, and that neither of them should be able to
distinguish that which is theirs from that which was the others. And hereupon
are the Laws both of the French and Lumbards grounded.

XIX. Community may arise by giving a new form to another matter.
If the matter belong to one, and the form given by another, the Sabinians give
the property to him whose the matter was; but Proculus to him that gave the
form, because he gave it such an existence as before it had not. At length a
middle opinion crept in, namely, that if the matter could be reduced to its
pristine form, then should the thing be his who gave the matter; but if it
could not, then should it be his that gave the form: But this opinion pleased
not Connanus, who would have no respect but to the value, so that whether of
them was of greater value, should attract unto it that which was of lesser
value, by an Argument drawn from those things which are delivered unto us by
the Roman Lawyers, concerning Accession. But if we look to the naked truth, as
by a commixture of several matters there arises a community to each, according
to proportion, because it cannot otherwise be determined; so when a thing is
compounded of matter and form as of its parts, if the matter or substance
belong to one, and the form to another, (which cannot be divided) there must
naturally follow a community to each, according to their respective
proportions; for the form is a part of the substance but not the whole, which
was acknowledged by Vlpian, in saying, that the form being changed, the
substance was almost destroyed.

XX. Yea though the matter be abused.
But although it be not altogether unjust, that he that abuses the matter,
being another man's, shall lose the form he gives it, yet we must know that this
is penal, and therefore not natural: For though it be natural that every
delinquent should be punished, yet does not Nature determine how, nor does she
of her self take away any man's property for his offense.

XXI. That the lesser should yield to the greater, by reason of its prevalence,
is not natural.
But that the greater part should swallow up the lesser, whereupon Connanus
grounds his opinion; though it be natural in respect of the Fact, yet is it not
of Natural Right: Wherefore he that has but the twentieth part of a Field,
has as much right in that, as he that has the other nineteen. Therefore what
the Roman Lawyers have decreed concerning an acquisition gained by way of
prevalence, or what they have or may decree in other the like cases, is not
justifyable by the Law of Nature, but by the Civil Law for the better dispatch
of business; yet is it not repugnant unto Nature, because the Laws have a power
to create dominion. There is scarce any one question in the Law, Natural est
facti, non juris.
more variously handled among Lawyers than this: For who can grant, that if
Brass and Gold were mixed together, they could not be separated, as Vlpian
writes; or that if Metals were soldred together, they must needs be confounded,
as Paulus, Ferruminatione.
etc. or that there is one rule for a Picture, another for a Scripture, that
the Table should carry away this but not that.

XXII. Of things planted or sowed on another ground, the fruits are naturally
to be communicated.
That things planted or sown should go with the soil, is a dictate likewise of
the Civil Law, grounded on this reason, because they are nourished by it; and
therefore it is a material question concerning a Tree whether it have taken
root: But in case we look unto Nature only, we must confess, that the
nourishment of a thing that had existence before, gives but augmentation to the
thing nourished, which is but an additional part of it. And therefore as there
is a Right due to the Lord of the Soil, in respect of that nourishment; so
surely there remains a Right naturally to him that owned the Plant or the Seed,
without which the Soil could not produce such fruits: So that here also Nature
admits of a Community, no less than in an House built upon another ground,
whose parts are the Soil and the Superstructure, and in which, were it
moveable, the Lord of the Soil could have no right at all: Of which opinion was
Scaevola.

XXIII. The Possessor cannot claim the fruits, but may his charges.
He that ignorantly sows another man's ground, thinking it to be his own, cannot
by the Law of Nature, appropriate all the fruits thereof to himself; but he may
charge the owner of the ground with his costs, and with his profitable labor,
and pay himself out of the profits either already perceived, or retain those
that are extant, if he cannot otherwise get satisfaction.

XXIV. Yea, though he possess it unjustly.
And the very same, it seems, may be said of him that is possessed of another
man's Estate, unjustly, where no penal Law interposeth. For though he tha^
possesses mine Estate be an intruder, or an Usurper, (says Paulus the Lawyer)
yet ought I to satisfy him for his just expenses: For he that seeks only to
recover his own, ought not to enrich himself by the loss of another.

XXV. That naturally the delivery is not requisite to transfer dominion.
The last means of acquiring dominion by the Law of Nations is by Tradition:
But (as I said before) this is not required to the transferring of dominion by
the Law of Nature, which the Roman Lawyers themselves acknowledge in some
cases: As when the property of any thing is given away, but the profits of it
reserved; or when it is bestowed on him that may hereafter possess it; or when
being but lent, it may be kept; (and in such like cases:) Yea and even now a
man may in some cases transfer Dominion to another, before he has gained
possession himself. As of an Inheritance expectant, of Legacies to be received,
of things given to Churches and to pious places, or to Cities, etc. whereof it
may be said, Then the delivery of possession seems to be good, when the deeds
of gift are in a man's own possession. Godwin 's Romans Ant. p. 240.
And thus did the ancient Romans use to aliene things sold by striking the
Scales with a piece of Brass, and then giving it to him that made the sale.

XXVI. What use may be made of what has been said.
These things have I observed, lest any man finding, among the Roman Authors,
the Law of Nations often quoted, should presently understand that Law to be
such as could not be changed: But rather that he should be able to distinguish
between such Laws as are purely natural, and those that are for some certain
state, natural; and between such Laws as are in force amongst many Nations
apart, and such as knit together all humane societies. And this likewise is to
be observed, That if either by the Law of Nations, improperly so called, or by
the Law of any Nation or People, any one way of acquiring a Right or Property
be agreed on, without making any distinction between Natives and Strangers;
there Foreigners also shall have and enjoy the same Right: And in case they
shall be hindered in the consecution thereof, they have such wrong done them as
may give occasion to a just War.

CHAP. IX. How Empire and Dominion may Cease and Determine.
I. Dominion and Empire determine, when he that had the Right dies, and leaves
no Successor in being. II. So the Right of a Family dies, when that Family is
extinct. III. The like of a People, when they cease to be a free people.. IV.
Which falls out, when their necessary parts are taken away. V. And when the
whole Body of a People are swept away. VI. And when their Form is lost, whereby
they become a People. VII. But not by the change of Place. VIII. Nor upon their
change of Government, where also is discust, what place a new King or free
People are to take in general Assemblies. IX. What if two People be united. X.
What if a People be divided. XI. In whom now are, what once belonged to the
Roman Empire, since there appears no Alienation. XII. Of the Right of Heirs.
XIII. Of the Right of Conquerors.
I. When the owner dying, leaves no Successor.
HOw as well Propriety as Empire were at first introduced, and how they may be
transferred, is sufficiently discust: Now let us understand how they may end;
And first, that they may determine by a voluntary dereliction has been already
demonstrated: For, Cessante voluntate non manet dominium; Where the Will
disclaims, Propriety vanishes. Again, they may cease when the Subject wherein
they are, is taken away before any Alienation be made of them, either express
or presumptive, as in Successions from him that dies intestate, and leaves no
Kindred behind him; wherefore all the right that he had in any thing, dies also
with him: Wherefore his Servants (unless the Laws do otherwise ordain) are
immediately free, and the people that were in subjection to him are at their
own liberty; because these are not in their own nature occupyable, but as they
are willing to surrender themselves, but all his other goods are naturally his
that has them.

II. So of a Family.
The very same holds true, if a Family happen to be extinct, whatsoever right
it had cease with it.

III. When the people that were free, cease to be so.
So also if a People fail, Isocrates first, and from him the Emperor Julian,
tells us, That Cities are immortal; meaning that so they may be, because the
people are a Body consisting of Members remote one from another, yet united
under one name, as having but one order or form of Government, as Plutarch
calls it; or one Spirit, as Paulus the Lawyer, which animates and informs all
the parts of it; and is therefore (as Aristotle terms it) the life of it. But
this Spirit in the people is a full and perfect consociation tending to a civil
life, whereof the supreme power is the first product: This is the bond that
knits all the parts together, the Vital Spirit, as Seneca terms it, Quem tot
millia trahunt, Lib. 1. declementia cap. 4. Ep. 58.
which animates so many thousands at once; for plainly the Artificial Bodies
have some resemblance with the Natural. The Natural Body though it every day
wastes a little, yet whilst that which wastes, is every day repaired, and the
same form or figure continued, cease not to be the same body. And therefore
that of Seneca, where he says, That no man is the same being old, as he was
when he was young, may very fitly be interpreted, as if understood of the
matter only: As also that of Heracleus in Plato verified, That no man can
descend twice into the same River; Which Seneca thus expounds, Manet idem
fluminis nomen, aqua transmissa est; The Name only continues, but the Waters
glide away. Pol. 13. c. 2.
So Aristotle comparing a River to the people, says, That the River is still
called by the same Name, though the Waters are not the same. Neither does it
retain its name in vain, for it has the same form, figure, Plut.
and spirit, (as they call it) as formerly it had: So is it in Cities, though
the Citizens are not the same that they were an hundred years since, Yet whilst
there remains the same consociation and communion, which both constitutes a
People, and continues them in the same Mould, Form, and Figure, as they were so
many Years or Ages since; it may justly be called the same City, though not one
of the Citizens thereof may be now living. As the Ship wherein Theseus sailed
with the principal young men of Athens, and safely returned, In the life of
Th^seus.
being by the Athenians (by repairing whatsoever was decayed in her) preserved,
till the time of Demetrius Phalerensis, gave occasion to Philosopher, to
dispute, Wbether she were the same or another. Which though much controverted
by them, yet is by Lawyers prudently adjudged to be the same. For, as Philo
Philo.
observes of the World, Not every thing whose parts do successively perish,
must certainly be dissolved; but that only, all whose parts do at one and the
same time perish together. Hence arises that custom used in Histories, as well
sacred as profane, of attributing unto the people which now are, those things
which were done by the people of the same City many Ages past: As may be seen,
Mat. 23.35. Acts 3.22. Mark 10.3. Jo. 6.32. and 7.19. So in Tacitus we read,
Tacitus.
That Antonius Primus serving under Vespasian, puts the Soldiers of the Tertian
Legion in mind, That it was their valor that routed the Parthian Army under
the Conduct of M. Anthony; and that it was their valor that under Corbuto, had
put to slight the Armenians: Whereas there was not one of that Tertian Legion
that sought under M. Anthony, then living when he said it, it being done an
hundred years before. A^he^ic. Gent. lib. 1. c. 23. I. 2.
It was therefore more out of hatred than truth, that Piso in the same Author,
denies the Athenians of his time to be natural Athenians, whom the Wars (as he
pretends) had totally destroyed, but the very scum and outcasts of other
Nations. Whereas in truth, these mixing with the Athenians, might happily detract
somewhat from their ancient honor, and repute, but not make them another
people: Neither was Piso ignorant of this, for in the same place, He objects
against the same Athenians, those Injuries which had been done many Ages
before, namely, how they had assisted Mithridates against Scylla, and M.
Anthony against Augustus, and how unsuccessfully they had made war against the
Macedonians, and what cruelty they had exercised over their own Subjects. Now
as there may be many particular changes in a Nation, and yet the people
continue the same, they were a thousand years since and more; so it cannot be
denied, but that there may happen so universal a change, as that they may
utterly cease to be a people; which may be done two ways, either when the whole
body of the People is destroyed, or when that order, form, or spirit, that
unites them together, is totally abolished.

IV. As when their necessary parts are taken away.
The Body perishes, either when all its Members are at once destroyed, without
which it cannot subsist; or when, though the parts be entire, yet the frame is
disjoynted and its parts dissipated: By these two ways is an Army destroyed;
either by an universal Slaughter, or by a total Dispersion. Among such as cease
to be a people the former way, are those that perish universally by some
deluge; See Sen. Not. Quest. lib. 5. c. 23. 32. Epist. 92. Lib. 17. rerum.
gest. The few remaining may retain their propriety as a private person, but not
as a State.
as did the people of the Atlantic Islands, whereof Plato makes mention in his
Timaeo; and such as are swallowed up by some great Casme, occasioned by
Earthquakes: Examples we may read of in Seneca, in Ammianus Marcellinus, and
elsewhere; and such as have voluntarily destroyed themselves, as the Sydonians
and Saguntines. But what if, of such a people, so few remain alive, as that
they cannot be said to be a people, yet may they retain that propriety which
that people had, as private persons; though what they had as being a people,
they cannot: The same is also to be understood of Corporations and Colleges.

V. When the whole people are swept away.
The frame or manner of being a Body is taken away, when the Citizens do either
of their own accord dissipate themselves, by reason of some general contagion
or sedition; or when they are by force so scattered and dispersed, as that they
cannot unite again, as it often happens in times of War: All Bodies consisting
of remote parts, as Flocks, Herds, Armies, being knit together no less than
members of the same body, if they be forced asunder, vanish, and are dissolved,
as a Ship that is torn in pieces.

VI. Or when the Form or Spirit is lost.
The form and spirit of a people perishes, either when all or a perfect
community of Right is taken away; Arist. Pol. l. 3. c. 2. Philo de mundo.
which is done either when every person is brought into captivity, as when the
Mycenaeans were by the Argives, the Olynthians by King Philip, the Thebans sold
by Alexander, and the Brutii condemned by the Romans to their public works; or
when enjoying community of Right, yet they are utterly deprived of all
Government. So Livy of Capua, It pleased the Romans that their Town should be
inhabited, but that there should be no Corporation of Citizens, no Senate, no
Common Council, no Magistrates, but a multitude of Folks without any public
Assemblies, and without any Jurisdiction Civil or Military; all causes among
them being to be decided by a Governor sent from Rome. Lib. 26.
So that as Cicero observed, in his Oration against Rullus, There was not left
in Capua so much as the face or shadow of a Commonwealth. In the very same
condition are those people, who being once a free Nation, are reduced by force
into a Province; and those also who are subjected to the power of another
people, as Byzantium was by the Emperor Severus to Perinthus, and Antioch by
the Emperor Theodosius to Laodicea.

VII. But not by the change of their Seat.
But if the people shall change their habitation, either voluntarily, through
scarcity of things necessary, or any such inconvenience, or being thereunto
compelled, as the Carthaginians were by the third Punick War; if the form or
spirit of Polity do yet remain, they do not cease to be a people, Plut.
Agesilao.
much less if their City Walls only be cast down: And therefore when the
Lacedaemonians refused to admit of the Messenians, among the rest of the
Grecian Cities, to swear the conservation of the peace of Greece, because their
Walls were destroyed, it was carried against them by the common suffrage.

VIII. Nor by their change of Government.
Neither does it much alter the case, under what Form of Government the people
are, Monarchical, Oligarchical or Democratical; that is, of King, Nobles or
People. The Romans were but the same people, whether under Kings, Consuls, or
Emperors: yea, though the Government be never so absolute, yet are the people
the same they were, as when they were free, so long as he that governs, governs
as the Head of that people, and not as the Head of another. For that Sovereign
Power, which resides in the King as Head, rests in the people, as in the whole
body, whereof the King is the Head; so that if the King being elected, should
dye, or if the Royal Family be extinct, the Right of Government recedes back to
the people, or to whom they grant it. Neither is that of Aristotle to be
objected against me, who denies that to be the same City, the form of whose
Government is changed: As the Harmony cannot be said to be the same, that is
changed from the Dorick to the Phrygian way: For we ought to know, that of any
one artificial thing, there may be several forms: As of a Legion or Regiment,
there is one form, whereby the Soldiers are governed, and another wherein they
fight: So there is one form consisting in a Consociation of Right and Empire,
and another, in relation to the parts between themselves, as those that are
governed, and of those that govern. This latter, the Politician respects, as
the Lawyer does the former: Pol. l. 2. c. 3.
Neither was Aristotle himself ignorant hereof, who presently adds, But whether
the Form of Government being changed, all debts and reckonings be discharged or
not, is a question belonging to another Art, which Aristotle would not confound
with his Politics; lest what he blamed in others, he should practice himself,
making a transition from one kind of Treatise to another. Surely a debt
contracted by a free people cease not to be a debt, because they have
admitted of a King; for the people are the same, and do still retain the Right
and Dominion of those things, that formerly were theirs, yea, and the Empire
too, A King newly admitted shall take that place in General Councils that the
Nation, when free formerly enjoyed.
though now it be not exercised by the body, but the head: whence we may easily
determine that Controversy, which is sometimes started, concerning his place
in General Councils, who is newly made a King over a Nation formerly free;
namely, that he is to be admitted into that very place which that Nation
enjoyed, whilst it was free: as Philip of Macedon in the Great Council of
Amphictyon, took that place that was due to the Phocenses; so on the other
side, That place which formerly belonged to the King, the people shall succeed
in, being made free.

IX.
But if two people or Kingdoms be united, the Rights shall not be lost, but
c^mmunicated; as the rights of the Sabines first, and afterward of the Albanes
were transferred into the Romans, and so were made one Commonwealth, as Livy
records. The same may be said of Kingdoms being conjoined, not in League, nor
as having but one King, but being perfectly made one.

X. Or one be divided.
But if a Nation or Kingdom be divided, either by mutual agreement, or by the
Sword, as the Persian Kingdom was by Alexander's Successors, then of one entire
Empire there shall be made two or more; and each shall enjoy its peculiar right
over its particular parts: Or if any thing shall be held in common, it shall be
either ratably divided between them, or else be administered in common. Hither
we may refer those, who are sent out to plant Colonies: For this is usually the
rise of a new free people; Coionies usually the Rise of a free State. Vid. sup.
B. 1. C. 3.. 1. L. 4.
For we do not (as Thucydides notes) send them out as our servants, but as
those who have equal right with our selves. And thus did King Tullius in
Dionysius Halicarnassensis judge this case, That the Mother Cities should
govern their Plantations abroad absolutely, as if by the Law of Nature, we
conceive to be neither true nor righteous; yet ought they to reverence them, as
the Carthaginians did the Tyrians their first Founders, as Curtius testifies.

XI. Where the old Roman Empire now resides.
It is also a famous Question much controverted both by Historians and
Civilians, To whom the rights belonging formerly to the Roman Empire do now
appertain: Some say, to the German Emperor, which by I know not what
deputation, they place in the room of it. But it is sufficiently known, That
the Great Germany, namely, that which lies beyond the Rhine, was but a little
while within the pale of the Roman Empire: And to translate the rights of
Kingdoms from one to another without certain and evident proofs, seems to me to
be too great a presumption. Wherefore, I am of opinion, that the Roman people
are now the same they were of old, though somewhat mixed by the access of
Foreigners; and that the Empire does still remain with them as in a Body
Politic wherein it was and should live. For whatsoever the people of Rome had
of old a right to do before they had Emperors, that they had the same right to
do in their Interregna, or vacancy of their Emperors. Yea, and the very Choice
of their Emperors was their right; who were often made either by the people by
themselves, or by the Senate; yea, From a Fleeting power, no Right can be
certain. It is of dangerous consequence for Soldiers to elect their Generals.
and those Elections which were made by the Roman Legions, (as such there were,
sometimes by these, and anon by others) were not firm nor stable by any right
that those Legions had: (for from a Fleeting power no right can be certain),
but by the approbation of the people. (When the two Roman Generals Publ. and
Cn. Scipio were both slain, and the Army had chosen L. Martius, a valiant young
Gentleman their Captain General, though he had vanquished two several Armies of
the Carthaginians, and forced their Camps; yet notwithstanding when in his
Letters to Rome he had assumed that Honorable Title of Pro-Praetor, the Senate
(considering that his Command was neither granted by the people, nor allowed of
by themselves) were much offended at his presumption in usurping it;
foreseeing well, that it was a matter of dangerous consequence, for Soldiers
abroad to make choice of such as should command Armies and Provinces: And that
the solemnity of Elections, so devoutly begun in the name of their Gods, should
now be transferred into Camps, far from Laws and Magistrates.) But yet we have
many examples of Elections made by their Armies; but so, as they were
afterward approved of, and confirmed by the Senate: as were those of Adrian,
Pertinax, Julian, Severus, Macrinus, Maximinus, Baldinus, Aurelian and others.
Capitolinus records an Epistle of Albinus concerning the right of the Senate in
the Election of their Emperor, and another of the Senate concerning the
Gardiani. Macrinus in an Oration thus bespeaks the Senate concerning the Roman
Legions, They have conferred the Empire on me, the defense whereof, O Fathers
Conscript, I do in the mean time undertake: and if it be as pleasing to you, as
it has been unto them, I shall also undertake the Government. So also does the
Emperor Tacitus in Vopiscus, Me, says he, has the Senate made their Prince,
according to the prudent advice of the Army. To the like purpose is that of
Majorinus to the Senate, Remember that I was made Emperor as well by your own
Free Suffrages, as by the appointment of your puissant Army. The Roman Empire
(as Maximinus in Herodian tells his Soldiers) is not the possession of any one
man, but the Ancient Inheritance of the whole people of Rome; upon whose safety
the Empire depends. And we together with you are to this purpose chosen, that
they through our Care and Courage may live securely. Neither does it avail to
the contrary, to say, That by the Constitution of Antoninus the Emperor, all
that lived within the Verge of that Empire, were made Roman Citizens: For by
that Sanction, all the Subjects of that Empire, were only made capable of such
rights and privileges, as the Roman Colonies and such other Towns and Cities
anciently had, For Rome over all her Colonies, appeared as a Lady or a Queen,
Zon.
that were made free; namely, that they might use the same Laws, and be
governed by such Magistrates, as the people of Rome had. But the Foundation of
the Empire was not so in any other people, as it was in the people of Rome; for
this was not in the power of the Roman Emperors to grant, who could neither
change the state of the Empire, nor its manner of holding it. Neither did it at
all detract from the right of the Citizens of Rome, that their Emperors
changed the place of their residence from Rome to Constantinople: The change of
the Imperial Seat did not change the Empire.
For even then also was the choice of their Emperors made by such of the Roman
Citizens, as were resident at Constantinople, whom Claudian calls the Byzantine
Romans: yet so, as that choice was to be confirmed by the whole body of the
people of Rome; who like Princes, jealous of their own Sovereignty, always
preserved the prerogative of their City, and the honor of their Consuls, The
Empire continued in the people of Rome, though the Emperor resided at
Constantinople.
(the first whereof did constantly reside at Rome) as the Trophies of their own
incommunicable right; wherefore all that right which those Byzantine Romans
pretended to have in those Elections, depended wholly on the people of Rome.
Nero in the fourteenth of Tacitus his Annals, accuses his Mother for
endeavoring to divide the Empire with him, by swearing to her self the
Praetorian Bands, and for hoping to put the same reproach upon the Senate and
people: Whereas (as Priscus notes) the Sovereignty of the Roman Empire
appertained not to women, but men. For after the death of Heliogabalus, it was
especially provided, that no woman should ever after be admitted into the
Senate, and that he that should do it, should be accursed to Hell. And it was
observed by Tribellius as a matter of reproach, That Zenobia usurped the
Empire, and governed the Commonwealth, longer than was fit for a woman to do
it. When the Byzantine Romans contrary to the mind and custom of the Romans,
had subjected the whole Empire to the Empress Irene, they deservedly revoked
that Grant, which they had either expressly or tacitly given them, and by their
own power chose Charles the Great, The Bishop of Rome the Principal Citizen in
the Vacancy of the Empire.
Emperor; which they publicly declared by their chief Citizen, the Bishop of
Rome: For so also was the High Priest among the Jews always accounted, during
the vacancy of their Kings. Now Charles the Emperor and his Successors did
always very prudently distinguish between the right they had to the Kingdoms of
the Francks and Lumbards, and the right they had to the Empire; the former
being their Ancient Inheritance, the latter being entrusted unto him upon a new
account: but afterward the Kingdom of the Francks being divided into the
Western, which is now called France, and the Eastern, which is Germany or
Almany, seeing that the Oriental Francks did then begin to set over themselves
Kings by Election, (for even at that time the succession to the Kingdom of the
Francks, being as it were Aquatical, depended not so much upon any certain Law,
as upon the choice of the people:) The Romans that they might enjoy a most
assured protection, chose not a King of their own, but him whom the Germans had
admitted for their Emperor; yet still reserving unto themselves, the right of
either approving or rejecting him, so far as concerned their own affairs. And
this approbation is in their name solemnly witnessed by their chief Citizen the
Bishop, by a peculiar Coronation. Wherefore as he that is admitted or elected
by the seven Princes of Germany, being the Representatives of the whole Nation,
has according to their customs the best title to the Empire: So is the same
person by the approbation of the people of Rome, made King or Emperor of the
Romans, or as Historians sometimes call him, King of Italy. As in the
excommunication of the Emperor Henry, the Pope makes express mention of the
Kingdoms of Germany and Italy; and in the Oath that the Pope administered unto
the Emperor Otto (as Gratian records) the Emperor swears, That he will make
no Decree or Ordinance concerning any thing belonging to the Pope or to the
Romans without his Counsel. So that the Emperor under the Title of being King
of the Romans, has a right unto all that did formerly belong unto the Roman
Empire, that has not been otherwise alienated or granted away, either by
agreement, or by occupancy, upon a presumption of being deserted, or by the
right of Conquest. From whence it is an easy matter to determine, By what
righ^ the Pope in the Vacancy delivers the Ornaments of the Roman Empire, to
the Emperou^ of Germany.
by what right the Bishop of Rome in the vacancy delivers to the succeeding
Emperor, the ornaments of the Roman Empire; namely, because at such time, the
people being free, the Primacy belongs to him. And it is usual for Bodies
Politic, to dispatch all their affairs by the chief person, in the name of the
whole. So that as the Prince Palatine and the Duke of Saxony do deliver the
Royal Diadem to the Emperor Elect, thereby giving him possession of the German
Empire: So does the Bishop of Rome in the name of all the Romans, give unto the
same person being by them approved, the ornaments of the Roman Empire. So it is
also in Poland, the Archbishop of Guessne during the vacancy, The Archbishop
of ^ Guessne in Poland.
sits on the Royal Throne, and administers the public affairs of the Kingdom,
as being of all the Orders, the chief. Neither is it much amiss, what Cynus and
Rainerius have delivered unto us, That if the Emperor either by Sickness or by
Captivity be disabled to perform his duty, it is in the power of the Roman
people to appoint a Deputy or Viceroy in his room.

XII.
That the person of the Heir succeeding to the person deceased, is sufficient
to preserve the propriety in any thing, either private or public, is of
undoubted right.

XIII.
But how far forth the Conqueror shall succeed to the conquered, when we come
to treat of the effects of War, shall be explained.

CHAP. X. What Obligation arises from Dominion.
I. The obligation to restore that which is another, from whence, and what
manner of Obligation it is. II. An obligation to restore the profits of what is
another: this proved by many examples. III. He that makes use of what is
another, thinking it to be his own, is not bound to restitution, if the thing
perish. IV. Yet is the same person bound to restore the fruits in being. V.
Yea, and those that are spent, unless it appear that otherwise he had not spent
them: VI. But not those that he neglected to gather: VII. Nor those that he
has given away to others; this explained by a distinction. VIII. Nor if he
sell only what he bought, explained by a like distinction. IX. When he that
honestly buys of one man what is really another, may reserve the price, or
part of it. X. Another man's Goods being bought cannot be restored to him that
sold them, but to the right Owner. XI. He that is possessed of a thing, that no
man can justly claim, is not bound to yield it up to any. XII. What is
received, being due, though for some bad cause or otherwise, is not to be
restored naturally. XIII. The opinion, That what consists in number, weight or
measure, may be alienated, without the Consent of the Owner, refelled.
I. Restitution.
HAving thus sufficiently, as to our purpose, unfolded what Right or Dominion
we may have over things or persons, let us now consider, What obligation lies
against us upon this account. Now this arises either out of things extant
(wherein also I include persons, if profitable unto us) or out of things not
yet extant. Out of things, or persons appearing, there naturally arises this
obligation, That he that has in his power, that which of right, is mine,
should endeavor (as much as in him lies) that it may be restored unto me.
Among other Precepts of the Law given to the Jews, this is one, That things
found should be restored to their right Owner: Deuteronomy. 22.1.
which is grounded as well upon Natural Equity, as upon that in Deuteronomy,
where we read thus, Thou shall not see thy Brothers Ox or his Ass go astray,
and hide thy self from them, but thou shall in any wise bring it home again
unto thy Brother, etc. Many there are (says Hierom) who think that what they
find, though of another man's, they may keep without offense; In Lev.
that say, Deus mihi dedit, cui habeo reddere? God has given it me, to whom
shall I restore it? But let them know, says he, it is a sin next to that of
Theft, not to restore what we have so found. So likewise St. Augustine, Si quid
invenisti and non reddidisti, rapuisti; Ser. 9. de verb. Domini. Great. c. 14.
q. 5.
If what thou have found, thou restore not, thou have robbed thy neighbor. And
in another place he tells us, That so long as a man enjoyes that, which he
knows not to belong to another, he may be honest; for his Ignorance is the
cause of his detention: but being once convinced of his error, then if he
restore not, he may justly be reputed an Usurper. As for my part, says
Bellisarius, I make but little difference between him that knowingly detains
what is another man's, Proc. Goth. l. 2.
and him that is a Thief or a Robber; Pari loco habeo, res alienas non
reddentem, cum raptore. Yet does this obligation reach no farther, than as far
as in us lies; for no man is bound to impossibilities, nor to restore any thing
that is lost at his own charge: but to declare his knowledge to the right
Owner, that so if he please, he may recover them. For as there is an equality
to be observed, where any thing is held in common, that it may be made use of
no less by one than another; So Dominion being once admitted, this is mutually
agreed on between the Proprietors, That if a man be possessed of another man's
Goods, he should restore them to their right Owner. Now if this obligation
extended no farther than to restore upon demand, it would both too much weaken
the future property, and aggravate the charge of keeping the thing lost.
Neither is it in this place regarded, whether a man has got the possession of
another man's Goods honestly or dishonestly: For there is one manner of
obligation arising from the crime, and another arising from the thing held and
detained by that crime. The Lacedaemonians thought they had expiated the Injury
done to the Thebans, by laying an heavy Fine upon Phaebidus; who contrary to
the League between them and the Thebans, had possessed himself of the Cadmaean
Fort, though they restored it not. But (as Plutarch observes) all Gr^^e stood
amazed at their Injustice, Quod cujus Facinoris Authorem poena affecissent,
Facinus tamen reipsa approbarent; In that they punished the offender, yet in
effect justified his offense. The like we may read of Bajazet recorded by
Leunclavius: The former, Plutarch attributes to the advice of Agesilaus, who
persuaded the City, Pl^^. Ag^silao.
to transfer the blame upon him; but to preserve the Fort to themselves. But
this kind of Injustice being singular, is usually, as Xenophon notes, punished
by the especial Providence of God. Hist. Cyr. l. 5.
Thus were M. Crassus and Qu. Hortensius much blamed by Cicero, for detaining
part of an Inheritance which was got by a Testament that was forged, though not
by any fault of theirs. But because this obligation as by an universal Contract
binds all men, and creates a certain right to the Owner of the thing, hence it
comes to pass, that all singular Contracts, as being post-nate, do from hence
receive their exception, which seems to illustrate that of Tryphoninus: A Thief
delivers that whereof he has robbed me, to Sejus to keep for him, Restitution
to be made to the right Owner, and not to him who has usurped another Right.
who is altogether ignorant of the theft. Now the Question is, To whom is Sejus
bound to restore it? If we look only to the Giver and Receiver, it is just that
the thing entrusted, should be restored to him that gave it. But if we respect
the equity of the matter, which takes in all the persons concerned, it ought to
be restored doubtless to me, from whom it was fraudulently taken. Whereunto he
adds, Et probo hanc esse Justitiam, quae suum cuique ita tribuit, ut non
distrahatur ab ullius personae justiore repetitione; And this I approve of to
be Justice, which so gives to every man his own, that it be not withheld from
the juster claim of any other person that has a right unto it. Now his must
needs be the juster title, that claims by a right as ancient as propriety it
self: Whence it likewise follows, That he that ignorantly accepts of that from
another in trust, which afterward he knows to be his own, cannot be bound to
restore it. And the case which the same Tryphoninus puts, concerning Goods
deposited by him whose whole Estate was before confiscate, is better determined
by this rule, than by that which he there produces, concerning the profits
gained by punishments. For if we look strictly to the nature of the propriety,
it matters not whether it arise from the Law of Nations, or from the Civil Law;
for either way it carries with it all things natural unto it self, whereof this
is one, That every person being possessed of another man's goods, is bound to make
restitution thereof to the right Owner. And this is the meaning of Martianus,
where he tells us, Res condici possunt ab iis qui non ex justa causa possident.
that Goods may by personal actions at Law be required from those, who without
any just cause are possessed of them. And from hence also springs that in Vlpian,
He that finds what is another, is so strictly bound to restore it, that he
cannot so much as require a reward for the finding of it; but he is to restore
it with its fruits, if any be, saving only to himself his reasonable charges.

II. Of the profit of what belongs to another.
Of things not extant the Law of Nations runs thus, That if another be enriched
by what is mine, I not enjoying mine own, he stands obliged to restore to me so
much, as he is made the richer by what is mine: Because as to that which he
has gained by what is mine, he has the more, and I for want of what is mine
own, have the less, by so much as he has gained. For dominion was therefore
generally agreed on, that every man according to his proportion, should enjoy
his own. Contra naturam est, Cicero Off. 3.
ex hominis Incommodo suum augere Commodum; For one man to enrich himself by
that, which is another man's loss, is unnatural, says Cicero. And in another
place, That we should build up our own Power, Fortunes or Wealth, upon the
ruin of other men's, nature it self will not permit. There is so much of
natural reason in this saying, that the Lawyers are enforced to decline the
prescript Rules of their Laws, and to determine many Cases by this of equity,
as being the most convincing. A Contract made by a Servant, being a Factor,
shall bind his Master, unless Proclamation be first made, that no credit shall
be given unto him. But yet, although such Proclamation be made, if that Servant
makes any profit thereby, either to himself, or puts it to his Masters account,
it shall be judged a Fraud; Videtur enim dolum malum facere, qui ex aliena
jactura lucrum quaerat: For he seems to deal deceitfully, that makes himself
rich by another man's loss. Where the words Dolus malus signify whatsoever is
repugnant to natural right and equity. If a Wife shall give unto her Husband
money, which by the Law, she may require of him again, the Wife shall have
either a personal Action against her Husband, or shall relieve her self by that
which was bought with her money: Because it cannot be denied, but that the
Husband is made the richer by it; and therefore enquiry shall be made, what he
possesses that was bought with her money. So again, if thou have spent or
otherwise disposed of money, which my Servant has stolen from me, conceiving it
to be his; I have a good Action against thee, for this reason, because my Goods
came into thy possession without any just cause. Pupils, according to the Roman
Laws, are not bound to pay what they borrow; yet if it appear, that they are
the richer by what they borrowed, an Action shall lie against them. So
likewise, if thou contractest with my debtor, not as mine, but supposing him to
be another man's, and borrowest my money of him, Thou stand bound to pay me;
not because I trusted thee with my money, (which could not be without mutual
Consent) but because my money coming into thy possession, it is both just and
righteous, that thou should restore it to me, as to the right Owner.

Our modern Lawyers do prudently judge of other the like Cases by these, as
namely, that he whose Goods, whilst he lay concealed had been sold, when he
might have had an exception should be admitted to receive the money that was
raised by the sale of them. And that he that accommodates the Father with money
for his Sons maintenance, if the Father be not able to discharge the debt,
should have his Action against the Son, if he enjoy any Goods that were his
Mothers. These two Rules being thoroughly understood, may guide us to give
satisfaction in such Cases of Conscience, as are usually by as well Lawyers as
Divines, proposed.

III. He that uses another, thinking it his own, not bound to restore if the
thing perish.
For in the first place it hence appears, That he that is possessed of what is
another, yet thinks it to be his own, is not bound to make any restitution, if
the thing it self so possessed do perish; because he has neither the thing it
self, nor any gains by it. But he that knowingly possesses what is another,
is bound not only by reason of the thing it self, but for his fact in detaining
it.

IV. Yet is he bound to restore the fruits in being, if any be.
Secondly, He that through Ignorance possesses another right, is bound to
restore not only the thing, but the fruits of the thing that are extant: The
fruits, I say, of the thing, but not the fruits of his own labors. For though
without the thing, those fruits could not be perceived, yet are they not due to
the thing it self, which without his labor could not have produced them. Now
the ground of this obligation arises from propriety; for he that is the Owner
of the thing, is naturally the Owner of the Fruits arising from the thing.

V. Yea, and those that are consumed, unless otherwise he had not spent them.
Thirdly, He that unknowingly possesses another man's Goods, is bound to make
restitution both of the thing, and of the fruits that are spent, if it appear
that he must otherwise have spent as much of what was his own; because he is by
that so much the richer. This Suetonius highly commends in Caligula, That those
whom he restored to their Kingdoms, he likewise restored to the Fruits and
Profits of them for half the time they stood exiled.

VI. But not for those which he neglected to perceive.
Fourthly, That he is not bound to make good that which he neglected to
perceive, because he neither has the thing it self, nor any thing that
succeeds in the place of it.

VII. Nor those that he has given away, this explained.
Fifthly, If such a possessor shall give to another that which was given to
him, he is not bound to restore it, unless in case he had not given that, he
must have given as much other ways; by sparing which, he is so much the richer.

Sixthly, If he sell the thing he bought he is not obliged, unless it be for
the overplus of the price it was bought for: But if he sell the thing that was
given, he is bound to restore the price, unless he have prodigally spent it,
which had it not been so given, he had not so spent.

VIII. Nor if he sell what he bought.
IX. When he that sells what is another, may reserve the price or a part of it.
Seventhly, That another man's goods, though bona fide bought, must be restored:
neither may the price given for them be required from the Owner; unto which
rule, we think it not amiss to add this exception, unless it be where the
Proprietor could not probably recover the possession of what was his, without
some charges; as when things are possessed by Pirates Ter. Heaut. Act. 4. Scen.
4, 5.
. For in this case, what the Owner would willingly have spent to have recovered
his Goods, may be deducted by him that delivers them. For the very regaining of
the possession being not to be done without charge and difficulty, is
accordingly to be valued; which charge and trouble being saved, the right Owner
(having thus lost his thing) is reputed by so much the richer. And therefore
since the buying this thing in the ordinary judgment of the Law be of no
value; yet as Paulus the Lawyer says, It is valuable, if from the beginning it
be agreed, that the possession of what is ours (being at present in another
man's power) may be bought. And where things so bought, are strictly required by
the Owner without any moderate allowance, Summam Jus summa Injuria. Ter. loc.
supradicto.
though it may stand with the Rigor of the Law, yet has this Rigor so much
of Injustice in it, as the one is a gainer by the others loss. Nor do I here
require, that the thing should be bought with an intent to restore it to the
Owner. In which case, Negotiorum actionem.
That an Action of Negotiation may arise, as there are some that affirm, so
there are others that deny. For such an Action arises from the Civil Law.
Neither has it any of those grounds or principles, whereupon Nature
introduces this obligation. Not much unlike is that which Vlpian relates of
Funeral charges, wherein a prudent Judge does not always walk by the same
rule, as in mere actions of Negotiation, but gives himself a looser Rein which
the nature of such an Action will very well bear. And that which the same
Vlpian in another place says, If any man mis-wage mine affairs, not so much
regarding me, as his own profit, and shall disburse money, in so doing he shall
recover by his Action, not according to what he laid out, but according to the
benefit that I receive by it. So the Owners of such Goods, as in a Tempest to
secure the rest, are cast overboard, shall recover a part of their losses from
those whose Goods remain entire: because he whose Goods are so preserved by the
loss of mine, is by my damage made the richer.

X. Another man's goods being sold, cannot be restored, but to the right Owner.
Eighthly, He that buys another man's Goods, cannot restore them back to him
that sold them, to recover the price he paid for them; because as soon as those
goods did come under his power (as we said already) the obligation began to
restore them to the right Owner.

XI. Where the right Owner is not known, we are not bound to restitution.
Ninthly, He that is possessed of a thing, and is ignorant whose it is, is not by
the Law of Nature bound to give it to the poor; though it be very pious so to
do, and in many places is well ordered to be so disposed: the reason is,
because by the Right of Propriety, no man can claim an interest in it, but the
Proprietor. But to him that is ignorant who that is, it is all one as if it had
none. For, De non entibus and non apparentibus eadem est ratio; Of things that
are not, and of things that appear not, there is the same reason, as to him to
whom they appear not.

XII. What is received if due, whether the cause be honest or dishonest, is not
to be restored, naturally.
Tenthly, By the Law of Nature whatsoever is received, which another is bound
to pay, be the ground of that Obligation honest or dishonest, is not to be
restored; although even this also be introduced by some Laws, and that not
without cause. The reason whereof is, because in respect of the thing it self,
no man is obliged to restitution, unless that thing belong to another man. But
in this case, he that was the right Owner before, has willingly transferred
his right to another. But it will be another thing, where the manner of
receiving it is vicious, as in the case of Extortion. For this is another kind
of Obligation, whereof we discourse not at present Vid. St. Aug. Ep. 54.
.

XIII. The opinion confuted, that holds, That things consisting in number,
weight and measure may be transferred without the consent of the Owner.
Neither is that true, which is delivered by Medina, namely, that the property
of other men's Goods may come unto us without the Owners consent, in case they
are such things as are usually valued by weight, number or measure. For things
of this nature may be restored in others of the same kind, which is true, if it
be done with consent, or if either by Law or Custom such a Consent may be
reasonably presumed; as when we restore what we borrow, or when the thing it
self being spent or consumed, we restore the like, in quantity and quality. But
without such a Consent, either expressed or presumed, and setting aside cases of
necessity, this giving of one thing for another is not to be allowed of.

CHAP. XI. Of Promises.
I. That Naturally a Right may arise from Promises. The contrary opinion
refuted. II. A bare assertion obliges not. III. That Naturally a single
Promise obliges, but from thence no Right accrues to another. IV. What that
Promise is, from whence a Right arises to another. V. First, It is required
that the Promiser have the use of Reason. The Law of Nature distinguished from
the Civil Law, about Minors. VI. A Promise made through Error, whether it
obliges Naturally, and how far. VII. A Promise made out of Fear binds, yet is
he that caused that Fear bound to remit the Promiser. VIII. That the Promise be
valid, it ought to be in the power of the Promiser to fulfill it. IX. Whether a
Promise made for something that is vicious do Naturally oblige, explained by
distinction. X. What we are to judge of a Promise made to gain something that
was before due. XI. The Form of a firm Promise. XII. The manner how a Promise
may be validly made by others: Where also is discust that of Ambassadors,
exceeding their Commissions. XIII. Masters of Ships and Factors, how far they
are obliged by the Law of Nature: Where also is observed the Error of the Roman
Laws. XIV. To make a Promise valid, Acception in him, to whom the Promise is
made, is requisite. XV. Whether this Acception ought to be certified to the
Promiser, explained by distinction. XVI. A Promise may be revoked, the person
to whom the Promise is made, dying before its acceptance. XVII. Whether it be
revocable, the person dying, by whom the Promise was sent, explained by
distinction. XVIII. Whether a Promise be revocable, being accepted by another,
explained by a distinction. XIX. In what time a Charge may be added to a
Promise. XX. How a weak Promise may be made firm and valid. XXI. A Promise made
without cause is not naturally void. XXII. A Promise made for the Fact of
another, how far it obliges Naturally.
I. That Naturally a Right may arise from Promises.
BY our Method formerly designed, we are now to treat of obligations made by
Promise; where we find Franciscus Connanus, a man eminently learned, opposing
us, who holds, That those Promises that are not made for a valuable
consideration, oblige not, either by the Law of Nature or Nations. And yet he
confesses, That they might justly be performed, in case the thing promised be
such as might justly and honestly be fulfilled, though no such Promise had been
made. To confirm which opinion, he produces not only the testimonies of some
Lawyers, but these Reasons also: First, That he who believes every rash Promise
causlesly made, is no less to be blamed than he that believes none at all.
Secondly, That it would endanger most men's Fortunes, were men bound to perform
all their Promises, which for the most part are made more out of oftentation,
than a premeditated Will and Purpose to fulfill them. Lastly, That it is fit
that some things should be left to every man's honesty, and not to reduce all
promises to a necessity of Performance. And whereas it is said, That it is
dishonest not to perform what we have promised, the meaning is not that it is
unjust, but that it argues lightness and inconstancy in the Promiser. Thus
pleads Connanus, urging besides the Testimony of Cicero, who denies that those
promises are to be performed, which are to them to whom they are made,
unprofitable; or that infer more damage to him that made them, than benefit to
them to whom they are made. But yet in case the matter be not entire,
(something having been performed by the one party) then he would have the other
party obliged, not unto all that was promised, but unto that only that is in
difference between them: And for those agreements that of themselves are not
binding, they receive their obliging power, either from the Contract wherein
they are, or whereunto they are adjoined, or from the delivery of the thing:
From whence arise, partly Actions, partly Exceptions, and prohibited Reclaims.
But as to those that may have their obligatory power according to the Laws, as
those made by stipulation, with some others, they receive their binding faculty
from the benefit of the Laws, whose efficacy is such as to make that which in
it self is only honest, to be even necessary. But this opinion of Connanus,
taken so generally as he seems to express it, cannot be current: For in the
first place it would thence follow, That those Articles of Agreement that are
made between Kings, and between the people of diverse Nations, so long as
nothing was on either side performed, were of no force; especially, in such
places where are no set Forms of Leagues or Sponsions found. Besides, no Reason
can possibly be given why Laws (which are but as it were so many common
Covenants or Promises of the people, for so both Aristotle and Demosthenes term
them) should add such an obliging force unto Agreements. And yet that every
man's own Will endeavoring by all means to oblige it self, cannot do the same
thing; especially where the Civil Law gives no restraint or Impediment unto it.
Whereunto add, That the Dominion of a thing may be transferred by the Will
being sufficiently declared: And why therefore may not the Will have the same
Right over a person, either to transfer Domiminion (which Right is less than
Dominion it self) or to do something, seeing that we have the same power over
our Actions, as we have over our Goods? And herein likewise we have the consent
of the learned. Nay, the Hebrews hold that where the thing consulted about,
will not admit of delay, our silence is equivalent to a Sponsion. For as the
Lawyers say, No Title can be naturally more assured, than that which the
Proprietor does willingly transfer to another: In the same manner it is said
there is nothing so fit to preserve faithful dealing among men, as to observe
and perform whatsoever is promised and agreed upon between themselves. So a
Decree for the payment of Money promised, though there were no other reason
assigned why it should be due, but the free consent of him that promised it, is
said to be agreeable to Natural equity. He, says Paulus the Lawyer, does
naturally owe, and by the Law of Nations must give, Condictione Indebiti.
upon whose word and promise we have relied: Where in the first place we must
observe, That this word. [Oportet] Must, implies a kind of necessity: Neither
may we admit of that which Connanus takes as granted, That we are then said to
rely upon a man's faith, when the thing cease to be entire (that is, when
something is already performed by one party.) For Paulus in that place treats
of a personal Action brought for a thing not due, which presently cease as
soon as something (upon what agreement soever) is paid: Because, even before,
when nothing was as yet performed on either side, by the Laws of Nature and
Nations, what was promised, ought to be given; although the Civil Law, to
prevent the occasions of unnecessary suits, do give little or no encouragement
to exact it. But Tully in his Offices attributes so great a power to Promises,
Lib. 1.
that he makes Faithfulness to be the very foundation of Justice; which Horace
also calls the Sister of Justice: As the Platonists also do oft-times express
Justice by (...), Apul. de Plat. Plat. lib. 1. de rep. Three degrees of
speaking of things to come.
Truth: Which Apuleius renders by the word Fidelity: And Simonides calls it
Justice, not only to restore what we have received, but even to speak Truth,
(that is, to perform what we have promised.) But to clear this yet better, we
must carefully distinguish between the three degrees of speaking concerning
things to come, which either are, or at least are reputed to be hereafter in
our own power.

II. 1. That a bare assertion obliges not.
The first consists in a bare assertion of what we purpose for the future,
things thus standing, and in the same mind we now are: And hereunto it is
required, that we speak sincerely, and without guile, what at that present time
we think: But not with any resolution to continue in that thought, if the face
of things change, or if other chances happen, which though we then foresee not,
yet may otherwise incline us. For the mind of man has not only a Natural
Power, See Q. Elizabeth's dealing with the Hollander, B. 2. c. 14.. 12.
but a Right and Freedom to alter its counsels; and if there be any weakness
or error in the change, as it often happens, that is not intrinsic to the
change, but to the matter, in that we change from the better to the worse.

III. 2. A Promise though naturally obliging, yet transfers no Right to another.
The Second degree is when the will confines it self for the time to come,
giving some sign whereby the necessity of its perseverance is sufficiently
declared, and this may be called a Pollicitation, or a Promise; which setting
aside the Civil Law obliges either absolutely, or under some condition, yet
gives no peculiar Right to another. For in many cases it happens, that there
may be an obligation within our selves when there is no Right given to another,
as may appear by those debts of mercy and gratitude, whereunto we may refer
those of Constancy and Fidelity; and therefore no man can by the Law of Nature
require the thing promised from the right owner by virtue of such a
Pollicitation, nor can the Promiser be compelled by that Law to perform what he
has so promised.

IV. 3. What that Promise is that gives a Right to another.
Thirdly, When the Will to the confinement adds some outward sign whereby its
consent to transfer its own proper Right to another is sufficiently declared:
Which is a complete Promise, as having the like effect to the alienation of a
man's Property. For it is the way to alienate a thing, or, at least, the
alienation of some part of our Liberty or Freedom. Unto the former belongs our
Promises to give, unto the latter our Promises to do something. And hereof the
Scriptures do give us a notable example, where they tell us, That God himself,
who cannot be bound by any Law; yet professes it to be contrary to his own
Nature, not to perform what he promises, Neh. 9.8. 1 Cor. 1.19.10.13. Prove.
6.1.
Heb. 6.17, 18. From whence it is plain, That to perform our Promises is a duty
springing from the Nature of Immutable Justice; which as it is in God, so is it
in some measure, common to all such as have the use of right Reason. Let us
hear the opinion of Solomon in this case, My Son, if thou have been surety for
thy Friend, thou have given thy Faith to a stranger; or (as the Septuagint
translate it) to thine Enemy: Thou art ensnared by the words of thy mouth: Thou
are taken and bound by thine own Speech. Whereunto may be added that of Thales
the Philosopher, Stipulatus and sponsio are such Promises as are made with
solemnity. Numb. 30.4, 5, 6. Vox mea, facta tua est.
Sponde noxa presto est; Engage freely, and thou art not far from harm. And
that also of Chilo, Sponsioni non deest jactura; Engagements are seldom made
to loss. Hence it is, that the Jews term a Promise, Vinculum, A Bond, which
also in the Scriptures is compared to a Vow; as if by Vows and Promises we did
contract (as it were) with God himself. From the same Root arises the Greek
word (...), which likewise signifies a Promise, namely, from (...), which
signifies To have or to hold: Because he to whom any thing is promised, does
hold fast, and, as it were, bind the Promiser. These things promised, Connanus
his Arguments are easily answered; For what the Lawyers say, De nudo pacto non
oritur actio; A bare Promise will bear no Action: has respect only to what was
introduced by the Roman Laws, which made Stipulation to be an infallible sign
of a deliberate mind. Paulus the Lawyer speaks very warily of such Promises,
Sent. lib. 2. tit. 14.
If (says he) we make a bare Promise to pay use, it avails nothing; for among
Roman Citizens no Action arises from a bare Promise. The like Laws we grant to
be in force among other Nations, Quae lex ad id praestandum, nos quod alicui
promisimus, De Promisso non Sponso; jam non promittunt de te, sed spondent.
Seneca Ep. 19.
obligat? What Law (says Seneca) binds us to perform all our Promises? Where
he speaks of humane Laws and of rash and inconsiderate Promises. But if we
respect the Law of Nature only, there may be other signs of a mind perfectly
resolved, besides that which the Romans introduced by Stipulation, or if there
be any other such like, which the Civil Law requires to beget an Action. But as
to that Promise which is made rashly, and without due consideration, neither do
we admit it to have any obliging power, as Theophrastus has well observed.
Yea, and as to that which is deliberately done, but not with a purpose thereby
to transfer our own proper Right to another, Rash Promises bind not.
we deny that from thence there arises Naturally a Right to any man to exact
the performance of it. Although we do acknowledge, That from such a Promise
there may arise an obligation, not in honesty alone, but in a moral necessity
to do it. And as to that of Cicero we shall treat hereafter, when we shall
discourse of the manner how Contracts are to be understood. But now let us see
what Conditions are required to make a Promise valid.

V. To make a Promise complete, the use of Reason is required in the Promiser.
And in the first place it is requisite that he that promises should be endued
with Reason, which renders the Promises of Madmen, Idiots, and Infants void,
and of no force; but the case of Minors is somewhat different: For although
they are believed to be but of weak judgment, as Women also are; yet neither
is this weakness of Judgment lasting, nor is it of it self sufficient to
invalid their acts. At what years a young man or woman arrives at the use of
Reason cannot certainly be determined, but must be guessed at, either by their
daily Actions, or by the Customs of every Nation: Among the Jews, a young man
after thirteen years of age might oblige himself by any solemn Promise he
should make, and a young woman after twelve. But the Civil Laws, upon better
reason, thought good to make void many of their Promises, not only among the
Romans, but among the Grecians. And against some they introduced the benefit of
Restitution: But these are the peculiar effects of the Civil Law, and do no
whit appertain to the Laws either of Nature or Nations; except only in this,
that where they are received, it is agreeable to Nature that they should be
observed. Insomuch that if a Foreigner shall contract with a Citizen, he shall
be bound up by the Laws of that City, as if he were, for that time, a Subject
of that Nation. But it were otherwise in case such a Contract were made either
on the Seas, or in some desert Island, or by Letters between two persons
inhabiting diverse Nations. For then such Agreements should be regulated by the
Law of Nature only, as are the Agreements made between such as are invested
with the Supreme Power, as they are such: For in these, what they do privately,
may by their Laws be made void, when it is done in favor to those powers, but
not when done to their Punishment.

VI. A Promise made through error, how far Naturally it obliges.
Concerning a Promise made by an error or mistake in the person promising, the
question is yet more difficult. For we are to distinguish between that Error
which is about the substance of the thing promised, and that which concerns not
the substance; and then we are to consider whether the Fraud gave occasion to
the Promise or not. Again, whether he with whom we have to do be guilty of the
Fraud or not. And lastly, Whether the Act be strictly due, or binds only in
Honesty and Conscience. For the opinions of Lawyers do vary according to the
variety of these cases, declaring some acts to be void and others valid. But
so, that according to his will and pleasure that is injured, the promise may be
either revoked or reformed. But most of these distinctions proceed from the
Roman Laws; as well from the old Civil Law, as from the Praetorian: And some of
them are either not altogether true, or not well digested. But yet it suffices
to chalk out a way for us to find out the natural truth; for as concerning the
force and efficacy of Laws, this has ever been allowed of by the general
consent of almost all Nations, That when a Law is enacted upon the presumption
of such a Fact as was not really so done as was suggested, and believed, that
Law is not obliging, because the truth of the Fact failing, the foundation of
that Law fails with it. But when a Law is grounded upon such a presumption,
may be gathered from the matter of that Law, from the Words, and from other
Circumstances. The like may be said in this case, if a Promise be made upon the
belief of such a fact as indeed never was done, that Promise naturally is of no
force; because the Promiser did not give his consent absolutely to the thing
promised, but upon such a condition (if not expressed, yet presumed) as really
was not: As in that case mentioned by Cicero, of him who falsely believing his
own Son to be dead, appointed a stranger to be his heir. And yet in case the
Promiser were neglective, either in his diligence to examine and search out the
truth of his Sons death, or in his care of expressing his own sense, and did
thereby occasion any damage to the person to whom he made that Promise, he
shall be obliged to repair it: Not upon the account of his Promise made, but
for the damage, which through his neglect, was sustained by him to whom it was
made; whereof we shall speak more anon. But if there were an error or mistake
in the person promising, and yet that Error was not the cause of the Promise
made, the act shall be valid, because there was nothing wanting of a true
consent: But if in this case also the person to whom the Promise was made, did
by any fraud of his, directly or indirectly, occasion that error, what damage
soever shall accrue to the Promiser by reason of that Error, shall be by him
repaired. But if the Promise were but in part occasioned by an Error, then as
to the other part the Promise shall stand good.

VII. A Promise made through fear obliges.
Concerning those Promises that are made through Fear, questions do arise no
less perpiext. For herein they do usually distinguish of Fears, which are
either great and vehement, or light and slender: If great, then they consider
whether it be so absolutely, or in respect only of the person fearing: Then
whether it be occasioned justly or unjustly; and whether by him to whom the
Promise was made, or by some other: As also they distinguish of the Acts,
whether free and generous, or grievous and burdensome; and according to this
diversity, are some Acts said to be void, others revocable at the pleasure of
the Promiser, and others to be wholly renewed. Concerning every one of these
cases, there are great differences in opinions. But I do wholly incline to
those who hold, That setting aside that Authority of the Civil Law, which
sometimes takes away, and sometimes moderates the binding power of such
promises: He that promises any thing through Fear, is obliged to perform what
he has so promised; because the consent he gave was not conditional, as in the
case of Error, but absolute. For as Aristotle well observes, He that for fear
of being shipwrackt, throws his goods overboard, Eth. Nic. 3.
would willingly preserve them on condition that he might not be wreckt; but
upon a serious consideration of the present danger he is in, he absolutely
resolves that his goods rather than himself, shall perish. But yet we must also
crave this allowance, That if he to whom the Promise was made, did occasion not
a just, but an unjust Fear, though but slight; and that thereupon the Promise
was so made, he is bound to discharge the Promiser if he desire it: Not that
the Promise is in it self void, but for the damage that he sustained who made
it, by reason of the injury done him. See Chap. 17.6.19. and P. 3. chapter 19.. 1.
But what exceptions the Law of Nations admits herein, shall in its proper
place be hereafter explained. But that some Acts are rescinded, which were made
through Fear, being occasioned not by him with whom we have to do, but by
another, is an effect of the Civil Law, which does often either null or revoke
Acts, though freely done, if they that do them be of weak Judgment. Seneca
argues according to the Law of Nature, when he tells us, That whatsoever either
Force or Fear or Necessity makes us to grant, Lib. 4. cont. 26.
may be revoked, if that Force or Necessity be imposed on us by him to whom the
grant is made. But what, says he, is that to me, what thou art compelled or
necessitated to do, if not by me? Meam culpam oportet esse, ut mea poena sit;
It is necessary that the Fault should be mine own, if the Punishment be so. Now
what we have before said concerning the force and efficacy of the Civil Law,
were not amiss to be here repeated: See B. 3. c. 19.. 4.
But what force or strength Oaths do add unto Promises to confirm them, shall
be showed anon.

VIII. What is promised ought to be in the power of the Promiser.
Again, That a Promise may be strong and binding, it is necessary, That the
thing promised either now is, or hereafter may be in the power of the Promiser.
Wherefore in the first place, we may be sure, That no Promise can bind us to
that which is in it self unlawful: For, Id possumus quod jure possumus; That
only we can do, which we can do, which we can lawfully do. All promises receive
their vigor from his Right that makes them, beyond which they are of no force.
Agesilaus being once challenged upon his promise, answered, Been si justum sit,
seu minus dixi tantum, non and promisi; Ye do well to urge it, if what I
promised were just; but if not, I only said it but did not promise it. But if
the thing promised be not now in our power, but may be, then does the strength
of that Promise hang in suspense; because the Promise was but conditional,
namely, if at any time it shall lie in my power. But if that condition whereby
the thing may be in our power, be also in our power, then is he that made the
Promise, obliged to do whatsoever is morally fit, that his Promise may be
fulfilled. But the Civil Law nulls many Promises of this kind also for profit,
which the Law of Nature would bind us unto: As when a man or woman shall
promise to marry another hereafter, being now already married: And not a few
other Promises made by Minors and Children, whilst under their Parents tuition.

XI. Whether a Promise made to do an act simply evil obliges.
But here it may be demanded, Whether a Promise for the performance of an act
in it self vicious, does naturally oblige: As if a man should Promise a Reward
to him that should kill another. That this is a wicked Promise does
sufficiently appear by this, That it was made to excite a man to do a wicked
Act. But yet not every thing that is viciously done, does lose the effect of a
just Right, as is manifest in things prodigally given, wherein notwithstanding
there is this difference, That so soon as the gift is prodigally given, Things
prodigally given may lawfully be retained.
the obliquity cease: For the gift contracts no soil from the giver, and
therefore it may without sin be possessed by those to whom it is given. But in
Promises made to a vicious end, the vice remains so long till the crime be
perpetrated: For so long the very fulfilling of the Promise being an incentive
to vice, must needs be sinful; which begins to cease, when the crime is
committed. Whence we may conclude, that the force and efficacy of such a
Promise until that time did hang in suspense, as I said before, concerning the
thing promised, being not in our own power. But the crime being done, then the
obligation arising from that promise breaks sorth, which from the beginning was
not intrinsically wanting, but hindered by a vice that was accidental. An
example hereof we have in Judah the Son of Jacob, Judah's Promise to Thamar.
Genesis 38. Val. Max. l. 8. lib. 2. n. 2. Chapter 12.. 9. 10, 11.
who performed his Promise unto Thamar, whom he dealt with as with an Harlot,
by sending her the reward which by the Law of Nature, then in force, was due
unto her. Though it be otherwise by the Civil Law, as may appear by the
sentence which C. Aquilius past in the like case. But in case that Promise were
occasioned by the fraud or injustice of the person to whom it was made, or if
it were made upon any unequal terms or conditions, how it is to be rectified,
is another Question, whereof we shall speak anon.

X. Concerning a Promise of that which was formerly due.
See Book 2. c. 6.. 2.
But when any Promise is made for some cause formerly due, it is not thereby the
less due, if we look unto Natural Right, according to what we have already said
concerning our acceptance of that which is another: Because Promises are
Naturally debts, though there be no cause preceding; but here also, if any
damage accrue by extortion, or if there be any inequality in the agreement
made, that damage is to be repaired, according to such Rules as shall be set
down anon.

XI. The manner of a firm Promise made by our selves.
Now as to what appertains to the manner of promising, it requires, as I said
before, concerning the Alienation of Dominion, some external Act or Sign
sufficient to testify the consent of the Will which may be done, sometimes by
a beck or nod, but is usually done either by voice or writing.

XII. Of the like made by others.
But we may also be bound up by another man's act, if it appear that we have
deputed and empowred him to act for us, either as our Instrument in that
particular business, or under some general notion or qualification. And it may
likewise happen, that where the Commission is to act in general, he that is so
commissionated, may oblige us, by acting contrary to his private Instructions:
For here are two distinct Acts of the Will, the one whereby we oblige our
selves to confirm and ratify whatsoever our Agent shall do in such a business;
Of Ambassadors exceeding their private Commands.
the other, whereby we oblige our said Agent, that he shall not act beyond our
secret Instructions: This we observe, in relation to those things which
Ambassadors do Promise for their Masters, by virtue of their Instructions or
Letters of Credence, but exceeding their secret Commands.

XIII. The obligatitions of Masters of Ships and Factors, how far they
naturally extend.
From hence also we may conclude, That such Actions as are brought against
Masters of Ships and Factors (who have the charge of goods transported by Sea
into foreign parts) which are not so much Actions, as qualities of Actions) are
grounded upon the very Law of Nature. And here we cannot but note the error of
the Roman Laws, which by the fact of the Master do bind every one of the
Mariners for and in the whole, which is both repugnant to Natural Equity, which
seems to be satisfied if every Mariner be bound for what concerns himself: And
also damagable to the Commonwealth; for men would thereby be deterred from
Navigating the Seas, fearing to be so strictly, and, as it were, infinitely
bound by the fact of the Master. Insomuch, that in Holland, a Country of late
famous for Merchandising, this Roman Law both of old was, and now is of no
force: Nay, rather on the contrary, it is decreed, That the Master and Mariners
in general, shall each of them be bound no farther than to the value of the
Ship, and the goods that are therein transported.

XIV. To a good Promise acceptance is requisite. A pretending demand argues an
acceptance, if no alteration appear.
But that a Promise should transfer a Right in the thing promised, the
acceptance of him to whom it is promised, is no less requisite, than it was in
the case aforesaid of Alienation: And herein Tertullian in his Book of Fasts,
speaks like a Civilian, Votum cum a Deo acceptatum est, Legem in posterum
facit; A Vow, (though freely made, yet) when it is by God accepted, is as
binding as a Law. And here also a preceding demand of a thing promised, (if no
alteration appear) shall be judged an acceptance. Neither does that which the
Civil Law has introduced concerning such Promises as are made to Cities hinder
this: Which notwithstanding has so far prevailed with some, that they hold
that the sole Act of the Promiser is by the Law of Nature sufficient to
transfer a Right: For the Roman Law says not, That the Promise is fully
complete, and of force before it be accepted; but that it is not lawful to
revoke such a Promise, but that it may be always accepted, which effect is not
from the Law of Nature, but merely from the Civil Law. Not much unlike unto
that which the Law of Nations has introduced in favor to Infants, Idiots and
Madmen. For, for these, as the will and purpose of possessing things that are
gained by occupancy, so the will and purpose to accept of things promised
creates a Right.

XV. Whether it be requisite that the acceptance should be made known to the
Promiser.
It is also sometimes controverted, Whether to make a Promise fully effective,
it be requisite that the thing promised be not only accepted, but that the
acceptance be also made known to the Promiser, before it can obtain its full
effect. And certain it is, that either way the Promise made may be binding: As
for Example, either thus, This will I do if it shall be accepted; or thus, This
I will do, if I shall understand that it will be accepted. And if the Promise
do imply a mutual obligation on both sides, then it is to be understood in the
latter sense. But if the Promise be free and spontaneous, then it is best to
believe that it was meant in the former sense, unless it shall appear otherwise.

XVI. Whether a Promise made may be revoked before it be accepted.
Again, Hence it follows, That such a Promise made before Acceptance (for till
then no Right passes) may be revoked, without the imputation of either
Injustice, yea, or Levity, if it were really so intended, when made, That it
should not be of Force, till it were accepted, so till then it could transfer
no Right. It may also be revoked, in case the person shall dye to whom such a
Promise was made, before he has accepted of it. Because the Acceptance was
referred to his own choice, and not to his heirs. For it is one thing, to be
willing to give away my Right to such a man, to be by him transferred to his
Heirs; and another thing, to be willing to give it unto his Heirs immediately:
It is very material to consider on whom we bestow a benefit. Of this opinion
was Neratius, who could not believe that a Prince would have granted that to
him being dead, which he had granted unto him, believing him to be alive.

XVII. Whether it may be revoked, if the party dye who was authorized to make
it. Explained.
A Promise may also be revoked upon the death of the person who was authozed to
make it; because the binding power was in his words: But not so, if the grant
be sent by a Messenger or a Carrier, because the obliging power is not in him,
but in the Instrument he carries. And therefore those Letters importing the
consent of the party may be conveyed by any man. We must also distinguish
between him that is deputed only to signify the Promise we make, and him that
is authorized by us to make that Promise himself. In the former case a
revocation shall take place, although it be not so expressed to him that carries
the Promise or Grant: In the latter case, the revocation is of no force;
because the obliging power depended upon the Will of him that is sent to make
it; who if he do make it whilst it is in his power so to do, that is, before
the revocation be made known unto him, the grant shall be valid, and the person
that made it justified. So also in the former case, though the Donor dye, yet
may the gift be accepted, as being on his part perfect and complete, although
subject to a revocation: which is apparent in Ambassadors. But in the latter
case it cannot, because the gift is not actually given, but only commanded to
be given. But where the matter will admit of a debate, it may be presumed, that
the will of the Prince was, That his Commands should be executed, unless some
great alteration should happen in the mean time: As namely, the death of the
person commanding. It Is true, there may be many conjectures that may be of
force to persuade us to think otherwise, which may easily be admitted, That so
what was in a good cause commanded to be given, may notwithstanding abide with
us. And thus may that question that has been heretofore muted, be answered,
Whether the heir of him that was so commanded, may be sued at Law.

XVIII. Whether a Promise be revocable after it has been accepted of by
another.
Controversies also do usually happen, concerning the accepting of a thing in
the behalf of another: Wherein also we must distinguish between that Promise
that is made to me of something to be given to another, and that promise which
is made in the name of him to whom the thing is to be given. If the Promise be
made to me (setting aside that Query introduced by the Roman Law, Whether any
benefit do accrue unto me by it.) The Right of accepting the thing seems
naturally to be given to me, and the power of transferring that Right unto
another, if he also will accept thereof; so that he that made the Promise has
no Right in the mean time to revoke it; but I to whom the Promise was made may
remit it. For this sense, as it is no whit repugnant to the Law of Nature, so
is it most agreeable to the words of such a Promise: Neither can it be said,
not at all to concern me, That another by me should receive a benefit. But if
the Promise be made in his name to whom the thing is to be given, we must then
enquire, Whether he that accepts of what is promised, has a Special Command so
to do, or an order so general, as may be thought sufficient to include it; or
whether he has no such order at all. If it do appear that he has such order
or authority to accept thereof, I do not then conceive it necessary to enquire
any farther, Whether the person so empowered be a Freeman or not, as is usually
done by the Roman Laws; but conclude rather, That the Promise is fully complete
by that acceptance: For it suffices to signify our consent, though by a
Servant, whose will is reputed ours, if we authorize him, and he accept
thereof. But if he that accepts of the Promise, have no such order from him to
whom the Promise is made, but is deputed by the Promiser, then has the
Promiser no power to revoke the Promise, until he whom it concerns, do either
accept thereof, or reject it. Yet so, notwithstanding, That he, who in the mean
time, has accepted of the Promise made, has no power to remit it, because he
is not deputed to accept of any Right to the thing promised, but to bind the
Promiser to observe and perform his Promise, in sustaining the thing promised:
So that if the Promiser shall retract, he may be said to break his Faith, but
he cannot be said to invade any man's Right or Propriety.

XIX. In what time a charge may be added to a Promise.
By what has been already said, it may easily be conceived, what we are to
judge concerning such a charge as is usually added unto a Promise. For such a
charge may be imposed, as long as the Promise is not yet made perfect by
acceptance, nor the Faith of the Promiser given, that it shall be irrevocable.
But yet this charge added for the use and benefit of a third person is also
revocable, until it shall be by that third person accepted: Although some there
be, that, as well in this, as in other the like questions, are otherwise
persuaded. But he that thoroughly considers the matter, will quickly discern so
much of natural reason and equity in what has been said, that he will judge
all farther proofs to be needless and superfluous.

XX. A Promise in it self invalid, how it may be made firm.
It is also sometimes Controverted, How a Promise occasioned by an error (or
mistake) in the Promiser may be made good, if, the truth being known, the
Promiser notwithstanding his mistake, be willing to stand to his Promise. The
like question may be put concerning Promises occasioned by fear, force, or the
like, when the cause thereof shall afterward cease, as in the case of
Matrimony, and the like. For the confirmation of which Promises, some are of
opinion, that nothing is requisite but the internal acts of the mind, which
being conjoined with the former external act, suffices to contract a firm
obligation. Others disallowing this, because they cannot admit that any outward
Act should be a competent sign of an internal act subsequent to it, do require
a new verbal Promise and Acceptance. But the middle opinion is the safer, which
requires some outward act, but not such as is verbal, seeing that the retaining
of the thing promised by the person to whom it was promised, and the
relinquishing of it by the person promising, or some such like act, are
sufficient to testify the mutual consent of both parties.

XXI. Promises made without cause not naturally void.
They also must not be omitted, lest we should confound the Civil Law with the
Law of Nature: That by the Law of Nature, Promises as well as Gifts may be good
and valid, though there be no cause or consideration expressed wherefore they
were made.

XXII. He that promises for the fact of another how far he stands bound.
Neither is any man bound by his Promise that he makes for the fact of another
man, to make good all that wherein they differ, so as he omits nothing of that
which on his part may be done, to procure that man to do it, unless either the
words of the Promise or the nature of the business do naturally require a
stronger obligation. So Livy in the like case, He thought himself discharged of
his Promise, forasmuch as he left nothing unattempted that lay in him, to have
had it performed.

CHAP. XII. Of Contracts.
I. The Division of humane Acts unto others profitable: And first of simple and
mixed. II. Simple are either purely liberal, or with mutual obligation. III. Or
into such as are permutatory, as well such as separate the parts. IV. As those
that introduce Community. V. Those that are mixed are either so principally, VI.
Or by way of Accession. VII. Which of these Acts are called Contracts. VIII. In
all Contracts there should be an equality, and that first in such Acts as are
Praecedaneous. IX. As an equality in knowledge. X. An equal freedom of Will.
XI. 2. In the very act, if it be by way of Exchange. XII. 3. In the things
contracted for, explained. XIII. That this equality takes place, even in such
Acts as are either merely or in part beneficent. XIV. How things are to be
valued, and for what causes the prices are either increased or diminished. XV.
When things are perfectly bought, and when the Dominion is transferred. XVI.
What Monopolies are contrary to the Law of Nature, or Rules of Charity. XVII.
How money receives its function. XVIII. Of Lands hired, nothing of the Rent is
to be abated by reason of the sterility or the like: And if the first Tenant be
disabled to use the Land or thing, may it not be let to another. XIX. How the
just hire of men's Labors may be increased or diminished. XX. By what Law Usury
is forbidden. XXI. What profit falls not under the notion of Usury. XXII. What
the Civil Law determines of Usury. XXIII. In Contracts, what value we are to
put upon the peril we run, in securing the main stock. XXIV. In social
Contracts how the profits are to be proportioned, and of its several kinds.
XXV. Of Naval Confederations. XXVI. If there be an inequality in the terms
agreed upon, as to Acts external, the Law of Nations allows no remedy; and in
what sense this is said to be Natural.
I. The division of humane Acts to others profitable.
OF such humane Acts as are to others profitable, some are simple, others mixed
or compounded.

II. Of those that are simple, some are merely beneficent, some mutually
obligatory.
Of those that are Simple, some are Beneficent, others Permutatory: Such as are
Beneficent, are either merely gratuitous or infer a mutual obligation: Such as
are merely gratuitous, are either presently done, or such as extend to the time
to come. Those that are presently done, are either some fact or deed that
yields profit to another, whereof there is no necessity that we should
discourse, since though it does produce profit, yet it has no effects of
Right: Or some donative or free gift, which also is a profitable act and
presently done, whereby Dominion is transferred, and whereof we have treated
above, when we discourst of the acquiring Dominion. Those gratuitous acts that
extend to the time to come, are promises, either to give or to do somewhat,
whereof we discourst in the Chapter preceding. Those beneficent Acts which
infer mutual obligation, are such as dispose either of things without
alienating them, or of some Fact; yet so, as that some effects remain to
another. Such, as to things, is the concession of the use of them, which is
called lending: And as to Facts, the performance of some work that is costly or
obligatory, which is called a Mandate or Charge, whereof one species is,
something deposited or committed to our trust, as namely, our labor in the
keeping of the thing. Now like unto these Acts, are our Promises of these Acts,
but that these, as I have already said, do extend to the time to come; which
also we would have to be understood of those Acts, which are now to be
explained.

III. And into such as are permutatory.
Of such Acts as do infer Profit by exchange, some divide and dissipate the
parts, others unite them, and so introduce Communion: Those which divide and
separate the parts, the Roman Lawyers rightly distinguish into these three
heads: Do ut Des, Facio ut Facias, Facio ut Des. First, when we exchange one
thing for another, the agreement runs thus; I Will give you this, if you will give
me that. 2. When we truck Deeds, then it runs thus; I Will do this for you, if
you will do that for me. The 3d. is mixed, as when we agree, That if I do this for
you, then you shall give me that as the price or reward of my pains. But the
Roman Lawyers do exempt from this Division, some Contracts, which they call
Nominati; not so much because they have proper names (for so have those
Contracts which are made by exchange also, which they will not admit amongst
their Nominate Contracts) But because by reason of their more frequent and
ordinary use, they had received some certain force, and were of such a Nature,
that though nothing at all had been particularly said, yet by their very name
they might have been sufficiently understood. Hence it was, that to those there
were certain set forms of Actions appointed; whereas to others that were less
ordinary, that common form was not sufficient: But the plea must be made in a
form fitted to the fact, and therefore it was said to be in prescript words.
Neither is there any other cause but this of frequent use, why in these
nominate conventions, if some things requisite to a Contract were by both
parties assented unto: As in the sale of any thing, if the price were on both
sides agreed on, yea, though the matter were yet entire, (that is, if there
were no money paid, nor any thing performed on either side) yet was there
enjoined a necessity of fulfilling the Contract on both sides; whereas in
Contracts not so frequent, whilst things stood entire, and nothing on either
sides performed, there was indulged unto them a liberty to retract, that is to
say, they might without any penalty revoke. For the Civil Law restrained all
coercive power from such Contracts, and left them wholly to the Faith and
Honesty of the Contractors: But the Law of Nature takes no cognizance of these
distinctions; for neither are those Contracts which they call Innominate,
either less natural or less ancient. Nay even Bartering, which they reckon
among those that are Innominate, is both more simple and more ancient, than
those made by bargain and sale. Thus Tacitus testifies of the Germans, That
they used the more simple and ancient way of Traffic, that is, by exchange of
Commodities. For as Servius rightly observed, Our Ancestors did only exchange
one thing for another. How much more happy was that Age, says Pliny, when men
exchanged Goods for Goods, the Native Commodities of one Country for those of
the growth of another. The like he relates of the Seres, a people of Scythia,
Who having exposed their Native Commodities to sale on the farther bank of the
River, they take away what they find to be set by it, if they are pleased with
the exchange. Which kind of bartering of Commodities is yet in use in some
parts of Africa: We therefore taking Nature for our best guide, do reduce all
diremptory Contracts (without taking any cognizance of that Roman distinction
of Nominate and Innominate agreements unto these three heads before named. When
we give to receive, we either barter one thing for another, which doubtless was
the ancient way of Traffic, or we receive money for money, as by Bills of
Exchange; or we receive goods for money, as in the case of buying and selling;
or we receive the use of a thing for another thing, or the use of one thing for
the use of another, or the use of a thing for money, as in things let and taken
to hire. By the use of things we are to understand, not only the bare use of a
thing, but also the fruits, profits, or proceeds of it, whether temporary,
personal, hereditary, or any other way however limited or circumscribed, as
among the Hebrews, that which was held until the next Jubilee. Some things are
given, that after some Intervals of time, are to be restored either in kind or
to the same value, as in things that are lent; and this kind of Permutation is
chiefly used, where the things exchanged do consist in number, measure, or
weight, whether it be money or other things. The exchange of deeds for deeds do
infinitely vary, according to the no less infinite variety of humane actions.
But when we do that we may receive, it is either work done for money, as when
for our daily labor we receive wages; and this also is a kind of letting our
selves to hire for profit in our several callings: Or when by our voluntary
act, we undertake to secure another man's goods from all casualties or
contingent misfortunes, Ensurance.
which manner of contract was hardly known to former ages, though now of
frequent use; or when we do somewhat to receive either things, or the use of
things for our pains.

IV. As into such as are communicatory.
But such Acts as are communicatory, do contribute either deeds or things, or
on the one side things, and on the others deeds, toward some public benefit:
All which are comprised under the notion of Society or Confederacy, under which
also we comprehend that of war, when private men combine together, to equip a
Fleet at their own charge, against Pirates, or against such as invade them, and
such a combination is vulgarly called the Admiralty.

V. Acts mixed are either so principally.
But such Acts as we call mixed, are either principally and originally so, or
are made so, by the accession of some other: As if I shall knowingly give more
for a thing than it is worth, or than I can buy it for of another, it is a mixed
Act, partly a Gift and partly a Buying. So if I do contract with a Goldsmith,
for so much money, to make me so many Rings of his own Gold, it is a mixed Act,
for I buy the Gold and hire the Workman. And thus it happens also in Societies,
as that one part should contribute deeds and money, but the other money only: So
likewise the grant of Land to be held in Fee Farm, is a benefit or a gift, but
the binding of him to whom this Grant is made to serve in the wars for our
defense, is, faciam ut facias, to do somewhat for him that he may do somewhat
for us: So the Gain, by money lent to traffic by Sea, is mixed; partly for the
loan of my money, and partly for running the danger of the Seas.

VI. Or by accestion.
Acts are mixed by accession, when we strengthen our own Acts by the Acts of
another; as by Sureties, or by delivering Pledges or Hostages: For Suretiship,
if we respect only the matter between the principal Debtor and the Surety, is
for the most part a Command, or bidding the Surety to engage his credit for
him: But if we respect the business between the Creditor and the Surety, who
receives nothing at all from him, it is an Act purely free; yet because it
confines upon such Contracts as are burdensome, therefore it is to be reckoned
as such: So the giving of a thing to pawn or as a pledge, seems of it self to
be a free act, whereby the detaining of the thing pawned becomes lawful; but
this also derives its nature from the contract, which is thereby strengthened
and secured.

VII. Which of these are called Contracts.
All such Acts as are profitable unto others, besides those that are merely
bountiful and beneficent, are comprehended under the name of Contracts.

VIII. Equality is requisite in Contracts and first in Acts precedaneous.
In all Contracts Nature requires an equality, and that so strictly that she
gives a right to him, that through inequality has less than his due. This
Equality does consist partly in the Act of Contracting, and partly in that
about which the Contract is made: And in the Act of Contracting, as well in
those Acts that are precedaneous, as in those that are principals.

IX. As Equality in knowledge.
It appertains to these Acts that precede any Contract, that he with whom we
have to deal, should discover unto us all the faults and defects which he knows
to be in the thing contracted for, which is not only required by the Civil Law,
but is most agreeable to the nature of the Act, there being a nearer relation
between the persons contracting, than that which is common to all mankind. And
thus may that of Diogenes Babylonius be answered, handling this Argument,
namely, Cicero offic. l. 2. 10.
that all things are not hid which are not spoken: Neither is it necessary for
me to express all that is profitable for thee to hear, as in matters celestial;
for the nature of a Contract being invented for gain and profit, requires
something that is more proper. Val. Max. lib. 8. c. 11.1.
To this purpose Valerius Maximus brings in an excellent example in Claudius
Contumatus, whose house standing near the Capitol, and so hindering the Augurs
in the prospect of the Birds, and consequently in their divination, was ordered
to be demolished; which Claudius knowing, but concealing, went immediately and
sold his House to Calphurnius Lanarius, who understanding the cheat, appealed
to Cato; who prudently condemned Claudius, alleging that bonae fidei venditor,
nec commodorum spem augere, nec incommodorum cognitionem obscurare oportet; And
that with a great deal of Equity, says Valerius, for an honest Seller should
neither heighten the Buyers hopes of gain, nor hide from him his knowledge of
the incommodities of what he sells. It was a good observation of St. Ambrose,
In contractibus etiam vitia eorum quae veneunt prodi jubentur; ac nisi
intimaverit venditor, quamvis in jus emptoris transcripserit doli action
vacuantur: In ordinary Contracts, whatever defects are in the thing exposed to
be sold, ought to be discovered to the Buyer; which if not faithfully done,
though the right of the thing be transferred to the Buyer, yet ought the
Contracts to be nulled, by reason of the fraud in the concealment of the
defects. Lact. l. 5.
As in case a man should sell an House that is haunted with Devils, or infected
with the Plague, or a Servant that is a Fugitive, and does not discover it,
regarding only his own profit and not natural equity. Non est ille sapiens, sed
callidus and astutus, That man is not wise, says Carneades, but crafty and
knavish. But if the thing concealed, do not immediately concern the thing
contracted for, we are not bound to reveal it: As if I expose to sale such
things, whereof I know a greater quantity is coming in after to be sold, I may
safely conceal mine own knowledge; yet even to discover this is commendable,
and in some cases not to be omitted without breach of charity; yet I dare not
say it is unjust, I mean any violation of his Right with whom we have to do. So
that what the same Diogenes says in the same place (as Cicero quotes him) is
very true, and to the purpose. Advexi, exposui, vendo meum; non plures quam
caeteri: Fortasse erunt minoris, cum major sit copia, cui fit injuria? Hither
have I brought my goods, I expose them to sale, I sell but mine own, and at no
dearer rates than others: Perhaps when there is greater plenty they will be
cheaper, and in so doing whom do I injure? Whence then we may observe, that of
Cicero is not generally to be admitted, Celare quid.
that to hide a thing is, when thou would have them whom it concerns, to be
ignorant of what thou know, thereby to gain profit to thy self. For then
only is this concealment unjust, when it immediately concerns the thing that is
to be contracted for; as in Houses infected with the Pestilence, or ordained by
the Magistrates to be pulled down, or the like: For of these things there
should be, between the Buyer and Seller, Par scientia.
an equal knowledge, for that makes them both equal.

X. And in freedom of Will.
And as there should be an equality in knowledge between both the Contractors,
so should there also be a like freedom of Will between them; not that in case
the Seller be prepossest with an unjust fear, no Contract can be made with him
till that fear be removed, for that is a thing extrinsick to the Contract. But
that no man ought to be constrained through fear to consent to the sale of what
he would not otherwise part withal, and if such an occasion of fear be given
him to that end, that it should be first taken away, that so as well the Seller
as the Buyer may have a like freedom of Will. When the Aelians had bought some
Lands of their Neighbors, who durst not deny to sell it them on any terms. The
Lacedaemonians made no scruple to make void the Contract, and therefore caused
the Aelians to make restitution; alleging, That there was as much injustice in
taking away the Goods of their Inferiors, under the specious pretense of
Purchase, as in extorting from them by mere force, Greek Hist. l. 3.
which are the very words of Xenophon. But what exceptions the Law of Nature
admits of in these cases, shall be discoursed of in its proper place.

XI. Equality in the act it self if it be permutatory.
In the very principal act of Contracting, there is also required this
equality, that no more be exacted than what is fit, which rule is of no force
in such acts as are beneficent: For if I will give somewhat more by way of
reward, either for work done at my command, or for things lent me, or for
preserving things deposited, than is justly due; I do no man wrong, I do but
mix the act by making it partly permutatory, and partly gratuitous. But in all
permutatory Contracts, this equality is punctually to be observed: Neither is
it to the purpose to pretend, that what is either promised or given by either
party more than is due, may be accounted as a donative; for this is not the
usual meaning of Contractors, nor is it to be so presumed, unless by some act
or word it be so declared. A just proportion to be observed between the Giver
and the Receiver.
For whatsoever either party does either give or promise, is but in proportion
to what they expect to receive, and as it were to even the Balance; insomuch
that St. Chrysostom was of opinion, and not without reason, That in Contracts
as often as we strive earnestly to buy any thing for less than it is worth, or
to have more than our just measure or weight, there was in that Fact a kind of
Theft. He that writes the Life of Isidore in Photius, tells a Story of one
Hermias, who having bought any thing that was judged more worth than he paid
for it, would of his own accord add as much as it wanted of the true value,
holding it a kind of Injustice to detain it, but such an injustice as few men
then understood (and as few now adays would scruple at.) And in this sense do
the Jewish Doctors interpret that Law of Moses, Lev. 25.14. and 17.
If thou sellest ought to thy Neighbor, or buyest ought of thy Neighbors hand,
ye shall not oppress one anocher.

XII. And in the things contracted for.
Yet farther, Though both parties have equal knowledge of the thing contracted
for, and also equal freedom of Will, so that there is nothing concealed that
should be discovered, nor a greater price exacted than is thought to be due;
yet if there prove to be any inequality in the things themselves, which the
parties themselves could not discern, or that there were a mistake of the just
price or value, then that error or mistake is to be rectifyed by the Roman
Laws: And he that has too much must impart to him that has too little,
because in that Contract it was or ought to have been the mind and meaning of
both parties, That there should be an even balance in a right estimation. And
yet do not the Roman Laws require this in every unequal Contract, Minima non
persequitur Lex.
In case the inequality be but small, the Law takes no cognizance of it to
prevent multitudes of suits; but only where the inequality is weighty, as where
it exceeds half of the just value: For the Law (as Cicero says) restrains
iniquity by pinnacling the hand, but Philosophy by Reason and Understanding.
But they that are not subject to Civil Laws, ought to follow that which by the
dictates of right reason seems unto them righteous; yea and they also that are
subject to Laws, so often as they have to do with such things as are agreeable to
Piety and Religion, if the Laws do neither give nor take away Right, but only
deny their aid and assistance unto it for some certain reasons.

XIII. What Equality takes place in Acts merely or in part beneficent.
But here also it is to be observed, that some equality ought to be had even in
such Contracts as are beneficent, yet not altogether so strict as are in those
that are permutatory, but as the case of such Contracts may be supposed,
namely, lest any man should be damnifyed by the good he does. For example, That
he who does any thing in obedience to another Command, should be saved
harmless and indemnifyed, as well in respect of his charges, as of any loss
sustained by reason of the execution of that command. Again, Things lent.
That he to whom any thing is freely lent, should satisfy the just value, if
the thing perish in his custody, because he stands obliged to the owner not
only for the thing it self, but to be thankful for the courtesy done him in
the loan thereof, unless it be evident that the thing so lent had certainly so
perished, had it continued in the possession of the right owner: For in this
case he loses nothing by the Loan. But on the contrary, He with whom any thing
is deposited, Things deposited.
receives nothing but a bare trust; and therefore if the thing miscarry he is
not bound to repair the loss: Neither in respect of the thing trusted, there
being no such in being, neither is the Trustee any thing the richer for it; nor
in respect of his acceptance of the trust, because thereby he receives no
courtesy but does one. And as to things pawned, as also in things let out to
hire, a middle way is to be taken; for in every case of loss the receiver is
not bound to restitution, as he is to whom a thing is lent; yet is a much
greater care required from him to preserve it, than of that which is committed
barely to trust, because the acceptance of it though gratuitous, yet usually
comes very near unto such Contracts as are burdensome. All which do agree with
the Roman Laws, but were originally extracted from natural equity; and are
therefore found to be of force amongst other Nations: As (amongst others) of
the Hebrews; See Exodus 22, 6, 10, 11, 12, 13.
for so Moses Maimonides testifies. And hereunto has Seneca respect De benef.
l. 7. c. 19.
, when he says, That some owe fidelity and others Tutelage and Protection. And
by these rules we may easily pass our judgments upon other Contracts: But now
having (as far as is requisite to our purpose) sufficiently discoursed of
Contracts in general, we shall briefly handle some more particular questions
concerning them.

XIV. Concerning the price of things, how they may be dearer or cheaper.
The most natural measure whereby the true value of every thing is known, is by
the want of it, as Aristotle rightly observes; which rule the barbarous Nations
do very strictly walk by: Yet is not this the only rule that guides the value
of things, for the mind of man, like an Empress, covets many things for their
rarity, which are not purely necessary. Margaritis pretia Luxuria fecit, It is
Pride that gives the price to Pearls, says Pliny Lib. 32. Pearls and Coral.
. And in another place, Look, says he, what value we put upon the Indian
Pearls, the same do the Indians put upon our Coral; for these things are valued
by the opinion that Nations have of them. And no marvel, says St. Augustine De
Civit. Dei l. 11. c. 16.
, For in the esteem of these men, an Horse is sometimes bought at a far dearer
rate than a Servant, and a Jewel than a Slave, etc. So Cicero, Qui modus est in
his rebus cupiditatis, idem est aestimationis; Nothing so much heightens the
prices of these things, as the longing desire that men have after them. So
likewise on the contrary, Those things that are most necessary, are least
prized where there is great plenty of them: Which Seneca illustrates by many
examples, where also he adds this, De benef. l. 6. c. 15.
The price of every thing varies with the times, when thou have sufficiently
praised these things, they are so much worth as they cannot advance to more. So
likewise Paulus the Lawyer, That which gives a just value to any thing, is not
the affection of any one person, or the profit that this or that particular man
can make of it, but what it may be commonly sold for. And this cannot be at all
times alike and certain, but it rises and falls according to the pains,
expenses, and hazards, that Merchants are at in their importation. Neither does
St. Augustine disapprove of it, who upon the Seventieth Psalm, brings in the
Merchant pleading thus, Affero e longinquo merces, Aug. in Psalm. 70. Of
Merchants.
mercedem laboris mei unde vivam, peto; Dignus enim est Mercenarius mercede
sua, etc. I bring my Merchandises from far, I require but a reward for my pains
that I may live, the Labourer is worthy of his hire. But says the good Father
there, De mendacio and perjurio agitur, non de negotio; It is not thy Calling
but thy Lying and Perjury that we condemn. Moreover the prices of things may
rise or fall by reason of the plenty or scarcity, either of Buyers, of Money, or
of the Merchandises themselves. Besides, such Accidents do sometimes fall out,
as may justly enhance or lessen the prices of things, as namely, we may happily
sustain some future loss by the sale of them, or for want of them; or our gains
we make by them may cease, or we may be unwilling to part with them for some
affection we particularly bear, either to the things themselves or to him that
gave them: And therefore we would not willingly sell them but in favor to him
that buys them. All which ought to be declared to him with whom we are to
Contract: Regard also may be had unto that damage or surceasing profit, which
is occasioned by either the delaying or anticipating the payment of the price
agreed on.

XV. When a sale is perfected by the Law of Nature, and when dominion passes.
As to buying and selling, we must know that the bargain and sale is good, from
the very minute of the Contract: For though the thing bought be not actually
delivered, yet may the property by a bare mutual consent of both parties be
transferred, and this is the most simple and innocent way of bargaining. So
Seneca, Venditio alienatio est, and rei suae jurisque sui in alium translatio;
Selling is the alienation of a thing and the translation of it, together with
our right and property in it to another. But if it be so agreed that the
property shall not pass presently, then shall the Seller be bound to transfer
his dominion, and in the mean time both the profit and peril shall be the
Sellers: And if it happen that one and the same thing be twice sold, that sale
shall be most valid which has the property first translated, either by
delivery of possession or otherwise; for hereby does the moral power pass away
from the seller to the buyer, and that which is made by promise only shall
stand for nothing.

XVI. What Monopolies are against the Law of Nature or the Rule of Charity.
The History of Thales is well known.
Monopolies are not all of them repugnant to the Law of Nature, for they may be
permitted by the Supreme Magistrate upon some just cause and at a certain rate,
as may appear by the example of Joseph in his Government of Egypt. So also
under the Romans, the Alexandrians had the Monopoly of all Indian and
Aethiopick Commodities. The like may be instituted by private men, so that they
retail them for moderate gains. But they that, like the Oylmen in Velabrum,
shall purposely combine, and either by fraud or force stop the importation of
Goods, that they may enhanse the price of those they have, which is already at
the highest; or that agree to buy all the Goods of that kind that come in, to
the end that they may sell them at what rate they please; are very injurious to
the Commonwealth, and are bound to make reparation. But if by any other means
they shall hinder the bringing in of such merchandises, or shall therefore
engross the whole to themselves, that they may vend them at a price (respect
being had to the time in which they sell them) not unreasonable, they infringe
the Bonds of Charity (as St. Ambrose proves by many Arguments, Off. l. 3. c. 6.
though to speak properly, they violate no man's Right.

XVII. How Money receives its value.
As for Money, the office it performs it naturally receives, not from the sole
matter, or metal, nor from its form or appellation, but from a more general
relation, namely, as we counterpoise it with other things, especially, with
those that are most necessary: Now the value that is put upon it, if it be not
otherwise agreed on, must be according to the rate, that it bears at the time,
and in the place, where payment is to be made. Now as Michael Ephesius rightly
observes, Ad. 5. Nicom.
Money it self varies as all other things do, according to the plenty or
scarcity of it; for as we have not always a like occasion to use other things,
and according to our desire of them, so the prices rise or fall: So Money does
not always retain the same value, but sometimes it is more and sometimes less
worth. But yet the price of Money is most lasting: Which we use chiefly as a
counter-ballance to all other things wherewith it is compared. Now that which
is the measure or standard to all things ought in it self to be constant. And
therefore Gold, Silver, and Brass by themselves are of the same value almost
always and in all places. And as other things that are useful or necessary, are
either rare, or abounding, so the same Money in weight, and made of the same
Metal is sometimes more, and sometimes less worth.

XVIII. Rents not to be remitted for barrenness or such like chances.
Next to buying and selling (as Cajus notes) is letting and taking to hire, and
steered by the same Rules. That which answers to the price is the rent or hire,
and that which answers to the Propriety, is the possessing and enjoying of the
benefit of it. Wherefore as when the thing perishes, the owner bears the loss:
So when the thing hired proves steril or barren, or by any other accident
proves fruitless and unprofitable; the loss is naturally the present occupiers:
Neither has the Lord any thing the less Right to the rent or hire agreed for,
because when he delivered the thing to him to use, it was so much worth as was
contracted for. Although that may be changed, either by general Laws, or by
Covenants between themselves; yet notwithstanding if he that first hired the
thing be disabled to make use thereof, and thereupon the owner let it to
another, whatsoever he shall gain thereby, more than the hire first agreed for,
he shall repay to him that first took it, lest he should enrich himself by that
which is due to another man.

XIX. How the reward of men's labors may be increased or diminished.
Again, what was before said in the case of selling, namely, that the price may
be more or less if the thing were only sold to gratify the buyer, but
otherwise was neither to be bought nor sold: The very same may be understood of
any thing, or of any work let or taken for hire, in favor of him that requires
it. But if a man by one and the same pains may accommodate diverse persons, as
in conveying them from place to place, if he that undertakes it shall oblige
himself entirely to every one of them, he may require the same reward from
every one, as he exacted from the first, if the Law do not otherwise provide;
because that, by my labor a second, third or fourth person receives a benefit
does no whit prejudice the Contract made with the first. And if the benefit be
equal, surely the reward ought to be so too.

XX. By what Law Usury is forbidden.
As concerning Money lent, it is frequently questioned by what Law Usury is
forbidden: and although it be the most received opinion, That it is prohibited
by the Law of Nature, yet was Albulensis of a contrary Judgment, neither are
those arguments which are brought to prove the adverse part of such weight as
to turn the Scale. For whereas it is said of things lent, that they are lent
freely, as much may be said of things delivered to another to use; and yet if
any thing be required for the use of either, it may happily cause the Contract to
pass by another name, but it cannot make the taking of a moderate price for the
use of a thing unlawful. Neither is that argument which they draw from the
sterility of Money any thing more persuasive. For man's Industry is able to make
Houses, Lands or any other thing, which in themselves are barren, to become
fruitful. But that which seems to be the most plausible Argument is this, That
here one thing is given for another, as an House for Rent. But the use of a
thing cannot be distinguished from the thing it self, Usus in abusu consistit.
where the thing it self perishes by the using of it: And therefore for that
nothing ought to be exacted. But here we must note, That when by the decree of
the Senate, the fruits arising from the use of things, that either by their use
perish, or are transferred into the dominion of another was introduced by the
Name of Vsusfructus, (which properly signifies the profit that is gained by the
use of another man's goods, the property remaining his own) they intended not
by that word Vsusfructus, that it should obtain the same effect of right with
that which was properly so called. For certainly the word so taken could not
according to its Propriety agree with such a Right. Neither will it thence
notwithstanding follow, That such a Right is nothing, or not valuable: Since,
on the contrary, it is certain, That if any man would yield up such a Right to
the Proprietor, Money may be required upon that account. So also the Right of
not paying either Money or Wine borrowed, till after such a time, is valuable:
Minus enim solvit, qui tempore minus solvit; For he pays not his due that pays
not in due time. And therefore in Lands mortgaged for Money, the profits of the
Land should answer for the use of the Money. Now what Arguments are brought by
Cato, Cicero, and Plutarch against Usury, do not so much respect the intrinsic
nature of the thing, as the adjuncts and consequences of it. What we are to do
in this case, we may collect from the Law given by God to the Hebrews, which
forbids them to lend money each to other upon Usury. The subject matter of
which Law, if it be not necessary, yet it is morally honest: And therefore in
Psalm. 15. it is enumerated among such as are highly Moral; as also in Ezech.
18. Some there are (says Hierom) who place Usury in the gain by money only;
See Psalm. 102. The good man is merciful and lends, and will guide his words
with discretion.
but the Scriptures do providently take away all Immoderate Gain by any thing;
and do require, that thou should take no more than thou gave. Now such
Precepts as these are, do as well oblige Christians as Hebrews, we being called
to be more excellent patterns of Virtue than they. Wherefore look what Moral
duties the Law then enjoined the Jews, and all that were circumcised, for they
were both herein equally obliged, the same ought now to be observed by all
Nations, the partition wall being now taken away by the promulgation of the
Evangelical Law, which under the notion of Neighbor, comprehends all mankind;
as by that excellent Apology of our Savior concerning the Samaritan, most
evidently appears. So Arnobius testifies of the Christians of his time, Lib. 4.
That they were communicative of their goods with all men, loving all men as if
they were their brethren. And therefore Lactantius treating of Christian
duties, makes this one, Epit. Instit. c. 2. De Off. 13. c. 2
He shall not (says he) give his money upon usury, for this is to seek gain by
another wants. So also St. Ambrose, Subvenire non habenti humanitatis est,
Duritiae autem, plus extorquere quam dederis; To relieve the wants of others is
humane, but to require more than was lent, cruel. And Augustus Caesar himself
blamed some who took up money at an easy rate, to lend it to others upon
harder terms. St. Chrysostom speaking of Fasting, gives this Caution, If thou
fast, take heed that thou lend not thy money upon Usury, but break the bonds of
all unjust Contracts. And on the last Chapter of the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, he says, See Great. c. 14. quaest. 3, 4.
That he that offers unto God money gained by Usury, is as if a woman should
offer out of her Meretricious Gain.

XXI. What Gain falls not under the Notion of Usury.
It is notwithstanding to be observed, that there are some Contracts which have
some resemblance of Usury, and are vulgarly so accounted, which yet are of
another kind: As when the lender requires somewhat to repair the damage he has
sustained, either by reason of the long detention of his money lent; or being
frustrated of the hopes of gain that he might have made by it, deducting
notwithstanding somewhat in respect of the incertainty of those hopes, and also
for the labor and hazard he must have run for it. So likewise, to defray the
charges of him that lends money to many, and to that purpose keeps his money
ready (with his Books of Account); and for the danger he runs of losing the
Principal where it is not sufficiently secured. If any thing in these Cases be
required, it is not to be reputed Usury. And if we would know, what opinion the
Roman Lawyers had of it, we shall find, that as they hated the word Foenus; so
they would easily admit of Vsura. Vsura, non propter lucrum petentium, sed
propter moram solventium; Not that the lender desired to make again by the
wants of the borrower, but because his money is not paid at the time agreed on.
The difference being only this, Foenus and Usura how distinguished.
[Foenus] is that which we contract for, more than the principal, merely out of
a desire of gain: But [Vsura] is that which is given more than the principal,
lest the lender should be damnified by the detention of the principal. But
since this word Vsura being abused by some, has gotten an ill report;
therefore has this latter Age substituted in its room the word Interest.
Demosthenes in his Oration against Pantaenetus, denies peremptorily, that he
deserves to be branded with the name of an Usurer, that lends what he has got
either by merchandising, or by his honest labor, sub modico lucello, for some
moderate gain: partly that he may keep what he has so got; and partly, that
thereby he may gratify another. It is recorded of Germanus Kinsman to
Justinian, That he lent money to every man that needed it, to be employed;
Goth. l. 3.
but never took any thing that deserved the name of Usury. (True it is, that
the Scriptures, the Fathers, the Canon Law and the Decretals do all declaim
against Usury, so do the Civilians: Baldus calls it a profitable Theft or
Piracy. Bartolus condemns all Usury, so do the Roman Emperors, and most
Commonwealths; yet are they contented to tolerate it, being restrained and
moderated. The Hebrew word Nishech, signifies a biting or grinding Usury, such
a lending of money, as under the pretense of Charity, devours the poor
borrower. The matter that binds the Conscience, is the Debtors gaining nothing
by the money lent, and not the taking of much or little Interest. It is a more
biting Usury, to take 2 or 3 per Cent. of him that gets nothing, than to
receive 6 or 8, of him that makes thereof a greater gain: which was the cause,
that among the Romans, he that took Usury of the poor, was more punished, than
he that robbed the rich. No man is by the Law bound, or so much as admonished
to lend to those who have no need: And in case another man gain by what is
mine, Natural equity requires that I should be a gainer, by so much as he, by
my means, is made the richer. Again, If to a man that stands in present want, I
lend freely until such a time prefixed, if he fail then of payment, and I
thereby incur any damage, it is reason that he should satisfy the damage, and
so Interest may be due ex damno habito, for the loss I sustain. Also, if a
Tradesman lend his money which he can spare till such a Mart to be then paid,
and the borrower fail in his payment, whereby he is disabled to drive on his
Trade for the next year; then shall he be bound to satisfy the damage the
lender sustaineth propter lucrum cessans, by reason that our hope of gain
cease. Again, four men are Partners in one Shop, two being Aged supply Money,
the other two being young and active, do take pains to improve it; if they by
their labor and care gain 20 or 30 per Cent. and pay the other two being past
their labor, 6 or 8 per Cent. for their Maintenance, Can this be called Biting
Usury? If it be objected, That the two lenders take no pains, nor run any
hazard; I answer, Yes, they did doubtless take pains when they were able, and
they do now run an hazard by lending their money to them that are painful, but
have nothing. It is recorded by Procopius, to the honor of Germanus, Proc.
Got. l. 3.
a Kinsman of Justinian's, That he lent great sums of money, to be employed by
such as needed it, but never took any thing that deserved the name of Usury.
Our King Edgar forbad Usury, and Edward the First sent away all the Bankers
whom Gregory the Tenth had sent out of Italy into England, and placed in
Lumbard-street: Henry the Eighth allowed 10 per Cent. for one year, which
Edward the Sixth repealed. Queen Elizabeth tolerated 10 per Cent. so did King
James, which Charles the First reduced to 6 per Cent. which yet continues.

XXII. What power the Civil Laws have determined in the case.
But these humane Laws that tolerate a moderate gain, for the use of money or
any other thing (as in Holland they permit 8 per Cent. to some, and 12 per
Cent. to Merchants for a year, as a reasonable compensation for that loss which
the lender does or may sustain by the forbearance of his money) are no way
repugnant to the Laws, either Natural or Divine: But if they exceed this rate,
those Laws may afford Impunity, but no just Right.

XXIII. How Contracts concerning ensurances are to be valued.
A Contract for the ensuring of Goods from Casualties either by Sea or Land, is
altogether void, if either of the Contractors do know, that the Goods are
already safely arrived at the Port or place whither they were bound, or that
they are perished by the way: not only in respect of that parity or equality of
knowledge, that there should be, between such Contractors; but in respect of
the subject matter of such a Contract, which is a loss, but uncertain, which in
respect of both parties may, or may not be. But at what rate these Goods are to
be secured, depends upon common estimation.

XXIV. How in Societies: with their several kinds.
In social Negotiations where traffic is maintained by the joint Stock of a
Company, if every member contribute an equal proportion in money, their gain or
loss, shall also be equal; but if their proportions be unequal, every member
shall be rated according to his proportion: The like is to be observed, where
the traffic is to be maintained by joint service, accordingly as the service
is by agreement, either equally or unequally to be performed. But yet, in such
Negotiations, services may be set against money, or against service and money,
so that they may answer one another, as it is usually said, Par pari datum
hostimentum est opera pro pecunia; To give like for like, is to even the
scales. But this may be done diverse ways; for, either service may
counterballance the bare use of money, in which case the principal stock
whether preserved or lost, is entirely his gain or loss that owns it, or the
work or service may counterballance the whole stock of money; in which case, he
that does the work, is partaker of the whole stock. In the former of these
cases, the work is set against, not the stock, but the danger of losing it, or
the gains that probably might be expected from it. In the latter case, the
price of the labor is added unto the stock of money, and he that performs it,
shall have a share in the stock equivalent to it. But that either of the
parties associated, should share in the profit, and yet be indemnified in case
of loss, is preternatural to societies; yet such an Agreement there may be
without injury: As when there is a mixed contract, partly by the society, and
partly for ensurance, wherein such an equality may be observed, as that he that
assumes to make good the loss, shall receive a greater proportion of the gain,
than otherwise he should have had. But that any man should bear the loss, that
partakes not of the gain, is inconsistent with a society, whose principal end
is common profit, without which it cannot consist. Now, whereas the Lawyers
say, That where the proportions are not expressly named, they are to be
understood as if they were equal, this holds true only where other things
contributed are also equal.

XXV. Of Naval Societies.
Where a Fleet is sent out by the joint Stock of a Society against Pirates,
there the common Profit is the common Defense; and sometimes the Prizes taken
from the Enemy: And then the Ships and all that are in the Ships are to be
apprized, and drawn into one gross sum, out of which, all charges and damages
are to be deducted, and born by the Owners of the Ships and Goods, according to
the parts they have in that sum; and among those charges, that of the wounded,
is to be reckoned. And what we have hitherto said, we judge to be most
agreeable to the Law of Nature.

XXVI. The Law of Nations takes no notice of Inequalities, if consented unto.
Neither do the Voluntary Laws of Nations alter any thing of it; except only in
this, That where the Contributions are unequal, yet consented unto, if no lie
be in the case, nor any thing concealed which should have been declared, in all
external Actions they shall be held as equal: So that as by the Civil Law,
before that Constitution made by Dioclesian, no action would be admitted of in
a Court against such an Inequality; so now by those that are consociated by the
sole Law of Nations, no exaction or constraint can be admitted for that cause.
Of this opinion was Pomponius, That naturally in buying and selling, it was
lawful for one man to circumvent another: where the word Licitum is not the
same with Fas; but it was so permitted, And how this is said to be Natural.
that there was no Remedy provided against it for him that was willing to
justify him by his Agreement: In which sense that is termed Natural in this,
and some other places, which is every where customarily received. In which
sense, St. Paul says, that some men are naturally vain, 1 Cor. 11.14.13.1.
and that it is against nature, that a man should nourish his hair, when it was
only against Custom, and that not of all, but of those Nations wherein he had
lived. So the same Apostle speaking not in his own, but in the person of the
Romans, with whom he converst, says, Ephesians. 2.3.
That they were by Nature the Sons of wrath: so that Nature is nothing but
Custom, or that which has been of long continuance. In which sense Galen is
to be understood, (...).
where he says, That Custom is an acquired or adventitious Nature. So
likewise Thucydides, Humana natura Legum victrix; Humane Nature cannot be bound
up by any Laws. So the Grecians called both Virtues and Vices, (...), when by
long Custom they are made natural unto us. Now how great the advantage of such
a Law if introduced, would be to the General Peace, is evident: for it would
prevent infinite contests which would arise, concerning the uncertain prizes of
Commodities, which could not possibly be determined or avoided, where there was
no common Judge, if every man might break off from his agreement, upon pretense
of such an inequality. Haec est Emptionis and venditionis substantia, (say the
Roman Emperors, calling a perpetual Custom by the name of Substance) This is
the perpetual manner of buying and selling, the buyer beating the price as low
as he can, and the seller drawing up the buyer as high as he can, till at
length they agree in an equal and just value. And Seneca respecting this very
Custom says, What matter is it what any thing cost, if the buyer and seller
are agreed about the price? He owes nothing to the seller, that gets a good
bargain. And much after the same Copy writes Andronicus Rhodius, That which by
the mutual consent of the Contractors is gained, is neither unjust, nor should
it be amended: For the Laws do indulge a license in these things. And he that
writes the Life of Isidore, calls the selling of any thing at too dear a rate,
or the buying of any thing at too cheap a rate, An Injustice tolerated by the
Law. Harum rerum licentiam Lex dedit, says Andronicus Rhodius; The Law gives a
License in these things. But yet such a permission it is, as will at length
undermine and easily pervert Justice.

CHAP. XIII. Concerning Oaths.
I. The great Authority given unto Oaths by the Heathens. II. Great
deliberation required in him that would take an Oath. III. Oaths oblige in that
sense which he to whom they are made, is thought to understand them. IV. An
Oath procured by Fraud, when binding. V. The words of an Oath not to be wrested
beyond their ordinary sense. VI. An Oath binds not to things unlawful. VII. Nor
to things that impede a greater moral good. VIII. Nor to things impossible. IX.
What if the Impossibility be but for some certain time? X. To be sworn by the
Name of God, and in what sense. XI. By other things in respect to God. XII. It
is an Oath though it be sworn by False Gods. XIII. The effects of an Oath:
whence arises a twofold obligation, one at the time of the taking of it, and
another after. This explained. XIV. When by an Oath a Right is gained to God
and Man, and when to God only. XV. The opinion, That an Oath, given to a
Pyrate, or a Tyrant, binds not before God, refuted. XVI. Whether an Oath given
to the Perfidious, be to be kept: explained by a distinction. XVII. He that is
bound to God alone, does not bind his heir after him. XVIII. It is no perjury
not to fulfill that, which he for whom it should be fulfilled, is willing to
remit it; nor when the quality cease whereunto it was sworn. XIX. When that
is made void, which is done against a man's Oath. XX. How far the Princes power
prevails, concerning what either his Subjects have sworn to strangers, or
strangers to them, explained by distinction. XXI. Of what manner of Oaths the
words of Christ are to be understood, when he forbids us to swear at all. XXII.
What Gestures or manners of Speech, have by Custom the force of an Oath,
though not the Form of one.
I. The Credit given to Oaths by Heathens.
IN all Contracts, Vows and Promises, the greatest assurance that any Age or
Nation could ever either give or require, of their Faith and Sincerity, is by
Oath. This is an indissoluble bond, which whosoever violates, is deservedly reputed
as an execrable and accursed thing both before God and men, whereof Sophocles
speaks thus, The mind that is startled by a sacred Oath,
Will carefully avoid two smarting Rods;
The blame of Friends, and the Anger of the Gods.


Nullum vinculum ad astringendam fidem, majores nostri jurejurando arctius esse
voluerunt; Our forefathers, says Cicero, never knew any thing stronger than
an Oath, whereby to bind us to perform our promises: and to violate this bond,
they always accounted a sin of the greatest magnitude; neither did they
believe any other sin to be so severely punished, as this of perjury: so Hesiod
testifies, Whence is it that mortal men thus plagued are?
Surely, because fallaciously they swear.


This is one of those sins which draws down vengeance on our posterity after
us, and wherein the bare Will is punished, Lib. 6.
without the deed. Of both which, Herodotus has given a clear example in one
Glaucus, a man highly famed by the Lacedaemonians for his Virtues, but
especially for his Justice; with whom a Citizen of Miletum (confiding in a man
of so great a repute) lest deposited a very great sum of money, with a writing,
desiring him to keep both; and to pay the money to such, as should hereafter
bring him a duplicate of that writing. Glaucus accepts of the money and
condition; but when the money was demanded by his Sons, and the duplicate
showed, he denied that he knew any thing of it; yet he told them, that he would
rub up his memory, and in case he could retrieve it there, he would repay it:
otherwise, he threatened to proceed against them according to the Grecian Laws.
So dismissing them for four months, and in that time consulting the Oracle of
Delphos, whether he might by his Oath make prey of the money, he received this
stabbing Answer: A nameless Brat, stumpt both in Hands and Feet,
False Oaths bring forth; which yet in furious rage,
Consumes the House, and blasts the Heritage.


Glaucus hearing this, devoutly implores the Gods to forgive him; but is again
answered, That it was the same thing to tempt the Gods in this case, by the
Will, as by the Deed. And though Glaucus did restore the money, yet the Curse
denounced by the Oracle did fall upon him: For in the third Age, Glaucus had
neither Child, nor House, nor any to inherit his Name, which also had been
forgotten long since, but that his example might (like Lots Wifes pillar) deter
others from the like attempt. Juvenal also reciting this story, concludes thus,
Has patitur poenas peccandi sola voluntas.
The bare intent to Sin, such Plagues attend.


So true is that of the Prophet Zachary, I will bring the Curse into the house
of him that swears falsely by my Name (says the Lord), And it shall remain
in the midst of his house, See Chrysostom, upon this place.
and shall consume it, with the Timber thereof, and the Stones thereof, Zach.
5.4. Cicero was in the right, when he termed an Oath, a Religious Asseveration
or a Divine Attestation of the truth of what we say: For what we seriously
affirm or promise, and call God to witness of, that we are bound to make good
and to perform, under the greatest penalty that can be. But whereas he adds,
Not for fear of the Anger of the Gods, which is none at all, but for Truth and
Justice sake. If by Anger he means a passion, or perturbation of the mind, we
deny it not: But if he understand by Anger a will to punish or revenge, it can
by no means be admitted, as Lactantius rightly observes. Lib. de ira Dei.
Now let us see from whence this Sacred Power of an Oath arises, and how far
forth it extends.

II. It requires a deliberate mind.
And in the first place, What we have already said of Contracts and Promises,
is true also in the case of Oaths, namely, That he that swears, should be of
sound mind, and should use great deliberation before he takes it. (The Romans
would not permit any man to swear by Hercules till he had gone out of the Court
for a while, and seriously considered with himself what he was to do.)
Wherefore if a man not intending to swear, shall rashly utter words importing
an Oath (as it is recorded of Cydippe) that may be true, which Ovid affirms of
him, Quae jurat men's est: nil conjuravimus illa. Sed si nil dedimus praeter
sine pectore vocem,
Verba suis frustra viribus orba tenes.
Non ego juravi, legi jurantia verba, etc.


It is the Mind that swears: we swear not there.


And what before him Euripides said in his Hippolitus: Jurata lingua est, Mente
juravi nihil.
It was our tongue that swear, our minds were free.


But he that willingly swears, yet is not willing to be bound by that Oath, is
notwithstanding strongly obliged to what he has sworn; Obligation being
inseparable from an Oath, and its necessary effect.

III. The words of an Oath are to be understood in that sense that he is
believed to understand to whom we swear.
There are some who hold, that though a man do seriously pronounce the words of
an Oath, yet if it be not with a purpose to swear, he shall not be bound by
that Oath: But that in speaking the words of that Oath he sins, by swearing
rashly. But it accords more with Divine truth, that he is bound to make good
his words, whereof he has called God for a witness: For that Act which of it
self was Obligatory, did proceed from a serious and deliberate mind: Wherefore
though what Cicero says, be for the most part true, Quod ex animi tui
sententia juraveris, id non facere perjurium est; That not to perform, what we
have deliberately sworn, is Perjury: Yet is it to be understood, with this
limitation, unless he that swears, knows, or at least believes, that he with
whom he converseth, does otherwise understand the words of the Oath. For he
that calls God to witness the truth of what he says, is obliged to perform his
word in that sense, wherein he thinks himself to be understood. That Soldier,
who being a Prisoner to the Carthaginians had gotten his Parole upon the credit
of his Oath, when being departed a little from the Camp, he upon some pretense
made his r^^urn unto it; and supposing that he was thereby discharged from his
Oath, fled imm^a^^^ly to Rome, was by the Senate immediately sent back. For
they regarded not what he intended that swear, The reverend esteem of Oaths
among the Romans.
but what the Carthaginians expected from him to whom he had sworn. For after
this Rule does God himself judge.

Qui non ut juras, sed ut jurasse putavit
Cui juras, audit: sic es utrique reus.
This is that which the same Cicero asserts, What is sworn must be so done as
he that imposed the Oath conceived must be done. And it was the observation of
Tacitus, That they who swear timorously, craftily changing the words of their
Oaths, had their Consciences polluted with wickedness. Wherefore St. Augustine
brands them with Perjury, who though they perform what is expressed by the bare
words of the Oath, do yet delude the expectation of those to whom that Oath was
given. But (as Isidore well observes) though the words of the Oath be never so
craftily penned, yet God, who is the Judge and Witness of the Conscience, does
judge of it, as he to whom we swear understands it. Wherefore Metellus did
wisely, in refusing to swear to the Apuleian Law, though he was told that that
Law was unduly enacted, and that the Oath was not binding, unless the Law
whereunto it referred, was rightly gained. For although in other Promises it be
no hard matter to suppose some tacit condition, which if admitted, may absolve
the Promiser; yet in Oaths, such tacit conditions are by no means to be
admitted, but if we do swear, we must liquido jurare, swear clearly and
apertly: For such an Oath for confirmation, is the end of all Controversies; as
St. Paul testifies to the Hebrews, and proves by the example of God himself:
Who to show to the Heirs of the Promise the immutability of his Counsels,
confirmed it by his Oath, that by two immutable things, namely, his Promise and
his Oath, wherein it is not possible that God should deceive us (For so the
word (...) is best expounded in this place, (...). Heb. 4.17. Dan.
7.16.8.26.10.1.
as Plain Speaking is elsewhere called Truth) we might have a sure Consolation.
For the clearer understanding of which words, we must know, That the Penmen of
the Sacred stories do often speak of God, (...), after the manner of men: Not
properly, as he is in himself, but as he appears unto us to to be. For God does
not really change his Decrees and Counsels: And yet he is sometimes said to
change his sentence and to repent, as often as he does otherwise than his words
seemed to import, by reason of some condition tacitly understood, though not
expressed, which cease to be. So we read in Jonah, Yet forty days and Nineveh
shall be destroyed. Jo. 4.2.
This was the Sentence that was denounced against their Impenitency; but that
ceasing, the Sentence was reverst, yet Gods Counsel did even then remain
unchargable. That such a condition is tacitly to be understood, will evidently
appear by that of the Prophet Jer. 18.8. And, that this was true, not in the
case of Jonah and the Ninevites only, Jon. 3.5. is plain, by the like
proceedings in the case of Abimelech, Genesis 20.3. Of the Israelites, Exodus
32.14. Of Ahab, 1 Kings 21.29. In which sense, God may, though improperly, be
said to deceive us, forasmuch as the word (...), (...). Hos. 1.2. Abac. 3.17.
Jos. 24.27. Esa. 58.11. Job 41.6. Hos. 9.2.
sometimes imports an event deluding our hopes or expectation, as it does Heb.
6.17, 18. Levit. 6.2. Now this may easily be admitted of in Comminations,
because they confer not a Right to any: And sometimes in Promises, namely, when
some condition is understood, though not expressed. And therefore the Apostle in
the place recited, does instance in two things, which do necessarily infer an
immutability in God: First, His Promise, which confers a just Right. Secondly,
His Oath, which will not admit of any conditions tacit, or any ways latent. As
may also be seen Ps. 89.30, 31, and so to the 36 verse. But it is another case,
where the very nature of the business does clearly discover some conditions to
be performed. Whereunto some do refer that of Numb. 14.30. where God tells the
Israelites, That they shall not come into the Land, concerning which he swear,
to make them dwell therein, save Caleb the Son of Jephunne, and Joshua the Son
of Nun. Though this Promise of the Land of Canaan be much better understood, as
sworn to the People and Nation of the Jews, than to any of their persons, as is
evident by verse 23. Surely they shall not see the Land, which I swear unto
their Fathers, neither shall any of them that provoke me, see it. Whence we may
observe, That the Oath that was made to their Fathers was not to be fulfilled
to them, but to their Children: For such a Promise might at any time be
fulfilled, which was not affixt to any particular persons, like as it was
afterward to Caleb and Joshua.

IV. An Oath by fraud procured, when binding.
From whence we may also learn what to think of an Oath by fraud gained; for
certainly, in case he that swears, supposes somewhat to be done that really is
not, or somewhat to be true that is false: And unless he did so believe, he
would not have so sworn, that Oath binds him not. But if it be doubtful,
whether he would not have bound himself by Oath, though he had not been so
deceived, then shall he stand to his agreement, For there is nothing that
naturally so well becomes an Oath, Josh. 9. Joshua's Oath.
as plain meaning. And hereunto we may refer the Oath of Joshua to the
Gibeonites, which though it were gained by fraud, yet does it not thence
necessarily follow, That had Joshua known that they dwelt amongst the
Canaanites he would not have spared them. And whereas the Israelites say,
Perhaps ye live amongst us, and how then shall we make a League with you? It
may be understood of the manner of the League which the Gibeonites desired,
Whether of Alliance only, as amongst equals; or of Dedition, as with such who
to preserve their lives, did willingly surrender all things else to the
pleasure of the Conqueror: Or it was so spoken, to show, That as it was not
lawful for them to enter into any League with some people, (meaning that of
Alliance;) so also it was not prohibited them to save the lives of such as
should freely surrender themselves to mercy. For that Divine Law that commanded
them to destroy the Nations, Deuteronomy. 7.4. Exodus 23.33. being compared with
another charge given by God, concerning them, Deuteronomy. 20.10. will admit of this
limitation, That if they yielded upon the first summons, they might be received
to mercy. As is clear by the Histories of Rahab, who for securing the Spies was
saved: Jos. 16.10.
Of the Inhabitants of Gezer, who were suffered to live among the Ephramites,
and to serve them: Of the Gergezites, of whom St. Matthew records, Mat. 8.28.
that there were some living even until his time. Neither shall we find these
ennumerated among those that were to have been extirpated, as you may read
Deuteronomy. 20.17. Jos. 9.1. And lastly, It is clear, by that Act of Solomon, 1 King.
20.20, 21: whereby he is said to have received the remainder of the Canaanites,
whom the Children of Israel could not destroy, as his Tributaries and
Bond-Servants unto that day. Yea, and if we examine the cause of that severe
charge given unto Moses for their extirpation, as it is expressed Exodus 23.33.
Deuteronomy. 7.4. we shall find that in case (as the Hebrew Doctors observed) they
would submit to the Commandments given to Noah, and his Sons, and pay Tribute,
the cause of their extirpation being taken away, they might live. Now, why
Joshua might not as well spare the Gibeonites upon their Dedition, as he did
Rahab, and the Canaanites of Gezer, upon theirs, no solid Reason can be
assigned. And yet that the Gergezites being the Offspring of the Inhabitants
of Gezer, were spared and lived as Tributaries to the Israelites till Christ's
time, is most evident by the Sacred story. The immediate cause of the
destruction of all the rest of the Canaanites, was not any inexorable Command
given by God to Moses, for that left them a possibility to live, because a
power to submit: But the hardness of their hearts, which, proceeded from God as
a punishment for all their great provocations, Jos. 11.19, 20. that so, he
might destroy them utterly, without any mercy, as the Lord commanded Moses.
Wherefore, considering that in case the Gibeonites had dealt plainly with
Moses, which they durst not do for fear of him, and had voluntarily given
themselves up as Bond-servants; It is probable, that he would have spared their
lives, under the same condition as he did the Inhabitants of Gezer. Therefore
Valuit juramentum, The Oath was to remain inviolable: Yea, and the breach of
this Oath (three hundred years after, when Saul, either forgetting the Oath of
his Forefathers, or out of a well-meant zeal, slew some of these Gibeonites)
cost the lives of many thousand Israelites, 2 Samuel 21.6
in the three years Famine which God brought upon Israel. Of this opinion was
St. Ambrose, who handling this Question, says, Joshua did not think it safe to
break the Peace with the Gibeonites, because he had confirmed it by Oath: Ne,
dum aliorum perfidiam arguit, De Off. l. 3. c. 10.
suam fidem solveret; Lest whilst he punished others for their perfidiousness,
he should be found guilty of Perjury. Neither did this fraud of theirs go
altogether unpunished: For whereas had they dealt plainly, they had been
admitted upon paying of Tribute only; now their Corporal Slavery is at once the
price of their lives, and the just Punishment of their Craft and Subtilty. So
were the Brutiani served by the Romans, Loh. 10. c. 3.
as Gellius relates.

V. The words of an Oath not to be too far extended.
Neither should the meaning of an Oath be wrested to any other sense, than the
words do usually bear. Wherefore, when the Children of Israel, having sworn not
to give their Daughters in Marriage to the Benjamites, did notwithstanding
suffer the Benjamites to take the Daughters of Shiloh by force, and to enjoy
them, they were not guilty of Perjury. For it is one thing to give, and
another, not to require what is already lost. Whereof St. Ambrose speaks thus,
This Indulgence of theirs was not without a Punishment suitable to their
Intemperance, whilst they were permitted only to enjoy those whom they had
ravished, without the solemnity of Marriage. Nec hortabantur Israelitae, nec
prohibebant, says Joseph; The Israelites did neither encourage the Benjamites,
nor forbid them. Now the Law, says Seneca, may punish him, that succoureth an
exile, but not him that only suffers him to be relieved. Not much unlike was
that request which the Achaians made to the Romans, (who were highly displeased
at some things by them done, and confirmed by Oath, namely, That the Romans
would be pleased to alter what they would, but not to bind them by any
Religious Vow, to null those things which they had already established by Oath.

VI. Oaths bind not to things unlawful.
Secondly, That an Oath be binding, it is necessary that it refer to things
lawful. For, if the thing promised upon Oath be forbidden either by the Law of
Nature, or by the Divine Law, or interdicted by humane Laws, (whereof more
anon) it has no power at all to oblige us. That which is unlawful to be sworn,
is unlawful to be done being sworn, and that which is unlawful for us to do, is
unlawful to be sworn. All Oaths have a tacit exception of the higher powers,
and of former Oaths: Now God is greater than man, and therefore having first
bound our selves unto him, no Oath made against him or against our duty to him,
ought by us to be performed, but repented of. No Weapon formed against him
shall prosper, says the Prophet, Es. 54. It is good counsel that Philo gives
in this case, Let him that goes about to do an unjust act by reason of his
Oath, know, That he does not thereby perform his Oath but break it. For an Oath
is a sacred thing, which deserves our greatest care and devotion, to preserve;
whereby we stand obliged to do such things only, as are just and honest. For he
does but accumulate one sin upon another, who to a wicked Oath, adds a
dishonest action. Wherefore let him that has ensnared his own Soul by a rash
Vow, yet refrain from doing wickedly, That God who is rich in mercy may forgive
him. For wilfully to contract a double guilt, when we may be discharged from a
single one, is an incurable madness. Rash Vows are ill made and sometimes worse
kept. Our Tongues must not bind our hands to do wickedly. 1 Samuel 25.
David was less sinful in breaking his Oath, and sparing the life of Nabal,
whom he had sworn to kill, than Herod was in killing the Baptist, or Agamemnon
in sacrificing Iphigenia, for their Oaths sake. Surely Oaths were never
invented to be the Bonds of Iniquity.

Praestare fateor posse me tacitam fidem,
Si scelere careat; interim scelus est fides.
My Faith perform I can, I do confess,
If void of Sin; else Faith's but Wickedness.
Some Promises cannot be performed, says Ambrose, nor some Oaths kept, without
the violation of our duties to God or Man. And if we have pawned our Faith to
commit a Sin (the best way to preserve our Faith is to break our Promise.) For
that is not properly called Faith, that engages us to do wickedly. Wherefore
take the Advice of Isidore, In malis Promissis rescinde Fidem, Gratian.
in turpi voto muta decretum, impia est Promissio quae scelere impletur; Make
no scruple of breaking that Oath, that would bind thee to a dishonest or unjust
action, for that Promise must needs be wicked that cannot be fulfilled, but by
making thee wicked.

VII. Nor that impede a greater moral good.
Yea, though that which is promised upon Oath be not unlawful, yet if it cannot
be performed without the omission of something that is a greater moral good, it
loses its binding faculty: For we owe unto God our growth in goodness, and we
cannot abridge our selves of this liberty without sinning against him. Some
there are, says Philo, of so harsh and unsociable a nature, either as bearing
hatred to all mankind, or so enslaved to their own inordinate passions, that
they even strengthen themselves in their churlish humors by rash and
inconsiderate Vows; as namely, That they will never admit such a man either to
bed or board; or that they will never do such a man good, nor ever receive any
thing from him till death. (St. Augustine being consulted with about one
Hubaldus, who (to save his own life being threatened) had bound himself by Oath
to marry his own Concubine, and to thrust his own Mother and Brethren out of
doors, and never to relieve them, gives this resolution of the Case, That as to
his marriage with his Concubine, whom he had long enjoyed, his Oath was
binding, for that was no sin: But as to his not relieving his Mother and
Brethren, it could not bind him: For Qui non alit necat; To deny them
necessaries, was no better than to kill them: And no Oath can oblige to a sin
so unnatural. The Error of the Jews concerning Oaths. See Godw. Jewish Ant.
page 274.
) Such a kind of Oath was called among the Jews an Oath concerning beneficence
or doing good: The form whereof we have set down, Mat. 15.5. (...) That is, By
the gift upon the Altar thou shall never receive any good from me. Which Oath
was always to be so understood as if some direful Execration were at the tail
of it. As, So do God to me, and more also, if thou ever receive any good from
me, which Oath was among the Jews thought to be the most binding of any, yea,
though it were against our own Parents. Such corrupt Interpreters of the Law of
God, were the Jewish Doctors in those superstitious times: Which Christ there
confutes, making no distinction between honoring our parents and relieving
them, as appears by comparing that of Matthew with the like in Mark, and with 1 Timothy 5.3, 17. and Numb. 23.11. Yea, though it be not made against our Parents,
but against others, yet does it not bind, because it is a duty we owe unto God
to do good unto all men, which is altogether inconsistent with such an Oath.

VIII. Nor to impossibilities.
To things manifestly impossible, no Oath can oblige us.

IX. If the impossibility be only for the present, how the Oath obliges.
But as to things that are for a certain time impossible, or supposed at
present to be so, the obligatory power of that Oath hangs in suspense, insomuch
that he that swears suppositively, ought to endeavor, as far as in him lies,
to make that which he has sworn possible.

X. The form of Oaths.
The forms of Oaths may be different, but the substance of all are alike: For
all invoke God as a Witness, or as an Avenger, both which in him are one and
the same. For in calling him to Witness, who has a Power and a Right to
punish, we do but bespeak him to a Revenge due to our Perfidiousness. And he
that is omniscient is therefore an Avenger, because a Witness. What is to swear
(says Ambrose to the Emperor Valentinian) but to acknowledge that Divine
Power which thou invokest, to witness and defend thy truth? Every Oath, says
Plutarch, ends in some Curse in case we Swear falsely. Quaest. Romans
And therefore the ancient forms of making and swearing Leagues was usually by
killing of Sacrifices, as appears Genesis 15.9, etc. and by that of the Romans in
Livy, Tu Jupiter, ita illum ferito, ut ego hunc porcum; And do thou, O Jupiter,
destroy him that breaks this league, as I do this Hogg. And in another place,
the Priest killing a Lamb, Prays the Gods to kill him that violates that Oath,
as he does that Lamb. So in Polybius and Festus we read, If I knowingly
deceive, let God cast me away from him, as I do this Stone.

XI. Oaths not by God only, but by others also in relation to God, oblige.
It was the custom of the Ancients, not only to swear by God, but by other both
things and persons, thereby either wishing those creatures might be noxious
unto them in case they swear falsely, as when they swear by the Sun, the Moon,
the Heavens, the Earth, etc. or wishing they might be punished in them; as when
they swear by their Head, by their Lives, by their Children, by their Prince,
etc. Neither did the profane and barbarous people only swear thus, but the
Jews themselves. Philo the Jew among his Special Laws, tells us, That it is not
fit for us upon every slight occasion, to have recourse to the Creator and
Preserver of all things. And Homer's Interpreters do testify the same of the
ancient Grecians, that they were not easily induced to swear by God, Oaths by
the Creatures oblige.
but by other things that were present, as by the Scepter, etc. Thus Apollonius
testifies of Socrates, That he swear by such things, Non ut per Deos, sed ne
per Deos; Not as by Gods, but lest he should swear by the Gods) And this custom
(as Porphyry records) was introduced by that Prince, who was so famous for his
Justice, King Rhadamanth. So did Joseph according to the custom of that Nation
among whom he lived, swear by the Life of Pharaoh, Elisha by the Life of Elias,
and the Shunamite by the Life of Elisha. 2 King. 4.30. Cant. 2.7. Mat. 5.
Neither does our Savior (as some think) declare such Oaths to be less lawful,
or less binding, than those whereby God himself was invoked: But observing that
the Jews did not so regard such Oaths (in an opinion, happily, not unlike to his
who said, Sceptrum non putat esse Deos, That he did not believe the Scepter to
be the Gods. He shows, that even these are true Oaths, See Wisd. 14.20.
and as binding as those that are made in the name of the true God. It was very
well said of Vlpian, He that swears by his own safety, seems to swear by God,
because he has respect to some Divine power that preserves him. So our Blessed
Savior tells us, That he that swears by the Temple, swears by him that
presides therein; and he that swears by Heaven, swears by God who dwells
there. The Error of the Jews concerning Oaths.
But the Jewish Rabbis in Christ's time, were of opinion, That an Oath made by
the Creatures did not bind, unless when some punishment was added thereunto, as
if the thing by which they swear were consecrated unto God; so that an Oath by
the Temple was nothing, but an Oath by the Gold of the Temple was binding: An
Oath by the Altar was invalid, but an Oath by the Gift on the Altar was
inviolable: And this Oath they called (...), (...).
or an Oath by the Gift, whereof mention is made, not only in the Story of
Matthew, but amongst the Tyrian Laws, as Josephus writes in his Disputes
against Appian. But this opinion of the Pharisees being erroneous, our Savior
refutes in Mat. 5. And Tertullian informs us, That the ancient Christians were
wont to swear by the Life of their Prince, which in their esteem was more
reverenced than all their Genii. And in Vegetius we find the form of the Oath
given unto the Soldiers that were Christians, wherein they swear, Not only by
God, but by the Life of their Emperors, which according to the Ordinance of
God, is a thing to be desired and prayed for by all mankind.

XII. And by false Gods.
Yea if a man swear by such as are false Gods, yet is he thereby bound, because
though under a false Notion, yet in the general he invokes the Deity: And
therefore the True God in case he forswear, does so interpret it as if done in
contempt of himself. See Wisd. 14.30, 31.
And although we see that holy men have seldom admitted of Oaths in that form,
and much less have taken such Oaths themselves, yet if we cannot prevail with
those with whom we have to do, to swear by the True God, we may enter into
League with them, taking for confirmation their Oaths in such a form as is
usual among them. An Example whereof we have in the League made between Jacob
and Laban, Genesis 31.53. Whereupon St. Augustine thus infers: Et qui per lapidem
jurat, si falsum jurat, perjurus est; He that invokes a Pillar or a Stone as
witness, if to what he knows to be false, is guilty of Perjury. For though Non
audit te lapis loquentem, puniet te Deus fallentem; The Stone hears thee not
when thou speak, yet God will certainly judge thee when thou deceivest.
(Moreover, He that swears by a false God, yet thinks the God he swears by to be
the True God, may be believed upon that Oath; and if that Oath refer to things
just and honest, he that makes a League with him upon that Oath, Non peccato
illius se sociat (says St. Augustine) does not partake with him of his sin
though he swear by Devils; but of that good agreement which by that Oath is
confirmed. And therefore St. Augustine in the same place concludes, Ad Publicol.
that Minus malum est, per falsos Deos veraciter jurare, quam per Deum verum
fallaciter; It is a lesser sin to swear truly by false Gods, than to swear
falsely by the True God. For the more holy the Person is by whom we swear, the
more execrable is the sin, and the greater is the punishment if we forswear.

XIII. The principal effect of an Oath.
The principal effect of an Oath is to determine all strifes: So the Author to
the Hebrews, An Oath for Confirmation is the end of all Controversies. Not much
unlike is that of Philoneus, An Oath is the Testimony of God in cases that are
doubtful. And to the same purpose is that of Dionysius Halicarnassensis, The
greatest assurance of Faith, that either Graecians or Barbarians can give,
Pers. l. 2.
and which no Age can cancel, is when to their sworn Contracts and Promises,
both parties bring in the Gods for their Sureties. An Oath, says Procopius, is
the greatest and strongest pledge that can be given by men, both of their
fidelity and veracity. He therefore that swears, ought to be careful of two
things: First, That his Heart consents to what his Tongue utters, Chrysippus
terms (...). Secondly, That his deeds be suitable to his Promises, which he
calls (...): He that offends in the former, is said (...): which is forbidden
Exodus 20. And he that offends in the latter, is said (...), forbidden likewise,
Lev. 19. As the same Chrysippus distinguishes them, acutely enough, though
sometimes they are confounded.

XIV. When by an Oath a right is given to God and Man, and when to God alone.
And truly if the matter be such, and the words so conceived, that they be
referred not only to God, but unto Man, without doubt a Right will be gained to
a man through that very Oath, even as by any promise or agreement, which ought
to be understood in the most plain and simple way of Construction. But if the
words of the Oath do not refer to man by conferring a Right to him, or if it
do, yet such a Right only as may be questioned; then such is the force of an
Oath, that though he to whom it is sworn, cannot acquire that Right (because
the words will not clearly carry it) yet is he that swears obliged before God
to make good his Oath. As for example, He that by some unjust terror or
affright, shall extort a promise of something; which promise binds with an
Oath, though the Promiser cannot thereby claim his Right to the thing promised;
or if he do, is bound to restore it, because he gave the occasion of the damage
unjustly: Yet as St. Augustine well observes, Etiam vi extortum jusjurandum, ob
Dei reverentiam servandum est: Even that Oath so extorted, ought for the
reverence that we owe to the Name of God, to be carefully observed. We read
that the Kings of Israel were sharply reproved by the Prophets and punished by
God himself, for not keeping their faith sworn to the King of Babylon, Ezekiel.
17.12, 13, 14. and so by Jeremy, Jer. 29.7. And Cicero highly commends
Pomponius the Tribune for observing his Oath, though wrested from him by
terror: Tantum temporibus illis jusjurandum valebat, says he; So great was the
reverence which in those times was given unto Oaths. So that not only Regulus
did well in rendering himself a Prisoner to the Carthaginians, but those ten men
also (recorded by Cicero) in returning to Hannibal, by reason of their Oaths
given in both cases.

XV. An Oath given to a Pyrate or a Tyrant valid.
Neither is this practiced among public enemies only, but generally amongst
all: For it is not the quality of the persons to whom we swear, but the fear
and reverence of God whom we invoke, as a Witness and an Avenger of what we
swear, that creates this Obligation. It was an error in Cicero to hold it no
perjury, Si praedonibus pactum pro capite pretium non attuleris, nulla fraus
est, ne si juratus id non feceris. de Offic. lib. 3. Though a man did not pay
the money, which he promised by Oath to Robbers for saving his life: Because a
Pyrate is not a particular enemy to this or that Nation, but a common enemy to
all mankind, Cum quo nec fides esse debet, nec jusjurandum commune; With whom,
says he, we ought not to keep either faith or common Oath. The very same he
elsewhere says of Tyrants, namely, that the Romans were not obliged by any
Oaths or Promises they made to or with them: For though the difference be vast
between an Enemy and a Pyrate, yet will not that difference much alter the
case, where we have to do with God and not with men. And though the condition
of the person be such, as that he cannot claim a Right in what is so promised,
yet to perform it being sworn, is a duty that we owe to God: And therefore is
an Oath termed a Vow, It is compared to a Vow.
because being made to God, we stand obliged before him to keep it. Neither can
we grant what Cicero asserts, That there is no Society of Right with a Pyrate
or Robber: For by the Law of Nations, whatsoever is deposited with us by a
Pyrate, ought to be restored to him, if the right owner of it does not appear,
as Triphonius rightly states this Question. Wherefore neither can we approve of
their opinion, who think it sufficient to lay down the ransom which he has
sworn to pay: So that it is lawful for him to take it away again, because when
we have to do with God, we ought to deal simply and sincerely, so that it may
have some effect. And better it is to bear a temporal loss, Vita Lysand.
than to provoke God by the breach of our Vow: For as Plutarch observes, Qui
juramento hostem circumvenit, is ostendit hostem a se metui, Deum contemni; He
that circumvents an Enemy by a false Oath, plainly discovers that he fears his
enemy, but despises God. (Yet that what is so paid, may by a due course of Law
be recovered, notwithstanding our Oath, was the opinion of Aquinas. 2da 2dae q.
89. Art. 7.
) And therefore the Soldier who having leave to depart upon his Oath given to
return, though he came privately back, and then departed, did not thereby in
the judgment of the Roman Senate, satisfy his Oath. (Yet if a man do happily
break his Faith with a Pyrate or a Robber, whether sworn or unsworn, he shall
thereby incur no penalty amongst other Nations: For generally all Nations in
detestation of these men, whom they account as common enemies to Humane
Society, are pleased to connive at whatsoever is (though unjustly) done against
them: For they that break the Communion and League that there is between all
mankind, are common enemies, and can have no right by the Law of Nations.)

XVI. Whether Faith be to be kept with the Faithless.
But it is farther questioned, whether we ought to keep Faith with them who
keep not theirs with us? To which I answer, that of Accius may be in this sense
approved of, namely, T. -- Thy Faith thou broken have,
A. Which I nere gave, nor to the Faithless give.
If our promise made and confirmed by Oath, were manifestly grounded on some
other promise, which was as a condition whereunto ours related, then that
condition being not performed, makes void our promise though confirmed by Oath.
But if the two promises were of several kinds, and did not mutually respect
each other, then each promise is to be kept by him that swear it, without any
respect had to what the other does. And hence it is, that Silius so highly
extolls the Fact of Regulus, in that he kept his Faith with the Carthaginians,
who had been so often known to break theirs with the Romans. A manifest
inequality in Contracts, does naturally afford cause sufficient either to
reform or rescind them, as I have already proved. And although the Law of
Nations has changed somewhat herein, yet by the Civil Law, which is in force
where both parties are of the same people, recourse is often had to that which
by the Law of Nature is allowed, as we have also elsewhere showed. But yet if
the Contract be bound up by an Oath, notwithstanding this inequality, our Faith
given unto God must be observed. The Psalmist gives this Character of a good
man, Psalm. 15. That if he swear to his Neighbor, he disappointeth him not,
though it be to his own disadvantage.

XVII. How far the Heir of that Promise stands obliged.
And here also it is to be noted, that where no Right is transferred to the
person with whom we have to do by reason of some such defect as is aforesaid,
but only in respect of the Oath that we have made to God, there the hire of him
that made the Oath is not bound: For although, Transeunt bona cum onere, The
Goods of the deceased do descend upon the heir with the debts which he owed; I
mean those Goods which are used in commerce with men; yet do not the debts of
mere Piety, Gratitude, or Fidelity, oblige his Children: For these do not
appertain unto that Right, which among men is strictly so called, as I have
elsewhere showed.

XVIII. Two cases wherein the Obligation cease.
Moreover where the Promise confers no Right to the Person, yet if being sworn
it seems to respect another profit, if that man will not accept thereof, or if
he be willing to release the Promiser, the Oath shall not bind him: So also if
the quality of the Person cease in reference whereunto a man swear, then the
Oath made to that Person in relation to that Quality, is of no force. As if a
Magistrate shall recede from his dignity, and become a private man, the
Obligation made by Oath to him cease: As Curio rightly informs Domitius his
Soldiers, who scrupled at the Oath they had formerly taken. How is it possible
that you (says he) should be bound by Oath unto him, who having thrown away
the Ensigns of Sovereignty, and renounced his Kingdom, is now become a private
man and a Prisoner to a strange Prince: And by and by he adds, That the Oath
had lost its obliging power by the loss of the Princes freedom.

XIX. When that which is done against an Oath is void.
Another Question is sometimes made, Whether an Act done contrary to an Oath,
be unlawful only or void? Where we must distinguish: For if our Faith only be
engaged, the Act that is done contrary to our Oath shall stand good as in
Testaments and Bargains and Sales. But in case the Oath be so framed, that it
comprehends an utter abdication of any power to do that Act, then shall the
Oath prevail, and the subsequent Act be made void. Now these things do
naturally attend any Oath, whereby we may easily judge of the Oaths of Kings,
and of Foreigners one to the other, when the Act is not subject to the Laws or
Customs of the place.

XX. How far the Prince's power prevails over his Subjects Oaths.
Now let us see what power our Superiors, namely, Kings, Princes, Masters, and
Husbands, have, in things that concern them in their respective Rights, over
their several Relations: And first we must know, That the Acts of our Superiors
cannot make an Oath that is truly obligatory, void; so that it ought not to be
fulfilled: For this would be repugnant both to Natural and Divine Right; but
because all our Actions are not fully in our own power, but so as they have
some dependence on our Superiors, therefore we grant that our Superiors have a
twofold power over us, concerning that which is sworn; the one directed upon
the person swearing, the other upon the person to whom he swears. The act of
our Superiors may restrain the person swearing either before he swears, making
such an Oath void, so far as the Right of an Inferior is subject to the power
of his Superior; or after he has sworn, by forbidding the performance of it.
For an Inferior, as such, could not bind himself without the approbation of his
Superior: beyond which he had no power. And after this manner, by the Jewish
Law the Husband had power to null the Vow of his Wife, so had the Father the
Vow of his Children, so long as they were under the power of his government.
Seneca starts this question, What if there should be a Law enacted, that no man
should do that which I have promised my friend to do for him? Which he thus
resolves, Eadem lex me defendit quae vetat; The same Law defends me, that
forbids me. There are also some mixed acts between both, as when the Superior
does appoint, that his Inferior shall bind himself by Oath in this or that
case, namely through fear, or want of judgment, but with this limitation, that
the Oath shall bind if his Superior shall approve thereof; And upon this
foundation are built all dispensations and absolutions from Oaths, which
Princes in former times did exercise by themselves, cap. 35.
as Suetonius testifies in the Reign of Tiberius, and Vasquius records to have
been long used in Spain; which power they now remit, that it may be with more
piety executed, unto the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. The power to absolve from
Oaths in whom anciently.
So the act of a Superior may be directed against the person to whom it is
sworn, either by taking away that Right which by that Oath he has gained; or
if as yet he has no Right, by forbidding him from claiming any Right by virtue
of that Oath. And this he may do two ways, either by way of punishment, or for
a more public good by virtue of his Sovereign power. And from hence we may
learn what power Princes have over their Subjects Oaths, where he that swears,
and he to whom it is sworn, are of several Nations. But he that upon his Oath
has promised any thing, to a Nocent person, as to a Thief, or to a Pirate, as
such, cannot by way of punishment take away from him, that Right he has given
him: For then the words of his promise or of his Oath, should have no effect at
all, which inconvenience is to be avoided. For the like cause, the Right of
that which is promised cannot be compensated, with the Right of that which was
before controverted, in case the agreement were made after that Controversy
began. Yet may an humane Law remove that impediment which it had put in acts of
some certain kind, in case an Oath either of what kind soever, or in some
certain form be added: As the Roman Laws have done, in such impediments as
respect not the public directly, but the private benefit of him that swears;
which if it may be done, the act sworn shall stand in force in the same manner
as naturally it would, if such an humane Law were not, either in obliging hi^
faith only, or in giving also a Right to another, according to the diverse
natures of acts, which we have already elsewhere handled.

XXI. What manner of Oath Christ forbad.
And here by the way we must observe, that what is said in the Precepts of
Christ, and by St. James, concerning our not swearing at all, does not properly
belong to assertory Oaths, whereof we have several examples in St. Paul; but
unto such as are promissory for a time to come, James 5.12. Romans 1.9.9.1. 2
Cor. 1.23.11.31. Phil. 1.8. 1 These. 11.9. 1 Timothy 11.7.
which is uncertain. And this is evident by the opposition in the very words of
Christ, Ye have heard it said to them of Old, Thou shall not forswear; but thou
shall pay thy vows unto the Lord. But I say unto you, swear not at all. And by
the reason that is added by St. James, That ye be not found to be deceivers.
For so the word (...) sounds among the Greeks, as will appear by Job 34.30 and
Mat. 24.57. The same may easily be evinced by our Saviors subsequent words,
Let your speech be Yea yea, Nay nay: which St. James thus expounds, Let your
yea, be yea, and your nay, be nay: which is a plain Figure, which the
Rhethoricians call (...) The former yea, signifying the promise made, the
latter yea, the fulfilling of that promise. For this word (...), (i. e.) yea,
is an Adverb of yielding, granting, or promising, and is expressed by Amen, Apoc.
1.7. The Roman Lawyers expressed it by (...) and Quidni, which is an affirming,
or an assenting to that which is asked of us. It is used for the fulfilling of
a promise by St. Paul, 2 Cor. 1.20. Where he says that all the promises of God
in Christ are yea, and Amen. Hence arises that old Heb. Adage, An honest man's
yea, is yea, and his no, is no: But on the contrary, he whose words and deeds
do not accord, is by them said to be (...) sometimes off, and sometimes on, as
2 Cor. 1.18, 19. 2 Cor. 1.18, 19.
That is, their (...), and their (...), their yea is no, and their no is yea;
the meaning whereof is, that they are inconstant, unsettled, always changing. So
St. Paul himself expounds it; for when they charged him with levity, he
excuses himself saying, that his speech to them was not yea and no, but as to
himself it was always yea. Festus among the various significations of the word
Naucum writes thus, Some there are that think that it is derived from the
Greek, (...), and so signifies a wavering man. Now if (...), yea and no,
signifies lightness or inconstancy; it will follow, that yea, yea, and no, no,
signifies stayedness, or constancy. So that our Saviors words signify no more
than what Philo's the Jew did, It is an excellent thing (says he) and most
agreeable to Rational men, De Decal*
so to accustom themselves to speak truth, That their bare words may carry as
much authority as other men's Oaths. And in another place he says, That a good
man's word is as firm, immutable, and void of deceit, as if he had confirmed it
with an Oath. So likewife Josephus testifies, of the Esseni, That whatsoever
they affirmed upon their words, was as true as if they had affirmed it upon
their Oaths. And therefore to swear, was unto them superfluous. And from these
Esseni, or from those Jews that followed them, Pythagoras seems to have learnt
it where he says, We must not swear by the Gods; but every man sbould be so
careful of his word and credit, that he may be believed without an Oath. It was
the advice of Chrysostom, If thou do believe that he with whom thou have to
deal, De stat. 15.
is honest and faithful, urge him not to swear; but if thou suspect him for a
liar, urge him not to forswear. The Scythians in Curtius told Alexander, That
it was not the custom of the Scythians, Gratiam jurando sancire, to purchase
his favor or establish their own peace by Oaths. For, says Curtius, Colendo
Fidem, Scythae jurant; The Scythians are so great admirers of truth and
Fidelity, that their bare words do oblige them as firmly as (and their deeds
confirm their promises, more than) their Oaths. Cicero in his Oration for
Roscius Comoedus tells us, that look what punishments the Gods awarded to a
perjured person, the same they awarded to a Liar. For it was not the form of
words, wherein the Oath was comprehended, that provoked the Gods unto
vengeance; but the malice and perfidiousness of the heart, wherein all
Treacheries and forgeries are minted. It is excellent Counsel that Solon gives
us, That we should have so great a regard to our own honesty, that our words
may be as Authoritative and convincing as our Oaths. Thus Clemens Alexandrinus
describes a just man, to be one, that evidenceth the truth of his promises, by
the sincerity and constant stability of his words and actions. Cicero records
it of a certain Citizen of Athens, that being known to be of a Religious, and
upright conversation; Orat. pro Baldo.
and being to give his public testimony upon Oath, was not permitted so to do;
but as he approached near the Altar to that purpose, all the Judges with one
voice cried out, That he should not swear, being unwilling to give more credit
to his Oath, than to his word. Very pertinent to the meaning of our Savior
where he says, Swear not at all, is that saying of Hierocles, He that in the
beginning said, Thou shall reverence an Oath; did therein enjoin us to abstain
from swearing, concering such thing as are contingent, and of uncertain events.
For such things are so mutable, and of so small an account, that they are not
worth an Oath, neither is it safe to swear about them. And Libanius inserts
this amongst many other Virtues, for which he highly extols a Christian
Emperor, That he was so far from Perjury, that he feared to swear to what he
knew to be truth; A perjurio tantum abest, ut etiam vera jurare vereatur.

XXII. Faith may be given without an Oath.
Therefore in some Nations, instead of Oaths, they give unto each other their
right hands; which among the Persians is the strongest assurance of Faith that
can be given. And amongst other people they oblige themselves by other signs,
and that so strongly, that unless he that shall so oblige himself, do fulfill
his promise, he is held as execrable, as if perjured. But especially of Kings
and Princes, it is usually said, that their faith given is as good as an Oath.
For such they should be, that they may say with Augustus, Bonae fidei sum, I
have a clear Reputation: And with Eumenes, I had rather lose my life than break
my Faith. Whereunto Gunther alludes, where he says: -- No Oath more Sacred
than the word of Kings. Whereunto we may add that of Alexis Comicus: -- If I
but nod it is firm, as though I swear. This testimony Isocrates gives of King
Evagrius, That he kept his word as Religiously as he did his Oath. Cicero in
his Oration for King Dejotarus highly commends Cajus Caesar for this, That if
he gave to any man his right hand, it was sufficient to confirm any Promise
that he made, whether in Peace or War. And in those Heroic times, The
elevation of the Royal Scepter was equivalent to the Oath of a King, as
Aristotle notes.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Promises, Contracts and Oaths of Sovereign Princes and
States.
I. The opinion of some, who hold that Restitutions to the full, arising from
the Civil Law, appertain to the acts of Kings as such, refuted: as also this,
that Kings are not bound by their own Oaths. II. To what Acts of Kings, the
Laws extend: explained by distinction. III. When a King is bound by his Oath,
and when not. IV. How far forth a King is bound to what he has promised
without cause. V. The use of what has been said concerning the force of the
Laws, about the Contracts of Kings. VI. In what sense a King may be said to be
obliged to his Subjects by the Law of Nature only, or even by the Civil Law.
VII. A Right gained to Subjects, how it may lawfully be taken away. VIII. The
distinction of Things, gained by the Law of Nature, and by the Civil Law,
rejected. IX. The Contracts of Kings, whether they be Laws, and when. X. How by
the Contracts of Kings, they that inherit all his Goods, stand bound. XI. How
by those Contracts, they that succeed in the Kingdom may stand bound: XII. And
how far. XIII. The free Grants of Kings, when revocable, and when not. XIV.
Whether the true Kings be bound by the Contracts of them that invade, or usurp
the Kingdom.
I. Whether Kings may rescind their own Acts.
THe Promises, Contracts, and Oaths of Kings, and of such others as have the
like Sovereign power, have some questions peculiar to themselves, as well
concerning what power they have over their own Acts, as concerning what they
have over their Subjects, as that which they have over their Successors. As to
the first of these, it is questioned, Whether the King himself has the same
power to restore himself to the full, or to make void his own Contracts, or to
absolve himself from his Oath, as he has, his Subjects. Bodine was of opinion
that a King being circumvented by another man's fraud, by fear or error, may for
the same causes be restored to his own Rights, as well in things appertaining
to the lessening of his Prerogative as a King, or in things appertaining to his
private Estate, as his Subjects may. Whereunto he adds, That a King is not
bound by his Oath, if the Contract agreed on be such, as by the Civil Law may
be revoked, although the Contracts be agreeable to honesty. And that a King is
not therefore bound, because he has sworn; but as every man may be bound by
such just covenants, so far as it concerns the other Party. But we, as we have
elsewhere distinguished, so do we here, between the acts of Kings which they do
as Kings, and the private acts of the same Kings. For what they do as Kings in
their politic Capacity, is so esteemed, as done by the consent of the whole
Nation: But over such acts, as the Laws made by the whole body of the people
could have no power, because the Community cannot be superior to it self; so
neither can the Prerogative Laws of a King null his own public acts; because a
King cannot be Superior to himself. Wherefore restitution which receives its
vigor from the Civil Law only, is of no force against such Contracts. Neither
are those Contracts to be exempted which Kings make in their Minority.

II. To what Acts of Kings the Laws extend.
Without all question, if the people elect a King, yet not with full and
absolute Right, but restrain him with some Laws; then what acts he shall do
contrary to those Laws, may by those Laws be made null, either altogether, or
in part, because the people did reserve that Right unto themselves. But if the
King do Reign in full Right, (i. e.) not bounded by any Law, yet holds not his
Kingdom in propriety, (i. e.) has no power to alienate it, or any part of it,
or of its Revenues: all such acts of his that shall tend to such an alienation,
are by the Law of Nature void, because what he so alienates, is not his own.
But the private acts of a King, are to be considered, not as the acts of the
Community, but as the acts of a Part, and are therefore made with a purpose,
that they may follow the common rule of the Laws. Whence it is that even the
Laws, which make void some acts either simply, or if the person damnified will,
shall take place even here also, as if it had been contracted upon this
condition: So we have seen some Kings, who have consulted the Laws for remedies
against extortion. Yet may a King, if he please, exempt from those Laws, his
own acts as well as other men's: but whether he will so do, or not, must be
gathered from Circumstances. If he do, then shall the mere Law of Nature
determine the case; yet with this Proviso, That where the Laws do make void any
private man's act, not in favor to the person acting, but as his punishment;
those Laws are of no force against the acts of Kings, nor indeed, any other
Penal Laws, nor any thing else that implies vim cogendi, a power Coercive. For
to punish and to compel, cannot proceed but from two different and distinct
wills, and so from distinct persons; neither can the compeller, and the
compelled, be any one person, though under diverse respects.

III. When Kings are bound by their Oaths, and when not.
A King may make void his own Oath, as a private man, antecedenter, i. e. If by
a former Oath, he has deprived himself of the power to oblige himself by Oath,
to any such thing: but consequently he cannot, for herein also is required a
distinction of persons. Besides, to every such absolution it is requisite, that
in the very Oath before taken there should have been this limitation or
exception (either expressed or implied) Nisi superior voluerit, Unless my Prince
command the contrary: Which in the Oath of a King cannot be admitted, because
this were to make a King superior to himself, or to make his Oath still to
depend upon his own will, which is contrary to the nature of an Oath. And
whereas an Oath, though made, may confer no Right to another, by reason of some
default in that person; yet is he that swears, bound before God, to make good
what he has so promised, as is before said. And thus also are Kings bound by
their Oaths, which they make, no less than private men: though Bodinus thought
otherwise.

IV. How far a King is bound by those Promises which he makes without cause.
We have likewise already showed, That full and absolute Promises being
accepted of, do naturally transfer our Right to another. Now this holds as well
in Kings as in private men. Their opinion therefore is not to be admitted, who
say that Kings are not bound by their promises which they make without good
cause; which notwithstanding may in some sense be true, as we shall show anon.

V. Of what use that which has been said of the power of the Law about the
Contracts of Kings.
That the Civil Laws of a Kingdom have no power over the Covenants and
Contracts of a King, is well acknowledged by Vasquius. But that which he would
thence infer, namely, that what is by him bought or sold for no price certain,
or what is by him let or taken to hire without any Rent agreed on; or what he
shall give away in Fee, without any Writing or Grant under his hand, shall be
of force, we cannot admit: For these acts are done by him, not as a King, but
as any private person; and over such acts as these, not only the Civil Laws of
that Nation, but even the Municipal Laws of that City wherein the King resides,
have power: because the King for some special reason places himself there as a
Member of that Corporation, unless it shall appear by good circumstances, that
it was his will, that those acts of his should be exempted from the power of
those Laws. But that other example brought by the same Vasquius, concerning a
promise any way made, does very well agree, and may be explained by what has
been before said.

VI. In what sense a King may be obliged to his Subjects by the Law of Nature
only, or by Civil Law.
That which Civilians do generally affirm, that the Covenants which a King
enters into with his Subjects, do oblige by the Law of Nature only, and not by
the Civil Law, is somewhat obscure. For that is sometimes corruptly said by the
Lawgivers, naturally to oblige, which is only agreeable to the rules of
honesty, but yet cannot properly be said to be due: As for an Executor to pay
the entire Legacies without Defalcation, though he have not the fourth part of
the Testators Estate left him; or to pay a just Debt, though the Creditor be
made by the Law incapable of receiving it; or to requite a Courtesy received:
all which can no ways be recovered by any action at Law. Sometimes again, That
is more properly said naturally to oblige, which is indeed truly obligatory,
whether it be such as transfers a Right unto another as in Contracts; or such
as transfers none, as in a full and firm Pollicitation. Maimonides the Jew does
very aptly distinguish between these three: Whatsoever comes more than is due,
falls under the notion of mercy, which is but the overflowings of a good
nature, Mercy, Judgment and Righteousness distinguished.
such are good works done merely out of bounty and munificence. Secondly, To
perform what we are strictly bound to do, which the Hebrews call judgment; but
to do that which in honesty and Conscience only we ought to do, this they call
Righteousness or Equity. Which three some Expositors upon that of Mat. 23.23.
render by mercy, judgment, and fidelity, whereby the word, (...), the Greeks do
commonly understand Righteousness; and by the word (...), judgment, that which
we are strictly obliged to do, as we may find, 1 Mac. 7.18, and 32. Moreover a
man may be said to be civilly obliged by his own act, either in this sense,
that the Obligation spring not from the mere Right of Nature, but from a Civil
Right, or from both; or in such a sense, as that an action at the Civil Law may
lie against him. We conclude therefore, that from the Covenants and Promises
which a King makes with his people, there may arise such a true and proper
Obligation, as may confer a Right unto them: For such is the Nature both of
Promises and Contracts, even between God and Men, as we have showed already. If
the acts of a King be such as may be done by any other man, the Civil Laws
shall bind him; but if they be such as are done by him merely as a King, the
Civil Laws do not reach him, which difference was not by Vasquius sufficiently
observed. Nevertheless an action may arise from either of these acts, so far
forth as to evidence the Right of the Creditor; but no enforcement there can
be, by reason of the quality or condition of the adverse party. For that
Subjects should compel him whose Subjects they are, is not lawful, which Equals
may do against Equals by the Right of nature, and Superiors against Inferiors
by the Civil Laws.

VII. How a Right gained by Subjects may lawfully be taken from them.
But this also must be noted, that a King may take away the Right of his
Subjects two ways, either by way of punishment, or by Virtue of his Sovereign
Power. But if he do it this latter way, it must be (in the first place) for
some public profit, and then also the Subject must receive, if it be possible,
a just satisfaction out of the Common stock for the loss he shall sustain; this
therefore as it holds in other things, so also in that Right, that is gained,
by either Promise or Contract.

VIII. The distinction of things gained by the Natural and Civil Law rejected.
Neither does it make any alteration in the case, whether the Right of the
Subject were acquired by the Law of Nature, or by the Civil Law. For the King
has an equal Right to both, nor can either of them be taken away from the
Subject without cause. For it is against natural Right that what Dominion or
other Right a man has lawfully gained to himself, he should be causelessly
deprived of. And if a King should do it, he ought without doubt to make
restitution, and to repair the damage that the Subject has sustained, because
he does thereby violate the true Right of his Subject. And herein is the Right
of Strangers much different from that of Subjects; for the Right of Strangers,
and of such as in no respect are Subjects, can by no means be under that
supereminent Dominion of a King; as the Rights of Subjects are for the public
good: unless by way of Punishment, whereof hereafter.

IX. The Contracts of Kings whether they be Laws, and when.
From whence we may collect, upon how sandy a Foundation they build, who hold
all the Contracts of Kings to be Laws. For from the Laws there arises no Right
against a King to any man. Therefore if the King should think fit to repeal
those Laws, he cannot be said to injure any man: Yet if he do it without good
cause, he gives just cause of offense. But from Promises and Contracts a man
may claim a Right. For by Contracts the Contractors only are bound; but by the
Laws, all that are Subjects. Yet may some things be of a mixed nature: Partly by
Contracts, and partly by the Laws, as when a King contracts with a Neighbor
King, or with Farmers of his Revenues, which he presently proclaims a Law, so
far forth as it contains what is by his Subjects to be observed.

X. How by the Contract of a King, his Heirs may stand bound.
Let us now proceed to the Successors, concerning whom we are to distinguish
between those that are to inherit all the goods of the deceased King together
with his Kingdom; as he that receives a Patrimonial Kingdom, either by his
Testament, or from an Intestate: and between those that succeed in the Kingdom
only, either by a new Election, or by Prescript; and that either in imitation
of other vulgar inheritances, or otherwise; or whether they succeed by any mixed
Right. For they that inherit all the goods, with the Kingdom, are without doubt
obliged to perform all the Contracts and Promises of the deceased King. And
that the goods of the deceased should stand obliged for his personal Debts, is
as ancient as Dominion it self.

XI. And how his Successors.
But how far they that succeed to the Kingdom only, or to the goods in part,
but to the Kingdom entirely, are obliged by the Covenants and Contracts of
their Predecessors, is as worthy to be discust, as it has hitherto been
confusedly handled. They that succeed in the Kingdom but not as Heirs, are not
immediately bound by the Covenants and Contracts of their Predecessors; because
the Title they have, they receive not from him but from the people; whether
that Succession fall like other vulgar inheritances, to him that is nearest of
kinn to the deceased, or to those that are more remote. But mediately (i. e.)
by the City that chose him, such Successors also are bound: which shall be thus
understood. Every Society, no less than every particular person has a power to
oblige it self, either by it self, or by its Major part. This Right every
Society may transfer, either expressly, or by necessary consequence, that is, by
transferring the Empire: for in Morals he that gives the end, gives all things
conducing to the end.

XII. And how far.
And yet should not this be boundless; neither is it at all necessary to the
good Government of a Nation, that this obliging power should be infinite, no
more than that of a Guardian is, but so far forth only as the Nature of that
power requires. Tutor Domini loco habetur, cum rem administrat, non cum
pupillum spoliat; The Guardian (says Julian) has a power equal to the Lord,
whilst he orders the estate prudently, but not, when he wastes it. And in this
sense is that of Vlpian to be understood, Every Society shall be bound by the
acts of their Governors, be the agreement profitable, or damagable to that
Society: yet notwithstanding, is not he that negotiates the public affairs, to
be strictly tied up to this rule as some hold, so that his act shall then only
be held firm, and ratified, when the Commonwealth is meliorated by it. For to
reduce a Prince to such straits would be dangerous to the Commonwealth. Neither
is it likely, that when the people transferred the Government upon him, they
intended so to retain him. But what the Roman Emperors answered in the cause of
their City, That what was transferred by the Magistrate,
should be of force in doubtful matters, but not, when that which is clearly
due to the City is rashly given away or forgiven; the same answer may and ought
to be given to this question, in the behalf of the whole body of the people,
observing a due proportion. For, as it is not every Law that obliges Subjects;
for besides those which command things unlawful, some Laws are evidently
absurd, and foolish, as that Law of Cabades King of Persia, recorded by
Procopius, and Agathias. Neither is it congruous to reason, (as Peter
Ambassador of Justine the Second, told Cosroes King of Persia, treating about
some things, which Justinian seemed long before to promise to the Saracens,
That a Commonwealth should forever be condemned, for one simple Law or custom
introduced, or enacted by one man, although an Emperor. So also the Contracts
of Princes do bind their Subjects, if they have any probable reason to justify
them, which in doubtful cases ought to be presumed, in respect of the wisdom,
and authority of those that made them. And it is much safer thus to distinguish
of them, than (as some do) by the greater or lesser damage, that arises to the
Commonwealth by them. For we are not so much to regard the event of such
Contracts, as the reasons whereupon they were grounded; which if probable the
people shall be bound by them, if by any accident they shall begin to a be free
people; and so shall they that are Successors as being for the time, the heads
of the people: For if the people being free, shall make any Contract or
agreement, their Kings that shall afterward Reign, shall thereby be bound,
although he receive the Kingdom in the fullest Right. The Emperor Titus is
highly commended for this, That he would not endure to be solicited to confirm
any thing that his Predecessors had granted, thinking it but reasonable, That
if he expected that his Successors should be bound by his acts, he also should
be obliged by the acts of their Predecessors: Suet. c. 8. The Grants of good
Princes shall bind their Successors.
Whereas Tiberius (and they that succeeded him) did never hold the Grants of
his Predecessors to be good, unless they themselves had granted the same, to
the same persons. That excellent Emperor Nerva, following the example of Titus,
in that Edict recorded by Pliny, speaks thus, Let not any man conceive, That
what he has got from any of my Predecessors either privately, or publicly,
shall by me be so far rescinded, as that they shall be indebted to me though
but to confirm it, neither shall they need any man's Intercession to obtain it.
But when Tacitus had declared, how Vitellius had torn the Empire in pieces,
without any regard had to Posterity, (the Common people flocking about him, But
not of prodigal Princes.
and courting him for his profuse gifts; and some others hoping for a good
purchase, tempting him with ready money) at length adds this, Apud sapientes,
cassa habebantur, qua neque dari neque accipi, salva republica poterant; That
such gifts were always by wise men accounted void, which could neither be
given, nor received without endangering the Commonwealth. Which very saying of
Tacitus, is much commended by Mariana, and applied to the vast and unbounded
Beneficence of Frederick King of Naples, who gave away, as Philip de Comines
relates, not his own Crown Lands only, but other men's also, according as his
fancy led him. The same may very fitly be applied to the question in hand, and
therefore Galba made no scruple of revoking the Grants of Nero, even from those
that had purchased them, leaving the Tenth part only unto them: as Tacitus and
Plutarch testify. So did Basilius the Macedonian Emperor, recover all that the
Emperor Michael had given away. Whereof Zonaras thus: That it was unanimously
agreed, that They that had received moneys without any probable cause, should
restore it, some wholly, and others one half. The like did Charles the Eighth
of France, revoke all that Lewis the Eleventh had prodigally, given not
excepting his Donatives to the Church: As Commineus testifies. Comines lib. 9.
This also may here be added, if any such accident fall out wherein a Contract
made by a King is discovered to be not only damagable, but pernicious to the
Commonwealth, so that at the time, when the said Contract was so made, had it
been applied to that case, it had been judged unlawful and unjust; Then may
that Contract be not so much revoked, as declared to be no longer binding, as
if made with condition, of being void in that case, without which condition it
could not have been justly made. Thus did that wise Queen Elizabeth revoke some
privileges granted to the Hans-Towns, See Camdens Elizab. Anno. 1595, 1597. in
Controversia Hansiatica.
by her Predecessors, when they began to exact them as due by rigor of Law,
and not as granted them by the mere favor of the Prince: Alleging that
privileges granted by Princes to their subjects, much more to strangers, might
according to the times for the benefit of the Commonwealth and other causes be
lawfully suspended, yea revoked and made void. And when the same Queen had
drawn a dangerous War upon her self, for assisting the Hollanders, who refused
to repay her those vast sums expended for their ten years defense, upon
pretense that by her Contract with them, that money was not due till the War
was ended, and that till then she could not recede from her contract: She
prudently replied, That all Contracts between Princes, were to be understood to
admit of an interpretation of sincere fidelity. Neither is any Prince bound by
his Contracts, when for just cause that Contract turns to the public
Detriment. That the peace is not broken, though a Prince recede from his
Contract, when it is done by an accident of a new case, or when it comes to a
new case, which had it been thought on had otherwise been provided against.
Lastly, That a Prince is not bound by any Contract though solemnly made, if it
tend to the Detriment of the Commonwealth: For that a Prince is more strongly
bound to the Commonwealth, Vide Camd. Eliz. 1595, 1597.
than to his own Promise, as Mr. Camden records. And what is here said of
Contracts is true also in the Alienation of the peoples money, and of any other
things, which the King has by Law a power to alienate, for the public good.
For herein also is this distinction to be observed, where there is any probable
reason for giving, or otherwise alienating what is the peoples. But in case the
King shall by any Contract go about to alienate any part of his Kingdom, or of
the Royal Patrimony, beyond what is permitted unto him, such a Contract shall
be of no force, as being made of that which was not his to dispose of. As much
may be said of such Kingdoms as are limited and restrained, if the people have
exempted any, either matter or kind of acts from the power of their King. For
to make such acts valid, the consent of the people, or their Representatives,
is necessarily required; as we have already showed when we discourst of
alienations. Now these distinctions being observed, it is no difficult matter
to judge, Whether the exceptions of Kings who refuse to pay their Predecessors
Debts, whose Heirs they are not, be just or unjust; whereof we may read many
examples in Bodine.

XIII. Of the Grants of Kings which are revocable and which not.
Neither is that which some affirm, to be admitted without a distinction,
namely, that the benefits of Princes which are freely and liberally granted,
may at any time be revoked. For some benefits, a King may give out of what is
his own; and which were it not for this clause, at the prayer or request of the
Grant, might well pass for a perfect Donative. Now these cannot be revoked
unless from Subjects by way of punishment, or for public good, for which also
satisfaction must be given out of the public stock, if possible. But other
benefits there are which only take away the binding power of the Law, without
any Contract; and these are revocable. For as a Law universally taken away, may
always be universally restored; so also being particularly taken away, it may
be particularly restored. For no Right is here acquired against the Lawmakers.

XIV. Whether the right King be bound by Contracts of an Usurper.
But by such Contracts as are made by Usurpers, or such as without any just
title invade a Kingdom, neither the people nor their lawful Prince are obliged.
For such have no right at all to bind them: Yet even these also shall be bound
by those Contracts, so far as they are enriched by those Contracts.

CHAP. XV. Of Leagues and Sponsions.
I. Public Agreements what they are: II. Divided into Leagues, Sponsions, and
other Conventions. III. How these differ, and how far Sponsions oblige. IV.
Menippus his division of Leagues rejected. V. Leagues divided into such as
oblige unto things agreeable to the Law of Nature, and from whence this
arises. VI. And unto things thereunto added, which are either equal: VII. Or
such as are unequal, which again are divided. VIII. Leagues made between those
of a different Religion, by the Law of Nature, are lawful. IX. Nor are they
universally forbidden by the Hebrew Law: X. Nor by the Christian Law. XI.
Cautions concerning such Leagues. XII. All Christians are obliged to enter into
a League against such as are enemies to Christianity. XIII. If diverse of our
Confederates are at War, which we ought to assist; explained by a distinction.
XIV. Whether a League may be understood to be renewed tacitly. XV. Whether the
breach by one Party, do free the other from being obliged. XVI. How far the
Sponsors stand obliged, in case what they undertake for, be refused. XVII.
Whether a Sponsion being known, but not refused, do oblige by silence: This
explained by a distinction.
I. Public Conventions what they are.
ALL agreements are by Vlpian divided into such as are public or private. The
public he expounds, not as some think, by a Definition, but by Examples. The
First whereof is, that whereupon a Peace is concluded. The Second is, that
whereon the Generals on both sides do agree among themselves about some things
touching the War. By Public Agreements he understands those which cannot be
made, but by such as have the Right of Empire either Greater or Lesser, whereby
it is distinguished not only from the Contracts of private persons, but from
the Contracts which Kings make in their private affairs; although even from
these private Contracts, a War is sometimes occasioned, but oftener from the
public. Wherefore since we have sufficiently treated of Conventions in
general, we will add thereunto some things concerning this kind, which of all
others is the most excellent.

II. How divided.
Now these public Conventions which the Greeks call (...), we may divide into
Leagues, Sponsions, and other Pactions.

III. The difference between them.
The difference between Leagues and Sponsions we may learn out of the ninth
Book of Livy, where he tells us, That Leagues are such agreements as are made
by the Command of the Supreme power, and whereby the whole Nation is made
liable to the wrath of God, if they infringe it. And this among the Romans was
wont to be performed by Heralds in the presence of the King of the Heralds:
But a Sponsion is where the Generals having no order from the Supreme Power to
conclude any thing about such a matter, do yet promise and undertake something
concerning it. In Salust we read thus, The Senate (as it is very fit) have
decreed, That without their, and the peoples Command, no League shall be made.
Lib. 24.
Hieronymus King of Syracuse (as Livy relates) contracted friendship with
Hannibal; but he sent afterward to Carthage to make of that Alliance, a
perfect League. Wherefore that of Seneca the Father, where he says, Cont. l.
4. c. 29.
[In that the Emperor struck up a League, the Roman people may be said to
strike it up, and to be concluded by it] must be referred to those ancient
Consuls or Generals who had received special Order from the Senate and People
of Rome so to do. But in Monarchical Estates, See Book 3. chapter 20.. 2.
the sole power of making Leagues is in the King. According to that of
Euripides, -- Adrastum hunc opus
Jurare: Namque is jus habet regni potens,
Vt civitatem foedere obstringat suo.
-- This Adrastus ought to swear, I say,
Who being their Sovereign, the whole City may
Oblige, this League for ever to obey.
Now as Inferior Magistrates cannot oblige the people, so neither can the
minor part of the people oblige the whole: But let us here enquire how far
forth they are bound, who not having the peoples Right, shall yet undertake
that, which the people only have a Right to do. Some may think that if the
Sponsors use their utmost endeavor to effect that which they have undertaken,
they have preserved their Faith, according to what we have already said, Vid.
sup. chapter 11.. 22.
of Promises made for the fact of a third person. But the nature of the
business concerning which this Contract is made, requires a stricter
obligation: For no man in Contracts, will either give or promise any thing of
his own, but expects that something shall be performed unto him in lieu
thereof. Whence it is, that by the Civil Law, which will not admit of one man's
Promise for another man's fault, such a Promise shall amount unto a Confirmation
of the things agreed on, and shall bind the Promiser to make good what the
Prince or People refuse.

IV. Menippus his division of Leagues rejected.
Menippus King Antiochus his Ambassador to the Romans, (as it is recorded by
Livy and Diodorus Siculus) being led more by his own use and custom than by
the rules of Art, divided Leagues into three sorts: The first whereof is, When
the Conqueror gives Laws to the Conquered, where it is in the Victors power to
determine what the Conquered shall have, and how far he shall be punished. The
Second is, When both parties being of equal power and success in the War, do
agree in an amicable League on equal conditions. And then by agreement, things
taken are on either side to be restored: And in case any man has been
disturbed in his possessions during the War, the difference is to be composed,
either according to ancient Right, or according to the mutual Profit and
Convenience of both parties. The Third is, When they that never were Enemies do
enter into a Social League between themselves, without either giving or
receiving Laws on either side.

V. Leagues divided into those that bind to things agreeable to the Law of
Nature.
But we are to distinguish somewhat more accurately: As, in the first place, we
may say that some Leagues require such things only as are congruous to the Law
of Nature, others add something thereunto. Leagues of the former kind are
usually made, not only between Enemies at the end of a War, but of old, were
both often made, and in some sort necessary amongst those who before had never
contracted for any thing. The ground whereof was, That that Principle of
Natural Right, (which instructed us, that Nature had prudently linked together
all mankind in a kind of strict Alliance: And therefore for one man to hurt
another was impiety) was, as of old before the flood, so again some times
after, by an universal corruption of manners so obliterated, that it was held
lawful to rob and spoil Foreigners; yea, though there were no Wars proclaimed.
No sin to rob strangers.
So Caesar of the Germans, Latrocinia nullam habent Infamiam, quae extra fines
cujusque civitatis fiunt; Look what Spoil and Robberies they committed without
the bounds of their City, De moribus Ger. lib. 14. In the Life of Minus.
they held as no dishonor The like Testimony Tacitus gives of them, with whom
agrees that of Plutarch touching the Spaniards, Who (says he) till that time
thought it an honorable employment to spoil and plunder out of their own
Territories: Nay, the Jews themselves refused to make satisfaction for damages
done, unless to a Jew or a Confederate. whence that question in Homer (An
Praedones estis? Are ye Forragers (i. e.) such as live by the spoils of
strangers) was an innocent and friendly Interrogation: For, says the Scholiast
upon that place, To prey upon strangers was then held an honorable employment.
The very same we find in Thucydides, with this addition, For this kind of life
was not at that time infamous, but commendable. No more was Pyracy upon the
Seas until the Reign of Tarquine, as Justin testifies. And this the Roman Laws
seem to justify. For if any thing had been taken by the Romans from any Nation
with whom they had no commerce, hospitality, nor League of Amity, (for these
were not accounted enemies) it was held by them as lawful prize: So if a Roman
Citizen were found among them, or brought unto them they were immediately made
Slaves. And in this case did their Law of Postliminy take place: The same and
no better quarter had those people being taken by the Romans. Thus we read that
the Corcyrenses before the Peloponnesian War, were no Enemies to the Athenians;
but neither had they Peace with them nor any Truce, as by the Oration of the
Corinthians in Thucydides appears. So Salust speaks concerning Bocchus, Nobis
nec pace nec bello cognitus; That he was altogether unknown to the Romans by
either Peace or War. And to rob and spoil such, was, in the opinion of
Aristotle, laudable: And is so far warrantable by the Roman Laws, Hostis taken
anciently for a Foreigner.
that the word Hostis, which signifies an Enemy, did in the old Latin dialect
signify nothing but a Stranger or Foreigner. Now under this kind of League, I
comprehend those also, whereby Freedom of Commerce and the reception of
strangers are on both sides assented unto, as being agreeable to the Law of
Nature, whereof we have treated above. And thus we shall find these Leagues
distinguished by Livy in that Oration which Arco makes to the Achaians, Lib. 41.
where he insists not upon any League of Society, but upon that of Commerce,
which consisted in giving and reciving that from each other which was due by
the Law of Nature; namely, That the Achaians would forbear to receive into
their protection the fugitive Servants of the Macedonians. Now all such
Conventions the Greeks do strictly include under the word (...) (i. e.) Peace,
whereunto they oppose the word (...), which is a League made by Sacrifices.

VI. And into those that add unto it, which are either things equal;
Those Agreements which contain those additaments to those of Natural Right,
are either equal or unequal; equal, when the Articles are the same on both
sides: Whereunto Virgil alludes, Nec mihi Regna peto, paribus sub Legibus ambas
Invictas gentes Aeterna in Foedera mittam.
Empire I claim not, but with equal Right,
Both Nations will with lasting Leagues unite.
And these the Greeks sometimes term (...), Leagues simply, sometimes Leagues
upon equal conditions, as we read in Appian and Xenophon: But those that are
made upon unequal conditions they call (...), because made by Sacrifices: And
as they respect the weaker party, (...), because imposed upon them upon hard
conditions, which (as Demosthenes advises) are carefully to be avoided by all
such as love their liberty, because they approach too near to subjection. Now
both these kinds of Leagues are made either for Peace or for Society sake.
Those equal Leagues of Peace are usually made for the restitution of Prisoners
or Goods taken in War, or for mutual security, whereof we shall speak more at
large anon, when we have occasion to speak of the effects and consequences of
War. Those equal Leagues of Society respect either mutual commerce, or an equal
participating of the charge of a War, or some other matters. Concerning
Commerce, equal Covenants may be various, as namely, That no Customs be paid on
either side, which we find to be one of the Articles agreed on in that ancient
League made between the Romans and the Carthaginians, except only what was
given to the Notary and to the Crier: Or that no more should be exacted than
what was at present paid, or not beyond such a rate. So also in a Social War,
That each party should contribute a like number of Foot or Horse or Ships, and
that, either against all Nations, and in all Wars, whether offensive or
defensive, which the Greeks called (...), as having the same both Friends and
Enemies; Examples whereof we often read in Livy: Or for the defense of their
own bounds only, or limited to such a War only as is expressed, or against such
an enemy, or against all except their Allies, as in the League concluded
between the Carthaginians and Macodonians, recorded by Polybius: Or as the
Rhodians covenanted with Antigonus and Demetrius against all Enemies
whatsoever, Ptolomy only excepted. The like equal Leagues may be made, in
respect of other things: As, That neither party should build any more Forts,
confining on the Borders of the others Territories; or that neither of them
shall protect the others Subjects; or that neither of them shall permit the
others Enemies to march through their Countries.

VII. Or unequal, which are again divided.
By what has been said of Leagues that are equal, we may easily discover what
is meant by such as are unequal. Which inequality may respect either the more
powerful party, or that which is weaker: From the stronger, as, when succors
are promised, but none required, or when more is granted, than is exacted. From
the weaker, as when harder conditions are imposed on them than are just, and
these we call Mandatory: And of these, some tend to the weakening of the
Empire, as in the second League made between the Romans and the Carthaginians,
wherein it was provided, That the Carthaginians should make no War without
leave from the Romans. And from that time were the Carthaginians by that
League, little better than Servants to the Romans. And to this also we may
refer those conditional surrenders, saving that this is not so properly a
diminution of the Empire, as a full translation of it to another. Yet is such
an Agreement sometimes sweetened with the name of a League, as Livy testifies,
Lib. 9.
The Teates in Apulia made suit to the Romans, That they might enter into a
League with them, not upon equal conditions, but that they might be under the
dominion of the Romans. Some again tend not to the undermining of the Empire,
but only impose grievous burdens upon the weaker party, and that either for a
certain time only, or for continuance. For a certain time, as the defraying the
charge of the War, the demolishing of their Walls, the quitting of certain
places of strength; Or to give Hostages to deliver so many Elephants, Ships, or
the like. Others are permanent, as, That they bear all reverence to the Majesty
and Empire of the other party, which how far it extends, we have elsewhere
showed. B. 1. c. 3.. 21.
Confining upon this is, That they account those as Friends or Enemies which
the other party declares to be so; also, that they permit no Army free passage
through their dominions that are the others Enemies. There are also some
lighter burdens sometimes laid upon them, as, That they shall not raise any
Fort, nor build any City, nor lead an Army, nor traffic by Servants to such
and such places, That they shall not keep above such a number of Ships, That
they shall make no War with such a people being Associates with the other
party, That they shall not supply the others enemies with any manner of
provisions, nor receive them though they come from other places; That they
shall break their League, though formerly made with such a people: For examples
of all these we find very frequently in the best Historians. Moreover, unequal
Leagues are often made, not only between the Conquerors* and the Conquered, as
Menippus conceited; but also between people of unequal power, yea, amongst
those Nations that never were at War against each other.

VIII. Leagues with such as differ from us in Religion, naturally not unlawful;
Concerning Leagues, it is frequently disputed, Whether they may be lawfully
made with a people that are enemies to the true Religion: which if we respect
the Law of Nature only, is not to be doubted. For that Law is so equally
indulgent to all men, that it will not admit of any difference upon the score
of Religion. The question then is, whether by the Law of God, it be lawful, or
not? And thus we find it often controverted, by not only Divines, but some
Lawyers, amongst whom are Oldradus and Decianus.

IX. Nor universally forbidden by the H^brew Law.
Let us therefore first look into the Old Testament, where we find, that such
Leagues if Inoffensive, were before Moses's time lawful: For Jacob we find
making such a League with Laban Genesis 31.44.
. We purposely omit that of Abraham and Abimelech, because it does not clearly
appear, that Abimelech was an Idolater. Neither did the Law given by Moses
change any thing herein. But we find a strict prohibition given to the Hebrews
concerning the Egyptians, That they should not treat with them as enemies, and
yet without doubt they were Idolaters. Deuteronomy. 23.7. Joshua might not make a
League with the Canaanites, not because Idolaters, but because God had declared
his purpose to cast them out. 2 Samuel 5.11. 1 Kings 5.12.
But here we must beware, that we draw not the seven Nations which God had
decreed to cast out of the Land of Canaan for their Idolatry, into a precedent,
and from their and the Amalekites examples, create a general rule. For the
reason why Joshua might not make a League with them, was not simply because
they were Idolaters, for so were the Egyptians; but because God had long before
declared his purpose to cast them out, and to plant his own people in their
room, according to his promise formerly made to Abraham, of which sentence the
Israelites were but the Executioners. And as to the League of Commerce, either
for mutual, or either parties advantage, that such might be made with
Heathenish people, we may safely conclude from those made by David and Solomon
with King Hiram: Where this is worthy our observation, That it is said in Holy
Writ, That this League was so made according to the wisdom that God had given
him. And David being persecuted by Saul fled to Achis, nor was he ever reproved
for so doing. It Is true, that Moses does every where command them to do good to
their Contrymen, and special care is taken to preserve them in love one with
another: And as true it is, that their very diet, and the whole manner of their
lives was such, that it would not suffer them to have any familiarity with
strangers. For as Juvenal observes, They were so morose, that they would not
direct a stranger in his way; that is, they would not do a stranger the least
of courtesies, though they might do it without the smallest pains or charge:
Non monstrare viam, eadem nisi sacra colenti.
-- Strangers shall not direct
Into their way; if not of their own Sect.
The like does Tacitus record of them, Hist. 6.
Apud ipsos, fides obstinata, misericordia in promptu, adversus omnes alios
hostile odium; Between themselves they were very faithful, and apt to show
mercy, but to all others they bare a mortal hatred. But because they were
commanded to be thus charitable to their Brethren, therefore to conclude, that
it was not lawful for them to do good unto strangers, will prove but ill
consequence. But yet such were the corrupt Glosses of the Hebrew Doctors, that
they persuaded the Jews, that if they performed those duties of Justice and
Charity to those of their own Nation, they had sufficiently fulfilled the Law;
though to all others they were not uncivil only, but barbarous, as indeed they
were. For we find it recorded of them by the Evangelist, that it was not their
custom to eat, to drink, or to have any familiarity with Strangers. And thus
through all Ages they have continued, as appears by the Characters given of
them by all Historians. Apollonius Molo objects against them thus, They admit
of none amongst them, that agree not with them in matters of Religion, neither
will they communicate with them in any thing. Thus do the Friends of Antiochus
in Diodorus brand them, A people they are of all others the most unsociable to
strangers; for they account all such as enemies: And a little after, They will
not eat with any other people, nor so much as salute or bid them farewell; such
a general hatred they bear to all mankind. The like testimony does Philostratus
give of them: And in Josephus we find it every where objected against them,
That they were a people of all others the most uncivil, and the most
unsociable. But Christ, who was every where most observant of the Law, did by
his own example teach them, that this was not the scope of Moses, nor the sense
of the Law, John 4.9.
when he preferred the good Samaritan before the Levite, and asked and received
water from the woman of Samaria. In that prayer which King Solomon made at the
Dedication of the Temple, we find this Petition, That God would vouchsafe to
hear the prayers of the strangers, which they should offer up unto him in that
house: whereunto Josephus adds these words, Ant. lib. 8. c. 2.
For we are not of so Inhumane a nature, as to stand ill affected to strangers.
Yet herein we are to except, not only the seven Nations above mentioned, but
the Ammonites and the Moabites, of whom we find it written thus, Deuteronomy. 23.6.
Thou shall not seek their prosperity nor their good all thy days for ever. In
which words the Israelites are forbidden to make any League of society or amity
with them; yet it gives them no right to make war against them. Or happily this
place of Deuteronomy may be better understood, according to the opinion of some
of the Hebrew Doctors, as if to seek a peace from them were forbidden, but not
to accept thereof, when offered. Certain it is, they were forbidden to make War
upon the Ammonites, Judge. 11.16.
Deuteronomy. 2.19. neither did Jephtha accept it till they had obstinately refused
equal conditions of Peace; nor David till he was provoked thereunto by
unsufferable injuries. The Question then rests here, Whether we may join with
Infidels in a Social War.
Whether it be lawful to enter into a Social War with Infidels? Before the Law
given, that this was not unlawful, appears by the practice of Abraham, who
assisted the wicked Sodomites in their War. Neither did Moses change any thing
herein, that we can read. Of the same persuasion were the Asmonaeans, who were
both very skilful in the Law, and very strict observers of it, witness their
religious observation of the Sabbath, whereon notwithstanding they made use of
their Arms to defend themselves, but not otherwise: and yet we find them
entering into Confederacy with the Romans and the Lacedaemonians by the consent
both of Priests and people; and instituting solemn Sacrifices for their safety.
These Asmonaeans, we find highly commended in the Chaldee Targum, in the Books
of the Maccabees, and in the Epistle to the Hebrews, whose example both
Emperors and Christian Kings following, made Leagues with such as were either
not at all Christians, or at least not sound Christians: as Constantine with
the Goths and Vandals, Justinian with the Lumbards, the Saracens, the Francks,
the Scythians. So did Theodosius, Honorius, Leo, Heracleus, Basilius, Isacius
and others with the Vandals, and the King of Spain with the Moors. Now the
examples that are brought out of the Scripture for the defense of the contrary
opinion, have causes peculiar to themselves. For certainly some Kings and
people there were (beside those forbidden by the Law) who were so wicked, that
God by his Prophets declared his purpose to destroy them; now to join in
Confederacy with these, was doubtless unlawful. Thus did the Prophet reprove
Jehosophat, for joining in League with Ahab; yea, and seems to threaten him for
it, Should thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? 2 Chr.
19.2.
therefore is wrath upon thee from before the Lord. For the Prophet Micah had
before told the unhappy success of that War. So did another Prophet reprove
Amasia, for waging a War with an Army hired out of Israel, Let not the Army of
Israel go with thee, 2 Chr. 25.7.
for the Lord is not with them But this was not by reason of the unlawfulness
of the League, but by reason of the quality of the persons; as may be evinced
by this, that God did sharply rebuke and threaten Jehosophat, for associating
himself with Ahaziah King of Israel, though it were but for traffic. And yet
when David and Solomon did the like with Hiram, God did not only not reprove,
but in part commend them for it: Constit. Clem. lib. 6. c. 18.
For in that Ahaziah is said to do very wickedly, it is to be understood of the
whole course of his life, which was aggravated, in that being an Israelite, he
had forsaken the God of his Fathers; and therefore was God provoked to blast
all his enterprises. For this also is to be observed, That the case of those,
who being Israelites, forsook the Lord whom they knew, Esaias 8.6. 1 Chr. 16.12.
Ambr. ad Romans 3.
was far worse than of those that were strangers. For against those that made
this defection, the rest of the people might take Arms, and destroy them and
all they had, Deuteronomy. 13.13. Sometimes again where the Leagues are blamed, it is
not for the Leagues sake, but for the wicked intention of him that makes it: So
God reproves Asa, for betaking himself to the Syrian, namely, out of
diffidence; which he had declared by sending the Vessels consecrated to God
unto the Syrian. So when he was sick, 1 Chr. 16.12.
he placed more confidence in his Physician, than in God; whereby we can no
more conclude, that it is generally and of it self unlawful to make a League
with such as this Syrian was, than it would be to consult a Physician about a
man's health. Multa enim non illicita, vitiat animus; The mind sometimes makes
that unlawful, which in it self is not: As that Act of David's in numbering the
people, and that of Hezekiah's in showing his treasure to the King of Babylon.
2 King. 20.13.
So Es. 31.1. the vain confidence of Gods people in the Egyptians is sharply
reproved, whereas it was lawful for Solomon to contract a League with them, 1
Kings 3.1. And good reason; for the Hebrews under the Old Law, had the express
promises of God for victory; in case they observed the Law, and therefore they
had no reason to fly to humane succors in times of danger. Besides, there are
many excellent Sentences in Solomon's Proverbs, that dissuade us from the
society of the wicked. But these are rather Prudentis monita quam legis
praecepta, Wise men's counsel, than Dictates of the Law: And these admonitions
have many exceptions, as most Morals have.

X. Nor by the Christian Law.
But the Gospel gives a greater encouragement to Leagues made with such as are
strangers in Religion, whereby they may in a just cause be relieved, than the
Law does; for as much as we are commanded to do good unto all men, yea, even
unto our enemies; and this too, not as a thing commendable only, as to be
thankful; but as a thing necessary: For we are enjoined thereunto, under this
penalty of being reputed Bastards, and not Sons of our Heavenly Father, who in
causing the Sun to shine, and the Rain to fall promiscuously upon and good the
bad, would have all his Children, to do good unto all men. Matthew. 5.45.
'Twas very well said of Tertullian, As long as God restrained his Covenant to
Israel only, he enjoined them to show mercy to their Brethren. But when he
enlarged his Kingdom over all, giving unto Christ the utmost parts of the Earth
for his possessions, he extends the Law of brotherly love unto all men, so that
as he exempts no Nation from his Calling, so we should exempt none from our
Charity. Gal. 6.10. Off. l. 3.
Which notwithstanding must be understood with some grains of allowance to
those who are of the same Faith. So Clemens in his Constitutions, We are to
communicate of our labors to all, but especially to the Saints. For as
Aristotle observes, Nic. 4.
There is no reason that we should take as much care of strangers as we do of
friends. Our eating and drinking with men of another Religion, is no where
forbidden us; neither are we interdicted all manner of commerce with such as
are Apostates from the true Religion, but only all familiar conversation with
them, beyond what is necessary, but not such as may happily beget hopes of their
Conversion. And by that of St. Paul to the Corinthians, 2 Thessalonians. 1.15.
Be not unequally yoked with unbelievers, etc. It appertains unto those who
communicated with them in their Idol Feasts, and were thereby drawn either to
commit Idolatry, or at least to seem to do so. And this is evident by what
follows, What fellowship has the Temple of God with Idols? 2 Cor. 6.14.
like unto what he said before, Ye cannot partake of the Table of the Lord, and
of the Table of Devils, 1 Cor. 10.21. And yet we may not conclude, That because
we may contract Leagues with them, therefore we may also willingly put our
selves to live under the Government of Infidels, and contract Marriages with
them: For in both these cases, there may be a great deal of danger and many
hindrances to the free exercise of the true Religion. Besides, these bonds are
more lasting: And a greater freedom of choice there is in our marriages,
whereas Leagues are usually made, according to the occasions of time and place.
And as to do good even to profane persons is not evil, so neither is it, to
implore help from them: For St. Paul, we read, sought aid from the Tribune, and
appealed unto Caesar.

XI. Cautions about such Leagues.
In contracting Leagues with Infidels then, there is no Intrinsic or Universal
Evil, but what evil there is, must be collected from circumstances. For special
care must be taken, that by our too near alliance with them, we do not
scandalize the weak: And therefore where there is a mixture of men of diverse
Religions, as in an Army, it is very convenient, that their habitations be
distinct, as the Israelites were from the Egyptians: whereunto also appertains
what we have elsewhere delivered concerning the Religion of Jews and
Christians, Book 1. Chapter 2.
when they jointly warred against the Pagans. And although by such Contracts,
great improvement of profane wealth may be made, yet were it better to
abstain, unless it be upon great necessity. In which case, that of Thucydides
takes place, They that are treacherously assaulted, as we are by the Athenians,
are not to be envyed, if they seek to preserve themselves by the aid, Lib. 1.
not of the Grecians only, but of the Barbarians. For, it is not the defense of
every thing that is our right, that can justify us in the committing of that,
which may, if not directly, yet indirectly prejudice our Religion. For we are
taught in the first place, to seek the Kingdom of God, that is, the propagation
of the Gospel: And it is seriously to be wished, that many Princes and people
at this day, would be mindful of that free and devout admonition, which Fulk
sometimes Archbishop of Rhemes gave to Charles the Simple; Whose heart does
not melt within him, to think that your Majesty should go about to contract
friendship with Gods enemies, and to the ruin and subversion of Christians, to
make use of the Arms of Pagans. Nihil enim distat, utrum quis Paganis se
sociat, an abnegato Deo, Idola col^t; For, says he, there is but small
difference between confederating with Pagans, and by denying God, to worship
Idols. Alexander in Arrianus, thought those men unworthy of the name of
Grecians, who being so, did notwithstanding fight for the Barbarians against
the Grecians, for that which did by right belong to Greece. Much more worthy of
Imitation, was the Piety of Emanuel Duke of Savoy, who when he might have
recovered Cyprus by the help of the Turks, refused it. I would to God, that all
Christian Princes would follow the Example of this Generous Duke, and not
implore the Aid of Pagans against their Brethren, nor assist them to enlarge
their Empires, and consequently to darken the Light of the Gospel.

XII. All Christians obliged to confederate themselves against the enemies of
Christianity.
Hereunto I shall add, That since all Christians are but Members of one Body,
which are commanded to have a fellow-feeling of ^ach others sufferings; as that
Command extends to every singular person, so should it to every Nation as they
are a Nation, and all Kings as they are Kings, should sympathize with their
Neighbor Nations, and Kings that are oppressed. Neither is every person more
bound to defend his own members, than Princes are (in obedience to Christ) to
defend each other with that power which he has given them. But this duty
neither Kings nor People can well perform, whilst Christendom is invaded by the
Enemies of Christ, unless they do mutually assist each other; which can never
be done successfully, unless they strongly confederate together for that end.
And such a General League between Christian Princes has heretofore been made,
whereof the Roman Emperor was by general consent chosen General, whereby all
Christians were obliged to contribute either Men or Money, according to their
power, as to the defense of Religion, which is or ought to be the common cause:
for the neglect whereof, I cannot see how any people can plead excuse, unless
it be such as are engaged in an inevitable War, or afflicted with some other
general calamity at home.

XIII. If our Confederates are engaged in several Wars, which we ought to
assist.
Another Question does often arise, namely, in case two Nations are engaged in
War one against the other, and both are our Confederates, whether of them we
are bound to help? Where in the first place, we must remember what we have
already said, that ad Bella injusta nulla est obligatio; No League can bind us
to a War that is unjust. He therefore is to be preferred, that has the juster
cause, if the War be against a stranger Prince, yea, if it be against another
Confederate. The words of him that swears Fealty to another, are these, Si
scivero velle te aliquem just offendere, and inde generaliter, aut specialiter
fuero requisitus, meum tibi sicut potero, praestabo auxilium; If I shall
understand, See Book 3. chap. 25.. 4.
that thou will make an offensive War against any man upon a just ground, and
that I am either generally or specially required to give thee mine assistance,
I shall do it to my utmost power. Thus Demosthenes in his Oration concerning
Megalopolis, The Athenians are bound by their League to aid the Messenians
their Confederates, against the Lacedaemonians their Confederates, if the
Lacedaemonians were the first Aggressors: which holds true, unless in our
Articles it shall be expressly forbidden, to send out any aid against such a
Confederate. Polyb. l. 6.
In that Agreement which Hannibal made with the Macedonians, there is this
Clause, Hosts erimus hostium, exceptis Regibus, Civitatibus, etc. Quibuscum
foedus nobis and amicitia est; Enemies we shall be to thine Enemies, except
only such as are in League and Amity with us. If two Nations be at War, and
both our Confederates, and neither of them have a just cause (which may so
happen) we are to stand Neuters, and to assist neither. So Aristides, If either
of our Confederates had required our aid against strangers, it had been readily
granted; but if against one another, we desire to stand Neuters. Leuctrica.
If both our Confederates be engaged in a just War against strangers, and both
send for Aid; if we are able, we must send to both either Men or Money: But if
a Prince shall be required by both to aid them in his own person, having so
promised; then because his person cannot be divided, it is but reasonable that
he should prefer him, with whom he has contracted the ancienter League: As the
Epirots answered the Lacedaemonians in Polybius: The like answer was given to
the Campanes by the Roman Consuls, In contracting friends, it is fit that we
take care, that the new do not supplant the old: The Ancienter the Leagues are,
the more Inviolable. Thus Ptolomy answered the Athenians in the like case,
Amicis ferenda Auxilia contra hosts, non contra amicos; We are to aid our
Friends against Enemies, but not against our Friends. Which also will admit of
this exception, unless the latter League do bind us farther than our bare
promise; for it may include a translation of the Government, and imply somewhat
of subjection. And thus we say, that in selling of Goods, the first sale is the
best, unless the latter shall also transfer the property and dominion. So Livy
of the Nepesines, That the faith given upon their surrender, bound them faster,
Deditionis quam societatis fides sanctior.
than that given by former Leagues as to their Associates. Some there are that
do more nicely distinguish between these: But what I have said, I take to draw
nearest as to simplicity, so also to truth.

XIV. When renewed.
A League for a certain time prefixed, is not easily presumed to be renewed
through silence, unless such acts intervene, which cannot otherwise be
understood; for a new obligation is not easily to be presumed.

XV. The League is void, if either party break it.
If either party violate the League, the other party is freed: because each
Article of the League, has the force and virtue of a Condition. Thus
Thucydides determines it; They, (says he) are not the first breakers of the
League, who being deserted, seek for aid to others; but they that perform not
by their deeds, what they have promised to do upon their Oaths. And in another
place, Si vel tantillum ex dictis, pars alterutra transgrederetur, rupta sunt
pacta; If either party shall transgress the Articles they have sworn unto,
never so little, the League is broken. This also is true, unless it be
otherwise provided by the League, as it usually is, lest what is seriously
debated and solemnly sworn, should be adjudged to be broken upon every rash
offense.

XVI. How far Generals engaging are bound, if the Prince refuse.
Sponsions are such promises or undertakings, as Generals make without the
consent of their Sovereign; for the performance whereof they engage themselves,
or give hostages till it be confirmed by their Prince or Senate. The subject
matters whereof are as diverse, as of Leagues. They differ from Leagues, in the
dignity of those that make them. Concerning these Engagements, two Doubts
usually arise: The first is, If the matter engaged for, be refused by the King
or State, how far forth are the parties engaged, bound? Whether to make up what
the King or State shall not think fit to grant, or to restore all things to the
same state and condition as they were in before such agreement was made, or to
deliver up their own bodies and the hostages to the Will of the Enemy. The
first whereof is most agreeable to the Civil Law of the Romans: The second to
Equity and Reason; which we find urged by the Tribunes of the people in the
Caudine Controversy: The third is most approved of by Use and Custom, as
appears by the examples of the two notable Sponsions made at Caudis and
Numantia. But by no means may we admit, The Sponsions made at Caudis and
Numantia.
that either the King or the people are thereby obliged. Posthumous therefore
was in the right, when he told the Romans, That they stood not engaged to the
enemy for any thing; neither had they commanded any of their Citizens to
undertake for them. And therefore, says he to the Senate, ye have nothing to
do with us, to whom ye gave no such command; nor with the Samnites, with whom
ye contracted nothing. And again, I utterly deny that any Contract can bind the
people, that is made without their approbation. And therefore neither are they
engaged to make good that wherein they and the Samnites do differ, nor to put
the Army into the same condition it was in, before the Contract made by the
Sponsors. But if the Samnites would have engaged the people of Rome, they
should have kept the Army within the Streights of Caudis, until they had sent
to the Senate and people, to treat with them concerning a League and a Peace,
that they might have judged how much the safety of the Army did concern them.
And then in case they had not stood to their Agreement, they might justly have
said what Velleius reports, both they and the Numantines did allege, That the
violation of the Public Faith ought not to be expiated with the blood of one
single person. Whereas now they may with more equity plead, that the whole Army
is bound by that Agreement: For so the Numantines understood it; namely, that
if the Sponsion was not approved of by the people of Rome, the whole Army which
was thereupon set at liberty, should have been delivered unto them; The two
Consuls, the two Questors, four Praefects, 12 Tribunes, all which were
delivered up, upon the Caudine Engagement, but upon the Numantine, the Consul
only: the rest were spared for Tib. Gracchus his sake; as Plutarch in the Life
of Tib. Gracchus records. With us the Sponsors Estates to satisfy the damage,
and their persons to be made Slaves.
which certainly had been most just, had that Agreement been made by the
Sponsors in their Name, and at their Command: As we read that was which
Hannibal made with the Macedonians. But if the Samnites were satisfied in the
Faith of the persons engaging, being the two Consuls and six hundred hostages
whom they had in custody, they might take their satisfaction from them, and
blame themselves for accepting them: But from the Senate and people of Rome,
they could expect nothing, being no way obliged unto them. But yet in case the
Sponsors here had pretended to have received power from the people of Rome, to
contract on their behalf, then had they been bound to have made restitution and
satisfaction for the damage, which by their fraud, the Samnites had received:
But if that appear not, then were they obliged to make good that which was in
difference by force of the Negotiation. And in this case, not their bodies only
had been obliged, but all that their estates would have amounted unto; unless
some other penalty had been in that agreement expressed, in lieu of that wherein
the Samnites and the people of Rome did differ. For as to the hostages, it was
expressly agreed, that if the peace should not be confirmed as it was promised,
they should be put to death. But whether the same punishment were to have been
inflicted upon the Sponsors is very doubtful. But the stipulation of a
punishment after such a manner made has this effect, that in case that fact
engaged for, may not be performed, nothing else can be exacted by that
Obligation; for of that which is in difference between them, something that is
certain is agreed on, in lieu of something that is uncertain. It was the common
opinion of those times, that their Lives were also engaged; but amongst us, it
is thought more agreeable to Reason, that to satisfy for that which the people
did not think fit to grant, the Estates of the Sponsors, should in the first
place be sold: And if that were not enough, their persons were to be delivered
up as Slaves. It is recorded by Plutarch of Fabius Maximus, Val. Max. l. 4. c.
8.
That when the Senate refused to confirm an agreement made by him with their
enemies, he sold his own Land to preserve his Faith: But the Samnites delivered
up Brutulus Papius to the Enemy together with all he had, for breaking a Truce
with the Romans.

XVII. Whether the Articles of agreement being made known to the Prince, do
bind him in case of Silence.
There is yet another Question to be resolved, namely, Whether after notice
given to the Supreme Power, of an agreement so made, silence may suffice to
prove a consent. And here we are in the first place to distinguish, whether the
Sponsion were purely and simply made, or whether it were upon condition, that
it be ratified by the Supreme Power; for if it were conditional, that condition
being fulfilled, the Sponsion is of no force* like as that of Luctatius, which
he made with the Carthaginians, which the people of Rome denied to have been
made by their Authority: And therefore another League was by common consent
agreed upon. In the next place, requisite it is to know, whether any thing were
by the Decree of the people acted, which might probably argue their acceptance
of the agreement so made. For silence of it self, is not sufficient to prove a
consent, without some other thing or deed which in all probability would not
have been, had not that engagement been approved of, as has been already
declared when we treated of the relinquishing of our propriety. But if any such
thing or deed happpen, which cannot probably be referred to any other cause,
then it may justly argue a Consent and Confirmation, as Cicero well observes in
the case of the Gaditans. Orat. pro Balh^.
The Romans pleaded Silence against the Carthaginians, when they understood the
Agreement made by Asdrubal: but because that agreement was made in Negative
terms, namely, That no Carthaginian should pass the River Iber, it would hardly
be admitted, that a bare silence should be sufficient to ratify the fact of
another; because no Act properly theirs, could suffice to prove the
ratification of that agreement, until some Carthaginian did attempt to pass the
said River; but being prohibited by the Romans, the Carthaginians did obey the
Order. For such an act, has the force of a positive act, and is not to be
ranked among those which are barely Abnutive. Now, if that Accord made by
Luctatius, had consisted of many parts; and if it had constantly appeared, that
the Romans had observed the rest of the parts which did abridge them of their
Common Right, this had been sufficient to justify, that that Agreement in all
probability was firmly ratified. It remained now that we should speak of such
agreements as Captains and Soldiers make among themselves, not concerning those
things which belong to the Supreme Power, but to their own private concerns,
and which are permitted unto them to do one to another: But we shall have a
fitter opportunity to treat hereof, when we come to speak of such accidents as
usually happen in War.

CHAP. XVI. Concerning the True meaning, and Interpretation of Leagues and
Promises.
I. How Promises do outwardly bind. II. The words to be understood, as vulgarly
taken, unless strong Conjectures lead us otherwise. III. Words of Art,
according to Art. IV. Conjectures useful, where the words are either ambiguous,
or seem to be repugnant, or offer themselves freely: as. V. From the Subject
matter of the Promise. VI. From the effect. VII. From things conjoined; either
in beginning, or in place also. VIII. Whereunto appertains that conjecture,
that is drawn from the reason moving, and when and how that takes place. IX. Of
the large and strict signification of words. X. The distinction of Promises,
into favorable, burdensome, and mixed or middle. XI. Concerning the acts of
Kings, or people; the difference of those Contracts, which oblige in equity,
and of those that oblige in strictness of Law, rejected. XII. Out of these
distinctions, some rules are formed that will guide us in our interpretations
of Promises and Contracts. XIII. Whether under the name of Associates, those in
present or those also in future, be comprehended, and how far. XIV. How these
words are to be understood, that one party shall not make War without the
approbation of the other. XV. Concerning these words, that Carthage shall be
free. XVI. What Contracts are to be accounted personal, and what real,
explained by distinction. XVII. A League made with a King is in force, though
that King be expelled his Kingdom. XVIII. But not, as to him that usurpeth the
Kingdom. XIX. A Promise made to him that shall first do a thing, if that thing
be done by many at once, to whom is it due. XX. A Conjecture freely offering it
self, may either be extended, and in what cases; XXI. Concerning the fulfilling
of a command not directly in kind, but in another kind, as good, or better;
XXII. Or Contracted; and that either from some Original defect in the Will,
which also may be collected, either from the absurdity that will ensue: XXIII.
Or when that which was the sole cause exciting the will shall cease: XXIV. Or
from the defect of the matter: XXV. (Observations upon the aforesaid
conjectures.) XXVI. Or from the repugnancy of some emergent case with the Will,
which may be collected, either as being unlawful; XXVII. Or when by reason of
that act some great damage or charge arises to him that promises; XXVIII. Or
by some other signs, as when the parts of the writing do clash one against the
other. XXIX. By what rules then we are to steer our conjectures. XXX. That in a
dubious case, a writing is not necessary to perfect a Contract. XXXI. That the
Contracts of Kings are not to be interpreted by the Roman Laws. XXXII. Whose
words are most to be observed, his that offers a condition, or his that accepts
of it, explained by a distinction.
I. How Promises bind externally
IF we respect the person alone that promises, he is obliged to perform that
freely, whereunto he was willing to be bound. What Cicero says in this case is
true De off. l. 1.
, In fide quid senseris, non quid dixeris cogitandum; In things depending upon
faith, what thou meanest is more to be considered, than what thou say. But
because our inward thoughts are not discernible, and that there would be no
obligation at all by Promises, were every man left at liberty, to frame what
interpretation he pleased of them, therefore some certain Rule must be agreed
upon, whereby we may know to what our Promises do bind us; and surely natural
reason will inform us, That he to whom any thing is promised, has a power to
enforce the Promiser to that which his Promise rightly interpreted, does
suggest. For otherwise, no treaty would have an end, which in things
appertaining to Morality is held impossible. And perhaps in this it was that
Isocrates treating of agreements in his prescription against Calimachus says,
We men do all of us, whether Greeks or Barbarians, dispatch affairs, using this
common rule: hence it was that in ancient Leagues, this form was usual, says
Livy, Without any evil fraud, according to the usual sense and true meaning of
the words here at this time. Thus do the Hebrew Doctors upon the 30. of Numbers
interpret Vows in that sense, as the words are commonly then understood. The
best rule of interpretation is that which guesseth at the will, by the most
probable signs. Now these signs are of two sorts, as words and other
conjectures: and these considered sometimes a part, and sometimes conjoined.

II. According to the sense of the words, if other conjectures do not hinder.
If there be no conjecture that guides us otherwise, the words are to be
understood according to their propriety; not that which is Grammatical or
Primitive, but that which is vulgar and most in use, Quem penes arbitrium est
and jus and norma loquendi;
Which giv^ at pleasure, Rules and Laws to speech.
It was very well said by Procopius, Vand. l. 1.
Long time does not always preserve words in the same signification as they were
at first given. For the very things themselves are turned in sense according to
men's pleasure, without regard to those names that were originally imposed on
them. It was but a simple refuge that the Locrians made use of against Perjury,
when having put some of their enemies earth into their Shoes, and carrying
some heads of Garlic covertly on their shoulders they swear, they would keep
the Articles of the League (which were very grievous) so long as they carried
those heads on their Shoulders, and trod upon that earth: But having cast away
the earth out of their shoes, and thrown away those heads of Garlic from
their Shoulders, they thought themselves absolved from their Oaths; which story
we find in Polybius: not much unlike is that of the Boeotians in Thucydides,
Lib. 12.
Who having promised to restore a certain City, thought it sufficient to
preserve their faith, if they restored it not standing, but demolisht. So
Sultan Mahomet, having taken Euboea, cut the Governors body asunder, whose
head he had promised to preserve. But (as Cicero well observes) this is not a
way to prevent Perjury, but to confirm it.

III. Words of Art according to Art.
Referent ad flatum finitivum.
If in a League, there be an occasion to make use of Terms of Art, which the
people understand not, those terms are to be defined and explained by the most
skillful in that Art, as what Majesty is, what Parricide, etc. wherewith
Rhetoricians use to limit the matter treated of. For what Cicero says is very
true, That the terms of Logic are not vulgar, but proper to themselves only,
as indeed are the terms of every art. As when the word Army is used, it is to
be understood of such a number of Soldiers, as dare openly invade another
Dominions. For Historians do distinguish between those that make spoil of
another Territories, secretly and like Robbers, and those that do it openly,
with a just Army. Now the best way to judge what numbers make an Army, is by
the strength of him against whom it is sent out. In Cicero's account Six
Legions with Auxiliaries was an Army. Polybius was of opinion, that One hundred
and sixty thousand Romans, and Twenty thousand of their Associates, made a
complete Army; but a lesser nember may also sometimes do it. Vlpian gives him
the title of General that had the charge of a Roman Legion, with some
Auxiliaries: Which as Vegetius expounds it, consisted of Ten thousand Foot and
Two thousand Horse. Livy seems to contract an Army to Eight thousand. The like
may be said of a Fleet, which a certain number of men of War make up sometimes
more, sometimes less. A Fort is a place so fortified that it may hold out
against an Army for a time; Arx from arceo to repel or drive away, because by
forts the enemy is restrained and driven back.

IV. Interpretation by conjectures.
Conjectures are useful when words or sentences will admit of diverse fences,
which Rhetoricians term Amphibologies; but Logicians do more subtly
distinguish, for if one word will admit of diverse significations, they call it
an Homonymy; if a sentence will admit of a double sense, they term it an
Amphiboly. So likewise when in any Contrcts, therer appears any seeming
repugnancy. Then must we fly to conjectures; as also where its several parts
seem to clash one against the other, we must by guessing at the sense,
reconcile them if possibly we can; but if not, then shall that be admitted
which pleased the Contracters last: Because it is not possible that at one and
the same time, the will should embrace two contraries, and in things that
depend upon the will, the latter act derogates from the former, whether it be
the act of one Party only, as in a Law, or a Testament; or of more, as in
Contracts or agreements: in which cases, the evident obscurity of the words and
sentences do justify our conjectures. Sometimes again the conjectures
themselves are so plain and evident, that they carry us to a sense contrary to
those of the words. The common heads whence these conjectures arise are
chiefly, either from the matter, or from the effect, or from other things
conjoined.

V. From the matter.
First from the matter: as the word Day (if a truce be made for Thirty days)
ought to be understood of natural days, but not of Civil, being most agreeable
to the subject matter. So the word donare (i. e.) to give freely is taken to
transact according to the quality of the affairs. The word, Arms, sometimes
signifying instruments of War, and sometimes armed Soldiers, is to be
understood in such a sense, as is most congruous to the matter whereunto it is
conjoined. So when men are promised to be delivered, it is to be understood of
living men, not of dead, contrary to the Cavil of the Plataeans. So where
Soldiers are required to lay down their Iron or Steel, it is enough if they
lay down their weapons, and not their Steel Buttons, as Pericle^ would have it.
And by a free departure out of a City, is meant a safe conduct to the place
agreed on, contrary to that fact of Alexander. And by leaving half a Fleet, is
meant the one half of the number of Ships whole, not dissected, contrary to
what the Romans dealt with Antiochus. The same judgment may pass upon the like
cases.

VI. From the effect;
Then from the effect, the chiefest whereof is this, If the word taken in the
most usual sense do infer an effect contrary to reason; then may we fly to
conjectures. For where the word is ambiguous we must take it in such a sense,
as will admit of no incongruity. It was therefore but a foolish Cavil of
Brasidas, who having promised to depart with his Army out of the fields of the
Boeotians, denied afterward that the place where his Camp was pitched, belonged
to the Boeotians; as if that promise had been made, in reference to the
possession which the present fortune of the War had given him, and not to the
ancient bounds of the Boeotians: in which sense the agreement had been void.

VII. Or from other things conjoined arising from the same will.
Lastly, from other things conjoined; and those either such as sprang from the
same root (i. e.) from the same evil, though happily in some other place, or upon
other occasion declared, whereupon we ground our conjectures. For it is to be
presumed that in a case that is dubious, the will does constantly adhere to one
sense. As in Homer where it is said it was agreed between Menelaus and Paris
that Helen should be his that should be the Victor; it was afterward judged
who should be the Victor, namely he that killed the other. Symp. 9.13.
For, says Plutarch, Judges are guided by that which is plain, and not by that
which is obscure. Ad Adimant.
It was an excellent observation of Augustine concerning some Heretics, That
they culled out some sentences of Scripture, whereby they deluded the simple by
their not observing the Coherence of it, to that which went before, and that
which followed after, whereby the meaning of the Writer was to have been
discovered.

VIII. And in the same place.
Or from such things as are also conjoined in the same place, amongst which the
most forceable is the reason of a Law, which some confound with the mind of the
Law, whereas it is but one of those signs, whereby we guess at the mind of the
Law. So Cicero in his Oration for Caecina, Whether I am thrown out of my
possession by your lawful Attorney in your absence, or by your Tenant, Farmer,
or Servant, who forces me out in your name, and by your command, it makes a
difference; for reason of the Law holds in any of these cases. Now of all
conjectures this is the strongest, when it evidently appears, That the Will was
excited to such a thing, by some one reason, as its solitary cause, for
oft-times there may be many considerations moving us to do a thing: And
sometimes besides reason, the Will to show its freedom determines it self, and
this alone is sufficient to beget an Obligation. Thus things given in reference
to a Marriage, alter not their property, in case the Marriage succeed not.

IX. By a strict or large signification of words.
Moreover, many words will admit of diverse significations, as being taken
sometime strictly, sometimes largely; which proceeds from many reasons, either
because the name of the Genus does adhere to one of the species, as in those
words of Cognation and Adoption; and in words of the Masculine gender, which
are taken for the Common, where the Common is wanting; or because words of Art
are more extensive, than those that are vulgar: As Death in the Civil extends
to banishment, but in the vulgar acception implies only a separation of the
soul from the body.

X. Of Promises, some are favorable, some grievous, and some mixed.
It is also to be observed, That of those things that are promised in any
League, some are friendly and favorable, as those that are on both parts
equal, and to both profitable, which the farther it extends, the greater is the
favor in the Promise; as in those that belong to Peace, the favor is greater
than in those that belong to War; and in War, those that respect defense are
more favorably to be interpreted, than those that are made for other causes.
Some also are odious, as those that are imposed on one Party only, or which are
more burdensome to one Party than to the other; and those that are imposed by
way of punishment, or which make some acts void, or alter what has been agreed
on formerly. But in case any are mixed, as those which do alter somewhat
formerly agreed for the settling of Peace, that according to the greatness of
the good, or of the alteration shall be judged either favorable or odious; yet
so as if other things are equal, those made in favor shall be preferred before
others.

XI. As to the acts of Kings or people, the distinction between Contracts due
in equity and strict Law, rejected.
The difference of acts due in equity and those due in strictness of Law, if we
mean only the Roman Law, appertains not to the Law of Nations: Yet may it in
some sense be better applied, as namely, If in any Regions there be some acts
which have one certain common form, that form so far forth, as it is not
changed may be understood to be in the very act. But in other acts, by
themselves, indefinite, such as are a free Donative, or a free Promise, we
should more adhere to the very words.

XII. By these rules we may frame Interpretations of words and promises.
These distinctions being thus observed, we are to guide our conjectures by
these rules, in things not odious, the words are to be understood in their full
propriety as they are vulgarly taken; and in case there be any Ambiguity in
them, then are they to be taken in the largest sense: As when the Masculine
only is expressed, both Sexes are to be understood; and where things are
mentioned indifferently, they shall be understood universally. So these words
unde quis dejectus est; From whence one is thrust out, See Book 3. c. 20.. 11.
shall be understood so as to imply the restoring him to the possession of that
which has been forceably detained from him: For the words in their largest
signification will admit of this construction, as Cicero pleads in his Oration
against Caecina. But in such as are yet more favorable, if he that promises
any thing be verst in the Law, or use the advice of Lawyers, the words shall
then be yet more largely understood, so as to include the signification of Art,
or that sense which the Law has given it. But to have recourse to such
Interpretations as are plainly improper, we ought not, unless it be where some
absurdity would otherwise ensue, or when somewhat would render the Agreement
unprofitable. On the contrary, if necessity shall so require, to avoid either
some manifest injustice, or some as evident absurdity, we may not interpret the
words more strictly than their Propriety will bear. And though there be no such
necessity, yet if there appear either manifest equity, or very great utility in
the restriction, we are to confine our selves within the strictest bounds of
Propriety, unless other circumstances forbid it. But in such as are odious,
that the burden may be moderated, even Figurative Speeches are sometimes
admitted: And therefore in voluntary grants, and in the remission of that which
is a man's Right, though the words be general, yet are they to be restrained
unto those things, to which in probability they were intended. And amongst
things of this kind, that is sometimes understood to be possessed, which we have
hopes may be recovered. So succors promised by one party only, are presumed to
be raised at the charge of that party that requires them.

XIII. Under the name of Associates, whether those at present only be
comprehended.
But here a notable Question is sometimes started, Whether by Friends mentioned
in a League, we are to understand those only who are so at the League making,
or those also which shall afterward be admitted. In that League made between
the Romans and the Carthaginians after the Sicilan War, it was Covenanted thus,
Vtriusque populi socii ab utroque populo tuti sunto; That the Friends of either
party should not be molested by either party. Hence the Romans would infer,
That though the League made with Asdrubal, of not passing the River Iberas, did
nothing avail them, because the Carthaginians refused to sign it; yet in case
the Carthaginians should own that fact of Hannibal's in besieging the
Saguntines, who had been admitted into League with the Romans, though after the
said League with the Carthaginians, they might justly denounce War against
them, as having first broken the League. Livy thought the Saguntines well
enough provided for, Lib. 21. The case of the Saguntines discust.
in that the Allies on either side were excepted. For neither was this clause
added, They that were at that time Friends, nor were they excluded that should
afterward be admitted, (Which was added in the Peloponnesian League, between
the Lacedaemonians and the Athenians). And seeing that it was lawful for them
to admit of new Confederates, who could conclude it reasonable, either that no
Nation should be received upon any merit whatsoever; or that being admitted,
they should not accordingly be defended. Provided always, That none of the
Allies of the Carthaginians should be either solicited to revolt, or received
into Protection, in case they voluntarily did so. Which are the very words
almost of Polybius, and from him by Livy borrowed. Hist. l. 3.
There is no question at all, but that the words of the League might admit of
either, (i. e.) either to restrain them to those then in League only, or to
enlarge them to those who should hereafter be received, and that without any
incongruity of speech. But the best interpretation may easily be guessed at by
the precedent rules: According to which we say, That they who were to be
admitted were not comprehended; for the matter in Treaty now is of the breaking
of a League, which is Res odiosa; A thing in it self odious. The breach of a
League being a thing odious, and the taking of a just Revenge natural; the
Carthaginian League with the Romans must be understood in the strictest sense.
And Secondly, It concerns the abridging of the Carthaginians of their liberty,
in taking a just revenge upon those who had injured them) which by the Law of
Nature was their due, and so not rashly to be understood as given away. What
then shall we hence conclude, That the Romans might not admit of the Saguntines
as their Friends; or being so admitted, might not defend them? Yea, certainly
they might, but not by virtue of the League, but by the Law of Nature, which
that League had not abrogated: So that the Saguntines were at that time both to
the Romans and to the Carthaginians in such a state, as if in that League there
had been no mention at all made of Friends: In which case, both the
Carthaginians might revenge the injuries done them, and the Romans might also
justly defend them, without breaking their League one with the other. Thus the
Romans answered the Samnites, who desiring that they might have liberty to make
War upon the Sidicines without offense to them, That they knew nothing to the
contrary, but that the Samnites had power to make Peace or War upon whom they
pleased. And in the League made with Antiochus, It was provided, That if any of
the Allies of the Romans should make War against Antiochus, it might be lawful
for him by force to repel them: So as he held not any of their Cities from them
by the Right of War, nor contracted any Alliance with them. Live. l. 38.
In the time of King Pyrrhus it was thus covenanted in a League between the
Romans and the Carthaginians, That in case either of the two Cities should make
Peace with Pyrrhus, it should be with a reservation of Liberty to send succors
unto that City against which Pyrrhus should at any time make War. I do not say
that the War on both sides in these cases could be just: But I deny that if
either party did send succors unto the other, they did therein violate the
League made between them: As Polybius rightly distinguishes concerning the
succor sent to the Mamertines, Pol. l. 1.
Whether it were just, and whether it were lawful so to do, without violating
the League. Thus does Alamandaras King of the Saracens plead for himself, That
none of the Articles of the Agreement made between the Romans and the Persians
had been by him violated, for as much as he was not so much as named in them by
either party. Procop. Pers.
Thus also did the Corcyrians tell the Athenians, That notwithstanding their
League made with the Lacedaemonians, they might send them succors, because it
was in their own power notwithstanding that League, to admit of any new Friends
at their own pleasure. And the Athenians did afterward assume this Liberty,
commanding their Generals not to make War against the Corinthians, unless they
saw the Corinthians ready to invade the Corcyrians in any of their Territories,
lest they should seem to break their League with the Corinthians. For, it is no
breach of a League, that they who are injured by others, should by others be
defended, so long as the Peace in other things is preserved. And so after these
times the Corcyrians decreed, That they would assist with their Arms the
Athenians their Allies, according to their Covenants, and yet preserve the
Rights of Friendship with the Lacedaemonians. Justin writing of those very
times, says, That the Athenians broke that Truce in the name of their Allies
the Corcyrians, which they made in their own name with the Corinthians,
thinking it a lesser Perjury to help their Friends being invaded, than to
engage against the Corinthians in a Solemn War. So the Athenians making a Peace
with King Philip, did expressly provide that those Grecian Cities that were not
comprehended in that Peace might remain free: And if any man did molest them,
it might be lawful for those that were included in that Peace to defend them.
And let this example suffice for equal Leagues.

XIV. What is meant by this clause, That one party shall not make War without
the consent of the other.
In such Leagues as are unequal we shall give another: If it be agreed that one
of the Confederates shall not make War without the others Consent; as it was in
that between the Romans and the Carthaginians after the second Punick War; and
as it was also in the League between the Romans and the Macedonians, before the
reign of King Perseus: Since under the notion of making War, all Wars may be
comprehended, as well that which is Defensive as that which is Offensive. The
word is to be taken in its strictest signification, lest the liberty of
defending our selves, being Natural, should be too much straitened.

XV. That Carthage should be free, how meant.
Of the same kind is that which the Romans promised, namely, That Carthage
should be free; which though it could not reasonably be understood of Absolute
Power, from the very Act, for they had long before lost the Right of making
War, and diverse other privileges, yet was it to be presumed, That some kind
of Liberty should be lest them, and so much, at least, that they should not be
obliged to translate the Seat of their dwelling into a Foreign Country, and to
have their own City demolished. It was therefore a foul gloss which the Romans
did afterward put upon that Promise, when they urged, That by Carthage they
meant the multitude of their Citizens, and not their City, (which, though
improper, may be granted, because of that attribute, Free, which is more
agreeable to their Citizens than to their Town). For, in th^se words, Carthage
shall be left free, was meant that it should be governed by its own Laws. And
as Diodorus Siculus expounds it, That they should enjoy their own Laws and
Territories, their own Religious Rites, their own Sepulchers, and their own
Liberties. For so much was granted in leaving them free. So that what the
Romans objected was a mere cavil, in making them free, yet taking their City
from them.

XVI. What Arguments are Real, and what Personal.
Another Question likewise does usually arise concerning Contracts real and
personal. When we have to do with a free people, there is no question, but that
the Contract that is made with them, is in its own nature real, because the
subject is a thing permanent. Yea, though that popular State should turn into a
Monarchy, yet would the League hold, because the body of the people is still
the same, though the head be changed; neither does the Supreme Power cease to
be the power of the People, because exercised by the King: where we must except
this case, namely, where it appears, that the cause was proper to that State
only, as when Free Cities enter into a Social League for defense of their own
Liberties. But if a League be contracted with a King, it is not instantly to be
accounted Personal: Because, as Vlpian well observes, for the most part the
person is inserted in the League: Not that the League is personal, but that it
may appear by whom that League was made. But if it be inserted in the League,
That it should stand for ever; or that it is so made for the general good of
the kingdom; or that it is made with him and his Successors: (For this addition
(...) is usual, says Libanius, in his defense of Demosthenes:) Or to continue
for such a limited time, (as mostly some of these are inserted:) It will from
hence sufficiently appear that the League is real. Such was the League made
between the Romans, and Philip King of Macedon, which when his Son Perseus
denied to bind him, was the cause of the War ensuing. There are also other
words that may serve to prove a League to be real, yea, and sometimes the
matter it self may administer ground for probable conjectures. And where the
conjectures are equally probable, there we may conclude, That those Leagues
which are favorable and equal, shall be accounted real, those that are
grievous and hateful, Personal: Leagues made for the preservation of mutual
Peace or Commerce are favorable; those that are made for War are not always
odious, as some hold; but if they are made for mutual defense, they draw near
to such as are favorable: But those that are for a Social War do too nearly
approach to those that are burdensome. Besides, in those that are made for any
War, great respect is to be had to the Prudence and Justice of those with whom
we contract: That they be such as will not engage us in a War, either unjustly,
or too rashly, when it may be avoided. And as to that saying, That Societies
are dissolved by Death, I allege it not here; for this appertains to Private
Societies, and is determinable by the Civil Law: And therefore whether the
Fidenates, Latins, Etrusians and Sabines, did right or wrong in departing from
their League upon the death of Romulus, Tullus Ancus, Priscus and Servius
cannot rightly be determined by us, because the words of the League it self are
not extant. The Queen of Scots being deposed by the Estates of the Realm, and
imprisoned in England, and her Son an Infant solemnly Crowned: The French
refused to own any but the deposed Queen, saying, That the ancient League
between her and the French King was to be observed. Whereunto the English
replied, That she being deposed, and her young Son inaugurate, the French King
ought by that League to defend him; for that ancient League was not contracted
betwixt the persons, but betwixt the Kingdoms of France and Scotland: Which was
plain by the very words of that League, Camden Eliz. anno 1572.
wherein it was provided, That if the Crown of Scotland should be at any time
controverted, the French King should defend him to whom the Estates of Scotland
should adjudge it. Whereunto not much different is that controversy in Justin,
Whether the Cities of the Medes, which had been Tributary, did change their
condition with the change of their Empire. For it is to be considered, Whether
in that Convention they had committed themselves to the protection of the
Medes. And here we must note, that Bodine's Argument is by no means to be
admitted, That the Leagues of Princes bind not their Successors, because the
obligatory power of an Oath dies with him that takes it. For an Oath sometimes
binds the person only, and yet may the Promise made and confirmed by that Oath,
bind the Heir. Neither is it altogether true, that all Leagues are grounded
upon Oaths; for usually there is power enough in the very Promise to bind,
though for the more reverence, those Promises are confirmed by Oaths. Publius
Valerius being Consul, the people of Rome bound themselves by Oath to assemble
at the Summons of the Consul; he dying, and Lucius Quintus Cincinnatus
succeeding him, the Tribunes of the people began to cavil, alleging that
Valerius being dead, the people were freed from that Oath. Whereupon Livy gives
his Judgment thus, That general contempt of the Gods that now rages, had not
then corrupted that age: Neither were men then so audacious, as to give unto
their Oaths what Interpretation they pleased, and thereunto to adapt their
Laws: But they choose rather to compose their manners unto that, whereunto they
had so religiously sworn.

XVII. A League holds with a King, though expelled his Kingdom.
Surely a League made with a King is valid, though that King or his Successor
be expelled his Kingdom by his own Subjects. For though he has lost his
possession, yet doubtless the Right and Title to the Kingdom remains in him,
according to that of Lucian concerning the Roman Senate: -- Non unquam perdidit
Ordo
Mutata sua jura loco --
Though the Imperial Seat be changed quite,
Yet must the Empire still retain its right.


XVIII. But not so with an Usurper.
But on the other side in case a War be made against him that usurps the
Kingdom, with the consent of the true King, or if it be made against him that
oppresses a free people, before he has been established by their general and
free consent, it shall not be interpreted as a breach of any former league:
Because these men, though they have got possession, yet they have no Right to
what they hold. And therefore the Emperor Justinian denied that he had broken
the League made between him and Gizerich, by making War against Gelimer, who
had at once deprived the lawful King Ilderichus both of his Liberty and his
Kingdom. Thus does Titus Quintius also plead against Nabis, on the behalf of
the Romans, We made no League or Confederacy with thee, but with Pelops, the
just and lawful King of Sparta. Now in Leagues, these qualities of a King, a
Successor, and the like, are favorably to be interpreted, as being properly
their Right, whereas the cause of an Usurper is odious.

XIX. A Promise made to him that shall perform such an act, if more do it
together, to whom is the Promise due?
Another Question we find handled of old by Chrysippus, namely, Whether a
Reward promised to him that shall first arrive at such a place, is to be given
to both, if both arrive together, or else to neither. Where we must observe,
that the word First is ambiguous: For either it signifies one that preceeds all
the rest, or one before whom, none. But because the Rewards due to virtue are
to be construed with favor, both of them that shall arrive together, shall
share the Reward between them: Although the Liberality of Scipio, Caesar,
Julian, and others, was more honorable, who to each of them that first scaled
the Walls, if more than one did it together, gave the entire Reward promised.
And let these suffice to be said concerning the proper and improper
signification of words.

XX. A conjecture offering it self either extends the signification, and when.
There is also another way of interpreting by conjectures beyond the
signification of the words wherein the Promise is contained: And this also is
twofold, either by extending them farther than the words signify, or by
restraining them. But that Interpretation which restrains the signification of
words is easy, but that which enlarges them, more difficult. For as in all
humane things, the want of any one cause is enough to make all the rest
ineffectual: But to produce an effect, all the causes must concur; so also in
this case of obligation, that conjecture that shall extend the Obligation is
not rashly to be admitted: But with much more caution than in the case before
mentioned, where we admit of words in their largest signification, though not
much in use. For here we raise our conjectures without regard had to the words
promising, which cannot introduce an obligation, unless the Conjectures be very
certain; for here a parity of Reason is not sufficient, unless it be the very
same: Neither is the same Reason at all times sufficient; because, as I said
before, Reason does often so move us, that to show our own freedom, our will
is of it self a sufficient cause of our Promises, without any other Reason. Now
to justify such an extended conjecture beyond the words of the Promise, it is
necessary that it should plainly appear, That the Reason under which that case
which we would comprehend falls, was the only and most efficacious cause which
moved the Promiser; and that that Reason was in its generality so considered by
him, because otherwise the Promise would prove either unjust or unprofitable.
As for Example, An agreement that such a place should not be surrounded with
walls, being made at such a time when no other Fortifications were in use,
should doubtless extend to all Muniments, though but of Earth, in case it do
appear, that the only reason why Walls were prohibited, was, That that place
should not be fortified. Another Example is usually brought of a man, who
believing his Wife to be with Child, disposes his Estate to such a man in case
that Child should dye, which by all probable conjectures should be extended to
this sense, Or if such a Child should not be born: For certain it is, That the
Will of the Testator was moved with this only consideration, That then he
should have no Child of his own to inherit it: This case we shall find, not
among the Lawyers only, Lib. 1 and 2. de Orat. Bruto and p^o Caecina.
but in Cicero, and in Valerius Maximus. Cicero in his Oration for Caecina,
pleads this case thus, What? Is this sufficiently provided for in words? No.
What then was of force to do it? The Will: Which if it could be understood by
silence, we should have no need of Words: But because that cannot be, therefore
were words invented, but such as should not hinder the Will, but declare it.
And a little after, in the same Oration, he adds, Idem jus esse, ubi
perspicitur una atque eadem causa aequitatis; Where there manifestly appeared
but one and the same cause of Equity, (i. e.) where there was the same solitary
cause moving, It may be presumed there is also one and the same Right. Thus
Philo in his Special Laws proves that it is Adultery to lie with a woman that
is betrothed to another, and he adds this reason, Quia idem valent sponsalia
quod Nuptiae; Because, says he, such Espousals are equal to Marriages. Exodus
21, 28, 35.
(So likewise in the Mosaical Law, under the name of Oxen, are all gentle
Beasts comprehended; so is every Pool or Pond under the name of a Well:) So
likewise an Injunction, though it run in this form, Vnde me vi dejeceris
hominibus coactis, armatisve; Whence thou have thrust me out by force and arms,
takes place also against all manner of force that threatens our life and limbs.
For that which is usually done by armed men, if by any other counsels or means
we are brought into the same danger, the Law affords us the same Right and
Remedy. Quintilian the Father, in one of his Declamations brings in this
Example, Murder does usually signify the effusion of humane blood by the
Sword: But if a man be killed by any other means we have recourse to the same
Law: For if a man shall fall among Thieves, or if he be thrown into a River,
and there drowned, or if he be tumbled headlong from an high Precipice, his
death shall be revenged by the same Law as if he had been killed by the Sword.
The like Argument we find used by Isaeus, concerning the Inheritance of
Pyrrhus, where because by the Laws of Athens, a Father having no Son could not
make his Testament if his Daughter were unwilling; he infers, that neither had
he, without her consent, the power of adopting one.

XXI. Whether a Command given for one thing, be fulfilled in doing another as
profitable, if not more:
And from hence that famous Question in Gellius may easily be answered,
concerning a Command given by our Superior, Whether it may be fulfilled,
though not by the same, yet by another thing equally profitable, or happily more
than that which was commanded. Servants, says Quintilian, act some things more
freely out of a good mind; and even our Slaves bought with our Money, do
sometimes think it an Argument of their Fidelity to do otherwise than they are
commanded. Which may be done, if it appear, That what was so particularly
described, but only under some general consideration, which might also be
otherwise obtained: But if that do not sufficiently appear, Lib. 1. c. 13.
then we are to follow Gellius his advice in that place, For the Authority of a
General would quickly be contemned, if what he commands should be disputed, and
not obeyed.

XXII. Or restrained, and that either by reason of some defect in the Will:
That Interpretation that restrains the sense from what the signification of
the words, wherein the Promise is contained, will bear, is derived either from
an originary defect of the Will, or from the repugnancy of some emergent case
with the Will. The originary defect of the Will is understood, either from some
absurdity which would otherwise evidently ensue; or from failing of the main
Reason which alone did fully and effectually move the Will; or from a defect of
matter. The first whereof is grounded upon this, That no man is to be believed
to will things that are absurd.

XXIII. Or when the main Reason cease:
The Second is grounded on this, That what is contained in the Promise
whereunto such a Reason is added, or where it is plainly understood, is not
considered barely or simply, but as it falls under that Reason.

XXIV. Or when there is a defect in the matter:
The Third is grounded on this, That the matter so restrained is always
observed to be in the mind of him that promises, although the words of the
Promiser do admit of a large signification.

XXV. (An observation concerning the last recited Conjectures.)
But as concerning the Reason that moves the Will we must observe, That under
it are comprehended not only things actually existing, but sometimes things
that morally considered, may be; which when it takes place, no restriction
ought to be admitted. As when it is in any League provided, That no Army or
Fleet shall be sent to such a place, they ought not to be led thither, though
there be no intention thereby to do harm, because in that agreement not so much
the present damage, as all future dangers whatsoever are regarded. But here it
is also sometimes questioned, Whether Promises are to be understood with this
tacit condition, That things remain so as they were when the Promise was made;
Which we deny, unless it do manifestly appear, That that present condition of
things was included in that only Reason which we have said. And we read of
nothing more frequently in Histories than of Ambassadors, who understanding so
great an alteration made in the State, as would render the whole matter and
cause of the Embassy frustrate, have returned home without attempting any
thing.

XXVI. Or from the repugnancy of some emergent case with the Will: Which is
taken either from something that is unlawful.
Courts of Equity necessary.
The Repugnancy of some emergent case with the Will is of two sorts: For the
Will is guessed at, either by Natural Reason, or by some other sign of the
Will. The proper office to judge at the Will by Right Reason, Aristotle assigns
to Prudence in the understanding, and in the Will, to Equity, which he very
fitly defines to be the Correction or Moderation of that wherein the Law by
Reason of its generality is deficient: Which ought to take place, as well in
Testaments as in Contracts respectively. For seeing that all emergent cases
could neither be foreseen by the Lawgiver, nor excepted in the Law; therefore
there is a necessity that some liberty should be granted for the exempting of
such cases, as he that made the Law would have exempted, had he been present,
or could he have foreseen it: And yet is not this rashly to be admitted, for
that were to make himself Lord over another man's act; but then only, when we
have sufficient signs to justify our Conjectures. Whereof none can be more
just than this, when they would binds us to things repugnant to the Laws either
of God or Nature. For such Laws having no power to oblige, are necessarily to
be exempted. Quaedam etiamsi nulla significatione Legis comprehensa sint,
natura tamen excipiuntur; There are some things (says Quintilian) that
naturally are exempted, although they are not comprehended by any signification
of the Law. As he that has promised to restore a Sword to him who entrusted
him with it, if the man to whom the Promise was made, be mad, he ought not to
deliver it, lest he thereby create danger to himself, or to some others that
are innocent. So neither are we to restore a thing to him that deposited it
with us, if the right owner demand it. This I approve of (says Triphonius) to
be Justice, that so gives to every man his own, that he detracts not from the
juster claim of another. The Reason whereof is, because such is the force of
Propriety, being once introduced, that not to return a thing to the right
owner, when known, is altogether unjust.

XXVII. Or when some too great a charge arises to the Promiser in comparison
of that act.
The Second sign shall be this, When strictly to follow the words of the
Promise or Contract is not of it self and altogether unlawful. But when it
binds to such things as to a prudent and well-balanced Judgment are too
grievous and intolerable: And that whether we respect humanity it self
absolutely, or by comparing the person promising, and the thing promised, with
the end for which such a Promise or Contract was made. So he that lends a thing
for such a time, may require it before that time, if he stand in great want of
it: Because it is presumed, that no man would willingly do his Friend a
courtesy in that, wherein he should do himself a manifest injury. So he that
shall promise succors to his Allies, shall be excused in case he be engaged in
War at home, so far forth as he shall stand in need of those Forces. In like
manner, he that promises immunity from Tributes and Taxes, means only from
ordinary and annual Taxes, not from those that may be imposed in times of
greatest danger, for the defense of the Commonwealth. Wherefore it was too
loosely said of Cicero, That those Promises were not to be performed, which
were unprofitable to him to whom they were made; nor those which did more
endamage the Promiser, than benefit him to whom they were made. For the person
promising is no competent Judge whether the thing promised will be profitable
to him to whom it is promised, unless it be in such a case as is before
instanced of apparent madness: Neither is every damage sufficient to absolve
the Promiser from the performance of his Promise, but the damage must be such,
as even from the very nature of the act it may be believed, That could it have
been foreseen, it would have been exempted. So he that is engaged to do so many
days service for another, is acquitted from his engagement, if either his
Father or his Son be affected with some dangerous sickness: This was Cicero's
opinion in this case, If being retained to plead the cause of thy Client, thy
Son should in the mean time fall desperately sick, Non est contra officium,
Off. l. 1.
non facere quod dixeris; Thou art not in duty bound to attend that Cause. And
in this sense is that of Seneca to be understood, Then do I break my word, then
may I be justly charged with levity, De Benef. l. 4. c. 35.
when all things remaining in the state they were in when the Promise was made,
I do not perform what I promised. But in case there fall out any unexpected
change concerning that whereupon the Promise was made, it gives me liberty to
consult anew, and yet I preserve my Faith. I am happily retained in a cause,
wherein I do afterward conceive that my Father may be damnified; I have
promised to take a Journey into the Country with such a Companion, but I
understand since that the way is infested with Robbers; I have engaged my word
to be present, and to assist in such a business, but am with held by the
unexpected sickness of my Son, or by my Wives falling into labor: Omnia esse
debent eadem, quae fucrunt cum promitterem, ut promittentis fidem teneas; All
things ought to be in the same condition as they were when I promised, to
oblige me to do what I did promise. Where by All things, we must understand all
things relating to the nature of that Act which is in question. See Camd. anno
1595.
The English did frequently make use of these politic Maxims both with the
Hollanders and with the Hans-towns, as Camden records: For when Queen
Elizabeth, by assisting the States of Holland, had drawn down the whole power
of Spain against herself, and therefore, for her necessary defense, demanded
those vast sums lent them to prosecute their War: They urging, That that Money
was not due, by their Contract, till the end of the War; and that until then,
she was obliged in Honor to assist them. She Answered, That a Prince was not
bound by his Contract, when for just causes it manifestly turned to the public
detriment; or when it was done by the accident of a new case; or when a new
case arises, which had it been foreseen, would have been provided against. For
that every Contract, though sworn, is understood with this reserved condition,
if matters continue in the same state, but not if they be changed. Which that
wise Queen grounded upon the Authority of Seneca, A wise man changes not his
resolution, all things continuing as they were at the time when he made it: nor
can he be said to Repent, because, at that time, and as the case then stood, no
better counsel could be followed than was then resolved on. And when the
Hans-towns complained against her to the Emperor, That their privileges were
broken in England, and their customs much enhansed: She Answered, That those
Privileges were by Authority of Parliament abrogated, as being not convenient
for the times, being granted when Traffic and Merchandises lay dead among the
English. And for her Customs, she said, that the Commonwealth could not
subsist, if no other Customs should now be paid by the Hans-towns than what
were paid three hundred years before. And much to this purpose is that of
Seneca, Being invited to a Feast, I Will go because I have promised, although it
be cold: I will arise to a Wedding because I have promised, although I am not
sufficiently refresht with sleep; but not if I am Fevorish, although I have
promised: Nor will I stand bound with thee for any thing that is uncertain,
though thou biddest me, in case thou art indebted to the Exchequer. For in all
these Promises there are some tacit exceptions to be understood; namely, if I
can, or if I ought so to do, if things be then as they now are: Effice ut idem
status sit cum exigitur, qui fuit cum promitterem; Make the case the same when
thou exactest my Promise, as it was when I made it: If any new thing intervene,
it is not levity or inconstancy in me if I fail. What wonder is it if a man
change his mind and counsel, when his condition is changed. Eadem mihi omnia
praesta, and idem sum; Make all things the same, and then I also am the same.

XXVIII. Other signs whereby we may guess that such a case ought to be exempted.
There are also (as we have said) other signs of the Will, whereby we may
conjecture, That that case was to have been exempted: Among which there are
none more convincing, than words spoken or recited, in some place, not where
they do directly contradict each other, which is (...), whereof we made mention
above. But when (as it were) unexpectedly from the very event of things they
seem to clash one against another, which the Greeks call (...).

XXIX. What Rules should then guide our conjectures.
Now when such a case happens, which part of the Writing ought to prevail with
us, we may be instructed by some rules that Cicero De Invent. 2. Verina 2.
has left us out of some ancient and approved Authors, which are by no means
to be slighted, yet in mine opinion are they not digested into a right order.
And therefore I think fit to place them thus, That that which is permitted do
always give place to that which is enjoined: For, as Quintilian says, Semper
potentior lex est qua vetat, quam quae permittit; That Law that commands is
always stronger than that which permits. Because he that permits any thing is
conceived to permit it, unless somewhat else do hinder, than what is then
treated of; and therefore Plus valet sanctio, quam permissio, A Decree or
Sanction is more prevalent than a Toleration. Secondly, That what is to be done
at a time prefixed be always preferred before what may be done at any time. From
whence it follows, That for the most part, that which forbids, is to be
preferred before that which enjoins: Because what prohibits, binds us at all
times, but so does not that which commands, unless it be either when the time
is expressed, or that the command comprehends under it some tacit prohibition.
Again, that in such agreements as are in their qualities before-named, equal,
That should be preferred, which is most proper, and comes nearest to the matter
in question: For Particulars are always more efficacious than Generals. And in
things prohibited, that those which have a penalty affixt, be preferred before
those that have none; and those that have a greater penalty, before those that
have a lesser. As also that those be preferred that have causes affixt, either
more honest or more profitable: And in the last place, that that which was
spoken last be more valid than that which was spoken before. Of what has been
already said, this also must be here repeated, That look what Agreements are
sworn unto, must be understood in the most usual Propriety of Speech: And that
all secret reservations and restrictions, more than the very nature of the
thing does necessarily require, be altogether disowned. Wherefore also in case
an Agreement sworn shall in effect clash with that which is not sworn, that
which was bound by an Oath shall be preferred.

XXX. In a case that is dubious, a Writing is not required to complete the
Contract.
It is also usually questioned, Whether in a doubtful case a Contract ought to
be accounted perfect and complete, before the Writings are signed and
delivered. For this Muraena alleges against the Agreement made between Sylla
and Mithridates. To me it is very plain, That unless it be otherwise agreed on,
the Writings stand but as the lasting Monument of the Contract, and not as any
part of the substance of it: If otherwise it must be so expressed, as in that
made with Nabis: Where it was provided, That those conditions should be of
force, From that day whereon they should be published by Nabis.

XXXI. The Contracts of Kings not always to be interpreted by the Roman Laws.
But I cannot admit of their opinion, who hold, That the Contracts of Kings and
Free States are to be interpreted, as far as is possible, by the Roman Laws;
unless it appear, That among those people the Civil Law, in such things as
concern the Right of Nations, has ever been received for the Law of Nations,
which is not rashly to be presumed.

XXXII. Whether his words that offers, or his that accepts, are most binding.
As to that Question moved by Plutarch in his Symposiacks; namely, Whether the
words of him that proposes conditions, or of him that accepts of them are most
binding. It appears to me, That seeing it is he that accepts that promises,
they are his words, if absolute, and in themselves, that gives form and being
to the Contract. For if he regards the words of him that offers conditions
affirmatively, he shall be thought to repeat those very words in his Promise,
according to the Nature of Relatives. But certain it is, That before the
conditions be accepted, even he that offers them is not bound to perform them.
For until they are accepted, there is no Right acquired, as appears by what
has been already said concerning Promises. And this offering of conditions, is
less binding than a Promise.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Damage done to one man, through the default of another, and
the Obligation thence arising.
I. He that occasioneth the Damage is bound to repair it. II. A Damage is that
which is repugnant to a man's Right strictly taken. III. A man's Aptitude or
fitness for a thing is exactly to be distinguished from his Right strictly
taken. IV. That Damage extends to even the fruits or profits of what was his;
V. And to the surceasing of gain, and how. VI. Of Damage Primarily occasioned:
VII. And of such as are occasioned secondarily. VIII. Of Damages occasioned by
omission primarily: IX. And secondarily. X. What they must contribute to the
act that are thus far bound. XI. In what order they are bound to reparation.
XII. This Obligation is to be extended to the Damage that shall ensue. XIII. An
example in a Manslayer: XIV. In him that offers violence otherwise: XV. In an
Adulterer or Fornicator: XVI. In a Thief, Robber, and others: XVII. And in him
that gives the occasion of a Promise, either by fraud, or by fear that is
unjust. XVIII. What if that fear be naturally just. XIX. What if that fear be
by the Law of Nations deemed just. XX. How far the Civil Powers are bound for
Damages done by their Subjects; where the question, concerning Prizes taken by
Sea, from Confederates, contrary to public command, is handled. XXI. That by
the Law of Nature no man is bound to repair damages done by his Beast, or Ship,
without his knowledge. XXII. Damages sustained in a man's credit or honor, how
to be repaired.
I. He that occasioneth the Damage, is bound to repair it.
WE have already showed, that a Right unto a thing may accrue unto us from
another, three several ways; either by Contract, or by injuries done us, or by
Law. Concerning Contracts I have spoken sufficiently. Let us now come unto that
which is naturally due unto us, by reason of wrong done unto us. For every
fault (whether it be by Commission, or Omission) that is repugnant to that
which men, either in respect to common humanity, or in respect to their
particular qualities or callings ought to do, we here call a wrong: From such a
default their naturally arises this Obligation (in case any Damage be done us,)
namely, that reparation be made us.

II. Damage is that which is repugnant to Right strictly so taken.
Damage is happily derived a demendo (i. e.) from something that is taken away
from us. It is (...), when a man receives less than what is his Right, or his
own, whether that Right do accrue unto him by Nature merely, or by the access
of some humane fact, as by Dominion, by Contract, or by Law; by Nature a man's
own is his life, (not to destroy it, but to preserve it,) his Limbs, his
Reputation, his Honor, and his peculiar actions. By Dominion and by Contracts,
how any thing becomes our own, we have been taught, by what has been already
said, and that in respect, as well to things, as to other men's actions. So
likewise by Law, there arises to every man his own Right; for that the Law
claims the same or a greater right over the persons, and Estates of Subjects,
than any private man can have over his own. Thus has a Pupil a Right to exact
from his Guardian his utmost care; so has the Commonwealth from the
Magistrate; and not only the Commonwealth, but every Citizen so far forth as
the Law shall warrant it either expressly, or by sufficient consequence. But
from any man's Aptitude or fitness only, because it is not so properly called a
Right, and that it belongs to that kind of Justice which is Distributive, no
true Dominion or property can arise; and therefore no obligation to
restitution: Because that is not instantly his own, for which he is fit or
capable. For as Aristotle well observes, He cannot be said to transgress the
rules of Justice properly so called, who out of pa^simony relieves not a poor
man with his money. Nic. v. c. 4. Orat. pro. C^. Planco.
This, says Cicero, is the condition of a free State, that they can by their
Votes, either give to, or take away from any man what they please. And yet he
presently subjoyns, That it sometimes happens that the people may do even what
they will, not what they ought, where the word, Ought, is taken in its larger
signification.

III. A strict Right distinguished from a bare fitness.
But here we must take heed, that we do not confound things that are of diverse
kinds. For, He to whom the choice of Magistrates is committed, is obliged to
the Commonwealth to choose a man that is worthy; and to exact this of him, the
Commonwealth has a peculiar Right, in so much that if by his evil choice, The
Commonwealth sustain any damage, he is bound to repair it: so any Citizen that
is not unworthy, though he have no proper Right to any Office, yet has he this
true Right, that he may be a Competitor for it as well as others. And in case
he shall be either by fraud or force hindered in this his Right, he may sue for
satisfaction, though not to the value of the Office he sought, yet to the value
of his uncertain damage. The like may be said of him to whom a Testator would,
but being by fraud or force hindered, cannot give a Legacy. For a capacity to
receive a Legacy is a certain Right; and consequently to hinder the Testator of
his freedom to bequeath it, is an injury that requires reparation.

IV. A Damage extends to the fruits and profits;
A man shall be understood to have less than his due, and consequently to be
damnified, not only in the thing it self, but in those things, which are
properly the fruits arising from it, whether it be perceived or not; if he was
to have perceived them, deducting the costs, which he was at in the meliorating
of the thing, or the charges which he necessarily should have been at in the
perceiving of them, according to that rule, that forbids us to make our selves
gainers by other men's losses.

V. And to the gain that cease, and how.
So also the hopes of gain, by that which is our own is valuable, not as if it
were gained, but according to the nearness of our hopes to gain it; as the
nearness of the Harvest to him that in hopes thereof sowed his own Land.

VI. Of Damages given Primarily.
Besides him that immediately does the wrong, others also may be obliged to
reparation, either by doing what they ought not, or by not doing what they
ought to have done. By doing, and that either Primarily, or Secondarily:
Primarily, as he that commands the doing of it, he that being required, gives
his consent unto it, he that assists in the action, or is ready to receive what
is injuriously taken away, or that shall participate of the wrong done, by any
other means.

VII. Secondarily.
Secondarily, they are bound to reparation which give their advice before it be
done, or that commend them that did it, being done. For as Totilas in his
Oration to the Goths observes, He that commends a Malefactor, even he is to be
reputed the Author of the fact: And as Vlpian speaks concerning an evil
Servant, whom (if upon the discovery of his intentions, to run away from his
Master, or to steal any thing from him) another man shall commend, That man is
bound to give satisfaction; for we ought not by our commendations to encourage
a Malefactor to sin. For, as Cicero observes in his Philippicks, What
difference is there between him that persuades to an unjust act, and him that
commends it, being done?

VIII. They that by not doing, occasion the Damage Primarily;
By not doing what he ought, a man may be bound to reparation two ways,
Primarily, or Secondarily: Primarily, as when he that has a Right properly so
calle^, expressly to forbid the doing of it, or to defend him who has the wrong
done him, does it not: for such a man the Chaldee Paraphrast calls obfirmator,
a strengthener of wickedness, qui non vetat cum potest, jubet; He that hinders
not when he may, commands. He is not only guilty that sets fire to his
Neighbors house, but he also, who could have hindered it, but would not.

IX. And Secondarily.
Secondarily, He that does not dissuade, when he ought, or shall conceal the
fact which he ought to discover. In all which cases the word debet (i. e.)
ought, is to be referred to that which is a man's proper Right, strictly taken,
whereunto Commutative Justice has respect; whether that Right do arise from
the Law, or from any quality in the person. For if it be due only by the rule
of Charity, the omission thereof may be a sin, but not such as shall oblige to
reparation; for to this it is required that there should be some proper and
peculiar Right, as we have said before.

X. What is required as to this.
Where also it must be observed, that all these do so stand obliged, as we have
said, if they are truly the cause of the damage given, (i. e.) if they do
contribute any thing of moment to either the whole or any part of it. For if it
shall evidently appear, that he that did the wrong had certainly done it, even
without their act or neglect, as it often falls out in those of the Second
order, and sometimes in those of the First, They are not bound to reparation.
Which notwithstanding is not so to be understood, that if there wanted not
others that would advise and help, they that did so, are not obliged; if he
that occasioned the damage had not done it without Counsel and assistance. For
even those others also, if they had counseled and assisted, had been partakers
of the sin, and so obliged to reparation.

XI. In what order they are bound.
But they are principally bound, who by their own command, or by some other
means, did compel another to do the wrong: But if they fail, then he that did
the fact, and after him the rest: Every one that contributed aid or advice to
the fact, are bound to make reparation, for the whole damage, if the whole fact
proceeded from them, though not from them alone.

XII. The obligation extends to the Damages that are consequent.
He that is guilty of the fact, is also guilty of all the evil consequences
that ensue by reason of that fact. Seneca in one of his Controversies handles
this question, putting the case in one who setting fire to a Plane-Tree, burnt
thereby the houses adjoining, and gives his opinion thus, Although thou did
not intend thy Neighbor so great an injury, yet art thou bound to satisfy the
whole, as if thou had done it purposely; for he ought to be innocent, as to
every part of the wrong done, that would excuse himself by his imprudence.
Ariarathes King of Cappadocia damming up, in wantonness, the mouth of the River
Melanus, caused the Waters to swelland rage with that violence, that forcing
its way into the River Euphrates, did so swell that River also, that washing
away a great part of the Cappadocian Land, it did much harm to the Inhabitans
of Galatia and Phrygia: which matter being referred to the Romans, Ariarathes
was adjudged to pay them 300 Talents to satisfy the damage thereby sustained.

XIII. An example in an Homicide:
For examples let these suffice. First, He that kills a man unjustly, is bound
to pay the charge of Physicians and Surgeons, if any such there be; yea, and
to nourish all that depend upon the person killed, for life, and livelihood,
as Parents, Wife, Children; and to give satisfaction proportionable to the
hopes of that Aliment, consideration being had to the Age of the person killed,
and to other Circumstances. As we read of Hercules, who the better to expiate
the Murder of Iphitus whom he had slain; paid a great sum of money to his
children, for the wrongs they sustained by their Fathers death. For, as Michael
Ephesius well observes, What is so paid, is in a manner paid to him that is
killed. We speak here of an unjust Homicide, (i. e.) of him who having no
lawful power given him, shall commit such an act of violence, that occasions
the death of the party injured; wherefore if a man shall have a Right to do it,
but shall offend against Charity, as he that will not fly away, he shall not be
obliged to reparation. The life of a Freeman is unvaluable, but otherwise of a
Servant who may be sold.

XIV. In him that maimeth another:
So he that has maimed a man, and deprived him of one of his Limbs, is bound
to pay all charges, and to satisfy him for the loss of his Limb, by reason
whereof he is incapable of making that improvement of his labor, as otherwise
he might have done. But as I said (before) of the life, so here I say of the
Limbs of a Freeman, that they cannot be valued. The like may be said in case
of false Imprisonment.

XV. In an Adulterer:
So also the Adulterer and Adulteress are bound, not only to save the Husband
harmless as to the Child's nourishment, but to repair whatsoever Damage the
Children that are Legitimate, shall afterward sustain by any share or portion,
that that Child shall claim in the Inheritance. If a man shall either by force
or fraud vitiate a Virgin, he shall be obliged to pay her so much as she shall
be thought to be damnified in her hopes of Marriage: and if he obtained the use
of her body by the promise of Marriage, he stands obliged to perform his
promise.

XVI. In a Thief or Robber, and others:
A Thief or Robber is bound to restore the thing taken away, together with its
natural increment, and the ensuing Damage, or the surceasing of his gains; but
if the thing taken away do perish, then the value of it, not to the highest
rate, nor to the lowest, but moderated. Among these, we may also rank such as
defraud Princes of their lawful Customs, and Contributions. In like manner are
they bound to reparation that have wronged others, by either their unjust
sentence, or unjust accusation, or by their false Testimony.

XVII. In him that by fear or fraud causes a Promise.
As also, he that shall either by fraud, force or unjust fear urge a Contract
or a Promise from any man, is bound to make reparation to the full: For hereby
he robs the man he deals with of a double Right; First, By the nature of
Contracts, he had this Right, That he ought not to be deceived; And then by the
natural liberty that every man should have, He ought not to be enforced, or
unjustly affrighted. And among these, we may likewise range those that will not
perform, what by their Office they are bound to do, without Bribes.

XVIII. What if the fear be naturally just.
But he that has given just cause why he ought to be, by force or fear
compelled, has reason to blame himself. For an involuntary act arising from a
voluntary, is naturally reckoned for a voluntary.

XIX. What if the fear be held by the Law of Nations, for just.
But as, by the consent of Nations, all Wars made and denounced by the Supreme
power on both sides are reputed just, as to to the external effects (whereof we
shall speak more anon) so is the fear of such a War, so far reputed just, That
whatsoever is obtained thereby cannot be required back. In which sense, that
distinction of Cicero's may be admitted, which he makes between an Enemy, with
whom we enjoy by the consent of Nations many common Rights; and a Thief or
Pirate. For if these extort any thing from us by fear, we may require it back,
unless we are bound by Oath not to do it: But so we cannot do from an Enemy.
Wherefore what Polybius writes concerning the Second Punick War (namely, that
the Carthaginians had just cause to make it, because the Romans (by denouncing
War against them, whilst they were engaged in another War against their
Seditious Mercenaries) had enforced them from the Island of Sardinia, and a
great sum of money) has indeed some show of Equity, but is not agreeable with
the Common Right of Nations, as we shall elsewhere prove.

XX. How far the Civil power is bound by Damages done by their Subjects,
Kings and Magistrates are obliged to reparation, if they do not make use of
such remedies against Thieves and Pirates, to suppress them as they may, and
ought to do: For which neglect, the Scyrians were condemned by the
Amphictyones. I remember that this case was once proposed amongst us, when our
Estates having granted Letters of Mart against our Enemies, some of those to
whom these Letters were granted, abusing themselves and us; had robbed our
friends, and leaving our Country, betook themselves to the Seas, and though
recalled, would not return: whence arose this question, Whether our States were
bound to repair the damages, by reason of Letters of Mart granted them.
either because they made use of such wicked instruments, or because they did
not require from them sufficient caution that they should not transgress their
Commissions: Whereunto I gave this answer, That they were obliged to no more
than to punish them being found, or to deliver them up: And besides, to take
care that reparation should be made out of the Goods of the Delinquents. A
judged case.
For that the States were not the causes of the depredations, nor did they
participate of them: that they had forbidden them by severe Laws to wrong their
friends; but to require Caution from them, they were not by any Law obliged,
seeing that they might empower all their Subjects without any Codicils, to make
what spoil they could, of whatsoever was their Enemies, as had been anciently
done: Neither was this permission, the true cause of the wrongs done unto their
friends; seeing that private men might arm their Ships, and put out to Sea,
even without permission. Neither could they foresee that these men would prove
wicked: Nor could they altogether avoid, the making use of wicked men; for then
it was not possible for them to raise an Army: Neither if their Soldiers
either by Sea or Land did injure their friends, contrary to the Command of the
Supreme Magistrate, were they obliged to reparation, as might easily be proved
by the Testimonies of France and England. (Yet in a League between Francis de
Valois King of France, and Henry the Eighth of England, Herbert's Henry the 8.
page 54.
it was agreed the better to prevent Depredations by Sea, that no Merchant of
either Nation should depart out of their Ports without giving Caution to their
respective Admirals, that no wrong or molestation should be done by Sea to
either of their Subjects.) But that any man should be bound to repair the
Damages which his Servants shall without his fault, and against his command, do
unto others, belongs not to the Law of Nations, by which this cause ought
properly to be judged; but to the Civil Law, and yet not in the general, but as
it is introduced for some particular reasons against Mariners, and some others.
And thus has this case been determined by the Judges of the Supreme Assembly,
against certain Pomeranians, and that according to Precedents of things of the
like nature, two ages before.

XXI. The owner of a Ship or Beast that hurts his Neighbor, not bound by the
Law of Nature.
This also is worthy our observation, that it proceeds from the Civil Law, and
not from the Law of Nature, That we deliver up our Beast, or Bondslaves to
punishment, which have endamaged our Neighbor. For the owner of them being
innocent is naturally bound to nothing, as neither is he, whose Ship without
his fault, falls foul and hurts another; though by the Law of diverse Nations,
as well as ours, such Damages are usually divided between both, because it is
very difficult to be proved.

XXII. The Damage against a man's honor how to be tepaired.
But the wounds we receive in our Honor, or Fame, as by Stripes, Reproaches,
Curses, and such like, must have their proper cures. And in these no less than
in Theft, and other Crimes, the hainousness of the fact is discerned by the
effect. For as in those, our reparation consists in the punishment of the
Thief; so in this, The Damage we sustain is repaired by confession of the
fault, and by exhibiting all due Honor to him who is wronged, and the public
Testimony given both of his innocence, and our own repentance, and such like
means: Although the offender in this kind may be punished in his purse, if the
injured person desire it, because money is the Common Standard whereby all
things tending to profit, are measured.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Rights of Embassages.
I. There are some Obligations that arise from the Law of Nations, as the Right
of Embassages. II. Among whom this Right takes place. III. Whether an Embassage
be always to be admitted. IV. Against such Ambassadors as endeavor to raise
Sedition, our defense is lawful, but not the exacting of punishment. V. He is
not obliged to the Rights, of an Embassage, to whom the Ambassador is not sent.
VI. An Enemy is bound, if the Ambassador be sent unto him. VII. Ambassadors not
subject to the Law of retaliation. VIII. The Rights due to Ambassadors, are due
also to their Companions, and followers, if the Ambassador please: IX. And to
their moveable goods. X. Examples of Obligation where there is no Law to
enforce. XI. How far by the Law of Nations, this Right of Embassages is in
esteem.
I. The Rights of Embassages arise from the Law of Nations.
WE have hitherto discoursed of such things, as by the Law of Nature are due
unto us, interserting some few things which the voluntary Law of Nations has
supperadded to the Law of Nature. It remains now that we come to such
obligations, as the very voluntary Law of Nations has of it self introduced:
Whereof the chiefest head is, of the Rights of Embassages. We have in all
Histories, mention made of the Sacred and Inviolable Rights of Embassages, of
the Sanctimony of Ambassadors: The Right of Nations peculiarly due unto them:
The Rights of Embassages Sacred amongst all Nations.

Sanctum populis per saecula Nomen.
Ages and Nations do this name revere.
says Papinius. If any man shall strike an Ambassador, though sent from an
Enemy, he is said to violate the Law of Nations, because Ambassadors are
accounted Sacred, says Pomponius. And therefore If whilst an Ambassador from
any Nation, I. Si quis. D. de Legationibus.
is resident with us, War be denounced against them, it is agreeable to the Law
of Nations that (if he please) he may remain with us. Quintus Mucius would have
him that presumes to strike an Ambassador, to be delivered up to that Enemy,
whose Ambassador he was. Ant. lib. 15.
Josephus also highly extolls the Sacred privileges of Ambassadors, who are
honored with the same name and title, as are the Angels, who are Gods
Ambassadors. Corpora Legatorum Sancta, The persons of Legates, says Varro, are
Holy. Varro. 3.
So likewise Cicero, The Rights of Ambassadors are guarded by all Laws both
Divine and Humane, whose very name is so venerable, that it secures their
persons not only among the Laws of their friends, but among the very weapons of
their Enemies. Wherefore to violate this Right, is not unjust only, but
impious, (...), as Plutarch calls it. Vit. Aemil. Ant. lib. 15.
Wherewith accords that also of Josephus, where he says, That the very name of
an Ambassador is so Sacred, that it is able to reconcile one Enemy to another:
For what can argue more impiety, than to kill Ambassadors, interceeding for
Peace. And to speak generally, says Totilas, Procop. Goth. 3.
Ambassadors are reverenced among all Nations, though Barbarous. And good
reason, For, even in the midst of War, they are the sole Mediators for Peace,
and he that assumes the Office of an Ambassador, does for that time put off the
condition of an enemy.

II. Among whom this Right takes place.
But yet we must in the first place, know that this Right of Nations, whatever
it be, belongs to such Legates only, who are sent by such as have the Sovereign
power, in both Nations between themselves. For such as are sent from Provinces,
particular Cities, or other subordinate powers, are governed not by the Law of
Nations, which is between diverse people, but by the Civil Law. An Ambassador
in Livy calls himself the Public Messenger of the people of Rome: And in
another place, the Roman Senate declares that the Right of Embassages was
granted, not to a Citizen, but to a Foreigner: And Cicero to prove that they
ought not to send Ambassadors to M. Anthony, says, Non enim cum Hannibale res
est, host reipublicae, sed cum cive; For we have not now to do with Hannibal,
a public Enemy, but with a Citizen and a Subject. Now what is meant by a
Foreigner, Virgil will inform us, as well as any Lawyer can do: A Foreign Land
is that, as I suppose,
Which being free, to us no duty owes.
But they that are Confederates, though upon Terms very unequal; yet because
they are sui juris, a free people, have likewise this Right of sending
Embassages: Yea, and they also that are partly Subjects, and partly free, for
that part wherein they are free. But such things as are conquered in a solemn
War, and driven out of their Kingdoms do lose, together with their other goods,
this Right of sending Ambassadors. And therefore did Paulus Aemilius, (having
conquered Perseus in open War) detain the Heralds, which he sent unto him. But
yet, in Civil Wars necessity does sometimes plead for the admittance of this
Right, though irregular: As namely, when the people are so equally divided into
parts, that it is an hard matter to judge, in whether part consists the Right
of Empire; or when two persons with very equal titles, contend for the
Succession. For in this case, one Nation for that time may be accounted as two.
Hist. l. 3.
Thus are the Flaviani accused by Tacitus, that in their Civil discord, they
had violated the Right of Ambassadors, Sacred even among Barbarous Nations, in
the Vitellians. And Magnensius in Zosimus did long debate it in his mind, Zof.
l. 11.
whether he should dismiss Philip, who was sent him on an Embassy from
Constantine without answer, or despising the privileges of Ambassadors, detain
him. Pirates and Thieves being enemies to Civil Society, can have no benefit by
the Law of Nations. Spartactus in Appian offered to enter into a League with
Crassus, but was rejected with scorn; and Tiberius, when Tacfarinus sent
Ambassadors to him, was highly vexed, to see a Traitor and a Thief to treat
with him, after the manner of Enemies: Which are the very words of Tacitus. Yet
sometimes these also are admitted to the Rights of Embassages, upon their Faith
given. As of old those Fugitives, Lib. 3. de bello civili.
in the Pyrenean Woods, were, whom Caesar mentions. Yet was this a particular
indulgence given at that time by him, which by the Law of Natitions was not
due, nor ought to be given to Subjects.

III. Whether an Embassage be always to be admitted.
There is a twofold Right due to Ambassadors by the Law of Nations: First, that
they be admitted; Secondly, That they be not injured. As concerning the former,
Livy brings in Hanno inveighing against Hannibal, in the Senate of Carthage,
thus, Our goodly General refuses to admit into his Camp Ambassadors coming
from friends, and for friends. Jus Gentium sustulit, He has broken the Law of
Nations: which notwithstanding must not be understood so largely as if none
should be denied; for a Prince may deny an Ambassador admittance; and he may
command him to depart his Kingdom, if he behave himself seditiously, but that
none should be without cause denied: Now causes there may be, First, from him
that sends, Secondly, from him that is sent, and Thirdly, from the matter of
Embassage. As to the first, we read that Pericles dismissed Melesippus, the
Lacedaemonian Ambassador, beyond the Territories of Athens, because he came
from an Armed Enemy. And the Roman Senate denied admission to the Carthaginian
Ambassador, Vid. Camden An. 1571. Quaest. 4. Livy l. 41. Zonaras.
because they had an Army in the heart of Italy. So did the Achaians to the
Ambassadors of Perseus, because he attempted a War against the Romans. The like
did Justinian to the Ambassadors of Totilas, and the Goths in Vrbin to the
messengers of Belisarius. And the Ambassadors of the Scythians, because they
were a people notoriously wicked, were in all places repulsed, as Polybius
testifies. As concerning the second cause (i. e.) from the person sent; an
example we have in Theodorus the Atheist, to whom Lysimachus refused to give
Audience, though he came as an Ambassador from King Ptolomy: The like has been
done to others, for no other cause but personal hatred. The third is, when the
ground or reason of him that sends is suspected to move Sedition, as was that
of Rabshakeh rejected by Hezekiah, Rabshakeh's Case, 2 Kings 18.
and the like: Or when the matter or form is not well suited to the digni^y of
the person with whom we treat, or not so well timed. So the Romans forbad the
Aetolians to send out any Ambassadors without their Generals permission: And
Perseus was forbidden from sending any Ambassadors to Rome, but only to
Licinius; so they commanded the Ambassadors of Jugurtha to depart out of Italy
within ten days, unless they came to deliver their King and Kingdom into the
power of the Romans. So the Emperor Charles the Fifth commanded the
Ambassadors sent to denounce War against him, from France, Venice and Florence,
to be conducted to a place thirty miles distant from his Court, as Guicciardine
records it. Lib. 18.
And thus may those Ordinary Ambassadors which are constantly resident in most
Courts, be worthily rejected as unnecessary, and a new upstart custom whereof
former Ages were wholly ignorant.

IV. Against such Ambassadors as raise Sedition, our defense is lawful, but not
their punishment.
Concerning the latter privilege of Ambassadors, namely, That they should not
be molested, the question is more arduous and knotty; and by the best Wits of
this Age, variously handled. In the stating whereof, they have respect, First,
To the persons, Secondly, To their Attendants, Thirdly, To their Goods. As to
their Persons, some think, that they are to be protected against all unjust
force only, esteeming their privileges to be understood of Common Right.
Others are of opinion, that the persons of Emperors are not for every cause to
be molested, but only when they themselves do violate the Law of Nations, which
opens a door so wide, that all delinquencies are punishable in Emperors,
except such as are committed against the Civil Law: For in those committed
against the Law of Nations, are contained even those that are committed against
the Law of Nature. Others do yet restrain this force to those, who shall be
found to act any thing against the State of the Commonwealth, or against the
honor and dignity of the person to whom they are sent: which some think to be
of dangerous consequence; and therefore would have complaint made to him that
sent them, and the Ambassadors sent home, to be by him punished. Others there
are, who think it fit in this case to appeal to other Kings and Free States,
that are not concerned; desiring their advice therein, which indeed may stand
with prudence, but not to be imposed upon us as a Law. The Arguments which
every one of these do bring to strengthen their several opinions, do conclude
nothing certainly: Because this Right is not grounded upon reasons that are
certain, as the Law of Nature is, but it receives its bounds from the consent
of Nations. Now the Nations may either altogether provide for the safety of
Ambassadors, or with some certain exceptions. For advantages may by either of
these arise to the Commonwealth: By this latter, the punishment inflicted upon
such as notoriously offend, deters others; and secures the peace of that
Nation. By the former, the profit arises to the State by Embassies, which are
the more easily and willingly undertaken, when the persons sent are encouraged
thereunto, as knowing that the greatest care that can be, is taken for their
security; we are therefore to observe, how far forth the Nations did agree in
this point; which cannot be evinced by examples alone. For of these we have
enough extant on either side; we must therefore have recourse herein, as well
to the Judgment of the Wisest Men, as to our own most probable conjectures.
For the Judgment of the Wisest Men are guided by two notable precedents; one
out of Livy, the other out of Salust. That out of Livy, by the Ambassadors of
Tarquine, who pretended only to treat with the Senate about some of Tarquine's
Goods, but were found conspiring with the Citizens to betray the City. And when
it was moved in the Senate, What should be done with them, It was at length
resolved on, That though they deserved to be proceeded against as enemies, yet
valuit Jus Gentium, The Law of Nations must be preserved. Whence we may
conclude, That by the Law of Nations, Protection is due unto Ambassadors,
though they should be found plotting against the State they are sent unto. That
in Salust, does more immediately respect the Concomitants of Ambassadors, than
Ambassadors themselves; and yet by an Argument drawn from that which is less
credible, to that which is more, may serve to prove, what the Law of Nations
allows to Ambassadors in the case aforesaid. Salust speaking of Bomilcar, who
came to Rome as an Assistant in the Embassage, but was found stirring up the
Citizens to Rebellion, says thus, Fit reus magis ex aequo bonoque quam ex jure
Gentium; He was made Guilty, rather by the Rules of Equity, than by the Law of
Nations. Where by aequum and bonum, is meant the mere Law of Nature, which
requires, that he that does evil, should suffer for it being found. But the Law
of Nations excepts from this General Rule, Ambassadors, and such as (like them)
come upon the security of the Public Faith. Wherefore it is contrary to the
Interest of the Law of Nations, that Ambassadors should be held guilty, as many
other things are, which are permitted by the Law of Nature. Our conjectures
also may be thus guided. Most probable it is, that the privileges granted to
Ambassadors, are somewhat more than what is due unto others by common right.
But in case they are no longer to be secured, than whilst they live regularly,
what have they more than others? Besides the benefit that accrews unto the
Commonwealth by securing their persons, does by much preponderate that which
we may hope for in their punishment. For his punishment may be required of him
that sent him, if he be willing: which if refused, then we can but make War
upon him, as being accessory to the crime by his approving it. But some will
object, That it is better that one should be punished, than a multitude engaged
in a War. But if he that sent the Ambassador do approve of his Fact, the
punishment of the Ambassador cannot free us from the Danger. (Now whether it be
safest for the Commonwealth, to connive and dissemble the fact, or to run the
hazard of a War, will be the question). On the other side, the safety of
Ambassadors, would be but slenderly provided for, if they were to give an
account to any, but unto him that sent them. For since the designs of them that
send Ambassadors, and of those to whom they are sent, are for the most part
diverse, if not contrary, it cannot possibly be, but that some of their Actions
will seem to be criminous. And although some are so manifest, as not to admit
of any doubt, yet is the universal danger sufficient for the equity and benefit
of an universal Law. Wherefore mine opinion is, That by the Consent of Nations,
that Common Custom which requires, that every man that resides in a Foreign
Country, should conform himself to the Laws and Customs of that Country,
should except Ambassadors, who as they are imagined to be the persons of them
that send them: (for so speaks Cicero of a certain Ambassador, Senatus Faciem
secum attulerat, He brought with him the Majesty of a Senate, the Authority of
a Commonwealth.) So may they be imagined to live in their own Country; and
therefore not bound by the Civil Laws of the place they are really in.
Wherefore if the offense be such as may safely be slighted, it is either to be
dissembled, or the Ambassador commanded to depart the Kingdom; which (as
Polybius tells us) was done unto him who procured the Flight of the Hostages
from Rome. The like was done by Stephen King of Poland, to the Muscovite
Ambassador, and by Queen Elizabeth, to the Scottish and Spanish Ambassadors.
For when Mendoza the Spanish Ambassador, was found practicing with Throckmorton
and others to bring in a Foreign Power into England, and to depose the Queen;
he being a man of a Turbulent Spirit, and abusing the privileges of an
Ambassador, was commanded to depart the Realm. But when the Bishop of Rosse
delegated Ambassador from the imprisoned Queen of Scots, was found designing
means both within the Kingdom of England, and without, to raise Rebellion, and
to procure a Foreign Invasion: It being demanded of the most Learned Civilians
of that Age, Whether an Ambassador raising Rebellion against the Prince, to
whom he was sent, might enjoy the privileges of an Ambassador; it was
answered, That he had thereby lost his privilege, and might be punished: as
Camden records it Anno 1571. and 1584. And we may also remember, that at
another time the Romans caused the Tarentine Ambassadors to be whipped with Rods,
for conveying their hostages out of Rome; but this was done, because the
Tarentines being conquered, began then to be under the Jurisdiction of the
Romans. So we read of Charles the Fifth, that he commanded the Ambassador of
the Duke of Millain, as being his Subject, that he should not depart his Court
without leave, as Guicciardine relates it. But in case the Crime be heinous and
menacing present danger to the State, then is the Ambassador to be sent back to
his Master, with demand, That he either punish him, or deliver him up to be
punished: as we read of the Gauls, that they demanded the Fabii to be
delivered up unto them. But, as I have often said before, All humane Laws are
so made, that they oblige not in extreme necessity; the same may also be said
of these Rights of Ambassadors. Wherefore that we may prevent some imminent
danger, especially to the Commonwealth, if no fitter means can be thought on,
we may both apprehend and examine him; as the Roman Consuls did the Ambassadors
of Tarquin, All intercourse by Letters being in the first place prevented, as
Livy directs Literarumim-primus habita cura, ne interciderent. Plut. Vit. Pet.
Off. l. 3.
. Pelopidas was imprisoned by Alexander Pheraeus, for that being an Ambassador,
he stirred up the Thessalians to liberty. But in case an Ambassador shall
attempt to assault another man by force of Arms, surely he may be killed; not
by way of punishment, but by way of Natural Defense. So the Gauls might have
killed the Fabii, whom Livy brands, as being the Infringers of humane Right.
Wherefore when the Herald in Euripides attempted by force to rescue the
Suppliants, he was by force resisted; and when the Herald demanded of him,
Dur'st thou, an Herald, hither sent, to smite? He was answered, Yes, if that
Herald first begin so fight. And because that Herald did act by Force and
Violence, he was slain by the people of Athens, as Philostratus records in the
Life of Herod. By the like distinction, Offic. l. 3.
does Cicero resolve this Question, Whether a Son ought to accuse his own
Father being a Traitor to his Country? Namely, if the Danger be great and
imminent, he ought by way of prevention; but in case the danger be past, he
ought not by way of punishment for the Fact. The very Name of an Ambassador,
says Theodatus the Goth to the Emperor Justinian's Ambassador, is with all
men held as sacred and honorable; which honor they may justly claim, whilst
they uphold their dignity by their modesty. For most men are of opinion, that
it is lawful to kill an Ambassador, if he be injurious to the person of him to
whom he is sent, or shall defile himself, by violating the Rights of Marriage.
And when some Ambassadors did allege, that they were so far from the suspicion
of committing Adultery, that they could not stir abroad without a Guard, they
prudently added, That if an Ambassador did deliver no other Message, Camd^n
anno 1571.
than what he received from his Master, though it were never so unpleasant, he
was not faulty, but he that sent him: For there was nothing committed unto him,
but that he should faithfully discharge the Commands that were given him.

V. He is not bound to these Laws of Embassages, to whom the Ambassador is not
sent.
This Law of securing Ambassadors from Force or Violence, obliges him to whom
they are sent, at least when they are admitted; as if from that time, there had
passed between them a Tacit Covenant. But before they are received, they can
claim no such privilege: because he to whom they are sent, may happily declare,
that they shall not be received: And if so, then they shall be accounted as
enemies: As the Romans premonished the Aetolians, and as the same Romans long
since, by an Edict signified to the Vejentine Ambassadors, That unless they
departed the City, they would show them no more mercy, Live. l. 27. Id. l. 4.
Lib. 10.
than Tolumnius their King had showed to the Roman Ambassadors, whom he
commanded to be killed. And as the Samnites declared to the Romans, namely,
That if they entered into any Assembly in Samninus, they should not depart in
safety. This Law therefore, reaches not unto those through whose Territories
Ambassadors presume to pass without License. For if they are going to their
Enemies, or coming from them, or do otherwise attempt any Act of Hostility,
they may be even killed. Thus did the Athenians serve the Ambassadors passing
between the Persians and the Spartans: So did the Illyrians, Thucyd. l. 2.
those that went between the Essians and the Romans: Much more being taken, may
they be bound and kept in Prison; as Xenophon past Judgment upon some, and
Alexander against those which were sent from Thebes and Lacedaemon unto Darius;
and the Romans against the Ambassadors sent to Hannibal. But if no such thing
be, and yet the Ambassadors be evil treated, the Law of Nations, whereof we now
speak, is not thereby violated: but the honor of those Princes, either from
whom they came, or unto whom they were sent, is thereby wounded, and all
friendship with them broken. Thus writes Justine concerning Philip the latter
King of Macedon, Li^. 29.
That he sent his Ambassador with Letters to contract Friendship with Hannibal;
who being taken, and brought before the Roman Senate, was dismissed with safety.
Not in honor to the King, but lest of a doubtful Friend, they should thereby
make him their certain Enemy. But it is otherwise in case any Prince shall lay
in wait to surprise the Ambassador of another Prince, without his own
Territories: for this is a violation of the Law of Nations; as is plain by the
Oration of the Thessalians against King Philip recorded by Livy.

VI. An Enemy is hereunto obliged if the Ambassador be sent unto him.
But on the other side, the Embassage being admitted, the Law of Nations
protects the person sent, even among those Nations that are in Actual Arms one
against another, much more among such as are barely Enemies. It is very true,
what Diodorus Siculus says, That Heralds enjoy Peace in the midst of War. The
Lacedaemonians who killed the Heralds, sent from the Persians, are said to
break the Law of all Nations Vide. 1.
. If any man shall strike an Ambassador coming from an Enemy, he shall be
judged (says Pomponius L. ult. D. de Legatis.
) as one that has violated the Common Right of all Nations; because their
persons are generally held as sacred. And Tacitus calls this Right Ann. l. 1.
Verrin. 1. Lib. 5. c. 2.
, whereof we now treat, the Right of Enemies, the Sanctimony of Embassies, and
the Law of Nations, approved by God himself. So likewise Cicero, Nonne Legati
inter hosts incolumes esse debent? Ought not Ambassadors te be secured, though
among Troops of Armed Foes? And Seneca in his Books of Anger, He offered
violence even to Ambassadors, thereby spurning at the Law of Nations. A
villainous Act, a wicked Cause, an impious Murder, as Livy calls it, in the
Story of the Fidenates assassinating the Roman Ambassadors: And in another
place, when their Ambassadors were brought into great danger, he says, Ne
belli quidem jura relicta sunt; They had not left amongst them so much as the
Rights of War. Lib. 4.
So Curtius, He sent Ambassadors to compel them to peace, whom the Tyrians
killed and threw headlong into the Sea, contrary to the Law of Nations. And
deservedly: For even in War many things fall out, which cannot be transacted
but by Ambassadors; and very hardly can Peace at any time be made without them.

VII. Neither are Ambassadors liable to the Law of Retaliation.
Another Question does usually arise, namely, Whether a Prince may retaliate
the wrongs done unto his own Ambassadors, upon the Ambassadors of him who did
that wrong? And surely, we may find in Histories, many examples of revenges
taken in this way. And no marvel, for Historians do usually record, not only
things that are justly and piously done, but those also that are done unjustly,
in heat of anger, rashly, and impotently. But the Law of Nations does not only
carefully provide for the honor of the Person sending, but for the security of
the Person sent. So that there is, as it were, a silent Contract made between
the Ambassador sent, and the Prince to whom he goes. And therefore though there
should be no injustice done, in respect of the Prince that sends his
Ambassador, as having justly deserved it for the affront given him in the
wrongs done unto his Ambassador; yet to the person sent there would be done a
manifest injustice, because by virtue of that tacit agreement he might justly
claim his Indemnity. And therefore it was not only magnanimously, but justly
done by Scipio, according to the Law of Nations, who though the Roman
Ambassadors had been very hardly used at Carthage, yet when the Romans brought
the Carthaginian Ambassadors unto him, demanding what should be done with them;
made answer, Nihil tale quale factum fuit a Carthaginensibus; Nothing of that
which the Carthaginians did unto the Romans. Or according to what Livy adds,
Nihil se facturum institutis populi Romani indignum; That he would do nothing
unworthy of the Roman Discipline. Whereunto Diodorus adds this Reason, Lest
what we blame in them, we justify in our selves. And the Romans themselves,
though they were not ignorant of what the Carthaginians had done, yet dismissed
their Ambassadors in safety. Thus did Constantius remit Titianus, being sent
unto him by Magnentius; though his own Ambassador, Philip, sent unto
Magnentius, had been hy him detained, as Zosimon testifies. And when long
before the Roman Ambassador, Cornelius Asina, was put in Chains by the
Carthaginians, and Hanno the Carthaginian Ambassador, being at that time in
Rome, was afraid of the like measure, the Consuls stood up in the Senate, and
thus bespake him: Isto te metu, Hanno, fides Civitatis nostra liberet; Let the
Faith of our City, Hanno, free thee from this fear.

VIII. The privilege of Ambassadors extends to their Retinue.
Not only the Ambassador himself, but his Followers and Goods are to partake
of the same privilege (if he please.) And therefore the Ancient Form of words
used by Ambassadors and Heralds unto the Kings to whom they were sent, were
these, O King, do thou admit of me, as the Royal Messenger of the People of
Rome, together with my Goods and Followers. And by the Julian Law, not only
they that offered violence to the persons of the Ambassadors themselves, but
they that injured any of their Attendants, were found guilty, De vi publiea, Of
violence done by force and arms. But this Sanctimony belongs unto them, but as
they are Attendants to the Ambassador, and therefore no further due than he
shall please: Wherefore in case any heinous crime be committed by them, they
are required to be delivered up by the Ambassador to punishment, but they are
by no means to be taken from him by force. Which, when once done by the
Achaians, who seized upon some Lacedaemonians, who attended upon the Roman
Ambassadors, the Romans presently cried out, That they had violated the Law of
Nations. Whereunto also we may refer the judgment of Salust concerning
Bomilcar, which we have formerly quoted. But if the Ambassador shall refuse to
deliver him, then we are to proceed in the same manner, as is before prescribed
against the Ambassador himself. But whether the Ambassador have jurisdiction
over his own Family, or whether his House be a Sanctuary for all such as shall
fly unto it for refuge, depends upon the pleasure of him to whom he is sent;
for this belongs not at all to the Law of Nations.

IX. And to their movable Goods.
The movable Goods also of an Ambassador, and whatsoever else shall appertain
to his person, are not to be received in pawn, or attached for any debt;
neither by any ordinary course of Law, nor by the hands of the King himself
(which some hold as the truer opinion.) For no force or compulsion must be, by
any means, used against him or his; that so he may enjoy an absolute and
perfect security. And if he shall have contracted any debt, and have no real
Estate (as it usually falls out) he must only be fairly entreated to discharge
them; which if he refuse, then is he that sent him to be likewise entreated to
pay them. But if neither will do it, then in the last place we must flee to
such Remedies, as are provided against such Debtors, as do reside in Foreign
Countries.

Yet is it no breach of their privilege, that their Coffers be searched at
their first entrance, in case it be according to the custom of the Country
whereunto they are sent: As it happened to Sir Thomas Chaloner in Spain, who
complaining thereof to Queen Elizabeth, and desiring to be recalled, Cambden
Eliz. Anno 1561.
was prudently answered by that most wise Queen, That an Ambassador should
take all things in good part, so as his Prince's Honor was not directly
violated.

X. Examples where there are Obligations, but no power to compel.
Neither is there any cause to fear (as some may imagine) that if the case be
thus with Ambassadors, no man will trust them, or make any Contract with them:
For the King himself though he cannot be compelled to any thing, yet never
wants Creditors (if they give good prices.) And among some Nations, as Damascen
informs us, it is customable, That as to such debts as are contracted upon
trust, there is no remedy provided by Law, no more than there is against men
that are ungrateful: So that men in those parts are compelled, either to pay
readily for what they buy, and on both sides to fulfill alike all their
agreements, or to content themselves with the bare faith and credit of the
Debtor. Seneca seems to envy the happiness of those Countries, by wishing the
same custom in all places: De benef. lib. 3. c. 15.
I would to God (says he) that we could persuade all people, that Moneys lent
upon credit should be recovered only from those men who were willing to pay;
and that no stipulation should bind the Buyer to the Seller; and that no
written Contracts or Covenants under Hand and Seal, should be preserved, but
rather that the performance of them should be left to the Faith and Honesty of
the Debtor. Appian relates of the Persians, That they hated the borrowing of
money, as being an inlet to Fraud, Falsehood, and Perjury. Lib. 4. Lib. 15.
And Aelian reports the very same of the Indians, with whom agrees Strabo, in
these words, Judicia non esse nisi de caede and injuria, etc. There are no
Judicatories unless it be for Murders and Injuries done, because it is not in
the power of any man to avoid these: But as to Contracts and Agreements, it is
in the choice of every man to make them or to refuse them; and therefore if any
man break his Faith with us, we are to bear it patiently, and to learn rather
to be wise, in taking heed before hand whom we trust, than by our folly to fill
the City we live in with Lawsuits. It was also wisely enacted by Charonda,
That no man should have his Action at Law against that man, whose Faith he
thought fit to take for the price of what he sold him; which Plato likewise
approves of. L. 8. de Leg. Mor. Nic. 8. 15.
This was also observed by Aristotle, In some Countries (says he) there is no
recovering of such Debts by Lawsuits, for they conceive that men ought to
acquiesce, and to be contented with the faith of that man whom they thought
worthy to be trusted. Mor. l. 9. c. 1.
So in another place, Some Countries there are where the Laws do forbid a man
to recover by Law, that which he has trusted upon the Faith of another; as if
he with whom we have made any Contract, and on whose faith we have taken, were
privately only to be dealt with. Those Arguments which from the Roman Laws are
brought against this opinion, are to be referred not unto our Ambassadors, but
unto such as are sent from Provinces, or from particular Cities.

XI.
Profane Histories are full of the Examples of Wars undertaken, for the
affronts offered to Ambassadors: And in the Sacred Story we read of a War made
by King David against the Ammonites upon that ground. Neither can there be any
cause more just, as Cicero pleads against King Mithridates.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Right of Burial.
I. From the same Law of Nations arises the Right of burying the Dead. II.
Whence this springs. III. It is due even to Enemies. IV. Whether to such as are
notoriously wicked. V. Whether to such as kill themselves. VI. What other
things are by the Law of Nations due.
I. From the Law of Nations arises the right of Burial.
FRom the same Law of Nations which is voluntary, arises the Right of burying
the bodies of the Dead. Dion Chrysostom amongst those Customs which he
opposes to written Laws, places this of Burial, next to the Rights due to
Ambassadors: And Seneca the Father, among those Laws that are unwritten, which
yet are more firm and binding than those that are written, inserts this of the
Interment of the dead. The Hebrew Historiographers, Philo and Josephus, term
this the Right of Nature; And Isidore Pelusiota, One of the Laws of Nature: as
it is very usual with them to comprehend all such Customs, as are common
amongst all Nations, and agreeable to Natural Reason, under the Notion of the
Law of Nature, as I have elsewhere showed. And no marvel, Epist. ult. edit.
491. Lib. 12. Lib. 13. Hist. 8. 19.
seeing that (as Aelian speaks) The burial of the dead is a thing commanded,
even by Nature it self. And in another place, The Earth and Graves are to all
men common and alike due. Eusebius also reckons it among the Laws of Nature.
And Euripides, The Laws of Mortals. Aristides calls it, (...), A Law common to
all men. Papinius, The Law of the whole Earth, and the general League of the
World. Tacitus, The great Commerce of humane condition. And Lysias the Orator,
The common hope of all. He that hinders the burning of the bodies of dead men,
is said in Claudian, to divest himself of all humanity; and by the Emperor
Leo, to reproach Nature her self: and by Isidore, to profane that which is
holy. And because the Ancients observed, that what Rights soever being common
to all Civilized Nations, to the end that they might be reputed the more
sacred, were attributed to the Gods as their Authors; As they did the Rights of
Ambassadors: So we find, that they every where ascribe unto them this Right
also. In one of the Tragedies of Euripides, and in one also of Sophocles, you
may find it called (...), Supplic. Ajace.
A Divine Law: and in another, Antigone.
you may find it reckoned among the Laws of the Gods. And Isocrates discoursing
of the Ground of the War which Theseus made against Creon, brings in Adrastus
(having lost his Army before Thebes, and by Creon denied leave to bury the
Dead) supplicating Theseus then King of Athens, That he would commiserate those
brave men that lay unburied before Thebes, and that he would not suffer the
Ancient Custom to be despised, nor that Common Right violated, which all
mankind might lay claim to, as being instituted, not by an humane, but by a
divine power: which when Theseus heard, he immediately sent his Ambassadors to
Thebes. The same Author exceedingly blaming the Thebans, for preferring their
own Decrees, before the Laws of the Gods. And not only Isocrates in this place,
but Herodotus in his Calliope, Diodorus Siculus in the fourth of his Histories,
Xenophon in the sixth of his Grecian History, and many other Historians, do
unanimously assert, That this War of Theseus was undertaken, for the Common
Cause of all Mankind. And every where in all Authors of the best account, we
read this office of burying the dead, commended unto us under the most specious
names of the best Virtues. Orat. pro Quintio. Lib. 6. c. 11, 22. Lib. 5. c. 1.
Cicero and Lactantius commend it as an Act of Humanity: Valerius Maximus, as
an Act of Humanity and Courtesy: Quintilian, as an Act of Humanity and
Religion: Seneca, as an Act of Compassion and Humanity: Philo attributes it to
Pity and Commiseration of Common Nature: Tacitus calls it the Commerce of
Humane Condition: And Vlpian ascribes it to Mercy and Piety: Euripides and
Lactantius term it, an Act of Justice and of Piety. Lib. 6. c. 12.
Vltimum illud and maximum pietatis officium est Peregrinorum and pauperum
Sepultura; To bury the Stranger and the Poor, is the last and greatest duty of
Piety, says Lactantius. As on the contrary, to deny Burial to the Dead, as the
Donatists did the bodies of the Catholics, Optatus Milevitanus condemns as
Impiety. And in Papinus we read -- Bello cogendus and Armis
In mores hominemque Creon.
-- By War and Arms must Creon be
Enforced to Customs, and Humanity.
Spartianus brands such men with Infamy, Vita Cara-] callae.
as if they had no respect or reverence at all to Humanity: And Livy calls it,
A brutish Cruelty beyond the belief of Humane Anger. Homer brings in Jupiter
and the rest of the Gods, as being offended at Achilles, for abusing the body
of Hector. And Lactantius condemns their wisdom, as savouring too much of
Impiety, who esteem all Care in burying the Dead, superfluous.

II. Whence this custom arises.
Upon what ground this Custom of burying the bodies of the Dead, was at first
introduced, whether embalmed according to the Custom of the Egyptians, or
burnt according to the manner of the Grecians, or interred as we now use, which
Cicero approves as the most Ancient, Not. Hist. l. 7. c. 54.
and after him Pliny; (who makes this difference between Sepultus and Humatus,
as if he were understood to be Sepultus, whose body was by any means kept and
preserved; but he only to be Humatus, that was covered with Earth) it is not
agreed upon, on all sides. Moschion attributes it to the savage Cruelty of the
Giants, who were wont to devour the dead bodies of men, Cujus abolitae signum
est sepultura; The abolishing of which Brutish Custom is signified by
Sepulture. Others are of Opinion, that by this means men seem voluntarily to
pay that debt which Nature will exact from us, though we were otherwise
unwilling. For that all humane bodies being extracted from the Earth, should
return to the Earth, was not said by God only unto Adam; but all both Greeks
and Latins, do every where acknowledge. Cicero quotes this out of Euripides,
that Reddenda terrae terra.
Earth must to Earth return.
Which also are the very words of Solomon, Eccles. 12.7. Eccles. 12.7.
Then shall the Dust return to the Earth as it was, and the Spirit shall return
unto God that gave it. Now on this subject what said Solomon more than
Euripides, who in the person of Theseus, says thus, Jam sinite terrae Mortuos
gremio tegi:
Res unde quaeque sumpserat primordium
Eo recipitur: Spiritus Coelo redit,
Corpusque terrae: Jure, nec enim Mancupi,
Sed brevis ad aevi tempus utendum datur:
Mox terra repetit ipsa quod nutriverat:
Now let the Dead be unto Earth bequeathed,
And each return from whence it once received
Its being; then will the Spirit soon retire to Heaven:
The flesh to dust, from whence it came, not given,
But for a short time lent: that past and gone,
The Earth what it so lent, soon seizes on.
Lucretius speaking of the Earth, says, She is, of All, the Womb and common
Tomb. Pliny likewise tells us, That the Earth receives us as soon as we are
born; and being born, she nourishes us; and being brought up, she always
sustains us; and at last, being forsaken by all the world, she like a tender
Mother, receives us into her own Bowels again, and there hides us. See Job
10.9. In Flaccum.
Nature, says Philo, has ordained the Earth, as Man's proper place, not only
whilst they live, but being dead also, Ut eadem quae primos suscepit Natales,
suscipiat and ex hac vita Exitum; That she that receives us from the womb, may,
when dead, afford us a Tomb. And yet as there is nothing that is laudably done
in man, but what God has imprinted some footsteps thereof in some Beasts; so
also it falls out in this very thing. Lib. 11. 30.
Pliny reports of the Pismires, That they only of all other living creatures
besides men, do bury one another. And yet he himself speaking of the Dolphins,
says, Lib. 9. c. 8.
That when they perceive one of their own kind dead, they carry him away, that
he may not be devoured by Beasts. The like does Virgil record of Bees: -- Tum
corpora luce carentum
Exportant tectis, and tristia Funera ducunt.
And when the Fogs of Death have closed their Eyes,
Their Dead the attend with pompous Exequies.
Some are of opinion, That the first hopes of a Resurrection were by our first
Parents consigned to their Posterity by this Emblem of Sepulture. So Pliny
testifies of Democritus, that he taught, That men's Bodies were deposited in the
Earth, expecting the accomplishment of a promised Resurrection. But Christians
do often refer this Custom, of their decent Interment of their Dead to their
hopes of a future Resurrection. So says Prudentius, Quidnam sibi saxa cavata,
Quid pulchra volunt Monumenta,
Nisi quod res creditur illis
Non mortua, sed data somno?
What means this Stately Tomb,
These Solemn Obsequies,
Surely what is in its Womb
Not dead, but sleeping lies?
But the most plain and obvious reason why Burial was introduced, is, because
Man being of all other creatures the noblest, it would seem a thing very
unworthy, to suffer his dead body to be torn and devoured by Beasts: Therefore
was Burial invented, that this Indecency might (as far as in him lies) be
avoided. This is the reason given by Quintilian, in commiseration of mankind,
Decl. 6.
we preserve their Bodies from the incursions of Birds and Beasts. So Cicero in
his first Book of Invention, Being torn by Wild Beasts, he wanted in his Death
the common Honor of Burial. And God himself threatens some wicked Kings by his
Prophets, 1 King. 14.11.
That they should be Buried with the Burial of an Ass, and that the Dogs should
lick their Blood. Jer. 22.
Neither does Lactantius give any other reason for Burials than this, We cannot
suffer, says he, the Image of God to lie as a prey to Fowls and Beasts. Nor
does St. Ambrose, Lib. 6.
whose words sound thus, Nothing is more excellent than to do this office for
him, who cannot requite it: To defend his Body from the Beasts and from the
Fowls, who is thy Companion in Nature. But, admit there were no such injuries
to be feared, yet to suffer an humane Body to be cut and torn in pieces, is far
beneath the dignity of humane Nature. Not much different from this is that of
Sopater, To bury the dead is a very decent thing, instituted by Nature it self,
lest the Bodies of men after death, being naked, should be exposed to shame and
reproach. And they that indulge this Honor to the Bodies of the Dead, perform
an office acceptable unto all, whether Gods or Semi-Gods. For it is not
congruous to Reason, That the Secrets of Humane Nature should after Death be
exposed to public view. And therefore has Antiquity traduced this Custom of
burying the Bodies of the Dead down even unto us, Ut Monumento condita clam and
procul a conspectu tabescant; That being deposited in their Sepulchers, they
may rot and moulder away secretly and invisibly. The like Reason is given by
Gregory Nyssen, We bury the Dead, that so what is the shame of Humane Nature
may not lie exposed to the Sun. Neither is this duty of Interring the Dead, due
to the person of any man, but to Humane Nature it self: And therefore it ought
not to be envied to any, whether public enemies or private. As to private
enemies, notable is that contest in Sophocles, concerning the burying of Ajax,
where Ulysses thus bespeaks Menelaus, After so many things the have wisely said,
Take heed, O Menelau', wrong not the Dead.
The Reason whereof is given by Euripides thus, Antigone.
To Mortal Men death is the end of strife:
For what can Rage do to him that has no Life?
So the same Author in another of his Tragedies, Supplicibus.
If by these Argives ye were injured,
It is revenge enough to see them dead.
And Virgil, Against Vanquished and Dead no War is made. Which Verse being
quoted by the Author to Herennius, he adds, For that which is the last and
greatest of Evils is already befallen them. With whom agrees Papinius, --
Bellavimus; esto:
Sed cecidere odia, and tristes mors obruit iras.
-- At War we were; it is confessed:
But all hate's past, when wrath's by Death suppressed.
The same reason is given by Optatus Milevitanus, Though your wrath were
implacable whilst your Enemy lived, yet he being dead, that hatred should be
appeased: For he is now silent, who happily was before litigious.

III. It is due to public Enemies.
Wherefore it is by all confessed, That this is a duty that we owe not to our
private only, but our public Enemies. This Right (says Appian) is common in
all War: It is the usual Traffic and Commerce of War, as Philo observes. So
also Tacitus, Our very Enemies do not envy us Graves. This also Dion
Chrysostom assures us, That this Right is granted even to Enemies in War,
though their hatreds before were irreconcilable. Lucan also treating on this
Subject, says, That Funeral Rites were observed even among Foes. Thus also
does Philo Philo.
plead against Flaccus, Even to those who are slain in War, do men usually
grant Burial: They that abound in Goodness and Humanity will do it at their own
charge, and others, that extend their hatred even beyond death, will yet under
some conditions deliver their Bodies, that they may not be deprived of the last
Honor that the Custom of Nations has decreed unto them. For what War (says
Sopater) can be so barbarous as to rob mankind of its last Honor? What enmity
can protract the remembrance of injuries done so long as to violate a Law so
universally binding? Orat. de Lege.
Whereunto we may add that of Dion Chrysostom, For by this Law (says he) no
man can reckon the Dead amongst the number of his Enemies, nor does any man
extend his hatred and his reproaches to the Bodies of the slain. Examples
whereof we may find in every Author. Hercules (we read) buried his Enemies
Bodies: Alexander those whom he had slain at Issus: Hannibal sought out the
Bodies of Caj. Flaminius, P. Aemilius, Tiberius Gracchus, and M. Marcellus,
being Romans, and gave them Honorable Funerals. The very same did the Romans
to Hanno the Carthaginian: The like did Pompey to Mithridates, Demetrius to
many of his Enemies, and M. Anthony to King Archelaus. In the War which the
Grecians made against the Persians, the Grecians bound themselves by an Oath
made in this Form, Socios omnes sepeliam; bello victor etiam barbaros: All my
fellow Soldiers I will Bury; and if I remain Conqueror in Battle, even the
Barbarians. And every where in Histories we read of leave given to carry away
their dead. See Lib. 3. c. 20.. 45.
An Example we have in Pausanias, of the Athenians, who buried the Bodies of
their Enemies the Medes; and the Reason is added, Quia qualemcunque Mortuum
terra condi fas sit: Because it was always thought an Act of Piety to inter all
dead Bodies whosesoever they were. Wherefore according to the exposition of the
Hebrew Doctors, The High Priest, though otherwise forbidden to be present at
any Funeral; yet notwithstanding, if a man were found dead and unburied, he was
even himself commanded to bury him. The very same was enjoined by the
Pontificial Law among the Romans, as Servius notes. Christians have so high an
esteem of this duty, that for this cause, as well as for the relief of the
Poor, and the redemption of Captives, they have thought it lawful to melt down
their Consecrated Plate, and to sell it. There are also Examples that may be
brought for the contrary opinion; but such as are by the Judgment of the most
and best men condemned. Hunc oro defend Furorem, says Virgil: Which Servius
thus expounds, O keep me from this rage, I pray, (i. e.) from that Malice which
rages even after Death. The like we may read of in Claudian, -- Hominemque
cruentus
Exuit, and teneum caesis invidit arenam.
Bloody are they, wanting humanity,
Who to the slain, a little dust deny.
Wherewith agrees that of Diodorus Siculus, Ferinum est bellum, quod cum
mortuis qui ejusdem sunt Naturae, geritur; To wage War with the Dead, who were
lately of the same Nature with our selves, is brutish Cruelty.

IV. Whether to such as are notoriously wicked:
But yet as concerning such notorious Malefactors as have deserved Death, and
according unto Law have suffered, there were some cause to doubt. But that the
Divine Law given to the Hebrews, which as it was our guide and directrix to all
other Virtues, so is it to this of Humanity also, did command, That such as
were hanged on the Gallows, (which was a Death very ignominious among them, as
appears Numb. 25.4. and Deuteronomy. 21.23.) should be Buried the same day. Whence
Josephus affirms, 2 Samuel 21.26:
That so great was the care that the Jews took of burials, that they took down
the Bodies even of those that were publicly Executed before the Sun went down,
and bequeathed them to the Earth. And as others of the Jewish Interpreters add,
This they did in reverence only to the Image of God, whereunto Man was created.
Homer records, That Aegysthus, who to the Sin of Adultery had accumulated
another Sin, Odyss. 3.
even that of the Kings Murder, being himself afterward slain, was
notwithstanding by Orestes, the slain Kings Son, buried. Yea, and among the
Romans, Vlpian will inform us, That the Bodies of such as were put to Death as
Malefactors, could not be denied their Kinsmen if they required them: yea, they
were to be given to any body else that would ask them, as Paulus understood it.
Neither did those cruel Emperors, Dioclesian and Maximilian, forbid Burial to
any, though guilty of the greatest crimes, and accordingly punished: Hos
Sepulturae tradi non vetamus, was the answer of both of them; We do not forbid
these to be buried. The like Custom there was among the Romans, as Philo
testifies against Flaccus. Yet Examples we have also of some who have been cast
out unburied: But this is more frequently done in Civil, than in Foreign Wars.
And though it be a Custom among us to hang notoriours offenders in Chains, to
deter others; yet whether this be commendable or not, The hanging men in chains
whether commendable.
is much disputed, not only by Politicians but Divines. On the contrary, we
find them highly commended, who have themselves caused those Bodies to be
buried, which they would not permit others to bury: As Pausanias, King of the
Lacedaemonians, who being provoked by the Aegeneti to retaliate what the
Persians had before done against Leonides, rejected their Counsel as unworthy
of him, or indeed the name of a Grecian. Papinius brings in Theseus bespeaking
Creon thus, -- Vade, atra daturus
Supplicia, extremique tamen secure Sepulchri.
-- Torments extreme, go and endure;
Yet of a Sepulcher be thou secure.
Josephus records it of the Pharisees, Ant. l. 13. c. 24.
That they gave a most sumptuous Funeral to their King Alexander Jannaeus,
notwithstanding his barbarous cruelty exercised over the Bodies of his dead
Contrymen. And though God has sometimes punished some persons with the loss
of Burial, as he did Jehoiakim and Jezebel; Jer. 22.19.
yet this he did by his own most Sovereign Power which is not bound up by any
Law but that only of his own Will. And whereas David kept the head of Goliath, 1
King. 21.23.
to show as a Monument of his Victory, it was done upon a Stranger, a contemner
of the true God: And under that Law, where by the word Neighbor none were
included but the Hebrews only.

V. Whether to those that killed themselves.
There remains yet one thing worthy our observation, concerning the Burial of
the dead, namely, That the Jews, as zealous as they were for this duty, yet
would not vouchsafe this Honor to those who killed themselves: And no marvel
(as Josephus well observes Ant. lih. 3. c. 25.
) since no other punishment can possibly be inflicted upon those who esteem
Death it self to be none. The Milesian Virgins (as Plutarch reports) were all
at once surprised with a violent fit of Melancholy, and in an humor would
needs dye, A. Gell. l. 15. c. 10. Plut. de Mul. virt.
no man knowing the cause why: Many of them, notwithstanding all persuasions
and care taken of them, did strangle themselves, and others daily attempting to
do the like, were prevented. At length, by the advice of a grave Senator, The
Milesian Virgins.
it was enacted, That all that were found so hanged, should be stripped naked,
and with the same cord being first dragged through the streets, hanged in the
Market place, and exposed to public view. The fear of shame was stronger than
the fear of death: After this Law made, none was ever found so regardless of
her Honor as to attempt such an Act. Servius upon the twelfth of Virgil's
Aeneads, tells us, That it was provided by the Roman Laws, Vt qui laqueo vitam
finisset, insepultus abjiceretur; That whosoever hanged himself should be cast
out unburied. And very frequent it is among most Nations, Nic. 55.
to inflict some brand of Infamy upon such as kill themselves, as Aristotle
notes. Which place Andronicus Rhodius expounding, says, That they were
prohibited Burial: Which Law Dion Chrysostom highly commends, among many
others, enacted by Demonassa Queen of Cyprus. Aesch. in Clesephontem.
At Athens, in the times of Aeschines, he that killed himself had his Hand
buried apart from his Body. Neither is it to the purpose to object with Homer
Aeschylu^, and others, that the Dead feel nothing, either of pain or shame. For
no malefactor is put to death simply because he has sinned, but in regard that
his death strikes a terror into others. Quod mortuis accidit, a vivis
metuitur; What happens to the dead affrights the living: and consequently,
restrains them from sinning in the same kind, which is enough to justify the
punishment. (Yet is it worthy to be observed, That though Plato were somewhat
favorable in his Sentence on such as killed themselves, yet does he not think
fit to leave them altogether unpunished: What expiation, (says he) or what
manner of Interment they should have that kill themselves, God knows. But then
he goes on, and gives his own opinion thus, Let them be buried, says he, in
some solitary and desert place, where none was ever buried but themselves; and
let there be no Statue, Monument or Inscription set over them, that their
Bodies, Names and Memories may rot together.) The Platonists do excellently
dispute against the Stoics, and against all such as hold, That a man may for
the avoiding either of some present slavery, or the violent assault of some
dolorous and incurable disease, or out of hopes of glory for a good cause,
undergo a voluntary death, by maintaining that the Soul is to be kept in the
safe custody of the Body until it be unavoidably required from us by him that
gave it. Much to this purpose may be read in Plotinus, Olympiodorus, and
Macrobius upon the Dream of Scipio. (Aristotle accounted such as killed
themselves to be weak and effeminate, Fortis viri est mala perpeti; It is the
part of a valiant man to suffer, as well as to act courageously. Seneca.
Non est virile terga Fortunae dare; It is but a weak and lazy refuge by a
voluntary death to avoid pain or shame, according to that of the Poet, Rebus in
adversis facile est contemnere vitam:
Fortiter ille facit, qui miser esse potest.
Each Coward, whilst distressed, can life disdain:
He valiant is, who dares encounter pain.)
Brutus condemned the fact of Cato, though afterward he wrote after the same
Copy: It is neither pious nor indeed manly, says he, to turn our backs upon
Fortune, and to fly away from those imminent calamities, which we should
magnanimously bear. Expectandus est vitae exitus quem natura decrevit; What
manner of death Nature has decreed for us, we must with patience expect,
Epist. 70. Mart.
says Seneca. It is no part of Valor or Fortitude to destroy our selves, but
a madness rather: Nonne furor est, ne moriare, mori?

Strabo l. 15.
It was well observed by Megasthenes, That the fact of Calanus was by the wisest
among the Indians condemned, it being contrary to their Laws for any man,
through impatience to kill himself. Neither did the Persians approve of it:
Witness that of King Darius in Curtius, Lib. 5.
Alieno scelere quam meo mori malo; I had rather perish by another man's crime
than by mine own. No, nor the Arabians, as may be collected from that of Job,
Who wait for death, but it comes not, Job 3.21.
and dig for it more than for hid Treasures. And therefore the Hebrews do
render this word [mori] To dye, by the Greek word (...), To be let go, or To be
dismissed, as may appear not only by Luke 2.29. Lord, now let thou thy
Servant depart in peace; but by the Greek Version of that place in Genesis 15.2.
and that in Numb. 20. toward the latter end. Which manner of Speech is
familiar among the Greeks also, as Themistius testifies of them in his Book De
Anima: They say of the Soul of him that dies, (says he) it is dismissed, and
death it self they call (...), A dismission. Plutarch also in his Book of
Consolation, has the same expression, Donec Deus ipse nos dimittat; Until God
himself dismiss us. It seems that the Jews did somewhat vary in their opinions
concerning this matter, as appears by Josephus, where he records, and seems to
commend the Generosity of Phasacles, Ant. l. 14. c. 25.
who knowing that he was adjudged to death, (which he feared not,) scorning to
fall at the command of an Enemy (seeing that he could not kill himself with his
own Sword, being bound) dashed his Head, with all the force he had, against a
Stone, and so perished. Thus the Jews plead to Petronius, as Philo records: We
(say they) mix our own Bloods by voluntary deaths, for fear lest whilst we
strive at two things (i. e.) to reverence our Emperor, and yet to observe our
Divine Law, we should incur the displeasure of God: Which danger we may avoid,
if by contemning this miserable Life, we embrace a voluntary Death. Some of
these Jews would admit of one only case, wherein it was lawful for a man to
kill himself, namely, rather than live to be a perpetual reproach and scorn to
the Enemies of God. For seeing the Power over our lives is not in our selves
but in God, as Josephus rightly instructs his Contrymen, They presume that
it is the will of God that they should put an end to that reproach by a
voluntary death. And hither they refer the Examples of Sampson, who seeing the
True Religion in, and through him, to be held in contempt, chose rather to dye
than that God by him should be dishonored. And that also of Saul, who fell on
his own Sword, that so he might not be insulted over by such as were Gods, and
his Enemies. For the Jews held, 1 Samuel 31.4.
That immediately after the Ghost of Samuel had foretold his Death he repented,
Umbra Samuelis.
and that although he knew he should dye in case he did fight; yet rather than
he would betray his Country, and the Law of God into the hands of his Enemies,
he refused not to fight: Therein meriting eternal praise by the Testimony of
David. And hence it was, that he so highly commends the men of Jabesh Gilead
for their Piety, in bestowing an Honorable Interment upon Saul. A third
Example we have in Razes a Senator of Jerusalem, in the History of the
Maccabees. 2 Mac. 14.37.
Infinite Examples we may find in our Ecclesiastical Histories, of such, who
lest they should be enforced by Torments to abjure their Religion, have killed
themselves; and of Virgins, who to preserve their Chastity, have cast
themselves into Rivers, whom notwithstanding the Church has honored with the
Crown of Martyrdom. St. Ambrose does highly extol them for it; and St. Hierome
on the first of Jonas, makes an exception of this only case from that general
Rule. For no Persecution can justify the killing of our selves (says he) but
where our Chastity is endangered. But St. Augustine seems to be of another
mind: For though he will not derogate from the Authority of the Church, De
Civit. Dei lib. 1. c. 26. Epist. 61. ad Dulc.
which happily might be led thereunto by some Divine Tradition, or those Virgins
guided by some Divine Instinct, yet would he not have any Christian draw this
into a Precedent; For (says he) no man must presume to offer up his own Son in
Sacrifice, because Abraham did it in obedience to Gods express Command: Yet
this he confidently asserts, That no man ought to destroy himself to avoid
either the torments of this life, lest he incur those infinitely greater in the
life to come; or to prevent Sin in another, lest he contract a worse in
himself; or for Sins already past, which require a larger time to repent of; or
out of an impatient thirst after immortality, because he that is guilty of his
own death, must not expect hereafter a better life. De Civ. Dei l. 1. c. 16.
And yet elsewhere speaking of those who to preserve their Chastity killed
themselves, he adds, Who can be so void of humanity as not to forgive them.
Among the Grecians also there was another sort of men exempted from Burial,
which custom the Locrians object against the Phocenses, Diod. l. 16.
saying, That it was generally observed through all Greece, that Sacrilegious
persons should be cast out unburied. The like does Dion Prusaeensis report of
such as are Atheists, and notoriously impious. And the very same punishment was
ordained at Athens, against such as were Traitors, as Plutarch testifies. But
Nicetas, in his Third Book of Alexius, the Brother of Isaacius, having declared
the death of Joannes Comnenus Crassus, who raised Sedition and affected the
Empire, says, That they afterward exposed his Body to be devoured by Birds and
Beasts, which was an act void of humanity, and savouring too much of a Brutish
Cruelty. But that I may retreat to what was first intended, all ancient Writers
do unanimously accord in this, That a War may be justly undertaken for denying
Burial to the dead, as may clearly appear by the story of Theseus, which is
recorded by Euripides and Isocrates, in the places before quoted.

VI. Some other things due by the Law of Nations.
There are also other things, which by the voluntary Law of Nations, are due:
As those things which have been long possessed, Succession to him that dies
Intestate, and such things as we hold by Contracts, though very unequal. For
all these, though they have in some measure their rise from the Law of Nature,
yet do they receive confirmation by Humane Laws, whether against the
uncertainty of conjectures, or against some exceptions which otherwise Natural
Reason may happily suggest: As we have already showed, when we treated of the
Rights of Nature.

CHAP. XX. Of Punishments.
I. The definition and original of Punishments. II. That they appertain to
Commutative Justice, and how. III. It naturally belongs to no one person, but
may by the Law of nature be exacted by any that have not alike offended. IV.
Among men, the end of Punishing is for some benefit; but otherwise with God,
and why. V. In what sense revenge is naturally unlawful. VI. The profit arising
from Punishment threefold. VII. As it respects the good of the delinquent, it
may naturally be exacted by any; yet with a distinction. VIII. So also as it
respects the good of the person injured, and of lawful revenge, by the Law of
Nations. IX. And also as it respects the good of every man. X. What the Gospel
requires as to this matter. XI. The Argument drawn from the mercy of God, set
forth in the Gospel, Answered. XII. Another concerning the cutting off the
opportunity of repentance, Answered. XIII. An imperfect division of punishments
rejected. XIV. It is not safe for private Christians to exact punishment, even
where the Law of Nations allows it. XV. Or to accuse any man willingly. XVI. Or
to affect capital Punishments. XVII. Whether those humane Laws that permit the
killing of a man as a Punishment, give him a right, or only impunity: except by
distinction. XVIII. Internal acts not punishable by men. XIX. Nor such external
as humane infirmity cannot avoid. XX. Nor such acts, as neither directly nor
indirectly do hurt to humane Society: And why. XXI. The opinion that
Punishments are never to be remitted, rejected. XXII. That they may be remitted
before the penal Law be passed. XXIII. Yet not always. XXIV. Yea, and after the
penal Law is past. XXV. What probable intrinsic causes justify the doing of
it. XXVI. What causes extrinsecal. XXVII. The opinion that no dispensation is
to be granted for any cause but what is tacitly excepted in the Law, rejected.
XXVIII. Punishments inflicted for some merit. XXIX. Where respect is had to the
causes impelling, which are compared one with another. XXX. As also the causes
which should withdraw us, and of the degrees of the precepts of the Decalogue
that concern our neighbor, and some other matters. XXXI. Of the propensity of
the offender to either, which has diverse respects. XXXII. That the merit of
Punishment may extend to a greater harm than that which the offender intended:
And why. XXXIII. An harmoniacal proportion in Punishments rejected. XXXIV. That
Punishments ought to be mitigated out of Charity, unless a greater Charity
forbid. XXXV. The facility of sinning how it incites to Punishment: also custom
how it incites or disswades from punishing. XXXVI. Of what use clemency is in
the mitigating of Punishments. XXXVII. What the Hebrews or Romans had respect
to in Punishments, may be referred to the places above mentioned. XXXVIII. Of
war made for the exacting of Punishments. XXXIX. Whether war made for the
punishment of injuries begun be just, explained by distinction. XL. Whether it
be lawful for Kings or States to make war upon such as violate the Law of
nature, though they have committed nothing against them or their subjects, and
that jurisdiction is not necessary naturally to the exacting of Punishments.
XLI. The Law of nature distinguished from civil customs largely taken. XLII.
And from the voluntary Divine Law not yet known to all Nations. XLIII. As to
the Law of nature, that which is manifest is to be distinguished from that which
is not. XLIV. Whether a War may be made for sins committed against God only.
XLV. Of some common notions of God, which and how they are expressed in the
Decalogue. XLVI. The first infringers of these Punishable. XLVII. But not
others, as is proved by the Hebrew Law. XLVIII. That War is not justly to be
made upon any, only for refusing to embrace Christian Religion. XLIX. War may
justly be made against them that persecute Christians, as such. L. But not
against such Christians as do misunderstand the meaning of the Divine Law,
illustrated by Authorities and examples. LI. But may, and that justly, against
those that are impious; against such, as they believe to be Gods.
I. The definition of punishments.
ABOVE when we began to assign the causes of War, we considered men's deeds in a
twofold respect, either as the wrong they did, might be repaired, or as it
might be punished. Concerning the former we have sufficiently spoken: we come
now to the latter, which is Punishments, which we shall the more accurately
discuss, for as much as its Origin and nature being misunderstood, has given
occasion to many errors. Punishment in its general acceptance is, malum
passionis quod infligitur ob malum actionis; the evil that we suffer for the
evil that we do. And though hard labor be sometimes imposed upon some persons
by way of Punishment, yet this is in respect of the pains and trouble that
accompanies those works, and may therefore fitly be referred to passion. As for
those inconveniences which some men suffer without any sin committed, as by
some contagious disease, or as being maimed, or for some uncleanness, to be
debarred the Society of men, or to be made incapable of some office or
function, (many whereof we may read of in the Jewish Law) these are not
properly Punishments, though for some resemblance they have with them, and by
the abuse of the word, they are so called. Among those things that natural
instinct tells us are lawful and not unjust, this is one, ut malum qui facit,
malum ferat; that he that does evil should suffer evil: which Philosophers do
reckon as the most ancient, and most perfect rule of justice, or as one of the
Laws of Radamanthus; yea so ancient, and indubitable, that Plato was so bold as
to say: That neither the Gods nor good men durst ever say otherwise, but that
he that does wrong deserves to suffer for it. Plutarch makes justice one of
Gods immediate attendants, whose offer it is to revenge all affronts done to
the Divine Law; which all men do naturally make use of against all men, as
being fellow Citizens. And Hierax describes justice by that which is its
principal office, namely, to hurt those who have first hurt others. And
Hierocles calls Justice the only cure for wickedness (as if no satisfaction
could be made for wrongs done but by sufferance; neither is there any thing
that so powerfully restrains us from sin, as the apprehension of some just
Punishment.) Lactantius de Ira dei c. 17.
We are therefore very irrational, when we blame either God or men for their
severity to us, when we are punished: non enim nocens dicendus qui nocentes
afficit poena; for he is not to be blamed that punishes, but he that deserves
Punishment. (That which we suffer is just, because that which we do is unjust)
Omnis poena, si justa est, peccati poena est; Every just Punishment (says St.
Aug. Aug.
) must necessarily refer to some crime: which is true even of those that are
inflicted by God himself; though sometimes by reason of our ignorance, latet
culpa, ubi non latet poena; the judgment flames out, when the sin lies
smothered.

II. It appertains to commutative justice.
But whether it appertain to distributive, or commutative justice, diverse men
are of diverse opinions. Some think that they that offend most are punished
most, and so on the contrary: And because punishment is inflicted as it were by
the whole on a part, therefore it is to be referred to attributive justice. But
whereas in the first place they say, that this branch of justice takes place
only where there is an equality to be assigned between terms more than two;
that this holds not always true, we have already shown in the beginning of this
work: Besides that they that sin most, are punished most; and they that offend
least, are least punished; this falls out by consequence only, and was not
primarily and of it self intended: for that which is simply, and in the first
place intended, is, that there be an equality between the offense and the
punishment, whereof Horace thus: Why does not reason weights and measure frame,
That every sin may have its proper pain?
-- adsit
Regula peccatis, quae poenas irrogat aequas,
Nec scutica dignum, horribili sectere flagello.
Whereunto we may refer also that of Deuteronomy. 25.2, 3. Deuteronomy. 25, 2, 3.
where the Judge is commanded to see the malefector beaten with a certain
number of stripes, according to his crime, iniquum erit si aequaliter irascatur
inaequalibus; De Ira l. 11. 6.
to punish all sins equally is very unjust, says Seneca: for, as the Scholiast
upon Horace observes; If we inflict the greatest punishments upon the smallest
crimes, it must necessarily follow, that the greatest will remain either (in
part) unpunished, or some new punishments must be invented. Neither is that
much truer which they say, that all punishment does proceed from the whole to
its parts, See beneath Sect. 28. 32. and Book 3. c. 11. Sect. 1.
as will appear by what we shall say hereafter. Besides the true intent and
reason of distributive justice properly consists, neither in such an equality,
nor in the procession of the whole to its part, as we have elsewhere showed; but
in the respect had to the fitness and aptitude of the Delinquent to such a
punishment, which does not infer any right thereunto strictly taken, but is
only preparative as giving occasion unto it; for although he that is punished,
ought to be worthy of punishment: yet may we not hence infer, that he must
necessarily undergo whatsoever distributive justice may impose upon him:
Neither do they that refer the punishment of Delinquents to commutative
justice, extricate themselves any better; for they consider the matter so, as
if punishments were due to a malefactor in the same manner, as things are
usually due upon contracts. That which deceives these men, is the vulgar manner
of speaking, whereby we say that punishment is due to a malefactor, which is
very improper; for he to whom any thing is properly due, has a right against
him from whom it is due. But in saying a Punishment is due unto any man, we
mean only this, that it is just he should be punished: yet notwithstanding true
it is, that in punishments, commutative justice is simply and by it self
exercised; forasmuch as he that punishes, that he may do it justly, ought to
have a right to do it, which right arises from the guilt of the delinquent.
And herein there is something that draws near unto the nature of contracts:
Because as he that sells a thing though he mention nothing particularly, yet is
presumed to stand obliged to perform all things natural to the sale: So he that
transgreseth a Law, does voluntarily oblige himself to the penalty of that Law,
because it is not possible that there should be any heinous crime that is not
punishable; so that he that is willing directly to transgress a Law, is by
consequence willing to undergo the penalty of that Law: In which sense, some
Princes do pronounce sentence against a malefactor thus, Ipse te huic poenae
subdidisti; thou have voluntarily subjected thy self to this punishment. And to
this purpose is that of Philo: Peccare cum festinatis, ad poenam festinatis;
Vita Mosis.
whilst you make have to sin, you do but run headlong to punishment. That woman
that would marry another man's slave is said in Tacitus, to consent to her own
slavery; Ann. 12.
because that was the punishment ordained for such women. Michael Ephesius upon
Aristotle tells us, That in every sin, Nicom. 15.
there is a kind of giving and receiving according to the nature of contracts;
for he that steals or robs me of what is mine, does for that very thing bind
himself to undergo such a punishment. And a little after, under the name of
contracts, the Ancients comprehended not only such as were made by mutual
Agreements, but such also as were forbidden by the Laws, under such a penalty.

III. In whom this right of Punishing is, naturally.
But yet, to whom this right of punishing offenders is due, is not by nature it
self determined; this natural reason dictates, that a Malefactor may be
punished, but not, who should punish him; this only nature prompts us to, that
it is most convenient, that it should be done by one that is his superior:
neither does she demonstrate this to be altogether necessary, unless, by
superior, we understand him that is innocent, and that we detrude the nocent
beneath the degrees of men, and rank them with beasts which are subject unto
men. Thus Democritus ascribes it to nature, that the better should govern the
worse; and Aristotle observes, that in that order that nature has placed every
thing, that which is worser was had for the use and service of that which was
better; which also holds true as well in artificial things, as in natural: The
consequence whereof is, that he that is nocent ought not to be punished by him
that is at least, equally nocent (for he that sits as Judge to punish
Malefactors, should himself be free, not only from that particular crime, but
from all others that may render him obnoxious to the same punishment) whence
arises that of our Savior to the Pharisees: Let him amongst you that is
without sin, Jos. 8.7.
cast the first stone at her; which he therefore spoke, because at that time,
the manners of the Jews were extremely corrupted, insomuch that they who would
seem to be the greatest Saints, were observed to wallow like swine in
Adulteries and such like grievous Sins; as may appear by that of the Apostle to
the Romans, Rom 2.22. Wherefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whoever thou art
that judge; for in that thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self,
seeing thou that judge, do the same things: whereunto appertains that of
Seneca, non potest ullam authoritatem habere sententia, ubi qui damnandus est,
damnat; that sentence can never carry any face of authority, where he that
condemns another, may as justly be condemned himself: for as St. Ambrose
says in the Apology of David, he that goes about to judge another, ought first
to judge himself, and not rashly to condemn the errors and oversights of other
men, when he daily commits far greater himself. It is very good advice that St.
Ambrose gives: Judicet ille de alterius errore, Great. cap. 3. q. 7.
qui non habet in seipso quod condemnet, etc, Let him be Judge of the errors
of others, that hatb in himself nothing condemnable: Let him be Judge, that is
not guilty of the same crimes that he deemes worthy to be condemned in another;
lest whilst he judges another, he pronounces sentence against himself. Let us
in the first place then consider with our selves, numquid ipsi tale commisimus?
whether we our selves have not committed the like? and the regard that every
man has to his own safety will make him more moderate in passing judgment on
others.

IV. To what end punishments are ordained.
Another Question here arises concerning the end we propose to our selves in
punishing; for what we have hitherto said, amounts to no more than this, that
the guilty person has no wrong done him, in case he be punished: But from
hence it does not necessarily follow, that he must be punished; nor is it true,
for both God and man, we see do pardon many men, many offenses, and are highly
commended for it: for as Plato first, and after him Seneca well observed; There
is no wise man that punishes an offender simply because he has offended, but
because he should not offend again; for what is once done cannot be recalled,
but what is to come may be prevented: therefore all punishments relate to the
time to come; Non irascitur, sed cavet. He that punishes is not angry, but
provident. Diodorus in Thucydides, speaking to the Athenians concerning the
Mityleneans, says, That they had, indeed, done very unjustly, but not so as
that they should be destroyed, unless it should be found expedient. But these
things are true in punishments amongst men, because we are all linked together
in Bonds of consanguinity; so that we should not hurt one another, unless it be
for a more general good: For if one hand hurt another, says Cassiodore, that
which is hurt will not rise up in revenge against the other; no more should one
man revenge himself upon another, unless it be for the prevention of some
greater evil. They therefore that punish Malefactors with Stripes, Banishment,
or Fines, do it not simply out of revenge, but in pursuance of some future good
that may thereby arise: But it is otherwise in God, unto whom Plato does
misapply those Sentences. For the actions of God may be grounded upon his very
Right of Sovereignty, especially when they are applied to some special sins of
men, although they propose to themselves no end beyond themselves: and thus do
some of the Hebrews expound that of Solomon, The Lord has made all things for
themselves, Prove. 16.4.
even the wicked for the day of wrath; that is, Even when he punishes the
wicked, he does it for no other end, than to show that he can punish them;
(thus he is said to raise up Pharaoh, Exodus 14.4. Romans 9.17.
that in him his power may be known.) And although we do admit of the more
vulgar Interpretation, it comes to the same sense; namely, That God is said to
make all things for himself, that is, By the right of that supereminent freedom
and perfection that is in himself, without seeking or rega^^ing any thing
without himself; as he is said to be (...), of himself, because not born of
any. Certainly the Holy Scriptures do testify that God does sometimes inflict
punishment upon some notorious Delinquents for no other reason but to show his
power. As when he is said to rejoice at their calamity, and to mock when their
fear comes, Deuteronomy. 28 63. Isai. 1.24. Secondly, When in revenge for our fo^mer
provocations, he is said to harden the heart, and to blind the eyes, and to
stop the ears, as Isai. 6.10. and thirdly, When in that last and great
Jail-deliver, he adjudgeth them to eternal torments, after which there is no
place or hopes of amendment, yea and some punishments even in this life that
are inconspicuous, such as are obduration and excecation, do clearly evince the
truth of that which we object against Plato. But when one man punishes another
man whom Nature has made his Equal, he ought to propose some end unto hmself.
And this is it that the Schoolmen say, That the mind of him that avengeth an
injury, should not acquiesce in the sufferings of the Off^nder. Of the same
mind also were both Plato and Seneca, Ad vindictam veniendum, non quia dulce,
sed quia utile; We should affect revenge, not as it is sweet, but as it is
profitable. So likewise Aristotle, Some things are simply honest, others honest
out of some necessity. And as an example of this latter, he inserts this of
exacting punishments, Exequor, says Seneca, non quia dolet, sed quia opportet;
I take revenge, not because I smart, but because it is convenient.

V. In what sense revenge is naturally lawful.
Thus indeed it should be with men; but for the most part it is far otherwise,
for we punish in revenge, and revenge to assuage the grief of our sufferings.
As if laeso doloris remedium inimici dolor; our pain were lessenned by our
enemies grief. So Cicero tells us, That grief is somewhat allayed and mitigated
by a just revenge. But this proceeds not from the rational, but from the
irascible part of the soul, being the same with us as it is with Brute Beasts.
For anger, as in Beasts, so in men, is nothing else but Aestus sanguinis circa
cor, ob appetitum reponendi doloris; An inordinate heat about the heart, out of
a vehement desire of revenging our own grief, as Eustratius rightly defines it:
which appetite is of it self so much without reason, that sometimes it mistakes
the true object, and is carried violently against those that did no ways hurt
us; as when we revenge our selves upon the young Whelps for the Bitches sake
that bit us; and sometimes against things altogether without sense, as when a
Dog bites the Staff or Stone wherewith he is beaten. Now what can be more
irrational, quam his irasci, quae iram nec meruerunt, nec sentiunt, says
Seneca, than to be angry with those things which neither deserve our anger, nor
feel it? Like the Brasilians, a fierce and brutish Nation, who being wounded by
a Sword, revenge themselves, as well on the Sword, as on the Man that weilded
it. But this appetite in it self considered, agrees not with the rational part
of the soul, whose Office it is to govern the passions; nor is it consonant to
the Law of nature, because it thwarts that Principle of rational and social
nature, as such which forbid us to do any thing whereby another may be
damnified, unless it be for some greater good. But in the grief or sufferance
of another, barely and in it self considered, there is nothing of good, but
what is false and imaginary; as in superfluous riches, and many other things of
the like nature. And in this sense it is that not only our Christian Doctors,
but the ancient Philosophers, who condemn revenge as unlawful, are to be
understood. So Seneca, This word revenge, although it be usually taken for a
thing that is just, yet it is inhumane, and differs nothing from an injury, but
in order only. He that retaliates his own grief upon another, has only this to
plead for his sin, That he was first provoked. Nay, if we will give credit to
Maximus Tyrius, He that revengeth, is sometimes the greater Sinner of the two;
forasmuch as he that returns an injury has more of malice, fury, and unbridled
passion, than he that gave the first occasion, which is sometimes done through
rashness or ignorance, and against a man's will. Now if so, as it is against
Nature for the Stream to rise higher than the Fountain that feeds it; so is it
most unjust that the punishment should be greater than the offense. Seeing then
that it is unmanly, nay brutish, remordere mordentem, to injure every man that
injures us: No one man either public or private, can by the Law of Nature
rightly punish another (merely as it is a punishment for what is past) unless
it be for some future benefit, either general or particular, public or
private. Dion in Plutarch, who turned the wisdom of Plato into civil acts, was
of opinion, That revenge in the judgment of the Law was reckoned more just than
any injury first offered; but if we look at the judgment of Nature, it springs
from the very same infirmity of the mind. It is therefore contrary to the
nature of man dealing with men, to appease his own grief by occasioning another
man's, barely as it is a grief. And by consequence, the less of reason any man
has, the more vindictive he is. This Seneca observed, That Infants, Old men,
and sick Men, are always more prone to anger than others. And every thing that
is weak and infirm, is naturally querulous and revengeful. This also was
Juvenal's Observation; Revenge than life it self is sweeter far, Sat. 13.

Infants for naught, Children for trifles are
Incensed. Chrysippus was not of that mind,
Nor gentle Thales; neither do I find
That Socrates, who did next Neighbor live
To sweet Hymettus, (though in Chains) did give
Part of his Hemlock-Potion unto him,
Who (being a Slave) had his Accuser been.
Blessed wisdom! first piece meal bids vice adieu;
Then, planting truth, all errors does eschew.
To joy in those men's sufferings whom we hate,
Argues a mind weak and effeminate;
This, thus we gather, For in all men's sight
None more than Women in revenge delight.
Thus wise men define anger to be a lasting ulcer of the mind, Am. Marc. l. 27.
which usually arises from the weakness of the understanding, which they
probably collect from this, That sick men are usually more angry than sound,
women than men, old men than young, and they that are miserable than they that
are happy. The very same Observation we find in Lactantius, Simple, and men
that are unexperienced, being provoked by an injury, are carried headlong with
a blind and inconsiderate fury to revenge themselves on those that hurt them.
Plain it is therefore that one man cannot be rightly punished by another,
barely as such; now then let us examine what those benefits are that justify
such punishments.

VI. A threefold profit arising from punishments.
Hereunto then appertains that Pa^^^tion of punishments that Plato gives us;
and after him the Philosopher Taurus, recited by Lib. 5. c. 14.
Gellius, which is drawn from the end or scope whereunto punishments do aim,
only with this difference, That whereas Plato proposes but two ends, namely,
for reformation and example; Taurus adds a third, namely, (...), which, (as
Clemens Alexandrinus defines it) is the retribution of some evil done, which
looks at the profit of him that requires it, which is satisfaction. Aristotle,
omitting that punishment which we call exemplary, adds only this of
satisfaction to that of reformation. Neither does Plutarch omit it where he
says, That the punishments that tread on the heels of wickedness do not only
restrain the audaciousness of such as offend, but do much comfort such as are
injured. And this is that which the same Aristotle attributes to that Justice,
which (as I have said before) does even the Balance, and which he there calls
commutative. But these require yet a more strict disquisition. I say then that
every punishment respects the good either of the person punished, or of the
person injured, or of every man indistinctly. The first of these aims at the
reformation of the person punished, and is called by Philosophers sometimes
reformation, sometimes satisfaction, and sometimes admonition. Paulus the
Lawyer calls it a punishment ordained for reformation; and Plato, to teach us
prudence; Plutarch, the Souls Emperick, whereby she is amended and made better,
as by Physic, which works by contraries. For because all humane acts,
especially if they be frequent and deliberate, do beget a proneness in nature
unto the same, which at length turns into a habit; therefore if such an act be
vicious, we must as soon as we can, take away all allurements and provocations
thereunto, which cannot by any means more properly be done than by allaying the
sweetness of the sin by the sharpness of the punishment. The Platonists, as
Apuleius testifies, hold, That there is no punishment so severe as to go
unpunished. Ann. 3.
And Tacitus will instruct us, That the Corrupter and the corrupted, the sick
and the distempered mind, is to be restrained with no gentler medicines than
are those very lusts that inflame them. And therefore as a tender Mother
imbitters the Nipple when she weans her Infant, Sen. de ira lib. 2.
or as a skilful Surgeon lanceth, burns, and scarifies his Patient, whom he
intends to cure; so it is the duty of a prudent Magistrate, corrigendo mederi,
to reclaim and reform a Malefactor by sharp but seasonable punishments.

VII. 1. To the offender.
Now the punishment that serves to this end, may lawfully be inflicted by any
man that is prudent and judicious, and not guilty of the same or of the like
fault, especially if it be verbal only, as will appear by that in Plautus.

Amicum castigare ob meritam noxiam
Immune est facinus, verum in aetate utile.
A Friend to chide, for what unjust appears,
Is blameless sure; but most, in men of years.
But if it be by stripes or any other forceable means, then is it not equally
lawful for every man; yet does not this difference between persons lawfully, or
unlawfully punishing, arise from the Law of nature (neither indeed could it,
but that reason peculiarly commends the free exercise of this right to parents
over their children, because they are so dearly affected toward them;) but from
the positive Laws of men, which to preserve love among neighbors, and to
prevent strife and discord, do restrain this common duty, and confine it to the
nearest of kinn, as appears, as well by the Codes of Justinian under this title
de emendatione propinquorum, as elsewhere: Apposite hereunto is that of
Xenophon to his Soldiers: If I shall strike any man for his good, I confess I
thereby deserve a punishment; but no other than parents do from their children,
or masters from their scholars: for even Physicians sometimes lance, cup, and
scarify their Patients, when otherwise they cannot cure them. God himself,
(says Lactantius) commands us to keep a strict hand over our children, that
is, to chastise them as often as they transgress, lest by overmuch fondness and
indulgence they prove ill nurtured, and contract unto themselves vicious
habits. But this kind of punishment never reaches unto death, because death
takes away all hopes of reformation, unless it be by way of reduction, whereby
negatives are reduced to their opposite positives, Mark. 14.21.
as in that speech of our Saviors; It had been better for some that they had
never been born; that is, it had been less evil for them: the like may be said
of incorrigible sinners, it were better for them, that is, less evil for them
to dye than to live. De Ira. c. 5. interesse pereuntium ut pereant. Jamblichus.
And of such it is that Seneca meant, when he said, that sometimes it is good
for them that dye, that they do dye: As when a tumor or impostume is grown to
suppuration, better it is to burn an hole, thereby to discharge part of that
impostumated matter, than longer to imprison it; so for a man that is past
hopes and desperately wicked, it is better for him to dye than to live: for as
Plutarch speaks of such, they are noxious to others, but most to themselves: so
Galen when he had said, that some men ought to be punished by death; first to
prevent the mischiefs they would do, were they suffered to live; next that by
their death, others may be forewarned; adds in the last place, that it is
expedient, even for themselves to dye, being so wholly corrupted in mind and
mann^rs, that it is not possible to reclaim them. Some there are who think,
that St. John spoke of such men, when he said, that there was a sin unto death,
1 John 5.16. 1 John 5.16.
And St. Chrysostom speaking of such, says, that they are like men
irrecoverably sick: so Julian of Constantius; seeing that there are two kinds
of offenses, some that are corrigible, as not despising the means of their
cure; others, of men desperately wicked, and incorrigible, for these the Laws
have found out a remedy, by death, to put an end to their wickedness; not so
much for their own, as for the benefit of others. But because no arguments can
be brought to prove this, but what are fallacious; therefore in very charity,
we are not rashly to judge any man's case to be desperate: and therefore this
kind of punishment, I mean, by death, is seldom inflicted to this end, namely,
for emendation.

VIII. To him against whom the offense is committed.
Some resemblance of this there is in some Beasts: Pliny records it of the
Lion, that in poenam Adulterae consurgit; he rises up to revenge himself of
his Adulteress. Not. Hist. 8. 16. Three ways to provide for ones safety against
him that has injured us.
The benefit that accrues by punishment unto him, against whom the offense is
committed, consists in this; that it prevents the like mischief, either by the
same person, or by others. Gellius out of Taurus describes this kind of
punishment thus: when the authority or dignity of the person against whom the
offense is committed, is to be upheld and maintained, then is the punishment
necessary; lest if it go unpunished, that authority be held in contempt, and
the honor lost. Now what is there said concerning authority, is also to be
understood of liberty, or of any thing else, wherein we may claim a just right;
for he that suffers one injury to go unpunished, does but invite another:
wherefore Tacitus concerning one of the Roman Emperors said well, consuleret
securitati justa ultione; he might have better provided for his own safety by a
just revenge. Now to the end that a man may secure himself against him that
has formerly injured him, there are three means:

First, By putting him to death that did the wrong; Secondly, By taking away
from him the power to do wrong: Or Thirdly, By deterring him from doing any
further wrong by the sharpness of his punishment, which is conjoined with
reformation, whereof we have just now already discourst. But to be secured from
others, by the punishment of him who has offended, it is necessary that the
said punishment be public and conspicuous, which appertains to exemplary
punishments, whereof more anon. Now if our desire of revenge though private, be
directed to these ends only, and can be impaled within the bounds of equity: if
we look at the bare Law of nature first abstracted from divine and humane Laws,
and from those other occurrents which do not necessarily happen to the thing;
it is not unlawful, whether it be done by the person injured, or by another,
seeing it is natural for one man to help another. De Invent. lib. 2.
In which sense may that of Cicero be admitted, where he defines the Law of
nature to be that which consists not in opinion or custom, but in that which
nature it self suggests unto us; where also amongst other examples, he places
this of vindication, which he there opposes to grace or pardon. And lest any
man should question the extent of the word, he defines it to be, that whereby
we defend both our selves, and those who ought to be dear unto us, from force
and calumny by a just revenge, or whereby we punish offenses. Mithridates in
that Oration which Justin extracts out of Trogus, speaks thus: Against Thieves
all men ought to draw their swords, if not for their safety, yet for their
revenge; which Plutarch in the life of Aratus calls (...), the law of revenge.
By this natural Law Sampson justifies himself against the Philistines, Judge.
15.3.7.11.
when they had provoked him by taking away his wife, and giving her to another:
Now (says he) shall I be more blameless than they, though I do them a
displeasure: for he concluded it to be just for him to injure them, who had
first provoked him by so great an injury; and according to this rule he pleads
his own cause and defends himself: for being demanded by the men of Judah what
he had done against the Philistines to provoke them; he answered, as they have
done to me, so have I done to them, v. 11. Plut. Romans ad finem.
When the Laurentines delivered up those that killed Tatius to Romulus to be
punished, he set them at liberty, saying, that blood was to be expiated with
blood: intimating that because Tatius had before slain their Ambassadors, or at
least connived at it; it was but just that blood should have blood: for as
Belisarius in Procopius notes, it is but natural to account him as mine enemy,
who has by an assault wounded me. Thus likewise the Plateans in Thucydides
plead for themselves in the like case: we have deservedly punished them, say
they; for by that Law that is in force amongst all men, it is lawful to be
revenged on those that first make war upon us. Vand. 1.
Demosthenes in his Oration against Aristocrates, says, that this Law is
common amongst all men to enforce satisfaction from them that have forceably
taken away our goods from us: and Jugurtha in Salust having showed how Asdrubal
had laid in wait for his life, adds, that the people of Rome, did that which
was neither just nor right, in forbidding him that rigbt which the Law of
Nations allowed him; that is, a just revenge: and Aristides the Orator proves
it by the authorities both of Poets, Lawyers, Proverbs, and Orators; that a
revenge may be lawfully taken, upon such as have first injured us. St. Ambrose
commends the Maccabees for revenging the blood of their innocent Brethren,
though it were on the Sabbath; and against the Jews, who bitterly complained
against the Christians, for burning their Churches, he pleads thus: if I should
argue according to the Law of Nations, I should recount how many Christian
Churches the Jews burnt in the time of the Emperor Julian: thereby concluding,
that to requite like for like was agreeable to the law of Nations: thus did
Jonathan, and his associates revenge the death of their Brother John upon the
Nabathits, as they were celebrating some great Nuptials, upon whom he
unexpectedly fell, and slew both men, women, and children, as Josephus informs
us. But because men are too partial Judges in their own causes; Ant. l. 13. c.
1.
therefore that liberty, which nature did at first indulge unto every man in
vindicating his own quarrel, is justly taken away; and Judges appointed to
determine all controversies between man and man, and to help those to right,
who suffer wrong. Thus Demosthenes pleads against Conon: As for these injuries,
it was thought fit by our Ancestors, that they should receive their punishment
from the Laws, and not from the rage and violence of every man's will. So does
Quintillian, the compensating of an injury is not only repugnant to the Law,
Laws and Magistrates ordained to punish offenders, and why.
but unto peace; for there are Laws, Judges, and Courts whereunto any man may
appeal, unless there be any that are ashamed to be vindicated by the Law. So
likewise the Emperors Honorius, and Theodosius: for this very cause are
Tribunals erected, and the defense of the public Laws instituted, lest any man
should arrogate to himself the liberty to revenge his own quarrels. So King
Theodorick; from hence do the Laws challenge from us a sacred reverence, that
no revenge may be taken by our own hand, nor any thing done against our
enemies, by the sudden impulse of our own passions. For how inconvenient this
would be, is evident by that plea of Tindarus against Orestes: This, if thou
suffer, Menelau', I ask,
If the angry wife her husband's blood should spill;
And in revenge, the son his Mother kill:
And if her blood cannot be washed away,
Without fresh blood, where would these mischiefs stay?


Which words of Euripides, being full of Prudence, do abundantly supply both
Philosophers and Orators with matter of Argument. Maximus Tyrius in his
dissertation concerning the retaliating of injuries speaks thus: A good man
will neither do an injury nor suffer one; not do one, I mean, willingly; nor
suffer one, because he magnanimously slights all that are done unto him: If to
infer an injury be wicked, surely to return one is somewhat like it; for
although he that wrongs another, in that he gives the first offense, commits
the greater fault; yet he that requites that injury, because he was pleased
with revenge, is alike wicked: for if he that does his neighbor wrong, do
evil; surely, he that returns that evil, is not the less evil, because he does
it in revenge. And a little after, quis erit unquam injuriarum finis, etc. if
it be granted, says he, that a good man having received an injury may revenge
it, then may he that suffers that revenge, as justly return it; for on both
sides, the equity of doing the same thing is alike: wherefore he cries out,
qualem, O Jupiter, justitiam fecisti! what manner of justice is this, that thou
have made! O Jupiter, that must necessarily arise out of injustice: quousque
progreditur malum, and ubi tandem consistet? how far shall this evil proceed,
and where shall it at length end? thus likewise does Aristides argue in his
Oration for peace; who of all the Grecians would be left alive, if to revenge
the death of those who are already slain, those yet living should wilfully run
upon their own ruin? For prevention of which inevitable mischief, were (as I
have already said) Laws instituted, Tribunals erected, and Magistrates
ordained; yet does this liberty, that nature gave us at the first, remain still
in force in such places where no Laws are, or can be executed, as on the Seas
and in desert places; yea, and in diverse Nations, especially amongst the
ancient Germans, where almost all differences were ended by the Sword; as
appears by that of King Theodorick in Cassiodore to his Goths: Break off (says
he) this prodigious custom of single combats, where matters in differenee are
much better discust with words than blows; and in another place, what need have
we of tongues, if every slight quarrel must be ended by the Sword? whither
(happily) we may refer that act of Cajus Caesar, who being then a private person,
did with a tumultuary Fleet pursue and chase certain Pirates by whom he had
been formerly taken, dispersing some of their Ships and sinking others; and
when he found the Proconsul negligent in punishing the Captives whom he had
taken, he himself returned to the Sea and commanded them to be hanged: so
likewise is it among the Umbrians, where every man is his own Judge and
avenger, which at this present is usually practiced among the Muscovites, and
that without any restraint in some small time after their address in vain made
to the Judges: from whence also before Christian Religion was planted, Duels
whence they arose.
sprung the custom of Duels among the Germans, which is not yet utterly
abolished. Wherefore the Germans in Paterculus, admired when they observed the
form of the Roman Jurisdiction, whereby all contests and injuries were decided
in a judicial way; and that that which was usually before determined by force
of Arms, was now decided by Law: the Hebrew Law permitted the kinsman of him
that was murdered to kill the murderer ^ith his own hand, in case he overtook
him without the Cities of refuge. And it is well observed by the Hebrew
Doctors, that a kinsman might exact the Law of retaliation with his own hand
for the person killed; but for himself, if any violence was offered him, either
by wounds, mutilation, or otherwise, he was to make his appeal to the Judges;
because it is a very difficult thing to moderate our passions, when they are
excited by our own personal grief. The like custom of taking private revenge
for murder we find to have been among the ancient Greeks, as Homer testifies;
but examples of this kind are much more frequent among such as have no common
Judge to decide controversies: whence it is, that just wars are defined to be
those, Aug.
whereby injuries received are revenged: And Plato does so long approve of
contests by war, until the person injuring shall be enforced to give unto the
person injured just satisfaction.

IX. 3. To every man indistinctly.
The profit that every man indefinitely may receive by the punishment of a
Malefactor, which is the third end why they are punished, has as many parts as
that which the injured person receives by it: for he is so punished, either
lest he that has injured one, should injure another; which may be prevented,
either by his death, or by disabling him from doing the like injury, as by
imprisoning him; or secondly, by reclaiming him; or thirdly, lest others being
encouraged by the hopes of impunity, should be alike injurious unto others,
which is the end of all public punishments which are therefore used, ut unius
poena metus sit multorum; that the punishment of one, might strike a terror
into many: Or (as Demosthenes speaks) that others may learn wisdom and fear.
Polybius records that he saw some Lions crucified for attempting the life of a
man, that so the rest for fear of the like punishment, Pliny. lib. 8. c. 16.
might be affrighted from committing the like crime. Now the power of executing
this right also is naturally in every man: thus Plutarch tells us, that nature
does design a good man to be a perpetual Magistrate; for that man that is
eminently just and honest, is by nature raised up and qualified for a Prince,
Vit. Pelop.
as the same Plutarch speaks of Philopoemen, that he took upon himself the
defense of the Citizens, who also, without regard to their Laws and times of
their Elections, followed him by the bare instinct of nature which always
intends the best to govern the worst: In 2 Cor. 7.13.
Thus Chrysostom speaks of Moses, that before he led out the people by his
hand, he declared himself to be their captain by his deeds; it was foolishly
demanded by the Hebrew, who made thee a ruler? facta vides, and de nomine facis
controversiam? thou see his deeds, and do thou well then to cavil about
names? as if a patient being first cut, and so cured of some desperate Disease,
should cavil with his Physician, and demand of him, Who made him a Physician,
or who gave him authority to cut him? To whom the Physician might very well
answer, Ars mea and Morbus tuus; My friend, it was my skill and thy Disease
that made me to cut thee. So might Moses have answered, It was thy cruelty and
manifest injustice that made me a Judge and a Ruler. To govern well is not a
dignity only, but an art, nay the greatest of arts. Sapiens nunquam privatus
est, A wise man is never a private man, as Cicero proves by the example of
Nasica. Neither is he unius anni Consul, a Magistrate for one year only, as
Horace speaks of Lollius. Yet notwithstanding is not this liberty to be
exercised in any place, but where the Laws of the Commonwealth do permit it.
For these natural qualifications (as I have often said) infer no right, though
they give us a capacity for it. Concerning this natural Right the opinion of
Democritus was this, Concerning the killing or not killing of living Creatures,
the matter stands thus, If those Creatures either do or would hurt us,
whosoever kills them shall be innocent; nay, he that kills them, does much
better than he that spares them. And presently after he says, As for those
Beasts which unjustly annoy us, it is altogether lawful for us to kill them
all. And surely it is not improbable that good men before the Flood did live
much after this manner, before God had declared his will of converting the rest
of the Beasts to serve a Man's nourishment. And by and by he adds, What we have
written of Foxes and other noxious Serpents, the same we suppose may be said of
men. Whereunto he presently subjoins, Furem and Latronem qui quocunque modo
occiderit, sive manu, sive jussu, sive suffragio, innocens est; He that kills a
Thief or a Murderer, whether it be with his hand, or by his command or
suffrage, is to be accounted innocent. And to these places of Democritus, I
suppose Seneca had some respect in saying, Sen. de ira l. 1.
When I command an obstinate Malefactor to be put to death, I do it with the
same mind and intent as when I command a noisome and venomous Beast to be
killed. Nay, if I see a Viper or a Scorpion (says Philo) though he attempt not
to bite or to wound me, yet will I kill him if I can, lest he should endanger
me or some others, by that malignity that is in him. We would not kill Foxes,
Wolves, and the like ravenous Beasts, could we but make them tame and
serviceable, and not be endangered by them; so, Ne homini quidem nocebimus quia
peccavit, sed ne peccet, Neither would we hurt and destroy men because they
have offended, but because they should not offend again. But since as well the
strict enquiry into the nature and quality of every Fact does often require
great diligence, as also the fitting of each crime with its just punishment,
much prudence and equity, lest whilst every man presuming on his own
sufficiency should arrogate more unto himself than others would be content to
grant him, and thereby much strife and contention should arise; therefore it
was unanimously agreed upon, That in all just Societies of Men, such should be
made choice of as they esteemed to be the best and most p^udent amongst them,
or at least whom they hoped might in time prove to be so; whom they called
Magistrates, upon whom, by common consent, they transferred all that right
which (by the Law of Nature) every one of them had to punish Malefactors. So
the same Democritus, The Laws would never restrain us from living as we please,
but that it was evident that men went about to wrong one another. For envy is
the mother of sedition. But yet what is said before of private revenge, the
same may be here also said of public and exemplary Judgments, namely, That
there does yet remain some footsteps of that ancient Right in such places, and
among such persons as are not subject to public Judicatories; yea and among
such also as are so subject in some particular Cases. As among the Jews it was
lawful for any man to kill him immediately who forsook God and his Law, Deuteronomy.
13.9. Numb. 25. 1 Macc. 2.24, 26.
or that seduced his Brother to Idolatry, which the Jews called the judgment of
zeal which was first exercised by Phineas, and from him was drawn into a
custom. Thus Mattathias and his five Sons fell upon a certain Jew, who, in
obedience to the Kings Command, was sacrificing unto the Heathenish Gods on the
Altar at Modin, and slew him, as Josephus informs us. Ant. l. 12. c. 4. 1 Macc.
2.24.
So we read of three hundred Jews which were killed by their own Countrymen,
in that Book which is vulgarly called the third Book of the Maccabees. This was
the sole pretense that the Jews made for their stoning of St Steven, Acts 7.57.
And for their conspiracy against St Paul, Acts 23. many other examples we may
find in Josephus, and in Philo, who in his Book of Sacrificers to Idols says,
That such a man as shall so sacrifice, Chapter 20. Sect. 9.
should be punished as a public enemy to all men, be he never so nearly
related unto us. And his Motives and Arguments whereby he would persuade us to
a defection from the true worship of God, are to be published unto all that
love true piety, that all men may immediately run from all places to take
revenge upon that impious Wretch, being fully persuaded that the desire to kill
such a man is an holy thing. Yea and in many Nations, this Right does yet
remain in Masters over their Servants, and in Parents over their Children, to
punish them even with death. So it was lawful for the Ephori of Sparta to put
to death any of their Citizens without judgment. Now from what has here been
said we may clearly understand what the Law of Nature was concerning
punishments, and how long it continued.

X. What the Evangelical Law requires as to this.
Let us now enquire whether this liberty of punishing or revenging an injury be
restrained by the Gospel. And surely it is no wonder, as we have elsewhere
said, that many things that are consonant to the Law of Nature, and to the
Civil Laws, are notwithstanding forbidden by the Divine Law, seeing that that
Law is the most perfect of all Laws, and proposes a reward far greater than
humane nature, or than can possibly be given by any other Lawmakers; for the
obtaining whereof there are deservedly required such Virtues as exceed those
commanded by the sole Law of Nature. Vide Lactant. de ira Dei, c. 18.
Those Chastisements that leave behind them no brand of infamy nor lasting
damage, and are necessary for certain Ages and Conditions, Servorum Filiorumque
peccata non coercere, peccatum est.
as for Children and Servants; are no whit repugnant to the Divine Evangelical
Law, especially if done by such as by humane Laws have a permission so to do,
as by Parents, Tutors, Masters, etc. which may easily be collected from the
very nature of the thing it self. For these are the Souls Physic, altogether
as harmless as well-tempered Potions, though to the sense as unwelcome. But as
to revenge it is otherwise: For as it only satisfies the mind that is sensible
of the wrong it suffers, it is naturally unlawful, much less is it agreeable to
this Evangelical Law, as we have already showed. But the Hebrew Law did not
only forbid to hate or bear any grudge against their Brethren, Revenge as it
proceeds from a delight in the Revenger, naturally unlawful.
(that is, against their own Countrymen) Lev. 19.17. but it commanded them to
confer on them some common courtesies, though they were their enemies, Exodus
23.4, 5. Now our Savior embowelling this Law, and showing, That under the name
of Neighbor all mankind was to be understood, does hereby convince us, That we
are not only restrained from hurting our enemies, but that we are also
commanded to do them good, Matthew. 5.44. But yet it was permitted to the Hebrews
to revenge some great injuries done them, though not by themselves, yet by
their Judges. But the Evangelical Law takes away this license also, as is
evident by that opposition that he puts between the Law and the Gospel, Ye have
heard that it has been said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth, says
Christ; but I say unto you, etc. And although the words following do properly
appertain to the repelling of injuries, which license they do at least in some
measure restrain; yet much more may we think their purpose was to prohibit
revenge, because they seem to be placed in direct opposition to that permission
which was anciently given them, and so to imply a rejection of that license, as
being agreeable only to Moses's more imperfect Discipline: Not that a just
revenge was evil, Non quod iniqua est justa ultio, sed quod ei praestet
patientia, Clem. Con. stitut. Aug. in Ps. 108.
but that Christian patience was much better. This revenge by way of
retaliation, St Augustine calls the justice of the unrighteous. Not that the
vengeance which the Law decrees is unjust, but that our thirst after revenge is
sinful, which better befits a Judge to order, than a wise man to exact for his
own satisfaction only. Concerning which matter, thus speaks Tertullian, God by
the Prophet Zachary commands thus, Let no man be mindful of, or remember an
injury done him by his Brother, Zach. 7.10. Zach. 7.10.
and not by his Brother only, but by his Neighbor also, as appears by another
charge given by the same Prophet, Zach. 8.17. Zach. 8.17.
Let no man imagine evil against his neighbor, no not in his heart. Whence
Tertullian infers, Multo magis patientiam indixit injuriae, qui indixit
oblivionem; He that commands us to forget injuries, does much more command us
to bear them patiently; and he that cleanses the heart from thinking evil,
does much more restrain the hands from doing evil: and when he says, Vengeance
is mine, I will repay it, what does he but teach us, That we should wait with
patience, till God (whose Prerogative it is to revenge) will be pleased to take
our Cause into his own hand? And seeing that he will not permit us so much as
to remember injuries, or to imagine evil in our hearts against our Neighbor,
it is plain, That he does not require that we should exact an eye instead of an
eye, or a tooth instead of a tooth, by way of revenge; but rather by permitting
the second injury, his main scope was to repress the first, Ut unusquisque
recipiens licentiam secundae injuriae, a prima semetipsum contineret; That
every man considering with himself, that whatsoever he does unto others, he
must suffer the like from others, may be the more fearful of doing that wrong
which he would not be content to suffer. For the Argument, as to men, was more
forceable to restrain us from doing violence, by setting before us the Law of
counter-passion, than by assuring us that he himself would avenge it. And yet
both these flaming swords are set to restrain us from doing wrong, Ut qui Deo
crederet, ultionem a Deo expectaret; qui minus fideret, Leges talionis timeret:
That he who believes that God is the Avenger, might fear to offend, lest God
should avenge it; and he who believes not, might yet be afraid of the Laws of
men, when he assuredly knew, That what wrong soever he did unto his neighbor,
he should undoubtedly suffer either from him or others. Our Savior's Precept
then of suffering injuries patiently, and of forbearing revenge, is not
inconsistent with the Discipline of Moses, but rather strengthens and confirms
it. And indeed if we look at the reason of this so perfect and exact patience
that is required of us, we shall find that there would be but little of equity
in the Precept, if it did not proceed from him who is the righteous Judge of
the whole Earth, and who has engaged himself by his word and promise, That he
himself will revenge our wrongs. For if he that imposes on me this grievous
burden, of not only not returning a blow that is given me, but of offering
mine other cheek to the Smiter, and of not only not returning reproaches for
reproaches, but of blessing those that curse me; if, I say, he that restrains
me thus from righting my self, do not right me, in vain does he command me
patience, if he give me not the reward of that patience which is a just
revenge, which he ought to permit to me, if he do it not himself; and if he
suffer not me to do it, he himself is bound to perform it. For Disciplinae
interest injuriam vindicari; It is a necessary part of good Discipline to help
them to right that suffer wrong. And metu ultionis, omnis refraenatur
iniquitas; the fear of a just revenge restrains all acts of violence. By this
of Tertullian we may see, That it is not only unlawful for a Christian to exact
this Law of retaliation, but that it was not tolerated among the Hebrews as a
thing simply, and in it self commendable, but only for the prevention of a
greater evil. Thus also does St Chrysostom expound that Law of retaliation, In
Ephesians. 4.13.
Therefore does Christ urge that of Moses, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a
tooth, Ut illius manus cohibeat, non ut tuas excitet contra; To restrain him
that offers the wrong, not to provoke thee to revenge who suffer it; not
only to preserve Thine eye, but to keep His also safe. That it is not lawful
for a Christian to exact this Law out of hatred, nor barely as a punishment for
that which is past, is without all question. The most learned amongst the
Hebrews did not apprehend it in that latitude; for they respected not so much
the words of the Law, as the reason of it, and the intent of the Lawgiver.
This appears by the acknowledgment of the Jews of Alexandria, (as Philo tells
the Story) who when they beheld the calamities that befell Flaccus, who was
their bitter enemy, cried out, Non delectamur, Domine, ultione de inimico, etc.
We delight not, O Lord, in revenge, though on our enemy; for from thy Sacred
Laws we have learned to commiserate the man. And to that end is that general
Precept of our Savior, To forgive every man (without distinction) that has
offended us; that is, Neither to do, nor to wish them any evil, out of the
sense of that evil which they have done unto us; Matt. 6.14, 15.
for he that does so is cruel, arrogating that unto himself which is due unto
the Laws: wherefore Lactantius reciting those words of Cicero, Is vir bonus est
qui prodest quibus possit, noceat nemini, nisi lacessitus injuria; He is a good
man that does good to whomsoever he can, but hurts none, unless provoked by
some injury; thus descants upon them, O what a plain and excellent Sentence is
here spoiled by the addition of two words! And St Ambrose, reciting the same
Sentence of Cicero, says, That that Sentence wanted the authority of the holy
Gospel to confirm it, (which teaches us, That to return an injury has no less
of evil than to infer one.) But what shall we say of that revenge which
respects not the time past, but that which is to come? Surely Christ commands
us to forgive even this also, first in case there appear any signs of
repentance in the person offending, Luke 17.3. Luke 17.3.
And a plenary remission the Apostle requires, Ephesians. 4.32. that is, Such a
remission as restores the Offender into the same degree of friendship wherein
he was before the sin was committed; whence it follows, That nothing ought to
be exacted from him by way of punishment. Besides, though there be no such
signs of repentance, yet if the damage we sustain be not very great, no greater
than the loss of ones Coat, Christ by this Precept restrains us from requiring
any revenge at all. Of the same opinion were both Plato and Maximus Tyrius: The
like does Musonius profess of himself, namely, That for small reproaches (as a
box on the ear, etc.) he would neither sue any man at the Law, nor persuade any
man so to do; because such as these are much better forgiven or dissembled. But
in case we cannot pass it by without giving encouragement to greater injuries,
either to ou^ selves or others; then we may provide for our own safety, yet
with the smallest damage we can to him that has provoked us. The Jews might
buy off their Talio.
For even the Jews themselves (as Josephus tells us) besides the costs and
charges of the hurt done, whereof we have a distinct Law, Exodus 21.19 did
usually buy off their Talio with a Sum of Money. The like they did at Rome, as
Favorinus in Gellius testifies. Lib. 20. c. 1.
So Joseph the softer Father of Jesus, believing his Wife to be with child by
adultery, chose rather to dismiss her privately, than to expose her to shame;
and this he is said to do, because he was a just man, that is, as St Ambrose
expounds it, A man free not only from the cruelty of revenge, but from the
severity of an accusation; for as Lactantius had before said, Vid. infra Sect.
15. Lib. 6. c. 10.
A good man ought not to accuse any man of a crime that is capital. Thus Justin
Martyr concerning those that bitterly accused Christians, We, says he, would
not have them punished; for they are sufficiently miserable in their own
wickedness, and in their ignorance of what is good. Lastly, Those punishments
that are executed, not for any private, but for the public good, either by
killing or restraining the person nocent, to deter others, or to prevent future
mischiefs; are not forbidden by Christ, as we have elsewhere proved by a most
irrefragable Argument: seeing that when he gave those Precepts, Capital
punishments not forbidden in the Gospel. Exodus 21.14. Numb. 33.14. Deuteronomy. 29.13.
Vide Aug. Qu. Evang. l. 1. c. 10.
he gave also this Testimony of himself, That he destroyed no tittle of the
Law: But the Law of Moses, which in these things was certainly in force so long
as the Jews had a Commonwealth, did peremptorily enjoin the Magistrate to
punish Capital Offenders with death. And if Christ's Precepts could consist
with Moses's Law, as it exacted punishments, even such as were capital;
certainly they may consist as well with those humane Laws, which, in imitation
of the Divine Law, do require and inflict the same punishments to the same end.
Josephus highly extols the Pharisees for their clemency and moderation in
punishments, whence arise so many exceptions in their Laws concerning public
punishments; and this also amongst others, That though the Offender must
certainly be put to death, Talmud Tit. Keluboth.
yet was the manner of his death to be gentle, and with the least of torments.

XI. The Argument from Gods mercy in the Gospel, answered.
Yet some there are, who in defense of the contrary opinion, do thus plead;
that God especially in the new Covenant, does declare himself to be full of
mercy and forbearance, which all Christian men, yea even Magistrates, as Gods
vicegerents ought to imitate; which I grant to be in some measure true, but not
in that large and unlimited sense as they would have it understood. For that
infinite mercy of God declared in the New Covenant, does principally respect
those sins which are committed against the Laws given to Adam and the sons of
Noah, or against those Laws given by Moses before the publication of the
Gospel, as will appear, Act. 17.36. Romans 2.25. Act. 13.38. Heb. 9.15. For those
that are committed after, especially if attended with contumacy and
stubborness, are threatened with Judgments of another nature, much more severe
than those threatened by Moses, as Heb. 10.29. Matt. 5.21, 22, 28. Neither are
they threatened with Judgments of the other life only, but very often with
Judgments of this life, as 1 Cor. 11.30. Neither does he at any time indulge
pardon to a sinner, nisi ipse de se quasi poenas exigeret; unless he that sins,
do as it were inflict punishment upon himself, 1 Cor. 11.3. And that with a
great deal of sorrow, 2 Cor. 11.27. But here they farther object, that in
imitation of Almighty God, the Magistrate should not punish those at least that
are penitent. But to pass by that, it will be a difficult thing for the
Magistrate to discern who are truly penitent; for if outward shows and
professions of penitence would be sufficient, no man would smart for his sin:
we find by the example of King David, that God does not always remit all kinds
of punishment, no not to the penitent: for though he do remit or abate of the
severity of the Law, so that he does not punish him with a violent, or
otherwise untimely death, whereunto his sin has subjected him; yet whilst he
suffers him to be chastised with the rods of men, it plainly shows that his
mercy is as well seen in the extenuation of punishments, as in the total and
absolute remission of them; there is much of mercy and lenity in the mitigation
of torments, and lesser judgments deserve not the name of judgments, when we
know that we have deserved greater: even so, now God may and undoubtedly does
express his mercy to a sinner, in remitting the punishment of eternal death,
which every sinner does contract for his sin, though he do visit him with an
untimely death, either immediately by himself, or mediately by the hand of the
Magistrate.

XII. And that of depriving a sinner of the time of Repentance.
But others there are again that urge, that together with the life of a sinner
all opportunity of repentance is quite cut off: whereunto we answer, that no
man is so suddenly snatched away, but he is allotted a certain time to make his
peace with God: And although he be not permitted to make a real expression of
his conversion, by his life and conversation; yet that God does sometimes
accept of the will for the deed in such cases, is most apparent by the example
of the Thief upon the Cross. And if it be yet objected, That a longer life
might happily conduce much to the glory of God, in the perfecting of this work of
repentance in him: I answer, That God happily might as probably have received as
much dishonor in his recidivation, or falling back to his accustomed wicked
courses; and so that of Seneca might very fitly be applied, Quod unum bonum
tibi superest, representabimus, Lib. 1. de Ira c. 16. c. 15.
mortem; that only good thing that thou art capable of, we represent unto thee,
which is death. And that also of the same Seneca, Quo uno modo possunt,
desinant esse mali; there being no way left for them to cease to sin, but to
cease to live; whereunto we may add, that which the same Author says elsewhere,
Talibus ingeniis vitae exitus remedium est, optimumque est abire ei qui ad se
nunquam reverturus est; De Benef. l. 7. c. 10.
death is to such the only remedy, it being best for him to dye, that lives
without any hopes of being cured. Let these therefore together with what we
have said in the beginning of this work, suffice for answer to those who hold
that either all punishments, or at least such as are capital, are without any
exceptions, prohibited unto Christians; the contrary whereunto we are taught by
the Apostle, who within the duty of a King includes the power of the Sword, as
being the Executioner of divine vengeance: and in another place he tells us,
that we ought to pray that Kings may be made Christians, and that as Kings,
they may protect the innocent; which in this general corruption and depravity
of mankind, even since the times of the Gospel, cannot be done, unless by the
death of some, the impudence of others be repressed; seeing that all the
public punishments that are every where inflicted upon the guilty, are not as
yet found sufficient to guard or protect the innocent. Neither is it altogether
impertinent, to propose unto all Christian Magistrates the example of Sabacon
King of Egypt for their imitation, a man highly famed for his Piety, by whom
all capital punishments were changed into some servile works, that were
profitable to the Commonwealth, and that with good success, Lib. 1.
as Diodorus testifies: Strabo relates the like of some Nations inhabiting
about Mount Caucasus, where, says he, They put no man to death although they
offend never so highly: yea and among the Romans, no Citizen was ever known to
be put to death or punished with stripes after the Porcian Law was made, unless
for Treason, or being first condemned by the people of Rome. Neither is that of
Quintilian to be slighted, No man will doubt, says he, but that if a
Malefactor could be reclaimed, and become a new man, as some such there may
sometimes be, it were better for the Commonwealth that he should live than
dye. It is observed by Balsamon, That those Roman-Laws which condemned men to
death, were most of them changed by the Christian Emperors into some smart
punishment, whereby both the condemned Party was more sharply urged to
repentance, and others more affrighted by their lasting punishment. Nicetas
records it, See Chap. 24. Sect. 2.
That during the Reign of Johannes Comnenus, no Malefactor was at any time put
to death. And when some ranting Donatists had killed two Catholic Priests,
most barbarously putting out the eyes, and cutting off the fingers of one of
them, Great. l. 23. q. 5. Circumcelliones.
St Augustine besought Count Marcellinus not to punish them by that strict Rule
of retaliation, whereby they should suffer according to what they had done; but
that he would suffer them to live, and to enjoy their limbs: yet to restrain
them from the like outrages by some hard, yet profitable, labor; or to reclaim
them from their madness by some smarting punishment. For this also, says he,
is called a condemnation. And who understands not this to be as well a benefit
as a punishment, whereby neither are the Reins let loose to licentious cruelty,
nor that wholesome Physic withheld, that should work Malefactors to
repentance? (An House of correction strikes more terror to an idle Rogue, than
the Gallows; and to be chained to an Oar, than Death it self.)

XIII. The imperfect Divisions of punishments rejected.
By that Division which we have made of the ends for which punishments were
ordained, it seems that somewhat was omitted by the Philosopher Taurus, out of
whom Gellius says thus, Whenever there shall appear in a Malefactor great
hopes of reformation without punishment, or no hopes at all of his amendment,
or that there is no necessary cause to fear the dignity of the Person against
whom the offense is committed, should be slighted or contemned, or that the sin
is not such as requires the impression of some necessary fear to preserve
others from it; then wherein soever it is that men offend, it is not worth our
study to inflict punishments. For he seems thence to infer, That punishments
are needless, if any one of these ends be wanting; whereas on the contrary all
these ends must cease, that there be no need of punishments. Besides, he omits
this end, namely, When an incorrigible Sinner (...) taken away, to the end that
he may not commit more or greater sins. And what he there said concerning the
loss of the dignity of the person against whom the sin is committed, was to be
extended to other damages, which we may have just occasion to fear. De Clem.
lib. 1. c. 21.
Much better is that Partition which Seneca makes, In revenging injuries (says
he) the Law looks at three things, which every Magistrate ought likewise to
pursue: namely, That either he whom we punish should amend his life; Three ends
of punishing.
or that by his punishment others should be meliorated; or that incorrigible
Malefactors being taken away, they that are innocent should live more securely.
In Legatione.
The two former of these Philo commemorates, Punishment oftimes corrects and
amends a Malefactor; but if this fail, it does certainly meliorate those that
come to the knowledge thereof. For many men are instructed by other men's harms,
and grow more watchful over themselves by fear of the like sufferings. But in
that Division of Seneca, if by those that are innocent, we understand as well
those who may hereafter be injured, as those who have already been injured, we
have a full and perfect Partition; especially if to those two words, taken
away, we add or suppressed. For both exile, imprisonment, and whatsoever else
it is whereby a man is disabled to do wrong, may be hither referred. But that
distribution which Seneca elsewhere makes, is more imperfect, where he says,
That in punishments this Rule is to be observed, That some are inflicted to
reclaim those that are wicked, others to take them away. And yet that of
Quintilian is yet more imperfect, That every punishment appertains not so much
to the sin, as for example.

XIV. Not lawful for private Christians to inflict capital punishments, though
by the Law of Nations they may.
From what has been already said, we may collect how unsafe it is for a
Christian, being a private man, to take revenge upon any wicked man, especially
by death, either for his own or for the public good; although it be sometimes
permitted by the Law of Nations, as we have already declared See Book 1. Chap.
3. Sect. 3. and this Chapter Sect. 8.
. And therefore it is a laudable custom among some people, for such as have the
supreme power to grant Commissions to such as put out to Sea to persecute
Pirates wheresoever they find them, whereof they may make use as occasions
serve, to show (if need be) that they did it not upon any private malice, but
in obedience to their Princes Commands.

XV. Or to accuse any voluntarily.
Not much unlike unto this is another custom which I find in some Countries,
where every man that will, is not permitted to prefer a Criminal Accusation
against another; but some particular men are chosen, and thereunto
commissionated by public Authority: so that no private man can attempt any
thing that tends to the effusion of humane blood, but such only as are bound to
do it by virtue of their Office. And to this has that Canon of the Eliberine
Council respect, which denies the Communion to any man that shall by his
private suggestion or accusation, occasion the death or proscription of another.

XVI. Or to affect the Office of a Judge in capital matters.
And from what has been already said, we may collect also how unsafe and
indecent it is for a man truly Christian, rashly to thrust himself into such
public Offices as to have it in their power to sentence men to death, or to
conceit and to publish himself to be fit that such a right of life and death
should be committed unto him, as to the most excellent of all others, and as
unto a God amongst men. For surely our Blessed Saviors advice, namely, To take
heed, as in a case of danger, how we pass sentence upon others (because, look,
Matthew. 7.1.
what measure we mete unto others, we must expect from God in like cases) does
chiefly appertain unto this kind of Judgment.

XVII. Whether those Humane Laws that permit the killing of some men, do give
them a true right before God, or only an impunity amongst men.
Another notable Question does sometimes arise, namely, Whether those humane
Laws which permit the killing of some men, do justify it before God, or
whether they grant only an impunity amongst men. This latter opinion was much
savoured by Covarruvia and Fortunius; but on the contrary so distasted by
Vasquius, that he calls it abominable. Without doubt, the Laws may do both in
some Cases; but whether they will do so or not, may be gathered, partly, from
the words of the Law, and partly, from the matter. For if the Laws have regard
to the grief and sorrow of the Offender, it remits the punishment, but not the
sin; as in the Case of an Husband that kills his adulterous Wife, or of the
Wife her adulterous Husband. A Wife taken in Adultery might by the Law of the
Lombards be killed by her own Husband; Great. Can. 33. Q. 2. inter haec. Lib. de
Civit. Dei. Great. c. 23. q. 8. quicunque.
but not so by the Roman Laws: yet if he did kill his adulterous Wife, being so
taken, he was excused and pardoned, non a culpa vel a peccato, licet a poena
civili; not altogether from the sin, though from the punishment due by the
Civil Law. For as St Augustine observes, If he that kills or wounds a
Malefactor be a Magistrate, he is God's Minister, and not to be blamed for it;
but if he be a private person, he shall be judged as an Homicide, because he
presumes to usurp that authority which is not given him by God. But if the Law
respect some ensuing mischief that is likely to happen by the delaying of the
punishment, then it is supposed to transferr public Authority to every private
man, who therein is reputed a Magistrate. And of this kind is that Law in the
Codes of Justinian under this Title, Quando liceat unicuique sine Judice, etc.
When it is lawful for any private man to revenge himself or the public worship
without a Judge. In which Law, license is given unto every man, by severe
punishments, to repress Soldiers when they are found straggling from the Army,
and plundering the Country: And the reason of the Law is there added, Melius
est occurrere in tempore, quam exitum vindicare; Better it is to ^revent
mischiefs in their beginning, than to revenge them when done. We therefore
(says the Emperor) grant you license to avenge your own wrongs, and what is
now too late judicially to punish, we shall endeavor to suppress by our
Proclamation, That no man shall hereafter spare a Soldier so plundering, but
shall resist and assault him with weapons, as if he were a common Thief. And of
the same kind also is the subsequent Law concerning Soldiers deserting their
Colors, Let all men know, (says he) That against Robbers and Soldiers that
fly from the Army, power is hereby given to every man, for the preservation of
the common safety, to execute public revenge. And thus is that of Tertullian
to be understood, In reos Majestatis, and publicos Hosts, omnis homo Miles
est; Against Traitors and public Enemies, every man is a Soldier. There is
not only in Great Commanders and other Potentates, Agathicas, lib. 4.
an innate and constant purpose of doing well to the Public; but it is both
lawful and honest for every man, that will, to be troubled at the calamities
that befall the Commonwealth he lives in; and to promote, as far as he is able,
the public safety and prosperity thereof. But the right of killing Exiles
(whom they also call Bannites) differs herein from those mentioned in the said
Laws: For as to the former, it is necessary that they should be particularly
sentenced unto death before they be killed. But as to these latter, a general
Edict, together with the evidence of the Fact, is as authoritative as a
Sentence particularly denounced. So thought Quintilian, There are some crimes
so evidently committed against the Commonwealth, Dect. 206.
that the very sight of them is enough to justify our revenge.

XVIII. What acts are punishable by men. The internal acts of the mind.
Now let us see whether all acts are such as ought to be punished by humane
Laws. And certainly they are not: For, in the first place, the internal acts of
the mind, although they afterward come to be known unto others, as by
confession, or by some other accident; cannot be liable to the punishment of
men, because it is not agreeable to humane nature, that any right or obligation
should arise from acts merely internal. And in this sense are the Roman Laws to
be understood when they say, Cogitationis poenam neminem mereri, (which we
render thus, Thought is free;) yet even these internal acts, as they have their
influence upon the external acts of the Body, have their estimation, not
properly of their own, but as those external acts deserve more or less
punishment, according to these internal ones of the mind.

XIX. Such as are inevitable to humane nature.
Those acts that are inevitable to humane nature, are not to be punished by
humane Laws. For though nothing be imputed to us as a sin, but what has the
concurrence of the will, and is done freely; yet to abstain altogether, and at
all times from sin, and over all temptations still to emerge Conquerours, is
above the strength and condition of humane Nature: whence it is that all sorts
and Sects of men have esteemed it natural for man to sin. As among
Philosophers, Sopater, Hierocles, Seneca; amongst Jews, Philo; amongst
Historians, Thucydides; and amongst Christians very many have left us their
testimony upon Record. Sen. de ira, c. 14.
There is no man to be found that can in all things justify himself, says
Seneca. A little before he had said, -- c. 9.
Amongst others the calamities that attend Mortals, this is one, namely, The
darknest of the understanding, which betrays us not only to a necessity of
erring, but to the love of errors. -- c. 17.
And presently after, Quis ille est qui se profitetur omnibus Legibus
innocentem; who is he that can plead his innocence to all the Laws? and in
another place, De Clem. l. 1. c. 8.
peccavimus omnes, etc. we have all sinned, some more, some less; some
intentionally, others happily by the persuasion of others, or violently carried
away by the lewdness of another; some of us through levity, not adhereing to
good counsel, and some upon the sudden approach of dangers, lose our innocence
though unwillingly, and not without some reluctance: neither do we sin only for
the present, but we will continue sinning to our death; and although a man do
purge his conscience never so well, so that nothing does either disturb or
deceive him, yet is it but by sinning, that we arrive at this innocence. Thus
likewise Belisarius in Procopius, not at all to sin, falls not under the power
of humane nature, neither can our weakness bear it: Si puniendus est, Goth. 3.
cuique pravum maleficumque ingenium est, poena neminem excipiet; if says
Seneca, every man that is of a depraved nature were to be necessarily punished,
no man would go unpunished. To the same purpose is that of Sopater, He that
will so punish, as if he would have men altogether without fault, must needs
exceed the natural bounds of correction. Of the same mind was Diodorus Siculus,
Strictly to observe whatever is done amiss, and severely to punish every
offense, is a wrong done to humane frailty, and to forget the weakness that is
common to all mankind. For as the same Sopater says wisely, Our lesser and as
it were, daily slips of infirmity, are rather to be connived at, than punished.
And indeed it may well be doubted, whether such as these, may properly be
called sins; because though we have freedom as to this or that sin, to do it,
or not to do it; yet not at all to sin in respect of our natural frailty is
impossible. Every Law then (as Plutarch in Solon says) should command things
possible, if it intends to punish a few profitably, and not a multitude
unprofitably. Some sins there are that are inevitable, not simply to mankind in
general, but to this or that particular person, or to this or that particular
time, or age, by reason of such or such a temperament of the body strongly
inclining the mind, as Seneca observes, Morum varietates mixtura elementorum
facit; the variety that there is in men's manners, is occasioned by the various
mixture of the elements, or by some overgrown customs, which notwithstanding
are usually punished, not so much for themselves, as for some former errors;
as either for neglecting the remedies whereby they might have been prevented,
or because those diseases of the mind were voluntarily contracted. Lot's
daughters made him drunk, and then lay with him, Great. Can. 15. Q. 1. c.
inebriaverunt.
but he knew it not; whereupon St. Aug. passes this sentence on him, That he
deserved to be punished, not for his incest, but for his drunkenness.

XX. Nor those that are neither directly nor indirectly destructive to humane
Society.
Thirdly, Neither are those sins to be punished by humane Laws, which are
neither directly nor indirectly against humane Society, or against any other
man; because there can be no reason assigned why such offenses should not be
referred to the supreme Tribunal of God himself, who is most wise to
understand, most righteous to perpend and weigh, and most mighty to revenge and
punish them: wherefore all humane punishments as to such sins are plainly
unprofitable, and therefore vain. Hence notwithstanding, we are to except such
punishments as tend only to reformation, although happily it may no way concern
others: neither are those sins to be punished by humane Laws, which are
opposite to such virtues, as the Laws do not compel, but persuade only, and
exhort us unto; as those of mercy, liberality, gratitude, etc. Seneca
discussing this question, whether the sin of ingratitude be punishable,
resolves it thus, Cum res honestissima sit refer gratiam, De Benef. lib. 3.
c. 6, 7.
desinit honesta esse si necessaria sit; since to be thankful is a thing
eminently honest, it would cease to be so were it necessary; which he thus
explains in the subsequent words: For (says he) if to be unthankful were
punishable, no man would more commend a thankful man, than he does that man
that restores what was deposited with him in trust, or that man that pays his
just debts: neither whereof can with honesty be detained; and therefore are not
courtesies but debts, which whosoever willingly pays, we do not so properly
commend, as discharge him: Non erat res gloriosa gratum esse, Lib. 4. Cont. 23.
nisi ingratum fuisse tutum fit; it were not so lovely, so grateful a thing to
be thankful, if to be unthankful were not safe. (He that provides alimony for
his wife and children, or that feeds and pays his servants for their labor,
deserves not thereby the honor of being reputed liberal or charitable, because
happily he does it for fear of the Laws, which have power to force him to do it:
But him that relieves the Poor, clothes the naked, redeems the captive, we
commonly magnify, and extol for his charity; Contr. l. 4. Contr. 23. Controv.
24.
because these acts depend wholly upon the freedom of the will, and if he did
them not, no Law can punish him.) So Seneca the father, Thou will say unto me,
we are no where commanded to do this: whereunto he answers, Hujus rei
aestimatio immensa est, itaque nulla vindicta est; because the esteem of a
grateful man is so precious, for (as Solomon says of a virtuous wife, His
price is above rubies) therefore there is no punishment awarded unto the
ungrateful; for such as these, are not so properly vices, as defects of virtue,
for which, chidden we may be, but not punished.

XXI. Whether Magistrates may forgive offenses
It follows that we enquire, whether Magistrates may sometimes forgive or
pardon offenses; which the Stoics deny, but upon very slender grounds: For
they say, all sins are equal, and therefore if some, then all are equally to be
punished. Again, a wise man say they, (and such should every Magistrate be,)
See Stobaeus frag. tit. de Magistratus.
ought to look straight forwards to what he ought to do as a Magistrate, and
not to do any thing contrary to his duty. Besides pardon, say they, Cicero pro
Muraena Sen. de clem. in fine.
is the remission of punishment that is due; but a wise man will do his duty,
and give unto every man what is his due: But the fallacy lies in the word due;
for if by due, we mean that which a man may lawfully do without injuring any,
then it will not follow, That he that does not punish, does not that which he
ought to do. But if by the word due, we understand that which we must do, then
we answer, that there is not always such a necessity; for in this sense, though
the offender be by the Law punishable, yet is it not always necessary that he
should be punished: for thus, the punishment is not always due, but lawful
only. And this may hold true as well before the penal Law is past as after;
against these Stoics Diodorus Siculus in his fragments argues well, Epist. 52.
Venia melior poenae exactione; it is much better to pardon then to exact
punishment. So does St. Cyprian for Christians, There is (says he) a great
distance between the opinions of Philosophers and Stoics, who hold all sins to
be equal, and that a wise man must not easily be bended; and the opinion of
Christians, who hold that to remit punishment is sometimes better than to exact
it.

XXII. The offender may be pardoned before the penal Law be ordained.
The Malefactor may be pardoned before the penal Law be ordained; for doubtless
he that offends, lies under a punishable condition naturally: but yet it
follows not that he must necessarily be punished. For as Julian speaks of
Eusebia, though some there be that deserve to he treated ill, and punished, yet
is there no necessity that these should be destroyed: Because this depends upon
the coherence that there is between that punishment, and those ends whereunto
punishments were ordained: wherefore in case First, these ends be not of
themselves in a moral estimation necessary. Or secondly, if there occur other
ends on the opposite part no less profitable or necessary. Or thirdly, if the
ends proposed by punishments, may happily be by some other ways obtained; then it
is plain that nothing can precisely oblige us to require punishment.

As for example, in the first case, when the offense is so privately committed,
that few persons take notice of it, and the public traduction whereof would be
not only unnecessary, but happily damagable; were it not better to connive and
dissemble the knowledge of it, and not at all to punish it, than by punishing
it, to make it the more public (as in the case of Scandal?) Ad. Q. fratr. 1.
21.
so Cicero of one Zeuxis, Adductum in judicium, fortasse dimitti non
oportuerit, conquiri vero ad judicium necesse non fuit; being brought unto
judgment, he ought not to be dismissed; but to have brought him unto judgment
there was no necessity. Again in the second case, sometimes the end that we
propose to our selves in punishing is overballanced by some other ends which
are no less profitable or necessary: As when the offense is committed by one
who either in his own person, or by his parents, has highly merited from the
Commonwealth. For then as Seneca well observes, Beneficium superveniens
apparere injuriam non patitur; we cannot see the injury done, for the glory of
his preceding merits. Thirdly, sometimes again the end that we propose to our
selves in punishing, may better be obtained by some other ways, as when
reproofs will serve to reform an offender, what need is there of blows? or when
a man is ready to satisfy an injury with an ingenious confession, and an
humble submission, it is in vain to exact punishment; whereunto that wise
Hebrew had respect when he said, Ecclus. 12.19.
That it became the just to be merciful. For seeing there is no punishment,
especially if great, but in it self considered has somewhat in it that is
repugnant, not to justice, but to charity: Surely common reason will easily be
persuaded to abstain from it, until by arguments drawn from a greater charity,
and a more universal good, she be irresistably overborn, and hindered. Very
apposite unto this, is that of Sopater, where he says, Justitiae pars illa
quae contractus ad aequalitatem reducit, omnino respuit omne gratiae genus: at
ea pars quae circa delicta occupatur, non recusat suavem and blandam gratiarium
faciem; that that part of justice, which weighs all contracts in an equal
balance, utterly rejects all kind of favor: but that which is conversant
about offenses, refuses not sometimes the meek and lovely face of the graces.
Ad. Q. frat. 1, 2.
The meaning of the former part of this sentence, Cicero delivers in these
words, The way of dispensing this right is in some things to do nothing through
favor: And the latter part of it Dion Prusiensis thus explains, Boni praesidis
est ignoscere; it is the duty of a good Prince to forgive. And in Favorinus
also we read thus, That which men call clemency is nothing else but a
seasonable mitigation of the rigor of the Law.

XXIII. Yet not always.
In punishment these three things do offer themselves to be considered, Either
that they should be altogether exacted, as in such crimes as are of dangerous
Precedents; among which, Josephus reckons Parricides, which as who so commits,
violates the Law of nature, and takes away the life of man; so he that does not
punish, does himself sin against humane nature. Or, secondly, That they should
not at all be required; as when some public good requires that it should be
altogether omitted: or, thirdly, That either of these may be done lawfully.
This is intended by Seneca, where he says, That clemency depends upon our own
free will. But then say the Stoics, Parcit sapiens, non ignoscit; He spares,
but forgives not. As if it were not as lawful for us (with the vulgar people,
being the Masters of speech) to express that by the word pardon, as for them to
do it by the word spare. But not only herein, but in many other cases we find
that to be true, which Cicero, Galen, and many others have observed, That most
of the disputations of the Stoics are about words only, which a Philosopher
should principally avoid. For as he that wrote to Herennius truly notes,
Vitiosum est Controversiam intendere propter nominum mutationem; Lib. 2.
To heighten Controversies about the change of names, is vicious. And as St
Augustine argues against the Academicks, Turpe est disputationibus in verborum
quaestione immorari, cum certamen nullum de rebus remanserit; It is absurd to
contest about words only, when there remains no difference at all about things.

XXIV. Yea and after the penal Law.
But the pardoning of offenses after the penal Law is past, seems to be more
inconsistent with the integrity of a Prince; because he that is the Author of
the Law, is in some measure bound up by his own Laws, which is true as the
Lawmakers is a Member of the City, and as so only considered; but not as he
sustains the authority, Vid. sup. C. 4. Sect. 12.
and is as it were the Body of the Commonwealth: For, as such, he may take away
even the whole Law; for the nature of an humane Law is such, that it depends
upon the will of the Lawmakers, not in respect of its institution only, but of
its continuation. Humane Laws alterable by him that made them.
But in case he do subvert or take away any Law without some probable reason or
cause, he sins against the Rule of Polity. But as he may take away the whole
Law, so also may he take away the condemning power of the Law, as to this or
that person, or to this or that particular Fact, the same Law remaining in
force as to others by the example of God himself; who, as Lactantius observes,
when he instituted Laws for men, did not intend to deprive himself of the power
of pardoning such as should offend against those Laws. It is lawful for a
Prince to revoke the sentence of death, and to absolve a person, though
condemned to dye, says St Augustine; whereof he adds this as the reason, Quia
non est subjectus Legibus, qui habet in potestate Leges far; Because he is
not subject unto Laws, in whose power it is to make Laws. For the condition of
a Magistrate is one, and the condition of a Prince is another; the Magistrate
is corrupt, if his Sentence be more remiss than the Law: but to mitigate the
rigor of a severe Law, is sometimes the Glory of a Prince. Seneca speaking in
the Person of Nero says, Occidere contra Legem nemo potest, Symmachus, lib. 3.
Ep. 63.
servare nemo, praeter me; Kill contrary to Law no man can, and save none can,
besides my self. But this also must be understood so, that it ought not to be
done without probable cause; but what these probable causes are, though it
cannot be particularly defined, yet must we grant that they ought to be greater
after the Law is past, than those that were looked at before; because unto the
other causes, for which punishments are required, there is superadded the
authority of the Law, which is fit should be maintained.

XXV. Causes freeing from punishment.
1. Intrinsic.
But the Causes exempting any man from the penalty of the Law, are usually
either intrinsecal, or extrinsecal. Intrinsecal, as when the punishment
compared with the Fact is severe, if not unjust.

XXVI. Or extrinsecal.
Extrinsecal, When a man's former merits, or some other thing commending the
person offending, pleads strongly for his pardon: Or when we discern some
extraordinary hopes of future good in the Delinquent: but especially if the
reason of the Law do at least particularly cease in that Fact for which the
punishment is to be inflicted: For although the general reason of a Law, where
it is not counterballanced with a contrary reason, is sufficient to uphold the
vigor of the Law; yet the failing even of that which is the particular reason
of the Law, does so far operate that the Law may more easily, and with less
detriment to Authority, be dispensed with; as Gratian proves by many instances.
C. 1. q. 7.
And this usually falls out in such sins as are committed through ignorance,
though not altogether blameless, or through infirmity of mind, which happily
might (though not without much difficulty) be overcome. Whereunto a Christian
Prince ought to have some regard in imitation of God himself, who in the Jewish
Law did mercifully provide that most sins of this nature should by some kind of
Sacrifices be expiated; as we may read in the fourth and fifth Chapters of
Leviticus. And as in the New Testament we may find confirmed both by words and
examples, wherein he declares how willing he is to pardon such sins to those
that repent: as Luke 23.34. Heb. 4.15. 1 Timothy 1.13. And by those very words of
Christ, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. By which words
Theodosius the Emperor was so wrought upon, that he freely forgave the
Antiochians, whom he had purposed to destroy, as St Chrysostom records.

XXVII. Yea though no such exemption be tacitly included in the Law.
Hence then we may discern the error of Ferdinandus Vasquius, who taught that
the Laws were in no cases to be dispensed with, but only to such wherein the
Lawmakers, had he been consulted with, would have confessed, That it was not
his intent that in that Case his Law should be observed. For Vasquius there
does not well distinguish between the equitable interpretation of the Law, and
the relaxation of it; whence it is, that in another place he reproves Thomas
and Scotus for saying, That the Law was binding, though the reason of that Law
did particularly cease; as if they took the Law to consist in the bare letter,
which they never thought. But every relaxation of the Law, which may be, and
often is, either granted or omitted freely at the pleasure of the Prince, is so
far from being referred to equity properly so called, that even that relaxation
which is due, either out of charity or polity, is not to be referred thither.
For it is one thing to take away the efficacy of the Law, upon some probable
cause, or upon some urgent occasion; and another thing to declare that that
Fact was not at the Law-making so much as thought upon by the Maker of it. But
let this suffice concerning the taking away the punishments. Now let us see
what may be said concerning their infliction.

XXVIII. All punishments are awarded according to men's merits.
By what has been already said, it appears, That in punishments two things are
considerable, First, The merit of the Crime; secondly, The profit that redounds
by the punishment. As to the former, Nemo puniendus est ultra meritum, No man
ought to be punished beyond the merit of his offense: for, as I said before,
There ought to be an equality between the sin and the punishment, according to
that of Horace, Epist. 15.
-- adsit
Regula peccatis, quae poenas irroget aequas.
Let sins have Rules, which equal pains require,
And not plague petty faults with Rods of Wire.
Whereunto we may add that of Cicero to Brutus, See to this purpose the speech
of the Melanois in Guicc. Lib. 17. Vid. sup. Sect. 11. and lib. 3. c. 11. sect.
1.
There is (says he) a moderation to be used as well in punishing as in other
things. And therefore Papinianus calls punishment the valuation of a crime. And
Leuct. 2.
Aristides says, That it is agreeable to humane nature that there should be
bounds prescribed, beyond which revenge should never stray, (in imitation of
God himself, who when he proceeds to Judgment, is said to lay Judgment to the
Rule, and Righteousness to the Balance, as if he would retale it, as it were,
by weight and measure.) But Demosthenes in his Epistle for Lycurgus's Children,
does not approve of such an equality as is barely in weights and measures, but
with respect had to the purpose and intent of the Delinquent; and then he
concludes, That within the Bounds of Merit, all sins may be punished more or
less, so far forth as the punishment shall be thought profitable.

XXIX. The impulsive Causes of sin are to be respected and compared together.
In the merit of the crime, three things are to be examined; First, The cause
that did provoke; Secondly, The cause which ought to have restrained, and,
Thirdly, The fitness and capacity of the person to either. As to the first of
these, there is, doubtless, some cause that moves every man to evil. There is
hardly any man wicked, but for some end; or if there be any man that loves
wickedness for wickedness sake only, surely he is not so properly a. man as a
Devil. The greatest part of Mankind are led unto sin by their affections; Jam,
1.15.
So says St. James, Lust conceives, and brings forth sin. Where under this
Notion, Lust or Appetite, I comprehend also that vehement desire of declining
every thing that may hurt us, which of all others is the most natural, and so
the most innocent. Oft-times a man is almost enforced upon a sin, to avoid some
present danger; as when to avoid death, imprisonment, torment, or extreme
poverty, he does some act of violence or injustice, and then the fear of the
evil that pursues him seems to render his sin the more excusable. Whereupon
Demosthenes inferrs, That if a rich man be unjust, he deserves doubly to be
punished, in respect of what he suffers for the like sin who is oppressed with
poverty. For before such Judges as have any sentiments of humanity, the poor
man's necessity pleads strongly for pardon; whereas they who, surfeiting with
abundance, sin merely out of wantonness, can have no excuse at all for their
wickedness. Thus does Polybius excuse the Acarnanae, that to avoid that
imminent danger that threatened them, were enforced to break the Articles of
their League with the Grecians against the Aetolians. The more vehement the
temptation is, the more pardonable is the crime. A Woman of Smyrna, as Gellius
tells the Story, Gell. l. 12. c. 17.
was convented before Cn. Dolabella the Proconsul of Asia, for poisoning her
Husband and his Son at the same time. The Fact She confessed, alleging, That
She had good cause so to do; because her Husband and his Son had betrayed and
murdered her own Son by a former Husband, being a young man, innocent, and of
singular hopes; which Fact was so clear that it could not be denied. Dolabella
calls a Council, but none durst pass Sentence in so doubtful a Case; for the
Woman's Fact being confessed, they thought, ought not to go unpunished, and yet
the revenge She took, for the murder of her Son, appeared to be but just. In
conclusion, Dolabella sent her to Athens to be judged by the Areopagites, as
being the most knowing and experienced Judges of that Age, who upon a full
hearing of the Cause, adjourned the determination of it for a hundred years; by
which means they neither acquitted the Woman of her crime against the Laws, nor
condemned her, though guilty; because the violence of the temptation pleaded
for pardon. The less of provocation a man has to do evil, the greater is his
sin. Whence Aristotle inferrs, That the sin of incontinence is greater than
that committed through fear, because it is more voluntary; for what a man does
out of fear, is to preserve himself from destruction: and in such a Case there
is a force upon the will. See Prove. 6.30, 31, 32.
But lust is conceived within us, and therefore has the more of evil, because
it has a larger share of the will. With whom accords Philo upon the Decalogue,
All other vehement perturbations of the mind are occasioned by the assault of
some outward temptations, which seem to happen against our will; only our
lusts, because they are conceived within us, can be imputed to none but our
selves. All sins, says Chrysostom, merit not the same punishment, but those
deserve the greatest which might easiest be resisted. Hence it is, that in
another place he inferrs, That the Slanderer is a greater sinner than a
Fornicator, a Thief or an Homicide, because these may have vehement
temptations, but the Slanderer none but his own Will. Men do not despise a
Thief, if he steal to satisfy his own soul when he is hungry; but he that
commits Adultery with a Woman lacks understanding: He that does it
destroys his own soul, Prove. 6.30, 32. All other appetites do tend to some
good, either real or imaginary; those things that are really good, besides
virtues and their actions which cannot entice unto sin, (being always at peace
among themselves) are either delectable, as pleasures; or such as are desirable
in order to things that are delectable, which we call things profitable, as
abundance of all outward enjoyments. Those that are imaginary only, and not
really good, are either the excellency that we think we have above others, as
it is separated from virtue and profit, or revenge, both which, the more
devious from Nature they are, the worse they are. (Naturalia desideria finita
sunt, ex falsa opinione nascentia ubi desinant non habent; Our natural wants
(says Seneca) are easily summed up, but those that are grounded upon a false
opinion are infinite.) St John collects all the provocations to sin under these
three heads, 1 John 2.16.
the lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, or the pride of life; the first
whereof comprehends the desires of pleasure; the second of profit; the third of
vainglory and anger. And Philo in his Exposition of the Decalogue derives all
that is Evil from the desires either of Riches, Honor or Pleasure. Lib. 6.
And Lactantius describes the office of Virtue to consist in the suppression of
our anger, in bridling of our lusts, and in the moderating of our desires of
riches. For (says he) almost all our unjust and wicked actions do arise from
one of these affections, which elsewhere he repeats.

XXX. The Causes restraining from sin.
The general cause that should restrain us from sin, is, the injustice of the
fact: For we speak not here of all sins, but of those which have respect to
something without the person sinning. Now this injustice is so much the
greater, by how much the damage thereby done to another is greater. And
therefore those are the greatest injuries that are actually consummated, and
those the least, which though they have made their progress through some Acts,
yet are not arrived to the utmost Act: For which reason the coveting of our
neighbors goods, is placed by Moses in the rear of the Decalogue, as being a
sin of the lowest form, or, as it were, but an introduction to sin, which the
farther it goes, the worse it is. In either of these kinds, that is esteemed
the greatest crime, which disturbs Common Order, and thereby gives offense to
most men. After this follow the injuries done to particular persons: And of
these the highest is, that which touches the life of Man, expressed by Moses in
this Precept, Thou shall not kill. The next is, that injury done to a Man's
Family, the foundation whereof is laid in Matrimony, contained in these words,
Thou shall not commit Adultery. The third and last are, such as are committed
against a Man's private Estate, either directly, as by stealing; or indirectly,
as when by our false Testimony we prejudice the Right of others. These may be
yet more acutely divided: But it pleased Almighty God in the Decalogue to
follow this Order. For under the name of Parents, which are Natural
Magistrates, it is fit that Magistrates and other Rulers and Governors should
be comprehended, by whose Authority Humane Society is maintained. Next unto
this follows the Interdiction of Homicide; the Institution of Matrimony, and
the prohibiting of Adultery; then Theft is forbidden, and false testimonies:
and in the last place, such sins as are inconsummate. Neither amongst those
Causes that should restrain us from sin, are we to place that single damage
only, that is done directly against others; but that also which is probably
consequent to it; as in firing an house, making a breach in the sea-bank, or in
a bulwark wherein the lives and fortunes of many Families are concerned.
Moreover that Injustice, which we put here as a general cause of restraining
from sin, is sometimes aggravated by the addition of another crime; as our
impiety to our Parents, our inhumanity to our Kindred, our ingratitude to our
Patrons or Benefactors. Again, a sin is reputed the greater being the oftener
committed; forasmuch as an habit of evil is far worse than some particular acts
of evil. Once to err is pardonable: but in iisdem saepius errare emotae est
mentis; To dash often against the same stone is folly, nay, madness; the oftener
we offend, the greater punishment we deserve. And from hence we may collect how
far forth that was naturally Righteous, which was usually done amongst the
Persians, who before they passed sentence upon a Malefactor, The Persian Custom.
looked back to his former life, and compared it with the present Crime he
stood convicted of; for they thought it unjust to take away the life of any man
for one evil act, unless the whole course of his life had been otherwise
sinful. And indeed what Asinius Pollio says, is very true; We are not to
judge of any person by some particular acts, but by his continued habits. (None
are to be accounted notoriously wicked, but they that have long persisted in a
constant course of wickedness, Nemo repent fit pessimus; No man arrives at the
height of impudency at the first: For our innocence leaves us not but by
degrees; and boldness, that it may learn not to startle at grosser villainies,
gathers strength and courage by the frequent committing of lesser ones.) And
yet what Asinius Pollio said concerning the judging of men's present Crimes by
their former lives, ought to take place in such only, who being otherwise not
wicked, have been on a sudden surprised by the sweetness of some particular
sin: But not in those who have changed the whole course of their former lives.
For of these God himself by the Prophet Ezekiel proclaims, Chap. 18. Lib. 1.
that he will have no regard at all to their former deeds; whereunto that of
Thucydides may very fitly be applied, They deserve doubly to be punished,
because they are Apostates from goodness, and degenerate from Virtue to Vice.
And therefore it was wisely provided by the Primitive Christians in their
censures of other men's failings, That no Judgment should pass barely for the
crime committed, but with retrospection on their fore-past lives, and on what
followed; as may be seen in the Council of Ancyra and others: Lib. 3. de
Sacerdotio.
So St Chrysostom, Punishments are not always to be inflicted according to
the sole measure of the Crimes: but we ought to enquire into the mind and
manners of him that commits them. But a Law being once Enacted against any one
Vice, Romans 7.13.
makes a sin exceeding sinful: So St Aug. Lex prohibens omnia delicta
congeminat; De vera Relig. Ob.
The Law in prohibiting doubles all offenses; for it is not a single sin when
we commit not that only which is in it self evil, b^t tbat also which is
forbidden us. And by this argument St Paul aggravates the sins of the Jews, in
respect of those of the Gentiles, because they had the Law to direct them. We
must not therefore be rash in judging, nor (as Cicero advises) in grave and
serious things determine of the will and intentions of the person accused
barely by the fact, but by his manner and custom of living. (A good man may
happily be ensnared by the sweetness of a sin, or by the sudden gust of
temptations, and yet in the general course of his life he may retain his
integrity: The heart of Asa is said to be upright all the days of his life;
and yet when he was sick, it is objected against him, That he sought unto the
Physician and not unto the Lord.)

XXXI. The fitness of the person offending, to both which is diversely respected.
Now before we can rightly understand how to punish, we must know the aptness
and capacity of offenders to apprehend the causes which do either excite them
to commit, or restrain them from committing of sin: Now this aptness or
capacity of theirs, we may guess at, by either their temperament of body, age,
sex, education, or some of the circumstances of the act. For it will easily be
granted, that children, women, fools, illiterate persons, and ill educated,
cannot so well distinguish between just and unjust, lawful and unlawful, as
they that have more perspicacity and ingenuity; and that they in whom choler
predominates, are prone to anger and revenge, as they also that are of a
sanguine complexion are to dalliance; so young men are propense to one passion,
old men to another; insomuch that Nature seems to plead somewhat in their
excuse, as to such sins as are, as it were, congeneal with them, as was well
observed by Andronicus Rhodius: And although it cannot exempt them altogether
from punishment, yet without doubt it renders the fault the more tolerable. So
the apprehension of some imminent danger quickly begets a fear, and then we
rashly adventure upon a sin to avoid that danger: In like manner, some sudden
and unexpected injury sets our hot blood on boiling, and then immediately
before reason can interpose, we attempt a revenge. These are the sudden
irruptions of passion, and not the deliberate acts of the Will, which certainly
are in themselves more excusable than those which arising merely out of the
desire of pleasure, assault us not so violently: And therefore may either be
deferred, or admit of some other matter wherein to delight without injury to
any. De Providentia In Epist. ad Gal.
So St Chrysostom, Lust (says he) seeks coition only, but not with this or
that particular person: And so Nic. l. 7. c. 10.
Aristotle, Anger and cruelty are much more natural than covetousness, or an
inordinate desire of things unnecessary. For this is generally to be observed,
That the more the judgment is hindered in its free choice, or in the act of
discerning between Good and Evil, and the more natural the causes are exciting
to sin, the less of evil the sin has, and consequently the less it should have
of punishment. Difficilium facilis est venia; The greater difficulty there is
in the thing commanded, the easier is the pardon if not performed: Quanto
potestas vitandi fuit, tanto contumaciae crimine oneratur, says Tertullian;
The more power and the greater helps we have to avoid a sin, the more contumacy
we bewray in the committing it. Aristotle likewise in the place before cited,
accounts that man less temperate, who being either not at all, or very weakly
provoked with carnal desires, either seeks after enormous pleasures, or flies
from some small inconveniences; than he that is urged thereunto by some
vehement passion. For what would the same person do, if he felt those vehement
perturbations of mind which are incident to youth, or that grief and vexation
that poverty brings with it? Pertinent whereunto is that of Antiphanes: Qui cum
sit opulens nequiter quicquam facit,
Hunc, si esset pauper, quid non facturum putas?
He that being opulent, unjust will be,
What will he not, if pincht by poverty?
And what we every where read in Comedians, concerning the doting love of old
men. From these causes we ought to guess at the merits of men's sins, and to fit
their punishments accordingly.

XXXII. Counter-passion rejected.
The Pythagoreans hold that justice requires (...), (i. e.) a sufferance in the
like kind by way of punishment; which is true, but not so to be understood, as
if he that hurts another deliberately, and without any just cause given, should
suffer just so much again and no more. For the Law of Moses it self, which is a
perfect pattern for all other Laws, rejects this exposition; for it requires,
That he that steals any thing from another, should restore four and fivefold:
and the Attick Law did require, That a Thief besides a double restitution
(whereunto that of St John Rev. 18.6. refers) should remain in bonds for
certain days, as Demosthenes testifies. And when the Minyans had without any
right, Cont. Timocr.
extorted tribute from the Thebans, Hercules compelled them to restore it unto
them double, as Apollodorus records it. Aristides also of the Grecian Laws
testifies, Lib. 2. Leuctr. 2.
That the injured person is permitted to recover more than the damage sustained
by way of revenge: whereof St. Ambrose gives this reason, Q^o furem a
detrahendo, aut poena deterreant, aut mulcta revocent; De offic. 3. c. 3.
that so they may affright the Thief from his pilfering by the punishment, or
discourage him by the mulct. Seneca speaking of judgments to be inflicted after
this life, says: -- Scelera taxantur modo
Majore nostra.
Our Crimes with greater plagues are there
Punished, than those we suffer here.
Strabo observed a Law among the Indians, Lib. 15.
That if one man had maimed or dismembered another, besides the common
punishment of retaliation, he was to lose his hand. And in that book which is
entitled Aristotle's Morals, we read, That it is just, Lib. 1. c. 34.
that he that willingly puts out another man's eye, should suffer not only in
the like kind, but somewhat more. For as Philo in his Special Laws observes, It
is not equal that the nocent and the innocent should suffer but alike. And from
hence it is, that the very attempt to commit some sins, though not consummated,
and consequently have less of evil in them, than those that are perpetrated,
yet are equally punished according to what they intended: as we may read, Deuteronomy.
19.19. in the case of a false testimony; so Deuteronomy 22.19. in the case of a
Husband accusing his Wife of whoredom to defraud her of her dowry; the like we
may read Exodus 22.9. As also among the Roman Laws it was provided, That he that
carried a weapon about him with an intent to kill a man, was to have been
punished as though he had done it. And if it be objected, That if the bare
attempt be punishable with death, surely the execution should be more severely
punished: I answer, that because nothing can be more grievous than death, and
because a man can dye but once; therefore we must necessarily aquiesce in this
punishment, because we can go no further, unless we do sometimes add thereunto
some kind of torments, to make death it self the more terrible.

XXXIII. In punishments regard is to be had to the person punished.
Punishments are not to be considered barely, but with respect had to the
quality of him that suffers them. The same mulct or fine that is grievous to a
poor man, is no punishment at all to the rich: and the Stocks or Pillory, which
by the viler sort of people are slighted, are worse than death it self to the
nobler. The Roman Laws did often make use of this difference of persons and
punishments; and Bodine upon this consideration did frame a kind of harmoniacal
proportion: whereas notwithstanding indeed, here is but a simple equality
between the merit and the punishment, such as is in numbers, as also in all
contracts between the things sold and the money, although the same Merchandises
are worth in some places more, and in some less, as also is money according to
its either plenty or scarcity. But we must acknowledge that oft-times among the
Romans, this was not done without too great a respect had to the persons and
their qualities nothing appertaining to the fact, which acception of persons
Moses his Law did exceedingly abhor. And this is, as we have said, the
intrinsic valuation of a punishment.

XXXIV. Charity mitigates Punishment.
But that which restrains us in punishing, within those bounds which the Laws
permit, is the love of him who is punished, unless a greater and juster love of
many persuade us otherwise, for some cause that is external; which sometimes is
some extreme danger that may arise from him who has offended, but very often,
the necessity of an example. But this most usually arises when the
encouragements to any sin are general, and cannot be represt without sharp and
speedy remedies. Now the principal encouragements to sin are these two, namely
Custom, and Facility.

XXXV. Custom and facility, how they add or detract from the punishment of sin.
Which two being so dangerous, ought to be provided against by sharp and severe
Laws; The Hebrew Law did punish a Thief more severely for stealing Sheep or
Oxen out of the field, than out of the house, Exodus 22.1.9. For he that stole
out of the field, was to restore four and fivefold; but he that stole out of
the house but double: The reason whereof was; because Cattle in the field are
more easily driven away, and therefore had need to be secured by the severer
Laws. Orat. pro Roscio.
Those crimes, says Cicero, are to be fitted with the severest punishments, Ea
maxim animadvertenda peccata, quae difficilime praecaventur.
which cannot be prevented without great difficulty. So Justin, speaking of the
Scythians, says,. There was no crime so heinous as Theft; because to them who
had neither houses, nor enclosures to secure their herds of Cattle, or their
flocks of Sheep in, what safety could there be, if it were permitted unto them
to rob and steal? Much like unto that in Aristotle's Problems, where speaking
of such Thieves as frequented Baths, he says, That the Lawgiver, considering
that the owners could not in those places look after their things wisely,
committed them to the safeguard of severe Laws. And accordingly we find that
these Balneary Thieves were in Athens punished with death; if what they there
stole, were above the value of ten Drachmaes, as Demosthenes testifies against
Timocrates. The Custom of a fact, although it detract somewhat from the crime;
(for as Pliny speaks in such a case, he gave him his pardon, and that not
without reason; for though the fact were forbidden by the Law, yet was it
commonly committed, and not punished:) yet did it require, in some sort, to
have been severely punished: Because as Saturninus speaks, Nimium multis
grassantibus, opus exemplo est; when a sin begins to spread, and Malefactors
grow numerous, then some exemplary punishment seems necessary: (for as an
hotheaded Horse has need of a strong rein; so the more public and customary
a sin grows, the sharper should be the punishments to suppress it.) But the
former that is, clemency in acquitting offenders is more to be followed in
giving sentence, and should be our guide in passing Judgments; but the Laws
themselves ought to be severe and impartial, yet with due regard had to the
time when those Laws or Judgments were made and published, because the benefit
that arises by punishments has respect to the universality, as all Laws also
have; but offenses do vary, and are not the same in every offender, for in
some, they are greater, and in some, less

XXXVI. Clemency in the mitigation of punishments.
But where there are no great or urgent causes to exact the severity of the
Laws, there we should incline to mitigate punishments. For herein consists one
part of clemency: the other part consisting in their total remission. Because
it is a difficult thing to find out an equal temperament between the sin and
the punishment, says Seneca, therefore let the inequality be always on the
gentler side. De Clem. l. 1. c. 1.
And in another place, Poenam si quis tuto poterit, condonet; sin minus,
temperet: If it may safely be done, the best way is to forgive; if that cannot
be, the next is to lessen the punishment. In Diodorus Siculus we find one of
the Kings of Egypt highly commended for inflicting punishments less than the
sin deserved. So Justin in his Epistle to the Huns, The manner of the Romans is
not to exact punishments equal to the merits of the Offenders. (And indeed (as
I have before observed) there is a great deal of mercy even in the mitigation
of punishments, the lesser lose much of their name and nature where the sin
deserves greater.) It is said of Marcus Antoninus, That his custom was always
to award punishments somewhat lesser than the crimes deserved, or the Laws
required. And Isaeus the Orator was wont to say, That the Laws ought to be
severe, but the punishments always milder than the Laws. The like by way of
advice we find in Isocrates, To make the punishments always less rigorous than
the sin was heinous. This was it which was intended by the Emperor Henry,
under the Symbol of a Pomegranet-Tree, with this word, Subacre, Very sharp. And
Cassiodore reports it of a King, Lib. 11. 40.
who was often heard to say, Where there is danger we are severe, but where we
are safe we always pardon. When some Donatists were apprehended and brought
before Marcellinus, for whipping a Catholic Priest, putting out one of his
eyes, and cutting off one of his fingers, Ep. 159. Great. c. 23. q. 5.
Circumcelliones.
St Augustine, fearing that he should have proceeded against them by way of
retaliation, humbly besought Marcellinus, That he would not do so, nor suffer
any such thing to be done; for nothing (says he) more becomes a Prince than
clemency. And as Macedonius tells St Augustine, It is the duty of a Priest to
intercede for the guilty.

XXXVII. To these are referred whatsoever the Romans or Hebrews have written
concerning punishments.
Thus have we, I hope, omitted nothing that may conduce to the clearing of this
Argument, of it self difficult and obscure enough. For those four things which,
as Maimonides says, ought principally to be regarded in punishments, namely,
The greatness of the sin, that is, the damage given; the frequency of such
Sinners, the vehemence of the temptation, and the facility of committing it, we
have referred to their proper places: no less than those seven mentioned by
Saturninus, (though confusedly enough.) For, first, As to the person offending,
he is considered principally in his aptitude to judge of the Causes exciting
to, or restraining from sin, whereof we have treated before. The person
suffering by that sin does sometimes guide us to judge of the greatness of the
sin. Sect. 31.
The place where it was committed does either peculiarly aggravate it, or
appertains likewise to the facility of sinning. Sect. 30.
(For it is not the same thing, says Philo, to offer violence to a Stranger,
as to ones own Father: Nor is it the same thing to speak evil of a private man,
as of a Magistrate; or to commit an unlawful thing in a common or profane
place, as, in a sacred; or on an holy day, as on another day; in a private
house, as in a public assembly: for as Vlpian observes, There is great
difference between an injury committed in the view of the Roman people, and the
same committed in a solitary place.) The time also is to be considered, whether
long in contriving; and if so, then was the will the freer in her choice; or
short and sudden, and if so, then was it done more out of rashness than out of
premeditated malice. Fifthly, The quality, which may be referred, partly, to
the several kinds of appetites, and partly to the Causes which ought to
restrain us from sin; the greatness of the sin is likewise referred to the
appetite, so must the event to the causes rest^aining.

XXXVIII. Of War for punishment.
That War is sometimes undertaken for the neglect of punishing offenses we have
already showed, and Histories do every where teach us; whereunto is usually
added the reparation of the loss sustained, when the same Fact is not only in
it self vicious, but unto others damageable. From which two qualities there
arises a double obligation; as first, That the person who has done the wrong,
be punished according to his merits: secondly, That the damage by him caused,
be repaired. That we are not to fly into Arms upon every provocation, is
evident enough. For even the Laws do not avenge themselves upon every one that
breaks them, though they may safely do it: because they hurt none but such as
hurt others. But small and common injuries, says Sopater, are better connived
at and dissembled, than punished.

XXXIX. Whether War for injuries begun only or intended, be just.
Another Question does sometimes arise, Whether the purpose or intent only of
doing wrong be a sufficient ground for a just War? The Rhodians sent their
Ambassadors to the Romans, to urge them (by threatenings) to make peace with
Perseus King of Macedon: The Senate taking this as an Argument of their evil
affections toward them, (though it proceeded no further than bare words) yet
thought it worthy their consultation, Gell. l. 7. c. 3.
whether this were sufficient ground for a just War. But because the Rhodians
did not break out into any hostile acts, nor had made any public Decree
against them; therefore by the advice of Portius Cato they were neither
admitted as Friends, nor declared against as Enemies: But yet this Precedent is
not always to be followed, because in some Cases the will which has proceeded
to express it self by some Overt Acts (though the internal acts of the mind be
exempted from humane Laws) does contract a kind of guilt, and so is obnoxious
to punishment. Scelera quoque, quamvis citra exitum subsederunt, puniuntur;
Sen. in Controversiis. Excerpt. 4. 7. Sen. de ira, l. 3. de Benef. l. 5. c. 14.
De Leg. special.
The very first attempts only of wickedness, though they fail of success, are
punishable, says Seneca the Father: and he who purposes and is about to do us
wrong, has already done it, says the other Seneca. So in another place, A
Thief is a Thief before he defiles his hands; neither is it the last act of
killing only, that denominates a murderer; it suffices that he goes out
armed, with a purpose to kill and to spoil, to make him in some degree guilty.
Of the same opinion was Philo, They only are not to be accounted Murderers,
who take away the lives of men; but they also that attempt all ways both secret
and open to kill any man, although they have not, as yet, effected it. Thus
Valerius Maximus speaks of Sergius Silo, That is was not his Fact that was then
called in question, but his Purpose: Plusque voluisse peccare nocuit, quam non
peccasse profuit; And that he would have sinned was more damageable, than that
he did not sin was profitable. So Cicero pleads in the behalf of Milo, Non
exitus rerum, sed Concilia Legibus vindicantur; Not the event of things only,
but their very purposes and intentions, are by the Laws punishable. To the same
purpose is that of Periander in Plutarch, Not they only that have wronged us,
Live. lib. 42.
but they that go about to wrong us, deserve to be punished. The Romans thought
they had just occasion to make war upon Perseus, unless he gave them good
satisfaction why he made such warlike preparations both by Sea and Land, and
had consulted about making war upon them, though they had not, as then,
committed any hostile act against him. And yet it is well observed by Livy in
that Speech which the Rhodians made to the Roman Senate, That it did not
consist with the Laws and Customs of any City in the World, to condemn a man to
death only for wishing his enemy dead, unless he had also acted something in
relation thereunto. But neither is every intention of the will, though it have
proceeded to some declarative act, ground sufficient for a just punishment. For
if all injuries, though perpetrated, are not to be revenged, much less ought
all that are only purposed or begun. For in many (as Cicero says doubtingly) I
know not whether it be sufficient for him that provokes another, to have
repented of the injury he did him. For neither does the Law of Moses award any
special punishment for such sins as were inchoated against piety, nor committed
against the life of a man, without judgment first pass on him; because in
these, as also in Divine matters which are not clear nor conspicuous, mistakes
are easy: and the passion of anger being sudden and violent, makes its effect
the more pardonable. Moreover where there are such a multitude of women,
whereof every man has liberty to choose a Wife; for any man to attempt
another, and in so equal a distribution of Goods, so far forth as nature
requires for her necessary support, to endeavor to enrich himself with the
spoil of others, is no ways tolerable. For that Commandment, Thou shall not
covet; Exodus 20.17.
although if we look to the scope of the Law, that is, the spiritual sense of
it, it extends it self farther, requiring the purity of the mind; yet if we
look to the literal and carnal Precepts, it refers to such acts of the mind
only as are declared by some outward deeds, as plainly appears by comparing
that of our Savior. Mark 10.19. Matthew. 10.19.
where he explains that very Precept by these words, Do not defraud, which in
the very same verse he had before expressed in these, Thou shall not steal. The
very same words we find Mich. 2.2. both in the Hebrew and Greek in the same
sense. Injuries begun only are not to be vindicated by Arms, unless the matter
be both very weighty, and that it has already proceeded so far, that from what
is already done either a certain mischief, though not yet what was intended,
has already befaln; or some extraordinary dangers do thereby threaten: so that
the vindication be either conjoined with some caution against future damage
(whereof we have treated above in the Chapter of Defense) or the maintenance of
our honor that seems by that act to be wounded, or to prevent it from being a
pernicious example for others to follow.

XL. War for violating the Law of Nature.
This also we must know, That Kings, and such as have equal right with them,
have also a right to exact punishments for offenses done, not against
themselves and their Subjects only, but for such injuries as do not
particularly touch themselves; but against any persons, by whom the Laws of
Nature or Nations have been greatly violated. For the liberty of providing for
the safety of humane Society, by punishments, which at first, as we have said,
was in every particular person, (Cities and Judicatories being now instituted)
resides in such as have the supreme Authority, not so properly because they
command all, as indeed because they are commanded by none. For that which takes
away this right from private men, is their subjection to the supreme Powers,
without whose Warrant they can attempt nothing of revenge. Yea, and so much the
more honorable it is to revenge other men's wrongs than our own, by how much it
may justly be feared; lest out of too great a sense of our own sufferings, we
either exceed the just measure of punishing, or prosecute our revenge with too
much malice. And upon this account it was that Hercules was so famous for
subduing those Tyrants, Antaeus, Busyris, Diomedes, etc. and cleansing both Sea
and Land from all such noxious Creatures, which he did, not out of ambition or
desire of gain, but to vindicate the cause of the oppressed, and to plague the
unjust (as Philo testifies of him.) De legate.
This Character is likewise given of him by Diodorus Siculus, Many Cities he
restored to an happy condition, by taking away insolent Tyrants and such like
Oppressors. For as the same Author speaks in another place, Orbem obiit
poenam de iniquis expetens; He traveled through the world for no other end but
to scourge Tyrants. The like testimony does Dion Prusiensis give of him,
saying, That he every where plagued the wicked, destroyed the Kingdoms of the
proud, and transferred them unto others. And for the general care that he had
of all Mankind, Aristides thought him worthy to be translated amongst the Gods.
Dionysius Halicarnassensis records this and many more inhumane Customs which
Hercules reformed, to the general benefit of Mankind, making therein no
distinction between Greeks and Barbarians. Lib. 30. c. 1.
The like does Pliny testify of the Romans, It is not to be imagined (says
he) how much we owe to the Romans, for taking away those Monsters among men,
who placed the principal part of their Religion to kill men, and their
wholesomest food to eat them. Thus Justinian commanded the Princes of the
Abasgi to abstain from gelding their Children, Goth. 4.
as Procopius relates. And the King of Incha in Peruana compelled all their
neighboring Nations, that would not willingly obey him, by force of Arms to
abstain from Incest, Sodomy, eating of Man's Flesh, and such like abominations;
whereby they obtained the justest Empire that we have ever read of (their
Religion only excepted.) The like honor is given to Theseus, for destroying
those great Enemies of Mankind, Sciron, Sinis and Procrustes, who in that Age
troubled all Greece with their barbarous inhumanity; Lib. 5. c. 3.
and is therefore by Euripides called, The Scourge of wickedness.

My Noble Acts through Greece are so extolled,
That I the Scourge of wickedness am called.
For as Valerius Maximus reports of him, Whatsoever Monster of cruelty that Age
produced, by the strength of his Body, and the gallantry of his Mind, he
subdued. So that without doubt, a War may be justly undertaken against
Parricides, whereof the Sogdians were in an high measure guilty; for till they
were reclaimed by Alexander, they usually killed their own Parents. Against
Canibals, or such as fed upon Man's Flesh, as the Scythians did, and the ancient
Gauls, before the former were better instructed by Alexander, and the latter by
Hercules, as Plutarch in Diodorus records. Against Pirates, and such as live by
Robberies at Sea, and the like; for against these any Prince has power to make
war, though they are not subject to his Government. For of such barbarous
people, who are rather Beasts than Men, In Panathenaic.
it may truly be verified what Aristotle sometimes said of the Persians,
Natural in eos esse bellum, That war against such is natural. Or as Isocrates
notes, The justest war is that which is undertaken against wild Beasts, and the
next is that which is undertaken against such men as are brutish. What, says
Seneca, though they do not infest my Country, yet if they are vexatious to
their own: De benef. lib. 7.
Though they are divided from me, yet if they infest their own people, they
deserve for the pravity and corruption of their minds and manners to be
destroyed. And so far we follow the opinion of Innocentius and others, who
hold, That war may lawfully be made against such as do break the Laws of
Nature: But we cannot approve of that which Vasquius, Victoria, Azorius, and
Molina have written, namely, That to justify a War, it is requisite, That the
person that undertakes it be injured, either in himself, or in the
Commonwealth, whereof he is the Supreme; or that he against whom the War is
made, be under his Power and Jurisdiction. For whereas they make the right to
punish to be but an effect proper to the Civil Jurisdiction: We on the other
side derive it from the Law of Nature, whereof we have spoken somewhat in the
beginning of the first Book. And surely, If these men's Opinions from whom we
differ be admitted, one Enemy shall not now have a right to punish another,
even after the War is undertaken for any cause not punishable; whereas most men
do admit of this Right, and the Custom of all Nations confirms it; and that not
only when the Enemy is weakened and brought under, but even whilst the War
lasts, not by any Civil Jurisdiction, but by that Natural Right, which was in
force even before Cities were built, and is yet in force, where the Inhabitants
live dispersed in private Families, and are not congregated into Cities.

XLI. The Law of Nature is to be distinguished from Civil Customs.
But here some Cautions are to be observed, the first whereof is, That we do
not mistake Civil Customs, which in most Nations are deservedly received for
the Law of Nature. Such almost were those wherein the Persians differed from
the Graecians, whose common pretense for their making war upon the Persians was
to civilize them: But as Plutarch observed, They did but cloak their ambition
and covetousness under the title of Reformation: As if the disagreement between
themselves and others in Civil Customs, had been a violation of the Law of
Nature.

XLII. And from the voluntary Divine Law not known to all men.
The second Caution is this, That among those things that are forbidden by the
Law of Nature, we do not rashly intersert such things, whereof it cannot
certainly be affirmed, that they are so forbidden, but are such rather as are
interdicted by the Divine Law, in which number we may happily place the sin of
Fornication, and some of those sins which we esteem to be Incest, Usury, etc.
Thus Asterius Bishop of Amasea, They that yield obedience unto the Civil Laws
of Princes only, do leave Whoredom unpunished. So likewise St Hierome to
Oceanus, Vide Hier. ad oceanum, supra, c. 5. sect. 9.
The Laws of Temporal Princes let loose the reins of unbridled lusts; and
condemning Adultery only, suffer men to run every where to Stews and
Brothel-houses without control, as if it were the dignity that made the crime
and not the will: But with us, what is unlawful for women, is likewise so for
men, the same yoke binds both to the same conditions.

XLIII. In the Law of Nature we ought to distinguish between things that are
clear, and that are obscure.
The third Caution is, That we diligently distinguish between those general
maxims of Reason that are manifest of themselves, as this, That every man ought
to live honestly, that is, according to the dictates of Natural Reason; and
others that are nearest unto these, but so manifest, that they can admit of no
doubting such as this, That we ought not to take away from another that which
is his. And between those maxims which are not of themselves so clear, but
must be collected from those before mentioned by consequences, whereof some are
easily drawn as this, admitting Matrimony, it follows, That we ought not to
commit Adultery, which was so generally received, that as Philo testifies in
the life of Joseph, It was every where punished; and Lactantius tells us, That
to defile the Marriage Bed was condemned by the Common Law of Nations. Others,
though as true, yet are not so manifestly true, because our assent unto them
cannot be gained but by the mediation of three or four consequences, as this,
That that revenge that does acquiesce in another man's grief is vicious. It is
here almost as it is in the Mathematics, wherein some things are of the first
Notion, or next unto the first; some are demonstrations which are immediately
both understood and assented unto: But some others, though true, yet are not so
evident unto all. Therefore as by the Civil Laws, our ignorance of the Law, or
of the true meaning of the Law, does in part excuse us: So concerning the Law
of Nature, there is the same Reason, That our weakness to collect what was
thereby forbidden by such consequences, or what an ill education has
ingenerated in us, should also excuse us: For as St Hierome well observes,
Vnaquaeque Gens hoc Legem Naturae putat, quod didicit; Every Nation thinks that
to be the Law of Nature, which it first imbibes. Now our ignorance of the Law,
as it takes away a sin if it be inevitable, so also it diminishes a sin,
though it be caused by some neglect. And therefore those that are corrupted by
some evil education, Aristotle compares to such, whose appetites are vitiated
by some malignant distemper: And Plutarch observes, That there are some
diseases of the mind that violently hurry a man from his natural constitution.
Lastly, this also is to be noted, (which I say once, but shall not often
repeat) That those wars which are undertaken for the exacting of punishments,
unless the injuries that are done are very great, very manifest, or backed with
some other cause, are always suspected to be unjust. For what Mithridates said
of the Romans, is oftentimes too true; Non delicta Regum illos, sed vires ac
Majestatem insequi: It was not the faults of Princes, In such Cases then, we
ought not to be too severe chastisers of other men's infirmities, but rather
pity their ignorance and their ill education, praying for them as St. Stephen
did for his persecutors, Father forgive them for they know not what they do.
but their Power and Majesty that they persecuted.

XLIV. Whether War may be made for offenses against God.
Our proposed method now guides us to Crimes committed against God, and to
enquire whether for the punishment of such, a War may justly be undertaken.
Covarruvius handles this question at large: But being swayed by the Authority
of others, he holds, That this punitive Power cannot subsist but where there is
a Jurisdiction properly so called, which we have already rejected. Whence it
follows, That as in the affairs of the Church, the Bishops are in some measure
said to take upon them the care of the Universal Church, (for so St Cyprian
speaks, It becomes us to watch over the whole body of the Church, whose members
are dispersed into several Provinces; And again, There is but one Episcopacy,
whereof every one holds his part entirely:) So besides the charge of their
particular Dominions, Kings may be said to assume the general Care of all
Humane Societies. But a better Argument brought by such as deny such a War to
be lawful, is this, That God alone is sufficient to punish such sins as are
committed against himself; for, Deorum injuriae Diis Curae, and perjurium satis
habet Deum ultorem; The affronts committed against God, God takes care of; and
it suffices, That God himself is the avenger of perjury. But we must observe,
That so it may be said of any other sins, God without doubt is sufficiently
able to punish them, and yet we see, That the Laws are justly and duly
exercised upon such offenders by Magistrates in all Nations, none dissenting.
But against this some reply, That those punishments are inflicted not so much
for offenses committed against God, as because of the damage thereby done unto
men: But on the contrary, It is to be observed, That not only those offenses
which are committed against others directly, are punished by Humane Laws; but
those also which may by consequence be prejudicial to others, as Self-murder,
Sodomy, and the like; for though the principal end and scope of Religion be to
purchase the Grace and Favor of God, yet has it also a very strong influence,
and works many notable effects upon Humane Society. Plato calls it, The
fortress and bulwark of all Power and Jurisdiction, and the very bond of good
Discipline: Plutarch calls it, the cement of all Humane Society, and the very
foundation and groundwork of the Legislative Power. Philo says, It is the
most effectual charm to procure love, and that the worship of one and the same
God is the most indissoluble band of friendship: Whereas on the contrary, Heu
primae scelerum causae mortalibus aegris,
Naturam nescire Dei --
All wickedness amongst Mortals hence does flow,
That the most Righteous God we do not know.


Every false Opinion concerning Religion, says Plutarch, is dangerous, and if
it be accompanied with perturbation of mind, most pernicious: But to have one
and the same Opinion concerning the worship of God, and to differ nothing in
life and manners from each other does produce the most perfect harmony and
agreement amongst men, as Josephus testifies against Appion. Contr. App. lib. 1.
And in another place, discoursing of the Reasons why most Cities were so ill
governed, he adds these, Because their Lawgivers did not at first rightly
apprehend the true Nature of God, nor did they study to explain that knowledge
so far as they were able, nor to frame their Government accordingly, but past
it over slightly, as a thing of small moment. Jamblicus also has an excellent
sentence out of Pythagoras, That the knowledge of God is both Virtue, Wisdom,
and perfect happiness. Aristotle therefore placed Religion as the first and
chiefest of all public cares, and as Justine Martyr calls it, a work worthy of
the care of all Kings; and Machiavel himself assigns the prosperity of the
Romans to their singular care of Religion. De Creat. Magistrate.
Philo seems to sum up the whole Duty of a King in these three particulars,
The Care of his own Estate, the Care of the Public, and the Care of Religion:
All which are to be considered, not only as in some one particular City or
Kingdom, in which respect it is true, what Cyrus in Xenophon testifies of his
Subjects, that they were, Tanto sibi addictiores, quanto Dei erant
metuentiores; The more Religious they were, the more loyal and obedient they
were to their lawful Magistrates: but they are to be considered in respect of
the preservation of the common safety of all mankind. Lib. 1. de Not. deor.
For as Cicero notes, Take away Religion, and all faithful dealings between
Man and Man, Nation and Nation, and consequently all Humane Society, and one of
the four Cardinal Virtues, Justice, will be quite lost: whereby it clearly
appears, that Epicurus, When he denied the Divine Providence, Justitiae quoque
nihil reliquit praeter inane nomen; Left nothing to Justice but an empty name;
which, says he, as it arises only from contracts and agreements, so it is no
longer in force than it yields profit to both parties. Herein (says Seneca) we
cannot agree with Epicurus, who holds, that nothing is naturally Just, and that
offenses are to be avoided, because they being committed, we cannot avoid fear:
As if nothing could restrain us from injuring others, but the fear of
punishment only. Again, it is very true what Aristotle observe, That as
Religion keeps Subjects in due obedience to Kings; so it restrains the Tyranny
of Princes, and begets a great deal of Trust and Confidence between them and
their people. The Prince may be assured of his Subjects Loyalty, and the people
will less fear to suffer unjustly by their Prince, whom they believe to be
Religious. Lib. 9. de placitis Hip. and Plat.
Galen observing many questions handled by Hippocrates and Plato concerning the
World and the Divine Nature, which as to the meliorating of men's manners he
conceived to be very impertinent, yet confesses that of the Divine Providence
to be of great efficacy and importance to the advancement of Virtues both
private and public: which blind Homer could very well see, as we may collect
from the sixth and ninth of his Odysses, where to men that were unjust and
cruel, he opposes such whose minds were seasoned with Religion. Justine out of
Trogus highly commends the Justice of the Ancient Jews, as being thoroughly
tempered with Religion; and Philo in the Life of Abraham, makes our love of
God, and our love of men, to be congeneal, and as it were twins of the same
birth: For as Lactantius rightly inferrs; If to know God be true piety, Lib. 5.
and the principal end of this knowledge be to worship him, then he that has
no knowledge of God, is likewise ignorant of true Justice; For how can he be
said to know Justice, who is ignorant from whence she comes? Now Religion is of
more use and greater necessity in the common Society of Nations, than in the
Civil Society of Men: Because in this Civil Society, the defect of Religion may
in part be supplied by severe Laws, and the easy execution of them; but the
Laws of Nations, as they are but few, so are they very difficultly executed,
namely by War; wherefore these Laws have always been held sacred, because God
himself is the sole and immediate Judge of them, and he that violates these
Laws, is said to sin against God himself. The injuries then that are done
against Religion, are by all Emperors reputed as common injuries, done as it
were against all mankind.

XLV. What are the common Notions concerning God, expressed in the four first
Commandments.
But that we may pierce a little deeper into this matter, we must observe, That
the true Religion that has been universally professed in all Ages, and in almost
all places, stands erected on these four Columns: First, the acknowledg^ment
that there is a God, and that he is but One. Secondly, That nothing of all
these things we see is God, but that he is something that is yet more sublime
and excellent. Thi^dly, That God takes care of Humane Affairs, and that he does
judge the world righteously. And fourthly, That he is the Creator of all Things
without himself. Which four Propositions are explained in the four first
Precepts of the Decalogue: The first whereof shows the Unity of the Deity
plainly, The Lord our God is one God: The second declares his Invisibility,
which is the reason, that as we cannot liken him to any thing, so we cannot
make any likeness or representation of him, Deuteronomy. 4.10. Thus much does
Antisthenes testify of him, No eye ever saw him, no likeness we have of him,
wherefore it is impossible by any Image or resemblance to know him. And so does
King Agrippa in Plato, To frame the likeness of that, either by graving or
painting, which cannot be seen, is profane and ungodly. The like we read in
Dion; neither had the Jews any Image in Jerusalem, because they thought, that
God could neither be seen, nor be by any words described. Diodorus speaking of
Moses says, That he ordained no Image, because he did not believe God to be of
humane shape. And Tacitus commends the Jews for adoring one only God, and him
in their minds only; and condemns them as profane, Dion lib. 36.
that worship the immortal and invisible God in Images made of Wood and Stone
in humane form. Plutarch also gives this as the reason, why Numa purged the
Temple from Images, Because it was impossible any other ways to comprehend the
Deity than by the mind only. By the third Commandment we are instructed to
acknowledge Gods Omniscience, which extends to our most retired thoughts, and
the care he has of Humane Affairs: for upon this foundation are Oaths built,
wherein he is invoked as a witness only, if we speak truth; but if we deceive,
then as a Judge and avenger, whereby also both his Justice and his Omnipotency
are at once acknowledged. Lastly, That God Created the whole frame of Nature,
and gave Being to all things, is confessed by the fourth Commandment; in
perpetual memory whereof the Sabbath was instituted, whereon he imprinted such
an indelible Character of Holiness, That it is more indispensable than any
other Right whatsoever: For if a man did eat of meats forbidden, or
transgressed in any other case, his punishment was left as arbitrary to the
Judges; but he that violated this Right was peremptorily to die the death;
because he seemed thereby to renounce his belief of the Worlds Creation;
Abnegationem Mundi a Deo creati continebat Sabbathi violatio. For as he that
wrote the Answers to the Orthodox very well observes, God did therefore give a
greater honor to the seventh number than to the rest, Ad Quaest. 69.
that so the memory of the Worlds Creation might be preserved. Now the Creation
of the World does tacitly declare both the Goodness of God, his Wisdom, his
Eternity, and his Omnipotency; from which contemplative Notions these practical
Duties will easily follow, That God is to be Honored, Loved, Worshipped and
Obeyed; wherefore Aristotle concludes, Top. 1.9.
That he that denies that God is to be honored, or Parents reverenced, That
there is a Creator proved by the nature of the Creatures.
is not to be convinced by arguments, but by punishments. To demonstrate the
truth of these contemplative Notions of God, we may draw arguments from the
Nature of the Things Created, amongst which the most forcible is this, That
some things are made, is manifest to our sense; but these things that are made,
if we will trace them up in their direct series, will certainly at length bring
us to something that was not made, which must needs be Eternal, and that is
God: but for those that are not able to comprehend the strength of this
argument, it may suffice to know, That these contemplative notions of God have
been assented unto in all ages, and in all places (some few only excepted) and
by all persons, as well gentle as simple; as well by those who have been too
simple and ignorant to deceive others, as by those who have been too wise to be
deceived by others; which universal consent Universal consent.
among such variety of other Laws and opinions, does evidently witness, That
this truth was delivered unto us from our first parents, and was never yet
solidly confuted: and even this alone, had we no other ground to ascertain our
persuasion, was enough. Philo argues this case thus, De unius imperio.
Nothing made by art can come by chance; but the worlds composure is done with
exquisite art, therefore it must needs be made by one, that is, the most
perfect of all Artists, and that is God. And hereby arises this first
persuasion, That there is a God. Thus likewise Tertullian argues against
Marcion, The first knowledge of God we derive from nature, the next by
doctrine; that from nature we learn by his works, that by doctrine from
preaching: whereupon Cyprian in his Book concerning the vanity of Idols,
concludes thus, Haec est summa delicti, nolle agnoscere quod ignorare non
possis; This is the height of wickedness that thou will not acknowledge him as
God, whom thou can not deny to be so. We are all of us, though untaught,
naturally persuaded that there is a God (says Julian to Heraclitus) unto whom
we look, unto whom we run, and toward whom (I believe) our souls do as
naturally turn, as our eyes to the light, (or as the needle to the North.) Thus
does Dion Prusiensis ground his belief that there is a God, first upon natural
reason, and then upon universal tradition. De coelo. l. 3. De leg. 10.
And Plutarch calls it (...), An ancient persuasion, than which nothing can be
more certain. For as Aristotle says, All men have naturally some persuasion
that there is a God: Of the same opinion was Plato. (Now to detract from the
authority of so many and so great witnesses, is not simply ignorance, but a
pertinacious madness.)

XLVI. They that contradict these, may be punished.
Wherefore they are not without sin, who because they are not so quick-witted,
as either to assert these notions, by arguments of their own, or to understand
those framed by others, do wilfully reject them; since they do both guide us
unto that which is honest, and the different opinion is not built but upon a
very sandy foundation. But because we are now treating of Punishments, and
those only humane, we must here distinguish between these notions themselves,
and the manner of dissenting from them: These notions that there is a God, (one
or more I here dispute not) and that he takes care of humane affairs, as they
are most generally received; so are they to the establishment of Religion,
whether true or false, Heb. 11.6.
most necessary. He that comes to God (says the Author to the Hebrews) that
is, He that is religious (for Religion amongst them, is called an access unto
God) must believe that God is, and that he dispenses rewards to those that
serve him. There has ever been, and now are, says Cicero, some Philosophers
who hold that God has no regard to the affairs of men; which if true, Quae
potest esse pietas, quae sanctitas, quae religio? says he, What piety can
there be, what holiness, what religion? This, says Epictetus, is the principal
office of piety, to have a reverent esteem of the Gods; as namely, that they
are, and that they dispose of all things with justice and righteousness. Lib.
2. c. 31.
Aelian professes that he never found any Nation, no, not amongst the
Barbarians, which did wholly Apostatize unto Atheism; but that all of them did
acknowledge some Divine Power that took care of them. The first part of Divine
worship, Ep. 95.
says Seneca, is to believe that there are Gods; and then, to ascribe unto
them all majesty, and acknowledge their goodness, without which there can be no
majesty. Plutarch in his vulgar conceptions says, That if we take away
providence, we darken that small light that we have of God: For, says he, we
are to conceive of God, not only as he is immortal, and in himself most
blessed; but as he is most affectionate to mankind, ever watching over us to do
us good. For otherwise, if he will do us neither good nor hurt, says
Lactantius, to what end do we worship him? And indeed if we look only at the
influence which these notions should have upon men's manners, it is all one to
deny that there is a God, and to deny that he has any respect to humane
affairs: wherefore that, in almost all Nations that are to us known, and
throughout all ages, these two notions should be thus maintained, is not
arbitrary, but purely necessary. Seneca in his 117 Epistle, Sen. Epist. 117.
pleads thus, That there are Gods amongst other things, we may hence conclude,
that nature herself seems to have insculpt this opinion in every man; neither
is there any Nation in the World, so desperately wicked, as not to believe that
there are some Gods. Neither is it possible, De Benef. lib. 4. c. 4.
says he in another place that all the World should be intoxicated with so
universal a madness, as to invoke, Surda numina and Deos in efficaces, such
idle Gods, as can neither hear our prayers, Vid. Plat. Protagora and de legibus
l. 10.
nor do us good. Nay Jamblicus makes it as proper for a man to acknowledge a
God, as for an horse to whinny. Hence it is that Pomponius places Religion
among the Laws of Nations; and that Socrates in Xenophon says, That to worship
the Gods, is a Law universal, being in force amongst all people: with whom
agrees Cicero, as we may read in his first Book of the Nature of the Gods, and
in his second of Invention: And Dion Prusiensis calls it a persuasion both
natural, and necessary to all creatures that have the use of reason. Xenophon
likewise affirms, That all Nations as well Greeks as Barbarians, have agreed in
this, That all things are known to the Gods, whether they be present, past, or
to come. Now whosoever first begins to erase these general notions of the
Divine Providence out of men's minds, as they have in all well governed Cities
been deservedly punished (as we read it happened to Diagoras Melius, and the
Epicureans, who were banished out of every well-governed Common-wealt^) so, I
believe, they may also be now by fo^ce restrained, in the name and behalf of
humane society; which, by this means (without any probable reason they
endeavor to dissolve. And therefore Moxus the Lydian, Lydus.
as Damascen relates the story, having taken the City Crambuz, drowned all the
Inhabitants thereof, because they neither acknowledged nor worshipped any Gods.
And Himeriu^ the Sophister pleads thus against the Epicures, Do thou suffer
punishment for thine opinion; no, but for thine impiety: It is permitted to
every man to deliver his opinion, but to none, to destroy Religion.

XLVII. But not others proved by the Heb. Law.
As for the other general notions; as, That there are not more Gods than one,
That none of these things we see is God, not the World, not the Heavens, nor
the Sun, nor the Air; That the World was not from Eternity, nor the matter
whereof it is composed, but rather created by God: these cannot be so easily
demonstrated, nor are they so universally received as the former. And therefore
the knowledge of these, through the corruption of men's manners, and the
looseness of the Laws (which did the less regard them, because, even without
these there might remain some show of Religion) have been in many places almost
totally expunged. Neither did the Law of God given to the Hebrews, though it
were confirmed by prophecies, and miracles; and though it utterly detested and
abhorred the worship of false Gods, adjudge every man to death, that was
convicted of such worship; but such only as by reason of some circumstances,
were of dangerous consequence, as him who being a Prince or a Prophet should
begin to seduce others, Deuteronomy. 13.16. Or as that City that should begin to set
up strange Gods, as we read Deuteronomy. 12.23. Those that worshipped the Sun, the
Moon, the Stars, thereby destroying the whole Law, and forsaking the worship of
the true God, Deuteronomy. 17.2. which St. Paul expounds to be the worshipping of the
creature, not the Creator (for the word (...) as well here, as elsewhere, has
an exclusive faculty) which was a crime punishable even among the Sons of Esau,
as appears Job 31.26, 27. So he that offered his Children to Molock, that is to
Saturn, Lev. 20.2. Neither did God himself adjudge the Cananites, and their
neighboring Nations to destruction, as soon as they fell to Idolatry, but
suspended the Execution of his wrath, till they had contracted a vast heap of
sins besides their Idolatry, Genesis 15.16. So it is said of other Gentiles
concerning their worship of false Gods, That God winked at the time of their
ignorance, Act. 17.30. It was truly said of Philo, That every man's own Religion
seems to him the best, because he judges of it, not by reason, but by
affection; like those Philosophers of whom Cicero spoke, who liked no
Discipline but their own. So we take our Religion not by choice, but by chance,
being engaged to that of the Clime wherein we are born, before our judgments
are awakened to discern truth from falsehood; as they then are rather to be
pitied, than by humane Laws punished, who having received no Laws from God, nor
having any knowledge of him, shall worship either the powers of Heaven, by
whose grateful heat, light and influence, all things are produced, both for
delight and nourishment; or the powers of any other natural causes, or of
spirits, whether in Images, or in living Creatures, or in any other things. The
souls of good men, who have been eminent and exemplary for virtue or such like;
especially, if they did not themselves set up that worship, but received it by
tradition from others, and therefore could not properly be said to have
forsaken the worship of the true God; (for we read of Sacrifices sent to the
Temple at Jerusalem from the Kings of Egypt, from Augustus and Tiberius to be
offered to the true God: and though these Kings were Idolaters, yet did the
Jews admit of them, as Josephus and Philo testify.) So they, on the other side,
are not to be reckoned among such as are purely ignorant and erroneous, but
rather among those that are impious and obstinately wicked; who worship Devils
as knowing them to be such, or the names of men's vices, or that attribute
Divine Honor unto men as wicked and vicious as themselves, or that honor
their false Gods with humane Sacrifices; which barbarous custom we read, was
practiced by the Carthaginians, until they were compelled to leave it, by
Darius the Father of Xerxes King of Persia, and by Gelo the Syracusian Tyrant,
who stand highly comm^nded for it. Plutarch also gives us an account of some
barbarous people, that were to have been punished by the Romans for offering
humane Sacrifices; but when they pleaded for themselv^s the Antiquity of those
Rites, they were dismissed without punishment, and only forbidden it for the
future.

XLVIII. Nor against those who will not embrace Christianity.
But what shall we say of that War which is undertaken against some people, for
no other Cause, but because they would not embrace Christianity when proposed
unto them? I do not here question whether the Religion so proposed were such as
ought to have been proposed, or in such a manner as it ought to have been. We
are willing to g^ant both: But two things are here to be considered, first,
That the truth of Chris^ian Religion, Two things observable.
in those Points which are superadded to that Primitive Religion which is
grounded upon the Law of Nature, cannot be demonstrated unto any man by
Arguments merely natural, because they are grounded upon matters of fact,
namely, upon Christ's resurrection, and upon those Miracles that were wrought by
him and his Apostles, which thing being matter of fact, though of old confirmed
to have been done by most irrefragable Testimonies, yet of old, so that this is
a question of Fact, and that now of great Antiquity. Much more may this be
questioned by such as now live so many Ages distant from that Age wherein they
were done, as well as the truth of their Histories, which are as ancient as
that is, especially by those who never heard of them before, nor have any of
those helps either inward or outward, which are necessary to beget Faith. And
therefore we say, That Faith is not by Nature, but by Grace: and that, as when
God gives it, it is not as the reward of any pleading merits; so when he denies
it, or gives it more sparingly, it is for Causes not indeed unjust, though unto
us for the most part unknown, and so not at all punishable by humane Laws. To
this purpose was that Canon of the Toletane Council made, whereby it was
decreed, That no man should be enforced (thenceforth) to Christianity: Romans 9.
For it is said, He will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he
will he hardenenh. So Josephus, Every man ought to worship God willingly and
freely, and not by compulsion. It is the custom of the Holy Scriptures, to
attribute that to the will of God whereof no probable cause can be assigned by
men. Wherefore, since it is not in the power of man to give a reason why some
men do believe, and others not, though both have the same outward helps and
means; hence it is that we resolve all such doubts in Gods will, saying, He
will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens.
Neither is this the manner of the Holy Scriptures only, but it is usual with
profane Authors, who when in doubtful Cases they find not reason sufficient
to inform their judgments, supply that defect with a sic visum, Thus it seems
to be. The second thing observable is, That Christ the Author of the New Law
did never intend that any man should be compelled to receive it by temporal
punishments, or driven thereunto by the fear of them. We have not received
(says St Paul) the Spirit of bondage to fear, Jo. 6.67. Luke 9.54. Matthew.
13.24.
Romans 8.15. So Heb. 2.15. In which sense it is very true what Tertullian says,
Nova Lex non se vindicat ultore Gladio, The Gospel does not call for the Sword
to avenge its injuries. Isidore speaking of Sisebutus King of Spain, says,
That in the beginning of his Reign, being inflamed with a zeal for Gods Glory,
though not according to knowledge, he compelled the Jews to Christianity by the
power of the Sword, whom he ought to have won to the Faith by meek and gentle
persuasions. And for this very Cause were the latter Kings of Spain highly
blamed by Osorius and Mariana. In the Constitutions of Clement it is said of
Christ, That he left to every man the free power of his own will, not punishing
the breach of his Law with temporal death, but calling them to an account for
it in the life to come. So our Blessed Lord, leaving every man to his own will,
makes Proclamation openly to all, If any man will come after me, Vid. Cypr. Ep.
55. and de Idolor. vanitate.
etc. And to his Apostles, Will ye also forsake me? as leaving it to their own
choice, without laying any inforcement upon their wills. And whereas in the
Parable of the Great Supper it is said, That some were compelled to come in; it
is answered, Luke 14.23.
That as in that Parable the word compel argues nothing else but a vehement
solicitation, so also is it to be understood in the Moral of that Parable; in
which sense the same word is taken, Luke 24.29. and not otherwise, Matthew.
14.22. Mark 6.45. Gal. 2.14. Procopius in his secret History tells us, That
Justinian the Emperor was by many very wise men taxed for compelling the
Samarites by force and menaces to Christianity: adding thereunto the
inconveniences that was likely to arise thereupon.

XLIX. That war may justly be made against them that persecute Christians as
such.
But they that persecute others for no other cause but because they either
teach or profess the Christian Religion, are most unreasonable. For certainly
our Christian Doctrine, (considered in its sincerity, without any commixture)
contains nothing prejudicial to Humane Society, nay that does not rather
advance it, it shall speak for it self, and its Enemies shall confess no less.
Pliny reports of the Christians of his time, That they had obliged themselves
by oath to abstain from thefts and robberies, and not to break their faith with
any man. Ammianus, speaking of our Religion says, That it teaches nothing but
what is just and merciful. So does Arnobius, treating of Christian Assemblies,
Wherein (says he) nothing is heard but what exhorts to humanity, meekness,
bashfulness, modesty, chastity, and communicating of their goods to all men, as
if they were all linked together by brotherly love. And it is the usual
Character that the very Heathen give of it, That it is Secta nemini molesta, A
Sect of Religion offensive to none. Zozimus, though a Pagan, gives this
testimony of the Christian Faith, That it is a promise and engagement to be
free from all crimes, and from all impiety. Apolog. 2.
So likewise Tertullian, We, says he, are Coadjutors and Fellow Laborers with
you in establishing the peace of the Empire, instructing our Auditors that it
is impossible for any man to conceal himself from God, whether he be an evil
Doer, a Thief, a Traitor, or a just Person; as also that every man shall be
adjudged to eternal either life or death, according to the merit of his deeds.
Tertullian also observes that it was a common byword in his time, Bonus vir
Cajus Sejus, tantum quod Christianus, He is an honest man, only he is a
Christian. And if it be objected, That all innovations are to be feared,
especially Conventicles, and private Assemblies: I answer, That those Doctrines
though new, are least to be feared, that teach all things that are just and
honest, but principally those that exact due obedience to Magistrates; neither
should the private Assemblies of Just and Innocent men be either envied or
suspected, especially of such as desire not to abscond themselves, unless they
are persecuted. And here I might justly apply unto these Christian Assemblies,
what Philo records that Augustus said of the Jewish Conventions, In Legatione.
Non eos Bacchanalia esse, aut coetus turbandae paci, sed virtutum scholas;
That such meetings were not for revelling or for sedition, but mere Academies
for Virtue: They therefore that persecute such men, Aquin. secunda secundae, q.
108.
and that for this only cause, may themselves justly be persecuted. Upon this
ground it was, That Constantine made War against Licinius, and other Emperors
against the Persians. Great. in causam 23. q. 3.
St Augustine brings in Maximinianus Bishop of Vagia craving aid of the
Christian Emperors against the Churches Enemies, Non tam sui ulciscendi causa,
quam tuendae Ecclesiae sibi creditae; Not to revenge his own wrongs, but to
defend the Church of Christ that was committed unto his care. And indeed such a
War should be undertaken more for the defense of the Innocent, than to punish
the Nocent.

L. But not against such as err in the interpretation of the Divine Law.
But they that eagerly persecute those that profess the Christian Law, only
because they either doubt, or happily err in some particulars, which either are
not expressed in our Law, or at least not so clearly, but that it will admit of
some ambiguity, and which have been otherwise understood by the Primitive
Christians are unjust, as may appear, partly by what we already said, and
partly by the example of the Ancient Jews, whose Religion, though strongly
guarded with corporal punishments, yet did never permit them to punish the
Sadducees, for rejecting the Doctrine of the Resurrection; because (though most
true) it was, as yet, but obscurely glanced at in their Law, and not at all
taught, but covertly under types and figures. But what if the Errors be such,
as amongst equal Judges may easily be confuted, both by the authority of the
Scriptures, and by the common Testimony of the Fathers? Yet even herein we must
consider how great the strength is of an overgrown Opinion; and how much a
man's endeavor to defend his own Sect, does diminish the strength and liberty
of his own judgment, which as Galen says, is malum omni scabie insanabilius; a
disease more incurable than any Leprosy: A man will sooner part with any thing
than with his Opinion, says Origin: So St Chrysostom, In 1 ad Cor. c. 2.
An Opinion that has taken deep root through Custom is hardly to be removed;
for there is nothing that we alter with more unwillingness than our Customs in
Religion. Again, how great the fault of him is that differs from us in Opinion,
must be judged by the manner and measure of his illumination, and by other
dispositions of his mind, which is not possible for man to know. St Chrysostom
makes Ambition the mother of Heresy; Ad Gal. 5.
and St Augustine defines an Heretic to be one that either for Gain,
Vainglory, or Ambition, does either set up, Lib. de utilitate credendi.
or at least follow false and New Opinions; where he makes a great difference
between him that is an Heretic, and him that believes and follows an Heretic:
This is most apparent, Great. c. 24. q. 3. and Ep. 162. Scrip. Respons. ad
Orthodoxos qu. 4.
that all Heresies proceed from either the Ambition or Emulation of their first
Inventers, says he that wrote the Answers to the Orthodox: And therefore St
Augustine calls it, The frenzy of a mind obstinately bent, or the height of
madness: And yet see, with what sweetness and calmness of spirit, the Fathers
of the Primitive Church treated the Heretics of their times. Salvian speaks
thus of the Arrians, Heretics they are, but not knowingly; to us they are
Heretics, but to themselves they are not; nay, so confident they are that they
are in the right, That they brand us with that infamous name of Heretics, who
are Catholics. What they are to us, the same are we to them. We are most
assured that they dishonor the Son by making him inferior to the Father; and
they as far condemn us, for dishonouring the Father, in making the Son equal
unto him: The Truth is on our side, yet they presume it is with them, both
pretend to honor God; to us they appear uncivil, but that to them seems to be
the chiefest Duty of their Religion; to us they appear impious, but this they
esteem to be true piety; they err indeed in their faith, but they do it in
perfect love and charity to God; and how far punishable this Error of theirs
now is, or, in the day of judgment will be, none can tell but the Judge
himself: In the mean time God (I believe) does therefore forbear them, because
he sees, that though they do err in their faith, yet this error proceeds from
no other root but from the affection to a pious Opinion. And indeed such are
not to be judged Heretics by us, who do bono animo errare, err through an
ignorant zeal: Miseratione quam odio digniores; they deserve rather our pity
than our hatred; as Agathias speaks of the superstitious Almans: For they do
not go astray, nor stumble willingly, and knowingly, they have without doubt
pious intentions, but being deceived in their judgments, whatsoever they rashly
apprehend for truth, they hold obstinately. Now in what measure, says
Chrysostom, Hom. contr. Anathematizantes.
such errors are to be punished, he only can without danger judge, who is the
Judge of Ages, or the Eternal Judge, who alone knows both the true measure of
knowledge, and the proportion of Faith. Concerning the Manichees, let us hear
what St Augustine says, who was himself once one of them; Let them rage
against you, (says he) who are ignorant, with what labor and sweat a man
finds out the truth; (which is but one) and how difficult it is to decline
errors, (which are infinite.) Let them rage against you, who know not how rare
and hard a matter it is to overcome all carnal conceits, by the serenity of a
pure mind: Let them rage against you, that apprehend not with what difficulty
the eye of our inward man is so strengthened, as to be able to behold the beauty
and splendour of its own Sun: Let them rage against you, who have not
experimentally learned, how many sighs and groans it will cost before a man can
attain to the knowledge of God in the least degree. Lastly, let them rage
against you, who can presume that they are without errors themselves: As for
me I neither can nor dare; for I ought to bear with you now, as others did
formerly with me, and to treat you with as much patience, meekness and
gentleness, as they did me, when I was blindly carried away with your errors.
Athanasius bitterly inveighs against the Arrian Heretics, because they were
the first that called in the Civil Power to their assistance against their
Antagonist, and that endeavored by force, stripes and imprisonments, to draw
such unto themselves, whom they could not win by the strength of arguments;
Thereby plainly declaring, how little of piety and true devotion there was
amongst the Professors of that Doctrine; alluding happily to that of St Paul,
Gal. 4.29. where it is said, That, as then, he that was born of the flesh,
persecuted him that was born of the spirit, even so now. Nova and inaudita est
ista praedicatio quae verberibus exigit fidem; Great. c. 23. q. 4. qui secund.
It is a new and unheard of manner of preaching, to enforce Faith by stripes
and punishments, as Gregory Bishop of Rome wrote unto the Bishop of
Constantinople. And we may read of many French Bishops who were by the
judgment of the Church condemned, for calling in the Civil Powers against the
Priscillianists, as Sulpitius Severus relates it; and of a whole Council in the
East that was condemned, because they consented to the burning of Bogomilus. It
was therefore wisely said of Plato, Errantis poena est, doceri; If there be any
punishment due to error, it is to be instructed: Sen Trag.
Quis nomen unquam sceleris errori dedit?
Who ever thought it criminous to err?
It is very true what Seneca says, De Ira. lib. 14.
No wise man ever hated those that erred; for if so, he must necessarily
sometimes hate himself. He that is ignorant ought not to be ill treated nor
accused, but it is fit he should be instructed in that whereof he is ignorant.
Chrysostom.
And Ammianus Marcellinus highly commends the Emperor Valentinian, That he
never persecuted any man for his Religion, never commanded this or that to be
adored; nor inclined the hearts of his Subjects to enbrace his own manner of
worship, in case they dissented from it.

LI. But they that are openly impious and profane against such as they believe
to be Gods, may be punished.
Errors in Opinion concerning the nature or worship of God, are not sufficient
ground for a Just War, but open impiety, irreverence and profaneness toward
any that is but acknowledged as God, are (deservedly) in all Nations to be
punished. This (amongst others) is given as one Cause of the Peloponesian War
between the Athenians and Lacedaemonians, and of that War which Philip of
Macedon made against the Phocians; whose sacrilege was so execrable, that as
Justine says Lib. 8.
, Orbis viribus expiari debuit; The whole world ought to have contributed to
the expiation of it. And it is St Hierom's observation upon the sixth of
Daniel, That whilst the vessels remained in the Idol Temple at Babylon, the
Lord was not angry, Diod. lib. 16.
for the error was in the understanding, and not in the will and affections,
(though they erred in their Opinion concerning God, yet were those vessels
employed to that use, whereunto they were primarily consecrated,) but no sooner
were they made use of in a common and profane way, but the Lord breaks out into
an open revenge. St Augustine ascribes the prosperity of the Roman Empire to
their care of Religion, though a false one: And Lactantius seems to justify
them in part, because they had a Zeal for the Worship of God, though not
according to knowledge; though they could not exactly perform their duty, yet
they served him sincerely, according to the light they had of him: And (as we
said before) by what God soever we forswear, the sin is punished by the True
God, because we swear by it as God, De benef. 7. c. 7.
says Seneca: And it is our opinion of him that we swear by, that obliges the
True God to revenge it. De benef. lib. 3. c. 6.
And in this sense we understand that also of Seneca, The punishments of such
as profane Religion may vary, but in all places they are punishable. And that
also of Plato, De legib. 10.
who would have all such as scoff at Religion punished with death: In like
manner they that falsely assume unto themselves the name of Prophets, are
deservedly to be punished as Agathias testifies. Lib. 5.


CHAP. XXI. Of the Communication of Punishments.
I. How punishments may pass to those that partake of the sin. II. That
Commonalties and their Governors are punishable for the Subjects faults, if
they know of them, and do not hinder them when they both ought and may do it.
III. Likewise by receiving those who have been criminous elsewhere. IV. Unless
they either punish them, or deliver them up to be punished, illustrated by
examples. V. The Rights of Suppliants belong to the unfortunate, and not to the
guilty, with its exceptions. VI. Suppliants are to be defended till their Cause
be known, and by what Law this knowledge is to be gained. VII. How Subjects may
partake of the faults of their Rulers, or the Members of the whole Body; and
how their punishments differ. VIII. How long the Right of punishing may
continue against a People. IX. Whether a punishment may be inflicted upon such
as partake not of the faults. X. A distinction between that punishment that is
inflicted directly, and that which comes by consequence. XI. That which comes
by occasion of a fault, distinguished from that which is inflicted for the
fault. XII. Properly no man can be justly punished for the fault of another.
XIII. No, not the Children for the sins of their Parents. XIV. Objections
answered concerning Gods Dealings with the Children of guilty Parents. XV. Much
less should their punishments extend to their other Relations. XVI. Yet some
things may be denied unto these which otherwise they might have; with examples.
XVII. Neither can Subjects be properly punished for the defaults of their
Kings. XVIII. Nor the dissenting part for the crimes of the major part. XIX.
The Heir is not liable to the punishment of his Ancestor as it is a punishment,
and why. XX. Yet he shall, if what was first inflicted as a punishment, do pass
under another kind of debt.
I. How by partaking of the sin of another man, we may be liable to his
punishment.
SO often as mention is made concerning the Communication of Punishments,
either it concerns those that are Partakers of the sin, or some others. They
that partake of the sin are not so properly punished for other men's sins as
their own. And who they are that partake of other men's sins, may easily be
understood by what has been already said above concerning the damage that is
occasioned by an injury done. For by the same ways, almost, whereby a man is
made guilty of that damage, by the same may a man be made guilty of another
man's sin: and yet not always where there is an obligation to satisfy for the
damage, there is the same to satisfy for the offense; but there only where
there is the concurrence of some notable malignity: whereas oft-times any
offense may suffice to oblige a man to satisfy for the damage given. He
therefore that commands a wicked act to be done, as David did Joab concerning
Vriah; he that gives his consent being required, as Saul is said to stone St
Steven, because he gave his consent unto it: for by the Law, Facientem and
consentientem par poena constringit, The same punishment is due to him that
commits a crime, and to him that consents to the committing of it. They that
aid and assist in the act doing, they that receive or conceal the matter, or
any other way participate of the crime; so St Hierome, Not only the Thief
himself, Sup. Parabolas.
but he that knowing the thing to be stolen, and where it is, conceals it or
does not declare his knowledge to the right Owner, is guilty. So also St
Chrysostom, Not only the perjured persons, but they that knowing of it, De
Statuis, 14.
conceal the perjury, are guilty. They that contribute their counsel and
advice, for so runs the Attick Law, He that gives his counsel to an act that is
wicked, is involved in the same punishment with him that does it. They that
countenance, encourage or commend a Malefactor; so St Chrysostom, Pejor
peccante qui peccatum laudat, He that praises and applauds a wicked act, is
more wicked than he that effects it. And by the Law of the Lombards, Qui
facinorosum astans hortatur, pro faciente habetur. The By-stander that
encourages a Malefactor is equally to be punished with him. They who having
full power and authority to forbid and restrain Offenders, do it not. So
thought St. Chrysostom, Not they only that commit the theft, but they also
that did not hinder the commission of it when it was in their power to do it,
are in the same manner to be punished. Just as he who hinders a wounded person
from being cured, is as guilty as he that wounds him even unto death. So they
who being strictly bound in Duty to help those that are oppressed, and do it
not. And they who do not dissuade when they ought to do it. And lastly, They
that conceal the Fact which they are bound by some Law to make known. All these
are obnoxious to the same punishment, if there be in them such a malignity of
Spirit as may suffice to deserve punishment, according to what we have already
said in the preceding Chapter.

II. How Princes and States are punishable by reason of the facts of their
Subjects.
This will be made clearer by examples. Where offenses are but personal, there
the punishment is not to be national. No Community or other Civil Society of
men may justly be punished for the fault of some particular persons, without
either committing or omitting some fact or duty of their own, whereunto they
were generally obliged. For as St Augustine well observes, In every Nation
those sins which are committed by particular persons, are to be distinguished
from those that are done in common, as when the whole Body of the people being
assembled do unanimously decree it to be done. Hence arises that Clause usual
in all Leagues, Si defexerit publico Consilio, If any thing shall be done to
the contrary by any public Decree, then shall the League be adjudged as
broken. Thus the Locrians in Livy excuse themselves to the Roman Senate,
saying, That their defection proceeded from some ignorant and ill affected
people, and not by any public Order of the Senate. And the Rhodians in the
same Senate make their defense by the same Argument, distinguishing between the
public Acts of the City, and the private Acts of some particular persons.
There is no City (say they) so well governed but may sometimes have some
malignant Citizens sitting even at the Stern, besides an unexperienced
multitude always. And if the attempts of every private person were ground
sufficient for a just war, no City could long subsist. Thus St. Chrysostom
likewise argues, It was not the common crime of the City, but of some strangers
and Foreigners, who do all things rather through rashness and ignorance of the
Laws, than by reason. Neither (says he) is it just that so great a City should
be destroyed for the indiscretion of some few, nor that the innocent should
equally suffer with the nocent. So neither are the sins of Children to be
imputed to their Parents, nor Masters to be punished for the crimes of their
Servants, nor others that govern for those whom they govern, unless it be for
some delinquency of their own. Now of those ways or means whereby they that
preside over others may be accessory to their sins, and so involved in their
punishments, there are two of singular use, and require our strictest
disquisition. As first, By connivence: 1. By Connivence.
For he that knows that such a crime will be committed, which he can hinder,
and is bound to do it, but does it not, is guilty of that crime when it is
committed. Thus Cicero argues this Case against Piso, Cicero in Pisonem.
It is not much material (says he) especial^y in a Consul, whether he do
himself stir up the people to sedition by his own pernicious Laws and wicked
Speeches, and so disturb the peace of the Commonwealth, or whether by his
connivence he permits others so to do. Par est delinquere and delinquentes non
prohibere, It is the same thing (says Agapetus to Justinian) to be wicked our
selves, and to suffer others to be so when it lies in our power to help it. He
that suffers a Sinner to sin, says Arnobius, adds unto him the strength of
confidence. Of the same opinion was Salvian, He who having a power to prohibit
a wicked act, and does it not, does in effect command it. And St. Augustine
likewise, He that does not resist and oppose himself against a sin when he can
do it, seems to give his consent unto it. By the Roman Laws, if a Servant did
kill a man with his Masters knowledge, the main guilt was transferred to his
Master, as if he himself had been the Murderer. Even so he that suffers his
Bond-slave to be prostituted, when he might rescue her, was by the same Law
judged the Prostitutor. By the Fabian Law, if one Man's Servant with the consent
of his Master seduced another man's Servant, the Master of the Seducer was
punished for it. But, as I said before, it is requisite that besides the bare
knowledge, there be also a power and authority sufficient to restrain and hinder
the committing of it. And this is that which the Laws intend: for when
knowledge is commanded to be punished, it is taken for connivence or
toleration; so that he stands guilty who having a power to forbid the doing of
a wicked act, does it not. And in this Case knowledge is taken for that which
has the consent of the will, and so it is to be understood as if the fact were
committed by his advice and counsel. And therefore as the Master is not bound
by his Servants crime, though he do know thereof, if that Servant shall contemn
his Masters authority, and proclaim himself a Freeman; and as Parents are not
bound by their Childrens crimes, though they know of them, if those Children
are not under the power and tuition of their Parents; because neither Masters
nor Parents have any power and authority over them. So on the other side,
although they had power and authority over them, and so might thereby prohibit
the doing of such crimes; yet if they knew nothing of their purpose and
intention to commit such acts, they cannot be punished for them. For both these
must necessarily concur to make one man guilty of another man's crime, knowledge
of the sin committed, and not restraining them when it was in their power. All
which arising from natural equity may by a parity of reason be applied to
Princes and their Subjects; wherefore Proclus upon that of Hesiod, Whole Cities
sometimes smart for the crimes of one, assigns this as the reason, Because
having power they did not restrain him from his wickedness. So in the Grecian
Army Agamemnon and some others being subject to a General Council of war, It
was deservedly said, The Princes errors on their Subjects fall; That is, the
Grecians were plagued for the folly of their Princes, because it was in the
power of that Council to have compelled Agamemnon and the rest, to have
delivered up Iphigenia to the Priest to have been sacrificed. Thus does
Cyrillus expound this matter in his Fifth Book against Julian, whereupon Ovid
thus: -- Virgin rapta Met. l. 14.

Quam meruit poenam solus, digessit in omnes.
-- The Virgin gone,
All stand engaged, though done by one alone.
Because it was in their power to have hindered it. Thus does St. Chrysostom
involve all the inhabitants of Antioch in the crimes of the Statues, De Statuis
orat. 1.
The fact (says he) though committed but by few, we all stand accused of; and
the revenge which is strictly due unto those only that did it, is threatened
against us all; which we might have avoided had we before expelled them the
City. So might we by a timely cutting off from us those parts that were
exulcerated, have wisely provided for the safety of the whole. And a little
after, For this very thing, thou art punished and utterly destroyed, because
thou were not present to resist, because thou did not prohibit, because thou
did not restrain their madness, that thou did not expose thy self to danger
to preserve the honor of the Emperor; it is true, thou did not join with
them nor partake of their crime, in this I commend thee, this I take in good
part; but because thou did not hinder them that did it, for this thou art
worthily accused. Livy records that as a good plea which the Vejentes and the
Latins made before the Roman Senate, namely, That their Subjects had aided
their Enemies without their knowledge: But on the contrary, it was not allowed
unto Teuca Queen of the Illyrians, when she pleaded that they were her
Subjects, and not her self that were the Pirates, for she knew thereof and
forbad them not; for it might easily be presumed, That of what was so
frequently and so publicly done, no Prince could plead ignorance. The
Laurentine Ambassadors being assaulted by some of King Tatius his near
relations, did complain that the Law of Nations was violated; but Tatius
favoring his own kindred more than common right, drew the revenge wholly upon
himself. And hitherto may that of Salvian be properly applied, That Sovereign
Princes who are able to prohibit the greatest crimes, do seem to approve of
them if they permit them to be done. It is sufficient for private men to keep
themselves upright, but they that are Princes must take care that others offend
not, Dion in Galba can. 4. Synod. Pistensis.
Non est liber a consensu qui quod emendare potest, emendare negligit; He that
neglects his duty in reforming abuses, does without doubt consent, if not
approve of them, and thereby involves himself both in the sin and punishment.
Id quod a multis fit necesse est ut a nemine ignoretur; Dion Prusaeensit.
what is done by a multitude no man can be ignorant of. Polybius reproves the
Aetoleans sharply, because when they would not appear to be enemies to Philip,
yet they suffered their subjects openly to act against him in an hostile
manner; yea, and preferred the principal actors to great Honors.

III. Of receiving Malefactors into protection.
Hitherto we have showed how they that preside over others, may be involved in
their sins and punishments by toleration; now let us see how they may partake
of their punishment by reception against punishments, although by the Law of
nature, every innocent person has a right to punish a Malefactor; yet since
the institution of civil societies, it is generally agreed, That all each
particular man's crimes, that shall be committed properly against that society,
should be left to them and to their Governors, either to punish or absolve as
themselves shall please: yet is not this Right so absolute and full as to those
offenses, which do any way appertain to humane society; but that other Cities,
and their Governors may have the like power to prosecute them, in the same
manner, as for some offenses. Popular actions are usually granted in every
City, much less have they that full power in such offenses, whereby any City,
or its Governor is peculiarly wronged: but that, that City or Governor has
likewise a right, either for the vindication of his own honor, or for his
future security, either to require the offender to be delivered up unto him, or
to require that he be punished by that City wherein he lives, according to the
injuries he has suffered by him; and of this right, he is not to be deprived.

IV Who ought to be either punished or delivered up.
Seeing that it is neither usual nor safe, for one Prince to permit another to
enter into his Dominions, with an Army to demand Delinquents to just
punishment; therefore it is fit that the injured Prince should send to him,
under whose protection the Malefactor resides, to require that either he would
punish him himself according to his merits, or to deliver him up to the
pleasure of the Prince that is injured; and this is that dedition, whereof we
find so frequent mention in all Histories. Thus did the rest of the Tribes
require the Benjamites to deliver up those Sons of Belial, that had abused the
Levites Concubine, Judge. 20. and the Philistines Sampson, Jud. 15. Paus. l. 14.
Thus did the Lacedaemonians make War upon the Messenians for refusing to
deliver up a man that had killed diverse Lacedaemonians: And at another time,
Strabo l. 8.
for not delivering up those that had ravished some virgins that were sent to
perform their devotions. So Cato would have had the Senate to have delivered up
Caesar for the War he unjustly made upon the Germans. Plut. vit. Camilli.
And the Gauls did in the like manner require the Fabii to be delivered up unto
them, who had made war against them unjustly. Thus did the Romans demand from
the Carthaginians, That Amilcar who had solicited the Gauls to Rebelion, Livy
lib. 28.
should be delivered, and afterward Hannibal as Diodorus, and Livy testify:
Thus likewise they required Jugurtha of Bocchus in these words; So shall thou
at once free us from the necessity of persecuting thee for thine error, and
him for his wickedness. Salust.
Thus the Achaians required from the Lacedaemonians those who had besieged
Lanvicus, adding, that unless they did deliver them, they would declare that
they had broken the League. And thus did the Athenians make public
proclamation, That whosoever should plot any mischief against Philip, and fly
for protection to Athens, should instantly be delivered up unto him; yet is it
not necessary, that every person that is so demanded, should immediately be
delivered up; but those only who upon due examination shall be found guilty:
For as Plutarch in the Life of Romulus rightly observes; It is not fit, (...),
to deliver up a man unheard. The King of Scotland (as Camden informs us) told
Queen Elizabeth, Camden, Anno 85.
that he would send Fernihurst, yea, and the Chancellor too into England, as
soon as by sound Evidence it was proved, that they had premeditately broken the
peace, and committed the murders they were charged with: Neither is every
Malefactor that is found guilty necessarily to be delivered up, for the
obligation being disjunctive, binds only either to deliver up or to punish. For
thus we read that the Elians made War upon the Lacedaemonians, because they did
not punish those Lacedaemonians that had injured them; that is, because they
would neither deliver them up, nor punish them: sometimes they that demand the
malefactor are left to their choice, but this is a favor and not a debt,
unless it be so agreed in the league; as it was between the Kings of England
and Denmark recorded by Pontanus. Thus did the Cerites put the Romans to their
choice, Live. lib. 7.
Whether they would have the persons who had injured them delivered up or
punished. Aeschines in his answer to Demosthenes declares, That treating with
King Philip concerning the general Peace of Greece, he told Philip amongst
other things, That it was fit that the Malefactors themselves, and not their
Cities should pay the price of their own wickedness; and that Cities could not
justly be punished, if they caused the Criminals personally to appear in
judgment. Declam. 255.
Quintilian tells us, That the next degree to Treason, is to harbor and
protect Traitors; and next to the Renegadoes are they that receive them.
Basilius sent to Cosroes desiring him to deliver up unto him one, who being a
Subject had taken up arms against him, being his Lord and Master; and that he
would not countenance so pernicious a precedent against himself. Zonaras
And Dion Chrysostom among other mischiefs arising from the discord of Cities
mentions this as one, Basil. Porphyrogenneto.
That it is lawful for offenders to fly for protection from one City to
another. And here we meet with another question, namely, whether they that
being so delivered up by their own City, and not received by any other, do
still remain Citizens of their own City? Whether they who being delivered up,
but not received, remain Citizens of their own City.
This Publ. M. Scaevola denies, because they that are so delivered are no less
banished from their own City, than they who are interdicted fire and water. But
Brutus, and after him Cicero, were of a contrary Opinion, which doubtless is
the more probable, though not properly for the reason brought by Cicero,
because as in gifts so in deditions, they cannot be complete unless accepted;
for in every donation that is perfect, the consent of both Parties is
necessary; whereas the dedition here meant is nothing else but the permitting
of a Subject to be under the Arbitrary Power of another Prince or State whom he
has injured; which bare permission does neither give nor take away any right;
only it takes away that which should hinder the execution: wherefore if that
other Prince or People shall not make use of that right, then does he that was
delivered, return unto the same condition as before, to be either punished or
not punished, as the City whereunto he returns shall see cause, (which was the
case of Clodius who was delivered to the Inhabitants of Corsica, but was not by
them accepted of,) as there are many offenses wherein a City may do either; but
this Right of the City as both other rights and goods are not immediately by
the bare fact lost, unless some public decree or sentence first pass upon him.
In the same manner, Goods also though delivered, yet if not accepted remain
his, whose formerly they were; but if that Subject being delivered up shall be
accepted, and afterward happen to return, he shall lose the privilege of his
Freedom, unless by some new service done he shall be admitted. Now what we have
here said of punishing or delivering offenders, is to be understood, as well of
those who fly to our protection from other places, as of those who are natural
and native Subjects.

V. The right of Suppliants belong not to malefactors, but to the miserable.
Neither do those so famous rights of suppliants, and examples of sanctuaries
and places of refuge, any thing derogate from what we have before said. For
these belong properly to such as are wrongfully oppressed, but not unto those
who do such acts as are in themselves either destructive to Humane Society, or
injurious to other men. Gylippus the Lacedemonian discoursing of this right of
suppliants, Diod. lib. 8.
speaks thus; They who first introduced these privileges, intended that they
who were through any misfortune miserable, should be preserved; but they that
were malicio^sly wicked, should expect nothing but punishment; for these have
nothing to blame Fortune for, neither ought they to assume to themselves the
name of suppliants, which is proper to those only, Quibus innocens est animus
irata fortuna, Whom nothing but an inevitable fate or fortune have made
miserable: But as for those who are constantly and professedly unjust, there
remains no place either for Pity or Protection, which two Menander thus
distinguishes; Misfortune and injustice differ much,
For that is our chance, this our own choice makes such.
Wherefore as Philo notes, Mercy indeed is due to the unfortunate, De Judice.
but they that are wilfully wretched are not unhappy, but unjust. When we
behold a man that is distressed, says Marcus Antoninus, we should diligently
observe his mind and manners, whereby we may discover whether it were his
ignorance, or his wilfulness that occasioned his misfortune, and accordingly we
should administer either our advice, or our reproof. Goth. lib. 3.
So Totilas in Procopius does wisely distinguish between those injuries that
are done through ignorance or forgetfulness, and those done out of a
premeditated malice. The former may plead if not for pardon, yet for mitigation
of his punishment; but the latter can urge nothing, but what aggravates both
the sin and judgment. In Aphor. 1.
Not much impertinent to this is that of Demosthenes which Cicero thus
translates, Misereri oportet qui propter fortunam, non propter malitiam in
miseriis sunt; To commiserate those that are miserable is an act of humanity,
but then only when such sufferings are occasioned by some misfortune, but not
when occasioned by our own wickedness: Nor that of Antiphanes, That which is
done involuntarily is from fortune, but what we do deliberately is but the
fruits of our own choice. Nor that of Lysias, There is no man willingly
unfortunate. But when a man is made miserable either by the undeserved malice
of an enemy, or by some secret fate, or some misfortune which could not be
foreseen, then protection by foreign Princes, is a debt due to the frailty and
inconstancy of our Humane Condition. It was a sanction of the wisest Law that
ever was; Deuteronomy. 19.1. 23.15. Exodus 21.14. 1 King. 2.29. 2 King. 11.13.
That he that had accidentally slain a man whom he hated not in times past,
should fly to one of the five Cities of Refuge, and there be safe. Because that
act as to the irregularity of it had not the consent of the Will, so that it
was not so properly his sin, as his misfortune: whereas the very Horns of the
Altar could not secure him, who out of premeditated malice had slain an
innocent person, or who out of an affectation of Sovereignty and Dominion did
attempt an innovation in the State; which Law Philo explaining, says, Profanis
in fanum nullum esse receptum; That no sanctuary can give protection to such
unsanctified persons. Quaest. Graec. 32.
The like provision we find to have been in use amongst the Ancient Grecians,
as Plutarch testifies. The Chalcidenses refused to deliver up Nauplius to the
Grecians; and the reason is given, because he had sufficiently cleared himself
of the Crimes they objected against him. The like we may read of in this latter
Age, for King Pepin did receive into his protection, and refused to deliver up
such as being tyrannically oppressed, fled out of Normandy unto him. Yea, and the
Emperor Ludovicus Pius received those that fled unto him, even from the Church
of Rome, as may appear by his Decree made in the year 817, and inserted in the
second Tome of the Gallican Councils, etc. Cicero, Pomponius and others relate,
That there was in Athens an Altar called, Ara Misericordiae, The Altar of
Mercy, which the calamitous have sacred made, says the Poet, and a little
after: Where the exiled, and the vanquished seek for rest,
And Kings of their own Kingdoms dispossessed.
That is, all that were unfortunately distressed, The City Athens, as Aristides
tells us, was of all other Cities the most ready to protect strangers, and such
as were through misfortune miserable. And elsewhere, This, in that age was the
common Port or Haven wherein all the wrecks of fortune put in and found relief,
from what part of the world, and for what causes soever they were distressed,
hither they came, and here they found succor and protection: The like Encomium
Mariana gives of Arragon. The Gepidae chose rather universally to perish, Lib.
20. c. 13.
as Procopius informs us, than to deliver up Ildigisales either to the Romans,
Goth. 4.
or to the Lombards. Sophocles in one of his Tragedies, brings in Oedipus
supplicating the Athenians in these words: Ah! men of Athens, I have suffered
much;
Suffered indeed: for God my witness is,
That knowingly, I have not done amiss.


And Theseus answering him thus, Such Guests as thee, at all times to defend
O Oedipus, repent I never can,
Till I forget my self to be a man.
And yet as highly as these Athenians delighted to protect their suppliants,
whom fortune and not wilfulness had made miserable, they would not protect a
known malefactor, nor give that to Vice, that was due only to Innocence;
witness that in the same Tragedy: Hunc qui facinorum conscius, nec legibus
Fidens, ad aras volvitur supplex Deum,
Trahere ad tribunal nulla relligio mihi:
Mala semper aequum far qui fecit male.
From sacred Altars, who to judgment draws
A guilty Traitor, that distrusts the Laws,
Does nothing impious: for just it is
That he should suffer, who has done amiss.


So the same Poet elsewhere, -- Non enim tangi decet
Manu nocente numina, at justum fuit
Piis patere templa contra injurias.
With hands impure the Gods to supplicate
Indecent is: yet should the Temple gate
Stand open, for the oppressed to enter at.
Lycurgus the Orator relates a story of one Calistratus, who having committed
some heinous crime, and consulting the Oracle about his safety, received this
answer; That if he would fly to Athens, he should have right done him. In hopes
of impunity, he betakes himself to that Altar in Athens, which was held the
most sacred, yet even from thence he was taken and put to death: So also was
Ferdinand Lord High Chamberlain of Portugal forced from the Altar, Lib. 21.
and burnt, for ravishing a Noble Virgin, as Mariana records: So religiously
did they distinguish between such as were criminous, and such as were
unfortunate. Tacitus condemns some of the Grecian Cities of superstition, who
thought their Gods to be pleased with their protecting of Malefactors. Princes
(says he) are like Gods; for neither do the Gods themselves answer the
supplications of the wicked: Ann. lib. 3.
and in another place, he assures us, Neque a diis nisi justas supplicum preces
audiri; That the Gods never heard the supplications of men unless they were
just. Such then as are notoriously faulty, are either to be delivered up
punished, or at least banished out of their Dominions from whom they are
demanded. Lib. 1.
Thus did the Cymaei in Herodotus, who though they would not deliver up Pactyes
the Persian, whom notwithstanding they durst not keep, yet chose that which was
safest to both, which was to suffer him to fly to Mitylene. Thus Perseus King
of Macedon in his Apology to Martius, concerning those that had betrayed
Eumenes, pleads thus, As soon as upon your information I found these men in
Macedon, I commanded them forthwith to depart my Kingdom, and have for ever
interdicted them my Dominions. Thus did Queen Elizabeth answer the Scots who
demanded Bothwell; Camden An. 1593.
That she was ready either to deliver him up, or to banish him out of England.
Yet do the European Princes in most places at this day, and in the age last
past, connive at one another for the reception of Malefactors, unless they be
such as disturb the public peace, or that are guilty of some egregious crimes;
for lesser crimes they usually pass by, unless they are directly excepted
against in the Articles of any League: as it was in that made between England
and France, wherein it was agreed, That Rebels and Fugitives should be
delivered up: And in that made with the Burgundians, wherein it was provided,
that all such should be expelled, as Camden testifies. Anno 1600.
However this is worth our observation, That notorious Thieves and Pirates,
when through long and prosperous successes, they are become formidable to their
Neighbors, may be protected as from punishment; because it conduces much to
the common safety, to withdraw such persons from their wicked practices, by
hopes of Indemnity, in case it cannot otherwise be done, this therefore any
Prince or People may undertake to do.

VI. Yet may they be protected until their Cause be examined, and by what Law.
And this also is observable, that Suppliants may be defended until the equity
of their case be rightly known. Thus Demophon tells the Ambassadors of
Eurysthius, who demanded of him some that fled unto him for protection: Si
crimen istis aliquod hospitibus struis,
Jus impetrabis; vi quidem hinc non abstrahes.
If with foul crimes you can them charge, you may
What Is right obtain, but not them force away.
But if the Crimes whereof they stand accused be such, as are neither against
the Laws of Nature or Nation, then shall they be judged by the Civil Law of
that place from whence the Suppliants came, which Aeschylus excellently proves
in his Tragedy of Suppliants, where he brings in the King of the Argives
bespeaking a Company of Grecians that came out of Egypt thus; Manum tibi si
immittat Aegypti genus
Quod lege patria proximos se sanguine
Dicant, quis haec objicere se contra velit?
Quare tuum est docere, natalis soli
Ex lege, nullo jure te illis subjici.


VII. How Subjects may partake of their Princes faults.
How the faults of Subjects, whether Natives or Strangers may be transferred to
their Governors we have already seen. Now on the other side, Subjects also may
partake of their Princes faults, in case they either consent thereunto, or act
any thing at his Command, or by his persuasion that is wicked: but hereof we
shall discourse more properly anon, when we treat of the Duty of Subjects
toward their Prince. There may be also a communication of Crimes between the
whole body of the people, and each particular member thereof; because as St
Augustine observes, Vbi universi, ibi and singuli; Vniversals cannot consist
without individuals; so every single person being congregated and united in one
gross body, does constitute a body universal. But yet the faults committed by
this Body Politic, are properly transferred to those particular members only,
which did yield their consents unto those public acts, and not unto those who
were over-voted by the major part of the Council: And as the faults so the
punishments of singular persons, Licurgus Orat.
are distinct from those of the whole Nation. For as upon individual persons,
the greatest punishment that can be inflicted is death; so the death of a City
is desolation; Sup. cap. 9. sect. 4.
which happens when the Body Politic is wholly dissolved; that is, when all
the Laws, Privileges and other advantages thereof do utterly fail; and by this
means every single person may of a Citizen become a slave; as the Thebans were
to Alexander of Macedon, Plut. Alex.
those only excepted that contradicted the decree of dissolving the Society. So
also a City or a Kingdom may be reduced into a civil servitude, by being made a
Province. And every particular person may lose his propriety by confiscation;
and whatsoever that City or People held in common, as their Walls, their
Magazins, their Ports, Men of War, Fleets, Elephants, Treasuries, yea, and
their Common Fields, all become the Conquerours. But for private men to lose
their particular Estates, through the defaults of the universality, without any
consent of theirs, is unjust, as Libanius very well observes in his Oration
concerning the Antiochian Sedition. The same Author approves the fact of
Theodosius, for punishing a common fault, with the loss of their public
Theaters, Baths, and the honor of being a Metropolis; which St Chrysostom
also confirms in his seventeenth Oration de Statuis. After the very same manner
were the same Antiochians of old, punished by M. Antoninus the Philosopher, etc.

VIII. Whether a punishment once due may at any time be exacted.
But here we meet with a notable question, whether the punishment due for an
injury done by the generality of any one City or State, may at any time
afterward be exacted: so long as that State, City or Commonwealth does
subsist, it may: for that which is justly due at all times, may at any time be
exacted, because the same body politic still remains, though the individuals
succeed each to other, as we have elsewhere showed. But yet on the other side
we must note, That some things are primarily and absolutely necessary to every
Corporation, as to have a public Treasury, to have Laws, and the like; others
appertain thereunto derivatively only, from those individual persons that
inhabit therein: In which sense a Nation or City may be said to be just,
valiant, prudent, if most or many of the Inhabitants thereof be such; and of
this kind are the merits of a City. For that which has no life, cannot of it
self contract any guilt, but a City is said to be guilty, in respect of those
particular persons who actually offended; but they being dead, by whom the
guilt was deduced to the generality of the People, the guilt dies also, and
consequently the obligation to the punishment, which without merit cannot
consist. Thus Libanius in his forecited Oration, There is no place left for
revenge, where all are dead that gave the offense. Wherefore Alexander is
highly condemned by Arrianus, for his too much cruelty and injustice in his
revenge taken upon the Persians, there being no one person then living of those
who had formerly offended the Grecians. And therefore Julian ascribes that War
to another cause, There was never any War, says he, reputed just, Constantii
laudatione.
that was undertaken for such a cause, neither by the Grecians against the
Trojans, nor by the Macedonians against the Persians, as may be made clear to
any child; for they never visited crimes anciently committed by Parents, on
their Nephews or Children; but invaded those only, who had by force oppressed
the posterity of such as had well deserved, and dispossessed them of their
Kingdoms. Concerning the destruction of the Branchidae made by the same
Alexander, Curtius gives his judgment thus, If (says he) the same punishment
had been inflicted upon the Traitors themselves, it had been recorded as an act
of his justice, and not of his cruelty; but the revenge fell upon the innocent,
whilst their posterity (who never so much as saw Miletum, and therefore could
not betray it to Xerxes) pay the price of their forefathers sin. The like
judgment does Arrianus pass upon Alexander's burning of Persepolis, in revenge
for what the Persians had long before done unto the City of Athens. But, says
Arrianus, In mine opinion, it was not wisely done of Alexander; neither could
that be truly said to be a just revenge upon those Persians, who had been dead
long before. For as to that answer which Agathocles made to the just complaints
of the Inhabitants of Ithaca, namely, that the Sicilians had of old suffered
much more by their Countryman Ulysses; none that hears of it but will think it
ridiculous. And Plutarch in his Book against Herodotus, says, That it was a
thing very improbable that the Corinthians should revenge an injury done them
by the Samians after three ages. Injuries done should not be revenged but on
those that did them.
From all which we may conclude, That the memory of injuries done us, ought not
to outlive the persons that did them; neither will those arguments brought by
Plutarch, in defense of the revenge taken by God upon Posterity for the sins of
their Ancestors, serve to justify the like in men; because, there is not the
same right between man and man, as there is between God and man: neither will
it necessarily follow, that because our Children do receive honors and
rewards, for the virtuous acts of their forefathers, therefore they may be
justly punished for their faults, because such is the nature of a courtesy, or
benefit, that it may be conferred upon any man without injury; but the nature
of a punishment is not so.

IX. Whether a man may partake of the punishment though not of the crime.
Thus having showed by what means a man may partake of the punishment, by being
made accessory to the sin of another; now we intend to show how a man may be
involved in the punishment, though he be no ways accessory to his sin: And here
to avoid mistake, and that we may not confound things in their own nature
distinct, because they are alike in name, we must walk cautiously as to some
particulars.

X. That which comes directly, distinguished from that which comes by consequence.
As in the first place, we must distinguish between that damage that is
purposely and directly done, and that which comes by consequence; that I
account a wrong directly done, when that is taken away, whereunto a man has a
peculiar right: And that I call a wrong done by consequence, when a man is
deprived of that, which otherwise he might have had, that condition ceasing
without which he could have no right or title. An example whereof Vlpian gives
us thus, If by digging a Well in my own ground, I cut off or intercept the
spring that feeds my neighbors Well; the damage he sustaineth, is not
occasioned directly, by any illegal act of mine, but by the lawful use of that
wherein I had a proper and peculiar right as being mine own. And in another
place, There is a great difference between the doing of an injury, and the
prohibiting a man to make the profit, which he has hitherto been permitted to
make. And it is very preposterous (says Paulus the Lawyer) to account our
selves rich before we have acquired those riches; As when a Father runs into
a praemunire by doing that, for which his estate is justly confiscate, his
Children may feel the loss, it is true; but the loss is not properly their
punishment, because the goods could not properly be accounted theirs, unless
they had continued to have been their Fathers to the hour of his death: which
was well observed by Alphenus, when he said, The Children indeed do suffer
through the default of their Father, but that they do not inherit that which
should otherwise have descended unto them, is not properly the Childrens
punishment, but their Parents: But those goods which accrue unto them, not from
their Parents, but either from nature, custom, or education, do
(notwithstanding their Fathers fault) remain perfectly theirs. Cicero writes
that Themistocles his Children suffered want; nor did he think it unjust, that
Lepidus his Children should do the like: and this he affirms to be an ancient
custom, and observed in all Cities; which notwithstanding the later Roman Laws
have somewhat moderated. So when through the default of the major part, which
(as we have said before) represents and has the power of the whole, the whole
offends, and upon that account loses their civil liberty (i. e.) their Walls,
Ports, and other Commodities; those particular persons who were innocent, do
indeed bear an equal share in the loss, but yet in those things only which
appertained not unto them, but as they were a part of the whole.

XI What befalls us by the occasion of a crime distinguished from that which befalls
us because of the crime.
Besides it is to be noted, that sometimes some evil is to be imposed on a man,
or some good taken from him by the occasion of another sin; yet so that that
sin is not the immediate cause of that action, as to the very Right of doing
it; as he that passes his word for the debt of another, suffers, not by reason
of the debt, but by reason of his engagement, according to our Proverb, A
Surety is a sure tie. For as he that passes his word for a buyer, is not bound
by the purchase, but by his own free promise: So he that undertakes for a
delinquent may suffer, Sponde, noxa praesto est.
not for his delinquency, but by reason of his vadimony or susception; which as
it was in his own free power to do or not to do; so being done, it shall no
less oblige him than the offense did the delinquent. Now the ground of this is,
the power and freedom that every man has to oblige himself, and therefore the
measure of his sufferings is not to be taken from the hainousness of another
fault, but from the power he has to oblige himself: The consequence whereof
is, That no man can justly be put to death, by being a surety for another,
(whose crime may happily deserve death) because no man can justly oblige
himself beyond what is in his power; but this power over a man's life, either to
take it away from himself, or to oblige another to take it away from him, no
man has: and therefore no man can justly be put to death by reason of such a
vademony. And this I hold to be the truer opinion, though it seems, that not
the ancient Romans only, but the Grecians and Hebrews also were of another
mind, who believed that even the sureties also might justly be adjudged to
death, as appears by that ancient story of Damon and Pythias. And by those
words of Reuben to his Father Jacob, Jos. Ant. lib. 2. cap. 3.
Slay my two sons if I bring him not back unto thee Genesis 42.37.
: whereunto St Augustine Ep. 54. ad Macedonium. See lib. 3. c. 4.. 14.
alludes, where he says, That he that is the cause of another death, is
sometimes a greater sinner than he that kills him: As when a malefactor leaves
his surety to suffer that lawful punishment which himself should undergo; as it
falls out frequently with hostages, as we shall show anon. Neither does this
power of obliging a man's self extend to mutilation; for no man has such a
power over his bodily members as to cut them off, unless it be for the
conservation of the whole body. But whatsoever any man has a full and absolute
power over, he may engage for another, and if he suffer thereby, it is not by
way of punishment, but by way of equity, which requires that what is promised
should be performed. Thus a man may forfeit his estate, his liberty, his goods,
and the like. The same almost may be said of such things as a man enjoys,
either jure precario, by entreaty or permission, respect being had to the
propriety of the thing: Or in his own private right, respect being had to that
Sovereign Right that every City or State has over it, for the public and
general safety. Now if any of these shall be taken away by the occasion of
another man's crime, it is not (as I have said before) properly as a punishment;
but as the execution of that precedent right, which by promise was transferred
to him that takes it. So when that Beast is put to death with whom a man has
had copulation, (as by the Law of Moses was decreed,) it was not by way of
punishment: forasmuch as a Beast having no Law, cannot be said properly to sin,
and consequently is not liable to punishment; but it is by virtue of that Right
and Dominion that men have over Beasts, to do with them as they please.

XII. Properly, no man can be justly punished for another fault.
These distinctions being granted, we say, that no innocent person can be
punished for the default of another; the reason whereof is, Because every
punishment presupposes an offense, and every offense must needs be personal,
because it arises from the choice of the will, and nothing can be more truly
and properly ours, than that which derives its Being from us.

XIII. No not the Children for their Parents.
It was St Hieroms observation, That Neque virtutes, neque vitia parentum
liberis imputantur; That neither the virtues nor vices of Parents are imputed
unto their Children: And St Augustine concludes peremptorily Epist. 105.
, That it stands not with the perfection of Gods Justice to punish an innocent.
Dion Chrysostom when he had said, That by the Athenian Laws, the Children were
sometimes put to death for their Parents crimes, speaking of the Law of God; he
subjoyns, But this Law does not like the other, punish the posterity of those
that sin; but makes every man to be the author of his own misery; according to
that common Proverb, Noxa sequitur caput. The punishment follows, the
malefactor only. We do Decree (say the Christian Emperors) That where the
guilt is, there shall be the punishment: for sin, like a viper, devours its own
parents; and therefore our fears should not be extended farther than our guilt.
Quis locus innocentiae relinquitur, si alienum crimen maculet nescientem?
Where, says St Augustine, shall innocence find sanctuary, if the child that is
ignorant and innocent must be involved in his fathers punishment? Philo in his
Special Laws, Lib. 2.
abominating the custom of some Nations, in destroying the Children of Traitors
and Tyrants, says, Justum est eorum esse poenas quorum sunt delicta; It is
just that they should suffer that have sinned: And in another place, There is
nothing (says he) more unjust, or of more dangerous consequence to a State,
than to deny either the virtuous children of wicked parents their deserved
honor, or the wicked children of virtuous parents their due punishment: For
the Law judges every man according to his own works, and neither commends any
man for the virtues, nor condemns any man for the vices of his ancestors. And
Josephus condemns the contrary fact in Alexander King of the Jews, calling it,
The exaction of punishment exceeding all humane measure. So also does Dionysius
Halicarnassensis, where he confutes that common pretense of cruelty, which is
that malus corvus malum ovum, the child will be like the father: For this also
(says he) is very uncertain, and an uncertain fear can be no ground sufficient
to justify a certain death. One was so bold as to tell Arcadius, (a Christian
Emperor) that the children should also attend their guilty parents to death,
if but suspected to have been infected by their example. And Ammianus relates a
story of a Daughter, at that time very little, that was put to death, Ne ad
parentum exempla succresceret, lest she should grow to be like her parents.
Neither is the fear of revenge any just cause to destroy the children of guilty
parents, which occasioned that Greek Proverb; Who kills the Sire and saves the
Son's, a fool. For, as Seneca notes, There is nothing more unrighteous than for
a child to inherit his fathers malice. Pausanias the Greek Emperor would not
do the least hurt to the Children of Attaginus, who had caused the Thebans to
revolt unto the Medes, presuming that they were not guilty of that conspiracy.
And M. Anthony, in his Epistle to the Roman Senate, commands them to pardon the
Sons of Avidius Cassius, (who had conspired against him) together with his
Son-in-Law, and his Wife, adding; But what speak I of pardoning them, who have
done no evil. And Julian highly commends the like humanity in Constantius,
showing, That good Children do many times spring from wicked Parents, as Bees
out of rocks, Figgs out of bitter wood, and Pomegranats from thorns.

XIV. The objection taken from Gods dealing with men answered.
But God in the Mosaical Law threatens to visit the sins of Fathers upon their
Children; but he has a full and absolute Power and Dominion, not only over our
goods but lives also, as being his own gifts, which he may take away from us at
any time, and that without any other cause given, than his own will. If
therefore he do at any time by some violent and untimely death snatch away the
children of an Achan, Saul, Jeroboam, Ahab, or the like, he does but exercise
his own right of Dominion, and not that of punishment; and yet by the same
effect, he does the more exquisitely punish the parents of those children, Rab.
Simon Barsemi. 2 Samuel 21. 1 King. 14. 2 Kings 8, 9, 10. Hom. 29. in Genesis 9.
as some of the Jewish Doctors taught very truly. For whether the parents do
survive their children, which the Divine Law did chiefly respect, and therefore
extends not its threats beyond the fourth generation, which was possible for a
man to see, Exodus 25. most certain it is, that the Parents were even therein
intended to be more severely punished by so sad an example, as being thereby
more deeply wounded than by their own sufferings, as Chrysostom well observes:
wherewith agrees that of Plutarch, Nullum durius supplicium quam eos qui ex se
sunt ob se miseros spectare; No punishment so grievous as to see those born of
us, to be for our faults miserable. Or, whether the parents do not live so long
as to see their childrens sufferings, yet doubtless to depart this life in that
fear is a most dreadful torment. The hardness of men's hearts (says
Tertullian) did urge the Almighty to this severity, that so they that had any
care of the welfare of their posterity, might yield the more ready obedience to
the Law of God. Whereunto we may add that of Alexander in Curtius, who being
demanded what should become of their innocent children? Answered, It is not for
you to know what I intend to do with them, that you your selves may perish the
more uncomfortably. But withal we must note, That God does not use this
severity, but for such sins, as are committed properly in the reproach of
himself; as for the sins of Idolatry, Sacrilege, Perjury, and the like.
Neither did the Grecians themselves think otherwise. For all those sins which
were thus visited on posterity, which they called stupendous, were of this
sort, (...).
whereof Plutarch discourses excellently in his Book, concerning the late
revenge of God. And in Aelian we find a Delphick Oracle to this very purpose
denouned against the sin of Sacrilege: At scelerum fontes divinum persequitur
jus,
Necpote vitari: non si genus ab Jove ducant:
Sed capiti ipsorum and qui nascunter ab ipsis
Imminet; inque domo cladem subit altera clades.
Vengeance, the guilty does from Heaven attend,
Which none can 'scape, though they from Jove descend,
Upon themselves, and on their Children all
Plague after Plague, throughout the house shall fall.


The like we have in Libanius, who speaking of some Sacrilegious persons,
says, Whereof some have already been punished, others not yet, but none shall
escape; and not only they, but their Childrens Children after them. This is
also confirmed by Strabo and Gellius, in the story of the Gold stolen out of
Temple at Toulouse. Concerning Perjury we have already given the like
testimonies above; and concerning Idolatry we have a most pregnant example in
Jeroboam, where it is also to be observed, That although God does thus threaten
to visit the sins of Parents upon their Children; yet he does not always do it,
especially if any spark of virtue appear in them, or if the Child do publicly
declare his detestation of his Fathers wickedness, as Andron Pelaeologus did;
as is evident, Ezech. 18. and by diverse examples alleged by Plutarch, in the
place before recited. And in the New Testament, where there is a clearer
discovery made of the punishments that attend us after this life, than in any
of the Prophets; yet is there no commination that extends beyond the person
sinning, whereunto that of Ezekiel has some respect, though but obscurely, as
the manner of the Prophets at that time was. Now though God do sometimes visit
the sins of Parents on their Children, yet is this no warrant for us to do the
same; neither can there be the same reason, because of that absolute Power and
Dominion, that he has over our lives, to take them away at his pleasure,
without any respect had unto our sins; whereas men can have no such power, but
what our own crimes give them: and therefore as the sin, so the punishment
should not be extended beyond our persons. And therefore the very same Law of
God does expressly in another place forbid, That either the Father should be put
to death for the Child, or the Child for the Father, Deuteronomy. 24.16. which some of
the pious Kings of Israel did religiously observe, even in the case of Treason,
as Amasias did; which Law is highly commended both by Josephus and Philo: As
Isocrates does the like Law amongst the Egyptians, and Dionysius
Halicarnassensis the same among the Romans. Neither the sin nor punishment of
the Father leaves any guilt at all upon the Children, says Calistratus out of
Plato. For it is just that every Fox should pay his own skin unto the fleaer,
and that every man should carve out his own fortunes, and no man answer for his
sin before God by an Attorney. Would any City (says Cicero) endure such a Law,
that should condemn the Son or Nephew, if the Father only or the Grandfather
did offend? Hence it is that the Roman, Grecian, and Egyptian Laws do forbid
the putting to death of Women with Child, as an act of injustice and cruelty.

XV. If not children; much less kinsmen.
And if so, then certainly the Laws of the Dan. 7.22. Justin. l. 10.
Persians and Macedonians, adjudging to death all the kindred and relations of
Traitors, that so they might the more dolorously perish (as Curtius speaks) are
most cruel and unjust, which Ammianus Marcellinus records as the severest of
all Laws. Philo also observes, that it was usual with Tyrants to put to death
together with the persons so condemned, the five Families that were of nearest
kin to them; which execrable custom is not so much as heard of among
Christians, being a cruelty exceeding any humane Judgment.

XVI. Yet may children be denied somethings which otherwise they might have had.
But yet in case the Children of such Traitors may have, or expect to enjoy any
thing whereof the peculiar Right is not in them, but in the King or People, it
may be taken from them by a certain Right of Dominion, as it adds to the
punishment of the offender. Hence it was that (as Plutarch observes) The
posterity of Traitors were held incapable of honors, as the Children of such
as were proscribed by Sylla were among the Romans. So by the Law of Arcadius,
it was provided (as a thing tolerable) against the Children of Traitors, That
they should not be admitted into any honor or office in the Commonwealth.

XVII. Nor are Subjects properly punished for their Princes crimes,
Now what has been here said of Children, may as well be said of such people
as are truly Subjects; if the Question be put, whether they may be justly
punished for the sins of their Kings or of their Governors? I mean not here,
in case the people shall give their consent thereunto, or act any thing in
relation to the fault of their Prince, which is in it self punishable. But we
treat of that contract, which arises from the nature of that body, whereof the
King is the Head, and the Subjects the Members: For as to those that give their
consent and assistance to the sin of their Prince, it is true what Philo
observes of Pharaoh in Abraham's time, That the whole Family felt the smart of
Pharaohs sin, because no man had indignation against so unjust a fact, but all
of them by commending it, were as guilty almost as himself So Josephus
discoursing of the judgment of Jeroboam, The people, says ^e. did likewise
partake of the punishment of the Kings sin, for they also were to be expelled
that good land, and to be scattered into foreign Nations, because they were his
companions in the act of his sin. But in case the people yield not their
consent, yet may they partake of the punishment, by reason (as I said) of the
connection that there is between them and their Prince. David numbered the
people, and his Subjects are consumed by the Pestilence; David thought this to
be hard dealing, because he thought the people innocent: But God (says the
Text) was angry with the people, and therefore moved him (against them) to say,
go, number the people, 2 Samuel 24.1. And then takes occasion by this sin of
David's, to punish the sins of Israel; Quaest. ad Orthod. 138.
and having absolute power over their lives, takes them away by the Pestilence,
thereby punishing both Prince and People: for, as a good Christian Author says
well, Kings are never more severely punished, than when they are punished in
their Subjects. And this is as just with God, as it is with men, ordinarily to
be whipped on the back, for an offense committed by the hand; or as it is with a
Physician, to burn a man on the great Toe, to cure him of a pain in the hip, as
Plutarch makes the comparison: But why this is not lawful for men, we have
already showed.

XVIII Nor Dissenters for the sins of the major part.
The self same may be said of the punishment of such particular persons (in
those things which are properly their own) as do not consent unto those
injuries that are committed by the generality of the people.

XIX. The Heir not obliged to his Fathers punishment as such and why.
But why the Heir that is obnoxious to other debts, is not obliged to this of
punishment, the true cause is, Because the Heir represents the person of the
deceased, not in merits, which are merely personal, but in his goods; whereunto
that those also that are owing unto any man, by reason of the very inequality
of things, should cohere, was at the first, by a general consent introduced
with dominion it self. Orat. Rhodiana.
For as Dion Prusiensis observes, Whatsoever was owing by the Father, is no
less due from his posterity; neither can ye justly charge it upon us, that we
have renounced our inheritance. So likewise Cicero, There is no person so fit
to succeed in the room of the deceased, as the right Heir.

XX. Yet he is, if that punishment be changed into some other kind of debt.
Hence it follows, That if beyond the merit there appear any new cause of
obligation, then even that contained in the punishment may be justly due,
though not properly as a punishment: So we have seen, that sometimes after the
sentence is past, and sometimes after the matter of fact is sufficiently
proved, in such things as will admit of a composition; the mulct or pecuniary
punishment shall be recovered from the Heir, as even that also which is drawn
into that agreement, because there now appears a new cause of obligation.

CHAP. XXII. Of Causes of War that are unjust.
I. The difference between Causes that are just, and such as are suasory only,
explained. II. The War that has neither of these, is brutish. III. That War
that has causes suasory only, not justifying, is predary. IV. There are some
causes which seem to be just, which are not. V. As uncertain fear. VI. Profit
without necessity. VII. The denial of Wives, where there are plenty of Women.
VIII. The desire to plant in a better soil. IX. The finding out of such things
as are pre-occupyed by others. X. What if those pre-occupiers be altogether
mad. XI. The desire of liberty no just cause, in such as are Subjects. XII. Nor
the desire to rule over others without their consent, though for their good.
XIII. Nor the title of being Universal Monarch, which some have given to the
Emperor, which is refuted. XIV. Which others give to the Church, which is also
refuted. XV. As also a pretense to fulfill some Prophecies, without a special
command from God. XVI. As also a pretense of some due debt, though not in
strictness of Right but some other way. VII. The difference between a War whose
cause is unjust, and that which is some other ways unjust, and the diverse
effects of both.
I. The difference between the true and the pretended causes of War.
OF the causes of War, some are (as I have said above Lib. 2. c. 1.
) justifying, some suasory only; those that are unjust, have notwithstanding
always some specious pretense or other, to make the War to appear just, which
Polybius calls (...), the other he calls (...), or the true causes, which
oft-times lie couchant, whilst something that is more plausible is exposed to
the public view; as in the War which Alexander made against Darius, the
preface or pretense was, to revenge some wrongs which the Persians had long
before done unto the Grecians; but the true cause was Ambition, and a vehement
thirst after sovereignty and riches, which also was very much heightened by the
facility of the enterprise, which he collected from the success, which both
Xenophon and Agesilaus had before in their several expeditions. Thucydides
distinguishes them into the outward show, and the inward truth; as when the
Athenians made War against Sicily, they openly declared, that it was only to
aid the Aegestans, but the naked truth was to gain Sicily to themselves. Appian
also has the very same expression, in the War made between the Romans and
Mithridates; and also in his fifth Book of their Civil War, where speaking of
the peace broken between Octavius and Sextus Pompeius he says, That there were
some causes which were true but latent, and others that were feigned and
pretended only; the one was but as a cloak or vizard, the other was the real
purpose and intention. It is true what Procopius in his Persian War says, Lib.
2.
Stultum est non libere loqui, ubi justitia dux est, comes utilitas; It is but
folly to dissemble, where justice is our guide, and profit our companion. The
pretense of the second Punick War was a contest about Saguntum; but the true
cause was, the secret disgust which the Carthaginians had against the Romans
for the hard conditions they had imposed on them in the low ebb of their
fortunes; and the great confidence they had in their own strength, upon some
prosperous successes, they then had in Spain, as Polybius observes. The same
distinction we find used by Livy, Live. lib. 7.
in the Oration made by the Campanes to the Romans, concerning their engagement
against the Samnites, which they pretended to be only to assist the Sedicines,
but their main end was their own defense; because they foresaw, that when their
neighbors house was burnt, the fire would quickly reach them. So when
Antiochus made War against the Romans, his pretense was to revenge the death of
Barcilla, and some other wrongs received; Lib. 36.
but the true cause was the great hopes he had to make some advantage to
himself of the looseness of the Roman Discipline. And And Plutarch observes,
that when Cicero objected against Anthony, That he was the cause of the Civil
War, it was but a pretense; for Caesar resolving to make War, took only his
pretense from Anthony.

II. A war without any cause is brutish.
Some there are that are carried headlong into War without either of these
causes, Periculorum propter se avidi; That delight only in sweat and blood, and
that live wholly upon spoil and rapine. This is a vice so much beneath the
nature of mankind, that Aristotle calls it (...), a savageness proper to wild
beasts only: And so does Seneca, Lib. 2. de clem. cap. 7.
Non crudelitatem sed feritatem dicimus; We cannot so properly call it cruelty,
as a kind of savage fierceness to delight in blood: We may also call it
madness, whereof as there are diverse kinds, so are there diverse symptoms, but
none more certain than that which delights in humane slaughter. Wherewith
accords that of Aristotle, He is cruel with a witness, who is so far
transported with a thirst after humane blood, that he makes no difference
between friends and foes. And that also of Dion Prusiensis, To engage our
selves in unnecessary Wars, and to rush into battle without any provocation, is
a mere madness. So likewise says Seneca, Orat. 37.
There are few or none so savage, as to shed humane blood prodigally, and that
for bloods sake only.

III. The War that has no justifying cause is but predatory.
Most men that make War have some Causes that move them thereto, some whereof
have matter sufficient to justify them, others none at all. Of this latter
sort was that War made by the Heruli against the Lombards, a War without any
pretense whatsoever. And such were the Wars made by the Gauls, as Livy
testifies; who thought the best right to consist in their Arms, and that the
longest sword might take all. But in the account of the Roman Laws, Qui rogatus
de possidendi causa, nullam aliam adfert, quam quod possideat, praedae est; He
who being demanded by what right he held any thing, could show none, but that
having got it he would keep it, was held to be a Thief, a Pyrate, or an Usurper
of another man's Right. So Aristotle of such as excite others to War, says,
That they regard not at all whether to subdue their innocent neighbors be just
or not. Such a one was Brennus, who held, That he had the best Right to All,
who was strongest of All: Such a one Silius thought Annibal to be, -- pro
foedere, proque
Justitia est ensis. --
Whose Sword did awe
Both Leagues and Law.
And such was Attila, and all those who look not at the Cause but at the
success of Wars, according to that vulgar saying of most Soldiers: --
Quaeritur belli exitus,
Non causa. --
It Is not the Cause, but the End that crowns the War.
For when once the dispute comes to blows, the vanquished Party cannot by the
strength of Argument convince the Conqueror that he is in an error, nor shall
Reason be heard when the Sword has decided the Quarrel: Haec acies victum
factura nocentem est:
This battle will the vanquished, guilty make.
-- For let the Cause be what it will,
The conquered party must be guilty still.
Whereunto that of St Augustine may very fitly be applied, De Civit. l. 4. c. 6.
To invade the Dominions of our neighbor Princes, and being encouraged by
success to proceed by force of Arms to wast their Countries, and out of mere
ambition to destroy those who never injured us: Quid aliud nisi grande
latrocinium nominandum est? What can we call this but a grand robbery? Of such
Wars as these thus speaks Vellejus, That they are made for no other cause, but
for pay and plunder: So thought Cicero also, That pride and haughtiness of
spirit, De Off. lib. ^.
whereby we confront dangers, and endure all manner of hardship, is no part of
true valor if justice be wanting. To the same purpose speaks Agathias, Lib. 2.
They who being transported either with an insatiable desire of Rule or of
Riches, or by a violent hatred, shall without any other cause invade another
man's Dominions; forasmuch as they offend those that are inoffensive, these men,
says he, are both proud and dishonest. Of the same mind was Andronicus
Rhodius, They who to enrich themselves, do rob others, are accounted wicked,
impious and unjust, and such are Tyrants, and they who for plunder make Cities
desolate. Ferinum est ad caedes and vastationes, nulla accepta injuria, venire.
See Bo. 2. Chap. 1.. 1.
Concerning whom, Philo upon the Decalogue writes thus: They that have got the
power of Thieves and Robbers, that spoil whole Cities being secured from
punishment, by being above the Laws; these are men of a barbarous nature,
ambitious of rule and dominion, committing great robberies, yet cloaking their
villainies under the specious names of Magistracy and Empire, which may more
properly be called notorious villainies. For to waste and depopulate Countries,
being by no injury provoked, is brutish cruelty.

IV Some causes are specious but not just.
Others there are that pretend to make War upon just and warrantable grounds,
which notwithstanding being thoroughly searched into, will be found unjust; and
as Livy speaks, A contest not to be decided by Law or justice, but by plain
force. Some Princes (says Plutarch) make the same use of Peace and War, as
private men do of Money; not always for just ends, but for ends suitable to
their own fancies. Now though what causes are unjust may be in some measure
known, by those that are just, Rectum enim est obliqui judex; for by a line
that is straight, we may easily discern that which is crooked: yet for
plainness and perspicuity, we shall insist upon the principal heads of them.

V. As an uncertain fear.
And First, Our fears by reason of the swelling power of our neighbor Prince,
is no sufficent ground for a just War; for that our defense by Arms be just, it
ought to be necessary, which it cannot be unless we are most assured, not only,
that he against whom we make War, has a power to do us wrong; but that he has
also a full purpose and resolution so to do, which certainly ought to be such
as takes place in moral matters. That therefore our Neighbor, being not
restrained by any former agreement, builds a Fort in any part of his own
Dominions, from whence we may be hereafter annoyed, is no just ground for us to
make War upon him; because, for prevention we also may do the like in any part
of our own Territories, Zonaras. Pausanias lib. 1.
or apply our selves to other the like remedies, and not by War. Whence we may
conclude, That the War made by the Romans against Philip of Macedon, and that
made by Lysimachus against Demetrius, were unjust, unless warranted by the
access of some other cause. The Cauchi.
I am very well satisfied with that of Tacitus, concerning the Cauchi, the
noblest People of all Germany, Who (says he) supported their grandeur by
justice, without any extraordinary affectation, either of glory, or riches, and
yet without any disability or want of power to either: they lived quietly and
without noise, provoked no Wars, nor were they wasted by spoil or pillage;
Though our own uncertain fears be no sufficient ground for us to make War, yet
may we use all lawful means cautiously to prevent dangers before they fall;
this is that prudence that Christ commands to his Disciples, where he bids them
to be wise as Serpents, but innocent as Doves. And this is the prudence of
Empires, that if any one would annoy us, to take such care, and to use such
means that he shall not be able to hurt us; which may be done two ways: As
first, if the neighboring Nations do see the growing power of any one Prince,
so as to conceive some jealousy of him, they ought to combine in a stronger
League; that if either shall be invaded unjustly, they shall all make War
against the Aggressor, this being then a just cause of War. Thus the Italians
being jealous of the Venetians power leagued themselves for their own defense;
so that though that Republic was too strong for any of them singly, yet being
far too weak for them all, it was wisely kept within its own bounds. Livy
discoursing of the several opinions of men, concerning the War between Perseus
and the Romans, some wishing well to one, and some to another, tells us; That
the best and wisest sort wished the victory to neither; for so should they live
free and secure from both. For if either of the two parties should offer to
opress them, the other would be ready to secure them. And as Spain formerly, so
France now, aspiring to act universal Monarchy, all European Princes have
reason to be jealous of him, and to combine together to withstand him. Secondly
if any Potentate being more powerful than his Neighbors, shall unjustly
oppress any of them, the rest ought to confederate, and to compel the Aggressor
to accept of due satisfaction, if there be cause for it; which if he refuse,
his cause then being unjust, (much more if it were originally so) they may all
of them make War upon him, as being the disturber of the public peace. Thus
did the Italian Princes against the French when they were invaded by Charles
the Eighth, which occasioned the late Triple League or Alliance, when the
French had seized upon the County of Burgundy, and invaded Flanders; both which
belonged to the Crown of Spain.
and which was the main demonstration of their valor and strength, the credit
and esteem they had before others, they got not by injuries and oppressions:
every man amongst them had his Arms in readiness, and if occasion required they
had an Army, both of Men and Horse they had good store; and thus they kept up
the repute of being a warlike Nation, though they lived in Peace.

VI. Unnecessary profit.
Neither has profit the same right to make a just War, as necessity has.

VII. The denial of Marriages.
Neither is the denial of Marriages, though there be plenty of Women, any just
cause of a War; which notwithstanding Hercules made the ground of his War
against Eurytus, who denied him his Daughter Iole in Marriage; as Darius also
did, of his War against the Scythians.

VIII. Desire to plant in a better soil.
Nor is the desire of possessing a more fruitful or more healthful soil, as it
is usual for such as inhabit Fenns or Deserts, any just cause of making War,
which was the case of the Ancient Germans, as Tacitus records Hist. l. 4.
.

IX. The discovery of things pre-occupied by others.
Neither is it sufficient to justify a War, to pretend that we were the first
discoverers of any place; in case it be possessed, though by Pagans and Infidels,
or by men of dull apprehension: For, Vict. de Ind. Rel. 1. n. 31.
Inventio est eorum, quae nullius sunt; To entitle our selves to be the first
founders, it is necessary that the land so found should belong to none.

X. What if the pre-occupants be mad.
Neither is it necessary to Propriety or Dominion, That a man should be endued
with Virtues either Moral or Theological, or to be of a quick understanding;
yet may this seem to be justifiable, That in case there can be found a people
that have no use of Natural Reason at all, there all Right and Dominion may be
taken from them: Yet ought we in charity to make them such an allowance as is
necessary for their support and maintenance, as well as unto other idiots and
madmen. For as to what we have already said, concerning the care which the Law
of Nations takes to preserve the property of Infants and Lunaticks, it
appertains to such people with whom we have any commerce, or make any contracts
with, which we cannot have with such a people as are wholly and altogether
destitute of Reason; Plato de Rep. lib. 2.
and therefore of these I may very well doubt whether they have any property at
all. The Grecians then were very unjust, in concluding the Barbarians to be
naturally their enemies, because they differed from them in manners, and were
not so quick of understanding as themselves. Livy lib. 31.
But how far forth a Man's Right and Property may be taken away for some heinous
crimes committed against Nature, or Humane Society, is another question,
whereof we have already treated, Vide Supra, Chapter 20.. 40.
where we discour'st of the Right of Punishments.

XI. Nor the desire of Liberty in such as are Subjects.
Neither is it a just cause for any people or persons to take Arms to endeavor
to recover their Liberty being lost; as if it did naturally and always belong
unto them. For when we say that Men or Cities are naturally free, we mean, that
they are so by that Right of Nature, which precedes all Humane Constitutions:
In which sense Liberty is taken only for a privation of Slavery, but not as it
is contradictory to Servitude; so that though by Nature no Man be a Servant,
yet no man has by Nature this privilege, that he can never be made so; for in
this sense no man is free. And thus is that of Albutius to be understood, Nemo
natus servus est, nemo liber, Sen. lib. 3. contr. 21.
haec postea nomina singulis imposuit fortuna; To be born either Bond or Free,
are the badges of Fortune, and not of Nature. So Aristotle, It is the Law that
makes any man either a freeman or a servant. And therefore into what Estate
soever Fortune has cast us, be it of Freedom, or of lawful Subjection, and
that either Personal or Civil, we ought therewith to be content, and in no wise
to struggle, or repine against it, according to the advice of the Apostle; 1
Cor. 7.21.
Art thou called to be a servant? grieve not at it.

XII. Nor the desire of Rule, without the consent of those whom we would rule.
Neither is it lawful for any man by force of Arms to reduce those under his
Government, who deserve to be enslaved, or as Philosophers say, are naturally
slaves. For although it be expedient for them to be well governed, yet this
gives no right to any man to compel them thereunto by Force and Arms; for to
such as have the use of Reason, the choice of things profitable and
unprofitable, should be left free to themselves, unless some one has already
got the Dominion over them. But as to Infants it is clear by another case; for
seeing that it is not permitted unto them freely to dispose of their own
actions, or to exercise that Right which belongs unto them, by reason of the
defect or immaturity of their judgments, therefore they are committed to fit
Guardians and Tutors.

XIII. The Roman Empire not Universal.
And here I should hardly mention that absurd Title, which some have given unto
the Roman Emperor, as if the Right of Empire over the remotest, and as yet
unknown parts of the World were already invested in him; but that I find
Bartolus (who for a while was admired as the Prince of Civilians) so daring, as
to pronounce that man an Heretic that should deny it: namely, because as well
the Roman Emperors have sometimes styled themselves Lords of the world; (as by
the Council of Chalcedon it may appear) as also, because in the sacred story,
that Empire (which later writers call Romania) is by way of Eminency mentioned
by the name (...), of the world: as indeed many such hyperbolical expressions
we shall meet with, not only amongst Poets, as Orbem jam totum Victor Romanus
habebat;
The conquering Romans held the World in awe:
and the like; which Empire, though it contained not the sixth part of the then
known world, yet because it was the greatest and most eminent Empire in the
world at that time, it was by way of excellency styled the Empire of the world.
Thus Philo, I speak, says he, De Legate.
of many, and those the most profitable parts of the earth, which a man may (by
way of eminence) call the world, as it is bounded between those two great
Rivers, that of Euphrates, and this of the Rhine: But even in the holy
Scriptures, as when Judea only is by the like way of eminency called the whole
earth; and Jerusalem said to be seated in the midst of the earth, (i. e.) of
Judea. For as St Hierome well observes, Nomen terrae, etiam addita particula,
omnis, restringi debet ad eam regionem de qua sermo est; This word, the Earth,
though this particle, All, be added unto it, ought to be restrained to the
Country whereof we discourst: So all the world is said to be taxed, Luke 2.1.
that is, all that was at that time under the Roman Jurisdiction. And in this
sense Delphos, because it was seated on the midst of Greece is said to be
Totius orbis umbilicus, as it were, the navel or midst of the whole earth.
Neither will it be very argumentative to say with Dante, That it would be
expedient for all mankind, that the Roman Emperor should have such a right of
Sovereignty, seeing that Commoda quae adfert suis compensantur incommodis; The
conveniences that it promises to bring with it, would be attended with many
more inconveniences that would follow it. For as a ship may be made of that
extraordinary bulk and burden, that it cannot be well steered; so an Empire
may consist of so vast a multitude of Men, and of Regions so diverse, and so
far distant, as that no one man can possibly govern it: Yea, and if we should
grant, that it were so universally expedient, yet would it not thence
necessarily follow, that this should actually confer a Right to the Roman
Emperors, because such a Right cannot possibly arise, but either by consent,
or by way of punishment. Neither has the Roman Emperor a Right to all those
Countries now, which once belonged to his Predecessors: for as many of them
were got by Conquest, so have they long since been lost by Conquest; as some
also have been quitted by Agreement, others being deserted have fallen under
the Jurisdiction of other Nations and Kings. And some Cities which heretofore
were wholly Subjects, became afterward but in part only, or admitted into a
social League, upon terms only unequal. For by all, or any of these ways the
Roman Empire, as well as any other might either lose or change, whatsoever
Right they could formerly have or pretend unto.

XIV. Nor the Pope.
But some there were that would challenge to themselves the power of the whole
Church also, even over those people who dwell in those parts of the world,
which are as yet unknown; whereas St Paul himself openly professes, That
without the bounds of Christianity he had no right to judge, What have I to do
(says he) to judge those that are without? 1 Cor. 5.12.
And although that power which the Apostle had, did in its manner appertain
unto earthly things, yet was not that power of Earthly, but of Divine
Institution, and to be exercised not by weapons or scourges, but by the Word of
God generally preached, and applied to some particular circumstances, and by
exhibiting or denying the seals of the remission of sins, as it should conduce
to the salvation of every man. And in the last place, by a revenge
supernatural, and therefore proceeding from God himself, as in the cases of
Ananias, Elymas, Hymenaeus and others, it evidently appeared: Yea, and our
blessed Savior himself, from whom all Ecclesiastical Power flows, and whose
life was a perfect Exemplar or Copy for the Church to imitate, Joh. 18.36.
denied his Kingdom to be of this world; that is, of the same nature with other
Kingdom: adding this, For if it were, then after the manner of other Kings,
should my servants fight. And yet even now, in case he would pray to his Father
to send him an Army, it should consist not of Men, but of Angels, Mat. 26.53.
And whatsoever he did by the Right of his own Power, he did it not by humane
strength, but by the virtue of his Divinity; and that even then when he drove
the buyers and sellers out of the Temple; the whip he used was not the
Instrument of Gods wrath, but the sign or symbol only; so was the spittle and
the oil, as Abulensis observes, In Mat. 9.
not the salve, but the sign of the cure. St Augustine upon that place of John
before-cited, thus proclaims, Hearken therefore O ye Jews and Gentiles,
circumcised and uncircumcised: And hear O ye Kingdoms of the Earth, your
Empires here I impede not; for my Kingdom is not of this world: Be ye not moved
with vain fears, as Herod the Great was at the report of Christ's birth, who was
so far transported with jealousy, that he slew a multitude of innocent Babes,
thinking thereby to secure his own Kingdoms by the death of this new born King:
Timendo potius quam irascendo crudelior; being more enraged through fear and
jealousy than anger. My Kingdom, says he, is not of this world: What could
have been said more to dispel those fears? Come, and be partakers with me of
that Kingdom, which is not of this world: Come unto me by faith, and let not
your fears provoke you to cruelty. So likewise Hilary Bishop of Arles, Christ
came not into the world to invade another man's Glory, but to communicate his
own; not to usurp an earthly Kingdom, but to confer an heavenly. St Paul tells
Timothy, That a Bishop should be no striker, 1 Timothy 3.2. Nor rule by constraint
or compulsion; for to d^ive by force, better becomes a King than a Bishop.
Princes may exercise their Power in punishing Offenders to deter them from
doing evil: De Sacerd. l. 2.
But what we do, says Chrysostom, must be, not by coercion, but by
persuasion: whereunto he adds this Reason, For God crowns not our forced, but
our voluntary; or as St Paul speaks, our reasonable service. Ad Ephesians. 1.4.
So in another place, It is our duty to instruct, persuade, exhort, and
reprove, but not to command, or to compel: Consiliariorum locum obtinemus; We
serve as Counselors to advice, and to give our Opinions, but still we leave
our Auditors to their free choice, whether they will act accordingly or no: We
have no such power given us, as to restrain men from sinning by severe
punishments. Whence it is evident, that Bishops, as such, have no Right of
Domination over men, In Epitaphio Nepotiani.
as Kings and Princes have. St Hierome distinguishing between a King and a
Bishop, concludes, That the Power of a Bishop is much inferior to that of a
King, for a King may enforce to an unwilling obedience; but a Bishop has no
power but over such as are willing to obey him. Episcopus docet, ne Judex
inveniat quod puniat; The Bishop instructs and admonishes, that the Magistrate
may find no cause to punish. It was well said of Frederick the Emperor
concerning the Pope: Ecclesiam regat ille suam, divinaque jura
Temperet: Imperium nobis, fascesque relinquat.
Let him his own Church rule, by Laws Divine,
But let the Sword and Scepter still be mine.
And when Suenno King of Denmark stood Excommunicate, William Bishop of
Ros^hil, in opposing himself against him, at his entrance into the Church with
his pastoral staff, and exposing his breast naked to the officers of the King,
who offered to draw upon him, did therein perform the office of a good Bishop.
The like did St Ambrose to the Emperor Valentinus as we have declared above;
Bo. 1. chapter 4.. 5.
but whether it be lawful for Kings themselves to make War upon such as have
rejected Christianity by way of punishment, we have already elsewhere discourst
in the Chapter of Punishments, as far as suffices to our purpose.

XV. The pretense of fulfilling of prophecies no cause of War.
And hereof also I shall give my advice, and that not in vain, (but because I
foresee, by comparing these modern times with those long since past; much
mischiefs likely to ensue, unless in time carefully prevented) that the hopes
we conceive that some things are due unto us, by our own interpretation of some
Divine Prophecies, can be no cause of a just War. ( Zozimus records it of
Nicomedes the Son of Prusias, that mis-appling a Prophecy of one of the Sibyls,
by the persuasion of Attalus made War against his own Father; the like he and
Ammianus relates of one Theodorus; so does Procopius of John of Cappadocia. In
the time of the Emperor Gratian.
) For besides that those Prophecies which are not fulfilled, cannot certainly
be understood without a Prophetic Spirit, the very time of the accomplishment
of such as are certain may be hidden from us. And lastly the bare prediction,
unless it be backed with an express command from God, gives no right to any
man, s^eing that God permits such things as he predicts to be sometimes brought
to pass, by wicked men and by wicked actions: For the Books of the Prophets are
shut and sealed up until a certain time, so that they cannot be understood,
Dan. 12.4.8.9. The Vision that the Prophet Habbakkuk saw concerning the
judgments to fall on the Chaldaeans, was not immediately to be inflicted on
them, But it was to be fulfilled in its appointed time; In the end whereof,
says that vision, it shall speak and not lie though it do tarry: yet was the
Prophet to wait for it, for it shall surely come to pass and not stay, Hab.
2.3. Time then is the best interpreter of Prophecies. St Jerome upon that place
of Daniel before-recited writes thus, If the Prophet did hear and not
understand, what will they do who presuming on their own understanding, have
published this Book which is sealed up, and until the time come for its
accomplishment. So Procopius concerning the Oracles of the Sibyls, Which, says
he, I believe are beyond all humane power to unfold, until the time come when
they shall be fulfilled. Let Divines therefore take heed how they undertake to
unriddle Prophecies; and let Politicians beware how they give credit to
over-arrogating Divines, though the things predicted were certainly to come to
pass; yet are the times and means when and whereby they are to be accomplished
very uncertain: and therefore it is no dishonor to profess our ignorance of
them, Eorum quae scire nec datur, nec fas est, docta est ignorantia, scientiae
appetus insaniae species; Some kind of madness it is to desire to know those
things, which are therefore screened from us that we should not know them. The
secret things belong unto God; but the things revealed, unto us, Deuteronomy. 29.29.

XVI. Nor a debt not strictly due, but some other way.
Thus also is it to be observed, that in case any thing be owing to a man, not
strictly out of justice, but arising from some other virtue; as from
liberality, favor, mercy, love, or the like, as it cannot be recovered by any
course of Law, so neither can it be required by War. For to either of these it
suffices not, that what is required is for some moral reason to be done: But
besides that, it is necessary that there should be in us some kind of Right
unto that, such a kind of Right as the Laws both Divine and Humane do sometimes
give even unto such things as are due by other virtues; which when it happens,
then it becomes a debt after a new way, which now appertains to justice. But
this being wanting, the War that is made for this cause is unjust; as was that
War made by the Romans against the King of Cyprus or ingratitude. For he that
does a courtesy to another, has no Right to exact thanks; otherwise it were
not a courtesy, but a contract or debt.

XVII. Though the War be just, yet the manner of prosecuting it, may make it
unjust.
It is also to be observed, that though there be a just cause of War; yet may
this just cause be spoiled by the access of some vice that cleaves to the
action from the mind of the Agent, either that something else, not by it self
unlawful, does more efficaciously move us to the War, than the Right it self;
as when we have a greater prospect unto Glory: or when some kind of profit
either public or private, is expected to arise from the very War, being
considered a part from the cause that justifies it; which vice is most
dangerous, because it comes mantled with the Robe of Virtue: But as St.
Augustine rightly advises, Satius est cujuslibet inertiae poenas luere, quam
istorum armorum gloriam quaerere; Better it is to suffer the punishments of any
cowardice, then to seek glory by such a War. This was it that sullied all the
Victories of Alexander, and for which all Historians declaimed against him as a
Robber, because he made War only for Ambition; and to that end disquieted the
whole World, vexing all Nations without any cause given, and making War upon
those whom he never knew: for what could this be but as St. Augustine calls it,
Grande Latrocinium? A great Robbery. Or a just cause may be spoiled when
accompanied with a passion manifestly unlawful; as when we rejoice in the
destruction of our Enemies barely as such, without respect to any thing that is
good. So Aristides was of opinion that the Phocenses were deservedly destroyed;
but withal he condemned King Philip for destroying them, because he did it,
not upon the score of Religion as he pretended: but out of an Ambitious desire
to enlarge his Empire. Salust ascribes all Wars to this one, and that very
ancient cause, namely, a vehement thirst after Dominion and Riches. And it was
Tacitus his observation, That Gold and Wealth were ever the principal causes of
making War; which Seneca attributes to Covetousness and Revenge, Mad anger and
a greedy thirst for gain
The League have broke.
Whereunto we may add that of St. Augustine, An earnest desire to make what
spoil we can, the cruelty of Revenge, an unquiet and implacable Spirit,
Contumacy and Rebellion, together with an ambitious thirst after Empire and
Riches, these and the like are deservedly blamed in all Wars. But yet these
where a justifying cause is not wanting, though they favor rankly of a corrupt
mind, yet do they not render the War properly unjust; and therefore restitution
cannot justly be required of damages sustained in such a War.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Causes of War that are doubtful.
I. Whence doubts arise in moral matters. II. That we ought to do nothing
contrary to the dictates of our own judgment, though erroneous. III. That the
judgment is sometimes swayed by arguments drawn from the thing it self. IV.
Sometimes by the Authority of others. V. If on either side doubts do equally
arise, and the matter be weighty, and one must be chosen, then we are to choose
the safest. VI. Whence it follows, that in such a case we are not to engage in
War. VII. Which may be avoided, either by a Treaty. VIII. Or by Arbitration,
where also is handled the duty of Christian Princes, in mediating between the
parties engaged in War. IX. Or by lot. X. Whether single Combats may be
admitted to prevent a public War. XI. That the present occupant has some
advantage, where the case is equally doubtful. XII. Where the case is equally
doubtful on both sides, and neither party be in possession, the matter
contended for may be divided. XIII. Whether a War may be on both sides just,
explained by many distinctions.
I. Causes of doubts whence?
IT is true, what Aristotle in the first of his Morals teaches, That there
cannot be the same certainty in Ethics, as in Mathematics; which therefore
happens, because the Mathematics abstract forms from all matter; and because
the very forms themselves are such for the most part, as will admit of no mean:
As between straight and crooked there is nothing intervenient. But in Morals
the least circumstance varies the matter, and the forms concerning which we
treat, have usually something interjacent, and of that latitude, that they
sometimes approach nearer to this extreme, and sometimes nearer to that. As
between things absolutely commanded, and things absolutely interdicted, there
are some things that may, or may not be done: so between things exactly just,
and things absolutely unjust, there are some things intermediate; whereof some
incline nearer to this extreme, and some to that: From whence does often arise
some doubt and ambiguity, to whether of the two extremes they approach nearest;
as we may perceive in the degrees of heat and cold in water when it is tepid,
and in the degrees of light and darkness, health and sickness, etc. Insomuch
that (as Aristotle says) The judgment has sometimes an hard task to
determine, which is to be preferred before the other. But Andronicus Rhodius
goes yet farther, affirming, That it is a very difficult thing sometimes to
distinguish between (Realities and Resemblances) things exactly just, and
things that are only apparently so.

II. Nothing to be done against our judgment.
But this Rule is in the first place to be constantly observed, That though an
Act be really Just, yet if upon a serious examination we shall judge it to be
unjust, to us if we do it, it is so: And this is that which St Paul intends
when he says, Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. In which place, Faith
signifies the firm persuasion or judgment of the mind concerning a thing; Romans
14.23.
as may easily be collected from those other expressions of St Paul in the same
Chapter, Let every man be full y persuaded in his own mind. B^^ssed is the man
that condemns not himself in that which he allows: Peccatum est q^od aliter
fit quam probatum est; Whatsoever any man does, says St Ambrose, Ambrose.
otherwise than what his own conscience approves is sin. For that a thing be
well done, says Plutarch, Plut. Timoleonte.
it is requisite, not on^y that what is done be just and honest, but that there
be a firm and constant persuasion of mind in him that does it, that what is
done, is therefore done, because his conscience tells him that it ought to be
so done. For God has endued the rational soul with a discerning faculty, to
the end, that it may guide us in all our actions, which being slighted, the
mind immediately becomes sensual and brutish. But yet it sometimes falls out,
that the judgment wavereth and gives but a dim and uncertain light; which if
upon a mature disquisition we cannot clear, then we should take the advice of
Cicero, De Off. lib. 1.
and forbear to act whilst we remain doubtful whether it be just or unjust.
The like advice Pliny gives, Wherein thou doubtest forbear. The Hebrew Doctors
also give this caution, Beware and forbear in matters that are dubious. But
this is then only seasonable where we have a free choice, either to do or not
to do; but not where we are obliged to do either this or that, and yet are
unsatisfied in either, whether it be just or not: for there we are to choose
that which in our judgment seems to be less evil. Semper enim ubi electio evadi
non potest, minus malum rationem induit boni; For always when the will is
straightened between two evils, and the choice of one of them cannot be avoided,
there the lesser evil has in it an appearance of good; because it participates
more of goodness than the other does; and therefore, of evils the least ought
to be chosen, says Aristotle: So also Cicero, (...).
De malis minimum, Of evils choose the least. And Quintilian, in comparing
evils, the less usurps the place of good.

III. The judgment sometimes led by arguments drawn from the thing it self.
But it often falls out in doubtful Cases, That notwithstanding our strictest
disquisition, yet the mind hangs as it were in a tottering condition, sometimes
inclining unto this, sometimes unto that part, being poized sometimes by
arguments drawn from the matter it self, and sometimes by the Authority of
Grave and Learned Men, who have declared their Opinions on that very case. For
as St Augustine in his third Book of Order well observes, When our minds are
assaulted with any difficulty, we have two ways to extricate our selves,
either by our own reason, or by the Authority of the most learned. And herein
also does that of Hesiod hold true, Lib. 22.
which Minutius in Livy makes use of after a battle unsuccessfully fought, The
highest point of wisdom is to be able to manage our affairs by the strength of
our own judgments: The next is to hearken to the advice of the best men; but he
that is neither wise enough to govern by himself, nor willing to be led by the
Counsel of wise men, is a rank fool. Whereunto Cicero likewise alludes in his
Oration for Cluentius, He is accounted the wisest of men, that in all
occurrents is able to direct himself; next unto him is he that can be content
to hearken to the good counsel of others: b^t he that cannot do the former, and
will not do the latter, is in the lowest form. Now the Arguments from the thing
it self are drawn from the causes, from the effects, or from some other
adjuncts: Ille quidem ante omnes, per se ipse quid utile, Hesiod.
quid non
Qui videt, and long fines prospectat agendi:
Qui been consultis didicit parere, secundus:
At qui consiliis pollet nihil ipse, nec audit
Suadentes alios, nullos homo vivit ad usus.


IV. By the Authority of others.
But to know these things rightly, there is required much knowledge and
experience; and if either of these be wanting, whereby the judgment may be
rightly informed to act by it self, then are we bound to steer our affairs by
the advice and counsel of the most judicious. For that, says Aristotle, is
most probable which is approved of by all, or by the most, or certainly by wise
men; and of these, by either all, or by the greatest part, or by the most
prudent and judicious of them: And by these means do Kings, who have no leisure
to be eminently learned, grow notwithstanding wise by the counsel of others:
Thus Princes by their Senators grow wise. Thus Aristides in his Oration for
Peace tells the Rhodians, As in matters of fact, that which is attested by the
most authentic and judicious witnesses is held for truth: So in matters of
polity, those counsels are safest, which are approved of by men of the greatest
learning and experience. The ancient Romans never made War without consulting
the College of Heralds, which consisted of men of the greatest Experience in
matters of War; neither did the Christian Emperors usually undertake a War
without consulting their Bishops, That so if any thing could be objected
against it in point of Religion, And it is recorded of Alexander the Great,
That he admitted into his Council men of the greatest Learning, but most
especially Historians.
they might be admonished of it.

V. If the doubts be equal, the matter weighty, and one must be chosen, choose
the safest.
But in many Controversies it falls out, That the Arguments on both sides, as
well from our own Reason, as from Authority, are so equally probable, that it
is very difficult to judge where the Right is: And in such a case, if the
matter in question be of no great moment, the judgment may be blameless, though
it pass on either side. But if it be of great concernment, as in passing
sentence of life and death upon a supposed offender, then by reason of the vast
distance that there is between the parts eligible, that part is to be adjudged
best, that is safest. And therefore it is much better to absolve the Guilty,
than to condemn the Innocent, says Aristotle; and he adds this reason, For
where the case is dubious, Sect. 29.
we should choose that part which will infer the least danger in case we should
err. To the same purpose is that of Antiphon, If we must needs run the hazard
of misjudging, it is more pious unrighteously to pardon, than injuriously to
condemn, for by the former we can be charged but with error; but by the
latter, with wickedness.

VI. The safest way is to abstain from War.
To make War is a matter of the greatest consequence that can concern a Nation,
whence ensues a torrent of mischiefs (as by a Sea-breach) whereby many
thousands of innocent people are on both sides destroyed: And therefore amongst
all our consultations the safest counsels are those that incline unto Peace.
This was it for which the Italian Poet so highly extolled Q. Fabius: Dangers he
prudently foresaw, nor for
Things mean or doubtful, gladly would make War.
Now three ways there are whereby differences among Princes may be reconciled
without breaking out into open War.

VII. 1. By Treaty.
The first whereof is by Treaty or Conference: Seeing there are two ways of
debating differences, says Cicero, The one by argument, the other by plain
force; whereof that is proper to men, this to beasts: we may make the latter
our refuge, if we cannot receive satisfaction by the former. This is the method
which Dionysius Halicarnassensis prescribes; not over-hastily to fly to blows,
till we have tried how words will prevail: All means unarmed, wise men will
first assay,
How know, if ask't, but he will unforced obey?
So Dionysius Halicarnassensis, We must not proceed to blows, until we have
tried what words can do: Agreeable whereunto is that of Menelaus in Libanius,
It more becomes a man to make trial how he can prevail with Reason and
Arguments, before he rashly rush into War. So also Menelaus in Libanius, It is
more agreeable to Humane Nature, to try, how far we can prevail with Reason,
than suddenly to fly into arms: The like we find in Euripides; This I Will obtain
by words, if not, by blows. Thus Paneas in Livy, There are, says he, many
things, which men rather than make War, are willing to remit; which
notwithstanding cannot be enforced from them by force of arms. Mardonius in
Herodotus blames the Grecians upon this account, That being all of one
Language, they did not first argue their grievances by the mediation of
Heralds and Ambassadors before they broke out into Arms. So Coriolanus in
Dionysius Halicarnassensis, If a man, (says he) without coveting another, do
but demand his own, and being thereof denied, shall make War; that War, by the
consent of all Nations is most just. For as King Tullus says in the same
Author, Quae verbis componi nequeunt, ea armis decernenda sunt; Those
differences which cannot by reasons be composed, must be determined by blows:
And yet, as Vologeses in Tacitus declares, I had rather keep what mine
Ancestors have left me by Equity, than by the expense of blood; by mine own
Just Title, than by a doubtful War. For as King Theodorick wisely observed,
Then only is War profitable, when our Enemies will not otherwise do us Justice.

VIII. 2. By Arbitration.
The second way to prevent War between those who have no Common Judge between
them, is to put the matter in question to Arbitration: This, though much
scorned by such Princes as are too confident in their own strength; yet is
worthily to be pressed and insisted on by all that love Peace and Equity: To
persecute him as an enemy that is willing to put his Case to an indifferent
Arbiter, is impious and unjust, says Thucydides. So concerning the Kingdom of
the Argives, Adrastus and Amphiraus were both content to refer thems^^ves to
the judgment of Eriphyla, as Diodorus testifies. The like did the Athenians and
the Megarenses to three Lacedaemonians concerning the Island Salamis. Lib. 5.
The same Thucydides records this to be one of the Articles agreed on, in the
League between the Lacedaemonians and the Argives; That in case any Controversy
should at any time arise between their Cities, the matter in difference should
amicably be referred to a third City, which should be indifferent to both,
according to the ancient custom of their forefathers. Thus the Corcyreans
declare their readiness to refer their difference with the Corinthians, to any
of the Peloponnesian Cities that they should agree upon. Many Great Princes and
States, to save the effusion of blood, have been contented to put their
grievances to Arbitration. Aristides commends Pericles, that to avoid a
doubtful War, he was willing to commit his Cause to indifferent Judges. So
also does Isocrates in his Oration against Ctesiphon, highly extol King Philip
of Macedon for his readiness to refer all those Controversies which he had with
the Athenians, to some other City that stood indifferently affected to either
party. Thus do the Samnites, as to the differences between themselves and the
Romans, offer to stand to the award of those States that were at Peace with
both of them. Xen. Cyro, lib. 2.
Cyrus makes the Indian King Judge between himself and the Assyrian: So do the
Carthaginians to avoid a War put the Cause of their Quarrel with Masinissa, to
the Judgment o^ others. Yea, and the Romans themselves do refer their
differences with the Samnites, Livy lib. 8.
to be compromised by their common Associates. We, for our parts are ready (say
the Gepidae to the Lombards in Procopius) to refer our selves to any
indifferent Arbiters. Goth lib. 3.
Queen Elizabeth offered to refer the differences between her and the Dane,
unto Commissioners on both sides, Camden. Anno 1600.
or unto the Elector of Brandenburgh, the King of Denmark's Father in Law, and
to the Duke of Mechlenburgh, and the Duke of Brunswick as Arbitrators. Now they
that refuse this way of disceptation, by Reasons, Arguments or Arbitrements,
running rashly into War, when it may be avoided, decline all Justice, Humanity,
and the common practice of the best and wisest Princes. Yet, that Philip King
of Spain would not admit of the Pope to be Judge between him and other
Competitors, for the Kingdom of Portugal, I do not wonder; Aberic. Gentilis.
because the Pope claimed the decision of all such Controversies as his proper
Right: wherefore that wise King was unwilling to add his own Example to some
ancient ones, whereby the Pope might hereafter prove himself to be the sole
Arbiter and Disposer of Kingdoms. Many other Examples may be produced, but in a
Case so clear these may suffice. Plutarch tells us, That it was the principal
duty of the College of Heralds among the Romans to take care, Ne sinerent
prius ad bellum veniri, quam spes omnis judicii obtinendi periisset; That no
War should be attempted, but where all hopes of receiving satisfaction for
injuries done them by any other means were frustrate. And Strabo testifies of
the Druides in Gallia, Lib. 4.
That anciently they were the Arbitrators between public enemies, and that, by
their mediation Peace was often made, even when the Armies were preparing for
battle: Which Office did of old in Spain appertain to their Priests, as the
same Author records. But much more does it concern Christian Kings and States
to prevent the effusion of blood by this means. Lib. 11.
For if both Jews and Christians have thought fit to appoint Arbitrators among
themselves to determine all Controversies, to the intent, Vict. de Jure Belli,
n. 28.
That Brother should not go to Law with Brother before unbelievers, as St Paul
has also commanded; how much more reason is there that such Arbitrators or
Judges should be chosen by us to prevent mischiefs far greater than going to
Law, namely, spoil, rapine, murder, yea, and sometimes desolation, which are
the unhappy concomitants of cruel War? From whence Tertullian concludes, That a
Christian ought not to wage War, seeing that it is not lawful for him to go to
Law; which notwithstanding is to be understood in a qualified sense. Gregor.
lib. 10.
And indeed it is very unfit for Princes who profess themselves to be followers
of Christ, to rush into arms one against the other with so much bitterness,
seeing that there are other means found out to compromise their Quarrels, and
to make better use of their Arms and Valor against the Common Enemy. And for
this, as well as for many other reasons, it would be very convenient, nay
necessary, that constant Diets and Conventions of Christian Princes should be
held, where by the prudence and moderation of such as are not interessed, all
Controversies may be composed; yea, and that some expedient may be found out to
enforce both Parties to accept of Peace upon equal and indifferent terms;
whereof we may find Examples in Cassiodore Cassiod. lib. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4.
, Gailius Gail. de pace publ. lib. 2. cap. 18. n. 12.
, and others, which anciently was committed to the care of the Druides in
France, to whom the Bishops did afterward by a better Right succeed: So we
read of the French Kings, that in the division of the Kingdom, they have
referred themselves to the judgment of their Peers.

IX. 3. By Lot.
The third way to prevent War is to decide Controversies by Lots, which Dion
Chrysostom much commends; and long before him Solomon, Prove. 18.18. whereof
see St Augustine in his first Book, 28. Chap. of Christian Doctrine.

X. Single Combats permitted.
Near of kin unto this are single combats between Competitors, the use whereof
is not altogether to be rejected: for where two persons, standing in
competition for one thing which cannot be divided, are ready to embroil a whole
Nation in blood; It were much better, and more just, that one should perish for
all, than that all should perish for one only. In which Case that of Jocasta in
Seneca is good advice, Plut. Otho.
Theb.
-- Rex sit e vobis uter,
Manente regno, quaerite.
-- Try which of you shall reign,
But let the Kingdom still remain.
And this if not justifiable in the competitors themselves, yet may it well be
accepted of by the people if offered, as being of two evils by much the lesser.
Thus Metius in Livy bespeaks Tullus, Lib. 5.
Let us agree about some way whereby it may be determined, whether of us two
shall reign over the other, without the effusion of so much blood, or the
slaughter of either of our people. Strabo set it down as an ancient custom
among the Grecians; And Aeneas in Virgil accounted it a very just thing, that
the quarrel between Turnus and him should have been thus decided: Aen. 11.
Fitter 't had been for Turnus thus to have died. And for this cause it was,
that M. Anthony challenged Caesar to a single combat, as Plutarch records.
Vit. Ant.
Sure it is, that amongst other customs of the Ancient Francks, Agathias highly
commends this, whose words being worthy of Eternal Memory, are to this purpose:
No sooner did any quarrel arise between their Kings, but immediately they
betake themselves to their Arms, they raise Armies and march against each other
so furiously, as if nothing but an absolute conquest could end the
controversy; but yet as soon as the Armies met and faced, they presently laid
aside all animosity and made peace; thereby enforceing (as it were) their Kings
to dispute their grievances, rather by Law than Arms; or if that pleased them
not, then to end their quarrels with the peril of their own lives only, as
judging it neither just nor reasonable, nor indeed agreeable to their national
customs, for their Kings to sacrifice the Commonwealth to their private hatred;
wherefore they instantly disband their Armies, reconcile their Princes, and
make Peace: Tanta in subditis cura justitiae and patriae amor, in regibus
animus placidus and suis obsequens; So great in the subjects was their esteem
of justice and love to their Country; and in their Kings, their moderation of
spirit, and their compliance with the people, in order to their common safety.

XI. In cases equally dubious, the present occupant has the best right.
Although where the equity of the cause is doubtful, both Parties are obliged
to seek after conditions of peace, to prevent the miseries of War; yet does it
more concern him that demands, than him that enjoys what the other requires, as
in the like equal cause, Melior est possidentis conditio; The title of the
present occupant is presumed to be best, as being most agreeable not only to
civil, but to natural Right; the reason whereof we have already given elsewhere
out of Aristotle's Problems: whereunto we must here add, That War cannot be
lawfully made by him, who though he know his title to what he claims to be
good, yet cannot produce evidence sufficient to convince the present occupant
of the illegality of his possession, because he has not a Right to compel his
Adversary to leave his possession.

XII. If neither be possessed, then a partition is just.
Where the Right is equally ambiguous, and neither party in possession, or both
equally, then he is to be reputed unjust, that shall refuse an equal partition
of the thing controverted, being offered unto him.

XIII. Whether a war may be on both sides just, explained by many distinctions.
By what has been herein said, it will be no hard matter to resolve that
question which is so frequently controverted, Whether a War in respect of the
principal promoters of it, can be on both sides just; where we must first
distinguish between the various acception of the word Just. So Gratian
distinguishes justice into that which respects the cause, the order, and the
mind. c. 11. q. 5. post C. Episcopus.
For a thing may be said to be just, in respect of the cause, or according to
the effects: Again, a thing a may be just in respect of the cause, either
according to the special and strict acception of justice, or according to its
more general acception, as it comprehends whatsoever in equity or honesty ought
to be done. Again the word Just, taken in its special signification may be
subdivided into that which respects the work done, or into that which respects
the mind of him that does it; for the agent may sometimes be said to do justly,
whilst he does not unjustly, though that which he does be not just. As
Aristotle Eth. l. 5. c. 10, 11. Greg.
rightly distinguishes between (...) and (...), to do unjustly, and to do that
which is unjust. Bonis male utuntur, qui temporali lucro just judicant; They
make ill use of things in themselves good, who do justice for rewards sake;
because it is the hopes of gain, and not the love of justice that excites them
to defend the truth. Now in this special acception of the word Just, and as it
relates to the thing it self, no War can be on both sides just; as, neither can
any other contest be: Quia facultas moralis ad contraria non datur per rei
ipsius naturam; Because the very nature so the thing, about which the dispute
was, will not admit of a moral power to things that are contrary: as namely, to
do a thing, and yet to oppose the doing of it. But yet it may very well be,
That neither of the Parties warring against each other does unjustly; because
no man can be said to do unjustly, but he that knows that which he does to be
unjust. But many men do not know that they do amiss, though that which they do,
be in it self unjust; so when men go to Law, they may justly (that is) with a
good mind, and intention do it on both sides, because they do both conceive.
that they are in the right; To some things the Right is not discernable whose
it is; and then, whilst each endeavors to take that from another, which he
thinks belongs to himself, who can condemn either of injustice?
for of many things, as well in point of Right, as in matters of fact whence
Right arises, men are ignorant. Now in the general acception of the word Just,
that is said to be just in the doing, whereof the Agent is altogether innocent;
for the act may be unjust, and yet the Agent blameless, by reason of his
insuperable ignorance. An example whereof we have in such as being (through no
default of theirs) ignorant of the Law, do not observe it; although happily that
Law be promulgated, and time of it self sufficient allowed for the knowledge
thereof: As also in such as go to Law, both Parties may be free, not from
injustice only, Nemo debet jus suum indiscussum relinquere. Tentanda sunt
quaecunque tantum sunt, Baldus.
but from any thing else that is blameable; especially when both, or either of
them contend, not in the behalf of themselves but of others; as a Tutor for his
Pupil, a Guardian for his Ward, whose Right he is bound in duty to defend,
though that Right be but uncertain. So in a wager at Law, two persons may
contend for one and the same thing, and yet neither of them be unjust: So also
a Councellor, may plead for either of them, without the least derogation to his
honesty. Again when something that is very profitable, stands in opposition to
what is honest, it is no easy matter to tell whether of them to follow.

When we first entered into War with Niger, says Severus the Emperor, there
was I confess no very plausible pretense for War, but the Empire lay at stake
between us, and both of us strove which should appropriate it to himself,
Herodian.


Nay as Aristotle well notes, to say of a Judge that he judges right, is but
an Ambiguous speech; for it may signify either that he judges (...), plainly
as he ought without any ignorance, or (...), according to the best of his
knowledge, or the clearest evidence that is brought before him. And therefore
the sentence which must pass, according to that evidence may be (through
misinformation) unjust, and yet the Judge that passes that sentence may be
righteous. Si dubium sit a qua part stet justitia, hanc si utraque pars
quaerit, injusta esse neutra possit.
If it be doubtful on what side the Right stands, if both Parties contend for
it, it is probable that neither does unjustly. The Jews made War against the
Canaanites justly, being so commanded by God; and the Canaanites being ignorant
of that charge given against them, did justly in defending themselves:
wherefore that War was on both sides just. Thus Pope Pius the second answered
the Hungarian Ambassador that complained against the Emperor, namely, He
thought that the King of Hungary did intend nothing dishonestly, and he knew
that the Emperor was a great lover of justice: But both contending for the
Kingdom, probable it was, that neither of them thought his Cause unjust. In
disceptationibus fori, par est litigantis utriusque jus, donec lata est pro
altero eorum sententia.
In all controversies this is found true, but especially in War, that both
Parties pretend to maintain a Cause that is just: But in War it is hardly
possible, that either party should be in that sense just, that is, free from
all blame, by reason of that great defect of love, and that overmuch rashness,
that for the most part inseparably accompanies it; besides the weightiness of
the business it self which is such, as being not satisfied with probabilities,
strictly requires such proofs, as are demonstrative and convincing. But if we
account that to be just, which is permitted to enjoy some effects of Right; it
is most certain, According to the effects of right, War may be on both sides
just.
that War in this sense may be on both sides just, as will appear anon, when we
come to treat of a public solemn War: for so, both a sentence though not
rightly past, and a possession not rightly gained, have both of them some
effects of that which is right.

CHAP. XXIV. War, though Just, not to be undertaken rashly.
I. It it better sometimes to remit our own Right, than to engage in a
doubtful War. II. But especially, when undertaken to exact punishment. III.
And chiefly by a King that is injured. IV. And that sometimes for his own and
his Subjects safety. V. Certain Rules guiding us to a prudent choice of things
apparently good. VI. An example whereby we may be guided in our endeavors
after liberty or peace; whereby the miseries of War may be prevented. VII.
Punishment not to be exacted by War, unless by the most potent party. VIII. War
not to be undertaken, unless compelled by necessity. IX. Or when we have some
very great Cause, together with some notable advantage. X. The miseries of War
lively described.
I. Better sometimes to forego our right, than to make War for it.
THough it be not properly pertinent to our purpose in treating only of the
Rights of War, to show how far other Virtues do either enjoin or persuade
thereunto, yet will it not be altogether impertinent for preventing of
mistakes, to give some cautions about it, lest any man should think, that
whenever he has a Just Cause offered him, he is bound to make War, or at
least, that it is at all times lawful for him so to do: whereas on the
contrary, it is, (for the most part) much more pious to remit somewhat of our
Right, than to endeavor to defend it by a dangerous War. We Christians are
especially taught to expose our own lives to the greatest perils that can be,
to preserve the lives, and (as much as in us lies) to procure the everlasting
welfare of others, in imitation of our great Lord and Master, who laid down his
own life to save ours, even then when we were strangers, nay, enemies unto him,
Romans 5.6. How much more reason have we to forbear the prosecution of our Just
Rights, when they cannot be obtained without the effusion of so much Christian
blood, and the destruction of so many men's Lives and Estates, Pol. lib. 4.
Rhet. ad Alex. c. 3.
besides other mischiefs, which War usually brings with it? This we are
forewarned of by Aristotle, and also by Polybius, not for every such cause to
run the hazard of a War. For the necessary defense of our Liberties, our Wives
and Children, we may lawfully make War, says Gallio in Seneca; but not for
such things as are either superfluous, or being lost, Suasoria 5. Philostratus,
lib. 23.
do not much damnifie us: This and somewhat more did Apollonius say to the King
of Babylon, We are not to contend with the Romans for a few small Villages,
which many of our Ancestors being but private men did enjoy. They must be great
matters indeed, that should so far provoke us, Adv. Apion. de popul. suis.
as to undertake a War, (especially with such potent enemies.) The like
Josephus testifies of his Country men, It is not our custom to muster up our
Forces, or to make War to enlarge our Dominions, but for the defense of our
Laws: All other losses we can bear with patience, but being debarred the use of
our Religion, we undertake War beyond our strength, and prosecute them to the
utmost of dangers. It was prudently advised by Dion Prusaeensis in his Oration
concerning War and Peace, We are not so much to consider whether we have been
justly provoked or no, as whether the injuries we have sustained be such as
will counterballance the expense of so much blood and treasure as will be
expended in the prosecution of a War for satisfaction.

II. Especially when undertaken for punishment only.
There are many arguments whereby we may be dissuaded from exacting
punishments: For first we see how many failings Parents are willing to wink at
in their Children: A Father (says Seneca Sen. de clem. l. 1. c. 14.
) unless highly provoked by many and those heinous offenses, so that his fears
swell higher than his just anger, will not proceed against his Son with the
utmost rigor and severity. Augustus sitting in Council with a Father
concerning a punishment to be inflicted on his Son, being found guilty of an
intended Parricide, would not adjudge him to the Sack, the Serpent, or to
Prison, but to banishment only whither his Father pleased, respecting not so
much the person offending, as the person offended; as knowing that gentle
punishments would best appease the wrath of a Father toward his own son.

Pro peccato magno paullulum supplicii satis est patri;
Few stripes, for great faults, Parents will appease.
Fathers (says Philo) do sometimes pass that sentence of exheredation on their
own sons, (...).
thereby cutting them off from their own families and kindred, but never until
they grow shamelesly and incorrigibly wicked, and that their hatred of their
Childrens Vices have quite overcome that great and unparalleled Love, which
Nature had at first imprinted in them. Not much different is that of Phinehas
in Diodorus, No Father does willingly punish his Sons, Lib. 5.
unless the measure of their wickedness do very much exceed the measure of his
natural affection. Nor that of Andronicus Rhodius, No Father can be so
unnatural as to cast of his Son, if he be not extremely wicked. Now whosoever
undertakes to punish another, assumes unto himself in a manner, the person and
office of a Governor, that is, of a Father; whereunto St. Augustine alludes,
when he thus bespake Marcellinus, Perform (O thou Christian Judge) the office
of a pious Father, who always prefers pardon before punishment. Ep. 87.
A merciful man (says Seneca) is as unwilling to spill another man's blood, as
he is to spill his own; knowing that nature in every man is equally solicitous
to preserve its being: And therefore, It befits men, Diod Sic. in fragm.
who are linkt together by the bands of Consanguinity, to be as sparing of
other men's lives as of their own; for not every man that offends is to be
punished, but they only that persist in their sins without repentance. Let all
men that are strangers to our faith, says Chrysostom, know, that the
reverence which we bear unto Christ is so great, that it restrains all earthly
powers: Servants are taught to honor their Masters, and Masters to forgive
their fellow Servants; De Stat^is l. ^.
that so our Great Lord and Master may be propitious unto us in that Great Day
of Judgment. It is usual in Scripture, where mention is made of sins and
punishments, to allay one word with another; and to a word that is likely to
heighten our anger, to add another that may serve to qualify it. If a man
shall commit a trespass against his neighbor (says Moses) which two words
(says St. Augustine) a [man] and a [sinner], are not conjoined without a
Mystery, but for this end, Aug. citat. a Gratian. causa 23. q. 4. Quia peccatur
corripe, quia homo miserere.
that if the sinner do exasperate us, the word [man] should presently becalm
us: for as he is a sinner he deserves punishment; but as he is a man he
deserves to be pitied. So in the new Law, thou beholdest a mote in thy
Brothers eye, Matt. 7.13. A mote that offends us no less than it does our
Brother, and our zeal is quickly inflamed to pull it out; but when we consider,
that it is in the eye, Vide supra c. 20.. 12, 26, 36,
and which is more, in our Brothers eye, then we go warily about it, lest
whilst we endeavor to pull out the mote, we put out our Brothers eye. So in
another place, If thy Brother offend thee, Luke 17.3. the offense provokes us
presently to passion; but when we consider that he who gives it, is Frater, our
Brother, that is, quasi fere alter, One cast in the same mold with us, and
scarcely divided from our selves; this should instantly appease our swelling
passion; so that though angry we may be, yet revenge we must not. The Emperor
Julian applauded that saying of Pittacus, which prefered pardon before
punishments. Orat pro Antioch.
But whosoever will imitate his heavenly Father (says Libanius) must glory
more in forgiving than in punishing; for in nothing do we draw nearer to the
Divine Nature (says Cicero) than in giving life to them, who have deserved
death. Again such cases there may happen, wherein to abstain from claiming our
Right, is not so much a courtesy as a debt, in regard of that love which we
owe unto all men though Enemies, whether considered in it self, or in obedience
to the Law of Christ: yea, and some persons there are, whose safety, though
they should persecute us, we are bound to prefer, even before our own lives;
because we know that their welfare is either very necessary, or very profitable
to the Commonwealth. And if Christ did enjoin us to part with our Coat, rather
than to contend for our Cloak, certainly he would have us to neglect much
greater losses, rather than go to War; because there is no contest so
destructive as War. Sometime again, the remedy brings more danger than the
disease; De off. l. 2. c. 2.
And (as St. Ambrose observes) to forego something of our just right, is not
only liberal, but for the most part gainful. Aristides exhorting the Grecian
Cities to peace, persuades them rather to yield, than to quarrel for small
matters, In imitation of good men, who had rather sit down with loss, than go
to Law for trifles. And Xenophon will inform us, That it is the part of a wise
man, not to embroil himself in War, though for matters of great importance. The
like advice Apollonius gives unto Princes, Graec. Hist. l. 6.
Not to engage in War though for great matters.

III. Especially by a King that is injured.
As concerning punishments, our principal duty, if not as men, yet as
Christians, is willingly and readily to remit them, as God in Christ does unto
us, Ephesians. 4.32. Seneca concerning a good Prince, says, That he is more ready to
forgive injuries done against himself, than those done against others; for as a
magnanimous person, scorns to be bountiful of another man's purse, but had
rather detract from himself what he gives unto others: so he only deserves the
title of being merciful, who bears his own injuries patiently, and freely
remits where he has power to revenge. Nec quicquam gloriosius Principe impune
laeso; Neither is there any thing more glorious than an injured Prince, that
disdains to revenge his own wrongs: And therefore Kings (as Quintilian
advises) should be exhorted to make themselves rather famous, for their
humanity and clemency, than formidable for their severity. Amongst other the
virtues that Ennobled C. Caesar, this is recorded by Cicero as the chief, That
he never forgot any things but injuries. Thus does Livia plead with Augustus,
As it is the duty of Emperors, severely to punish offenders against the
Commonwealth, so is it their honor to forgive their own personal injuries.
Dion.
It is very true what Antoninus the Philosopher told the Senate, That there was
nothing so unbecoming a Prince as to avenge his own wrongs; for though the
punishment be put just, yet being Judge in his own cause, it will seem cruelty:
And what Themistius said unto the Senate in the praise of Theodosius, That a
good Prince should excel those who had wronged him; not in power to hurt them,
but in his readiness to do them good. Aristotle denies that Prince to be
magnanimous, that is mindful of an injury, which Cicero explains thus, For,
says he, there is nothing more becoming a noble person than gentleness and
clemency. When one told Antisthenes that Plato spoke ill of him: he answered
without passion, Regium est benefacere, and male audire; To do well and hear
ill, is commonly the fate of Kings. The Holy Scriptures do furnish us with many
excellent examples of clemency, as in Moses; who when the people began to
mutiny against him for want of flesh, instead of punishing them prays for
them, Numb. 11.12. And when God himself branded Miriam with Leprosy for her
seditious murmuring against him; He, instead of taking revenge, intercedes for
her, healing her foul face with his devout tongue, Numb. 12.13. The like we
find in David, who being bitterly reviled by Shimei, crying out against him,
Come up thou man of blood, etc. returned not reproaches for reproaches, but
being urged by some to a revenge, answered meekly, Let him alone, let him
curse, for happily, God has bidden him, 2 Samuel 16.7, -- 10. Thus did St Stephen
intercede for his persecutors, saying, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge,
Acts 7.60. Now this does in a more especial manner become those who are
Sovereign Princes, Chrysostom. in laud Clem.
Unto whom as all things are permitted, so freely to restrain themselves, and
to make the Divine Law their guide in all their actions, is the readiest way to
purchase glory and immortality. The advice therefore of St Augustine to Count
Boniface was worthy to be by all Kings observed, Remember speedily to forgive
him, who having injured thee, begs for pardon. And these are the principal
motives which should dissuade us from entering into a bloody War, though happily
justly provoked, which are drawn from that affection, which as men, we either
owe, or may rightly show, even unto our enemies.

IV. And that sometimes for his own and his Subjects safety.
Sometimes it concerns us to abstain from War, for our own and their sakes that
are under us. Procopius Procop. Goth. lib. 2.
brings in the Goths thus bespeaking Belisarius, Since these things stand thus,
it is a duty incumbent upon the Governors of either Nation, not to be too
prodigal of the blood of their Subjects out of an ambitious desire of their own
glory; but to prefer those things that are both just and profitable, not for
themselves only, but for their enemies. Plutarch in the Life of Numa tells us,
That after the College of Heralds had judged that they might lawfully make
War, the Senate consulted, whether it were fit and expedient for them so to do.
In the Parable of our Savior, it is said, That before any King entered into
War, he first sat down and consulted about the charge, and whether with ten
thousand he was able to encounter him that came against him with twenty
thousand; and if not, he instantly sent and made peace with him. So Diodorus in
Thucydides, Although I should pronounce them guilty of great Crimes, yet I
shall not adjudge them to be slain, unless I see it expedient. So likewise Livy
records of the Tusculans, That by suffering all things, and denying nothing,
they purchased their peace with the Romans. Lib. 6. Plut. vit. Camilli.
The very same was done by the King of Armenia in the times of the Emperor
Severus, as Herodotus testifies Herod. lib. 3.
: And Tacitus tells us, That the Romans sought an occasion of War with the
Aeduans in vain, for being commanded to send money and arms to their Camp, they
sent both, and not only those, but victuals also, and that frankly. So Queen
Amalasuntha professed to the Ambassadors of the Emperor Justinian, That she
would not contend with him in Arms. Sometimes an Enemy may be pacified in a
moderate way; Lib. 7.
as Strabo informs us was done by Syrmus King of the Triballi, who at once
forbad Alexander the Macedonian entrance into the Island Peuce, and at the same
time honored him with many rich presents: thereby showing that it was the fear
of his power, and not any hatred or contempt of his person that made him to do
it. And indeed what Euripides sometimes said of the Cities of Greece, may fitly
be applied to other States: De Mart quoties itur in suffragia,
Nemo imminere cogitat mortem sibi,
Sed quisque cladem destinamus alteri:
Quod si in comitiis funera ante oculos forent,
Furiata bello non perisset Graecia.
When in full Senate Votes for War pass free,
No man his own destruction does foresee,
But all foretell the others destiny:
When if its own sad fate, each had foreseen,
Greece thus by War consumed had never been.
When we wax proud, and confident in our own strength, (says Livy) Let us then
call to mind that great command that fortune has over all sublunary things;
together with the sudden changes, and uncertain events of War. And as
Thucydides advises, Before we engage our selves too far, let us consider how
many sad mischances do usually happen in War, which the most piercing eye of
humane wisdom cannot foresee.

V. Prudent Rules about our choice of Good.
The things that usually fall under consultation, are either about the
intermediate ends which may probably conduce to the last end we fully resolve
on, or about those means whereby we may probably obtain those ends: The end we
propose to our selves is always either some good, or doubtless the avoiding of
some evil, which also falls under the notion of good. But those things that
lead us hither or thither, are not expetible for themselves, but as they
conduce to those ends: wherefore in all our Consultations we are to compare
both those ends between themselves, and the effective power or faculty of those
things which lead to the end to produce that end. For as Aristotle rightly
observes, The arguments that excite us to action are of two sorts, De motione
animalium.
either they are drawn from the goodness of the end, or from the possibility of
obtaining it; which comparison has these three Rules, whereby we may be
guided: First, Three Rules to guide us in the choice of Good.
If the thing in debate seem to have (in a moral esteem) an equal efficacy to
good and to evil; then if the good we hope for have somewhat more of good than
the evil we fear has of evil, we may adventure upon the action, (but if the
conveniences be not able to overbalance the inconvenience, it is better to
refrain;) for a wise man, though never so daring and magnanimous, will not run
the hazard of his life for every cause; but then only when the reward is great,
weighty and honorable. The second Rule is this, If the Good and Evil seem to
be equal which may proceed from the thing in question, then we may thus guide
our choice; if the thing it self have a greater efficacy to produce the Good
than it has to produce the Evil, then we may choose it. Thirdly, If both the
Good and Evil seem unequal, and the power or efficacy of the things no less
unequal; then that thing is at length to be chosen, if its efficacy to the Good
be greater, being compared with its efficacy unto the Evil, than the Evil it
self is, being compared with the Good: or if the Good it self compared with the
Evil be greater, than its efficacy unto Evil being compared with the Good. Thus
Narses to Belisarius, Where the dangers appear to be equal, and the damage
alike if we err, Procopius Goth. lib. 2. cap. 13.
there much discourse and consultation is necessary before we determine the
matter in question; but where the difficulties are unequal, and the damages
upon mistake greater or less than the hopes of gain, there the choice is very
easy, and requires no great depth of judgment to determine. What we have set
down here somewhat more accurately, Cicero has in a plainer way, De Offic.
lib. 1.
but to the same purpose described, where he advises us not to expose our
selves to dangers without cause, than which nothing can argue a more
fool-hardiness: Wherefore in perilous cases we should imitate Physicians, who
in light distempers use gentle remedies; but when the disease threatens death,
then those that are more doubtful and dangerous: Therefore it is the office of
a wise man to help in a time of danger, especially when he rationally
conceives, that the good he shall reap by it, if it succeed, does overbalance
the damage that he fears if it miscarry. But as the same Cicero elsewhere
says, No prudent man will endanger himself in such an enterprise, wherein the
good success shall bring him little profit, but where the least miscarriage may
prove fatal. For as Dion Prusaeensis says, Grant that our grievances be unjust
and unworthy to be born, yet will it not follow, That whenever we suffer any
thing unjustly, we ought by striving against it, to make our condition worse.
To make use of iron and steel, when more gentle remedies may prevail, Plutarch.
or where the case is not extremely dangerous, becomes neither a skillful
Physician, nor a Politic Statesman. Dion Prusaeensis, When our burdens are
beyond our strength, our endeavors to ease our selves of them are just and
honest, because necessary; but if they are tolerable, and that we have cause to
fear, that by struggling they may be made worse, we must arm our selves with
patience. For as Aristides Aristides.
says well, Where our fears are above our hopes, then it concerns us
especially to beware.

VI. Life better than Liberty.
An example whereof we will borrow out of Tacitus, who relates, that amongst
the Cities of France, there arose a great debate whether were more desiderable,
Peace or Liberty: where by Liberty, we must understand that which is Civil,
namely, a right to govern by their own Laws, which in a popular estate is
absolute and full; but mixed and moderate in an Aristocracy, especially in such
an estate wherein no Citizen is incapable of honors; and by Peace we mean such
a Peace, whereby the destruction of a City or Nation by a cruel War may be
prevented; that is, as Cicero explains it, When the whole City is in danger of
being lost: or when the case of a Nation or City is so desperate, that nothing
but an utter desolation can otherwise with any probable reason be expected,
which was the very case of the Jews being besieged by Titus. No man can be
ignorant of Plato's Opinion in such a case, who preferred death before
subjection; thereby showing, -- Quam sit non ardua virtus
Servitium fugisse manu;
-- with what ease
A man from slavery may himself release.
But Right Reason suggests the contrary; for the Life of Man, which is the
foundation of all temporal blessings, and the occasion of eternal, is more to
be esteemed than Liberty, whether we take both to be either personal or
national: And therefore God himself intended it as an act of his mercy, 2 Chronicles. 12.78. Jer. 27.13.
that he delivered his people into captivity, but destroyed them not. And by
the Prophet Jeremy he persuaded them, To yield themselves into the hands of the
King of Babylon, lest they died by the Famine or by the Pestilence. It is a
question not easily answered (says St. Aug.) whether the Saguntines did well
to preserve their Faith given to the Romans, De Civit Dei lib. 22. c. 6.
so long, until the City with themselves was totally destroyed by Hannibal. De
repub. lib. 3.
For though Cicero thought nothing sufficient to justify a War, but either the
public safety, or the public Faith given; yet does he not there determine the
case of the Saguntines, by showing, that if a City were driven into such a
strait, that they could not possibly preserve their Faith without the ruin of
themselves; nor preserve themselves without the breach of their Faith (which
was the case of the Saguntines) whether of the two were most eligible: But by
the Authority of the Holy Scriptures we are taught, That death is the greatest
of all terrors, and that Captivity, whether of a Nation, or of some particular
persons, is far more desiderable than utter destruction. Thus Guido the Italian
Poet bespeaks the Citizens of Milain, Omnia securi pro liberate feremus:
Sed libertatem co tempta nemo salute
Sanus amat; neque enim certae susceptio cladis
Quam vitare queas, nisi cum ratione salutis,
Libertatis amor, sed gloria vana putanda est.
It is not so properly a love to liberty, as a preposterous itch after vain
Glory, that makes a man to prefer his freedom before his life. Cicero instances
this as a case of necessity, that the Cisilinenses were necessarily to give
themselves up to Hannibal, although this clause were added to that necessity,
Nisi malint fame perire; Unless they had rather perish by famine. For as
Anaxilaus in Xenophon apoligizeth for his surrender of Byzantium, being
thereunto constrained for want of Bread, Pugnandum est hominibus in homines,
non in rerum naturam; Men ought to fight against men, but not against nature;
neither do men commend a voluntary death, so long as their hopes are above
their fears. That sentence which Diodorus Siculus past against the Thebans,
which lived in the time of Alexander the Great, stands yet upon record, namely,
That they were the authors of their own ruin; for as much as they had with
more courage than prudence provoked Alexander to their own destruction. And in
another place, the same Author examining the ground of that War, which the
Thracians undertook against Alexanders Army, after his death, says, That in
the opinion of the wisest men, they had consulted well for their own glory, but
not so well for their own profit, by thrusting themselves over-hastily into so
dangerous an enterprise, being no ways urged thereunto by any necessity; but
especially being forewarned by the destruction of the Thebans. The like censure
does Plutarch pass upon Cato and Scipio, Whom, for refusing to submit to Caesar
after his victory in Pharsalia, he condemns, as being the cause that so many,
and so gallant men, did unnecessarily perish in Africa. Now what I have here
said concerning liberty, may likewise be said concerning other things that are
desiderable, when they cannot be obtained without, if not a more just, yet at
least an equal expectation of some greater mischief. For as Aristides says; To
preserve the ship with the loss of the goods, is usual, but not with the loss
of the passengers.

VII. War seldom made for punishments by Princes of equal power.
This also is chiefly to be observed, That Wars are seldom or never made for
exacting punishments only, by such Princes or States as are of equal power; for
as the civil Magistrate, so he that undertakes to punish injuries by Arms, must
always be presumed to be of power sufficient to enforce it: Neither is it
prudence only, or the love we bear to our Subjects, that should dissuade us
from a doubtful War; but sometimes even justice, that I mean, which is
essential to Government, which requires, as obedience from inferiors, so
protection and preservation from superiors. And consequently as some Divines
have rightly observed, If a King for any small or trifing cause, as for the
exacting of punishments which are unnecessary, In what case a Prince is bound
to repair his Subjects losses.
engage his Subjects in a dangerous War, he is bound to repair the losses they
shall thereby sustain: for although to his Enemy happily he does no wrong who
has justly provoked him; yet does he thereby wrong to his Subjects, by
involving them in a dangerous War for such slight causes, as might better have
been dissembled, and is therefore bound to repair their damages; in which sense
that of Livy holds true, Justum est bellum quod necessarium est, and pia arma,
quibus nulla nisi in armis relinquitur spes; That War is just that is
necessary, and Arms are there necessary, when there is no hopes of safety but
by Arms. This was Ovids wish, Ovid. Fast. 1.
Sola gerat miles, quibus arma coerceat, arma;
May then the Soldier armed be,
When he repels his Enemy.


VIII. War not to be undertaken but in a case of necessity.
There is then one rare cause, when War either cannot, or ought not to be
omitted; as namely, when (as Flora speaks) Jura sunt armis saeviora; Laws are
more cruel than War it self: that is, when the oppressions of Tyrants are more
greivious than the miseries of War. He (says Seneca) needs not to fear the
miseries of War, that suffers the like, if not greater, living in Peace. So
Aristides, When it is manifest that our condition will be worse in sitting
still, then we may adventure upon the dangers of War. Neither is that opinion
of Tacitus much to be condemned, where he says, That a miserable Peace may
well be exchanged for a doubtful War; that is, as the same Author says, When,
if we conquer, we enjoy our freedom; or being conquered our condition can be no
worse: Or, when (as Livy speaks) Peace is more grievous to those that serve,
than War is to those that are free. But not (as Cicero puts the case) if it
appear that being Conquered, we shall be proscribed, (i. e.) our estates shall
be sold, and our persons banished; but being Conquerours, we change only our
oppressors, but are not eased of our oppressions.

IX. Or without great cause, and great advantages.
Another time when War is to be preferred before Peace peace, is, when upon a
rational debate we find that we have the best Right, and which is of greatest
moment, power sufficient to defend it; that is, as Augustus in Suetonius
sometimes said Sueton. c. 24.
, When there is more hopes of gain than fear of loss: Or as Scipio Africanus,
and L. Aemilius Paulus were wont to say of the Battle Aul Gel. l. 13. c. 3.
Val. Max. l. 7. c. 2.
, We ought not to run the hazard of a Battle, but upon some unavoidable
necessity, or upon great and manifest advantage; wherewith accords that of
Plutarch Gracchis.
before-recited, To use Iron and Steel without very great necessity, neither
becomes a good Physician, nor a prudent States man. The like Zonaras records of
Marcianus, Kings when they may lawfully enjoy Peace, ought not to make War.
Whereunto we may add that of St. Augustine, Pacem habere voluntatis est, Bellum
autem necessitatis esse debet, ut liberet nos Deus a necessitate, and conservet
in pace; Peace we should make voluntarily, War out of necessity: That so God
may relieve us in our necessities, and preserve us in Peace. But then most
especially may we make War, when we have good cause to hope, that our Enemies
through fear, or by the fame of our Victories, will be ready to yield without
any or very little danger on our part; and this is as Pliny calls it, the most
glorious of all Victories.

X. The miseries of War.
War indeed is, as Plutarch speaks Vit. Eamilli.
, a very savage thing, and never comes unaccompanied with a torrent of
mischiefs and insolences, Which (says St. Aug. De Civit Dei l. 19. c. 7.
) should I undertake to describe, when and where would my discourse end? But
they may say, a wise man will sometimes make War; as if, when he considers
himself to be a man, he does not much more grieve to find himself enforced
thereunto, though that War be just; for unless it were just, there could be no
necessity to make it, because it is the iniquity of the adverse part, that
thrusts a wise man into a just and necessary War; which very iniquity as
proceeding from men (though no necessity of a War should thence arise) is to be
lamented: whosoever therefore, shall with any remorse consider those so great,
so horrid, and so direful effects of War, cannot but confess that it is
miserable; but he that can feel them, or think upon them without sorrow, much
more he that can glory in the success of them, Ideo se putat beatum quia
humanum perdidit sensum; Therefore thinks himself happy because he has lost
all sentiments of humanity. So the same Father in another place tells us, that,
Id de Civit Dei lib. 4. c. 15.
Belligerare malis videtur felicitas, bonis necessitas; Good men make War their
refuge, but wicked men make it their delight. And were there nothing of
injustice in the War, yet to be enforced unto it, that is in it self miserable,
says Maximus Tyrius: whereunto he adds, Wise men never make War but by
constraint, whereas fools fight for pleasure and gain. Lib. 13.
The Lacedaemonians in Diodorus, considering those great enmities and
animosities, likely to arise from War, thought themselves bound in duty, to
declare before the Gods, and unto all good men, that they were not the Authors
of it. Plutarch brings in some making this objection, But has not Rome much
improved her self by War? Whereunto he answers, It Is true indeed she has so,
in the opinion of those who place their greatest glory in Riches, in Pleasure,
Wantonness, and Martial Power (which are but the dregs of Honor;) but not in
theirs who place their glory in the safety of their People, in meekness,
justice, and contentation. It was therefore worthily said of Stephanus the
Phiysician unto Cosroes King of Persia, To thee O King who art wholly
conversant in blood and slaughter, in subduing Kingdoms, and depopulation
Cities, other glorious attributes may be due; but surely thou can never hope
by these ways to be esteemed good: for as no good man will greedily covet that
which is another: so, Non est homini homine prodige utendum, as Seneca tells
us; Aelian lib. 14. c. 2.
It is no point of Honor to be prodigal of humane Blood. Philiscus advised
Alexander to be emulous of Glory, but not by making himself like unto a Plague
in depopulating Cities, and laying whole Kingdoms wast. Nothing can add more
Glory to a King, than to provide for the safety of his Subjects that they may
live in Peace. Not. Hist. l. 7. c. 25.
Pliny after he had recounted so many famous Battles, gained by the Dictator C.
Caesar, wherein were slain (as he there computes) Eleven hundred Ninety two
thousand men, adds this, I do not reckon it as any part of his Glory, to have
done so great wrong to mankind however provoked. Philo in the life of Moses
observes, That though the killing of Enemies in War, were by the Laws
permitted; yet whosoever did kill a man, though justly, though in his own
defense, though compelled thereunto against his will, did notwithstanding
contract some guilt unto himself, in respect of that common kindred and
alliance between man and man, which was derived from the supreme Cause;
wherefore expiations and purgations were thought necessary to cleanse them from
that crime which seemed to be committed by them. If then, by the Hebrew Laws,
He that killed a man, though against his will, Pollutus esset, hostili quidem,
attamen sanguine.
was to betake himself to one of the Cities of refuge: And if God would not
permit David to build him a Temple, because he was a man of blood, though of
his enemies; that is, as Josephus writes, because he had made many Wars, which
by the Law was permitted: If among the Ancient Greeks, he that had slain a man,
though accidentally, Lib. 7. cap. 4.
or in defense of himself, had need of expiation: Who cannot see, how unhappy a
thing it is, and by all means to be avoided, voluntarily to engage our selves
in a War, though happily not unjust? Surely among the Greek Churches, that most
Christian Canon was long in force, whereby he that in what War soever had slain
a man, though an enemy, was not by the space of three years admitted unto the
Sacrament.

CHAP. XXV. For what Causes a War may be undertaken for others.
I. That a War may justly be undertaken by a Prince for his Subjects. II. But
yet it is not always to be so undertaken. III. Whether an innocent Subject may
be delivered up to an enemy to prevent a War. IV. That a War may justly be
undertaken in the behalf of our Confederates, equal or unequal. V. As also for
our Friends. VI. Yea and for any man. VII. Yet may it also be omitted without
blame, if it endanger himself, or cannot be done without the death of the
invader. VIII. Whether that War be just that is made to relieve another man's
Subjects, this explained by a distinction. IX. All those military
consociations, and mercenary succors that respect not the equity of the Cause,
are unjust. X. To engage in War for spoil, or pay only, is wicked.
I. A Prince may justly make War for his Subjects.
ABove when we treated of such persons as had a Right to make War, it was said
and showed, That naturally every man had a power to vindicate, not only his
own, but the right of another See lib. 1. c. 5.
; wherefore look what Causes do justify a War undertaken for our selves, the
very same do justify a War made for another: But our principal, and most
necessary care should be for our own Subjects, whether they be our Domestics,
or such as live under our Civil Government, for they are a part of the
Governor as we there showed. Josh. 10.6. Persicor. 2.
Thus Joshua we read made War in defense of the Gibeonites, who had yielded
themselves unto him. It is not sufficient to denominate a Man Just, that he
wrongs no man, says Procopius, unless he also be careful to protect those
from injuries, who for that very end have put themselves under him. Our
Ancestors, says Cicero to the Roman Senate, did often make Wars in the behalf
of their Merchants and Mariners when they have been abused by Strangers. Verr.
2.
And in another place, How many Wars (says he) did our forefathers undertake
to revenge the wrongs done to the Citizens of Rome, when their Seamen have been
imprisoned, and their Merchants spoiled? Yea, and the very same Romans who
refused to take Arms in the defense of a People that were their Confederates,
thought it necessary to defend the same People when they had surrendered
themselves, and so became their Subjects: Thus do the Campanes bespeak the
Romans, Though ye refused to assist or defend us against our enemies, whilst we
were your Friends and Confederates, yet now that we are your Subjects, you will
certainly protect us. Whereupon Florus says, That the Campanes made that
League which they had formerly contracted with the Romans, more strong and
inviolable by their voluntary surrender of all they had unto them; for it
agreed not with the Faith of the Romans, Livy lib. 7.
says Livy, to desert such.

II. Yet is it not always convenient.
Neither is it prudence in a Governor to enter into a War always, though upon
a just ground for any particular Subject, unless it may be done safely, without
endangering all, or the greatest part of his Subjects. For it is the Duty of a
good Prince to prefer the safety of the whole before its parts; and the greater
the part is that he provideth for, the nearer it draws to the nature of the
whole.

III. Whether an innocent Subject may be delivered up to preserve the whole.
Wherefore in case the Enemy shall require any one person to be delivered to
death, though that person be innocent, there is no question but that he may be
forsaken, if it clearly appear, that the City is too weak to make resistance.
For as Nicephorus, in Zonaras, advised rightly, concerning the delivering up of
the Fugitives to the Bulgarian General, to purchase their peace, We judge it
much better that a few men should perish, than that so great a multitude should
be destroyed.

-- Non malo unius domus
Commune vinci, sed nec aequari potest.
No one man's sufferings can equal be
Unto a general calamity.
(When Alexander had destroyed Thebes, he came to Athens, threatening to destroy
it, Plut. vit. Phocion.
unless Demosthenes, Lycurgus, and others who had highly exasperated the people
against him, were delivered unto him. Phocion thereupon being urged in the
Senate to deliver his Opinion in that Case, pointing to his dear friend
Nicocles, answered, Eo in fortunii urbem nostram isti perduxerunt, ut etiamsi
hunc Nicoclem meum dedi Alexander poscat, dedi jussurus sum; Into such a
desperate condition have these men brought this City, that if Alexander had
demanded my dearest friend Nicocles, my Vote should have past for his delivery:
Yea, and I should think my self happy, might my life alone be accepted, as a
sacrifice to preserve it.) It is true Vasquius seems to be of a contrary
judgment, yet he that thoroughly weighs not so much his words as his intention
and purpose, may perceive that all he aims at is this only, That such an
innocent person is not rashly or easily to be delivered, where there remains
any hopes that he may be defended. For he there brings in a story of a certain
Band of Italian Foot, whom he deservedly condemns for deserting Pompey before
his Case was desperate, upon Caesar's promise of safety and protection which he
condemns, and that not unworthily. But whether an innocent Citizen may be
delivered up into the enemies power to preserve his City from imminent ruin,
is much disputed now amongst the learned, as it formerly was, when Demosthenes
invented that notable Apologue of the Wolves, who were content to make peace
with the sheep, upon condition that their Dogs might be delivered up unto them.
Neither does Vasquius only deny this, but Sotus also, whose Opinion Vasquius
condemns, as being too near a neighbor to treachery: Yet Sotus was of Opinion,
that such a Citizen ought to deliver up himself; which Vasquius denies, being
swayed by this reason, because the nature of a Civil Society, which was at the
first entered into for mutual preservation, does not permit it. But the force of
this argument reaches no farther than this, That no Citizen is bound so to do
by any right strictly taken; but it argues not, That if he do it, he
transgresses the rules of Charity: For there are many Duties, which though not
by the strict rules of Justice, yet by the bonds of Charity we stand obliged to
perform, which are not only laudable being done, (as Vasquius acknowledges)
but which cannot be left undone without blame; whereof this is one, That every
man prefers the safety of an innocent multitude before his own. Know ye not,
says Caiaphas the High Priest, that it is better, that is, less evil, that one
man should die, than that the whole Nation should perish. For the destruction
of no one Family can equal the destruction of the Universe. A particular
mischief is much more tolerable than a general calamity. And therefore Phocion
did wisely when he persuaded Demosthenes, rather to undergo death himself, than
that for him his Native Country should be destroyed; Diodor. lib. 17*
which he urged upon him by the examples of the Daughters of Leus, and of the
Hyacinthides. This was Cicero's resolution in the like case, as appears by that
Oration he made for P. Sextius, If it should happen, says he, that sailing in
a ship with my friends, and being therein assaulted by many Pirates, who
peremptorily resolved to sink the ship, unless I only were delivered up unto
them; I should choose rather to cast my self into the sea to preserve my
friends, than endeavor to preserve mine own life with the danger of theirs:
And so in another place, An honest and a prudent man observing the Laws, and
knowing the duties of a Civil Life, De finib. lib. 3.
does always prefer a general good before the advantage of any particular
person, though of himself. Livy speaking of certain Molossians, says, That he
had often heard of men that willingly exposed themselves to death for the
defense of their Country: But these, says he, are the first that ever I heard
of, that thought it fit, that their Country should perish for themselves only.
But here also it may be questioned, whether a Citizen (though obliged in duty
to do it) may be compelled thereunto. This Sotus denies, by the example of a
rich man, that is bound by the bonds of mercy and charity to administer to the
necessities of the poor, yet cannot be compelled thereunto. But we must here
note, that there is not the same reason, for the parts compared between
themselves, as there is for the Superiors compared with those that are subject
unto them: for equals cannot compel one another, unless it be to such things as
are strictly due; whereas it is in the power of Superiors, as Superiors, to
enforce their inferiors to any virtuous act for the public good. So we read,
that the Lucans ordained a punishment against Prodigality, the Macedonians
against Ingratitude, and the Athenians and Lucans both against Idleness. As in
a time of dearth, any one Citizen may be enforced to produce his private store
of Grain, and to make it public: So in this case, whatsoever Charity requires
of us, the Magistrate for a more universal good has a power to enforce; as
Phocion would have delivered up his friend Nicocles had Alexander demanded him.

IV. War may justly be made for our confederates, equal or unequal.
Next unto our own Subjects, or rather equally to be defended, are our
Confederates, whether they surrender themselves upon condition of protection,
or whether it be covenanted for mutual aid and assistance: Qui non repellit
injuriam a socio si potest, tam est in vitio quam ille qui facit; He that
defends not his Associate when it is in his power, is as blameworthy as he
that injures him. Yet are not such Covenants to be so far extended, as to
engage us in a War if there be no just Cause. Amb. de Off. l. 1. c. 36.
Wherefore the Lacedaemonians before they had made War against the Athenians,
referred the justice of their Cause to the judgment of all their Confederates.
Live. l. 34.
So did the Romans before they began their War against Nabis, make the Grecian
Cities Judges in their case. So Simler Simler.
concerning the Commonwealth of the Switzers, If the Lord shall make War
against any man, and it be known that his cause be just, or if it be doubted
whether it be so, the Vassal shall be bound to assist his Lord; but if it be
manifest that the War is unreasonable, then is the Vassal bound only to defend
his Lord, but not to offend another. Whereunto we may add, That though the case
of our Confederates be just, yet if his case be desperate, A Confederate not to
be assisted, in case his condition be desperate, and why.
and that, though we should assist him with what forces we can, there are no
hopes of a good end; we are not then bound to aid him, because all alliances
were at first made for preservation, but not for destruction: yea, and we may
defend one of our Confederates against another of our Confederates, unless we
are by any Article in a former League, particularly forbidden it. Thus the
Athenians might have defended the Corcyreans, if their Cause had been just,
against the Corinthians their more ancient Associates.

V. For our Friends.
Next to our Confederates, our friends are to be assisted, to whose aid, though
we stand not engaged by any League or promise; yet upon the score of common
friendship, we ought to contribute toward their assistance, if we may do it
with ease, and without any inconvenience to our selves. Thus Abraham too up
Arms in defense of his Kinsman Lot. And thus the Romans farbad the Pirates of
Antium, to rob the Grecians their Friends and Kinsmen. And thus we often read
it of the same Romans, that they frequenly either made War, or at least
threatened so to do; not in the behalf of their Associates only, to whom they
stood obliged, but for their Friends and Neighbors also, upon no other
account, but that of Love and Friendship. There is an old Oracle that serves to
guide us in this case, Non open juvisti praesens in morte sodalem:
Effabor tibi nil, nisi, Templi finibus exi.


VI. For any man.
Lastly we owe our assistance to all mankind, by reason of that near
conjunction that there is between us, which alone were sufficient to excite us
to aid and to succor each other. Homo in adjutorium mutuum generatus est; Men
(says Seneca) are born to help each other: And again, Cic. de Fin. l. 3. de
Off. l. 2. Sen de Ira. l. 1. c. 7. de Clem. 2. 5.
A wise man will as often as be can, prevent misfortunes: According to that of
Euripedes, What Beasts from Rocks, Servants from Altars have:
Cities distressed, the like from Cities crave.
And indeed, That fortitude that defends the cause of the weak and innocent, is
full of justice, says St Ambrose; but of this we have treated above.

VII. Yet it may be omitted, if either it endanger our selves, or take away the
invaders life.
Here also it may be questioned, whether for one man to defend another, or for
one People or Nation to protect another from violence and wrong, be a debt
whereunto we stand bound. Plato in the fourth of his Laws affirms, That he that
does not repel violence offered to another (if he can do it) deserves to be
punished. The like provision was made, both by the Hebrew and Egyptian Laws
Diodor. l. 1.
; but this general will admit of some exceptions: for in case we cannot do
this, without incurring some manifest danger unto our selves, it is most
agreeable to nature that we abstain from attempting it; for every man may
prefer his own before the welfare of another. And in this sense does that of
Cicero hold true, He that does not defend another, nor resist an injury when he
can, is as much to blame, as he that deserts his Parents, his Country, or his
Friends; if he can, that is, with safety to himself: For he himself in another
place admits, That some, happily, may he left unprotected without blame. Salust
in his History gives this wholesome advice, Let them, says he, who being in
prosperity, are about to engage themselves in a social War, seriously consider,
First, Whether they may then live in peace; Next, Whether the War they engage
in be just, safe, honorable; or otherwise, inconvenient. De benef. l. 2. c. 15.
Succuram perituro, sed ut ipse non peream; I will defend him (says Seneca)
that is ready to perish; but so, that I thereby perish not my self, unless it
be to rescue from death some person of great honor; or to purchase some very
great advantage unto either my self, or my relations: De benef. lib. 1. c. 10.
See Book 2. chapter 1.. 8.
Bonum etiam impendio sanguinis mei tuebor; A good man, says he, though with
the hazard of my life, I shall defend; and if I can rescue a bad man from
Thieves, by my clamor and outcry, I shall willingly strain my voice to do him
good. But yet if that good man be so oppressed, that he cannot be relieved
without the death of the oppressor, I am not bound to do it; for if what I have
said above be granted, namely, That the case may so happen, that the person
invaded may choose rather to dye himself, than to be the death of the invader:
He that does believe, the invaded does wish, or would choose rather so to do,
does not sin, if he do not rescue him; especially when the damage that is
likely to befall the invading party, is in all probability likely to be both
irreparable and everlasting.

VIII. Whether a War may be made upon another King for oppressing his own
Subjects.
Another Question is sometimes started, Whether that War be just which is
undertaken to free another Subjects, from the oppression of their own Prince:
without doubt, as soon as civil societies were at first instituted, every
Governor had some peculiar Rights over his own Subjects, according to that of
Euripides: Nos quotquot hujus colimus urbis moenia,
Sufficimus ipsi nostra judicia exequi;
We that within these walls reside, suffice
Our selves to punish our Delinquencies.


To the same purpose also is that, Spartam tibi quae contigit orna:
Nobis fuerint cura Mycenae;
Let Sparta's care be thine:
Mycena's shall be mine.
Thucydides amongst other marks of Sovereignty reckons this, namely, A Power in
it self to execute judgments; and this he holds to be as necessary, as the
Power either of ordaining Laws, or creating Magistrates: and to this we may
refer that of Neptune concerning Aeolus, Virgil Aen. lib. 1.
Non illi imperium pelagi renumque tridentis,
Sed mihi sort datur;
The Sea's vast Power was not by lot assigned
To him, but me.


Whereunto not much unlike is that of Ovid, -- Rescindere nunquam Metam. lib.
14.

Dis licet acta Deum; --
Nor can the Gods, each others Acts rescind.


So likewise Euripides, -- Mos ille est Deum,
Quod cupiit unus; huic nefas obsistere:
-- The Gods their custom have,
None must oppose what any one did crave:
That is as St. Ambrose well expounds it, Lest by usurping upon each others
jurisdiction, they should stir up War amongst themselvos. That every State
should be permitted to punish their own Subjects, was thought by the
Corinthians in Thucydides to be just. And Perseus in his Oration to Martius,
denies that he needed to make any defense for himself for what he had done
against the Dolopes, saying, Jure feci meo; I did but exercise mine own just
Right, seeing that they were my Subjects, and so under my jurisdiction. For as
St. Augustine observes, Lib. 2. de lib. Arb.
There is not the same reason, that because it is an Argument of some men's
goodness, to confer courtesies on strangers; therefore it should be the like
argument of their justice, to punish those that belong to another
jurisdiction. But rather as Procopius has it, It is more agreeable to the
rules of equity, that every man should carefully govern his own Province, and
not trouble himself with the affairs of others: Yet are all these to be
understood of such cases, wherein another man's Subjects have manifestly
offended, or at least whereof it is doubtful whether they have or not; for to
this end were Empires at first distributed: But they hold not in case Subjects
apparently groan under such Tyrannies, as no just man can approve of; and
therefore are precluded from those Rights that are common to humane Society.
For in such a case as this it was that Constantine made War against Maxentius
and Licinius; and other Roman Emperors against the Persians, or at least
threatened so to do, unless they protected from oppression such of their
Subjects as were Christians, being persecuted for no other cause but that of
Religion. Yea, and although we should grant that Subjects could not justly
taken up Arms against their Prince; no, not in case of greatest necessity
(which we see is doubted, even by those, whose purpose it was to defend the
Regal Power): Yet will it not thence follow, That other Princes may not take
Arms in their own defense. For whenever the impediment to any action is
merely personal, and not drawn from the thing it self, then that which is
unlawful for one to do by himself, may yet be lawful for another to do for him,
if the matter be such wherein one man may profit another: So a suit at Law
which a Pupil, by reason of his minority cannot maintain by himself, his Tutor
or Guardian may maintain for him. So a Client that cannot appear in his own
person by reason of the distance of place, may notwithstanding appear by his
Attorney. Now that impediment which in a Subject hinders resistance, arises
not from the Cause which is the same in Subjects, as in those that are not; but
from the condition or quality of the person, which passes not into another.
Thus thought Seneca, He that being separated from my country is vexatious to
his own, may be justly by me invaded, as I have showed before where we treated
of punishments; which thing is often conjoined with the defense of innocents.
Although we are not ignorant by those many examples we find in Histories, both
ancient and modern, That Ambition, and an insatiable thirst after Gain, do too
frequently disguise themselves under such specious pretenses; yet may we not
thence conclude, That because wicked men do sometimes usurp this Right for
sinister ends; therefore to defend other men's Subjects from manifest
oppression, cease to be lawful. For, Navigant and Piratae, ferro utuntur and
Latrones; Pirates we see navigate the Seas, and Thieves wear swords: yet no man
will hence infer, That it is not therefore lawful for Merchants to traffic by
Sea, or for Princes to make use of Arms to defend their Subjects.

IX. Of Soldiers of fortune.
But as those Warlike Confederacies, which are made to the end that succors
may be promised upon any War, undertaken by wh^msoever, or upon what occasion
soever, be it right or wrong, are already declared to be unlawful; so is there
no kind of life more wicked than that of mercenary Soldiers, who without any
respect had to the equity of the Cause, fight only for plunder and pay; to
whom, Ibi fas, ubi plurima merces: That's the best Cause which pays best, Livy.
32.
which Plato proves out of Tyrtaeus. This was it that Philip upbraided the
Aetolians with, and Dionysius Milesius condemned in the Arcadians, in these
words, Belli instituuntur nundinae; They made War a trade to live by: And, what
was the common bane of all Greece besides, was matter of gain and profit to
them, whilst they sent out their mercenaries, sometimes to this part, sometimes
to that, without any regard to justice or equity. Surely a Soldier is a thing
to be much pitied, Miles qui vitae causa se auctorat neci, Antiphanes. Bacchid.
who as Antiphanes speaks, hires himself to be killed, to preserve a life that
is miserable. So Dion Prusaeensis, What can be more necessary, what more dear
and precious than life? and yet even this, many men imprudently lose for
greediness of gain. This was Plautus his Character of mercenaries, Suam qui
auro vitam venditant; Their lives for gold they sell: The like does Gunther,
Aere dato conducta cohors, and bellica miles
Dona sequens, pretioque suum mutare favorem
Suetus, and accepto pariter cum munere bello
Hunc habuisse, dator pretii quem jusserit, hostem.
And yet, did they sell their own lives only, it were the less hurt; but
together with their own, they sell the lives of many innocents, Tanto carnifice
detestabiliores, quanto pejus est sine causa, quam cum causa occidere; By so
much is the condition of such Soldiers worse than that of Hangmen; by how
much, it is more abominable to kill the innocent, than to destroy the guilty:
As Antisthenes was wont to say of Tyrants, Tbat they were more cruel and
merciless than common Executioners; for these hang Thieves and Murderers only;
but those murder innocents. And Philip of Macedon, Diodor. l. 18.
as truly of those who made War for gain only, That War was to them as Peace,
and Peace as War. So likewise Seneca, What may a man call this but madness, to
make dangers our inseparable companions, fiercely to assault those whom we know
not, to be enraged without any offense given, to destroy all we meet, and like
wild Beasts to kill those whom we never hated? Surely War is not a trade to
live by; nay, it is a thing in it self so horrid, Quest. Not. lib. 5. c. 18.
Great. c. 33. q. 1.
that nothing but pure necessity, or perfect charity, can denominate it just or
honest. So St. Augustine, Militare non est delictum, sed propter praedam
militare peccatum est: Simply to make War is not sinful; but to make War for
plunder and pay only, must needs be wicked.

X. Especially they that make War for spoil.
Nay to make War for pay or hire is likewise a sin, if that be the only or
principal thing we aim at; though otherwise to receive pay for our pains, when
we are lawfully called to fight, is altogether lawful: For who, says St. Paul,
goes to War at any time upon his own charge?

CHAP. XXVI. How War may be justly waged by such as are Subjects to another
Command.
I. Who they are that are under the dominion of another. II. What they ought to
do being admitted to debate, or being left to their free choice. III. If they
think the cause unjust, though commanded, they ought not to make war. IV. What
they ought to do in case they doubt the justice of the Cause. V. If they cannot
be satisfied, their persons are to be spared, but their Taxes heightened. VI.
In what case Subjects may justly take Arms in an unjust War.
I. Who are said to be under another Dominion.
HItherto we have treated of such as are free, and have power to dispose of
their own actions. There are others that are under a more servile condition,
and such are the Sons of a Family, Servants, Subjects, and each particular
Citizen, compared with the whole Body of the City whereof they are.

II. What they are to do, being left to their own choice.
But these men, if either admitted to advise, or left to their own choice,
whether they will either take up Arms or be quiet, ought to be guided by the
same Rules, which are already set down for those who being free have power to
make war either for themselves or others.

III. What if they think the cause unjust.
But if commanded thereunto, as usually they are, then if it be evident unto
them that the Cause is unjust, they ought altogether to forbear; for that God
is rather to be obeyed than man, was not only the judgment of the Apostle, but
even of Socrates also, as Plato testifies in his Apology. So also thought the
Hebrew Doctors, namely, That Kings, if they command any thing contrary to Gods
Laws, were not at all to be obeyed. For this Josephus records of his
Countrymen, who being convicted before Herod for pulling down the Roman Eagle,
which he had caused to be erected over the Great Gate of the Temple at
Jerusalem, and demanded how they durst do it, returned this Answer, Ant. lib.
17. c. 8.
What we have done, we did in vindication of God's honor, and of that Divine
Law whereof we profess our selves to be the Disciples; neither have thou cause
to wonder if we hold the Laws which Moses delivered unto us from God himself,
to be more sacred and indispensable than thy Decrees. Neither do we refuse to
suffer death, or any other punishment thou shall think fit to inflict upon us;
as knowing that we shall not suffer as Malefactors, but as Martyrs in a good
Cause. That excellent Saying of Polycarpus, now ready to expire, lives still
upon Record, namely, To Princes and Potentates we owe all due honor and
obedience, yet not so as thereby to endanger our eternal salvation. It was the
advice of St Paul, Children obey your Parents in the Lord, Ephesians. 6.1.
for this is right: upon which words St Hierome thus glosseth, For Children not
to (...) their Parents, is a sin; but because Parents may happily command that
which is unlawful, therefore he adds, In the Lord. And St Chrysostom thus
expounds them, Children obey your Parents in the Lord, that is, in all things
wherein you shall not disobey God. Ad Patrem Infidelem.
And in another place he says, For it is no small reward that God proposes to
us for our obedience to Parents (and Magistrates.) For we are commanded to
esteem them as our Lords, and both in words and deeds to yield them all due
observance; yet so, as the works of true piety and devotion are not thereby
hindered. But if thine obedience unto God call thee forwards, then that of St
Hierome holds true, (which he speaks declamatorily out of Seneca) Per calcatum
perge Patrem, Thou must go on, though thou tramplest on thine own Parents. For
our obedience unto our Parents cannot justify our disobedience unto God. For
as the same Apostle says, Every man shall receive from God according to his
own works, whether bond or free. The like advice does St Hierome give unto
Servants, where he adds, In Ephesians. 6.1:
But when our carnal Lords shall command any thing contrary to the will of him
(who is the God of the Spirits of all Flesh,) then they are not to be obeyed.
Again, in another place, In those things only are men subject unto their Lords
and Masters, which are not contrary to the Commands of God. So likewise
Chrysostom, Servants also have their bounds and limits prescribed them by God;
In 1 Cor. 7.24.
and how far they may go in their obedience, is also commanded, beyond which
they must not proceed. If the Lord command us nothing that is by God forbidden,
he is to be followed and obeyed; but not beyond. The like advice gives Clemens
Alexandrinus concerning a Wife, Let her, says he, obey her Husband in all
things, and do nothing against his will, but what she believes may very much
conduce to virtue, and her own salvation. So likewise Tertullian, We are
sufficiently instructed (says he) by the Apostles Precept to be subject to
Magistrates, Princes, and Powers in all obedience. Sed intra limits
Disciplinae, So far as they transgress not the Rules of Christian Discipline.
The like we read of Silvanus the Martyr, We therefore despise the Roman Laws,
lest we should thereby transgress the Divine Laws. And Musonius, If a Son, a
Servant, or a Subject, In Martyrologio.
shall refuse to yield obedience unto either a Father, a Master, or a Prince in
such Commands as are impious and ungodly, they shall not be accounted as
disobedient, injurious or wicked. Now as the obedience of Servants is bounded
by the Divine Laws, so is that of Children to Parents. Lib. 2. c. 7.
Aulus Gellius approves not of this opinion, That a Father is in all things to
be obeyed. For (says he) what if he command his Son to betray his Country, to
kill his own Mother? etc. Therefore the middle way is best and safest: in some
things we must, in other some we must not obey. So Seneca the Father, Non
omnibus Imperiis parendum est, All Commands oblige us not unto obedience. So
Quintilian, There is no necessity that Children should execute all their
Parents Commands; for there may be many things, which, though commanded, may
not lawfully be done. As if a Father command his Son to give his suffrage, or
to pass a sentence contrary to his own judgment, or to bear witness to that
whereof he is ignorant. If my Father command me to burn the Capitol, to possess
my self of such a Fort or Castle; I may lawfully answer, These things I must
not do. So in another place, We are not to execute all our Parents Commands,
for otherwise nothing would be more destructive than benefits received, if they
oblige us unto all manner of servitude. To the same purpose is that of Seneca,
Neither can we command all things, nor can our servants be compelled to obey us
in all our Commands: Contra Rempublicam Imperata non facient, They will not
obey us if we command them any thing against the Commonwealth; they will not,
though commanded, put their hands to any wickedness. Of the same opinion was
Sopater, A Father (says he) is indeed to be obeyed, if his Commands be
according to Law, it is true; but if otherwise, it is not convenient. To
justify Subjects for refusing to execute the wicked Commands of their Princes,
we have diverse examples in the Sacred Stories. Saul commanded his Guards to
fall upon the Priests at Nob, but they would not put forth their hands to fall
upon the Priests of the Lord, 1 Samuel 22.17. Ahab at the instigation of Jezebel
persecuted the Lords Prophets to death; but good Obadiah preserved a hundred of
them, and fed them by fifty in a Cave, 1 Kings 18.4. Ahaziah commands a Captain
and his Fifty to apprehend Elijah, only for pronouncing that Sentence which God
passed against him; Elijah not only refuses to come down, but to vindicate his
Commission, commands fire from Heaven to consume the Messengers, 2 Kings 1.10.
In our Christian Stories we find Manuel and Georgius highly commended, for
refusing to be instrumental in the murder of Augusta. And in Profane, we have
likewise two notable Examples of such who have refused to obey their Princes in
their unlawful Commands; the one of Papinianus, that great Lawyer, who being
commanded by Caracalla to justify as well to the Senate as the people, the
Paracide he had committed upon his own Brother Geta, Spartianus. Lib. 21.
readily answered, That it was not so soon justified as done; and for his
refusal suffered death. The other of Helpodius, both recorded by Ammianus
Marcellinus; whereunto we may add that of Severus, who would have no man
exempted from punishment that should dare to take away the life of a Senator,
(extrajudicially, as I suppose) though at the Emperors Command. Stratocles was
worthily derided among the Athenians, for but offering at a Law, Vid.
Xiphilinum.
whereby whatsoever should please King Demetrius, should be reputed as pious
^^wards God, and just amongst men. Pliny in his Epistle to Minutius labors to
make it appear, Lib. 3.
That the very ministry or execution of unlawful commands is sinful. For as
Tertullian speaks, Plus caeditur qui jubet, quando nec obsequitur qui
excusatur; Surely he that commands things unjust is severely punishable, when
he that but executes them cannot be excused. Those Civil Laws which do easily
pardon venial sins, are also very favorable to those who are enforced either
to sin, or to disobey; and yet they are not favorable to all alike. For where
the crimes are foul, and such as Nature by a secret instinct seems to abhor,
they show no favor at all. But where the offense appears not to be heinous, by
any natural interpretation, but by Logical inferences may be proved to be so,
there they wisely vouchsafe pardon. Josephus relates, That the Jews that served
under Alexander the Great could neither by stripes, nor any reproachful words,
be enforced to carry Earth, or other materials, as the rest of the Soldiers
did, toward the repair of the Temple of Belus, which was in Babylon. But
examples more pertinent to our purpose are the Thebean Legion, whereof we have
already spoken; and the Soldiers that served under Julian, Christian Soldiers
under Julian the Apostate.
whereof St Ambrose speaks thus, Though the Emperor Julian were an Apostate,
yet had he many Christians that served under him; to whom if had said, Draw out
for the defense of the Commonwealth, they would instantly have obeyed; but if
he should have said, March out against the Christians, tunc agnoscebant
Imperatorem Coeli, then they would have acknowledged no King but the King of
Heaven. The like we read of those Executioners, who being converted to
Christianity, chose rather to dye themselves than to execute the Sentence of
death pronounced against Christians. Now the Case is the very same, whenever
any man is persuaded that the thing commanded is unjust; for to such a man it
is so long unjust, until he can be convinced that it is otherwise.

IV. But what if he doubts.
But what if he be in doubt whether it be lawful or not, is he to suspend, or
to obey? The most received opinion is, That he must obey. Neither should he be
startled at that notable Saying, Q^od dubitas, ne feceris; forbear if thou
doubtest. For he that contemplatively doubts, may, as to his practical
judgment, not doubt at all; because he may be confident that in doubtful Cases
he is bound to obey his Superiors. And indeed that this distinction of a
twofold judgment is of necessary use in many actions, it cannot be denied. The
Civil Laws, not only of the Romans, but of other Nations, do not only
indemnifie obedience in such a Case, but will admit of no civil action against
them that do it in obedience. Many Magistrates (says St. Chrysostom) we have
heard of, who being accused of unjust murders have been punished. But no man
ever questioned the Executioner, or made inquisition after him; for the
necessity of obeying his Superior, makes his fact excusable. Is damnum dat qui
jubet dare; He, say the Lawyers, gives the damage that commands it. And again,
Ejus vero nulla culpa est, cui parere necesse est; Neither can the fault be
properly his, who being commanded must obey. And again, Necessitas potestatis
excusat; That which is enforced on us by a power above us, is pardonable.
Aristotle himself, Nicom. 5. Injustum facere, sed non injuste.
among those who do unjust things, but not unjustly, reckons the Servant of a
wicked Master. For he is said to do unjustly from whom the action does
originally proceed. Now because in a Servant there is no full deliberative
power; therefore the Servant, though he do that which is unjust, yet in doing
that only which he is commanded, he does not unjustly. According to that
Proverbial Saying, Dimidia virtute caret servire coactus;
He wants one half of goodness that must serve.
And that also, One half of humane reason God withdraws
From those who live under another Laws.
And that which Philo makes use of, If serve thou do, what is reason unto
thee? Vlpian out of Celsus says, Servum nihil deliquisse, qui Domino jubenti
obtemperavit; The Servant is not to blame, whilst he does but what his Lord
commands him. So in another place, Velle non creditur qui obsequitur Imperio
Patris vel Domini; It is not believed to be his own act, if he do it in
obedience either to his Father or Master. Mithridates freely dismissed the
Servants of Attilius without any punishment at all, though they were found
guilty of the murder intended upon him. Neither would he punish the Children of
those that had rebelled against him, because they were compelled to Rebellion
by the Commands of others. Themisthius in his Ninth Oration observes, and that
truly, That Princes have always the resemblance of reason, as Soldiers the
like of anger. The like is observed by Tacitus, God has allotted unto Princes
the faculty of judgment, but unto Subjects he has left only the glory of
obedience. And as the same Tacitus relates, Annal. l. 3.
The Son of Piso was by Tiberius acquitted of the crime of sedition, because
what he did was by his Fathers command, whom he durst not disobey. Servus
herilis Imperii non Censor est, sed Minister; De Controv. l. 3. c. 9. Cont.
Faustum, lib. 22. c. 74.
The Servant is not to sit as Judge of his Masters Commands to dispute them,
but to obey them. But in this case of War let us hear what St Augustine says,
If a good man shall happen to war under a King though sacrilegious, he may,
being commanded, fight with a good conscience, if observing the order of his
Countries peace, he be either assured that what he is commanded is not
repugnant to the Law of God, or doubtful whether it be or not; so that happily as
the iniquity of the command may render the King guilty, so the necessity of
obeying those commands for Orders sake, may likewise render the Soldier
innocent. And again, De Civit. Dei lib. 1. c. 26.
If a Soldier under lawful Command shall in obedience thereunto kill a man, by
the Laws of his City he is free from murder; nay, unless he do it, he shall be
held as a Traitor to his own Country. But if he shall do it of his own accord,
or without command, he shall be guilty of murder. That very Law that will
punish him if he do it without command, will likewise punish him if he do it
not being commanded. And from hence arises that so generally received opinion,
I mean as to Subjects, That a War may be just on both sides; that is, in
respect of them it may be on both sides void of injustice, whereunto the Poet
had respect when he said, -- Quis justius induat Arma
Scire nefas --
-- Who has the juster Cause
It Is hard to know --
Yet is not this opinion so generally received, but that it meets with some
difficulty. For Pope Adrian defended the contrary; which may be confirmed not
by that Argument precisely which he urges, but by this, which seems to be more
forcible, namely, That he that doubts contemplatively, ought in his active
judgment to choose the safer part, which is, To abstain from War. The Esseni The
Esseni.
are highly commended, for that amongst other things they bound themselves by
Oath, To hurt no man, though they were commanded. In imitation of whom the
Pythagoreans did wholly abstain from War, as being the Ringleader to
destruction, commanding murder as by a Law. Neither will it much avail to say
for the other opinion, That it is dangerous to disobey: For whilst both are
uncertain, (for if the War be unjust, it is no act of disobedience to avoid it)
he is not to be blamed that chooses the safest. But our disobedience in such
things has in its own nature less of evil than murder, especially of so many
Innocents. It is storied by the Ancients, That when Mercury (being accused for
killing of Argus) excused himself, for that he did it at the command of
Jupiter; the rest of the Gods, notwithstanding, durst not acquit him: No more
does Martial Pothinus, an Officer of Mark Antony's, when he says, Antoni tamen
est pejor, quam Causa Pothini:
Hic facinus Domino praestitit, ille sibi.
Worse than Pothinus 's Case is Antony 's;
This for himself, that for his Lord does dye.
Nor will that be of much greater moment which some men urge to the contrary,
namely, That in case we admit that every private person may have liberty to
judge of the justness of the War, and accordingly either yield or deny their
obedience, the Commonwealth would soon be destroyed; because for the most part
it cannot be expedient for the State, that the reasons of their counsels should
be communicated to the Vulgar. For although this may be true where the causes
of the War are suasory only, yet not where the War is justifiable; for there
the causes thereof should be published unto all, that every man may judge of
them, and be satisfied in them. What Tertullian sometimes said, perhaps too
confusedly,
of Laws in general, may very appositely be said of these of War; No Subject so
faithfully observes a Law, as he that knows the reason of that Law. For every
Law ought to give testimony of its own integrity, to those from whom it
requires obedience. On the contrary, Suspecta Lex est, quae probari se non
vult; improba si non probata, dominetur: That Law that will not endure the
trial, is held suspected; as that which being disapproved, yet exacts
obedience, is held as wicked. Thus when Ulysses endeavored to persuade
Achilles to join with the Grecian Princes in a war against the Trojans,
Achilles urges them to declare the cause: Papin.
What cause Greece has so great a War to wage,
Declare, whereby thou may increase our rage.
And hence it is that Theseus in the same Poet thus encourages his Soldiers,
Go, and fight boldly in a Cause so just. For as Propertius well observed, The
justice of the Cause cannot but heighten the spirits and inflame the
indignation of a Soldier, whose courage droops so, that he grows ashamed of
his Arms when his Cause is naught. Herod in his Oration to the Jews, after the
slaughter in Arabia, thus bespeaks them, Josephus.
I am willing to show you how justly I have undertaken this War, being provoked
thereunto by the reproaches of our enemies; which being known unto you, must
needs heighten your courage to a revenge. It is very often verified what the
Panegyrist observed, So prevalent, even amongst Armies, is a good Conscience,
that the Victory seems properly to belong, not to the numbers or valor of the
men, but to the justness and equity of the Cause. And so some Learned Men have
interpreted that of Genesis 14.14. as if Abraham had before the Fight instructed
his Servants fully in the justice of his Quarrel. And certainly the
denunciation of War ought to be public, and the cause expressed, that the
whole Race of Mankind may judge of the equity of it. Prudence indeed, as
Aristotle notes, is a Virtue proper to Princes; but Justice belongs to men as
they are men. And therefore the reasons of their counsels as Princes are not to
be communicated, but the reasons of their actions as men may be proclaimed.
These things considered, we conclude with Pope Adrian, That where the Subject
does not only doubt the lawfulness of the War, but by very probable Arguments
is induced to believe that it is unjust, especially if that War be offensive,
and not defensive; he is bound to abstain. Nay, very probable it is, That the
Executioner, whose Office it is to execute the penalty of the Law upon a
condemned Malefactor, should be thoroughly informed in the merits of his Cause,
either by being present at the whole Trial, or by hearing the confession of the
person condemned; that so he may be convinced that he whom he puts to death,
has by the Law deserved it, which in some places is observed. Neither can
there any more probable reason be assigned for that Hebrew Law, whereby it was
provided, That when a Malefactor was to be stoned, Deuteronomy. 17.7. 1 Samuel 22.17.
the Witnesses should go before the people, and cast the first stone at him.
And for this Cause it was that the Kings Guards refused to fall upon the
Priests of Nob at Readiness command, being thoroughly convinced both of the
sanctity of their Order, and of the equity of their Cause. And for this very
reason it was, that the third Captain, 2 Kings 1.17.
being sent by Ahaziah unto Elijah, would not lay violent hands upon him. And
for the same reason it was that many public Executioners amongst the Jews,
being converted to Christianity, renounced their Offices, as being very
dangerous; if we may give credit to the Martyrology, Lib. 1. c. 7.
and to venerable Bede.

V. Extraordinary Taxes to be exacted, instead of obedience in this Case.
But in case the Subjects minds are not satisfied concerning the equity of the
Cause by their Princes Declaration, then it is the Office of a good Magistrate
rather to impose some extraordinary Taxes upon them, than to compel them to
serve him in his Wars unsatisfied; especially when he may be supplied with men
otherwise. Now whether these Soldiers do serve him with a good or evil
intention, is no matter; for a good Prince may make use of both, as God himself
does of Satan and his Disciples, as Instruments to bring about his own most
Sovereign purpose: or as a poor man may and does make use of Jews and
Extortioners to supply his present wants, and that without sin. Nay, though
there be no doubt of the lawfulness of the War, yet it is not fit that
Christians should be compelled to fight against their wills; seeing that to
abstain from War, even then when it is in it self lawful, has always been
required of Churchmen and Penitentials to preserve them in the greater
sanctity, and is, in all others, many ways commendable. When Celsus upbraided
the Christians for refusing to go to war, Origin apologized for them thus, To
those who being Unbelievers would enforce us to fight for the Commonwealth, and
to destroy men, we shall give this Answer, That even their own Idol-Priests,
and those that attend upon the service of their reputed Gods, do keep
themselves unstained with humane blood, that so they may offer up their
Sacrifices for the whole Nation with clean and unpolluted hands: Neither in
case there should arise a War, are these men to be listed in their Armies. And
if this be not done without reason, how much more may they be said after their
manner to fight, who being Priests to the Most High God, endeavor to preserve
themselves free from blood and rapine; that so, whilst others are polluted with
spoil and slaughter, they may wrestle with God himself by constant and
incessant prayers for the welfare of them that make war justly, and for the
safety of them that govern righteously. Apoc. 1.6.
Wherefore Origin calls all Christians Priests, by the example of the Holy
Scriptures. 1 Pet. 2.5.


VI. When Subjects may justly engage in an unjust War.
But yet I believe that a Case may so fall out, that in a War not only
doubtful, but manifestly unjust, it may be just for Subjects in some measure to
defend themselves. For seeing that no enemy, though prosecuting a just War, can
have any true and internal right to kill such Subjects as are innocent, and no
ways accessory to the War, unless it be either for necessary defense, or by
consequence, and not intentionally; (for such Subjects are not liable to
punishment) it follows, That if it evidently appears that the enemy comes with
a full purpose not to spare the lives of such hostile Subjects, when with
safety to himself he may, then those Subjects may by the Law of Nature defend
themselves; which right neither does the Law of Nations take from them: neither
will we say, That such a War is on both sides lawful; for we dispute not here
concerning the legality of the War, but of a certain and determinate action in
the War, which action (though it proceed from one that otherwise has a
sufficient right to make war, yet) is unjust, and may therefore be justly
repelled.

The End of the Second Book.
Hugo Grotius OF THE RIGHTS OF WAR and PEACE. BOOK III.
CHAP. I. Of certain General Rules, showing what by the Law of Nature may be
lawful in War, wherein also he treats both of Fraud and Lies.
I. The order and method of the Book following. II. The first Rule; whatsoever
is necessary to the end is lawful in War, explained. III. The second Rule; A
Right in War may arise as well from Causes subsequent, as from the beginning of
the War. IV. The third Rule; that in War, some things may be done indirectly
without injury, which if by themselves, and intentionally done, were unlawful
with a caution. V. What may lawfully be done to such as supply the enemy with
things needful; this explained. VI. Whether in War Fraud be lawful. VII. That
Fraud in its negative act is not of it self unlawful. VIII. Fraud in its
positive act is either by such outward acts, as admit of several constructions,
or by such as signify as it were by arguments; fraud in the former sense
lawful. IX. Of that in the latter sense, the question is difficult. X. The use
of words in another sense than that wherein we know they are understood, not
always unlawful. XI. The form of a Lie as it is unlawful, consists in the
repugnancy it has with another Right; this explained. XII. That it is lawful
to speak that which is false to Children and Madmen. XIII. So also when he is
deceived to whom our speech is not directed, and whom without speech we may
lawfully deceive. XIV. And when we are assured, that he to whom we speak is
willing to be so deceived. XV. And when he that speaks exercises that
Supereminent Power that he has over his own Subjects: XVI. Or happily when the
life of an innocent person, or somewhat that is equal unto it, cannot otherwise
be preserved. XVII. That it is lawful by false speaking to deceive an enemy;
by whom asserted. XVIII. This not to be extended to words, promissory. XIX. Nor
to that which we affirm upon Oath. XX. But it is more generous, and more
agreeable to our Christian simplicity to abstain from falsehood, even to our
enemies. XXI. That it is not lawful for us to compel another to do that which
is lawful for us to do, but not for him. XXII. It may notwithstanding be
lawful for us to make use of his service, that freely offers it.
I. The order and method of this Book.
WHo may make War, and for what Causes, we have seen: It follows that we
enquire what in War may be lawful, how far forth, and by what means we may
prosecute it: which we are to inspect either simply, or in reference to some
antecedent promise or agreement. Simply in it self, and that first, according
to what is justifiable by the Law of Nature, and then according to what is
agreeable to the Law of Nations. And in the first place, let us see what is
lawful by the Law of Nature.

II. Things necessary to the End, lawful in War.
First then, as we have often said before, in Morals, those things that conduce
to the End, do receive their true intrinsic value from the End; wherefore
whatsoever is necessary to the End, that is to receive or recover his own
Right, (taking the word Necessary not physically but morally,) that we are
understood to have a Right unto. A Right, I say, strictly so called, as namely,
it signifies a Power or Faculty of doing in the sole respect of Society:
wherefore if I cannot otherwise preserve my life, it is lawful for me by what
force soever to repel him that would take it away, though happily, he that
attempts it be without fault. Because this Right of defending mine own life
does not properly arise from another man's sin, but from the Right that Nature
has granted unto me to defend my self: whereby also I am empowered to take
away from another that whereby my life will otherwise be certainly endangered,
without any respect at all had to his sin; and to possess my self of it, not as
its right owner, for this is not indulged unto me for that end, See second
Book, Chap. 2.. 10.
but to keep it so long as is necessary for mine own security. So by the Law of
Nature, I have a Right to take away from another that which he has formerly
taken from me; or if that cannot easily be done, yet to take that which is
equivalent unto it; as also for the recovery of my just debt: and from hence
will also ensue Propriety or Dominion, because that breach that is made in
Equality, cannot otherwise be repaired. So where a punishment is justly due,
there all manner of Force and Violence is Lawful and Just, if that punishment
cannot be had without it: And so whatsoever is a part of that punishment, as
the destruction of Corn, Cattle, the firing of Houses, Towns, Cities, and the
like, are also just, so long as they exceed not in measure, but keep proportion
with the offense.

III. A Right in War may arise from some subsequent Cause in its prosecution.
Secondly, we must know, that what is our Right is not to be adjudged by the
first cause of the War only, but from other emergent causes which arise in the
prosecution of it; so we have seen in our Courts of Justice, after a Cause has
been well argued, a new Right has often arose to a Party which was not before
thought on. Thus they that shall associate with him that invades me, be they
either Associates, or Subjects, do give me a Right to defend my self against
them. So also they that shall join themselves with others in a War that is
unjust, especially if they may or ought to know it to be so, do oblige
themselves to repair the damage, and to pay the charges of the War, because
they have caused it by their own default. So likewise they that rashly thrust
themselves into a War undertaken without any probable Reason, deserve to be
punished according to the injustice of their actions: For so long does Plato
approve of the War, Donec hi qui sontes sunt cogantur insontibus male affectis,
poenas dare; Until the guilty party be compelled to give satisfaction to those
who being innocent, have been injured by them.

IV. Some things may be gained without injury, indirectly, which purposely was
not lawful.
We must observe also in the third place, that whilst we execute the Right that
Nature give us, either to defend our selves, or to recover our own, many things
do indirectly and beyond our purpose accrue unto us, whereunto we could
otherwise have no Right at all. How this Rule holds in cases of our own
necessary defense we have elsewhere shown. So in the recovery of what is our
own, if we cannot get just as much as was ours, we may take more, but on
condition that we restore the surplusage to the Right Owner. So a Ship wherein
there are many Pirates, or an House wherein are many Thieves, may be battered
down or sunk, though it be to the endangering of many Infants, Women, and such
like innocent persons that were accidentally mixed amongst them. But this must
ever be observed, that Non semper omni ex part licitum est, quod juri, stricte
sumpto, congruit; We are not always to extend our Right to its extremity, for
not every thing that is strictly due, is always and altogether lawful. For
sometimes our compassion toward the Innocent, and our Charity toward our
Neighbors, will not suffer us to exercise our full Right: wherefore in such
cases we ought to be circumspect, and (as much as in us lies) to foresee, and
to avoid all such contingencies, which may fall out beyond that, which we
principally aim at, unless the Good that we aim at be far greater than the Evil
that we fear; or unless where the Good and Evil being equal, our hopes of
obtaining the Good be greater, than our fears of the Evil can be, whereof
prudence is the best Judge; yet so, that whenever the case shall happen to be
doubtful, we always incline to that part which provideth rather for another
safety than our own, as being much the safer, and if an error, yet it falls on
the right hand. Mat. 13.29.
Let the tares grow up with the wheat, (says our best Master) lest while ye
pluck up them, ye pull up the wheat also. Multos occidere and indiscretos
incendii and ruinae potentia est; To destroy whole multitudes, says Seneca,
without distinction, argues a power proper to the sudden irruption of fire, or
the fall of some great building, rather than the rage of a man. And how much
sorrow and penitence such a rash act cost the Emperor Theodosius, upon the
admonition of St Ambrose, Histories will inform us. And although Almighty God
does so sometimes, yet ought that to be no example to us, because of that full
and absolute Right of Dominion that he has over us, which he has not granted
unto us to have one over another; and yet, even God himself, who is Lord
Paramount over all Mankind, does often spare a World of wicked and ungodly men
for a very few that are good, thereby manifesting his equity, as he is a Judge;
as sufficiently appears by that sweet Colloquy between him and Abraham
concerning Sodom: by which general rules, it is easily collected, Genesis 18.23.
etc.
how far our Right extends in War against our Enemies by the Law of Nature.

V. What we may do against them that supply our Enemies with what they want.
And here another Question is usually started, namely, what we may lawfully do
to those who are not Enemies, or at least will not be so reputed, and yet do
daily supply our Enemies with such things as they need: Great contests have
anciently been, and now are about this matter; some stiffly maintaining the
rigor of the War, others as earnestly contending for the liberty of Trade and
Traffic. But first we must distinguish of the things wherewith the Enemy is
supplied; for some things there are that are of no use but in War, as Arms and
Ammunition; some things there are which are of no use at all in War, Procop.
Goth l. 1.
as things serving for pleasure only: And lastly, some things there are that
are useful both in Peace and War; as money, Victuals, Apparel, Ships, and
materials for Shipping. (At Athens it was prohibited to export Flax, Bottles,
Timber, Wax, Pitch, and the like) Concerning things not useful but in War, it
is true what Amalasuintha told the Emperor Justinian, He is to be esteemed as
an Enemy, that supplies the Enemy with things necessary for War: as to the
second sort of things there is no just cause of complaint. So Seneca thought,
The favor of a Tyrant I may purchase, in case that which I give him, do
neither increase his power to do mischief, nor confirm that which he already
has; for such things as these a man may give without increasing the common
calamity. I will not, says he, supply him with money whereby he may keep his
Army in pay; but if he require Marble, Perfumes, or costly Apparel, these being
but the fuel of his lust, can hurt no man but himself: Soldiers and Arms will I
not furnish; but if he will accept of the best Artists I have, to make Scenes
for Masks and Plays, I shall willingly part with them. (Thus did Hyram gladly
furnish King Solomon with Timber, and all kind of curious Artificers, that
might increase the delight he took in sumptuous buildings, thereby to divert
him from pursuing with his vast Riches his Fathers conquests in Syria.) So also
St. Ambrose, De Off. lib. 1. c. 30.
to contribute to him that conspires against his own Country, is no commendable
liberality. As to the third sort of things which are of doubtful use, we must
distinguish of the present state of the War. For if I cannot defend my self,
unless I do intercept those things which are sent to mine Enemy, necessity will
give me a good Right to them; yet upon this condition, that I make restitution,
unless there be sufficient cause to the contrary. Again, if the supply that is
sent in, do hinder the execution of my defense of the design, and he that sends
it might have known that it would so do: As for example, If I have besieged a
Town, and blocked up its Ports, so that I may justly expect the surrender of
it, or a Peace; in this Case, he that shall knowingly send in relief, is bound
to give me satisfaction for the loss I sustain thereby, no less than he that
takes a Prisoner out of Custody that owes me a just Debt, or instructs him how
to make his escape thereby to defraud me: and proportionably to that loss I
sustain I may seize his goods, and posess them as mine own till I am satsfied;
and if the damage be not already given, but intended only, then have I a Right
by the detention of those supplies, to compel him that sent them to give
security, either by pledges, hostages, or the like, that he will not for the
future send any more supplies to the besieged. But in Case the wrongs done me
by mine Enemy, be manifestly unjust, and that he by those supplies, do abet and
encourage him in his unjust War; then he shall not only be bound to repair my
loss civilly, but also criminally, as he that rescues a notorious malefactor,
in the very presence of a Judge: and for this Cause it is lawful for me to do
unto him agreeable to his offense, according to those rules which we have
already set down for punishments. And so long as we contain our s^lves within
these bounds, we may make War upon him; and for this Cause do they that make
War usually, send out Declarations, and Remonstrances to other Nations, as well
to insinuate unto them the equity of their Cause, as also what probable hopes
they have to recover their Right. Now the reason why we refer this matter to
the Law of Nature is, because we find nothing certainly determined in Histories
by the voluntary Law of Nations, as to it. There is a Book written in Italian,
Entitled, Liber consulatus Maris, concerning the Government of the Seas,
wherein are recited the Constitutions of the Emperors of Greece and Germany,
the Kings of France, Spain, Syria, Cyprus, the Baleares, Venetians, and
Genoese; wherein are handled two hundred seventy four Questions upon this
Subject, where we shall find it adjudged, That if the Ship with its freight be
both the Enemies, then there is no doubt but both are lawful prize: If the Ship
belong to such as are at peace with us, and the goods to our Enemies, we may
enforce them to put into any of our Allies or our Ports, there to unlade the
goods; yet so, that we pay the Master of the Ship for the freight of them. But
in Case the goods belong to our Friends, and the Ship to our Enemies, then is
the Ship lawful prize, and to be agreed for; which if refused, they may be
compelled into any Harbor of our Friends, and withal to pay us for the freight
of those goods. In the Year 1438. There being War between the Hollanders and
the City of Lubeck, with other Cities Confederate, situate upon the Baltic
Sea, and the River Albis, it was in Holland adjudged in full Senate, That the
Goods found in an Enemies Ship, if it did appear that they belonged to others,
were no lawful prize, and this was there from thence established for a Law;
and so pleaded by the Danish King in the year 1597. who thereupon sent his
Ambassadors into Holland to assert his Freedom to transport his Goods into
Spain, notwithstanding the bloody War which the Hollanders then had with the
Spaniards. The like has always been permitted by the French to any Nation that
were at Peace with them, and that so freely, that oftentimes the Enemies have
in other men's names transported their Goods without damage; as appears by an
Edict made 1543. Chapter the 42. and by another made 1584, wherein it is
provided, that their Friends might freely traffic whither they pleased, so as
it were with their own Ships, Men and Goods, and that those Goods were not
Belli Instrumenta, Arms, nor Ammunition for War, whereby their Enemies might be
made stronger. But in case they did so, then it might be lawful to seize them
to their own use, paying a valuable price for them. Wherein two things are
observable, first, That by these Laws, Ammunition for War was not held as
lawful prize, much less were other innocent Merchandises obnoxious to this
danger. I cannot deny but that these Northern Nations have sometimes usurped
another Right, but not constantly, being urged thereunto rather by present
necessity, then by a perpetual equity. The English upon pretense of their War
would not permit the Danes Freedom of Traffic, whence arose that War between
those two Nations, whereby the English were compelled to pay a Tribute to the
Danes, which was called the Dane penny, which though the Cause were changed,
yet the name of it continued till the Reign of William the Conqueror, as
Thuanus records it in the year 1589. Again, we find it recorded as well by
Rh^danus in his History of Holland in the year 1575, o^ by Master Cambden in
his History of Queen Elizabeth in the year following, That that most Wise Queen
sent her Ambassadors, Sr William Winter and Secretary Beale to Remonstrate,
That the English could not endure that the Hollanders in the heat of their War
then with Spain, should detain their Ships trading in the Spanish Ports. And
when the English and the Hollanders being both at War with Spain, did disturb
the Cities of Germany in their traffic with the Spaniards, with what a
disputable Right they did it, appears by the eager dissertations of both
Nations, which are worthy our perusal for the deciding of this Controversy.
And it is observable, that the English themselves do in their writings
acknowledge no less, whereas they principally insist upon these two Arguments
to defend their Cause; namely, That the Germans did furnish the Spaniards with
Instruments of War: and secondly, that it had been mutually agreed in Ancient
Treaties between both Nations, That it should not be lawful for them so to do.
The like agreement we find afterward made between the Hollanders and their
Associates, and the Lubeckers and theirs, in the year 1593. That neither the
one nor the other should permit the Subjects of their Enemies to traffic
within their Dominions, or should aid them with either Men, Money, Ships or
Victuals. And afterward, namely, in the year 1617. It was agreed between the
Kings of Denmark and Sweden, That the Dane should obstruct all manner of
Traffic with the City of Dantzick, being then at Enmity with the Swedes; and
not only so, but that they should not suffer any Merchandises to pass through
the Sound, or the Baltic Sea to any of the Swedes Enemies; for which the King
of Denmark was to receive other Privileges and advantages from the King of
Sweden. But these are particular Contracts, from whence no general Rule can be
inferred. Neither did the Cities of Germany only blame the English for denying
them freedom of Traffic with their Enemies: But the Polanders also complained
against them in the year 1597, as Cambden relates, That the Law of Nations wa^
violated, because they were molested in their Commerce with Spain, because at
that time the Spaniards had War with England: But the French having made Peace
with Spain, being solicited by Queen Elizabeth, (who was still at Enmity with
the Spaniard) that it might be lawful for the English to search their Ships
for Arms and Ammunition, would not admit so much as this, alleging that it was
but a pretense for rapine, and to disturb traffic. So in the League that the
English made with the Hollanders and their Associates, it was agreed, That
other Nations whom it concerned to give check to the swelling Power of the
Spanish Monarchy, should be solicited to forbi^ all Commerce with Spain, which
if they did not voluntarily, then that they would permit their Ships to be
searched, that no Arms or Instruments for War might be thither imported; but
beyond this, neither were the Goods or Ships detained, nor any hurt done under
that pretense to such as traffick'd peaceably. Nay, when in the same year
several Hamburgers were taken laden mostly with Instruments of War, those only
were challenged by the English as prize; but for the rest of the Commodities
they paid the just value. But the French when their Ships were seized and
confiscate by the English, because bound for Spain, did declare unto Queen
Elizabeth that they would not suffer it. It is fit therefore, as I have said,
That there should be Remonstrances and public Declarations, forbidding
Traffic with our Enemies, before we seize their Goods as Prize. So Queen
Elizabeth in favor to the King of France, against the Spaniard and those of
the Holy League, See an example of a Declaration made by the English in Cambden
about the years 1591. and 1598.
sent out her Proclamation commanding that no man should carry Victuals or
Provisions for War out of ^ngland, into any of the Ports of France possessed by
the Leaguers, or traffic with them upon pain of High Treason. And afterward
the War waxing hot, it was publicly commanded upon the like pain, That no man
should carry Corn, Munition, or Provision for Shipping into Spain, because he
professed himself an Enemy to England, and refused to confirm the Ancient
League betwixt their predecessors. Neither is it necessary, that any Nation
should be restrained from their freedom of Traffic by such Declarations; but
it is left to every Nations choice to do as their own occasions and advantages
shall prompt them to, there being nothing found in Histories, Vid. Thuan. An.
1589. lib. 96. Cambd. An. 1589. and 1595.
that may probably infer any certain determination of this controversy amongst
Nations: wherefore such Declarations though published, have been sometimes
observed, and sometimes not, accordingly as it stood with the respective
advantages of several Nations. And for this Cause we refer the decision of this
Question to the Law of Nature. When the Hansetowns made sore complaints against
Queen Elizabeth, Cambd. An. 1595.
upon Her taking of Sixty Hulks Trafficking to Spain, then in open War with
England, as if their Ancient Privileges had been broken: She answered, That
she had forewarned them, that they should not carry any provision for War to
the Enemies of the Realm of England; and that carrying them she had lawfully
taken them, and could do no other unless she would wilfully draw destruction
upon her self and People; That Privileges were but Private Laws, which are not
to be maintained against the Public Safety, which is the highest Law: and this
she asserts to be the Law of Nations. Many things to this purpose we may find
in Jo. Meursius his Danish History l. 1. and 2. where the Lubeckers and the
Emperor are for a free trade, the Danes against it.
The Carthaginians we read sometimes took the Romans Prisoners, who had carried
such Warlike Provisions to their Enemies, but yet upon demand they set them at
liberty. But Demetrius being possessed of Attica, and having strictly begirt
Athens both by Sea and Land, taking a Ship that was attempting to relieve it
(being now ready to yield) hanged the Master of the Ship together with the
Pylot; whereby others being deterred from the like attempt, the City was
yielded unto him, as Plutarch relates in the life of Demetrius. Not much unlike
unto this, was that which the same Plutarch in his Mithridatick War testifies
of Pompey, That he placed Guards upon the Bosphorus, so that if any Merchants
sailed through it, they were if taken, put to death.

VI. Whether fraud in War be lawful.
As to the manner of prosecuting War, it is generally granted, That Force and
Terror are the most proper ways: The Question is, Whether deceit be lawful.
Both Homer and Pindar were of opinion, that an Enemy might be annoyed any way,
by Fraud or Force, plainly or secretly, clamve, palamve: So Virgil, Force or
Deceit who in a Foe disputes. No man was more famous for wisdom than Solon, yet
he made use of both. Lib. 15.
So did Fabius Maximus, and is highly commended for it by Silius. For
stratagems of War, none so celebrated as Ulysses amongst the Grecians; from
whence Lucian makes this conclusion, Lucian Phil. Xenoph. de Cyri Inst. lib. 1.
Thucyd. lib. 5. Plut. Agesilaus,
that Deceit in War is praiseworthy. There is nothing so profitable in War as
Fraud, says Xenophon. Bracidas in Thucydides gives the greatest Honor unto
him that overcomes his Enemy by craft and subtilty. Hosts decipere and justum,
and licitum; To overreach an Enemy, says Agesilaus in Plutarch, is both just
and lawful. So Polybius, He that can circumvent his Enemy, by wiles and
stratagems, deserves more Honor than he that overcomes him by plain force. And
from him Silius brings in Corvinus speaking thus, Bellandum est astu, levior
laus in Duce dextra;
It Is fraud, not force, commends a Captain most.
So also thought the severe Spartans, as Plutarch notes in the life of
Marcellus; and therefore they offered more solemn Sacrifices to the Gods, for a
Victory obtained by craft and policy, than for that which was gained by mere
force. And herein it was that the same Plutarch commends Lysander, because he
used more craft than courage in destroying his Enemies; with whom he compares
Sylla, of whom this Character was given, That he pieced to the Lions skin the
Foxes tail. So likewise in that Encomium which he gives of Philopoemen, he
inserts this, That being well instructed in the Cretensian Discipline, he did
expedite that plain and generous way of fighting by wiles and stratagems. Thus
Ammianus also, Nullo discrimine virtutis ac doli, prosperi omnes laudari debent
bellorum eventus; Without any distinction at all between craft or courage, all
prosperous successes in War deserve commendation. The Roman Lawyers accounted
all fraud, whereby an Enemy was weakened, to be just and honest: And if a man
could by any means delude the designs of his Enemy, whether it were by force or
wit, he was to be encouraged. Neither amongst Divines does St Augustine differ
in opinion from these Historians, as appears by his tenth Question on Joshua,
Sup Josh. qu. 10,
Cum justum bellum suscipitur, vi aperta pugnet quis aut insidiis, nihil ad
justitiam interest; In case the War be just, says he, it matters not to the
justice of its prosecution, whether it be by force or policy. Nay St.
Chrysostom seems to give greater honor to those Generals that overcame their
Enemies by subtilty, than to those who conquered them by pure valor. But there
are opinions that seem to defend the contrary, some whereof we shall rehearse
anon. The main hing^ whereupon the Controversy hangs, is this, Whether deceit
be universally Evil, for the^ it will follow, that we are not to do Evil that
Good may come of it; or, Whether Deceit be to be ranked among such things as
are not universally Evil in their own Nature, but that sometimes it may so
happen that it may be Good.

VII. Fraud in its negative act not unlawful.
Here therefore we are to observe, That some fraud consists in a negative act,
and some in a positive. But in this question, I extend the word Fraud even unto
those things which consist in the negative act, as Labeo did, who referred it
unto that fraud which is not Evil, when a man by dissimulation preserves that
which is either his own, or another man's. De Offic. 3.
Cicero doubtless was very short in his expression, when he labored to explode
simulation and dissimulation out of the world: For seeing that we are not bound
to reveal unto others, all that we either know, or would have; it will follow,
That it is lawful for us to dissemble some things before some men, that is, to
hide from them somewhat of what we know, Lib. cont. Mendat. cap. 10.
or of what we desire. Licet occultare veritatem prudenter sub aliqua
dissimulatione; The truth we may sometimes prudently conceal under some
disguise, says St Augustine; which we may do without being justly charged with
lying: For as the same Author elsewhere speaks, Aliud est mentiri, aliud verum
occultare; It is one thing to lie, and another to conceal the truth. As Abraham
when he affirmed Sarah to be his Sister, did not therein deny that she was his
Wife, but only concealed it. So St Augustine, Veritatem voluit celari, Genesis 20.
non mendacium dici; He was indeed willing that the truth should lie
undiscovered, without telling a lie. Now if this be lawful in others, surely
it is necessary and unavoidable in Princes, as Cicero testifies in many places.
A notable example whereof we have in the Prophet Jeremiah, Jerem. 38.
where the Prophet being enquired of concerning the event of the siege, did at
the Kings request prudently conceal it from the Nobles, alleging some other
cause of their Conference, which notwithstanding was really true also. So
Abraham told Abimelech true, when he said of Sarah that she was his Sister,
that is, according to the custom of that speech among the Hebrews, his near
Kinswoman; dissembling for that time, that she was his Wife.

VIII. Fraud in its positive acts distinguished.
But fraud which consists in a positive act, if in things, is called
simulation; if in words, a lie. Some place the difference between these two in
this, That words do naturally signify the conceptions of our minds, but things
not so: But on the contrary, words, of their own nature, and set aside from
that sense which men have agreed to give them, signify nothing, unless it be
such an inarticulate and confused noise as pain and grief causes us to make,
which is more understood by the thing we suffer, than by the noise we utter.
And if it be objected, that it is peculiar to the Nature of Man, above all
other Creatures, That he is able to express the manifold conceptions of his
mind unto others, to which end words and voices were invented, we do not deny
it: Yet this also may be added, That such indications are not made by words
only, but by becks, nods, and other signs made by the eyes, head or hand, as
among such as are born dumb. (Thus Pliny testifies of the Aethiopians, Pliny
lib. 6. cap. 30.
Quibusdam pro sermon, nutus, motusque membrorum est; That some of them
instead of words, express their minds by various motions of their other
members.) Whether those becks, or other motions have naturally something common
with the things signified, or whether they have a certain signification by
agreement only. Consonant whereunto are those Egyptian Hieroglyphics, which
as Paulus the Lawyer says, signify not words but things: for says he, It is
not the figures of the letters, but the speech expressed by those letters that do
oblige us so far forth as it is agreed on, That what is by any writing
declared, shall be as binding, as what is expressed by word of mouth. Where you
must note, that the word Placuit is very emphatical, as showing that that which
gives such force and validity to words is consent and agreement. And here again
we must have recourse unto that distinction, which we made use of to take away
all ambiguity concerning this word, the Law of Nations. For we then said, that
the Law of Nations signified, either that which was admitted of by every Nation
without mutual obligation, or that which all Nations did mutually oblige
themselves to observe. Now voices, nods, and such like indications of the mind,
are admitted to signify things by mutual obligation, which Aristotle calls
(...), according to agreement; whereof some are so universally agreed on to
signify such and such things, that all Nations are obliged so to understand
them; which cannot be so generally understood of things. Whence it follows,
that it is lawful for me to do or use other acts, or things, though I do
foresee that another man will conceive a false opinion of them: I speak of that
which is intrinsic, and not of that which is accidental. And therefore we must
give an instance, first of such a case wherein no detriment at all ensues; such
was that of Michal when she deceived her Father, with an Image laid in stead of
David. 1 Samuel 19.16. Luke 24.28.
Thus our blessed Savior seemed to his two Disciples, as if he would have
traveled beyond Emaus; and perhaps he intended so to do, unless they did
importune him to abide with them, as God himself is said to will many things
suppositively, which notwithstanding come not to pass, the condition being not
fulfilled. Mark 6.28:
And Christ himself made as though he would have passed by his Apostles as they
were sailing on the Sea, that is, unless they should earnestly desire him to
come up into their Ship. Another example may be given in St Paul, who doubtless
when he circumcised Timothy, Acts 16.3.
knew very well what construction the Jews would make of it, namely, That the
Law of the Circumcision, though abolished by Christ, did still, even in the
judgment of the Apostles, oblige the Children of Israel; whereas St Paul,
dispensing with this error, proposes to himself another end, namely, That
through that mistake he and Timothy might gain the advantage of a more free and
friendly conversation with them. For the Ceremonial Law being abolished,
neither did circumcision, by its first institution, any longer signify a
necessity of keeping that Law; neither was the evil of that error, which from
thence arose, and for a while continued, (though afterward to be exploded) so
great as was that good which Paul and Timothy then aimed at, which was a more
facile insinuation of the Doctrine of the Gospel. The Greek Fathers do usually
express this kind of simulation by the word (...), signifying a dispensation.
So Chrysostom, In 1 Cor. 4.6.
This was no deceit nor hypocrisy, but a compliance or dispensation. And
again, upon that of St Paul, To the Jews I became a Jew, etc. he says, That
St. Paul, to the end he might convert those that were really superstitious, at
first appeared unto them to be so too, making an outward show, as though he had
been otherwise than what he was; he did such things as they did, but not with
the same purpose and intention as they did. And this is his meaning when he
says, I became all things to all men, that I might save some. 1 Samuel 21.12.
Hither also we may refer that personated madness of King David in the Court of
Achish. There is is a notable Saying extant of Clemens Alexandrinus, who,
describing the qualities of a good man, says, That some things he will do for
his Neighbors sake, which otherwise he would not do. Such was that act of the
Romans, who when their City was besieged, threw great quantities of Bread from
the Capitol into their Enemies Camp, (when in truth they had but little to
spare) to the end that their enemies, despairing to take the City by Famine,
might give over the Siege. Another example of such a simulation wherein the
hurt or detriment that follows (setting aside the fraud) is lawful, we have in
that feigned flight of Joshua before the Inhabitants of Aye, Josh. 8. Josh. 8.
which is very frequently practiced by other Generals. For such a seeming
flight is, questionless, lawful, as signifying nothing by consent or agreement,
but according to the construction that the enemy will make of it, wherein, if
they are deceived, they deceive themselves. And to this end also it is lawful
for us to make use of our Enemies Arms, Colors, Garments, Sails, and the
like, whereof we shall read in all Histories. For all these things every man
has liberty to make use of, though contrary to usual custom, at his own
pleasure; because that very custom of using or wearing such or such a color
or fashion is in every man's particular choice, and is not appropriated to this
or that Nation by common consent, and therefore obliges none.

IX. Whether to ly be lawful to an Enemy.
There is yet a more arduous Controversy concerning those notes or signs which
men frequently use in their commerce one with another, of which sort the most
proper and usual fraud is lying. Much may be found in Holy Writ against it, as
Prove. 13.5. A good man hates lying. So Prove. 30.8. Remove from me all falsehood
and lies. So the Psalmist, Thou shall destroy all those that speak lies, Psalm.
5.7. And it was the charge of the Apostle to the Colossians, Do not lie one to
another, Col. 3.9. This opinion is very strenuously defended by St Augustine,
and with him agree many, both Poets and Philosophers. Very well known is that
of Homer, Ille mihi invisus pariter cum faucibus Orci,
Cujus men's aliud condit quam lingua profatur.
Equal to Hell it self hateful be he,
Whose heart and tongue do always disagree.
And that of Sophocles, Aliena vero proloqui nunquam decet:
At vera certam si cui pestem ferant,
Huic danda venia est, si facit quod non decet.
Untruth to speak is an indecent thing;
Yet if to any, truth swift ruin bring,
A lie to him is not imputed sin.
And that of Cleobulus, Mendacium odit quisquis animitus sapit.
He that sincerely wise does lies detest.
Aristotle is on this point somewhat modest, Simply, says he, and in it self,
lying is vile and reproachful, but truth fair and commendable. But this, he
says, by it self considered, without any regard to circumstances. Yet does not
the contrary opinion want Advocates, and those of great authority. As first, In
the Holy Scriptures, the examples of many good men, who though they did it upon
very weighty occasions, yet are they not reproved upon record for it.
Concerning which Irenaeus, being so instructed by a certain Old Priest, gives
us this Caution, De quibus Scripturae non increpant, sed simpliciter sunt
positae, nos non debemus fieri Accusatores; We ought not to be their Accusers,
whose words or deeds the Scriptures do simply recite, but not blame. Secondly,
The declared opinions of many ancient Christians, as Origin, Clemens,
Tertullian, Lactantius, Chrysostom, Hierome, Cassianus; yea, and of almost all
Christian Writers, as St Augustine himself confesses, herein only dissenting
from them, That he acknowledges it to be a very knotty question, full of
intricacy, and by the learned variously disputed; Plato de Rep. l. 1 and 2. and
5. Xen. lib. 4. Socrat. Plut. de Stoic. Contract. Quint. 12.1. Arist. Nic. 7.3.
l. 4. c. 8.
all which are his own words. Among Philosophers, the plain Assertors of this
opinion are Socrates, and his two Disciples Plato and Xenophon; as also Cicero;
and if we give credit to Plutarch and Quintilian, the Stoics, who reckon this
among the qualifications of a wise man, To know where and when it is lawful to
lie. Neither does Aristotle himself seem to dissent from them in some places,
witness that Clause of his beforementioned [(...)] of it self, that is,
commonly the thing considered in it self, without respect to other
circumstances. For as Andronicus Rhodius, giving an instance in a Physician
lying unto his Patient, says, He deceives indeed, but yet is no Deceiver; and
gives this reason for it, Because his purpose and intention is not to deceive
his Patient, but to preserve him. And Quintilian beforementioned, defending
this opinion, says, That there are many things which are said to be either
honest or dishonest, not simply from the fact, but from the Causes moving to
that fact. So Diphilus, If by a lie man's life preserved may be,
What harm may thence ensue I cannot see.
When Neoptolemus in Sophocles asked Ulysses, Whether he were not ashamed to
lie: Ulysses readily answered, No, if our safety do thereon depend. The like
testimonies may be produced out of Lisander and Euripides. So in Quintilian
also I read, Nam and mendacium dicere, etiam sapienti aliquando concessum est;
For it is no disparagement to a wise man sometimes to tell a lie. A wise man,
says Eustathius upon Homer, may upon a great occasion tell a lie. And for
confirmation of what he there says, he produces testimonies both out of
Herodotus and Isocrates. There are some (says Donatus upon Terence) that
writing concerning the Duties of a good man, and ipsum fallere in tempore,
rectum putant, do esteem it a point of honesty sometimes to deceive. And indeed
he that would do some men good, cannot do it, unless he circumvent them;
wherefore Cicero in his Oration for Ligarius, approves of such a lie as honest
and charitable.

X. To use such words as may be taken in another sense, not always unlawful.
These so different opinions may happily be in part reconciled by that common
distinction of lies, taken in a stricter and in a larger sense. For we do not
here take the word so largely as to comprehend all that falsehood which
sometimes is spoken through imprudence, as Gellius rightly distinguished
between mentiri, and mendacium dicere; To lie, and to speak that which is not
truth. But we take it here as it signifies an untruth, spoken knowingly,
whereby we contradict the conceptions of our own minds, either in our
understanding or our will. For whatsoever is first and immediately signified by
either words or other notes, are the conceptions of our minds; wherefore he
does not lie, who though he do speak that which is false, yet conceives it
(when he speaks it) to be true. But he that says a thing is true, yet thinks
it to be false, does undoubtedly lie. For ream linguam non facit nisi rea men's;
De verbis Apost. Ser. 28.
The tongue is not made guilty, but by a guilty mind. And as St Augustine
speaks, Quantum in ipso est, non fallit, sed fallitur; He that speaks an
untruth, but thinks it to be true, does not deceive, but is deceived. And if
so, then it will follow, That when any word or sentence will admit of diverse
significations, either by familiar use, or by the custom of art, or by any
figurative expression that is intelligible; then if our inward meaning agree
with any of these significations, it is not to be esteemed as a lie, though he
to whom we speak is believed to understand it in a different sense. Ambr.
citat. a Gratian. l. 22. q. 2. post si quaelibet.
Thus did Abraham commune with his Servants subtly, when he bad them to tarry
there whilst he and his Son Isaac went a little further to sacrifice, promising
that they would both return; which as then he intended not. But these captious
and equivocal expressions are not rashly to be allowed; yet may they upon some
occasions be justified: as in case we are thereby to instruct such as are
committed to our charge, or to decline some pernicious questions whereby we may
be ensnared. John 11.11.
Of the former Christ gives us an example in himself, when he said, Our friend
Lazarus sleeps; which the Apostles understood of his taking rest in sleep. So
when he told the Jews, That they would destroy the Temple, and in three days he
would raise it up; John. 11.20, 21.
which he meant of his Body, but they of the material Temple. So again, when he
promised his Apostles, That they should sit on twelve Thrones, judging the
twelve Tribes of Israel; Luke 22.30. Matthew. 26.25,
and that they should drink new wine with him in his Fathers Kingdom: He knew
very well that they understood him as of a temporal Kingdom, whereof they were
full of hopes, even unto the very Day of his ascension. And thus in another
place he speaks to the people in Parables, lest hearing they should understand;
that is, unless they should bring with them such reverence and attention as was
requisite, in order to the right receiving of his pure Doctrine. As to the
latter use of these Amphibologies, Amphibologies,
amongst profane Authors Tacitus will furnish us with the example of one
Lucius Vitellius, who being urged by Narcissus to unriddle himself, and to
speak the truth plainly, could never prevail; but still he gave ambiguous and
doubtful Answers, such as might incline them to that whereunto he would have
them led. So the same Tacitus in another place, speaking of Tiberius, says,
Tacit. Ann. lib. 6.
Ita compositus, ut ex eventu rerum adversa abnueret, vel prospera agnosceret;
He did so artificially compose his Answers, that expecting the event, he might
either renounce the Plot if it succeeded not, or own it if it prospered. Much
like unto that of the Oracle to Croesus, If Croesus over Halis go,
A Kingdom shall he overthrow.
Which Croesus understanding in a wrong sense, instead of conquering Persia,
lost his own Kingdom of Lydia.

The like we read was sent from Rome to some that waited but for the Popes
fiat, to have killed King Edward: Edvardum occidere nolite timere bonum est.
Which being written without any Point or Comma, would admit of two contrary
expositions.


There is a very notable Saying among the Hebrew Doctors, Si quis norit uti
perplexiloquio, recte; sin minus, taceat: If a man being put to answer
insidious questions, can either prevent or avoid them by Amphibologies, let
him; if not, let him not answer at all. For as St Chrysostom observes, He is
not to be reckoned as a Deceiver that uses Amphibologies to a good end, but he
that uses them to a bad. But yet, in some Cases, to use them is not allowable,
as namely, when either the honor of God, or our charity to our Neighbor, when
our reverence to our Superiors, or the nature of the thing it self whereof we
treat, requires that we should clearly unmask our selves, and declare the
truth; then to use these Amphibologies is not only indecent, but impious. So in
Contracts, we have already said, Whatsoever the nature of the Contract requires
to be understood, should be declared. So of Laws which should be the Guides of
men's manners, it is required that they should be expressed in the plainest and
most significant words that may be found. Now in the Case of Contracts may that
of Cicero be fitly understood, That lies ought to be excluded out of all humane
commerce; which he seems to have borrowed out of that old Attick Law, (...); In
a Market nothing ought to be spoken but truth. In which Cases the word
mendacium is to be taken so largely as to comprehend all doubtful and ambiguous
Phrases, which we speaking properly have hitherto excluded from this Notion of
lying.

XI. The form of a lie as it is unlawful, wherein it consists.
It is required therefore to the nature of a lie, commonly so taken, that what
is either spoken or written, or by any other signs expressed, cannot otherwise be
understood than in such a sense as is different from his mind that so declares
it. But to a lie strictly taken, as it is naturally unlawful, there is
necessarily required some peculiar difference, which if rightly understood, at
least according to the common acception of Nations, can be nothing more than
the violation of his existing and remaining right with whom we converse. For
certain it is that in respect of himself no man can lie, let him speak never so
much falsehood. Where by Right, I understand not every Right, and what is
extrinsick to the thing; but that which merely relates unto the matter in hand,
which is nothing else but his freedom with whom we discourse, to judge at the
conceptions of our minds, which as by a silent Contract, we are presumed to owe
unto him. For this, and no other, is that mutual obligation which men were
willing to introduce so soon as language was invented, or those other notes or
signs generally received as significant of our inward thoughts; without which
obligation that invention had been altogether fruitless. (And therefore amongst
the Hebrews, he that deprived a man of the means of knowledge, was said cor
furari, Cor furari.
to steal away his heart, as Jacob is said to steal away the heart of Laban, in
that he did not acquaint him with his purpose to depart from him, Genesis 31.20,
26, 27. Genesis 31.^^, 26, 27,
Now it is also requisite that this right or liberty to judge by such words or
signs at their inward conceptions, should remain entire at that time when we
discourse. For possible it is that though there was such a freedom, yet it is
then taken away, or may be by some other right that is supervenient. As a Debt
that was, may cease to be so, by reason either of an Acquittance given, or a
failing of the performance of some Condition. Again, it is required, That the
right that is violated be his with whom we discourse, and not a Bystanders, or
any other man's. As in a Contract there arises no injustice, but by the
violation of the right of one of the Contractors. Hence happily it is that after
Simonides, Plato refers the speaking of truth to justice. And that St Augustine
himself inserts into the definition of a lie, That it be spoken animo fallendi,
with a purpose to deceive. And Cicero, Plato, and oothers would have the
speaking of truth to be referred to the fundamentals of Justice. And that that
lying that is forbidden, the Scriptures do often describe by bearing false
witness against our Neighbor; Instit. 6.18.
whereunto Lactantius has respect where he says, That no untruth ought to be
spoken at any time with an intent either to hurt or deceive our Neighbor. But
this right may be taken away (as I have said) as by express consent of him with
whom we converse, when he declares before he speaks that he will speak false;
and he to whom he declares it, does permit it: So by a tacit consent, or on a
presumption grounded upon just reason, or by the opposition of another right,
which by the common judgment of all is most prevalent. From these premises
rightly understood, many inferences may be drawn, in order to the reconciling
of those different opinions formerly mentioned.

XII. It is lawful to speak untruth to Infants and Madmen.
As first, In case we converse with either a Child or a Mad man, if what we say
be false, it cannot be imputed as a lie; because (as Quintilian says) it is
universally permitted, as profitable, to instruct Infants by Tales and Fables.
But the immediate reason is, Because not having a freedom of judgment, they
cannot be injured about that liberty which they have not.

XIII. When he to whom we direct our speech is not deceived, but a By-stander.
Secondly, Whilst we discourse with one man who is not deceived, if another to
whom we direct not our discourse be thereby deceived, we cannot be justly
charged with a lie. For first, It is not a lie, in respect of him to whom it
was spoken; because his judgment remains sound and uncorrupted, as his does who
hearing a Romance, understands it to be so: So likewise does his, who hearing a
Parable or figurative speech, whether it be by way of Irony or Hyperbole,
whereby we arrive, as Seneca speaks, at the knowledge of what is true by
something that is not true, De Benef. l. 7. c. 23. Hyperboles, Ironies.
asserting things incredible to gain belief to things credible. Neither is it a
lie in respect of him that overhears it; because he being not concerned in our
discourse, we stand no ways obliged unto him: but if that man do conceive an
erroneous opinion by reason of a discourse between others, he may justly blame
himself if he be deceived, See Albericus, Gent. l. 2. c. 5.
and not others. For to speak properly, Our speech one with another is no
speech at all in respect of a By-stander, neither does it signify to him any
thing. Livy l. 34. App. Hysp.
And therefore neither was Cato the Censor to be blamed for promising aids to
his Confederates, though falsely; nor Flaccus in divulging unto others, That
Emilius had taken his Enemies City by assault, though it were untrue, and his
enemies thereby deceived. The like Plutarch records of Agesilaus. For nothing
was therein said to the Enemy; and therefore the damage that was consequent
thereunto was but extrinsick and adventitious, which to an enemy either to wish
or procure was not unlawful. Unto this kind of false speaking St Chrysostom,
Hierome, Cyril, and others, refer that speech of St Paul, reproving St Peter at
Antioch for too much Judaizing, as believing that St Peter very well understood
St Paul, namely, That he did it not seriously, and in good earnest; but only to
prevent a scandal that might thence arise to such as were weak amongst them.

XIV. When our speech is directed to him that is willing to be deceived.
The third Inference is this, When we are sure that he with whom we converse
will not only not be offended, though his judgment be for the present deluded,
but that he will also be thankful in regard of the profit that will thence
arise to him. In this case a lie strictly taken, that is, an injurious lie,
cannot be imputed unto us, no more than that can be imputed unto us as theft,
when upon presumption that the Owner will not be offended, we spend somewhat
that is his, thereby to procure him a much greater profit. For in cases of such
certain profit, our presumptions are as authoritative as his express consent.
And to him that is willing, is no injury done. Wherefore a Physician is not
presumed to lie, when he cheers up his desponding Patient with the feigned
hopes of recovery. Or when a General in a dangerous Battle cheers up the
Spirits of his fainting Soldiers, with some comfortable news, though false,
whereby he procures both their safety and victory. We are altogether to speak
truth (says Democritus) where it is advantageous: yet, as Xenophon observes,
Deceive we may even our very friends, when it redounds to their good. The
Physician (says Maximus Tyrius) deceives his Patient, the General his
Soldiers, and the Pilot his Mariners; yet neither of these can be said to
injure them: whereof Proclus in Plato gives this reason, Because that which is
good is to be preferred before that which is true. Quod bonum est, id vero est
melius. Socr. 4. Plut.
Histories are full of examples of this nature; as that in Xenophon, when to
encourage his Soldiers, he caused it to be given out, That an Army of their
Confederates were coming to assist them. And that of Agesilaus in Plutarch, who
when he came into Boeotia, and there understood that Pysander, was there
overthrown in a Naval Battle by Pharnabazus and Conon, caused the quite
contrary to be published to the Army, which to confirm he came crowned into the
Temple, causing solemn Sacrifices to be offered to the Gods for the Victory.
And (that salubre mendacium, as Historians call it) that wholesome lie of the
Consul Quinctius, who to encourage the Right Wing, gave it out, That the Left
Wing had routed their Enemies. Thus is that of Clemens Alexandrinus to be
understood, who allows of a lie as the utmost refuge in the time of danger.
Where we must observe, That the injury that is done unto the judgment in this
kind, is so much the less as it is momentany; whereas the good that may ensue
is great, general and lasting: for the victory being gained, the truth
immediately appears.

XV. When he that speaks, uses that sovereign power he has over his
Subjects.
The Fourth, and that which comes nearest unto the former is this; so often as
he, who has a supereminent Right over all the Rights of another, makes use of
that Right, either for his own particular interest, or the public good. And
hereunto had Plato De rep. 3.
respect, when he indulged unto Princes that liberty to speak untruths. And yet
the same Plato when he seems sometimes to grant, and sometimes to take away
this license to, or from Physicians, seems to put this only difference that in
giving it, he intends it to such as are publicly Authorized unto that calling;
and in taking it away, he intended it from such as over arrogantly assumed it
unto themselves. And yet neither did Plato himself think it fit to admit of
lying in God, notwithstanding that Sovereign Power that he has over men;
because it is an argument of much weakness and insufficiency, to have recourse
to such shifts (which to attribute to God were Blasphemy.) An example of this
innocent and unblamable falsehood we have in Joseph to his Brethren, for which
^hilo so highly commends him, who as the Kings Vicegerent, does with a becoming
seve^ity charge his Brethren contrary to his knowledge; first, for being Spies,
and afterward, for being Thieves. Another we have in Solomon, who to discover
the true Mother, commanded the Child to be divided, when he intended nothing
less. So true is that of Quintilian, Aliquando exigit communis ^tilitas, ut
etiam falsa defendantur; It is sometimes expedient for the common good, that
some falsehoods should be maintained.

XVI To preserve the life of an innocent person.
We may add a fifth, namely, when the life of an innocent person, or some such
like, cannot otherwise be preserved; or when the execution of some dishonest
act cannot otherwise be prevented; such was the fact of Hypermnestra so much
celebrated by Horace, As, Splendide mendax, Hor. 3. Carm. ^. 11.
and in omne virgo
Nobilis aev^m.
Deserving for her pious fraud
Immortal praise.
Whereupon the Scholiast has this note, Decenter: Pulchrum est enim pro
justitia mentiri; Very decently: for to lie sometimes for justice and innocence
is a lovely thing. There are says St Aug.) two sorts of lies not much to be
blamed, though they are not altogether without blame; and these are either the
^ocul^r, or the charitabl^ ly: The jocular is not pernicious, because it
deceives no man; for he to whom it is spoken, knows, that what is so spoken is
but in sport. The officio^s lie is so much the less dangerous, because i^
proceeds from charity. And therefore Tertullian amongst those (...) sins of
infi^mity, whereunto we are subject, deprecates this, When in cases of (...) we
make ^yes our sa^^^^ (...). St. Chrysostom, does not only excuse Rahabs lie,
but co^^^^^s it, O p^lci^^m m^n^^^i m! O laudabilem dolum, etc. O lovely lie! O
commendable fr^^^d, says he, of one that betrayed not things Devine, but to
preserve true Piety. So likewise does St. Augustine of the Aegyp ian M^dwives,
O magnum humanitati^ ingenium! O pium pro salute mendacium! O rare device of
humanity, Vid. Eras. in Moriae Encomio. Haesitat. Aug. Lib. 2. qu. super Exodus
O p ous lie framed only to preserve life! For which St. Hierome does not only
comm^nd them, but believes that God also did reward them, even with eternal
blessedness, as will appear to any that reads his exposition on the 17. of
Ezech. and on the 56. of Esaias.

XVII. Lawful to Enemies.
Some wise men are of opinion, that to an Enemy we may use falsehood in a larger
sense. As Lib. 2. de rep.
Plato and l. 2. de Cyr. Inli. and 5. Socrat.
Xenophon among the Grecians, Philo among the Hebrews, and amongst Christians
St. Chrysostom; who to the rules they give for not lying, add thi^ exception,
Unless it be to our Enemies. If we call to the test the brave exploits of our
noblest Captain, says St. Chrysostom, we shall find that they owe most of
their triumphs to fraud, and that those Victories so gained, were always more
renowned, than those gained by plain force St. Aug. is very doubtful in this
case.
. And hitherto happily we may refer that Message that the men of Jabesh Gilead,
sent unto the Ammonites, by whom they were besieged, 1 Samuel 11.10. And that of
Elisha the Prophet, when he told those that were sent to apprehend him, from
the King of Syria, That that was not the way, nor the City where Elisha was, 2
Kings 6.19. 2 Kings 6.19.
As also that of the same Elisha to Hazael concerning Benhadad, Go and say to
him, Thou may certainly recover, howbeit the Lord has showed me that he
shall surely dye, 2 Kings 8.10. 2 Kings 8.10.
As that also of Valerius Levinus, when he boasted that he had slain Pyrrhus.
To the third, fourth, and fifth of these inferences above mentioned, we may
refer that of Eustratius, In lib. 6. Nicomicor.
It is not always necessary that he that gives good advice should speak true;
for, happily he that rightly advises, may advise purposely how he may frame a
lie, so that thereby, either his Enemy may be deluded, or his friends
preserved. Examples of these kinds are very frequent in all Histories: To the
same purpose is that of Quintilian, If a Thief enquiring after a Traveller,
with an intent to kill him, may be misguided; or if an Enemy for the
preservation of our Country, may lawfully be deluded: then that which in a
servant is reproveable, is in a wise man commendable. Tho. 2.2. qu. 110. art.
1. and 3. with others,
The Schoolmen of this latter age will not I know admit of this, who out of all
the Ancient Fathers, have chosen St. Augustine only as their guide in almost
all things. The Schoolmen make St. Aug. their guide.
But yet as scrupulous as they are and nice, in admitting of false speaking in
any Case, they notwithstanding, make no scruple of admitting tacit
interpretations, and mental reservations, which are wholly to be rejected;
insomuch, that it is hard to determine, whether it be not better to admit of
speaking falsely to some persons, and in some cases (as those beforementioned)
than so indifferently to distinguish between falsehood, and those secret
interpretations, and silent reservations, whereof they approve; which being
admitted, no man can possibly know, when his Neighbor speaks truth, and when
not: As when to a Question that is asked me, I answer, I know not, I mean, I
know not so as to tell you that I know it; or when I say to a poor man, I have
nothing, I mean, I have nothing to give you, etc. which interpretations, even
common sense is ashamed to own; and which being admitted, will easily introduce
plain contrarieties: so that he that affirms any thing, may be understood to
deny it; and he that denies any thing may be said to affirm it. For it is most
true what Chrysippus in Gellius maintains, That there is scarce any voice that
admits not of some ambiguity, because every word besides the signification,
which is of its prime institution, has also another of the second, and that
diverse according to the diversity of arts, yea, and others also, which it
borrows from translations and from semblable figures. Besides as Seneca
observes, There are infinite things without names; which we are forced to
describe, by such names as we borrow from other things. Neither do I better
approve of those, who as if they quarrelled more with the word, than the thing,
call that jest or sport, which they utter, with a countenance and pronunciation
very serious.

XVIII. This not to be extended to words promissory.
We are likewise to observe, that what we have here set down concerning false
speaking, is to be referred to that kind of speech which is assertory, and that
also so far forth only as it damnifies none, unless it be a public Enemy, but
not at all to that which is promissory; for every promise confers a new and
special Right to him, to whom that promise is made: And this is in force, even
amongst Enemies, notwithstanding the greatest and most open hostility, and
that, not only where the promise is express; but where it is presumed, as in
the sounding of a party, whereof more anon, when we come to treat of public
Faith, which is to be preserved even amongst Enemies, between these two kind of
speeches, I mean assertory, and promissory. Agesilaus in Plutarch clearly
distinguishes, where he says, Foedera violare, Deos est contemnere; extra ea
verbis hostem decipere, non justum modo est, sed and gloriam habet and cum
lucro voluptatem; To violate Leagues, is to despise the Gods: But otherwise to
deceive an Enemy, which words are not only just, but glorious, and with delight
profitable.

XIX. Not to Oaths.
Neither is it to be extended to oaths, either assertory or promissory; for
oaths have a power to exclude all exceptions, because therein we have to do not
with men only, but with God, to whom by our oaths we stand obliged, although
there arise no Right at all to men: for (as I have already said) it is not so
in those speeches which are confirmed by oath, as it is in others; for in
others it is sufficient to justify us from lying, if the words spoken be true
in any sense, not altogether unusual; but in that which is sworn, it is
necessary that our words be plain and significant, and fitted to that sense,
wherein he to whom we swear, is thought most probably to understand them, when
we may discover the detestable impiety of those, who affirm that it is as
lawful to deceive men with oaths, as Children with dice and other toys.

XX. It is more generous and Christian like to abstain from falsehood and lies.
We know, that there are some kinds of fraud, which though naturally permitted,
yet are by some people and some persons decryed; not so much for any thing in
them that is unjust, as out of either magnanimity of spirit, or sometimes out
of a presumption on our own strength. There is in Aelian an excellent saying
recorded of Pythagoras, namely, That there are two things wherein men draw near
unto God, in speaking truth always, and in doing good unto all men. For truth
(as Jamblicus speaks) is the Captain or Guide to all virtues whether Moral or
Divine. And Aristotle gives it as the truest Character of a magnanimous person,
Nic. 4.1.
that he loves truth, and to speak his mind freely. Whereas on the contrary, It
is, as Plutarch notes, Lib. 1.
the badge of a vile and servile spirit to lie. And therefore (as Arrianus
speaks of King Ptolemy) It is worse in a King to lie than in any other. So the
same Author speaks of Alexander, Lib. 7.
Nothing so well becomes a Prince, speaking to his Subjects, as truth. And
Mamertime speaking of the Emperor Julian, says, Admirable is the concord that
there is between our Princes tongue and his heart, as knowing, that lying
argues a base and abject spirit; and whereas it is fear and poverty only, that
makes men liars, he is ignorant of his own Majesty, who being a Prince disdains
not to lie. It was Plutarchs observation of Aristides, That he was so great an
admirer of truth, that he hated lying though but in jest. The like did Probus
commend in Epaminondas, Adeo veritatis diligens, ut ne joco quidem mentiretur;
That he was so great a lover of truth, that he would not tell a lie, though but
for sport. And as for such as are fallacious and deceitful, we usually account
them (says Philo) as base and sordid; truth therefore ought much more
religiously to be observed by us Christians, by how much we are enjoined to be
simple and innocent, Mat. 10.16.
and forbidden, not only falsehood and wrongful dealing, but all idle talk and
vain babbling; yea, Matt. 12.36.
and since we have him for our Copy to write after, in whose mouth was found no
guile. Wherefore as Lactantius says, That man that is truly honest, will not
say with Lucilius, Homini amico ac familiari non est mentiri meam; When with my
friend I talk, I do not lie: But rather will think it his duty not to lie,
though he have to do with a stranger or an Enemy, and at no time to do that
thing, that may occasion his tongue to speak what his heart thinks not. Such as
Sophocles testifies, was Neoptolemus the Son of Achilles, who being urged by
Ulysses, to piece the Foxes tail to the Lions skin, made this answer: Ego
audiens quae doleo, Laerta sat,
Implere factis oderim multo magis:
Nam sic nec ego sum natus, ut fallacias
Secter, nec olim genitor, ut perhibent meus:
At sum paratus vi mora, non fraudibus
Pertrahere raptum.


So likewise Horace concerning his Father Achilles, Carm. lib. 4. Ode. 6.
Ille non inclusus equo Minervae
Sacra mentito, male feriatos
Troas and laetam Priami choreis
Fallerat aulam: --
Sed palam captis gravis, etc.
Whereby he intimates, That Achilles though Father of Neoptolemus, Scholiast
upon that place in Horace.
was of that noble and generous spirit, that he disdained even victory it self,
if not obtained by mere manhood.

Thus Euripides also, Generosus animus hostibus furtim necem Rhesc.

Infer nescit.
-- A gallant soul has he
That scorns by stealth to kill his Enemy.
The like we read of Alexander, who being advised to circumvent his Enemies by
some wile: answered, Se nolle furari victoriam; That he scorned to steal a
victory. The like Polybius testifies of the Achaians, That they hated to use
fraud though against their Enemies, esteeming that the surest victory, which by
the confession of their Enemies was so. Such were the Ancient Romans until the
second Punick War, insomuch that Aelian appropriates this honor unto the
Romans above all Nations; that they overcame their Enemies, not by craft or
subtilty, but by plain force, And when Perseus the Macedonian King, was
deceived with the hopes of Peace; the old Senators disowned such Roman arts,
denying that their Ancestors (who gloried more in valor than in fraud) did
ever manage their Wars, with that wiliness which the Carthaginians, or with
such deceit as the Grecians used, with whom it was ever held more honorable to
circumvent their Enemies by stratagems, than to overcome them in plain Battle;
adding withal, That sometimes wit might prevail against valor for the present;
but that his courage was for ever quelled who was convinced, that in a pious
and a just War, he was not by fraud, nor by chance, but fighting hand to hand
with his whole strength in plain Battle vanquished: Yea and in latter times,
Tacitus testifies of them, That the Roman people sought revenge upon their
Enemies, neither by craft nor treachery, but openly and by force of Arms. Such
also were the Tiberines, who always proclaimed as the time, so the place, when
and where they would give battle to their Enemies. And such were the Achaians,
as Polybius testifies. The like does Mardonius in Herodotus record of the
Grecians of his time. (When James the fourth of Scotland, invaded the North of
England with a powerful Army, Thomas E. of Surrey sent an Herald to him to let
him know, that on the Friday following he would give him Battle in case he
would stay so long in England; And Thomas his Son, sent the King word, that he
would spare none save the King himself; and that he might find him in the van
of his Army. Herb. H. 8.
) But this (as I said before) proceeds rather from magnanimity of spirit, and
confidence in our own strength, than from the justice of the thing.

XXI We must not enforce a man to do that which he cannot lawfully do.
As to the manner, how the War should be prosecuted, this rule is pertinent,
What is unlawful for a man to do, is also unlawful for another to compel or
persuade him to do, whereof let these suffice for examples. It is unlawful for
any subject to kill his Prince, or to deliver up a Town or Fort without the
consent of a Council of War, or to plunder his fellow Subjects. And therefore
it is likewise unlawful for me being an Enemy, to persuade another Prince's
Subjects remaining so to do it. For evermore, He that occasioneth another man
to sin, does therein sin himself: Neither is it sufficient to say, That it is
lawful for him that excites such a man to do such a villainous act, to do it
himself; for it is true, that it may be lawful for him to kill him, but not to
do it in that manner. For that of St. Augustine is very true, Nihil interest
utrum ipse scelus committas, an alium propter te admittere velis; It matters
not much, whether a man do commit wickedness himself, or cause another to do it
for him.

XXII. Yet if he offer himself, we may make use of him.
But it is another rhing, if such a person shall freely offer himself, without
any instigation from us; for it is not unlawful for us to make use of him, as
an instrument to effect that, which it is lawful for us to do, as we have
already proved by the example of God himself Lib. 2. c. 26.. 5.
. Transfugam jure belli recipimus, says Celsus; that is, It is no way
repugnant to the Law of Arms, to receive Renegadoes into protection, and to
make use of them. Neither are such to be delivered up, unless it be so agreed
by the Articles of Peace.

CHAP. II. How Subjects Goods become liable to their Princes Debts.
I. Naturally no man is bound by the fact of another, but the heir only. II.
Yet by the Law of Nations, the Goods and Acts of Subjects, are liable to the
debts of the Prince. III. An example whereof in the taking of men Prisoners.
IV. And in seizing their Goods. V. Which is lawful, when the Right is denied,
and when that is; where is also showed, that though the thing be adjudged, yet
it neither gives nor takes away any man's Right. VI. That the lives of innocent
Subjects are not liable to satisfy the Princes debt. VII. The difference
herein between the Civil Law, and the Law of Nations.
I. Naturally none but the Heir obliged by the fact of another.
LET us now descend to those Rights, which the Law of Nations grants unto us;
some whereof appertain to every War, others to some particular kinds of Wars
only. Let us now begin with generals. By the bare Law of nature no man is bound
by the fact of another, but he that succeeds to inherit his Goods; for as soon
as Dominion was first introduced, it was likewise agreed on, That all debts
should pass, together with the Goods to the next Occupant, Videsupra B. 2. chapter
21. 19.
according to that old Law-Maxime, Transeat fructus cum onere; Let the Estate
and the Charge go together. The Emperor Zeno was wont to say, That it was
contrary to natural equity, that one man should be molested for another man's
debt. Hence arise those titles in the Roman Laws, That the Wife shall not be
sued for the Husband, nor the Husband for the Wife; the Son for the Father, nor
the Father or Mother for the Son. Neither as Vlpian says expressly, shall any
particular person be liable to the debts of the Commonwealth; that is, if the
common stock be able to discharge them; otherwise they shall, not as individual
persons, but as they are a part of the whole. De Benef. l 6. c. 20.
If any man shall lend his money to my Country, says Seneca, I shall not
acknowledge my self his debtor, yet shall I willingly advance my proportion,
not as my own debt, but to disengage my Country. And again, Singuli debebunt
non tanquam proprium, sed tanquam publici partem; What the Commonwealth owes,
every particular Citizen owes, not as his own debt, but as his part of the
public. It was particularly provided by the Roman Laws, That no one of the
Villagers should be obliged for another of the Villagers debts: and in another
place, That no ones possessions should be destrained for the debts of another;
no, not for the public. And in Justinians Novels, Reprisals are expressly
forbidden, and this reason added, Because it has no face or color of justice,
that one man should be the debtor, another enforced to pay the debt, where also
such exactions are called odious. Thus did Theodorick in Cassiodore account it,
for one man to be kept as a Pledge or Hostage for another.

II. But by the Law of Nations Subjects are for their Prince.
Although these things be true, yet by the voluntary Law of Nations it may be,
nay as it appears, it has been, introduced, That what debts soever any Civil
Society, or their Prince shall contract, either primarily by themselves, or be
engaged for by not rendering unto others that which is their right; all the
Goods both corporeal and incorporeal of those that are subject to that Society
or the Prince thereof, shall be liable and stand bound to discharge. Now this
seems to be enforced by a kind of necessity; for otherwise the Gap would be so
wide as to let in all manner of injuries. For the goods of Princes are but few,
and those not so easily taken as those of private men's which are many:
wherefore it is reckoned by Justinian amongst those Laws which custom had
found requisite to be constituted, for the relief of humane necessity. Neither
will this be found so repugnant to nature, that it might not be introduced by
custom and by the tacit consent of Nations, seeing that Sureties do stand
firmly bound for other men's debts, without any other cause than by their
voluntary susception only. And very probable it is that the Members of any one
Society may more easily be relieved one by another, than Strangers can, whose
complaints, though never so just, are little regarded in many places. Besides,
the benefit that arises from this obligation, being common to all Nations,
they that find themselves aggrieved by it at one time, may be relieved by it
some other. Nor is this custom in force only where there is a perfect and
complete War between Nation and Nation. (For what is lawful in such Wars
appears by the very words of their denunciation, Against the ancient Latin
People, Live. lib. 1.
and against the men of Old Latium, I denounce and make war, says the Roman
Herald in Livy. So likewise when the Heralds demand the peoples consent, they
say, Is it your will and pleasure that War be forthwith denounced against King
Philip, and his Macedonians, and against all that are under his Government. So
also in the Decree it self, The Roman people do proclaim War against the
Hermundulian people, and against the men of Hermunduli: which is all one as
what in another place he expresses in these words, Hostis sit ille, quique
intra praesidia ejus sunt; Let him be declared an enemy, and whosoever betakes
himself to his protection.) But this custom is in force even where there is no
perfect war absolutely denounced, but where notwithstanding a certain violent
prosecution of our right is necessary; which is, as it were an inchoate and
imperfect War. It is worth our observation what Agesilaus answered to
Pharnabazus, being a Subject to the Persian King, O Pharnabazus, Plut. Ages.
and Xenoph. Hist. Graec. 4.
when heretofore we were friends to the King of Persia, we dealt friendly with
all that appertained unto him; so now being his enemies, we use all his as
enemies: and therefore since thou art willing to depend upon his protection, we
may lawfully weaken him by thee. The learned Damascene does prudently
distinguish between the taking of Prizes or Reprizals for the recovery of
debts, or reparation of damages, and the making of War, which he illustrates by
the example of King Herod, For whom, Jos. Antiq. 6.
though it were not lawful to make war upon the Arabians, yet was it lawful for
him, (...), to take prizes throughout all Arabia for the five hundred Talents
due unto him, if not paid by a certain day appointed; for so it was expressly
covenanted between them: and therefore Herod did rightly deny that to be the
making of War, which was but a just and lawful way to recover his own right.

III. An example in taking of men Prisoners:
A branch of the execution of this right was that which the Athenians called
(...), the making men Prisoners; concerning which the Attick Law was this, If
any man had been by forcible assault killed by a Stranger, the next of kin had
a right to take any three men Prisoners, but no more, and to detain them until
the Murderer were either punished, or delivered up to be punished. Hence we may
perceive, That there is a kind of incorporeal right of Subjects (that is, a
liberty to live where, and to do what they please) engaged for the debts of
every Society, which ought to punish such of their own Society as shall dare to
injure those of another Society; so that any of the Members of that Society
that shall negglect or refuse to do it, if taken, may be held in bondage until
that Society do what they ought; that is, until they either punish or deliver
up the Offender. For although the Egyptians (as Diodorus testifies) did
maintain, That it was not just to imprison a man for debt; yet is there nothing
in it repugnant to nature. And the general practice not only of the Grecians,
but of most other Nations, is sufficient to warrant the contrary. Aristocrates,
who was Contemporary with Demosthenes, demanded, That a Decree might pass, That
whosoever should kill Charidemus, should be taken away from what place soever;
and that whosoever should make resistance, should be held as an enemy. In which
Decree Demosthenes observes these errors: First, that Aristocrates did not
distinguish between the putting to death of Charidemus justly or unjustly,
seeing that possible it was that he might deserve death; next that he did not
require that judgment should first be demanded against him: And thirdly, that
not they amongst whom he should be killed, but they that should receive the
murderer being escaped into protection should be prosecuted as enemies.
Demosthenes his words are to this purpose, If a murder be committed amongst
any people, and they refuse either to punish or to deliver up the murderer,
the Law allows the apprehension of three men; but Aristocrates leaves these men
untoucht, and not so much as mentions them; but would have those persecuted as
enemies who have according to the Common Right of Nations concerning suppliants
received him that has escaped by flight, for so I put the case, into
protection, unless they deliver him. The fourth thing that he reproves, is,
that Aristocrates would instantly bring it to an absolute War; whereas the Law
requires only the detention of three men. Of these four exceptions, that
Demosthenes takes against Aristocrates his Decree, the first, the second, and
the fourth are not altogether without reason; but for the third, unless
restrained to the sole event of the murder done, either accidentally, or in
the defense of himself, I cannot perceive why it should be mentioned, unless it
were like an Orator for arguments sake, rather than truly or justly: for as we
said before, Vid. lib. 2. cap. 21. Sect. 7.
That Right which all men challenge of receiving and defending Suppliants, does
concern those only whom Fortune, and not their own crimes have made miserable;
for otherwise there is the same Law for those amongst whom the crime is
committed, as for those who resuse either to punish or deliver the guilty. And
surely either the Law it self cited by Demosthenes has through custom been
thus interpreted, or against such cavils was afterward more liquidly expressed;
the truth of one of these, none will deny, that reads that of Julius Pollux,
Lib. 8. c. 6.
whose words are these, The taking of men prisoners is then lawful, when a man
having demanded Homicides, (who have fled for safety to others) cannot receive
them: For the right of apprehending three men lies against those, who having
received malefactors into protection, refuse either to deliver them, or to
punish them according to Law. The like we find in Harpocration, The Right of
taking prisoners is a Right to snatch away some men from some other City: For
it was an ancient custom against such Cities as received Malefactors, and
refused either to punish them, or to deliver them to be punished, to make use
of this Right of Pignoration. The like may be done by any City whose Citizen
has been manifestly and injuriously taken away and detained from them. Thus we
read, that at Carthage there were some that opposed the taking of Ariston the
Tyrian prisoner upon this ground, Live. l. 34.
That the like would be done against the Carthaginians, both at Tire, and at
other Mart Towns, where the Carthaginians used to traffic.

IV. Reprizals lawful.
Another kind of forcible execution of this Right, is the taking of Goods
between the People of diverse Nations, which our Modern Lawyers call Reprizals,
or a violent seizing and detention of each others Goods, which the English and
the Saxons call Withernam, and the French, (even where it is wont to be
obtained from the King) Letters of Marque: which also are frequently granted,
and are of force, as Lawyers say, where Right is denied.

V. Our right being first denied, and when that is.
And this may be presumed, not only when they cannot in any reasonable time
obtain judgment against a delinquent or a debtor: But when in a Case that will
hardly admit of any doubt, sentence shall pass plainly against Right; for Cases
that are ambiguous, the definitive power is supposed to be in the Delegates, as
persons publicly chosen to do Justice, Vid. Gaiiius de pace publ. l. 2. c. 8.
n. 7. Vasq. Cont. illust. c. 10. sect. 41.
whose Authority notwithstanding is not of the same force to oblige strangers,
as their own Subjects; nay, even between their own Subjects, it makes not a
debt void that was justly due: For as Paulus the Lawyer observes, Verus
debtor, licet absolutus sit, Natura tamen debtor permanet; He that owes a
real debt, though he be discharged by the sentence of the Judge, yet by the Law
of Nature stands still obliged. And when by the injury of the Judge, a Creditor
had taken away from the right Owner something that had not been the Debtors, as
if engaged unto him: the question being put, Whether the debt being paid, that
thing were to be restored to the debtor; Scaevola proved that it ought to be
restored. But between a Subject and a Stranger, there is this difference,
Subjects are bound up by the Sentence of the Judge, though it be unjust, so as
they can neither resist the execution of it lawfully; nor by Force recover
their own Right against a Sentence unjustly given, by reason of the efficacy of
that power they live under: But Strangers have a coercive power, though it be
not lawful for them to use it so long as they may recover their Right in a
Judicial way: wherefore in such a Case, that both the Persons, and the moveable
Goods of his Subjects that refuse to restore what is violently taken away, may
be by the like violence taken, is not introduced by Nature, but by Custom
generally received in all Nations. The most ancient Example of this we may read
of in Homers Iliads, where Nestor is said to drive away the Cattle of the
Elidenses; because they had before plundered his Fathers Horses: whereupon as
the story goes on, Proclamation was made, That every man to whom the Elidenses
did owe any thing, should come and partake of the spoil, in such a manner, as
that every man might have his just proportion. Another Example we have of this
in the Roman History, where Aristodemus Tarquin's heir, seizes the Roman Ships
lying in Harbor at Cumae, which he detained for the Goods of the Tarquines
detained in Rome. And in Aristotle we find a Decree against the Carthaginians
to seize all foreign ships, if any man had a Right so to do.

VI. This Right reaches not to the life of him that is taken.
It has happily been believed among some people, that the lives of innocent
Subjects do stand engaged upon the like account, and that happily upon this
presumption, that every man has an Absolute Power over his own life, which
Power may be transferred unto the Commonwealth, which is very imbrobable; and
as we have already said, not consistent with sound Divinity: yet it may fall
out, that such Subjects may be killed, though not intentionally, Book 1. Chapter 1.
Sect. 12, 13.
yet accidentally, namely, when they shall attempt by force to impede the
execution of this Right. But yet if such a mischief may be foreseen, we are
obliged by the Law of Charity to forbear the prosecution of our Right, as we
have elsewhere showed; since by that Law, we that are Christians especially
ought to set a greater value upon the life of a Man, than upon our Goods, as we
have elsewhere proved.

VII. The distinction that is herein made between the Law of Nations, and the
Civil Law.
Moreover as well in this, as in several other Cases, we must take heed, That
we distinguish between those things that are properly due by the Law of
Nations, and those that are due by the Civil Law, or by a mutual agreement
between some people. By the Law of Nations, all Subjects that are injurious
unto the Subjects of another Prince are liable to this Law of Reprizals,
especially if they have occasion to reside there, whether they be Natives or
Strangers; but not if they be only Travelers, or sojourn there but for a
little time. For these Pignorations are of the same nature with Taxes, which
being raised for the discharge of public debts, are imposed on such as are
constant Inhabitants, and not on such as are Sojourners, and so subject to the
Laws of the place for a while only. Neither are the Persons or the Goods of
Ambassadors, being not sent to our Enemies, any ways liable to this right of
Pignorations by the Law of Nations; as also in many places the persons of Women
and Children are by the Civil Law often exempted: But even the Goods of such as
addict themselves to Learning or to Merchandising, may by the Law of Nations be
taken by any, as their persons also were at Athens. But by the Civil Law of
many places, this Right of seizing Goods or Persons, must first be demanded
from the Supreme Power, but in other places from the Judges. By the Laws of
Nations the Propriety of things taken passes immediately to him that takes
them to the value of his principal debt, together with his charges, so as the
remainder ought to be restored. Thus did the Venetians to the Genoese, as
Gregoras relates; Whose ships, says he, being taken at Galata, laden with
Wheat, Barley, and Salt for Fish, whereof the Lakes of Copais, Gregor. lib. 9.
and Maeotis, and the River Tanais affords great plenty, they did not diminish
the least part of the Goods, but took great care to preserve them, until having
received their just debts, they restored all they had taken entirely. By the
Civil Law they that have any share in the Prizes taken are usually cited, and
being adjudged lawful, they are by public Authority sold and divided among
such as are concerned in them. But to be better informed in these and the like
Cases we must consult such as have treated of the Civil Law, especially
Bartolus, who has written much concerning the matter of Reprizals. One thing I
shall here add, because it serves somewhat to allay and qualify the severity
of this Law, in it self too rigid, namely, That they who either by the
non-payment of what they owe, or not doing that which is Right to such as they
have wronged, do occasion the seizing of their fellow subjects Goods, are bound
by the Laws both of God and of Nature to make satisfaction for those losses,
which other men through their faults have sustained. Cymon.
Thus Plutarch of the Syrians, Many of them, says he, would not contribute
money, but commanded those that had either received or taken away other men's
Goods to repair their loss.

CHAP. III. Of a Just or Solemn War, according to the Law of Nations; and of
its Denunciation.
I. That a Solemn War by the Law of Nations ought to be between diverse people.
II. A distinction between a Nation, though doing unjustly, and a company of
Thieves and Pirates. III. Yet sometimes there happens to be a change. IV. It is
requisite to a Solemn War, That he that makes it should have Sovereign Power;
and how this is to be understood. V. And that the War be solemnly denounced.
VI. Whereunto what by the Law of Nature, and what properly by the Law of
Nations is required, is handled distinctly. VII. The denunciation of War is
sometimes conditional, sometimes simple and absolute. VIII. In denunciations,
what belongs to the Civil Law, and not to the Law of Nations. IX. War being
denounced against a Prince, is denounced also against his Subjects and
Associates, so far forth as they follow him. X. But not as by themselves
considered; this illustrated by examples. XI. The reason why denunciation is
requisite to some effects of War. XII. That these effects are not to be found
in other Wars. XIII. Whether a War may be made as soon as it is denounced. XIV.
Whether against him that has violated the Rights of Ambassadors a War may be
made, though not denounced.
I. A Solemn War ought to be between two diverse Nations.
WE have already said Lib. 1. cap. 3. sect. 4.
, That according to the Opinion of the best Authors, a War is oft-times said to
be Just, not from the Cause that excites it, nor from those Heroic Actions
that are done in it, but from some peculiar effects of Right which one War has
more than another. But what manner of War this is, is best understood by the
definition which the Romans give of an enemy, Hosts sunt qui nobis, aut quibus
nos public bellum decernimus; They are Enemies, says Pomponius, against whom
we publicly denounce War, or who do the like against us; the rest are but
Pirates and Robbers: to the very same purpose speaks Vlpian: Wherefore as he
there adds, He that is taken by Robbers, is not a slave to those that take him,
neither need he recover his freedom by the Right of Postliminy, L.
Postliminium, sect. 2. D. de Cap. L. si quis ingenuam.
as one that returns out of Captivity does. A Piratis aut latronibus captus,
liber permanet, says Paulus the Lawyer; He that is taken prisoner by a Robber
or a Pyrat loses not thereby the privilege of a Citizen, as he does, that is
taken prisoner in War by the Germans, or by the Parthians. Whereunto we may add
that of Vlpian, In Civil Dissentions, although the Commonwealth be dangerously
wounded, yet does not the Contest extend to the ruin of the State; they that
betake themselves to either part are not such mortal Enemies, as they are to
whom the Right of captivating men, and of Postliminy belong: And therefore
though they be taken and sold, yet whenever they shall recover their liberty,
they shall not need to petition their Prince to restore them to their Freedom,
because they never lost it by a just Captivity. This only is to be observed,
That under the Example of the People of Rome, whosoever in any City or
Commonwealth has the Supreme Power, has a Right to make a Just War;
according to that of Cicero, Philip. 4.
Ille hostis est, qui habet Rempublicam, Curiam, Aerarium, etc. He is accounted
an Enemy who enjoys a Commonwealth, a Court, a Treasury, the Consent and
Concord of Citizens, with some regard had, if the matter require it to Peace
and Leagues: The word Hostis, signifies properly an Equal, which Pirates and
Robbers cannot be to Sovereign Princes; and therefore they cannot be said to
make a Just War.

II. A distinction between a Nation doing things unjustly, and Pirates, and
Robbers.
Neither does a Commonwealth cease to be a Commonwealth, because some Acts of
Injustice are publicly and generally committed by them; nor are Robbers or
Pirates to be deemed a Civil Society, because happily they do observe some kind of
equality between themselves, without which no Society can possibly long
subsist: For these latter are not (as Procopius speaks Vand. 2.
) Turba hominum, Lege congregata, sed injustitiae causa, in unum coacta; A
company of men associated under a Law, but forced to unite, to defend
themselves against the Law: whereas the former, though guilty sometimes of some
injustice, and so not without some faults, yet do they associate for the
defense of their own Right, and do Right unto Foreigners, though happily not in
all things according to the Law of Nature, which in many places is almost
obliterated; yet certainly according to those Covenants and Agreements which
they have made with every Nation, or according to the Customs by them used.
Lib. 1.
This the Scholiast upon Thucydides observes, That whilst the Grecians preached
Pyracy as a lawful Calling, they at the same time abstained from Murder, from
robbing by night, and from driving away the Oxen that ploughed the earth. Lib.
2.
And Strabo records it of diverse other Nations, who though they lived by
Piracy; yet as soon as they returned home, would send to the right Owners, that
if they would they might redeem their Goods at indifferent prizes. And hitherto
we may also refer that of Homer: Ipsi etiam rapti avidi, qui aliena pererrant
Littora, concessu Superum si praeda reperta est,
Navibus impletis abeunt, and vela retorquent:
Quippe Deos metuunt, memores fandi atque nefandi.
Greedy of Gain to foreign Coasts they stray;
If by their starry Guides they find a prey,
With sails retort they go, their Ships full fraught,
Fearing the Gods, minding what is good, what is naught.
The Ancient Normans accounted Piracy an honorable Trade to live by. And
Plutarch notes of the Scipii, that they were extremely corrupt (yet a
Commonwealth) although they robbed even such Merchants, as came in a friendly
way to traffic with them; but in Morals the principal part gives form to the
whole: And as Cicero well observed, De finibus. 5.
Because it contains the most parts, and spreads farthest, therefore it gives
denomination to the whole. To the same sense is that also of Galen, In
temperaments the denomination is always taken from that which is the greatest
portion. Wherefore Cicero is very crude in his expression in saying, That when
the King is unjust, the Nobles unjust, and the generality of the People so, it
is not so properly a corrupt Commonwealth, as none at all: which sentence of
Cicero's, St. Augustine thus corrects, Neither can I therefore say truly, that
that people are no people, De Civit. Dei lib. 19. c. 24.
or that Commonwealth no Commonwealth, so long as there remains any society of
a rational multitude, unanimously congregated for the mutual defense of such
things as they love. A Body though diseased yet remains a Body; and a City is
still a City so long as it has Laws, and executes judgments, and has other
means necessary for both natives and strangers, to preserve or recover their
just Rights. That which Dion Chrysostom observes, comes much nearer to truth,
who tells us, That the Law (especially that of Nations) is in a City, as the
Soul in an humane Body; which being taken away, it remains no longer a City.
Lib. 10. Ep. 1.
So likewise Cicero in another place, There were neither Laws nor judgments,
nor any sign to show that there was a Commonwealth. Aristides in his persuasive
Oration to the Rhodians for Peace, proves that many good Laws may very well
consist even with Tyranny. And Aristotle informs us, Lib. 5. de rep.
That he that strains the power, either of the Nobles or of the People, to too
high a key, marrs the Harmony of good Government; and first corrupts the
Commonwealth, and then destroys it. Let us illustrate this by examples: That
they who are taken by Robbers, are not made slaves, was (as we have said) the
opinion of Vlpian. But if a Roman Citizen was taken by the Germans or
Parthians, he lost his freedom; and yet among the Germans, Lib. 6.
the Roberies that were done without the bounds of the City were blameless,
which are Caesar's own words. Tacitus records it of the Garamantes, that they
were, Gens Latrociniis foecunda, sed Gens tamen; A Nation wholly addicted to
Roberies, but yet a Nation though. The Illirians spoiled all they met at Sea
without regard; but yet to him that subdued them, was a triumph granted; which
was denied to Pompey who had purged the Sea of Pirates. So great is the
difference between a Nation though corrupt, and a company of men combined only
to do mischief.

III. Yet there often happens a change.
Yet a change does sometimes happen, not in particular persons only; as in
Jephtha, Arsaces, Variatus, who of Captains over Thieves and Robbers, became
lawful Commanders; but in Societies also: As when a company of Robbers or
Pirates shall forsake that wicked kind of life, and unanimously betake
themselves to a Civil Government, an example whereof we have in the Mamertines.
St. Augustine concerning Robberies speaks thus, When this mischief by the
concourse of men of desperate fortunes, grows so great, that they betake
themselves to some certain place to inhabit, and there build Cities, raise
Forts, and thereby are able to subdue Nations; then it assumes the title of a
Kingdom or free State: Not, as St. Augustine goes on, De Civit. Dei, l. 4. c. 4.
that they cease to be what before they were; but because what they formerly
did through fear, and therefore secretly, they now do with boldness and
confidence. It was a bold answer, that Diomedes the Pirate made to Alexander
the Great, when he demanded of him the reason why he so troubled the Seas; For
the same (says he) that thou do the World: But because I rob with one single
Ship, I am called a Pirate; whereas thou, because with a great Fleet, art
therefore styled an Emperor. But that which makes this change according to
what is here intended, is not so much their impunity as their repentance. For
this St. Augustine requires, that deserting their wicked courses, they live
together under some wholesome Laws, according unto which, justice may be
administered, as well to strangers, as natives.

IV. A solemn War ought to be between such as have Sovereign Power.
Who they are that have sovereign Power we have already showed, from whence we
may also collect, That he that has that power but for a part, may for that
part make a just War; much more, they who are not Subjects but Confederates,
though on Articles very unequal. Thus were all the Wars between the Romans and
their Confederates, the Volscians, Latins, Spaniards, and Carthaginians, just;
though their Confederacies were made on very unequal terms, as we may collect
out of Histories.

V. A solemn War must be denounced.
Neither is it sufficient to denominate a War, in this sense just, that it is
made between such as have sovereign Power: But as we have heard before, it must
be publicly declared; yea so publicly, that both parties may have equal
knowledge thereof, which Ennius calls the proclaiming of War, Bellum infer
non ante denuntiatum, injustum est; To make War before it be denounced is
unjust: Jos. Ant. l. 15.
to exercise Hostility without denouncing War or requiring satisfaction, is not
done like a Christian, nor allowable by the Law of Nations; as the English
Ambassador told the Emperor of Russia. And therefore as Cicero well observes,
To determine of the equity of a War, Camd. Eliz. an. 1582.
was a Right proper to the College of Heralds which was amongst the Romans
held very sacred; thereby giving us to understand, that no War could be just,
but that which was made, either for the recovery of things unjustly taken away,
or publicly decreed and solemnly proclaimed. Not so clear is that of an
Ancient Writer, quoted by Isidore, That War is just which is made by public
Edict, either for the recovery of our own, or for repelling an invading enemy.
Livy describes a just War thus, That War which is openly decreed by public
Edict, and solemnly denounced, is just; that is, if it be so done by such
persons as have the supreme Authority. And the same Author having first
declared, That the Epirots had wasted the Territories of Athens, says, That
the Athenians were first highly incensed against the Epirots, and afterward by
the Decrees of their Cities, first voluntarily denounced, and then waged
against them a just War.

VI. Wherein what is required by the Law of Nature, and what by the Law of
Nations.
For the clearer understanding of this and the like places, which concern the
denuntiation of War, we must accurately distinguish what things are due by the
strict Law of Nature; and what things are honest and commendable, though not by
nature due; Thirdly, What things are by the Law of Nations required to the
obtaining of the proper effects of the right of Nations; and lastly, What
things do arise from the peculiar Laws and Customs of some people. By the Law
of Nature, where force cannot be repelled but by force, and where punishment
cannot be demanded but of him who is the Offender; there the denouncing of War
is needless. 1. The Invader may be repelled without the denouncing of War.
Sthenelaidas in Thucydides pleads thus Lib. 1.
, Non est quod verbis and judciis disceptemus ultra verba laesi; It Is vain to
contest with words and arguments, when the wrongs which we manifestly sustain,
are more than verbal. Thus likewise do the Plateans in the same Author plead
Lib. 3.
, By that Law that is received by all Nations, it is lawful to repel him by
force that shall invade us like an enemy. So Flaminius in Diodorus Excerp.
Peiresianis.
, calls all, both Gods and men, to witness, That according to this Law, the
King, and not himself, was the Aggressor. And if so, then as Latinus in
Halicarnassensis notes, Every man that is by a War damnified, may right himself
upon him that began it. And as Aelian out of Plato, Quod ad propulsandam vim
suscipitur Bellum, Lib. 1.
non a Caduceatore, sed a natura indicitur; That war that is made against an
Invader, needs no other Herald to proclaim it than nature it self. And herein
is that of Dion Chrysostom verified, That many wars are made, which were never
denounced. Neither is there any thing else that Livy blames in Menippus King
Antiochus's General, but that he had slain certain Romans before any war was
denounced, or any hostile act had proceeded so far as either to the drawing of
a weapon, or the effusion of blood in any place; intimating thereby, That i^
^ither of these cases that fact of Menippus had been justifiable. Neither does
the Law of nature necessarily require, So may the right Owner apprehend his own
without declaring his intention. But to recover a Debt, or one thing for
another, a predemand is necessary.
That the right Owner being to apprehend what is his own, should first denounce
war, or declare his intention before he do it. But so often as one thing is to
be taken in lieu of another, or the Goods of a Debtor attached for a Debt;
there a predemand is necessary: much more is it necessary when the Goods of
Subjects are to be seized for the Debt of their Prince, that thereby it may
appear, That we had no other means or way left, but by war to recover either
our own, or what is due unto us. For the right that we have in the things so
seized, is no primary, but a surrogated right, as we have elsewhere declared.
The like may be said of him who has the supreme Authority, who cannot justly
be invaded for either the debts or the faults of his Subjects, until
satisfaction has been demanded; which if denied, renders the Prince also
culpable, either by participating with them in the wrong done, or at least by
omitting what he ought to do, 2. What in these cases Nature requires not, yet
may be done honestly and laudably. Vid. lib. 2. c. 23. sect. 7.
according to those Rules which we have elsewhere given. Nay farther, even
where the Law of Nature does not require any such demand to be made, yet may it
be done both honestly and honorably, to the end that men may be more careful
to abstain from giving offense; and that those already given, may be expiated
by confession and satisfaction: according to those Rules which I have already
prescribed for the prevention of those mischiefs which do usually accompany
War, whereunto even that also appertains: Extrema primo nemo tentavit loco.
No man at first unto extremes will fly.
When all Israel were ready to fall on the Gibeonites to revenge the outrage
done to the Levites Wife, the Elders restrained them, urging, Deuteronomy. 20.11. Jos.
Ant. l. 5. 2.
That it was not fit that they (who were forbidden by the Law, rash^y to make
war upon Strangers, though justly provoked, till by their Ambassadors they had
sought all means to induce them to do them justice) should unadvisedly fall
upon their Brethren, until they had first heard their grievances and denied
satisfaction. And as to that Command which God gave unto the Israelites, Deuteronomy.
20.2. namely, That before they fought against any City, they should offer them
peace. It was peculiarly given to that Nation, and therefore not at all to be
confounded with the Law of Nations. Nor was that peace which was so offered an
absolute peace, but on this Condition, That they would submit and pay tribute.
When Cyrus had marched with his Army into Armenia, Xenoph. Hist. l. 2.
he forbore all hostile acts till he had sent Ambassadors to the King to
require of him the Tribute and Succors by the League due; esteeming it (as
Xenophon speaks) more friendly thus to proceed, than to act farther, until he
had declared the ground of the War. Nevertheless by the Law of Nations, as to
those peculiar effects of a just War, a public denunciation is in all cases
requisite, if not on both sides, yet on one.

VII. War denounced sometimes conditionally, and sometimes absolutely.
This denunciation of War is sometimes conditional, and sometimes absolute.
Conditional, when restitution or satisfaction is demanded at the same time when
the War is denounced. Now the Fecial Law (whereby the Heralds are guided) do
under the Notion of things demanded, comprehend not only a vindication of what
is due by the right of dominion, but the persecution also of whatsoever is due,
either upon any civil account, or by reason of any crime committed, as Servius
rightly expounds it. Hence it is, that in all such Conditional Denunciations we
read either of some things to be restored, of some damages to be repaired, or
some Offenders to be delivered up; unless they from whom such Offenders are
demanded, shall choose rather to punish them themselves, as we have elsewhere
said. And that this solemn Demand of things was called Clarigationem, or a
proclaiming of War, Pliny testifies in these words, Et Legati cum ad Hosts
clarigatum mitterentur, id est, Lib. 22.2.
res raptas clare repetitum, unus utique Verbenarius vocabatur; And
Ambassadors, when sent to their enemies to demand with a loud voice
restitution of things taken away by force, one of them was called Verbenarius,
an Herald, because he was always crowned with Vervin. And in another place,
speaking of Vervin, he says, That it is that Herb which Ambassadors and
Heralds do usually carry with them to their enemies, as we have elsewhere
showed. Lib. 25. c. 9.
One example of this conditional denouncing of War we have in Livy, in these
words, Which injuries, Lib. 8. Ann. l. 1.
unless redressed by those that occasione^ them, they are resolved with all
their power to revenge. Another we have in Tacitus, Ni supplicium in malos
praesumant, usurum promiscua Caede; Unless punishment be inflicted on the
Malefactors, they will seek their revenge by War. And of this kind of
proclaiming War we have an ancient Precedent in Euripides, where Theseus gives
this Charge to his Ambassadors: Vicina Theseus qui tenet Regni sola
Humare poscit mortuos; quod si datur,
Sit amica faciet Gens Erechtidum tibi.
Haec si probantur, tam refer retro pedem;
Sin nemo paret, verba sint haec altera:
Jam mox ut Arma pubis expectent meae.
All which Papinius, rehearsing the same Story, abreviates in this Verse,
Graves for the slain, or War against Thebes proclaim. A pure or absolute
denunciation is that which is especially called an Indiction or Proclamation,
The Greeks calls this (...), to declare Reprizes lawful.
which is either when the other Party has already begun the War (which is that
which in Isidore is called a War to repel the force of an invading Enemy;) or
when he himself has committed that which deserves to be punished. Sometimes
after a denunciation that is conditional, there follows another that is pure
and absolute, though not necessarily, yet redundantly. Hence arises that usual
Form, Testor hunc Populum injustum esse, neque jus reddere; I declare this
Nation to be unjust, neither will they do right. And this other Form,
Concerning which matters, differences and causes, Remonstrance has been given
by the Chief Herald at Arms of the People of Rome, to the Chief Herald at Arms
of the Ancient Latins, and of the People of the Ancient Latins; but yet
neither have they paid, given or done any of those things which they should
have paid, given or done: wherefore I do judge, agree and ordain, That
satisfaction be sought by an open and a just War. Whereunto we may add a third
Form, which follows, Because the people of the Ancient Latins have injured the
people of Rome, and failed in what they ought to have done, and because the
people of Rome have decreed to make war against the Ancient Latins; therefore
I and the people of Rome do denounce and make war against the Ancient Latins.
Livy lib. 31.36.
But yet that the denouncing of War is not in this case (as I have said)
precisely necessary, is plain by this, That it is sufficient if it be
proclaimed but at the next Garrison. For thus it was adjudged by the Heralds,
as well in the case of Philip of Macedon, as afterward in the case of
Antiochus; Since he is first to denounce the War that seeks satisfaction by the
War. Nay, the War that the Romans made against Pyrrhus was denounced but to one
of his Soldiers, and that in the Flaminian Cirque only. Besides, this also
gives an occasion to another needless Observation, That War is sometimes
solemnly denounced on both sides; as that Peloponesian War, which was made
between the Corcyrians and the Corinthians; whereas had it been proclaimed but
on one side only, it had been sufficient.

VIII. 3. In denouncing War what is required by the Civil, and what by the law
of Nations.
That Heralds were usually sent to denounce War among the Graecians, clad with
party-colored Coats, and armed with a bloody Javelin by the Aequicoli first,
and afterward in imitation of them by the Romans. That there should be a
solemn renunciation of all former friendship and alliance, (if any such there
were) after thirty days demand of reparation for damages received; And that
the King of the Heralds should again thrust his Spear into the enemies ground,
as Servius upon the ninth of Virgils Aeneads records, and the like, Caducaeus.
whence derived, see Plinys Not. Hist. l. 29. c. 3. and Servius upon the 4th and
8th of Virg. Aeneads.
are not dictates of the Law of Nations, but are Ceremonies arising from the
Customs and Institutes of some particular Nation, many of which Arnobius
confesses, were antiquated in his time, and some of them grown out of use even
in Varro's. The third Punick War was as soon made as denounced, and it was the
Opinion of Mecoenas in Dion, that some of those Ceremonies were peculiar to
popular States only.

IX. War denounced against a Prince, is denounced against all that adhere unto
him.
War being denounced against him that has the Supreme Power in any Nation is
presumed to be denounced also against not only all his Subjects, and against
all that shall afterward adhere unto him, as being his Associates. And this is
the meaning of our Modern Lawyers, when they say, Diffidato Principe, diffidati
sunt omnes adhaerentes; War Proclaimed against a Prince, is proclaimed also
against all that shall side with him: For Diffidare with them is to proclaim
War, which is to be understood of that very War which is made upon him against
whom it is denounced: As when the Romans denounced War against Antiochus, they
thought it needless to denounce it against the Aetolians also seperately, Livy
lib. 36.
who had publicly espoused Antiochus his quarrel; for say the Heralds, The
Aetolians have spared us that labor, by denouncing War against themselves.

X. But not by themselves considered.
But that War being ended, If any other either Prince or People are to be
invaded for Succors sent unto our Enemies during that War, we ought to
denounce that War anew, if we expect the effects proper unto a Just War by the
Law of Nations: For such a Prince or State are not then to be looked at as
Accessaries, but as Principals. Neither is it the prosecution of the old War,
but the beginning of a new: Whereunto, as the Law of Nations requires a solemn
indiction, so by the Civil Law of the Romans was it not to be undertaken,
until it had the Warrant of a new Decree from the People. Wherefore the War
that Manlitis made against the Gallo Graecians, and that which Caesar made
against Ariovistus were not justifiable by the Law of Nations. And whereas when
the consent of the People of Rome was asked to make War against King Antiochus,
the question was put in this form, Livy lib. 36. cap. 42.
Is it your Will and Pleasure, that War be made against King Antiochus, and
against all that shall side with him? (Which was also the form used in the
Decree against King Perseus.) It ought to be understood with this limitation,
namely, so long as that War shall continue with those two Kings, and with those
who are truly and really engaged in it with them.

XI. 4. Why denunciation is necessary to some effects of War, in a Solemn War.
Now the reason why a Solemn Denunciation is so necessarily required unto such
a War as by the Law of Nations is Just, is not (as some think) to prevent
deceit and treachery; for this is better referred to Magnanimity than to
Justice. Thus have we read of some Nations so confident of their own strength,
that they have appointed the time and place long before, when and where they
would give their Enemies battle: As Plutarch tells us, that the Romans did to
King Porsenna Alb. Gent. lib. 1. cap. 2.
. Thus Thomas Earl of Surrey sent an Herald to James the fourth King of
Scotland, to let him know, that on the Friday following he would give him
Battle, if he would stay so long in England; and Thomas his Son, then Lord
Admiral sent the King word, that he might find him in the Van of his Army; as
Herbert Records it in his History of Henry the Eighth, The Turks two days
before Battle make many great fires. Chalcoc. lib. 7. Lib. 3. de Ira. cap. 2.
page 43. But the true reason is to remonstrate unto all Nations, That the War
is made not rashly or upon any private ends, but with the Consent and
Approbation of both Nations, or at least of those who have the Supreme Power on
both sides. For from hence arises those effects proper to a Just War, which in
a War made with Pirates and Robbers, or in a War made by a Prince against his
own Subjects will not be allowed. And therefore Seneca did well distinguish
between a War denounced against Foreigners, and that made against Subjects or
Citizens.

XII. Which are not in other Wars.
Now where some note, and by examples teach, that even in such Wars as these,
whatsoever is taken away immediately becomes his that takes it: I answer, That
this is true but on one side only, and that likewise by the Law of Nature, but
not by the voluntary Law of Nations, which makes provision for the safety of
Nations only, Ayala. l. 1. c. 5. Alb. Gent. l. 2. c. 2.
and not of those who are either no Nation, or but a corrupt part of one. They
likewise are in an error, who conceive, that in a War undertaken for the
defense either of our own persons or our Goods, there needs no Denunciation;
for even in such a War Denunciation is altogether necessary, though not simply,
yet to the obtaining the effects proper to a Just War, as we have already
hinted, and shall hereafter more fully explain.

XIII. Whether a War may be as soon made as denounced.
Neither are they in the right who hold, That War cannot justly be as soon made
as it is denounced, which Cyrus did against the Armenians, and the Romans
against the Carthaginians, as I said before. For the Law of Nations requires
not that any time should be allowed, the War being denounced; yet
notwithstanding the nature and quality of the business may happily require that
some time be given, as in case Restitution be demanded, or punishment against
an Offender, but not as yet denied: For in these Cases convenient time is to be
granted for the doing of it.

XIV. Whether it be to be denounced, in case the Right of Ambassadors be
violated.
Nay, though the Rights of Ambassadors should be violated, yet it will not
thence follow, That to the attaining those Effects, which are proper to a just
War, Denunciation is not necessary; for it is sufficient if it be done either
by Citation, Declaration, Proclamation, or any other safe way or means, as is
customarily done in such places, whereunto we cannot without danger approach.

CHAP. IV. That in a solemn War, the Right of killing Enemies is by the Law of
Nations granted.
I. The effects of a solemn War generally explained. II. The word Lawful
distinguished, into what may be done without blame, though it may be more
commendably otherwise; and what is done is unpunishable. III. That the effects
of a solemn War generally considered, are therefore lawful because
unpunishable, IV. Why such effects were introduced. V. Diverse testimonies
concer^ing those effects. VI. In this sense it is lawful to kill, or any other
ways to distress all that reside in an Enemies Territories. VII. What if they
came thither before the War. VIII. That the Subjects of an Enemy may in any
place be assaulted, unless protected by the Laws of a foreign Prince. IX. That
this license extends to Women and Infants: X. Yea, and to Captives, and that at
all times: XI. Yea, even unto such as are willing to yield themselves, if not
accepted of: XII. Also unto such as surrender themselves without condition.
XIII. That this Right ought not to be refered to any other cause, as to
Retaliation, Obstinacy, etc. XIV. That this license may be extended even to
Hostages. XV. By the Law of Nations it is forbidden to kill by Poison. XVI. Or
to Impoison either Waters or Weapons. XVII. But not any other ways to corrupt
their Waters. XVIII. Whether the Law of Nations will admit the killing of an
Enemy by a private Murderer, explained. XIX. Whether the ravishing of women be
permitted by the Law of Nations.
I. The Right of killing Enemies in a solemn War.
SERVIVS upon this Verse of Virgils, Tum certare odiis, tum res rapuisse
licebit.
Then lawful 'twas to fight, to kill and spoil.
deriving the fecial Laws from Ancus Martius, and so upwards from the
Aequicolae, tells us, That when any great injuries were done unto the Romans by
any other Nation, the Pater patratus, or President of the College, with some
other of the Heralds, whose office it was to contract Leagues, and denounce
War, went to the borders of that Nation, and there with a loud voice proclaimed
the cause of the War; and if they did not restore the things taken, or deliver
up the offender within thirty days, then he cast a Javelin into their
Territories, which was the beginning of the War; that done, it was lawful for
them to kill and spoil. He had before said, That the Ancients under Res rapere,
comprehended all manner of injuries; and under Res reddere, the restoring
things, all manner of satisfaction, though there were nothing at all of rapine
in the case: Whence we learn that a War solemnly denounced between two Nations,
or their chief Magistrates has some peculiar effects; Crantzius Saxonicorum 2.
5.
which War in its own nature cannot challenge, all which are very agreeable to
what we have already quoted from the Roman Lawyers.

II. The word lawful distinguished.
Which words of Virgil that we may the better understand, we must note, That
the word Lawful is taken in a twofold sense; for in the first place, that is
said to be lawful which is altogether just and honest, though happily some other
thing may be more commendably done; in which sense St Paul speaking of things
in themselves indifferent, says, All things are lawful for me, 1 Cor. 6.17.
but all things are not expedient: As for example, to marry is lawful, Adv.
Marcion.
but to contain if it be with a pious intention is more laudable. For as
Tertullian well observes, Continence would lose her best evidence, if to marry
were unlawful. Virgins, says St. Hierome, Ad Helv.
deserve the greater honor, because what they may do without sin, they
voluntarily disdain. Ad Pammach.
And again, All those supereminent virtues that lead to perfection, are left as
Arbitrary to our Auditors: Nulla tibi imponitur necessitas, ut voluntas
praemium consequatur; No necessity is imposed on thee, that what thou do
truly, may receive the greater reward. St. Chrysostom speaking of Matrimony
shows, That although it be lawful, yet it is better to abstain; and yet in his
exposition on the seventh to the Romans, Ad 1 Cor. 7.
he says, That to them that do not what they are commanded, Hell is denounced;
thereby showing, that things absolutely commanded, are not of the same nature
with those that are left to their own free choice: As Virginity and the
renouncing of our possessions, because those that are commanded must of
necessity be done. And therefore in his second Oration concerning Fasting, He
places Virginity without the lists; and above that which we are commanded to
strive for; unto which, as he that can attain, shows his Christian magnanimity;
so he that shall fall short of, easily obtains pardon. And in this sense also
are second Marriages lawful, although to have been contented with one only were
much better, Strom. 4. See Great. out of St Aug. c. 14. q. 1. Ad Pollent. lib.
1. c. 15. Great. c. 28. q. 1.
as Clemens Alexandrinus rightly states the Question; where speaking of a man
that had contracted a second Marriage, he says, That although therein he
sinned not, because there was no Law that forbad it; yet could he never attain
unto that perfection of holiness, that the Gospel seemed to commend unto us. So
for a believing Husband to put away his unbelieving Wife is lawful, as St.
Augustine affirms, (which with what circumstances is to be verified, it is not
to our purpose in this place to discuss) but yet he may, and that happily more
laudably retain her: Wherefore he adds, Both are equally lawful, according to
the rules of Divine Justice; for neither of them are prohibited by God, but yet
both are not equally expedient. Vlpian concerning him that having sold his
Wine, and covenanted with the buyer, that if he fetched it not by such a day, it
should be lawful for him to pour it out, says, That although he may do it, yet
if he do it not, he is the more to be commended. Secondly, this word Lawful may
be taken for that which is not punishable by humane Laws, although it consist
not with Piety, or the rules of Morality; thus in many Countries fornication is
lawful, that is, not punishable. Amongst the Lacedemonions and Egyptians theft
was lawful. And in Quintilian we read, That there are some things, which though
not in their own nature commendable, yet that are by the Laws tolerated; as by
the Laws of the twelve Tables, The body of the Debtor might de divided among
the Creditors; all which, though in themselves unfit and unseemly, yet are by
some Lawgivers permitted to avoid greater inconveniences: Licentia plerumque
est tentatio Disciplinae; License, says Tertullian, is for the most part but
the touchstone of Discipline. All things, says S. Paul, are lawful, but all
things edify not. Now this acception of the word Lawful is somewhat improper,
as Cicero testifies in his Tusculans, Lib. 5.
where speaking of Cinna, who had been four times Consul, and had caused diverse
of the chiefest of the Roman Nobility to be slain, says thus, Shall we esteem
this man happy; nay, on the contrary, I think him miserable, not because he
committed these things, but because he so governed the Commonwealth, that he
might lawfully commit them: not that it is lawful for any man to sin (Sed
sermonis errore labimur, dum id licere dicimus, quod cuique conceditur;) But we
are misled through the common error of speech, whilst we pronounce that lawful
which is only permitted. Summum jus summa injuria.
Whence Columella concludes, That we ought not to prosecute our revenge to the
utmost of what we may, for extreme severity is too near a Neighbor to extreme
cruelty: Yet notwithstanding, though this acception of the word Lawful, be not
so proper, yet is it among the Romans very frequent, as will appear by the same
Cicero, who thus bespeaks the Judges, Orat. pro Rabirio Posthumo.
Quid deceat vos, non quantum liceat vobis, spectare debetis; Ye that are
Judges ought to consider, not so much what in strictness of Law ye may do, but
what in every case is most fit and convenient to be done; for if you regard
your own power only, ye may put to death even whom you will. In the same sense,
as it is usually said of Kings, That they may do even what they please, because
they are exempted from the lash of humane Laws; yet is that advice which
Claudian gives unto his Prince, much more worthily to be by all Princes
received: Nec tibi quid liceat, sed quid fecisse decebit,
Occurrat. --
-- Resolve to do,
Not what you may, but what becomes you.
Musonius highly blames those Princes who study more their own Prerogatives,
Declam. lib. 3. cap. 5.
than the Good of their Subjects, and that say, thus and thus I can do, rather
than thus and thus I ought to do. Hence it is, that we find these two words,
Licet and Oportet, it is lawful, and it behooves, placed sometimes in
opposition one to the other: Lib. 30.
As in Ammianus Marcellinus, Sunt aliqua quae fieri non oportet, etiam si
licet; Some things there are which are not fit to be done, though lawfully we
may do them. So in Pliny's Epistles, Things that are dishonest we must avoid,
not as they are unlawful, but as they are shameful. And as Cicero himself
affirms the same, Est enim aliquid, quod non oporteat, etiamsi licet, Orat. pro
Balbo.
Somethings are not fit to be done, though lawful. And in his Oration for the
defense of Milo, he distinguishes between fas and licet, attributing to the
former, that which is agreeable to the Law of Nature, and to the latter, that
which was agreeable to the Laws of particular Countries. So Quintilian the
Father in one of his Declamations tells us, Orat. 251.
That It is one thing to look strictly to what is a man's Right, (i. e.) to what
a man may do; and another thing to respect that which is just: Aliud est
spectare jura, aliud justitiam.

III. In War the effects are lawful generally, that is, not punishable.
In this sense therefore it is lawful for one Enemy to hurt another, both in
his Person, or in his Estate; It is lawful, I say, not only for him that makes
War upon a Just ground, and that in the prosecution of that War contains
himself within those bounds, which by the Law of Nature are prescribed him, as
we have already said, but for both parties, and that without distinction. So
that he that does thus injure his Enemy, though he be apprehended in another
Princes Dominion, yet can he not be proceeded against as an Homicide, or as a
Thief; neither can any other Prince for this only Cause make War upon him, and
in this sense is that of Salust true: By the Law of Arms all things are lawful
to the Conqueror.

IV. Why such effects were introduced.
Now the Reason of this so great a license granted by all Nations, is this,
because when two Nations are at War, for any other Nation to judge, where the
Right is, had been dangerous; for by that means, that Nation may quickly be
entangled in the others War, as the Marseillians pleaded in the Cause of Caesar
and Pompey: And therefore they confessed, That they had neither Wisdom nor Power
sufficient to determine, whether of them had the Juster Cause. Besides even
where the War is manifestly Just, it is a very nice thing by any outward token
to judge which is the Just Rule or Measure, either of defending our selves, of
recovering our own Right, or of exacting punishments: So that it is agreed,
that it is much better to leave it to the Honesty and Conscience of the Princes
engaged to determine of these things among themselves, than to refer it to the
arbitrament of others. Thus did the Achaians demand of the Roman Senate, How it
came to pass, that what had formerly been acted by the Right of War, should now
fall into debate? Now besides this of license and impunity, there is another
effect of a Just and Solemn War, namely Dominion, whereof we shall treat
hereafter.

V. Testimonies of these effects.
But the license that a Just War gives to one Enemy against another, extends
either to his person, or his Estate: And first to the person of an Enemy, and
hereof we have many testimonies recorded in the most approved Authors: The
Greek Proverb acquitteth the Soldier for what he does against the person of an
Enemy in the time of War, in that it says, He guiltless is that does his Enemy
kill. Euripides.
The custom of the ancient Grecians was not to wash nor to eat with an
Homicide, much less to join with him in any Duties that were holy, and yet with
him that in the War had killed an Enemy it was lawful. And in all Authors we
read, That to kill was Jus Belli, the Right of War. Marcellus in Livy justifies
himself by this Right, Livy 26. Id. 21. Lib. 28.
Quicquid in hostibus feci, jus belli defendit; Whatever I did among mine
Enemies, the Law of Arms does defend me in. And so does Alcon justify himself
and his Soldiers to the Saguntines, Suffer your Wives and your Children to be
dragged about and ravished before your faces, according to the license given in
Wars, for better it is with patience to endure those outrages, than that they
should put you all to the sword. And the same Livy having declared, the general
Massacre of the Astapenses adds, That it was done by the Right of War. Cicero
likewise in his Oration for King Dejotarus pleads thus, And why, O Caesar,
should he be suspected as thine enemy, who could not forget, that whereas thou
might have adjudged him even to death by the Law of Arms, thou made both
him and his Sons also Kings? And in another place he confesses, That whereas
Caesar, Pro M. Marcel.
by the Right of a Conqueror might have sentenced them all to death, Lib. 7.
he out of his Princely Clemency had preserved them. Caesar in his Commentaries
acquainted the State of the Hedui, That he saved their people, whom by the Law
of Arms he might have slain. Josephus also in his Jewish War, accounts it an
honorable death to dye in the War; but he means to die by the Law of Arms, or
at the Will and Pleasure of the Conqueror: Of the same mind was Papinius, Non
querimur caesos; haec bellica jura, vicesque
Armorum. --
-- Nor for our slain we grieved are;
This is the Law of Arms, the chance of War.
Yet we must observe, That when these Authors seem to justify such acts of
cruelty by the Right of War, they do not altogether free them from sin, but
from being punishable as sins, Annal. lib. 1.
as will appear by other places in the same Authors. It was well said of
Tacitus, In pace, causas and merita spectari, ubi bellum ingruat innocents ac
noxios juxta cadere; Peace does usually distinguish of Causes and Merits, (and
accordingly dispenses rewards and punishments) but in War the nocent and
innocent do fall alike. And in another place, speaking of a Common Trooper, who
demanded of his Captains a Reward for killing his own Brother in the head of
his Enemies Troops, he says, Nec illis aut honorare eam caedem jus hominum,
nec ulcisci, ratio belli permittebat; Neither would the Laws of humanity suffer
them to reward so unnatural a murder, nor the Law of Arms permit them to
punish it. For that which Seneca observes is very true; Troad. See the second
Book, chap. 1. sect. 1.
Quodcunque libuit facere, victori licet.
What e're he will, that may a Victor do.
And what he notes in his Epistles, Epist. 96.
Quae commissa capite luerent, tum quia paludati fuerunt, laudamus; What in
another we punish with death, that in a Soldier under command we commend:
wherewith accords that of St Cyprian, Epist. 2.
Homicidium cum admittunt singuli, crimen est, virtus vocatur cum public
geritur; That which in a time of peace is a capital crime, in the time of War
is accounted valor; but it is not the nature of their fact, but the
exorbitancy of their cruelty, that renders Soldiers unpunishable: And a little
after he adds, Consensere jura peccatis, and coepit esse licitum quod publicum
est; The Laws do connive at sin, which is therefore sometimes reputed innocence
because licensed by public authority. And in this sense it is true what
Lactantius says of the Romans, Institut. 4. c. 9. Pharsal.
that they did Legitime injurias infer; Infest others lawfully: As that also
of Lucan, Jusque datum sceleri, which we may translate in the words of David,
Wickedness is practiced as by a Law.

VI. All that are found among enemies are liable to the effects of War.
But this Right of license or impunity in War extends it self very far, for it
reaches not only to such as are actually in Arms, nor unto such only as are
Subjects to these Princes against whom the War is made, but unto all such as
reside within their Territories or Dominions; as may appear by that form so
often used in Livy, Hostis sit ille, quique intra praesidia sunt ejus; Let him,
and all that live under his protection be held as enemies. Livy lib. 37.
And no marvel, seeing that by all such we may be damnified, which in a War
that is lasting and universal, is sufficient to justify the license here
spoken of; otherwise than in Reprizals or Pignorations, which, as I have said,
was at the first introduced after the manner of Taxes for the payment of
public debts. Wherefore it is not to be wondered at, if, as Baldus notes, This
license in War, be much greater than that in Pignorations: Nor is there any
question, but that Strangers coming into the Enemies Territories after the War
is proclaimed and began, may be persecuted as Enemies.

VII. Though they come before the War began.
But as for those that went thither before the War was proclaimed, it is
thought fit by the Law of Nations, that they should have some time allowed them
to depart thence with their Goods; for so we read of the Corcyraeans, That
before they laid close siege to Epidamnum, Live. l. 25. Thucyd. lib. 1.
they gave warning to all strangers to depart, or to be held as Enemies.

VIII. But natural Subjects every where, unless protected by another Prince.
But such as are true and natural Subjects, if we have respect only to their
persons, they may in all places whatsoever be persecuted, because, as we have
already showed, when War is decreed and denounced, it is declared to be against
a Prince or Nation, and the People thereof: So the Romans in their Decree
against King Philip, did Will and Command that War should be proclaimed against
him and the Macedonians under his Dominions. Now he that is an Enemy may by the
Law of Nations be every where persecuted, according to that of Euripides;
Vbicunque prensum jura laedi hostem sinunt.
A Foe where ever found destroyed may be.
And that of Marcianus, Renegadoes where ever they are met, may be killed as
Enemies: And therefore, whether it be in their own Country, or in the Enemies,
in a desert that belongs to none, or on the Sea, where ever it be, if found,
they may lawfully be killed. But yet, that it is not lawful to kill them, or to
spoil them in a Country that is in peace, this arises not from any Right that
belongs properly to their persons, but from the Right of that Prince under
whose Power and Protection they are. For all Civil Societies have a Right to
Ordain, That no force or violence be offered against any in their Dominions,
unless the differences be first examined in a judicial way; as we have already
proved out of Euripides: Si crimen istis aliquod hospitibus struis,
Jus impetrabis: vi quidem hinc non abstrahes.
If charge thou can these Guests with great offense,
Thou may have Right, but shall not force them hence.
Where Laws flourish, and Courts of Justice are open, there every man is
punished according to his deserts; and then this promiscuous license of
injuring each other cease, which was only granted amongst Enemies in times of
War only. Whilst the War raged between the Romans and the Carthaginians, it
happened that seven of the Carthaginian Galleys rode in a Port belonging to
Syphax, who at that time was in League with both Nations: At which time Scipio
with two of the Roman Galleys was by storm driven into the same Harbor before
the Carthaginians could weigh anchor. It had been lawful for the Carthaginians
to have taken or sunk them before they had entered the Port: But being entered
into the Kings Chambers, they durst not assault them lest thereby they should
have violated the League with Syphax. The like we read of the Venetians, who
would not suffer the Grecians to injure the Turks in any Port belonging unto
them.

IX. This Right extends to Women and Infants.
But to return to what we have in hand, how far this license of Murder, Spoil,
and Rapine, extends it self in the time of War will appear, in that Women and
Infants are subject thereunto. I shall not hitherto refer the slaughter that
the Israelites made of the Women and Children at Heshbon, Deuteronomy. 11.34. Nor that
which they were commanded to do against the Canaanites, and their Associates,
the Amalakites; whereof Josephus (speaking of the Acts of Saul) writes thus, He
proceeded even to the slaughter of Women and Children, accounting nothing
therein too cruel or inhumane: First, because they were Enemies; and Secondly,
because it was done at the special command of God, whose Right over men is far
greater and more unquestionable, than that which men claim to have over beasts,
as we have elsewhere said. No, rather, that which comes nearer to testify the
manners and customs of the Nations as to this, is that of the Psalmist, Psalm.
136.
Blessed is he that takes thy children and casts them against the stones:
Agreeable to that of Homer, -- Illisa corpora terrae
Infantum, saevus dum concutit omnia Mavors.
When dreadful War, whole Nations does lay wast,
Then Infants bodies against the Earth are dashed.
And that also which Severus out of the same Homer applied to the Britains, --
Nec qui latet abditus intra
Viscera Matris adhuc, fugiet crudelia fata.
-- Nor can the Babes unborn,
Escape Wars rage, being from their Mothers torn.
The Thracians of old having taken the City Mycalessus put all to the Sword,
both Women and Children, as Thucydides relates. So did the Macedonians when
they took Thebes, as Arianus tells us. Thus did the Romans also when they had
taken the City Ilurgis in Spain, destroy all without distinction of Age or Sex,
as Appianus testifies. The like did Scipio when he took Numantia. The Emperor
Julian having taken by storm the City Majozamaltha, destroyed all, making no
distinction of Age or Sex: Quicquid impetus reperit, potestas iratorum
absumpsit; Whatsoever force found, was sacrificed by the Swords of the enraged.
Germanicus Caesar is said in Tacitus to depopulate all the Villages of the
Marsi, a people of Germany, with Fire and Sword, so that neither Sex nor Age
could find pity. And the Emperor Titus when he conquered the Jews, exposed
their Women and Children to be devoured by Beasts in their public shows; and
yet were neither of these two Princes esteemed to be of a fierce and cruel
nature, but were only carried away with the customs of those times: No marvel
then, if old men did sometimes undergo the same fate, as Priamus did who was
killed by Pyrrhus.

X. And to Captives.
Neither were Captives exempted from the rage of the Conquerours: when Elisha
the Prophet had led the Syrians blindfold to the Gates of Samaria, as Josephus
relates the story, King Joram demanded of the Prophet whether he should kill
them; but the Prophet answered, that it was not lawful for the King so to do,
Solus enim Bello superatos hosts occidi fas est; For those Enemies only may be
lawfully killed that are taken in War. Pyrrhus in Seneca according to the
custom of the Nations then in use, pleads thus, Troad.
Lex nulla capto parcit aut poenam impedit.
No Law from punishment does slaves protect.
Neither does this license extend to Men only, but even to Women if taken in
War, according to that of Scylla, concerning a Woman taken Prisoner: At Belli
saltem captivam lege necasses.
By the Law of Arms, thy slave thou might have killed.
To the same purpose is that of Seneca before quoted to be understood; for it
was spoken of Polyxena, who being taken Captive might have been slain: yet is
the advice of Horace to be preferred, Vendere cum possis captivum, occidere
noli.
Kill not thy slave, in case thou can him sell.
Wherein he takes it as granted, that kill him he might, though to sell him
were better; hence it is, Terence Adelph. Act. 2. Scen. 1.
that they are called servants, because they are saved alive, whereas by the
Law of Arms they might have been killed: thus were all the Captives taken in
Epidamnum put to death by the Corcyraeans, as Thucydides relates; and seventy
thousand Slavonians we read of that were put to the Sword by the Emperor Otto,
and of five thousand Captives that were at once put to death by Hannibal. Dion.
47.
And Hirtius in his African War, brings in a Caesarean Captain giving thanks
unto Scipio for sparing his life in these words, Tibi gratias ago, quod mihi
vitam incolumitatemque belli jure capto polliceris; I thank thee noble Scipio,
for that being thy slave, thou art pleased to engage thy word for my life and
safety. Neither is this license of killing our Captives confined to any space
of time, although by Municipal Laws it be restrained in some places more, in
some less.

XI. Yea, and to Suppliants.
No nor Suppliants as we are instructed by many examples in all Histories; as
namely, by the example of Achilles in Homer, of Mago and Turnus in Virgil;
which do therefore stand yet upon record, to justify the like practice
hereafter by the Right of War: For St. Augustine himself commending the Goths
for sparing Suppliants, De Civit. Dei. c. 2.
and such as fled unto Temples for protection, yet says, That which by the
Right of War they might do, they thought unlawful for them to do: Neither are
they always received to mercy that beg it, witness the Grecians that sided with
the Persians against Alexander, at that great Battle fought at the River
Granicum. Ann. 12.
And the Uspenses in Tacitus, Who craving leave but to depart their City with
their Bodies free, were rejected by the Conquerours, because it would have been
thought cruelty to have killed them in cold blood after they had yielded
themselves, and hard to keep a Guard upon so great a multitude, therefore they
chose rather to let them perish by the Sword according to the Law of Arms.
Observe here also the Right of War.

XII. Yea, and to such as yield without conditions.
Neither do they always find mercy that surrender themselves without any
condition at all, but even these are sometimes put to death, as the Princes of
Pomeria were by the Romans, the Samnits by Sylla, the Numidians, yea, and
Vercingentoriges himself by Caesar: Nay, it was almost the perpetual practice
of the Roman Generals upon the days of their Triumph, Dion. 45. Livy. 2.
Cicero in Ver. 5. Livy lib. 28. Annal. 1.
to put to death all the Captains and other Commanders (whether they were taken
Prisoners during the War, or had yielded themselves) as Cicero in forms us in
his fifth Oration against Verres; which, both Livy and Tacitus confirm: Nay,
the same Tacitus records it of Galba, That he caused the tenth Man to be killed
of those, whom upon submission he had received to mercy. And Caecina upon the
surrender of Aventicum, caused Julius Alpinus to be put to death, as being the
principal instigator of the War; but the rest of the Citizens he left to,
either the mercy, or the severity of Vitellius.

XIII. This right not to be referred to other causes.
It is the usual custom of Historians to ascribe the cause of this cruelty and
outrage against Captives, or Suppliants; either to the like cruelty done by
them unto others, or to their obstinacy in resisting them: But these are rather
pretenses than just causes; for Retaliation (properly so called) is not to be
executed, but upon the same persons that offended (as has been already said,
where we discourst concerning the Communication of Punishments.) But
contrariwise in War, this Right of Retaliation is often exercised on those, who
were in no measure guilty of the crime, for which they are said to be punished.
This custom is thus described by Diodorus Siculus, The chance of War being on
both sides equal, neither party can be ignorant of this; that in case they be
vanquished, what they intended to do against their Enemies had they been
Victors, that they must be contented to suffer from them. Thus did Philomelus
the Phocensian General persuade his Enemies to refrain from a proud and
insolent revenge, by threatening to exact the like in case the Victory fell on
his side. But as to the other pretense which is usually pleaded, namely, an
obstinate endeavor to defend their own party; Goth. l. 1.
it is so far from being punishable as a crime (as the Neapolitans alleged to
Belisarius in Procopius) that according to the Ancient Roman Discipline, it was
ever accounted a capital crime to do otherwise, especially if we were engaged
therein, either by some natural obligation, or by an honest and deliberate
choice; for in these cases they seldom admitted of any excuse, were the fear
or danger never so great, Polyb. l. 1. and 5. Live. lib. 24.
Praesidio decedere apud Romanos capitale est; To desert a Garrison, says
Livy, was ever accounted among the Romans a capital crime. Every man therefore
may make use of this rigor and severity, so far as he sees it may conduce to
his own advantage, and is therein justified before men, by that common right
and license of Nations, whereof we here treat.

XIV. It extends also to Hostages.
This right or license does sometimes extend it self to hostages; and that not
only to those who voluntarily give themselves as Pledges for the performance of
Articles agreed upon, but unto those also who are delivered up by others. Thus
we read of two hundred and fifty hostages slain by the Thessalians, and of
three hundred slain by the Romans; Plut. de claris Mulierib. Dionys. 16. Tac.
An. 12. 1 Mac. 13.17. Hist. 4.
where also by the way we may observe, That sometimes Children are admitted as
Hostages, as by the example of Simon the Maccabite we may learn; and sometimes
Women, as by the Romans in the time of Porsenna, and by the Germans in Tacitus.

XV. To kill by poison, unlawful.
As there are many things tolerated by the Law of Nations in this sense that we
now speak of, which by the Law of Nature are prohibited; so are there many
things forbidden by the former, which by the latter are tolerated. For if we
respect the Law of Nature only, if a man have deserved to be put to death, it
matters not much whether it be by the Sword or by Poison: by the Law of Nature,
I say, though otherwise it be far more noble so to invade another man's life, as
to give him an equal power to defend himself. But this is not due unto every
man that has deserved to dye. But by the Law of Nations, (if not of all, yet
of the greater and better part of them) it is not lawful to take away the life,
no not of an Enemy, by poison; which Custom was introduced for a general good,
lest dangers, which are too rife and frequent in War, should be beyond all
measure multiplied. And very probable it is that this Law was first enacted by
Kings and Emperors, whose lives, as they are principally guarded by Arms, so
are they most easily endangered by poison, were it not for the severity of the
Laws, and the sear of infamy. Lib. 42.
This Livy calls a clandestine villainy, speaking of Pyrrhus. And Claudian,
concerning the design of Pyrrhus's Physician, who offered Fabritius to poison
him, calls it a detestable act, Offic. l. 3.
not fit to be spoken; so does Cicero, glancing at the same Story: which offer
of the Physician, the Consuls not only rejected, but discovered unto Pyrrhus;
not so much for his sake, as to prevent the reproach and scan^al that might
ensue to themselves, lest it should be said of them, That whom they could not
conquer by true valor, they had by treachery destroyed. Plut. vit. Pyrrhi.
Or as Aulus Gellius recites the Epistle of the Consuls out of Claudius
Quadrigarius, Communis exempli and fidei ergo, visum est; We think it not fit
for common examples, and our own honor's sake, to admit of so great a
wickedness. For as Valerius Maximus well observes, Armis Bella, Lib. 3. c. 8.
Lib. 5. c. 5. Annal, 3.
non Venenis geri debent; Wars should be waged by Arms, and not by Poison.
Insomuch that when the Prince of the Catti made offer to poison Arminius,
Tiberius rejected it, therein equalling himself in honor to the old Roman
Emperors. They therefore that hold it lawful to destroy an Enemy by poison, as
Baldus by the authority of Vegetius did, do regard the mere Law of Nature, but
overlook that Law which is established by the voluntary consent of Nations.

XVI. As also by impoysoning Waters or Weapons.
Somewhat different from this manner of poisoning (because it has something of
force in it) is the anointing the Heads of Spears with poison, thereby to
enforce death upon a double account; which, as Ovid records, was much in use
among the Getae. The like testimony does Pliny give of the Scythians, For they
anointed their Arrows, says he, with poison, compounded of the putrified Gore
of Vipers, and humane blood: immedicabile id scelus; How this wa^ prepared, we
may learn our of Rhodoginus, c. 10. 23. See Lyps. Ann. upon Plin. l. 11. c. 53.
a mischief incurable, because it made every slight hurt mortal. Lucan
testifies the same of the Parthians; so does Silius of some of the Africans;
and Claudian particularly of the Ethiopians. It was observed, that in India
Alexander's Soldiers being wounded by these impoysoned Arrows dyed immediately.
Yet was this also contrary to the Law of Nations; though not of all,
Salisburiensis, lib. 8. c. 20.
yet of these of Europe, and of such others as are civilized like them; amongst
whom the use of poison was never by any Law allowed, although among Pagans and
Infidels it has sometimes been usurped. Therefore in Silius's account this was
but ferrum infamare veneno, the shame and reproach of valor. And therefore
Ilus Mermerides in Homer denied poison to Vlysses's Spears, for fear of a
revenge from the Gods Immortal. So also the impoysoning of Springs, Florus
reckons to be unlawful, being repugnant not only to the Constitutions of men,
but to the Laws of God. Where we may note, (as we have already elsewhere) That
profane Authors do usually ascribe the Laws of Nations unto the Gods. Nor
will it seem strange that there should be such a tacit agreement amongst
Nations, for the lessening of the dangers that attend the Wars, when we find it
anciently covenanted between the Chalcidenses and the Eretrienses, Strab. l. 10.
That during the War between them, it should not be lawful to cast or to dart
any thing.

XVII. But not otherwise to corrupt Waters.
But it is otherwise where waters are (without poison) so corrupted, that they
cannot be drunk; as by throwing Carrion into them, and dead Bodies, or
asbestus, which Belisarius made use of in the Siege of Auximum; or Lime, which
the Turks did at Dibibras, or such like. Proc. Goth. l. 2. De Piscatu. l. 4.
For this was approved of by Solon, the Amphictyones, and others, against the
Barbarians; and as Oppianus records, was usually done in his Age: it being no
more than if the Current of a River, or the Veins of Water that feed a Well,
should be cut off or turned some other way, which by the Law of Nature and the
general consent of Nations are held lawful.

XVIII. Whether it be against the Law of Nations to use Murderers.
But whether the Law of Nations do justify the killing of an Enemy privately,
that is, by sending one purposely to kill him in his own Quarters, is often
questioned. For the resolving of which doubt, we must distinguish of the
persons sent: for in case he be such a one as has any ways given his faith,
either expressly or tacitly, unto him whose life he attempts; as if he be a
Subject that shall be hired to kill his Sovereign, a Vassal his Lord, or a
Soldier his General, or if he be received by him in protection as a Suppliant,
a Stranger, or a Renegado; yea if the person sent owe any faith to him whom he
is sent to kill; then the Law of Nations does not only condemn the person that
is the instrument for his treachery and perfidiousness, but those also that
make use of him. For although in other matters he that makes use of wicked
instruments, though against an enemy, may be found guilty before God; yet is he
not so before man. For he is not thereby said to violate the Law of Nations,
because in this Case, Mores Leges perduxerunt in potestatem suam; Custom has
prevailed above the Laws. Et decipere, pro moribus temporum, prudentia est: And
to deceive (as Pliny says) if it accord with the manners and customs of the
Age we live in, Lib. 8. Epist. ad Rufinum.
is not a crime, but a Virtue; no knavery, but commendable policy. Yet does not
this custom extend it self so far as to the killing of an enemy: For he that
shall make use of another man's treachery in such a case, does not only sin
against the Law of Nature, but of Nations. Curtius l. 4.
This is plain by what Alexander wrote to Darius, Impia Bella suscipitis, and
cum habeatis Arma, licitamini hostium capita; It is an impious War that ye wage
against me; for having Weapons to fight, ye choose rather to purchase with money
the lives of your enemies. And presently after he complains, Lib. 14.
That they did not observe the Law of Arms. And in another place, I ought to
persecute him even unto death, not as an open Enemy, but as a secret Murderer.
Live. l. 42.
Hither we may refer that of Livy concerning Perseus, of whom he complains,
That he waged not a just and open war with a mind becoming a Prince, but that
he used all manner of base and clandestine ways to destroy his Enemies, like a
Thief or a Poysoner. All which, Marcius Philipus, Live. l. 44.
how odious they are to the Gods themselves, would at length be seen by the
event of his Fortunes. Agreeable hereunto is that of Valerius Maximus
concerning the murder of Viriatus, Lib. 9. c. 7.
which gave occasion to a double accusation of perfidiousness, the one by his
friends, by whose hands he was killed; the other in Quintus Servitius Caepio
the Consul, who by encouraging them to do it by his promise of impunity, became
himself the Author of the fact, and did therefore justly lose the glory of the
Victory. For Victoriam non meruit, sed emit; He deserves not the honor of a
Triumph that buys the Victory. Wherefore when the Murderers demanded the
reward promised them by the Consul Caepio, it was answered, That it was never
thought a meritorious act by the Romans for Soldiers to kill their General, as
Eutropius testifies. Now the reason why the Law of Nations, Eutropius.
that allows us to make use of the treachery of others in all other cases, does
not allow of it in this case, is the very same that was before given in the
case of poison; namely, To restrain the dangers that attended Kings and
Princes. When one told Eumenes, Just. lib. 14.
That his Enemies had hired one to kill him, He would not believe that any
General or inferior Captain would give so ill an example against himself. And
in another place the same Justine declares, Just. Lib. 12.
That when Bessus had killed King Darius, it was not to be endured for examples
sake; because it was the common cause of all Kings. For as Seneca well
observes, Regi tuenda est maxim Regum salus.
A Kings chief care is the defense of Kings.
In a solemn War, and amongst those who have a right to denounce a solemn War,
it is not lawful by the Law of Nations privately to kill an Enemy; but where
there is no solemn War, it is by the same Law of Nations accounted lawful, that
is, unpunishable. Annal. l. 11.
Tacitus denies peremptorily, That the Plot that was laid against the life of
Gannascus, was at all, Lib. 7.
degenerous; because he was a Traitor. And Curtius was of opinion, That the
guilt of Bessus in killing Darius, did make the treachery of Spitamenes appear
the less odious; for that nothing could be thought wicked that was done against
a Regicide. So likewise Ammianus concerning Florentius and Barchalba, who had
surprised Procopius the Traitor, Si Principem legitimum prodidissent, vel ipsa
Justitia jure caesos pronunciaret; si rebellem and oppugnatorem internae
quietis, ut ferebatur, amplas ei memorabilis facti opportuerat deferri
mercedes: If it had been their lawful Sovereign that they had betrayed, the
Laws had justly sentenced them to death; but if he were a Rebel, or a Disturber
of the peace of his own Country, (as was said) ye ought to give him a reward
worthy of so memorable a fact. Thus is Artabanes highly commended in Procopius
for killing Gontharides, as we may read at the latter end of the second of his
Vandal History. So perfidiousness or treachery against Thieves and Pirates,
though it be not altogether blameless; yet is it not by the Law of Nations
punishable, because committed against such as are Enemies to humane Society.

But what if they, that are sent to kill an enemy privately, do owe him no
faith, But not if he owe him no faith.

But not, if the person sent owe no faith to him whom he is sent to kill.


nor are any ways obliged unto him? Surely then by the Law of Nations it is
lawful for them to kill him if they can, even in his own Quarters. Thus Pipin,
Father to Charles the Great of France, attended with one only of his Guard,
passed the Rhine, and killed his enemy even in his own Chamber. The like was
attempted by one Theodotus an Etolian upon Ptolomy King of Egypt, which
Polybius commends as no unmanly attempt. Such also was that Heroic enterprise
of Q. Mutius Scaevola, who was in Plutarch's esteem. A man accomplished with
all virtuous endowments, which attempt he thus defends, Hosts hostem occidere
volui; I being an Enemy would have killed an Enemy. Livy. l. 2. Lib. 3. c. 3.
Porsenna himself acknowledged this to be an act of true valor. Valerius
Maximus commends it for a brave and gallant resolution. So does Cicero in his
Oration for Publius Sextus; because to kill an Enemy wheresoever we find him,
is lawful both by the Laws of Nature and Nations; neither does it make any
difference, how many they are that either thus act or suffer. Six hundred
Lacedaemonians we read of that with Leonides their King, marched directly
through the Camp of five hundred thousand of their Enemies, even unto the Kings
Pavilion; Just. l. 2. Zozimus l. 4.
the same may be done by fewer. A reward was promised by the Emperor Valens to
him that should bring in the head of any Scythian, whereupon a Peace
immediately ensued. They were not many that circumvented Marcellus and his
fellow Consul and slew them, Livy 27. Tacit. Hist. l. 5. De Off. l. 1. c. 40.
and Jos. Anc. 15. Lib. 4. Lib. 24.
and that had likely to have killed Petilius Cerealis even in his Bed. Ambrose
highly commends Eleazer, who seeing a mighty Elephant higher than all the rest,
assaulted him, supposing that he that sat upon him had been the King. Not much
unlike was that attempt that Theodosius made upon Eugenius, recorded by
Zozimus. Nor that of the ten Persians against the Emperor Julian attested by
Ammianus. Neither are they only that make these attempts excusable by the Law
of Nations, but they also that employ them. Those Roman Senators that were so
renowned for their Wars, Livy l. 2.
were reputed the Authors of that gallant attempt made by Scaevola. Neither is
it to the purpose to object, that such men being taken are put to exquisite
torments; for this happens, not for that they violate the Law of Nations, but
because by the Law of Nations, every thing is lawful that is done against an
Enemy; and all Conquerours are more or less severe, according as it shall
conduce to their future advantage, for thus are spies dealt withal; yet
notwithstanding, it is held lawful by the general consent of Nations, to send
out such, as Moses did Joshua into the land of Caanan. It is the custom of all
Nations to kill spies, says Appian, and that justly sometimes by such as have
apparently a just Cause to make War; but by others, it is only lawful by that
license which the Law of Arms sometimes gives: But if there be any that will
not make use of such instruments, though offered, this proceeds rather from the
Magnanimity, and the confidence of him that makes the War in his own strength,
than from an opinion he has that by the Law of Nations it is unjust.

XIX. Whether ravishment be in such a War lawful.
The ravishing of Women is by the Law of Nations sometimes permitted in War,
and sometimes forbidden. They that permit it do respect only the injury done to
the body of an Enemy, which by the Law of Arms they think ought to be subject
to the Will of the Conqueror: But others much better, look not unto the sole
injury done unto the body of an Enemy, but to the very unbridled act of Lust,
which conduces nothing either to the security of the Conqueror, or to the
punishment of the Enemy; and therefore should be no more unpunishable in War,
than in Peace, and this is the Law if not of all Nations, yet at least of the
better and more civilized amongst them. Marcellus before he took Syracuse took
special care of the preservation of the Chastity, Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib. 2.
even of his Enemies. And Scipio (as Livy testifies) told his Soldiers, That
it much concerned his own honor, Lib. 26.
and the honor of the people of Rome, That nothing that was any where, (that
is among such Nations as were civilized) reputed sacred, should be by them
profaned or violated. Diodorus Siculus complains against Agathocles his
Soldiers, That they abstained not from that foul sin of ravishment. The like
does Appian in his Mithridatick War, concerning the Captives taken in Chius,
That both Women and Children were barbarously ravished by those that led them
away prisoners. Aelian speaking of the insolences of the Sicyonians, being
Conquerours in ravishing the Pellenaean Virgins, and Matrons cries out thus,
These by the Gods of Greece are such acts of cruelty and inhumanity, as were
never to my remembrance, allowed of by the very Barbarians. And surely it is
but reasonable, that this should be generally observed among the Christians,
not only as a part of our Military Discipline, but as a part of the Law of
Nations: namely, That he that shall forcibly abuse a Woman, though in the War,
shall every where be punishable. Belisarius always observed this Rule: So did
Totilas when he had taken Cumae, Goth. lib. 3.
and at Rome also, as Procopius leaves it upon Record. Neither did the Hebrew
Law suffer this wickedness to go unpunished, as may be collected from that part
of it, which so provides for a Virgin taken Captive, That he that takes her
might marry her, and if afterward he liked her not, he might dismiss her, but
not sell her: Thou shall not take money for her, because thou have humbled her,
says the Law, Bacchai.
Deuteronomy. 21.12. Upon which words one of the Hebrew Doctors thus glosseth, God
would have the Camp of Israel to be holy, and not like the Camp of the
Gentiles, polluted with Whoredom, Contra App.
and such like abominations. Josephus likewise highly extolls the Jewish Law
for its care of prisoners taken in the War, to preserve them from shame and
reproach, especially of women. Arrianus highly commends that fact of Alexander,
who being taken with Roxana's beauty, refused to abuse her as his Captive, but
did her the honor to marry her: So does Plutarch also, He disdained to force
her as a Conqueror, but wedded her as a Philosopher. The same Plutarch relates
it of one Torquatus, That he was banished by the Romans into the Isle of
Corsica, for forcing a Virgin whom he had taken Captive: But Cosroes King of
Persia was more severe, for he caused one that had ravished a young Maid to be
Crucified; as Procopius informs us in the second of his Persian Wars.

CHAP. V. Of Spoil and Rapine committed in War.
I. That the Goods of an Enemy may be spoiled or taken away. II. Even those
that are sacred, which how to be understood. III. Yea, and those that are
Religious, where some caution is added. IV. How far forth fraud may be used in
this case.
I. That the Enemies Goods may be wasted and taken away.
CIcero in the third of his Offices gives this Rule, Non est contra naturam
spoliare eum, quem honestum est necare; It is no whit repugnant to the Law of
Nature, to spoil and plunder him, whom it is lawful to kill. It is not then to
be wondered at, That the Law of Nations permits the spoil and devastation of an
Enemies Land and Goods, seeing that it permits him to be killed. Polybius tells
us Lib. 5.
, That by the Right of War, It is lawful either to take away or to destroy the
Forts, Ports, Cities, Subjects, Ships, Corn, Cattle, and such like things of an
Enemy. And in Livy we read, That there are certain Rights in War, which as we
may safely do unto an Enemy, so we must with patience suffer from them; such
are the burning of our Corn, the pulling down of our Houses, the taking away of
our Men and Beasts. He that is vers't in Histories, will find almost every page
filled with these dreadful effects of War, the demolishing of Cities, the
razing and throwing down their Walls, the spoiling and laying wast of the
Enemies Country with Fire and Sword; yea, and we may observe, That all these
are lawful to be done, though the Enemy do voluntarily surrender themselves.
The Townsmen, says Tacitus, set open their Gates of their own accord, and
submitted themselves, and all they had to the Romans, whereby they saved
themselves: But the Romans burnt the City Artaxata and laid it level with the
ground, because they could neither keep it with safety, nor leave it with
honor.

II. Though Consecrated.
Neither are things sacred, that is, consecrated to any one or more Gods,
exempted from these Outrages of War, merely by the Law of Nations, setting
aside the consideration of other Duties: for, Cum loca capta sunt ab hostibus,
omnia desinunt esse sacra; As soon as any place is taken from the Enemy, every
thing in it cease to be sacred, says Pomponius. And so says Cicero, Sacra
Syracusarum victoria profana fecerat, The victory made all the sacred things in
Syracuse profane. Tertullian in his Apologeticks confesses, That War and
Victory cannot consist without the subversion of Cities; which also cannot
happen without some injury done to their tutelar Gods. For Temples undergo the
same fate that their Cities do, and their Priests have an equal share in
public Calamities as other Citizens; neither do their consecrated vessels
escape better than their profane. Tot Sacrilegia Romanorum, quot Trophaea; tot
de diis, quot de gentibus triumphi: Look how many Victories the Romans had, so
many Sacriledges they committed; and as often as they conquered their Enemies,
they spoiled and rifled their Gods. The cause whereof is this, because those
things which are said to be sacred, are not in truth exempted from humane uses,
but are made public, as Marsilius Patavinus observes in his Defense of Peace:
But they are called Sacred, Chap. 5.. 2.
from the end whereunto they are destined, which appears by this, That when any
People give themselves up to another People, or to any King, they deliver up
that also which is called Sacred; as is manifest by the usual form in Livy, We
the People of Campania, do deliver up into your Power and Possession, O Fathers
Conscript, our City Capua, our Fields, the Temples of our Gods, together with
all that we have whether Humane or Divine: (the like we read in Plautus his
Amphitryo.) And therefore as Vlpian concludes, There is a public Right even in
things that are sacred. And Pansanias tells us, That it was a Custom common as
well with the Grecians as Barbarians, that things Sacred should be disposed of,
at the Will and Pleasure of the Conqueror. So when Troy was taken, the Image
of Jupiter Hercaeus was given to Sthenelus, and many other Examples he there
brings. And Thucydides confirms this, saying, That it was a Law among the
Graecians, Lib. 4.
That look whose the Empire was of any City or Country, whether great or
small, theirs also were the Temples: Wherewith accords that of Tacitus, where
he says, Annal. l. 12.
That all the Ceremonies, Temples and Images, that were in any of the Cities of
Italy, were at the dispose, and under the Jurisdiction of the Romans. Wherefore
it is plain, That the People themselves changing their minds, may make any
thing profane that was holy; and this is not obscurely proved by those great
Lawyers Paulus and Venulejus. We may also observe, That in times of War, and in
cases of necessity, those things which have been consecrated, have by those
that consecrated them been converted to uses of War; as was done by the
Syracusians in the time of Timoleon, as Plutarch testifies. So the Chii raised
the tribute imposed on them by Mithridates by the sale of the consecrated
Vessels of the Temple, Bell. Mithrid.
as Appian testifies. Pliny speaking of Portius Cato tells us, That he suffered
the consecrated Trees and Groves to be cut down, having first offered
sacrifices. Sulla in his War against Mithridates robbed the Temple at Delphos
of those rich Presents, sent thither by Olympia and Epidaurus, as it is storied
in Plutarch; the just price whereof he afterward restored, as Diodorus informs
us. Augustus we read borrowed all the Treasures of the Temple in a time of
necessity, as Appian writes. And Agapetus pawned all the Consecrated Vessels,
as Cassiodore relates. The Emperor Heraclius in his great necessity, turned
all the Vessels of the Church into Money, the price whereof he afterward
restored, as Theophanes writes. The like was done by Pericles, but with a
promise of restitution; by Mago in Spain, by the Romans in their War against
Mithridates, by Sulla, Pompey, Caesar, and many others. There is nothing so
Sacred, so Holy, as those things that are Consecrated to the Worship of the
Gods, says Tiberius Gracchus in Plutarch: And yet there is none that can
hinder the people from using them, or removing them as they please. Our
Churches, Contr. in excerptis 4. 4. Eclog. 7.
says Seneca, are sometimes spoiled for the defense of the pubiick, and what
was given to the Gods, we often take to pay our Soldiers. Whence Servius upon
Virgil tells us, That whatsoever is given to the Gods is so long holy, as it
continues unprofaned. And therefore Trebatius the Lawyer in Caesar's time says,
That is said to be profane, which is taken from an Holy and Religious use, and
converted to the use of private men. Thus Germanicus having conquered the
Marsians destroyed all things both Sacred and Profane, levelling with the
ground that Temple so famous among those Nations called Tanfanae, Lib. 8.
as Tacitus relates it. It is acknowledged by Pausanias, That whatsoever was
Consecrated to the Gods, Verr. 3.
was lawful prize to the Conqueror. And Cicero speaking of Publius Servilius
says, That the Images, and other Ornaments of the Enemies Cities, which by
force and valor he had conquered, He by the Law of Arms, and by the Right of
Conquest took and carried away. So Plutarch speaking of Fabius, says, That the
Image of Hercules which he took at Tarentum, he sent to be placed in the
Capitol at Rome, leaving the rest of their Gods as enraged against the
Tarentines. So also Livy concerning the Ornaments taken out of the Temples at
Syracuse by Marcellus, and brought to Rome, says, That they were Parta Jure
Belli, Got by the Right of War. Thus Fulvius also in his Oration, calls the
spoilings of Temples, the Rights of War. The like we read in Salust of Cato,
who recounting the miseries that usually befall the Conquered, brings in this
amongst others, the robbing of their Churches. But yet in case it be believed,
That there is any thing of a Deity in this or that Image, then to break it, to
spoil or deface it, is in them that are of that persuasion, great impiety. And
upon this presumption, that both Parties agree in this belief, it is, That they
that commit such robberies, are so often branded with impiety, and accused for
violating the Law of Nations. But in case the Enemy be of another persuasion,
then it is otherwise. As to the Jews it was not only permitted but commanded,
Deuteronomy. 7.5.
That they should utterly abolish the Idols of the Gentiles, but that they
should not assume them to themselves: the reason was, to instill into them the
greater detestation of their superstitions, by begetting this conceit in them,
That the very touching of them was not without pollution; and not that what was
consecrated to strange Gods was to be spared, Antiq. lib. 4. cap. 8. and lib.
2. Contr. App.
as Josephus seems to expound it, therein doubtless flattering the Romans no
less, than in the Exposition of another Precept, namely, of not naming the Gods
of the Gentiles, which he so interprets, as if it were therefore prohibited to
name them lest they should reproach them: whereas their Law did expressly forbid
to name them with any Honor or Reverence, nay, without some show of
detestation. For the Hebrews most assuredly knew, that in those Images there
was nothing sacred, neither Angel, nor Spirit, nor any virtue of the Stars, as
the Gentiles dreamed, unless they were such Evil Spirits as are usually
destructive to Mankind. And therefore as Tacitus rightly observed, in his
description of the Manners and Institutes of the Jews, Profana illis omnia,
quae apud nos sacra; All things that are holy to us, are unto them profane. It
is no wonder then, that we read of so many Idol Temples burnt by the
Macchabees, That Nebuchadnezzar should sack the Temple at Jerusalem was not to
be admired; but for Joaz (though an Idolater) yet one that acknowledged the
Eternal True God, and that had worshipped him that was Lord of the Temple: That
he, I say, should lay his hands on the Consecrated Vessels, and call the Family
of Obed-Edom, whose Children had the Hereditary charge of its Treasures to a
strict account, as if they had been Officers of his own Exchequer; this was an
execrable sin, which hastened his destruction.
1 Mac. 5. and 10.

Xerxes when he demolished all the Idols of the Grecians, did nothing contrary
to the Law of Nations, though all their Historians did bitterly inveigh against
him. For the Persians could not believe, that there was any Divinity in them,
because they adore the Sun only as God, and the fire as a spark or ray of the
Deity; and therefore as Diogenes Laertius tells us, did their Magi abhor
Images. By the Hebrew Law, None must enter into the Temple but the Priests
only; Tacit.
yet Pompey the Great entered into it by the Right of a Conqueror, as Tacitus
thought: Or, as St Augustine relates it, De Civit. Dei lib. 18. cap. 45. Pro
Flacco.
Non devotione supplicis, sed jure Victoris; Not as a Suppliant, but as a
Victor. He did well to spare the Temple, and to restrain his Soldiers from the
pillage of it, though, as Cicero wisely conjectured, it was more out of shame,
and to avoid scandal, than out of any true piety; but he did ill in entering
thereinto in contempt of the True God, for which the Prophets did so bitterly
inveigh against the Chaldeans, Dan. 5.23.
and for which cause it was so ordered by the Divine Providence, That Pompey
should afterward be killed at Cassium a Promontory in Egypt, as it were, in
the sight of those Jews, whose Temple he had so profaned. But yet, if we regard
the Opinion of the Romans, there was nothing done by Pompey that was contrary
to the Law of Nations. So when Josephus had declared the destruction of the
same Temple by Titus, he likewise adds, That it was done by the Right of War.

III. Yea, and things that are Religious.
What has been said of things Sacred, may also be said of things Religious.
For these are not such as belong to the dead, but to the living, whether of
some People, or of some Families: Wherefore as Pomponius well observes, as
places being taken by the Enemy, though holy; so whatsoever is Religious in
those places cease to be so after the victory. Sepulchra hostium religiosa
nobis non sunt, ideoque lapides inde sublatos in quemlibet usum convertere
possumus; The Sepulchers of our Enemies are not unto us Religious, says Paulus
the Lawyer; and therefore we may take away the stones, and convert them to what
use we please: Which notwithstanding must be understood so, With caution to the
dead.
that no violence be offered to the bodies of the dead, which by custom is
admitted among the Laws of Nations.

IV. And that not only by force but by fraud.
This also we must here repeat, That the Goods of our Enemies may be taken away
from them, not only by plain force, but even by fraud also, so it be without
perfidiousness; nay, we may by the Law of Nations be permitted to excite the
treachery of others; (that is to say) the said Law of Nations begins so to
connive at such petty and ordinary slips, as the Civil Law does at whoredom,
and griping usury.

CHAP. VI. Of the Right to things taken in War
I. What the Law of Nature is, concerning things gained by War. II. What the
Law of Nations ordains. III. When things moveable are said to be taken by the
Law of Nations. IV. When Lands are said to be acquired. V. Things being not the
Enemies, are not acquired by War. VI. What the Law of Nations determines
concerning goods taken in an Enemies Ship: VII. By that Law what we get from
Enemies, though by them taken from others, is lawful prize. VIII. That it is
not altogether true, that things taken from an Enemy, are theirs that take
them. IX. That naturally, both possession and dominion may be acquired by
another. X. The distinction of public and private acts done in War. XI. That
Land may be gained, either to the people, or to him that maintains the War.
XII. That things moving themselves or moveable, being taken by a private act,
become any man's that takes them: XIII. Unless the Civil Law do otherwise
determine. XIV. That things taken by a public act, are either the peoples, or
his who maintains the War. XV. Yet in such things somewhat is usually left to
the Will of the General: XVI. Who either adjudgeth them to the public
treasury: XVII. Or divides it among the Soldiers; and how: XVIII. Or suffers
it to be pillaged by the Soldiers: XIX. Or gives it unto others: XX. Or
dividing the spoil into parts, disposes of some, one way, and some another,
and how. XXI. Sometimes the State is defrauded of the spoil. XXII. That
somewhat of this common Right may be altered, either by some Law, or some act
of the will. XXIII. So some part of it may be given to our Associates: XXIV.
Sometimes also to subjects; this illustrated by examples. XXV. What use may be
made of what has been here said. XXVI. Whether things taken without the
Territories of both parties engaged in War, be by the Right of War lawfully
acquired. XXVII. This Right, whereof we have spoken, how proper to a solemn
War.
I. What the Law of nature decrees concerning things gained by War.
BEsides the license that a just War gives to commit such acts against men,
whereof we have treated hitherto; there is also another effect, which by the
Law of Nations is proper to a solemn War. And indeed, even by the Law of
Nature, those things may be acquired by a just War, which are, either
equivalent to that Vide lib. 2. chapter 7.. 2. Lib. 2. chapter 20.
, which though due, cannot otherwise be obtained; or which causes them to
suffer who have done wrong, so as it exceeds not the bounds of a just
punishment. By virtue of this Right of acquiring things by a just War, Abraham
offered unto God the tenth of the spoil he got from the five Kings Genesis 14.
, as the Author to the Hebrews seems to expound the story Heb. 7.4.
. So also did the Grecians, the Carthaginians, and the Romans unto their Gods;
as to Apollo, to Hercules, to Jupiter Feretrius, and others. The Patriarch
Jacob leaving to Joseph an especial Legacy above his Brethren, Genesis 48.22.
says, Lo I give thee one part above thy Brothers, which I took from the
Amorites with my Sword and with my Bow: where the word, cepi, I took, seems to
be Prophetically spoken for, certo capiam, I shall surely take, (for so the
Chaldee Paraphrast expounds it, as if it had already been done by Jacobs
Prayers to God, who by his special favor preserved Sichem for Jacob and his
Posterity:) Where note also, that that is attributed unto Jacob which was done
afterward by his Posterity, who were called by his name, as if he and they
were but one and the same person; which place is better thus expounded, than to
wrest it (as the Hebrews do) to the spoil taken from the Sichemites, which was
long before done by the Sons of Jacob. For that, as being somewhat perfidiously
done, the old Patriarch did conscienciously disclaim, as may be yet seen upon
record, Genesis 34.30. and Genesis 49.6. Now that this Right, which Abraham and
others had unto the spoils taken in a just War, was approved of by God, so long
as it was limited within the natural bounds prescribed, will appear, not by
this only, but by other the like places of the Scripture. God in the Law which
he gives, Deuteronomy. 20.14. concerning that City that should refuse to surrender,
but was afterward taken by the Sword, orders thus, Thou shall take the spoil
of it to thy self, and thou shall enjoy the prey of thine Enemies which the
Lord has given thee. 1 Chronicles. 5.20, 21, 22.
Again, The Rubenites, the Gadites, and a part of the Tribe of Manasses, are
said to have conquered the Itureans, and their Neighbors, and to have taken
much spoil from them; this being given as the reason, because in the fight they
called upon God, and he was propitious unto them. The like is said of that good
King Asa, who being provoked by an unjust War made against him by the
Aethiopians, and calling upon God, obtained the Victory, and by it much spoil,
2 Chronicles. 14.13. Which is the more notable, because that War was not undertaken
by any special command from God, but only out of common Right. Joshua also
pursuing the same Rubenites, Gadites, and part of the Manassites in their
prosperous successes, says, Divide the spoil of your Enemies with your
Brethren, Josh. 22.8. And when David sent to the Elders of Israel the spoil
taken from the Amalekites, he gave this honorable Character of it, 1 Samuel
30.26. De Benef. 37.
That it was a present sent them out of the spoil of the Enemies of the Lord.
And no marvel; for, as Seneca observes, To enrich any man with the spoils of an
Enemy is honorable. There are also certain Divine Laws extant concerning the
dividing of such spoils, as Numb. 31.27. And Philo the Jew reckons it among the
Curses of the Law, That their fields should be reaped by their Enemies, whereby
must necessarily ensue, Famine to themselves and Plenty to their Enemies:
Whereunto we may add, That God gave the spoil of Tire to Nebuchadnezor for the
pay of his Army, Ezech. 29.19, 20. because that by him God punished the Pride
of the Tyrians for insulting over Jerusalem, Ezech. 26.2.

II. What the Law of Nations.
Moreover by the Law of Nations, not only he that makes War for a just cause,
but every man in a solemn War, is without either end or measure owner of
whatsoever he can take from an Enemy; namely, in that sense, that both he, and
whosoever claims from him are to be defended in their possessions of the things
so gained by all Nations: which, according to the external effects thereof may
be called Dominion. This, says Xenophon, is an everlasting Law with all men,
that a City being taken by force, all the goods and riches are the Conquerours.
Plato likewise was of the same opinion, All that was the Conquereds, Bona quae
victus habuit omnia victoris fiunt.
become after the Victory, the Conquerours. And elsewhere amongst diverse kinds
of natural acquisitions, he places this also which he calls sometimes
Polemical, sometimes Predatory, and sometimes Certatory: Therein agreeing with
Xenophon, who brings in Socrates by diverse interrogations drawing Euthydemus to
this confession, That it was not at all times unjust to spoil and to destroy;
as for example, when done against an Enemy. Aristotle in the first of his
Politics, says, That the Law of Nations, as by an universal agreement had
ordained, that whatsoever is conquered from an Enemy by War becomes immediately
the Conquerours. To the like purpose is that of Antiphanes, We ought to wish
our Enemies abundance of riches without valor; for so those riches will
quickly find other Masters, not those that possess them, but those that can
conquer them. For as Plutarch observes in the life of Alexander, What was the
vanquisheds, both is, amd ought to be accounted the Conquerours. Instit. Cyri.
l. 2.
And elsewhere the same Plutarch, The goods of those that are by War overcome,
are proposed as the reward of the victory; which are the very words of
Xenophon. What is gained by Arms, says Diodorus, or got by the right of War,
ought not easily to be lost. Thus Philip in his Epistle to the Athenians,
says, All of us possess Cities, which were either left us by our Ancestors, or
being subdued became ours by the right of War. Thus Aeschines also, If by
making War against us, thou had subdued our City, thou might lawfully have
possessed it by the Law of Arms. Marcellus in Livy justifies himself in taking
the spoil of Syracuse by the Right of conquest. And the Goths in Agathias, do
by the same Law, justify King Theudorick who had first conquered Odoazer,
saying, Quae ejus fuerant omnia tenuit jure belli; Whatsoever Odoazer had,
Theudorick possessed by the right of War. Thus the Roman Ambassadors told Philip
concerning the City of Thrace and some others, That if he had taken those
Cities by War, they had been his by the Law of Arms, as being the reward of his
victory. And thus Massanissa pleads, saying, The land that his Father conquered
by War from the Carthaginians, he held by the Law of Nations. So also
Mithridates in Justine says, Lib. 38.
That to please the Romans he had withdrawn his Son out of Cappadocia, which as
a Conqueror he was rightly possessed of by the Law of Nations. Or. 2. contra
Rullum. Offic. 1.
Cicero tells us that the City Mitylene became the Romans by the Right of War
and by Conquest. And in another place he tells us, That propriety in some
things may be gained either by preoccupancy, or by War, as in those things that
are gained by Victory. Of the same mind was Dion Cassius, All that was the
Conquered's immediately becomes the Conquerours: Quae ex hostibus capiuntur
jure gentinus statim capientium fiunt; Whatsoever, says Cajus the Lawyer, is
taken from an Enemy by the Law of Nations, immediately is made his that takes
it. And this kind of acquisition Theophilus calls a natural possession. So
likewise Aristotle, Arist. l. 1. de rep. c. 8.
because it has respect to no other cause than the bare fact it self; from
whence arises a kind of natural Right, as the Dominion of all things at first
began by Preoccupancy: an impression whereof, we have yet remaining in such
Creatures as are naturally wild, whether they live on the Earth, in the Sea, or
in the Air, which for the most part are theirs that first take them. As those
things also which are taken in War: Besides those things are presumed to be
taken from an Enemy, that are taken from the Subjects of an Enemy: Hist. G^. l.
3.
As Dercyllides in Xenophon argues, since Pharnabazus was an Enemy to the
Lacedaemonians, and Mania subject to Pharnabazus, therefore were the goods of
Mania lawful prize by the Law of Nations.

III. When moveable Goods are said to be taken.
Moreover, by the Law of Nations things are then said to be taken in War, when
they are so detained from us that we are deprived of any probable hopes to
recover them, and are no longer able to pursue them; as Pomponius determines
the like Question. And this, in things moveable, is to be presumed as soon as
they are carried into the Enemies Garrisons. A thing may be said to be lost in
the same manner as it is said to return after it has been lost; but may be
said to return as soon as it comes within the Bounds of the Empire from whence
it was taken, that is, as soon as it comes within our Garrisons. Nay, Paulus
the Lawyer does plainly averr that man to be taken that is carried out of our
Bounds. And Pomponius declares that man to be taken in War whom our Enemy,
having apprehended from out of our Garrisons, had led into their own. For until
he be secured within their Garrisons, he remains a Citizen or Subject of ours.
Now by this Law of Nations there is the same reason for Goods as there is for
Persons, whereby we way easily conclude, That in some places things taken in
War are presently said to be his, or theirs, that take them, that is, upon this
condition, That they continue in their possession for such a time. Whence it
seems to follow, That at Sea, Ships and other Goods are then said to be taken
when they are carried into our Enemies Harbors, or to such a place where their
whole Navy rides; for then their remains no hopes of recovery. But by a later
Law of Nations, especially of these of Europe, it is thus judged, namely, If
the things taken continue in the possession of the Enemy twenty four hours,
then are they accounted for lost.

IV. When Lands.
But it is not so with Lands. For they are not said to be taken as soon as the
enemy sets down upon them. For though it be true that that part of the Land
which an enemy with a strong Army encamps upon, is by them for the present
possessed, as Celsus observes; yet is it not every possession that is sufficient
to alienate the Title of Land, but such a one as is firm and lasting. The
Romans were so far from thinking that part of their Land lost whereon Hannibal
encamped, that at that very time they sold it for as much as it would have
given before. But that Land only is said to be lost that is so immured or
secured with Walls, Forts, Rampires, and such like Muniments; that unless the
enemy that holds them can be driven away, there can be no possible access unto
it by the former Owners. And this derivation of the word Territory, which
Siculus Flaccus gives, namely, A terrendis hostibus, From deterring the enemy
from approaching unto it, seems to be as probable as either that assigned by
Varro, a terendo, from wearing; or that of Frontinus, From the soil or earth;
or that of Pomponius the Lawyer, From the power that the Magistrate of the
place has to affright all persons within those bounds by removing or driving
them out of it. Thus Xenophon in his Book concerning Contribution says, That
the possession of Lands is held in the time of war by Muniments, which he there
calls Walls and Frontier Garrisons.

V. Things not the Enemies cannot be acquired by War.
Whence this also may be gathered, That before the War can transfer a Right
unto us in any thing so taken, it is requisite by the Law of Nations, that that
Right should first be in our enemies. For things deposited or laid up within
our Enemies Towns or Garrisons, whose right Owners are neither Subjects to our
Enemies, nor have any hostile mind toward us; cannot by War be made lawful
prize, though we do conquer the place; as is sufficiently proved, among many
others, by that of Aeschines, where he shows, That Amphipolis, being a City
belonging to the Athenians, could not be lawful prize to King Philip by that
War which he made with the Amphipolitans. First, because no reason could be
given why the Athenians should lose their right, being no Enemies at that time
to King Philip; and then, Because this Right of changing properties by mere
force would prove a matter of so dangerous a consequence, that it ought not to
be largely interpreted.

VI. Concerning Goods found in an Enemies Ship.
Wherefore that which is commonly said, That Goods found in the Ships of our
Enemies are adjudged to be the Enemies Goods, and consequently are lawful
prize, is not so to be understood as though it were a certain Law made by the
Right of Nations, but because it gives occasion to a very great presumption
that they are so, which notwithstanding by pregnant and evident proofs to the
contrary may be dashed. And so it was long since adjudged in Holland in a full
Senate during the War with the Hans-towns in the Year 1338. and from thence
has since past into a Law. Neither are the Ships of our Confederates
forfeited, though the Goods in them be an Enemies, unless it be so agreed with
the consent of the Masters of the Ship. And so are the Laws of France, as I
suppose, to be understood, which adjudge the Goods lawful prize, if the Ship be
so; and the Ship lawful prize, if the Goods be so. But otherwise the Goods only
are prize, but not the Ship. So in the War between the Venetians and the
Genoese, the Ships of the Grecians being searched, those Enemies that lay hid
in them were taken and made Prisoners. Greg. l. 9.


VII. Things taken from our enemies are ours by the Law of Nations, though they
took them from others.
This also is most certain, That if we look no farther than the Law of Nations,
whatsoever is taken by War from our Enemies, cannot justly be claimed by those
from whom those Enemies won it, by the Right of War; because, The Law of
Nations first made our Enemies Lords of it, (as to an external Right) and
afterward the same Law made it ours. Thus Jephtha pleads his Title against the
Ammonites, because the Land in question, as also another part of the Land of
the Moabites were, by the right of Conquest first won from the Ammonites and
so, invested in the Amorites; and from the Amorites, 1 Samuel 30.20.
by the same Right of War, was transferred unto the Israelites, Judge. 11.23,
24, 27. Thus did David claim and divide as his own, the Lands that he took from
the Amalekites, notwithstanding that the Amalekites had before taken it from
the Philistines. Titus Largius (as Dionysius Halicarnassensis records the
Story) did thus adjudge this Case in the Roman Senate, Lib. 6.
when the Volscians laid claim to some of those Lands which the Romans had then
lately won by the Right of War, because anciently they had been Lords thereof,
saying, We Romans do account the possession of those Lands which we have won by
the Sword to be most just and honest; neither can we be so easily persuaded to
erase the Monuments of our Ancestors valor, by restoring that back unto those,
who when they had them were not able to keep them. Nay those Lands that we thus
gain, we conceive our selves bound not only to communicate to those Citizens
that are now living, but to leave to those who shall hereafter succeed us. So
far are we from adjudging that against our selves (by a voluntary surrender of
what we have gained by the Sword) which is usually adjudged against Enemies.
Vit. Romans
This Plutarch relates to be the ground of the War between the Romans and the
Vejans, who demanded of the Romans the City Fidonae, as anciently belonging
unto them; which demand was not thought by the Romans to be unjust only, but
ridiculous; to wit, that they who would not aid and assist the Fidenates whilst
they were contending against the Romans, and in great danger; but suffered the
Citizens thereof to be destroyed, should now lay claim to their Houses and
Lands when the were possessed by the Romans by the Right of Conquest. This also
is plain by that Answer which the Romans gave unto the Arunci, We Romans do
conceive that whatsoever any man wins by his valor from his Enemies, he may
bequeath to his Posterity, as being by the best of titles his own. So in
another place they return this in answer to the Volsci, We account that which
we conquer from our Enemies to be the best Estate we have, Dionys. Halicar. l.
7.
seeing that this is not only adjudged ours by our own Laws, but by a title
derived more truly from the gods than from men, and approved of by the constant
practice of all Nations, both Greeks and Barbarians; we shall not therefore
yield up any thing cowardly of that which we have gotten by valor, nor calmly
forego what by the Sword we have gained. Maximum hoc probrum foret, Livy lib. 7.
quae virtute ac fortitudine quaesita sunt, ea per formidinem aut stupotem
amittere; For this would be the greatest dishonor unto us, if either through
fear or stupidity we should lose that which by virtue and mere manhood we have
acquired. And this is also confessed in that Answer of the Samnites, We have
gained this by Conquest, which Law is of all acquisitions the justest. By this
Right the Romans held Syria, as Appianus notes, Lib. 12.
without restoring it to Antiochus Pius, from whom Tigranes, that great enemy
to the Romans, had formerly taken it; adjudging it more equal that Syria should
be governed by the Romans, who had expelled Tigranes; than by the Seleucidae,
who had been ejected by Tigranes. Yea, and Antiochus himself was of opinion,
That that was the most just and lasting possession that was got by the sword.
Polyb. in execrpt. Legate. n. 72.
Justine brings in Pompey answering the same Antiochus (who, after the
recession of Tigranes into Armenia, demanded the Kingdom of Syria, out of which
he had been by the same Tigranes driven, and into which after eighteen years he
had been restored by Lucullus) in these words, Mithrid. civil. 1.
That he would neither with nor without the consent of the Syrians set such a
King over them as could be content to hide himself in a corner of Cilicia all
the while that Tigranes held Syria. Justin lib. 40.
And now the same Tigranes being vanquished by the Romans, would demand the
reward due to other men's labors. And therefore as he had not taken the Kingdom
from him, so that Kingdom which himself had left unto Tigranes he refused to
give him, because he knew not how to defend it. So also those parts of Gallia
which the Cimbri took from the Gauls, the Romans afterward taking, held as
their own. Nor did the French restore to the Romans that part of Italy which
they took from the Goths.

VIII. That things taken from the Enemies are not always theirs that take them.
But here a more knotty Question arises, concerning the persons to whom the
spoils taken from the enemy in a solemn War belong, whether to the State, or to
every person of, or among the people. The Modern Lawyers do vary exceedingly in
their opinions concerning this Point; for most of them finding it in their
Civil Law, That capta sunt capientium; Things thus taken, are theirs that take
them. And in the Body of the Canon Law, That the spoil is to be distributed by
public Authority, do one from another (as is usual) deliver their opinions
thus, That primarily, and by original Right, he that first apprehends them has
the best title to them; but notwithstanding that they are all to be brought to
the General, who may distribute them amongst his Soldiers. But this opinion is
not more common than false; and therefore that we may hereby learn how unsafe
it is in such doubtful cases to be biassed by so weak an Authority, I shall the
more accurately confute this opinion. We cannot indeed deny but that by the
consent of Nations this Question may be determined either way, namely, That the
Spoil may belong either to the people, or to him that bears the charge of the
War, or to those particular persons that with the hazard of their lives do
first lay hands on it. But the Question here is, Not what they may determine in
this Point, but what they have or do determine of it; whereunto I answer, That
the things of an enemy, by the consent of Nations, are no otherwise their
enemies that take them, than as they belong to none; as we have already
explained it from that Saying of Nerva the Son.

IX. That possession and dominion may be gained for us by another.
But the things that are no Bodies, are indeed theirs that first take them. But
they may be said to take them that employ others to take them, as well as they
who take them for and by themselves. So they that are employed by others to
catch Fish, Fowl, Deer, or Pearls, whether they be Children, Servants or
Freemen, do not appropriate them unto themselves, but take them for those that
employ them. It was well said of Modestinus the Lawyer, L. eaquae D. de acq.
dom.
Whatsoever is naturally gained, as possession is, may be gained by any man
whomsoever we will appoint to do it for us. So likewise Paulus the Lawyer,
Possession is gained by the mind, and by the body, but then the mind must be
our own; but the body may be either our own or another. And in another place,
Possession may be taken for us by either a Proctor, an Attorney or Guardian;
that is, if it be done by them with that mind and purpose as to make it ours.
Thus it was among the Grecians, they that overcame in the Olympian Games,
obtained indeed the prize; but not for themselves, but for those that sent
them. And the reason is, because naturally one man may make use of another as
his Instrument, if both are willing. Wherefore the difference that is said to
be between persons bond and free, as concerning acquisitions, respects only the
Civil Law, and appertains properly to civil acquisitions; as appears by that
place of Modestinus before cited. And yet the Emperor Severus drew these
nearer to the pattern of natural acquisitions, not only for profit, as out of
Jurisprudence, as he himself acknowledges. Setting then aside the Civil Law,
that saying will hold good, That what a man may do for himself by himself, that
he may also do by another; and it is the same thing to do it by another, as to
do it by himself.

X. A distinction of Acts done in War into public and private.
Here then we must distinguish between those acts which in a War are truly
public, and those private acts that are done by the occasion of a public War.
By these private acts the Goods of an Enemy may primarily and directly belong
to the private Soldier; but whatsoever is gained from an Enemy by such acts as
are public, is due to the people, or to him that maintains the War. Upon this
Right of Nations Scipio grounds his Plea against Massanissa in Livy, Lib. 30.
Syphax, by the good conduct of the Roman people, is conquered and taken; and
therefore He, his Wife, his Kingdom, Lands, Towns, with their Inhabitants, yea
and in a word, whatsoever Syphax had, is thereby become lawful prize to the
people of Rome. And in the same manner does Antiochus the Great argue, That
Coelosyria did of right belong to Seleucus, and not to Ptolomy; because it was
Seleucus that maintained the War, to whom Ptolomy was but an Auxiliary, Lib. 5.
as Polybius relates.

XI. The Land that is taken is his that maintains the War.
The Soil, and whatsoever is fixed thereon, are not usually taken but by some
public Acts, as by the introducing of an Army, by placing of Garrisons in
Strong Holds, Towns and Castles; and therefore, as Pomponius says, Publicatur
Ager qui ex Hostibus captus est; Lands taken from an Enemy fall to the State,
that is, (as he expounds himself) praedae non cedit, is no part of the prey or
booty strictly taken, (which is sometimes granted to the common Soldiers.
Vand. l. 2.
) So Salomo in Procopius, That Prisoners and some other Movables should be
given as a prey to the Soldiers, is not without some reason, (so as it be done
by public Grant, as we shall anon explain it;) but that the Lands should
altogether belong to the Prince, or to the Roman Empire that defrays the charge
of the War, Lampridius.
is but just; though the Emperor Severus gave the very Lands conquered from his
Enemies unto the Captains and Soldiers of his Frontier Garrisons. Among the
Hebrews and Lacedaemonians the Land taken by War was divided by Lots amongst the
Tribes; yet so, that amongst the Hebrews the Kings Lot was equal to that of
each single Tribe. Among the Romans, the Lands taken in War were either kept to
be let out, some small portion thereof being sometimes left for honors sake to
the former Owners; or alienated and sold, or assigned over to Husbandmen to be
ploughed or made tributary, whereof we have diverse testimonies in their
Histories, Laws and Commentaries. The Romans, (as Appian tells us) when they
subdued Italy, took away part of their Fields by way of punishment. And
elsewhere he tells us, That the Romans having conquered their Enemies did not
take away all their Lands, but a part only. Cicero also in that Oration that he
made to the Chief Priests for his own house, notes, That their Emperors having
subdued an Enemies Country, did sometimes consecrate their Fields, but it was
always by the Decree of the people.

XII. Things moving themselves and moveable, being taken by private Acts, are
theirs that take them.
But as to things moving themselves or moveable, they are taken either in
public service, or out of it. If they are such as are not taken upon public
Duty, they are theirs that take them. And hither we may referr that of Celsus,
Quae res hostiles apud nos sunt, non publicae, sed occupantium fiunt;
Whatsoever is found amongst us that was the enemies, belongs not to the
Commonwealth, but to them that apprehend them; that is, the War being begun.
For the very same was observed even of Men and Women at such time as they in
this case were equally valued with Goods. We have a notable Saying in
Tryphonius to this purpose, But they who in times of peace come to sojourn in
another dominions (as friends) the War suddenly breaking out, were made Slaves
with them amongst whom they were by their own hard fate apprehended as enemies.
Where we may note, That the Lawyer ascribes this unto Fate, because they were
brought into bondage without any merit of their own; for all such were
anciently ascribed to Fate. So Servius upon that of Virgil, Acti fatis,
observes, That the Poet endeavors to attribute nothing to the merits of the
Trojans, but all to Fate. So Naevius concerning the Metelli, Fato fiunt Romae
Metelli consules; The Metelli were made Consuls at Rome (as it were) by Fate,
that is, without any merit of their own. In like manner it is, when Soldiers
take any thing from their enemies whilst they are not upon Duty, nor executing
the Commands of their Captain, but by permission of their Commanders, or by a
promiscuous license that Soldiers do usually take on each side one against
another; what, I say, is so taken is lawful prize to him that takes it; because
it is not taken in order to any Command, but voluntarily, and is therefore
given them as the reward of their valor. As when in pickeering a Soldier
overcomes, disarms or kills his Enemy, the spoil of that enemy is due unto him
in recompense of his Virtue; so when a Party shall make an excursion freely
without Command into an enemies Country, so as it be beyond ten miles from the
Camp, according to the Roman Discipline (as we shall see anon) whatsoever they
shall so take is theirs that take it.

XIII. Unless the Civil Law do otherwise ordain.
And whereas we say, That by the Law of Nations whatsoever is thus acquired
becomes directly his that takes it, we are so to understand it, that this was
the Law of Nations before any thing in this Case was decreed by the Civil Law.
For every State or people may among themselves otherwise determine of it, and
prevent the right and dominion of him that takes it, as we may perceive it done
in many places where Fowl and Deer are taken. So also the Civil Law may ordain,
That whatsoever is found amongst us of or belonging to our enemies, the War
being begun, shall be confiscate to the use of the Commonwealth.

XIV. What is taken by a public act is his that maintains the War.
But as yet as to those things that any man takes by any public Act of a
solemn War, there is another reason why those things should not be theirs that
take them. For herein every private Soldier represents the Body of the
Commonwealth, and what is done by any one is taken to be done by the public
State that employs him; and therefore whatsoever, whether possession or
dominion, any of them do thus take, (unless the Civil Law do otherwise
determine) the people may be said to acquire; and therefore they may transfer
their right thereunto to whom they please, and to what uses they please. But
because this seems to be repugnant to the common opinion, therefore I shall
endeavor to confirm it with more than ordinary proofs, which I shall draw from
the examples of the noblest Nations. I shall begin with the Grecians, whose
custom, in this case, Homer in several places describes.

Omnia jam divisa, quibus spoliavimus Vrbes.
Their Cities sacked, the spoils divided are.
Achilles in the same Poet, speaking of the Cities which he himself had
stormed, says, Omnibus his ingens pretio numeroque suppellex
Nostra rapta manu: Regi sed Victor Atridae
Cuncta tuli, celeres residens qui pone carinas,
Divideret cum pauca aliis, sibi multa tenebat.
From which Cities Achilles brought to Agamemnon all the rich plunder which he
divided, distributing some few things for others, but reserving the greatest
part to himself. For here we look at Agamemnon, partly, as he was at that time
Prince of all Greece, and so representing the whole Body of the people; by
which right he divided the spoil, but with the advice and consent of his
Council: and partly as a General, and so out of that which was public he
claimed a greater share than others to himself; and therefore Achilles thus
bespeaks Agamemnon, Nam neque me tecum praedae pars aequa sequetur,
Si Danaum virtus Trojanum everterit Vrbem.
My part of the prey with thine must not compare,
Though by our valor Troy subverted were.
And so in another place Agamemnon by the advice of his Council offers unto
Achilles a Ship laden with Brass and Gold, with twenty Women, which he might
take first out of the Spoil. Troy being taken, Virgil, speaking of King
Priamus's Palace, says, Custodes Lecti Phoenix and dirus Ulysses
Praedam asservabant: huc undique Troia gaza.
Incensis erepta adytis, Mensaeque Deorum,
Crateresque Auro solidi, captivaque vestis
Congeritur.
Aen. l. 2.
There Phoenix and Ulysses guard the Spoil,
And from all parts Troy's precious things do pile,
Snatched from burnt Temples, and from Altars rare,
Goblets of Gold, and sacred Vestments are.
Thus we read, Plut. Aristid. Herod. l. 9. Plut. Lysand.
That in after Ages Aristides preserved the Spoil at Marathon entire. And after
the Battle at Plataeae it was severely forbidden that any man should presume to
take to himself any part of the spoil; afterward the spoil was preserved and
distributed among the people, according to each man's deserts. After this, when
Athens was conquered, Lysander caused the spoil of the City to be brought into
the open Market. And the Lacedaemonians had public Officers who were appointed
to make Portsale of all their prizes taken in the War. (...).
If we look into Asia, Virgil will inform us, That the Trojans were wont to
divide the spoil by lot, as is usual; where things held in common are to be
divided amongst many, Homer. Iliad. 10.
In other places the spoil was divided by the General, by which right Hector at
the special instance of Dodonis promised to give him Achilles's Horses, whereby
we may understand, That this Right of gaining propriety was not always in the
bare taking of the thing. Pliny lib. 23. c. 3.
So the spoil taken in Asia was brought to Cyrus the Conqueror, and not
distributed but by his order, whose whole care was to choose out such things to
offer unto the Gods as the Magi thought most acceptable to them. If we look
into Africa, we shall find the same custom there. Plut. Alex. Curt. Diod. l.
17. Strab. 15. Greg. Turon. l. 2. c. 27. Aen. l. 3. Servius. Live. l. 23.
So whatsoever was taken at Agrigentum, or in the Fight at Cannae, or in other
places, was sent unto Carthage. Among the ancient Francks, whatsoever was taken
in War was divided by lot; neither had the King himself any other share than
what fell to him. Captivi and Praedae inter Victores sort dividebantur; The
Conquerours divided by lot both the Captives and the Spoil, says Servius upon
Virgil. But look how much more excellent the Romans were than other Nations in
Military Discipline, so much the more worthy they are of our imitation.
Dionysius Halicarnassensis, a most exact Observer of their Manners and Customs,
thus instructs us in this Case, Whatsoever is taken from the Enemy by valor in
War, is decreed by the Law to be public: so that not only the private Soldier
was forbid to claim any propriety in it, but even the General himself could
claim no interest therein; but the Quaestor received it, and in an open Market
exposed it to sale. These are the very words of those that undertook to accuse
Coriolanus to the people of Rome; which words, though true, yet smelt too
rankly of envy and distraction.

XV. Yet was some power herein always granted to the General.
For that the people were the right Owners of the Spoil, was most true (as
Simler testifies in his History of the Switzers:) and yet it is as true, that
the power of disposing thereof was allowed in every free State to the General,
yet so that he was to render an account thereof unto the people. Polybius
concerning L. Aemilius Paulus testifies thus, Being possessed of the whole
Kingdom, and having it thereby in his own power to dispose of all things at his
pleasure, he yet coveted nothing. Live. l. 37.
So does Livy concerning the same Aemilius, It is in the power of the General
to destroy those Cities that are taken by the sword, but not those that are
surrendered; yet even in these also the disposition of the spoil is in his
power, and not in the Soldiers. But notwithstanding this power that custom
has given to Generals, some of them to the end that they might free themselves
from all manner of suspicion, have wisely transferred it back to the Senate,
Live. l. 5.
as Camillus did. And they that have claimed it, have been observed to have
disposed of the spoil to several uses, according to their several designs, to
the promoting of either Religion, Honor, or Ambition.

XVI. Who have either brought into the public Treasury,
But those amongst them who desired to be, or to appear, most holy, would not
at all enrich themselves with the spoils of the enemy; but whether it were in
money, the Quaestor of the people was commanded to receive it; or in other
Goods, he was commanded to make Portsale of them: and the money for which they
were sold, went under the name of Manubiae, Lib. 13. c. 23.
as Favorinus in Gellius notes, and was by the Quaestor brought into the
Treasury. But in case there were matter for a triumph, then it was first
ostentously showed to the people. Manius Curious called the Gods to witness,
That he had not so much as touched any of the spoil, but only one poor Beechen
Cup, wherewith to sacrifice to the Gods. But that of Aemilius Paulus, Vit.
Aemil.
which Plutarch records, is admirable, and for which all men did extol him for
his magnanimity, namely, That when he had collected from the enemy an infinite
mass of Gold and Silver, nec inspicere voluisset, he would not be tempted with
the sight of it. But delivered it to the Quaestor for the public use. Lib. 2.
The like did Pompey, of whom Vellejus writes thus, The money that he took from
Tigranes, he caused to be delivered to the Quaestor, as his custom was, Lib. 2.
Ep.
and to be publicly registered. So also Marcus Tullius in his Epistle to
Salust, gives this testimony of his own integrity, De praeda mea praeter
Quaestores Vrbanos, Teruntium nec attigit, nec tacturus est quisquam; Besides
the Quaestors of the City, no man has or shall touch the least part of the
spoil that I have got from the enemy. And this indeed was the general practice
of the Romans in their most ancient and best days; whereunto Plautus alluding,
says, Nunc hanc praedam omnem jam ad Quaestorem deferam.
Now all this spoil I Will to the Questor bring.


The like he says of Prisoners taken, Whom from the Questors of the spoil I
bought. But others of the Roman Generals, did without the Questors make
Portsale of the spoil taken from the Enemy by themselves, as may be gathered
from the ensuing words of Halicarnassenses. Thus we read that the Sabines being
vanquished by King Tarquin, he sent the Prisoners together with the spoil unto
Rome. Live. l. 1.
So likewise Romulius and Veturius being Consuls, the spoil was sold to supply
the public Treasury, which was then almost exhausted, the whole Army repining
at it. But in a case so clear and so beaten, Live. l. 3.
what need we any more testimonies? But yet this is worthy to be observed, That
the spoil, Dion. Hal. l. 2.
or part thereof at least, was sometimes given to the Gods, sometimes to the
Soldiers, and sometimes to others; to the Gods were given, either the spoils
themselves, as those which Romulus was said to hang up in the Temple of Jupiter
Feretrius; or being reduced into Money, that Money was employed to religious
uses: Live. l. 1.
Thus was the Temple of Jupiter built on the Hill Tarpeius, with the Money
raised out of the Pometine spoils by Tarquin the Proud.

XVII. Or divided it to the Soldiers, and how.
To give the spoil to the Soldiers, was by the Ancient Romans accounted as
proceeding from Ambition. So Sextus the Son of Tarquin the Proud, but driven
unto the Gabians, is said to distribute the prey amongst the Soldiers, that
thereby he might render himself the more powerful. Appius Claudius in the open
Senate condemned such kind of largesses to Soldiers, as savouring too much of
novelty, rashness, and prodigality: Live. l. 5.
The spoil given to the Soldiers, was either divided amongst them, or taken,
as when each man had what he could catch; when it was divided, either it was in
lieu of their pay, in case it could not conveniently be reduced to money, and
so brought into the public Treasury, and this was never opposed by Appius
Claudius; Loco dicto.
or else it was divided according to every man's merits for services then done.
The order and method of this distribution is excellently described by Polybius,
namely, Lib. 10.
the lesser part of the Army was sent out daily to fetch in the spoil, who were
commanded to bring whatsoever they found into the Camp, where the Tribunes were
equally to divide it. They that had the charge of the Camp, which from the
practice of King David grew into a Law; 1 Samuel 30.24.
and they that through sickness, or by reason of some public employment were
absent, had equal shares with those that were present: sometimes the spoil was
reduced into money, Live. 45.
which in lieu thereof was distributed among them; which in Triumphs was
usually done. The proportions I find to be thus divided, sometimes to a Foot
Soldier a single share, to a Captain of Foot a double, to an Horseman a
treble; and sometimes to a Footman a single, and to an Horseman a double
proportion; elsewhere, a single to a Foot Soldier, a double to the Captain: but
to a Tribune, and to a Horseman (or rather to a Captain of Horse, as Appianus
relates) a quadruple share. There was also sometimes a respect had to the
merits of Soldiers. Thus was Cajus Marcius, who had behaved himself gallantly,
at the taking of Corioli highly rewarded for his valor out of the spoil of
that City, before it was distributed among the Soldiers; but which way soever
the spoil was to be divided, it was lawful for the General to take of the
principal part of it, what he pleased unto himself, that is, as much as was
sit: which also has sometimes been granted unto others, as the reward, or an
encouragement to valor. As Euripides speaking of the Trojan Ladies says, --
Quae principibus eximiae datae
Erant Achivis.
-- They that were most fair
Unto the Grecian Princes given were.
And of Andromacha he tells us, That Pyrrhus the Son of Achilles chose her to
himself. Dion Hal. l. 4.
Fabricius in his Oration to Pyrrhus, challenges to himself this privilege,
saying, That of the things taken in War, it was lawful for him as General, to
take what and as much as he pleased; whose example Julian proposes both to
himself and his Army, as Ammianus testifies. Whereunto Isidore has respect,
where treating of the Right of War, He divides the spoil into that part which
was equally to be distributed among the Soldiers, with regard had to the
quality of their persons and to their hard service, and into that which was the
Princes or Generals portion. Tarquin the Proud, as Livy testifies, Lib. 1.
would both enrich himself with the best, and pacify the minds of the people
with the rest of the spoil. Servilius in his Oration to Lucius Paulus, says,
That it was in his power to have made himself rich in the division of the
spoil. And there are some of opinion, that it is that part only that falls to
the General, Verr. 3.
which is signified by the word Manubiae, amongst whom we find Asconius
Pedianus. But much more commendable are those Generals, who can be content to
forgo their Right in this case, and assume nothing of the spoil unto
themselves, but the Honor of the Conquest; among whom was that Fabricius
before named, who preferred his own honor before riches though justly got,
which he confesses he did in imitation of Valerius Publicola and some few
others; Plut. M. Cato.
whose example M. Porcius Cato also followed in his Spanish Victory, denying
that he kept any thing to himself of the spoil he had taken from the Enemy,
besides what he had eaten and drank: yet adding withal, that he did not thereby
blame those Generals that had, or hereafter should enrich themselves by the
spoil of their Enemies; but that he chose rather to emulate the best of men in
their virtues, than the wealthiest in their riches. Next unto these are to be
commended those Generals, who took somewhat of the spoil to themselves, but
very sparingly. Such was Pompey whom Cato in Lucan commends, for that he
brought into the public treasury much more than he kept himself. In the
division of the spoil, regard was sometimes had to such as were absent from the
fight, as it was ordained by Fabius Ambustus at the taking of Anxur; and
sometimes no regard at all was had of some, though present: As when Cicinnatus
was Dictator, no respect was had in the division of the spoil to that part of
the Army, that was commanded by Minutius. But look what Right the Emperors had
in the Ancient Commonwealth, the same was translated when the Commonwealth was
settled to the Generals of the Armies, Magistri militum.
as appears by Justinians Code; where from an insinuation of acts done, all
donations of thing moving themselves and moveable were discharged, which their
Generals gave unto the Soldiers out of the spoil of the Enemies, whether they
were then occupied in the War, C. de donationibus.
or in what places soever they were known to abide. But this division gave
frequent occasion of calumny, as if those Captains did by that means purchase
favor to themselves only, which was the crime charged upon Servilius,
Corolianus, and Camillus, as if they obliged their friends and clients by their
liberality out of the public stock; whereunto they plead that they had done it
for the public good, Dion. l. 6. and. 7. Livy lib. 5.
namely, That they that were present at the work done, receiving the fruits of
their own labors, might thereby be encouraged the more willingly to adventure
themselves in other expeditions, which are the very words of Halicarnassenses.

XVIII. Or by plunder.
Dion. Hali.
Thus much for Division, now we come to Direption, when every private Soldier
held what he could catch; which license was granted unto the Soldiers, either
in wasting the Enemies Country, or after a set Battle, or at the storming of a
City that had been long besieged: for then commonly upon a sign given, every
man ran in and took what he could get; this license was very rarely give^
^nciently, yet does it not want some precedents. For Tarquin we read gave the
spoil of the City Suessa to his Soldiers. So did Q. Servilius the Dictator,
Live. l. 4. Dion l. 5, 6.9.10.
the rifling of the Camp of the Aequi. The like did Q. Fabius, having defeated
the Volsci, and taken the City Ecetra, and afterward some others did the same
very often. Perseus being put to flight, Paulus the Consul gave the spoil of
those that were slain or maimed upon the spot to his Foot Soldiers; Livy l. 46.
but to the Horse, the spoil of the Country adjoining. So also by the decree of
the Senate, did he give the spoil of the Cities of Epirus to the Soldiers. The
like did Sulla the City of Athens. Lucullus having vanquished Tigranes, did for
a while restrain his Soldiers from gathering the spoil; but at length being
assured of the Victory, he suffered them to take it: He gave also the plunder
of Tigranocerta, as Plutarch records, to the Soldiers. The like did the
Emperor Severus the spoil of Ctesiphon to his; yea, and commanded his
Tribunes, Captains, and common Soldiers to plunder all the Villages about it.
Mahomet the second to encourage his Army, promised them all the spoil and
Captives they could find in Constantinople. That which some men do object
against this is, That it oftens comes to pass, through this license given to
every Soldier to catch what he can, that they that are greedy of plunder, do
deprive those that are truly valiant, of the reward of their valor. For it is
frequently seen, that they that are most backwards to fight, are most forwards
to plunder; whereas they that have magnanimously exposed themselves to the
greatest labor and danger, have reason to expect the best part of the prey,
which are the very words of Appius in Livy. Whereunto not very impertinent is
that of Cyrus in Xenophon, Lib. 6.
In this way of partition, I mean by plunder, I very well know that the worst
Soldiers get most: But unto this, it is commonly answered, That what any man
takes from his Enemy with his own hands, is ever more acceptable unto him, than
that which is assigned him by others, though in value it be much less.
Sometimes again it is permitted Soldiers to plunder, because indeed it cannot
easily be prevented. So it was in the winning of Cortuosa a Town of the
Hetruscians, The Tribunes ordered the spoil to be sold: but Imperium quam
consilium segnius fuit; The command came too late; for the Soldiers had
already got it, which could not without envy be retrieved.

XIX. Or grant it to others.
Now whereas I said, that the spoil, or the money raised out of it, was
sometimes divided among such as were no Soldiers; this often happens, when to
the maintenance of the War, some men have liberally contributed, unto whom
restitution has been promised to be made after the Victory to the full value:
yea, and sometimes Plays and Interludes have been ordained out of the money
raised by the spoil of the Enemy.

XX. Or being divided it is diversely disposed of.
Neither is the spoil thus diversely disposed of only where the Wars are diverse,
but the same prey in one and the same War, is often set apart for diverse uses,
distinguishing it either by its parts, or by its kinds. So Abraham gave the
Tenth of the spoil to Melchisedeck. The like did Camillus to Apollo Pythius in
imitation of the Greeks, who also learned it from the Hebrews; at which time
under the vow of decimating the spoil, Livy l. 5.
the Chief Priests did adjudge, That not only things moveable, as Money,
Jewels, Cattle, and the like; but Towns, and Fields, and the like immovable
things were also comprehended. The same Camillus having conquered the Falisci,
allotted the greatest part of the spoil to the Questor, yet reserved some small
part of it to to the Soldiers. Livy l. 5.
So did Lucius Manlius also sell part of the spoil which he reduced into the
public treasury; Lib. 38.
and yet took great care that part thereof should be divided among his
Soldiers, as it was most just. The spoil of the Enemy may also be divided by
its several kinds, which are these; either they are Captives, Droves, or Herds
of Cattle (which the Grecians when they speak properly, call, (...), the prey)
Money, things moveable, and these either common and ordinary, or such as are
more rare and precious. Q. Fabius when he had overcome the Volsci, commanded
the prey and spoil to be sold; but for the Silver, Dion. lib. 8.
he reserved that for himself. And when he had subdued the Volsci and Aequi,
Idem lib. 10.
the Prisoners he led beyond the Territories of Tusculum, and distributed them
to the Soldiers; but the common people, and the Cattle, he left in the fields
of Ecetra for pillage and plunder. Ibidem.
Lucius Cornelius when he had taken Antium, brought all the Money, whether
Gold, Silver, or Brass, into the public Treasury, caused the Prisoners and
spoil to be sold, reserving for the Soldiers such things only as sufficed for
food and clothing. Neither was that of Cincinnatus much unlike, who having
taken Corbio, a Town belonging to the Aequi, Live. l. 10.
sent the most precious part of the spoil to Rome, the rest he divided among
the Soldiers by their Centuries. Camillus having taken Veji, brought nothing
to the public Treasury, but the Money he had raised by the selling of the
Captives: But having Conquered the Hetrusci, and made sale of the Captives; out
of the Money so raised, he restored to some Roman Matrons the Gold they had
contributed to maintain the War, and laid up three Cups of Gold in the Capitol.
Fabricus having conquered the Lacanes, the Brutii, and the Samnites, Live. l. 5.
L. 6.
did very much enrich the Soldiery, restored to every Citizen his Taxes, and
brought into the Treasury Four hundred Talents besides. So did Fabius, when he
had taken Tarentum, Live. lib. 37.
brought the Money raised by the sale of Prisoners into the Treasury; but the
rest of the spoil he dispersed among his Soldiers. Thus did Q. Fulvius, and
Appius Claudius, when they had taken Hanno's Camp, they sold the spoil and
divided it, rewarding every man that had done any signal service in that fight.
Scipio having taken Carthage, Lib. 25.
gave the spoil of the City to his Soldiers, reserving only the Gold and
Silver to gratify his friends. Acilius upon the taking of Lamia, divided among
the Soldiers one part of the spoil, and sold the other. Cn. Manlius having
subdued the Gallogrecians, Live. l. 37.
and according to the then Romish superstition, burnt their Arms, sold the rest
of the Prey; Id. l. 38.
part whereof as his own he brought into the Treasury, the rest he divided
among his Soldiers with singular care as was most fit.

XXI. Oft-times it was embezelled.
Whence we may collect, That no less among the Romans, than among other
Nations, the spoil did belong to the people of Rome, though the disposition
thereof was sometimes granted to their Generals; yet so, that they were to give
account thereof to the people: which we may learn amongst others, by the
example of L. Scipio, Lib. 5. c. 3.
who as Valerius Maximus relates it, having conquered King Antiochus, and added
Asia to the Roman Empire, Livy lib. 45.
was afterward (as Livy reports) condemned for enriching himself with the
spoil that belonged to the Commonwealth, for he had received Four hundred and
eighty Talents of Silver from the Enemy, more than he had brought into the
Treasury. Cato in his Oration concerning the spoil taken from the Enemy,
bitterly and resolutely complains of the license and impunity granted unto
their Generals in his time, in imbezelling the spoils of the Enemy, and so
robbing the public Treasury: A fragment of which Oration is recorded by Aulus
Gellius in these words, L. 11. c. 18.
Fures privatorum furtorum in nervo atque compedibus aetatem agunt: Fures
publici in auro atque purpura. Private Thieves we usually load with bolts and
fetters: But they that rob the Commonwealth, are clad in Gold and Purple (and
are indeed the only Gallants of our age.) So elsewhere the same Cato wonders,
That any man should dare to hang up in his own house those Ensigns that were
taken in Wars, as if they were a part of hi^ own household stuff. Neither are
Generals only guilty of this crime, but even private Soldiers, in case what
they so take from the enemy, they do not forthwith produce in public. For they
were all of them bound by Oath, says Polybius, that they should not purloin or
convey away any thing of the prey, but that they should faithfully discharge
their trust in regard of their Oaths. Lib. 16. c. 4.
The Form whereof we find recorded by Aulus Gellius, whereby they were obliged
not to take away any thing, either within the Army, or within ten miles of it,
that was more worth than a small piece of Silver: or if they did, then they
were to bring it to the Consul, or within three days to make open profession of
what they had done: which gives some light to that of Modestinus, Is qui
praedam ab hostibus surripuit Peculatus tenetur; He that steals away any of
the spoil and keeps it to himself, is guilty of robbing the public Treasury.
And this one thing is sufficient to admonish those that expound the Law not to
believe that the spoils taken from the enemy are peculiar unto those that take
them; but unto the State that bears the charges of the War. For there can be no
robbing of the Commonwealth but in those things that are either public, sacred
or religious. The result of all this is to show, That, setting aside the Civil
Law, and primarily, whatsoever is, in the public acts of a Just War, taken
from the enemy, belongs to the Prince or people who are at the charge of making
the War.

XXII. That somewhat may be changed of this common right by any Law or Act of
the Will.
We add setting aside the Civil Law, and primarily or directly. The former,
because the Law, whether made by the people, as among the Romans, or by the
King, as among the Hebrews and other places, may dispose of these things that
are not actually possessed to the benefit of the Commonwealth. And here under the
word Law we understand also Custom, if rightly introduced. The latter I add,
that we may know that it is in the power of the people to grant the spoils of
the enemy to others, as well as they may dispose of other things. And that not
only after they are got, but before; so that immediately upon the taking of
them, Actions are commenced, brevi manu, as the Lawyers speak, that is,
compendiously, declining the dilatory Forms of Suits. Which Grant may be made
not only nominally, but generally also, as to Widows, to the aged and impotent,
and to poor Orphans; as part of the spoil was thus given in the times of the
Maccabites: 2 Mac. 8.28, 30.
or unto uncertain persons, in imitation of those Sportulae which the Roman
Consuls and other Princes cast among the people, whereof every man had liberty
to catch what he would. Neither is the translation of this Right, either by Law
or Grant, unto others always a mere donative. For sometimes it is due by some
former Covenant or Agreement, sometimes in discharge of some Debt, or as a
recompense for some loss received, or some extraordinary charge men have been
at in the War either by purse or pains. As when a man serves in the War without
pay, or for less than his pains deserves. For in these cases it is usual, we
see, to grant either all, or some part of the spoil unto others.

XXIII. Some of the spoil may be due to our Associates.
It is also observed by Civilians, That Custom has so far prevailed almost
every where, that whatsoever either our Associates or Subjects that serve
without pay, and at their own cost and peril, shall take in the Wars, is their
own. As to our Associates, the reason is manifest, because by the Law of
Nature, they that are associated in a War, are bound to repair each others
losses, which shall be occasioned by reason of the War which is common and
public. Besides, there are very few that will expose themselves to labor and
danger for nothing; De benefic. 4. c. 15.
for this reason (says Seneca) we usually reward Physicians, though they cure
us not, Quod a rebus suis avocati nobis vacant; Because we call them from their
own affairs to serve ours. And the same reason likewise serves for Lawyers, as
Quintilian notes, Because they tear out their time, and employ their whole
study to defend other men's Estates, thereby neglecting all other means to
improve their own. The very same is given by Tacitus, Ann. l. 9.
Omittit res familiares, ut quis se alienis negotiis intendat; That he casts
off all care of his own domestic affairs, that he may the better intend the
good of others. It is therefore very credible (unless there shall appear some
other cause, as namely, mere kindness, or some former Contract) that it was the
bare hope of gain by the spoil of the enemy, which they expected as a
compensation for their loss of time and of their labor, Vid. Plut. Marcell.
that made them to expose themselves to so great dangers.

XXIV. And often to Subjects.
But as to Subjects, the reason is not so evident; because Subjects and
Citizens owe their help and assistance to the Country or City whereof they are.
But yet seeing that all Citizens either cannot or will not expose themselves to
those hazards and hardships that attend War; therefore it is but reasonable
that retribution be made by the whole Body of the people, unto such as shall
sustain the toil or the charges of it, but much more the damage that shall be
thereby occasioned; in full recompense whereof, the hopes of the whole prey, or
of an uncertain part thereof, is by the people easily (and that not without
reason) granted unto them. So thought the Poet, Propert.
Praeda sit haec illis quorum meruere labores.
Theirs be the prey whose pains deserved it have.
As to our Associates, an example we have in the League that was made between
the Romans and the Latins, wherein it was agreed, Live. l. 4. c. 24.
That in all the Wars wherein the Romans should engage them, the spoil taken
from the Enemy should be equally divided between them. So in the Wars wherein
the Aetolians engaged the Romans, it was agreed, Dionys. l. 6. Polyb. l. 6.
That the Cities and Territories should be the Aetolians, but the Prisoners and
all Movables should be granted to the Romans. To the ancient Latins the
Romans gave a third part of the spoil, as Pliny testifies. And proportionable
to the succors sent, the free Towns of the Switzers received their share of
the spoil, as Simler relates. Paruta l. 8.
In a War against the Turks, the Pope, the Emperor and the Venetians, divided
the spoil according to their respective charges that they had been at in making
the War. And Pomponius gratified Deiotarus King of Galatia with the lesser
Armenia, because he had been his Companion in the War against Mithridates. St
Ambrose, upon the Story of Abraham, Lib. 1. de Abra.
demonstrates the equity of this custom, Abraham, says he, perhaps thought it
but just, that they that came up to his assistance in that War, should likewise
partake with him of the spoils, as being the reward of their labor. But as to
Subjects, an example we have in the Nations of the Jews, Numb. 31.27.
where God commands Moses to divide the spoil of the Midianites into two parts,
that is, between them that undertook the War and went out to Battle, and
between all the Congregation. And in ver. 47. he subdivides that part which
belonged to the Congregation, and gave the fiftieth part thereof to the
Levites, that had the charge of the Tabernacle. Thus David divided the spoil
taken from the Amalekites equally, between them that went down to Battle, and
them that guarded the Stuff. Sometimes the Jews would divide the spoil, 1 Samuel
30.24.
and grant half to the Soldiers; and as to the other part, they admitted the
maimed, the Widows and the Orphans to have share with them. So we read of
Alexander's Soldiers, 2 Mac. 28.30.
that they always challenged the spoil taken from private men unto themselves,
only the most precious things they reserved and presented to the King.
Wherefore we find them accused for robbing the public Treasury, who had
conspired to assume all the prey taken at Arbela to themselves, so as to bring
nothing to the Treasury. But yet those public things that belonged to the
enemy, or to the King against whom they fought, were exempted from this
License. Thus it was with the Macedonians when they brake into Darius's Camp,
they carried away an infinite Mass of Treasure, leaving no place unrifled, but
the Kings Pavilion only; it being a custom received amongst them (as Curtius
notes) as well as amongst most Nations, to receive the Conqueror in the
Pavilion of the conquered. The custom of the Hebrews was not much unlike this
of the Macedonians; 2 Samuel 12.30.
For they always set the Crown of the vanquished King upon the head of the
Conqueror, assigning all the Furniture of the Kings Palace or Pavilion unto
him, as his share of the spoil. And amongst the Acts of Charles the Great we
find that having conquered the Hungarians, Whatsoever was taken from private
men, he gave to the Soldiers; but what was the vanquished Kings, was brought
into the Emperor's Treasury. The Grecians distinguished them by their several
names, calling the public (...), but the private (...); as also they did those
taken in the Battle (...); but those taken after Battle, being public, (...);
which distinction was afterward approved of by other Nations. But it is plain,
by what has been already said, That the Romans during their ancient
Commonwealth did not allow to their Soldiers so much; yet they began to be
more indulgent to them in their Civil Wars. Thus you may read Aequilanum given
to the Soldiers for pillage by Sulla. And Caesar after the Battle of
Pharsalia, gave Pompey's Camp to be pillaged by the Soldiers, with this
Complement, -- superest pro sanguine merces,
Quam monstrare meum est, nec enim donare vocabo
Quod sibi quisque dabit.
For loss of blood, a recompense I Will make,
Not what I Will give, but what each man shall take.
And in another Civil War, the Flavians being led against Cremona, App. Civil.
1.
made all the haste they could the Night approaching, to storm the City, lest
the pillage thereof should fall unto their Commanders and Legates; having, it
seems, been sufficiently instructed by Tacitus, Tacit. Hist. 3.
Expugnatae Vrbis praedam ad militem, deditae ad Ducem pertinere; That the
Plunder of a Town, if stormed, belonged to the Soldiers; but if surrendered,
unto the General. Ne manente periculo omissis hostibus praeda manus impediret,
quod plurimas saepe Victorias corrupit. Sub Corona.
But afterward as the Discipline grew more remiss, so this License of pillage
was more willingly granted to the Soldiers upon this ground, lest whilst the
Victory was yet doubtful, the greediness of the Soldiers should make them
neglect their Enemies, and over-hastily fall upon the prey, which has often
proved fatal to the Conqueror. When the Castle Volandum in Armenia was taken
by Corbulo, Tacitus tells us, That the common people were sold, but the rest of
the spoil was the Conquerours, The same Tacitus brings in Suetonius encouraging
his Soldiers to pursue their Enemies, and not at all to mind the pillage,
assuring them that the Victory being ascertained, the spoil should be their
own. Goth. 2.
So in Procopius we read that all the pillage taken at Picenum was brought to
Belisarius, that he might divide to every man according to his merits; the
cause whereof is added, For, says he, it is most unreasonable, that whilst
some with much toil and valor are killing the Drones, others without any
labor or peril should devour the honey. Vand. l. 2.
And in another place he tells us, That the Soldiers were much incensed
against Solomon when he warred against the Levatae, because he detained from
them the prey, who excused himself, in that he did it for no other reason than
that at the end of the War he might therewith reward every man according to his
deserts. There are some things of so small value, that they are not worth the
publication, or exposing to sale, these are usually granted to those that take
them: such in the old Roman Commonwealth were a Spear, a Javelin, Fodder, Fuel,
a Bottle, a Pair of Bellows, a Torch, Lib. 16. c. 14.
and any thing else of less value than a small Piece of Silver. For all these
are expressly excepted in the Military Oath given to the Soldiers, as we may
read in Gellius. Not much unlike is that which is allowed to Seamen and
Mariners, although they are under pay. Gall. Constitut. lib. 20. tit. 13.
The French call this the spoil or pillage, wherein are comprehended Apparel,
Bedding, Fuel, Gold also and Silver, under ten Scutes, sometimes the fifth
part, sometimes the third, Leges Hisp.
sometimes half the prize, belongs to the King, as it does in Spain; and the
seventh, and sometimes the tenth to the General of the Army; the rest belongs
to them that take it, except Men of War with all their Tackle, which are always
the Kings, and so are all Engines of War amongst the Swedes. Jo. Magn. in his
Sweed. Hist. Consulatus Maris Cap. 285.
In some places again, regard is also had to the labor, peril and charge that
any man has been at, and allowance is made in the partition of the spoil
accordingly. In Italy, a third part of the Ship taken in Fight is the Masters
of the Ship that took it, and as much belongs to them whose Goods the
conquering Ship is laden withal, and another third is theirs that fought and
took her. And sometimes it falls out, that they who at their own charge and
peril maintain the fight, do not carry away the prize; but some part thereof is
due to the State, or to him, at least, that derives it from the State. As in
Spain, they that set out the Ship upon their own charge, Leg. Hisp.
yield a part of the spoil taken to the King, and a part to the Admiral of the
Seas. In France the Admiral claims the tenth part; so also in Holland: But
there the State first takes the fifth part to themselves. Thus it is at Sea,
but at Land in the sacking of Towns, and in Battles, every man usurps that
which he takes to himself. And in excursions into the Enemies Country by
Parties, whatsoever is so taken is divided among them that take it, according
to every man's merit and dignity.

XXV. To what use these serve.
What hitherto has been said, serves to this end, That if in any Nation, not
embroiled with War, any Suit or Controversy arise concerning any thing taken
in War, the things shall be adjudged unto him to whom the Laws and Customs of
that people from whose parts they were taken, shall determine. But if nothing
can be thereby proved, then by the common right of Nations the thing so taken
shall be adjudged to the State or people themselves, if at least it were taken
in the act of War. For by what we have already said it is plain, Lib. 5. c. 8.
that what Quintilian sometimes said in the behalf of the Thebans does not
always prove true. As to what may be brought under the trial of the Law, the
right of War avails nothing; neither is it a good Plea to say, It was gained by
Arms, unless by Arms we can retain it.

XXVI. Whether things taken without the Territories of either Party, be lawful
prize.
But whatsoever is not the enemies, though it be found with the enemy, shall
not be adjudged to them that take it. For this, as I have already said, is
neither agreeable to the Law of Nature, nor was introduced by the Law of
Nations. So the Romans in Livy answer Prusias, If the Lands in question were
not King Antiochus 's, neither could it by Conquest belong to the Romans. But
if the Enemy had any right or interest in those things which were annexed to
the possession, as if it were taken by him as a Pledge for some Debt, or if it
were retained by him for the performance of some Covenants, for service or the
like, that was for the advantage of the Enemy. See above Chapter 4. Sect. 7. and
this Chapter Sect, 5. Livy lib. 55.
In all or any of these Cases, I see no reason but that whatsoever was the
Enemies is transferred unto the Conqueror. This also is sometimes
controverted, Whether persons or Goods taken without the Territories of either
of those Princes or people that are at War against each other, be theirs that
take them. Whereunto it is answered, That if we respect the Law of Nations
only, no place can give an Enemy protection: for as we have already said, Every
where an enemy being found, may be killed. But yet he that has the supreme
power in that place, may at his pleasure prohibit the prosecution of an Enemy
within his own Dominions; and in case of disobedience, may require satisfaction
as for an injury done against himself. The like may be said concerning Deer
taken in another man's Ground, That they are his that takes them; but it is
lawful for him whose Ground it is, to prohibit his access unto them.

XXVII. This Right, how proper to a solemn War.
But this external Right of gaining things taken in War, is by the Law of
Nations so peculiar to a Solemn War, that in other Wars it can take no place.
For in other Wars amongst Foreigners the Right to a thing is not gained by
force of the War, but only in compensation of some Debt, which cannot otherwise
be recovered. But in Civil Wars, whether they be great or small, there is no
change of Dominion, but by the Authority of a Judge.

CHAP. VII. Of the Right over Captives taken in War.
I. That Captives taken in a solemn War, are by the Law of Nations, slaves. II.
Yea, and their posterity. III. That whatsoever is done unto them is
unpunishable. IV. Even the incorporeal things that belong to Captives may be
acquired by War. V. The cause why this was ordained. VI. Whether Captives may
make their escape* VII. Or resist their Lords. VIII. That this Right is not
allowed in all Nations. IX. Nor now amongst Christians, and what succeeds in
its room.
I. Captives in a solemn War naturally slaves.
THERE is no man by nature servant to another, that is, no man in his primitive
state or condition considered, without any fact done by himself, whereby his
natural liberty is impeached, as I have elsewhere showed Videlib. 2. chapter 22..
11.
; in which sense our Lawyers may be understood, when they say, that to be
another man's slave is against nature: But that this kind of slavery might at
first be introduced by some fact done; namely, by some voluntary agreement, or
for some crime committed, is not repugnant to natural justice, as we have
elsewhere also showed. But by that Law of Nations, Book 2. chapter 5.. 27.
whereof we now treat, the word Servitude is of a larger extent, both as to
persons, and as to its effects; for as to the persons, not only they that
surrender themselves to the will of the Conqueror, or that oblige themselves
by promise so to do, but all persons whatsoever that are taken in a solemn War,
as soon as they shall be brought within our Garrisons, are altogether accounted
Captives or Slaves, as Pomponius has well observed. Neither is it to any
purpose to plead, that they never bare Arms against us, nor declared themselves
Enemies by any Hostile Act, seeing that in this case, Par est omnium fortuna;
Every man's condition is alike: yea, even the condition of those, who by mere
fate happen to be found in the Enemies Territories, at such time as the War
unexspectedly brake forth. Lib. 2.
Polybius speaking of Captives taken in actual Arms, puts the Question thus,
Quid patiendum est his ut justa supplicia pendant? What must these men suffer
that their punishment may be just? If any man say they may be sold with their
Wives and Children, he answers, At haec belli lege etiam illis ferenda sunt,
qui nihil impii commiserunt; But so, says he, may they be by the Law of Arms,
who never did us hurt. Philo notes the very same where he says, That many good
men lose their natural liberty, by occasions that are involuntary, and merely
accidental. Dion Prusaeenses recounting the several ways whereby a man may get
Dominion, assigns this as the third, When a man has taken a Prisoner in time
of War, that never did any act of hostility, and by that means makes him his
slave: Oppianus de piscatu l. 2.
So Children being taken in War may be led away and made slaves. Servius upon
the first of Virgils Aeneads speaking of Hesione the Daughter of Laomedon, whom
Hercules slew as he was going out of Troy, says, That she was taken Prisoner
by the Law of Arms, and given to Telemon, Hercules his companion. And in
another place he tells us, That the Grecians refused to deliver her back to the
Trojans, saying, she was a Prisoner of War.

II. Yea and there posterity.
Neither are the persons of Men and Women only, thus taken made slaves, but
their posterity for ever; for whosoever is born of a Woman after her Captivity,
is a slave born; for, Partus sequetur ventrem; The Child will follow the
condition of the Mother. Martianus accounts all those for slaves by the Law of
Nations, who are born of Bond-women. And Tacitus speaking of the Wife of
Arminius a German Prince, who had been taken Prisoner by Germanicus, says,
That she had Vtrum servitio subjectum; meaning, that whatsoever Children were
born of her were bondslaves.

III. Whatsoever is done unto such is unpunishable.
The effects and consequences of this Right are infinite so that there is
nothing so unlawful but the Lord may do it to his slave, as Seneca the Father
notes 1. Controv. 5.
, there are no Torments but what may with impunity be imposed on them, nothing
to be done but what they may be forced to do by all manner of rigor and
severity; so that all kinds of cruelty may by the Law of Nations, without
control or appeal be exercised upon Captives, were it not that this license is
somewhat restrained by the Civil Law. It is universally indulged by all
Nations, to the Lord to have power of life and death over his slave, says
Cajus the Lawyer; but he tells us withal, That the Roman Laws did limit
otherwise unbridled power within their own Territories. Quid non iustum Domino
in servum? What may not the Lord do unto his slaves, says Donatus upon
Terence? yea, Andr. Act 1. Scen. 1.
not only the person, but all that is taken with him are lawful prize, Ipse
servus qui in potestate alterius est, nihil suum potest habere; He that is a
slave, says Justinian, Libro omnem virum bonum liberum esse-
and under the power of another, can have right to nothing that was his before.
So likewise Philo, He that is a Captive loses his right to all other things,
no less than the power over himself.

IV. Even the things incorporeal of the slave are transferred to the Lord.
Hence then, their Opinion may be confuted, or at least restrained, who hold
that things incorporeal cannot by the Law of Arms be acquired. Lib. 6. cap. 9.
2.
Val. Maximus records it of Scipio Nasica, That whereas being Consul he was
taken prisoner by the Carthaginians at Lipara, and so by the Right of War had
lost all; yet fortune afterward smiling upon him, he recovered all, and was
again created Consul. It is true, that primarily, and by it self, things
incorporeal cannot by War be gained, but they may be lost as to the person
whose they formerly were. But yet we must here except all things that do
proceed from some singular propriety in the person taken, which by no means can
be alienated, as the right of a Father to his Son, for such Rights, if they do
not remain with the person are altogether extinct.

V. The reason why this Instituted.
Now all this unlimited Power is by the Law of Nations granted for no other
Cause than that the Conqueror being allured by so many advantages might be
willing to forbear that utmost cruelty which they may lawfully use by killing
their Captives, either in the heat of fight, or afterward in cold blood. The
name of servant, as Pomponius tells us, did at first arise from the custom of
Generals who sold their Captives, and thereby preserved them from being slain;
(Servi quasi servati:) That they may be the more willing to forbear, I say, for
it is no bargain or agreement, whereby they stand obliged to save them, if we
respect the Law of Nations; but a persuasive argument drawn from profit, it
being far more beneficial to the Conqueror to sell his Prisoner then to kill
him. And therefore he has the same power to transfer his Right in his Captive
to another, as he has to assign over unto others the Right and property he
has in any of his own Goods or Chattels. This Power is also extended to the
Children that are born after Captivity, because if the Conqueror had used his
power to the utmost, they had not been born. From whence it follows, That the
Child that is born before that Captivity, in case he be not taken Prisoner,
remains free. Therefore by the Law of Nations, the Children born of such
Captives follow the Mothers condition, because their Chastity is not provided
for by any Law, nor is there any strait guard kept upon them; and therefore no
presumption how great soever is sufficient to prove who is the Father. And thus
is that of Vlpian to be understood, Lex Naturae haec est, ut qui nascitur, sine
legitimo matrimonio matrem sequatur; The Law of Nature is this, That he that is
born without lawful marriage, should follow the condition of the Mother: that
is, General custom grounded on some Natural Reason has molded this into a Law
( See second Book, chapter 13.. 26.
abusively sometimes so taken, as we have already elsewhere shown) they that are
born out of wedlock should retain the name and quality of the Mother, and not
of the Father, because of the certainty of the one, and the uncertainty of the
other. But that this unlimited Power over Captives was not introduced by the
general consent of Nations in vain, we may collect from the usual practice of
Civil Wars, wherein all Prisoners are commonly put to the sword, because they
cannot be sold for slaves, Lib. Hist. secundo and tertio.
which was well observed by Plutarch in the life of Otho; and by Tacitus, who
speaking of the Captives taken at Cremona, says, Irritam praedam militibus
fecerat consensus Italiae; That it was agreed throughout all Italy, that no
quarter should be given: whereby no booty came to the Soldiers by the sale of
Prisoners. Moreover, whether the Prisoners taken should belong to the people,
or to them that take them, must, by what has been said of the spoil, be
determined. For the Law of Nations has in this case equalled the condition of
men with goods: So Cajus the Lawyer, Those things that are taken from the Enemy
are by the Law of Nations theirs that take them; so that even such as were free
men are by this Law reduced into bondage.

VI. Whether such as are taken may fly.
Neither can I concur in Opinion with those Divines who hold, That Captives
taken in an unjust War, or such as are born of them, are obliged in conscience
not to make their escape, unless it be to their own Garrisons, for herein I
believe they err; surely in this lies the difference, if they can fly and make
it good to their own Garrisons, whilst the War lasts, See Chap. 9th of this
Book.. 5, 6.

Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 7. c. 28.


by the Right of Postliminy they recover their liberty, and all things
consequent to it. Of M. Sergius Pliny reports, that being twice taken by
Hanibal, he both times made his escape out of his chains. But in case they make
their escape to others, or unto their own Country after the Peace made, being
re-demanded they are to be delivered. But yet from hence it follows not, that
the Captives themselves are bound in conscience to return; for there are many
Laws which bind only as to the outward judgment, which do not at all restrain
the conscience; and such are these of War whereof we now discourse: neither is
it much to the purpose to say, that the very nature of Dominion does of it self
induce such an obligation; because there being many kinds of Dominion, possible
it is, that such there are as are of force only in humane judgment, and so
long only as the coercive Power lasts, which is frequently seen in other kinds
of Right. Such in some sort also is that Law that makes void some Testaments,
because, forsooth, they want some formalities which the Civil Law requires;
whereas the more probable Opinion is, that what is bequeathed by such a
Testament, may with a good conscience be retained, so long (at least) as
nothing appears to contradict it. And not much different is his Right, who has
according to the Civil Laws unfaithfully prescribed to another Estate; for by
the judgment of those Laws, even this man's Title shall be defended, until it
be made void by another sentence of the same Law. And thus is that riddle of
Aristotle's resolved, Is it not just (says he) that every man should enjoy his
own, Lib. 2. de cavillat. c. 5.
but whatsoever the Judge has according to his understanding decreed, is by
Law confirmed (though in it self it be fa^se) therefore will the same thing be
both just and unjust. But in this question of ours, there is no cause
imaginable why the Nations should respect any other Right than that which is
external, and merely humane. For the Right of laying claim to a Captive, of
forcing him, of binding him, and possessing what he has, or can do, is of it
self motive sufficient to persuade the Conquerours, that it is a greater
advantage to them to keep them alive than to kill them. But in case this cannot
move the Conquerours, surely, no obligation that can be laid upon the
conscience can do it, which notwithstanding he may impose, by requiring either
his verbal or sacramental engagement, if he think it necessary: Yet if the
Captive can make an escape, and carry with him some Goods, Bemb. lib. 10.
his Conscience cannot be charged with theft, so as he carry away nothing but
what was before his own. In such Laws as arise not out of natural equity, but
are purposely made to avoid a greater mischief, we must not rashly admit of
such an interpretation, as makes that act to be sinful, which is otherwise
lawful. Nihil interest quomodo captivus reversus est, utrum dimissus,
an vi, aut fallacia potestatem hostium evaserit; It matters not much (says
Florentinus) which way a Captive gets loose from his enemy, whether he be
freely dismissed, or make his escape either by force or fallacy. Because the
right of holding a man Captive is so a Right, that in another sense, it is for
the most part an injury; for which reason Paulus the Lawyer calls it, a Right
as to some certain effects; but an injury as to the intrinsic nature of the
thing it self. From whence this also appears, That a man being taken in an
unjust War, and brought within the Power of the Enemy, cannot in his conscience
be guilty of theft, though he do, as I said before, carry away with him
somewhat that was his own; or though not his own, yet that is due unto him as
the reward of his labor: If at least he have reserved any thing besides his
sustenance, provided that he himself owe nothing unto either his Lord, or him
from whom his Lord claims his Right unto him. Pertinent hereunto are those
Testimonies of Irenaeus and Tertullian, concerning the departure of the
Israelites out of Egypt, and their carrying away their Goods with them; See
the second Book, seventh Chap.. 2.
which fact Irenaeus seems to defend by the Law of Nature, as being but the
recompense of so many years hard labor: for says he, The Egyptians were
indebted unto the Hebrews, not only for their Goods, but for their lives.
Tertullian also handling the same subject speaks thus, The Egyptians demand
of the Hebrews their vessels of Gold and Silver; Lib. 2. Cont. Marcion.
the Hebrews on the other side allege, That the Egyptians owed them much more
as due unto them for their long and hard service. Thus also Philo pleads for
his own Country men, Vita Mosis.
That they spoiled not the Egyptians out of Covetousness, but first as the
reward of their long labor, and then as a gentle mulct or punishment, far
inferior to their great oppression. Neither is it much to the purpose to say,
that such an escape and taking away of Goods is usually severely punished, if
the Prisoner be apprehended; because such, and far greater acts of injustice
are usually done by men of Power against their Inferiors, Non quia aequa sunt,
sed quia ipsis expedit; Not because they are just and equitable, but because
they are for themselves expedient. Now whereas some Canons do prohibit any man
from persuading any servant to forsake his Masters service: I answer, Synod.
Gangr. See second Book, 5. chap. toward the end.
That in case such prohibition be referred to such Servants, as are deservedly
punished with the loss of their Liberty, or have by some voluntary covenant or
bargain made themselves servants, then it is just: but in case it be referred
to such as are made slaves by the misfortune of an unjust War, or to such as
are born of them; it only argues, that Christians ought to persuade Christians
to Patience and Sufferance, rather than to such courses, which though lawful,
yet may give offense unto others. In like manner, are those admonitions of the
Apostles to Servants to be understood, unless we had rather say, that those
admonitions seem only to persuade Servants to strict obedience whilst they do
serve; which indeed is but consonant to Natural Equity, for their labor is but
equivalent to their sustenance.

VII. Whether they may resist their Lords.
But whereas the same Divines hold, That a Captive ought not to resist his Lord
in the execution of that external Power that he has over him without
injustice; therein I agree with them. But yet between those things which before
I denied, and this that I here assert, there is this manifest difference, That
external Right which a Lord has over his Slave, which consists not in a bare
license of doing what he pleases to him, but in the protection of the Laws for
doing it, were altogether vain; if on the other side it were lawful to resist
it. For if it were lawful for a Servant by force to resist his Lord or Master,
it would be lawful for the same Servant to resist the Magistrate that defends
his Master, seeing that it is from the Law of Nations that that Magistrate
ought to defend the Lord in that Right, and in the exercise of it. This Right
therefore is like unto that which we nave elsewhere granted unto the Supreme
Magistrate in every City, whom forceably to resist is unlawful, nay, impious.
And therefore St Augustine unites these two Powers, saying, That Subjects
should so bear with their Princes, and Servants with their Masters, that in the
exercise of their patience they may preserve their temporal estates, and hope
after eternal.

VIII. This not in force in all Nations.
But this also we must observe, That even this Law of Nations as to Captives
has not at all times, nor amongst all Nations been received; though the Roman
Lawyers are pleased so to understand it, taking perhaps the Customs of those
Countries which were then most known to them, for the Universal Custom of all
Nations. Among the Hebrews (who did at little mix their Customs with those of
other Nations, as they did themselves in Marriages) there were places of refuge
for Slaves, Deuteronomy. 23.15.
namely, for such as became such by fate or misfortune, rather than by any
fault of their own; whereupon seems to be grounded that privilege which among
the Francks is given unto Slaves, to proclaim themselves at Liberty, Bod. de
rep. l. 1. c. 5.
which is also now indulged, not only to such as are taken in the War, but to
all other Slaves whatsoever.

IX. Nor now amongst Christians, and what is introduced in its stead.
But even among Christians it is universally agreed, That being at War amongst
themselves, they that are taken Prisoners are not made Slaves so as to sell
them, or to enforce them to servile offices, or to impose upon them such things
as they usually do on Slaves: And there is good reason for it, for they either
are, or at least should be better instructed in the Principles of Christian
Charity, than not to abstain from the shedding the blood of those whom
misfortune only has made miserable, unless it be granted them, that they may
be permitted to use a little less cruelty. It is a Custom generally received
among Nations of the same Religion, That what Goods or Chattels soever are
taken in War, are lawful prize; And for men taken in War, they neither make
them Slaves, nor kill them in cold blood, as Gregoras testifies. Lib. 4.
Boerius also makes mention of this Custom, whereunto he adds, That it is
observed in France, in England, and in Spain, That in case a Duke, a Baron, or
an Earl be taken in War, they are not their Prisoners that take them, but the
Prince's that maintains the War. And this at least (though but a small matter)
has Christian Religion brought to perfection, Plat. de rep. lib. 5.
which Socrates attempted to have done among the Grecians but could not. The
same Custom which Christians observe among themselves, do the Mahumetans
likewise observe among themselves; yet notwithstanding even among Christians
this custom still remains entire, That such as are taken in the Wars are kept
in safe custody till their ransom be paid, which commonly is set as the
Conqueror pleases, unless otherwise agreed before hand: which Right of
keeping Prisoners is usually granted to those that take them, unless they be
persons of honor, who are always kept and maintained at the charge of the
Commonwealth, or of the Supreme Magistrate, according to the Custom of Nations.

CHAP. VIII. Of Empire over the Vanquished in War.
I. That a Civil Empire, whether in a King or a people, may be acquired by War,
and what the effects are of such an acquisition. II. Such an Empire may be
gained over a people as is merely despotical, and then they cease to be a City.
III. Sometimes a mixed Government is acquired. IV. Sometimes even the
incorporeal things of the people may be acquired by War, where also is handled
the Bond given by the Thessalians to the Thebans, forgiven by Alexander.
I. That the Civil Empire, as well in a King as people, may be gained by War.
IT is no marvel that he who can bring into subjection every particular person,
can also subdue the Body Politic, whether it be a City, or part of a City, and
whether that subjection be merely civil, or merely despotical, or mixed. This
Argument we shall find used by Seneca in that Controversy which is de
Olynthio, where he brings in one pleading thus, He is my Slave whom I bought by
the right of War; and very expedient it is for you, O ye Athenians, not only to
acknowledge my Title to be just, but to defend it; otherwise notwithstanding
all your great Conquests, your Empire also must be confined within your ancient
Territories. Wherefore Tertullian acknowledges, That Empires are gained by
Arms, but enlarged by Conquests. So likewise Quintilian, Kingdoms, Nations,
and the Bounds of Cities and Countries, are determined by the Rights of War.
Alexander in Curtius claims by this Right, saying, That Laws are usually given
by the Conqueror, and received by the Conquered. Thus Minio in his Oration to
the Romans, Live. l. 35.
Why do ye Romans send every year your Praetor with the Ensigns of your Empire,
the Rods and Axes into Syracuse, and other the Grecian Cities in Sicily; for
which ye can give no other reason but this, That having conquered them by your
Arms, you impose upon them what Laws you please. De Bello Gallic.
Ariovistus in Caesar's Commentaries says, That by the Law of Arms, the
Conqueror may govern the Conquered in what manner he pleases; and that the
custom of the Romans was to govern those Cities which they had by their Arms
subdued, not after other men's prescriptions, but according to their own will
and pleasure. Justine likewise out of Trogus tells us, That before Ninus, Lib.
1.
Princes that made War, sought not Empire but Glory; and therefore were
contented with the honor of the Victory, but sought not to enlarge their
Kingdoms: and that this Ninus was the first that ever incroached upon another
man's dominions, and from him it became a custom. Bocchus in Salust pleads, That
he took up Arms only to defend himself; for that part of Numidia, from whence
he had driven Jugurtha, was made his by the Law of Arms. But a Right may be
gained by a Conqueror, either so far only as it was in the King or some other
Governor; and then he succeeds in his Right only, and no farther. So Alexander
after the Battle at Gaugamela was saluted King of Asia. And the Romans also
claimed unto themselves all that was Syphax's by the Right of War. But when the
Huns pleaded to the Romans, That the Country of the Gepidae was theirs, because
they had taken their King Prisoner: the Romans denied it, because the Gepidae
were governed by a Prince rather than by a King; for that the Kingdom was not
Patrimonial. And therefore they conclude, That he could not lose more than what
was his own. Or it may also be gained, as it is in the people; and then the
Conqueror has as much power to alienate it as the people had; and thus do
some Kingdoms become Patrimonial, as I have elsewhere said. Book 1. Chapter 3,
Sect. 2.
Thus the Persians in Menander plead for the Territories of the City Daras,
For, say they, since the City Daras it self is by the Right of War subdued by
us, it is but reasonable that what belonged to that City should likewise be
ours. Procop. Vand. 2.
So Belisarius having conquered the Vandals, would have had Lilybaeum in Sicily
yielded up to the Romans; because, as they pretended, the Goths had before
given it to the Vandals, which the Goths denied.

II. Such an Empire may be gained over the people as is merely despotical.
Or an Empire may be yet more absolutely gained. For such a Government may by
War be gained, as that which was before a City, may cease to be any more a
City, but be rather reduced (as it were) into a Family; which may be done
either by adding it unto another City, as Kingdoms were by the Romans annexed
to their Empire as Provinces; or by annexing it to no other City, (but by
destroying its Charter, and nulling the Government thereof:) As for example,
When a King maintaining the War at his own proper charge, does so enslave the
people, that in his Government over them he minds his own private gain and
interest only, but neither their profit nor safety; which kind of Government is
Despotical, and not Civil. Aristotle thus distinguished them, Of Empire, De
Repub. lib. 7.
says he, some are altogether fitted to the profit of the Prince, others for
the profit and safety of the Subjects; this is proper to Monarchy, that to
Tyranny. Now the people that are held under this kind of Government, are no
longer Citizens, but a multitude of Servants in a great Family. It was well
said of Anaxandrida, -- Servorum nulla est usquam Civitas. A multitude of
Slaves can never constitute a City. Which distinction is allowed of by Tacitus,
Annal. lib. 12.
He did not carry himself, says he, in his Government as a Lord over his
Slaves, but as being chief among his Fellow Citizens. So Xenophon of Agesilaus,
What Cities soever he reduced under his obedience, he made free by exempting
them from the slavery which Captives pay unto their Lord, and by contenting
himself with that obedience that a free people do willingly yield unto their
natural Prince.

III. A mixed Government is sometimes got by War.
Whence we may understand the nature of a mixed Monarchy, that is, between that
which is Despotical, and that which is Civil; as namely, when our servitude is
mixed with some kind of personal liberty. Thus we read, that to some people the
use of Arms are forbidden by the Conqueror, and that no Iron shall be wrought
into any thing, but such Instruments only as are necessary for ploughing the
Earth, and such like. So some people being conquered, are enforced to change
their language, others to alter the whole course of their lives, and the like.

IV. That even the incorporeal things of the people, may be by a War gained.
Now as whatsoever any particular Prisoner had when he was taken, was by the
Law of Arms his or theirs that took him; so whatsoever belongs to the people in
general is his or theirs that subdue them, if they will take it. For what Livy
says of such as surrender themselves, namely, All are given up to the
Conqueror; so that what he will take to himself, and wherein and how far forth
he will punish the Conquered, is wholly in his own power. The very same in a
Solemn War may be said of those that are conquered. Thus Polybius, They that
yield themselves up to the Romans, See Book 1. Chap. 4, Sect. 8. Book 2. Chapter 5.
Sect. 31. Book 3. Chapter 5. Sect. 2. and Chapter 20. Sect. 49. Vid. Chapter 7. Sect. 8.
do yield up in the first place their Country, and what Towns and Cities soever
are therein, together with all their Men and Women that are in them; then all
their Rivers and Ports, and generally all things sacred and religious: so that
the Romans are Lords of all, and they that thus surrender themselves have
nothing left. And the self same Right has the Conqueror over those that are
actually conquered in a solemn War. For dedition does but voluntarily yield up
that which otherwise would be taken away by force. Hannibal encourages his
Soldiers, being ready for Battle, with this Argument, Whatsoever the Romans
have by so many Conquests got and heaped up, shall together with themselves be
ours after the Victory. Thus all that Mithridates had by force of Arms added
to his own, Pompey by subduing him annexed to the Roman Empire; wherefore even
those incorporeal Right which formerly belonged to the whole Body of the
people, are now by the Law of Arms the Conquerours, so far forth as he
pleases. Thus Alba being subdued, what Rights soever the Albans enjoyed were
claimed by the Romans. Whence it follows, That the Thessalians stood fully
discharged of the hundred Talents for which they stood bound to the Thebans,
when Alexander the Great conquering the Thebans, had by the Right of Conquest
forgiven the Debt. Neither is that altogether true that Quintilian urges in
the defense of the Thebans, namely, That that only is the Conquerours which he
can lay hold on. But that Right which is incorporeal cannot be apprehended by
any man's hand; and again, That the condition of an Heir is one thing, and that
of a Conqueror is another; because to the Heir may pass the Right, but to the
Conqueror the thing: For he that is Master of the persons, is also Master of
the Estate, and of all the rights belonging to the persons. He that is himself
possessed as a Slave, cannot be said to possess any thing to himself; neither can
he have any thing in his power to dispose of, who has no power to dispose of
himself: yea, though the Conqueror do grant unto the conquered Jus Civitatis,
The Right of being a City; yet may he take away and reserve to himself
whatsoever he pleases out of what was the Cities. It is in his own power to
prescribe what bounds he will to his own bounty. Thus Caesar, in imitation of
that Fact of Alexander's to the Thessalians, forgave a very great Debt to the
Dyrrhachines, which they owed to another City of the adverse part. But here it
might have been objected, That that War of Caesar's was not of the same kind
with that concerning which this Law of Nations was instituted. So also we read
that Mark Anthony commanded the Tyrians to restore unto the Jews what belonged
unto them, as not being granted unto them by the Roman Senate, and whereof they
were possessed before the War made with Cassius; as Josephus relates it.

CHAP. IX. Of the Right of those that return out of Captivity.
I. The original of the word Postliminium. II. In what places this Right takes
place. III. By this Right of Postliminy, some things are said to return, and
some things to be received. IV. This Right appertains both to War and Peace,
and what, if in the articles of Peace nothing be said. V. When a freeman during
the War, may return and be admitted by this Right. VI. What Rights he may
receive, and what he may not. VII. All Rights are recoverable from him. VIII.
Why they that yield themselves are not admitted to this Right of Postliminy.
IX. When a people may obtain this Right. X. In those that return by Postliminy,
what things are required by the Civil Law. XI. How servants are received by
Postliminy, how fugitives; and how they are received that are ^edeemed. XII.
Whether a people formerly subjected, may recover their freedom by Postliminy.
XIII. That Lands may be received by Postliminy. XIV. What difference was
anciently made between things moveable. XV. What the Law now determines
concerning things moveable. XVI. What things may be received, that need not
this Right of Post^iminy. XVII. That the Civil Law may change somethings among
their own subjects. XVIII. How Postliminy was observed between those that were
not Enemies. XIX. When this Right may be now in force.
I. Postliminium what it is.
THERE are none of our modern Lawyers, who have written any thing solidly,
either concerning things taken from the Enemy, or concerning the Rights due
unto them, who having been taken Prisoners, yet have either by favor, force,
or fraud, escaped and got home again. The Ancient Romans have handled this
Question somewhat more accurately, but yet oft-times so confusedly, that the
Reader cannot distinguish between what is due by the Roman Civil Law, and what
is due by the Law of Nations. Concerning the word Postliminium, that opinion of
Servius is to be exploded, who held, that the latter part of the word signified
nothing. That of Scaevola pleases better, who makes it a compound word, of
post which signifies a return, or coming from beyond, and Limen, or Limes,
which s^gnifies properly the threshold of an House, or the utmost bounds or
frontiers of a Country: for Limen and Limes, though they differ no less in
flection, than in termination, as Materia and Materies; yet are they both
derived from that old Verb Limo, which signifies transverse or overthwart,
Aenead. l. 12. Eunuch.
as Servius upon Virgil, and Donatus upon Terence observe; from whence Limes
oculis aliquem intueri, is, to look a squint upon a man: Though by the latter
use of the word, Limen be referred to things private, and Limes to things
public, as to the bounds or borders of Kingdoms. For, as Isidore notes, all
oblique or cross-ways, the Ancients called Lima: from whence, the thresholds of
doors over which we go in and out, are called Limina ostiorum. So the Ancients
when they banished any man, were said eliminare, to thrust him beyond their
marches; and banishment they called Eliminium, a thrusting out of their bounds
and Territories.

II.
Postliminy therefore is a Right that arises unto a man that was a Captive
upon his return from Captivity; that is, upon his entering within the Frontiers
of his own Country. So Pomponius, He is said to be returned out of Captivity
that begins to be within our own Garrisons; or as Paulus says, that enters
within the bounds of our Territories. But by a parity of reason, it is by the
general consent of Nations granted, That the Right of Postliminy takes place,
as soon as the person that was a Captive, or any other thing that is capable of
this Right, shall come within the Guards or Garrisons of our friends and
Associates, as Pomponius speaks; or as Paulus expounds it by way of example, as
soon as he shall enter into any Garrison that belongs unto such a King or
State, as are our friends and companions in the same War. For so indeed are
these words (Friends and Associates) here to be understood, not of any Nation
or King with whom we are at peace, but of such only as are so Confederate with
us that they are parties in the same War, into whose Garrisons whosoever enters
out of Captivity, shall enjoy his former Rights, and be defended upon the
public account. It matters not much whether they that so return are men or
things, or whether they come into our Garrisons, or the Garrisons of our
Associates: But in case they that are taken Captives, shall fly into the
Dominions of our Neighbor King, who though at Peace with us, is not associated
with us in the same War, they shall not change their condition of being
Prisoners; unless it were before so expressly agreed, as it was between the
Romans and the Carthaginians in their second League, That if any of the friends
of the Romans, being taken by the Carthaginians, could escape out of any
peoples Territories that were friends to the Romans, into any of their Ports or
Cities that were Subjects to the Romans, they might enjoy their liberty; Val.
Max. lib. 5. c. 2. 6. Diod. Sic. exc. Leg. n. 3. Plut. Vit. Flaminii.
the like provision being made for the friends of the Carthaginians. And
therefore when some of the Romans, being taken in the second Punick War, were
sold by way of Traffic into Greece; they were not admitted to enjoy this Right
of Postliminy, because the Grecians in that War stood Neuters: and therefore it
was necessary that they should be first ransomed before they could be set at
liberty; yea, and although Flaminius, having conquered King Philip, had set all
the Cities of Greece at liberty, yet would he not take away from their Masters
by force those Roman Captives, which had been formerly sold by the
Carthaginians unto the Grecians; but the Achaians to gratify him for their
liberty, bought Twelve hundred of them who were dispersed though Greece, and
presented them to Flaminius, who received them as a Present of great value. So
did the Rhodians buy the Athenian Captives, Polyb. except. Leg. n. 3.
taken in the War that King Philip made in Greece, and frankly restored them to
the Athenians. And in Homer we read of diverse persons taken in War, that were
sold into such Countries that were in Peace.

III. Some things return, and some are received by the Right of Postliminy.
The Ancient Romans did always account those that were received out of
Captivity as freemen. Gallus Aelius in his first Book of the significations of
Law Terms, says, That he who being free of one City did voluntarily depart to
another, and afterward did return back into that City, whereof he was at the
first made free, was said to be Postliminio receptus; that is, admitted to his
old freedom by that Law, which provides for such as return out of Captivity. As
also in case a servant being taken from us, and carried Captive into our
Enemies Garrison, should afterward return unto us, he may by this Law of
Postliminy place himself under his old Master. So Horses, Mules, and Ships, by
a parity of reason, had the same right of reception as servants. And look what
kind of things do teturn unto us by this right, the very same may return from
us to our Enemies. But the Ancient Roman Lawyers have more discreetly admitted
but of two sorts of Postliminy; as namely, when we either return, or receive
something that is returned.

IV. It is of use as well in Peace as War.
Neither may we altogether reject that of Trophonius; namely that this Right of
returning out of Captivity into Freedom, may be of use as well in Peace as War,
though in a little different sense than as Pomponius expresses it. This Right
of Postliminy in Peace, appertains unto those who were not conquered in War by
force of Arms; but were through misfortune surprised within the Enemies
Territories, when the War unexpectedly brake forth. But to other Captives there
belongs no such Right in times of Peace, unless it be otherwise agreed on by
both parties at the making of the Peace, as it was at the conclusion of the War
between Jonathan and Bacchides recorded by Josephus. Ant. l. 13. c. 2.
Polybius among other Articles of the Peace concluded and agreed on between
King Philip and Antiochus, recites this, That all Prisoners taken on either
side (the Aetolians only excepted) should be set at liberty. Thus we read that
Probus made Peace with the Vandals and Burgundians, upon this condition, That
all the prey they had taken, together with the Prisoners should be restored.
Nay sometimes it is agreed, That not only those Prisoners that belong to
private men, but those that belong to the Commonwealth are to be discharged, as
Thucydides testifies. Now this is plainly evinced, as well by the subsequent
reason, as by its opposite member, The Peace was concluded, and the Prisoners
released, for, says Zonaras, so it was agreed. It was then by virtue of the
agreement, and not simply by their making of Peace, that their Captives were
dismissed. So Pomponius, If the Captive concerning whom it was agreed in the
Articles of the Peace, that he might return home, shall notwithstanding choose
to remain with the Enemy, he shall not afterward claim this right of
Postliminy. So also Paulus, If a Prisoner taken in War when the Peace is made,
shall fly away and come home, he shall be made to return back to him, who in
the War took him Prisoner; because in the Articles of Peace it was not
mentioned, that the Prisoners should be released. Why the Romans neglected
their Citizens taken Prisoners.
Now the reason why the Romans seemed so to neglect their Prisoners, is because
they would have them to place all their hopes of returning back in their
valor, rather than in a Peace. For thus does Livy testify of them, That Rome
was a City, that of old was in Captivos minime indulgens, very regardless of
their Captives. But this reason being proper only to the Romans, could not of
it self constitute the Law of Nations; it might notwithstanding serve as one
cause amongst others, for which the Romans did the more willingly embrace that
Law which was before introduced by other Nations. But a truer reason may be
this, because all Princes and States making War would willingly be believed
that there Cause was just; and on the contrary, that they that took Arms
against them did the wrong. Now whilst both parties are thus persuaded, it
would not be safe for any other Prince or State that would live in peace to
judge between them; therefore they conclude it better to sit still, and to
esteem whatsoever should be done in that War to be just, and so the Prisoners
on either side taken in actual Arms to be lawfully taken. But now against
those Prisoners, that have been by misfortune surprised through the sudden
eruption of the War, no such thing can be alleged; for they have neither
advised nor attempted any ^urt to us. Nevertheless to weaken the power of the
enemy, because possible it is that they might be enticed to injure us, it has
been thought not unjust to detain them during the War; but the War being ended,
there can be nothing alleged why they should not be released: and therefore it
is generally consented unto by all Nations, That such Prisoners, when the Peace
is made, should be enlarged, as being confessed by both parties innocent. But as
to other Prisoners, every man that usurps a Right over them, is willing that he
should be believed that he has justly gained them, unless by some preceding
Agreements he be limited. And for this Cause neither Captives nor any thing
else taken in War, is to be restored in Peace, unless it be so expressed in the
Articles of Peace, because the Conqueror would be thought to have a just Title
to them, which to contradict, were to renew the War: and therefore Totilas in
Procopius charges Pelagius, who was sent unto him from the Romans, that he
should not mention the releasing of the Sicilian Captives; urging that it was
not equitable that the Romans should redeliver their Fellow Soldiers to their
old Masters. Wherefore the Agreement brought by Quintilian in the behalf of the
Th^bans, is rather witty than solid, namely, That Prisoners it they can make
their escape into their own Country, the War being ended, are to be reckoned as
Freemen; because what is gotten by force, is no longer ours than we can keep it
by force. Concerning those that make their escapes after the Peace is
concluded, we have hitherto treated: now in the time of War they are said to
return by Postliminy to their former freedom, who were free before they were
taken Captives in the War; but they are said to be received, who before were
not free, as Servants and other things.

V. The War lasting, when a Freeman may be said to return.
He that was a Freeman returns so by this Right, in case he return to this
purpose, That he may follow the Fortune of that City whereunto he returns, as
Trophoninus delivers it; because, as the Servant that is to be made free, ought
first to be sui juris, of and for himself, that so his act may be voluntary: so
he that would be admitted as a Citizen after captivity, must resolve to
incorporate himself with that City, and become one with it, or as a Member of
it. Moreover, Whether the Captive be retaken by force of Arms, or whether he
have made his escape by fraud, it is all one, as Florentinus observes; and the
Case is the same if he be freely dismissed by the Enemy. But what if he be sold
by way of Contract to another, and that he thence escape into his own Country?
This Question is handled by Seneca in his Controversy concerning the
Olynthians, whom Parrhasius bought. For when the Decree was past by the
Athenians, whereby it was ordained, That the Olynthians should be free, he made
this doubt, Whether by that Decree it was meant that they might be made free;
or that they were adjudged thereby to be free: which latter opinion was the
truest. Thus Childubius in Procopius pleaded, That being returned into his own
Country, he was by the Law thenceforth a free man.

VI. What Rights he may receive, and what not.
But a Freeman being returned home, does not only recover his own freedom, but
all things else that were his in any Nation that is at peace, whether they are
things corporeal or incorporeal; because, though people that are at peace, as
they do not enquire into the justness of the War, but take every thing that is
done to the Captive to be just: so when they see the Captive to be at liberty,
they dispute not the manner how, but take it as granted that he was released
justly, whereby they show themselves indifferent to both parties. Wherefore he
that by the Law of Arms is possessed of a Captive, has not an absolute and
indubitable Right unto all things that belong to him. For it is possible that
his right may surcease without or against his will, that if the Prisoner can
make his escape, and return into his own Country; for then just so as he loses
his right to the Man, does he lose his title to those Goods which were his. But
what if those Goods be alienated, Whether shall he that derived his title to
them from him who at that time was by the right of War the Owner of them, be
defended by the Law of Nations, or shall the same thing so alienated be
recovered? Those Goods, I mean, that are extant among such people as stand
Neuters in the War. Here then we are to distinguish between such things as may
return by Postliminy, and such as are incapable of this right; the difference
whereof we shall presently explain, That the former may appear to be alienated
during their Cause only, and under this Condition, That the person be still
held in custody: these latter, simply and absolutely. By things alienated, I
understand even those things that are given or received.

VII. All Rights against him are restored.
As he that returns home has a Right unto all things by the Law, that were his
before he was taken; so are the Laws in force against him as fully as if he had
never been under the power of the Enemy.

VIII. Why they that yield themselves are not capable of (...) Right.
But unto this Rule, as it concerns such as are Freemen, Paulus allows of this
exception, Postliminio carent, qui Armis victi hostibus se dederant; They that
being conquered by Arms had yielded themselves up to the will of their enemies,
have no benefit by their return home. The reason whereof is, Because all
agreements with enemies are, by the Law of Nations, to be observed, as we shall
show anon. Neither is this Right of Postliminy to be admitted against those
agreements; and therefore those Romans in Gellius, Lib. 7. (...).
who being taken by the Carthaginians, and sent back to Rome to procure
exchanges, did acknowledge, That the Right of Postliminy was not due unto them,
because they were bound by Oath to return. From wh^nce also it is rightly
observed by Paulus, That during the time of a truce there is no Right claimed
by Postliminy; yet Modestinus is of opinion, That if they that delivered
themselves up to their enemies were bound by no Covenant or Promise made, they
might be admitted to their freedom by Postliminy.

IX. How a people may obtain this Right.
That which has been said of particular persons, may also be said of Cities
and people, That if they were free they may recover their freedom. If the power
of their Friends and Associates be able by fo^ce of A^ms to release them from
the power of their enemies. But if the very Body of the people that constituted
that City be dissolved, I believe that they that succeed are not to be
accounted the same people; neither are those things that formerly belonged to
that City to be restored unto them by this Right of Postliminy, according to
the Right of Nations; because a Nation, like a Ship, by the dissolution of its
parts, does absolutely perish: for that its whole Nature consists in the
perpetual Conjunction of all its M^mbers. Wherefore it was not the same City of
Saguntum, though the place where it formerly stood were restored unto the
ancient Inhabitants eight years after its dissolution. Neither was Thebes the
same City after that Alexander had sold the Citizens for Slaves: whence it
follows, That what the Thessalians owed unto the Thebans before such
dissolution, could not justly be claimed by those Thebans by Postliminy; and
that for a double reason, First, Because they were then a new people; secondly,
Because Alexander whilst he was Lord over them, had a power to alienate that
Right, and accordingly had done it: and lastly, A Debt is not to be reckoned
among those things which return by Postliminy. Not much unlike to what we have
said concerning Cities, is that which the ancient Roman Laws concluded of
Marriages, namely, That they were by captivity dissolved, neither could they be
restored by postliminy, but must be redintigrated by the first consent of both
parties. But it is otherwise among Christians, witness that of Pope Leo unto
Nicetas, Bishop of Aquileia concerning such Marriages, namely, That as in
Slaves or Fields, or even in Houses and Possessions, the right and title of
them is preserved for those that are Captives, in case they shall return out of
captivity; so also in Wedlock, if either party be married to another, let them
be reformed. See what Hincmar has written to this purpose in his Tract
concerning the Divorce of Lotharius and Terberga, to the thirteenth
Interrogatory; and the Answer of Pope Stephen, in the second Tome and
nineteenth Chapter of the Councils of France.

X. To those that return, what Rights arise from the Civil Law.
By what has been already said, it is no hard matter to understand what manner
of right by the Law of Nations, Postliminy gives to free men. Moreover, this
very same right may by the Civil Law, so far as it belongs to things agitated
within the City, be both restrained by adding some exceptions or conditions,
and also enlarged unto other profits and advantages, as occasion serves. As by
the Roman Civil Law Fugitives are exempted out of the number of those that were
capable of this right; so were also the Sons of a Family, over whom the Father
was conceived not to have lost that Paternal power and authority which was
peculiar to the Romans; and that for this reason, as Paulus observes, Because
to Roman Parents their Military Discipline was ever dearer than their own
Children; whereunto agrees that which Cicero records of Manlius, That he
strictly upheld the Discipline of the Roman Empire, though to his own grief,
that so he might the better provide for the safety of the City, wherein was
also bound up his own; which made him prefer the Sovereign Right of Majesty,
which was then in himself, before the bonds of Nature, or the tenderness of a
Father toward his own Son. Again, some diminution of this Right of Postliminy,
is that which was ordained, first, by the Athenians, and afterward by the
Romans, namely, Vt qui redemptus est ab hostibus, Redemptori serviat donec
pretium reddiderit; That he that was redeemed, should serve his Redeemer until
he should have repaid his ransom. But this was made in favor to the poor
Captives, lest if there should be no provision made for the recovery of the
money so paid, many Prisoners should have been left in perpetual slavery among
their enemies. But yet even this very slavery was many ways mitigated by the
Roman Laws, and at length by the last Law of Justinian, it was limited to five
years service; neither could the money paid for his redemption be recoverable
after the death of the party redeemed. So also by any Contract of Marriage
between the person redeemed, and the person redeeming, it was adjudged to be
forgiven. So if it were a Woman that was redeemed, if the Redeemer did
prostitute her Body, the ransom was lost. There were many other Laws made
among the Romans in favor to those that would redeem Prisoners, and to punish
their Kinsmen for neglecting them. Again, this Right of Postliminy was by the
Civil Law much enlarged, in that not only those Rights in Postliminy which are
allowed of by the Law of Nations, are granted unto him that so returns; but
generally all things and all Rights are as entirely his, as if he had never
been within the power of the enemy. And this was also the Attick Law: for as we
read in Dion Prusaeensis, A certain man pretending to be the Son of Callias,
who had been taken Prisoner in the Slaughter at Acanthus, and, as he said, been
kept as a Prisoner in Thrace, when he had made his escape to Athens, claimed by
Postliminy his inheritance from those that then had the possession thereof
after his Father; we do not read that any thing was pleaded against his Right,
only it came in issue, Whether he were the Son of Callias, or not. The same
Author likewise relates, That the Messenians after long captivity, at length
returning, received both their liberty and Country. Yea, and those things which
either by usucapion or redemption seemed to be taken away out of the Goods, or
through disuse, to be deserted, are all of them recovered by a Rescissory
Action. For under the Edict of making restitution to Ancestors, he also who is
under the power of Enemies, is comprehended. Nay farther; the Cornelian Law
provides for the Heirs of such as dye in captivity, and conserves all their
Goods as lawfully as if he that returned not, were at that very time when he
was taken, dead. Now were it not for these Civil Laws, without doubt as soon as
any man were taken Prisoner by the enemy, his Goods would presently be theirs
that had them in possession; because, Qui apud hosts est, pro nullo habetur;
He that is under the enemies power is held for none. And then, if he that was
taken should return, he should receive nothing but such things as by the Law of
Nations were due unto him by Postliminy. But that the Goods of a Captive were
confiscate and brought into the Treasury, in case he had no Heir, was a Law
peculiar to the Romans only. Hitherto we have treated of things that return,
now we shall speak of such things as are received by Postliminy.

XI. How Servants are received by Postliminy, how Fugitives, and how they that
are redeemed.
Amongst which, in the first place, are Bondmen and Bondwomen, yea even such
ofttimes as have been alienated, and such as have been set at liberty by the
enemy; because (as it is very well noted by Tryphoninus) it is not just that
his former Master being our Citizen, should be damnified by the Right of an
Enemy. By an Edict of King Theuderick it was ordained, That Servants and
Tenants being taken by the enemy, and returning home, should be restored to
their own Lords, if they were not before bought by some other from the enemy by
way of traffic. But by the wise Gothic Law, a Servant recovered by War was
restored to his Master, he paying unto him that took him the third part of his
just price. But in case the Servant were sold by the Enemy, then was the Lord
to pay the full price for which he was sold with some advantage. Therefore that
a Servant may be capable of reception, it is necessary that his old Master
should be either actually possessed of him, or at least that the Servant be where
he may easily have him, if he so pleases. And therefore whereas in other
things it may suffice, That they are brought within the Bounds of our own
Territories, this is not sufficient in a Servant to receive the right of
Postliminy, unless it be also made known to his Master that he is there. For as
Paulus says, If he lie sculking in Rome, and will not be seen nor known to be
there, he is not yet received by this Law. And as herein Servants differ from
things inanimate, so do they from the case of a Freeman in this, That it is not
required in them to make them capable of being received, that they should
return with an intent to follow the fortune of the City whereunto they return;
for this is required from him only that is to receive his own freedom, and not
of him that is to be received by another. Sabinus.
For every man has a free power to make himself a Member of what City he
pleases, but not of the Right of Dominion. Neither do the Roman Laws exempt
Fugitive Fugitives.
Servants from this right of reception: for even in these may their old Masters
claim their Right, as Paulus notes; lest if we should admit the contrary, it
should prove injurious not to the Servant, who nevertheless is still to remain
a Servant, but to the Master who would want his service. But generally,
concerning such Captives as are redeemed by the valor of Soldiers, that may
be truly said by their Generals, which some would so wrest, as if it were meant
of all things, Receptos eos non captos judicare debemus, and Militem nostrum
defensorem eorum decet esse non dominum; We are to esteem of these not as
taken, but received, whom we ought rather to defend and protect, than insult
over. Those Captives that are ransomed from the enemy, are by the Roman Laws
theirs that redeem them; but the Sum paid being tendered, they are understood
to be by Postliminy received. But by the more recent Laws some things have been
changed; and that Servants being taken may be encouraged to return, they now
propose present liberty to such as have been maimed in their service, and to
the rest after five years, as appears by their Military Laws, collected by
Rufus.

XII. Whether a people, being subjected by another, may be received by
Postliminy.
But unto us (that are Dutchmen) this Question is more pertinent, Whether
those people that were once subjected to the power of another Prince, may
return back to their former state and condition; which will admit of a Dispute,
in case not he whose the Empire had been, but some other of their Associates,
had recovered them from the enemy, whereunto the same Answer, I conceive, may
serve that was before given concerning Servants, unless by some Social League
it be otherwise agreed.

X^^I. Whether lands may be said to be received.
Among things that are received by this Right of Postliminy, the first that
offer themselves are Lands; whereof Pomponius speaks thus, Expulsis Hostibus ex
Agris quos ceperint, Dominia eorum ad priores Dominos redeunt; The Enemy being
driven out, the Lands return to their former Owners. Now the Enemy is then said
to be driven out, when it appears plainly that they are not able to recover it
again. Thus the Island Aegina which the Lacedaemonians took from the Athenians,
they restored to their Associates who were the Ancient Lords thereof. Compare
this with what was said above chapter 6.. 7.
And the Goths and Vandals being expelled; Justinian, and the Emperors
succeeding, restored the Lands unto the Heirs of those who anciently possessed
it, notwithstanding those prescriptions which in other cases the Roman Laws did
admit of against them. The very same was confirmed by a Law made by Honorius,
who though Spain had been in the possession of the Vandals for Three hundred
Years, Vand. l. 1.
yet would not permit that any prescription should be pleaded in Bar against
the Ancient occupants, Council. His pal. 2.
as Procopius testifies; which Law we find also recited in the Council of
Sivil, where this is added as the reason, Non enim erit objicienda praescriptio
temporis, ubi necessitas interest hostilitatis; For no prescription of time is
to be pleaded which is enforced by open hostility. Now look what Right they
have to the Lands, the same also they have to every thing that is affixt to the
soil; for even those places, which had been formerly held as Sacred or
Religious, being taken by Enemies if they do escape that calamity; they also as
if returned by a kind of Postliminy, shall be restored to their former
condition, as Pomponius notes. Wherewith agrees that of Cicero concerning Diana
in Segesta, P. Africani virtute Religonem simul cum loco recuperavit; By the
valor of Scipio Africanus, Diana recovered both her Temple and worship:
wherefore the fruits and profits of the ground thus received, are likewise to
be restored, according to what Pomponius writes concerning Lands first drowned,
and afterward recovered. So in Spain it is provided by a Law, that as well the
honor and dignity, as all the hereditary jurisdictions thereunto belonging,
may return by Postliminy; the greater at any time, the lesser if claim be laid
unto them within four Years after their reception, unless it be some strong
fort, which if lost and recovered again is the Kings.

XIV. What difference was anciently made between things moveable.
Concerning movables the general rule is quite contrary; for they do not
return by Postliminy, but are utterly lost, as being lawful prize, and may
therefore be bought and sold; wheresoever they are found, they are adjudged his
that bought them: neither has the first owner any Right at all to them, though
he find them either abroad among Neuters, or at home in his own Country. But
from this general rule we find, that in Ancient times, such things as were of
use in War, were excepted; which seems to be agreed unto by the Nations for
this reason, that the hopes of recovering such things to themselves, might
render them the more cheerful and industrious in regaining them. For the Laws
of most Cities in those times were made for the encouragement of valor, and in
favor to military affairs, wherefore their consent was easily gained. What
things were accounted useful in War we have already summed up out of Gallus
Aelius, but we find them more accurately set down, as well by Cicero in his
Topics, as by Modestinus: As, namely, Ships that are long and fit for burden,
but not such as are made for pleasure; Mules, but such as are accustomed to the
Pack-Saddle; Horses and Mares, but such as will abide the Bit, and are fit for
service: Arms also and Apparel are of necessary use in War, but these do not
return by Postliminy; because they were thought to merit no favor at all, who
would suffer their Weapons and Garments to be taken from them: nay, it was
accounted as a crime that deserved punishment, as may every where appear in
Histories. And herein we may observe the difference they made between Horses
and Arms; the one being capable of reception, the other not; because possible
it was that an Horse may break loose of himself, and so fall within the Enemies
power, without any default of his Rider, but so could not Arms. And this
difference between movables seems to have continued in use from the Goths
until Boethius lived, who expounding Cicero's Topics, seems to speak of this
Right, as if it were in force at that Day.

XV. What at this Day.
But in these latter times, if not before, this difference is taken away; for
now no movables do return by Postliminy, as has been observed by those who
are most expert in the Customs of Nations; and the same Custom is for Ships,
as we may perceive in many places.

XVI. What things are received that need no Postliminy.
But those things, which though taken by the Enemy, yet were never within their
Garrisons, have no need of Postliminy; because by the Law of Nations, the owner
never lost his property in them: The like may be said of such things as are
taken by Thieves and Pirates; Because (as Vlpian and Javelinus answer) the Law
of Nations never granted unto them a power to alter the property of what they
got: upon which ground it was, that the Athenians were willing to accept of the
Island Halonesus, which some Pirates had taken from them, as King Philip did
from those Pirates, as of a thing restored by Philip; but not as of a thing
given them, as will appear by the very Epistle of King Philip recorded by
Demosthenes. And therefore things so taken, wheresoever they are found may be
claimed, only (what out of equity we have already concluded to be just) so much
ought to be allowed him, who at his own charge has possessed himself of them, as
may be conceived, it would have cost the first owners themselves to have
recovered them.

XVII. Some alterations may be made by the Civil Law, as to their own Subjects.
Now though it be thus by the Law of Nations, yet may the Civil Law otherwise
determine it, as in Spain, the Ships that are taken from Pirates are theirs
that take them; so also they are among the Venetians. Neither is it
unreasonable that a private thing should give way to public profit, especially
where the recovery of them must necessarily be accompanied with so much
difficulty. But yet this Law can be no Plea against Strangers, who may
notwithstanding challenge their own things.

XVIII. How Postliminy is observed among such as are not Enemies, but Strangers.
But that which is more to be admired, is that which the Roman Laws do
testify, namely, That this Right of Postliminy took place, not only between
enemies, but even between the Romans and Strangers. But surely this, as I said
elsewhere See second Book, chapter 15.. 5.
, was but a Relic of that barbarous Age, wherein the general corruption of
men's manners had taken away all sense of that natural Society that should be
between all Mankind: and therefore among Nations that had no public War one
against another, there was practiced among private men a certain license of
War, which their different language and manners seemed to denounce; which
license, that it might not swell so high as to kill each other, it pleased the
Nations to limit, and to agree, That they that were taken on either side, being
Strangers, should be held as Slaves; and consequently they introduced the Law
of Postliminy, which puts a difference between Strangers and Robbers or
Pirates; because Strangers do usually agree upon equal Conditions, which
Pirates and Robbers disdain. It seems that of old it has been a Case much
controverted, Whether if the Subjects of a Confederate Nation, being Slaves
here, should escape from us and get home, They may be said to return by
Postliminy. This Question we find proposed by Cicero, concerning which Gallus
Aelius delivers his opinion thus, We, says he, Lib. 1. de Orat*
observe the same Right of Postliminy with a free people, with Confederates and
with Kings, as we do with Enemies. But Proculus's opinion was quite contrary, I
doubt not, says he, but that both our Confederates, and they that are a free
Nation, are all Strangers unto us; between them and us there is no Postliminy.
We are therefore to distinguish of Leagues; for if any Leagues be made on
purpose only to put an end, or to prevent open War, those Leagues do not for
the time to come hinder either the taking of Prisoners, or the Right of
Postliminy. But if in the Articles of the League it be expressed, That the
Subjects of either Nation may upon the public Faith safely travel or sojourn
in the others Dominions, then it is not lawful to take Prisoners on either
side, and so there is no place for Postliminy. And this I take to be the
meaning of Pomponius, where he says, If there be a Nation with whom we have
neither friendship nor hospitality, nor League made for friendships sake; these
indeed are not enemies: But yet whatsoever of ours comes to them is theirs; and
a man that is free with us, being taken by them, is made their Slave: and it is
the same if any thing come from them to us, and therefore in this case
Postliminy is granted. In mentioning a League made upon the account of
friendship, he shows that there may be Leagues that have no Right either of
friendship or hospitality. And Proculus sufficiently declares, That by a people
confederated, he understood such a people as had promised friendship and safe
hospitality, where he subjoined these words, For what need is there of
Postliminy between us and them, when they may equally retain as well their own
liberty as property in their own things with us, as they do among themselves;
and we may enjoy the same liberty and dominion with them as with our selves.
Wherefore that which follows in Gallus Aelius, namely, With those Nations that
are under our jurisdiction, there is no Postliminy is to be understood with
this supplement: nor with those with whom we have contracted any League of
friendship.

XIX. How the same may now take place.
But in our days, not only amongst Christians, but even amongst Mahometans,
this Right of Captivity without the time of War, as also that of postliminy,
are worn out of use. The necessity of both being taken away by virtue of that
cognation or affinity wherein Nature has linked us, which is now
re-acknowledged to be between all Mankind. Yet may that ancient Right of
Nations be now in force, in case we have to do with any Nation so barbarous as
to conceive it lawful for them to invade in an hostile manner the persons and
properties of all Strangers without any provocation or denouncing of War. And
even whilst I am writing this, thus it is adjudged in the High Court of Paris,
Nicholaus Verdunius being President, That the Goods which have been the
Subjects of France, but were afterward taken by the Pirates of Argier, who
live upon the spoil of all that traffic by Sea, were by the Right of War
justly alienated; and therefore being recovered by others, were theirs that
recovered them. And in the same Court this also was adjudged, which I said even
now, That Ships are not to be at this day reckoned among the number of those
things that are received by Postliminy.

CHAP. X. Admonitions concerning things done in an unjust War.
I. In what sense modesty may be said to forbid what Law permits II. Thi^
applied to such things as are permitted by the Law of Nations. III. In an
unjust War, what the Law of Arms permits are internally unjust. IV. Who are
hereby obliged to make restitution, and how far. V. Whether things taken in
such a War, are to be restored by him that took them; VI. Or by him that
knowingly does detain them.
I. Modesty forbids what the Law permits.
I AM now to look back, and to take away from those that make War almost all
those Rights which I may be thought to have granted them, though indeed I have
not. For when I began to explain this part of the Law of Nations, I also
declared, That many things were said to be right and lawful, because they were
not punishable by Law, partly because they derive their authority from Military
Councils, which notwithstanding either swell beyond the Bounds of honesty,
whether we confine it to Right strictly taken, or place it in the Precepts of
other Virtues; or else they are such as may more religiously, and amongst good
men, more commendably be left undone. Seneca brings in Pyrrhus pleading thus,
Lex nulla capto parcit, aut poenam impedit.
No Law spares Slaves, nor them from stripes defends.
To whom Agamemnon replies, Quod non vetat Lex, hoc vetat fieri pudor.
What Law forbids not, Modesty commends.
For the word Pudor in this place respects not so much a man's same and
reputation, as what is in it self right and honest; or at least what is better
and more laudable than that which the Law permits. Thus we read in Justinian's
Institutions, Things are said to be committed to a man's trust, when they have
no tie of the Law to secure them, but the honesty and integrity of the person
entrusted: So in Quintilian the Father, The Creditor cannot with any honesty or
conscience require his Debt of the Surety, Salvo pudore.
unless it be when he cannot get it from the Principal; and in this sense we
find that Pudor and Justitia, Equity and Justice, are very often conjoined.

Nondum Justitiam facinus mortale fugarat.
Vltima de Superis illa reliquit humum.
Proque metu populum sine vi pudor ipse regebat.
Justice as yet did amongst Mortals dwell,
She was the last that bid the Earth farewell.
'Twas shame, not force, that then the people awed.
Plato calls Justice the Companion of modesty; and in another place he tells
us, That God fearing the destruction of mankind, had sent Equity and Justice
amongst men, as Ornaments to Cities, and as Bonds to contract love and
friendship between them. Plutarch also in the life of Theseus terms Justice an
Inmate or Cohabitant with Righteousness. And in another place he joins them
together as Companions. But Cicero assigns them their distinct Bounds, De
Offic. lib. 1. De ira l. 1. c. 27.
saying, It is the Duty of Justice not to hurt our Neighbor, but of Modesty
not to offend him; Justitiae est non violare homines, Verecundiae non
offendere. With that Verse above quoted of Seneca agrees that of the same
Seneca in his Philosophy, Quam augusta est innocentia ad Legem bonum esse; How
scant is that innocence that is measured by the Law only? Justice and
faithfulness require such things of us as no Law can oblige us unto. Where we
may observe that he puts a difference between Jus and Justitia, attributing to
the former that which the Law enjoins, but unto the latter that which right
reason and conscience dictates. Of how much larger extent are the Bounds of our
Duty one to another, than what is contained within the Hedge of the Law; How
many things do piety, humanity, liberality, justice and fidelity require of us,
which fall not under the Commands of the public Laws: Which the same Seneca
does in another place excellently illustrate, by the Right of a Lord over his
Slave, Orat. 15. Lib. 1. de Clem. c. 18.
As to our Bondservants, says he, we should consider, not what we may impose
upon them with impunity to our selves, but what we ought in right reason and
equity to do unto them, which commands us to show mercy even to our Slaves, and
to those whom we have bought with our money. And again, Cum in servum omnia
liceant, est aliquid quod in hominem licere commune Jus animantium vetat;
Whereas all things are by the Law tolerated that are done to a Slave, there are
notwithstanding some things that the common Right of living Creatures forbids
us to do unto him, as he is a man. Where also we may observe the twofold
acception of the word licet, the one being referred to the judgment of the Law,
the other to the dictates of right reason. There are many things, says Seneca,
De Benef. l. 5. c. 21.
that are not enjoined us by any Law, neither will the omission of them bear an
Action, notwithstanding we are led into by the mere custom of our lives, which
is far more forcible than any humane Law. Quintilian tells us, That there are
some things, which though granted by the Law, Instit. l. 3.
yet in their own nature are not very commendable; as by the Law of the twelve
Tables, it was lawful for the Creditors to divide the Body of the Debtors (if
insolvent) between themselves, which Law common custom did abhor. So likewise
Cicero in the third of his Offices, Aliter Leges, De Offic. l. 3.
aliter Philosophi tollunt Astutias; Leges, quatenus manu tenere possunt;
Philosophi. quatenus ratione and intelligentia: The Laws take away fraud one
way, Philosophy another; the former by pinnacling the hands, the latter by
clearing the understanding, and informing the judgment.

II. This applied to what the Laws permit.
To the same pu^pose is that of Marcellus in his Oration to the Roman Senate,
That which comes here to be discust, says he, is not what I have done against
the Syrac^sians; for what ever I have done against them as enemies, the Law of
Arms will justify me in; but what those men, being overcome, ought in reason
and equity to suffer. Aristotle discussing this Question, Whether Captivity
arising from War be just, seems to own this distinction, Pol l. 1. c. 6. Vid.
sup. c. 4. 2.
Some (says he) looking only at that which the Law permits (for the Law it
self also is something that is just) do hold, That Captivity in War is just;
but yet they deny it to be so absolutely, because possible it is that the cause
of that War may be unjust. Others there are, says Seneca, that create unto
themselves a Right by Arms in another Territories: where these two words [a
Right, and in another Territories] do seem no less to clash than the Arms
whereby that Right was got. But that is there called Right which the Law of
Nations permits only. Consonant whereunto is that of Thucydides in that Oration
which the Thebans made to the Roman Senate, As for those, says he, that were
slain during the Conflict, we complain not; for this was in some sort just.
Nay, the very Roman Lawyers themselves do often call That the Right of
Captivity, which in another place they term an injury, and place it in
oposition to natural equity. And Seneca, respecting that which often falls out
(namely, when the War is unjust) accounts the very name of Slave as a badge of
injustice. The Italians in Livy, Ep. 32.
detaining from the Syracusians that which they had gained by War, are said to
be obstinate in the detention of that which they had gained unjustly. And Dion
Prusaeensis, having declared such Captives free as could make their escape
home, adds this, As being unjustly brought under bondage. So Lactantius
observes, That the Philosophers in all their Discourses concerning Military
Affairs, always fitted their Orations rather to the public customs of the Age
they lived in, than to justice and true valor. And St Augustine in an Epistle
of his to Marcellinus, tells him, Ep. 4. De diversis Ecclesiae Observe.
That if in this World the Precepts of Christianity were duly kept, no War
could be made without some mercy. And in another place, Among the true
Worshippers of God, even their very Wars are peaceable.

III. What is done in an unjust War, an unjust, as to internal Justice.
We conclude therefore in the first place, That the ground of the War being
unjust, although it be solemnly undertaken as to the manner, yet are all those
acts that are done in it unjust, if we understand injustice, not as it is
repugnant to the Law of Arms; but according to its natural acception, as it is
repugnant to right reason, equity and conscience. So they that shall knowingly
either commit such acts, or assist in the doing of them, are included in the
number of those, 1 Cor. 6.10.
who without repentance cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: for
repentance, if true, necessarily requires from such as have time and estates
sufficient, That he that has done wrong, either by killing men, spoiling
Goods, driving away Cattle, or the like, should make satisfaction. Es. 58.6.
And therefore did God himself renounce the solemn Feasts of the hypocritical
Jews, Numb. 5.6.
because they did not suffer their Captives unjustly taken to go free. And the
King of Niniveh proclaimed a Fast throughout the City, Jonah 2.10.
and commanded all his Subjects to turn every one from his evil way, and to
empty their hands from all things got by rapine and violence; as being by the
very dictates of natural reason taught to acknowledge, That without restitution
all their humiliations were but vain and fictitious. Non differtur ultionis
sententia, si non redduntur universa; Hier.
Vengeance will not be long delayed, unless restitution be made to the full,
says Hierome: with whom agrees St Augustine, If that wherein we have sinned be
not restored, being in our power, we do not repent, but dissemble. Neither is
this the judgment of Jews and Christians only, Turcicor. 5* c. 17.
but of the Mahometans also, as Leunclavius informs us.

IV. Who and how far forth they are obiged to restitution.
Now they that are obliged to make restitution, according to what we have
elsewhere delivered in general, are in the first place the Authors of the War,
whether as having the supreme power, or as counselling and persuading
thereunto; and these are bound to make satisfaction as well for all damages
that are usually done in War; as also for all those unusually done, if they
were done by their either order or persuasion, or by their permission, in case
it were in their power to have hindered it. Thus also are Captains bound to make
restitution for those things that are either spoiled, or taken away by any
under their Command; yea, and the whole Army in general, that shall run
headlong to any one common outrage, as to fire a Town, or the like; and for
particular acts, every particular Soldier shall satisfy for that loss whereof
he was the Author, either solitary, or concurrent with others.

V. Whether things taken in an unjust War are to be restored by him that took
them.
Neither may we herein admit of that exception which by some is brought of such
as are only Auxiliaries, if they be any ways guilty of the crime; To oblige any
man to restitution without guilt, the bare crime suffices. Some also are of
opinion that though the War be never so unjust, yet the things taken in it are
not to be restored; because, both Parties, when the War began, were pr^sumed to
agree to this, That their Goods should be theirs that could take them. But on
the contrary, it cannot easily be granted that any man will rashly give away
his Right; and the nature of War is much different from that of Contracts. But
to the end that Nations being once at peace, should rest so, and not involve
themselves in endless War against their will; it was thought sufficient to
introduce this external Right of Dominion, See Book 2. Chap. 11.
whereof we have already spoken, which notwithstanding may very well consist
with that internal obligation to restitution. Nay, these very Authors seem to
assert as much in their Discourses concerning the Right of taking Prisoners;
wherefore the Samnites in Livy declare, Lib. 9. Lib. 8.
That the spoil which they had taken from their Enemies, and which by the Law
of Arms seemed to be theirs, they had restored: Which, he says, seemed to be
theirs, because the very Samnites themselves had before acknowledged that War
to have been unjust. Not much unlike is that power which the Law of Nations
gives in a Contract made without fraud, wherein there is some inequality to
compel the Contractor to fulfill his Contract; yet nevertheless he that receives
more in value than what he gives, See Book 2. Chap. 9.
is bound, though not by Law yet, in honesty and conscience, to even the
balance by reducing the Contract to an equality.

VI. Or whether by him that detains it.
Yea farther, as though the damage be not done by our selves, or if it be yet
without any fault of ours; yet if the thing taken away in an unjust War by
another, be in our possession, we are bound to restore it; because there can be
no reason given naturally just, why the right Owner should be deprived of it:
for he never consented to its alienation, nor was their any crime committed by
him, nor did he receive any recompense for it; apposite whereunto is that of
Valerius Maximus, Lib. 6. c. 5. Sub Hasta.
The people of Rome, says he, when Claudius had publicly sold some Camerine
Prisoners taken in the War, although they saw their Treasuries thereby filled,
and their Empire enlarged; yet being convinced, That their General had not
dealt very faithfully in their Conquest, they with great diligence sought out
those Captives, and redeeming them, restored them unto their Lands. So also is
that which Josephus records of Mark Anthony, Ant. l. 14. c. 22.
who commanded the Tyrians to restore to the Jews those Parts of Judaea which
they withheld from them, to release their Prisoners, and to return the spoil to
the right Owners. Thus we may read of the Phocians, That by the Decree of the
Roman Senate, even their public liberty, together with their Lands formerly
taken from them, were restored. So likewise were the Lygurians sold by M.
Pompilius, but redeemed by the Romans, and, together with their Goods, set at
liberty. The self same Decree past for the Abderites, the reason being added,
Because the War made against them was unjust. Thus Macrinus released all the
Parthian Prisoners, and restored all the spoil, Because the Romans had unjustly
broken the peace. And Mahomet the Turk dismissed upon this account, all the
Captives taken at Sancta Maria in Achaia. Yet may the present Possessor of such
Goods or Persons deduct so much for his either charge or labor, as in
probability it would have cost the right Owner to have recovered them: but if
he who without any default was thus possessed of any thing so taken, has either
consumed or alienated it; he is not bound to make any farther satisfaction,
than he shall be thought to have been made the richer thereby.

CHAP. XI. Moderation to be used in killing of men in a Just War.
I. That some acts in a just War are not internally just: explained. II.
According to internal justice who may be killed. III. That no man can be justly
slain for his misfortunes, as they that are forced to either party. IV. Nor for
faults intermediate between mischances and mischiefs: this explained. V. The
principal Authors of a War, distinguished from those that are drawn into it.
VI. In the Authors we are to distinguish of the Causes, whether probable or
improbable. VII. Even to those who have deserved death, the punishment may
sometimes be justly remitted. VIII. Care should be taken of the innocent, that
they be not unadvisedly killed. IX. Infants to be spared, and Women if not
highly criminous, and old Men. X. Priests to be spared, and such as addict
themselves wholly to learning. XI. As also Husbandmen. XII. Yea, and Merchants,
and such like. XIII. And slaves. XIV. And such as surrender upon equal
conditions. XV. They also that deliver themselves up without conditions. XVI.
All these may be admitted to mercy, unless they be very criminous, which how to
be taken. XVII. A multitude of offenders may well be spared. XVIII. Hostages,
unless in themselves faulty, are not to be slain. XIX. That all unprofitable
Combats are to be avoided.
I. In a just War some acts are not internally just.
NEITHER is that generally true that is commonly said, He hazards all, who what
is just denies. That of Cicero is much better, There are some good offices to
be performed, Offic. l. 1. Vide lib. 2. chapter 20.. 2. -- 28.
even to those who have injured us; there is also some moderation to be used
even in revenge and punishments. And even in the sharpest War, there ought to
be some grains of mildness and clemency, if it be regulated according to
Christian Discipline. Sen. de Clem. lib. 2. c. 4.
Nay the very Philosopher has already pronounced them cruel, who though they
have cause, yet know no measure in punishing. Cicero commends that golden age
of the Roman Empire, De Off. l. 2. Pol. 5, 6. Lib. 3.
the end of whose Wars were mild and gentle, and never otherwise but upon
necessity. Aristotle notes, That the punishment taken on the Thebans and
Heracleans, savoured more of cruelty than equity. And Thucydides speaks of
some, that suffered punishments greater than what were fit. Annal. l. 3.
So Tacitus taxes Pompey, for exacting punishments far greater than the crimes
deserved. And in the same Book he blames Aug. Caesar, that in punishing
Adulteries he was more cruel than any of his Ancestors; yea, oft-times than his
own Laws. Although as Juvenal speaks in this Case: -- Exegit autem
Interdum ille dolor plus quam lex ulla dolori
Concessit. --
This Grief sometimes far greater license pleads,
Than any Law to other grief concedes.
So Quintilian, A punishment beyond what is humane, is not to be exacted from
any, unless it be from the very worst of Parricides. Lib. 26.
And therefore M. Antoninus the Emperor did well when he wrote to the Senate,
To be careful that their proscriptions were not too severe, nor their
punishments too cruel. Whereof Ammianus likewise complains, Their rage against
many was much greater, than either their errors or crimes deserved. It is
possible, says Aristides, that they who take revenge for an injury done to
themselves, may be unjust, if they shall exceed in measure; for he that in this
case, proceeds beyond his just bounds, is the Author of a new quarrel. And he
that punishes a Malefactor beyond what he has deserved, deserves himself to
be punished. This was Ovids opinion of a King: -- Caede nocentum
Si nimis ulciscens extitit ipse nocens.
He that for Blood too great revenge does take,
Does (sure) himself the greatest Murderer make.
The Plataeans in Isocrates demand, Whether it be fit or reasonable, to require
for so small faults, so great and grievous punishments. And in his second
Oration for Peace, the same Aristides gives this wholesome advice, Look not so
much at the crimes, as at the persons to be punished; and at your own frailty
and propensity to fall, that are about to punish: and lastly, at the measure
how far you may with equity punish. Minos in Propertius is highly commended in
that, Ovid Trist. lib. 1. Eleg. 1.
Victor erat quam diu aequus in host fuit.
Though Victor he even to his foes was just.


So he in Ovid, who, In giving Laws to's Captives was most just.

II. According to internal justice who may be killed.
But when we may justly kill our Enemies in a just War, according to that which
we call internal justice, and when we may not, may easily be understood by what
we have already said in the first Chapter of this Book. One man may be said to
kill another, either accidentally or purposely; no man may justly be killed
purposely, unless it be for some crime that deserves Death, or because we
cannot otherwise defend our own lives or fortunes: And although to take away
the life of a man, for things of small value, do not swerve from the rules of
justice strictly taken; yet it does from the rules of Charity. Now that the
punishment may be just, it is necessary that he that is killed should offend,
and that in so high a measure, as that by the sentence of an upright Judge, he
may be condemned to Death; whereof we shall now speak the less, because we have
already sufficiently done it in the Chapter of Punishments.

III. No man may justly be killed for being unfortunate.
Heretofore when we treated of Suppliants (for such there are as well in War as
Peace) we distinguished between misfortune and injustice. Gylippus the
Lacedemonian, discoursing about the Right of Suppliants, states the Case thus;
they who at the first introduced that Right, did certainly intend mercy and
compassion to those whom fortune had made miserable; but as to such as were
fallen into misery, through their own deceitful dealings, or out of a desire to
usurp another man's Right, these have no reason to blame fortune, nor ought to
assume unto themselves the name of Suppliants. Whence we may observe, That
whereas there are two sorts of men, that usually cry for protection, they that
are unfortunate, and they that are malefactors: Gylippus places the Athenians
amongst these latter, because unprovoked by any injury, they made War upon the
Syracusians; whereupon he infers, that since they voluntarily began the War, it
was but just that they should feel the evil consequences that attended the War.
Examples of such as are unfortunately miserable, are those who being no
Enemies, are notwithstanding unhapily found, and thereby blocked up amongst
Enemies, although they bear no malice against us: Such were the Athenians, when
Aristion their Tyrant forced them to side with Mithridates against the Romans;
of whom Paterculus writes thus, Lib. 2.
If any man shall impute that to the Athenians as an act of Rebellion, when
being close besieged by Sulla, they were enforced by Aristion their Governor,
to defend themselves and their City against him in favor to Mithridates, he
will find himself mistaken, as well in the truth, as in the Ancient Histories;
for the Athenians were so fast friends to the Romans, that at all times, and
upon all occasions, whatsoever was faithfully performed, the Romans would
usually say was done (side Attica) with as much fidelity, as if done by the
Athenians. Nevertheless being miserably oppressed by the forces of Mithridates
within, who held their City in despiet of them, and straightly besieged by the
Romans, their friends without, whilst their hearts were without their walls,
Lib. 26.
they were compelled to keep their bodies within. The latter part of which
sentence seems to have been borrowed from Livy, who speaking of Indibilis,
says, That with his Body he served the Carthaginians, but with his mind the
Romans. For as Cicero rightly observes, Pro Quintio.
They who hold their lives at the mercy of others, do more consider their power
what they may do, than their justice what they ought to do. So the same Cicero
elsewhere, Pro Ligario.
The third time was, says he, when after the coming of Varus into Africa, he
remained therewith, if it were a crime: Necessitatis non voluntatis fuit; It
was rather inevitable than voluntary. And this very course took Julian in the
case of the Aquileians, as Ammianus testifies; Lib. 21.
who when he had described the punishment of some few, adds, The residue he
dismissed without any hurt done them: Quos in certaminum rabiem necessitas
egerat, non voluntas; Who, says he, fought more through compulsion, than by
choice or election. Thus did this merciful Prince upon very equitable
considerations. Thus also did Cleon in Thucydides freely forgive them who being
enforced by the enemy, did serve against him. So Pertinax speaking of Laetus
and others, Lib. 3.
whom Commodus compelled to serve under him; They, says he, obey Commodus with
an unwilling mind; but whenever they have a power and opportunity to serve
us, they never wanted a will to do it. Necessity is a strong and violent thing,
not to be resisted; wherefore Cassius Clemens in Xiphilinus, treating
concerning the affairs of the Emperor Severus, pleads thus, For my part, says
he, I never knew thee, nor yet Niger; but being unfortunately left in that part
which he had obtained, I did what necessity urged me unto, and obeyed the
present Power; not that I was willing to make War against thee, but that I was
desirous to repel Julian for mine own safety. Thus also Aurelianus, when he
made his entry into Antioch, set out a very gracious Proclamation, referring
all that was done rather to an impulsive necessity, being overawed by Zenobia,
than to any enmity they bare unto him. And Belisarius in Procopius thus
excuses the Africans, That what they did was against their wills, Vand. l 1.
being then under the power of the Vandals. So likewise Totilas told the
Neapolitans, Goth. l. 1.
That he knew them to be under the Command of their Enemies unwillingly. An
ancient Commentator upon that part of Thucydides, where he discourses
concerning the selling of the Corcyraean Captives, thus glosseth, He showed
therein a Princely clemency, Lib. 1.
every way agreeable to the honor of the Grecians; for to kill men in cold
blood is barbarous, especially Servants, who fight not upon their own choice,
but at the command of their Masters. The Plataeans in Isocrates do thus plead
for themselves, We did not serve the Lacedaemonians voluntarily, but by
compulsion; for we durst not do otherwise. The same Plea does he make for the
other Grecians, Illorum parts Corpore sequi cogebantur, animo vero nobiscum
erant; They were compelled with their Bodies to serve the Lacedaemonians, but
their hearts were with us. So likewise of the Phocians Herodotus, That they
followed the Medes, but by compulsion, not willingly. Upon which account
Alexander forgave the Zeldi, as Arrianus testifies, Because they were enforced
to take part against him with the Barbarians. And Diodorus brings in Nicolaus
the Syracusian thus pleading for the Captives, They that are Confederates with
our Enemies, are by force driven to make War upon us; therefore as it is but
just that they that studiously and industriously make War against us, be
severely punished; so to pardon those who unwillingly offend us, is alike
conscientious. So Antigonus alleged, Lib. 38.
That he made War indeed against Cleomenes, but not against the Spartans, as
Justine reports it.

IV. Nor for an intermediate fault between fraud and misfortune.
This also is to be observed, That between a plain and manifest injury, and an
injury done by a mere mischance, there intercedes sometimes something of a
middle nature, as if participating somewhat of either; so as the action is
neither merely or altogether voluntary, nor yet done merely through ignorance
or against our will. Aristotle calls these acts (...), slips or failings, as
the Latins do trespasses or offenses. Of actions, says he, that are
spontaneous, some are done deliberately, others rashly, Mor. l. 5. c. 10.
and without consideration. Now whereas in humane Society injuries may be done
three several ways; those done merely through ignorance are called mischances,
as when a mischief lights upon a man against whom no hurt was ever intended,
(as for example, if a Son by forcing open a Door should accidentally wound his
own Father, whom he could not suspect to be behind;) or if a greater hurt or
damage befall a man than what was intended, (as if a Fencer, for the trial of
skill, and only intending to draw blood, should kill his Adversary,) it might
be called a mischance, but not a mischief. For whatsoever happens besides what
a man proposes to himself, is to be attributed to misfortune: for happily
vellicare voluit non vulnerare, He intended to beat him, not to wound him; or
if he did intend to wound, yet happily not this man, but another; or it may be
not in that manner, or in so great a measure, as it fell out: if therefore any
such hurt or damage do arise, besides what was intended, or might probably be
expected, it shall be esteemed as a mischance, not a mischief. But secondly, If
the wrong done might have been foreseen and prevented, though it were not done
improbo animo, with a wicked intention, it shall be accounted as a fault
((...), as Aristotle terms it) for culpae affinis est qui in se habet agendi
principium; qui vero extra, infoelix: He must needs be accessory to the sin or
fault committed, that acts by a principle within him; but he that is passive
and overruled by something without him, is unhappy. But when a man does what
he does knowingly, though not deliberately, it is confessed that an injury is
done; as he that in a Forest shoots at a Deer, but kills a man whom he saw not,
is unfortunate: but he that discharges a Musket in a populous Street, though
with no mischievous intention, yet if he kill a man, he sins; because he did it
freely and voluntarily (though not considerately:) As also they that through
anger, or any other perturbation of the mind, either natural or necessary,
shall hurt a man, cannot be faultless; and yet we cannot account them wicked or
malicious. But yet if a man should knowingly and premeditatedly do the same
thing, he may justly be accounted wicked. Wherefore whatsoever is done, through
anger suddenly, may very well be said to be unadvisedly done; Non incipit is
qui ex ira quid facit, sed is qui ^^am provocavit. Arist.
for it is not he that does the wrong through anger that begins the fray, but
he that first provokes that anger: Hence it is that before judgment in such
Cases can be given, the Query is not so much after the fact as after the
occasion, namely, Who gave it, and how great the provocation was. For anger
usually arises from hence, when a man thinks himself to be injured; and
therefore in such differences as do arise about wrongs done through anger, the
Question is not as in ordinary Contracts, An hoc factum sit, Whether done or
not; for therein, unless excused by forgetfulness, one of the Parties must of
necessity be unjust; as namely, He that fulfils not the Contract. But the
Question should be, Whether the wrong done were justly done, considering the
provocation. For he that first gave the occasion, did it knowingly; it is no
marvel then if the one Party may think himself to be injured; and the other
not, it may notwithstanding so happen, That he that through anger does the
wrong may be unjust; if, namely, the revenge swell higher than the provocation;
or the wrong we do, bear not a just proportion with what we before suffered.
For justus est qui deliberato just agit, He is a just man who knowingly and
deliberately does justly; for possible it is that a man may do justly
knowingly, but not deliberately. Moreover, of such wrongs as are spontaneous,
some deserve pardons, others not. Those injuries are pardonable which are done
not only by such as know not but that they may lawfully do them. But these also
that are done through ignoranee, that is, when their ignorance is the cause of
the offense. But if injuries be committed by ignorant persons, but not through
their ignorance, but with such an affection of mind as exceeds the common
bounds of humanity, such Offenders deserve no pardon. Thus far Aristotle, whose
very words, because the matter is of great use, I have therefore, says
Grotius, entirely turned into Latin, because usually being but ill translated,
they are not easily understood, Quod sponte non fit, omne dignum venia;
Whatsoever is unwillingly done, says Dionysius Halicarnassensis, is
pardonable. So likewise Procopius, They who have wronged others, if through
ignorance, that is, when their ignorance is the cause of the wrong, ought in
equity to be forgiven by those whom they have wronged. Nic. 7.2.
Michael Ephesius interpreting that place of Aristotle, where he speaks of an
injury that may be done beyond the expectation of him that did it, places that
which I have before-recited as an instance in a Son, who forcing open a Door
wounds his own Father. And of that which might have been foreseen, he puts that
of a man that without any malice shoots an Arrow at random in an Highway; and
of that done by necessity, he instanceth in him who being oppressed with hunger
or famine is constrained to be injurious to others to preserve himself; an
example of faults committed out of natural perturbations, he puts in love,
grief, fear. That is said to be done through ignorance when the fact is
unknown, as when Abimilech would have taken Sarah, not knowing that She was
Abraham's Wife. An injury is said to be done by a person ignorant, but not
through ignorance, where the Law is unknown. And this very ignorance of the Law
is sometimes excusable, and sometimes inexcusable. All which do very well agree
with what our Civilians tell us. Not unlike unto this is another place of the
same Aristotle, De Art Oratoria.
It is equity, says he, that distinguishes as well between manifest injuries
and trespasses, as also between these trespasses and mischances. Whatever hurt
is done without an ill intention, and that could not be foreseen and prevented,
is merely a mischance; that which might have been foreseen, yet is done without
any prepensed malice, is a fault or oversight: But what is done purposely, and
with a wicked intent, is a manifest mischief, or an open injury, which deserves
no pardon. The Ancients digested all wrongs done into these three Forms, as
proceeding from either ignorance, improvidence, or wilfulness. And Homer in the
last of his Iliads, speaking of Achilles, says, (...), i. e. That he was
neither ignorant, inconsiderate, nor mischievous. The like distinction also we
find in Marcian, Delinquitur, aut proposito, aut casu, aut impetu; We commonly
offend either purposely, or casually, or rashly: Purposely, as Thieves, whose
Trade it is to rob and kill men for what they have; casually, as when a man in
hunting shoots at a Deer, and kills a man; rashly, when men, being drunk with
wine or anger, do usually fall out from words to blows. De Offic. l. 1.
The first and last of these Cicero thus distinguishes, In all acts of
injustice, says he, it is very considerable whether they be done by a too
hasty eruption of passion, which usually lasts not long, and then ends in
repentance; or by judgment and premeditation. For what proceeds from the former
are like Mushrooms, hasty in their birth, and sudden in their fall; and are
therefore much more pardonable than those that grow up leisurely by
premeditation. A wise man will easily remit injuries, De ira l. 1. c. 16.
says Seneca, if he understand that they proceed not from a deep rooted
hatred, but from some sudden puff of passion. And a little after, Sometimes he
sooner remits greater injuries, than he does lesser; that is, if the former be
committed through rashness, and not cruelty; and the latter proceed from a long
lingering and inveterate malice. Neither will he punish the same sin in two
several persons in one and the same manner, if what the one did unadvisedly,
the other did wilfully. Thus also Philo in his Exposition of some certain Laws,
Dimidiatum est facinus ubi non antecessit longa animi deliberatio; That injury
abates one half of its punishment that is unpremeditated: of which kind are
those that we are provoked unto by pure necessity, which if it do not
altogether justify, yet it extenuates the fault. See Book 2. Chap. 20. Sect.
29. and Sect. 3. in this Chapter. Lib. 5. de Prove.
Thus the Samians in Thucydides told Alcidas the Lacedemonian, when he would
have put the Captives taken at Chios to death, That it was not probable that he
came to set Greece at liberty, as he pretended, who killed men no ways
obnoxious unto him; but only as they were associated with the Athenians,
whereunto also they were compelled by necessity. So also St Chrysostom,
Strangers can forgive Strangers, and one Enemy another, if the wrongs done by
them, though never so great, were involuntary, and done by mere compulsive. For
as Demosthenes pleads against Aristocrates, So strong and impulsion an Orator
is necessity, that it robs us of our freedom in judging what is and what is not
to be done in any thing that lies before us; wherefore such Cases are not to be
too nicely sifted in a Court of Equity. Concerning which Point, the same
Demosthenes does much enlarge himself in his Oration concerning false
witnessing, against Stephanus. To the like purpose is that of Thucydides also,
It is very probable, says he, Lib. 4.
that God himself is ready to forgive whatsoever is involuntarily committed,
either in War, or in such other like cases of necessity. For the Altars of the
Gods have ever been as so many Sanctuaries for such to fly unto as have
offended against their will; for they only are to be persecuted as Malefactors,
who are willingly and professedly so; but not they whom extreme necessity has
enforced to transgress. Deuteronomy. 22.26.
Thus it is by the Hebrew Laws, as we may collect from that place, wherein it
is provided, That he that had ravished a Damosel in the Field was to be put to
death, but in the Damosel there was found nothing worthy death; because there
was a force upon her. Lib. 7.
The Caerites in Livy humbly besought the Romans, That they would not call that
an act of counsel, which was an act of pure necessity. And Justine, speaking of
that execrable act of Sacrilege committed by the Phocians, says, That the
scandal thereof did more properly belong to the Thebans, by whom they were
reduced to that extreme necessity, than to the Phocians. It was the opinion of
Isocrates, That he that was enforced to steal or else to starve, had an
excellent Advocate to plead his Paodon, meaning necessity. Of the same opinion
was Aristides in the like Case, Difficilia tempora excusationem aliquam dant
desciscentibus, Leuct. ^.
The difficulty of the times is some excuse for those that fly away; as the
dangers of a close Siege, a Famine, or Plague, are the best Pleas for
Fugitives. Philostratus excuses the Messenians for not entertaining those that
were banished Athens upon this ground, That they durst not do it for fear of
Alexander, whom they and all Greece at that time stood in awe of. The like does
he in Aristotle, who being compelled through necessity to do some unjust act,
confesses himself that he was (...), half wicked; but neither altogether
unjust, nor at all malicious. Thus Cleon in Thucydides aggravates the crime of
the Mityleneans, The injuries they have done us were not casual nor compulsory,
but voluntary, nay malicious; but those injuries only are pardonable that are
done unwillingly. Philo therefore instructs his Prince thus, That whenever he
was provoked to revenge or to punish, he should learn how to distinguish
between such as were notoriously and professedly wicked, and those who were
only evertaken with a sin, or overborn by some violent temptations; for to kill
all that have in the least degree offended, is brutish and savage. Themistius
in his Panegyric upon the Emperor Valens, thus applies these distinctions to
our purpose, Thou, says he, have wisely distinguished, O Emperor, between
acts of prepensed malice, acts of humane frailty, and acts of inevitable
misfortune. And although thou have not at all conversed with Plato, nor read
Aristotle; yet has thy practice been much according to their Precepts, whereby
thou have justified their Sayings. Thou have not inflicted the same punishment
upon all sorts of Offenders, upon those who were the first Authors of the War,
and upon those who in process of time were enravelled in it, and upon those who
have since yielded themselves, as unto the Conqueror; but illos damnasti, hos
castigasti, and postremos miseratus es; The first thou have condemned, the next
thou have chastised, and on these last thou have had compassion. And the same
Author in another place thus instructs a young Emperor, Observe, says he,
what a vast difference there is between an act done through misfortune, an act
done through imprudence, and an act done out of obstinate malice: Now
accordingly it becomes a Prince to pardon the first, correct the second, but to
persecute these last, even unto death. Thus did the Emperor Titus, as Josephus
records it, punish the Leaders of the people severely and exemplarily, but for
the multitude he only rebuked them with sharp and menacing words. Those
injuries that are done by misfortune only, and that could not be avoided,
neither deserve to be punished, nor are liable to restitution. Those that are
wilful and malicious do both deserve punishment, and are liable to restitution.
But those of a middle nature that are done through rashness or imprudence, do
engage us to restitution; yet are not always punishable: but if they be, yet
not unto death. What Themistius said of the Emperor Valens, Xiphilinus
testifies of that most excellent Emperor Trajan, That though he were not
capable of much bookish Learning, yet what concerned himself, and matters of
Government, he both knew and practiced. The like Testimony Herodian gives of
Marcus Aurelius, That he was the only Prince whose wisdom consisted not in
Discourst or in speculative knowledge; but in a grave, constant and sober habit
both of life and manners. The like Character does Xiphilinus give of the
Emperor Macrinus, Leges non tam norat exact, quam fideliter exequabatur; He
was not so skilful in the Laws, as he was exact and faithful in the execution
of them. God grant such Princes unto us in our days.

V. The Authors of the War to be distinguished from them that follow them.
Every History will furnish us with Examples of the different punishments
inflicted on the principal Authors of a War, and those who have been seduced
into it. Herodotus tells us, That the Grecians did severely punish the chief
Authors of the Revolt of the Thebans, to the Medes. So does Livy, That the
chief Citizens of Ardea were beheaded. And when Agrigentum was taken, he tells
us, That Valerius Levinus took the principal Leaders of the people, whom having
first whipped with Rods, he afterward beheaded; but the rest, together with
the spoil of the City, Lib. 4.
he sold. And in another place he tells us, That Atella and Calasia being taken
by surrender, the Leaders of the people were put to death. And elsewhere he
thus bespeaks the Roman Senate, Lib. 26.
Seeing that the principal Authors of this Rebellion are deservedly punished by
the Immortal Gods, and by you, O Fathers Conscript, what does it please you
shall be done with the innocent people? Whereupon it was at lengeh decreed,
That they should not only be pardoned, but that their City should be restored
unto them, that so, as he there speaks, Vnde orta culpa esset, ibi poena
consisteret; Where the crime began, the punishment should cease. Euripides
highly commends Eteocles the Argive, for that, Culpam ferebat semper illo Judice
Reus ipse; non Vrbs Patria, quae passim mali
Rectoris ergo sustinet calumniam.
Whilst he was Judge, the guilty person still
Bare his own punishment; nor was it his will
That Princes crimes their Subjects blood should spill.
And the Athenians, Lib. 3.
as Thucydides tells us, repented of that Decree which they had past against
the Mitylenians, whereby the whole City, rather than the principal Authors only
of their destruction, should be put to the sword. And when Demetrius took
Thebes, he put ten of the Leaders of the people to the sword, and spared the
rest; as Diodorus testifies.

VI. And in them the Causes, whether probable or improbable.
But even in the Authors of the War distinguish we must of the Causes; for some
causes there may be, which though not just, yet are such as may easily delude
men not otherwise wicked. The Author to Herennius sets done this as a most
equitable Plea for Pardon, when to those injuries we have done, we have been
provoked, not by any hatred to the adverse part, nor by our own cruelty, but by
the Bonds of love and faithfulness to others. Lib. 2. de clem. c. 7.
Seneca's Wiseman will sometimes dismiss his enemies with safety, yea and
sometimes commend them too for their fidelity, when he is convinced that their
engagement in that War was upon just and honest grounds; as to express their
loyalty toward their Prince, to assert their own liberties, Lib. 7.
or to keep faith with their Friends and Confederates, whereunto they stood
obliged. The Caerites in Livy beg pardon of the Romans, for assisting their
Kinsmen the Phocians and others, who according to the League which, with the
good leave of the Romans, they had entered into, Leuct. 2.
had helped Antiochus. Aristides, concerning the Thebans, who had under the
Conduct of the Lacedaemonians made War upon the Athenians, says, That they were
engaged in an unjust action, but not without a plausible excuse, being
thereunto induced by their fidelity to the Prince of their League. De Offic.
Cicero also concludes them to be pardonable, who neither begin the War through
hatred, nor prosecute it with cruelty: Besides, that War which is undertaken
merely for Glory and Empire, is not to be prosecuted with too much severity:
which King Ptolomy seems to insinuate to Demetrius, when he tells him, That he
did not make War for Plunder and Spoil, Lib. 3.
but for Glory and Empire only. So Severus in Herodian confesses, That when he
first entered into a War with Niger, he had no very plausible pretense to
quarrel with him; but the Empire lying at stake, and the Title as then dubious,
each of them endeavored to gain it to himself. What Cicero observed in the War
between Pompey and Caesar, Ep. ad Brut. 2.
does very often fall out, That the thing in question was very obscure, the
Contest among Commanders very great: insomuch that many of us know not which
Cause is best. But in his Oration for Marcellus he thus pleads, We may perhaps
be guilty of some failings, being as men subject to error; but we are
certainly clear from all wickedness. Thus also does the same Cicero excuse
Deiotarus to Caesar, for that he followed Pompey, not out of any hatred to
Caesar; but being misled by vulgar error. So likewise Salust in his History,
The residue of the multitude, led more by popular reports than by their own
judgment, do one follow another, every one thinking his Leader wiser than
himself. What Brutus sometime said of Civil War, may also be said of all other
Wars, namely, That they should be more discreetly managed, than to suffer the
common Soldiers to satiate their anger with the blood of the Conquered.

VII. Even Enemies deserving death, may be sometimes pardoned.
Yea though in strictness of justice they have deserved death; yet oft-times it
is more agreeable to the Goodness, Modesty, and Magnanimity of a Conqueror to
forgive than to revenge. Of this mind was King Theuderick in Cassiodore, Those
Wars have always succeeded well to me, says he, which have ended moderately;
for he can never want the victory, that knows how to use it with temperance and
clemency. Salust ascribes the prosperity of the Romans and the greatness of
their Empire, ^ib. 2. c. 41.
to nothing more than to their promptness to forgive. And it was the advice of
Tacitus, Quanta pervicacia in hostem, Annal. l. 12.
tanta benificentia adversus supplices; To show as much love and kindness to
poor suppliants, as courage and resolution toward Enemies. Yea and Seneca
tells us, That the most generous of Beasts did disdain to tear and prey upon
things vile and abject; Elephants and Lions scorn things that are prostrate,
and pass by what they have overcome. Lib. 4.
The Author to Herennius has an excellent saying to this purpose, Our
Ancestors, says he, did very wisely observe this custom, never to put any
King to death whom they had taken in War; but why? because, says he, it would
seem unreasonable to use that power which fortune has now given us, to destroy
them whom the same fortune not long before had so eminently favored: And why
should I now punish them? because they have led their Armies against me? This
having now got the victory, I am willing to forget, Quia viri fortis est, qui
de victoria contendant eos fortes putare; qui victi sunt, eos homines judicare,
ut possit Bellum fortitudo minuere, Pacem humanitatis augere: Because it is the
part of a valiant Commander, to esteem men as Enemies whilst they are able to
contend for victory; but being overcome, then to pity them as men; that so
valor may end the War, and humanity confirm the Peace. But you will happily say,
what if he had overcome you, would he have done so? wherefore then should you
spare him? I answer, Quia talem stultitiam contemnere, non imitari consuevi;
Because it is my custom to contemn, and not to imitate such folly. Now if this
Author did mean this of the Romans (which is very uncertain, because he
intermixes many strange, and indeed Romantic stories, with some true ones) it
manifestly contradicts that which we read in the Panegyric of Constantine the
Son of Constantius, He acts the part of a prudent man, who having conquered
Rebels can bind them to himself by a free pardon; but he, of a valiant man, who
having vexed them, can trample upon them. Thou have revived, O Emperor, that
ancient confidence of the Roman Empire, who triumphed in the death of those
great Commanders whom they had taken in the War; for in those days their
Captive Kings, after they had graced their triumphs, by attending the
Conquerours Chariot from the Ports to the most public place of the City, as
soon as he turned his Chariot toward the Capitol, were hurried away to
Execution. Only Perseus upon the intercession of Paulus Aemilius, to whom he
had yielded himself, escaped the severity of this custom; but the rest having
their eyes put out, remained for ever after in Chains: teaching thereby other
Kings rather to preserve their faith and friendship with the people of Rome,
than to exasperate their justice. But these things are written somewhat too
loosely. Josephus in his History concerning the death of Simon Bar-jorae,
testifies the same severity of the Romans; but he speaks it of such Captains
and Commanders only as was Pontius Samnis, but not of such as carried the
titles of Kings, whose words sound thus, The conclusion of the triumph was
after that the triumphant Chariot was come to the Capitol; for there by the
Ancient custom the Conqueror was to stay till tidings were brought of the
death of that great Commander, whom he led in triumph; who having an halter
cast about him, was presently drawn into the Marketplace, his Keepers whipping
him forward: for in that place by the custom of the Romans, such as were
condemned for Capital crimes, were put to death, and there executed. So soon
then as it was declared unto the Emperor, that his Enemy was dead, they
immediately proceeded to perform all other the Rites that were in those cases
provided very joyfully. Orat. in Ver.
The very same ceremonies does Cicero also recite in his Oration concerning
Punishments. Concerning great Commanders thus Executed, Histories afford us
examples enough, and some few of Kings also, as of Aristonicus, Jugurth,
Artabasdus; I should be loath to revive this obsolete custom, Jos. Ant. l. 5.
c. 1. Dion.
yet we read that Joshua put to death those Kings that he took Captives. And
Dion relates of Sossius, That he whipped Antigonus with rods after be had fastened
him to his Cross. But withal the same Historian wisely adds, Which no King ever
suffered by any of the Roman Conquerours. The same History we may also read in
Josephus. Ant. l. 15.
Eutropius likewise records it of Maximianus Herculius, that having slain the
Francks and Almains, and taken their Kings Captives, He exposed them to be
devoured by wild Beasts. So does Ammianus concerning a King of the Almains, who
being taken Captive was crucified. Yet even among the Romans there were diverse
Kings besides Perseus, that escaped the severity of that custom, as Syphax,
Gentius, Juba, and in the time of the Caesar's, Caractius, and others: Whence it
may appear that the Romans (though as Cicero and others blame them for being
too severe in this case) had always some respect both to the causes of the War,
and also to the manner of its prosecution, when they thus punished them: And
therefore it was no ill advice that M. Aemilius Paulus gave to the Roman Senate
in the case of Perseus, Si nihil humani metuerent, at divinam vindictam
timerent iis imminentem qui victoria insolentius utuntur; Though they stood not
in awe of any humane power, yet they should do well to fear the anger of the
Gods, who never failed to avenge themselves on those who abused their favors,
with too much pride and insolency. Plutarch in the life of Agis observes, that
in the Grecian Wars such reverence was born unto the office and dignity of a
King, that their very Enemies durst not offer violence to the Lacedemonian
Kings. An Enemy therefore that considers not what humane Laws permit to be
done, but what in equity he ought to do, or what Religion and Piety requires to
be done, forbears the shedding of the blood even of his Enemies; neither will
he sentence any man to death, unless it be to preserve life or livelihood to
himself, or for such personal crimes as by the Laws of God or Man deserve
death; yea, and though some of them do deserve it, yet in consideration of
humane frailty, and of the instability of fortune or some such probable
reasons, he either altogether omits, or at least contents himself with such a
punishment as is not capital. It is an excellent observation that Diodorus
makes, That whosoever succeeds prosperously in War, whether it were the
expugnation of Cities or victory in Battle, Saepe fortunae magis quam virtuti
debentur; are for the most part rather the gift of fortune, than the necessary
effect of true valor. But to show mercy unto such as they have conquered, is
the work of Providence only. Thus Alexander in Curtius, Though he was highly
incensed against the Authors of the War, yet he thought it prudent to forgive
them all.

VIII. The innocent not to suffer for the nocent.
Concerning such as may occasionally or accidentally, but not intentionally be
killed, mine opinion is (as I have already said) that if not for justice sake,
yet for pity, we ought not to attempt any such design, wherein the safety of so
many innocents may be concerned, unless it be for some very great cause, or for
the necessary preservation of a multitude. Lib. 5.
Of the same mind was Polybius, It is a good man's duty not to prosecute a
mortal War, though against such as are not just, any longer than till they have
given satisfaction for the wrong done, and reformed what is amiss, but not to
involve the innocent with the nocent in the same punishment, but rather to
spare the nocents for the innocents sake.

IX. Children and Women to be spared.
These things being granted, it will be no hard matter to determine those
things that are more special; for (as Seneca in those Books, wherein he seems
to be angry with himself, observes, De Ira l. 3. c. 24.
) Puerum aetas excusat, Foeminam sexus; Children by their nonage, and Women by
their sex are to be excused. God himself in the Wars of the Hebrews, even after
the Peace was offered and refused, took special care for the preservation of
Women and Infants; Deuteronomy. 20.14.
some few Nations only being by a particular Law excepted, against whom the War
that was made, was not in the behalf of man but of God; and therefore it was
called the War of the Lord. Number. 31.40.
And when he commanded the Midianitish Women to be slain for crimes properly
their own, he excepts those who were pure Virgins; yea, and when he threatened
imminent destruction to the Ninivites for their crying sins, he suffered
himself to be moved, to retract that sentence by the compassion he took on so
many thousands of Infants, Jon. 4.2. De Ira l. 2 c. 9.
who knew not good from evil. Very like whereunto is that of Seneca, Number quis
irascitur pueris, quorum aetas nondum novit rerum discrimina; Will any man be
angry with an Infant, whose age is not yet capable of understanding the
difference of things. So also is that of Lucan, Crimine quo parvi caedem
potuere mereri.
For what crimes may poor Infants slaughtered be.


If God then, who without any cause at all, may without violation of his
justice, destroy any of what Sex or Age soever, as being Lord and giver of
life; do thus, not only spare Women and Children himself, but command us also
so to do: How does it befit men, to whom God has given no such Right over the
lives of others, but what is necessary for the conservation of humane safety
and society, to destroy in our rage so many innocent persons, who can neither
resist nor deserve our anger. Let us therefore in the first place observe, what
the judgment of those people and of those times was concerning Infants, wherein
Religion and Piety were in greatest esteem. Plut. vita Camilli.
We, says Camillus in Livy, come not armed against Women and Children, for
though we destroy their City, yet we spare them; but our Arms we use against
such only as are armed. And Plutarch handling the same Subject, tells us, That
good men observe some Laws even in War: Where we must note that he says, among
good men, that so we may distinguish between this moderation, and that license
which is supported only by custom and impunity. Lib. 24.
And Livy speaking elsewhere of Children says, A qua aetate etiam hosts irati
abstinerent; Whom in respect of their age an Enemy though enraged would spare.
And in another place, describing the more than humane cruelty committed in War,
he says, Vsque ad infantem caedem ira crudelis pervenit; Their cruelty was
such that they spared neither infants nor sucklings. Lib. 8. c. 16.
Pliny in his natural History discoursing of the Lion, says, That when he
roameth about he preys upon Men rather than Women, but never upon Infants
unless extremely oppressed with hunger. Horace passionately complains of the
brutish cruelty of Achilles, who was so merciless, that he spared not Infants,
no not in the Womb.

Nescios fari pueros Achivum
Vreret flammis etiam latentes
Matris in alvo.
The Trojan Babes but lately born,
And those that from the Womb were torn,
In fire be burnt.
Philo also in his Special Laws tells us, That there may be a thousand specious
pretenses for men to quarrel with men; but for men to quarrel with infants and
sucklings, Ne calumina quidam quod dicat, habet; Even malice it self can have
no pretense, they are so very innocent. Josephus likewise speaking of Manaemus,
says, That he that in War destroys, leaves nothing undone that cruelty can do.
And ^e records it of Judas the Maccabite, that upon the taking of Bosra and
Emphrone, He destroyed all the Males amongst them, and whomsoever he found in
them able to fight. And in another place, he calls that punishment which
Alexander surnamed Thracidas inflicted upon the Jewish Women and Children, A
revenge more than humane. Agathias also concerning this Subject writes thus,
Forasmuch as piety forbids us to exercise our rage upon infants newly born, who
must needs be ignorant of their Fathers crimes, therefore shall this sin be
surely and severely visited upon you. Nicetas also, or whosoever else continued
that story unto the times of King Henry, writing of the Scythians, who took
Athira, says, Neither were their Babes as yet sucking at their Mothers
breasts, exempted from their outrage; but were either mowed down by the sword
like grass, or suffered to pine and wither like blossoms for want of
nourishment. A most barbarous act of men void of humanity, and having no sense
of the wrong done unto nature herself, nor of the breach they made of the Laws
both of God and Man, by extending their cruelty beyond what was necessary in
subduing their Enemies. Whereunto we may add those Pious Mandates given by
Queen Elizabeth, recorded by Mr. Cambden in the Year 1596. Camden 1596.
who when she sent out her Fleet against the Spaniard, gave charge that if they
took any Towns, they should spare the Female Sex, and those of feeble Age; and
offer violence to none but to such as resisted. Now that compassion which seems
to have been in all Ages taken of Infants, and such as have not yet attained to
the use of reason, is for the most part showed unto Women, that is, if they
have done nothing in their own persons that may particularly deserve
punishment; or if they have not personally performed such service, as properly,
belongs to Soldiers only. For as Statius notes, It is Sexus rudis insciusque
ferri; A sex that is ignorant and unfit for War. As the Captain in Seneca's
Tragedies demanded of Nero, who had termed Octavia an Enemy, Foemina hoc nomen
capit? Can a Woman be so called? For which Cause Tucca and Varus, thought it
fit to expunge those two Verses in the second of Virgils Aeneads, where Aeneas
consults about the putting of Helen to Death. It was a magnanimous speech of
the great Alexander in Curtius, It is not my custom to make War against
Captives and Women, Armatus sit oportet quem oderim; He must be armed whom I
look at as an Enemy. So Grypus in Justine denies, that either he or any of his
Ancestors, in all their Wars foreign or civil, did ever after the Victory
obtained, exercise their cruelty upon Women, whom their very sex did
sufficiently guard, as well from the perils of War, as from the rage of the
Conqueror. And so does he in Tacitus profess of himself, That he never made
War against Women, nor against any others, but such as he found armed to resist
him. Valerius Maximus relating the barbarous outrage, L. 9. c. 1.
which Munatius Flaccus exercised on Women and Children, calls it Ffferatam
crudelitatem, and auditu etiam intolerabilem; A savage cruelty and not with any
patience to be heard. The Carthaginians, as Diodorus testifies, at Salinae
destroyed not the Women and Infants only, Lib. 13.
without the least sense of humanity; but their very Beasts also, which he
elsewhere calls, an act of cruelty. Now what Latinus Pacatus said of Women, that
they were, Sexus cui Bella parcunt; A sex always favored in War. The like does
Papinus say of old men, that they are, Nullis violabilis armis
Turba, senes.
A sort of People that no Arms can hurt.


X. Priests and Students to be spared.
What we have said of Women and Children, may also be said of all men
generally, whose manner of life is altogether abhorrent from deeds of Arms,
Jure Belli in armatos repugnantesque caedes; By that Right of War which is most
agreeable to the Law of nature, they only are to perish by the sword, who have
actually taken up the sword. Livy l. 28. Ant. 12. c 3.
Where there is no power to resist, there can be no cause of revenge. So
Josephus, It is but just and equal that they that take up arms, should be
punished by Arms, but the innocent should always be indemnified. Thus Camillus
in Livy when he had taken Veji, Lib. 5.
commanded his Soldiers to spare every man whom they found unarmed. And among
these, they are in the first place to be spared, who are conversant about
things sacred and holy: for anciently, it was the general custom of all Nations
to exempt such from bearing Arms; and for that cause were they also
privileged from the Force of Arms. (...) 10.5.
For seeing they could do no violence, therefore was no violence done unto
them. Though the Philistines were mortal Enemies to the Jews, yet did they
forbear to use any violence to the College of the Prophets at Gaba. So we read
of David, that he fled with Samuel to another place, where there was such
another College of Prophets, as to a place of refuge against all hostile
violence, 1 Samuel 19.18. Hircanus, when he besieged Jerusalem, sent Sacrifices
to the Temple; as the Jews testify. And the Goths are commended by Procopius
for sparing the Priests that belonged to the Church of St Peter and St Paul,
being situate without the Walls of Rome. Quaest. Graec.
Plutarch records it of the Cretians, That though they were embroiled in Civil
Wars, yet did all Parties carry themselves inoffensively toward their Priests,
and toward those that had the charge of burning the Dead. Lib. 8.
It is observed by Strabo, That when all Greece was harassed with Intestine
Wars, the Aeleans being consecrated to Jupiter, together with those that came
to sojourn with them, lived in great peace and security. And Servius upon the
seventh of Virgil's Aeneads, speaking of a Reverend Old Priest, says, Eum
defendebat a Bello, si non Aetas, saltem Religio Sacerdotis; That he was
privileged from all violence, Polyb. l. 4.
if not by his Age, yet in respect of his Priesthood. In like manner also they
that went up to try their Fortunes at the Olympian, Pythian, Nemaean and
Isthmian Games, though it were in the time of War, Thucyd. l. 5. and 8 Plut.
Arat.
were on all sides protected. The like Privileges and Immunities from the
calamities of War were due unto such as, though no Priests yet, do
voluntarilily sequester themselves from worldly Affairs, giving themselves up
wholly to piety and devotion. For whom the Ecclesiastical Canons (grounded upon
natural equity) do make the same provision as they do for Priests. To these
also we may add those who spend their time in either the invention or
perfection of such arts as are useful or necessary for humane Society.
Wherefore Protogenes being demanded by Demetrius, How he durst trust himself
without the Walls of Rhodes? Answered, That he knew Demetrius warred against
the Rhodians, not against Arts.

XI (...) Husband^
Next unto these are Husbandmen, who are also provided for by the Canons.
Diodorus Siculus records this in honor of the Indians, That in their Wars they
that are Soldiers do kill an^ destroy one another without mercy; but such as
were employed in Husbandry they never molested, (...) 2.
as being Benefactors in common to all Parties. The like does Plutarch testify
of the ancient Corinthians and Megarenses, Nemo Agricolas ullo afficiebat malo;
Not one of them would wrong an Husbandman. ^y^opad. l. 5.
Thus favorable was Cyrus in Xenophon, as appears by the M ssage he sent to
the King of Assyria, wherein he tells him, That he was very willing that
Husbandmen should follow their Callings without any disturbance. And it is a
very honorable te^timony that Suidas gives of Belisarius, and worthy of all
men's imitation, That he was so great a friend to Husbandmen, and took such care
for their indemnity, that whilst he commanded the Army, Goth. l. 3.
no Soldier durst ever injure them. The like Testimony does Procopius give of
him.

XII. And Merchants and the like.
Next unto Husbandmen, the Canon provides for Merchants, and not only for such
as are Factors and Sojourners in the Enemies Country for a while, but for such
as are perpetual Subjects; because the course of these men's lives are
altogether averse from War: where also we must note, That under this general
name of Merchant are comprehended all kinds of Tradesmen and Artificers, who
for their gain do usually prefer Peace before War.

XIII. And Captives.
Let us now proceed to such as have born Arms: That of Pyrrhus in Seneca we
have already quoted, namely, That though the Law permits us to do what we
please to Captives; yet equity and conscience forbid us to take away their
lives. Of the like opinion was Alexander, who (as we have said) places Captives
in the same condition with Women: whereunto we may add that of St Augustine to
Boniface, Epist. 1.
Hostem pugnantem necessitas perimat, non voluntas; It is not cruelty, but
necessity, that makes us destroy a fighting Enemy. As force and violence is
properly used against those that are armed against us; so to those whom the
chance of War has left naked and unarmed, mercy and compassion is peculiarly
due; especially to those who can no ways endanger the public peace. Xenophon
writes of Agesilaus, That he gave command to his Soldiers not to destroy their
Prisoners as Malefactors, but rather to preserve them for humanity sake. And
Diodorus testifies of the Greeks, That they always fought valiantly where they
found resistance: But to those that were subjected they were very merciful.
Salust in his Jugurthine History, speaking of some young men, who having
yielded themselves, were put to death, says, That it was done contrary to the
Law of Arms, that is, contrary to equity and the custom of civilized Nations.
Lib. 5.
Lactantius of the times he lived in, says, Parcitur victis and est locus
inter Arma clementiae; We spare those whom we have conquered, and there is
clemency to be used, Hist. l. 4.
even in Arms. Tacitus commended Primus Antonius and Varus, two Flavian
Commanders; for that they never committed any act of cruelty, beyond the place
where the Battle was fought. De pace secunda.
So likewise Aristides, It is the custom of our Age by force of Arms to subdue
those that resist us, but to deal mercifully with those that submit unto us.
Concerning such as were taken Prisoners in the War, the Prophet Elisha puts
this Question to the King of Samaeria, 2 Kings 6.22.
Would thou kill those whom thou have taken Captive with thy Sword and with
thy Bow? When one in Euripides demanded, Whether the Grecian Laws did forbid
the killing of an enemy, he as readily answered, Quem Mars reliquit Praelio
superstitem; That they did, if that Enemy survived the Fight. And therefore
Eurystheus, being taken Prisoner, comforts himself in this, He that kills me
guiltless shall never be. Plutarch comparing Marcellus with Pelopidas, seems to
condemn Marcellus for his cruelty in shedding blood unnecessarily after the
Victory, whereas neither Pelopidas nor Epaminondas did ever put any to the
Sword whom they had overcome, neither did they take away the liberty of any
City that they took; neither would the Thebans (as it was believed) have
exercised that cruelty upon the Orchomenians, had either of these Commanders
been present. Besides, when Scipio would have put all the Inhabitants of Vtica
to the Sword, Plut. in Ca^. Vticensi.
wit^out regard of Age or Sex; because they had taken part with Caesar, Cato
would not suffer him: But protesting against it as an act of inhumanity, and
calling the Gods to witness in open Council, with great difficulty he saved
them from so great a sla^ghter. Procopius in the first of his Persian Wars,
which he also repeats in his second, says, That to use cruelty to the
Conquered, is repugnant to the Rules of Piety; so that when Cabadas King of
Persia, after he had taken the City A^mada by storm, had made great slaughter
among the Inhabitants, a certain old Priest told him, That to kill so many
Captives, was not King y. Goth. l. 1. c. ib.
And the same Procopius elsewhere records an excellent Speech of Belisarius to
his Soldiers, upon the taking of Naples, dissuading them from the unnecessary
effu on of blood; Do not (says he) extend your hatred of your enemies beyond
measure: No Conquerours continue to hate the Conquered: If you kill them now,
you do not abate the number of your Foes, but of your Subjects. Do not
therefore prosecute your revenge too far; but consider, that having subdued
them, to become now Slaves to your own passions, is ignoble. Ann. Comn^nat.
When Alexius the Emperor was persuaded by one of his Council to kill his
Scythian Captives, he made this noble Answer, Though they be Scythians, yet are
they men; though they be enemies, yet do they deserve pity: It is the chance of
War only that puts the difference between us and them. It is a most excellent
Observation that we read in Gregoras. Lib. 4.
Whatsoever is done in the heat of Fight is pardonable, because the faculties
of Discourse and Ratiocination is (as it were) blocked up; so that the hands,
being as it were drunk with anger and revenge, and wanting the guidance and
manuduction of Reason, do even they know not what. But when by our strength and
courage our dangers are over, See Chap. 7. toward the end.
and our Reason enjoys her liberty to examine and judge of what we are about,
and to issue out her Mandates to the hands for execution; then if any things be
done unjustly or unseemly it plainly shows the perverseness of the mind. Julian
in his second Panegyric on Constantius, under whose Person he describes a
virtuous Prince, says, That having conquered his enemy by force of Arms, he
makes no farther use of the Sword, esteeming it impious to kill him who is no
longer able to defend himself. And therefore Diodorus Siculus condemns the
Byzantines and Chalcedonians of notorious cruelty, for killing a multitude of
Captives taken in War. And in another place he tells us, That it was a Law
generally observed to spare Captives, and that he that violates this Law does,
doubtl^ss, sin against God and man. And hence it is, that in all Stories we
find those Commanders highly commended, who having taken a multitude of
Captives, whom they could not without danger and charge keep, have chose rather
freely to dismiss them, than to kill them.

XIV. They are to be spared that surrender on equal Conditions.
Wherefore they that in a Battle shall cry for Quarter, or in a Siege shall
offer to yield upon Conditions to save their lives, are neither of them to be
rejected. The Romans (as Procopius testifies Goth. 4.
) thus bespeaks the Persians whom they held closely besieged in the Fort of
Petra, We, say they, do extremely commiserate your hard condition, and would
gladly spare you, though ye wish to dye; and that life which ye so nicely
disdain, we would save, as it becomes Christians and Citizens of the Roman
Empire. And therefore Arrianus speaking in that Slaughter, which the Thebans
made of their Captives that had yielded to mercy, says, Lib. 3.
That it was not according to the custom of the Grecians. The like we read of
Thucydides, Ye did accept of us, who willingly and with lifted up hands begged
to be received to mercy, and it is not the custom of the Grecians to kill such.
The Syracusian Senators in Diodorus tell us, That to spare a Suppliant is the
sign of a truly noble and magnanimous spirit. And Sopater confesses, That it
was the custom of the Grecians to save such as begged for life in the Wars. In
Towns that were besieged this custom was generally observed by the Romans, That
if they yielded before the Battering Ram touched the Walls, the lives of the
Citizens were saved. Caesar signifies to the Advatici, That he was willing to
preserve their City, in case they would surrender before his Ramms approached
their Walls: Which custom is yet observed, with this difference, In places
meanly fortified before the Cannons begin to batter; but in places of great
strength, before a breach be made in their Works. Howbeit, Cicero respecting
not so much what may lawfully be done, as what in equity ought to be done,
gives his opinion in this Case thus, Seeing that we ought to provide for the
safety of those whom we conquer, it is fit that we receive them into
protection, who shall surrender themselves, though our Ramms have battered
their Walls. The Jewish Interpreters note, That it was a custom among their
Ancestors, when they had laid close Siege against any Town, not to incircle it
with a Ditch quite round, but to leave one part thereof open for such to fly,
as would save themselves by flight; whereby the Town might be taken with the
least effusion of blood. Thus Scipio Aemilianus being commanded to destroy
Carthage, made Proclamation, That they that would provide for their own safety
by flight, might do it freely; as Polybius testifies.

XV. They also that surrender without condition.
The same equality bids us to spare those who are willing to surrender
themselves to the will of the Conqueror, without any Conditions at all.
Trucidare deditos saevum, To kill those who are at our mercy is cruelty, says
Tacitus Tac. Lib. 12. Bello Jug. lib. 1. de Rep. ord.
. So also Salust, rehearsing that bloody fact of Marius in putting to death
those young men among the Campsans that had delivered themselves to mercy,
says, That it was facinus contra Jus Belli, A cruelty scarce justifiable by
the natural Right of War. And in another place he complains of the like
cruelty, saying, That he was so far transported with rage, that he put to the
Sword not only men armed, and such as were in Battle, which he might do by the
Law of Arms; but even Suppliants also that begged for mercy. So also Livy, Qui
deditis contra Jus, ac fas Bellum intulisset; He made War even against those
that yielded themselves, contrary to the Laws of God and good men. Nay, the
principal design of a General should be rather to force his enemy through fear
to surrender, than to kill them. And herein is Brutus to be commended, who
would seldom fall on his enemy by assault, but chose rather to encompass them
with his Horse, commanding his Soldiers to spare them, who e're long would be
his own.

XVI. Unless some very great crime do hinder.
Against these Rules of natural Right and Equity, are usually brought these
specious Exceptions, which notwithstanding have little of solidity in them: as
namely, What if such acts of cruelty be done by way of retaliation? what if
they be done by way of example, to deter others? or what if it be done against
such as have been notoriously obstinate? None of these are sufficient to
justify an unnecessary or an unjust Slaughter, as is easily to be collected by
what we have already written concerning the just causes of killing Enemies. For
from Captives and such as actually deliver themselves or desire so to do, there
can be no danger. That therefore they may justly be put to death, there ought
to precede some such crime, as to an impartial Judge should deserve death. And
thus we may happily read of cruelty sometimes used unto such as have either been
taken Prisoners, or yielded without Conditions of life, if being convicted of
the injustice of the War, they have still persisted in Arms, or if they have
reproached or defamed the Conqueror with bitter invectives, or have broken
their faith, or somewhat of the Law of Nations, as the privileges of
Ambassadors, or have been Traitors, Renegadoes, or the like. But as to the
Objection of retaliation, Nature does not admit thereof, unless it be against
those numerical persons, who have done the wrong. Neither will it suffice to
say, That the Enemies do all of them make but one Body by their combination
against us, as may easily be gathered by what has been already said, when we
treated concerning the communication of punishments. For, as we read in
Aristides, Is it not a shame to imitate that as just, which we condemn in
others as unjust. Upon which account it was that Plutarch blames the
Syracusians for putting to death the Wives of Hicetas, Plut. Tim. and Dion.
and his Children; for no other cause, but because Hicetas had before put
Dion's Wife, his Sister and little Son to Death. But as to the profit which may
hereafter be expected by putting a terror into others, Terror.
this gives no positive Right to put any man to death that yields himself
Prisoner. But if there be just cause of death before given, this may be one
cause amongst others why the punishment due may not be remitted. Again, an
obstinate endeavor to maintain our own Party, if our cause be not altogether
unjust or dishonest, does not at all deserve punishment, Goth. lib. 1.
as the Neapolitans argue in Procopius; or if it do, surely that punishment
cannot amount to death, if equity may be the Judge. When Alexander had
commanded all the Youth in a certain Town to be put to death, because they
defended it so resolutely against him, Polyan. Lib. 4.
the Indians told him, That he made War like a Thief or a Murderer; Latronum
more bellare Indis visus est, says the Author: whereupon to preserve his own
honor he ever after used his Victories with more clemency. Much more for his
honor it was, that he would have spared some Milesians, because he perceived
them to be very generous and faithful to their own Party; as Arrianus records.
When Phyto the Praetor of Rhegium was dragged out to tortures and death,
because he had resolutely defended his City against Dionysius, as they dragged
him along he cried out, That the Tyrant had thus punished him, for no other
reason than because he would not betray the City to him. For which cause the
Gods would certainly revenge his death upon the Tyrant within a short time.
Such punishments as these Diodorus calls unjust. For mine own part, I am highly
pleased with that wish of Lucan's, -- Vincat quicunque necesse
Non putat in victos saevum distringere ferrum,
Quique suos Cives, quod signa adversa tulerunt,
Non credit fecisse nefas --
His be the Day, who can contented be
To conquer, but not kill his Enemy;
That can believe his Neighbor honest, though
He march against him as an Armed Foe,
So that we understand the word Cives, not for Neighbors inhabiting the same
Town or Country, but Citizens of the same Universe. Much less can the griefs we
conceive for the like loss we have sustained in War, make the unnecessary
shedding of blood to be just and lawful, as we may read of Achilles, Aeneas,
and Alexander, who were wont to celebrate the Funeral of their friends whom
they had lost in the War (thinking thereby to make an atonement for them) with
the blood of their Prisoners, and such as had yielded themselves to the mercy
of the Conqueror; which Homer deservedly condemns as an unjust act; and which
after Ages adjudged as cruelty, as Servius notes upon Virgil. Aen. l. 10.


XVII. A multitude offending may be justly pardoned.
Yea, and where their crimes are such as to deserve death, yet is it the
property of mercy to abate somewhat of the extremity of our Right, by reason of
the multitude of Offenders; an example whereof we have even in God himself, who
commanded the Hebrews to tender Peace to the Canaanites, and other bordering
Nations, though exceedingly wicked, that so paying an Annual Tribute to the
Conqueror they might enjoy Peace. Pertinent to this purpose is that of Seneca,
When some particular Soldiers in an Army mutiny, the severity of a General is
necessary; but if the whole Army threaten a revolt, then is a General Pardon
seasonable. And again, Quid tollit iram sapientis? Turba peccantium; De ira l.
2. c. 10.
What is it that sooner appeaseth the wrath of a Wiseman, than the multitude
of Offenders? Quicquid multis peccatur inultum est, When the people generally
offend, there revenge is not so proper as pardon. For as Livia in Xiphilinus
observes out of Dion, He that will punish all Offenders according to the utmost
rigor of the Law, will be enforced to destroy the greatest part of Mankind.
That of St Augustine is very seasonable advice in this Case, He that would
reform the errors of a multitude, must do it magis monendo quam minando, more
by persuasion than by threatenings. For severity is then seasonable when the
number of Delinquents are but few. But when they are numerous, then that of
Lucan holds true: Tot simul infesto juvenes occumbere Letho,
Saepe Fames, Pelagique furor, subitaeque ruinae,
Aut Coeli Terraeque Lues, aut Bellica clades,
Nunquam poena fuit.
Sadly at once so many Youths to slay,
Sometimes a Famine, or a Sea-breach may,
A sudden Fall of Buildings, or a Plague
From Heaven and Earth, or Wars unbridled rage;
(But in cold blood to show such ire and teen)
By way of punishment was never seen.
And therefore to avoid the effusion of much blood was the invention of Lots,
or casting of Dice, (as Cicero testifies) whereof Salust gives this reason,
where speaking of such bloody and inhumane punishments, he says, Quibus
vastatur Civitas magis quam corrigitur, Orat. pro Cluent.
Whereby a City is rather wasted and depopulated, than reformed.

XVIII. Hostages to be spared, unless in themselves criminous.
By what has been already said, it may easily be gathered what the Law of
Nature does determine concerning Hostages. In Ancient times when it was
generally believed, that every man had as much right over his own life, as he
had in any other thing wherein he claimed a propriety; and that this right, was
either by explicit or implicit consent transferred into that Commonwealth or
City wherein he lived, it was not to be wondered at; if, as we may read, those
hostages, though in themselves innocent, were sometimes put to death for the
offenses of those Cities whereunto they belonged, whether they were delivered
by their own peculiar consent, or by the public, wherein theirs also was
included: But since a purer light has discovered unto us, that the sovereign
power over men's lives is reserved in God alone; it follows, that no man can by
his own consent only, give unto another this power, either over his own life,
or over the life of his fellow Citizen. Wherefore that noble Captain Narses (as
Agathias relates) did abominate it as an act of cruelty, to put to death such
hostages, as were no ways guilty of those crimes that were committed against
him. So also have others done in like cases, even by the example of Scipio
(perhaps) who was wont to say, That he scorned to take revenge on the innocent
hostages, but he would severely punish the Delinquents themselves, Nec ab
inermi sed ab armato host poenas expetiturum; Disdaining (it seems) that
revenge that was taken upon an unarmed foe. The very same answer do we read of,
given upon the like occasion by the Emperor Julian, as Eunapius testifies.
That which our modern Lawyers, and those no mean ones hold forth, namely, That
such conventions and agreements are valid, in case they are confirmed by
ordinary and general practice; I also condescend unto, in case they will
understand by right, that which is not punishable; for so, in this argument it
is usually taken: but in case they imagine, that they that shall take away the
life of any, by virtue of such a pact or agreement only, do not sin, I fear
that they are both deceived themselves, and by their perilous examples deceive
others. But plainly, if he that comes as an hostage be at that time, or at any
time before has been a notorious offender, or has afterward in any matters
of moment satisfied his faith given in any of these cases, his punishment may
be without injury. But the flight of Clelia over Tiber, when she made her
escape to King Ethruseus, was not only safe, but to use Livys own words, an
honorable attempt; because she came as an hostage, not by any voluntary act or
consent of her own, but by the command of the City she was sent from.

XIX. All needless and unprofitable combatings are to be avoided.
This one thing is yet to be added, that all Duels and Trials by Combitants,
seeing that they are of no use, either to the decision of right, or the ending
of a War, but merely for ostentation of strength, are not only repugnant to our
Christian profession, but to the Laws of humane society. And therefore all
Commanders in all Armies should carefully provide against such unprofitable
effusion of Blood, as being liable to render an account the^^of to those whose
Vicegerents they are; because, as Salust observes, it is the honor of a
General, Incruento exercitu victoriam deportare; To conquer with the least
effusion of blood that may be. Tacitus writing of the Catti, a Nation at that
time eminent for their Valor and good Conduct, says, Rari excursus, and
fortuitae pugnae; They made but very few excursions, and fought as few Battles
but upon advantage. Upon which account it was that Plutarch deservedly censured
Demetrius, Who rashly exposed his Army to unnecessary dangers, rather out of
vain ostentation, than hopes of gain.

CHAP. XII. Moderation in the spoiling of an Enemies Country.
I. What wast is just, and how far forth it is so. II. Things profitable unto
us, and out of the Enemies power not to be wasted. III. Nor in case there be
great hopes of a speedy victory. IV. Nor if the Enemy may sustain themselves
without them from other parts. V. If the things to be destroyed are of no use
to the maintenance of the War. VI. As those things that are sacred or thereunto
belonging. VII. So likewise those that are Religious. VIII. The benefit that
attends such a moderation observed.
I. What spoil is just and how far forth.
THAT one man may destroy the things of another without injustice, it is
necessary that one of these three things should proceed: Either such a
necessity as may be presumed to have been excepted in the institution of
primary Right or Dominion, as when a man merely to avoid some imminent danger
to himself, shall cast the Sword of a madman into a River; yet even in such a
case, there remains an obligation to make restitution to the full value,
according to the opinion of the best Authors, as we have elsewhere declared: Or
secondly, there proceeds some debt, Lib. 2. c 2.. 9.
which arose from some inequality; and then that which is wasted is so
understood, as if it had been taken in satisfaction of that debt, for otherwise
it would not be just: Or thirdly, there must proceed some crime or wrong done
that may deserve such a punishment; or which, such a punishment does not in
proportion exceed. For as it is well observed by a Judicious Divine, It cannot
stand with equity or right reason, Vict. de Jure Belli n. 52. and. 56.
that a whole Kingdom should be wasted, because some herds of Cattle have been
driven away, or some houses or villages burnt: which also is acknowledged by
Polybius, who would not have punishments by War multiplied without end or
measure; but rather that all injuries should be expiated by punishments
proportionable. And for these causes, and within these bounds and limits, an
Enemies Country may be spoiled and wasted without injustice; but otherwise,
unless it be for some great advantage to do another man hurt, and to gain
thereby nothing, is but mere folly. Srat. c. 6.
Therefore wise men are usually swayed by matters of profit, whereof the
principal is that noted by Onesander, Where he advises a Prince to destroy,
burn, and lay wast his Enemies Country, because, says he, a scarcity of money
and victuals will soon shorten the War, as plenty will prolong it. Herod. lib.
1. Pol. lib. 4. Front. Strat. 3. c. 4.
Consonant whereunto is that of Proclus, It is the duty of a good General to
cut off forage from his Enemy, and provisions from every side. So thought
Curtius of Darius, That having nothing to feed himself and his Army with, but
what he must get by rapine and spoil, he must needs at length be overcome by
want and famine. Now, that spoil and devastation may easily be dispensed
withal, which soonest enforces an Enemy to sue for Peace. Philo the Jew in his
Book of a contemplative life, says, They that are in Arms do ^sually destroy
and lay wast their Enemies Country, Ut hosts eo facilius se dedant rerum
necessarium penuria; That so being punished by famine, they may without the
hazard of a Battle be compelled to yield themselves to the Conqueror. After
this manner did the Halyattes make War upon the Milesians, the Thracians
against the Byzantines, the Romans against the Campanes, Capenates, Spaniards,
Legurians, Nervians, and others. But if we would diligently observe how our
modern Wars are managed, we shall find that such devastations are now a days
made more out of hatred, than any prudent council: for it so falls out
oft-times, that either those reasons which would persuade us thereunto do
cease; or those that dissuade us from it, are more forceable.

II. No wasting of things profitable to us, and without the reach of the Enemy.
And this in the first place happens, when that part of the Country which
yields profit is so in our possession, that the Enemy can reap no benefit by
it. And hereunto does the Divine Law properly look, when it permits wild and
unfruitful trees to be cut down to make engines for War, but commands such as
are fruitful to be preserved for food Deuteronomy. 20.19. De Creation. Magist.
; adding this reason, because trees cannot rise up in Arms against us as men
may: which precept, Philo by a parity of reason enlarges to fields and other
lands that are fruitful, affixing these words thereunto, Quid rebus inanimis
quae and mites sunt, and mites fructus ferunt, irasceris? Why art thou angry
with things inanimate, especially with such as are in themselves gentle, and
that yield sweet and delectable fruit unto others? Do they like men express any
menacing signs of hostility against thee, for which they deserve to be
eradicated? Are they not much more profitable to the Conqueror whilst they
live and bear fruit, than when they shall be torn up? Do they not yield thee
plenty of things, not only for necessity, but for delight and pleasure? For
trees and fields as well as men, do in their respective seasons pay tribute to
the Conqueror, yea and much better, being so necessary, that we can no ways
live without them. And in another place, he commends the equity of Moses, in
restraining the license of Soldiers, from destroying Trees bearing Fruit or
Corn before it be ripe, adjudging it very unjust, Iram in homines conceptam
erogari in ea quae causa mali nullius sunt; That our indignation against men
should be exercised upon things that do no ways hurt us; besides, seeing that
all sublunary things are mutable, and that nothing long continues in the same
state wherein now it is, some provision ought in prudence to be made for the
future. Possible it is, that they that are now most bitterly enraged against
us, may upon debate and conference had, become our Friends and Allies. And then
we will easily confess, That Amicos necessariis fraudare, durum est; To defraud
our Friends of necessaries, is very hard. It is very true what from our
Ancestors we have received, We ought so to trust our friends, as if at some
times or other they may be our Enemies; that is, that every man ought to
reserve something within his own breast of what nearest concerns himself,
whereby to provide for his own safety; and not so wholly to discover himself by
his words or actions, as that he may one day repent himself by reason of the
vehemence of either passion, and blame his own rashness when it is too late to
help it. This in all Cities is observed as an Oracle, That in times of Peace
they ever provide for War; and in times of War they lay the foundations of a
firm and lasting Peace: we should neither place too much confidence in our
friends, because they may prove our enemies; neither should we appear too
diffident of our enemies, because they may hereafter prove our friends. But if
the hopes of our enemies conversion cannot prevail with us to do them civil
offices, yet let us remember, That there is no hostility at all against us in
those things which an enemies Country produces. For all things there are
serviceable, all things profitable, all things pleasureable, or very necessary
to our selves. All its fruits affording unto us, either nourishment, or
somewhat that is equivalent unto it. Again, Non opportet Bellum infer Belli
nesciis; We ought not to make War upon those things that are so amicable, so
innocent, that they know not what War means. To burn, cut down, and utterly to
extirpate those things which Nature by heat from above and moisture from
beneath, has so tenderly brought up and nourished, to no other end but to pay
their yearly Tribute unto men, as unto Kings, savours of too much inhumanity.
Thus far Philo; wherewith agrees that of Josephus, If Trees, says he, could
speak, they would certainly upbraid us with injustice, for inflicting upon them
the plagues and miseries of War, who are in no wise guilty of the causes
thereof. Neither has that Saying of Pythagoras any other ground than this,
where he tells us, That to cut down or to hurt tender Plants or Trees that bear
Fruit, is a sin against Nature, and not justifiable before God. De non edendis,
lib. 4.
Porphyry likewise describing the manners of the Jews, taking (as I suppose)
their Customs to be the best Interpreters of their Laws, extends this Custom or
Law to all Beasts that are serviceable for Tillage. Their Talmuds and their
Interpreters do yet stretch out this Law somewhat farther, even to all things
that may causelessly perish, as the firing of Houses, the poisoning of Springs,
or the spoiling of any thing that may afford nourishment to Mankind, unless it
be such Trees or Houses, as being near unto the Walls may thereby hinder
Soldiers in the performance of their Military Duties. Agreeable with this Law
was that prudent moderation of the Athenian General, De Repub. l. 5.
Timotheus, Who would not suffer his Soldiers to destroy any House or Village,
nor cut down any Plant that bare Fruit. There is the like Law extant in Plato,
prohibiting the laying of any Lands waste, or the demolishing of any Houses.
And if we may not waste the Country of an Enemy, much less when by Conquest we
have made it our own. Offic. l. 1.
Cicero did not approve of the demolishing of Corinth, though the Citizens had
unhandsomly treated the Roman Ambassadors. And in another place he calls that
War an ugly, Pro domo sua.
horrid and malicious War, that was made against Houses, Walls, Pillars, and
Posts. Livy highly commends the lenity of the Romans, for that having taken
Capua, Lib. 26.
they did not pull down the Walls, nor set on fire the innocent Houses. There
is a most excellent Epistle upon this Argument extant in Procopius, which
Belisarius writes to Totilas, It has been, says he, reputed in former Ages
the Glory of wise men to raise fair and magnificent Structures, to preserve
their Names and Memories; but to raze and demolish them being built was ever
esteemed the badge of folly and madness, as not blushing to transmit to
Posterity the Monuments of their own vileness. It is confessed by all men, That
Rome is the most magnificent and beautiful City of all that the Sun beholds:
Neither did it arise to this height of splendor by the bounty or industry of
any one man, or in few years; but many Kings and Emperors, and a vast series
or succession of Noblemen, many Ages, and a stupendous Mass of Treasure, have
drawn hither, as other things, so the most expert Artificers in the World,
whereby having by little and little brought this City to that perfection,
wherein we now see it, they have bequeathed it to future Ages, as an
everlasting Monument of their Virtue and Magnanimity; wherefore to raze this
City, were to be injurious to Mankind in all Ages; to our Ancestors, in
sacrilegiously burying in its Ruins the memory of their noble Acts; to our
Posterity, enviously depriving them of the very sight of those noble
Structures, whereby they may be excited to the imitation of their Virtues. And
if it be thus, then consider that one of these two must necessarily fall out,
either the Emperor must vanquish, or you: If you be Conqueror, then in
destroying this City you destroy not what is your Enemies, but your own; and in
preserving it, you enjoy the richest and most beautiful place on the Earth. But
in case thou be worsted, thy clemency in preserving this great City shall plead
strongly to the Emperor for mercy; but in destroying it, all hopes of favor
lie buried in the ruins of it: and thou shall not only lose whatever thou
can gain by the Spoil, but an eternal brand of shame and infamy shall cleave
unto thy Name throughout all Ages, according to thy dealings herein. For fame
is equally ready to report either good or evil of us. Potentum quales sunt
actiones, talis existimatio; According to the lives and actions of Grandees, so
is their fame to the Worlds end. Thus far Procopius. It is true, Josh. 6. 2
Kings 3.19.
that God himself in the sacred Scriptures did not only command, that some
Cities should be destroyed by fire, but also that the Trees of the Moabites,
contrary to this General Rule, should be cut down. But this was not done out of
an hostile malice, but out of a pure detestation of their sins, which were
either publicly known to deserve such a punishment, or at least were so
reputed in Gods account.

III. If there be great hopes of Victory.
Secondly, We should forbear to waste an enemies Country, where the possession
of it is in question, especially if there be any probable hopes of a speedy
Victory, whereby both the Land and the profits thereof are likely to become the
reward of the Conqueror. So Alexander the Great (as Justine tells us)
prohibited his Soldiers from depopulating Asia, telling them, That they ought
rather carefully to preserve their own, and not to destroy that which they came
to possess. Thus Gelimer with his Vandals besieging the City Carthage, Proc.
Vand. 2.
made no spoil, nor took any pillage; but secured the Country to himself as his
own. The like Speech I find in Helmoldus, Nonne Terra quam devastamus nostra
est? Lib. 1. c. 66.
Is not the Land that we waste, ours? and the people whom we destroy, our
Subjects? Wherefore then are we become Enemies to our s^lves? wherefore do we
drive away those who should serve us with food, and pay us Contributions? So
Quintius, when Philip overran Thessaly, wasting all before him, persuaded his
Soldiers so to march, as if the whole Country were now their own. Thus
likewise Croesus persuades Cyrus, not to give Lydia to be spoiled by his
Soldiers, by this very Argument, Non Vrbem meam, non res meas diripies; nihil
enim ad me ista pertinent: Tua sunt: Tua isti perdent. No sober man will
voluntarily destroy his own. This Country, these (...) these Goods, are no
longer mine, but thine; The fortune of the War has left me nothing: (...)
thine by the Right of Conquest: Whatsoever then the Soldiers thus waste and
consume, is not (...) but thine. And to those who after the Conquest shall so
waste and spoil what they have conquered, may that of Jocasta to Polynices be
not unfitly applied, Petendo Patriam perdis: Sen. Th^^.
ut fiat tua
Vis esse nullam: quin tuae Cansae nocet
Ipsum hoc, quod Armis vertis infestis solum,
Seget osque adultas sternis, and totas fugam
Edis per Agros. Nemo sic vastat sua.
Quae corripi Igne, quae meti Gladio jubes,
Aliena credis.
Whilst thou seek to regain thy Country, thou destroyest it; by endeavoring
to make it thine, thou make it none. It is a good Argument against thy Title,
that thou labourest to destroy it. No man does so to his own; that which we
wilfully consume by Fire and Sword, we confess to be not ours, but our enemies.
To the same sense are those words of Curtius, Lib. 9.
Quicquid corrupissent hostium esse confessi; Whatsoever they had wasted they
confess to have been their Enemies. Ep. 7. 9, 10.
Nor very discrepant are those Arguments which Cicero in his Epistle to Atticus
uses against that Counsel that Pompey gave, namely, To destroy his own Country
by Famine.

IV. If the Enemy may be elsewhere supplied.
Thirdly, We ought to forbear the wasting of an Enemies Country, if we see that
they may be otherwise supplied with necessaries, either by Sea or Land.
Archidamus in Thucydides, in that Oration wherein he disswades the
Lacedaemonians from making War against Athens, enquires what hopes they had to
subdue the Athenians; If by wasting and destroying their Country, they might do
well to remember, That the Athenians had other Lands and Countries under their
Dominion, which confined not on their Cities (as Thrace and Ionia) and that
they wanted neither Ships nor Ports, whereby they might be supplied with
necessaries from any other Coasts. In which Case it was best to cherish and
protect the Husbandman, even to the Enemies Quarters; that upon payment of
their Contributions to either Party, they might enjoy Peace in the midst of
War: which we have seen done, not only in our own late Civil Wars in England,
but (not long since) in the Wars of the Netherlands; which also is very
agreeable to the practice of the Indians, among whom, as Diodorus writes, Their
Husbandmen enjoy the very same Privileges and Immunities, as do their Priests;
insomuch that they follow the Plough without danger, even in the midst of their
Troops, and to the very Skirts of their Camp. And a little after he adds, There
is no enemy that will willingly wrong Husbandmen, but will rather preserve them
from all injuries, as being the common Benefactors to both Parties. Wherefore
it was agreed and concluded in the War between Cyrus and the Assyrian, as
Xenophon records it, That, Cum agricolis pax esset, cum armatis bellum; Though
the soldiers might fight, yet the Husbandmen should live in peace. Neither do
the Indians, as Diodorus testifies, either burn their Enemies Corn, or cut down
their Trees. Polyaenus reports the same of Timotheus, namely, that he set the
fruitfullest part of the Country to Farmers and Husbandmen; Oecon. 2.
yea, and as Aristotle adds, sold the Corn even to his Enemies, and with that
money paid his Soldiers. So did Viriatus in Spain, as we read in Appian.
Procop. Goth. l. 3.
And Totilas, Whilst he besieged Rome, gave no disturbance to the Husbandmen
throughout all Italy, but commanded them to follow their business without fear,
so as they sent their annual contributions unto him. This is the Glory of a
Conqueror to defend what he has won, and not to destroy it. And this we have
seen in our days to be practiced by the Hollanders, who ordinarily sold their
Corn and other provisions even to their Enemies, and with the money so raised
paid their own Army, with as much equity as profit, even to the admiration of
foreign Nations. These manners and customs do our Canons commend to our
Christian imitation; because as we profess to be more civilized, so ought we to
express more humanity in our Wars, than was practiced among the Heathens;
whereof they enjoin us not to spare not the husbandmen only, but the Oxen and
Horses wherewith they plow, and the seed which they carry out to sow their
ground. For the self same reason does the Civil Law forbid to take in pawn any
of those instruments that belong to the plough. The Cyprians and Phrygians of
old, Aelian. Hist. l. 5. 14.
and since them, the Athenians and Romans did condemn it as an heinous Act, to
kill an Ox that plowed up the Earth, because the Ox was Man's companion and
fellow labourer in tilling of the Ground; it was therefore forbidden by the
Laws of Athens, Rhodog. c. 26. 19.
that the Ox should be offered in Sacrifice. And Suetonius in the life of
Domitian testifies, That in the beginning of his Reign, he so far abhorred
murder, that in his Fathers absence, remembering that Verse in Virgil, An
imp'ous people wh' on slain bullocks feast. He forbad by an Edict the killing
of Oxen. Vid. Plin. Not. Hist. l. 8. c. 45. cum Lipsii Annot. Lit. D.
And Aratus in his Phenomenon assures us, that it was not lawful to eat of an
Ox that plowed the ground, until the Brazen Age of the World began, nor that
their Gods in their bloody Sacrifices should be worshipped by them.

V. Nor if the things be of no use in War.
Fourthly, there are some things of so innocent a Nature, that they neither
cause a War, nor prolong it; which things, though the War continue, yet common
reason should persuade us to spare. Thus do the Rhodians plead with Demetrius,
who in mere envy had besieged their City, and threatened to burn it for that
exquisite piece of Art, the Picture of Jalysus drawn by Protogenes, Lib. 15. c.
31.
as it is recited by Aulus Gellius, whose words sound to this sense, What
reason (say they) can thou give for destroying so famous a Picture, by firing
the house wherein it is? If thou can conquer us, the whole City, together
with that Picture safe and unblemished, will by thine own; but if thou fail in
that design, consider what a dishonor it will be to thee, when it shall be
said, that although thou could not conquer the Rhodians, Lib. 5.
yet thou had made War against Protogenes a dead Painter. Polybius thought it
an Act of the highest madness to seek to destroy those things, which being
destroyed weakened not the Enemy, nor brought any advantage to those that
destroyed them; Ver. 2.
such as are Churches, Statues, Schools, and Religious Houses. Cicero highly
extols Marcellus for the care he took to preserve all the fair Buildings in
Syracuse, both public and private, Quasi ad ea defendenda cum exercitu non
expugnanda venisset; As if he had been sent with his Army to defend the City
and not to take it. And a little after he gives this reason, Our Ancestors did
ever leave unto the Conquered such things as to them were pleasant, but to the
Conquerours of no great use or benefit.

VI. Especially things sacred or thereunto belonging.
And although this also may be pleaded in the behalf of other public
ornaments, yet a more special reason may be added; for those things that are
dedicated to sacred uses, although these also are in some sort public, and so
not exempted from the outrages of War; yet if there be no great danger that may
justly be feared by them, the very reverence that we owe to those holy places,
and to the things thereunto appertaining, should plead strongly for their
preservation, especially with those that agree in the worship of one and the
same God, though they do differ in opinion concerning some outward rites and
ceremonies. It was observed as a Law among the Grecians in the time of
Thucydides, that when they invaded one another as Enemies, they should always
forbear to use violence to holy places. And Livy tells us, that when the Romans
had sacked and destroyed Alba, they spared the Temples of their Gods. And when
Capua was taken, the Poet Silius writes thus of the Romans: Ecce repens tacito
percurrit pectora sensu
Relligio, and saevas componit numine mentes,
Ne flammam taedasque velint, ne templa sub uno
In cinerem sedisse rogo.
Livy tells us, that it was objected against Qu. Fulvius the Censor, Lib. 42.
That by the spoil and ruin of Churches, he had made the people of Rome guilty
of Sacrilege, as if the immortal Gods were not in every place the same, but
that the Gods of one place delighted in the spoil of the Gods of another. But
Marcius Philippus coming to encampe about Dium, Livy l. 41.
under the Temple, gave special command that no violence should be offered to
that Holy place. Strabo relates it of one Tectosages, That having (with some
others) robbed the Temple at Delphos of some treasure, thought he had
sufficiently appeased the Gods by consecrating that Money, with some addition,
to the Gods at home (supposing it to be no sacrilege, to despoile the Temple
at Delphos to adorn his own Temple, both happily being consecrated to one and the
same God.) But let us descend to such as were Christians. Agathias tells us,
That the Francks spared the Temples in Greece, Lib. 2.
as being of the same Religion with them: Nay it was usual not only amongst the
Heathens (whereof Historians give us many examples, and do therefore call it
the common custom of the Grecians) but amongst Christians also, to spare the
persons of such as fly for sanctuary to the Temples, even for the reverence
they bear unto the places; De Civit Dei l. 1. c. 1.
which St. Augustine highly commends in the Goths, having taken Rome: who (as he
there tells us) had so great a regard to the Temples dedicated to the memory of
the Apostles and Holy Martyrs; that in that miserable devastation all that fled
thither found protection, whether natives or strangers: Hitherto (says he)
might the fury of the Enemy rage without restraint: But here as by a divine
power, it was suddenly checked: Hither do the commiserating Soldiers bring
their distressed Captives, left they should be destroyed by their fellow
Soldiers that had no remorse: And they, who elsewhere were inexorably bloody,
no sooner approached to these places, where the license which the right of War
gave them was interdicted, but instantly all manner of Cruelty and all desires
of revenge wholly vanished. We give such reverence to holy places, says
Appian, That we use no manner of hostility against them amongst our Enemies,
though Foreigners. For as Polybius observes, In excerpt. Peires.
It is the greatest folly and madness in the world to behave our selves
impiously toward God, because we are enraged against our Enemies who are but
men: For much better it is, that God should in those places, after any manner
be worshipped, than that they should be made tippling-houses. It is written of
Agesilaus, That not in Greece only, but amongst the Barbarians, Severus.
he spared with holy reverence whatsoever was consecrated unto the Gods; as
well their Altars and Images, as their Churches, Mirarique se praedicabat eos
non sacrilegorum numero haberi, qui supplicibus eorum nocuissent; Admiring how
they could be excused from Sacrilege that had violated the privileges of
those places, by oppressing them who fled thither for protection. The very same
testimony does Plutarch give of him. Vita Ages.
The like he does also of diverse Roman Generals, who in their Conquests, as
well in Greece as in Macedonia, did not only spare the Temples of their Gods,
but honored them with presents, and enlarged both their immunities and
privileges. Procopius records it of one Cabao a Moor, Vand. l. 1.
who (though no Christian) yet commanded, That all honor and reverence should
be given to Christian Temples: The neglect whereof by the Vandals themselves,
he hoped that the God of the Christians (who ever he was) would severely
revenge on them. And in the Second Book of his Persian Wars he testifies the
same of Cosroes the Persian King, who, though no Christian, yet took special
care to preserve the Christians Church at Antioch. Neither durst the Emperor
Justinian keep the spoils of the Temple at Jerusalem, which Vespasian brought
to Rome; but they being found at Rome, were transported by Gizerich into
Africa; as the same Procopius testifies in the Second Book of his Vandal Wars.
Nor can I here omit that memorable fact of King Alarick, Cassiodor. l. 12. c.
20.
who having ignorantly received some vessels, which his Soldiers had taken out
of a Temple dedicated to St. Peter, and being afterward informed thereof,
commanded the same vessels to be restored by the same persons, adding others of
a very great value unto them, to expiate the crime.

VII. Yea and things that are Religious.
What has been already said of things Sacred, may likewise be said of things
that are Religious; even of such as are erected as Monuments for the Dead. For
though the Law of Nations do expose these also to the will of the Conqueror,
yet ought they for humanities sake to be spared. Our Lawyers do assert, That to
be the best and highest Reason which advances Religion. There is an excellent
saying in Euripides which makes as well for Religious things, as for things
Sacred.

Homo quisquis urbes vastat and dis Manibus
Seeds sacratas, templaque, haud recte sapit:
Nam similis ipsum pestis excidii manet.
Who conquered Cities rashly do erace,
And Temples with their Monuments deface,
Do not foresee the like may be their case.
Apollonius Tyanaeus does thus interpret that Fable of the Giants fighting
against Heaven, When audacious men presume to violate the Temples and Images of
the Gods. It is said of Scipio, That having taken Carthage he inricht all his
Soldiers with the spoil, excepting only those who had before invaded the
Temple of Apollo; neither durst Caesar himself (as Dio relates) demolish the
Trophies of Mithridates, being consecrated to the Gods of War. Cicero speaking
of Marcus Marcellus, In Ver. 4.
thus testifies of him, Quae victoria profana fecerat, religione impeditus, non
attigit; What the victory had made common and profane, that his Conscience
would not permit him to touch. Adding withal, That there were some Enemies who
voluntarily observed the Rights of Religion and of Customs, even in the midst
of War. And in another place, he declaims against the War made by Brennus
against the Temple of Apollo as wicked and impious. So does Livy against that
act of Pyrrhus in Plundering the Treasury of Proserpine, which he calls
Foedum, and in deos superbum facinus; An act of high insolency against the
Gods. The same Livy bitterly inveighs against the War which Philip made as
being wicked, and as if it had been made against all the Gods: Vltra enim jus
victoriae in Templa, in Aras, in Sepulchra saeviit; For that he spared neither
their Temples, nor their Altars, no nor the S^pulchres of the dead: Whereat
Polybius also glancing, adds his own judgment in these words, Wilfully to
destroy those things which can be of no use unto us in War, nor does much
incommodate our Enemies, especially Temples, Images and such like ornaments,
who can deny to be an act of brainsick madness? Neither does he herein admit of
that common excuse of retaliation.

VIII. The advantages that accrue by this moderation.
Although to speak properly it was not our intention in this place to enquire
what is now most in use, but to reduce that loose and inordinate license in
making War, to that which is most agreeable to natural equity, or to that which
among things lawful is best; yet will virtue her self, being but little valued
in our age, plead mine excuse: If seeing her by her self so despised, I
endeavor to set a much greater price upon her, by proposing what great profits
and advantages may by her be reaped. In the first place therefore this
moderation which spares such things as do not protract the War, does so far
weaken the Enemy, as it disarms him of one of the most forceable engines he
has to destroy us, which is desperation. Zenoph. Hist. Graec.
Archidamus in Thucydides would needs persuade his Soldiers, That the Enemies
Country whereof they were possessed, was no other than an hostage or pawn, which
the better it was stockt with Corn and Cattle, was the richer and so the
better: great reason therefore we have to spare it, ne desperatio hosts
redderet invictiores; Lest desperation should make them to redouble their
valor. The same Counsel did Agesilaus in Plutarch follow, when contrary to the
opinion of the Acarnanians, he gave the Achaians a free liberty to sow their
Corn; saying, That the more they sowed, the sooner they would harken to Peace.
This is the meaning of the Satyrist, when he tells us, That spoliatis arma
supersunt; They are compelled to live by force and arms, that have nothing else
to live by. This was the usual practice of the Gauls, as Livy notes, who when
they had taken a City, would not burn all their houses, that so they might
pacify the minds of their Enemies by giving them some things, when it was in
their power to have destroyed all. Whereunto we may add, That our preserving
the Enemies Country during the War, begets in the Soldiers a great assurance
of the victory. For what a man intends, and can make his own, he will not be
easily persuaded to destroy. Again, Clemency is in it self apt to soften the
resolutions and animosities of Enemies, and to draw them to a submission.
Hannibal spares all the fields and territories of the Tarentines, but not
(says Livy) out out of modesty or conscience; but rather that thereby he might
the sooner gain them to a voluntary surrender. (For to a Conqueror, vtilis est
clementiae fama; Nothing is more advantageous than the fame of being merciful,
especially if the Enemy be any ways diffident of his own strength.) Thus did
Augustus Caesar abstain from all Plunder and Rapine in Pannonia, Lib. 49.
Because (as Dio gives the reason) he hoped to conquer them without the least
effusion of blood. Lib. 3.
The like does Polybius testify of Timotheus, That by taking care to spare the
Country wherein he marched, He got much love and the good opinion of his
Enemies. Thus Plutarch commemorating the same care in Quintius Flaminius when
he made war in Greece, adds this as the effect of it, Not long after (says he)
did Quintius reap the fruits of his moderation and clemency; for as soon as he
came out of Thessaly, the Cities yielded unto him: And the Grecians that dwelt
in Thermopilae did earnestly long for his coming: yea and the Achaians
renouncing their Confederacy with King Philip, entered into League with the
Romans against him. We read in Frontinus, that a City of the Lingones, Lib. 5.
c. 3.
having unexpectedly escaped a general devastation in a War made by Domitian
the Emperor, under the conduct of Cerealis against Civilis the Batavian;
because they had contrary to their fears lost nothing, being reduced to
obedience, supplied him voluntarily with an Army of seventy thousand Men, well
armed. Whereunto also we may add, That from the contrary Counsels have usually
arose clean contrary effects: An example whereof Livy gives in Hannibal, who
was, as he describes him, exceeding prone to covetousness and cruelty, Lib. 26.
insomuch that what Cities or Towns he could not keep, he would totally spoil
and burn; which Livy there calls wicked counsel, as well in respect of the
cause as of the success of it. For he did not only thereby alienate the hearts
of those who were the immediate Sufferers, but he deterred others; and so
enforced them the more to strengthen themselves against him; because, Ad plures
exemplum quam calamitas pertinebat, More were frighted by the example than felt
the calamity it self. And therefore what some Divines have observed and taught,
I must needs assent unto, That it is the Duty of such Commanders as would be
thought Christians, (as far as in them lies) to intercede for and hinder the
sacking and pillaging of Towns and Cities, especially of such things in them as
add but little to the Conquest, being taken away; and yet whereby many innocent
persons are or may be damnified: so that such acts as these Christian clemency
does always almost, and Justice it self also does for the most part abhor.
Surely there is a greater tie and obligation among Christians, than there ever
was anciently amongst the Grecians; yet we find a Decree made by the
Amphictiones, Ne qua Vrbs Graeca Bello exscinderetur, That none of the Cities
of Greece should ever be burnt down by War. And it stands yet recorded by some
ancient Writers, That Alexander the Great never repented any thing more, than
he did the destroying of Thebes.

CHAP. XIII. Moderation concerning things taken in War.
I. The Goods even of our Enemies Subjects being taken in War are to be
detained only after the manner of some just Debt. II. But not for the
punishment of another man's crime. III. By Debts here, all the charges and
damages occasioned by a just War, are also included. VI. Not to exact the
utmost of our Right, is an Argument of humanity.
I. Subjects Goods taken in War, detained in the manner of a just Debt.
THE taking of our Enemies Goods in a Just War is neither altogether blameless,
nor is it exempted from all Obligations of restitution. For if we respect that
which is done rightly, we can neither take nor detain more from our Enemies
than what is justly due from him, unless it be such things as (beyond what is
due) we are enforced to detain for our necessary safety, which are likewise to
be restored (the danger being past) either in kind, or to their full value, (as
we have already declared. Lib. 2. c. 2.
) For what is lawful for us to do to the Goods of such as are at peace with us,
is much more lawful to the Goods of those that are our Enemies. But in the
times of Peace, what is necessary for our preservation, may be taken so as it
be with a purpose to restore it, as is already proved; this necessity creating
a kind of Right to take that wherein we have otherwise no propriety at all.
Lib. 2. c. 2. 6, 7, 8.
But whereas Debts may arise either by reason of some inequality that there is
in things, or by reason of some punishment due for some acts of injustice done
unto us, we may in either of those cases possess our selves, if we can, of the
Goods of our Enemies; but yet with this difference, namely, In the former of
these cases: The Goods, not of the principal Debtor only, but those of his
Subjects also, by the Law of Nations (as it were by way of Suretiship) stand
obliged. Which Right of Nations we conceive to be of another kind than that
which consists either in a bare impunity, or by virtue of external Judgments.
For as by our own private consent or agreement, he that deals with us for what
is ours, seeks to have not only an external or judicial Right, but an internal
and equitable also, in that which he deals for; so is it by a kind of common
consent or agreement, wherein is virtually contained every particular man's. In
which sense the Law is called the common Pact or Agreement of the whole City.
Now it is so much the more credible that it pleased the Nations that such a
Right should be thus acquired, because this Law of Nations was at first
introduced, not only for the prevention of greater mischiefs, but also as a way
whereby every State and Nation might recover their own.

II. But not for the punishment of another crime.
But if the Debt wherein a Foreign Prince stands obliged unto us be penal only,
I do not perceive that by the consent of Nations such a Right is given to
detain his Subjects Goods barely for his neglect. For such a tie upon another
man's Goods would be odious, and therefore should not extend it self farther
than the person offending. Neither is there the like profit arising from these
latter Debts, as from the former; for the former Debts require some reparation
for the loss of Goods, but so do not these latter: and therefore the
prosecution of them may without damage be omitted. Neither does that which we
have already said concerning the Attick Law, Lib. 3. c. 2.
contradict this. For there men stood obliged, not for that properly, because
the City might have been punished; but only to compel the City to do what it
ought to do, that is, to inflict punishments upon Offenders; the neglect
whereof is referred to the former, and not unto these latter sort of Debts. For
to owe a Duty in punishing Offenders is one thing, and to lie obnoxious to
punishment for the nonperformance of that Duty is another. The omission of
that does usually induce this, yet so that the former is the cause and the
latter the effect. And therefore the Goods of an Enemies Subjects cannot
lawfully be possessed by way of punishment. For this were to punish the innocent
for the nocent; but such things only are liable to this Debt, that belong to
the persons who are Delinquents, amongst whom are the Magistrates themselves,
whose Duty it was to punish, but did it not.

III. By Debt is understood the subsequent charges also.
Besides, the things belonging to our Enemies Subjects may be taken and kept,
not only to reimburse our selves of our original Debt, which was the ground of
the War; but to repair our losses and expenses in the War, according to what
has been already said in the beginning of this Book. And thus must we
u^derstand that which some Divines have written, namely, That things taken in
War are not to be equalled with the principal Debt, that is, until satisfaction
be made, according to sound judgment, for the damage done in the War it self.
Thus the Romans, in their Treaty with Antiochus, adjudged it equitable, That
the King should bear the charges of the War, through whose default it was that
the War began. So Justine, Impensas Belli Lege Justa suscepturus, qui Belli
Author est; He that is the Author of the War, ought by the Law of Arms to bear
the charges of it. The like we find in Thucydides, where the Samians are
condemned to defray the charges of the War. Now whatsoever is justly imposed on
the vanquished, may by the Conqueror be exacted by force of Arms.

IV. For humanities sake we ought not to exact our utmost due.
Moreover, this also must be remembered, which I have elsewhere delivered, That
the Rules of Charity are of larger extent than those of Justice. That man has
but little of mercy in him, who, being opulent, uses the extremest rigor of
the Law to enforce from his poor Creditor the utmost Farthing of what the Law
permits, especially if that Debt were contracted by his kindness to his friend
only, in being Surety for him. Very lamentable were the condition of such a
Surety, says Quintilian the Father. But yet such a Creditor does nothing
herein but what he may do by Right, strictly taken; whereunto he adds, Salvo
pudore, ad Sponsorem non aliter Creditorem venire, quam si recipere a Debitore
non possit; The Creditor cannot for shame sue the Surety, unless the Principal
be insolvent. Wherefore it behooves us for humanities sake, to spare their
things, who have no ways offended, either as Authors or as Promoters of the
War; nor are any other ways concerned than as by way of Suretiship, and who can
worse endure the loss of them than we can. But especially if it do sufficiently
appear unto us, That they shall receive no reparation for what we shall so take
away from that Prince or City whereof they area part. King Ptolomy having
overcome Demetrius the Son of Antigonus, and taken his Camp, sent back his
Money and his Apparel, Plut. vit. Demetrii.
with this Message, That the Contest between them was for honor and Empire
only, and not for private gain. Thus does Cyrus bespeak his Soldiers when they
had taken Babylon and plundered it, What ye have got from your Enemies, ye may
without any injustice possess; but if you will leave them some things, it will
testify your humanity. This also is to be noted, That since this Right of
seizing the Goods of innocent Subjects for their Princes Debt, is but
subsidiary, or by way of Suretiship, in case there be any hopes of recovering
our Debts from the original Debtors, or from them who by not doing us Right,
have voluntarily made themselves Debtors, then to fall upon them who are no
ways accessory to the injury done us, though it may stand with the Rules of
Justice strictly taken, yet it cannot stand with the Rules of humanity. Appian.
Civil. l. 2.
The Ancient Romans having conquered their enemies, never made sale of all
their Lands, but left them some part thereof to till for their sustenance. So
did the Vandals in Africa, and the Goths in Italy, as Procopius informs us.
Histories do plentifully supply us with such like examples of humanity; as when
the Romans having overcome their Enemies, granted them their Fields back, upon
Condition, That they should be from thenceforth held of the City they had
conquered, or when some small portion of those Lands were for honor's sake
left unto the ancient Occupants. Thus Romulus punished the Vejentes with the
loss of a part of their Territories. So Alexander restored the Lands he had
conquered to the Vxii, under a certain Tribute. The like we read in several
Histories of Cities taken, but restored, and not destroyed; and of not the
persons only of Husbandmen, but their Goods laudably restored, at least under a
certain Tribute: as also under the like Tribute, immunity from War we may read
of usually granted to Merchandises.

CHAP. XIV. Moderation concerning Captives.
I. How far forth it is lawful to make men Slaves by internal Justice. II. What
may justly be done to them by right Reason, Equity or Conscience. III. That it
is not lawful to kill an Innocent; IV. Nor to punish him unmercifully; V. Nor
to impose upon him excessive labor. VI. The Stock of a Slave, how far his own,
and how far his Lords. VII. Whether Captives may fly from their Lords. VIII.
Whether the Children of Slaves are bound to their Masters, and how far forth.
IX. What may be done where the service of Captives is not in use.
I. How far forth men may be enslaved by internal Justice.
IN such places where this Right is yet in force, of taking men Prisoners, and
making them Slaves, if we respect internal Justice, it is to be restrained in
the same manner as the Right of taking things is; that is to say, It is so far
lawful, until we are satisfied our original Debt, together with the subsequent
Charges thereof, unless the persons so taken shall be found guilty of such
particular crimes as in common equity deserve to be punished with the loss of
liberty. Hitherto therefore, but no farther, has he that wageth a just War a
Right in the Captives taken from his Enemy, and a power to transfer that Right
firmly unto others. But here also the same equity and humanity should persuade
us to put the like difference as before we observed, when we discoursed
concerning the killing of our enemies. Demosthenes, in that Oration which he
wrote concerning Licurgus's Children, extols the clemency of Philip of Macedon,
for that he made not all that were found amongst his Enemies, Slaves; but
weighing, as in a just Balance, all circumstances, he proceeded rather as a
Judge than as a Conqueror. Thus likewise did Alexander his Son, Plut. vit.
Alex.
who having taken Thebes, set at liberty both their Priests, and such of their
Citizens as had not assented to the Decree that the City past against him.

II. What may be justly done unto Captives in equity.
But here it is in the first place to be observed, That this Right of making
men Slaves, which arises as by Suretiship for that City, whereof they were
Members, does not extend it self so far as that which arises directly from
personal delinquency, and are therefore made Slaves by way of just punishment.
And therefore a resolute Spartan being commanded to do some slavish Office,
pleaded, That he was indeed a Captive, but no Slave. Captivum se, non Servum
dicebat.
Philo observes, That sometimes Parents are taken and made Slaves for their
Childrens faults, and sometimes Children for their Parents crimes; as when they
are taken either by Pirates or in the Wars, whom notwithstanding the Law of
Nature, much more vigorous than any humane Law, sets free. And indeed, if we
look directly into that general Right which a just War gives over Captives, it
is much like unto that which a Lord has over such Servants, as being reduced
to poverty have sold themselves unto him; only herein lies the difference, That
the condition of those taken in War is the more to be pitied, because this
calamity befell them, not through any crime which was properly their own; but
through the default of their Governors. To be made a Slave by the Right of
War, is (as Isocrates accounts it) a bitter thing. For this kind of bondage is
a perpetual Obligation to all kinds of labor and hardship, for a perpetual
supply of Food and Raiment. Chrysippus's definition does very well agree with
such kind of Slaves, who says, That a Slave is a perpetual Hireling. And thus
does the Mosaic Law esteem of him whom poverty has compelled to sell his
liberty, as we read Levit. 25.18, 40, 53. And his Redemption shall be paid by
his work, as the Fruits of Lands sold or mortgaged, shall redeem it to them
that sold it, Lev. 25.50. There is therefore a main difference between that
which by the Law of Nations may be done unto a Slave without punishment, and
that which natural reason and equity does allow to be done unto him. So says
Seneca, in the place before cited, De Clem. l. 1. c. 18.
Cum in servum omnia liceant, est aliquid quod in hominem licere, commune jus
animantium vetat; Although whatsoever is done to a Slave be lawful, yet are
there some things which the very Law of Nature prohibits to be done unto him,
as he is a man. For whosoever is born a man, though he be a Slave, Phelim.
yet does he not thereby cease to be a man. So Seneca, Are they Servants? yet
are they men; Epist. 47.
Are they Servants? yea, and our Companions? Are they Servants? yea, and our
humble Friends; Are thy Servants? yea, and our fellow Servants, if we do but
consider what power fortune has over either of us. And a little after in the
same Epistle, Consider that he whom thou call thy Servant, is born of the
same nature, equally to enjoy the same common air, equally to breathe, live and
dye as thy self; and if it had so pleased fortune, might as well have seen thee
a Slave, as he now sees thee a Freeman. And what we may read in Macrobius, is
but the same advice that St. Paul commends unto us, Coll. 4.1.
Masters do unto your Servants that which is just and honest, as knowing that
ye also have a Master in Heaven. And in another place he admonishes us, not to
terrify them with menaces and threatenings; which he presses upon us by the
same argument, because we also have a Master in Heaven, who regards not such
distinction of qualities. Lib. 7. c. 14.
In the constitutions of Clemens Romanus we have this advice, Govern not thy
man nor thy maidservant with too much austerity: The reason whereof is given
by Barnabas in his Epistle, Lest thereby thou testify against thy self, that
thou fear not him who is the supreme Lord both of them and thee. Clemens
Alexandrinus also exhorts us to use our Servants as our second selves, Seeing
that they are men as well as we, imitating therein that wise Hebrew, If thou
have a Servant use him as a Brother, for he is such a one as thy self.

III. That it is not lawful to kill an innocent.
Let us now admit that the Lord has over his Slaves the power of life and
death to uphold his Domestic Discipline; but then, let that jurisdiction be
used with that religious moderation, as the Magistrate uses in the public.
This was the advice of Seneca, De Clem. lib. 1. cap. 18. and Ep. 47.
In thy Bondsman thou art to consider, not what thou may inflict on him
without the restraint of the Law, but what in equity and good conscience thou
ought to do unto him, which requires sometimes to favor even thy Captive
and thy Slave, whom thou have bought with thy money. De. Benes. lib. 3. c. 18.
And in another place comparing Subjects with Servants, he says, Though they
have different titles, yet is the license over both, the same; which certainly
holds true in this particular, in taking away the life of either, Majores
nostri domum nostram pusillam Rempublicam esse voluerunt; Our Ancestors, says
Seneca, did reckon every family as a little Commonwealth. Ep. 43.
So also Pliny, Every man's house as to Servants is as a City. Insomuch that
Cato the Censor, as Plutarch informs us, would not punish any of his Servants
for never so great a fault, Nisi postquam damnatus esset etiam conservorum
judicio; Until he had been found guilty by his fellow Servants. Job. 31.13, 14,
15.
Whereunto we may add that of Job, If I did despise the cause of my manservant
or of my maidservant, when they contended with me, what then shall I do when
God rises up and when he visits, what shall I answer him? Did not he that
made him make me, and did not one fashion us both?

IV. Nor unmercifully to punish him.
Yea, and to lesser punishments, as stripes and blows, etc. much of equity and
favor is to be showed to Captives and Bondmen, Thou shall not oppress him or
rule over him with rigor, says the Divine Law concerning the Hebrew Servant;
which since the coming of our Savior, Levit. 25.
by reason of that affinity that there is between all mankind, ought to extend
to all Servants: upon which Law Philo thus glosseth, Servants in respect of the
goods of fortune are our inferiors, but in respect of our common nature our
equals. But the rule of Divine justice, says he, is not that which is
agreeable to fortune but to nature. Masters therefore are not to behave
themselves toward their Servants insolently, nor to abuse that power which the
Law permits them, thereby to grow cruel. For these are signs not of a meek and
calm, but rather of a froward and intemperate mind, domineering over their
Servants in a tyrannical way. In excerp. Legationum.
Priscus comparing the Romans with other barbarous Nations, tells us, That they
treated Captives with much more mildness than others did, performing unto them
rather the offices of Fathers and Tutors than of Conquerours: For as they
studiously withdrew them from those things, which in respect of their own
customs were unlawful; so if they did offend, they only corrected them as
sons; but to kill them (as the Scythians did) they esteemed utterly unlawful.
There are diverse kinds of liberty indulged unto them by their Lords, and that
not only whilst they lived, but at their deaths: for whatsoever dying, they
ordain or appoint to be done, with that which is their own, has the power and
force of a Law. Philo in his second Book of Special Laws, as also St. Cyprian
in his Epistle to Demetrian, highly blames this severity toward Servants, If
thou art not readily obeyed in all things (say they) if thy will be not
executed as a Law, thou growest presently imperious and cruel; thou tormentest
thy slave with whips and scourges, thou afflictest him with hunger, thirst,
nakedness, and oft-times woundest him and throwest him into Prison; and yet,
wretched man that thou art, whilst thou thus abusest thy power toward thy
captivated slave, thou forgettest thy duty to, and thy fear of the Lord thy
God. Now what can be more foolish and absurd, says Seneca, Seneca.
than to make the condition of a Servant worse than that of a Beast: He that
would skilfully manage an Horse, will not provoke and exasperate him with many
stripes; for unless he be gently handled at the first, he grows fearful and
headstrong. And again, What can be more unseemly (says the same Seneca) than
to exercise that cruelty upon a man though our Slave, which we would be ashamed
to exercise over Dogs or Oxen. To restrain which brutish cruelty, it was
wisely provided by the Hebrew Law, That if a Master did strike out the eye or
tooth of his Servant injuriously, he was for that eye or tooths sake, to let
him go free, Exodus 21.26, 27. Whereby it falls out, says Philo, that the
Master undergoes for his cruelty a double punishment in the loss of his
Servants, both labor and ransom: whereunto we may add a third more grievous
than both the former, namely, That thereby he is compelled by the Law against
his will to do good in a matter of the greatest concernment to a person whom he
hates, and whom he wishes it were in his power everlastingly to vex and
torment; whereas the Servant for the wrong he has suffered, receives this
double comfort, first that he enjoys what of all things he most desires, to
wit, his liberty, and then that he is for ever freed from the commands of so
cruel and severe a Master.

V. Nor to impose too hard labor upon him.
Neither are we to impose upon them too hard labor, without regard had to
their strength and health. To this end with some others was the Sabbath by the
Mosaical Law instituted, namely, That Servants as well as Beasts might enjoy
some refreshment from their labors. Do ye not observe, says Seneca Ep. 47.
, how careful our forefathers were, as well to prevent all occasions of envy
to Masters, as of reproach to Servants, when they styled the Lord, Exodus
20.10.23.14. Deuteronomy. 10.14.
Pater Familias, The Father of the Family; And his Servants, Familiares, His
familiar Friends. So in another place he bitterly inveighs against the too
strict exaction of Servants labors; where speaking of such, he says, Ep. 107.
Nos non tanquam hominibus sed tanquam jumentis abutimur; Whom we abuse not as
Men but as Beasts. And Dion Prusaeensis describing a good King, says, That he
is so far from usurping the title of Lord over his Subjects, being Freemen,
That he will hardly admit of it over his Servants. Ulysses in Homer professes,
Od. 1.
That those of his Servants whom he found faithful were as dear unto him as his
own Son Telemachus, Gratius est nomen pictatis, quam potestatis; Tertul.
Much more graceful is that name which imports Piety than Power; and better it
is to be called the Father than the Lord of a Family. Neither is there any
other reason, says Lactantius, Lib. 5. c. 15.
why we call each other Brethren, but because we believe that we are all by
nature equal. For since we esteem all humane things, not from or by their
Bodies but their Spirits, though the condition of the bodies be diverse, yet
are they not unto us Servants; but we both esteem of them, and call them in
spirit Brethren, but in Religion our fellow servants. De moribus Eccl.
Thus also St Augustine concerning the customs of the Catholic Church, Thou (i.
e. the Church) teach Servants to adhere to their Masters, not as pressed
thereunto by necessity, but out of delight they should take in doing their
duty. Thou teach Masters in imitation of God, who is the supreme Lord and
Master of all, to be gentle and merciful to their Servants, and to be always
more propense to exhort and admonish them than by force to compel them to do
their duty: And in case they transgress, rather to correct them as Sons, than
to rage and tyranize over them as Slaves. The like advice does St Hierome, or
Paulinus, give unto Celantia concerning Servants, So order and govern thine
House, as though thou were rather a Mother than a Master in it: And invite thy
Servants to reverence thee, not by thy sharpness, but by thy meekness and
benignity. De Civit. Dei l. 19. c. 16.
And St Aug^stin observed, That in ancient times good Parents governed their
Families in this order: As to temporal things the condition of their Children
was much better than that of their Servants; but as to Religious duties they
made no distinction, but Servants as well as Children were with the same
affection instructed in the true worship of God: From whence every Master was
called Pater Familias, which in time grew so common, That even they that lorded
it over their Servants with the greatest severity, would not willingly be
called Lords. And for the very same reason were Servants called Children, as
Servius notes upon that of Virgil, Claudite jam rivos pueri, etc. Tacitus
commends the Germans, That they made the same account of their Servants as they
did of their Farmers or Tenants. And Theano in an Epistle of his, prescribes a
just measure for Servants, namely, That they should neither be tired with over
much labor, nor weakened through want or poverty.

VI. The Stock of the Servants, how far the Lords, and how far his own.
To Servants for their Labor we owe Aliment; So says that wise Son of Syrach,
Bread, correction and work are due to a Servant. Of the same opinion was
Aristotle Oecon. l. 5.
, The reward of a Servants work is Aliment. Neither are they much out who
command us to use our Servants as we do Mercenaries, Operam exigendo, justa
praebendo; By exacting their work, and withal paying what is their due. So
provide for thy family, says Cato, that they be not pined through hunger, nor
starved through cold. There is somewhat, says Seneca De benef. l. 2.
, that a Master owes unto his Servant, that is, Food and Raiment. And in
another place Idem de tranquilitate.
, Familia vestiarium petit victumque; A Family requires Food and Raiment. For
this it is that the Roman Captives plead unto Bessus Procop. Goth. 3.
, Give us, say they, at the least Food, as we are thy Slaves, not as much as
suffices, though our necessities require it, yet so much as may keep us alive.
St Chrysostom gives this advice to the Master of a Family In Ephesians. 5.2.
, If thy Servant perform his daily labor for thee, do thou feed him; and
besides his food, provide that he be well clad and well shod: and this is some
kind of service that we owe unto our Servants; for unless thou do this office
for him, neither will he do his duty to thee, but will remain free, Neque ulla
eum lex constringit si non alatur, operas praestare; For there is no law to
enforce him to perform his duty, if thou neglect to perform thine. The
proportion allowed to every Captive amongst the Romans, was four Roman Bushels
of Corn for every Month, Phorm. Act. 1. scen. 1.
(every such Bushel containing of our measure about three Pints and ten Ounces
above our Peck) as Donatus upon Terence informs us. Thus also Martianus the
Lawyer, Some things there are which of necessity the Lord must do for his
Servant, namely, to provide for him meat and clothing. (...). 7. (...) 11.1.
Lib. 1.
The Sicilians stand condemned by all Historians for their cruelty in famishing
the Athenian Captives. So also does Isaacus Angelus, for the like cruelty to
the Sicilian Captives, as Nicetas records: who also recites an Epistle sent by
the King of Sicily to the Grecian Emperor concerning this matter. Besides,
Seneca in the place before quoted proves, That Servants are in some sort free,
and in some things able to oblige their Masters by some courtesies; as when
they do more than is imposed on them, or when they do some profitable acts,
being not commanded, but voluntarily and freely and beyond their duty; wherein,
though servants, they perform the office of Friends. As also when a Servant or
Slave shall out of his dimensum or allowance pinch his own carcass to save
somewhat every day, or by improving his spare time gain something to himself:
This is in a manner his peculium, which is (as Theophilus defines it) his
natural Patrimony; as if thou should call the Marriage of a Bondman with a
Bondwoman a natural Marriage. Which stock Vlpian calls, Pusillum Patrimonium;
A small Patrimony. Such was that which Ulysses proposes to Eumaeus and
Philaetus.

Vestrum utrique thori socias dabo, largiar and rem
Vicinasque domos nostrae.
Wives for you both, and Goods will I provide,
And Houses where, near us, you may reside.
Thus also Varro speaking of Servants says, That by treating them liberally,
as by enlarging their proportion in diet and clothing, by remitting somewhat
of their hard labor, or by granting them some little stock of their own to be
kept with those of their Masters, they may be made more sedulous, careful and
industrious than they would be. Neither will it be much to the purpose to say,
Peculium.
That such a little stock may at the will of the Lord be either taken away or
diminished at pleasure: For in case he does so without just cause, he deals
very unrighteously with them. But a just cause there may be, not only when it
is done by way of punishment, but when it is done to supply the necessity of
his Lord; for the Servants profits are more subject to the necessities of his
Lord, than the goods of Citizens to the City they inhabit. Lib. 7. de Ben.
Very pertinent hereunto is that of Seneca, It will not follow that a Servant
has nothing, because his Lord may choose whether he shall have any thing. And
again in the same place, Who can doubt but that the Servant, together with his
stock, is the Lords; yet may the Servant present his Lord with a gift. And
hence it is that the Lord cannot re-demand that debt which being due unto his
Servant in the time of his servitude, he pays him after his manumission. For as
Trophoninus testifies, Debiti, vel non debiti ratio, in condidictione
naturaliter intelligitur; In personal actions, the consideration of what is due
or not due is to be understood naturally. But possible it is, That the Lord may
be indebted to his Slave naturally: As therefore Clients may confer something
to the use of Patrons, and Subjects to the use of Kings; so we may read of some
Servants who have out of their own small stock contributed something to the use
of their Lords: Dionys. lib. 1. Lib. 8. Ep. 16.
As in case he be to raise a Portion for the marrying of his Daughter, or to
redeem a Son out of Captivity, or upon such like accidents. Pliny indulged this
favor to his Slaves, That they might make their Wills, and give or bequeath
what they had got unto any, so they were of his own Family. Among some Nations
we read, That a fuller right of acquiring things was granted unto them
according to the several degrees of servitude; as we have elsewhere described.
Lib. 2. c. 3.
And many nations have corrected their Laws, reducing their external right of
Lords over their Servants unto that internal justice, which we have heretofore
expounded: For even among the Grecians it was lawful for Slaves, being too
rigorously treated, to demand, That they might be sold. And even at Rome they
might ad Statuas confugere; Fly to the Statues, or implore the assistance of
the Magistrates in cases of Famine, Cruelty, or any such unsufferable injuries
done them. And this also is now allowed, though not in the strictness of right,
yet as proceeding from the goodness and humanity, and sometimes such as may be
in equity due; as, That after long and very hard service, they have rewarded
that service with liberty. So says Vlpian, After that Captivity by the Law of
Nations came to be in force, manumission became a courtesy. An example whereof
Terence gives us: Thou wast my Slave, till I enfranchiz'd thee,
Because thou did thy duty cheerfully.
In some places it is customary to set a Slave at liberty if he can procure
eight times as much as he was bought for. Lib. 3.
Salvianus observes, that in his time it was of frequent use, That Servants,
though not of the best, yet at least not of the worst kinds of servitude, were
rewarded with liberty. And as he adds, Were permitted to carry away with them
whatsoever they had got in the time of their service. Whereof we have many
examples yet extant in our Martyrologies. And here I cannot but commend the
generosity of the Hebrew Law, which commanded, That the Servant having served
out his time prefixed, Deuteronomy. 15.13.
should be altogether free, and that he should not go away empty handed: That
is, as their customs expound it, That his Gifts should not be less worth than
thirty Sicles, (which in our Money amounts to about three pounds ten
shillings.) Against the contempt of this Law, the Prophets do bitterly
complain. The like does Plutarch of Cato Major, for selling his Captives, who
had faithfully served him until they were almost worn out with Age, forgetting
the common condition of mankind.

VII. Whether Captives may fly.
But here falls in another Question, namely, Whether a Captive taken in a just
War may lawfully make his escape? I do not speak of him that for some
particular fault of his own had deserved to be deprived of his liberty; but of
him who in the public discharge of his duty falls into this calamity:
Whereunto the best Answer is, That he ought not; because as I have said, by the
general content of all Nations, upon the account of the City he owes his
labor. Which notwithstanding is so to be understood, unless to avoid some
intolerable cruelty he be enforced so to do.

VIII. Whether they that are born of Slaves are obliged to the Lord, and how
far.
We have elsewhere started another Question, Whether or no, and how far forth,
the Children that are born of such Captives are by an internal Right bound to
him whose Bondmen the Parents are? Which Question in regard of the persons so
taken in War, cannot be well omitted. For if their Parents did for their own
crimes deserve to be put to death; Children that were expected to be born of
them are bound to serve for giving them their lives, which otherwise they had
never had. For otherwise also even for want of Food and Raiment their Parents
had power to have sold them for Slaves, as we have elsewhere showed. Such a
Right it was that God himself gave unto the Hebrews, Lib. 2. c. 5.
over the Children of the Cannanites. So for the public Debts of a City,
Children already born, Deuteronomy. 15.13.
as being a part of that City, may stand no less obliged than their Parents.
But for those that are unborn, this reason suffices not, but some others are
requisite: As the express consent of Parents, together with the necessity of
nourishing them, and that even for ever; or for affording them aliment, and
that so long only until their labor shall fully satisfy the charge of their
maintenance. If any Right beyond this be given to a Lord over such Children, it
proceeds from the too great indulgence of the Civil Law to the Lords themselves.

IX. What may be done where Bond-slavery is not in use.
But in such places where this Right of making Men Slaves is not in use, there
the best way is to exchange Prisoners: And next to this is to release them
paying their ransoms, which likewise should not be over great but moderate;
Neither can any man set down a certain rate; but common humanity instructs us
that it should not be so excessive as that the Prisoner being released should
thereby want necessaries: which are allowed by the Civil Law, even unto such as
through their own peculiar fact are fallen into debt. In other places the
ransom of Prisoners is prefixed, either by mutual covenants, or by the customs
of the Countries. Amongst the Graecians of old, the ransom of a common
Soldier was Mina, a Pound, that is of our Coin about three pounds two
shillings and six pence. We now a days require for every Soldier a Months pay.
In the War between France and Spain in Italy, the ransom of every Horseman
was the fourth part of a Years pay, unless he were a Captain or some other
eminent Commander, or that he was taken in a just Fight, or at the storming of
a Town, as Mariana testifies. Lib. 27. c. 18.
Plutarch records it of the Corinthians and the Megarenses, Graec.
That the War between them was prosecuted mildly, and as it became Neighbors
and Kinsmen. If any man were taken Prisoner, he that took him entertained him
as his guest, and taking his word for his ransom dismissed him friendly: whence
arose the name (...), for one that by the courteous usage of his Enemy taken in
the War, makes him his friend. But much more magnanimous was that of Pyrrhus,
so highly extolled by Cicero: No wealth I ask, nor ransom will I take,
It Is Steel, not Gold that must the Victor make:
Yet, whosoever after Fight shall chance to live,
To him his liberty I Will freely give.
Pyrrhus thought no doubt that his cause was good; but yet he was content to
restore them to liberty, whom some probable reason had induced to fight against
him. The like fact of Cyrus, Xenophon highly commends: As Polybius does that of
King Philip: Cyropast. l. 2.
And Curtius that of Alexander: Plutarch also records the same of King Ptolomy,
Vit. Demet.
and of Demetrius, that they strove whether of them should excel, not so much
in Arms, as in clemency and benignity toward the vanquished. Strabo l. 7.
And Dromichaetes King of the Getes, having taken Lysimachus Prisoner in War,
entertained him friendly as his Guest; and understanding by the King how
poorly, and yet how obligingly the Getick Nations lived, he chose ever after
rather to make them his Friends than his Enemies.

CHAP. XV. Moderation in the acquiring of Empire.
I. How far internal justice permits the acquiring of Empire. II. That by this
Right to spare the Conquered is laudable: III. Either hy mixing the Conquered
amongst the Conquerours: IV. Or by leaving them under their Government, who
before had it. V. Yet sometimes placing Garrisons amongst them. VI. Or by
imposing on them tributes and such like charges. VII. The benefit that arises
from such moderation. VIII. Examples, and of the change of Government over such
as are conquered. IX. The Empire though gained, yet some part thereof ought to
be left to the vanquished: X. Or at least some kind of liberty: XI. Especially
in matters that concern Religion. XII. At least the vanquished are to be
treated with much clemency: and why.
I. How far Empire may be gained by internal justice.
WHAT in equity is requisite, or in humanity commendable, being done to single
persons, is so much more being done to a Nation or any parts of it; by how much
the good or evil that is done to a multitude, is more notorious than the same
done to particular men. Surely by a just War, as other things, so also the
Right of sovereignty over the people, and the very Right that the people have
in the Government may be lawfully acquired; that is to say, so far as the
greatness either of the punishment due to their crime, or of some other debt
does warrant it. Whereunto we may add so far as is necessary to secure the
Conqueror from some great and imminent danger that otherwise may befall him.
But this Cause is for the most part mixed with others, which notwithstanding as
well in making of peace, as in prosecuting the Victory is principally aimed at.
For in the other cases that the Conqueror remits the punishment or debt, it is
from his mercy. But that security which in public dangers exceeds moderation
is cruelty. Thus does Isocrates advise Philip, It will suffice thee so far to
subdue the Barbarians, that thou may secure the Peace of thine own Country.

II. To abstain from it, commendable.
That which Salust records of the Ancient Romans is worthy of our imitation,
namely, that they were so Religious, That they they took nothing away from the
conquered, but the license they took to do them wrong. And in another place he
tells us, That wise men make War for Peace sake, and sustain labor in hopes of
rest; Sapientes pacis causa Bellum gerunt, Jugurth. De Rep. l. 7. c. 14, 15.
and c. 10. De Off. l. 1.
and laborem spe otii sustentant. Not much discrepant is that of Aristotle, The
end of War is Peace, as the End of Motion is rest. To the same purpose is that
notable saying of Cicero, Bellum ita suscipiatur, ut nihil aliud nisi Pax
quaesita videatur; War should be so made, as if nothing else were thereby
intended but Peace. And in another place, War should be undertaken for this
cause only, that we may live in Peace and not be injured. Nor is this much
different from what our Christian Divines teach us, The end, say they, of War
is to remove those things that disturb Peace. Before Ninus his Reign, Kings
were studious to preserve the bounds of their own Empires, but not to enlarge
them. Thus Alexander wrote to Artaxerxes the Persian, Manendum cuique intra
fines suos nihil novando; Every King ought to confine himself within his own
Dominions, and not encroach upon another; neither should any man, out of an
uncertain hope invade the right of another, but rest contented with his own.
All Kingdoms were at first limited with their own bounds, neither were Kings so
Ambitious of Empire to themselves, as of glory to their People; and if they did
make War it was not for Dominion, but for the honor of the Conquest. Now unto
this Ancient Custom it is, that St. Aug. labored as much as in him lay to
reduce us, De Civit. Dei l. 4. c. 15.
Let Princes (says he) consider, that it belongs not to good Kings to take
pride in the enlargeing their Dominions; for as he there adds, Major est
foelicitas vicinum habere concordem, quam malum subjugare bellantem; It is
greater happiness to have a good Neighbor that is peaceable, Lib. 5. cont.
Julian.
than to subdue a bad one that is troublesome. Upon which account it was that
St. Cyril commends the Hebrew Kings who always contented themselves with their
own bounds, without encroaching on their Neighbors; which was the very sin for
which the Prophet Amos did so severely reprove the Ammonites.

III. Which may be done either by intermixing the Conquerors with the Conquered;
Nearest unto this original draught of innocence, comes that prudent moderation
used by the old Romans: What, says Seneca Lib. de Ira c. 34.
, had our Empire been, had not a wholesome providence taught us to intermix the
Conquered with the Conquerours? Our great founder Romulus, as Claudius in
Tacitus tells us Annal. l. 5. Lib. 1.
, did so prevail by his wisdom, that many people, whom the rising Sun saw his
Enemies, the setting Sun saw his Subjects and Citizens. Neither was there any
thing that did more ruin the Lacedaemonians and the Athenians than this, That
they always drove away the vanquished as Strangers. Livy informs us that the
Commonwealth of Rome was much augmented by the reception of the Conquered into
their City, whereof Histories afford us plenty of examples: As of the Sabines,
the Albanes, the Latins, and so of the rest of the Italian Nation; till at
length Caesar first led the Gauls in triumph, and afterward admitted them to
be of his Court and Council. Cerialis in Tacitus thus bespeaks the Gauls, Ye
your selves are usually admitted to command our Legions; Ye are they that
govern not this only, but others of our Provinces, there are no places of trust
from which ye are excluded; wherefore (as he there infers) ye ought in all
reason to endeavor all you can to preserve that life and Peace; which ye,
though vanquished, do equally enjoy with us the Victors. Nay, which is yet more
admirable by the decree of the Emperor Antoninus, all that lived within the
Circle of the Roman Empire were made Citizens of Rome, which are the very words
of Vlpian: whereupon Rome was then accounted, as Modestinus affirms, Communis
Patria; The common City, or every man's Country. Whereof Claudius thus, Hujus
pacificis debemus moribus omnes,
Quod cuncti gens una sumus.
To the honor of this Prince it may be said,
That of the World he but one Nation made.


IV. Or by leaving the Government to the vanquished.
Another kind of moderation used in Victory, is when the Government is left in
the same hands, either of King or People who hold it before the Conquest. Thus
Hercules bespeaks King Priamus, Hostis parvi victus lacrymis, Sen. Troad.

Suscipe dixit, rector habenas,
Patrioque sede celsus solio:
Sed sceptra fide meliore tene.
By a weak Enemies tears ore'tane,
Take, says he, thy Crown again,
Ascend thy Fathers Throne on high:
But henceforth rule more moderately.
So also the same Hercules, having conquered Neleus, gave his Kingdom to Nestor
his Son. Thus the Persian Kings were wont to leave their Kingdoms to the Kings
whom they had conquered, contenting themselves with the bare Victory. Thus did
Cyrus to Armenius, Alexander to Porus. De Clem. lib. 1. c. 21.
And this is it that Seneca highly commends in a Conqueror, Nihil ex rege
victo praeter gloriam sumere; To take nothing from the Conquered besides the
honor of the Conquest. This is triumph over Victory it self; and to declare
that there was nothing to be found among the Conquered worthy of the
Conquerours acceptance, but the Conquest it self. Thus Pompey having overcome
Tigranes, left him a part of his Kingdom to govern, as Eutropius informs us.
And herein is Antigonus extold by Polybius, That having brought Sparta under
his absolute power, Lib. 6.
he gave the Citizens the free use of both their Ancient Laws and Liberties;
for which Act his praises were highly celebrated throughout all Greece. Thus
did the Romans give unto the Cappadocians whom they had conquered, a power to
use what form of Government they pleased; and many Nations we may read of,
which being Conquered, were notwithstanding left free. Thus was Carthage left
at liberty to live under their own Laws, as the Rhodians pleaded to the Romans
after the second Punick War. Livy lib 32.
And when the Aetolians told Quintius, that there could be no firm Peace until
Philip of Macedon were driven out of his Kingdom: He answered, That they were
too severe in their censures, as being unmindful of the common custom of the
Romans; who for the most part spared those whom they had in their power, adding
this withal, Adversus victos mitissimum quemque maximum animum habere; That he
who was mildest toward the Conquered was ever held most magnanimous.

V. Sometimes by keeping of Garrisons.
Sometimes though the Empire be restored, yet the Conquerours security is also
provided for. Thus it was ordained by Quintius, That the City of Corinth should
be restored to the Achaians; but withal; That there should be left a Garrison in
Acrocorinth, which also was afterward withdrawn; and that Chalcides and
Demetriades should be detained, until all fear concerning Antiochus should
cease.

IV. Sometimes by imposing Tribute.
The imposition of Tribute is oft-times, not only for the defraying the charges
of a War but, for the mutual security of both the Conqueror and the Conquered
for the time to come. Cicero, in his Epistle to his Brother Quintus concerning
the Grecians Lib. 1. ad Quintum Fratrem. Epist. 1.
, writes thus, Let Asia also consider, That unless She be secured by the Roman
Power, She can never be without a Foreign War or Domestic, Broils: And since
this Power that secures her cannot possibly subsist without Tribute, good
reason it is that She should be contented, with sopme part of her wealth, to
purchase to herself perpetual Peace. Thus does Petilius Cerealis in Tacitus
plead for the Romans, Hist. l. 4.
with the Langres and other Gauls, We, say they, though often provoked, yet by
the Right of Conquest do offer unto you one only Condition of Peace, namely,
That ye pay your Tribute. For Peace among Nations cannot be defended without
Arms, nor Arms without Pay, nor can we pay our Soldiers without
Contributions. Hereunto likewise we may refer those other things mentioned
before, Lib. 2. c. 15. 7.
where we discoursed concerning unequal Laws, as the Delivery of Arms, of
Fleets, of Elephants, the prohibiting the use of Weapons, the raising of
Armies, and such like, whereby the Conqueror may be secured.

VII. What profit arises from this Moderation.
But that the Conqueror should leave the Conquered possessed of his own Kingdom,
stands not with humanity only, but sometimes with policy. Among Numa's Laws
this is commended for one, That in those Sacred Rites wherewith they worshipped
their God Terminus, Plut. Quaest. Romans qu. 15.
he would have no blood spilt; thereby intimating, That nothing could more
conduce to a lasting Peace between Neighbor Princes, than to content to live
themselves within their own Bounds. It was very well said of Florus,
Difficilius est Provincias obtinere, quam facere; viribus parantur, jure
retinentur: It is much more difficult to keep Provinces, than to make them; for
they may be gained by force, but they must be kept by justice. Not much unlike
is that of Livy, Lib. 37.
Facilius parari singula quam teneri universa; Particulars are more easily
gained than Vniversals kept. Nor that of Augustus in Plutarch, It is better to
govern our own well, than to be possessed of a greater Empire. Whereunto we may
add that Saying of Darius's Ambassador to Alexander, A foreign Empire is full
of danger: Thou will find it very difficult to hold what thou can not grasp:
Some things may be easily gained, yet not so easily kept. How ready are our
hands to catch at that, which when they have, they cannot hold? Which Calanus
the Indian, Plut. vit. Alex.
and before him Oebarus, Cyrus's Friend, did very well emblem out by a dried
Oxe's Hide, which being pressed down with our feet on the one side, rises
instantly on the other. And Titus Quintius in Livy by a Tortoise, Lib. 27. Val.
Max. 4. 1.
who whilst he gathers himself up within his Shell is safe, but as soon as he
thrusts out any one part he is exposed to danger. Plutarch thus relates, That
when the Achaians consulted about the taking of the Island Zant, he dissuading
from it, told them, That it was a dangerous attempt, if like the Tortoise they
thrust their head beyond Peloponnesus. And herein is that of old Hesiod
verified, which Plato likewise thus applies, Plato de Leg. 3.
Dimidium plus toto, That sometimes it is better to take up with the one half,
than to covet the whole. When some Nations, as Appian notes, would willingly
have annexed themselves to the Roman Empire, they were refused: And over other
Nations they thought it fitter to appoint Kings, than to unite themselves as
Provinces. And in the judgment of Scipio Africanus, the Roman Empire was in his
time of so large an extent, that as to effect more might well be thought
greediness; so if they could but keep what they had, they might be abundantly
happy. Wherefore that Prayer, whereby in their solemn purgations they invoked
the Gods to prosper and enlarge their Empire, he so changed, that he prayed
only, That they would preserve it in perpetual peace and safety: which the
Emperor Augustus thought worthy his imitation; and is therefore commended by
Dion, for that he did never attempt any new Conquest, esteeming that which he
had already got to be sufficient.

VIII. Examples of the change of Government among the Conquered.
The Lacedaemonians, yea and the Athenians also, in their Golden Age, never
challenged the Sovereign Power over any City that they took by War; only they
required that they should mould their Government according to their own Form.
For the Lacedaemonians used an Aristocratical Government, wherein a few of the
best governed the rest. But the Athenians used a Democratical, whereby the
Government was wholly settled in the People; Lib. 4. de Rep. cap. 11. lib. 5.
cap. 7.
as Thucydides, Isocrates, and Demosthenes teach us. Nay Aristotle himself
confirms as much in several places. Tacitus records the like done by Artabanus
at Seleucia Ann. 6.
, Who assigned the Government of the Common People to the Noblemen, according
to his own use and custom: For he judged it the next way to Liberty to leave it
in the People, as to leave it in a few was the next way to Tyranny. But whether
these alterations in Government do conduce any thing to the security of the
Conqueror, is not our purpose in this place to determine.

IX. If the Empire be assumed, to leave some part thereof to the Conquered;
But in case it be not thought safe for the Conqueror to leave the Conquered
altogether free, yet may the matter be so moderated, that some part of the
Government may be left to them, or their King, with a reservation of some other
part to the Conqueror. Tacitus tells us, That it was the manner of the Romans
to make use of Kings themselves as Instruments of subjection. Antiochus is said
to be, Romany inservientium Regum ditissimus, The richest of all the Kings
that were subject to the Romans. The like we read in the Commentaries upon
Musonius, namely, Of some Kings that were subject to the Romans. So in Lucan,
Atque omnis Latio quae servit purpura Ferro.
And every King whom Rome's vast Power commands.
Thus did the Scepter continue amongst the Jews in the Sanhedrim after
Archelaus's confiscation. And Evagoras King of Cyrus (as Diodorus testifies)
told the King of Persia, Lib. 15.
That he would obey him, but as one King obeyed another. And when Darius was
overcome, Alexander was willing to restore him to his Kingdom, but upon this
Condition, Lib. 17.
That he might command others, but obey him only. Such Kings there were also
anciently in Italy, who though they ruled others, yet were themselves subject
to other Kings. So in Aeschylus we read, That among the Persians, there were,
Reges, Regis magni subices; Petty Kings, Leunclav. lib. 18. Lib. 1. c. 3. 17.
Lib. 3. c. 8. 3.
that were subject to the Great Kings: As there are now also among the Turks.
Now as concerning the manner how an Empire may be mixed, we have already
treated; but sometimes a part of a Kingdom being taken away, the rest is left
to the Conquered, as is usual after the Conquest to take away some part of the
Fields, and to leave another part to the ancient Occupants.

X. Or at least some liberty;
Yet when the Conquered are altogether deprived of their Empire, may there be
left unto them power over their private Estates, and some smaller things that
are public; as their own Laws, Customs and Magistrates. Thus Philo in his
Embassy to Caius says, That Augustus was no less careful to preserve the Laws
peculiar to every Nation, than to preserve the Laws proper to the Romans. So we
read also in Pliny, That in Bithynia, Lib. 10. Ep. 56. and 14. Lib. 3. Ep. 113.
being a Proconsulary Province, the City Apimaea retained this privilege, That
they governed their Commonwealth at their own pleasure. And in another place he
tells us, That it was granted them that they might choose their own Magistrates,
and their own Senate. The City Sinope, though under the Persian Monarchy, was
yet permitted to live under a popular Government; as Appianus testifies. Such
another shadow of liberty the Grecians enjoyed under the Romans. And Cicero
confesses, That though the Romans had conquered Cyprus, yet it was not lawful
for the Romans to call the Cypriots out of their own Island. So likewise in
Pontus, The City of Amisenes, by the favor of Lucullus, retained the use of
their own Laws. And the Goths, though they had conquered the Romans yet they,
changed not the Roman Laws.

XI. Especially in Religion:
Another favor may also without danger be granted to the vanquished, namely,
The free exercise of their Religion, and not at all to withdraw them from it;
unless it may be done by persuasion: which, as Agrippa in his Oration to the
Emperor Caius proves, is both grateful to the Conquered, and no ways
prejudicial to the Conqueror. And this was it that, as well Josephus himself
as, the Emperor Titus objected against the rebellious Jews at Jerusalem, That
through the Indulgence of the Romans they might exercise their own Religion
with so great a right and freedom, that they might drive Strangers out of their
Temple, even with the peril of their lives. But in case the Religion of the
Conquered be false, yet may the Conqueror make it his care that the true
Religion be not oppressed. As the Emperor Constantine did, by weakening
Licinius's Party; and as the Francks and other Kings did after him. And
although we cannot persuade them to the worship of the true God, yet must we
not drive them from the worship of their own. For, to use the words of Severus,
Melius est ibi aliquem coli Deum, quam nullum; Better it is that any God be
there worshipped, than none at all. Thus the Goths in Procopius profess, That
they would not compel any man to embrace their Religion, but leave them to
their own.

XII. At least to use the Conquered gently, and why.
The last Premonition is this, That where the Empire is fully and absolutely
got, the Vanquished should be treated with much kindness and clemency, and so
as may stand with the mutual good both of the Conqueror and Conquered. Cyrus
in Xenophon bids the Assyrians, whom he had overcome, to be of good cheer, for
their condition should be the same as before; for they should only change their
King, but their Houses, Fields, Wives, Children, etc. should as fully remain
theirs, as they were before. And if any man should wrong either them or theirs,
he and his would revenge their injuries. We read in Salust, That the Romans
always sought to engage men as their friends, rather than as their Slaves;
thinking themselves more safe in a free than in a compulsory obedience. Thus we
read of the Lacedaemonians in Thucydides, We, say they, are of opinion, That our
worst Enemies may thus be made our best Friends, not if the one Party thirsting
only for revenge, and abusing his good fortune, shall endeavor to bind the
other Party by Oaths, to Conditions manifestly unequal; but if (though he may
so do) he show no less equity in conquering his own passions, than he did
courage and conduct in conquering his Enemies; using his Victory with as much
moderation as may stand with his own security. Vit. Agr.
The Britains in Tacitus's days did readily make their Levies, pay their
Tributes, and perform all Duties enjoined them by the Romans, so long as they
were not provoked by manifest injuries; but such they bare very impatiently,
Jam domiti ut parerent, nondum ut servirent; Being already so far conquered as
to be Subjects, but not so far as yet, Lib. 8.
as to be Slaves. That Pincernas in Livy, who was asked in the Roman Senate,
What manner of Peace it was that the Romans might expect from him? answered
readily, Si bonam dederitis, and fidam and perpetuam; si malam, haud diturnam:
If on reasonable Conditions, that which was firm and lasting; if otherwise, not
very durable. Adding this Reason. No Nation, and indeed no man, will remain
longer in such a Condition whereof he repents that he is fallen into, than
necessity shall enforce him. So Camillus was wont to say, That was the most
lasting Empire under which the Subjects rejoiced. Curt. lib. 9.
Thus the Scythians answered Alexander, Between the Lord and his Slave there
can be no true friendship; for though they live in peace, yet there still
remains some Rights of War. Thus likewise Hermocrates in Diodorus, To overcome
is not so glorious as to use the Victory with clemency and moderation. Lib. 13.
Whereunto we may refer that excellent Saying in Tacitus, Bellorum egregii
fines, quoties ignoscendo transigitur; The effects of those Wars are notable
which are shut up with a General Pardon. For as Caesar observes, Haec nova sit
vincendi ratio, ut misericordia and liberalitate nos muniamus; This is a new
way of conquering, when we secure our selves by our acts of mercy and
liberality.

CHAP. XVI. Moderation concerning such things as by the Law of Nations want the
benefit of Postliminy.
I. That what is taken away by an enemy in an unjust War, ought in equity to be
restored. II. Examples. III. Whether any thing may be deducted. IV. That even a
people being subjected, or any part of them, if by an unjust War, are to be
restored to them whose they formerly were. V. In what space of time this
obligation to restitution cease. VI. What is to be done if the Case be
dubious.
I. Things taken in an unjust War ought to be restored.
HOW far forth in a Just War things taken away may be his that takes them, has
been already declared; from which are to be deducted such things as are
received by the Right of Postliminy: for these are as if they had not been
taken. But the things taken in an unjust War (as we have said before) are to be
restored, not only by those that took them, but by others also unto whomsoever
they shall by any means come. Nemo plus Juris ad alium transfer potest, quam
ipse habuit; No man can transfer more Right to another than he has himself;
say the first Founders of the Roman Laws, which Seneca thus briefly explains,
Lib. 5. de Benef.
Nemo potest dare quod non habet, No man can give what he has not. But he that
first took them had no internal Right or Property in them; wherefore neither
shall he have any that has no Title to them, but what he derives from him. Now
that Dominion which the second or the third Occupant has gained, we call
external; that is, such an advantage that he is every where to be defended in
it, by all judiciary Power and Authority, as if he were the first Owner. But
yet, if he plead this Right against him, from whom the thing was at first
unjustly taken, he deals not honestly. For look what Answer some eminent
Lawyers have given concerning a Servant, L. Latrones. D. de Captivis.
who being first taken by Robbers did afterward escape unto the Enemy, namely,
That it was true that he was taken away, Aegid. Regius de Act. supern. did.
31. dub. 7. n. 122.
neither was his having been amongst Enemies, nor that he did return back by
Postliminy, any impediment unto him as to that thing. The very same Answer from
the Law of Nature may serve concerning him who being taken in an unjust War,
and afterward either in a just War, or by some other means, comes under the
power of another. For, as to that which we here call internal Right, there is
no difference between an unjust War, Can. 10.
and Piracy or Robbery. And according to this opinion did Gregorius
Neocaesariensis frame his Answer, being consulted with concerning the Goods of
some of his Citizens, which after they had been taken away by the Barbarians,
were received by some of the Inhabitants of Pontus.

II. Examples.
Wherefore things so taken ought in honesty and conscience to be restored to
their first Owners, as being unjustly taken away, which we see frequently done.
Livy having declared how the Volsci and Aequi had been conquered by Lucius
Lucretius Tricipitinus, says, Lib. 3.
That the spoil was brought and exposed to public view in the Field of Mars,
that every man might within the space of three days find out his own, and take
it away. Lib. 10.
The same Livy in another place, having related the Victory got over the Volsci
by the Dictator Posthumous, tells us, That he restored a part of the spoil to
such as knew their own, of another part whereof he made Portsale: And elsewhere
he tells us, That two days were allowed for every man to come in, and to lay
claim to his own Goods. And in another place, Having recited the joyful Victory
which the Samnites got over the Campanes, wherein there were taken seven
thousand four hundred of them Prisoners, and a very great Booty from their
Associates. He likewise tells us, That the right Owners were summoned by
Proclamation to come in by a certain day, to find out and receive back their
own Goods. The like fact he records of the Romans; For the Samnites,
endeavoring to possess themselves of Interamna, a Colony of the Romans, but
not able to keep it, having plundered the City and depopulated the Country, and
driving away before them an infinite number of Men, Cattle, and other things;
fell unexpectedly into the hands of the Roman Consul in his return from
Luceria, who recovering the spoil, and pursuing the Samnites with great
Slaughter, at last exposed all he had got to open view, sending out his Edict,
That every man might come in and receive his own. The same Author speaking of
the Prey taken by Cornelius Scipio at Ilippa, a City in Portugal, says, All
which being exposed to view before the City, every man had leave granted to
search out and take away what was his own; the rest was delivered to the
Questor to make sale of; which was presently done, and the money divided among
the Soldiers. So again, after the Battle fought by Titus Gracchus at
Beneventum, Lib. 24.
The whole Prey, except the Prisoners, was divided among the Soldiers; but the
Cattle were preserved, which the right Owners had liberty given them within
thirty days to find out and to recover. The like does Polybius record of L.
Aemilius, Who having conquered the Gauls, Hist. l. 2.
restored all the spoil to them from whom it had been taken. The very same does
Plutarch, Plut. Apotheg. Appian Puni.
Appian and Diodorus testify of Scipio the African, who having taken Carthage,
^^funded their many rich Presents which the Carthaginians had taken from the
Cities of Sicily, and elsewhere, and brought thither: With whom agrees Valerius
^ ^aximus concerning the same Scipio, Lib. 1. c. 1. n* 6.
Whose humanity, says he, was such, that having taken Ca thage he sent Letters
to all the Cities of Sicily, Orat. Ver.
That they might by their Ambassadors receive back all the Ornaments of their
several Churches, which the Carthaginians had taken from them; which he desired
them to take care of, and to set them up in their former stations. The like
testimony does Cicero give of him, The Carthaginians, says he, did formerly
possess themselves of Himera, one of the beautifullest and best adorned Towns
in Sicily; Scipio esteeming it an act worthy of the Roman People, took care
that, the War being ended, and Carthage taken, all the ancient Ornaments taken
at any time from the Sicilians should be restored unto them. Lib. 37.
Thus did the Rhodians restore four Ships to the Athenians, which they had
recovered from the Macedonians, who had formerly unjustly taken them from the
Athenians. So likewise Peneas the Aetolian, Lib. 31.
as Livy records it, thought it sit that all that before the War began had been
the Aetolians, should be restored unto them: which Titus Quintius did not deny,
Lib. 33.
had the demand been only of Cities taken in War, and had not the Aetolians
first broken the Laws of friendship. Nay even those Goods that were at first
consecrated to the Temple at Ephesus, Strab. l. 13.
which afterward their Kings made their own, the Romans caused to be restored
to their former condition.

III. Whether any thing may be deducted.
But what if such Goods so taken shall come unto us by way of Commerce, may we
not charge him from whom they were taken with so much as they cost us? We may,
as we have already said Lib. 2. c. 10. 9.
, so far forth as the recovery of the possession of things so desperately lost,
would probably have cost him from whom they were taken. And if the charges may
be required of him, why may not our labor and peril also be valued, as if a
man should recover some precious Jewel of another man's out of the Sea, by
diving unto the bottom? Very pertinent unto this is the Story of Abraham's
return from the Conquest of the five Kings, Reduxit omnes illas res, He brought
back all those things, Genesis 13.16. Verse. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
says Moses (i. e.) which the Kings had taken away. Neither can we refer that
Offer which the King of Sodom made unto Abraham, of restoring the men, and
detaining the Goods to himself, to any other cause than this, That those Goods
should be the reward of his pains and peril. But that Abraham refused to take
any thing to himself of the Prey, was an Argument of his, no less piety than,
magnanimity; which was very well observed by Jacchiades on the fifth Chapter of
Daniel. Nevertheless, of the things so recovered, Dan. 5.17.
he gave the tenth to God, as being due to himself by the reason of his
necessary charges, and some portion thereof he was willing should be given to
his Companions. St Ambrose, speaking of this generous fact of Abraham, says,
The reward which he refused from men he received from God. And Sulpitius
speaking of the rest of the spoil, says. That Abraham restored it to those
from whom it was taken. Not much inferior to this of Abraham's was that Heroic
Act of Pittacus the Mytilenean, Lib. 6. c. 5. n. 1. See above Book 2. Chap. 14.
Sect. 6. Book 3. Chap. 4. Sect. 1.
recorded by Valerius Maximus, Who being offered by the general consent of his
Countrymen the one half of the Land taken from the Athenians for his good
conduct, utterly refused it; accounting it a dishonor to sully the Glory of
his Victory, by receiving so large a part of the spoil.

IV. The people or any part of them, to be restored, if unjustly possessed.
As things taken in an unjust War are to be restored to their right Owners, so
a people or any part of a people ought to be restored to him or them who had
the Right of Government over them, or even to themselves, if before any unjust
force was used against them, they were a free people. Thus we read of the
exiled Saguntines, That after six Years they were restored by the Romans Live.
lib. 2. -- lib. 73. Xenoph. Hist. Graec. lib. 3.
. So Anthony in the War of Cassius set at liberty all those that were made
Bondmen, and commanded their Goods to be restored unto them. Thus also was
Calatravia restored by the King of Castile and others to the Soldiers, from
whom the Moors had before taken it See above Chapter 10. Sect. 6.
. And so also was Sutrium taken and restored in Camillus's time, as Livy
testifies Live. lib. 34.
. The Aeginetae and Melii were likewise restored to their Cities by the
Lacedemoniaes. The Cities of Greece, which had been subdued by the Macedonians,
were set at liberty by Flaminius; who in the Treaty he had with Antiochus's
Ambassador, insisted on this as a Point of Equity, That the Asian Cities,
which were called by Greek Names, should be restored to their liberty; which
Seleucus, the Great Grandfather of Antiochus, had taken by force, and which
afterward, being lost, were re-taken by the same Antiochus: For, says he,
those Grecian Colonies were not sent into Aeolia and Ionia to be enslaved by
the King; but for the increase of the Greek Race, and to propagate that ancient
Nation throughout the World.

V. In what time the obligation to restitution cease.
It is sometimes questioned, How long a time is required before this Obligation
to restitution cease? But this Question, if it happen to arise between
Subjects of the same Empire, is best determined by their own Laws; that is, in
case those Laws will admit of this Internal Right, and not of that only which
is External: which by a prudent inspection into the words and purpose of those
Laws may be collected. But in case it be between such as are Strangers to each
other, then it must be determined by a sole conjecture of the former Owners
dereliction, Lib. 2. c. 4.
whereof we have sufficiently spoken as far as is fit for our purpose.

VI. What if the Right of War be dubious.
But if the Right of War be very ambiguous, it is best to follow the Advice of
Aratus the Sicyonian (as King Ferdinando did Mariana lib. 29. c. 14.
) who in part persuaded the new Occupants to accept of present money, and to
yield up their possessions; and in part persuaded the ancient Lords to accept
of the value of their Lands, rather than to hazard the recovery of them.

CHAP. XVII. Of Neuters in War.
I. From Neuters nothing is to be taken away, but in extreme necessity; nor
then without restoring the full value. II. Examples and Precepts of such
abstinence. III. What the Duty of Neuters are to such as are at War.
I. From Neuters nothing must be taken but upon pure necessity.
THough it may seem impertinent here to treat of such as are not concerned in
War, because against these it is plain, That War has no Right at all; yet
seeing that many outrages are committed, and many injuries done against such,
if Borderers, (by reason of the War) upon pretense of necessity; it will not be
much amiss briefly to repeat here what has elsewhere been delivered more at
large Book 2. Chapter 11. Sect. 10.
. In the first place therefore we must remember, That it is required that that
necessity that gives us a kind of Right to that which is properly another,
must be extreme; Secondly, That there be not a like necessity in the right
Owner of the thing; Thirdly, If there be such an extreme necessity, it is plain
that we ought to take no more than what our present necessity requires. As for
example, If the bare custody be sufficient, we ought to forbear the use; if the
use be necessary, we ought to forbear the abuse; if the abuse be necessary, we
ought to give the full value of it to the right Owners.

II. Examples of abstinence, and some Precepts.
Moses being necessitated to pass with his Israelites through Idumaea, promises
first to pass only through their Highways, and not to hurt either their Fields
or Vineyards; and in case they should want water, they would pay for it. Those
famous Generals, both of the Greeks and Romans, did the same. The Greeks in
Xenophon Xenophon.
under Clearchus promise the Persians, That in passing through their Country
they would offend no man. And if they might be supplied with necessaries for
their money, they would not forceably take either Meat o^ Drink from any man.
Thus did Dercyllides pass with his Army through Countries that were quiet,
without offense given to the Provincials. Livy testifies the same of King
Perseus, That he passed into his own Dominions through Phthiotis, Achaia and
Thessaly, without any damage or injury done to the Country through which he
past. The self same does Plutarch testify concerning the passage of the Army
led by Agis the Spartan into Peloponnesus, It was a pleasant Spectacle, says
he, to all the Cities of Greece to see how civilly and inoffensively they
marched, and almost without noise. The like Testimony does he give to Titus
Quintius Flaminius. Thus Vellejus writes of Sulla, That he led his Army through
Calabria and Apulia into Campania, so orderly, and with such singular care of
their Fruits, Fields, Cities and People, Lib. 2.
as if he had come into Italy, not as one meditating revenge, but as a
Peacemaker. Pro Lege Manilia.
Tully speaking of the Great Pompey, says thus, Whose Legions came into Asia
so inoffensively, that neither the hands of so great a multitude, nor the print
of their feet, Plut. Pomp:
were observed to hurt any that lived peaceably. And understanding that some of
his Soldiers had misbehaved themselves in their March, Sigillum Gladiis eorum
imposuit, quod qui non custodisset, is puniebatur; He sealed up their Swords in
their Scabbards, which Seal whosoever brake was severely punished. Lib. 2.
Strat. c. 2.
Frontinus thus testifies of Domitian, That being about to raise new Forts and
Castles upon the Frontiers of the Ubii, he caused all the Fruits growing within
the places which he intended to entrench, to be first apprized and paid for,
and thereby got himself so great a fame for his Justice, that every man was
willing to trust him. So likewise Lampridius concerning the Parthian Expedition
of Alexander Severus, tells us, That his Army was so well disciplined, and bore
so great a reverence to his Person, that they seemed rather Senators than
Soldiers. For the Tribunes were so ready, the Captains so modest, and the
Soldiers themselves so friendly, that the Country People wheresoever he came,
for those many and great benefits they received from him, honored him as a
God. The Panegyrist, speaking of the Goths, Vandals and Alanes that served
under the Emperor Theodosius, says. That in that Army there were no such
tumults, nor such confusions, nor such robberies committed, as were among the
Barbarians; but if at any time there happened to be a scarcity of provision,
they sustained it patiently, lessening every man's dimensum or proportion, as
either their numbers increased, or their Stores decreased; which very praise
Claudian gives unto Stilico: Tanta quies, tantusque metus, Servator honesti,
Te moderante fuit, nullis ut Vinea furtis
Aut seges erepta fraudaret Mess Colonum.
The Army thou in so much awe did leave,
That no man's Vineyard was of Fruits bereaved,
Nor Farmer of his Harvest hopes deceived.
Concerning the singular modesty of the Goths in their Wars, we find many rare
testimonies in Cassiodore, Lib. 5.10. Lib. 11. c. 13.
but especially in the twenty fifth Epistle of the eleventh Book, where he
brings in the Emperor giving his charge to his Soldiers, Ye shall destroy
neither the Corn nor the Meadows in your march toward us; but ye shall hasten
hither without giving offense to any, that so your access unto us may be
acceptable, who for this very reason do freely undergo the whole charge of the
War, that so you may preserve the reputation ye have gained by your civility,
unblemished. The like testimony does Suidas give of Belisarius, whose admirable
Discipline is so celebrated by Procopius Procopius.
(as being both his Companion in Arms, and a witness and strict observer of all
his Actions) whose excellent speech to his Soldiers, as they were marching
into Africa, is worthily recorded by Procopius in the first of his Vandal Wars.
Goth l. 3.
But that which he records of him in the third of his Gothicks, deserves to be
here inserted, whose words sound to this sense, So great was his care of
Husbandmen, that no violence was at any time offered unto them, whilst
Belisarius was their General; but on the contrary, the Provincials grew rich
whithersoever he came with his Legions; for they sold them necessaries at their
own rates, and when the Corn grew ripe, his care was doubled, that the
Horsemen should not spoil it, nor were any of his Soldiers permitted to pluck
so much as an apple from the trees. The like Discipline Gregoras extols among
the Venetians, Lib. 9.
Where justice and magnanimity seemed to contend for mastery, no man being
permitted to straggle from the Army, or to take away any thing but what he
bought with his money: which might easily be done where there was plenty of
Provision, Ammianus. Pacatorum tellus non debet calcari.
the Army well paid, and a strict Discipline constantly observed, whose
principal Law is, That the Countries with whom we have Peace should not be
wasted. Wherefore, says Pliny Hist. Not. l. 26. c. 4.
, did the Roman Generals make it their greatest care in their Wars that there
should be freedom of commerce? Whereunto Cassiodore gives this answer Cassiod.
14. c. 1^.
, Vt habeat miles quod emat, ne cogatur cogitare quod auferat; That what the
Soldier wants he may buy, which otherwise he should be enforced to steal.
Vopiscus brings in the Emperor Aurelian giving this charge to his Soldiers
Vopis. lib. 18. Aurel.
, Nemo pullum alienum rapiat; Let none of you presume to take away a Chicken or
a Sheep of another man's; let none of you presume to trample down the Corn, to
pluck a Grape, or forceably to require from any man either Oil, Salt, or Wood,
etc. So likewise in Cassiodore, Vivant cum Provincialibus, jure civili; nec
insolescat animus qui se sentit armatum: Let the Soldiers live with the
Provincials according to the rules of the Civil Law; neither let them grow
insolent because they know themselves to be armed, for the shields of our Army
ought to protect our friends in Peace. Apposite whereunto is that of Xenophon,
Exped. l. 6.
No City that is at Peace can be compelled to give us any thing against their
will. By all which wise precepts, we may the better understand those cautions
which the great Prophet gave unto the Soldiers, who demanded of him what they
should do, Luke 3.14. Luke 3.14. Accuse no man: for, oppress or defraud no man.
Psalm. 118.121. Prove. 14.33.22.16. Levit. 19.11.
namely, Offer violence to no man, accuse no man falsely, and be content with
your wages. Where, by the way we may observe, that the words here translated
accuse no man, may as well be translated (as it is elsewhere) Oppress no man,
or, Defraud no man, as will appear by the Greek Version of the same word, Job
35.9. and other places. And by the vulgar Latin, Luke 19.8. Agreeable
whereunto is that of Aurelian in Vopiscus, Let the Soldier be content with his
allowance, and let him choose rather to enrich himself with the spoil of his
Enemies, than with the tears of Strangers. There are many excellent Penal Laws
in Gregory Turonensis to this purpose. That of Frederick the first, Gunther
thus translates, Si quis pacificae plebis villasve domosve
Vsserit, abrasis signabitur ora capillis,
Et pulsus castris, post verbera multa recedet.
Who peaceful Countries waste or Houses burn,
B'ing branded in the front with Hair all shorn,
And smartly whipped, shall from the Camp be turned.
Neither is there any reason that any man should think that these things thus
generously spoken cannot be done; for neither would so holy a man as St John
was, advise, nor so many wise Law makers command that which they believed to be
impossible. Besides, what we have seen done, we must needs grant may be done;
but that it has been done we have already proved by many examples. Whereunto
we may add that notable one of Frontinus (recited out of Scaurus) Of an
Appletree hung full with fruit, An Appletree in a Camp.
which happening to stand within the compass of ground whereon the Camp was
that day pitched, was the next day, the whole Army being gone, left with all her
fruits untoucht. And that exemplary punishment taken by Niger on a Soldier of
his, for but taking away of a Dunghill Cock, as it is related by Spartianus.
Lib. 28.
Livy having declared how dissolutely the Roman Soldiers lived in their Camp
at Sucro, when straggling from the Camp by Night, they robbed and pillaged the
Countries round about that lived at Peace: Adds this as the Cause, That all
things were done loosly and licentiously, without order or military discipline.
Another notable place we find in Livy to this purpose, where description is
made of Philips march through the Territories of the Denthelatae, Lib. 40.
These (says Livy) had been Philips Associates, but yet the Macedonians
pressed by want, wasted their Country as if it had been the frontiers of their
Enemies, robbing and pillaging every where as they went, first great Houses and
small Villages, afterward laying waste some Towns, to the no little shame of
the King, who from all parts heard his friends and confederates imploring in
vain the Gods and him for redress. Ann. 12.
Pelignus we find branded by Tacitus with infamy, for that he did more hurt to
his Friends than to his Enemies. And the Vitellian Soldiers were notorious
throughout all Italy for their sloth and Thievery, and for this cause were only
terrible to those that entertained them. And here I cannot but insert the
opinion of some Divines which I conceive to be very right, namely, Aegid.
Regius de act. supernat. disp. 31. dub. 7. n. 95.
That the King who pays not his Army, stands obliged not to the Soldiers only,
but to his Subjects and Neighbors for the injuries they sustain by them, who
without pay cannot live, but by rapine and plunder.

III. The duty of those that are at Peace.
On the other side, it is the duty of those that are not concerned in the War,
to do nothing whereby he that foments an ill cause may be strengthened, or
whereby he that moves in the defense of a good cause may be hindered, according
to what has been already said: But where the cause is doubtful, Lib. 3. c. 1.
to show themselves equally civil to both parties, whether it be by suffering
them to go through their Country to pass and repass with their Legions, or by
not relieving either, being closely besieged. The Corcyrenses in Thucydides
tell the Athenians, That it concerned them if they would be thought Neuters,
neither to suffer the Corinthians their Enemies, nor themselves to raise forces
in Attica. For this, the Romans objected against Philip, that he had doubly
violated his League with them; first, in wronging their Friends, and again, in
assisting their Enemies with Men and Money. The very same objections T.
Quintius makes in his Treaty with Nabis, Thou say (says Quintius) that thou
have not directly violated thy league with us: How often shall I convince thee
that thou have? I shall not use more arguments, but shall draw to this issue;
By what means think thou may friendship be broken? certainly by these two
chiefly; if thou persecutest our Associates as thine Enemies, or joinest thy
self with our Enemies against us. Agathias tells us, Lib. 3. Goth lib. 1.
that he is an Enemy who does that which pleases an Enemy. And Procopius
reckons him to be in the Enemies Army, who supplies the Army of an Enemy with
things properly appertaining to War. Queen Elizabeth tells the Hansetowns,
complaining that their privileges were broken by her seizing of some hulks
carrying warlike provisions into Spain, who had then open War with England,
That the right of neutrality is in such sort to be used, Camden Ann. 1589.
that whilst we help the one we hurt not the other. And so on the contrary, as
Amalasuntha in Her Epistle to Justinian pleads, He is a friend and companion,
who though he stand not in a readiness to fight, yet readily and openly
supplies us with all things requisite for War. Of the same opinion was
Demosthenes of old, Qui ea facit aut machinatur quibus ego capi possim, etiamsi
nec feriat, nec jaculum emittat, hostis mihi est; He that makes or contriveth
such things whereby I may be taken, though he neither strikes me, nor throws a
dart at me, is mine Enemy. M. Acilius tells the Epirots, Livy lib. 36.
who though they sent no supplies of Soldiers to Antiochus, yet were accused
for supplying him with money, that he knew not whether he should rank them
among Neuters or Enemies. Lib. 37.
And L. Aemilius the Praetor reproves the Teji, for that they had victualled
the Enemies Fleet, and promised them wine; adding withal, that unless they did
the like for them, they should be held as Enemies. We shall conclude with that
of Augustus Caesar recorded by Plutarch, Plut. Brute.
Pacis jus amittit Civitas, quae hostem recipit; That City has lost its right
to Peace, that receives and protects an Enemy. It would be very commodious for
us therefore, if such a League could be made with both parties engaged in War,
that with their consents we might sit still as wellwishers to both; and yet,
that it may be lawful for us to perform the common duties of humanity to either
of them. So Livy, Pacem, Lib. 35.
quod medios decet amicos, optent; Bello se non interponant: It behooves those
that are friends to both parties, to endeavor to make Peace, but not to engage
themselves in War on either side. Archidamus King of Sparta perceiving the
Elians inclining to take part with the Arcadians, wrote an Epistle unto them,
wherein were contained these words only, (...), It is good to be quiet.

CHAP. XVIII. Concerning things privately done in a public War
I. Whether it be lawful to hurt a public Enemy privately, explained by a
distinction. II. What they may lawfully do against an Enemy by internal
justice, that make War at their own private charge (i. e.) as Privateers; first
in respect of the Enemy: III. Secondly in respect of the State or City under
whom they fight. IV. What the Laws of Christian Charity require of them. V. How
a private War may be mixed with a public. VI. Unto what he stands obliged, who
without order damnifies an Enemy, explained with a distinction.
I. Whether to hurt a public Enemy privately, be lawful.
WHAT we have hitherto said does mostly appertain unto such as have the supreme
Authority in an Army, or unto such as are to execute public commands. Now we
are to see what in a public War may privately be done, whether we respect the
Law of Nature, Nations, or the Divine Law. Cicero in the first of his Offices
relates, that when Marcus the Son of Cato the Censor, had listed himself in the
Army under Pompilius the General, that Legion in which he served being
disbanded; yet he for the delight he took in Arms, continuing still in the
Army, Cato wrote to Pompilius, desiring him in case his Son would continue
there, to give him a second Oath; adding this reason, because the former Oath
being with that Legion discharged, it was not lawful otherwise for his Son to
fight the Enemy. Whereunto the same Cicero adds the very words of Cato recited
out of his Epistle to his Son, wherein he advises him, To take heed how he
engaged in Battle, for that it was not lawful for him to kill an Enemy being
then no Soldier. So we read in Plutarch of one Chrysantas a Soldier under
Cyrus, Plut. Quaest. Romans 39. and de Marcello.
who having his Sword lifted up to kill his Enemy, and hearing the Trumpet
sound a Retreat, withdrew his hand and would not hurt him (as if it were only
the necessity of obeying his General, that could justify a Soldier in killing
his Enemy, without which it would be no better than Homicide.) Seneca tells us,
That that Soldier is useless that neglects the sound of a Retreat. De Ira. c.
9.
Now they that conceive this to proceed only from the external Right of Nations
are mistaken. For if we respect that Right only, Bo. 3 chapter 6. Supra l. 3. c. 7.
it is lawful for any man as to possess himself of his Enemies Goods (as has
been said) so to take away his life also; for by that Right, Hosts pro nullis
habentur; Enemies are not reckoned as men. This therefore that Cato advises,
proceeds from the Roman Military Discipline, which provided, That he who being
a Soldier observed not the word of Command, though the success were good,
should notwithstanding be put to Death (as Modestinus observes:) But he that
without order or command should engage in fight with an Enemy, was so
understood as if he wilfully disobeyed his Generals command; Livy lib. 7. Plut.
paral. Romans and. Grae. paral. 12.
as we are taught, as well by the severity of Manlius to his own Son, as by the
like proceedings of Epaminondas against his. Because in case such things may
rashly be done, it may happen that Soldiers may sometimes desert their own
stations; which license increasing, the whole Army or some part thereof, may
happen to be unexpectedly engaged on terms very unequal, which by all means is
to be avoided: which is the reason why Acidius Cassius past the sentence of
Death in the like case, Evenire potuit ut essent infidiae; It might have so
happened, says he, that ambushes had been laid to the destruction of the Army.
And therefore Salust in his description of the Roman Discipline, tells us, That
in War, as well they who contrary to command had fought the Enemy, as they who
being called back made not their return in time, were frequently punished. A
certain Spartan being just about to kill his Enemy whom he had in his Power,
hearing the Trumpet sounding a Retreat, suddenly staid his hand, giving this
reason for it, Praefectis parere satius est quam hostem occidere; Better it is
to obey our Commanders than to kill our Enemy. And Plutarch gives this as the
reason, why he that is dismissed the Army, has no Right to kill an Enemy,
because he is not bound by any Military Laws, which they that are to fight the
Enemy are obliged to observe. 17.6.
Epictetus in Arrian, reciting the fact beforementioned of Chrysantas, adds,
Tanto illi potius videbatur Ducis quam suam voluntatem exequi; That he thought
it much better to execute the commands of his Captain than to humor his own
passion. But if we respect that Right which is internal and natural, it seems
lawful in a just War for any man to do those things whereby the innocent party
may receive benefit, so as he exceed not the just measure of making War: not
that it is lawful for him to make any thing that he takes from the Enemy his
own; for to him there is not any thing owing, unless happily it be in the nature
of a punishment, which he exacts by that Right which is common to all mankind,
which in what measure it is by the Evangelical Law restrained, may easily be
understood by what we have said above. Lib. 2. c. 17.
Now a command in War may be either General, or Special: General as when in a
tumult among the Romans, the Consul cried out, Qui Rempublicam salvam volunt,
me sequantur; Let them that wish the safety of the Commonwealth follow me. Nay,
Serve. ad 8. Ae. nead.
sometimes this power of killing is granted to every Subject, beyond what is
done in our own defense, if it be expedient for the public safety,

II. What Reformadoes and Privateers may do by internal Right against an Enemy.
A special charge or command to kill an Enemy may be given, not only to them
who receive pay, but to those who go to War on their own charge; or (which is
yet more) who administer upon their own charge a part of the War, as they that
build, set out, and maintain men of War at their own private charge, who
instead of pay, gain to themselves whatsoever they can take from the Enemy, as
is elsewhere declared Bo. 3. chapter 6.
: which how far it is agreeable to that which we call internal justice, is
worthily disputed. This justice has respect, either to the Enemy, or to the
City, with which we make our Contract. From an Enemy, the possession of all
things that may conduce to the maintenance of the War, may for our own security
be taken away, but this must be under a condition of restitution; but the
Dominion or property in those things must be no farther retained, than will
serve to compensate the costs and damages which that City that maintains the
War has been at, either from the beginning, or in the prosecution of the War;
whether the things so taken, belong to the Commonwealth that is at enmity with
us, or some private Citizens thereof, though happily of themselves they are
innocent: but the goods of such of their Subjects as are nocent, or in actual
Arms against us, may be taken and detained by way of just punishment. Things
therefore taken from the Enemy may be theirs, who at their own charge maintain
part of the War in respect of the Enemy, so far forth as to balance their
damages and expenses, with some allowance for the peril they undergo, which
also ought to be valued by equal Arbitrators.

III. What in respect of their own City.
But as to the City with whom we contract, the same will be internally just, if
at least there be an equality in the Contract, that is, in case the charge and
peril we undergo, be but equivalent to the Body we take or may hope to gain.
But if the Booty hoped for, do in value surmount the charge and danger, the
overplus ought to be restored to the City; just as he that buying at a low
prize, the cast of a Net, which though uncertain, yet is easily made, and yet
of great hopes (if it answer his expectation, is bound to give to him with whom
he did contract, so much as to make the balance even.)

IV. What Christian charity requires.
But suppose that what we do thus take, be no more than what in strictness of
justice we may keep, yet may we thereby break the bonds of charity, wherein, as
Christians we stand obliged; as in case it appear, that the Booty so taken,
does not impoverish the Commonwealth or the King that maintains the War, or
those particular persons that are in actual Arms against us; but rather such
particular persons as are innocent, who likewise are thereby reduced into so
miserable a condition, that in case we should cast those who are privately
indebted unto us into the like, we should be thought unmercifully cruel.
Whereunto if we likewise add, that the spoil we take from these, contributes
little or nothing, either to the finishing of the War, or to the enfeebling of
the Enemies strength, it will easily convince us that it would ill become an
honest man, much less a Christian, to make an advantage to himself by the sole
infelicity of the times. For which very thing it was that Plutarch so highly
blamed Crassus, saying, Pleraque horum ex igne belloque rapuit, nihil magis
lucro habens quam communes calamitates; The greatest part of whose riches he
gained by Fire and by War, raising his private fortunes by nothing more than by
public calamity.

V. How a private War may be mixed with a public.
But it sometimes happens, that by the occasion of a public War there arises
a private; as if a Man fall by accident amongst his Enemies, and is thereby in
danger of his life or Goods, in which case, such means as we have already
granted Lib. 2. c. 1.
, may lawfully be used in defense of our lives and fortunes. We read that
sometimes in War, private profit is warranted by public Authority; as when a
man having sustained some extraordinary damage by the Enemy, obtains of his
Prince a Commission to repair, his losses by what he can get from the Enemy,
which also is to be limited in the same manner, Lib. 3. c. 2.
as pledges, and such like things are that are left in gage.

VI. How far he stands obliged, who without command hurts an Enemy.
But in case any Soldier or others, shall in a just War set fire to an Enemies
House, or destroy his Fields, or commit such and such like Acts, whereby the
Enemy is damnified without special order or command from his Superiors,
whereunto we must add, unless it be in case of necessity, or for some other
just cause, That man according to the opinion of our best Divines, stands
obliged to make satisfaction. I have here added what they have omitted, unless
it be for some other just cause; because if there be any such cause, he may
happily be bound to answer for it to his own Prince or State, whose Laws he has
transgrest; but not to his Enemy, to whom he has done no wrong. Not much
unlike was that Answer which a certain Carthaginian made to the Romans, who
demanded, That Hannibal should be delivered to them: We, says he, are not to
dispute with you, Whether Saguntum were besieged by the private command of
Hannibal, or by the public Decree of the Carthaginian Senate; but whether it
were justly or unjustly done, for it belongs unto us only to call him to an
account, being our Subject, whether he did it by his own Authority, or by ours.
This only concerns you to enquire, Whether it were lawful to be done by that
League which we have made with you.

CHAP. XIX. Concerning Faith to be kept between Enemies.
I. That faith is to be kept with all sorts of Enemies. II. The Opinion, That
faith is not to be kept with Thieves and Tyrants, refuted. III. This Argument,
That such deserve punishment, answered; being not considerable when we treat
with them as such. IV. Nor will it avail to urge, That the promise was extorted
through fear, if he that made the promise was not himself affrighted; V. Or if
the promise were confirmed by Oath, though with men such a violation is not
punishable. VI. This fitted to rebellious Subjects in Arms. VII. A notable
difficulty handled, concerning promises made to Subjects in respect of the
Sovereign Power. Where it is showed, VIII. That such promises may be confirmed
by the Oath of the City: IX. Or it may be made to a third Person on the behalf
of such Subjects. X. How the Government of a State may be changed. XI. That by
the Law of Nations the exceptions of fear appertain not to a solemn War: XII.
This to be understood of such a fear as is acknowledged by the Law of Nations.
XIII. That faith is to be kept, even with such as are perfidious: XIV. But not
if the Conditions are not fulfilled; Or if either Party refuse to stand to any
part of the Agreement: XV. Nor if the thing promised be counterballanced by a
just Debt: XVI. Though that Debt be due upon another account; XVII. Nor if the
Promiser be otherwise damnified to the like value: XVIII. Or if the value of
the thing promised be due by way of punishment. XIX. How these take place in
War.
I. That faith is to be kept with Enemies of all sorts.
WE have already showed, What and how much may lawfully be done in War, simply
and in it self considered. We are now to consider what and how much may be
done, as considered in relation to some foregoing promise, namely, Concerning
the faith which Enemies ought to keep one with another. It was notably said by
Silius, an Italian Poet, concerning a Roman Consul: -- Optimus ille
Militiae, cui postremum primumque tueri
Inter Bella fidem.
He amongst Generals the best praise deserves,
Who first and last in Wars his faith preserves.
Xenophon in his Oration concerning Agesilaus, from his Example concludes thus,
So great and excellent a thing it is for every man, but especially Generals, to
be just, and to be so accounted in the performance of their Oaths and Promises.
Leuct. 4.
So Aristides, In the preservation of Peace and of all other public
Agreements, they are ever most to be regarded that are most just. There is no
man, as Cicero well observes, but approves of and commends that affection of
mind by which no profit is sought after, but rather faith is preserved against
profit. It is the public faith only, as Quintilian the Father rightly
observes, that makes Truces even among armed Troops, and that conserves the
Right of surrendered Cities. Faith, says the same Quintilian, Lib. 2. c. 29.
is the strongest and most indissoluble Bond of humane Society. Sacra laus
fidei inter Hosts, Its reputation is great, even amongst Enemies. Fides
sanctissimum humani pectoris bonum; Faith, says Seneca, is the most precious
Ornament of the rational soul, the best gift that God bestows upon Men, the
strongest support of humane Society. It is the Cement that binds up all
Traffic and Commerce between man and man, Qua sine non Tellus Pacem, non
Aequo^a norunt,
Justitiae Consors, tacitumque in pectore Numen.
-- without her
No Peace is firm either by Land or Sea,
She Is Justice's Mate, an inward Deity.
The Romans placed her in their Capitol next to Jupiter himself; and
deservedly, for a great cause of their prosperity may be attributed to their
faith, which they religiously kept both with their Friends and Enemies. Though
all other Laws sleep in War, yet must Faith and Justice be strictly observed,
says Ambrose. Of the same mind was St Augustine, Ep. 205. ad Bonif.
Fides quando promittitur etiam hosti servanda est, contra quem Bellum geritur;
When our word is past, it must be kept, though with an Enemy, against whom we
wage War. Foedera jurastis, dexteras dedistis, quae etiam inter Hosts valent;
Ye have sworn Leagues with us, Appian. Civil. 4.
says Archelaus the Philosopher in Appian, Ye have plighted unto us your
Faith, all which are in force even amongst Enemies. For in being Enemies they
cease not to be rational men, but by being men endowed with reason they are
capable of a Right by virtue of a promise. Camillus in Livy professes, That
there was between him and the Falisci such a Society as was common with all
Mankind; but even from this common Society of discourse and reason, there
naturally arises that obligation from a promise, whereof we now speak. Neither
must we think that because (as many Authors hold) it is lawful, or at least
blameless, to deceive an Enemy by falsehood; therefore by a parity of reason
the same may be done, though we have given our faith. For the obligation of
speaking truth proceeds from a cause long preceding any War, and which may
happily be in some measure relaxed by War; but a promise does of it self confer a
new Right: which difference was clearly discerned by Aristotle, who treating of
veracity thus distinguishes, I speak not of him who speaks truth in ordinary
Contracts and Agreements, and in those which appertain unto Justice and
Injustice; which are indeed Branches of another Virtue. Pausanias, speaking of
Philip of Macedon, gives of him this Character, No man, says he, can well
style him a good Emperor, as being (indeed) always regardless of his Oaths,
though made by the Immortal Gods, and upon every slight advantage faithless in
his promises; so that, though a King, no man was less to be believed, either
upon his Word or Oath, than himself. The like testimony does Valerius Maximus
give of Hannibal, namely, That as professed an Enemy as he was to the people of
Rome and all the Italians, yet was he a much greater Enemy to faith and
sincerity, rejoicing always in falsehood and lies, as if they had been
commendable Virtues; whereby it came to pass, That whereas he had otherwise
bequeathed unto the World an honorable memory of himself, he hereby left it
disputable, Whether his Vices did not exceed his Virtues. Thus the Trojans in
Homer, being pricked in conscience by reason of their perfidiousness, condemn
themselves: -- rumpentes Foedera sacra,
Juratamque fidem, pugnamus; non quibus fas est.
Breaking our sacred Leagues, and Faith, though sworn,
We fight against those who such false Dealings scorn.


II. Faith to be kept with Thieves and Tyrants.
Neither, as we have already said Lib. 2. c. 13. Sect. 5.
, may we admit of that of Cicero, Nulla nobis Societas cum Tyrannis, That no
Society is to be held with Tyrants. No, nor of the same Cicero, Pirata non est
perduellium numero, cum hoc nec fides esse debet, nec jusjurandum commune; A
Pyrate is not to be reckoned as any man's particular Enemy, with whom neither
faith nor common Oath is to be kept. Nor that of Seneca, who speaking of a
Tyrant, says Lib. 7. de Benef.
, All Obligations to him are cancelled, if he cut off from that which is the
common Right of all Mankind. From which impure Fountain proceeded that error
of Michael Ephesus Ad 5. Nicom.
, who taught, That it was not Adultery that was committed with the Wife of a
Tyrant. Non putans Adulterium Vxorem Tyranni polluere; sicut nec homicidium,
Tyranvum occidere: Supposing it, says Seneca Sen. in excerp. 4. 7.
, no Adultery to pollute the Wife of a Tyrant, nor Murder to kill him. Thus
Julius Clarus In Sect. Homicid. n. 56.
conceived that a Woman who stood outlawed might be lain withal, without being
punished as an Adulterer. And thus did some of the Jewish Doctors maintain the
like error concerning Strangers R. Levi Ben. Gerson. in Levit. 20.10.
, whose Marriages they reckoned as none at all. But Pompey finished a great
part of that Naval War which he made against Pirates, by covenanting to
preserve their lives, and to assign them a Country wherein they might live
without rapine. And of Didius we read, That he was condemned as perfidious, for
breaking faith with the Celtibrians, who lived by robbery. Caesar also in the
third of his Civil Wars, writes of a composition made by the Roman Captains,
with the Tories and Renegadoes, who lay lurking in the Pirenaean Mountains. Now
who can say, That such a composition being made is not binding? It Is true
indeed that such Agreements do not produce so friendly a Communion, as that
which the Law of Nations has introduced between Enemies engaged in a Solemn
and Just War: But yet, being men, it may induce such a Communion as natural
Right affords them; as Porphyry rightly argues, which is sufficient to prove
that such Contracts are to be performed. Thus did Lucullus keep his faith given
to Apollonius, who was Captain of the Renegadoes; as Diodorus records. And thus
did Augustus pay the ransom imposed on him by Crocata the Thief, being by him
apprehended, rather than he would satisfy his word; as Dio testifies.

III. This Objection. That such deserve punishment, answered.
But let us now see what more probable Argument than those brought by Cicero
may be produced. The first whereof is this, That such as are notoriously
wicked, and are no part of a Civil Society, may by the Law of Nature be by any
man punished, as we have elsewhere showed. But they that may lawfully be
punished, even with death, may also be lawfully dispoiled of their Goods, and
dispossessed of their other Rights: as the same Cicero well observes, Offic. lib.
3.
Non est contra Naturam spoliare eum si possis, quem honestum est necare; It is
no violation of the Law of Nature to despoil him of his Goods if we can, whom
it is lawful to kill. But among those things wherein he claims a Right, even
those which accrue unto him by virtue of any promise that is made to him, may
be included; and therefore even those, by way of punishment, may lawfully be
taken from him. Whereunto I answer, That all this may be very true, if we did
not knowingly treat with him as such: But in case we treat with a Thief, as
such, we are so to be understood as if we were contented to remit the
punishment due, as to that offense; because, as we have elsewhere said,
promises are always to be taken in such a sense, as that we make not the act
void. Thus the old Pimp in Terence, Leno sum, fateor; Pernities communis
Adolescentum;
Perjurus, Pestis; tamen tibi a me nulla est orta injuria.
A Bawd I am; Youth's Common Pest, it is known;
Perjured; yet wrong by me Thou have had none.
It was no ill Plea then that Nabis (in Livy) made, when his tyranny was
objected against him by Quintius Flaminius, Concerning the name Tyrant, I
answer, That whatsoever I am, I am the very same I was when thou, O Titus
Quintius, entredst in League with me. And by and by, These things, whatsoever
they are, I did when ye contracted friendship with me. Whereunto he presently
adds, Si quid ego mut assem, mihi inconstantiae meae; cum vos mutetis, vobis
vestrae ratio reddenda est: If I had changed, I ought to have given the reason
of my inconstancy; but seeing it is you that change, you ought to give the
reason of yours. Not much unlike unto this is the Answer that Pericles in
Thucydides gives unto his Subjects, Our Confederates we shall permit to enjoy
their own freedom, and to live by their own Laws, if they did so when they
first entered into League with us.

IV. Fear not to be objected, if the Promiser were not himself affrighted.
Another Objection may be made, which I have heretofore hinted Lib. 2. c. 11. 7.
, namely, That he that by fear has extorted a promise, ought in Justice to
release the Promiser; as having by his injustice damnified him, that is, by
such an act as is repugnant both to the nature of humane Liberty, and to the
nature of the act it self; for all promises that bind ought to be free. This,
though in some cases true yet, is not to be extended to all promises that are
made to Thieves; for that the Promised be bound to free the Promiser, it is
requisite that he to whom the promise was made should have extorted the promise
by an unjust fear: But in case a man shall come and promise to pay the ransom
of his Friend, and thereby deliver him out of Bondage, he is bound to perform
it; because there was no impression of fear upon this man, who in the behalf of
his Friend came voluntarily to make this Contract.

V. What if the promise were bound by Oath.
Whereunto we may add, That he that is compelled, even by an unjust fear, to
make a promise, may be obliged to perform it, if he confirm that promise with
an Oath; for thereby (as we have showed before) he stands bound, not unto men
only, but unto God, against whom no exceptions can be admitted. But true it is
notwithstanding, That by such a sole promise, though confirmed by Oath, the
Heir of the Promiser stands not obliged; for those things only descend to the
Heir which by the original Right of Dominion may pass from man to man in
ordinary Traffic. But those things that are due unto God, cannot, as such, be
included amongst these. Moreover, here we must again repeat what we before
delivered, Lib. 3. c. 4.. 10.
That if a man do happily break his faith with a Thief, whether sworn or unsworn,
he shall thereby incur no punishment amongst other Nations: For generally all
Nations, in detestation of these men, whom they account as common enemies to
humane Society, are pleased to connive at whatsoever is (though unjustly) done
against them.

VI. This applied to Subjects that make War.
But what shall we say concerning the War that Subjects make against their
King, or against such as have the Supreme Authority? Though they may happily have
a cause not in it self altogether unjust, yet that they can have no Right to
act by force against their Prince, we have elsewhere showed Lib. 1. c. 4.
. But yet it sometimes so happens, That either their Cause is so notoriously
unjust, or their obstinacy in resisting so great, that it may be severely
punished. But yet, if they be treated with as Rebels or Traitors, and therein
any promise made unto them, the punishment though justly due for their Treason
ought not to be pleaded in Bar to the performance of that promise. For such was
the piety of the Ancients, that they durst not break their faith, no not with
their very Slaves; as may appear by the Lacedaemonians, Aelian. 6, 7.
who were generally believed to have been justly punished for putting their
Tenarensian Prisoners to death, contrary to their Covenants. And it is likewise
observed by Diodorus, Lib. 11.
That the faith given to Slaves in the Temple of the Palici was never broken by
any of their Lords. Neither will any exceptions of fear be allowed of in this
Case, if the faith given be by Oath confirmed: as we may collect from M.
Pomponius, the Tribune of the People, Sen. de benef. l. 3. c. 37.
who being bound by Oath, punctually performed what he had, though compelled by
fear, promised to L. Manlius.

VII. Of Promises made by Sovereign Princes unto their Subjects.
But a greater difficulty than any before mentioned may arise from the
Legislative Power, and from that supereminent Right of Dominion which every
City has over the things of their Citizens, and which is exercised in its name
by him who has the Supreme Power therein: Which supereminent Right, if it
extend it self to all that is the Subjects, why should it not likewise unto
that Right which arises from any promise made in War? Which being granted,
then it should seem that all such Promises and Agreements may be nulled, and so
all hopes of concluding a War, unless by Victory, would be lost. But on the
contrary, we must observe, That this superlative Right is not fit to be put in
execution promiscuously, at all times; but so far forth as it is commonly
expedient to the preservation of the public safety in a Government not
Tyrannical, but Civil, yea even Regal. But for the most part it is commonly
expedient, That all such Promises and Agreements should be fulfilled. Very
apposite to this purpose is that which we have already written concerning the
defense of the present Government; adding thereunto, That where the public
safety requires that this Sovereign Right should be made use of, satisfaction
ought to be given out of the public to such particular persons as shall be
thereby damnified, as shall be hereafter more fully explained.

VIII. That such promises may be confirmed by the Oath of the City.
Moreover, Agreements may be confirmed by Oath, and that not by the King or
Senate alone, but by the whole Body Politic; as Lycurgus bound the
Lacedaemonians, and Solon the Athenians, by Oath to observe the Laws they had
given them. And lest the change of Citizens should in time relax the binding
power of this Oath, (and so at length it be forgotten, or left arbitrary) this
Oath may be every Year renewed; which if done, the Citizens could by no means
recede from their Engagements, no though it were for their public profit. For
a City has power to grant away even what is her own. Now the words of the Oath
may be so clear and so full as not to admit of any exceptions, Lege Legem, quae
te jurejurando obstrictum tenet; Read over your own Law, Lib. 5. c. 3.
says Valerius Maximus to the City of Athens, whereunto ye stand bound by your
Oath. And such Laws the Romans held as sacred, because the people of Rome were
obliged by Oath to keep them, as Cicero testifies. We find in Livy a very
pertinent Discourse as to this matter, Orat. pro Balbo. Lib. 3.
though of it self more obscure, where (as the opinion of the best Expositors
of the Laws) he asserts, That the Tribunes of the people were sacrosanct, that
is, so holy, that they could not be injured without perjury. But so were
neither the Aediles, Judges, nor Decemviri; and yet to injure either of these
was punishable by the Laws. The ground of which difference was this, Because
these latter were thought sufficiently defended by the severity of the Laws
alone. But that which was in the last place enacted by the people was most
inviolable, yet whilst the Law remained in force, no man could pretend to a
Right to act contrary to the Laws. But that which defended the Tribunes,
besides the Law, was the public Religion of the Romans; for they were all
bound by a solemn Oath not to offer violence unto them, which they that took,
could not break without giving a public scandal to their Religion. This light
we receive from a place in Dionysius Halicarnassensis, where it is thus
recorded, Brutus calling the Assembly together, proposed it to the People of
Rome, That the Tribunes of the People might thenceforth be rendered inviolable,
not by the Laws only, but by a public Oath, whereunto all the People gave
consent. And hence it was that this Law was called sacred. Plut. vit. Gracchi.
And therefore that fact of Tiberius Gracchas in deposing Octavius from the
Tribuneship, (alleging that the Tribunitial Power had its sanctimony from the
people, but not to be exercised against them) was much condemned by all honest
men. And therefore, as I have said, as well a City as a King may be bound up by
Oath in such Agreements as they make with their own Citizens or Subjects.

IX. Or if the promise be made to a third person, for the Subjects --
But yet farther, A Promise or Agreement made by Princes or States to their own
Subjects shall be valid, being made to a third person, who has given no cause
of fear. But wherein and how far forth that third person may stand interessed
in that promise, being one of the niceties of the Roman Law, we shall not here
search into. For naturally it concerned all men to provide (as much as in them
lies) for the safety of others. Thus we read, That King Philip having made his
Peace with the Romans, bound himself by promise, Not to revenge himself on
those Fugitives, who during the War had sided with the Romans.

X. How the public State may be changed.
But yet possible it is, as we have elsewhere proved, that a State may
sometimes become mixed; and as from an Absolute Monarchy it may pass into an
Absolute Aristocracy or Democracy, so also it may by Covenants and Agreements
be transferred from any one of these simple, into one mixed, of any two, or of
all. So as they which before were Subjects, may begin to settle the Government
in themselves, or at least some part thereof, even with a liberty to defend and
protect their own Party by Force of Arms.

XI. That fear in a Solemn War, by the Law of Nations, is no Just Exception.
But a Solemn War, that is, such a War as is on both sides public and
denounced, among many other things which (by that Right which we call external)
it peculiarly enjoys, has this also, That all promises made in that War, or
that conduce to the concluding of it, are so firm and valid, that though they
were caused through a fear unjustly brought, yet can they not be nulled or made
void without the consent of him to whom they were made; because, as many other
things, though in themselves not altogether just, yet are by the Law of Nations
reputed so, so fear, though it be in either side unjustly caused, yet shall it
in such a War by the same Law be accounted just: Which unless granted, it would
follow that such solemn Wars, which are indeed but too frequent, could be
neither moderated nor ended; both which are very expedient for the conservation
of Mankind. And this we have reason to believe is that Right in War which
Cicero tells us is to be kept even with Enemies, De Offic. l. 3. Ver. 4.
to whom also it was elsewhere said, That there were some Rights which an Enemy
might retain, though in War, namely, Not such only as are allowed of by the Law
of Nature, but some such also as are introduced by the consent of Nations.
Neither does it hence follow, That he who in an unjust War has extorted any
such thing may without the breach of piety or honesty retain what he has
thereby got, or compel another to perform such a promise sworn or unsworn. For
internally, and in the very nature of the thing it still remains unjust.
Neither can this internal injustice of the act be otherwise removed than by the
new and absolutely free consent of the Promiser. Again,

XII. This to be understood of such a fear as is allowed by the Law of Nations.
Whereas that fear is said here to be just which is caused in a Solemn War, it
is to be understood of such a fear as the Law of Nations does not disallow: As
for example, A promise wrested from an Ambassador that is taken Prisoner,
shall not yield the least advantage to him that extorts it; as Mariana
testifies. So in case any thing be extorted through the fear of Ravishment, or
through any other the like terror or affrightment, contrary to our faith
given; this ought to be judged by the Law of Nature, because the Law of Nations
takes no cognizance of any such fear. Again,

XIII. That faith is to be kept with the perfidious:
That faith ought to be kept with such as are notoriously perfidious, we have
in a more general Treatise already proved: Which also we may learn from St
Ambrose, which without doubt reaches even unto such enemies as are altogether
faithless. Such as the Carthaginians were unto the Romans, who notwithstanding
kept their faith inviolably with them. For, Lib. 6. c. 6.
as Valerius Maximus well observes, The Roman Senate regarded not what the
Carthaginians deserved, but what in honor became the People of Rome; which is
the Testimony that Salust gives of them, In all the Wars, says he, between
Rome and Carthage, though the Carthaginians, as well in times of Peace as
during their Truces, committed many outrages, yet would not the Romans upon any
provocation permit that the like should be done unto them. And concerning that
fact of Sergius Galba, who, in revenge upon the Portuguese for so often
breaking their League with him, first deceived them with a new League, and then
slew eight thousand of them; Appian gives this Answer, Perfidia perfidiam
ultus, contra Romanam Dignitatem, Barbaros imitabatur; In revenging one
treachery with another, he wounded the Majesty of the people of Rome, imitating
therein the Barbarians. For which he was afterward worthily accused by Labo, a
Tribune of the People, whereof Valerius Maximus gives his opinion thus, Is was
not equity, but compassion, that pleaded in that Cause: For that absolution
which his own innocence could not challenge, was given to his innocent Babes:
which also is confirmed by Cato, He had certainly died for his treachery, had
not his own tears, and the innocence of his Children, procured his pardon.

XIV. But not if the Condition be not performed, or if either Party stand not
to the Agreement:
But this also we may observe, That there are two ways whereby a man, though he
perform not that which he promised, yet may avoid perfidiousness, as namely, If
the Condition be not performed whereupon that promise was grounded, or if some
other compensation be made for it; for want of the Condition the Promiser is
not really discharged: But it will appear by the event, That there had been no
obligation but what was contracted upon Condition; therefore that Condition
being not performed, there needed no discharge. Whereunto we may refer another
Case, namely, If the other do not perform that which he was first bound on his
part to fulfill. For the particular Heads of one and the same Agreement seem to
be complicated each with other in the manner of a Condition, as if it had been
thus expressed. Thus will I do, if you do so or so, which he has promised.
Wherefore Tullus in his Answer to the Albans, calls the Gods to witness,
Whether of the two Nations were the first Aggressors; praying earnestly, That
all the miseries of the War might befall that Nation. For as Vlpian notes, He
breaks not the League, who therefore renounceth his Associates, because they do
not perform some Articles, whereupon the League was at the first made. For
which Cause, where it is otherwise intended, it is usually thus expressed, That
if either Party shall transgress in this or that Article, yet shall the rest
remain firm and inviolable.

XV. Nor when there is otherwise a just compensation made:
The original of compensation or recompense we have elsewhere declared Book 2.
Chapter 7. 2.
, namely, When we cannot otherwise recover either what is our own, or what is
justly owing unto us, we may take away from him that either detains it or owes
it the full value, thereof in any thing else; whence it follows, That
whatsoever is actually in our possession, whether it be Corporeal or
Incorporeal, we may much more lawfully detain and keep. Whatsoever therefore it
is that we have promised, it is in our power not to perform; if it be of no
greater value than that which being once ours, he to whom the promise was made
injuriously keeps from us. Comparatio nulli invidiosa est, Tertul.
ubi aut Gratiae aut Injuriae communis est ratio; That comparison is to no man
odious, wherein a common regard is had to either courtesy or injury. Thus in a
wager at Law, says Seneca, De benef. lib. 6. cap. 4.
the Debtor does sometimes cast the Creditor, when he has upon some other
account got more from him than his Debt amounted unto. For between the Creditor
and the Debtor only the Judge sits as an equal Arbitrator, who may say to the
Creditor, It was thy money that thou lentest, how came thou then by the Land
which thou possessest, but never boughtest? wherefore upon a just valuation,
Thou that came in a Creditor, Depart hence a Debtor.

XVI. Although due by another Contract:
The Case is the same if he with whom we have to do owes me as much upon any
other Contract, which I cannot otherwise recover but by detaining that which I
have promised to him. In Courts of Justice there are, says Seneca Eod. Lib. c.
6, 7.
, some separate Actions, neither is the form confounded. But those Precedents,
as it is there said, are contained within certain Laws, which are necessarily
to be followed. One Law is not mixed with another. We must walk as every Law
does lead us. But the Law of Nations admits of no such distinctions, namely,
Where there is no other hopes of recovering what is our own.

XVII. Or some damage done.
The like may be said where he that exacts a promise has damnified the
Promiser to the value of the thing promised. Thus the same Seneca Eod. lib. c.
4.
, The Farmer is not bound to his Landlord, though his Lease be not cancelled,
in case he wilfully trample down his Corn, and cut down his Fruit Trees; not
because he has received what he agreed for, but because he has hindered his
Tenant from receiving the Fruits of his Grounds, whereby he should have paid
his Rent. Where also he subjoins another Example, Pecus abegisti, Servum
occidisti; Thou have happily driven away his Cattle, or slain his Servant. And a
little after, It is lawful for me to compare the good that any man does me,
with the heart that he does me; and thereby to pronounce my self his Debtor, or
him mine.

XVIII. Or for some punishment justly due.
Lastly, Whatsoever also is due to the Promiser by way of punishment, may be
emballanced with what he has promised; which Seneca in the same place thus
clearly illustrates, Beneficio Gratia debetur, injuriae ultio; Thanks is due
for a courtesy, revenge for an injury: If therefore I pay him no thanks, nor
require that punishment from him that I lawfully might; there is nothing at all
due to either, for the one acquits the other. And anon, By comparing the good
turns I receive with the wrongs I receive, Ib. c. 6.
I shall easily discern whether I am indebted unto him, or he to me.

XIX. How these take place in War.
But as whatsoever is contended for by a wager at Law cannot whilst the Suit
depends be counterballanced against that which is promised, whether it be the
thing sued for, or the costs and damages sustained in the Suit; so neither can
the injuries that first occasioned the War, nor any of the losses or expenses
which are usually through the license in War caused, be recompensed as long as
the War lasts. For the very nature of this business, lest nothing at all be
done, shows that setting a part on either side the controversies of the War,
they are agreed. For otherwise there can be no Agreement so firmly made, that
may not be avoided. Whereunto may that of Seneca not unfitly be applied, De
Benef. lib. 7, cap. 15.
Our Ancestors would admit of no excuses at all for the breach of promises,
that so they might teach us that our faith was altogether to be kept: For
better it was not to admit of some excuses, though just, from a few, than to
encourage all to make what excuses they would for the breach of their faith.
But what things are those which may countervail that which is promised? Surely
in the first place, Whatsoever by any other Contract made since the War is
owing unto us by him to whom our promise was made, or whatsoever damages we
have sustained by him in the times of Truces, or in case the Persons or Rights
of Ambassadors have been by him violated, or, in brief, if he have done any
other thing which between Enemies is not justifiable by the Law of Nations,
where this also is to be understood, That the satisfaction be made between the
same persons, and that the Right of no third person be thereby injured; but yet
with this allowance, That the Goods of Citizens may stand obliged for the Debts
of their own City, as those of Subjects may for the Debt of their Prince; as we
have already showed. Whereunto we may add, Lib. 2. c. 2.
That it is the sign of a generous Soul strictly to observe his faith in
Leagues given, notwithstanding all provocations to the contrary by injuries
received: Upon which account it was that that wise Indian Jarchas so highly
commended that King, who being much injured by his Confederates, yet would
never break his faith given, saying, Philost. l. 3. c. 6.
Tam sancte se jurasse, ut alteri ne post acceptam injuriam nociturus esset;
That the Oath he had taken was so sacred, that he durst not injure him to whom
he had given his faith, though he were sufficiently provoked. Now look what
other Questions usually arise concerning our faith given to Enemies, may almost
all of them be resolved by applying them to those Rules heretofore prescribed,
concerning the Obligatory Power, as of Promises in general, so of those special
promises made by Oaths, Leagues, Sponsions, Lib. 2. c. 11. and seq.
and of the Right and Obligation of Kings, and concerning the interpretation of
such promises as are ambiguous. But yet notwithstanding for the better use of
what has been already said, and for the clearing of any other doubts which may
happen to arise, it shall not at all be troublesome to me briefly to unfold
such of these special Cases as are most notable, and as do most frequently
occur.

CHAP. XX. Concerning the public Faith, Treaties, Lots, set Combats,
Arbitrements, Surrenders, Hostages, Pledges.
I. The division of Faith among Enemies in order to that which follows. II. In
Monarchies, it is in the Kings power to make Peace. III. What if the King be an
Infant, Mad, a Prisoner, or an Exile. IV. In other Governments this power is in
the major part. V. How an Empire, or a part of it, or the goods of a Kingdom,
may be firmly alienated to obtain Peace. VI. How far by a Peace made with a
King, his People and Successors may stand bound. VII. That what is the
Subjects, may in Peace be granted away for the public good, but with condition
of repairing damages. VIII. What may be said of things already lost by War. IX.
No distinction here between things got by the Civil Law, and things got by the
Law of Nations. X. With Foreigners, what a King does, is held to be for the
public good. XI. A general rule whereby to interpret Articles of Peace. XII.
In doubtful cases it is credible, that it is agreed, that things should remain
in the state they are at present: how this is to be understood. XIII. What if
it be agreed, that all things shall be restored to the condition they were in
before the War began. XIV. Then they who being before free, and had voluntariy
enslaved themselves, were not to be made free. XV. That damages occasioned in
War, if left dubious, are presumed to be forgiven. XVI. But not those, which
before the War were due to private men. XVII. Punishments also before the War
publicly due, if left doubtful, are believed to be remitted. XVIII. What is to
be said concerning the Right that private men have to require punishment. XIX.
That Right which before the War, though publicly claimed, was controverted, is
easily believed to be forgiven. XX. Things taken after Peace made, to be
restored. XXI. Of agreements, whereby things taken in War are to be restored:
some certain rules. XXII. Together with the things, the fruits and profits are
to be restored. XXIII. Concerning the names of Countries. XXIV. Concerning the
relation that is had to some precedent agreements. XXV. Of delay. XXVI. Where
the words are doubtful, the interpretation must be made against him that gives
Laws. XXVII. Distinction must be made between the giving of a new cause of War,
and the breaking of Peace. XXVIII. How a Peace may be broke, by doing contrary
to that which is presumed to be in every Peace. XXIX. What if we be invaded by
Associates. XXX. What if by Subjects? and how their fact may be judged as
approved. XXXI. What if Subjects engage under another Prince. XXXII. What if
Subjects be invaded? explained by distinction. XXXIII. What if Associates? who
are likewise distinguished. XXXIV. How a Peace may be broken by doing contrary
to that which was said in the Peace. XXXV. Whether any distinction is to be
made between the Articles of Peace. XXXVI. What if to the breach of the
Articles there be some punishments added. XXXVII. What if we are hindered by an
unavoidable necessity. XXXVIII. The Peace shall stand firm, if he that is
injured be willing thereunto. XXXIX. How a Peace may be broken, by doing that
which is contrary to the special nature of every Peace. XL. What under the name
of friendship may be comprehended. XLI. Whether it be enough to break
friendship, to receive Subjects and Exiles. XLII. How War may be ended by lots.
XLIII. How by a set combat, and whether lawful. XLIV. Whether the fact of the
King do in this case oblige the People. XLV. Who is to be judged the
Conqueror. XLVI. How War may be ended by Arbitrament, and how it must be
understood, if it admits of no appeal. XLVII. Arbitrators in cases doubtful,
must be so understood as bound to do Right. XLVIII. That Arbitrators are not to
determine of possessions. XLIX. How far forth the force of a pure dedition
extends. L. What a Conqueror ought to do as to such as surrender. LI. Of a
surrender upon conditions. LII. Who may and ought to be given in Hostage. LIII.
What Right is given against Hostages. LIVE. Whether an Hostage may awfully
escape by flight. LV. Whether an Hostage may be lawfully detained upon any
other account. LVI. Upon the death of him, for whom an Hostage is given, the
Hostage is to go free. LVII. The King dying who sent the Hostage, whether the
Hostage may lawfully be detained. LVIII. Hostages may sometimes be principally
obliged, and that one of them is not bound for the fact of another. LIX. What
obligation lies upon pledges. LX. When the Right of redemption of things
engaged, is to be judged as lost.
I. The Division of Faith in order to what follows.
ALL agreements between Enemies depend upon Faith, either expressed or
understood. Faith expressed is either public or private. Public, is either that
given by supreme, or that given by subordinate power. That given by the supreme
power, either puts an end to the War, or is of some force, the War continuing.
Among those things that conclude a War, some things are looked at as
Principals, and some Accessaries. The principals are those very things that
finish it, either by their own act, as the Articles of agreement; or by consent
on both sides, that it shall be determined by some other thing; or by Lots, by
the event of some Combats, the award of Arbitrators: whereof that by Lots is
altogether fortuitous, the other two moderate the case by the strength of the
mind, or of the body, or by the discerning faculty.

II. The power to make Peace is in the King if the Government be Kingly.
They that have power to begin a War, have also a power by Articles of
agreement to to end it See Bo. 2. chapter 15.. 3.
, for every man is the best moderator of his own affairs; whence it follows,
that in a War on both sides public, the power of making Peace belongs to them
who are entrusted with the Supreme Authority, as in a Government truly
Monarchical to the King, so as he be no ways disabled to exercise that
Authority.

III. What if the King be an Infant.
For in case a King be not at Years of discretion (which in some Kingdoms is
determinable by Law Bo. 1. ch 3.. 24. Francis King of France (being Prisoner to
Charles the Fifth Emperor and King of Spain) his case about the Duchy of
Burgundy. See Lord Herberts Hist. of H. the 8th page 193.
, but in others by probable conjectures) or if he be not of sound mind, he is
not capable of making Peace. The like may be said of a King that is in
Captivity; in case that Kingdom had its first rise from the suffrages of the
People, it being incredible that the People should ever consent to entrust
their Government into such hands, as were not at liberty to exercise it;
wherefore in this case also, though not the full power, yet the exercise of
that power, and as it were the Guardianship of it is in the people, or those
whom the people shall surrogate in their stead. Thus when Rodolfus the Palatine
fled through fear into England, and when the Bishop of Mentz was driven out of
his Territories, by the Bishop of Tryers; neither the one nor the other lost
their Electorship. But yet as to those things that are privately his own, a
King though a Captive may make any Contract good, after the example of those
things that we shall say concerning private agreements. But what if the King be
an exile (as Camillus was when he lived amongst the Vejans of whom Lucan writes
thus, Vejos habitante Camillo,
Illic Roma fuit.)
is it in his power to make Peace? yea surely, if it appear that he lives free,
obnoxious to none; for otherwise the condition of an exiled King is not much
different from that of another Captive, a banished man being but a Prisoner at
large. Thus Cicero speaks concerning Regulus, that he refused to give his
opinion in the Senate; alleging, that so long as he stood bound to his Enemies
by Oath, he was incapable of voting as a Senator.

IV. In other States it lies in the major part.
But where the Supreme Authority is seated, either in the Nobles or in the
People, it is in the power of the major part of them to make Peace: The Decrees
either of the public Senate in the former, or of the Citizens in the latter,
being to be pronounced by such as by use and custom have a Right thereunto,
according to what we have elsewhere delivered. Bo. 2. chapter 5.. 17.
And therefore what is thus agreed upon shall oblige the whole, yea, even those
that dissented from them. Thus Livy Lib. 32.
, Whatsoever is once upon a full debate decreed, is to be defended by all, even
by those who had been before against it. Wherewith accords that of Dionysius
Halicarnassensis, Parendum est his quae pars major decreverit; Whatever the
major part thinks fit, must by all be obeyed. So likewise Appian, Omnes decreto
obsequi tenentur, nulla admissa excusatione; What is so decreed is by all men
to be observed, no excuse being admitted of to the contrary. With whom agrees
Pliny, Quod pluribus placuisset, cunctis tenendum; What pleases the greater
part obliges all: But those whom Peace obliges, it also profits; Iisdem and
volentibus prodest.

V. How an Empire or any part thereof may be alienated for Peace.
Now let us see what manner of things they are that are subject to such
agreements; most Kings now a days, because they hold not their whole Kingdoms,
nor any part of them in propriety, but in respect of their fruits and profits
only, cannot by any Contract or Agreement alienate them See above Bo. 2. chapter
6.. 3. and what follows.
. Yea, and before they receive that great charge of the Empire upon them
(during which time the People are as yet above them) all such acts of
alienating the Kingdom or any part thereof, may by a public Law for the future
be made absolutely void, so that as to what concerns That, they shall not be
binding at all. And credible it is that the People were generally thus minded,
Ne alioqui si ad id quod interest salva esset actio contrahenti, subditorum
bona pro debito regis caperentur; Lest otherwise if as to that which is so
provided against the action should hold good to the person contracting, the
goods of the Subjects might be taken for the Debt of the King: And consequently
this caution of not alienating the Kingdom would be in vain. But that the whole
Empire may be firmly alienated, the whole body of the People must yield their
consents, which may quickly be done by their Representatives, which are the
three Orders or States of a Commonwealth; namely the Clergy, Peers, and the
Commons: But that any part of the Empire may be firmly alienated, a twofold
consent is requisite; first of the whole, but more especially of that power
which is to be alienated, which cannot be severed from the body whereunto it
grew against its will. This was the French Kings Plea why he would not deliver
Burgundy as he had upon his Oath agreed and promised. But yet in a case of
extreme necessity, and otherwise unavoidable, That very part may firmly
conveigh away the Government over themselves unto any other without the consent
of the People; because credible it is, that when that society was instituted,
this power was reserved. But in Kingdoms that are Patrimonial, what should
hinder a King from alienating his Kingdom I know not; but yet such the case may
be, that such a King has no power to alienate any part thereof, as if he
received the whole as his propriety upon this condition that he should not
divide it. But as concerning those things which are called the goods of the
Kingdom, these may also become the Kings Patrimony two ways, either as
separable from the Kingdom, or as inseparably united unto it: if this latter
way, they may be transcribed, See Bo. 2. chapter 15.
but not unless with the Kingdom; if the former, they may be alienated without
it. But such Kings, whos^ Kingdoms are not patrimonial, can hardly be permitted
to alienate the Goods of the Kingdom, unless it evidently appear by some
Primitive Law, or by a continued and uninterrupted custom that they may do it.

VI. How far the people and successors are obliged by a Peace made by the King.
But how far forth the promise of a King shall bind his Subjects and
Successors, has already been declared See Bo. 2. chapter 3.. 10, etc.
, namely, so far as the power obligatory is comprehended in that Government,
which should be neither infinite nor impaled within in too narrow bounds, but
to extend so far only as in probable reason it shall be found convenient. But
in case the King be absolute Lord See Bo. 3. chapter 8.. 2.
over his People, as having at his own charge conquered him, and so holds them
under a Government merely Despotical and not Civil; or if he have gained the
Dominion, not over their persons but over their things, as Pharaoh bought all
that the Egyptians had, for Corn; or as they that admitted of Strangers into
their Houses, to whom they prescribe what Laws they please: if, I say, the
Government be thus absolute, then it is another thing. For in this case,
besides that Right which is regal, there is an access of another Right which
makes that justifyable, which a bare regal power could not.

VII. What power a King has over his Subjects goods to the making of Peace.
But here there usually arises another Question, namely, What Right Kings have
over the Estates of private men in order to the establishing of Peace, as
having no other Right to that which particularly belongs to his Subjects, than
what he has as a King. That the things belonging to Subjects are under the
supereminent power of the Commonwealth, whereof they are a part we have already
proved, so that that Commonwealth, or he that exercises the supreme power in
it, has a Right to make use thereof, either by even destroying them, or by
alienating them, and that not only in a case of extreme necessity, which is
even between private men justifyable; but when it extends even to the good of
the public, which is always to be preferred before any private man's, by the
general consent of those who first entered into civil society: Which
notwithstanding is so to be understood, that the whole Commonwealth is obliged
to repair the damages, that shall befall any of her Subjects or Citizens, by
reason of any such spoil or alienation, out of their public stock, or by a
public contribution; whereunto even he who has sustained the loss, shall (if
need be) pay his proportion. Neither shall that City or Commonwealth stand
discharged from this obligation, although at present it be not able to satisfy
it; for whenever that City shall be enabled, this sleeping obligation may
rise up against it.

VIII. But what if the things be already lost by War.
Neither can I here generally admit of the opinion of Vasquius, namely, that
the City is not obliged to repair the damages of her Citizens sustained by the
War, because such damages are by the license of War permitted. For this Right
of War has only respect to the People of several Nations as we have elsewhere
explained it Bo. 3. chapter 6.. 2.
; and partly to such as were in open hostility amongst themselves, but not to
Citizens amongst themselves, who being mutually associated, and equally engaged
in the defense of their City, should in equity esteem every man's to be the
common loss. But yet doubtless, it may by the Civil Law be so ordained, that no
Action shall lie against such a City for any damages sustained by the War, to
the end that every man may be the more watchful and resolute to defend his own.

IX. No difference between things got by the Civil Law, and things got by the
Law of Nations.
Some there are that place a vast difference between those things which belong
to Subjects acco ding to the Law of Nations, and those things which are theirs
by the Civil Law, gra ting a larger Right to the King in taking away these,
without either cause or recompense; but not so in the former, but erroneously.
For a Right of Dominion, however lawfully gained, has always by the Law of
Nature its proper effects; that is to say, that it cannot be taken away, unless
it be for such causes as are naturally inherent in Dominion it self, or such as
arise from some fact done by him that is the right owner.

X. What is done by a King, is taken by Foreigners to be done for a public
good.
Now this care and inspection that the things of private persons be not
alienated, unless it be for a public benefit, appertains to the King and to
the Subjects, as that of repairing of damages does to the City, and each
particular Citizen: For the bare fact of the King, is sufficient to Strangers
that contract with him, not only in respect of the presumption, which the
Dignity of his person brings with it; but also in respect of the Law of
Nations, which permits the Goods of Subjects to stand obliged by the fact of
the King.

XI. A general rule for the interpreting of Articles of Peace.
But as to the right understanding of the Articles of Peace, what we have said
before, must here also be observed See Bo. 2. c. 16.. 12.
, The more of grace and favor any Article contains, the more extensively it
should be taken, and the more of rigor it has, the more restrictively it
should be understood. If we look at the bare Law of Nature, the greatest favor
that can be granted, seems to be this, That every man should enjoy his own:
wherefore where the Articles are ambiguous, such an interpretation should be
admitted as may lead us to this sense, That he that undertakes a just War
should receive what he fights for, together with his costs and damages; but not
that he should get any thing more by way of punishment, for this savours of
rigor which ought to be restrained. But because a bare acknowledgment of
wrongs done, seldom procures a lasting Peace, therefore in Articles of Peace,
such an interpretation should be admitted, as may according to the justice of
War make the balance on both sides even, which may be done two ways; either by
an equal composure of all such things, as the Sword has not as yet determined,
Livy, lib. 34.
according to the form of Ancient Right (which are the very words of Menippus
in his Oration, wherein he discourses of the several sorts of Leagues) or
otherwise, as the Greeks say, (...), That every man should keep what he has.

XII. In dubious cases it is to be believed that things should remain as they
are.
Of which two ways of pacification, the latter, if the case be doubtful, is the
rather to be believed; because as it is more facile, so it requires no
alteration. Upon which that of Triphoninus seems to be grounded, where he
says, That in Peace such Captives only are to return by Postliminy, as are
comprehended in the Articles of agreement; as also where he says, That
Fugitives are not to be restored, unless it be so expressly agreed on, as we
have already proved by irrefragable arguments. For by the Law of Arms we may
receive such, See chapter 9.
and muster them among our own Troops: All other things by such an agreement
remaining his that at present holds them; where the word [Hold] is meant of a
natural not of a civil possession; for in War a possession in fact only is
sufficient, neither is any other required. Fields (as we have already said) are
then sopposed to be possessed, when they are strongly secured by fortifications;
for such as are for a while only encampt upon (as in Leaguers or Sieges) are
not here to be regarded. Lib. 3. c. 6.. 4.
Demosthenes in his Oration for Ctesiphon, says, That Philip made have to get
into his possession what places he possibly could, as knowing that the Peace
being concluded, Lib. 3. c. 7.. 4.
whatsoever he could get, he should keep; but things incorporeal cannot be
kept, unless either by the things whereunto they adhere (as the services of
Tenants that are annexed to Manors) or by detaining the persons whose they
are, that whilst in a Country that is their Enemies, they shall not be
exercised.

XIII. Of the restoring all things as before the War.
In that other kind of pacification, whereby the possession of things not yet
determined by War are to be r^stor^d, we are to understand, That restitution is
to be made to those who held the possession thereof last before the War began;
yet so, that those private men that were cast out, might lawfully appeal to the
Judge for either injunction or vindication.

XIV. This reaches not unto such as have voluntarily yielded themselves.
But if any free People do voluntarily subject themselves to either Party that
were in Arms, this Article of restitution shall not extend unto them, because
it was intended only to such things as were done either by force, fear, or
otherwise by such kind of fraud as is not lawfully used but against Enemies.
Thus the Peace being concluded among the Grecians, the Thebans detained
Plataea, alleging, That they were possessed thereof neither by force nor
treachery, Thucyd. l. 3.
but by the voluntary surrender of the Citizens. And in another place the same
Author urges, That Plataea ought not to be restored because it submitted it
self to the Thebans of its own accord. Thucyd. l. 5.
By the same Law Nisaea was detained by the Athenians. And the same distinction
is used by Titus Quintius against the Aetolians, who urging that the Cities of
Thessaly might be set at liberty, was answered, That as to the Cities taken by
force, Livy lib. 33.
that indeed was the Law; but the Cities of Thessaly did freely submit
themselves to the Roman jurisdiction.

XV. Damages by War, if in doubt, are believed to be remitted:
If nothing else be agreed on, yet this in every Peace ought to be presumed,
that no Action shall be commenced for damages done in War, which is also to be
understood of such damages as are received by private persons; for these also
are the effects of War. For where the cause of the War is doubtful, neither
party will be willing so to agree as to condemn themselves of injustice.

XVI. But not those done by private persons, before the War began.
Yet must not those Debts, which were due to private men when the War began, be
accounted as pardoned: For these were not contracted by the Right of War, but
forbidden to be exacted during the War; and therefore the War (which only
hindered the exacting of them) being ended, the Debts remain in force as before.
For although it ought not easily to be believed, That that which was a man's
Right before the War should be taken away, (for for this cause chiefly, as
Cicero observes, De Offic. lib. 3.
were Commonwealths and Cities at first instituted, That every particular man
might be defended in what was his Right) yet ought this to be understood of
that Right only, which arises from the inequality of things.

XVII. Punishments, if in doubt, though publicly due before the War, are
presumed to be remitted.
But as to punishments, it is not so; for this Right of exacting punishments,
so far as it concerns those very people or Kings that have contracted Peace, is
therefore presumed to be remitted, lest if any old grudge should remain
unforgiven, there could be no firm or lasting Peace. Wherefore even those
injuries which are as yet unknown to the Party injured, are usually
comprehended in general words; as that fact of the Carthaginians in drowning
some Roman Merchants was remitted by the Romans, before it was made known unto
them; as Appian tells us. Optimae conciliationes quae iram and offensarum
memoriam delent, Those are the best reconcilements that pacify all anger,
Dionys. Hal.
and leave nothing in the memory unremitted. For as Isocrates very discreetly,
In Pace non decet ante peccata exequi; After Peace is ratified, to revenge
former injuries is unseemly.

XVIII. Not so as to punishments due to private men.
But there is not the same reason that this Right of exacting punishment should
also be remitted by private men, because these may without War be judicially
required; yet forasmuch as this Right is not so properly ours, as that which
proceeds from inequality, and that the very exacting of punishments argues
somewhat of hatred; therefore any flight interpretation of words will suffice
to ground our conjectures, that this also was intended to be remitted.

XIX. That Right which though publicly claimed before the War, but controverted,
is presumed to be remitted.
Now whereas we said, That the Right which we had, before the War ought not
easily to be believed to be remitted, this holds very true as to that Right
which belongs to private men. But as to that which belongs to Kings and
Nations, it will be more easily granted, if the words will but afford us
whereupon to raise any probable conjectures to that purpose; especially if it
were not a clear, but a controverted Right that was in Debate. For to believe
that to be done whereby all occasions of a new War may be prevented, is
generous; because, as the same Dionys. Halicarnessensis excellently observes
Lib. 3.
, Non tam cogitandum est de sarcienda in praesens amicitia, quam id curandum ne
Bello iterum implicemur; neque enim ad differenda, sed ad auferenda mala
convenimus: We are not so much to consider how to piece up a broken friendship
for the present, as how to provide that we be not again entangled in the same
War hereafter. For our main design in this Treaty is not to put off the
miseries of War, but to take them quite away. Which last words are borrowed
from Isocrates. Orat. pro pace.


XX. Things taken after the Peace is made, are to be restored.
The Peace being once concluded and ratified, it is expedient that whatsoever
is taken away afterward must be restored; for from thenceforth all license of
War is taken away.

XXI. Some cautions concerning the restoring of things taken in War.
But among those Articles that concern the restitution of things taken in War,
those in the first place will admit of a larger interpretation that are mutual,
than those that concern one Party only; and next, those that respect Prisoners
are to be construed with more allowance of favor than those that respect
things: And among those that respect things, those that have relation to Lands
ought to be more favorably understood than those that relate to Movables; and
even among these, such as are in the possession of the Common wealth than those
in the possession of private men. Cic. de Offic. l. 2.
And among those Articles that command the restitution of things in the
possession of private men, those are to be taken in the larger sense that are
possessed under a gainful than those under a chargeable title, as things bought
with our money, and things held in Dowry by Marriage.

XXII. The profits restored with the things.
To whomsoever any thing is granted by Articles of Peace, to him also is
granted all the fruits and profits thereof, from the time of that concession,
but not before; which Augustus justly defends against Sextus Pompeius, who
having Peloponnesus granted unto him, claimed all the Tributes that were in
Arrears for some years past, before the time of that Grant.

XXIII. The names of Countries.
The names of Countries are to be taken, as they are at present used, not so
much by the common people, as by such as are learned; for by such only are
these Affairs negotiated.

XXIV. Reference to some former Agreements.
The aforesaid Rules are of frequent use, as often as reference is had to some
precedent or ancient Agreement, for so often the Qualities and Conditions,
expressed in that Agreement, are supposed to be rep^a^^^. Quintil. Dec. 248.
And he shall be deemed to have performed his Agreement, who was willing to
have performed it, had he not been hindered by another, in whose power it was to
obstruct the performance of it.

XXV. Of delay.
But whereas some are of opinion, That excuses may be admitted for some short
delay in the performance of an Agreement, this holds not true, unless that
delay be occasioned by an unexpected and unavoidable necessity. That some of
our Canons do seem to favor suth purg^tions, is no wonder; seeing that it is
their design to persuade Christians to such things as promote mutual Charity.
But in this Question that concerns the interpretation of Agre^ments, we
enquire, not what is best, no nor what either piety or Religion require of us
but, what we may lawfully be compelled unto. All which is to be determined by
that Justic^ (...) w^ call external.

XXVI. The interpretation of words doubtful ought to favor the weaker.
But where the words w^^l b^a^ a double sense, that interpretation is most to
be favored which makes against him that imposes Laws; because he is usually
the most potent Party. (The power, says Hannibal, is in him that gives, not in
him that demands Conditions of Peace.) As in other Contracts that are doubtful,
the interpretation ought to favor the Buyer; for the Seller may blame himself
that he did not fully express himself. But the other, receiving Conditions in
words that will admit of diverse senses, has a Right to accept of what is
offered in that sense which is most favorable to himself. Tua merx, Persa.
tua judicatio est, says Plautus; It is in him to set the price that ownes the
Goods. In War, he prescribes first that is most powerful; but in demanding
Conditions, he first speaks that is the weaker. So Sulla in Plutarch, Eorum est
prius loqui qui opus habent Pace; Victori satis est tacere: Let them speak
first that stand in need of Peace; it is enough for the Conqueror to be silent.

XXVII. Great difference between giving cause of a new War, and breaking the
Peace.
It it also frequently disputed when a Peace may be said to be broken; for it
is not one and the same thing to give a cause of War, and to break a Peace. But
between these two the difference is great, as well to require punishment from
the Delinquent, as to vindicate the Faith of him against whom the offense was
committed in other matters. Now a Peace may be broken three several ways,
first, By doing that which is contrary to all Peace; secondly, In doing
contrary to that which is plainly and expressly said in that Peace; thirdly,
Peace broken three ways.
In doing contrary to that which from the nature of every Peace ought to be
understood.

XXVIII. The first way of breaking Peace.
First, The Peace is broken when that is done which is contrary to all Peace;
as when we are invaded by Force of Arms, there being no new cause of War;
which if with any probability it may be alleged, better it were so to
understand it as if the War were simply unjust, than that it should be both
unjust, and also treacherous: Pacem rumpunt non qui vim vi arcent, Thucyd.
sed qui priores vim inferunt; They break not the Peace who repel force with
force, Lib. 29.
but they who first offer violence. Therefore Ammianus, speaking of the Romans,
says, That they purposely gave back, because they would not be thought the
first Aggressors; yet afterward, Pers. 2.
being urged thereunto by necessity, they gave Battle willingly. So likewise
Procopius, in that Oration which Armenius makes to Cosroes, They, says he, are
not always to be accounted the Peace-breakers that are first in Arms, but they
who during the League, are found treacherous to their Confederates. Vand. lib.
2.
Thus also do the Moors in Procopius, They break not their League, who being
first injured, and publicly complaining thereof (in vain) fly for succor unto
others; but they who first wrong those whom they own as their Associates:
Neither do they make God their Enemy, who taking nothing with them but their
own, fly unto others for protection; but they who invading other men's Rights do
enforce them into War to defend their own. This being granted, let us now
examine by whom and upon whom, an invasion being made, the Peace is dissolved.

XXIX. What if we are invaded by the Associates of those that are at Peace with
us.
There are some of opinion, That if they that shall forceably invade us were
but their Associates, with whom we have made Peace, that Peace is broken. I
deny not but that such a League there may be made, not properly, That one man
should be punished for the fact of another; but because that Peace seemed not
to be fully and absolutely made, but rather under some Condition, partly
potestative, and partly casual. And yet that such a Peace should be made,
unless it evidently so appear, is scarce credible; because it is irregular, and
inconsistent with the common design of those that make Peace. Wherefore they
that do actually invade, being no ways assisted therein by others, they only,
and not their Associates, shall be judged the Peace-breakers; and against these
it shall be lawful to make War. Paus. lib. 9.
Contrary unto which, the Thebans did sometimes plead against the Associates of
the Lacedaemonians.

XXX. What if by their Subjects, and when it may be imputed unto their Prince.
But what if they be Subjects that make such an invasion without public
Warrant or Authority? Then we ought to consider whether such a fact of private
men be publicly approved of. For the better understanding whereof, three
things are requisite (as elsewhere we have declared L 2 c. 21. 2 and eq.
) First, The knowledge of the fact; secondly, A power to punish; thirdly, A
neglect in them that could and ought to have done it. Their knowledge may
easily be evinced, if the fact be public and declared. A power to restrain or
punish it is to be presumed, unless it appears that they are Rebels. The
neglect will appear by the space of time which Cities usually take to punish
Malefactors; and such a neglect is equivalent to a public Command. Neither is
that of Agrippa in Josephus otherwise to be understood, in saying, That the
Parthian King had broken the Peace, for suffering his Subjects to march armed
against the Romans.

XXXI. What if those Subjects fight under the command of another Prince.
Another Question is here usually started, Whether the Case be the same if
Subjects take Arms, not by themselves but, under the Command of others. Surely
the Cerites in Livy do thus excuse themselves Lib. 7.
, That their Subjects took Arms without any public Warrant or Commission from
them. The like defense do the Rhodians make for themselves Aul. Gel. l. 7. c. 3.
. But that opinion which savours more of truth is, That neither should this be
permitted, unless it appear by very probable Arguments that it has been
otherwise customarily done, as it is sometimes used now amongst us, in
imitation of the ancient Aetolians, amongst whom it was accounted lawful, Ex
omni Praeda Praedam sumere; To take Arms on either side. Which custom, says
Polybius, was of that force, Lib. 17.
That although they were not at War themselves, but their Friends or Associates
only; yet it was lawful for the Aetolians without any pub^ick Decree of their
Senate to list themselves on either side, and consequently to pillage both
Parties. This is likewise the Testimony that Livy gives of them, They suffer
their Youths without any public Order to serve in the Wars, with their
Associates, or against them: so that oft-times in two contrary Armies, the
Aetolians serve as Auxiliaries on both sides. Thus the Aetrurians of old,
although they denied aid to the Vcjentes, Livy l. 5.
yet if any of their Youths would serve them voluntarily, they would not hinder
them.

XXXII. What if our Subjects be invaded.
Again, the Peace is broken, not only when the whole Body of a State or
Kingdom, but if any of its Subjects shall by force of Arms be invaded, unless
there be some new Cause of War given. For for this Cause is every Peace made,
That the Subjects on both sides might live secure; it being an act of the City
or Commonwealth, in behalf of the whole, and of every of its parts; yea and
although there were a new cause of War, yet by Peace it shall be lawful for
every man to defend both himself, and whatsoever is his. By Arms to defend our
selves against Arms, says Cassius, is that Right which Nature has given us:
Which Right cannot easily be presumed to be renounced amongst Equals. But to
revenge our own private Quarrels, or to recover by force what has been taken
away, is not lawful, unless judgment be first denied us: for this will admit of
delay, but that of none. But if Subjects make it their continual trade of life
to rob and pillage, contrary to the Law of Nature, so that it be apparent that
what they do is contrary to the will of their Governors, and that no Court of
Judicature can reach to punish them, such as are Pirates, Robbers, or the like;
from these, as if they were surrendered up unto us, we may both recover our
damages, and revenge our selves of them by force of Arms. But to do the like
to those that are innocent for that cause, is to break the Peace.

XXXIII. If our Associates be invaded, the Peace is broken.
Although we are not as yet invaded, yet if our Associates be, the Peace is
broken; that is, if they be such as are comprehended in the Peace, as has been
already proved in the Case of the Saguntines See Book 2. Chapter 16. 13.
. This the Greeks in Xenophon allege Graec. Hist. l. 6.
, Omnes nos omnibus vobis juravimus; We have all of us sworn this Peace to all
of you. Yea, though those Associates do not contract for themselves, but others
do in their behalf, it is all one, in case it do sufficiently appear that they
have ratified it. But so long as this is uncertain, they are to be held as
Enemies. But for the rest of Associates, that are not expressly comprehended in
the Peace, and for our Kinsmen and Allies, that are neither Subjects nor
nominated, the Case is otherwise. Neither can an invasion of them amount to the
breach of Peace. But yet it will not hence follow, as we have elsewhere said,
That it is unlawful for us in this Case to make War, but that the War so
undertaken is not grounded upon the breach of Peace, but upon a new cause given.

XXXIV. The second way of breaking a Peace.
The Peace is also broken, as we have said before, by doing contrary to that
which is expressed in the Peace: Where, under the word [doing] we are to
comprehend the not doing of what we ought to do, and when we ought to do it.

XXXV. All the Articles of Peace are alike to be observed.
Neither may we here admit of any distinction between the Articles of Peace, as
if some were of greater concernment than others. For what is thought worthy to
be inserted, is also thought worthy to be observed. Yet should goodness and
common humanity prevail with all men, but especially Christians; to pass by
small faults, but chiefly if repented of: For as the Poet speaks, Quem poenitet
peccasse, pene est innocens.
He Is almost guiltless who is penitent.
But yet to the end that the Peace may be the better preserved, Yet small
offenses are to be referred;
to these of smaller concernment, this Clause ought be added, That in case any
of them should be broken, it should not amount so high as to the breach of the
peace: But that such things should be first put to reference, before it should
be lawful to take Arms, which we find added to the Peloponnesian League
recorded by Thucydides.

XXXVI. Or some punishment for them inflicted.
And I am clear of opinion that the same may be done in case some special
punishment be inserted in those Articles; not that I am ignorant that such an
agreement there may be, That it shall be in the choice of the Party injured,
either to accept of some punishment, or to null the Peace: But that the nature
of the offense may be such, as requires rather that, Lib. 3. c. 19.. 14.
than this. Besides, what I have formerly said and proved by the Authority of
History is evident, That he that fulfils not his promise, being first failed,
breaks not the Peace, for he is not bound but under condition.

XXXVII. What if hindered by necessity.
But if the nonperformance of what is agreed unto be occasioned through
necessity, as if the thing promised be taken away or perished; or if what was
agreed to have been done, be by any chance or casualty rendered impossible, the
Peace shall not be deemed as broken: For (as we have said before) Peace does
not usually depend on such conditions as are casual. But the other Party shall
be at his choice, whether he had rather expect the performance of that promise
hereafter, if there remain any hopes that it may be done though late; or
receive to the value of the thing promised; or lastly, whether he had rather be
discharged from some other thing mutually promised, and answerable to that in
this Article, and that is thought equivalent to it.

XXXVIII. Yet if the innocent party will, the Peace is not broken.
It is certainly an argument of great integrity in the innocent party to
preserve the Peace, even with those who have often broken their Faith as Scipio
did with the Carthaginians, notwithstanding their many perfidious dealings with
them; because no man can possibly cancel his obligation by doing contrary unto
it: For although it be expressed that by such a contrary fact, the Peace shall be
broken; yet is this so to be understood, that it shall ly in the choice of the
innocent person, whether he will make such an advantage thereof or not.

XXXIX. The third way of breaking Peace.
Lastly we said, That the Peace may be broken by doing that which is contrary
to the special nature of every Peace.

XL. What falls under the notion of Friendship.
Thus those things that are done contrary to Friendship, do break that Peace
that was contracted under condition of Friendship; for look what the duty of
friendship may require from others, ought also to be performed by the Right of
this agreement. And to this, though not to every Peace ( for some there are
that are not tied up to this condition, Pro Gabin.
as Pomponius observes) may we refer many of those dissertations, which
Civilians handle concerning such injuries and contumelies as are committed
without force of Arms, and particularly that of Tully, If after Peace made any
thing be committed, it shall not be accounted as a bare neglect, but as a
wilful breach; neither shall it be imputed to impudence, but unto
perfidiousness. And even here also (as much as in us lies) we are to take care
that we judge not of the fact invidiously; if therefore an injury be done
against either our Allies, or Subjects, it shall not be imputed to him with
whom we have made Peace, unless it be evident that it was done by his
instigation. According to which natural equity, do the Roman Laws proceed
concerning such acts of cruelty as are done against Servants; as Adultery and
Ravishment are imputed rather to acts of unbridled lust than of hatred; and so
the invading of another man's Right is adjudged as an act of Covetousness,
rather than of Treachery. Cruel threatenings whether by words or signs, unless
it be upon some new cause given, cannot consist with friendship, no more than
can the erecting of new Forts and Bulwarks upon the Frontiers, when it is
manifest that they are not so much for defense as offense; so also, the more
than ordinary preparations for War, either by Sea or Land, if he with whom the
Peace is made have ground enough to believe that they are made against none,
but against himself.

XLI. To receive Exiles whether contrary to friendship.
The reception of such particular persons as are willing to transplant
themselves from one Princes Dominions to another, is no breach of Friendship,
for this freedom is not only natural but benign; whereunto we may likewise add
the receiving of Exiles: for as I have elsewhere proved out of Euripides Lib.
2. c. 5.. 24.
, over such the City or Prince that banished them, can have no power. What
advantage is it, says Perseus in Livy Lib. 42.
, that every man has power to banish himself, if there be no place left him to
fly unto? And this Aristides calls a right common to all mankind to receive
persons banished Leuctr. 2.
. Solon would not admit that any Strangers should be enrolled among his
Citizens, but such as had been for ever banished their own Country, or such as
came with their whole Families to Athens, there to exercise some Craft or
Manufacture. Perseus in Appian pleads thus with the Romans, concerning his
receiving of some fugitives, What I did, says he, was justifiable by the
common right of all mankind, which you your selves also do sometimes: which
likewise is usually confirmed by mutual Covenants, as may appear by that Peace
made between the Romans and the Persians. The like does Strabo testify of the
Aradii, who whilst the Kings of Syria were at War among themselves, obtained
this liberty, That they might receive what Fugitives they pleased, but send
away none. But as to walled Towns, or any great Multitudes, that did constitute
any one entire part of a City, that it is not lawful for any Prince to receive
these, we have already proved. This was the cause of the War between the
Persians and the Romans, Lib. 2. c. 5.. 24.
because King Lazus at the solicitation of the Consul had revolted to the
Romans. Neither is it lawful to receive such as are bound, either by Oath, or
otherwise to perform duty or service to another Prince. The like has sometimes
been introduced by the Law of Nations among some people concerning such as have
been by the chance of War made Slaves; but as concerning the dedition of such,
who are not banished, Lib. 2. c. 21.. 3. and seq.
but do fly to avoid condign punishment, we have elsewhere treated.

XLII. War sometimes ended by lot.
To determine a War by lots is not always lawful, but then only when we have an
absolute propriety in the thing contended for; for Cities are to be defended
for the preservation of the Lives, Goods, Chastities, and such like of their
Citizens. And Kings are more strictly bound to defend the general safety of
their Kingdoms, than to omit those means which for their own and others defense
are most natural; but yet in case, he that is unjustly invaded, shall upon due
examination find himself too weak to ^ake any considerable resistance, it may
seem lawful for him to refer the quarrel to the chance of a lot, that so by
exposing himself to a danger that is uncertain, he may avoid one that is
certain, of which two evils the lesser is to be chosen.

XLIII. Whether it may be determined by the event of a set number of Combatants.
But here follows a case very much disputed, namely, Whether it be lawful to
determine a War by the success of a Battle fought by an appointed number of
Combatants, as between on each side one, as that between Turnus and Aeneas,
Menelaus and Paris; or between on each side two, as between the Aetolians and
the Aelians; or between on each side three, as that between the Roman Horatii
and the A^ban Curatii; or between on each side three hundred, as that between
the Lacedaemonians and the Argives: Whereunto I answer, That if we look no
farther than unto the Law of Nations, which is external, without doubt, such a
decision is lawful; for by that Law every man may destroy his Enemy any way:
But if according to the opinion of the Ancient Grecians, Romans, and other
Nations, every man has an absolute power over his own life, then surely there
is nothing therein repugnant to internal justice. But this opinion (as we have
often said) is contrary not only to right reason but to Gods precepts; for to
kill a man for his detaining of such things as we may well spare, Lib. 2. c.
7.. 12. and lib. 2. c. 19.. 5. c. 21.. 1.
is as we have already proved, to transgress the rules of Charity. Whereunto
let us now add, That if he to whom God has given life as a blessing, shall set
so meanly by it, as to cast it away for a trifle, he sins both against God and
his own Soul. If the thing contended for be worthy of a War, as if it be
undertaken to preserve the lives of many innocent persons (as Charles the fifth
Emperor pretended when he challenged Francis the first King of France to a
single Combat) in this case we ought with all our power to endeavor it; but to
make use of a set Combat, Aq. 2.2. c. 95. A^t. 8. and ibi Cajetan.
either as a trial of the goodness of our Cause, or as an instrument of Divine
judgment, is vain and abhorrent from true Piety. There is but one only case
which renders such a Combat just and innocent, and that too but on one side
only, which is when nothing can reasonably be expected, but that he who
maintains an unjust cause, will otherwise be certainly the Victor, and will
prosecute his Victory to the destruction of a multitude of Innocents. Now he
that shall in this case adventure his life by any means, whereby he conceives
any probable hopes to prevail, must needs be innocent, or at least so reputed.
But yet we cannot deny, but that many things, though not exactly done, yet may
be by others, if not well approved of, yet permitted for the prevention of
greater mischiefs, which could not otherwise be avoided. Like as in many
places, griping Usury and public Stews are at this Day tolerated. Wherefore in
that case formerly put, of two persons pretending with equal titles to one
Kingdom which cannot be divided, if they shall offer to try their fortunes in
such a Combat, the people may safely permit them for the prevention of a more
general calamity, which must otherwise necessarily ensue. The like may be said
where such a Combat may put an end to any bloody War. Thus did Cyrus challenge
the King of Assyria; and Metius in Dionysius Halicarnassensis thus concludes,
That seeing that the contest did not concern the power or dignity of the Nation
but of their Princes only, it was but reasonable that they only who were
concerned should decide the quarrel by Arms between themselves. Thus did the
Adrianopolitans answer Mahomet, when he and Musa Zilebes contested for the
Ottoman Empire. And so we read of sundry challenges made by several Pretenders
to one and the same Kingdom, as of that which Charles the Fifth sent to Francis
the first King of France; and of many Duels fought in such Cases, as that of
Heraclius the Emperor with Cosroe Son to the King of Persia.

XLIV. Whether the fact of a King do oblige the people.
Where also we must note, That they that cast their Fortunes upon the Trial of
such Combats, may happily lose their own Right, if any they had, to the thing
contended for. But they cannot transfer any Right to another, unless the
Kingdom contended for be Patrimonial. And therefore, for the confirmation of
such Agreements, the consent, not only of the people but, of such as have any
Right to the Succession, if there be any then born, would be necessary. And so
it is the consent of the chief Lord in those Estates that are not free.

XLV. Who is to be adjudged the Conqueror.
It is likewise frequently disputed (where such Combats are permitted) which is
the conquering Party, seeing that neither of them can be said to be absolutely
conquered, unless all the Combatants on one side be either killed or put to
flight. As in Livy Lib. 3. Guic. lib. 1.
, he that forsaking his ground shall retreat either within his own Bounds, or
unto places of strength, is said to be conquered. Amongst those three famous
Historians, Herodotus, Thucydides, and Polybius, we read of three Questions
proposed concerning Victory; the first whereof concerns this of set Combats.
But he that judiciously weighs it, shall find that both Parties departed the
Field without any true Victory. Herod. lib. 1.
For the Argives were not put to flight by Othryades, but marched away by
Night, steadfastly believing, and as confidently proclaiming themselves
Conquerours to their own Countrymen. Thucyd. lib. 1.
Neither were the Corinthians routed by the Corcyreans, but having fought it
out gallantly, and perceiving a strong Fleet of the Athenians near them,
without endangering their Forces with the Athenians; they made a safe retreat.
But Philip King of Macedon having taken a single ship of Attalus, forsaken by
her Mariners, though he were far enough from destroying his whole Fleet; yet
thereupon (as Polybius notes) rather carried himself like a Conqueror, Lib. 16.
than thought himself one. Lib. 29.40.
And as to those other things which, as well Livy in several places as, the
Authors before recited, do set down as signs of Victory; as the taking of the
spoil, the granting leave to bury the dead, and the offering Battle a second
time: These though they carry some show of Victory, yet of themselves prove
nothing; but as they are backed with other more demonstrative Aguments of the
Enemies Flight. Plutarch, concerning Agesilaus, writes thus, Having given the
Enemy leave to bury their dead, and thereby gained to himself the honor of
being Conqueror, he went to Delphos. So the same Plutarch in the life of
Nicias proves both by Law and Custom, That he who craves leave to bury his
dead, seems thereby to disclaim the Victory. Neither had they that craved this
leave any Right at all to erect Trophies. But this (as I have already said) is
no infallible sign of Victory; and yet where the Victory is otherwise doubtful,
he that first departs the Field may more probably be thought to fly, than he
that keeps it. But where there are no certain signs of Victory, there every
thing is to remain as before the Fight; and so both Parties are either to
prosecute the War, or to draw to a new Agreement for Peace.

XLVI. War sometimes determined by Arbitration.
Concerning Arbiters, Proculus informs us, That they are of two sorts, whereof
the one he makes so Authoritative; that whether his award be just or unjust it
must be obeyed: which (says he) is to he observed whenever both Parties do
engage themselves to stand to the determination of a third person. The other he
makes to be less binding; as when both Parties are content to refer their Case
to be moderated by some indifferent person: An example whereof we have in that
Answer of Celsus, If the Servant, being made free, shall swear to perform such
services as his Patron shall think fit to impose upon him, the imposition of
the Patron shall not be binding, unless what he imposes be equal. But this
interpretation of an Oath, though happily it might be warranted by the Roman
Laws, yet can it not agree with the plain and genuine sense of the words simply
taken. But yet this is very true, That the word [Arbiter] may be taken in both
senses, either for a Moderator only, such as the Athenians were between the
Rhodians and Demetrius; or for an absolute Judge, whose Sentence must be
obeyed. And in this sense we here take it, as also we did elsewhere, treating
of the means how to prevent a War. Lib. 2. c. 22.
And yet even against such Arbiters, to whose award both Parties have mutually
promised to stand, it may be provided by the Civil Law, as in some places it
is, That Appeals shall be granted and Bills of complaint admitted. But this
cannot be between Kings or between Nations, for here can be no superior Power
that can either hinder or dissolve the obliging power of the promise. And
therefore whether the Sentence be right or wrong, we must be concluded by it.
So that what Pliny sometimes said may very fitly be applied hither, Praef. Not.
Hist.
Summum quisque Causae suae Judicem facit, quemcunque elegit; Every man makes
him to whom he refers himself, the supreme Judge of his own Cause. This also we
must add, That it is one thing to discourse concerning the Duty of an Arbiter,
what he ought to do; and another thing to treat of their obligation that are
content to refer their Cause to such an Arbitrament. For as though there were a
Law among the Cities of Italy, That one Kinsman should not go to Law with
another, but that all differences should be determined by Arbiters chosen on
purpose; yet notwithstanding this Law, there were some Cases wherein they might
refuse such a reference. So also there may be some Cases and some Reasons why
Princes may refuse to put their differences to Arbitrament. Amongst which, this
is not the least, When no assurance can be given that the persons referring
will stand to the award, Quis alterutrum coget nostrum, qui conventis stare
noluerit? says Augustus to Mark Anthony; Who shall compel him (of us two) that
refuses to be determined by the Sentence of our common Judge or Arbiter?
Private men may be compelled to stand to an Agreement by the public
Magistrate, but who shall compel Princes that have no Superior? Other Reasons
also there may be; Albericus Gentilis. See page 335.
as that of Philip King of Spain, who refused the Pope to be Arbitrator between
himself and other Competitors, for the Kingdom of Portugal; because the Pope
claimed the decision of all such Controversies as his Right: wherefore that
prudent King was unwilling to add his own example to some ancient ones, whereby
the Pope might prove himself to be the sole Arbiter of Kingdoms.

XLVII. Arbiters in Cases dubious, tied up to Law.
That which is to be considered in an Arbiter is, Whether he be chosen as a
Judge or as a Moderator, which was the proper Office of an Arbiter, as Seneca
thought where he tells us Lib. 2. de benef. c. 7.
, That a good Cause is better referred to a Judge than to an Arbiter: Melior
videtur conditio bonae Causae si ad Judicem, quam si ad Arbitrum mittitur;
Because a Judge has a constant Rule to walk by which he must not transgress;
whereas an Arbiter being freed from the Shackles of the Law, has liberty to
judge according to equity and good conscience; and therefore can either add or
detract from the rigor of the Law, and give Sentence, not always as Justice
shall exact, but sometimes as pity and humanity shall direct. Rhet. 1. c. 19.
Aristotle reckons it as a Duty of an honest and a frugal man to refer his
Cause to an indifferent Arbiter, rather than to a severe Judge, Arbiter id quod
aequum est respicit, Judex Legem; For an Arbiter looks at that which is
righteous, but a Judge at that only which is legal. And therefore is an Arbiter
made choice of, to the end he may rebate the edge of the Law, or otherwise
supply that wherein the Law is defective. Equity, what.
For equity in this place does not signify (as elsewhere) that part of Justice
that expounds the general words of the Law, nearest to the mind of the
Lawmakers; for even this also is the Office of a Judge; but every thing that is
better done than not done, although it be not according to the strict Rules of
Justice properly so called. But such Arbiters as they are very frequent among
private men, that are Fellow-Citizens or Subjects to the same State, and are
highly commended, especially to us Christians, by St Paul, 1 Cor. 6. so in such
Cases as are ambiguous, we are not to allow them so much power as to determine
of them. For in these we are to follow that sense that has the least of doubt
in it; but especially when the dispute arises between two Sovereign Princes,
who having no common Judge between them, may be presumed to restrain the power
of Arbiters within those strict Rules of Justice which Judges are usually
confined to.

XLVIII. Arbiters, not to judge of possessions.
Where this also is to be noted, That such as are chosen Arbiters by a People,
or such as have the Sovereign Power over them, ought to give Sentence on the
principal matter, but not to intermeddle with Possessions; For the judgment of
these belong to the Civil Law. By the Law of Nations, Dominion follows the
Right of Possession; and therefore till the Cause be tried, no innovation ought
to be made, as well to avoid prejudice, as because the recovery of things out
of possession is difficult: Wherefore Livy in his Book of Pleas between the
Carthaginians and Massinissa, has this Observation, Legati jus possessionum
non mutarunt, Ambassadors do never alter the Right of Possessions.

XLIX. What the power is of a pure Dedition.
There is also an assuming of an Arbiter, but of another kind; when a man
yields himself up to the judgment of his very Enemy, which is a pure and
absolute surrender, whereby he makes himself a Slave, and gives his Enemy
Sovereign Power over him. Thus the Aetolians in Livy were demanded in the
Senate, Whether they would submit themselves to the Judgment of the Romans.
This was the advice of L. Cornelius Lentulus, Lib. 37.
as it is recorded by Appian about the end of the second Punick War, Lib. 14.
concerning the affairs of Carthage, Let the Carthaginians, says he, submit
themselves to our censures, as the Vanquished usually do, and as many others
have formerly done; then we shall see how thankful they will be for what we
shall give them. Neither shall they call this a League, for the difference
between a League and this is great. For if we enter into a League with them,
they will never want some plausible excuse to break it, alleging, That they
had been first injured in some part of it; for seeing that many words in that
League will admit of a doubtful interpretation, they can never want a pretense
that have a mind to cavil. But when we shall have disarmed them as Prisoners,
and made them our Slaves, then at length they will perceive, That they have
nothing that is properly their own; and then they will despond, and whatsoever
we shall afterward give them they will thankfully accept of, as of a mere
gratuity. But here also we must distinguish between what the Conquered ought to
suffer, what the Conqueror by the Right of his Conquest may do, and lastly,
what most of all becomes him. The Conquered Party having yielded themselves,
ought to suffer whatsoever the Conqueror will impose upon them; for being
perfectly inslaved, if we respect that Right of War that is external, they have
nothing but what may be taken from them, even their lives and personal liberty,
much more their Goods, whether they be those that are public, or those that
belong unto them, as private men. Lib. 37.
The Aetolians, says Livy, having yielded themselves to the will of their
Enemies, dreaded nothing more than corporal punishments. Above, Book 3. Chap.
8. Sect. 4.
And, as we have elsewhere said, When all things are surrendered, it rests in
the choice of the Conqueror what he will take away, and wherein and how far he
will punish the Conquered. Pertinent whereunto is that of Livy, It was the
ancient custom of the Romans, when they had to do with a people or a King with
whom they were not joined in friendship, either by League, or by equal Laws,
not to use their Sovereign Power over them, as being at peace with them, until
they had first delivered up unto them all things both Divine and humane, and
until they had received their Hostages, taken away their Arms, and had placed
Garrisons in their Cities. Yea, and sometimes they that thus surrendered
themselves might be killed, as we have elsewhere showed Above, Book 3. Chap.
11. Sect. 18.
.

L. The Duty of a Conqueror toward the Conquered.
But the Conqueror, that he may do nothing unjustly, ought in the first place
to take care that no man's life be taken from him, unless it be for some crime
that deserves death. As also that no man's Goods be taken from him, unless it be
by way of a just punishment. For in the Conqueror there is nothing so
honorable, nor in some Cases so necessary, as in this manner to extend his
clemency and liberality to the Conquered, so far forth as it may stand with his
own security. See Book 3. Chap. 15. in finem.
When Cyrus had subdued the Assyrians, he comforted them by this assurance,
That their Condition should be the same that before it was, their Houses,
Lands, Wives and Children, they should freely enjoy; and in Case any personal
injuries were offered them, both he and his would readily defend them.
Admirable are the effects of those Wars that are concluded with a general
pardon. Thus did Nicholas the Syracusian plead in Diodorus in the behalf of
those that had yielded to mercy, They have, says he, yielded themselves, and
given up their Arms, relying wholly on the Conquerours clemency: Quare
indignum foret, eos decipi spe nostrae humanitatis; Wherefore it would be an
everlasting dishonor to us to suffer them to be deceived in their confidence
they have of our clemency. And a little after, Who amongst all the Grecians did
ever inexorably condemn them to punishment, who yielded themselves to the
Conquerours mercy. Appian brings in Octavius Caesar thus bespeaking L.
Antonius, when he came to surrender himself, If the end of thy coming hither
had been to purchase thy Peace only, thou had found me, not only a
Conqueror, but such a Conqueror as was thoroughly incensed by the wrongs thou
have done; but since thou art come to yield thy self, thy Friends, and thine
Arms to our discretion, thou have appeased mine anger, and taken away from me
that power I had to have enforced thee to have accepted of what Conditions I
pleased. For I am now to weigh, not so much what thou deservest to suffer, as
what becomes me to grant; wherefore I shall choose rather to consult mine own
honor by forgiving, than to gratify my passion by a just revenge. We do often
meet with these expressions in the Roman Stories, namely, That the Conquered do
yield themselves sometimes to the faith, sometimes to the mercy or clemency, of
the Conqueror. As in Livy, To those Ambassadors that were sent from the
Neighbor Provinces to surrender their Cities to the faith of the Romans, he
gave a gracious Audience. So in another place, speaking of King Perseus, he
says, Paulus earnestly laboring that he might be permitted to surrender both
himself and whatsoever was his, to the faith and clemency of the People of
Rome: Whereby nothing else is to be understood but an absolute rendition. For
the word [Faith] in this and the like places, signifies nothing but the bare
honesty and goodness of the Victor, unto which the Vanquished submits himself.
There is a notable Story extant both in Livy and Polybius, concerning one
Phanea an Aetolian Ambassador, who in his Speech to the Consul Manius let fall
these words, That the Aetolians did freely surrender themselves and all they
had to the faith of the same People of Rome: Which (being thereunto urged by
the Consul) he re-affirmed in the very words. But when the Consul demanded the
principal Authors of the War to be immediately delivered unto him, Phanea
readily answered, That it was only to the faith, and not to the subjection, of
the Romans that they submitted themselves: Adding, That it was not the custom
of the Grecians to be commanded; whereunto the Consul replied, That he cared
not what the manner of the Grecians was, but the custom of the Romans was to
impose Laws upon those who by their own concession had surrendered themselves:
And immediately commanded the Ambassador to be clapped up in Chains. Polybius's
words are to this sense, Do ye, having newly surrendered your selves unto our
trust, teach us what we must or ought to do? By which words it is evident what
he to whose faith any people do commit themselves may do with impunity, and
without violating the Law of Nations. But yet the Roman Consuls did not make
use of their power so as these Historians have reported, They only dismissed the
Ambassadors, and gave the Aetolians longer time to consult about it. Thus did
the people of Rome answer the Falisci, as Valerius Maximus informs us, That
they very well understood that the Falisci had surrendered themselves not unto
the power, but unto the faith of the Romans: And of the Campanes, That they had
put themselves under the Romans, not by any League but, by a voluntary
surrender. Now as concerning his Duty unto whom such a surrender is made, that
of Seneca is very pertinent, Clementiae liberum arbitrium habet, The Conqueror
may show what clemency he pleases; but yet he ought to give Sentence not as a
Judge according to the rigor of Law, but according to equity and good
conscience, he may either absolutely forgive, or he may exact whatever
satisfaction he pleases. Nor do I think it much material in what form of words
such a surrender is made, whether to the Conquerour's wisdom, or to his
moderation, or to his mercy and clemency. All these being but palliations, the
main thing intended is, That the Conqueror must be Judge.

LI. Of a Conditional Surrender.
Yet there are also Conditional Surrenders, which make provision either for
every person, as when their lives, liberties, or some part of their Goods are
expressly excepted; or for the generality, and amongst these some may amount
even unto a Mixed Government, whereof we have elsewhere discoursed. Lib. 1. c.
3. 17.


LII. Who may and ought to be given as Hostages.
To the Articles agreed upon for such a Surrender, there succeeds in the next
place Sureties for their performance; and these are either Hostages or Pledges.
Hostages are either such as freely give themselves, or such as are sent by the
Prince or State. For in all Civil Governments, he that has the Sovereign Civil
Power has a Right as well to the actions, as to the Goods of his Subjects; but
so that the Prince or State that sends them are obliged to satisfy either them
or their Relations, for the losses and damages they shall thereby sustain. And
in Case there be many nominated to be sent, and it be indifferent to the
Commonwealth whether of them goes, it is best to determine it by Lots. But yet
he that is only Lord of the Fee has no such Right over his Vassal, as to send
him, unless he be also his Subject; for the reverence and obedience due unto
him does not extend so far.

LIII. What Right is given over Hostages.
That an Hostage may be put to death by that Right of Nations which we call
external, we have elsewhere showed. But not by that which is internal, unless
for some crime of his own, he has deserved it. Neither can they be made
Slaves: Nay farther, they may by the Law of Nations enjoy and leave their Goods
to their next Heirs; although by the Roman Laws it is provided, That their
Goods being confiscated, should be brought into the public Treasury.

LIVE. Whether they may make their escape.
But whether it be lawful for an Hostage to make his escape, would be likewise
enquired. Certainly it is not, if either at his first entrance, or at any time
after, to the end that he might live under a more gentle restraint, he engaged
his word, That he would not. Otherwise it was not the purpose of the City or
State in sending their Citizen to oblige him not to fly; but to empower the
Enemy to keep him in such a strict custody, that though he would, yet he could
not fly. And thus may that Fact of Claelia be defended, who made her escape
from Porsenna, to whom She was sent, with other Ladies, as Hostages. But admit
that Claelia had not at all offended in making her escape, yet could not the
City of Rome justify her reception and detension. Which made Porsenna declare
plainly, That unless they sent back his Hostage, Live. lib. 2.
he would take it to be a breach of their League. Whereupon the Romans
immediately restored her, as a Pledge of their Peace.

LV. Whether an Hostage may for any other cause be detained.
But this kind of assurance by Hostages is to those who are sent very odious,
as well by reason that it deprives them of their liberty, as because it is
occasioned by the fact of another. Wherefore in all Cases that are dubious, we
are to understand it in the strictest sense; as that they that are sent as
Hostages in one Case, cannot be detained as Hostages in another. Which is so to
be understood, That when the latter Agreement was made, there was no mention at
all made of those Hostages. But if we have already broken our faith in any
other Agreement, or if there be any Debt justly due, then those Hostages may be
detained, yet not then as Hostages, but as Subjects, which by the Law of
Nations may be taken and kept as Prisoners for their Sovereign's Debt. Which
very thing may also be easily prevented, by inserting this Clause amongst those
Articles, That so soon as that, for which they were sent, shall be performed,
those Hostages shall be freely sent back.

LVI. The Principal being dead, the Hostage is to be set free.
He that is sent as an Hostage to release for a while either a Prisoner or
another Hostage, this dying, the other shall be released. For when the person
dyed that was the Hostage, all the Right that any man had in him as an Hostage,
dyed with him; as Vlpian speaks in the Case of a redeemed Captive. Wherefore as
in Vlpian's Case, the ransom is not due, if the Captive dye before it be paid;
so in this Case, the person substituted cannot lawfully be detained, if the
principal Person be defunct. Appian.
It was then no unreasonable Demand that Demetrius made to the Roman Senate, in
desiring to be dismissed, as being no longer an Hostage for Antiochus, he being
dead. Which very Plea, Justine also out of Trogus records and approves of,
where he says, That as soon as Demetrius heard that his Brother Antiochus (
for whom he remained as an Hostage in Rome) was dead, he immediately addressed
himself to the Senate, telling them, That whilst his Brother lived he was
contented to be his Pledge; but he being dead, he would gladly know whose
Hostage he then was.

LVII. The King dying, whether the Hostage may be detained.
But what if the King dye that made the Hostage, shall his Hostage be detained?
Of this the Answer depends upon that which we have heretofore handled Book 2.
Chapter 16. Sect. 18.
, namely, Whether the League so made be personal only, or real. For Accessaries
cannot justify us in receding from that general Rule which we ought to walk by
in the interpretation of Principals, whose nature they themselves ought to
follow.

LVIII An Hostage may sometimes be principally obliged.
But here by the way we must add, That Hostages are not always bare Sureties in
the Obligation, but sometimes the principal Parties; as when in an Agreement
one man engages himself for the fact of another, which if not performed, he
himself is to make it good: and thus Hostages in his stead may stand obliged.
Thus it was adjudged in that Sponsion made at Gaudys, as we have elsewhere
declared See Book. 3. Ch, 15. 18. Alb. Gent. l. 2.
. But their opinion who hold, That Hostages may stand obliged one for the fact
of another, though done without their consent, is not only rigorous, but unjust.

LIX. Pledges, how engaged.
Pledges have some things common with Hostages, and some things they have
peculiar to themselves. That which they have in common is, That they may be
detained for another Debt, at present due, unless faith be given to the
contrary. That which they have peculiar is, That what Contract soever is made
concerning these, will admit of a larger construction than those made
concerning Hostages. Neither is the one so distasteful as the other: for that
things should be kept strictly is natural; but that men should be so kept, is
not so.

LX. The Right of Redemption, how lost.
Lastly, That length of time cannot prejudice the Right of Redemption as to
things so engaged, if that be performed for which they were originally
deposited, we have elsewhere proved Book 2. Chapter 4. Sect. 17.
. For that act that was done upon an ancient and known Agreement cannot easily
be believed to proceed from a new one; and therefore that the Debtor forbears
to redemand his Pledge, is no good Argument to prove his dereliction of it,
unless some other strong conjectures do induce us to believe otherwise: As in
Case a man being by some means hindered when he would have redeemed it, had past
it over in silence so long as was sufficient for him that detained it to ground
his conjectures that we had forsaken it.

CHAP. XXI. Of Faith during War, of Truces, Safe Conduct, and the Redemption of
Prisoners.
I. What a Truce is, and whether it be a time of Peace or War. II. The
derivation of the word Induciae. III. It being ended, there needs no new
denouncing of War. IV. How the time prefixed for a Truce is to be computed. V.
When Truces begin to bind. VI. What during that time may lawfully be done. VII.
Whether to retreat to repair breaches, etc. be lawful. VIII. A distinction
concerning possession of places. IX. Whether he that is forceably detained till
the Truce be ended, has afterward a right to return. X. Of the special
agreements for Truces, and what questions do thence usually arise. XI. Upon the
breach whereof the War renews. XII. What if some punishment be thereunto added.
XIII. When the acts of private men break the Truce. XIV. A Safe-pass when there
is no Truce, how interpreted. XV. Who are comprehended under the name of
Soldiers. XVI. To go, to come, and to return, how to be understood. XVII. How
far a Safe Conduct extends to persons; XVIII. And how far unto Goods. XIX. Who
may come under the name of Attendants, and who under the name of a Nation. XX.
Whether a passport be valid, he dying that gave it. XXI. What if it be given
during pleasure only. XXII. Whether security be due, without or beyond his
Territories that gave it. XXIII. The redemption of Prisoners, a favor. XXIV.
Whether such a redemption may by any Law be forbidden: explained. XXV. That the
Right a man has to his Captive may be transferred. XXVI. The ransom of one
Captive may be due to more. XXVII. Whether a ransom agreed upon may be nulled,
if the estate of the person be then unknown. XXVIII. What goods of a Prisoner
are his that takes them. XXIX. Whether an Heir may be charged with a Prisoners
ransom. XXX. Whether he that is released, to release another be bound to
return, if that other be dead.
I. Whether a Truce be a time of Peace or War.
THERE are some things which Sovereign Princes even in the midst of War, do
usually grant one to another, which Virgil and Tacitus call, Belli Commercia,
The Traffic of War; and in Homer are said to be (...), Mutual Agreement, or
Covenants of War. Such are Truces, Safe-Conducts, and the redemption of
Prisoners. A Truce is an agreement, whereby though, the War continue yet, all
acts of hostility do for a while cease, though (as I said) the War continue.
For, as Cicero speaks, between War and Peace there is no Medium; it may be
called a War, although at present its operations are intermitted: As, A man may
he said to be wise or prudent, though he be asleep; and virtuous, though for a
while he be void of action. The distance of place, says Aristotle, does not
dissolve friendship it self, Nic. 8.
but interrupts the exercise of it. An habit there may be, though at present it
operates not. For, Ad 6. Nic.
as Eustratius well observes, An habit being compared with an ability simply
taken, is called an act; but being compared with action it self, or the
exercise of that ability, is called power; as a man may be an excellent
surveyor, or a skilful Architect, though at present he be fast asleep: Est
disertus etiam qui tacit; A man may be eloquent though for a while he be
silent: and a good Workman, though he have no tools to work with. So then as
Gellius sometimes said, Neque Pax est induciae; Bellum manet, pugna cessat: A
Truce cannot be called a Peace; for though the fight cease, the War continues.
So Pacatus in his Panegyric, Induciae Bella suspendebant; A Truce is but the
suspension of the acts of War. Which I here the rather mention, that we may
understand, That whatsoever is agreed upon to be of force during the War, is
also of force during the time of a Truce; unless it plainly appear, that it was
not the state of War that was so much looked at, as the exercise of it. On the
contrary, If any thing be agreed upon as concerning Peace, that is of no force
in the time of a Truce: Neither am I ignorant that Virgil calls a Truce, Pacem
sequestram; An indifferent Peace, or a thing between Peace and War: And that
Servius upon that place calls it a temporary Peace. As also does the Scholiast
upon Thucydides: Varro calls it The Peace of Camps for a few days, all which
are rather descriptions than definitions, and those also but figurative; such
as was that of the same Varro, who calls a Truce Wars Holyday, who might as
well have called it Wars napp or short sleep. As Papinius calls those Days
whereon there are no pleadings, Days of Peace. And as Aristotle called sleep,
Vinculum sensuum; The lock or chain of the senses: By whose example we may
rightly call a Truce the fetters of War. Which exposition of Varro (which also
Donatus follows) Gellius deservedly blames for adding thereunto, Ad Ter. Eun.
Act. 1. Scen. 1.
for a few days, as if there could not be a Truce made for a few Hours.
Whereunto also I may add, for Years; nay, for twenty, thirty, forty, yea a
hundred Years: Examples whereof we may find in Livy, which serves also to
confute that definition of Paulus, Induciae sunt cum in breve, and in praesens
tempus convenit, ne invicem lacessant; A Truce is when by an agreement, neither
party shall at present, or for a short time prefixed, provoke each other to acts
of hostility. But yet possible it is, that if it shall evidently appear, that
an absolute cessation from all Hostile Acts, was the solitary reason simply and
wholly moving both Parties to make such an agreement, that then whatsoever is
said concerning a time of Peace, may also be said concerning the time of such a
Truce, not simply by virtue of the word [Truce,] but by a certain conjecture
that it was the mind and intention of both Parties, Lib. 3. c. 16.. 20.
that that Truce should be equivalent to a Peace, whereof we have already
treated in another place.

II. The word Induciae whence derived.
This word Induciae, which signifies a Truce, is not (as Gellius would have it)
derived from Inde uti jam; from thence, as it is now: Nor (as Opilius thought)
from the word Endoitus, or Endoitium, which signifies an Entrance into, or a
beginning of; but rather from these words, Gell. l. 19. c. 8.
Quod inde, that is, That there should be rest from such a time; or as the
Greeks call it, A cessation of Arms from thenceforth. For it is confessed both
by Gellius and Opilius, that the word, Induciae, was by the Ancients wrote with
a [t,] and not with a [c,] thus, Induciae; and that what they now use in the
plural, was doubtless of old used in the singular number, the Ancient word
being Endoitia: As, for Otium, Rest, they then pronounced, Oitium, from the
word Oiti, which we now pronounce Vti: As also of the word Poina (for which we
now use, Poena, Punishment) is made Punio, and of Poinus (now Poenus) is made
Punicus: So of that word, Ostia, Ostiorum, is now made Ostia, Ostia; and of
Ostrea, Ostreorum, is now made Ostrea, Ostreae; so of Endoitia, Endoitiorum, is
made Endoitia, Endoitiae, and from thence Indutia; whereof the plural number is
now only in use. Neither was Donatus much amiss, who would have Indiciae, to be
derived from In dies otium, A rest for some Days. A Truce then in War is a rest
or cessation, Livy, Plut. Justine.
and not a Peace: Therefore some Historians do exactly distinguish them, when
they say (as they often do) Pacem negatam, inducias datas; That though a Peace
was denied, yet was a Truce granted.

III. The Truce ended, War need not be redenounced.
Wherefore this time of a Truce being expired, there needs no new denouncing of
War, for that which for a time hindered it, being taken away, the War presently
starts up and enjoys its own Rights, being during that time not dead, but
asleep, just as the Dominion or Jurisdiction that a State has over a madman,
does, as soon as he recovers from his madness. But yet we may read in Livy of a
War, that by the judgment of the College of Heralds was denounced after the
expiration of a Truce: But then we must know, that it was the custom of the
Ancient Romans to make use of these unnecessary cautions and premonitions, to
show how much they loved Peace, and how unwillingly they made War though their
Cause were just, it being usual with them, Bellum indicere ne inferrent; To
proclaim War to the end that they might make Peace. And this Livy himself
seemed to hint, Livy l. 4.
where he says, That after a pitched Battle had been fought with the Vejentes
at Nomentum and Fidenae, there was indeed a Truce granted, but no Peace made;
which Truce being ended, though they had before broken it, yet were the Heralds
notwithstanding sent, who receiving no satisfaction to their demands, denounced
War.

IV. How the time of a Truce is to be composed.
The time assigned for a Truce is either continual, as when it is made for an
hundred Days; or by prefixing a time when it shall end, as until the Calends of
March. In the former, the account must be to the last moment; for this is most
natural. For that account which is made by days Civil, depends upon the several
Laws and Customs of Nations. In the other kinds of assignments, it is usually
questioned, Whether the Day, the Month, or the Year, whereon any Truce is to
determine, ought to be included or excluded the time of the Truce. Surely all
natural things have two Bounds whereby they are terminated, the one within, or
adhering to the things themselves, as the Body is terminated by the Skin, being
the utmost part of it: The other outward, as a River is the Bound of the Land.
Now according to either of these two ways, may those Bounds that depend upon
the will be assigned. But yet those are most natural, that are a part of the
thing bounded. Met. lib. 2. c. 17.
So says Aristotle, Terminus dicitur, quod ultimum cujusque est; That is said
to be the end of any thing which is the extreme part of it. Neither is this
repugnant to common use, For if a man promise to do a thing before the day of
his death, it shall include that very day whereon he died. Suet. in Caes. c. 81.
Spurina forewarned Caesar of some danger that should not be protracted beyond
the Ides of March; and being upbraided by Caesar as a false Prophet, because
the Ides of March were already come, yet no danger had befaln him; he replied,
Venisse quidem eas, sed non praeteriisse, That they were indeed come, but not
past. Wherefore much more should the interpretation of Truces be thus
understood, the production whereof deserving so much the more of favor, as it
is sparing of humane blood. But yet that Day from whence any Truce is to
commence is not to be reckoned as one of the number, because such is the force
of this Preposition [from] that it serves not for Conjunction, but for
separation.

V. When they begin to bind.
But this also I may add on the by, That Truces and such like Conventions do
immediately oblige both Parties consenting, as soon as they are perfected; but
the Subjects on either side are not bound until the Truce receives the Form of
a Law by a public Proclamation: which done, The Subjects on either side are
obliged to observe it. But yet this Proclamation being made in one place only,
shall not from that instant extend its obliging power through all parts of that
Nation. But sufficient time must be allowed, that every part may receive
knowledge thereof. And in the mean time, if any thing be by those Subjects done
contrary to that Truce, they are not at all punishable for it. Neither are the
persons contracting notwithstanding any thing the less bound to repair those
damages. Wherefore that fact of the Spaniards in Italy, recorded by Mariana,
Lib. 28. cap. 7.
cannot be defended.

VI. What may lawfully be done during a Truce.
What may lawfully be done, and what not, may easily be collected from the very
definition of a Truce. All hostile Acts are unlawful, whether they be done
against persons or things. For whatsoever is by force of Arms done against an
Enemy during a Truce is contrary to the Law of Nations, as Lucius Aemilius in
Livy tells his Soldiers. Nay, whatsoever shall come from the Enemy
accidentally into our Quarters, although it had been formerly ours, yet must it
be restored; because by that external Justice, whereby such things ought to be
tried, they are the Enemies. And therefore, as Paulus the Lawyer observes, the
Right of Postliminy in the time of a Truce, is, as it were, out of date;
because unto this Right it is required that there should precede another Right,
namely, A Right to take from an Enemy by force what we can; which during a
Truce cannot be admitted. To go and come hither or thither, as we please, so
arrayed as not to threaten danger, is lawful. This Servius notes upon the words
of Virgil, Trojans, with Latins mixed, in safety go. Aenead. lib. 11.
Where also he relates this Story, That the City being besieged by Tarquin, and
a Truce agreed upon between Porsenna and the Romans, whilst the Circean Games
were celebrating within the City, the Latin Captains were permitted freely
without any restraint, not only to try their Fortunes among the Romans, but,
being Victors, to be crowned also.

VII. Whether to retreat back, to repair breaches, or the like.
For an Enemy to retreat back with his Army, as Livy informs us that Philip did
Live. lib. 31.
, is no breach of a Truce: No more is it to make up our breaches, to levy
Soldiers, and the like, unless it be particularly agreed to the contrary.

VIII. To surprise places of strength, unlawful.
But on the contrary, by corrupting a Garrison to surprise places held by them
during a Truce, is utterly unlawful; for it is not possible that such places
should be justly gained but by the Right of War. The like may be said of
Subjects, who during a Truce, cannot, if they would, revolt to the Enemy. An
example whereof we may read in Livy Lib. 42.
, For when the Inhabitants of Coronaea and Haliartus, in favor to Monarchy,
sent their Ambassadors to Macedonia to desire a Garrison, whereby the better
to defend themselves against the insolent pride of the Thebans; they received
this Answer from the King, That having lately made a Truce with the Romans, he
could not at present answer their desires. We may indeed read in Thucydides,
That Brasidas took the City Menda, revolting from the Athenians, to the
Lacedaemonians, in the time of a Truce; but withal he excuses himself by the
like formerly done by the Athenians. And yet to possess places altogether
deserted is lawful, that is, if they be truly so, with a purpose never to own
them again; but not if they be left only without Guards or Garrisons, whether
those Guards were omitted before any Truce was made, or whether they were
withdrawn upon the Truce-making only. For where the propriety is retained,
another man's usurpation is unjust: whereby that cavil which Belisarius urged
against the Goths, is easily refuted; Proc. Goth. 2.
who in the time of a Truce seized on some places being ungarrisoned, upon this
pretense of being forsaken.

IX. Whether he that being forcibly detained during the Truce, has a Right
afterward to return.
Here also it may be questioned, Whether he who during the Truce is forcibly
detained, and that Truce being ended is found among Enemies, has by the Law of
Nations a Right to return. If we look only to that Right which is external,
this man's condition is the same with his, who coming in Peace only for
Traffic, the War breaking out unexpectedly is unfortunately found amongst
Enemies, whose doom (as we have already declared Book 3. Chapter 9. Cic. l. 2. de
inv.
) is, To be kept Prisoner during the War. Neither is this repugnant to internal
Justice, so far forth as the Goods and actions of Enemies stand obliged for the
Debt of the City they inhabit, and may be taken in discharge thereof. Neither
has this man any more reason to complain, than many more innocent persons
have, who occasionally suffer by that War. Neither are we to refer hither that
Case which Cicero puts in his second Book of Invention, concerning that Ship
armed with an Iron Beak, which contrary to the Rhodian Law was found driven by
a violent Tempest into Harbor, and according to that Law confiscate, and by
the Questor demanded to be sold. For there the force of the Tempest did excuse
the punishment. But here we discourse not of punishment, but of a Right that
for a certain time only lay, as it were, asleep. Yet without all doubt to
release such a man were far more generous.

X. Of some special reasons, for which a Truce is granted, and some Doubts
thereupon.
There are also some things that during a Truce are unlawful, not simply of
themselves, but as they are repugnant to that end for which only the Truce was
granted. As for example, If a Truce were granted only for the Burial of the
Slain, there ought nothing to be altered; so if the Truce be made, That the
Besieged should not in such a time be assaulted, as that made by Totilas with
the Neapolitans; then to receive fresh Supplies, or to go and come freely, is
unlawful. For seeing that such a Truce is granted in favor to one side only,
it ought not to be made use of to the detriment of the other. Sometimes it is
agreed, That during the Truce it shall not be lawful to come and go at
pleasure. Sometimes again safety to our persons is granted, but not to our
things; in which Case, if any man's person shall be hurt in the defense of his
Goods, nothing shall be judged done contrary to the Truce. For since it is
lawful for us to defend our Goods, personal safety is here to be referred to
that which is principal, and not to that which comes by consequence only.

XI. A Truce broken on one side, may discharge the other.
If the Truce be broken on one side, there is no doubt but the injured Party
may take Arms without any other solemn Denunciation; for every Article implies
a Condition, as we have elsewhere said Book 3. Chapter 19. Sect. 19. and Chapter 20.36.
. Some examples we may find in Histories where the breach of a Truce has been
connived at, even to the end of it; but we may likewise read of the War made
against the Hetrusci and others, for doing things contrary to the Truce agreed
on. From both which different examples we may collect, That the injured Party
may lawfully take Arms. But whether he will make use of this Right or not,
lies in his own choice.

XII. What if a punishment be added.
But this is evident, That if the punishment agreed upon, being required, be
accordingly inflicted on him that breaks the Truce, then the Party injured has
no Right to make war upon that account. For to this end is the Offender
punished, That all others may be secured; so on the contrary, If the injured
person shall choose rather to make war, then is the Offender acquitted of
punishment.

XIII. When private acts break the Peace.
But yet what is done by a private person breaks not a Truce, without the
access of some public Act, that is, of command or approbation. But if he that
does it be neither punished, nor delivered, nor restitution made, it shall be
reputed as done by the public Order of the State.

XIV. Free Passage without a Truce, how to be understood.
A freedom to pass to and fro when no Truce is agreed on, is a kind of
privilege, and will therefore admit of such an interpretation as is already
declared Book 2. Chapter 16. Sect. 12.
, where we treated of privileges. Now this privilege being neither
prejudicial to any third person, nor grievous to him that granted it, is not to
be understood in the strictest sense, but with some allowance of favor, yet so
that the propriety of the words will bear it; but especially if it were freely
offered and not granted at the request of him that has it. But much more when,
besides that which is private, there is any public advantage to be gained
thereby. We are therefore to forbear rigorously to interpret any such Passes,
though the words may perhaps warrant it, unless otherwise some great absurdity
will ensue, or that we are thereunto led by very probable conjectures, That it
was so intended by him that gave them. On the contrary, A favorable
construction, even beyond the proper signification of the words, shall take
place, rather than any such like absurdity shall be admitted, especially if we
shall be thereunto induced by any such probable conjectures.

XV. Who may be admitted under the name of Soldiers.
From whence we may collect, That a safe Pass given unto Soldiers comprehends
not inferior Captains only, but even chief Commanders; because the propriety
of the word will admit of such a construction. Although also it may admit of
another more strict, so under the name of a Clerk may be understood a Bishop;
as under that of Soldiers, Mariners employed in a Ship may be comprised, and
all such as in that War are engaged by a Military Oath.

XVI. Leave given to come, implies leave given to return.
Leave given to come, shall be understood as if it were also given to return;
yet not through the force of the word, but to avoid somewhat that would
otherwise be absurd. For that which is intended as a courtesy, should not by
any construction be rendered unprofitable; wherefore it implies also a safe
return, so far until we shall arrive thither, where we may be in safety. Diod.
Sic. lib. 17.
It was therefore but treachery in Alexander to cause those persons to be
killed in their journey homewards, to whom he had indulged the favor to
depart. Concerning which fact Plutarch gives his censure thus, Haec velut
macula adhaesit bellicis actionibus regis, caetera in Bello agere and just and
regaliter soliti; This was a great blemish to the actions of a King, otherwise
just and magnanimous. But on the other side, if license be given to depart, it
shall not be so understood as if it were also given to return; neither does
that which is given us to come, give us a Right to send; for these are two
diverse and distinct things: neither is there any reason why we should seek
after a sense beyond that which is natural to the words; but yet an error
herein committed, though it confer no right, yet certainly it mitigates
somewhat of the punishment, if any such be added. But even he, to whom leave is
given to come, may come once, but not again, unless the time limited in the
Pass be such as may induce us to believe otherwise.

XVII. How far it extends to persons:
The Son shall not be permitted to follow his Father, nor the Wife her Husband,
unless it be with a purpose to cohabit with him: for it is usual to dwell, but
not to travel with our Families; a Servant or two though not expressed, yet may
be presumed to be allowed to such as cannot well travel without them: for he
that grants the principal, may well be thought to grant the necessary
consequents, which yet is to be morally understood.

XVIII. How far to Goods:
Where license is granted to persons, Their goods are also comprehended, though
happily not all, yet such as are useful for travelers to carry with them.

XIX. To Attendants.
Under the word [Companions,] we are not to understand such whose condition is
more hateful than his, to whom the license of Safe-coming is granted, as
Pirates, Robbers, Fugitives, and Rebels, if the Nation from whence they come,
be in the Passport expressed, it evidently excludes all Foreigners from
protection.

XX. A Pass dies not with him that gave it:
License to pass freely, being granted by virtue of the supreme power, is not
in a case that is dubious, made void by the death of him that granted it,
according to what has been already said Lib. 2. chapter 13.
concerning the grants of Kings and Sovereign Princes.

XXI. During pleasure, how to be understood,
It is likewise frequently questioned what is meant by this clause in a Pass,
during my pleasure; whereunto the best answer is, that this privilege shall
last until some new declaration of the will of the Donor shall rescind it; for
in a dubious case, that which was deemed sufficient to give a Right, shall be
presumed sufficient to continue it: But yet not, if he that granted it be
disabled any longer to declare his pleasure; as in case he be dead, for then
whatsoever depended barely upon the uncertainty of his will, shall likewise
cease, as accidents do when the substance fails.

XXII. A Pass implies protection.
A Safe-pass being granted, protection is due even beyond the Territories of
him that grants it, because it ought to protect us against all the license of
War, which of it self is not confined within the bounds of any one Princes
Dominion, as we have elsewhere showed. Bo. 3. chapter 4,


XXIII. The redemption of Prisoners.
The redeeming of Captives is very much favored, especially among Christians,
it being an especial act of mercy commended unto us by the Law of God.
Redemptio magnum and praeclarum justitiae munus, were the words of Lactantius;
The redeeming of Prisoners is a great and singular part of justice. And in case
it be from Barbarians, Matt. 25.36.39. De Offic. l. 2, c. 28.
it is by St. Ambrose reckoned as the best and greatest liberality in the
World; and in that Apology he makes for himself and his Church, for the
breaking in pieces the consecrated Vessels, thereby to redeem the Captives, he
affirms, that, Ornatus Sacramentorum est redemptio captivorum; The chiefest
ornament to Christian Sacraments, is the redeeming of Slaves: where also he
has many other such excellent sayings to the same purpose. St. Aug. following
the example of St. Ambrose did the like, though contrary to the carnal sense of
some who therein opposed him, as Possidius relates. The very same is recorded
by Hincmarus in the life of Remigius. And Adamus in his Ecclesiastical British
History, makes honorable mention of the like fact done by Rimbertus Archbishop
of Breme. And we likewise find it approved of by the sixth general Synod, whose
decree is recited by Gratian, namely, Causa. 12. q. 2.
That no Bishop shall presume to alienate any of the consecrated Vessels of
their Churches, unless for such causes as were of old approved of by the
Ancient Canons of the Church, as for the redeeming of Captives and the like,

XXIV. Whether the redemption of Prisoners may by any Law be forbidden.
Being thus awed by so great Authorities, I dare not absolutely approve of
those Laws, which forbid the Redemption of Slaves, without a distinction, such
I mean as we may read of among the Romans, Nulli Civitati viliores Captivi quam
nostrae; There is no City so regardless of Captives as ours, says a wise Roman
in open Senate. For which cause Rome is called in Livy, Civitas Captivis minime
indulgens; A City showing little favor to Captives. That Ode of Horace is very
well known, where he condemns the ransoming of Prisoners as an opprobrious act,
an example of dangerous consequence, and is an execrable fact encouraged with a
reward. But what Aristotle blames in the Laconian, is also usually blamed in
the Roman Government, namely, that all their Polity tended only to the
advancement of their Military Discipline, as if in this alone consisted the
safety of their Commonwealth; whereas, if we will but duly consider it as
rational men, with the allowance of some grains of compassion, it would seem
much better to rebate somewhat of that rigor, which the license of War
permits, than to leave so many of, perhaps, our Kinsmen and Countrymen in an
everlasting slavery. I cannot therefore conceive how such a Law can be reputed
just, unless it shall appear that such a severe course is necessary for the
prevention of far greater, and morally inevitable calamities, which will
otherwise in all humane probability fall upon us: for in such a case of
necessity, as the Prisoners themselves ought by the rules of Charity, patiently
to bear their hard fortune; so may this punishment be justly imposed upon them
and threatened against others, to deter them from the like cowardice, according
to what we have elsewhere written concerning any one Citizen, which for the
public safety of the City may be delivered up.

XXV. That a man may transfer his Right in a Captive.
True it is, that to make Slaves of such as are taken in War, is not agreeable
to our Laws and Customs; yet doubtless may that Right of exacting a ransom
from him that is so taken, by him that took him, justly be transferred to
another: For by the Law of Nature things even incorporeal may also be alienated.

XXVI. The ransom may be due to more than to one.
And possible it is that the same ransom may be due to several persons; as in
case a Prisoner being discharged by one, the ransom not paid, be apprehended
by another, and after that by another, these must needs be distinct debts,
because they arise from distinct causes.

XXVII. Whether an agreement for a ransom be nulled, his estate or quality
being not then known.
The ransom agreed upon, shall bind the Contractors, though the Prisoner be
found richer than he was thought to be, when the Contract was made; because by
that Right of Nations which is external, whereby we are in this case to be
judged, no man can be compelled to give a greater price than what was first
agreed on, although undervalued, if there were no fraud in the Contract, as may
easily be understood by that which has been already delivered in the Chapter
of Agreements Lib. 2. c. 26.
.

XXVIII. What Goods of Captives are his that takes them.
From what has been already said, that Captives are not now to be made Slaves,
it follows, That the Dominion that we have over their persons, does not give us
an universal Right to all that is theirs, as has been elsewhere said Lib. 3.
c. 7.. 4.
: for he that takes a Prisoner has a Right to nothing but what he particularly
lays hold on; so that if the Prisoner can conceal any thing he has from him,
he cannot be said to get it, because he is not thereof possessed. Thus Paulus the
Lawyer pleads against Brutus and Manlius, He that takes a Field into his
possession, cannot be said to be possessed of the treasure, which he knows not
to be there buried; for no man can be said to possess that which he knows not
of: Whence it will likewise follow, that what the Prisoner can so conceal, he
may make use of for his Redemption.

XXIX. Whether the ransom agreed on be chargeable upon the Heirs.
Another Question is like to arise, namely, whether a ransom agreed on, the
Prisoner dying before it be paid, may be recovered from his Heir? Whereunto the
answer is easy, for if the Captive dye in Prison, doubtless the ransom is not
due; because the promise was made upon condition that the Prisoner should be
set at liberty, but he that is dead cannot be said to be at liberty: But on the
contrary, if being at at liberty, he shall dye, the ransom shall be recovered,
because he enjoyed that for which the ransom was promised; yet I confess the
Contract may be so made that the ransom shall be due simply, and immediately
from the time of the Contract, and then the person taken shall not from
thenceforth be held as a Prisoner of War, but as one that does freely engage
himself as a Surety for the payment thereof: So on the contrary, the Contract
may be so made that the ransom shall not be due, unless the Prisoner live and
be at liberty upon a Day prefixed; but these things being less natural, shall
not be presumed to be done, unless evidently proved.

XXX. Whether he that is freed to free another, ought to return, the other
being dead.
It may likewise be questioned, whether he that is released on condition, that
he shall release another, if that other dye before he be released, is bound to
return into Captivity. I have elsewhere Bo. 2. chapter 11.. 22. and 15. and in this
Book chapter 20.. 58.
proved that a promise freely made for the Fact of a third, is sufficiently
performed if nothing be omitted by the Promiser, in order to its
accomplishment; but if a promise be made upon a valuable consideration, the
Promiser stands obliged to the full value of what he promised. Just so it is in
this case, for he that is released is not bound to return into Captivity,
because it was not so agreed upon; nor will that indulgence that is given to
liberty, admit it so to be tacitly understood, neither ought any man to make a
gain of another man's liberty; but yet he that is so dismissed out of Prison,
ought to pay the value of that which he could not perform. For this cause was
Balionius much blamed by Mariana, who being released upon his promise to
release Carvailius, Carvailius dying before he could be released, refused to
pay the value of his ransom. This answer I conceive to be more agreeable to
the naked and simple truth, than that which is delivered unto us by the
Interpreters of the Roman Laws.

CHAP. XXII. Concerning Faith given by inferior Commanders in War.
I. Of the several kinds of Commanders. II. How far an agreement by them made,
binds the supreme power: III. Or gives occasion to such an obligation. IV. What
if any thing be done contrary to commands: this explained by distinctions. V.
Whether in such a case the contrary party be obliged. VI. What the Commanders
in War, or the Magistrates may do concerning their inferiors, or for them.
VII. It is not in the power of a General to make Peace VIII. Whether h^ may
grant a Truce; this cleared by a distinction. IX. What security of persons, and
what of things may be granted by them. X. Such Agreements are to be strictly
understood: and why. XI. A surrender accepted by a General, how to be
understood. XII. The addition of this caution, if the King or the People shall
think fit, secures the General. XIII. How the promise of delivering up a Town
is to be interpreted.
I. The several kinds of Commanders.
AMONGST public agreements this is reckoned by Vlpian as one, when the
Generals of each Army do agree about some things between themselves: We
declared before that when we had sufficiently discourst of Faith given by the
supreme Powers, we would likewise say somewhat of Faith given by subordinate
Powers, and that either between themselves or unto others, whether those powers
were next immediately to the supreme: As that of Generals, to whose Conduct the
Army is committed; whereunto we may fitly refer that of Livy, Nec Ducem
novimus, Lib. 4.
nisi cujus auspicio Bellum geritur; We acknowledge no other Captain, but him
to whom the management of the whole War is committed: Or whether they are such
as are Commanders under them, between whom Caesar in his Commentaries
distinguishes thus, Lib. 3.
The office of a private Captain is one thing, and the office of a General is
another; the former does but execute particular orders, but this latter ought
freely to consult and provide for the safety of the whole.

II. How far agreements by them made, bind their Sovereigns:
As concerning these men's engagements, there ought to be a twofold inspection,
first, Whether the supreme powers are thereby engaged; and secondly, Whether
they themselves are bound by them. The former of these may be determined by
what we have already said, namely, That Princes may be obliged by such as they
depute to declare their wills, whether particularly expressed, or collected from
the nature of their office; for he that grants a power, grants as much as in
him is, all things necessary to that power, which in moral things is morally to
be understood: whence we may collect, That subordinate Commanders may oblige
their Sovereigns two several ways, first, by doing that which in all
probability belongs to their place or office; secondly, by doing that which
belongs not to their office, yet which they have a special Commission to do, in
case that Commission be either publicly known, or at least unto those with
whom they have to do.

III. Or give occasion to such an obligation.
There are also other ways whereby a Sovereign Prince may be bound by the facts
of his Officers, yet so, that that fact is not the proper and immediate cause
of that obligation, but the occasion only, which may be done two ways, either
by con^^^ting unto it when done, or by the thing it self. Their consent will
appear by their approbation, which may be given not only expressly but tacitly;
that is, when the supreme power had knowledge thereof, and yet permitted them
to be done, which cannot with any probability be referred to any other cause;
and how this may proceed we have elsewhere showed. By the thing it self he may
be so far obliged, Bo. 2. chapter 4.. 5. and. chapter 15.. 17.
as not to enrich himself by another loss; as if by an agreement made by his
Ministers, a Prince receives any benefit, he is thereby bound to perform that
part of the said agreement which concerns himself to perform; or if he refuse
to do it, then he is bound to forego the benefit, which he either has or may
receive by that agreement: for this is that equity which as we have often
elsewhere said, evens the scales of justice. And hitherto and no farther is
that saying true, Si quid utiliter gestum sit, valet; Whatsoever contract
brings profit, binds the Contracter. And therefore we cannot but condemn them
of injustice, who refusing to fulfill the agreement, yet are resolved to detain
that, which but by that agreement they could never have had; as the Romans did
when they refused, either to confirm the agreement made by Cnaeus Domitius, or
to set at liberty King Bituitus, whom Domitius had first invited as his Guest,
and then perfidiously taken and sent bound to Rome: which fact as Valerius
Maximus testifies, Senatus nec approbare potuit, nec rescindere voluit; The
Roman Senate neither could approve of, nor would for Reasons of State rescind.
Many other such like examples we may find in Histories.

IV. What if any thing be done contrary to Command.
And here also we must repeat what we have formerly delivered, namely, That a
Sovereign Prince may be obliged by the fact of his General, in case he
transgress not the bounds of his public Office, though he act contrary to his
private instructions; this equity was well observed by the Roman Praetor, in
such actions as concerned Factories. For it is not every Contract made with a
Factor that shall be binding to him that employs him; but such only as are made
concerning such Goods for which he is appointed his Factor. But in Case it be
publicly proclaimed, That no man shall thenceforth treat or make any Agreement
with such a man, that man shall no longer be treated with as a chief Minister:
Nay, though such a Proclamation be made, yet if it appear not so to the
Contractors, whatsoever shall be by him agreed on, shall bind the Prince that
first employed him. Moreover, the condition of his Preposition ought to be
observed; for he that is willing to be treated with under such a certain
condition, and by the mediation of such a person, whatsoever is agreed upon by
that person, in reference to the business for which he was commissionated,
ought in all equity to be observed. Whence it follows, That some Princes or
People are more, and some less, bound by such Contracts as are made by their
Generals, if their several Laws and Constitutions are sufficiently known. But
in Case these be not well known, then must we be guided by the most likely
conjectures, which always presume that to be within their power, without which
they cannot well discharge the Office of a General. But yet if any such
inferior Officer shall transgress his Commission, and promise more than he can
perform, he himself shall be bound to the full value, unless some Law
sufficiently known shall hinder it. So likewise if there shall be found any
fraud in the Case, as if such a principal Commander shall pretend to have a
greater power given him by his Prince than indeed he has, he shall then be
obliged to satisfy for the damage thereby sustained; yea, and if through his
crime some great injury do arise to the adverse Party, he shall be bound to
suffer punishments answerable to his crime. In the former Case, his Goods shall
make satisfaction; and if those fall short, his service, or his Corporal
Liberty: In the latter, his person, or his Goods, or both, according to the
greatness of his crime. Neither will it suffice in the Case of fraud to declare
beforehand, that he will not oblige himself: For as well satisfaction for the
damages done, as punishment for a crime committed, are both of them due, not by
a voluntary, but by a natural obligation.

V. In which Case the other Party stands obliged.
Now because in all such Contracts, either the Prince or his Principal
Minister, does stand obliged; therefore it follows, That the other Party is
thereby obliged; for the Contract cannot be said to halt. And by this we may
discern the power that subordinate Commanders have to oblige their Superiors.

VI. What power they have over their Inferiors.
Now let us see what power they have over their Inferiors. And surely it is
not to be doubted but that a General has a power over his Soldiers, and a
Magistrate over his Citizens, as to those Acts that are usually subject to
their Command; but not otherwise, without their consent. On the contrary, an
Agreement made by a General or a Magistrate in such things as are merely
profitable, shall wholly bind their Inferiors. For this is sufficiently
warranted by their Office and Authority; yea, and in such things also as are
burdensome and chargeable, so as those burdens be such only as have been
usually exacted; but as to those that are extraordinary, they stand not obliged
without their own consents and acceptance: Which things are very agreeable to
what we have already from the very Law of Nature proved, Lib. 2. c. 12. 18.
concerning a stipulation made in the behalf of a third person. But these
Generals will receive a clearer light in the handling of these Particulars.

VII. It is not in the power of Generals to make a Peace;
It belongs not to a General to look into the Causes or consequences of a War,
it being his Duty carefully to manage the War, but not to conclude it; yea,
though he have the greatest power that can be given him by his Commission, yet
shall it be understood of the conduct of the War only, Neque enim nos Jus
habemus ordinandi res Imperatoris, For neither have we any power to dispose of
what only belongs to the Emperor (says Belisarius to the Goths.) Thus
Agesilaus answered the Persians, De Pace constituendi Jus est penes Civitatem,
It is only in the power of the Commonwealth to make Peace. And therefore the
Peace which Albinus made with Jugurtha, withour Order from the Senate, the
Senate broke, as Salust informs us. Thus likewise Livy, Qui rata ista pax, quam
non ex authoritate Senatus, non jussu populi Romani peregerimus? What stability
can there be in that Peace which is made without any Order or Decree, either of
the Senate or People of Rome? And therefore neither did that Promise made at
Caudis, nor that made at Numantia, bind the people of Rome, as we have
elsewhere said. And thus far is that of Posthumous verified, If there be any
thing whereunto a People may be obliged, they may be also obliged to all
things; that is, to all things that concern not the Conduct of War. And this is
apparent by what has been already said about Surrenders, and about Sponsions
made for the leaving or burning of Cities, and concerning the change of
Government.

VIII. But it is to grant Truces:
To grant Truces is in the power, not of a General only but, of inferior
Commanders; that is, to such as they either assault or hold besieged, so far
forth I mean as it shall concern themselves and their Forces. For other
Commanders are not thereby obliged, as we may-learn from the examples of Fabius
and Marcellus, recorded by Livy. Lib. 24.


IX. But not to dispose of Men, Empires or Lands.
On the other side, to dispose of Men, Empires or Lands is not in the power of
Generals; and therefore was Tigranes dispossessed of Syria by the Senate,
although it had been given him by Lucullus Just. l. 40.
. Neither was it in the power of Massinissa to release Sophonisba, whom he had
taken in War; because (as Scipio pleaded) She was under the power, and at the
discretion of the people of Rome Live. l. 30.
. But over the rest of the spoil the General has some kind of Right, yet not
so much by virtue of his Authority as by the custom of Nations, whereof we have
discoursed sufficiently before. But as to such things as are not actually
possessed, they are wholly in the Generals power to forgive; because it is
frequently seen, that both Men and Cities are willing to surrender themselves
upon condition of their lives or their liberties, or sometimes that their Goods
may be preserved; concerning which, the present state of things will not permit
so much delay, as to expect the Prince or the Peoples pleasure. And by a parity
of reason, the same power may be granted to an inferior Commander concerning
such things as are particularly committed to his Conduct. There were some Roman
Soldiers that had escaped out of the Battle at Thrasymenes, to whom Maharbal
in Hannibal's absence had granted leave to depart, not with life only, but,
laying down their Arms, unstript; whom notwithstanding Hannibal detained,
pretending, That Maharbal had no power to grant such a Pass without his
knowledge. Upon which fact of Hannibal Livy gives his censure thus, Punica
Religione servata Fides, That he kept his Faith like a Carthaginian: Wherefore
we must consider Cicero rather as an Orator than a Judge, who pleading before
the Senate for Rabirius, endeavored to persuade them, That Saturninus was
lawfully killed by him, notwithstanding that Marius the then Consul had drawn
him out of the Capitol with the promise of life. For, says he, without a
Decree of the Senate, who could give indemnity? as if the Faith given by Marius
did oblige himself only. Not considering that Marius by his Commission was
empowred to use all lawful means, whereby as well the Majesty as the Empire of
the Romans might be preserved. Neither can it reasonably be denied, That the
Right of pardoning Offenders, if by that means the Commonwealth may be secured,
must needs be comprehended under the Consular Power, which among the Romans was
ever accounted the greatest; as Salust testifies in the Wars of Catiline.

X. Such Agreements are to be taken in a strict sense.
Moreover, in these Agreements made by principal Commanders, because they
govern not their own, but the Affairs of the State, the strictest
interpretation that the nature of the Contract will bear is to be followed,
lest thereby Princes be bound to grant more than happily they would, or their
Generals damnifie themselves in the execution of their Office.

XI. How a Surrender accepted by a General is to be understood.
So he that is accepted of upon an absolute Surrender, shall be judged to
submit himself wholly to the will of the Conqueror, whether it be of the King,
or of the People that maintain the War; Examples whereof we have in Gentius
King of Illyrium, and Perseus King of Macedonia, of whom the former yielded
himself to Anicius, the latter to Paulus.

XII. How that caution, If the King or the people please, is to be understood.
Wherefore, if this Clause may be added to the Contract, namely, That it shall
stand good if the Prince or the People shall think fit; as of such we may read
in diverse Histories, diverse Sponsions. It will so far provide for the Generals
safety, that in Case that Agreement shall not be confirmed by the Supreme
Power, he himself shall be indemnified, unless it be in that wherein he shall
clearly be enriched.

XIII.
And they who have engaged themselves to deliver up a Town, may dismiss their
Garrisons; as we read in Livy the Locrians did.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Faith given in War by private Men.
I. That Faith given in War by private men binds not, confuted. II. Faith given
to Pirates and Thieves, how far binding: III. Minors herein not exempted: IV.
Whether an error does excuse us. V. The Objection drawn from public profit,
answered. VI. These applied to our Faith given to return into Prison. VII. Or
not to return unto such a place; Nor to bear Arms against such a Party. VIII.
Faith given not to make an escape. IX. A Prisoner taken in War, cannot yield
himself to another. X. Whether private men may be compelled by their Sovereign
to perform what they have promised. XI. What interpretation such Contracts will
admit. XII. What is to be understood concerning Life, Apparel, the coming of
Aids, etc. XIII. What is meant by returning back unto the Enemy. XIV. In
Agreements made, Not to surrender if just Aids come, how to be understood. XV.
The manner of the Execution makes no Condition. XVI. Concerning Hostages given
to perform such Agreements.
I. Faith to be kept even with Enemies by private men:
THAT Saying of Cicero is very well known, Etiam, si quid singuli, temporibus
adducti Hosti promiserint, est in eo ipso Fides servanda; Whatsoever any
private person, being urged by the necessity of the times, shall promise to his
Enemy, even in that very thing ought he to preserve his Faith. Now whereas he
says [any private person] it is plain that it matters not whether he be a
Soldier or a Citizen; for Faith ought to be kept with an Enemy by both.
Strange it is then that any man, expert in the Laws, should averr, Bartol. in
L. Conventio.
That Faith in public Agreements ought strictly to be kept, but not in
private. For if private men have Rights peculiar to themselves, which they may
dispose of as they please. And if an Enemy be capable of those Rights, what
should hinder but that these private men may for their lives or liberties
engage those? Whereunto we may add, That unless this be granted, many Murders
would daily be committed; yea, and many men kept in perpetual bondage: For
neither could the lives of many men be otherwise preserved, nor their liberty
procured, if no Faith privately made were to be kept with Enemies.

II. Even with Pirates and Thieves, and how far forth.
Yea, and not only with such as the Law of Nations accounts Enemies, but even
with Pirates and Thieves, are we to keep our private Faith no less than if it
were public; as we have elsewhere proved Book 3. Chapter 19. Sect. 2.
, with this only difference, That in Case any promise shall be extorted from us
by an unjust fear, impressed by him to whom the promise is made, the Promiser may
demand restitution; which if refused, he may take by himself: which by the Law
of Nations we cannot do, if that fear proceed from a public War. But in Case
such a promise be confirmed by an Oath, it must necessarily be kept, if we
would avoid the sin of perjury; which if committed against a public Enemy, is
punishable by man; but if against Pirates or Thieves, it is connived at; yet
not that it is then justifiable, but merely in detestation of their condition
of life, who are to receive the benefit thereof.

III. Minors not herein exempted.
Neither may we in this Case exempt Minors, if they be of such capacity as to
understand what they promise; for the privileges indulged unto them spring
only from the Civil Law, whereas we respect only the Law of Nations.

IV. Whether an error do excuse us.
As to those promises made through error or misbelief, we have already
declared, That we have a power to retract them, when that which was erroneously
believed was, as it were, the Condition of the promise; as when a man believing
his own Son to be dead, adopts another to be his Heir.

V. The Objection drawn from public profit, answered.
B. 2. chapter 11. 6.
But how far forth the power of private men extends in making any Contract with
an Enemy, is a Question of greater difficulty. Certain it is, That no private
man can alienate that which is public. For if so great a power be not to be
given to a General, much less to private men; as is elsewhere proved Chapter 22.
Sect. 7.
. And yet what Contracts private men may make with an Enemy concerning their
own private affairs, whether actions or things, may very well be doubted;
because we cannot well grant these to our Enemies without endamaging our own
Party: Whence it will appear, That all such Contracts made are unlawful, as
well with Citizens, in respect of that supereminent power their City has over
them, as with mercenary Soldiers, in respect of their Military Oath. But yet
we must know, That such Agreements being made to prevent a greater or more
certain mischief, are to be reckoned rather as beneficial than destructive,
even to the Public. For always a lesser evil being compared with a greater,
has the appearance of good; according to that Saying of him in Appian, Of
evils the lesser is most eligible. And yet neither can that bare Faith whereby
a man does not utterly renounce all power that he has over himself, and all
that he has; nor can the public benefit, without the Authority of a Law, be
of that efficacy as to make void that which is done, so as it shall have no
effects of a just Right, though we should grant, That that which was promised
was contrary to his Duty that promised it. The Law indeed may take away this
power from its Subjects, whether they be Natives or Sojourners; but it does not
always do so, for it spares Citizens. Neither indeed can it always do it; Book
1. Chapter 4. Sect. 7. 21. Book 2. Chap. 14. Sect. 12.
for humane Laws (as we have already said) do then bind when made after an
humane way: but do lose their binding power when they impose such things as are
either altogether unreasonable, or unnatural. For those Laws or particular
Mandates which do manifestly enjoin such things, are not to be either held or
obeyed as Laws. For all general Laws are to be construed with so much favor to
humanity,
as not to bind in Cases of extremity. But if that act which by any Law or
Precept was prohibited, and though done, declared to be void, might with equal
Right be so prohibited; then shall that act of a private person be altogether
void, yet may that man be justly punished, because he promised that which he
had no Right to perform, especially if being bound by Oath he shall do it.

VI. This applied to a Captive promising to return into Captivity:
A promise made by a Prisoner to return into Prison is deservedly binding,
because it renders not his Condition worse than it was: and therefore that fact
of Regulus was not only glorious, but just; for as Cicero well observes,
Regulus ought not by his perjury to interrupt that general Traffic and
Commerce of War, or to break those mutual Covenants and Conventions made
between Enemies; yea although, as Horace speaks, -- He could not choose but know
The tortures threatened by his Barbarous Foe.
For even when he did engage himself by promise to return, he was not ignorant
what they might do. So of those ten Captives sent to Rome, eight of them
denied, That they had any Right to recover their Estates by Postliminy, being
bound by Oath to return back; Lib. 7. c. 18.
as we may read in Gellius.

VII. Or to such a place, or not to take Arms.
Some Prisoners are set at liberty upon their promise, That they will not
return to such a place, or that they will never more bear Arms against them,
under whose power they then are: An example of the former we may find in
Thucydides, where the Ithomenses engaged themselves to the Lacedaemonians to
depart out of Peloponnesus, and never to return thither again. And of the
latter, Examples are now very frequent; an ancient Example whereof is left us
by Polybius, where we find that the Numidians were dismissed by Amilcar, Goth. l.
2.
upon Condition, That none of them should ever engage in War against the
Carthaginians. The like Condition we find imposed on the Heruleans in
Procopius; yet there are that hold such an Agreement to be void, as being
contrary to the Duty we owe unto our Country. But to this I answer, as before,
That not every thing that we do contrary to our Duty is presently void.
Besides, it is not against our Duty to procure our own liberty by such a
promise; because, being already under the power of the Enemy until we are
dismissed, we are as useless to our Country as if we were dead: wherefore our
Countries condition cannot be made worse by such a promise.

VIII. Not to fly.
Some there are that engage themselves not to make their escape; and herein
also Faith is to be kept, though when we made that promise we were under
restraint: though some there are that hold otherwise. For by this very promise
either our lives are sometime preserved, or we enjoy the more liberty. But yet
if after this promise made, we are still kept under a closer restraint, we are
thereby discharged of our promise, if it were made upon Condition that we
should not be so bound.

IX. A Captive taken by one, cannot yield himself to another.
It is but a foolish Question that some make, Whether he that is taken Prisoner
by one, may yield himself Prisoner to another. For it is too clear, That no man
can take away that Right which another man has gained by any Contract that he
can make: For by the very Right of War, or partly by the Right of War, and
partly by the Grant of him that maintains the War, according to what we bave
already said, A Prisoner taken in War is his that takes him.

X. Whether private men may be compelled by their Prince to perform what they
have promised,
As concerning the effects of such Agreements there is a notable Question,
namely, Whether private men, in Case they neglect to perform what they have
promised, may be compelled thereunto by their superior Power? Whereunto the
best Answer is, That they may, but in a solemn War only; because they that make
War, are bound by the Law of Nations each to other to do that which is right
and just, even concerning the facts of private men; as if an Ambassador being
publicly sent from an Enemy, should by a private person be assaulted.
Wherefore, that motion which Cornelius Nepos made, was assented unto by many of
the Roman Senators, as Gellius testifies, namely, That those two of the ten
Captives, who being bound by Oath to make their returns, refused, should by a
strong Guard be conducted, and delivered up to Hannibal, especially considering
that the same Senate had, not long before, compelled those to return whom King
Pyrrhus had dismissed upon the like Conditions.

XI. What interpretation we should give to such a Contract.
Concerning the interpretation. of some words in such an Agreement, we are to
be guided by those Rules which we have often recited, that is to say, We ought
not to recede from the proper signification of the words, unless it be to avoid
some absurdity that would from thence follow; or that we be induced thereunto
by some other very strong conjectures: and where the words are ambiguous, that
we incline to that sense that makes most against him who gives the Law.

XII. How these words [Life, Garments, the coming of Aids] are to be understood.
As he that covenants for his life only, has no Right to his liberty; under
the name Apparel we are not to comprehend Arms: Aids are then said to come
when they are in sight, though they do nothing; for their appearance has some
kind of efficacy.

XIII. Who may be said to return to the Enemy.
But he cannot be said to return to the Enemy, who returning privately,
presently departs: For our promise to return is not fulfilled, until we have
put our selves under the same power of the Enemy as we were when we promised to
return. The contrary interpretation Cicero accounts to be merely delusive, and
foolishly crafty, introducing fraud, and sometimes perjury. And Gellius calls
it a fraudulent Cheat, always branded by the Censors with reproach, and the
persons that made use thereof rendered intestable.

XIV. Succors, when said to come.
In Agreements made, Not to surrender in case just succors should come within
such a time to their relief, such succors are to be understood as are
sufficient to repel the Enemy, and secure us from farther danger; four Examples
whereof are recorded by Procopius. Goth. l. 3.


XV. That which relates to the manner of the execution is no Condition.
This also deserves to be observed, That if any thing shall be agreed on
concerning the manner of the execution, that shall be annexed unto the
Agreement as a Condition. As for example, In Case a Safe Conduct be granted to
such a place, and that place before we can arrive thither, happen to be in the
possession of the Enemy, the Agreement is not fulfilled until we come where we
may be in safety.

XVI. Of Hostages to perform such Covenants.
As to Hostages, we are to be guided as abovesaid; sometimes they are but
Sureties for the acts of their Principal; but yet it may be so agreed that the
Obligation should be disjunctively understood, that is to say, That either such
a thing shall be done, or the Hostages may be detained. But if the meaning be
doubtful, we must incline unto that which is most natural, which is, That they
shall be held as Sureties only, until such things shall be performed.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Faith tacitly given.
I. How Faith may be given by silence. II. An example in one desiring to be
received into protection by any Prince or People. III. In another that either
demands or admits of a parley or treaty. IV. That it is lawful for either party
during a treaty to promote his own interest, so that he hurt not him with whom
he treats. V. Of dumb signs which by custom become significant. VI. Of a
silent approbation of something demanded. VII. A punishment when it may be
presumed to be remitted by silence.
I. Faith given by silence.
THAT some things are by silence agreed on was not ill observed by Javolenus,
for this is usual in most agreements, whether they be public, private or mixed;
the reason whereof is, because it is our consent only however signified and
accepted that has the power to transfer our Right. But this consent of ours
may be otherwise expressed than by voices or letters, as we have already showed:
for some signs are naturally included in the act it self.

II. As in him that desires to be admitted unto protection;
As for example, He that coming from an Enemy, or as a Stranger, commits
himself to the Faith of another King or People, does without doubt tacitly
oblige himself, not to act any thing against that State under which he desires
protection; we cannot then agree with them, who justify that act of Zopyrus,
who not being able to conquer Babylon by force, cut off his own Nose, Ears, and
Lips, and so mangled, fled into the City, and persuaded the Citizens that
Darius his Master had done it in revenge for speaking somewhat in their behalf;
and having thereby got into some place of eminent trust, betrayed the City unto
Darius: For Zopyrus his fidelity unto his Prince, could not justify his
perfidious dealings with them to whom he fled, and by whom he was received into
protection. The like may be said of Sextus the Son of Tarquin, who betook
himself for safety to the Gabii. Virgils censure upon the like fact of Sinon
was this, Now Graeci'an Treacheries view, and from this one,
Learn to avoid the rest. --


III. And in him that craves a Parley.
So he that demands or admits of a Parley, gives his Faith tacitly, that during
that Parley both Parties may be secure. Lib. 1.
Agathias condemns Ragnaris the Hun, for attempting to kill Narsetes in his
return from a Conference whereunto he had invited him. This Livy concludes to
be a manifest breach of the Law of Nations, when Enemies under the color of a
Treaty, shall lay wait to destroy each other, which he there styles, Colloquium
perfide violatum; A treaty most perfidiously broken. Live. 38.
Upon that fact of Cnaeus Domitius beforementioned in treacherously seizing
upon King Bituitus, whom he had first invited to a Parley, and afterward
entertained as his Guest, Valerius Maximus gives this censure: Nimia gloriae
cupiditas perfidum existere coegit; Lib. 10. c. 6.
His immoderate thirst after glory constrained him to be perfidious. Wherefore
I cannot but admire why he that wrote the eighth Book of Caesar's Gallick Wars,
rehearsing the like fact of T. Labienus, adds these words, Infidelitatem Comii
sine ulla perfidia judicavit comprimi posse; He conceived that Comius his
disloyalty might be thus suppressed without any imputation of Treachery.

IV. During a Parley each may promote his own interest, not hurting the other.
Neither may we wrest this tacit consent beyond what I have said; for if
carrying themselves inoffensively one toward another during the conference,
they can under the color of that conference divert their Enemies from their
Warlike Counsels, and in the mean time strengthen themselves and promote their
own affairs, this shall not be accounted treachery but policy, such as in times
of War are not lawful only but commendable: wherefore they that blamed King
Perseus for suffering himself to be deluded through hopes of Peace, had not so
great a regard to justice and fidelity, Live. l. 42.
as to the generosity of a mind emulous of Martial Glory, as may be
sufficiently collected from what has been already said concerning the deceits
and stratagems usual in War. Such was that stratagem wherewith Asdrubal
preserved himself and his Army out of the Ausetane Forests. And that also
whereby Scipio African the Elder, See Bo. 3. c. 1.. 6. etc. Livy l. 26. lib. 30.
discovered the situation of Syphax his Camp, both which we find recorded by
Livy, whose example L. Sulla also followed in the social War at Esernia, as
Frontinus informs us.

V. Of dumb Signs which by custom are significant.
There are also some dumb signs, which through custom are significant, as
testifying the consent of the will; as of old the branches of Olives, and among
the Macedonians the erection of Pikes; among the Romans the covering of their
heads with their Shields, these were then the usual signs of submission and
rendition: So also was the folding of the hands behind them among the Persians;
and the turning of their Shields and Ensigns downwards among the Romans, Lib.
18. Lib. 26. Lib. 22.
as Ammianus testifies. The Germans, and from them some other Nations, express
their submission by the holding forth of Herbs or Grass, as Pliny tells us. And
they that yield themselves to the Conqueror, do usually cast away their Arms,
and beg mercy, as Servius notes upon Virgil. But he that would signify his
acception of a surrender, whether he be bound to give quarter, and how far
forth, we may inform our selves by what has been said above. In our days the
hanging forth of a white Flagg is a tacit sign that a Treaty is demanded: So
among the Northern Nations is the kindling of a fire, as Johannes Magnus
relates. Pliny l. 15. c. 30.
The like does Pliny write of the Laurel, all which according to the customs
of several Nations, are no less significant, and consequently as obligatory, as
if they were expressed by words and voices.

VI. Of a tacit approbation of something demanded.
A Sponsion made by a General, how far forth it may be believed to be tacitly
approved of by the Prince or People, we have already declared Bo. 3. chapter 4..
15. and Bo. 2. chapter 15.. 17.
; as namely when both the act is sufficiently known, and thereupon some thing
done or not done, whereof no other reason can be given, but what proceeded from
their consent to that promise or agreement.

VII. Punishments when tacitly remitted
We cannot conclude that a punishment is remitted, because it is for a time
dissembled or connived at; but some other act must necessarily intervene, which
either by it self may argue, either a perfect reconciliation, as when a League
of friendship is made with such a man; or at least that the person offended
has so great an opinion of the virtue or the valor of the person punishable,
that what he formerly did, deserves to be pardoned, whether this opinion be by
words expressed, or by such other means as are usually taken to signify as much.

VIII. Whether the actors being pardoned, the instigators be also acquitted.
Another Question we find discust by Polybius, namely, Whether a punishment
being remitted to them that did the mischief, may be judged to be remitted to
them that commanded it to be done; which I conceive it ought not, for, Singulos
tenent sua delicta; Every Fox ought to pay his own skin to the fleaer, and
every offender bear his own punishment.

A TABLE put Alphabetically, guiding to the PRINCIPAL MATTERS and WORDS
contained in the TREATISE.
A.
ABraham declaring Sarah to be his Sister, did not deny her to be his Wife page
438 Abraham by the light of Nature made War upon the four Kings with Commission
from God, 13, 15. and gave the Tenth of the Spoil unto God page 468 Abraham's
Sons by Keturah had Legacies, no Lands page 125 Abraham assists Infidels in a
Social War page 185 The Absents Right devolves upon the Present page 114 The
Absent sometimes partake of the Spoil page 476 Absolutions and Dispensations
from Oaths, from whence they arise, 174. to whom they anciently belonged ibid.
Abstinence from spoiling a Country at Peace page 431, 432 Absurdities to avoid
conjectural Interpretations admitted, 197. or other improper or figurative page
192, 193 What is Accepted in full of a Debt, is a Discharge page 98 Acceptance
to a Promise that transfer a Right requisite, 154, 155. whether it be
necessarily to be made known to the Promiser page 155 Acceptance in the behalf
of another, of what force page 156 Accusations criminal by none but Persons
Authorized page 374 Acquisitions by War peculiar to a solemn War 480. naturally
just, 405. original Acquisitions page 88 Acquisitions improperly said to belong
to the Law of Nations page 134 To Actions two things excite, the goodness of
the end, and the facility of obtaining it page 419 Acts some, abhorred by
humane Nature page 6 Acts contrary to Oaths, sometimes sinful, sometimes void
page 173 Acts beneficent permutatory page 157 Acts diremptory, commutatory,
mixed page 158 Acts generally permitted to all, cannot justly be denied to any
without some Cause page 86 Acts in War, either public or private; what is
taken by the former is the States maintaining the War, what by the latter is
theirs that take it page 472 In such Acts of a King as private men do, the
Civil Law binds him, but not in such as he does as a King. page 177 Acts
against Conscience unlawful page 411 Acts not liable to humane Laws page 450
Acts of Kings, in which the Laws have power page 176 Acts internal of the mind
insufficient for alienation page 41 Act involuntary arising from voluntary,
naturally accounted as voluntary page 203 Acts inevitable to humane Nature not
subject to humane Laws, 374. nor such ^s are not directly or indirectly
destructive to humane Society page 375 Acts some in a Just War not internally
just page 498 Acts of prepensed ma^^^, are to be punished, -- of humane
frailty, and are to be chastised, -- of inevitable misfortune are to be
pardoned. page 500 Actors being forgiven, whether the Instigator be acquitted
page 370 (...) page 136 Admonitions concerning things done in an unjust War
page 494 Adopted Sons, what Right a man has over them page 115 Adultery,
Incest, etc. capitally punished before Moses page 16 Adultery to lie with a
Woman betrothed to another page 196 Of Adultery, he that puts away his Wife,
and he that marries her, both guilty by the Gospel page 106 In Adultery taken,
if the Husband kill the Wife, or the Wife her Husband, the Magistrate may remit
the punishment, but not the sin page 374 An Adulterer and an Adulteress, to
what obliged page 202 Aetolians, Soldiers of Fortune page 549 Age 30. years,
3. Ages 100. years page 99 The Agent unjust when the thing done is just, and so
on the contrary page 414, 415 Agreements, what are real and what personal, 194,
195. made by Generals to be understood strictly page 565 Agreements equal to be
accounted real, grievous if in doubt personal page 195 Agreements between
Generals, how they may bind their Sovereigns page 563 Aids when said to be
sent, 558. to send who excused page 198 Aids being promised on one side only,
are presumed to be at his charge that demands them page 193 Alexander called a
Robber or Pyrate page 70 Algerines Pirates page 493 Alienation, its Rights,
what naturally required to it, 118. it may be made two ways, by commutation,
and by succession 122. the whole cannot alienate its parts without consent page
118, 119 To Alienation, some requisites are merely from the Civil Law page 120
Aliment, in what sense due to our Children page 123 Altar of mercy at Athens
page 397 Alteration of Government, none without violent Commotions page 66, 67
Another what is, may be withheld to prevent danger to us page 434 For
Another's Debt, none bound naturally but the Heir page 403, 404, 446 When
Another's Goods may be taken for a just Debt page 122 (...) page 499 Ambition
emblem'd by Babel, which caused dispersion page 79 Ambition of a Neighbor
Prince to restrain, no ground of War page 100 Ammunition for War no lawful
prize in France 1543. page 436 Amphibologies frequently used by Christ, 441 in
some Cases commendable, in others impious, ibid. in Amphibologies, if our
intentions agree with either sense, though misunderstood, it is no lie, 440.
not to be used in sworn Leagues page 190 Ambassadors, see Ambassadors (...)
in force among the Athenians page 447 Anger, what page 364 Animals to all
Nature has given Arms page 12 Antiochus whether an Usurper page 60 Apostles,
their power whether of Divine Institution, 408. some of them traveled with
swords page 33 Against Apostates the Israelites might take Arms page 185
Apple Tree full of Fruit, so left in the midst of a Camp page 532, 533 Aptitude
distinguished from Right strictly taken, 201. it confers no Right ibid. Arbiters
either Moderators or Judges, 552. in Cases dubious tied up to Law, 553. not to
meddle with Possessions, ibid. succession, if in doubt, to be referred to them
page 131 By Arbitrament War sometimes ended. 552. a safe way to end
Controversies between Princes page 412, 413 Arcifinious Lands page 94 Arguments
on both sides equal, to whether to incline, 411. which in Morals are best page
412 Arms not to be used but against Arms, 504. not capable of Postliminy, and
why page 492 An Army when destroyed, 142. what numbers make an Army page 191
The word Arms, what it signifies page 192 The Arms and Colors of an Enemy to
use, lawful page 440 The word Art, how understood page 191 Articles of Peace
ought to be strictly kept, 536. they oblige all alike, 549, 550. the violation
of any one breaks the whole, ibid. how they are to be understood, a General
Rule page 546 Articles of Peace being made known, whether they bind the King in
Case of silence page 188 Articles of Peace broken through necessity, how taken
page 550 The Asian Custom of dividing the Spoil, 474. their Kings Absolute
Monarchs page 47 The Assertion of things to come how valid, 151. in what
different from a Promise page 444 Associates, one may compel another to keep
the League, 50. under the name of Associates who are meant, they only at
present, or they to come page 193 Associates ought to do each other Right,
their Subjects being accused page 49 Associates, when to be defended, 424. when
they partake of the Spoil page 478 Associates being invaded, when the Peace is
broken page 549 Associates in an unjust War obliged to damages, and sometimes
to punishments, 434. how the Controversies between them are to be adjudged page
50 Associates sometimes oppressed by Associates page 51 Of Associates which is
to be preferred page 187 Associates not named in the League, to aid them breaks
not the League page 193 Assassinating of a Prince though our Enemy privately,
not allowed by the Law of Nations page 462, 463 Atheists and such as deny Gods
Providence, to be persecuted in the name and behalf of humane Society page 388,
389 At Athens all that were unfortunately miserable found protection page 398
The Athenian Government Democratical, the Lacedemonian Aristocratical, and
accordingly the Conquered Cities formed their Government page 526 Authors of
War sometimes excusable, 502, 503. if it proceeded not from hatred, but
seduction page 12, 13 The Authors and Leaders punished severely, the rest
threatened but not punished page 501, 502
B.
BAlneary Thieves page 382 Baltic Sea, how far the Emperor's page 138
Banished, not subject to the power of their City page 115 Barbarians unjustly
accounted Enemies by the Grecians page 407 The Bargain naturally good from the
time of the Contract, but if twice sold, his Title is best that gets the first
possession page 161 Barklay's Opinion concerning resistance of the Supreme
Power in some Cases page 60, 63, 64 Bastards their Rights, 124. sometimes made
Legitimate, and how, ibid. sometimes admitted to succeed, 125. the Roman Laws
made no provision for them, nor Solons, 123. the Canon Law provides necessaries
for life only ibid. Of Battle, the time and place appointed page 454 Bees,
what is good for the Hive, is good for the Bees Pref. viii Beasts, their
outrage, whether to be imputed to their Masters, 204. from them some moral
duties may be learnt, Pref. iii, iv. not capable of Laws, 6. justice improperly
attributed to them, ibid. yet some resemblance they have of it, ibid. killed
not by way of punishment, but by our right of Dominion page 401 Beasts do some
of them abhor unnatural coitions, 108. to all God has given some Arms page 12
Beasts-wild, Birds, Fish, are naturally theirs that take them page 81
Benefactors in our Testaments, first to be gratified, and then Friends obliged
page 162 Benefits public preferred before private page 55, 56 Benefits, some
due even to the wicked by us Christians, 184. given by Kings, if to the public
damage, are not only to be revoked but made void, 179. given by Kings, whether
to last longer than their lives ibid. Benjamites, their controversy with the
Israelites page 169 Bigamy page 105, 106. Bituitus, betrayed by a pretense of
Parley page 569 Bishops office when opposed to Kings, 408. they may advise, but
not compel page 409 Bodies politic and natural, their difference page 117, 118
Bounds of Kingdoms if doubted, are presumed to be Arcifinious, 137. 138. they
change not, though the River changes page 95 Bonum and aequum (i. e.) the mere
Right of Nature page 208 The Brabantine Law, concerning the Children by a
second marriage page 125 Brethren coming from one common stock, are almost one
and the same page 126 Brother kills his Brother in the head of his Enemies
Troops, and demands his reward page 458 Buggerers may lawfully be killed page
72 Burial due to Enemies, 216. whether due to the notoriously wicked, 217. an
emblem of the Resurrection, 215. observed by Pismires, and Dolphins, and Bees
page 214, 215 To Bury him that was found dead the High Priest commanded, though
not otherwise to be present at a Funeral page 216. Burial, whether justly
denied to self-murtherers page 218 Burial, denied a just cause of War page 213,
214 Burial its right, whence ibid. A Bushel Roman, how much of ours page 521
C.
Celare what, not every thing hid that is not revealed page 159 Caesar in his
War destroyed 1192000 men page 421 Caesar forewarned of the Ides of March page
559 Calistratus misunderstanding the Oracle, instead of protection at Athens
found his Death page 398 Canaan not promised to any person but to the People
page 168 Canaanites capable of mercy if they yielded page 169 Canibals, and
Sacrificers of mankind destroyed page 384 Canons Ecclesiastical, of what use,
Preface xviii The twelfth Canon of Nice against War was occasioned by Licinius
his cruelty page 28, 29 Canons concerning the wasting of an Enemies Country
page 514 Canons concerning Slaves, how understood page 483, 484 Captives,
whether they may be at any time killed page 460 Against Captives redemption,
Laws unjust page 561 A Captives promise to return, binds him page 567 Captives
lose not their things if not found and taken, 562. when they may be put to
death page 508 Captives, and things not restored, unless so agreed, 489. their
Children Slaves page 481 To Captives taken in War, what in equity may be done
page 520 A Captive released for exchange, ought to return or pay his ransom,
his exchange being dead page 562 A Captive Woman, if her redeemer either marry
her or prostitute her Body, her ransom is lost page 490 Captives to take in
War, dow far lawful page 519 Captives to redeem, Vessels consecrate may be sold
page 216, 217 Captives, whether they may make their escape page 523 A Captive
who takes, has a Right to all he has so long as he keeps him page 489 A
Captive redeemed to serve his redeemer, how long page 490 A Captive may owe his
ransom to diverse, 562. his ransom agreed shall bind, though he be richer than
was believed ibid. A Captive is a perpetual hireling, whose ransom is paid by
his work page 519 Captivity better than death or desolation page 420 Captives
in a solemn War, Slaves, though they never acted hostility against us page 483
Captives taken in a public War, distinguished from such as are Slaves for
personal crimes page 519, 520 Captives, how long in equity they may be detained
page 519 A Captives allowance among the Romans how much it contains of ours
page 521 Captives not exempted from the license of War, 460. yet to be spared,
page 506, 507 Captives redeemed by the valor of Soldiers, not taken but
received page 491 Captivity arising from an unjust War, unjust page 495
Captivity, into what now changed page 484 See Slaves Capua dissolved page 142
Carneades holding all lawful that was profitable, confuted, Pref. iii, vii. his
Arguments against Justice answered ibid. Carthage to be free, how understood,
194. the Captive promising to return, and failing, sent back by the Romans page
167 The Cauchi, a People of Germany, well disciplined yet always at Peace page
406 Cavils concerning interpretation of Articles page 191, 194 Causes of a just
War Defense, Recovery, Punishment,
page 70, 71 Without Cause to make War, not cruelty but madness page 405 Cause
may be good, but the manner of its prosecution unlawful page 401 Causes of a
War unjust page 404 Causes of a just War three page 70 Causes and pretenses
distinguished page 404 Cautions to limit the Law of necessity page 82
Certainty, there cannot be the same in Morals as in Mathematics page 410
Change of Counsels is not evil if not from better to worse page 151 To Change a
Man's will is natural ibid. Change of Seat no loss of Empire, 142. no more is
the Change of Government page 143 The Charges of the War may be required from
the Authors of it page 518 Charity sometimes forbids what Law permits, 434. its
Rules extend farther than those of Justice page 518 Charity mitigates
punishments, unless hindered by a greater Charity page 381 Charity should be
extended by Christians as Christ extends his Grace to all men page 186 Children
born of Captives, how far Slaves, 523. not to be punished for their Parents,
401. in this Case God no Precedent for us, and why, 399, 400, 402. how long
they owe Obedience to Parents, 104. grown to discretion have a moral power over
their own actions, and how, ibid. even of Traitors spared by good Princes, 402,
403. to succeed their Parents dying intestate, 123. to nourish their Parents
like the Stork ibld. The Child to follow the Condition of the Mother only, not
natural, 133. why threatened to be visited for their Parents page 402 Choice of
the Empire, not in the Citizens of Constantinople, but of Rome page 144 Christ's
actions not all imitable by us page 34 Christ not Moses's Interpreter only page
16, 17 Christians, whether they may join with Infidels in a Social War page 185
Christian Religion inoffensive by the testimony of Heathens, 390. being
grounded on matter of fact, none to be thereunto compelled page 389, 390
Christians to persecute as such, a just Cause of War, 390. not to be impressed to
serve in War against their will, 431. should confederate against the Enemies of
Christ, 186, 187. swear by the Creatures in reference to God, 171. not to fight
against Christians under Heathens, 29, 30. make not Christians Slaves, nor
Turks Turks, 414. to inflict capital punishment, how not safe for them, 373.
should not resist persecuting Emperors, 57, 58. ought to assist Christians
persecuted for Religion, 186, 187. whether they may enrich themselves by the
Spoil of Enemies, 535. whether they may resist in Cases of extreme necessity,
page 60, 61 Christians even unarmed make War page 431 Churches and things
consecrate to be spared page 414, 515, 516 Circumcision, to whom it belonged,
9. why Strangers were circumcised, ibid. not necessary to salvation the Jews
confess ibid. A City what, 8. in what sense said to be free, 407. their Right
over their Citizens page 114 A City has no power over her Banished, 115.
revolting to receive, is against the Law of friendship page 510 Cities and
Rivers immortal, 141. being by War conquered, whether it ceases to be a City
page 485 A Citizen not to depart till his part of the public Debts be paid,
115. nor in a Siege till he has substituted another, ibid. being delivered up
but not received, may return and remain a Citizen, 396. whether they may
forsake their City page 115 A Citizen, though innocent, whether to be compelled
to deliver himself up to preserve his City page 423, 424 Cities not to be
punished if the Criminal appear in Judgment, 396. though unjust, cease not to
be Cities page 451 A Citizen taken by Pirates, loses not his freedom, 456. and
a Servant, how they differ, 486. of Rome, all that live within the Pale of the
Empire page 450 The Citizens Right over their Magistrates page 201 A City, how
distinguished from a Company of Pirates, 451, 452. War worse than Tyranny page
65 Civil Power, wherein it consists, 37. Empire gained by War and its Rights,
485. Law may bind or restrain from that which Nature leaves free, 81. Laws,
some unjust page 127 Claim from a Foreigner everlasting 182, 183. whose best,
his that gives the matter, or form page 139 Clergymen exempted from War page
67 Clemency most becoming a Prince, 382, 383. to be used to the Conquered, the
Conqueror secured, 527, 528. seen in the mitigation as well as in the
remission of punishment, 382. of the Pharisees in punishing, 371. Motives
thereunto, 417, 418. Emperors famous for Clemency, 501. a great Ornament to
Princes where their injuries are done against themselves page 417, 418, 554,
etc. Colleges spared by the Philistines page 506 Colonies have the same Right
their Mother Cities have, 143. not governed absolutely by their Mother Cities,
49. yet by the same Laws and Magistrates, 142, 143. usually the rise of Free
States page 143, 144 A Command given for one thing, whether fulfilled by
another more profitably, 197. without it he that kills an Enemy, to what
obliged page 535, 536 Commanders inferior in some Cases may make War, 35. how
far they may bind their Soldiers page 564 Command in War may be either general
or special page 535 Commands of a General must not be disputed, but obeyed page
197 Commands distinguished from Counsels Pref. xviii Of Commerce, the most
ancient way is by exchange, 157. the liberty, and for it Tolls due page 84, 85.
A Commonwealth is such, though corrupt page 451 The Common safety sometimes
preferred before our own page 73 Community, their Rights over their Members
page 3 A Community may arise by giving a new Form to the matter of another,
139. or through commixture, according to the proportion of either ibid.
Communication of crimes between Kings and Subjects page 398, 399 Communication
of things useful to others, and not damageable to our selves, charitable page
82 To Compel stands not with the nature of an Inferior, 46. being compelled,
they that war against us to be spared page 498, 499 Compensation due to
Subjects, whose Goods are alienated for public Peace page 545, 546 Concubinary
Marriages, see Marriages Concubinate a kind of natural Marriage page 112 A
Concubine who, and how allowed page 113 Conditions, who offers, or who accepts,
which makes the Contract page 199 Conditions hard imposed on the weaker Party
or the Conquered page 183 This Condition, things standing as they do, when
tacitly understood page 197 Conditions not fulfilled on the one side,
discharges the Promiser page 541 Conditions when severe seldom lasting page
529 A Confederate on unequal Conditions may obtain the Supreme Power page 48
Confederates, their differences how determined page 49, 50 Confederates engaged
in several Wars, and both demanding War, which we should assist page 187
Confederates, one may be assisted against the other, unless expressly forbid by
former agreement, 424. in their behalf War lawful in a just cause, ibid. the
ancienter to be preferred, caeteris paribus, unless in one case page 412, 413
Confederates, not to be assisted in cases desperate: and why page 424
Conjectures, useful when words admit of diverse senses page 191 Conjectures
restraining promises how guided page 193 Conjectures from the matter, effects,
things conjoined page 191, 192 The Conqueror may give the Conquered what he
pleases, 486. as some part of the Government, or some liberty or freedom in
Religion page 527 The Conqueror may be secured, by imposing Garrisons or
Tribute on the Conquered page 526 That the Conqueror may live securely is the
end of War, and how this may be done without cruelty page 524, 525 Who is
Conqueror in single Combats page 552 To the Conqueror to submit better than
desolation page 119 The Conqueror may impose what Laws he pleases, 485.
crowned in the pavilion of the Conquered, 479. more safe in a free than
compulsory obedience page 527 Conscience not bound by some Laws page 482, 483
Consecrated Plate sold for what uses page 216, 217 Consent gives signification
to words, not things page 438 Constantine page 28 A Contract made with a
Servant binds his Master, 147. binds according to Laws of the City wherein it
is made, but not if made on the Sea or in a Desert page 152 Contracts
permutatory that separate the parts have three heads, Do ut des, etc. 157.
mixed, principally, or by accession, and such as introduce Communion page 158,
159 In Contracts, a just proportion is to be observed, 160. all errors and
mistakes are to be rectified, ibid. The Contracter with another for what is his
own, releaseth his Right page 98 The Contracts of Kings and Free States, not
always interpreted according to the Roman Laws page 199 Of a Contract, the
writing is but a lasting Monument, and no part ibid. A Contract in doubt is
perfect before the delivery of the writing, when otherwise it must be so
expressed ibid. Controversies in War, not determinable by the Civil Law, 122.
concerning things taken in War, shall be judged in any Nation at Peace, where
they were taken, according to their customs, page 488 Corn, and other things
useful in War, may be sold to the Enemy to pay Soldiers, to destroy them were
madness page 513, 514 Of Corn sown on another Lands by mistake, whose the
Fruits are page 139 Conventions public, how, and when divided page 180 In
Councils General, a King newly made, shall have the same place as the People
being free had before page 143 Counsel of wise men, how prevailing page 25 The
thoughts of Counter-passion restrains from wrong doing page 371 Counter-passion
has no equality, if the nocent and innocent suffer alike page 381 Crassus, how
he gained his great wealth page 535 Creatures naturally wild are for the most
part theirs that take them page 469 Cruelty arising from vain fear page 72
Cruelty of the Roman Generals in their triumphs page 461 Custom, and
opportunity, two great incentives to sin, unless curbed by severe Laws page 381
Customs Civil, sometimes mistaken for the Law of Nature page 385 Cyrus his
judgment concerning the two coats page 4
D.
IN Dearth, Strangers forbid Corn, yet Sojourners not then to be expelled page
86. Death voluntary in defense of Chastity commended, 219. in some cases
allowed by the Jews, as the Death of Sampson, Saul, etc. ibid. termed a
dismission, ibid. the only good thing to an incorrigible offender page 272, 273
Day, until such, in a Truce whether exclusively or inclusively to be
understood, 562. in a League how understood page 191 Damage, a demendo (i. e.)
from taking away a man's Right, 200. which may be either in the things or
profits of them, 201. given by doing or not doing, ibid. directly or by
consequence page 400 Damages done by another, and the obligation thence, 200.
done to our honor and fame how repaired, 204. who occasion, bound to
reparation, 200. if done in War, no action arises, 547. in War remitted, Peace
being agreed page 546, 547, Dangers, to prevent by Treachery, Poison, etc.
whether it justify the killing of any man, 72. to prevent we are sometimes
enforced on sin, 378. in things equally doubtful, choose that which has least
danger page 412 David, how far forth he resisted Saul page 60 Debts not
strictly due, not to be recovered by War page 409 Debts due to the Conquered,
may be remitted by the Conqueror page 410, 411 For Debts of the Prince, the
Subjects Goods liable, 446. upon breach of Faith not to be sued for, 211, 212.
of one private man, anoh ers Goods not obliged page 446 Debts of mercy,
liberality, and gratitude, not recoverable by Law page 151 Decalogue, the four
first precepts explained page 387, etc. Deceit sometimes taken in a good sense,
437, 438. Dolus malus taken for that which is repugnant to natural Right page
147 A Deceitful Contract, to what restitution bound page 203 Dedition,
conditional and its effects, 183. pure how far it extends, 553. what in equity
is to be imposed on them 553, 554 See Surrender. Defensive Acts break not the
Peace page 548 Defense we owe to the Innocent, and when page 424 Defendant in a
just Cause gathers courage from a good Conscience page 76 Defense in a public
War, ibid. of our Limbs, whether it justify the killing of any man, or of
Chastity page 72 He whose Duty it is to Defend others, ought not rashly to run
himself into danger page 73 Defensive War lawful, yet against the Aggressor
only; and where the danger is certain, and not opinionative only page 71, 76
Defense in those who have given just Cause of War unlawful, unless ample
satisfaction be first tendered page 77 In Defense of our Goods, to kill a man
naturally lawful page 74 Delays in performing Articles of Agreement, when only
to be admitted page 548 Delivery not necessary to transfer Dominion by the Law
of Nature page 140 Degrees of things to be beloved page 23 Demosthenes's
Apologue of Wolves and Sheep page 423 The Denial of just things justifies the
taking of them page 86 War is sufficiently Denounced, though at the next
Garrison page 454 Denunciation, its form, 453. Conditional requires either
Restitution, Reparation, or Punishment, 453. to be made by him that requires
satisfaction page 453, 454 Before Denunciation to make War, unjust, 452. why
necessary to a Solemn War, 454. absolute, when necessary, 453. whether
necessary, the Rights of Ambassadors violated page 455 War Denounced against a
Prince is so against his Subjects and Adherents page 454 War without
Denunciation, in what Cases lawful page 452 In Denouncing of War what Nature
strictly requires not, may be honestly and laudably done ibid. Deposited things
after confiscation, must be restored to the Exchequer, not to the owner page
147 The difference between things Deposited, lent, and pawned, and of their
obligations page 160, 161 Dereliction, when presumed, 98. of Empires examples
page 100 To Destroy things profitable to us and unprofitable to the Enemy,
folly, 511. multitudes without distinction, inhumane page 434 Desert places,
and Lands untilled, given to Strangers page 85 Things clearly Deserted are the
next occupants page 95 Despair makes Enemies invincible page 516 Not the bare
Detention, but the power to dispose of that which was another, makes it ours
page 122 The Detention of things taken in an unjust War, binds to restitution
page 496 Devils who worships, or men's vices, or that offers humane Sacrifices
to be persecuted by all page 389 Dictators of Rome had for a time Kingly power
page 40, 42 Differences between Princes, how composed page 412, 413 Diffidare,
what page 454 Disability in a Prince, supplied by a Viceroy page 145 Discipline
loose, no distinction between friends and foes, 533. makes Soldiers seem
Senators, 531, 532. military the end of the Roman and Spartan Laws page 524
Discovery of places pre-occupyed no cause of War page 406 Dispensation from
penal Laws, lawful, 377. distinguished from equity ibid. To Dispense with Oaths,
once in Princes, now in Ecclesiastics page 174 Dissimulation, whether lawful,
438. where truth is our guide and profit its companion, folly page 404 Divorce
permitted in most Nations page 106 The Divorced may marry after a set time, to
any save to him that p^t her away page 105 Dominion naturally, and by another
gained, 472. of Infants and Madmen, 89. conditional, 97, 98. distinguished from
its exercise, 52. external, 470. without internal, 482, 483. over Beasts page
401 In Doubtful cases what to do page 412 Servants in Doubt that the War is
just, what they ought to do page 429 Doubts, whence in morals they arise, 410
where we doubt of, we should forbear page 411 Drowned Lands to drain a time
prefixed, 137 lost if not drained or otherwise claimed in ten Years ibid. Due
taken in a twofold sense page 376 Duelling page 368 Duellum page 2 Duels, in
two cases lawful page 76 Duels, and combating to be avoided page 510 Dumb
signs, sometimes by custom significant page 570
E
EArth to Earth, 214. Judea called the midst of the Earth, 407. all added to
Earth, yet must be restrained to the Country spoken of ibid. Education, if bad
corrupts the natural constitution page 385 Education of King Ptolomie's Son
page 44 Ehud's fact, what page 66 Ambassadors sacred in all Nations page 206
Ambassadors resident, an upstart custom, 207, 208. they have no privileges
till admitted, 210. nor in another Territory without license, ibid. a twofold
Right due to them, Admittance and Indemnity, 206. in what case inviolable, in
what cases not, 208, 209. not admitted for three causes, 206. their Goods
secured against Creditors, 211. their Companions and Attendants, how far
protected page 211, 212 Ambassadors, if admitted, secured even among Enemies,
210. not liable to the Law of Retaliation, ibid. moving sedition may be sent
away, 208. performing the office, blameless, 200. in what case they may be
apprehended and killed, 208, 209. not admitted from Traitors, Pirates page 206,
207 Empires, some Patrimonial and Alienable, 42. how divided into parts, 46.
each part may have a Right to make War, 63, 64. it may be gained to the King or
People by long possession or prescription, page 100, 101. Empire of Rome
distinct from the French and Lumbards, 143, 144. whether universal page 407
Empire of Rome and Germany, whence they derive their Right page 143, 144 Empire
relates to Persons and Territories, 118. alienable with the consent of the
People, ibid. if great, hardly kept, 526. how far acquired by internal justice,
524. as in a King may be gained by War, 485. how firmly alienated for Peace
page 544, 545 Empire and Dominion how they differ, 88, 89 under one firmer,
than divided, 128. by a just War it may be lawfully acquired, 524. distinguished
from the manner of holding, 42. over some part of the Sea, without any other
propriety may be possessed: and how, page 91, 92, 93 Empire and Dominion when
they cease, 141, 142, 143. not changed with the imperial seat page 144 Empire
may be acquired either so far as it was in the conquered King, or absolutely
and so despotical page 485 The Empress Irene's design to divide the Empire
between her Sons page 127 Enemies to be buried page 216 Enemies are they that
denounce War, the rest are Thieves and Robbers and Pirates page 450 An Enemies
Country with, and how far it may be wasted page 511, etc. To Engross the Fruits
of one Nation, how far lawful page 87 To Enrich our selves with other men's
losses unnatural page 147 Ensigns of Sovereignty granted to a Prince of a free
People page 41, 42 Ensurances void, either Party knowing the Goods either to be
safe or lost page 164 Epicurus, taking away Religion, left nothing to Justice
but an empty name page 386 Equal Rates set upon things to be exchanged ibid.
Equality in Contracts, what page 159 Equality, what takes place in Acts merely,
or in part beneficent page 160 Equity takes place, where the Obligation is in
the literal sense, grievous and intolerable page 197, 198 Equitable Courts
necessary, 197. in what Cases especially ibid. Equity the Corrector in such
Cases wherein the Land by reason of its generality is deficient ibid. Equity,
what page 553 Equivocal expressions not admitted but upon great occasions, 440.
especially in Leagues page 191 Error, whether it makes void an Act, 151. in
some Points of Religion, whether punishable page 391, 392 An Error or mistake
unknown to either of the Contractors at the Contract-making must be rectified
page 160 Of Error the punishment is to be taught page 392 An Escape made by a
Captive, he recovers all he lost by Postliminy page 488 (...) page 534 Esseni
swear not, 220. they wholly abstain from War page 430 Evangelical Precepts,
whether comprehended in the Law of Nature page 16 Evidences no part of the
substance of Contracts page 199 Of Evil the least to be chosen, 411. has the
appearance of good page 488 Excursions above ten miles from the Camp, makes
what is taken, theirs that take it page 473 Executioner to be satisfied in the
Malefactors crime page 430, 431 Exheredation, 124. a Son exhederated, whether
any thing be due unto him, ibid. whether a King may exheredate his Son page 130
Exiles, their City has no power over them, 115 to inhabit any other Country
lawful page 85 Extremity of our Right not to be exacted by War page 518
F.
BY the Fact of another, none naturally obliged but the Heir page 446 Factors
and Masters of Ships, how far bound page 154 Faithfulness the foundation of
Justice page 151 Faith given to Subjects or Slaves, though Rebels, as such must
be kept page 539 Faith sometimes taken for a full persuasion of the mind page
411 Of Faith whatever is not, is sin ibid. Faith to be kept with the faithless,
173. with Pirates and Thieves upon Oath ibid. Faith given by Signs equivalent
to Oaths, 175. its breach, though by Oath, not punishable by humane Laws, and
why, 538. sometimes given by silence, 569. to be kept with Enemies of all
sorts, 536. even with Pirates and Tyrants, and when, 537. Objections answered
page 538 Faith not broken by a generous man, though provoked, 542. to be kept
with the perfidious, 540. and when not page 541 Whether private men may be
compelled to keep their Faith with an Enemy page 557, 558 Faith given in War by
private men to be kept, even to Pirates, Robbers and Tyrants, though given but
by Minors page 538 Fides Attica page 498 To preserve Faith, an Exhortation to
Kings page 571 False speaking to some Persons better admitted than
equivocations, etc. page 444 False speaking to Infants and Madmen no Lie page
442 Falsehood of Joseph, and the simulation of Solomon no frauds page 443
Falsehood may be sometimes expedient for the common safety ibid. False Prophets
page 392 Fate, how understood in the Roman Laws page 472, 473 Father of a
Family, what it signifies page 521 Fathers have as much power over their
Children as over Slaves page 104 The Fathers, the more Ancient the more
Authoritative, Pref. xix. in them three things observable page 25, 26, etc. A
Father, when he has power to sell his Son, 104. forfeiting his Estate, his
Children may be said to suffer, but not to be punished page 400 Fear uncertain
no ground of War page 71, 406 Where the Fear of loss is greater than the hopes
of gain, none will adventure page 419 By the Fear of War what is gained cannot
be recalled, yet from a Thief it may, if not bound by Oath ibid. Fee-farms and
Copyhold, why first granted, 129. this done first by the Germans page 38 Ferus
and Erasmus great Lovers of Peace, Pref. xii. their Opinion concerning War
refuted ibid. Feuds, 51. Empires may be so held from another, it implies
Obligations personal or real, but takes away no Right of Empire or Dominion
page 52 To Fight for Pay only, unlawful; but to receive Pay, being lawfully
called to fight, lawful page 426 No Fighting against Famine page 420 Firing of
Houses in War lawful page 434 Fish in Ponds, Deer in Parks held in propriety
page 135 Fish and Fowl, though naturally common, yet may the Owner of the Land
or Water forbid their taking page 81 Flight from Persecution, in what Case
lawful page 61 By Flight they that would save themselves in a Siege, by the
Hebrew Laws, might page 508 Force to repel with force naturally lawful, 14. not
all unjust, 12, 13. Force for punishment lawful page 434 By Force and Arms to
be thrust out of possession, what it signifies page 196 The Form of a
Commonwealth, how changed, 540. of denouncing of War page 70, 71 Foreigner
compared with a Proselyte, how they differ page 8 Forts of Friends weakly
guarded, may to prevent danger to our selves, be surprised by us page 82
Frailty humane and Fortunes instability, great Motives to clemency page 504
Frater, quasi fere alter page 417 Fraud consists in acts negative or positive,
438. whether in War lawful, 337. in its positive Acts distinguished, if by acts
into simulation, if in word into a lie page 338 A Free-pass how to be
interpreted, 560. it extends to Persons, Goods and Attendants page 561 Freedom
is either Personal or Civil page 42 A Free-pass dies with him that gave it,
561. if during pleasure only, how to be understood ibid A Free State, if power
over its Subjects page 201 A Free Nation is not subject to another page 49
French Kingdom anciently Elective, 144. their custom to avoid Civil War, 414.
distinct from the Romans, 144. divided into Eastern and Western, ibid. their
Succession Agnatical, 130. their custom concerning Captives page 484 Friends to
be assisted, if with our own inconvenience page 424 Friendship, to what Offices
it obliges, 550. the breach whereof dissolves Peace ibid. Fruits of any one
Nation to monopolize, whether and how far lawful page 87 Fruits with the thing
to be restored, 147. and what Fruits those are page 147, 148 Fruits of the
Earth not to be destroyed, if the Enemy may elsewhere be supplied page 513
Fugitives exempted from Postliminy page 491 Future things being contingent, not
worth Oaths page 175 Of Future things, three kinds of speaking, 151. a bare
Assertion, what and of what force ibid.
G.
GElderland, Rights concerning Islands and Increments page 138 A General, and a
Captain, how distinguished, 563, his power over his soldiers, 564. he may
manage the War but not conclude it, ibid. he cannot dispose of Men, Lands, or
Empire, 564. he might of the spoil among the Romans, 474. yet were some of them
very abstentious, 475. what power he had over the spoil page 565 A General not
transgressing his commission binds his Prince though it be contrary to his
private instructions, 564. but if beyond his commission, he binds not his
Prince but himself ibid. By a General, agreements made to be strictly
interpreted page 565 Generals may make Truces, so may inferior Officers, but
not Peace, ibid. may contract if profitably, and thereby bind both his Prince
and himself page 563, 564 Gentiles, and Greeks who, 8. not obliged by the
Mosaical Law page 9 Germans, anciently contented with one Wife, 106. they gave
their Servants Houses and Land for to supply them with Corn and Cattle page 38
Giants age, what it signified page 79 Gibeonites Peace with Joshua page 168,
169 God approves of the Right of the spoil in War, page 468 God, (...), in what
sense, 364. made all things for himself, ibid. visits the sins of Parents upon
their Children, by what Right, 402. his decrees and councils change not, 168.
cannot ly, 443. spares the nocent for the innocent, 434. his Right over Men
greater than ours over men, page 459 That there is a God proved, 387, 388. by
natural reason and universal tradition, ibid. God by his promise obliges
himself, 152. in Oaths both witness and avenger, 171. the best and most
powerful of all Beings, Pref. vi. how said to change and repent, 168. his love
no impediment to his justice, 23. sometimes said to deceive, but improperly,
168. his threatenings extend but to the fourth Generation: and why, 402. his
power over men's lives absolute, ibid. Good better than True: and why page 442 A
Good man does Good though provoked otherwise page 371 A Good that's general, to
be preferred before that which is private though our own, page 412, 423 The
Goods of Subjects, naturally liable to the Debts of Princes, page 447 Goods of
the innocent, balanced with the lives of the nocent, 74. Subjects how far in
the power of the Prince to make Peace, page 545 Goods of friends in an Enemies
ship, nor the Ship of our friends, fraught with Enemies Goods, are lawful Prize
page 470 Goods moveable when taken and when Land ibid. Goods of a Captive, are
his that takes him page 562 Goods of Subjects may be detained for a just Debt,
or in cases of necessity, but not as a punishment for another crime page 517,
518 Goods, not to be taken away with an intent to restore, unless in case of
necessity page 149 Gospel requires more than the Law of Nature, Pref. xviii.
commands us to love our Enemies, but not equally with Friends page 23 Gospel
adds new precepts and heightens the old page 17 Goths, moderate in pillaging
things sacred page 515 Government not at all established for the good of
Subjects, though most Empires are, 40. none without inconveniences, 46. the
best under a good King page 38 Government, where Despotical, is like that of a
great Family, 485. the present not to be altered, 100. mixed examples, 47. some
left to the Conquered, 527. that which respects the good of the People is
Monarchical, but that which respects the Prince only, Tyrannical page 485
Grants of a Prince bind his Successor, if there be any public reason for them,
179. when revocable and when not page 180 Gratitude preserves society, Pref. v.
to the Dead how it should descend, 126. to be preferred before Benificence page
124 Grecians had two Wives, 166. their custom concerning the spoil page 474
Guardians to King Ptolomy the Romans page 44 Guardians and Protectors to Kings
disabled, who ibid. In Guessing at the will of the Intestate, Debts of
Gratitude to be prefered before Beneficence page 125 In Guessing at the will of
the Prince, whether an inferior Officer may make War page 35
H.
HAbitation, whether to be granted to Strangers page 85 Habits in sin to be
prevented by punishments page 379 Heresy what, 392. it proceeds from Ambition,
Vainglory, or Covetousness, ibid Heretic, they are not that err through an
ignorant zeal ibid. Toward Heretics the meekness of the Fathers ibid.
Hardness of heart from God when he will destroy page 169 Heart to steal away,
what page 441 Hebrews, whether they might do good to, or receive good from
Strangers, 184, 185. their Laws concerning Slaves, 520, 521 concerning Trees in
War, 511. concerning Contracts, 160. commanded to destroy the Temples and Idols
of the Gentiles, 466. their Law concerning the Women Captives, 463. concerning
Land taken in War, 472. concerning the crowning the Conqueror page 479 Heir
not bound to pay Debts of gratitude, Piety, or Fidelity page 173 The Heir of a
Promiser how far bound by Oath, ibid. not punishable for his Fathers sin,
though chargeable with his Debts page 404 Heralds, the College judge of the
equity of a War, 452. proclaiming War crowned with vervain, 453. their form in
denouncing War page 70, 71 Herod defended by M. Anthony, for what he did as a
King. page 39 Holland Laws concerning Islands and Increments, 137. concerning
Rivers dried up and Lands drowned ibid. Homicides, to what restitution obliged,
202 to kill lawful, 15. their Children not capable of honor page 403 Honesty
consists not in a point generally commanded in the Gospel page 21 Honor what,
more seen in patience than in revenge page 74 Hortensius page 123 Hostages to
kill lawful in War, 461. to be spared unless criminous, 509. to be freed, the
Principal dead, 555. one not obliged for the others fact, 556. whether freed by
the Death of him that sent him, 557. escaping not to be received, 555. no
Slaves, ibid. who may be sent, what Right is given over them, whether they may
fly, or for other causes detained ibid. Hostis signifies a Foreigner. page 182
Husbandmen in War spared page 506, 513, 514 Hyberboles, to what end spoken page
442 Histories have a twofold use, examples and judgment Pref. xvii Historians
not always to be believed. page 36
I.
IDolatry, its kinds and degrees page 369, 388 Idolaters, not all put to death
by the Jews page 389 Jehu's Fact, what page 93 Jews a Nation no whit obliging
Strangers, 236. under Alexander, deny to carry Materials to the Temple of
Belus, 428. in what Cases not to associate with wicked Kings page 185 Ignorance
excuses, when page 237 Ignorants to be spared in a Just War page 500 Ignorantly
and through Ignorance, distinguished ibid. Islands and Increments by inundation
whose, 136. floating, 137. how distinguished from Increments ibid. Images
abhorred by the Persian Magi, 466. to deface, to him that believes to include a
Deity, impiety ibid. Imperare, (...) page 50 Impiety, and open profaneness
toward any that is acknowledged as God, punishable page 392 Imprisonment
unjust to what it obliges page 201 Importation of some goods prohibited page
86 Of Inequality, The Law of Nation takes no cognizance, if consented unto page
165 Incestuous Marriages forbidden by the Law of Nature, 107. two reasons given
against such page 109 An Increment, what is thereby meant, 138. whether stopped
by an Highway, 139. it is his whose the River is, o^ his whose the Grounds are
that bound it, 138. it is his to whom the Land is granted, if the Land be
arcifinious, ibid. if in doubts is the peoples, ibid. whether it may belong to
the Princes Vassal ibid. Indians many Wives, 106. no Tribunals but for murder
and injuries done page 211 Induciae, whence page 558 Infants capable of
Dominion, 89. but not to dispose thereof without a Guardian, ibid. so is he to
inherit, but not to dispose of it page 103 Infeudations, 119. made by Kings
without the peoples consent void, with consent how gained ibid. Ingratitude of
the Romans punished by M. Levinus with disfranchizement page 39 To Inhabit any
Country free for Exiles page 85 Injuries, faults, mischances, distinguished,
500 on the one side, makes War just on the other, 70. what oblige to
restitution, what not page 531 Injure others we ought not, to benefit our
selves page 82 Injuries done us by our Country, Prince, Parents, to be
patiently born page 58 Injuries intended only, sometimes punished page 383
Innocents to be defended page 425, 426 The Innocent not to be destroyed with
the Nocent page 504 The Innocent falsehood of Joseph to his Brethren page 443
Instruments of the Plough not to be taken in pawn page 514 To Insult over the
Vanquished ignoble page 506, 507 Intent sometimes equally punished with the
fact, 381. though ill, obliges not to restitution page 383 Invaders Command
how far obliging, 62. in what Case he may be killed by a private man page 65
For the Interpretation of Promises and Contracts some Rules page 193 What
Interpretations given to contracts between Enemies, 558. if odious in their
full propriety, if ambiguous in the largest sense page 193 Interpretation of
Leagues, 190, sometimes gathered from the Context, 191, 192. if in doubt ought
to favor the weakest page 548 Intestates Estate, to whom naturally it descends
page 122 Invasion made by Confederates or their Subjects, whether it break the
Peace, 548. by Subjects when attributed to the Prince ibid. By Inundation the
Owner may lose his Right page 137 Inundations and Increments thereby gained
page 136, 137 Josephus in expounding the Hebrew Law, flatters the Romans page
466 To Judge of the Cause of a War between Princes dangerous page 457 The
Judges Office in criminal Causes dangerous page 373 A Judge should be tenderly
affected as a Father, 416, 417. may be punished his Sentence being unjust, but
not the Executioner, 429. said to be just, though the Sentence be unjust page
55 In Judgment the matter, not the Persons to be considered page 3, 4 To Judge
of a man's meaning by his speech, how due page 441 Judgment of zeal, what page
445 Judgment contemplative and practical page 429 Judging of the Supreme Power,
Ca^tions page 41 The Judgment, how steered in doubtful Cases page 411 Against
Judgment, though erroneous, nothing to be done ibid. Judgments Capital, why by
Christ permitted, 372, 373. Christians may execute them, but not affectedly
ibid. Jus and Justice, how distinguished page 494 Just in War, what page 2 Just
taken strictly, what page 414 Justice derived from Jove Pref. vi Justice and
Valor usually attended by Victory xii Justice Expletive and Attributive page 4
Just Cause procures Friends xii Just Cause adds courage to Soldiers ibid.
Justice Commutative or Expletive page 3 Justice how described by Porphyry, v.
preferred to fortitude, x. it begets courage, 430. it so gives to every one his
own, that it detracts not from the just Right of another, 198. it should extend
it self to all Mankind x Where Justice is not required, the longest Sword takes
all page 435
K.
KEturah's Son by Abraham received Gifts or Portions, but no Inheritances page
125 He that Kills an Enemy in the War is guiltless page 357 To Kill a man for
slight injuries is againast Charity, 73. in defense of our Goods, naturally not
unlawful page 74 To Kill a private man, is murder; but thousands in an unjust
War, Valor and Virtue page 70 To Kill a Nocturnal Thief, whether tolerated
only by the Civil Law, or approved, 75, 76. an incorrigible Malefactor, not
against the Law of Nature page 368 To Kill an Enemy after Battle, against
Charity page 506 To Kill an Enemy privately in his own Quarters, whether lawful
page 462 To be Killed, none for his valor in defense of his own cause, if good
page 568 To Kill all that have offended brutish page 501 Who may be justly
Killed in a just War according to Justice internal page 498 Kings Grants, when
revocable, and when not, 180. their Contracts do not always bind their
Successors page 178, 179 Kings how they serve God as Kings page 17, 18 Kings,
whether bound by prescription see Prescription Kings that make Laws not subject
to Laws, 377. not all constituted by the People, 40. not bound by their own
Laws directly, 101. in name some, not in power, 39. whether he may renounce his
Kingdom, so as his Son shall not inherit page 131 Kings raised by providence,
fit for the times and People, 41. they have no superior but God, 40. their
vices must be born with patience, ibid. to revile them is wicked, but to kill
them though wicked, horrid page 39 A Kings person to be spared in cases of
absolute necessity page 66 Kings regard honor more than power, yet does not
this abate of their Right, 54. their private Acts subject to the Laws page 177
Against Kings the Law that makes void any private man's Acts by way of
Punishment is void ibid. Kings Promises, Contracts, and Oaths page 176 A Kings
word as firm as an Oath page 175 A King may null his own Oath as private men
antecedenter, not consequenter, 177. whether he may revoke his own acts which
he does as a King page 176 Kings defended by severe Laws page 61 By the
Contract of a King, how the Heir may be bound page 178 How a King may be bound
to his Subjects naturally, and how civilly page 177 Kings bound by their own
Laws as a member, not as the body politic, 377. not punishable for their
Subjects crimes, but for neglect of their own duty, 393, 394. their Oaths may
strengthen their power, not lessen their supremacy page 44, 45 Kings
vanquished, what they had is the Conquerours, 479. whether to be spared page
502, 503 Kings warring for punishment, bound to repair their Subjects loss page
420 Kings, though conquered, yet substituted under the Conqueror page 527
Kings should have a general care of humane Society page 388 The Contracts of
Kings, whether Laws, and when page 177 The King, a Minor, Mad, a Captive, in
whom the power to make Peace is page 544 A King not reigning by full Right, his
acts may be nulled by the Peoples Laws page 176 A King who pays not his Army is
bound to satifie the wrongs done by it page 533 A King murdered, nothing
ensues but Blood and Slaughter page 65 A King may claim relief by the Laws
against such private acts of his as are occasioned by fraud, fear, error, and
against extortion page 176 A good King respects what he ought to do, not what
he may do page 46 Kings of Persia absolute, yet swear, not to alter the Laws
page 45 Kings falsifying their Oaths, judged after death ibid. Kings of Israel
punished, beaten with Rods, 47. in some cases had not Right to judge ibid.
Kingly Government asserted by the Gospel page 18 Kingdoms absolute, 38. mixed
between Monarchy and Principality, 47, 48. Patrimonial if indivisible, due to
the eldest Son page 127 Kingdoms transferred by the People, are inheritances;
yet separable from others, nor liable to Debts, ibid. in what cases alienable,
not possessed in full Right, not alienable without the Peoples consent page 44.
Kingdom and Principality promiscuously used page 41 Kingdoms transferred by the
People, if in doubt individual, and to descend rather to Males than Females,
128. more difficultly kept than conquered, 526. how divided, 143. some held
during the Peoples pleasure, 42. bounded, some by natural some by artificial
Bounds page 94, 137 Kingdoms held by a Right usufructuary, others by a full
Right of Propriety, and so alienable page 42 Kingdoms Patrimonial may descend
to such as are nearest to the first King page 127 Kings absolute accountable to
none, 39. have a Right from God to command Subjects to obey, 54. of Judah could
not inflict capital Punishments, but the Kings of Israel might unless in some
cases page 63 Kings govern not only according to the Laws, but the Laws
themselves for the public good page 38, 39 Kings in their private concerns
submit their cases to be judged by the Judges, which they themselves make page
50
L.
Lacedaemonians prefer the Son born after the Father is King, before him born
before, 132. they used more craft than force in their War, 437. their custom
concerning Lands taken page 410 Levinus his advice to the Roman Senate page 56
Lands taken in War are his that maintains it, 472. when said to be gained, 470.
may be sold, the measure named, and yet not according to that measure page 137
Lands, some divided and artificially fenced, some assigned by measure, and some
arcifinious page 94 Lands if in doubt not judged arcifinious, ibid. now found,
if prepossest no ground of War, if drowned where presumed to be deserted page
137 Lands drowned naturally not lost, ibid. gained by War several ways
disposed, yet always as the People ordered, 472. recovered by Postliminy page
491 Humane Laws may ordain things preternatural, but not things against nature
page 81, 89 A Lawmaker may take away the condemning power of the Law as to
particular Acts or Persons page 376, 377 Law what, 4. of Nature, what it is,
ibid. from whence, Pref. v. in some sense the Law of God, vi. not alterable by
God himself, 5. distinguished into that which is so purely, and that which is
so for some certain States. page 140 The Law of Moses taken in a twofold sense,
carnally and spiritually page 17 Law Ceremonial and Judicial, when and how
taken away, 19. Mosaical, has neither first nor last page 110 The Law of
Nature and Nations takes place where the Civil cannot be exercised page 368 The
Law of Nature explained by those given by God Pref. vi The Law of Nature how
proved and distinguished from others, Pref. xiv. nothing in the Old Law
repugnant unto it, xviii. it has sometimes some show of change, Pref. ix The
Laws of Nature and Nations violated, every Prince may make War page 384 Every
man takes that to be the Law of Nature that it first imbibes page 385 The Law
does not always null what it for bids, 37. of Tithes and the Sabbath how
obliging Christians page 10 A Law implies every man's express consent, 517.
grounded upon presumption of a fact never done, obliges not page 152, 153 The
Laws of Holland for Lands drowned page 137 The Roman Law concerning such
Contracts, wherein the inequality is above half the value page 160, 161 The Law
in permitting a private man to kill a Thief, whether it frees the conscience,
page 76, 373, 374 The Civil Law may forbid what naturally is Lawful page 81 The
Law of Vsucapion, whether it extends to the Supreme Power, 101. or to its parts
ibid. The universal reason of the Law particularly failing in any one fact, the
Law may be dispensed with page 153, 377 How far a Lawmakers obliges himself
page 377, etc. Hebrew Laws forbidding Polygamy and Divorce page 105, 106 What
Laws oblige page 530 The Hebrew Laws Copies for Christians, except in three
Cases page 10 Laws and Contracts, how they differ, 178. not all obliging, 178,
179. common Agreements amongst the People, 150, 151. some very unjust page 121
Laws adjudging Criminals to death to be favorably interpreted, 59. the Divine
Laws judging to death have sometimes tacit exceptions ibid. Laws respect that
which is generally profitable, 56. some may be made decreeing when and how the
Supreme shall be lost page 101 Laws concerning things promised oblige, 152.
judging to death the Relations of criminal Malefactors, unjust page 403 Law
Civil concerning the promises of Minors page 152 Laws pinnacle the hand,
Philosophy the mind, 160. respect not small cheats, and why, ibid. diverse
concerning buying and selling page 161 Law, Divine voluntary, how different
from the Law of Nature, 7. it obliged before it was written, 8. Civil what, 7.
whence, Pref. vii. Ceremonial, when abrogated, and the Judicial when page 9
Laws given to the Jews oblige not Strangers, 8. to the Mos call Law the
Israelites only stood obliged, but to that of Circumcision all Abraham's
Posterity page 9 Laws have two Parts, directive to Kings, and coercive to
Subjects page 39 Laws given by God three times, to Adam, Noah, Christ, 8. the
Old not useless by the coming of the New Pref. xviii Laws should command things
possible, 375. give testimony of their integrity page 430 Laws differ from
counsels, and how, 3, 4. and from permission, and how page 4. A Law made
against Murderers by Force and Arms, judges all sorts of Murderers page
196, 197 Laws guide to wisdom Pref. ix. Laws may so far proceed against a King
as to evidence the Right of the Creditor, but not to compel him page 177, 178
Contrary to Law things done not nulled, un^ess so expressed by the Law it self
page 147 Laws bind not in cases of extreme necessity page 567 Laws made to
avoid greater mischiefs only, must not be so understood as to make that sinful
which is otherwise lawful page 483 Laws without a coercive power externally
weak Pref. ix Laws and Arms opposed Pref. ii. The six Laws given to Adam, what
page 8 There is the same Law, where is the same reason or equity page 196
Humane Laws to be interpreted with some allowance for humane frailty page 59
The Law in prohibiting, doubles the offense, 380. of Moses erroneously quoted
for that of Nature Pref. xviii. Without Laws no community can consist, Pref. ix
Laws humane depend upon the will of the maker for their institution and
continuation page 21, 22 Laws may bind as to humane judgment that bind not the
Conscience, 483. nor bind longer than the coercive power lasts, ibid. severe in
the defense of Kings page 61 Laws commanding, stronger than those that permit;
and those that forbid, stronger than those that command page 199 The reason of
a Law particularly failing shall not exempt that case from the Law, but it may
be dispensed with page 35 Lawful, taken either for that which is just and
honest, or for that which is not punishable page 456 The Law of Nations how
beneficial, Pref. ix. it is like the Soul in the Body page 451 Humane Laws
depend upon the will of the Lawmaker, both for their institution and
continuation page 377 A League, what, 181. when said to be renewed, 187. void
if by either broken ibid. Of Leagues, the Ancienter to be preferred, ibid. that
made with a Free people real, ibid. that with a King not always personal ibid.
A League holds with a People or a lawful King, though exiled his Kingdom, but
not with an Usurper page 195 League equal or unequal page 183 Leagues how they
differ from Sponsions, ibid. Leagues unequal, 48, 183, 184. give no
jurisdiction properly page 49 In unequal Leagues Kings or People may be equal
in freedom though not in dignity ibid. In Leagues who are superior page 49, 50
Leagues some require exact natural Right only: and why, 182. its breach is a
matter odious page 193 The Prince of the Leagues may be said in some things to
command page 49, 50 In Leaugues unequal, the danger whence page 51 Leagues,
unequal contracted sometimes where no War is, 184. whether to be made with men
of different Religion, ibid. this proved by experience, 185, 186. some cautions
page 186 Leagues forbidden to be made with some Nations: and why page 184 Of
Leagues, some favorable, some odious, some personal, some real page 195
Leagues of Peace and society, these either for Commerce or War page 182, 183
Whether they that are unequally Leagued have the Right of Embassages page 206
Leagues divided page 182 A League for a set time not by silence renewed page
187 No League binds to an unjust War page 186 No breach of League to defend the
injured Party, if in other things the Peace be kept page 194 Leagues never made
but between Sovereign Princes page 181 Leagues of Joshua with the Gibeonites,
169 he might not make a League with the Canaanites: and why page 184 In
Leagues, words of Art interpreted according to Art, 191. the stronger gives the
greater power, the weaker the greater honor, 49, 50. this Article not to make
War without consent, is to be understood of an offensive War only page 194 A
League made with a Free People, is real and binds though they admit of Kings,
unless made with other Free Cities to defend their liberty page 195 The Lenity
of the Ancient Fathers toward them that erred in things Divine page 391 Letter
of Marque page 448 Liberty personal recovered by Postliminy, 489. or Peace,
which to be preferred page 419 The Liberty of a People what it signifies, 42,
43, etc. of making War not rashly to be believed to be renounced page 193 The
Liberty of Subjects obliged by the fact of their Superiors page 447 Liberty
natural is to live where we list page 115 Liberty the usual Cloak of Ambition
page 65 Liberty lost, to recover, no just cause of War page 407 Liberty some
left, the Conquered may secure the Conqueror page 527 Life preferred before
Liberty page 419 The Lesser number to yield to the greater, not natural page
139 Long possession, see Possession Lots sometimes end a War page 551 Love of
Parents toward their Children more natural, than that of Children toward
Parents page 123 A Lie strictly taken, what, 440. forbidden, 439. by some good
Authors in some cases approved, 440. a wholesome lie, the jocular and
charitable not much blamed page 442, 443 The form of a Lie, what, 441. whether
naturally unlawful ibid. To Lie and to tell a lie, differenced by Gellius page
440 Lies our refuge in danger, Rahabs lie page 443 No Lie, if by an untruth
spoken by me, a Bystander be deceived page 442 Of Lies, the Schoolmen admit
not, but they do of Equivocations page 443, 444 A Lie to preserve life, whether
lawful page 443 To Lie to an Enemy lawful, 439, 443. to be understood of words
assertory not promissory, 443, 444. yet not if bound by Oath ibid From Lying to
abstain even to an Enemy, magnanimous page 444 Lying to be excluded in all
Contracts in a Market page 441 To Lie in time and place fitting, the part of
Stoical wisdom page 440 Lying ill becomes a Prince, 444. fear and poverty make
Liars ibid. For Lying and Perjury, the punishment the same page 175 It is no
Lie if in an Amphibology our words agree with either sense, though
misunderstood page 440
M.
MAccabees resistance, what page 60 Macedonians put all that are of kin to
Traitors to death page 403 Magistrates should punish Offenders as Parents do
Children page 417 Magistrates killing men are innocent, but private men doing
the same are Murderers, 374. whether they may remit punishments, 375.
Inferiors must not resist the Supreme, 58. why chosen, 376. they must judge
according to Law, but Princes the Laws themselves page 377 No Magistrate chosen
without an Appeal to the People of Rome page 65 Magistrates Inferior may
reduce Rebels in a Case of imminent danger page 35 Magistrates Christians in
St. Paul's time page 18 Magistrates amongst the Jews did not resist their
Kings, though wicked, 57. in what Cases obliged to reparation of damages, 203.
how far they may oblige Citizens page 564 Magistrates not taking caution from
Privateers, whether obliged for the wrongs they do to their friends page 203
The Magnanimity of the Romans in respect of the Greeks page 445 Mahometans hold
a necessity of restitution page 495 Majesty taken for the Dignity of the Person
governing, 49. what that is ibid. Malefactors to be either punished, delivered
or banished page 398 Major part has the power of the whole page 40 Man made to
do good, Pref. iv. greedy of Society, iii. eminently just, a Magistrate born,
369. only capable of knowledge by general Rules, iv. born naked, others armed,
v. all of one Stock page vii Men use men as Instruments page 471 Merchants and
Artificers to be spared in War page 506 In Markets nothing to be spoken but
truth page 441 Marriages, what lawful, 106. the consent of Parents not
necessary, ibid. of Cosen Germans, Pref. iii. by the Law of Nature what, 105.
with another Wife void, 107. dissolved by Captivity, nor to be restored by
Postliminy, 490. under the Law not undissolvable page 105 In Marriage the
obligation is mutable ibid. Marriages though forbidden to be made, yet being
made, are not thereby nulled page 111, 112 Matrimony wherein different from
Wedlock, ibid. to contract a common Right, 86. to deny to Strangers, injurious
to humane nature, ibid. yet being denied, no just ground of War page 179 In
reference to Marriage, things given alter not the property if it succeed not
page 192 The end of Marriage is to know whose the Child is page 124 Marriages
what justifiable by the Law of Nature, 106. why, and by what Law or custom
forbidden between Kindred, is difficult to prove, 107. by the Hebrew and
Grecian Laws in some Cases enjoined ibid. In Marriages more remote degrees seem
not forbidden, but amongst Christians they are, and why page 111 Marriages
incestuous forbidden by God to Noah or Adam page 109 In Marriage a Son should
be left to his own choice page 107 Marriage Concubinary, what, 125. some amount
to true Marriages, and when page 106, 107 Marriages second in Brabant page 125
Marriage Rites among Christians page 105 Marriage not to be contracted with
profane Persons page 186 In some Marriages the Children shall not inherit page
124, 125 Marriage with diverse Women of old lawful, 106. between Brother and
Sister, by what Law forbidden, and whence unlawful page 108 Marriage to
contract, to whom, and how far forth a liberty due page 86 The Measure whereby
things are naturally valued, is their want page 161 Members to preserve, it is
lawful to kill page 72 Memory of wrongs done, not to outlive them that did them
page 400 Mercy in punishing, and cruelty in sparing, 3 mitigating punishments
as well as in their remission page 372 Mercy, Judgment and Righteousness, how
distinguished by the Hebrews page 177 To be Merciful brings great advantage to
a Conqueror page 516 Might with Right does wonders Pref. ix Mildness of the
Fathers toward Heretics page 391, 392 Military Discipline dearer to the
Romans than their Children page 491 Military Oaths page 28 Military Acts and
Orders, some repugnant to Christianity page 26 Minors, whether bound by their
Promises page 152 Minor Part not guilty if over-voted by the Major page 399
Minos, why hated Pref. x Mischances, mischiefs, faults, how distinguished page
500 Mixed Government gained by War page 486 Modesty sometimes forbids what Law
permits page 494 Moderation as to the acquisition of Empire, 524, 525. in
killing men, 497, 498. in spoiling things useless in War page 516 The
Moderation of Scipio the African, 481. of Antiochus page 100 Monogamy, whether
commanded by the Law of Nature, or by the Evangelical Law only, 105. commended
in the Creation, but Polygamy not condemned page 106 Monopolies not all
condemned by the Law of Nature page 161 To Monopolize all the Fruits of a
Nation, which are not elsewhere to be found, whether lawful page 87 Money,
whence it receives its value page 162 Moral Duties more strictly required by
Christ than Moses page 10 Moses's Laws Patterns for Christians, unless in some
Cases ibid. Mothers bound to nourish their Children that have no certain Father
page 123 Movables not capable of reception by Postliminy page 492 Mountains
dug through to let in the Sea page 90 Multitudes to be spared page 509
Murderers to be made use of against Enemies, whether lawful, 463. see Homicides
Mutius Scaevola commended ibid. Mutual Subjection of King and People refuted
page 41
N.
NAbides his controversy with the Romans page 196 (...), what, and (...), what,
174. (...), what ibid. Naucum, what ibid. Names of Countries, how to be
understood page 547 Nations may be equal in liberty though not in Dignity page
49 Natures first Principles, and what are consequent to them, what page 11, 12
Nature sometimes taken for custom, page 163, 164 Nature indulgeth many things
which the consent of Nations approves not page 90, 91 Natural instinct common
to Men with Beasts makes no distinct Law page 7 The Nature of any thing is
known by that which is sound and perfect, not from that which is corrupted page
108 Natural issue differenced from that which is Legitimate, 124, 125. they may
succeed their Father unless some Law hinder it, ibid. they may be adopted,
ibid. not capable of that Empire that is derived from the People page 125
Natural, some things may be, not simply, but during such a condition as they
were first in, as Deer, Fish page 135 Not every thing that is by the Law of
Nature lawful, is so by Gods Laws page 74 Navigation a great help to humane
Society, 84. in some parts of the Sea prohibited, 94. but this being by
consent, takes not away the freedom of the Seas as to Navigation ibid. Naval
Societies page 163, 164 Necessaries to buy a common Right, unless they from
whom such things are required do stand in need of them page 86 Necessity knows
no Law but that of Nature, 81, 82, 119. it makes what is properly ours, common,
81. yet under the condition of restoring if able, 82. yet if that necessity be
avoidable it justifies not, ibid. or if there be a like necessity in the right
owner, ibid. if it justify not, yet it extenuates page 501 Necessaries to a
lawful end are lawful, page 434 Necessity, what Right it gives to Neuters, page
531 Through Necessity, what is done breaks not the Peace page 550 Neglect of
punishing, punishable page 393 Neighbor, who by the Hebrew Law, and who by the
Gospel page 23 Neighbors power to diminish no cause of War page 76, 77 Nephew
from the first Son, preferred before the second Son page 132 Whether the younger
Nephew from the Son be to be preferred before the elder from the Daughter page
133 To Nephews is due aliment page 122, 123 Neuters in War their duty, 533.
nothing to be taken from them without full satisfaction page 531 Ninus the
first that made War to enlarge Empire page 485, 524 Nocents some to be spared
for many Innocents, 434, 504. to be punished by the Innocent page 363 Nocent he
is not that punishes Nocents page 362
O.
OAths sacred among Heathens, 166. may differ in form not in substance, 171.
require great deliberation, 167. and great reverence, 175. so to be understood,
as he understands to whom they are made, 167. called Vows, and why, 172. the
end of all controversies, 172. bind not to things unlawful, 169. of Joshua to
the Gibeonites binding page 168, 169 The Oath of the Roman Soldiers to the
Carthaginians binding page 167, 168 An Oath not to be too far wrested, 169. not
to do good not binding, 170. nor that which hinders a greater good, ibid.
cannot bind to impossibilities, ibid. by false Gods binding, 171. by the
Creatures obliges, ibid. by fraud or fear extorted, must be fulfilled for the
Oaths sake, 172. made to Pirates or Tyrants obliges ibid. In Oaths two things
requisite, truth in words and fidelity in Actions ibid. Over Subjects Oaths
what power Superiors have page 173 By a false Oath to deceive an Enemy,
Perjury page 172 Of Oaths some are assertory, and some promissory, 174. the
latter forbidden by James and Christ ibid. Oaths should except necessity and
coaction page 123 From Oaths Absolutions, from whence originally page 174 By
Oaths promises made, in what Cases oblige not page 173 An honest man's word as
good as his Oath page 175 An Oath to perform, Kings bound before God page 177
Oaths from Subjects should have this restriction, Unless my King command the
contrary ibid. Philip of Macedon regardless of Oaths page 537 The form of Oath
Military page 28 To Obey more natural to some Nations than to command page 38
Obedience in what cases necessary, 55, 56, 429. sometimes unlawful, 427.
especially in things forbidden by God or Nature, 53. to commands unjust not
due, 429. readily yielded by him that understands the reason of the Law page
430 Obedience to Parents and sustentation to Children due, 123. yet it cannot
justify our disobedience to God page 427 Obligation restraining the faculty or
the exercise of such an Act only, the difference page 47, 48 Obligation,
feudal, see Feudal. Obligations arising from Dominion page 146 Obligation
internal gives no Right to another page 151 Obligations all require
deliberation page 551, 552 Obligations by Officers with our default, from what
Law it proceeds page 203, 204 Kings may be obliged either naturally or civilly
page 177 Obliged we may be by another page 154 Oblige we may whatsoever we have
absolute power in or over page 400, 401 Obliged we may be to a Pirate or
Robber, being not terr^fyed by fear page 538 Obliged a man may be by some
Delinquency page 200 Obliged none can be to an unjust War page 187 Of
Obligations without compulsion examples page 211 Obstinacy to defend our own
Party, no just cause to kill an Enemy page 508 By the Occasion of another sin,
a man may suffer though that sin be not the cause of his suffering page 401
Occupancy, its Rights where things are in common page 78 By Occupancy what
every one had was the first rise of propriety page 79 Of Occupancy after the
communion was lost page 80 Occupancy presumes things bounded, 81. as Lands by
Manors or Farms, ibid. of Empire, and of Dominion as distinguished from
Empire, 88. it was the original way to gain Dominion by the Law of Nations page
135 What if it be of a place pre- Occupied by men irrational page 407 The
Occupant in doubtful Cases has the best Title page 414 To the ancient
Occupants, Lands restored by the Emperor Honorius after three hundred Years
page 492 Odious Promises which, 192. how to be interpreted, ibid. Leagues and
Promises if in doubt are personal page 194 Offenders being demanded, when to be
delivered page 395, 396 (...), 439. (...) page 407 Old men in War to be spared
page 505 None the same Old as young page 141 Opinions concerning God being not
easily demonstrable, no cause of War page 389 Our Opinions, especially
concerning Religion, hardly parted from page 391 Oppression notorious a just
cause of War, if without danger to our selves page 424 Oppression of Subjects,
where greater than the miseries of War, War may be made against Tyrants page
421 Ordinance of God, in what sense Kingly Power is said page 18 Order, what
among Equals or Associates page 114 The Order of such as have equal shares in
things ibid. In what Order they are bound to restore who have occasioned
damages page 201, 202 The Order of Christian Kings sitting in Council page 114
Original acquisition page 88 Owner right not known, none bound to restore page
149 The right Owner transferring his Interest is a sure Title page 151 Oxen
forbidden to be eaten, -- to be spared in War page 514
P.
PApinianus put to death for not defending Parricide page 428 Parents to be
nourished, 123. though severe to be obeyed, 57. to be reverenced as Gods, Pref.
vii. honor and obedience due to them, 123. differing in their Commands,
whether to obey, 103. their Right to sell or pawn their Children, what, 104.
their Right over their Children different, according to their several Ages and
Conditions, 103, 104 their Estates due to their Children by a twofold right,
124. whether they owe any part of their goods to their Children by the Law of
Nature, 122. their love to their Children more natural than their Childrens to
them, 123. their power to punish as well as to govern their Children, 104.
never exheredate their Children until they prove incorrigible, 416, 417. Their
Marriage with their Children unnatural page 107 Parliaments to what end called
page 42 A Parley demanded and accepted renders both sides secure, 569. --
during, each may promote his own interest, so that he hurt not the other, ibid.
under pretense of a Parley, Bituitus was treacherously taken Captive by the
Romans ibid. Parricides page 28 Particulars, if they consent not, not
punishable for the whole page 399 Partition just where the Title is dubious,
and neither possessed page 414 Passage denied may be by Arms forced page 83
Passage by Land or Sea common to all, ibid. how Armies may pass safely without
danger page 84 Passionate acts more pardonable than deliberate page 380 Pater
Patratus what page 546 Patience commended by Christ's example, 63. preferred
before revenge, 33. in bearing reproaches, 21, 22, 23. in a Governor or in a
State punishable page 393 Patrimony distinguished from the profit of it page 120
Paul refused not a Guard of Soldiers page 20 Parents that receives, to what
bound page 160 Peace profitable to the Victor, Vanquished, and those of equal
Power, 572. once obtained, to be religiously kept, 571. its Articles, how to be
understood, 546, 547. all of them to be equally observed, 549, 572. when said
to be broken, 548. to be embraced, though with loss, 572. not to be patcht up
but firmly made, 547. being made, all public injuries, though then unknown,
presumed to be remitted, 547. to purchase from an Enemy too Potent no dishonor
page 418 For Peace whether the Goods of the Crown be alienable, 544. or the
Goods of Subjects, 545. the Empire or any part thereof ibid. Peace, by whom it
may be made, 544. being made by the major part it shall bind the minor, ibid.
whether it may be made with a Minor, Captived, Exiled King, ibid. being made
with a King, whether the People and his Successors are bound, 545. broken on
one side may be kept by the other, 550. whether to be preferred before liberty,
65. firmly made is the end of War, 571. caused by fear unjustly occasioned, not
to be broken, 533. made, free Cities surrendering to be set at liberty page 546
By Peace the Primitive Christians understood a vacancy from persecution page 29
Peculium, what, 522. how far the Lords and how far the Slaves ibid.
Perfidiousness with Rebels, Pirates, Thieves, connived at by the Law of
Nations, 462 what perfidious men to employ is against the Law of Nations ibid.
The People may alienate the whole Government from themselves page 37 The People
of Rome choose always their own Emperor, 144. are the same they anciently were
page 143 The People changing their Government, stand obliged to those Debts
contracted before such change, page 143 A free People held the same place the
King held before ibid. The People are the same under any Government, ibid. yea,
though they change their seat, 142. when they cease to be the same, 141, 142.
whether punishable for their King, 403. their consent how gained, 119, 120. how
far obliged by the act of their King in making Peace, 545. why punished for the
fact of their King, 41. their Patrimony or any part, how far and in what cases
engaged by their King, 120. not alienable without the consent of the three
States, ibid. No Part of the People can be alienatd from the whole without
consent, but in extreme necessity page 119 Perjury always attended with curses,
166. for it, Glaucus how punished, 166, 167. and lying have the same
punishment, 175. it reaches the whole Posterity, 166. its very intention
punished, 166, 167. to Pirates and Robbers not punished, and why page 538
Permission twofold, perfect and imperfect, 10. what, 4. of crimes by him who
ought and can hinder it, punishable page 394, 395. Permitted many things are
which are not agreeable to reason or equity page 494, 495 Persians have many
Wives, 106. their opinion concerning God, 466. the custom in judging of
Criminals, 379. their severity in punishing the Children and Kindred for their
traitorous Parents, 403. the Right over their Children page 104 Perseus his
Controversy with the Romans page 195 Peter forbid to use his Sword, why page
133 Physicians rewarded though they cure not, and why page 478 Picture of
Jalysus by Protagenes at Rhodes page 218 Pignorations forbidden by the Civil
Law page 446, 447 Pillage, what page 480 Pipin the Father of Charles the great
attended with one only Soldier killed his Enemy in his Tent page 463 Pirates
being subdued no triumph granted, 451. against them every Prince makes War,
384. they are not capable of making a solemn War, 378. what they take, alters
not the property, 492. though they use some equality amongst themselves, yet
they make not a civil society, 450, 451. which they may do, if leaving their
Piracy they settle under wholesome Laws page 451 What Right is given to Pirates
and Robbers as such, cannot by way of punishment be taken away, 202, 203, they
cannot claim the right of Embassies page 205, 206, 207 The Pirate Diomedes his
answer to Alexander page 414 By a Pirate or Robber what is taken may be
recovered page 203 Pirates or Thieves how different for a Nation doing some
unjust things, 450. some Nations live by Piracy, 451. War with Pirates and
Subjects no just War page 454 Pyrrhus in danger to be poisoned by his
Physician, was forewarned by the Romans page 461 Places unoccupyed are the
first Occupants, 81. and persons freely surrendered not to be restored unless
so agreed page 545, 546 To Plant in another soil no ground of War page 406
Plants whether theirs whose the spoil is page 139 Pledges he that takes, to
what bound, 160. an agreement about them how understood, 556. how engaged, the
Right of redemption how lost ibid. To Penitents, whether all Punishments be
remitted page 372 Poison not allowed against a Prince though an Enemy page 462
To Poison Springs, Weapons, against the Law of Nations, but not to corrupt
Waters otherwise page 461, 462 Polygamy not forbidden the Patriarchs nor under
the Law, 16, 17, 105. allowed by most Nations page 106 Pompey enters the Temple
at Jerusalem by the Right of a Conqueror page 466, 467 The Pope not universal
Bishop, 408. nor has he any jurisdiction in temporal things, much less over
Kingdoms, ibid. delivers the ornaments of the Empire to the Emperor by what
Right, 145. and Crowns him as a King of the Romans page 144, 145 Possession may
be acquired by another, 472 of creatures wild, got by instruments, and not by
wounding, but by taking them page 135 Possession long confirms a private Right,
but is of no force against different Nations though sometimes pleaded, 97.
immemorial and uninterrupted transfers Dominion by the Law of Nations page 100
The Right of Possessing thing moveable may by Law be anticipated page 89
Possession unjustly gained, and a sentence unjustly past, have some effects of
a just Right, 415. after three hundred Years restored by the Emperor Honorius
to the Ancient Occupants page 492 Things long out of Possession to require,
vain page 98 Possession long much favored in Empires: and why page 99, 100 The
Present Possessors Right is best if in doubt page 82, 414 Of things twice sold,
his title is best that first got Possession page 161 The Posterity of Slaves
are Slaves page 481 Postliminy what, its original, 487. by it some things
return and some received, 488. if they escape to Friends or Associates, ibid.
in force as well in Peace as War, ibid. in Peace it belongs to such as are
unfortunately found among Enemies, ibid. by it Freemen are said to return, but
Horses, Mules, Ships, to be received, 489. by it a Freeman returns free, when,
ibid. so may a People or Nation, 490. but not they that surrender themselves,
489. by it, how Servants are received and how Fugitives page 491 Of Postliminy,
moveable Goods, what not capable, 492. Lands whether capable ibid. Postliminy
in force not amongst Enemies only but Strangers, ibid. how this may now take
place. ibid. by it who may return in Peace and who not page 488 Power what, 3.
the Civil wherein it consists, 36. the supreme what, 37. the Subject in whom it
is, ibid not always in the People, ibid. Supreme, some but temporary, 39, 40.
Civil, called by Peter an humane, and by Paul a Divine Ordinance, in what sense
page 60 The Power of Fathers over their Sons with the Romans page 104 Power
supreme may be obliged by the facts of their inferior Officers, and how, 563,
564, 565. must have some Prerogatives, page 101 All Power is given to the Lord
over his Slave; and why page 482. Power over his own life no man has page 380
The Power that common practice has over us to commend or discommend any thing
to humane sense page 111 The Practice of the Saints the best Interpreters of
Christ's Precepts page 25 The six Precepts written to Adam and Noah page 110
Precepts of Christ for non-resistance, in what sense page 33 Precepts of the
Gospel, whether contained in the Law of Nature page 16 Precepts of the second
Table their Order page 379 Predictions Divine, whether they confer a Right page
411 Prayers and Tears the best remedy against the Tyranny of Kings page 47
Prey, the customs of the Greeks, Romans, French, concerning them, 473, 474.
sometimes given to the Soldiers: and why, 475. sometimes to several uses, 477.
when this custom amongst the Romans began, 479. it may be disposed of by the
Civil Law, 478 sometimes to Subjects and Associates, ibid. the tenth
consecrated to God, 468. approved of by God page 468, 469 To Prey upon
Strangers anciently lawful page 182 After Prey to hunt, before the Victory be
assured, dangerous page 479 Present Government to obey, the Duty of a good
Subject page 99 Preparations extraordinary for War a just Cause of War page 383
Price of things, whence page 204 By Prescription Titles to Empire may be got or
lost, 100, 101. yet not without some presumption of dereliction page 101
Prescription enforced by open hostility, not good page 492 By Prescription may
be lost what is separable from Sovereignty, 101. whether Kings are bound by it
ibid. Presumptions sometimes Authoritative page 442 Priests not to be embroiled
in War, 29. exempted by the Heathens, 431. to be spared in War, 505. not to
marry a Woman divorced, a Widow, or a Wh^re page 105 Princes to abstain from
War for the safety of their Subjects, 418. to regard their hono^r more than
their power or profit, ibid. their lives to be favorably censured, 56. not to
be obeyed in things contrary to the Laws of God and Nature, 427. their vices to
be born with patience, 56. may alienate the Peoples money for the public
Goods, yet satisfaction must be given, 179, 180. better to forego somewhat of
their Right, than harrass their Country with intestine War page 99 One Prince
may hold of another in Fee, and yet remain free and have Supreme Power page 66
The Princes Electors consent includes all the States in Germany in any
alienation page 119 The Princes of a free People may by force be restrained
page 63 A Prince newly made retains the same place which the people formerly
did page 143 Principles of Nature, some by themselves manifest, others by
deduction page 385 Prisoners may be taken for the Debt of a Society, 447.
released upon their promise to return, whether they may be compelled to do so
page 567, 568 Prisoners they are when carried into the Enemies Garrison, 470.
taken by Thieves no Slaves page 451 A Prisoner released to release another, he
being dead, is bound to pay his own ransom, but not to return page 562 A
Private man obliging himself to an Enemy, whether he do it against the
Commonwealth, 566, 567. should not attempt to judge what is the peoples page 66
Of Private men killing their Enemies Examples page 167, 168, etc. Whether for
Private Christians to kill Malefactors be lawful page 373 A Private man how far
what he takes he may make his own page 434, 435 Private Agreements with
Enemies, when void and when obliging page 566, 567 A Private Cause in War may
be joined with a public page 66 Private men not engaged naturally for public
Debts farther than proportions page 446 Private profit should give place to
public, Pref. viii Private men must be careful of themselves, but Princes of
others page 495 Privileges, how interpreted, 207, 208. which to be largely
interpreted page 560 Prizes, see Reprizals Procreation begets a community in
things procreated page 138, 139 Prodigal gift may be received, 154. but when
given by Princes to the detriment of the Commonwealth, they may be revoked page
180 Profit to procure to another to spend somewhat of his, no Theft page 442
Profit, common the ground of the Civil Law, Pref. vii. unnecessary, no ground
of War page 406 Prohibition does not always null the thing being done that is
prohibited page 112 Promises, all do not derogate from Sovereign Power, 45. to
be binding they must be accepted, 155. whether the acceptance should be made
known to the Promiser ibid. Promises naturally Debts, 154. made by another
binds, ibid. when such a Promise may be revoked page 155 A Promise made,
whether revocable before accepted, or the Person to whom dying before accepted
ibid. A Promise in it self invalid, how it may be made good, whether it may be
revoked, being by another accepted, 56. made for the fact of another, how far
obliging, ibid. not to admit of this restriction, things remaining as they are,
unless in one Case, 197. made by Oath binds not in two Cases, 173. some
favorable, some odious, some mixed page 192. Promises that more damnifie the
Promiser than benefit the Promised, not to be performed when only true page 198
In Promises some Cases excuse the nonperformance page 199 Promises to be
understood as the words then signify, if no other conjectures hinder page 191
The Promise of a King made to a third Person in behalf of his Subjects binding
page 540 Promises naturally may transfer a Right, 150. made through error or
misbelief, not binding, 566. how far naturally page 152 A Promise made not to
sail or go to such a place, not to take Arms, not to make an escape, binds
page 567 Promises confirmed by the Oaths of the whole Body of the people
inviolable page 539. The force of a Promise page 150 To a Promise the use of
reason is required in the Promiser page 152 A bare Promise will bear no Action
ibid. A Promise called by the Hebrews a Bond, and why, ibid. if rashly made,
binds not, ibid seldom made but to loss ibid. Promises transferring a Right
require some outward sign page 153 A Promise made out of fear, how far
naturally obliging, 154. binds not to things unlawful ibid. To a Promise when a
charge may be added page 156 A Promise made for some Cause vicious, obliges,
154. charged with somewhat beneficial to another, how effectual page 156
Promises naturally good, sometimes nulled by the Civil Law page 154 A Promise
made to acts of mercy, gratitude, etc. oblige to our selves, but cannot be
exacted by Law page 151 Prophecies none, not yet fulfilled, can be understood
but by the Spirit of Prophecy, 409. that of Esaias about the peaceableness of
Christ's Kingdom, how understood page 20 Prophecies in expounding, Cautions to
Princes, 409. the pretense of fulfilling them no cause, of War ibid.
Proportions Arithmetical and Geometrical, whether properly they distinguish
between Justice Expletive and Attributive page 396 Propriety, its beginning and
growth, 78, 80 it came in, 1. By partition, 2. By Occupancy, 80. it may be held
by Infants, Idiots and Madmen page 89 Prosperous successes in War, whether by
force or fraud justifiable page 437, 438 Protectorship in the minority or
disability of Kings, to whom page 44 Protection takes not away Civil Liberty,
49. it does not always argue subjection, 50. due to the oppressed, but not to
wilful Malefactors page 496 Provocation to sin, wbence, 379. causes of
rest^^^ni^g ibid. Prudence ^onversant about things indifferent called the Tree
of Knowledge of good and evil, 79. a Virtue proper to Princes, Justice to men
as men page 418, 419, 430 Prudential Rules guiding us in the choice of things
good page 430 Pupils not bound to pay Debts, unless they gain by what they
borrow page 147 Public Good preferred before private page 56 Public
Remonstrances forbidding the importation of Goods before they can be made
Prizes page 436, 437 Public profit preferred before honesty, confuted Pref. x
Public safety consists in well commanding and well obeying page 57 Public
things distinguished from things common page 89 Punishment of Kings, what page
41 Punishment what, 362. the Cure of wickedness, ibid. proportionable to the
Crime, ibid. sometimes public when the sin is secret, ibid. how said to be due
page 363 To Punish all sins equally, unjust page 362 Punishment, to what end
ordained, 363, 365 all refer to the time to come, 364. Not as sweet to the
Punisher, but profitable to the Punished, ibid. God punishes sometimes to show
his power, and merely for revenge, ibid. To Punish the incorrigible with death,
better, than to suffer them to live page 366 To Punish, any man has a right
naturally that is himself innocent page 367 By Punishment what benefits accrue
page 368 Of Punishments exemplary ibid. All Punishment not remitted to the
Penitent, Objections answered, first, from Gods Mercy page 372 Punishments not
all Capital, 376. not necessary, when the end may be attained without it, ibid.
may be remitted, both before and after the penal Law be past page 376, 377 Of
Punishments some may be remitted, some severely exacted, some may be either
page 376 From Punishment some Causes exempt Offenders page 377 Punishments
should be proportioned to merit, 378. do not always argue civil Jurisdiction,
385. vary according to the capacity of the Offender, to judge between good and
evil page 380, 381 Beasts properly not punishable page 401 Punishment by bare
Counter-passion rejected page 381 In Punishing regard to be had to the quality
of the person punished, ibid. no acceptance of persons ibid. The Punishment of
Cattle stolen out of the Field, or out of the House ibid. Punishments ought to
be milder than the Laws, 382. exemplary upon such only as are incorrigible
ibid. Of Punishments a man may partake by reception of Malefactors, 395. and
how otherwise page 393 Punishment of individuals is death, of Cities
Desolation, 399. communicated between Bodies politic and its Members, how far
ibid. How a man may be involved in the Punishment that is not partaker of the
Crime, with some Cautions page 400 For what the major part decrees, the minor
dissenting are not Punishable page 399 None Punished properly for the sin of
another page 401 Punishment for public injuries may be exacted at any time
during the Offenders life, 400. may be remitted or mitigated for some
preceding Merits page 417 Punishment better remitted than exacted by War,
especially by injured Kings page 416, 417 When Punishments are tacitly
remitted page 570 In Punishments the measure whence collected page 379 In
Punishments retrospection to be had to our former lives ibid. Punishment once
due may at any time be exacted page 399 All Punishments if great have somewhat
of Justice in them, but somewhat also that is repugnant to Charity page 376 The
Purpose and intention only sometimes punished page 383
Q.
QUalifications natural transfer no right page 368 A Question put, if in the
whole it cannot be assented unto, it must be discust in parts page 114 The
Quarrel is begun by him that provokes it page 499
R.
RAbirius perfidiously dealt with by Marius page 565 Ransom agreed binds
though the Prisoner be of better quality than was supposed page 562 The Ransom
of Prisoners vary page 523 Redemption of Captives much favored amongst
Christians, 561. whether it may be lawfully forbidden page 562 Ransom whether
chargeable upon the Heir ibid. A Rape committed in the Field and in the City,
the difference page 75 Ravishment, whether in War lawful, 463. the most
civilized Nations restrain it, 464. against it no Law extant before Moses page
110 Reason adequate what it operates, 408. the foundation of Law, 6. natures
best guide page 11 The Reason of the Law directs us to the meaning of it, 192.
none so readily obey as he that knows the reason of the Law ibid. The Reason of
the Law not always the same with the meaning of the Law ibid. When the self
same Reason justifies an extended signification of the words of a promise page
196, 197 The Reception of Malefactors tolerated, unless they are such as
disturb the Peace page 398, 399, 550, 551 The Reception of Exiles, Fugitives,
and such as come to inhabit, no breach of Peace page 550* 551 Redemption of
Captives much favored ibid. The Redeemed, how far bound to the Redeemer page
490 For the Redemption of Captives the consecrated Vessels sold page 561
Reformadoes, what they may do by internal justice, either in respect of
themselves or their Prince, 535. what Christian Charity requires of them ibid.
Refuge Cities of what use page 397 Regal Power exercised by the Roman
Dictators, though not under the title of Kings page 41 Relief sent to a Town
closely besieged, to what it obliges page 435 Religion, men's chance not
choice, every Nation thinks his own best, 389. in what sense it belongs unto
the Law of Nations, 387. it restrains both Prince and People, 386. how
necessary for humane society, ibid. its foundation is to know God and his
Providence, 388, 382. it depended among the Jews upon no other humane Authority
than upon the King and Sanhedrim, 59. in defense of our Religion and Liberty
War lawful page 416 Religion freely left to the Conquered, no prejudice to the
Conqueror page 527 Religious places obnoxious to the license of War, 465. they
ought to be spared page 515 To Remit punishments sometimes better than to exact
them page 376 Renegadoes punishable, when page 396 Rents not to be abated for a
barren Year page 162 Renunciation of a Kingdom, whether it prejudiceth the
Children born or unborn page 124, 125, 131 Reparation for damages done
primarily and secondarily, 201. he that encourages or commends a Malefactor
is bound ibid. To Reparation how far an Homicide is bound, 202. so for
Mutilation, loss of liberty, Adultery, Ravishment, Robbery, defrauding of the
Kings custom ibid. The Principals and Accessaries how far bound to Repair
damages page 201 To Reparation they are not bound that omit what in charity is
due ibid. Reparation for damages done to Friends, by Letters of Marque, granted
against Enemies, whether due from the Grantors page 203 Representative
Succession admitted by the Hebrews, 124. when in doubt to be allowed of, ibid.
but lately admitted among the Germans ibid. Reprizals what, 448. the Sea-Laws
concerning them, 435, 436. their Right reaches not to the Lives of such as are
innocent, 448. they may be taken when no War is denounced page 447 When the
Right of Reprizals passes to them that take them page 449 Concerning Reprizal
their difference of the Civil Law and the Law of Nations, and what persons and
Goods are exempted page 450 Things taken without the Territories of either
Party, whether lawful Prize page 480 Res rapere, Res reddere, what page 456
Request of a Superior in a League equivalent to a Command page 51 To Require
things, what it signifies page 453 Required what is, before War be denounced
page 452 Resistance of the supreme Power, whether in extreme necessity lawful,
54, 55. disallowed by the Primitive Christians, even to persecuting Emperors,
57, 58. unlawful by the Gospel, 55. the opinion of Barklay concerning it, 63.
in what Cases lawful, 59, 60, justifiable by inevitable necessity by the
example of David and the Maccabees, 60. naturally lawful, civilly not, 53. and
why page 54 Obstinate Resistance justifies not the killing of men internally
page 508 Resistance in some Cases may be reserved in the translation of
Kingdoms page 60 To Restitution who are obliged either by doing or not doing
page 201 Restitution arises from Dominion page 146 No Restitution of things
which are another, if in Case they perish, if in Case we use them thinking
them our own, 148. yet are we bound restore the profits if any be ibid.
Restitution must be made of the things and profits, 147. necessary to
repentance, 495. it must be made to the right Owner, 147. not due in some Cases
page 149 Restitution intended justifies not Rapine, unless in a Case of
absolute necessity page 149 Things bought or deposited, may be restored to
their Right Owner page 149 Restitution of things taken in an unjust War, 528.
what may be deducted, 529. it must be to the full page 496 No Restitution of
places or persons freely surrendered, unless so expressed page 546 Of Restoring
things after War, some Cautions page 547 No Restitution in a just War sometimes
by reason of the evil intention in its prosecution page 331 Restitution where
the C^^se of War is doubtful, how to be moderated page 530 Restitution of
things taken from the Enemy who held them unjustly page 451, 452 To Restitution
who are wholly, and who in part bound page 202 Retaliation not to extend beyond
the persons offending, 461, 539. agreeable to the Law of Nations, 367.
tolerated under the Law to avoid greater mischief, 371. not to be exacted by
Christians, ibid. in what sense required by the Hebrews, its use both amongst
Hebrews and Romans ibid. Retreat sounding, to kill an Enemy is homicide page
534 Return to the Enemy who may be said page 531 Revenge by retaliation
naturally lawful, page 366, 367 Revenge, whether agreeable to the Law of
Nature, 364. whether by the Law of Nature and Nations lawful, 366. whether
permitted to Christians, how restrained, 369, 370 it differs not from injuries,
but in order only, 364. taken with delight unnatural, 370. in that it mitigates
grief, whence it proceeds page 364 To Revenge his own Quarrel every man has a
Right naturally, 66. why now committed to Magistrates, 370. not to go beyond
the persons that injured us page 400 Reward for labor, how increased or
diminished. 162. to whom due, if two at once fulfill the Condition page 196 The
Reward promised to Thamar due by the Law of Nature, not by the Civil Law page
154 A Reward demanded by a Soldier for killing his own Brother in the head of
his Enemies Troops page 458 Right in War what, 2. taken for a moral
qualification of a person divided, ibid. for aptitude or fitness, 3. taken for
a Rule or Law, 4 divided into natural and voluntary ibid. Right reason a Rule
infallible ibid. Right by the Law of Nations distinguished from that which has
some effects of Right, Pref. xv Right of Government distinguished from the ill
management of Civil Affairs page 41 Right distinguished from Just, 54. Right
extreme, sometimes extreme wrong ibid. What Right of Kings it is that Samuel
describes page 54 What Right a Lord has over his Slaves, 115. whether it
extend to death, 116. over the Children of his Slave born in his house ibid. A
Right a man may have to that taken from another page 122 Right acquired by Law,
121. By the Civil Law none can right himself page 122 Right of a Father over
his Children distinguished into Natural and Civil, 104. of an Husband over his
Wife, 104, 105. of Societies over their Members page 114 By the Right of
Nations many things claimed that are not thereby due page 134 The Right of
Strangers not subject to the supereminent dominion of a King, 178. nor of a
Subject without Cause ibid. Right better lost than contended for sometimes,
416, 417. not to be extended to the full, 434. when said to be denied, 448.
considered directly and indirectly page 434 A Right none can give that has
none, 528. incorporeal gained by War page 486 The Right of War makes no
distinction of Age or Sex page 459 The Right of the Sword in Histories sacred
and profane, what page 17 Right distinguished from its exercise page 52 The
Right supereminent of Kings and States, whether it can free them from the
breach of Faith given to their Subjects page 539 Right external what, 395. how
differenced from internal page 453 The Right of Kings and States when by Peace
said to be remitted page 547 The Right of Nations concerning inequality in
Contracts page 164 Righteousness, Judgment and Mercy, how distinguished page
177 Rivers, how held in propriety, 89. the whole sometimes belongs to one
Territory, and none to another, 95. as flowing streams common, 82. but as the
profit, his that ownes the Banks, ibid. changing their course, whether they
change the Bounds of the Territory page 94 A River in what sense said to be
always the same, page 141, etc. Rome once the common City, 525. regardless of
Captives or Prisoners, and why page 488 The Romans severe in their Victories,
503. they anciently abstained from fraud in their Wars page 444, etc. The Roman
Empire in whom now, 143. founded in the People of Rome page 144 The Romans
claimed that to themselves which their Enemies took from others page 471 All
the Roman Tribes disfranchized for ingratitude page 39 Roman Dictators
absolute, though temporary page 43 The Romans choose their Emperor when
residing at Constantinople. page 144 The Roman Empire not universal, though
sometimes so called page 407 The Romans Right over their Children, 104. their
custom concerning Lands taken in War, 472. concerning the spoil, 474, 475.
Captives redeemed, 491. those that return by Postliminy, ibid. concerning
things taken, 518, 519 concerning their Captive Kings page 503 Rules guiding us
in Political Consultations 419 Of Rule or Dominion the desire, with the consent
of the People to be ruled, no cause of War page 407
S.
SAbacon converted capital punishments into servile works page 372, Sabbath the
symbol of the Creation, 387. its Law more indispensable than any other, ibid.
its breach why punished by Death, ibid. driven away by the danger of life, 59.
made for the refreshment of Servants page 521 Sacred things in what sense
public, 465. whether subject to the license of War, ibid. and 466. rendered by
their City, cease to be sacred, ibid. made profane by the consent of the
People, ibid. in war to be spared, page 515 Sacrilege in War not punishable
page 465 It is Sacrilege to violate Temples and Altars page 515 Sacreligious
persons to be cast out unburyed page 219 Safety of the Conqueror how provided
for page 525, 526 Safety of the whole consists in the preservation of its
parts, and so on the contrary page 57 Safe Conduct to such a place how
understood, 568. how far it extends to persons Goods or Attendants, 544. what
it implies page 560 The Saguntines case discust page 193 Sampsons Death page
219 Sanedrin called Gods page 47 Satisfaction to be demanded before War be
denounced, 367. to be tendered by him that has offended, 77. if refused,
justifies a War ibid. Saul, whether he dyed impenitent page 219 Scarcity of
money and provision shortens a War page 511 Schoolmen, their singular modesty,
Pref. xix. their opinion concerning Lying and Equivocation, 444. the generality
follow St. Augustine ibid. Scriptures, what they barely recite and reprove not,
we ought not to condemn, 449. to understand, two main helps page 25 Sea, taken
either universally or in its parts, whether occupyable, 80. it cannot be
possessed because not bounded, ibid. may be held in propriety, and how, 89. near
the shore occupyable by the Law of Nature, 90. filled up and let in to the Land
by the Romans 90, 91. serves for three uses, Water, Fishing, and Navigation
page 80 The Seas Empire over it: parts how lost page 92, 93 Sects, all hold
somewhat that's true, none infallible Pref. xvi. Self-murder not valor but
madness page 218, 219 The Sentence does not properly give a Right, 448, 449.
sometimes divided sometimes conjoined page 113 Sepultus and Humatus the
difference page 214 Sepulchers subject to the Conqueror by the Law of Nature
page 467 Sergius Paulus a Magistrate after his conversion page 20 Servus quasi
servatus page 482 Servants may do what is unjust and yet be just, 429. not
punishable for what they do being commanded, ibid. not Judges of their Masters
commands but Executioners, ibid. not examined by the Romans without torture,
28. prohibited by the Canon to forsake their Masters, how understood, 116, 117,
483. whether they may resist their Master, ibid. or take reward for their
labor, ibid. if good, to be used as Brethren page 520 Servitude by way of
punishment, 117. its degrees, ibid. not repugnant to Nature, 115, 116. perfect
and imperfect page 115 The Severity of the Roman Laws toward the Conquered
page 503 See Slaves Severity then seasonable when delinquents are few page 37
Severity extreme too near a Neighbor to Cruelty, 456. of Lords justifies the
Servants flight page 116 Sex preferred in Succession to Kingdoms before Age
page 128 Signs testifying the consent of the will page 98 Significations though
improper sometimes admitted page 193 Ships, when said to be taken, 470. of War
with the Tackle and Ordnance taken, the Kings, 480. if they hurt any, whether
the Master stands obliged, 204. where are many Innocents, whether to be
battered with Ordnance page 434 Shores, how common and how held in propriety,
90. forsaken by the River, whose, 138. are the Occupants, Sheds for shelter may
be built thereon page 85. Silence, when taken for consent, 98, 99. if not free,
works nothing ibid. Simulation in War laudable to deceive an Enemy page 137,
138, 139 Simplicity of our first Parents, wherein, page 79 Single Combats from
whence, 368. in what cases lawful page 76 Sins re-acted aggravates the
punishment, 379 the most customary, the more severe, 382. differ with men's age
and complexion, 380. of humane infirmity not punishable by humane Laws, 374.
some unavoidable to some complexions, 375. visited upon Parents and their
Children; what, 402. against the second Table, their degrees page 379 To Sin,
he that urges another, sins himself page 445, 446 Sisters two, to marry
Anciently lawful page 111 A Slave what, 115, 116. not to resist his Lord, 483.
too severely used, may fly, 116, 117. taken in an unjust War, and making an
escape whether he may carry any thing with him, 483. what ere is done unto him
is unpunishable, ibid. has nothing of his own page 483, 484 Of Slaves, a
multitude cannot constitute a City, 486. some permitted to make their Will,
523. in cases of Famine or Cruelty they may appeal to the Magistrate ibid. A
Slave may merit from his Lord and raise himself a stock, 522. not to be killed
nor too rigorously punished nor oppressed with over hard labor, 520, 521, 522.
after very hard service rewarded with freedom, and not to go away empty handed,
523. to be used as an hireling, 521. the Hebrews and Romans very merciful to
them page 520 Where Slavery is not in use, exchange of Prisoners and ransom
succeeds page 523 Society the foundation of Law, Pref. iv, v. and reason man's
best weapons ibid. A Society and a City how they differ page 50 Civil Society
an human institution page 59 Society not to be kept by the Hebrews, with whom
page 184 Societies of ensurance against dangers page 164 Societies where work
is set against Money ibid. In Societies, the major part obliges the whole,
113. what Right they have over their members page 114 Societies with profane,
what, and how far dangerous, and how they may be avoided, page 186 Where diverse
Societies have unequal shares, how the votes are to be reckoned page 114
Societies hold not where any one part have no hopes of gain page 163, 164
Societies Naval page 164 Social War, its division page 183 See Associates
Sojourners in times of Peace, may in War be made Captives page 472 To Solicit
Subjects to betray their own Prince unlawful page 445 Soil lying waste may be
given to Strangers page 85 Sold twice, whose they are page 161 Solemn War
cannot be but between Sovereign Princes, 252. it has its peculiar Rights page
456, 480 A Son when he may accuse his own Father of Treason page 209 The Son
born before the Father was King, preferred before him that was born after page
131 Sons Adopted, whether capable of Succession page 127, 128 Sovereignty not
lost by a promise of any thing that is not of natural or Divine Right, 45. nor
by misgovernment lost page 73 Soldiers to choose their General, dangerous, 143,
144. straggling from the Army and Plundering, may be killed, 374. -- of Fortune
fight for Plunder and Pay, 426. -- lives most miserable, ibid. -- common worse
than Hangmen, ibid. most backward to fight, most forward to plunder, 476. bound
by Oath not to embezel the spoil, 478. how they march inoffensively in a
Country at peace, 531. their Swords sealed in their Scabbards ibid. Soldiers
straggling and plundering, to be assaulted as Thieves page 374 Specification
page 88, 139 Speech proper to man Pref. iv Spies to send, allowed by the Law of
Nations, 463. yea and to kill them being discovered ibid. Spoil taken from an
Enemy, whose, 471. disposed of by the General, 474. sold by the Questor, and
the Money brought into the Treasury without diminution, 474, 475. sometimes
divided amongst the Soldiers, 475. sometimes parted by Plunder, 476. whereof
the General might take what he pleased, 475. sometimes to them that had
contributed extraordinarily to the maintenance of the War, 477. sometimes
between the Soldiers and the State, 478, 479. sometimes to the maimed, and to
Widows and Orphans, 479. sometimes imparted to our Associates in War, 478. and
to Reformadoes, 479. may by an antecedent Law be decreed to public uses, 478.
sometimes embezeled and the Commonwealth robbed, ibid. taken by public Acts,
the Commonwealths, but by private, theirs that take them, ibid. of a Town if
stormed, the Soldiers; if surrendered, the Commanders page 479 Sponsions what,
187. how far a General bound if the King refuse, 188. at Caudis and Numantia,
obliged the Army not the People of Rome, ibid. made by Generals, Leagues by
Kings page 179 Sponsors in War, how far bound, 180. their Estates may be sold,
their Persons enslaved, but their Prince not obliged page 188 So Steal away the
heart what it means page 441 Stipulation is the sign of a deliberate mind page
152 The Stock of a Slave may be taken from him, in what cases, 522. how far his
Lords and how far his page 521 The Stoics dispute much about words, 376, 377.
they account it wisdom to know when and where to lie page 440 To Strangers to
deny marriage unlawful, 86. their Goods not subject to the supereminent power
of Kings, 178. they must observe the Laws and Customs of those they live with,
81. to rob them anciently an honorable Trade, 182. how they should judge of
things taken in War, 480. how a Right may arise by the Civil Law, 141 their
Goods may be detained for our, or our Subjects Debts page 448 Subjection mutual
between King and People refuted, 41. public what, 117. sometimes requires
protection page 422 Subjects sometimes called Servants, 42. when they may
safely engage in a just War, 43. their Goods may be seized for the Debts of
their society, 448. how their Right may lawfully be taken from them, 178. but
not without just cause, 179. may justly make War, 427. what they may do if the
cause be unjust, ibid. or if they doubt not to execute the wicked commands of
their Prince, 428. not punishable for their Princes sin properly, 411. of an
Enemy may every where be presented, unless protected by another Prince page 458
A Subject not to be solicited to kill his Prince, nor a Soldier his General,
462. bound by the sentence of a Judge, but so are not Strangers, 448. being
invaded the Peace is broke, 549. not if Pirates, ibid. fight under an Enemy,
whether it breaks the peace, ibid. whether they may be compelled to be
Hostages, 555. and how, ibid. of another Prince whether they may be defended
page 425 Subjects not to resist the supreme Power, proved by the nature of
humane Society and Gospel, 54, 55. their liberty liable to the fact of their
Prince, 447. as to them a War may be on both sides just, 429, 430. taken in an
unjust War to be delivered to their Prince, 529. may make War against their
Magistrates being authorized by the Supreme Power page 53 Subjection by way of
punishment, 117. Civil, 485. Despotical, ibid. mixed, 486. perfect and imperfect
page 116, 117 Success good of bad designs, no encouragement Pref. xii
Succession is the continuation of an old Title in the same Family, 42. makes
men and Kingdoms Immortal, 117. Males preferred before Females, and the Eldest
before the Youngest, 128. to Kingdoms not to last beyond the time of the first
King, ibid. the Laws are diverse concerning it, 126. to an Intestate, 122. what
if childless, 127. to an Estate newly gained, 126. in Kingdoms Patrimonial how
guided, 127. Representative what, 124. not known to the Germans till lately,
126. Lineal, Agnatical, 130. Cognatical, 129. that always respects the
proximity to the first King, 130. in Kingdoms indivisible, to the Eldest, 127.
wherein the elder Brothers Son is preferred before the younger Brother, 132.
the Sisters Son before the Kings own Son, 130. who shall be Judge of it if in
doubt, 131. of the Nephew before the Uncle is but of late page 132. Succession
to Kingdoms the same as to other Estates when that Kingdom was first
established, 129. wherein the Antenate is preferred before the Postnate, if the
Kingdom be indivisible, 131. why descendent rather than ascendent page 123, 124
The Successor bound by the Contracts of a King, 178. and how far page 179
Suffer a man may by occasion of another sin, and yet not for it page 400, 401
Suffrages how to be reckoned where diverse Societies claim by unequal shares
page 114 Superiors how they may lie to their Subjects, 443. what they may do
about the Oaths of their Inferiors, 173, 174. may compel their Inferiors not
only to that which is justly due by Justice, but by any other Virtue page 423
Suppliants liable to the license of War, 461. their Right to whom due, 396,
397. to be protected until the equity of their Cause be known, 399. to be
spared, 508. unless guilty of some crimes deserving death ibid. Supplies sent
to an Enemy by Neuters page 435 See Relief
Supreme Power what and in whom. 37. not in the People, 37, 38. it may be
divided into Parts subjective and potential, 46. not lessened by consenting
that their acts shall be confirmed by the Authority of the Senate ibid. A
Surety suffers not for the Debt, but for his Engagement, 400, 401. not to be
troubled unless the Principal be insolvent page 518 To Surrender unless
succors come, how to be understood page 531 Swallows feed their Young by turns
page 123
T.
TAlio not to extend beyond the person page 508 See Retaliation
Talio bought off by the Jews page 371 Taxes that maintained the War restored
by Fabritius page 477 The Temple at Jerusalem entered into by Pompey, and burnt
by Titus, 466, 467. its religious sanctity page 466 The Temples of the Gentiles
burnt by the Jews ibid. Temples in War to be spared, 514. to violate them
Sacrilege page 515 Temptation vehement excuses in part page 378 Terminus
would have no blood shed in his Sacrifices page 526 Territory, whence, 470.
with what is fixed therein, being taken in War, is the Kings page 472 Terror
alone gives no internal Right to kill page 508 Testament wanting some
formality, what effect it may have, 482, 483. to make is due by the Law of
Nature, 120. they may be made by Strangers by the Right of Nature ibid. By
Testaments, Kingdoms Patrimonial may be bequeathed, but others not, but by the
Peoples consent page 43, 44 To hinder a man from making his Testament obliges
to satisfaction page 201 Thebaean Legion page 62, 93, 428 Theseus the Scourge
of Wickedness page 384 Theft prohibited by the Law of Nature, 5. in extreme
necessity lawful, with some Conditions, 81, 82. nocturnal and diurnal, the
different punishments, and why, 74, 75. against it, severe Laws sometimes
mitigated through Charity page 75, 76 It is Theft to require more or give less
in measure, weight or number, than was contracted for page 160 Theft not
punishable by death by the Mosaical Law, 76. nor by the Civil Law is approved,
though tolerated ibid. A Thief nocturnal may be killed in what Case, 32, 75. to
kill whether the Civil Laws do only tolerate or justify page 76 Thieves live
not without Laws, Pref. ix. and Pirates have no Right of Embassages page 206 No
Theft to spend somewhat of another to procure him a greater profit page 442
Things thus standing how and when understood, 151. stolen lose not their
property, 97. that have no Owner, the Germans give their Prince, 135. given as
lost, cease to be ours, 98. taken from an Enemy are theirs that take them,
though first taken from friends, 470, 471. taken in a just War, how far ours by
the Law of Nature, 468. moving and moveable taken by private acts in a just
War, are lawful prize, 472, 473. useless in War may be spared, 514. sacred and
religious received by Postliminy, 492. not the Enemies not gained by War, 470,
etc. to defend justifies interfection naturally, 74. how far lawful by the
Gospel, 75. twice sold, whose Right is best page 161 Things to restore, taken
for any satisfaction, as things to take away, understood for any injury, 456.
lose not their Dominion till within the Enemies Garrisons, 492. of Enemies to
spoil, how far lawful page 411 Time out of mind what, 99. long out of
possession, of what force to prove dereliction page 98 Time and place of Battle
always proclaimed page 445 Titles, none to be set on foot after four ages, 99,
100. to Empires should be fixed, 99. originally naught, cannot by any Postact be
made good, how understood page 100, 101 Tolls for importation of Goods in what
cases lawful, 84, 85. for passing Rivers and Bridges, ibid. by Sea, may be
lawfully taken page 93 To Traffic, a Right common to all, 86, it unites
Countries remote, ibid. to hinder it with such Nations unjust page 84 In
Traffic by Companies, how the gain is divided page 164 Traitors have no Right
of Embassies, 206. against such and public Enemies every man is a Soldier,
65, 374. to kill, not punishable by the Law of Nature page 462, 463 Of Treason
against our Country, the danger not past, a Son may accuse his own Father page
209 To Treason, the next degree, is, to harbor Traitors page 396 Travelers
may for a while reside in any place page 85 Treasures found whose it is, 136.
the public not touched by Mark Antony without the consent of the Senate page 59
Treachery against Robbers and Pirates, when and why* not punishable, 463. in a
solemn War lawful, unless by Poison or private Assasinatinn page 462 Tree of
Life, what it signified, and of knowledge of good and evil page 79 Tribunals
wanting, the Law of Nature takes place page 122 Tribunes, how made inviolable
page 539 Tributes and Taxes due to Kings, 3. to maintain Soldiers page 20
Tributary Associates page 57 Trifles not worth contending for, page 21, 22, 23
Truce, what, a Time of Peace or War* 557. when it begins to oblige, and when it
ends, 558, 559, broken on one side, or ending needs no indiction of War, 558,
560. continuing, no place to be surprised, nor received that would revolt, 559.
what may ^awfully be done within that time 559, 560. it may be made by
inferior Commanders, 565. being ended, whether they that were forceably
detained, during it, have a Right to return page 559 Truths, some easily
assented unto, others not but by three or four consequences page 385 Truth the
same spoken or sworn page 175 Truth only to be spoken in Markets page 441
Tyrants worse than Hangmen, 426. their scourge, Hercules, 384, with them Faith
to be kept, if given as to such page 537, 538
V.
VAlentinian's answer to his Army page 40 Valor cannot prevail against Nature,
nor dwell with Famine page 119 The Valerian Law in Rome distinguished from
Solons in Athens page 65 The Value of things, from whence page 161 The
Vanquished to be treated gently, 527. which may be done either, 1. by mixing
them with the Conquerours, 525. 2. by taking nothing from them but what
disturbs Peace, 524. 3. by leaving them their own Empire, 525. excepting some
strong Garrisons, 526. 4. permitting their own Laws Magistrates Religion, with
caution for the true Religion 527. 5. by imposing some tribute on them, 526. or
some part of their Government page 525 Variety of manners occasioned by the
various mixture of the Elements page 375 Venom to use unlawful in War, page
461, 462. See Poison
Veracity a Guide to all Virtues page 444 Virtues, some require moderation of
affection, others not, Pref. xvii. what the Law enjoins, the Gospel requires in
a larger measure page 10 Vices, what not to be punished, 374. of things
contracted for to be made known, and why page 159 Victor who, 552. his duty
toward them that yield page 554 Victory disdained unless got by Manhood, 445
sometimes the gift of fortune, and not always the reward of Valor, 504. being
assured, to waste things is madness, 513. gained by fraud more honorable than
that gained by force page 437, 438 Virgins Milesian page 218 Virgins, not to
choose themselves Husbands page 107 Visible what is not, has no certain Right
page 100 That Universals have a power to oblige singulars, 113. their Debts how
far they bind their Members page 545 Unborn, the Right defended by Law lost by
prescription page 187 Uninhabited places are the First Occupants page 85 Unjust
that is, which is repugnant to humane Society page 2 Unjustly what is denied,
may justly by War be taken page 86 Unjust if the War be, what ever is done in
it is internally unjust page 495 Unjust Wars are no better than great Robberies
page 70 To do Unjust things, and to do Unjustly, how distinguished page 428, 429
Unlawful things none to be urged unto page 446 Untruth whereby a By-stander is
deceived, no Lie page 441 Unwillingly what is done, deserves pardon page 500
Votes in a society, where diverse claim unequal shares, how to be reckoned page
114 Usurpation what, 97. of no force between Kings of diverse Nations ibid. Use
common, its Authority in expounding Laws page 25 The Use of things Natural page
78, 79 The Use of a thing consisting in abuse, is to be esteemed beyond the
thing, page 162, 163 To Use a man's help being offered is lawful, though to him
that offers it, it be unlawful page 446 Usurper, who page 405 An Usurper not to
be killed but obliged by private men: by whom he may, 64, 65, 66. his act binds
not a lawful King, 180. but in some Cases, his Subjects page 64, 65 Usura and
Foenus how distinguished by the Roman Laws page 163 Usury by what Law forbidden,
162. under it, what gain falls, ibid. concerning it, what the Civil Law has
determined, 164. what the Law of Holland ibid.
W.
WAR and Arms distinguished, Pref. vi. when justly made, Pref. xi. to be justly
managed ibid. War defined, 2. proved lawful by the first principles of Nature,
11. by the Law of Nature, 11, 12. by right reason and by the nature of human
Society, 12. by sacred story, 13. by the consent of the wisest in all Nations,
14. not repugnant to the Law of Nations, not to the Divine Law, ibid. avoided
by the Primitive Christians, to prevent some Acts which their Religion allowed
not page 26 War, some lawful proved out of the Fathers, 26. public, private,
and mixed, 31. private permitted by Moses, 32. after tribunals erected,
sometimes lawful, 31, 32. private, in our own defense, lawful, 33, 34. solemn
and less solemn, ibid. sometimes made by inferior Officers, and whether such a
War be solemn or public, 35. whether made by inferior Commanders by guessing
at the Will of their Prince ibid. War to make, without Commission from the
Prince, Treason, ibid. solemn cannot be but between Sovereign Princes, page 35,
36, 452. The War of Manlius against the Galatae, Caius Caesar in Germany,
Octavius and Decimus Cassius, whether just page 35, 36 War against Superiors
unlawful, 54. without Cause unjust, 70. Civil worse than Tyranny page 65 War
should be just if we would have it prosper, 70. it has three efficient Causes,
Principal, Auxiliary, Instrumental, 66. it begins where Justice ends, 69. its
pretenses always just, though its Causes sometimes unjust page 70 War caused
for wrongs done, or in our own defense, just, 70. made for others naturally
lawful, 66. to repair damages, or to exact punishment lawful, 383. for
punishment only seldom just, 385, 386. made to lessen the power of a Neighbor
Prince only, unlawful, 76, 77. for sins against God, whether lawful, 386.
without cause suspected to be predatory, 405. the most natural is that against
wild Beasts, next is that against men as brutish as Beasts page 384, 385 By War
some things gained are the Kings page 43, 44 War between Christians not to be
made for the Scriptures misunderstood, 391. then profitaable when our Enemies
will not otherwise do us Justice, 412. when unlawful, though the Cause be good,
409. whether it may be on both sides just, 414, 415. undertaken for Religion or
Liberiy, whether lawful page 416 War made for a single Subject not always
convenient for the whole, 422. for the defense of Subjects lawful, ibid. for
punishment seldom made by Princes of equal power page 420 The Condition of War
miserable page 421 In War many changes and chances happen which cannot be
foreseen page 418 War may prudently be undertaken where there is great cause
and great advantage, 420, 421. may be in respect of Subjects on both sides
just, 415. denounced against Princes, and against all that are under his
Government, 447. whether it may be made as soon as denounced, and in what
Cases, 455. made by Pirates or Subjects have no effect of a solemn War ibid.
That War is just that is made for the recovery of things taken away, that is,
publicly decreed, and solemnly denounced page 452 In War the effects are
lawful, i. e. not punishable, 457. its license extends to all that are found
among Enemies, even Strangers, 458. the Innocent and Nocent fare alike, ibid.
its rage, 459. not to be waged but with some clemency, 497, 498. especially
amongst Christians, 495. made against Walls, Pillars, Houses, malicious page
512 In an unjust War, as things so a People taken should be restored to
Liberty, 530. what is taken should be restored page 496 A War may be mixed, in
part public, in part private, 435. may be made by Soldiers, though wicked,
431. may be made against such as sin against the Law of Nature, 384. made to
compel to Christianity, unlawful page 389 War to be sometimes avoided by
Princes for their Subjects sake, 418. made to establish Peace, 524, 571. for
revenge not to exceed a just measure page 497, 498 Unto an un^ust War none to
be compelled page 187 War may lawf^lly be made for Friends and Associates, 424.
etc. for the Subjects of another Prince* 425. for any men page 424 War then
just when necessary, it should be our last remedy page 452 Wedlock, how it
differs from Matrimony page 112 Of Weight or measure to exact more or less than
is contracted for, is Theft page 160 A Wife may rocover from her Husband what
she lent him, if thereby he be enriched, 147. she may claim the Estate if
bought with her money, ibid. she has power over her Husbands Body by the
Gospel Law page 109 Wives many to have at once lawful of old, ibid. whether it
be lawful to forsake them, ibid. in favor to them Divorce permitted to the
Hebrews ibid. Wild Beasts, how possessed, 135. by the Germans given to their
Prince, as all other things that had no owner, ibid. in private Woods enclosed
are possessed ibid. whether the Dominion be lost with the possession, ibid. and
Fish, whose they are, 81. that they should be the Kings is not against the Law
of Nature page 135 Will, what has no known Cause we refer to Gods will page
390 The Will in some case punishable, 374. naturally mutable, 379, 380. of the
Dead a Law page 122 The more of the Will the greater the sin ibid. The Will is
moved by things really or imaginably good page 379 To have understood the Will
of the Deceased creates a Right page 122 The Will expressed by some outward sign,
creates a guilt, and makes us liable to punishment page 383 The Will to show
her own freedom, acts sometimes without any other reason page 419, 420 Wise men
make War by constraint, Fools for delight page 421 Wisdoms chiefest part is to
direct our selves in doubtful cases, the next is to be directed by others of
greatest learning and experience page 411, 412 Wolves Peace with Sheep upon the
delivery of the Dogs page 423 Women Captives how favored by the Hebrew Laws,
464. they have no guard for their Chastity, 482. their Children Slaves born
ibid. Women succeed in Kingdoms that are Patrimonial, 127. how they are
obnoxious to the license of War, 504. their Empire unknown to the Romans page
144 Women and Children to be spared in War page 504 Words signify by consent,
but things and acts not so, 438. in Leagues taken as vulgarily understood page
190, 191 Wrecks, that they should be the Kings or Peoples, unjust page 121
Writings are but lasting monuments of the contracts, but no part of the
substance page 199 In a Writing, if two clauses clash and cannot be reconciled,
to which we should incline, ibid. if its parts cannot be reconciled, the latter
derogates from the former page 191 Wrongs on the one side, make War on the
other side just page 70
X.
XEnophon's institution of Cyrus page 4 Xerxes his contest with Artabazanes for
the Kingdom page 132 (...), what page 183
Y.
YEA, Yea; Nay, Nay: what it signifies page 174
Z.
OF Zeal, the judgment page 369 In Zealand, the Vassals pay Tribute for their
common fields to the State, whereunto every man contributes his proportion page
138 Zeleucus his Law concerning such as drank Wine contrary to the prescription
of their Physicians page 4 Zopyrus (another Sinon) betrayed Babylon to Darius
perfidiously page 569
The End of the TABLE.

