HVGO GROTIVS Against PAGANISM, JUDAISM, MAHUMETISM.


Translated by C. B.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be Sold by John Barksdale
Book-binder, next door to the Five Bells in New-street near Shoe lane, 1676.

STEPHANVS CVRCELLAEVS To the Most Illustrious HVGO GROTIVS.

A Vreus tuus de Christianae Religionis veritate Liber, omnibus Pietatis
studiosis in deliciis esse debet.

That Golden Book of yours, of the verity of Christian Religion, deserves to be
in the bosom of all that are studious of Piety.

To his Honored Patron DAVID WILLIAMS of Corndon, Esquire.
SIR,
THE former Discourses were long since Dedicated to your Worthy Brother, now
with God, and they have born several Impressions. It is high time these should
follow, to complete The Defense of Christian Religion; and they gladly come
forth under your Name, hoping for the like favorable reception amongst
ingenuous Readers; because the Author is the same, and the Translator; and the
Dedication now will add as much Grace to this little Piece as the former has
received. And it serves my Design as well, that is to remain as a little
Monument of my Thankfulness to your self and your Noble Family, whom I daily
pray God to bless.

Your most humble Servant, Cl. Barksdale.

HVGO GROTIVS AGAINST PAGANISM.
I. A special Refutation of Religions differing from the Christian.
IT is the happiness of a Christian in this life not only to rejoice within
himself, and delight in Truth found out, but also to give help to other men,
that wander about in the various bypath of Error, and make them partakers of
so great a Good. This, although we have in some measure endeavored in our
former Discourses, (because the demonstration of Truth contains the refutation
of Error:) Nevertheless, seeing every sort of Religion, opposite to the
Christians ( viz. Paganism, Judaism, and Mahumetism) beside what they have
common among them, have certain proper Errors, and some peculiar arguments,
which they are wont to urge against us; 'twill be to good purpose, I think, to
enter into a special disputation with them severally, entreating the Readers so
free their Judgment from partiality and prepossession, that they may give the
more equal sentence upon the things to be delivered.

II. And first of Paganism. That there is one God alone.
And first, against the Pagans we say, if they put more Gods eternal and equal,
that is sufficiently refuted already in our first Discourse, where we
demonstrated the only one God, the cause of all things. But if by the name of
Gods they call created Minds or Intelligences, superior to Man; they are
either good or evil. If they say Good, they ought to be sure of it, lest they
fall perhaps into a dangerous Error, receiving enemies for friends, fugitives
for messengers. Besides, reason requires, that some evident difference of
Worship be made between the Highest God and these Intelligences. Moreover, it
should be known, what order is among them, what good may be expected from every
one, and what honor the Greatest King is willing should be done unto each of
them. All which being wanting in their Religion, it is hence apparent enough,
how nothing of certainty is therein; and how much more safe a way twere for
them, to betake themselves to the Worship and Service of the one Supreme God
(which also Plato has affirmed to be the duty of a Wise man:) and so much the
rather, because good Spirits being the Ministers of the Supreme God, they
cannot choose but be very serviceable to such as live in Gods favor.

III. That evil Spirits are worshipped by the Pagans.
But we have weighty Arguments to prove the Spirits which the Pagans worshipped
were not Good, but Evil Spirits. First, because they remitted not their
servants to the Worship of the Highest God: yea, as much as they could they
took away that Worship, or at least, by all means would therein make themselves
equal to him. Secondly, because they procured very grievous Persecutions of the
Worshippers of the Supreme God, stirring up the Magistrates and people against
them. For, whenas the Poets might freely sing of the Parricides and Adulteries
of the gods, and the Epicureans deny the Divine Providence, and no other
Religion was so dissonant in Rites, but was admitted into Society, (as the
Egyptian, Phrygian, Grecian, Thuscan at Rome,) the Jews only were Curti,
recutiti, nubium adoratores, dementes in porcos.
mocked every where, (as appears by the Satyrs and Epigrams) and sometimes
Joseph. 18.5. Tacit. Annal 2. Sen. Epist. 109. Act. 18.1. Suet. Tiber. cap. 36.
banished; but the Christians Tac. An. 15. Iuvenal -- toeda lucebis in illa, Qua
stantes ardent, qui fixo gutture sumant.
were also put to most cruel Torments: whereof there can be rendered no other
cause, but that these two Sects had a Veneration for the one true God, whose
Honor the Vulgar gods opposed, emulous, not so much one of another, as all of
him. Thirdly, From the manner of Worship, which cannot please or become an
honest good Spirit, by Hmmane Vid. Disc. 2.
Blood, by runnings Vt in Lupercalibus. Live. I.
of naked men in the Temples, by sports and dances full of Vt in Floral. Ovid.
Fast. 4.
obscenity, such as are now also seen among the People of America and Africa,
overwhelmed with darkness. Moreover, there were of old, and at this time are,
People which adore evil Spirits, which they know and profess to be evil: as the
Persians Plutarch. de Iside. Laert Praef.
Arimanius, the Grecians Cacodaemons, the Latins Cic. 3. de Not. Deorum.
Vejoves, and now some of the Ethiops and Indians Other: than which nothing can
be imagined more impious. For, Religious Worship, what is it else, but a
testimony of most excellent goodness, acknowledged to be in him whom you
worship? Which, if it be bestowed upon an evil Spirit, it is false and lying,
and contains in it self the crime of Rebellion: when the Honor due to the
King, is not only withdrawn from him, but transferred also upon his desertor
and his Enemy. Now, it is a foolish persuasion, when they imagine the good God
will not avenge it, as if that were not consistent with his goodness: For,
Clemency, that it may be just, has its Quomodo diliges, nisi times non
diligere? Tertull. adv. Marcion. 1.
limits; and where wickedness exceeds a measure, Justice produces out of it
self, as it were upon necessity, punishment. Nor is it less to be blamed, that
they say, they serve Evil Spirits, drawn thereto by fear. For, since he who is
most infinite in goodness, is also most communicative, and the producer of all
other Natures, it follows, that he has supreme dominion over them, as his
works, so that none of them can do ought, which he will plainly hinder.
Whereupon this is easily gathered, Whosoever has the favor of God, who is
highest both in power and goodness, can be hurt no farther by the evil Spirits,
than God, for some good end, will be pleased to permit. Neither can any thing
be obtained of those evil Spirits, which is not to be rejected; because the
Evil one when he (...) Soph.
counterfeits, is most evil; and the gifts of Enemies are (...) Soph.
snares.

Malus bonum cum sim^^lat, tunc est pessimus. Sir. Mimus.
IV. Against worshipping of the Dead.
There have been also Pagans, and now there are, who affirm, that they give
Worship to the Souls of men deceased. But first, this Worship too, was to be
distinguish by evident marks, from the Worship of the most High God. And then,
Prayers made to them are in vain, unless those Souls are able to bestow
something on us. Whereof the Worshippers have no knowledge, nor any ground to
say that so it is, rather than it is not so. But this is worst of all, that the
persons to whom they pay this honor, are found to have been notorious evil
Livers: Bacchus given to Wine, Hercules to Women, Romulus cruel to his Brother,
Jupiter to his Father: so that the honoring of them redounds to the dishonor
of the true God, and of the Virtue wherein he delights; whilst unto Vices,
pleasing enough of themselves, there is given a farther commendation from
Cyprian. Epist. 2. Deos suos quos venerantur, imitamur: fiunt miseris and
religiosa delicta.
Religion.

V. Against worshipping the Stars and Elements.
The Worship given to the Stars and the Elements of Fire, Water, Air, Earth,
was more ancient than this, not less erroneous. For the greatest part of
Religious Worship are Prayers: and these cannot without folloy be offered up to
any but intelligent Natures. That the Elements are not such, appears even by
sense. And if any one affirm it of the Stars, he will find no proof thereof;
since from their operations, the tokens of their nature, no such thing can be
collected: yea, the contrary is evidently gathered from their motion, not
varied, as theirs is, which have free will, but certain and The King of Peru,
moved by this Argument, denied the Sun to be God.
prescribed. And we have elsewhere showed, the courses of the Stars are fitted
for the uses of mankind: Whence it is man's duty to acknowledge himself to be,
both more like to God in his better part, and more dear; and therefore that he
does an injury to his own Nobility, if he subjects himself to those things God
has given him: When on the contrary he ought to render unto God thanks for
them, which they are not able to do for themselves, or are not proved to be
able.

VI. Against worship given to Beasts.
Now this is most unworthy of all, that men have fallen even to the worship of
Beasts, Vide lib. I. Diod. Sie.
especially the Egyptians. For although in some, there shows it self, as it
were, a shadow of understanding, yet is that nothing, compared to man; because
their inward conceptions they cannot express by speech or writing, neither can
they do works of diverse kinds, nor works of the same kind after a diverse
manner; much lest attain to the knowledge of numbers, of measures, or of the
heavenly motions. On the contrary, man by the subtilty of his Wit, catches any
of those Creatures, even the strongest of them, wild Beasts, Birds, Fishes; and
partly ramos them, as Elephants, Lions, Horses, Bulls; deriveth also profit to
himself from such of them as are most hurtful, namely, medicines from Serpents:
Certainly, has this use of them all, which themselves know not, that he
vieweth the frame of their bodies, the site of parts, comparing their several
kinds one with the other, and here also learneth his own dignity; how much the
structure of humane bodies is more perfect than the rest, and more noble. Which
things, if a man (...) Vide Porph. de usu anim. lib. 1.
consider rightly, he will be so far from worshipping other living creatures as
gods, that he will rather think himself to be by the great God, constituted as
a little God over them all.

VII. Worship of Accidents.
We read, the Greeks and Latins, and others also, adored things which have no
subsistence, but are the accidents of other things. To omit those ill-favored
deities, the Fever, and Impudence cic. de Legib. 2.
with such like, Sanity is nothing else but a right temper of the parts of the
Body: Fortune a suitableness of Event with man's desire; and the Affections, as
Love, Fear, Anger, Hope, and the rest, arising from the consideration of a
thing good or evil, easy or difficult, are certain motions in that part of the
Soul, which is most united to the body by the blood, being not in their own
power, but subject to the dominion of the Will, at least, as to their duration
and direction. And Virtues, which have several names, Prudence in the Election
of what is profitable, Fortitude, in abiding dangers, Justice, in doing no
wrong, Temperance, in moderation of pleasures, and other, are certain
pronenesses unto good, sprung up in the Soul, and ripened by long exercise;
which, as they may be increased in a man, so by neglect may be lessened, and at
last extinguished. Now Honor, Live. l. 27.
whereunto also we find Temple to have been dedicate, is the opinion of others
concerning some person as endued with Virtue: Which opinion often happens to the
bad, and does not happen to the good, it being natural to men easily to err and
to be mistaken. These things therefore, having no subsistence, and so being not
comparable in Worthiness to things which do subsist, neither having any
apprehension or sense of Prayers or Veneration; to worship them for gods, is
most contrary to right reason, seeing He is to be served for these things, who
is the Donor and Conservator of them.

VIII. Answer to an Objection of miracles.
For the Commendation of their Religion, the Pagans are wont to allege
Miracles: against which many Exceptions may be made. The wisest among
themselves reject many of them, as supported by no sufficient Faith of
Witnesses, and plainly counterfeit. Datur haec venia antiquitati, ut miscendo
humana divinis, primordia urbium augustiora facerent. Livius, l. 1.
. Some which are reported to have been real, happened in secret, in the dark,
in the presence of one or two, whose eyes, by the cunning of their Priests,
might be easily deluded. Others there are, which caused admiration only in such
as were ignorant of things Natural, and of Occult proprieties: as it comes to
pass among ignorant people, if they see one draw Iron after a Loadstone. By
such Arts, Simon, and Apollonius Tyanaeus, as many have written, sometime
prevailed. I grant, some greater things than these were seen; but yet such, as
needed not a Power truly Divine, being within the reach of Spirits interposed
between God and Man, who by their celerity, efficacy, and sagacity, might bring
together things distant, and compound things very different, to the producing
of astonishing effects. Now, that the Spirits, by whom this was effected, were
not good Spirits, and therefore that the Religion was not a good Religion, as
it appears by what we have said in another place, so is it hence also manifest,
because they confessed themselves to be constrained Apollo a pud Porphyrium.
Invitum me audi, quando me lege ligasti.
, against their Will, by certain charms; whenas, among the wi^^st, even of the
Pagans, it is agreed, that in Words is no such power, but the power of
persuasion only, and that according to the manner of their signification.

This is also an argument of their wickedness, that they did undertake to
inveigle Vid. pharmaceutri^m Theocriti and Virgilii.
some persons into the love of others, from whom they were of themselves
averse; herein injurious, either in promising or effecting it, being a thing
forbidden Paulus sent. l. 5. tit. 23.
, even by Humane Laws, under the name of Witchcraft. Neither may we wonder,
that the most High God suffered some mavelous things to be performed by
wicked Spirits among them, who, having first forsaken the true God, and his
service, had deserved to be given up to such 2 These. 2.9.
delusions. Their Impotency is farther proved by this: That their Works brought
with them no considerable benefit. For, if any seemed to be restored to Life,
they continued not long alive, nor exercised the functions of the living. And
suppose any thing, some time, appeared in the sight of Pagans, proceeding from
a Power Divine; yet was it not foresaid, it should come to pass for the
confirmation of their Religion: but we may conceive the Divine operation
proposed to it self far different causes. For example, Be it so, that by
Vespasian a blind man was made to see, 'twas done to this end, that he being
thereby more Venerable Tac. Hist. 4. Multa miracula evenere queis coelestis
favor, and quaedam in Vespasianum inelinatio numinum ostenderetur.
might be the more easily advanced to the Roman Empire, as a man chosen of God,
the Minister of his Judgments upon the Jews. And the like causes of other
Prodigies may have been, where Religion was not at all concerned.

IX. Answer to the Objection of Oracles.
The same answer almost may serve for that which they object concerning
Oracles; chiefly what was said, That those men deserved to be illuded, who had
contemned the notices, which reason, and most ancient tradition does suggest.
But farther, the Words of their Oracles were usually ambiguous, and such as
easily received an Interpretation cicero de Divinat. 2. Vtrum little accidisset,
inquit, verum oraculum fuisset.
from whatsoever came to pass. But in case any thing more definitely was
foretold by them, it is not necessary it should proceed from an omniscient
Spirit; when the things were such, which might from natural causes pre-existing
be foreseen (as Physicians have predicted diseases) or probably conjectured
from the consideration of common events, as we read it has been often done
Cic. de seipso. 1. Epist. 6. Quo in bello nibil adversi accidit, non
praedicente me.
by Politicians. Now, if at any time God has, among Pagans, used the service
of some Prophets o foreshew things that could have no certain causes besides
the Divine Will, this pertains not to the confirming of the Pagan Religion,
but rather to its overthrow; namely, that passage extant in Virgils Vide
August. de C. D. 10.27.
fourth Eclog, taken out of the Sibyllin Verses: where he, unwittingly,
presents to us the coming of Christ, and his benenefits. So 'twas in the same
Sibyllin Verses, that He must be received for King cicero meminis 2. de Divin.
, who truly should be our King: and, That he should come from the East Sueton.
Vesp. c. 4. Tacit. Hist. 4.
, who should have Dominion over all things. In Porphyrius, the Oracle of Vide
August. de C. D. 20.23.
Apollo is read, wherein he says, Other Gods are aerie Spirits; The God of the
Hebrews is alone to be Worshipped. Which saying, if Apollo's Worshippers obey,
they will then cease to worship him: if not obey, they accuse their God of a
lie. Add this also, that if those Spirits had, by their Oracles consulted the
welfare of mankind, they would above all things have proposed a General Rule of
Life, and given assurance of a reward for those that lived well. They have done
neither. But contrarily, Vid. Eusebius. praep. Evang. lib. 5.23, 35.
in their Verses, Kings, although wicked, are often commended; Divine Honors
are decreed for Gamesters; men enticed into Loves illegitimate, to unjust Gain,
to Murder, as might be demonstrated by many Examples.

X. Pagan Religion, destitute of Humane aid, decayed.
Moreover, Beside the Proofs already made, the Pagan Religion affords us a
great Argument against it self, in that wheresoever it was destitute of humane
strength, it fell to the ground, the prop being taken away upon which alone it
stood. For, if you cast your eyes upon all the Kingdoms, either of Christians
or Mahumetans, you shall no where see any memory of Paganism, but in Books.
Yea, you shall find in Histories, that, even in those times, when Emperors
used either force and punishments, as the former did; or Learning and Wit, as
Julian, for the supporting of Pagan Religion; nevertheless it decreased daily:
not by any force opposed, not by nobleness of birth, (for JESUS was, by the
Vulgar, called the Carpenters Son) not by Flower of Learning, (the speech of
the Christian Doctors was not adorned with it) not by gifts, (for they were
poor) not by any assentation or allurements; for they, on the contrary,
declared that all Worldly advantages were to be despised, and all adversities
to be suffered for the Gospels sake. Behold the imbecility of Paganism, pulled
down and overthrown by no other Engines but these! Nor did only the credulity
of Pagans vanish at the appearance of Christ's Doctrine, but the Spirits also
themselves, at the Name of Christ, departed out of bodies, Act. 5.16.8.7.16.18.
held their Tongues and being asked the cause of their silence, were forced to
confess, They had no power Tert. Apol. vide Chrysostom. cont. gent.
where Christ was called upon.

XI. The pretended efficacy of Stars.
There were Philosophers, who ascribed as the rise, so the fall o^ every
Religion to the Stars. But the science of the Stars, which they profess to have
Learned, is delivered under so disagreeing rules, that nothing can be found
certain therein, but this, that there is no Vide Dissert. in philocal. origin.
certainty. I speak not of those effects that follow naturally from necessary
causes, but of those which proceed from the Will of man, which is endued with
such liberty Vide Alex. Aphrodis. hac de re librum.
in it self, that no necessity can be imposed on it from without. For, if by
such impression the act of the Will should necessarily follow, then, the power
of deliberating and choosing, which we feel Eusebium vide, praep. Evang. 6.6.
in our Souls, had been given in vain; then, the equity of all Laws, Justin.
apol. 2.(...) Nisi il, electione libera a facultatem habet humanum genus, ut
turpia fugiat, honesta sumat, in neutram partem ipse ascribenda actionis causa.
of rewards and punishments, were taken away: First, because in that which is
plainly inevitable, there can be neither merit nor demerit, neither praise nor
dispraise. And farther, being there are some acts of an Evil Will, if these
come by a certain necessity from Heaven, in as much as God has given such a
power to Heaven, and Heavenly bodies, it will now follow; that God, who is most
perfectly good, is the true cause Contra quam dixit pluto de repub. 2. (...)
of moral evil: and whereas, by Law made, he professes himself to hate sin, the
inevitable cause whereof he has inserted in his Creatures, by consequence he
must will things contrary to each other, the same thing to be and not to be;
and sin must be committed in that which one does by Divine impulse. It Is more
probable, which others say, that by influx of the Stars, the Air first, and
then our bodies are touched, and imbibe certain qualities, which often excite
in the Soul correspondent appetitions, by which the will is moved, and many
times prevailed with. But this so granted, makes nothing to that question
which we have in hand, For Christian Religion, because it very much wi^hdraws
men from those things which are pleasing to the body, could not have beginning
from bodily affections, and therefore not from the power of Stars, which as we
have said, work not upon the Soul but by those affections. The wisest of
Astrologers exempt from the Law and Regiment of Stars, such men as are truly
wise Ptol. (...) Potest vir sapiens multas astrorum efficientias avertere.
and Virtuous: and such in truth were they, who first took upon them the
Religion of Christ, as their life demonstrates. And if we attribute also to
erudition and good Letters, any value against the inclination of the body,
there have been always among the Christians, men of good note in this respect:
Lastly, the effects of the Stars, as the most skillful do acknowledge, regard
the several quartets of the World, and are temporary: But this Religion
continnes now Sixteen hundred years, not in one, but in most distant parts of
the World, and under very diverse constellations.

XII. Many points of Christianity approved by wise Pagans.
But Pagans have the less to oppose against Christian Religion, because all the
parts of it are of such integrity, that by their proper light they do as it
were convince the minds of all: So that even among Pagans have not been
wanting, such as have said severally, what our Religion has all together.
Namely, that Religion is not placed in rites, Menander: Deo sacrifica semper
ingenio probo. Cic. Cultus deorum est optimus, ut cos semper pura mente
veneremur. Persius: compositum jus fasque animi, etc.
but in the mind; that he is an adulterer, who has had a desire Intus adulter
erit. Ovid.
to commit adulter,;that injury is not to be Menander: Ille vir virorum est
optimus, Qui melius aliis callet far injurias.
repaid; that one Wife Vide Eurip. Andron.
is to be joined with one man; that the Covenant of Marriage ought to be Val.
Max. l. 2. c. l.
perpetual; that it is the duty of man to do good to Homo sum, humani nibil a
me alienum arbitror. Ter.
every one; specially to the needy; that that we must abstain from (...) Pyth.
swearing as, much as we can; that in food Satis est populis fluviusque
Ceresque. Luc.
and raiment, we must be content with that which nature requires. And if there
be any thing in Christian Religion hard to be believed, like things are found
among the wisest of the Pagans, as that of the immortality of Souls, and that
of a return of bodies to life again. So Plato Epist. ad Dion.
taught by the Chaldeans, distinguishes the Divine Nature into the Father, the
Fathers mind, which he also styled the offspring of God, the maker of the
World; and the Spirit which contains all things. That the Divine Nature may be
united with the humane, Lib. 6.
Julian so great an Enemy to Christians, did believe, and gave an Example in
Esculapius, whom he thought to have come from Heaven to teach men the Art of
Physic. The Cross of Christ offended many: but what things do not the Pagan
Authors say of their Gods? that some were in service to Kings, others
thunderstruck, others cut and wounded. And the wisest of them affirmed, Virtue
is then most joy ous, when it is at the dearest rate. Plato in his second De
repub. Unde Cic. Bonus ille vir vexetur, rapiatur, damnetur, etc.
prophetically says, To exhibit the Righteous man, it is requisite that his
Virtue be spoiled of all ornaments, that he be accounted by others wicked, that
he be mocked, and at last Hanged. And certainly, to set forth an example of the
highest Patience, was otherwise impossible.

HVGO GROTIVS AGAINST JUDAISM.
I. Address to the Jews.
WE know the Jews are the progeny of Romans 9.10, 11.
Holymen, whom God was wont to visit by his Prophets and his Angels: Of this
Nation was born the Messiah and the first Doctors of Christian Religion: theirs
is the Tree into which we are inoculated: they the keepers of Gods Oracles,
which we reverence much as they do; and with St. Paul we send up sighs to God
on their behalf, praying for the speedy approach of that day, when the 2 Cor.
3.14.
Vail being taken off which hangs before their eyes, they shall with us clearly
behold the Romans 3.27.
completion of the Law; and when (according to the Old Prophecies) we that are
strangers, shall every one lay hold upon the skirt of an Hebrew Zach. 8.21.
with this request, that we may all join together in the Worship of that one
God, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

II. Christ's miracles cannot be denied by the Jews.
First, then let not the Jews think that unjust in our Cause, which they judge
to be equal in their own. If a Pagan ask, Why they believe the miracles done by
the hand of Moses, they would say nothing else but this: There has been
delivered down such a perpetual and constant report thereof amongst them, that
it could not but proceed from the Testimony of those who had seen the miracles;
namely, that the Widows Oil 2 Reg. 4.
was increased by Elishah, that Naaman the Syrian was on a sudden cleansed from
his Leprosy, that the good like; the Jews believe them for no other reason,
but because Faithful Witnesses have transmitted the same unto posterity.
Touching Etijahs being snatched up to 2 beg. 2.
Heaven, they give credit to Elisha alone, as a man beyond all exception. But
we, concerning Christ's ascension into Heaven, produce twelve Witnesses Mar. 16.
19. Act. I.
of unspotted life; many more of Christ's being seen I Cor. 15.
on earth after his death. Which things being true, the Doctrine also of Christ
must also of necessity be true; neither can the Jews allege any thing at all
for themselves, which may not be sitted to us, by an equal or a better right.
But to omit Testimonies, it is the Confession of Jews and Talmudists In tit.
Aboda Zora.
themselves, that prodigious works were achieved by Christ. This ought to be
sufficient, For God cannot in a more effectual way, procure authority to
Doctrine promulged by man, than by sealing it with miracles.

III. Answer to an object. of the Devils aid.
But some have said, Christ did his miracles by the help of Devils. This
calumny is refuted already on this account, that where Christ's Doctrine was
made known, all the power of Devils was broken. That which some add, that Jesus
learned Magic Arts in Egypt, has much less show of truth, than the like
accusation against Moses, which we read in Lib. 30. I.
Plinius and Apolog. 2.
Apuleius. For it appears not, that ever Jesus was in Egypt, save in the Books
of his Disciples, who also say he returned thence while he was yet an Infant.
But Moses spent a great part of his riper age in Egypt, as we are certified by
his own Exodus 2. Justin. Tacit.
and other men's relation. Howbeit, both Moses and Jesus are cleared
sufficiently by their own Law, expressly forbidding Exodus 22.18. Act. 19.19
such Arts, as hated of God. Moreover, if in the time of Christ and his
Disciples, there had been either in Egypt, or elsewhere extant any Magic Art,
able to do the things which are published of Christ; to make the Dumb to speak,
the Lame to go, the Blind to see; the Emperors Tiberius, Tacit. Annal. 6.
Nero Plin. 30. 2.
and others, who spared not charge to enquire after such things, would
doubtless have found it our. And if it be true, which the Jews deliver, Talmud.
tit. desynedr.
that the Senators of the great Council, to the end they might convince the
guilty, were skilful in Magic Arts, surely being most bitter Enemies to Jesus,
and envying his Honor, advanced most of all by miracles, they would either
themselves have showed forth like Works by the same Art, or by evident reasons
have declared, that his Works were wrought by it.

IV. Of the force of words
But whereas some of the Jews ascribe the miracles of Jesus to a secret name,
which being by Solomon placed in the Temple, was kept safe by two Lions for
more then a thousand years, and stolen away by Jesus: This is not only falsely
but impudently feigned; for neither do the Books of Kings, nor the Chronicles,
nor Josephus say any thing of these Lions, a thing, if true, most notable, and
to be admired: no, neither did the Romans, who entered the Temple with Pompey
before the times of Jesus, find any such thing.

V. The miracles of Jesus were Divine.
This ground being laid, which the Jews confess, that prodigious things were
done by Christ, we say it follows from the very Law of Moses, credit is to be
given him. For God foretold, Deuteronomy. 18. That after Moses other Prophets should
be raised up by God, and the people should obey them, otherwise denouncing
grievous punishments. Now, the chiefest and purest marks of Prophets are And
predictions which are reckoned among prodigies, Deuteron. 18.
prodigies. For no things more illustrious can be conceived in the mind. It Is
said Deuteronomy. 13. if any bearing himself as a Prophet, should show wonders, he is
not to be believed, if he entice the people to another God. For God does only
therefore suffer those prodigies to be done, to make trial whether they be
constant enough and settled in the Worship of the true God. From which places
compared together, the Hebrew interpreters Vide Council. Manasis. qu. 4. in
Deuteren.
do rightly Collect, credit is to be given to him that works miracles, And
whose predictions are fulfilled Vide Chrysostom. 5. adv. Jud.
unless he draw away from the Worship ship of the true God: for in that case
alone they are premonished, not to trust miracles, though of the fairest show.
But Jesus not only did not teach to Worship false Gods, but on the other side,
expressly forbad it as a most heinous Mar. 12.29. I Cor. 5.10.
Crime; and taught us to reverence the Writings, both of Moses, and of the
Prophets that followed him. Wherefore there is nothing can be objected against
his Miracles. For that which some object, that the Law of Jesus differs in some
part from the Law of Moses, is not sufficient.

VI. Answer to the object. of the difference between the Law of Moses, and the
Law of Jesus.
The Hebrew Doctors themselves give this rule: At the Command of a Prophet, i.
One doing Miracles, any pracept whatsoever (except that for the Worship of one
God) may boldly be Thalmud. tit. de Synedrio. Ad praceptam Josua violata lex
subbati. Jos. 6. vide I. Reg. 18.38.
transgressed. And surely the power of making Laws, which was with God, when he
gave Commands by Moses, departed not from him afterward; nor is any man, who
by his own right has made Laws, hindered thereby from making other Laws, though
opposite from the former. That they say God is immutable, is to no purpose: for
we speak not of the intrinsec Nature of God, but of his Works. Light is changed
with darkness, Youth into Old Age, Summer with Winter; all which are Works of
God. To Adam God in the beginning permitted the other Fruits, reserved all the
Fruit of one Tree. Why so? It was his will and pleasure. He commanded Abraham
to kill his Genesis 22.
Son. Sacrifices apart from the Tabernacle, some he prohibited, some he
accepted. Nor does it follow, if the Law given by Moses were good, no better
Law could be given. Parents are wont to lisp with their Infants, to wink at the
faults of their Age, to entice them with a Sugar-Cake to learn their Lesson;
but when they are grown, their speech is Corrected, virtuous precepts are
instilled, they are made to see what is the beauty of goodness, what are its
rewards. Now, that the precepts of the Old Law were not exactly Heb. 8.7.
perfect, even hence appears; because many of those ^ines, holy men, led a Life
more excellent then those precepts. Moses who permits revenge to be taken by
the grieved person, partly by his own hand, partly by the Judge, himself being
affronted with intolerable injuries, interceded Exodus 32.11.
for his Enemies. So David wills his rebellious 2 Samuel 18.5.
Son to be spared, and takes patiently the reproaches 2 Samuel 16.10.
cast upon him. Good men are never read to have put away their Wives, when yet
the Law permitted them to do it. Indeed, Laws are Quidam interrogatus, an
optimas dedisset leges civibus; non omnium optimas, ait, sed quantum fieri
poterat vide Origin. cont. Cells. lib. 3.
adapted to the major part of people; and to that state it was agreeable that
some things should be connived at, to be reduced to a more perfect rule at that
time, when God would gather to himself, out of all the World, a new people, by
a greater power of the Spirit. The rewards also openly proposed in the Law of
Moses, do all belong unto this mortal life: Whence we must confess, that some
Law better than that, was possible to be given, which might propose eternal
rewards, not under shadows, but clearly. And this we see, is done 2 Timothy 1.10.
Hebr. 8.6.
by the Law of Christ.

VII. How Jesus observed the Law of Moses, and what he abolished.
Here by the way we are to note, (to evince the iniquity of the Jews
contemporary with Jesus,) that Jesus was dealt with by them extremely ill, and
exposed to punishment, when no offense of his against the Law could be
alleged. He was Luc. 2.21.
Circumcised, he used Gal. 4.4.
Jewish mears, and like Mat. 9.20.
apparel; he sent them to the Mat. 8.4.
Priests that were cleansed of the Leprosy: the Luc. 2.41. Job. 7.2.
Passover, and other Holy days he Religiously observed. If he healed any on
the Sabbath, he showed that such works are not forhidden, not only out of the
Law, Mat. 12.5.11.
but also the received opinions. And then first he began to promulge the
abrogation Act. 10. Col. 2.14.
of some Laws, when having overcome death, and ascended into Heaven, he had
furnished his Apostles with conspicuous indowments and thereby declared himself
to be stated in his Act. 2.36. Apoc. 1.5.
regal power, wherein is contained the authority of lac. 1.25.
making Laws: and that according to Daniels Prophecy, who had foretold it
should come to pass, that after the destruction of the Kingdoms of Syria and
Egypt, (the latter happened under Augustus) God would give the Kingdom to a
man, Dan. 7.13. Filius hominis Hebrais vilitatem quandam significat.
a despised one, over all people, an everlasting Kingdom. Now, that part of the
Law, which was dissolved by Christ, contained nothing good in its own nature,
but consisted of things in themselves indifferent, of a middle Nature, and
therefore not immutable. For if those things had any value by themselves for
which they should be done, God would have prescribed them to all Nations,
Maimon. ad Deuteronomy. 33.
not to one; and from the beginning, not after mankind had lived above Two
thousand years. Abel, Enoch, Noah, Melchizedek, Job, Abraham, isaac, Jacob, all
Pious men, and exceeding dear to God, were ignorant of this part of the Laws,
either all or well nigh all: Nevertheless, they received Testimony both of
their Faith in God, and of Gods Love to them. Neither did Moses exhort his
Father in Law Fethro to undertake these rites, nor Jonas the Ninivites; nor do
other Prophets reprehend the Chaldeans, Egyptians, Sidonians, Tyrians,
Idumeans, Moabites, unto whom they write, for not admitting these Ordinances,
and yet they reckon up their sins exactly enough. Wherefore these were peculiar
precepts, introduced either for the shunning of some evil, Adidololatriam proni
Ezech. 16.
to which the Jews were prone, or for trial of their Obedience, or to signify
things to come. It is not therefore more to be admired, that they should be
abolished, then if a certain King should take away some municipal Statutes, to
the end he might bring the whole Kingdom to an uniformity of Government. If you
object, that these are styled perpetual precepts; men also douse the same L.
hac in perpet. cod. de diverse, prad. 1. II.and alibi.
expressions, when they will signify, what they so command, not to be annual,
or accommodate to certain times, as of War, Peace, dearnefs of Corn: Where yet
they are not hindered, but they may set forth new Constitutions, when the
public utility shall require. And in like manner, the precepts of God, given
to the Hebrews, some Were temporary, whilst the people sojourned in the Deuteronomy.
23.12.
Wilderness; others appropriate to their Habitation in the L and of Deuteronomy. 12.1.
Canaan: to distinguish them from the former, these he calls perpetual, whereby
it may be understood, that they must not any where, or at any time be
intermitted, unless God gave a signification of his Will to the contrary. Which
way of speaking commonly received, may be the less strange to the Hebrews, who
know, that in their Law, it is called a perpetual right,. Exodus 21.6.
and perpetual servitude, that endures from Jubilee to Jubilee; and the coming
of Messiah, is called by themselves the Complement Et Esa. 61.2.
of the Jubilee, or the great Jubilee. Besides, there is extant, in the Hebrew
Prophets, a promise of a new Covenant, to be made in after time, Jer. 31.31.
as in Jerem. 31. Where God says; he will enter into a new Covenant, which he
will write in their minds, and men shall not need to learn Religion one of
another, for it shall be manifest to all, and he will grant pardon of former
offenses. Just as if some King, after great quarrels of his Subjects among
themselves should for the establishment of Peace, take away the variety of
Laws, and impose upon them one Common, and the same a perfect Law, granting
impunity and general pardon to all, that for the Future amend their manners.
Although we have said enough, yet we will go through the single parts of the
abolished Law, and show that they are not of such a nature, as to be either
pleasing unto God by themselves, or sit to endure for ever.

VIII. Sacrifices never pleased, God by themselves.
The first, and that which is most obvious to our eyes, are the Sacrifices, of
which many Hebrews think, they were devised by the wit of men Chrysostom. de
Abele. Apud se suapte motus conscientia Sacrificium illud obtulit.
before they were ordained by Gods Command, Plainly it appears, the Hebrews
were greedy of many Rites and Ceremonies; So, there was cause enough for God to
enjoin many, even for this, lest in remembrance of their dwelling in Egypt
Maimonides duct. dub. 3.32.
they should return to 01 the Worship of false Gods. But when their posterity
too much esteemed these things, as of themselves to God acceptable, and a part
of true Piety, they were reprehended by the Prophers. I will not (says God
Psalm. 50.) speak aword with thee for Sacrifices, etc. Think thou, that I
will eat the Fat of Beasts, or drink the Blood of Goats? Offer unto God
Thanksgiving, and pay thy Vows. There are among the Hebrews, that affirm this
is said, because the offerers were of an impure heart and life. But the
alleged Words inform us, of how small regard the thing it self was in the
sight of God. If you consider the whole series of this Psalm, God speaks there
to the Godly. For he had said, Gather my Saints together unto me: and then,
Hear O my People. These are the Words of a Teacher. After having ended the
forementioned Speech, he turns (as it is usual) to the ungodly: But ta the
wicked says God, etc. Other places do show the same sense, as Psalm. 51. Thou
desire not that I should give thee Sacrifice, nor art thou delighted with
burnt Offerings: But the Sacrifice truly pleasing unto thee, is a broken
Spirit, etc. The like is in the Fourtieth Psalm. Sacrifice and Offering thou
art not delighted with. But thou have made me thy Servant, my ear, as it were,
boared; not requiring, either burnt Offering, or fin Offering. Therefore I
answered, Here I am, and as bound by written Covenant will do what thou will,
which is my delight. For thy Law is in my heart. The praises of thy
righteousness, I shut not up within my thoughts; but every where declare thy
veracity and benignity, especially do I celebrate thy mercy and truth in the
great Congregation. See Esa. I. and jer. 3. In Osce these are the Words of God,
chapter 6. Mercy toward men, is far more acceptable to me Ita and Chald. interpres.
then Sacrifice; and to have right thoughts of God, is above all burnt
Offerings. In the Sixth of Micah, when question was asked, how one should best
gain Gods favor? With a great many Rams, measures of Oil, or Yearlings? God
answers, I will tell thee, what is truly good and accepted by me: Namely, Leg
is pracepta contracta in tria.
that thou render to every man his due, show kindness to thy neighbor, and
behave thy self humbly toward God. From which places, being it appears, that
Sacrifices were not in the number of those things, which God willed primarily,
and for themselves; and that the People, superstition creeping in, placed in
them the chiefest part of Religion, and believed their sins were sufficiently
expiated by their Offerings; what marvel is it, if God at length took away a
thing in its own nature indifferent, and the use whereof was now corrupted;
when King Hezekias also 2 Reg. 18.4.
brake the Brazen Serpenterected by Moses, for this reason, because the people
had begun to Worship it. Nor are there wanting Prophecies, which foretold the
abolition of those Sacrifices, as any man will easily perceive, that shall only
consider; Aarons posterity alone, after the Law of Moses, was allowed to
Sacrifice, and that only in their own Country. But now, in the 110. Psalm. a
King is promised, one whose Dominion shall be over all, proceeding out of Sion;
a King and Priest for ever, and that like unto Melchisedek. And Esaias c. 19.
says, an Altar shall be seen in Egypt, where not only the Assyrians, but the
Egyptians too, and Israelites shall Worship God: and c. 66. he says, It shall
come to pass, that people of far Countries and of all Languages, as well as
Israelites, shall offer gifts unto God, and there shall be made of them also
Priests and Levites: Add Jerem. 3.16.
all which, the Law of Moses standing, was impossible. Add to this, that in
Mal. c. 1. God foretelling things to come, faith; Vide hujus loci luculentam
paraphrasin apud Chrysostom. 2. adv. gentes.
He was wearty of the Hebrews Sacrifices, and from East to West his; name shall
be celebrated among all Nations; and incense, and most pure offerings shall be
given him: And Daniel says, c. 9. relating the Oracle of the Angel Gabriel
concerning Christ; He shall cause the Sacrifice and Oblation to cease. Neither
with words alone, but really has God signified enough, that he no longer
approves the Sacrisices prescribed by Moses, having suffered the Jews for above
a thousand and five hundred years, to be without Temple, without Altar, without
Genealogy. Whence we may clearly see who they are, whom he has admitted to do
him service.

IX. Difference of Meats.
What we have demonstrated of the Law of Sacrifices, let us show concerning
that whereby certain kinds of meats are forbidden. It Is manifest, after Mentio
immundorum in diluvii bistoria(...).
the great Flood, Noah and his posterity had a right given them by God, to use
any sort of Food: Which right therefore passed, not to Japhet only and Cham,
but to Sem and his Progeny, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: But when afterward the
people had been infected in Egypt with foolish superstitions of that Nation,
then did God forbid some kinds of living Creatures to be eaten, either because
the Egyptians Vide Origin, cont. Cells. l. 4.
offered them (especially) to their Gods, and from them had their South
sayings; or because in that umbratick Law, certain kind of Creatures denoted
certain Vide Epist. Barnaba apud Clementem, Stro. 5. and Philonem. lib. de
Agricult.
vices. That these precepts are not universal, appears by that which was
ordained concerning the flesh of a Beast that died of it self, Deuteronomy. 14. 21.
that although the Israelites might not eat of it, the strangers Pii sc. sed non
circumcisi.
might, whom the Jews are commanded nevertheless to treat with all good
Offices, as men received into Gods favor. And the Ancient Hebrew Masters have
plainly delivered, that in the time of Messiah Ita R. Sam. in Mechor Chaim.
Thalmud. in tit. Nida: Legem non mansuram, nisi ad tempora Messiae. Some
Masters thought the Law of meats propet to Palestin.
the Law of forbidden Meats shall cease, and Swines flesh shall be as clean as
the flesh of an Ox. Surely since God was pleased, out of all, to gather one
People to himself, it was agreeable, that liberty in such things, rather than
bondage, should be made Common to all. Next, to Festivals.

X. Of Days.
Festival days were generally instituted in remembrance of the benefit received
from God, when they were delivered from the Egyptian bondage, and then brought
along into the Land of promise. But now, the Prophet Jeremy c. 16. and 23.
says, the time will come, wherein new and far greater benefits shall so
obscure the Memory of that benefit, that scarce any mention shall be made
thereof. Moreover, what was lately said of Sacrifices, is true of Festivals:
that the people began to rely upon them, as if these being well observed, their
offenses in other points were of small account, whereupon c. 1. of Esaias, God
says, he loathes the new Moons and Feast days, they are a burden to him, and he
cannot abide them. Touching the Sabbath particularly, it is objected: That the
precept is universal and perpetual, as being given, not to one people, but in
the beginning of the World, to Adam the Parent of all. I answer, the most
Learned of the Hebrews assenting; The Command of the Sabbath was twofold, the
Command of remembering it, Exodus 20.8. and the Command of observing it, Exodus
31.13. The precept of remembering, is fulfilled by a Religious memory of the
Creation; the precept of observing is placed in the exact abstinence from every
other work. That first Command was given in the beginning, and without doubt
the Pious Men From whom also to the Grecians some vencration of the seventh day
was derived. Clemens.
before the Law obeyed it, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob: of which last
although we read many peregrinations, yet no where find we, that they rested or
intermitted any journey In this sense, Justin. and Tert. deny the Pious men of
those times to have sabbatized.
for the Sabbath day, which after the going forth out of Egypt you shall meet
with always. For, after that the people being brought out of Egypt, and having
happily passed over the Red Sea, the first day of safety kept a Sabbath, and
therein Sang an Epinicion; since that time, that exact rest of the Sabbath was
Commanded, whereof the fist mention is in the gathering of Manna, Exodus 35.2.
and Levit. 23.3. And in this sense, the cause of the Law of the Sabbath is
rendered, the deliverance out of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 5.21. and withal, by this Law,
provision is made for Servants against their Masters hardness, indulging them
no respiration from their labors, as appears in the places cited. True it is,
that the strangers also were obliged by this Law: the reason was, th t the face
of the Commonwealth. while they rested together, might be but one. But, that
this Law of exact rest was not imposed upon other Nations, appears hence:
because in sundry places, as Exodus 31.13.16. it is called a sign, and a special
Covenant between God and Israel. Now, that things ordained in memory of the
deliverance out of Egypt were not such, as never to cease, we have showed before
from the promise of much greater mercies. Besides, if the Law requiring rest on
the Sabbath, had been made in the beginning, and in that sense, as never to be
cancelled; certainly that Law, in the conflict with other Laws would have
prevailed: Which now is otherwise. For it is evident, that Infants are lawfully
Circumcised Proverb. Heb. Circumcisio pellit Sabbatum. Vide Jo. 7.22.
on the Sabbath day: as also Sacrifices (while the Temple stood) were slain
Number. 28.9.
as well upon the Sabbath, as other days. The Hebrew Masters themselves do show
the mutability of this Law, when they say, that at the Command of a Prophet,
work may rightly be done on the Sabbath; which they prove by the example of
Joricho, taken on the Sabbath day, at the Command of Joshua. And some of them
well assert, that in the times of the Messiah, the difference of day, shall be
no more, alleging the place of Esaias c. 66.23. Where it is Prophesied, that the
Worship of God shall be continued from Sabbath to Sabbath, and from one new
Moon unto another.

XI. Of outward circumcision.
Come we to Circumcision, which is (no doubt) ancienter than Moses, being
enjoined to Abraham and to his prosterity. But this very precept was an
inchoation of the Covenant published by Moses. For so we read, God said to
Abraham, Genesis c. 17. I will give unto thee, and to thy Seed, the Land wherein
thou have been a stranger, even the Land of Canaan for an everlasting
possession Thou shall keep my covenant therefore, thou and thy Seed for ever.
This is my Covenant between me and you, and your Seed, that every Male be
Circumcissed. But we have understood above, that into the place of this
Covenant, should succeed a new one, and this common to all Nations; for which
reason that necessity of a distinguishing mark must also cease. Moreover this
is manifest, that in the precept of Circumcision, is contained a certain
mystical and more excellent signification; which the Prophets do declare, when
they command the Heart Jerem. 4.4.
to be Circumcised, to which all the precepts of Jesus do pertain: and
therefore the promises added to Circumcision must likewise be referred to some
greater thing: Namely, that promi^e of an earthly possession, to the Revelation
of a possession Heb. 4.
truly Eternal, which was never more clearly opened then by Jesus; and that of
making Abraham a Father of many Genesis 17.5. Romans 4.11.
Nations, to that time, wherein not some few, but innumerable people dispersed
all the World over, should imitate that so memorable Faith of Abraham; and
verily this came to pass, not otherwise but by the Gospel. Now, it is nothing
marvelous, that the shadows of a designed work should vanish, when the work is
finished. But that Grace is not tied to this (...), ait justious in Colloq.
sign, you may learn hence; because not the more ancient only, but Abraham
himself, as yet uncircumcised, pleased God; and in all the time of Traveling
through the deserts of Arabia, Circumcision was Jos. 5.4.
omitted by the Hebrews; God never expostulating with them for that omission.

XII. The Apostles toleration of Jewish rites.
Certainly the Hebrews had cause to render great thanks to Jesus and his
Apostles, that they were by him delivered from that heavy burden of Ceremonies,
and were assured of their liberty, by gifts and miracles not inferior They were
greater, as appeared in raising the dead.
to Moses. And yet those first publishers of our Doctrine did not exact of them
so much as this, that they should acknowledge their own felicity: but easily
suffered them (would they receive the precepts of Jesus full of nothing but
goodness) in things indifferent to follow what way Act. 16.3. Romans 14.1. Gal.
5.6.
they pleased: yet so, that they should not impose upon the Gentiles, to whom
that Law of rites was never given, a necessity Act. 15. Gal. 2.3.15.
of observing it. Which one thing is enough to convince the Jews of their
unreasonable rejection of the Christian Faith, under that pretense of the
ritual Law. The grand objection against the Miracles of Jesus being answered,
let us proceed to other arguments, fit for the Jews conviction.

XIII. The Jews confess a promise of the Messiah.
It is agreed between us and them, that in the Books of the Prophets, above
many, whom God gave the Hebrews, Authors of great benefits, one was promised
much more excellent then the rest; whom, though by a common name, yet eminently
competent to him alone, they call the Messiah. Him we assert to have come long
since, they expect him to come hereafter. It remains that we seek for a
determination of this controversy in those Books, whose authority we do
equally acknowledge.

XIV. That he is come, proved by the time.
Daniel, whom Ezckiel Ezekiel. 14.4. and 28.3. Joseph de 'Da^. sine 1.10. Spiritus
'Dei ci adorat.
commends for his great Piety, neither would deceive us, nor was dece^ved by
the Angel Gabriel. What the Angel dictated to him, he has left written for us
c. 9. That after the promulgation of the Commandment to restore the City of
Jerusalem, there should not pass Five hundred years, but the Messas should
come. But unto this day are past, since that time, more than Two thousand
years, and He whom the Jews expect is not come, nor can they name any other to
whom that time agrees. But unto Jesus it is so convenient, that the Hebrew
Master Nehumias, who Fifty years preceded him, openly then declared, that the
time of Messiah signified by Daniel, could not be protracted beyond those Fifty
years. With this note of time agrees another, touched above, of the Kingdom
Lapidem illum cujus permissu imago illa imperiorum figuram habens, comminuta
esset, Messiam esse tradidit R. Levi Ben. Gerson.
over all Nations to be given by God, after that the posterity of Seleucus and
Lagus had ceased to Reign, the latter whereof ended in Cleopatra, not long
before Jesus was Born. The third note, is in the forecited ninth Chapter of
Daniel: That after the coming of Messiah, the City Jerusalem should be
destroyed: Which Prophecy of the destruction of the City, Josephus Lib. 10. c.
12. Septuaginta annoram hebdomadas finire in excidio templi secundi, etiam
Jacchiades docet, ad Dan. 9.24.
himself refers unto his own age: Whence it follows that the time appointed for
the coming of Messiah, was then already past. It Is pertinent, that of Haggai c.
2. Zerubbabel the Prince, and Jesus the Son of Josedec the High Priest, being
sad when the saw the Temple built by them, not to answer the greatness of the
former Temple, God comforts them with this promise, that the glory of this
later house shall be greater than that of the former: Which cannot be verified,
neither in respect of the greatness of the Work, nor the materials, nor the
Art, nor Ornament, as the story of these times in the Scripture and in
Josephus, compared with the History of Solomon's Temple, undoubtedly proves.
Add, that the Hebrew Masters observe two of the greatest endowments were
wanting to the later Temple, which were in the former; a certain conspicuous
Gemara Hieros. cap. 3.
light, betokening the Divine Majesty, and a Divine Afflatus. But wherein this
later Temple should excel the former, God sh^ws briefly there, when he said,
in this place I will give Peace. That is, in that Temple establish his grace
and good will by a sure Covenant: in Malachi more largly c. z. Behold I will
send my Messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me, and the Lord whom ye
seek, shall suddenly come into his Temple (Malachi lived when the later Temple
was built) even the Messenger of the Covenant, whom ye delight in. Therefore
the Messiah ought to come, the second Temple Venire debuisse Messiam in Templum
secundum, sensit R. Akiba, mul^ique etiam.
standing: by which the Hebrews name all that time from Zerubbabel to
Vespasian. For in the time of Herod the great, the Temple was not raised again
out of ruins, but by little and little, and by parts made news which change
notwithstanding, it is called the same Temple still And verily there was such a
strong opinion among the Hebrews and their Neighbors, that the Messiah was in
those times to be expected, that many took Herod, some Judas Vide Joseph. 18.1.
Gaulonites, some others who lived about the time of Jesus, for the Messiah.

XV. Of the delay of his coming.
The Jews feel themselves pressed with these Arguments of the coming of
Messiah: Which to elude, some of them say, their sins were the cause why he
came not at the promised time. To omit, that in the aforesaid prophecies, is
expressed a desinite decree, Id diserte affirmat Rabbi David Kimchi in Ps.
108.5. Apparet and ex Mal. 3.1.
not suspended upon any condition: how could the coming be delayed for their
sins, when this also was foretold, that for the very many and very great sins
Dan. 9.24.
of the people, the City should be destroyed a little after the times of
Messiah. Add that Messiah was to come for this cause also, that he might cure a
most corrupted Age, Esa. 53.4. Jer. 31.31.
and together with rules of new life, bring pardon unto sinners. Whence in
Zachary it is said of his times, chapter 13. that a Fountain should then be opened
for the House of David, and all Jerusalem, to wash away their iniquities; and
amongst the Hebrews themselves, it is usual to style the Messiah Ischopher,
Vide Chald. Paraph. Cant. 1.14.
that is, a peacemaker. Now, it is plainly against all reason to affirm a thing
to be deferred because of a Disease, which was precisely destined for the Cure
thereof.

XVI. The present State of the Jews.
Even sense it self may convince the Fews of that which we maintain, that the
Messiah is long since come into the World. In the Covenant made by Moses, God
promised them Exodus 15. Levit. 18.
a happy possession of Palestin, so long as they should compose their life
according to the prescript of his Law: on the contrary, Levit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28.
threatened them, if they greatly transgressed, with Vanishment and other
Calamities; and yet assured them, if at any time, afflicted with misery, they
should repent of their sins, and return to obedience, he would have compassion
on his people, and bring them back into their own Country, though dispersed
into the most remote parts of the carth; as appears, both elsewhere, and Deuteronomy.
30. Nehem. 4. But now are passed a Thousand and above Five hundred years, since
the Jews are without their Country, without their Temple, and if any time they
attempted to build it new, Sub Adriano, sub Constantino, sub Juliano,
chrysostom. 2. adv. Judaeos.
they were always hindered, yea, Balls of Fire breaking forth at the
Foundations, to the destruction of the Workmen, as it is related by a Writer not
Christian, Lib. 23. Chrysostom. ibid. dignus qui legatur.
Ammianus, Marcellinus. When in former times the people had polluted themselves
with most grievous abominations, had frequently sacrificed their Children to
Satan, reckoned Adulteries, but as a small thing, robbed Widows and Orphans,
shed innocent blood in great abundance, (all which the Prophets Esa. 1.17. and
3.14. Amos 2.6. Jer. 2, 3. Ezech. 2 and 6. Dan 9. Mich. 2.2.
upbraid them with) they suffered Captivity, yet no longer than Seventy years;
and in the mean time, God omitted not to speak unto them by his Jerem. 30.
Ezech. 36.
Prophets, and comfort them by hope of a return, notifying the very Jer. 25.15.
time thereof. But now, since they have been once cast out of their Country,
they remain exiled, condemned; no Prophet comes unto them, no signification of
any future return: Their Masters, as possessed with a Spirit of giddiness, are
fallen to shameful Fables, and ridiculous opinions, wherewith the Talmud Books
are replenisht: Which yet they are so bold as to style the Law, and to compare
with or prefer before the Writings of Moses. As for that which is read there,
of Gods weeping because he sussered the City to be overthrown, of his daily
diligence of reading the Law, of Behemoth, and Leviathan, and many other Quorum
multa transcripsit Christianus Gerson, in suo ad Judaeos libro.
things; they are so absurd, that I am loath to repeat them. Howbeit in all this
time, the Jews have neither departed to the Worship of false Gods, as of old;
not do they pollute themselves with Murders, nor are they accused of
Adulteries: But they labor to appease God, both by prayers, and by Fastings,
and are not heard. Which things being so, one of these two Conclusions will
certainly follow; either that the Covenant Mosaical is wholly abrogated; or,
that the whole Nation of the Jews is Guilty of some great sin abiding so many
Ages. Which sin what it is, let themselves pronounce; or, if they cannot, let
them believe, us, it is that sin of rejecting the Messiah, who came unto his
people before these calamities began to fall upon them.

XVII. Jesus proved to be the Messiah, by the Prophecies.
What we have alleged serves to show that the Messiah, so many ages agon, is
come. We are next to prove, he is no other but Jesus. For whosoever else
assumed this little, or had it given them, have left no Sect in which that
opinion might persevere. None do now profess themselves the sectators, neither
of Qui, (...) Justino.
Herod, nor of Judas Gaulonites, no nor of Barchocheb who took the name of
Messiah in Adrians time, and deceived some men As, Rabbi, Akiba, lib. Zemach,
David.
very learned. But the followers of Jesus, ever since he was on earth, have
been, and are unto this day, very many, not in one Region, but all the World
over. I could here bring many other things of old predicted, or credited of the
Messiah, which we believe came to pass in Jesus, when of others they are not so
much as assevered: Namely, that he was of David's Ps. 89.4. Esa. 4 2. Mat. 1.1.
race, that he was born of Esa. 7.14. Mat. 1.18.
a Virgin, the Husband of the Virgin being admonished of it from Heaven, Mat.
1.20.
who would not have kept her otherwise with Child; that he was born at Mich. 5
2. Mat. 2.2.
Bethlechem, that he began his preaching in Esa. 4.1. Mat. 4 12.
Galilee, that he healed all manner of Diseases, Esa. 53.5. Mat. 11.5. Add
this, that he raised the dead; which R. Ben. Gerson puts among, the chief make
of the Messiah.
made the blind to see and the lame to walk: But I am content with onething,
the effect whereof endures to this day. It is as clear as the Sun, from the
Prophecies of Ps. 2.6.
David, Esa. 2.2.
Esaias, Zach. 8.20.
Zachary, Hos. 2.24.
Hose, that the Esa. 2.18.
Messiah should be the Master not only of the Jews, but of other Nations; that
he should overturn the worships of false Gods, and bring a huge multitude of
aliens and strangers to the service of the only true God. Before the coming of
Jesus, almost all the World was overspread with false Religions; and after by
little and little, they began to vanish, and not single persons alone, but
Kings and Nations were converted to the One Gods Worship. This is to be
ascribed, not to the Jewish Rabbis, but to the Disciples of Jesus, and their
Successors. So were they made the Hose. 2.24.
people of God, who before were not, and it was fulfilled which had been
foretold by Jacob, Genesis 49. Vide pulchre dicta apud Chrysoft. Sermon. Christum
esse deum.
That before the civil power should be wholly taken away from the posterity of
Judah, Shilo (whom the Chaldee and other interpreters expound the Messiah)
should come, and to him also other Vide Esa. 11.10.
Nations should submit themselves.

XVIII. Objection, that some things are not fulfilled, answered.
Here the Jews are wont to oppose, that some things are predicted of the
Messiah times, which are not seen fulfilled. But the things which they allege
are obscure, or of doubtful signification, for which we ought not to relinquish
those which are manifest: Such as are the Holiness of Christ's precepts, the
excellency of reward, clearness of the promise: Whereunto miracles being added,
there is nothing wanting, that may move us to embrace his Doctrine. To the
right understanding of Prophecies, which are called by the name of a sealed
Book, Esa. 29.11. Dan. 12.4.9. Vide Chrysostom. Sermon. 2.Cur obscurum sit V. T.
often are needful certain helps of God, which are justly withdrawn from them,
that are negligent of plain Revelations. Now the places they object, they know
are variously expounded, and whosoever w^ll compare the old interpreters,
living under the Babylon Captivity, or about the time of Jesus, with the
Interpreters that wrote after the Christian name was odious to the Jews, shall
find new expositions invented, studio partium, when formerly other had been
received, agreeing well with the sense of Christians. They are not ignorant,
many places in Holy Scripture, are to be understood, not by the propriety of
words, but Quomodo Maimon, in lib. I. ad locum Esaiae, II 6. de Messiae
temporibus (...) vult intelligi.
figuratively: As, when God is said to have Vide Maimon. duct. dub. 1.10. and
11, 29.
descended; when Jerem. 9.12.
mouth, Ps. 31.3.
ears, Ps. 34.16.
eyes, Ps. 18.9.
nostrils are attributed to him. And why may not we, after this manner, expound
many things spoken of Messiah times: As, that the Wolf shall dwell with the
Esa. 11.6.
Lamb, the Leopard with the Kid, the Lion with the Calf; that the Infant shall
play with the Snake, that the Mountain of God shall rise Esa. 2.2.
above other Mountains, and Aliens shall come thither to offer Sacrifice. Some
promises there are, which by the antecedent or consequent words, or by the very
meaning of the place, contain in them a tacit condition: So, many things were
promised the Hebrews, on condition they would receive the Messiah sent unto
them, and obey him: Which promises if they be not performed, they must lay the
fault upon themselves. Some things also definitely and without condition
promised, if they be not yet fulfilled, may be expected hereafter. For it is
certain, even among the Jews, the time or Kingdom of Messiah endures Perek
Chelek p. 97.
to the end of the World.

XIX. Answer to the low estate and death of Jesus.
Many are offended at the humble Fortune of Jesus: But without cause. In the
sacred cripture, God often says He raises the humble, 1 Reg. 2.8. Ps. 34.19.
Esa. 57.15.
and pulls down the proud. Jacob, Genesis 32.
without himself, carrying naught but a Staff, passed over Jordan: He returned
enriched with great store of Cattle. Moses, Exodus 3.
an exiled poor man, was feeding Sheep, when God appeared to him in the Bush,
and gave him Commission to be Leader of his People: David also, 1 Samuel 16.7.
feeding the Flock, is called to a Kingdom: And with many such examples the
sacred History is full. But of the Messiah we read, that he should be? welcome
Messenger Esa. 61.1. Mat. 1.1. 5.
to the poor should not exalt Esa. 4. 7. Mat. 12.19.
his voice in the Streots, nor make Quarrels but behave himself gently; not
break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smocking Flax. Neither ought any of his
sufferings, nor death it self, make him less beloved of any. For God does often
permit Pious men, not only to be vexed by the impious, as Lot Genesis 19.
by the Citizens of Sodom, but to be slain also; as is manifest by the example
of Abel Genesis 4.
murlered; of Esaias Ita habet Judaeorum traditio, ad quam respicit scriptor ad
Hebr. 11.37. and Joseph. 10.14.
cut asunder; the Maccabean Brother, 2 Mac. 7. Joseph. (...)
with their Mother, tormented to death. The Jews themselves do Sing the Nine
and seventieth Psalm,wherein are these words. The dead Bodies of thy Servants
have they given to be meat unto the Fouls of the Air, and the Flesh of thy
Saints unto the Beasts of the Land: Their blood have they shed like water on
every side of Jerusalem, and there was no man to Bury them,etc. And that the
Messiah himself, through sorrows and death, ought to come unto his Kingdom, and
to the power of bestowing on his Saines the greatest blessings, none can deny
that will consider these words in the Three and fiftieth Chapter Quem locum
interpretantur de Messia Chald, paraph. and Gemara Babylon, tit. le Synedrio.
of Esaias. How few have believed our Speech, and acknowledged the power of Gid?
And that for this reason, because be is risen in the sight of God, as a tender
Plant, and as an Herb out of a dry Ground; in he countenance no beauty, no
comeliness, nor if you beheld him, was there any thing delightful; he was open
to contempt, and among men as it were most object, a sufferer of ma^y sorrows,
many griefs: All turned away themselves from him, so much was he despied, and
in no estimation. But surely he has borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows,
we accounted him as touched from Heaven, stricken of God and des^^ressed: But
he was wounded for our fins, bruised for our crimes. The punishment which might
bring Sovation unto us, was laid on him; his sores were given us for a remedy.
For certainly, we all like Skeep had gone astray hither and thither: God
inflicted upon him the punishment which was due to our fins: And yet, when he
was oppressed, and most grievously pained, be opened not his mouth, as a Lamb
to be slain, or a Sheep at shearing, is dumb. After botts, after Judgment he
was put to death; but yet, who shall be able to speak worthily of the aviation
of his Life? Indeed he was taken away out of this place wherein we live; but
this stroke fell upon him for the transgressions of my people. Unto death and
Burial was he given into the hands of the mighty and the wicked, when yet he
had done injury to none, nor was ever any guile found in his mouth. But though
God so far suffered him to be bruised and to be affected with sorrows, yet
because be made himself a Sacrifice of explation, he shall see his posterity,
he shall live a durable life, and the things which pleased God, shall by him be
happily accomplished, Beholding himself delivered from evil(says God) he shall
be satiated with delight, herein especially, because this my righteous Servant
by his Doctrine shall absolve many taking away their iniquities. I will give
him an excellent portion, when the spoils shall be divided among the warriers,
because he yielded up himself to death, and was numbered with transgressors, and
when himself bare the punishments of other men's fins, made himself an
intercessor for the guilty.Who can be named, either of the King, or Prophets,
to whom this agrees? Surely, none. As for that device of the Later Jews,that in
this Chapter is meant the Hebrewpeople dispersed into all Nations, to make many
proselites every where by their example and instruction: First, this sense is
repugnant to very many places of Holy Scripture, which proclaim the Jewsto have
suffered no calamity, but what (and more also) by their evil deeds Vide Dan. 9.
and Nehme. 9.
they had deserved. And then, the very series of the Chapter suffers not that
interpretation. For the Prophet, or (which seems more convenient to the place).
God himself says: For the transgression of my people was he stricken, v. 8,
Now the peculiar people of Isaiah, or of God, was the Hebrew people. Wherefore
it cannot be that same people, which is there said to have endured so great
afflictions. Better did the ancient Hebrew Masters acknowledge these things to
be spoken of the Messiah,Which some of the later Masters, well perceiving, they
have feigned two Talmud. tit. Succa. R. Sal and R. Da. Kimchi.
Messiahs,one whereof they call the Son of Joseph, who should suffer many
afflictions and a bloody death; another, who should have all things prosperous:
When it were more easy far, and more congruent to the prophetic writings, to
own Quod ipsum sequitur Abarbaniel.
but one, who by adversities and death was to attain unto his Kingdom, This we
believe of Jesus, and this really appears to be the truth.

XX. Answer to this, that good men crucified Jesus.
This detains many from receiving the insticution of Jesus, a preconceived
opinion of the virtue and probity of their Forefathers, and especially of the
Priests by whose prejudgment Jesus was condemned, and his Doctrine rejected.
But what manner of men their Forefathers were, that they may not think I
reproach them, let them hear, both in the very words of their own Law, and of
their Prophets; where they are often called Jerem. 4.4.6.10.
uncircumcised in ears and heart, a people drawing near unto God with their
lips and a multitude of rites, but in their minds very far Deuteronomy. 32.5. Esa.
29.13.
removed. Their Ancestors were they, Genesis 38.
that were about to kill their own Brother. Joseph, and really sold him for a
Slave. Their Ancestors were also they, who by their perpetual Exodus 22. Number.
11.12.14.16.20.25.
murmurings made Moses almost weary of his life ( Moses their leader and
deliverer, whom the earth, and the Sea, and the Air obeyed:) who loathed Number.
11.6.
the bread sent from Heaven; who complained of penury when they even surfeited
upon dainties. Their Forefathers revolted from David, 2 Samuel 15.
so great and so good a King, and followed his Rebellious Son. Their
Forefathers murdered 2 Paralip. 24.21.
Zicharias the Son of Joiada in the Holy place, and sacrificed the Priest
himself to their cruelty. And then for their chief Priests, they were such as
by false accusation contrived the death of Jeremias, Jerem. 26.
and had effected it, had they not been prevented by the authority of the
Nobles: yet so far they prevailed, Jerem. 38.
to have him kept in ward even till the City was taken. If any conceive better
of those that lived in the times of Jesus, Josephus will free them from this
error, describing their doings extremely wicked, and their unheard of
sufferings, and yet (as the Historian judges) below their deserts. Nor can we
have more favorable thoughts of the great Council, especially secing at that
time the Senators were chosen in, not according to the old custom by imposition
of hands, Josephus 14.19.
but at the will of those in power: as also the chief Priests, 18.3. and 6.
not now for life to enjoy their dignity, but yearly and for Money. Wherefore
we cannot wonder, that men swollen big with arrogance, in ambition and avarice
insatiable, were driven into fury, at the sight of him, who brought most holy
precepts, and upbraided them for, their evil life by the integrity of his
conversation. Neither was any thing opposed against him, but what has been
objected to excellent persons of old time. So Michaia,he that lived in the time
of Josaphus 1 Reg. 22.
was cast into Prison, because he had courageously asserted the truth against
Four hundred false Prophets. So Ahab charged 1 Reg. 18.17.
Elias, just as the Priests did Luke 23.2.
Jesus, that 'twas he who troubled the peace of Israel. So was Jeremy accused
Jerem. 7.4.
like Jesus, for speaking against the Temple. Here may be added, what the old
Talmud, de synedrio Traditio Ri Judae: quo tempore adveniet filius David, domus
institutionis divina fiet lupanar. Vide Jer 10.21, and 29.14.
Hebrew Masters have left in writing, that in the times of Messiah, men shall
be impudent as Dogs, stubborn like Asses, cruel as wild Beasts. God himself,
who saw long before what sort of men most of the Jews would be in Messiahs
time, said, Hose 2.24.
he would take to himself a people, which had not been his people; and, from
the Cities and Villages of the Jews Jan and 14. Esa. 53.
very few would go up to the Holy Mount but their want of number should be
supplied by Foreigners; and that Messiah should be for ruin Esa. 8.14.
to the Hebrews, and the Stone which the Builders refused, Psalm. 118.20.
should become the head Stone of the Corner.

XXII. Objection of more gods answered.
It remains, that we answer Two objections wherewith the Jews assault both the
Doctrine and the Worship of Christians. The former is, that we Worship more Gods
than one. But this is nothing else, but an odious interpretation forced upon
our Religion. For upon what ground, should this be objected to the Christians,
rather than to Philo the Jew, who does often distinguish De sacrific. Abel and
Gain. Habet quae his pertinent and Maimon. 1.68
three in God, and calls the reason or word of God, In Allegoriit.
Gods name, the worlds Ib. verbum efus quo velut instrumento usus mundum fecit.
maker, not unbegotten, as is God the Father, Libs Quis here is.
nor so begotten as are men. (Whom al so Philo, and Moses the Son of Neheman
Vide doctiff. Mafium in Jos. 5.
stilet^ Angel and legate, taking care of this universe,) or objected to the
Cabalists, who distinguish God into Three lights, some by the same names as
Christians do, Vide audit. ad lex. sobind.
of the Father, of the Son, or the Word, and of the Holy Ghost. And to assume
that which all the Hebrvos clearly confess; that Spirit where with the Prophets
were moved, is not any Creature, and yet is distinguished from the sender, and
so is that which they commonly called And diftinguish from the Holy spiris.
Gemura Hierold. tit. de documentis. R. Jonathan says, the Schekina staid Three
years and a balf in Mount Oliver, expecting the conversion of the Jews. (Praef.
Ecka. Rabthi.) which being rightly taken it most true.
Schekina. But now, that in Messiah shall inhabit the Divine nature, which
they call wisdom, man of the Hebrews R. Solomo. Idem ad Gel. 19.18. ag^os^it a
Deo assumi posse humanam naturam; quam and olim ad tempus assumtam puta^
have delivered: Whence Messiah is called the word of God, by the Chaldee Hose
9.
Paraphrast as in David Esaias, and other, Messiah is styled by the Holy and
Reverend name of God. Jehova Kimchi ad Ferem 23.6.
and by the name of Lord Elohim Ps 4^.7b aid Chald. par.


XXII. Objection of adoring humane nature answered
The answer is as ready to their other, Objection against us, that we give the
Worship due to God unto a nature by God created. For we say no other honor is
given by us to the Messiah nor other worship, han the Second Psalm, and the
hundred and Tenth Psalm Hoet loca, and Zach. 9.9. de Messia exponit doctiss. R.
Saadia
require. Where of the forner, imperfectly, pertaining unto. David, is more
excellently fulsilled in the Messiah as even David Kimchi that great adversary
of Christians, does acknowledge; De Messia eundem exponunt Abraham Esdra and C.
R. Jonathan.
and the later cannot of any other, but of the Messiah be interpreted For what
the more recent Jews, some do imagine of Abraham, some of David some of
Ezechiah, is frivoious. The Psalm if self is David's, as the Hebrew inscription
shows. Now that which David affirms to be spoken unto his Lord, can neither
be applied unto David himself, nor to Ezechiah, who among the Sons of David was
in nothing more excellent than David. And for Abraham, he had not any eminent
Priesthood, but as one inferior to him, was blessed by Who received Tithes of
Abraham by his Priestly right. Genesis 14.19, 20.
Meschisedec. This then and what is annexed tonching the Scepter Psalm: 110.2.
to come out of Sion and to go to the farthest parts, clearly belongs to
Messiah, as like places Genesis 49.10.
undoubtedly speaking of Messiah manifest, nor have the more ancient Hebrews
and Paraphrasts taken it otherwise. And that Jesus of Nazareth is He, in whom
these things are fulfilled, I might believe his Disciples alone affirming it,
because of their perfect honesty; as the Jews believe Moses in those things,
which without other witness, he says were from God delivered unto him. But
beside this, we have in readiness very many and very strong arguments of that
supreme power which we ascribe to Jesus, himself seen of many after his
Resurrection, seen to be carried up into Heaven; and then, Devils cast out, and
Diseases healed only by his name, and gifts of Languages sent to his Disciples;
which tokens of his Reign, Jesus himself had promised. Add to these, that his
Scepcer, that is, the Word of his Gospel, proceeding out of Sion, without
humane assistance, by sole Diving force made its way to the most remote parts
of the World, and subdued to it self Nations and Kings, even as the Psalm had
foretold. The Jewish Cabalists place, between God and men, a certain Son Nomen
qued ei faciunt Hebraei est metator, ita Latinis dicitur, qui regi viam parat.
of Enoch, without any sign of so great power. How much more justly do we place
him, who has given so great demonstrations of himself? Nor does this any whit
diminish God the Father, from whom this ipso fatente, 70.5.19.30.36.43.
power of Jesus comes, and to whom it will Fatente Apostolo, I Cer, 15.24.
return, and to whose honor it is 70.13.31. and 14.13.
subserviant.

XXIII. conclusion of this part.
To discourse of these things more exactly, is not out business here; nor would
we have treated of these, but to make apparent, that in the Christian
institution, there is nothing either impious or unreasonable, for any one to
pretend, against his embracing a Religion, set forth with so great miracle,
adorned with so gracious precepts, and backed with so glorious promises. A for
special questions, he that has embraced the profession, ought to consult those
Books, wherein the Doctrine of Christian Religion is contained. I conclude with
my hearty prayer to Almighty God, that he would be pleased to open the eyes of
the Jews and enlighten their minds, that they may find the good effect of that
petition, Luc. 23.34.
which Christ himself put up to his Father, on their behalf, upon the Cross.

HVGO GROTIVS AGAINST MAHUMETISM.
I. The Rise of Mahumetism.
THat sincere and simple Piety, Vide Ammian. Marcellin. 1.21. de constantion.
which had flourished amongst the Christians, whilst they were grievously
persecuted and oppressed, began by little and little to decay, after that by
Constantine and the succeeding Emperors it was brought to pass, that this
profession was not only safe but honorable, the World Vide de hac re pulchre
dictachrysostomimor. 2. ad 2 cor. 12. post v. 10.
being as it were thrust into the Church. First of all, the Christian Princes
made no end of Warring, even when they might have enjoyed Marciani laudabile
dictum apud zonaram: (...)
Peace: The Bishops had great contentions among them about the chiefest Ammian.
l. 27. vide nobiles epistolas Gregoris vere magni. l. 4.32.34.36.
Seats: and, as in the beginning, the Tree of knowledge, Genesis 11. and 3.
preferred before the Tree of life, brought in great misery; so at this time
also, curious learning was more in request than good manners, and Religion was
turned into an Ammian. l. 22. in fuliani Historia.
art: Whereupon it followed, that after the pattern of those builders of the
Tower of Babel, Genesis 11. Exprobrat has controversias Christianis saepe
Mahumetes praesertim Azoara. 26.32.
the unadvised affectation of sublime things bred dissonant forms of Speech,
and difference of mind. Which being observed by the Common Laudat Gregoras l.
8. dictum Lysidae Pythagorici deinde synesii, apud pop. subtiliter
Philosophari, causa hominibus fuit magni contemptus rerum divinarum.
people, often knowing not which way to turn, they cast the fault upon the Holy
Scriptures, and began to shun them as if they were poisoned. And Religion every
where began (as if Judaism had been returned) to be placed, not in purity of
mind, but in rites, and in such things as contain in them, rather an exercise
of the 1 Timothy 4.8.
body, than amendment of the Soul; and also in a slagrant study 1 Cor. 1.12.
of parties once chosen: So that at last, it came to this; in all places there
were many Christians in name, Salvian. l. 3. de Gubern. Praeter paucissimos
quosdam, qui mala fugiunt, quid est alind omnis coetus Christianorum, quam
sentina vitiorum?
very few in deed. God did not conceal his displeasure at these faults of his
people, but from the farthest recess of Scythia Hunnos, Avaros, Sabiros,
Alanos, etc.
and Germany, Gotthos, Vandalos, Alemannos, etc.
called up vast Armies, and as in a deluge, poured them out upon the Christian
world, and when the slaughters made by these, were not sufficient to correct
the survivors; by Gods just sufferance, Mahumet in Arabia sowed a new Religion;
which although it directly opposed the Christian profession, yet in words after
a sort, it expressed the life of a great part of Christians. This Religion was
first entertained by the Saracens, who had film off from the Emperor Heraclius:
who having in short time by force of Arms subdued Arabia, Syria, Palestine,
Egypt, Persia, seized after upon Africa, and upon Spain also on the other side
of the Sea. But of the Saracens mighty State, as others, so the Turks Vide
Turcica Leunclavii, and Laonicum Chalcocondylam.
chiefly were the successors; a Nation as Warlike as any; which after many
Battles against the Saracens, at last invited and closing with them in a
League, easily received a Religion agreeable to their manners, and transferred
the Majesty of the Empire upon themselves. After this, the Cities of Asia and
Greece were taken, and progress was made by their prosperous Arms, into Hungary
and the bounds of Germany.

II. The Foundation of Mahumerists overturned.
This Religion, plainly made for the shedding of blood, much rejoices in
rites, and would have it self to be believed without any liberty Alcoranus
Azoara 13. ut habet prima editic lat.
of inquiring; whence it is, that the reading of books, which it accounts
sacred, is forbidden the Common people. This very thing is at first a manifest
argument of iniquity. For, that commodity is justly frustrated, which is
obtruded to you, on such terms that you may not look into it. True it is, all
have not equal sharpness of sight to discern all things, many by arrogance,
many by passion, by custom some are carried away into error; but, that the way
to eternal salvation Vide resp. ad quoest. 4. ad orthodox. inter opera Justini.
cannot be known of those, which without any respect of profit or honor seek
it, subjecting themselves, and all they have to God, and praying to him for
assistance, the Divine goodness will not suffer it to be believed. Verily,
since God has implanted in man's Soul a power of judging, no part of truth is
more worthy upon which it may be exercised, then that which cannot be left
unknown without danger of losing eternal happiness.

III. Proof against Mahumetists from the Holy Scriptures.
That Moses Azoara 5.21.
was sent from God, and Jesus, Azo. 5.12.
and that they were Holy men Azo. 5.71.
who first propagated the Discipline of Jesus, Mahumet and his followers do
confess. But in the Alcoran many things are related quite contrary De Abrahamo,
Azo. 31. in Hist. Exodus multa, Azo. 17. and 30. in Hist. Josephi multa, Azo. 22.
to the relations by Moses and by the Disciples of Jesus. To take one example
of many, that Jesus died upon the Cross, returned to life within the third day,
and was seen of many, all the Apostles and the Disciples with the greatest
consent do testify. On the contrary, Mahumet teaches, that Jesus was secretly
stolen away Azoara 11.
to Heaven, and that on the Cross was fastened a certain Image of him, and
therefore Jesus died not, but the eyes of the Jews were deluded. This objection
cannot be evaded, except Mahumet say, as he does say, that the Books both of
Moses and of the Disciples of Jesus, remained not such as they were at first,
but were Azo. 9.
corrupted. But this fiction is resuted by us already in a former discourse.
Surely, if any one should say, the Alcoran is corrupted, the Mahumetists would
deny it, and think that sufficient against those which bring no proof: but they
are not able, if they would, to allege the arguments for the integrity of
their Book, which we produce; of Copies presently spread over all the World
(not as of the Alcoran, in one Language) and preserved by the fidelity of so
many Sects, so differing in other matters. The Mahumetists persuade themselves,
that in the Fourteenth Chapter of St. John, where is spoken of the sending a
comforter, there was something written of Mahumet which the Christians blotted
our. But here I would ask of them; would they have this change of writing made
before the coming of Mahumet, or afterward? After the coming of Mahumet, it was
impossible, when at that time were extant in all the world very many, not only
Greek Copies, but Syriac, Arabic, and in parts distant from Arabia, Ethiopic,
and Latin of several versions: all which do agree in that place without any
variety of the writing. Before the coming of Mahumet, there was no cause of
change, for none could know what Mahumet would teach. Yea, if the Doctrine of
Mahumet had nothing contrary to the Doctrine of Jesus, the Christians would not
have been more difficult in receiving his Books, than they were in the Books of
Moses and the Hebrew Prophets. Suppose we, nothing had been written in either
side, either of Jesus's institution, or of Mahumets; equity would tell us, that
is to be taken for the Doctrine of Jesus to which all Christians, that for
Mahumets to which Mahumetists have consented.

IV. Mahumet and Christ compared.
Let us now compare the adjuncts and properties of both Institutions, that we
may judge which is to be preferred: and first let us look upon the Authors.
Jesus, by the confession of Mahumet himself, Azoaia 29
was 09 that Messiah promised in the Law and the Prophets: he is called by
Mahumet himself the word of God, 5.11.
the Mind, 4.11.
the Wisdom Ibid.
of God, he is said by the same Mahumet, to have had no Father 31.
among men: Mahumet is believed, even by his own Disciples, Videlib.
Generationis Mahumetis.
begotten after the accustomed way of Nature. Jesus of a life always
immaculate, to whom nothing could be objected: Mahumet long time Vide clron.
Mahumetis versa and Arab.
a Robber, always given to Azo. 42.43.
Women. Jesus carried up into Azo. 11.
Heaven, as Mahumet confesses: Mahumet is detained in his Sepulcher. Which of
the two is worthy to be followed, who cannot plainly perceive?

V. Their actions compared.
Consider the actions of them both. Jesus Azoara 5.13.
gave fight to the blind, strength to the lame, and health to the Sick: Mahumet
3.14.17.
says, he was not sent with miracles, but with Arms. Yet some came after, who
would attribute also miracles to him; but of what sort? Truly, such as by
humane art may easily be effected, as that of the Pigeon flying to his ear; or,
whercof there were no witnesses, as of the Camel speaking to him by night; or,
which are refelled by their own absurdity, as of a great part of the Moon
Azoara 64.
fallen into his Sleeve, and returned by him to make up the roundness of the
Star. Who will not say, in a doubtful case, we must stand to that Law, which
has on its side the surer Testimonies of Divine approbation? Let us now see
what they were, who first undertook either of the professions.

VI. The first profession of both Religions.
They that embraced the Law of Jesus, were men fearing God, of an innocent
^ife; and it becomes God, not to suffer such men to be deceived either with
cheating words, or seeming Prodigies. But the first followers of Mahumetism
were men that lived upon the Vox ipsa Saraceni(...) significat. Scal.
spoil, strangers both to humanity and to Piety.

VII. The manner of propagation of both.
Next, let us show the manner, how both Religions Were propagawted. Of the
Christian we have already said, the increase of it was from miracles, not of
Christ only, but of his Disciples and their successors, and also from their
patience of adversities and Persecutions. But the Teachers of Mahumetism
wrought no miracles, they suffered no grievous troubles, no cruel deaths for
that profession. That Religion, whither their Arms lead the way, follows, and
is an occasion of their Victory. Nor do the Masters themselves bring other
Arguments for it, but the success of their Wars, and the greatness of their
Empire; then which nothing is, in this affair more fallacious. Themselves
condemn the Pagan Religion; and yet we know, how great were the Victories of
Persians, Macedonians, Romans, and how large their Empires. Nor have the
Mahumetists always prospered in their Wars. Notable overthrows have they
received in many places, both by Sea and Land: Out of Spain they were totally
expelled. A thing of so uncertain event, and common to good and bad, cannot be
a certain note of true Religion: So much the less here, because their Arms are
unjust, being often raised against Nations, not troublesome unto them, not
known by any injury; so that they an pretend no cause of War, but Religion
alone, which is most of War, but Religion alone, which is most irreligious. For
the worship of God is no worship, unless it proceed from a willing mind. And
the will is drawn by instruction and persuasion, not by threats and violence.
He that is compelled to believe, does not believe, but only makes a show, that
he may escape pain. And he that by sense or fear of punishment would extort
assent, thereby shows his distrust of Arguments. But again, themselves destroy
this very pretense of Religion, when they allow those whom they have subdued,
to use what Religion they will; yea, and some times openly acknowledge, that
Christians may be saved in their own Religion.

VIII. Their precepts compared.
Compare we now the precepts together. On the one side patience is commanded,
and benignity even to enemies; on the other side, revenge, on this side
perpetual fidelity of Marriage, mutual toleration of manners: on that license
of Vide Euthymium.
departing. Here, the Husband performs himself what he exacteth of the Wife,
and by his own example teaches her to fasten love but upon one: there came
women Azoara 3.8, 9.
after women, new provocations unto Lust. Here, Religion is called inward to
the heart, that being cherisht therein, it may bring forth Fruits profitable to
mankind: there it spends almost all its virtue in Vide Barth. Geor. de ritibus
Turcarum.
circumcision, and other things in themselves Azoara 9.
indiffererent. Here a temporate use of meats and Wine is permitted: there to
eat of the Swine, 2.26.
or drink of the Vide Euthymium.
Grapes, is forbidden; although Wine is a great gift of God for the comfort of
the mind and body, being taken with moderation. That such weak Rudinients, as
'twere for Children, preceded the most perfect Law, such as is Chrifts, we do
not wonder: but to succeed after it, and for us now to return to types and
shadows is preposterous: nor can any cause be given, why another Religion,
after the Christian, which is far the best of all, should be now produced.

IX. Objection, touching the Son of God, answered.
The Mahumetists say, they are offended, that we give God a Son, when he uses
not a Wife: as if the name of Son in respect of God, cannot have a more Divine
signification. But Mahumet himself ascribes many things to God, not less
unworthy, then if he should be said to have a Wife: namely, that he has a cold
hand, Cantacuz. orat. in Mahum. 2.18.
and he felt it to be so: that he is carried in a Chair, Ibid.
and such like. As for us, when we call Jesus the Son of God, we signify the
same thing which he does, when he styles him the word of God: for the word is
after a sort Vide Plat. in Conviv.
begotten of the mind: add also, that he was born of a Virgin, the operation of
God alone supplying the Fathers part: that he was taken up into Heaven, by the
power of God: which things being confessed also by Mahumet, declare that Jesus
may, and ought to be called the Son of God, Luc. 1.35. Jo. 10.36. In lib.
doctrina Mahumetis Jesus inducitur deum suum patrem appellans.
by a cerrain singular right.

X. Absurd things in their Books.
But on the contrary, in the Mahumetan writings, it would be tedious to
enumerate how many things there are, remote from all truth of Azoara 28.37.
History, how many altogether ridiculous. Such is that Fable of a fair Woman,
Cantacuz. orat. 2.15.
whom the Angels overcome with Wine taught a charm, to get up to Heaven and
come down again. But having got up very high, God caught her, and fixed her
there, and this is the Star Venus. Another is of a Mouse Inlib. doctr. Mahum.
in Noabs Ark, made of the Elephants Dung; and a Cat Ibid.
of the Lions breath. And that's a notable one, in fine dicti libri.
of death to be turned into a Ram, and to be lodged in the middle space between
Heaven and Hell; And of Exodus 1.
dainty meats in the other life to be voided by sweat; and of Companies of
women to be assigned every one for his pleasure. All which are of such a
nature, that they must needs be sotted by their own folly, who can give any
credit to such gross faults, especially now the light of the Gospel shiues
round about them.

CONCLUSION.
I address my self now, leaving Aliens, to Christians of all sorts and names,
beseeching them to lift up pure hands Jam. 4.8.
unto that God, who has made all things visible and invisible, Col. 1.26.
out of nothing; with a sure confidence, that he takes care I Pet. 5.7.
of us, that without his permission, not a Sparrow Mat. 10.29.
falls: and that they fear not those which can only hurt the body, 10.28.
in comparison to him, who has equal power both over body and Soul. Let them
not trust in God the Father only, but in Jesus Jo. 14.2.
seeing there is no other name Act. 4.12
in earth, which can save us. This ye shall rightly do, if you persuade your
selves, not they that call the one Father and the other Lord, shall live for
ever; but they that compose their lives according to the will Mat. 7.21.
of God. Farther, I exhort you, carefully to keep 1 Timothy 6. 20.
Institution of Christ, as a most precious treasure, and to that end also read
often the 1 Cor. 4.16.
Holy Scriptures, where with no man can be deceived, but he that first deceives
himself. For the writers of them were more faithful and more full of a Divine
Afflatus, than to deprive us Vide Tert, de praeser.
of necessary truth, or to hide it under a Cloud: but we must bring a mind
disposed Jo. 7.17.
to obedience. If we do so, none of those things shall escape us, which ought
to be believed, hoped for, or performed 2 Timothy 3.15.16.
by us. And by this means is the Holy Spirit nourished 1.6.
and raised in us, who is given as the earnest Ephesians. 1.14.
of our future happiness. Moreover, I dissuade all Christians from the
imitation of Pagans: First, in the worship of false gods, 1 Cor. 8.5.
which are nothing but vain names, that wicked Spirits 1 Cor. 10.20.
use, to avert us from the Service Ephesians. 2.2.
of the true God: Wherefore we cannot partake of their Sacrifices, so as withal
to have a part in Christ's Sacrifices. Secondly, in their licentious manner of
living, Ephesians. 2.3.
having no other Law, but what is dictated by their own Lust; from which it
behooves Christians to keep 2 Cor. 6. 15.
themselves far off, who ought not only to excel Pagans much, but even the
Jewish Lawyers Mat. 5.20.
and Pharisees; whose righteousness, consisting in some external works, is not
sufficient to bring us unto the Kingdom of Heaven. In no esteem now, 1 Cor.
7.19.
is the circumcision made with hands, but that other internal of the heart, the
keeping of Gods commands, the new Gal. 6.15.
Creature, Faith efficacious by love; 5.6.
by which are known the true Israelites, Romans 9.6.
mystical Jews, 2.28.
that is, the worshippers of God. Difference of meats, Act 10.13.
Sabbaths Col. 2.16.21.
Festival days, are shadows of things, which have a real existence in Christ
and Christians, On occasion of Mahumetism, these are our admonitions. It was
foretold by the Lord Jesus, Jo. 5.43.
that after his times some would come and falsely say they were sent by God;
but, though an Angel Gal 1.8.
should come from Heaven, no other Doctrine is to be received then that of
Christ, confirmed by so great testimonies. 1 Jo. 5.7.
For of old, in many and sundry ways, Heb. 1.2.
God spoke unto the pious men, at that time living; but at last was pleased to
speak unto us by his Son, the Lord of all things, 1 Cor. 15.27.
the effulgence Heb. 1.3, 1.13.
of his Fathers brightness, the express image of his substance, b^ whom are
made, the things that have been, or shall be; who has all things under his
Dominion, and having expiated our sins, being lifted up to the right hand of
God, has attained dignity above the Angels; and being the author Heb. 2.3.
of our Religion, nothing can be expected more magnificent. Here I may recall
into your memory, that the Arms in Ephesians. 6. 11.
appointed for Christ's Soldiers, are not those upon which Mahumet relies, but
the proper arms of the Spirit, able to overthrow all strong holds that lift
themselves up against the knowledge of God: for a shield, faith, to repel the
fiery Darts of the Devil; for a breast plate, righteousness of life for a Helmet
to defend the weakest part, the hope of life eternal; and for a Sword, the word
is delivered to us from Heaven, piercing into the inmost parts of the Soul.
Here follows my serious exhortation to mutual concord, which Christ at his
departure Jo. 14.27.
so earnestly commended to his Disciples. We ought not to have many Masters,
but one is our Jam. 3.1.
Master, Jesus Christ: we Christians are all Baptized into 1 Cor. 1.13: 1.10.
one name: We ought not to admit Sects among us, Rom 12.3.
and divisions; for a remedy whereof we must be mindful of those A postolical
sayings, be soberly wise, according to the measure of knowledges; God has
given to every one: if any have less understanding, bear 15. 1.
with their weakness, that they may easily and without contention join with us,
if any excel others in knowledge, it is fit they should excel also in their love
2 Cor. 6.6.
and compassion, and patiently wait till God reveal Phil. 3.15.
unto them the Truth, as yet unknown. Mean while things certain and agreed upon
are to be held fast, and practiced. Now we know in part, 1 Cor. 13.11.
the time is come, when all points shall be perfectly comprehended. And this I
entreat of every one, not to hide the Talent Mat. 25.15.
entrusted to him, but use his best endeavor to gain others unto 1 Cor. 9.19.
Christ: to which purpose, we are not only to give them wholesome Ephesians. 4.29.
words, but the example of a good life; that the goodness of our Lord may be
seen in the good behavior 1 Pet. 3.16.
of his Servants, and the purity of the Gospel may shine forth in their
obedience.

Amen.
I. Against Paganism.
I. A Special Refutation of Religions, differing from the Christian. II. And
first of Paganism, That there is one God alone. III. That evil spirits were
worshipped by the Pagans, and how unworthily. IV. Against worshipping of the
dead. V. Against worshipping the Stars and Elements. VI. Against worship given
to dumb Beasts. VII. worship of accidents. VIII. Answer to an objection of
miracles. IX. Answer to the objection of Oracles. X. Pagan Religion failed,
being left of humane aids. XI. The pretended efficacy of the Stars. XII. Many
points of Christianity approved by Wise Pagans.
II. Against Judaism.
I. ADdress to the Jews. II. Christ's miracles cannot be denied by the Jews.
III. Answer to an objection of the Devils aid. IV. Of the force of words. V.
The miracles of Jesus were Divine. VI. Answer to an objection of the difference
between the Law of Moses and the Law of Christ. VII. How Jesus observed the Law
of Moses, and what he abolished. VIII. Sacrifices never pleased God by
themselves. IX. Difference of Meats. X. Of Days. XI. Of outward Circumcision.
XII. The Apostles toleration of Jewish rites. XIII. The Jews confess the
promise of Messiah. XIV. That he is come, proved by the Time. XV. Of the delay
of his coming. XVI. The present State of the Jews. XVII. Jesus proved to be the
Messiah, from the Prophecies. XVIII. Objection, that some things are not
fulfilled, answered. XIX. Answer to the low Estate and death of Jesus. XX.
Answer to this, that good men crucified Jesus. XXI. Objection of more gods
answered. XXII. Objection of adoring humane nature, answered. XXIII. Conclusion
of this part.
III. Against Mahumetism.
I. The rise of Mahumetism. II. The Foundation of Mahumetists overturned. III.
Proofs against Mahumetists from Holy Scriptures. IV. Mahumet and Christ
compared. V. Their actions compared. VI. The first profession of both
Religions. VII. The manner of propagation of both. VIII. Their precepts
compared. IX. Objection touching the Son of God, answered. X. Absurd things in
their Books. Conclusion of all.
FINIS.

