See you not Learning in his Looks? See it more Lively in his Books.

Tho. Cross Sculpsit



THE ILLUSTRIOUS HVGO GROTIUS OF THE LAW OF WAR AND PEACE WITH ANNOTATIONS.

III. PARTS. AND Memorials of the Author's Life and Death.

(...) M. Antonin. Imp. l. 9. LONDON, Printed by T. Warren, for William Lee,
And are to be sold at his shop, at the sign of the Turks-head in Fleet Street,
M. DC. L V.

TO THE ENGLISH GENTRY, WITH ALL DUE HONOR TO THEIR WISDOM AND VALOR, THIS
WORK IS HUMBLY DEDICATED BY THEIR SERVANT THE TRANSLATOR.

TO THE READER.
THat This Book may obtein General Acceptance, I have somewhat to say to every
sort of Readers. The Divine shall here behold the Evangelical Law shining above
all other in the perfect Glory of Charity and Meekness. The Gentlemen of our
Noble Innes of Court shall here read the most Common Law, that of Nature and
Nations. The Civilian may here observe some footsteps of the Goodly Body of his
Law. (To the Statesman and the Soldier 'twill be enough to see the Title, of
War and Peace.) The Philosopher, the Poet, the Orator, and Historian, shall
here meet with the choicest Flowers gathered out of their spacious Gardens by a
most skilful hand, the hand of Him that was excellent in all these kinds of
good Learning, the Incomparable HUGO GROTIUS. This Great Name, as well as the
Usefulness of the Argument, we hope, will commend the Book to every Ingenuous
Reader; to whose candid Censure it is in all humility submitted by

C. B.
The Author's Dedication to the most Christian KING.
THis Book, Most Eminent of Kings, is bold to bear Your Royal Name in the
Front, in Considence, not of It self, not of the Author, but of the Argument.
Because it is written for Justice. Which Virtue is so properly Yours, that, by
your own Merits, and by the Suffrage of Mankind, You have thence received a
Title most worthy of so Great a King: being known every where now, no less by
the Name of JUST, than of LUDOVIC. The Roman Commanders esteemed the Titles
very specious, which were derived from Crete, Numidia, Afric, Asia, and other
conquered Nations: How much more Illustrious is Yours, whereby you are declared
both the Enemy every where, and all ways the Conqueror (of no people, of no
man, but) of that which is Unjust? The Egyptian Kings thought it a great
matter, if One were called the Lover of his Father, Another of his Mother, a
Third of his Brother: How small parts are These of Your Name, which
comprehends not only those things, but whatsoever can be imagined fair and
honorable? You are Just, when, by Imitation of Him, you honor the Memory of
your Father, a King Great, above all that can be said; Just, when you instruct
your Brother every way, but no way more than by your example; Just, when you
grace your Sisters with Highest Matches; Just, when you revive the Laws almost
buried, and, as much as you can, oppose your self against the declining Age:
Just, but withal Clement, when you take away nothing from your subjects (whom
Ignorance of your goodness had transported beyond the limits of their Duty)
beside the license to offend; and offer no Violence to Souls of a different
persuasion in matter of Religion: Just, and withal Merciful, when, by your
Authority you relieve oppressed Nations, afflicted Princes, neither permit
Fortune to be too insolent. Which singular Beneficence of yours, and as near
like to God, as human Nature suffers, compells me, on my own behalf also, to
make this public thankful Acknowledgment. For, as the Heavenly Stars do not
only communicate their Influence to the greater parts of the world, but
vouchsafe it to every living Creature; So you, being the most beneficent Star
on earth, not content to raise up Princes, to ease people, have been pleased to
be a safeguard, and a Comfort, even to me, ill used in my own Country. Here is
to be added, to fill up the Orb of Justice, after your public Actions; the
Innocence and Purity of Your private life, worthy to be admired, not by Men
alone, but by the Angels too. For, how Few of the Inferior sort, yea of those
that have secluded themselves from the Fellowship of the world, keep themselves
so untoucht by all faults, as You, being placed in such a Fortune, which is
surrounded with innumerable allurements to sin? And how Admirable a Thing is
This, among Business, in the Throng, in the Court, among so many Examples of
Those that sin so many ways, to attain unto that, which solitude scarce, yea
often not at all, affords others? This is indeed, to merit, even in this
life, not only the name of JUST, but of SAINT, which was given by the consent
of pious men, to Charles the Great and Ludovic your Ancestors, after their
Death; that is, to be, not by a Gentilitious, but by your own proper right,
Most Christian. Now, as every part of Justice is Yours, so is that which
concerns the Matter of this Book, about the Counsels of War and Peace, yours
peculiarly, as you are a King, and King of France. This your Kingdom is great,
which stretches it self to both Seas, through so many spaces of so happy
Lands: but it is a greater Kingdom than This, that You do not covet other
Kingdoms. This is worthy of Your Piety, worthy of that eminency; not to Invade
the Right of any Other by your Arms, not to remove ancient Bounds; but to do
the Business of Peace in the time of War; neither to begin War, but with this
Desire, to bring it to a speedy end. And, How Brave, How Glorious is This, How
Joyful to Your conscience, that, when God shall call you up to His Kingdom,
which alone is better than yours, you may confidently say, This sword have I
received from Thee, for the safeguard of Justice; This I render to Thee pure
and unstained with the blood of any man, rashly shed? Thus it shall come to
pass, that the rules we now look for in books, hereafter may be taken from Your
actions, as from a most perfect Exemplar. It is a very great matter, This; Yet
does the world of Christians dare to exact something more at Your Hands;
Namely, that, the Flames of War being every where extinguished, not only
Empires, but Churches may see their Peace returning to them by Your
procurement: and, that Our Age may learn to submit to the Judgment of That Age,
which All Christians profess to have been truly and sincerely Christian. The
minds of Good men, weary of Discords, are raised to this Hope by the Friendship
newly made 'twixt you and the King of Great Britain (a most wise Prince, and
exceedingly studious of that Holy Peace) and confirmed by the most Auspicious
Marriage of your Sister. Difficult is the Business, by reason of Partial
Affections, inflamed and exasperated more and more: but Nothing is worthy of so
excellent Kings, but That which is Difficult, but That which is Despaird of by
all others. The God of Peace, the God of Justice, O Just and peaceable King,
Crown your Majesty (nearest to His) as with all other happiness, so with this
also, the procuring of a Just and Universal Peace. 1625.

THE PREFACE OF THE AUTHOR.
THE Civil Law, whether Roman, or that which is proper to any other Country,
many Writers have attempted either to illustrate with Commentaries, or in a
more compendious way to propose unto their Readers: But, that Law which is
between many Nations, or their Rulers, whether proceeding from Nature it self,
or constituted by divine precepts, or introduced by customs and tacit
agreement, Few have touched, None have hitherto handled universally, and in a
certain order, when yet the Doing hereof is of much Concernment to Mankind.
For, Cicero truly called this an excellent Science, in Leagues, Covenants, and
Agreements of several people, Kings and foreign Nations, and in all Rights of
War and Peace. Euripides also Sic enim Theoc'ymenem compellari facit: Nam turpe
id essct, cum scias hominum ac Deum Quod est eritque, justa te haud cognoscere.
prefers this science before the knowledge of divine and humane things. 1. This
Work is the more necessary, because, both in our age there are, and in former
times there have been some, who so contemned this part of Right and Law, as if
it were only an empty word, and had no real existence. That saying of Euphemus
in Thucydides, is almost in all men's mouths, Thucyd. l. 6. (...). Likewise, in
the first Book, the Athenians being at that time in their pride, say thus to
the Melians: Humane reason judges those things just which are necessary; and
things possible to be done, are done by the mighty, and suffered by the weak.
That nothing is unjust, which is profitable to a King or Commonwealth having
power. Whereto that is like, In the highest Fortune that is more right, which
is more prevalent. And, A Commonwealth cannot be governed without injury. Add
hereunto, that Controversies arising between Nations or Kings, commonly have no
arbitration, but are determined by force. Now, this is not only the opinion of
the Vulgar, that War is very far distant from all right and equity, but even
learned and prudent men do often let fall words favorable to that opinion. For
nothing is more frequent than Right Ennius: Non ex jure manu consertum, sed
mage ferro Rem repetunt. Horatius de Achille: Jura negat sibi nata, nibil non
arrogat armis. Alius de alio: Hic pace^ temerataque jura relinguo.
and Arms opposed one to aother. Old Antigonus derided one that presented to
him a Commentary of Justice, when he was assaulting Cities. And Marius said, He
could not hear In Plutarch, Lysander showing his sword, says: He that has
this in his hand, best dis^utes of the bounds of his dominion. And Caesar in
the same Author: Laws have no place in the time of war. And Seneca says,
Princes, in war especially, give with their eyes shut; One man cannot satisfy
so many armed usts: nor can he at the same time act the good Man and the good
General. De ben. lib. 4. c. 38.
the Laws for the clashing of Armor. That very Pompey, of so bashful a
Countenance, was bold to say, What? would you have me think on Laws, now I am
armed Plutarch relates this saying of Pompey to the Momentines, thus: Will you
never leave prating of the Laws to us that wear Sword^? Curtius, lib. 9. So,
does war overthrow even the Laws of Nature.
? In Christian Writers many sayings of the like sense occur: One of Tertullians
may suffice instead of all: Deceit, rigor, injustice, are the proper
businesses of wars. All that are of this mind, will (no doubt) object against
us that in the Comedy Terent. Incerta haec, s^tu postules Ratione certa facere,
nihilo plus agas, Quam si des operam, ut cum ratione insanias.
: These uncertain things, if you seek to order by certain Reason, you do but
endeavor to be mad with Reason. Wherefore, seeing in vain is any Disputation
of Right, if there be no such thing, it will pertain to the commendation and
defense of our work, that this very great Error should briefly be refelled.

Now, that we may not have to do with the Multitude, let us allow them an
Advocate: and whom rather than Carneades, who had attained to that, which was
the height of his Academy, that he could put forth the strength of his
Eloquence for Error no less than Truth. He therefore, when he had undertaken
to oppose Justice, that especially of which we treat, found no stronger
Argument than this: That Men had established for themselves various Laws (with
respect to their Utility) according to their Customs; and among the same Men
often changed with the times: That there is no natural Right or Law; But, that
all Men, and other living Creatures, are carried by the guiaance of Nature to
things profitable for them: Wherefore, there is no Justice; or, if there be
any, it is extreme Folly, because it hurts it self, taking care for the
benefit of others.

But, what the Philosopher says here, and the Poet follows Nec natura potest
justo secer^re bonestum.
, That Nature cannot make any difference 'twixt right and wrong, must not be
admitted. For, Man indeed is an Animal, but excelling all the rest, and
differing farther from them, than they do from one another: Which is confirmed
by many Actions proper to Mankind. And, among these things that are proper to
Man, is the Appetite of Society, that is, of Community, not of any sort, but
Quiet, and (according to the measure of his understanding) Orderly, with those
of his own kind: which the Stoics called (...) Chrysostom on the Romans Hom. 30.
says, we men have by nature society with men. What else (...) when even the
Beasts have so too. See the same Father in the 1. Chapter to the Ephesians. where he
shows, that we have given unto us by nature, the seeds of virtues. Marc.
Antoninus, that Philosopher in the Throne: It has appeared, that we are born
for Society. Is it not plain, worser things are ordained for the Better, and
the better for one another?
. What is objected then, that every living Creature is by nature carried only
to its own profit, so universally taken, ought not to be granted. For, even
some of the mere Animals, in some sort, restrain It is an old Proverb, A Dog
eats no Dogs-flesh. Juven. Tigris agit rabida cum Tigride pacem: Parcit
cognatis maculis sera. Philo has an excellent passage upon the fifth Command:
Be you Men imitators of the mute Creatures. They are taught to requite
benefits, etc. See Porphyry (de non esu animal. 3.) of the exceeding care of
Doves about their young ones.
the desire of their own profit, with a respect, partly of their Issue, partly
of others of their own kind. Which, in them truly, we think proceeds from some
external intelligent principle; because, in other actions not more difficult
than the former, they do not discover such intelligence in themselves. And the
same is to be said of Infants: in whom, before all Discipline, there shows it
self a certain propension to do good to others, prudently observed by Plutarch:
as also, in that Age Compassion breaks forth of its own accord. But, in a Man
of perfect Age, knowing to do like things in the like manner, with an exceeding
appetite Mar. Antonin. l. 9. (...). And he says, One may more easily find a
thing of an earthly nature not inclining to the earth, than a man separating
from Mankind. Add August. de doct. Christ. l. 3. c. 14.
of Society, having Speech, the peculiar instrument thereof, as his privilege
above all other Creatures, we must conceive there is an Ability of
Understanding and Working, according to general precepts; and the things
agreeable thereto, belong not now to all living Creatures, but are peculiar to
humane nature. Now, this custody Nam quo alio tuti sumus, quam quod mutuis
juvamur officiis? hoc uno instructior vita, contraque incursianes subit as
^citior est, beneficiorum commerc^o. Fac nos singulos, quid sumus? praeda
animalium and victimae, ac vilissimus and facillimus sanguis. quoniam caeteris
animalibus in tutelam sui sat is virtum est. quaecunque vaga nascuntur, and
actura vitam segregem, a^mata sunt. hominem imbecillitas cingit: non ^guium
vis, non dentium, terribilem caeteris fecit. duas res dedis, quae illum
obnoxium caeteris validissimum sacerent, rationem and societatem. It que qui
par esse nulli posset si diduce^tur, rerum potitur, etc. Seneca 4. de benefic.
c. 18.
of Society (which we have thus rudely expressed) convenient to humane
Understanding, is the fountain of that Law, which is properly called by such a
name: to which pertains Abstinence from that which is Another; and if we have
any thing of that sort, or have gained by it, Restitution; Obligation to
fulfill promises; Reparation of Damage unjustly done, and the Merit of
Punishment amongst Men.

From this signification of Law is derived another more large: for, because Man
above other Animals, has not only that social virtue which we mentioned, but
also judgment to discern what things delight or hurt, not present only, but
future; and what things can lead to either; it is convenient to humane nature,
according to the measure of humane understanding, in these things also to
follow a rectified judgment, and neither to be corrupted with fear, or the
allurement of present pleasure, nor to be transported with any impetuous
rashness: And that, which is plainly repugnant to such a judgment, is also
conceived to be against the Law of Nature, to wit, humane.

What we have now said, would have some place, though we should grant, which
cannot be granted without the highest sin, That there is no God: or, That he
has no Care of humane Affairs: the contrary whereof being implanted in us,
partly by Reason, partly by perpetual Tradition, and confirmed by many
Arguments and Miracles testified in all Ages, it follows, that we must without
exception obey God, as our Maker, to whom we owe our selves, and all we have:
especially, seeing he has many ways declared his infinite Goodness and Power;
So that, he is able to give unto those that obey him greatest Rewards, and
eternal, being himself eternal; and may be believed willing; and much the more,
if he has expressly promised it: Which we Christians, convinced by undoubted
testimonies, do believe. This is now another fountain of Law, beside that
natural, coming from the free will of God Inde M. Antonino judice, lib. 9.
(...). He that is unjust, is irreligious, in the judgment of that Philosophic
Emperor.
, to which, that we ought to be subject, our own understanding does
irrefragably dictate to us.

Moreover, that natural Law of which we have spoken, (whether it be the Social,
or that which is more largely so called) though it proceeds from principles
internal to man, yet it may deservedly be asscrib'd to God Chrysostom. 1. ad Cor.
11. 3. Cum naturam dico, Deum dico; ipse enim est naturae opifex.
, because it was his will that such principles should be in us: in which sense
Chrysippus and the Stoics said, The Original of Law came from no other Head
but Jupiter Jus a Jovis nomine dictum, nisi forte verius pe^ abscissionem, ut
ex ostum os, va ex justum, jus, jusis, postra ju is, ut ex pap^si, Papi (...).
d. quo vid Cic. l. 9. epist. 21. Chiy fig. 3. de Diis: Non po t^st inveniri
principium oliud aut origo justiciae, quam ab j v. and communi natura. Inde
enim initium duci debet, ubi de botis ma^isque disserendum est.
. Add, that God, by Laws given, has made the said principles more
conspicuous, even to men of Weaker minds: and those impetus and passions
regarding our selves and others, and drawing us several ways, He has forbid to
wander, regulating their vehemence, and keeping them in compass. And the sacred
History, besides that which consists in precepts, does not a little excite
that social affection, by showing that all men are descended from the same
first Parents: so that, in this sense may be rightly said what Florentinus said
in another, Nature has made us all Kinsmen: Whence it follows, that it is
impiety for one man to be treacherous to another Leg. ut vim. D. de just. and
ju.
. Among men, Parents are as it were Gods (...). Hier. (...). Ph. l. Secunda
post Deum federatio. Hieron. Dcorum simulacra. Pla. Horos parentibus ut dits
debetur. Arist.
; to whom therefore, not an infinite, but a peculiar observance is due.

And further, being it is a point of the Law of Nature, to stand to Covenants,
(for some way of binding themselves was necessary among men, nor can any other
natural way be imagined) from this very fountain Civil Laws have flowed. For,
they that had joined themselves to any Assembly, or subjected themselves to Man
or Men, had either expressly promised, or by the nature of the business ought to
be understood to have promised tacitly, That they would follow what either the
major part of the Assembly, or Those to whom power was given, had constituted.
Wherefore, what Carneades and others say Utilitas justi prope matter and aequi.
Ad quem locum Acron, aut quisquis est vetus Horatii interpres: Repugnat
praeceptis Stoicorum. ostendere vult justitiam non esse naturalem, sed natam ex
utilitate. Contra hanc sententiam, vide quae disputat Augustinus, de doct.
Christ. l. 3. c. 14.
, That Utility is even the Mother of Justice and Equity, if we speak
accurately, is not true. For the mother of Natural Law is humane nature it
self, which would carry us to a desire of mutual society, though we wanted
nothing: but the mother of Civil Law is the very obligation by consent, which
having its virtue from the Natural Law, Nature may be called the Grandmother of
this Law also. But to Natural Law Utility is added: for the Author of Nature
was pleased we should be weak singly, and stand in need of many things useful
to our life, that we might the more vigorously embrace Society: To the Civil
Law, Utility gave occasion: for that consociation or subjection aforesaid,
began to be ordained for some Utilities sake. And they that prescribe Laws to
others, are wont, or ought, to respect some Utility therein.

But, as the Laws of every Common wealth respect the interest and profit of the
same; so, between Commonwealths, either all, or most, some Laws may have
arisen from Consent, (and it appears they have arisen) which might respect the
Interest, not of several Societies, but of the Whole. And this is that which is
called the Law of Nations, as often as that name is distinguished from Natural
Law. Which kind of Law Carneades omitted, distributing all Law into Natural
Law, and the Civil Law of single Nations: when yet, being to treat of that Law
which is common to Nations one with another (for he added a discourse of War,
and things got by War) he ought by all means to have mentioned the same.

And it is another error of Carneades, to traduce Justice by the name of
Folly. For, as by his own confession, the Citizen is not a fool, who follows
the Civil Law in the Commonwealth, though for his reverence unto it he must
omit some things profitable to himself: So, neither is that people foolish,
that value not so much their own Interest, as to neglect therefore the Common
Law of Nations. The reason is the same in both. For, as a Citizen Antoninus
uses this similitude appositely, lib. 9. Whatsoever action of thine has not
respect, either near or remote, to the common Good, it makes a breach, and is
against the peace, and seditious, like him that separates himself from the
people. And as the same Antoninus says, What is good for the Hize, is good for
the Be.
, who breaks the Civil Law for his present Commodity, breaks that wherein his
own and his posterities perpetual benefit is contained: Even so a people
violating the Laws of Nature and Nations, destroy the muniments of their own
Tranquillity for the future.

Again, though no profit were expected out of the observation of Law, yet were
it a point of Wisdom, not of Folly, to be carried unto that, to which we feel
our selves directed and inclined by our nature. Wherefore, neither is that Jura
inventa metu in justi fateare necesse est.
which one has in Plato, Laws were found out through fear of receiving injury,
and Men are forcibly drawn to advance justice, universally true. For that
pertains only to those Institutes and Laws, which are invented for the more
facile execution of Law: as, Many weak of themselves, that they might not be
oppressed of the stronger, conspired to institute, and by united force to
maintain Courts of Justice, that all together might prevail against those they
could not match single. And in this sense may that Saying be well taken, Law is
that which pleases the Stronger, conceiving Law to want its external end,
unless it have Force to back it: as Solon did very great matters, (...)
Ovidius: Valet causa, causamque tuentibus armis.
joining Might and Right together, as he said himself. Yet does not Law, though
destitute of Force, want Effect altogether; for Justice brings security to the
Conscience, Injustice torments and tearings, such as Plato describes in the
breasts of Tyrants. Besides, the consent of honest man approves of Justice,
condemns Injustice. And, which is the greatest of all, this has God for an
Enemy, that for a Friend; who does so reserve his judgments after this life,
that he often too represents the power of them even in this life, as Histories
do show by many examples.

Now, whereas Many require not that justice in a State or Governor, which they
exact of private Men; the Cause of that error is, first, in that they consider
nothing in the Law, but the Profit arising thence: Which is evident in single
Citizens, unable to defend themselves; but great Cities and States, seeming to
contain all things in themselves, which are needful for the well supporting of
life, seem not to have need of that virtue that looks abroad, and is called
Justice. But (not to repeat what was said, that Law was not only provided for
profits sake) there is no Commonwealth so strong, that may not sometime stand
in need of help from without; either for commerce, or also for repelling the
Forces of many foreign Nations united together against it: Whence we see the
most potent States and Kings have desired Leagues, all virtue whereof is taken
away by those that confine Law within the bounds of a City. It is most true,
Omnia sunt incerta, cum a jure discessum est. Cic. ep. 11. 16. Plutarch blames
that saying of Pyrrhus, That he should be his Heir who had the sharpest sword,
as a bloody speech, adding, So unsociable and savage is Ambition.
Take away Law, and all things are uncertain. If there be no Community that can
be conserved without Law, (which Aristotle proved by a memorable example of
Thieves Thieves, if they be not true to one another (says Polybius, 4.) and do
not keep a Law among themselves, cannot subsist.
) certainly that which binds Mankind and many Nations together, has need of
Law: as he perceived who said, Unhonest things are not to be done, no not for
ones Country. Greatly does Aristotle Platarch in his Agesilaus, says, The
Lacedaemonians know no honesty but prosit, nor law but that which makes for the
advantage of Spa^ta. The Athenians in Thucydides, l. 5. say of the same, That
they are civil to one another; but, in respect of others, that seems honest,
which is pleasant; just, which is profitable.
accuse them, who, when they would have no man govern among themselves, but he
that has right, have no regard of right or wrong toward Foreiners. That same
Pompey, whom we named before on the other part, corrected this Speech of a
Spartan King, That Commonwealth is most happy, whose bounds are terminated by
the Spear and Sword, saying, That Is truly blessed, which has Justice for its
bounds: to which purpose he might have used the authority of another Spartan
King, who preferred Justice before Military Valor Agesilaus, when he heard the
Persian King styled Great, How, says he, is he Greater than (...) am, unless
he be Juster?
, upon this ground; because Valor must be governed by Justice; but if all men
were just, there would be need of Valor. Valor it self is defined by the
Stoics to be a virtue fighting for equity. Themistius elegantly shows, that
Kings, such as the rule of Wisdom requires, have not a tender eye only to one
Nation committed to their trust, but to all mankind, being, as he speaks, not
(...) Lovers of Macedonians,.
or (...).
Lovers of Romans, but (...).
Lovers of Men Excellently Autonmus: As I am Antoninus, Rome (...) my Country;
as I am a Man, the world.
. Vide cyril lum adversus Julianum, l. 6.
Minos his name was hated among Posterity, because he restrained equity to the
bounds of his Empire.

But so far is it from Truth, which some imagine, that all Laws cease in War)
War ought neither to be undertaken, but for the obtaining of right, nor to be
waged, being undertaken, but within the limits of Justice and Faith. Well said
Demosthenes, War is against them, who cannot be ruled by Judgments; for
Judgments prevail upon them, who feel themselves weaker: but against them, who
make or think themselves equal, Arms are taken up, which truly, that they may
be right, are to be exercised with no less religion, than Judgments are wont
to be exercised. Let the Laws then be silent among Arms, that is, those Civil
Judiciary Laws which are proper to peace, not those other Laws that are
perpetual, and accommodate to all times. For it was excellently said by Dion
Prusaeensis, Written Laws indeed, that is, the Civil, prevail not among
Enemies, but the not-written Laws prevail K. Alfonsus being asked, Whether he
owed more to Books, or Arms, said, He had learned out of Books, both Arms, and
the Laws of Arms. Plutarch says, There are among good men some Laws also of
Arms: Nor is Victory so to be pursued, as not to refuse profit arising out of
unjust and impious actions.
, that is, those that are dictated by Nature, and established by the Consent of
Nations. This appears by that old Formula of the Romans, I judge those things
are to be required by a pure and pious War Eas res ^uro pioque duello
quaerendas censco.
. The same ancient Romans, as Varro noted, undertook Wars slowly, not
licentiously, because they thought none but a pious War was to be waged.
Camillus said, Wars are to be waged justly, as well as valiantly. Africanus:
That the People of Rome did both undertake Wars, and finish them with Justice.
In another you may read, There are Laws of War also, as of Peace. Another
admires Fabricius, a brave man, and (which is a rare thing) innocent in War,
and one that believed an Enemy might be wronged. What power the Conscience of
Justice Been apud Appianum Pompeius: Confiuere oportet diis, and causae belli,
honesto justoque suscepti studio, ad tuendum^ patriae statum. Cassius apud
eundem: In bellis spes optima, and causae jus. Josephus 15. antiquae historiae:
Abs quo stat jus, ab eo Deus. Belisarius apud Procopium: Victoriam fortitudo
datura non est, nisi justitiam habeat commilitem. In Longobardorum sermon ad
Herulos, sunt haec, sed correcta a nobis: Testamur Deum, cujus potentiae vel
minima particula omnem humanam vim aequiparat; is, ut credibile est, belli
causas intuens, dabit debitum utrisque praelit exitum: quod dictum eventus mox
admirabilis comprobat. Sic and apud eundem Procopium ad Gotthos Totilas: Fieri
nequit, Nequit (inquam) fieri, ut qui vio entia and injustitia utitur, decus
pugnando par^at; (ed prout vita cuique est, ita ei obtingit belli fortuna.
Precopius has many passages to the same effect. And Agathias. l. 2. says,
Injustice and neglect of God are to be eschewed always as hurtful, but then
most of all, when men go forth to Battle. Which he proves in another place by
the illustrious examples of Darius, Xerxes, and the Athenians in Sicily. In
Thucydides, l. 7. The Lacedaemonians confess they were justly overthrown for
refusing to submit their quarrel to judgment; and renewed their hopes of
better success, when they saw the Athenians refused judgment after they had
done many wicked acts.
has in Wars, Historians frequently demonstrate, often ascribing Victory to
this cause especially. Thence those common Sentences: The Hearts of Soldiers
rise or fall at consideration of the Cause: He seldom returns in safety, that
fights unjustly: Hope waits upon a good Cause, and the like. Nor ought any to
be moved at the prosperous Successes of just Attempts. For it is sufficient,
that the Equity of the Cause has a certain peculiar, and that a great
influence upon the Action, though that influence (as it happens in humane
affairs) is often hindered in its efficacy by the intervention and opposition of
other causes. Also, for the procuring of Friends, which, as particular persons,
so States have need of to many purposes, much avails an Opinion and Fame of War
not unwisely nor unjustly undertaken, and piously managed. For, no man is
desirous to join himself to such, whom he supposes to hold justice, piety, and
faith in vile esteem.

When, upon the grounds and reasons aforesaid, I saw most clearly, that there
is among Nations a Common Law, which avails both to Wars, and in Wars, I had
many and weighty causes to write thereof. I saw, through the Christian world,
such license of going to War, as even barbarous Nations may be ashamed of; that
men take Arms greedily for light causes, or none at all: which being once put
on, all reverence of divine and humane Right is put off, even as if the Furies
had commission given them to work all kind of mischief. In contemplation of
which immanity, many good Men have gone so far, as to deny all Arms Tertullian.
de resurrect. carnis: Gladius been de belle cruentus, and melior homicida.
to a Christian, whose Religion consists chiefly in Charity toward all the
world: in which opinion seems to be sometimes, both Johannes Ferus, and my
Countryman Erasmus, great Lovers of Peace both Ecclesiastical and Civil; but
with that intent, as I suppose, wherewith we are wont to bend what is crooked
to the other side, that it may return into straitness. Yet indeed, this
endeavor of too much contradiction, is often times so far from being
profitable, that it hurts, because it is easily found, that excess in some
sayings takes away authority for other, even when they stand within the limits
of truth. Wherefore both Parties had need of a Moderator, that it might appear,
Neither nothing, nor every thing is lawful.

And withal, my Design was, by my private study and diligence, to advance the
profession of the Laws, which heretofore in public Offices I had exercised
with as much integrity as I could: This comfort of my studies was left me,
after I was unworthily cast out of myown Country, honored by so many Labors
of mine. Many, before me, have purposed to bring this into a form of Art, but
no man has done it perfectly: Nor is it possible, unless (which hitherto has
not been done with care enough) the things which are by Constitution be rightly
separated from Natural. For, Naturals, because they are always the same, may
easily be collected into Art: but the things that come from Constitution,
because they are often changed, and are diverse in diverse places, are put
without Art, as other precepts of singular things. Nevertheless, if the Priests
of true Justice would undertake to handle the parts of natural and perpetual
Jurisprudence (laying aside what has its original from free will,) One of
Laws, another of Tributes, another of the Judges Office, another of the
conjecture of Wills, another of proving Facts, thereupon might be composed a
Body of all parts collected. What course we thought fit to take, we have showed
in deed, rather than words: this work, containing that part of Juris-prudence,
which is by far most noble. For in the first Book, having first spoken of the
Original of Right and Law, we have examined that question, Whether any War be
just and lawful. After, to know the difference 'twixt public and private War,
we had to explain the nature of the Supreme Power; what States and Kings have
it full, what in part; what with right of alienation, what otherwise. Last of
all, we had to speak of the duty of Subjects toward their Superiors. The
second Book expounds what are the Causes whence War may rise: And there we
speak of Community and Propriety, Leagues, Oaths, Embassages, Punishments, etc.
The third Book having expounded what is lawful in the time of War, and
distinguished what is done without fault, from what is done without punishment,
ends with Arguments and Peace.

Now this Argument seemed the more worthy of our pains, because, as I have
said, no man has handled the whole; and, they that have handled the parts,
have so handled them, that they have left much for another Industry. The old
Philosophers have nothing extant in this kind, neither the Greeks, among whom
Aristotle made a Book, entitled, (...), nor They that gave their name to new
Christianism (which was much to be wished:) And the Books of the old Romans, De
jure Feciali, have transmitted to us nothing of themselves, but the Title. I
have seen also special Books De Jure Belli, partly by Divines, viz. Franciscus
Victoria, Henricus Gorichemus, Wilhelmus Matthaei Add to these Joannes de
Carthagena, set forth at Rome, An. 1609.
; partly by Doctors of Law, viz. Jannes Lupus, Franciscus Arius, Joannes de
Lignano, Martinus, Laudensis: But all these have said but very little of a most
copious Argument; and most of them so, that without order they confounded
things of Natural Law, and of Divine, and of the Law of Nations, and of the
Civil, and of the Canon Law, and mingled them all together. What was most
wanting to all these, the light of Histories, the most learned Faber in some
Chapters of his Semestria (but as it stood with the purpose of his work, and
alleging only testimonies:) Balthazar Ayala more largely, and bringing a heap
of examples to some definitions, have attempted to supply. Albericus Gentilis
yet more largely: by whose diligence, as I know others may, and profess my self
to have been helped; so what may be wished in him, in the kind of teaching, in
order, in distinguishing the questions, and several sorts of Law, I leave to
the Readers judgment. This only I will say, He is wont, in determining
Controversies, to follow either a few examples not always to be approved, or
also the authority of the new Lawyers, in his Answers; Many whereof are framed
in favor of those that consult them, not to the Nature of Right and Good. The
Causes whence War may be called just, or unjust, Ayala has not touched:
Gentilis has, as it pleased him, delineated some general heads, and has not
so much as touched many places of both noble and frequent Controversies. We
have endeavored to speak of all, showing also the fountains, whence it may be
easy to define what we have here omitted.

It remains now, that I declare briefly, with what aids, and with what care I
set upon this business. First, my Care has been, to refer the proofs of things
pertaining to the Law of Nature, unto Notions so certain, that no man, without
offering violence to himself, may be able to deny them. For, the principles of
that Law, if you mark them well, are open and evident of themselves, even after
the manner of things perceived by our outward senses: which, if the organs be
well formed, and other necessaries be present, do not deceive. Therefore
Euripides in his Phaenissae makes Polynice, whose cause he will have to be
manifestly just, speak thus:

Haec sum prosatus, matter, haud ambagibus
Implicita, se^ quae regulis aequi and boni
Suffulta, rudibus pariter and doctis patent.

It Is plain, and grounded on good right,
To the Idem Euripides Audioma^hen Hermione dicenti: Non barbarorum more in
urbe hac vivitur: respondentem facit: Quae turpia illis, hic quoque hau^ culpa
vacant.
rude and learned clear as light.
And presently he adds the judgment of the Chorus (which consists of Women,
and those Barbarians) in approbation of her speech.

I have also used to the proof of this Law, the testimonies of Philosophers
What else? when Alexander Severus continually read Cicero's Books, De Rep. and
De Officiis.
, Historians, Poets, and lastly, Orators: not that we must give credit to them
without difference; for they are wont to serve their Sect, Argument, Cause; but
that, where many in diverse times and places affirm the same thing for certain,
it ought to be referred to an universal Cause: which, in our questions, can be
no other, than either right Illation proceeding from the principles of Nature,
or some Common Consent. That shows the Law of Nature, This the Law of Nations.
The Difference of which Laws is to be conceived, not from the testimonies
themselves (for Writers do commonly use the words, Law of Nature and of
Nations, promiscuously:) but from the quality of the Matter. For, that which
cannot, by sure consequence, be deduced out of sure principles, and yet appears
every where observed, must needs have its rise from free will and consent.
These two therefore, I have still been very careful to discern one from the
other, and both from the Civil Law. Yea, in the Law of Nations also, I have
distinguished what is truly and in every respect Right, and what only brings
forth a certain external effect, like unto that Primitive Right, viz. that it
may not be resisted; or also, that every where, for some Commodities sake, or
the avoiding of great incommodities, it must be defended. Which observation,
how necessary it is to many things, will appear in the contexture of the Work it
self.

Among Philosophers, Aristotle deservedly obtains the principal place, whether
you consider the order of his discoursing, or the acuteness of his
distinguishing, or the weight of his Reasons. Only I wish that Principality had
not, for some Ages, gone into Tyranny; so that Truth, to which Aristotle was
(...) faithful servant, is oppressed by nothing more, than by the name of
Aristotle. For my part, both here and elsewhere, I imitate the liberty of the
Ancient Christians, who were sworn to no Philosophers sect: not, that they did
assent to them, who said, Nothing could be known, than which nothing is more
foolish; but, that they judged no sect had seen all Truth, and not any but had
some. Wherefore, to gather up Truth dispersed among them all, and diffused into
Sects, into a Body, This they thought was indeed to deliver Christian
Institutions Lactant. Instit. l. 6. c. 9. Justin in his former Apolog. says,
The doctrins of Plato are not altogether different from those of Christ, nor
altogether the same. And so of the rest. For every one saw and expressed in
part. what was planted in him by reason. Tertullian calls Seneca often, ours:
but says, the university of spiritual documents, no man ever had besides
Christ. Augustine. epist. 202. The good Manners, which Cicero and other
Philosophers commend, are taught and learnt in Churches all the world over. See
the same Austin of the Platonists, who, he says, a few things being changed,
are Christians. epist. 56. and de vera relig. c. 3. and Confess. l. 7. c. 9.
and l. 8. c. 2.
. Our purpose is to magnify Aristotle, but with that liberty, which He, in
love of Truth, indulged to himself toward his own Masters. Histories have a
twofold use, as to our Argument: For they supply us with Examples, and with
Sentences. The Examples have so much the more authority as the times and
Nations are more virtuous: therefore we have preferred the old Greek and Roman
above the rest. Nor are the Sentences or Judgments of Historians to be
contemned, especially when they are agreeing: for the Law of Nature, as we have
said, is in some sort proved thence; and the Law of Nations cannot be proved
otherwise. Sentences of the Poets and Orators have not so much solidity: and we
use them often, not so much for proof as ornament.

I do often use the Authority of the Books either written or approved by Men
inspired of God, making a difference 'twixt the old Law and the new. Some do
urge the Old Law for the very Law of Nature: erroneously, no doubt: for many
things in that proceed from the free will and pleasure of God, which yet never
is contrary to the true Law of Nature: and so far is an argument rightly drawn
thence, while we distinguish accurately the Right of God which God sometimes
executes by Men, and the Right of Men among themselves. We have therefore, to
our power, avoided both this error, and another opposite to it, that thinks
there is no use of the Old Covenant, since the times of the New. Our judgment
is otherwise, both upon that ground now mentioned, and because such is the
nature of the New Covenant, that the things pertaining to virtue and good
manners, commanded in the Old, 'the same, or greater, are commanded in the New:
And we see the Ancient Christian Writers have used the testimonies of the old
Covenant in the same way. But, to understand the meaning of the Books belonging
to the Old Covenant, no little light may be borrowed from the Hebrew Writers
Ira sentit Cassianus, Instit. divin. Scriptur.
, those especially who thoroughly knew the Languages and the Manners of their
own Country.

The New Covenant I use to this end, that I may teach, what cannot be learned
elsewhere, what is lawful for Christians: which yet, contrary to the opinion of
many men, I have distinguished from the Law of Nature; being assured, greater
Sanctimony is commanded us in that most Holy Law, than the Law of Nature
exacteth by it self alone. Yet have I not forgotten to observe, what is rather
commended to us than commanded, that we may know, it is impious and penal to
decline from the precepts; to aspire unto the highest perfection, is the part
of a generous mind, and shall not go without reward. Synodical Canons, which
are right, are Collections out of the general sentences of the Law Divine,
fitted unto the present Occurrences. These also either show what the Divine Law
commands, or exhort to that which God persuades. And this is the office of
the true Christian Church, to deliver those things which are delivered to Her
from God, and after the same manner wherein they are delivered. Moreover, the
Customs among those old Christians, who filled up the measure of so great a
name, either received or praised, justly have the force of Canons. Next to
these is their Authority, who flourished among the Christians in several Ages,
Men renowned for their Piety and Learning, and noted for no grievous Error.
For, what these men say with great asseveration, as certain, ought to have no
small moment for interpretation of things that seem obscure in Holy Scriptures:
and the more, by how much greater is their Consent, and nearer access to the
times of the first purity, when neither domination as yet, nor any Faction,
could adulterate the Primitive Truth. The Schoolmen, that succeeded the
Fathers, often show what good Wits they had: but they fell into unhappy times,
and ignorant of good Arts: the less cause we have to wonder, if, among many
things to be praised, they have some things to be pardoned. Yet, when they
agree in matter of morality, they seldom err: having very clear eyes to
perceive what was awry in the Sayings of other men. Nevertheless, in this
contentious study, they give us a commendable pattern of Modesty, opposing one
another with Reasons, not (which is a fashion of late times risen up to the
disgrace of Learning) with reproaches, the unhansome issue of an impotent and
unruly mind.

The Roman Lawyers are of three sorts. First are they whose labors appear in
the Pandect, the Codes of Theodosius and Justinian, and in the Novel
Constitutions. The second rank are they that succeeded Irnrius, viz. Accursius,
Bartolus, and a number of names more, that a long time reigned in the Court. In
the third place we have those, who joined polite Learning with the study of
Law. To the first I owe much: for they do both often afford excellent reasons,
to demonstrate that which is of the Law of Nature; and often yield testimony to
the same Law, and no less to the Law of Nations: But thus, that they, as well
as others, often confound these names; yea, and call that the Law of Nations,
which is only of some people; and that, not as on Agreement, but, which some
have received by imitation of others, or by chance. Besides, they often handle
what is truly of the Law of Nations, promiscuously and indistinctly, with those
things which are of the Roman Law, as appears by the Title, De Captivis and
postliminio. That these things therefore might be discerned, we have taken some
pains. The second sort, incurious of Divine Law, and of ancient History, was
pleased to define all the Controversies of Kings and Nations out of the Roman
Laws, assuming now and then the Canons. But these men also, by the infelicity
of their times, were hindered from a right insight into those Laws, being
otherwise subtle enough to search into the nature of Right and Good: whence it
comes, that they are often very good Authors of Law to be made, even when they
are bad Interpreters of Law made before. But then chiefly are they to be heard,
when they bear witness to such a Custom that makes the Law of Nations of our
times. The Masters of the third order, who confine themselves to the Roman
Laws, and expatiate, either never, or very lightly, into that which is Common,
have scarce any use in our Argument. Two Spaniards, Covarruvias and Vasquius
(the latter with great liberty, the other more modestly, and not without exact
judgment) have joined Scholastical subtilty with their skill in the Laws and
Canons, not abstaining from the Controversies of Nations and of Kings. The
French have been more studious to insert Histories in the same profession of
the Laws: amongst whom, Bodin and Hottoman are of great name, the former in a
continued Work, the latter in scattered Questions: whose determinations and
reasons will often furnish us with matter to examine.

In the whole Work I have proposed to my self three things; to make the reasons
of defining most evident, to dispose in a certain order the matters to be
handled, and to distinguish perspicuously the things which seemed to be the
same, and were not. I have abstained from things that are not of this Treatise,
as, those that show what is useful to be done: because they have their special
consideration in the Politics, which Aristotle handles so judiciously and
distinctly, as to mingle nothing that is impertinent, otherwise than Bodin has
done, in whom this Art is confounded with the Art of our Law. Notwithstanding,
in some places I have mentioned what is profitable, but on the by, and that I
might distinguish it more plainly from the question of just. He will do me
injury, that thinks I had an eye upon any Controversies of our Age, either
already up, or like to rise. For I profess sincerely, as Mathematicians
consider Figures abstract from Bodies, so have I in treating of Right, elevated
my Meditations above all particular Actions. As to the style and manner of
speech, I was not willing, by adding a multitude of words to the multitude of
matter, to cloy my Reader, whose Good I intended. I have therefore followed, as
near as I could, a concise and plain way of expression convenient to a Teacher:
that such as have a hand in public Affairs may here behold, as in one view,
both what Controversies are usually incident, and what are the Principles
whereby they may be judged: which being known, it will not be difficult to
accommodate that which is said to the subject matter, and to extend it as much
as you will. I have sometimes alleged the very words of ancient Writers, where
they were such, that they might seem spoken with authority, or with a singular
grace: which I have done in the Greek too now and then, but especially where
either the sentence was short, or whose Elegancy I could not hope to equal by
my translation.

To conclude; the Liberty I have taken to my self in judging the Sentences and
Writing of other men, let All, I humbly entreat them, into whose hands this
Book shall come, take the same to themselves upon me. They shall not more
readily admonish me of any error, than I will obey their admonition. And at
this instant, if here be any thing spoken by me diffentaneous to piety, or good
manners, or holy Scripture; if any thing against the Consent of the Christian
Church, or against any Truth, with all my heart I wish it never spoken.

I. Of the Lawfulness of War. II. Of the Causes of War. III. Of what is lawful
to be done in War.
THE CONTENTS.
I. PART.
I. WHat is War. page 1. II. What is Law. 2 III. Of Natural Law. 2 IV. Of the
Law of Nature and Nations. 5 V. The proof of Natural Law. 5 VI. Of Voluntary
humane Law. 6 VII. Voluntary Divine Law. 7 VIII. That the Law given to the
Hebrews, obliges not other Nations. 8 IX. What Arguments Christians may deduce
from Moses Law, and How. 10 X. That War is not against the Law of Nature. 12
XI. Further proof out of the Sacred History. 15 XII. That War is not contrary
to the Voluntary Divine Law before the time of the Gospel. 17 XIII. Of the
Gospel-Law. 22 XIV. That War is not against the Gospel-Law. The first Argument.
25 XV. The second Argument. 27 XVI. The third Argument. 29 XVII. The fourth
Argument. 30 XVIII. The fist Argument. 31 XIX. The sixth, seventh, and eighth
Arguments. 33 XX. The ninth, tenth, and eleventh Arguments. 35 XXI. Objections
answered. The first. 37 XXII. The second Objection answered. 38 XXIII. The
third Objection answered. 43 XXIV. The fourth Objection answered. 46 XXV. The
fifth, sixth and seventh Objections answered. 48 XXVI. Of the opinion of the
Ancient Fathers. The first Observation. 50 XXVII. The second Observation. 53
XXVIII. The third Observation. 54 XXIX. A Confirmation of the Lawfulness of
War, out of the Ancients. 56 XXX. Further proof out of Ecclesiastical History.
58 XXXI. The twelfth Canon of the Nicene Council objected and answered. 60
XXXII. Leo's Epistle objected and answered. 63 XXXIII. The last proofs out of
Church-story. 64 XXXIV. That all private War is not unlawful by Natural Law.
66 XXXV. Nor by the Law Evangelical. Objections proposed. 69 XXXVI. The
lawfulness of Private Defense confirmed. 71 XXXVII. The Objections answered. 72
XXXVIII. Public War solemn, or less solemn. 76 XXXIX. Of War waged by
inferior Magistrates. 79 XL. Wherein consists Civil Power 83 XLI. What Power
is Highest. 84 XLII. That the Highest Power is n^ always in the People. 86
XLIII. The same further proved. 90 XLIV. Arguments to the contrary answered. 9^
XLV. Of mutual Subjection. 9^ XLVI. Cautions for the understanding of the true
opinion. The first. 9^ XLVII. The second Caution. 10^ XLVIII. That some highest
Empires are holden fully, that is, alienably. 10^ XLIX. Some highest Empires
are not holden fully. 109 L. A further manifestation of the second Caution. 110
LI. A third Observation. 111 LII. The fourth Observation. 114 LIII. A further
explication of the last note, about division of Power, and mixture. 116 LIVE.
True Examples of the Supreme Power divided. 118 LV. Whether he can have Supreme
Power that is comprehended in an unequal League. 123 LVI. An Objection
answered. 126 LVII. Another Objection answered. 129 LVIII. That the Highest
Power may consist with paying of Tribute. 132 LIX. That the Highest Power may
be holden in Fee. ibid. LX. The Right and Exercise of it distinguished. 134
LXI. Of the War of Subjects against their Superiors. The question stated. 135
LXII. By the Law of Nature, War upon Superiors, as such, is not ordinarily
lawful. 136 LXIII. Nor is it allowed by the Hebrew Law. 138 LXIV. Least of all
by the Evangelical Law. The first proof out of St. Paul. 139 LXV. The second
proof out of St. Peter. 143 LXVI. Further proof from the Examples of the
ancient Christians. 144 LXVII. It is not lawful for the Inferior Magistrates
to make Wa^ upon the Highest. 147 LXVIII. In case of extreme and in evitable
Necessity, what may b^ done. 149 LXIX. The King's Person sacred 154 LXX. of
Christian Subjection. 156 LXXI. The famous example of the Thebaean Legion. 158
LXXII. In what cases Force is lawful against a Prince. 16^ LXXIII. How far we
must obey a^ Invader of another Empire. 16^ LXXIV. Whether it be lawful to
kill an Invader, or expel him by force, and in what cases. 166 LXXV. Who may
lawfully wag^ War. 170
II. PART.
I. WHat are called the Justifiek Causes of War. 173 II. Three just Causes of
Wars. 176 III. War is lawful in defense of life, only against an Assailant,
and in present certain danger 177 IV. Of the loss of a member, and defense of
Chastity. 181 V. Defense may lawfully be omitted. 182 VI. Defense is unlawful
sometimes against a Person very profitable to the Public. 183 VII. It is not
lawful to kill another for to avoid a box on the ear, or the like disgrace.
185 VIII. In defense of Goods, to kill a man is not unlawful by the right of
Nature. 188 IX. How far the same is permitted by the Law of Moses. ibid. X.
Whether, and how far it is permitted by the Evangelical Law. 192 XI. Whether
the Civil Law permitting one to kill another in his own defense, give a right,
or only impunity. 193 XII. When a single Combat may be lawful. 194 XIII. Of
Defense in Public War. 195 XIV. It is not lawful to take Arms, to diminish a
Neighbors power. 196 XV. Defensive War also is unjus on his part, who gave
just cause o^ War. ibid XVI. The Rise and Progress of Propriety. 198 XVII. Some
things cannot be mad^ proper, as the Sea taken for the whole, or principal
parts, and why 204 XVIII. Of things that may be made proper. 205 XIX. Over
things made proper, men have a right to use them i^ time of necessity, and
whence i^ comes. 20^ XX. Three Cautions to be applied to this case of
necessity. 209 XXI. An example of this right in Wars. 210 XXII. Another right
of men over things proper, without damage to the Owner. 211 XXIII. The right of
Passages explained, by Land and Water. 212 XXIV. Of passage for merchandise,
and of impost. 215 XXV. The right of staying for a time, of inhabiting, and
having desert places. 218 XXVI. Of Oaths. How great their virtue is even in the
opinion of Pagans. 220 XXVII. In an oath is required a deliberate mind. 222
XXVIII. In what sense the words of an Oath bind. 223 XXIX. An Oath deceitfully
procured, when binding. Of Josua's oath. 226 XXX. The words of an Oath not to
be extended too far. 228 XXXI. An Oath binds not, being made of unlawful
Matter. 229 XXXII. Or which hinders a greater moral Good. 230 XXXIII. Of Oaths
about things impossible. 231 XXXIV. In Oaths God is named, and in what sense.
ibid. XXXV. In Oaths also other things are named with respect to God. 232
XXXVI. Of swearing by false Gods. 234 XXXVII. The Effect of an Oath. 235
XXXVIII. When an Oath gives (...) right to God and Man, when (...) God alone.
ibid. XXXIX. Of an Oath to a Pyrat, o^ to a Tyrant. 236 XL. Of an Oath to one
that is perfidious. 238 XLI. Of the Heir's obligation. ibid. XLII. Two cases
wherein the Obligation cease. 239 XLIII. Of that which is done again^ ones
Oath. 240 XLIV. What Superiors can do about the Oaths of their Subjects ibid.
XLV. What Oaths are properly mean^ in the charge of Christ against swearing.
242 XLVI. Of Faith given without an Oath. 245 XLVII. Of Leagues. They are
lawful with Aliens from true Religion by the Law of Nature. 246 XLVIII. They
are not universally forbidden by the Hebrew Law. ibid. XLIX. Nor are they
forbidden by the Evangelical Law. 252 L. Cautions about such Leagues. 255 LI.
All Christians are obliged to join in League against the Enemies of
Christianism. 256 LII. If diverse Confederates wage war, which is to be aided.
257 LIII. Of the Dissolution of a League. 258 LIVE. Of Interpretation. 259 LV.
How words of art are to be interpreted. 261 LVI. Interpretation by Conjecture.
262 LVII. Some Distinctions and Rules for interpretation. 263 LVIII. Whether in
the name of Confederates are contained those that shall be so. 266 LIX. One
shall not wage war without leave of the other, How understood. And, That
Carthage shall be free. 268 LX. Of Agreements Personal and real. 269 LXI. A
League made with a King is extended to him being expelled, not to the Invader.
272 LXII. To whom a promise made to the First is due, when more have performed
a thing together. 273 LXIII. How far States are accountable for damages done by
their Subjects. 274 LXIV. Of the right of Embassages. 276 LXV. Among whom the
right of Embassages has place. ibid. LXVI. Whether an Embassage be always to
be admitted. 278 LXVII. Of not violating Ambassadors. 280 LXVIII. The Law in
favor of Ambassadors binds not him to whom he is not sent. 286 LXIX. An Enemy
to whom an Ambassador is sent, is bound. 288 LXX. Ambassadors may not be
wronged by way of retaliation. 289 LXXI. The Companions also of Ambassadors,
and their Goods, are inviolable. 290 LXXII. The Right of Ambassadors
vindicated by War. 293 LXXIII. Of the right of Burial. It springs from the same
Law of Nations. 293 LXXIV. What was the first Cause of this Custom. 296 LXXV.
Burial is also due to public Enemies. 301 LXXVI. Whether burial be due to
notorious Malefactors. 302 LXXVII. Whether it be due to those that have killed
themselves, to the sacrilegious, and traitorous. 304 LXVIII. Of Punishments.
The definition of punishment, and the Original. 309 LXXIX. Who should punish an
evildoer. 311 LXXX. Of the End of punishment. 312 LXXXI. In what sense Revenge
is naturally unlawful. 314 LXXXII. The Utility of Punishment is three fold.
317 LXXXIII. Of punishing a Delinquent for his own benefit. 318 LXXXIV. Of
Punishment for his profit who is offended, and of Revenge by the Law of
Nations. 320 LXXXVI. The End of Punishment is also the profit of all. 325
LXXXVII. What the Evangelical Law has constituted about this matter. 328
LXXXVIII. An Objection taken from Gods mercy, in the Gospel, answered. 334
LXXXIX. Another Objection answered, about precision of Repentance. 335 XC.
Three Inferences from the former Doctrine. 337 XC. Whether humane Laws, that
permit the killing of some men, give the killers a true right before God, or
only impunity among men. 339 XCII. What acts are not punishable by men. 340
XCIII. That it is lawful to pardon both before and after the penal Law. 344
XCIV. Causes of freeing one from punishment of Law. 348 XCV. Of war for
punishment; and whether war be just for Offenses begun. 350 XCVI. War for
violation of Natures Law. 352 XCVII. Three Cautions to be observed. 356 XCVIII.
Whether war may be undertaken for Offenses against God. 358 XCIX. Four most
common principles of Religion. 362 C. The first violators of these may be
punished. 365 CI. Wars are not justly made against them that will not embrace
Christian Religion. 370 CII. Justly against them, that deal cruelly with
Christians, only for Religions sake. 373 CIII. Not against them who are
mistaken in the sense of Scripture. 375 CIV. Justly are they punished that are
irreverent to the Gods they own. 379 CV. Of Communication of Punishment. How it
passes to partakers of the fault. 380 CVI. The Community or Rulers are engaged
by their subjects fault, if they know, and do not forbid it when they ought.
381 CVII. Likewise, if they receive them that have offended elsewhere, unless
they punish them, or yield them up. 384 CVIII. Whether the persons yielded up,
and not received, remain Citizens. 387 CIX. That the rights of Suppliants
belong to the miserable, not to the guilty; with the exceptions. 388 CX. How
Subjects are partakers of the faults of their Rulers, or parts of the whole,
and how their punishments differ. 392 CXI. How long the right of punishment
lasts against a Community. 394 CXII. Whether the punishment may pass without
communication of the fault. Two distinctions here needful. 396 CXII. None is
justly punished (in propriety of speech) for another fault. 400 CXV. Of unjust
Causes. Causes of War, some are justifiable, others suasory. 407 CXVI. Wars
without any cause are wild and brutish. 409 CXVII. Against wars, which have not
justifick causes, or not truly such. 409 CXVIII. Fear of an uncertain danger,
no just cause of War. 411 CXIX. Of some other unjust causes. 413 CXX. Of the
title of universal Emperor. 415 CXXI. Of the Empire of the Church. 417 CXXII.
Of a desire to fulfill prophecies. 420 CXXIII. Of that which is due, not by
strict justice, but otherwise. 421 CXXIV. A distinction of War, unjust in
respect of the cause, or of some accident. ibid. CXXV. Of doubtful cases.
Whence doubts do arise in moral matters. 423 CXXVI. Nothing is to be done
against ones own judgment, though crring. 424 CXXVII. How the judgment is
drawn either way. 425 CXXVIII. In doubtful cases, the safer way is to be taken.
Three ways to avoid a doubtful war. 426 CXXIX. Whether war may be just on
both sides. 432 CXXX. Admonitions. For the eschewing of war, Right is often to
be remitted. 434 CXXXI. Punitive right especially is to be remitted. 4^6
CXXXII. Again, of the remission of punishment. 438 CXXXIII. War is to be
declined in favor of our selves, and our own party. 440 CXXXIV. Rules of
prudence about the election of good. 442 CXXXV. An example of a debate about
Liberty and Peace. 444 CXXXVI. He that is not much the stronger, ought to remit
punishment. 447 CXXXVII. War not to be undertaken, but upon necessity, or upon
greatest cause, with greatest opportunity. 448 CXXXVIII. The evils of War. 449
CXXXIX. Of War for others. And first for Subjects. And, whether an Innocent
person may be yielded up. 451 CXL. War may also be undertaken justly for
Confederates, for Friends, yea for all men. 455 CXLI. Whether man is bound to
defend man, and one people another. 457 CXLII. Whether War be just to relieve
the Subjects of Another. 458 CXLIII. Concerning Soldiers of Fortune. 461
CXLIV. Of just Causes, that War may be waged by those that are under others
command. Who they are, and what they should do, where they are left free. 462
CXLV. What they should do, when they are commanded to war, and believe the
cause of the war to be unjust. 463 CXLVI. What they should do, when they are in
doubt. 466 CXLVII. Such are to be dispensed with, upon payment of extraordinary
tribute. 471 CXLVIII. When the Arms of Subjects are just in an unjust War. 472
III. PART.
I. HOw much is lawful in War. General Rules. First, things are lawful in
war, which are necessary to the end. 475 II. The second Rule. Right is
considered, not only in respect of the first, but after-causes. 477 III. The
third Rule. Somethings follow without injury, which could not be lawfully
intended. 478 IV. What is lawful against them that send things to the Enemy.
480 V. Whether it be lawful to use Guile in war. 483 VI. Guile in the negative
act is not unlawful. 485 VII. Guile in the positive act, when lawful. 486
VIII. Whether Guile by acts signifying by agreement be lawful? The difficulty
of the question. 490 IX. Not all use of speech, which may be known will be
taken in another sense, is unlawful. 492 X. The form of a Lie, as it is
unlawful, consists in its repugnance to the right of Another. 494 XI. Five
illations thence, about the lawfulness of speaking false. 497 XII.
False-speaking, whether lawful toward Enemies. 500 XIII. This is not to be
extended to promising words, nor to Oaths. 504 XIV. It is more grievous and
agreeable to Christian simplicity, to abstain from false speech also against an
Enemy. 505 XV. It is not lawful to make a Traitor; it is, to use him. 508 XVI.
Goods of Subjects bound for the Rulers debt. Naturally none is bound for
another debt but the Heir. 509 XVII. By the Law of Nations Subjects are tied
for the debts of the Ruler. 511 XVII. An example hereof in the apprehension of
men and of goods. 513 XVIII. Of Reprizals, after right denied. Life is not
engaged. 514 XIX. A distinction, in this matter, 'twixt the Law Civil, and the
Law of Nations. 516 XX. Of just and solemn war, by the Law of Nations. Between
whom this war is; and, That it must be denounced. 518 XXI. In denouncing war,
what is of the Law of Nature, what proper to the Law of Nations. 522 XXII. War
proclaimed against any one, includes his Subjects and Adherents: But, not as
considered by themselves. 526 XXIII. The cause why Denuntiation is requisite to
some effects, which are not found in other wars. 527 XXIV. War may be indicted
and waged together. War indicted for violation of Ambassadors. 529 XXV. The
right of killing Enemies in a solemn War. The effects of that War in general.
530 XXVI. Lawful is distinguished into that which is done without punishment,
and that which is done without fault. 531 XXVII. The effects of solemn war
generally considered, are referred to the latter sense of lawful, in respect
of impunity: And, why such effects were introduced. Testimonies. 534 XXVIII. Of
Strangers found in an Enemies Country. 537 XXIX. The Enemies Subjects may every
where be offended. This right extends to Infants and Women; to Captives, and
such as yield themselves without Conditions. 538 XXX. That right ill referred
to other causes. It reaches also to Hostages. 542 XXXI. By the Law of Nations,
it is forbidden to kill with poison. Of poisoning weapons, and waters. 544
XXXII. Whether it be against the Law of Nations to use Murderers. 547 XXXIII.
Of ravishing of Women in war. 551 XXXIV. Of VVast. The Enemies Things may be
spoiled. 553 XXXV. Of spoiling things sacred and religious. 554 XXXVI. About
acquisition of things taken in war. What is the Law of Nature: what, of
Nations. 558 XXXVII. When moveable Goods are by the Law of Nations judged
taken: when Lands. 562 XXXVIII. Things that are not the Enemies are (...)
acquired by War. Of Goods found in the Enemi^ Ships. 564 XXXIX. By the Law of
Nations, the things are mad^ ours, which our Enemies took from others by war.
565 XL. Of the right over Captives. Their condition, an^ the reason of it. 567
XLI. This right over Captives prevailed not among (...) Nations, nor does it
prevail among Christians. 570 XLII. Of Empire over the Conquered. 571 XLIII.
Admonitions about things done in an unju^ War. 575 XLIV. A Temperament about
the right of killing i^ a just War. General Rules. 581 XLV. Children, Women,
Old Men, Priests, Scholars Husbandmen, are to be spared. 589 XLVI. Captives,
and they that yield, are not to b^ killed. 594 XLVII. Objections answered. 59^
XLVIII. The Multitude spared. Hostages spared Needless Fights to be avoided.
601 XLIX. A Temperament about VVast, and the like. What Wast is just; when not
to be made. 604 L. Things sacred and religious are not to be spoiled. 611 LI.
The Utilities of Moderation. 615 LII. A Temperament about things taken. 618
LIII. A Temperament about Captives. 621 LIVE. A Temperament about acquisition of
Empire. 631 LV. Restitution of things unjustly taken away. Questions answered.
641 LVI. Of Neuters in War. How they are to be used, and how to behave
themselves. 645 LVII. Of things done privately in public War. 650 LVIII.
Admonitions touching Faith and Peace. Conclusion. 657
HVGO GROTIVS OF WAR AND PEACE.
I. PART.
I. What is War.
WAR is the State of those that contend by Force, as they are such. Which
general Description comprehends all sorts of War that we shall speak of. For I
exclude not here the Private, which indeed has priority, and without question
has the same nature with the Public; and therefore may properly be denoted by
the same word. But if the name of War beat any time given only to the Public,
it is as many other general words are, often applied particularly to that
Philo. 2. de leg. special. Hestes non soli existimantur qui (...) Navdi aut
T^rrestri praelio decertant, sed pro talibus habendi et qui machinas admovent
portubus aut manibus, eti^st nondum pugnam incipiunt Se^v. ad illud primae Ae
(...) Nec bello major et armis. Bellum et Consilium habet: arma tantum in actu
ipsi sunt.
Species that is most excellent.

II. What is Law.
LAW, taken in the largest sense, is a Rule of Moral Actions, obliging to that
which is Right. We say Obliging; For Counsels and other Precepts, though
right, yet not obliging, are not called Laws; and Permission properly is not
the Action of Law, but the Negation of that Action, unless as it obliges some
other not to hinder him that is permitted. We said, obliging to that which is
Right, not simply to that which is just; because it pertains not to Justice
only, but to other virtues For example, Zaleucus made a law inflicting
punishment upon him, that against his Physicians Precept, drank Wine.
. The best division of Law is out of Aristotle, into Natural and Voluntary.

III. Of Natural Law.
NAtural Law is the Dictate of right Reason Philo. Lex mentiri nescia est ^ecta
ratio, quae lex, non ab hoc aut illo mortali mortalis, non in Chartis aut (...)
exanimis oxa^ima, sed cocumpt nescia, quipye ab immortali natura insculptain
immortali intellectu. Tertul. Quaeres igitur Legim Dei, habens communim illam
in publico mundi, in naturalibus rabulis. Vid. Chiysost. 12. et 13. de star.
Thom. secund 57. 2. and Sco^. 3. 37.
showing moral turpitude, or moral necessity to be in some act, by its
convenience or disconvenience with the Rational Nature: and consequently that
it is forbidden or commanded by the Author of Nature, God. The Acts, concerning
which is ^ant ^uch a dictate, are due, or unlawful of themselves, and
therefore are conceived necessarily to be commanded of God, or forbidden. By
which note, this Law differs not from humane only, but from the Divine vo
untary; which does not command or forbid what is by it self and in its own
nature, due or unlawful; but by forbidding makes the thing unlawful, and by
commanding makes it due. For the better understanding of Natural Law, we must
observe, some things belong unto it not properly, but reduct vely, viz. the
things whereto the Law Natural is not repugnant: So are things called just,
which are without in justice. Sometimes also by abuse of the word, the things
which Reason allows for honest and better than the opposite, although they be
not due and necessary, are said to be of the Law Natural. Observe farther, this
Law is not only conversant about things not subject to human pleasure, but
about many things also which are consequent to the Acts of Man's Will. So the
Will of Man introduced Dominion, such as is now in use: But, that being
introduced, the law of Furtum natura turpe Ulpian. Namque odit iose vim Deus:
nec
Nature tells me it is wickedness for me to take away, without thy consent, that
which is under thy dominion. divites nos esse rapto, sed probe partu cupit.
Eurip. H^.
Moreover the Law of Nature is immutable: yet sometimes it comes to pass that in
the Acts determined by that Law, a seeming mutation deceives the unwary; when in
truth the Law of Nature is the same, but the matter about which it is, is
changed. For example, If my Creditor accounts the debt I owe him as received, I
am not bound to pay: The reason is not, because the Law of Nature is become
more indu^gent, and requires me not to pay what I owe; But because by the
indulgence of my Creditor the debt is forgiven me. So if God command a person
to be slain, or his Goods to be taken away, it will not follow that
Manslaughter or Theft is lawful; which words include a Vice; but the act is
not Manslaughter or Theft which is done at his command who is supreme Lord of
our Lives and Goods. Lastly, there are some things that do not simply, but in
such a state of affai^s, belong to Natural Law: as the common use of things was
natural before Dominion was introduced; and before positive Laws, every man had
right to get his own by force.

IV. Of the Law of Nature and Nations.
AS for that distinction extant in the Roman Law Books, between the immutable
Law, common to other Creatures with men, (called the Law of Nature;) And that
which is proper to men alone, (usually called by them the Law of Nations,) it
is of very little or no use. For no nature, that has not the use of general
precepts, is properly capable of a Law In equis, in leonibus jusli^iam non
di^imus. C c Offic. 1.
. If at any time Pliny notes a likeness of Justice in Elephants. (...) 8. and
he speaks of an Asp that killed her own young one, because that young one had
killed the man's son that entertained her. l. 10. c. 74. Sen. Muta animalia, ai^,
humanis aff^cti-bus carent: habent autem similes illis quosdam imp^.
Justice is attributed to the brute creatures, it is improperly, for that there
is in them some shadow and print of reason. Whether the act it self, determined
by the Law of Nature, be common to us with other creatures, as the breeding up
of our Issue; or proper to us, as the worship of God, it is not in this respect
material.

V. The proof of Natural Law.
A Thing is proved to be of Natural Law two ways, a priori, or a posteriori.
That way of proof is more subtle, this more popular. The proof is a priori, if
we show the necessary convenience or disconvenience of any thing to the
rational and social nature; a posteriori, if, though not with full certainty,
yet very probably, we conclude that to be a point of Natural Law, which is
received for such amongst all, or at least the most civil Nations. For an
universal effect has an universal cause; and of so general an opinion, there
can hardly be any other cause, but sense it self which is called common
Argumentum veritatis est aliquid omnibus videri. Sen.
. But I said, with good reason, the Non (...) penitus est vana est senten^a,
multi quam populi celebrant. Hesiod. Tertul. Quod apud multos unum invenitur,
non est erratum sed traditum.
more civiil Nations; for as the Philosopher has it, Justin coll cum Tryph.
Exceptis illis qui ab impuris spiritibus abrenti and per malam educationem,
instituta prava and le^es iniquas corrupti naturales notiones perdiderunt.
What is natural we must judge by those in whom nature is least corrupt, and
not by the depraved. * Arist^t. Polit. 1. 5.


VI. Of Voluntary Humane Law.
THe other kind of Law is Voluntary, which draws its original from the will.
And this is either Divine, or Humane Law. We begin with Humane, because more
known. And this is either Civil, or of larger extent, or of less extent than
Civil. The Civil Law is that which proceeds from the Civil power. The Civil
Power is that which rules the Commonwealth. And a Commonwealth is a society
of Freemen united for their common benefit. The Law of less extent, and that
comes not from the Civil power, though subject to it, is various, containing
the precepts of Fathers, Masters, and such like. That of larger extent is the
Law of Nations, i. e. which by the will of all, or of Iasqu. 2. controv. 54. 4.
many nations has received force to oblige. I add, of many, because there is
scarce found any Law, besides the Natural, (which is also called the Law of
Nations) common unto all. Y^a, oft-times in one part of the world, there is not
the same Law of Nations as in another: as we shall show hereafter. This Law of
Nations is proved in the same manner with the unwritten Civil Law, by
continual use and the testimony of skillful men. And to this purpose Historians
are of singular profit.

VII. Voluntary Divine Law.
VOluntary Law Divine (as the words at first sound inform us) is that which
has its rise from the will of God; whereby it is distinguished from Natural
Law, that may be also, as we have said, entitled Divine. Here has place that
indistinct Anaxarchi apud Plut. in Alex.
saying: God wills it not, because it is just; but it is just, (i. e. due in Law)
because God wills it. This Law was given either to mankind, or to one people;
thrice to mankind; presently after the creation, again in the restoration
after the flood, lastly in that more sublime restoration by Christ. All these
Laws doubtless oblige all men, after they have sufficient notice of them.

VIII. That the Law given to the Hebrews obliged not other Nations.
THe Hebrews were the only people in all the world, to whom God peculiarly gave
his Laws, as Moses, and the Psalmist tell them. And certainly Deuteronomy. 4. 7. Ps.
147.
those Jews are out (one is Trypho in his disputation with Justin) who think
all strangers, if they will be saved, must take upon them the yoke of the
Hebrew-Law. No Law binds them to whom it was not given; To whom this Law was
given, the Law it self speaks, Hear O Israel! With them the Covenant is made;
They are taken for a peculiar people of God, as Maimonides confesses, and
proves out of Deuteronomy. 33. 4. Amongst the Hebrews indeed there always lived some
strangers These pious men of the Gentiles, as Maimonides often faith, shall be
partakers of future happiness.
that feared God, such as Cornelius, Acts 10. and the worshipping Greeks, Acts
17. These, as the Hebrew Masters say, were bound to observe the Laws given to
Ad^m, and to Noah, namely to abstain from Idols and from blood: but to the
proper Laws of the Israelites they were not bound. The Prophets when they
Preached unto the Gentiles never imposed on them a necessity to submit to Moses
Law. And the Jews in Antiqu. 22. 2.
Josephus said well, that God might be worshipped and his favor obteind without
circumcision Tryphon Justino sic air. Si in illa Philosophandi ratione
mansisses erat tibi reliqua spes aliqua status (...). Gal. 5. 3.
. For, the reason why many strangers were circumcised, and by circumcision
bound themselves to the Law (as Paul explains it) was to procure the Privileges
of that Commonwealth (for such Proselytes Justin. coll. cum Tryph. (...) qui
circum^ populo se aggregavit par est indigenae.
had the same right with native Israelites) and to partake of those promises
which were not common to mankind, but peculiar to the Hebrew people. Ye^ I deny
not, in after times it grew to an erroneous opinion in some, as if without
Judaisim were no salvation. That we are bound by no part of the Hebrew Law, as
it is properly Law, we collect hence, because all obligation, except by the Law
of nature, comes from the will of the Law-give^: but, that it was the will of
God, others besides the Israelites should be holden by that Law, we have not
the lest intimation. Wherefore, as to us, there is no abrogation of that Law;
for how could it be abrogated in respect of them whom it never obliged? From
the Israelites indeed is the bond taken off, as to Rituals, presently after the
first publication of the Gospel (which was revealed to Peter Acts 10.) and as
to other points, after that people by the overthrow of their City and their
utter desolation, without all hope of restitution, ceased to be a people. But,
for us foreiners, we obtained not this by the coming of Christ, to be freed
from Moses Law: but, we who before had only an obscure hope placed in the
goodness of God, are now sustained with a perspicuous Covenant, and the Hebrews
Law, the partition Wall between us, being taken away, we are incorporated with
them into one Catholic Church.

IX. What arguments Christians may deduce from Moses Law, and how.
NOw, seeing the Law given by Moses cannot induce upon us a direct obligation,
as we have showed; let us see what other use it may have, both in this of War,
and other the like questions. To know this is very useful to many purposes.
First then, the Hebrew Law does manifest, that which is commanded in that Law
not to be against the Law of Nature. For, the Law of Nature, as we have said,
being perpetual and immutable, it consists not with the justice of God to
command any thing contrary unto it. Moreover, the Law of Moses is called pure
and right by the Psalmist; and, by the Apostle, P^. 19. Romans 7.
holy, just and good. I mean the precepts; for, of the permissions we must
speak more distinctly. Legal permission (for that which is merely of fact, and
signifies removal of the impediment, is not pertinent here) either is plenary,
which gives a right to do a thing lawfully; or less than plenary, which only
gives impunity among men, and a right that no other can lawfully hinder the
doer, From the former permission, as from a pr^cept, it follows, that the thing
permitted is not against the Law of Nature: not, from the later. But this
consequence seldom is of use: because, the permitting words being ambiguous, we
must rather, by the Law of Nature, interpret what kind of permission is meant,
than from such a kind of permission prove it to be the Law of Nature. Our
second observation is, That it is now lawful for Christian Governors to make
Laws of the same sense, with the Laws given by Moses: unless the whole
substance of any Law concern the time of Christ exspected, and of the Gospel
not yet revealed; or, unless Christ himself, either in general or in special,
has ordained the contrary. For, no other reason can be imagined, why any of
Moses constitutions can be now unlawful. A third observation's this:
Whatsoever pertaining to the virtues Christ requires of his Disciples, is given
in precept by Moses, the same is now also, if not more, to be performed by
Christians. The ground of this observation is, that the virtues required of
Christians, as Humility, Patience, Love, are required in a greater degree
Chrysostom. de Virgin. 94. Major (...) vi^tus ostenden da est, qu^a multa nuno
spiritus essusa est gratia, and ingens donum est Christi adventus. and v. Iren.
l. 4. c. 26. Heb. 7. 19. 8. 7. Romans 10 5. Gal. 3. 25.
than they were in the State of the Hebrew Law. And justly, because also the
heavenly promises are much more clearly proposed in the Gospel. Hence, in
comparison of the Gospel, is the old Law said to have been neither perfect nor
faultless; and Christ is called the end of the Law; and the Law a Schoolmaster
to bring us unto Christ. So, that old Law of the Sabbath, and that other of
Tithes V Iren. l. 4. c. 34. and Chrysostom. ad Ephesians. 11. 10.
do show, that Christians are obliged to separate no less than a seventh part
of their time for Gods service; nor less than a tenth of their fruits, for the
maintenance of his Ministers, and the like pious uses.

X. That War is not against the Law of Nature.
WE said before, when the question is about the Law of Nature, the Ex. l. 1. c.
2.
meaning is, whether a thing may be done, not unjustly: and, that is un ust
which has a necessary repugnance to the rational and social Nature. Now, among
the first principles of Nature, there is nothing repugnant unto War; there is
much in favor of it. For, both the end of War, the conservation of life and
members, and the keeping or acquiring of things useful unto life, is most
agreeable unto those principles: and, if need be, to use force to that purpose,
is not disagreeable, since every living thing has, by the gift of Nature,
(...) strength, to the end it may be able to help and defend it se^f. Galen
Dente lupus, cornu taurus petit; unde nist intu^ monstratum? Hor.
says, that Man is by nature fitted for Peace and War; though coming into the
world unarmed, yet he has a hand fit * De usu part 1.
to provide and to handle arms; which also Insants, we see, of their own accord
without a teacher make use of for a weapon. So Aristotle De part. anim. 4. 10.
says, the hand is to man instead of a spear, of a sword, of any arms
whatsoever; because it can * Cassiodor. de anima. Et quoniam neque cornu, neque
dente, neque fuga (sicut alia animalia) corporis humani formase praevalet
vindicare, robustus illi thorax, brachiaque concessa sunt: ut illatam insurtam
mann defenderet, and objectu corporis quasi quodam clipeo vindicare^.
take and hold all. Moreover, Right reason and the nature of society inhibites
not all force, but that which is repugnant to society, that is, which depriveth
another of his right. For the end of society is, that by mutual aid every one
may enjoy his own. This were so, although the Dominion and propriety of
possessions had not been introduced; for life, members, liberty would yet be
proper to every one, and therefore could not without injury be invaded by any
other. And, to make use of what is common, and spend as much as may suffice
nature would be the right of the occupant. Which right none could without
injury take away. This is more plain, since by Law and use Dominion is
established: which I will express (...) Tullies words: If every member should
De offic. 3.
think to gather more strength by drawing to it self the strength of the member
next it, the whole body must needs (...) weakened and destroyed: So, if every
one of us snatch unto himself the commodities of other men, and draw away from
every one what he can to advantage himself, humane society cannot stand. Nature
gives leave to every man, in the acquisition of things useful, to supply
himself before another; but by the spoili of another to increase his own store,
that nature does not permit. It is not then against society to provide for one
self, so that another right be not diminished: nor is that violence unjust,
which does not violate the right of another, as the same Author says: Of the
two kinds of contention, by debate, and by force, the one agreeing to men, the
other more becoming beasts, we must fly unto the later, when the former will
not serve. And elsewhere: Epist. Fam. 12. 3. L. 1. Sect. Vim vi. D de vi and vi
arma^.
What is there that can be done against force, but by force? Ulpian says:
Cassius writes, that it is by nature lawful to repel force by force; and arms
by arms. Armaque in armatos sumere jura sinunt. Ovid. Caius Juriscons. Adversus
periculum natural ratio permittit se defendere.


XI. Further proof, out of the sacred History, that all War is not against the
Law of Nature.
THis is further proved out of the sacred History. For when Abraham having
armed his servants and friends, pursued the four Kings that had spoiled Sodom,
and returned with victory, God by his Priest Melchizedeck approved his action.
Blessed be the most high God, said Melchisedeck, who has Genesis 14. (...).
delivered thine enemies into thine hand. Abraham, as appears by the story, had
taken Arms without any special commission from God: therefore the Law of Nature
was his warrant, whose wisdom was no less eminent than his sanctity, even by
the report of aliens, namely of Berosus and Orpheus. The History of the seven
Nations, whom God gave up to be destroyed by the hand of Israel, I shall not
use: because there was a special mandate to execute Gods judgment upon people
guilty of the greatest crimes; Whence, in the Scripture, these Wars are
properly called the Wars of God, undertaken by his command not by humane
Coun^el. It is more pertinent, that the Hebrews, under the conduct of Moses and
Joshua, when they were opposed by the Amalekites, repulsed them by Armies. The
Action was Exodus 17.
not set upon by Gods command, yet was it approved by him after it was done.
Moreover, God has prescribed to his people general and perpetual Laws of
waging War, thereby showing, War Deuteronomy. 20. 10. 15.
may be just even without his special mandate. For he does plainly distinguish
the cause of the seven Nations from the cause of other people: and prescribing
nothing about the just causes of entering into War, thereby shows them to be
manifest enough by the light of nature, as the cause of defending the frontiers
in the War of Jephtha against the Ammonites; and the cause of Ambassadors Jud.
11.
violated in the War of David against 2 Samuel 10.
the same. It is also to be noted, which the divine writer to the Hebrews
says, that Gedeon, Baruc, Sampson, Jephtha, David, Samuel and others, by Faith
overthrew Heb. 11. 33. 14.
Kingdoms, prevailed in War, put to flight the Armies of Aliens. Where, in the
name of Faith, as we learn by the series of that discourse, is included a
persuasion whereby is believed that the thing done is pleasing unto God. So
also the wise woman says of David, that he fought the battails of God, that
is, pious and just. 1 Samuel 25. 28.


XII. That War is not contrary to the voluntary Divine Law, before the time of
the Gospel.
THe greatest difficulty lies in this point, concerning the positive Divine
Law. Nor may any object, the Law of Nature is immutable, and therefore nothing
could be constituted by God to the contrary; for this is true in things
commanded or forbidden by the Law of Nature; not in things permitted only:
which things, being not properly of the Law of Nature but without it, may be
either forbidden or commanded. First then, against War is brought by some that
Law given to Noah and his posterity: And surely (says Genesis 9. 5, 6.
God) Your blood of your lives will I require: at the hand of every beast will
I require it; and at the hand of man, at the hand of every man's Brother will I
require the life of man. Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be
shed: for in the image of God made he man. Here do some most generally
understand that which is said of requiring blood: and what is said of shedding
blood for blood, they will have to be a commination, not an approbation. I can
allow of neither; for the prohibition, not to shed blood, is not of larger
extent than that in the Law, Thou shall not kill: and this, it is manifest, has
neither taken away capital punishments nor Wars. Wherefore, both this Law
and that does not so much constitute any new thing, as declare and repeat the
old natural Law obliterated and depraved by evil custom. And the words are to
be understood in a sense which includes a crime: as in the wor^ homicide, we
understand not every killing of a man, but that which is on purpose and of an
innocent person. The which follows, of shedding blood for blood seems to me not
to contain a naked act but a Right. I explain it thus. By nature it is not
unjust, that every one suffer as much evil as he has done; (...) Quae fecit
st quisque ferat, jus fiet and aequum.
of a sense of this natural equity, (...) accused of paricide by his own
conscience said, Whosoever finds me she flay me. But, God in those first
times Genesis 4. 14.
either by reason of the paucity of men or because there being yet but few
offenders, exemplary punishments were (...) necessary, repressed by his edict
the which seemed naturally lawful, and appointed the manslayers company to be
avoided, not his life taken away. The like was decreed by Plato in his Laws,
and of old practiced in Greece Euripides. Quam been parenium provida aetas
statuerat: ut cogeretur de vita decedere Hominumque visu caede patrata nocens,
Fugaque lueret triste non letho seelus.
. Pertinent is that of Histd. 3.
Thucydides: Anciently great crimes had little punishments Servius ad 1 Ae^.
Luetts, (...), Et hic sermo (...) pecunia descendit; antiquo (...) enim (...)
omnes pecuniariae fuerunt.
: but in progress of time, those being contemned, death was inflicted. From one
notable act a conjecture being made of the divine pleasure went into a Law: so
that Lamech also, upon the like crime committed O^ rather [if he had committed
the like: for the words bear this sense.
, promised to himself impunity from that example. Nevertheless, Adhuc enim
videbatur nesas, quamvis malos, lamen homines, (...) capi^ affi (...). Lactant.
l 2. Gen 4. 24.
when before the flood, in the Giants age, a promiscuous license of shedding
blood had prevailed, mankind being again restored after the flood, God, to
restrain that license, thought it meet to use more severity; and laying aside
the lenity of the former times, permitted now what nature did before dictate
not to be unjust, that he should be guiltless who slew the manslayer Josephus.
Edico ut a caede humana purae habeaniur manus; quod si quis eadem commiserit,
poena^ scrat.
. This, after Courts of Justice were established, was upon very great reasons
restrained to the Judges only: yet so that some Print of the former custom was
seen, even after Moses Law, in his right, who was the next Kinsman to the
person slain. We have no mean Author to countenance our interpretation.
Abraham, who being not ignorant of the Law given to Noah, took arms against the
four Kings, not doubting but his enterprise was very reconcilable with that
Law. And Moses too gave order that the Amalekites violence should be withstood
by Arms, using the right of nature: for it appears not that God was consulted
Exodus 17. 9.
with in this. Moreover, capital punishments, it appears, were used not
against man-slayers only, but other Malefactors; Genesis 38. 24.
and that as well among the holy people as other nations. By the aid of
natural reason, having some ground to make conjecture of the divine will, they
proceeded from like to like, and collected, that the constitution against the
manslayer, might extend also to other notorious and great offenders. For, some
things there are equal unto life, as reputation, virginal chastity, conjugall
fidelity; or without which life cannot be secure, as reverence to authority,
whereby society is preserved: Offenders against these seem no better than
man-slayers. Hither pertains an old tradition extant among the Hebrews, that
more Laws were given unto Noah's Sons by God, but Moses did not relate them
all, because it was sufficient for his purpose, that they were after
comprehended in the peculiar Law of the Hebrews; so, against incestuous
Marriage, there was extant an old Law, though not remembered by Moses in its
place, as appears Levit. 18. And among the Laws God gave to Noah's children,
this also they say was decreed, that not only homicides, but adulteries,
incests and rapes should be punished with death; which is confirmed by the
words of Job. Also, the Law given by Moses Chap. 31. 2.
adds unto the capital sanctions, reasons, that are of no less value among
others, then among the Hebrew people: peculiarly it is said of homicide, that
the earth cannot be purged but by the bloodshed of the manslayer As Levit.
18. 24, etc. Psalm 104. 5. Prove. 20. 8.
. Besides, it is absurd to think, the Hebrew Number. 25. 31, 33.
people were allowed to secure their Government, and the public and private
safety, by capital punishments, and to bear Arms for their own defense, but
other Kings and Nations at the same time were not allowed to do so; and yet
were never admonisht by the Prophets for using capital punishments and making
War, as they were often reproved for other sins. Yea on the contrary, who would
not believe, seeing Moses Judicial Law is an express of the divine pleasure,
other Nations who would take a Copy thence, did well and wisely: as it is
probable the Greeks, especially the Athenians did? whence there is so great
similitude in the old Attick Law, and the offspring thereof, the Roman of the
12. Tables, with the Hebrew Laws. This is enough to show, that the Law given to
Noah is not of such a sense as they would have it, who impugn all Wars by that
Argument.

XIII. Of the Gospel-Law.
THe objections against War taken out of the Gospel have a greater show; in
the examination whereof, I will not say with many, that in the Gospel, beside
the precepts of Faith and the Sacraments, nothing else is found but what is of
Natural Law; for, as most understand this, it is not true. This I willingly
acknowledge; in the Gospel nothing is commanded us, which has not a natural
honesty and comeliness; but, that we are not further obliged by the Laws of
Christ, than we are by natural Law, I cannot grant. It is mavelous to see
what pains they take, why are in the other opinion, to prove the things
forbidden by the Law of Nature, which by the Gospel are made unlawful, such as
are concubinacy, divorce prolygamy Spectat huc illud Hicronymi: Aliae sunt
leges Caesarts, aliae Christi; aliud Papinianus, aliud Paulus noster praecipit.
. Things indeed of such: nature, that to abstain from them, reason it self
tells us is more honest and becoming: Yet not such, as contain in them (set
the divine Law aside) any apparent wickedness. And who can say, nature has
bound us to that which the Christian Law gives in precept, to 1 John 3. 16.
lay down our lives for the brethren? It is a saying of Justin Martyr ocus est,
ad Zenam (...) idemque sensus apud Originem in excerptis illis quae Philocatia
dicuntur.
, To live according to nature is his duty, wh^ has not yet attained to the
Faith of Christ. Neither will I follow their conjecture, who suppose Christ in
his Sermon on the Mount, was only an Interpreter of Moses Law. These words Mat.
5, etc.
of his so often repeated have another sound: Ye have heard, that it has been
said to them of old: but I say unto you. Which opposition, and the Syriack and
other versions prove the truth of that reading, to them (not, by them) of old.
Those of old, or the ancients, were no other than they that lived in Moses
time; for the commands rehearsed as spoken to the ancients, are not the sayings
of the Lawyers, but of Moses, either word for word, or at lest in sense. Thou
shall not kill. Whosoever shall kill shall be in Ex. 20. 13. Lev. 21. 21.
danger of judgment. Thou shall not Ex 20. 14.
commit adultry. Whosoever shall put away Deuteronomy. 24. 1.
his Wife, let him give her a writing of divorcement. Thou shall not forswear
thy self, but shall perform unto Ex. 20. 7.
the Lord thine oaths. An eye for an eye, Lev. 24. 20.
and a tooth for a tooth (understand thou may require in the Court of
judgment.) Thou shall love thy neighbor Lev. 19. 18.
(i. e. the Israelite) and hate thine enemy (i. e. the seven Nations In hos
odium lege permitti ait illustrissimus Aba' baniel ad Deuteronomy. 23. 21. Ex. 34 11.
Deuteronomy. 7 1. Ex. 27. 19.
, to whom they might not show friendship nor pity: to these the Amalekits are
to be added, against whom the Hebrews are commanded to have War for ever.)
But, to understand the words of Christ we must note, that the Law given by
Moses may be taken two ways: according to what it has common with other Laws,
made by men, restraining the greater offenses with fear of open punishments,
and hereby containing Heb. 2. 2.
the Hebrew people in the state of civil society; in which sense it is called
the Law of a carnal Commandment, and the Heb. 7. 16. Romans 3. 27.
Law of Works: Or, according to what is proper to the divine Law, as it
requires also purity of mind, and some acts, which may be omitted without
temporal punishment; in which sense it is called a spiritual Law, re oycing
the Romans 7. 14. Ps. 19.
heart. Now the Lawyers and Pharisees, contenting themselves with the form^
part, neglected the second, which is the better part, nor did they inculcate it
into the people. The truth of this appears not only in our Books, but in
Josephus also and the Hebrew Masters Moreover, as to this second part, we must
know, the virtues exacted at the hands of Christians, are either commended or
commanded to the Hebrews also, but surely not commanded in the same degree and
latitude Egregius imprimis Chrysostom. locus de Virgin. cap. 44. Olim tanta
nobis injuncta non eral virtutis mensura, sed and vindictam sumere de injuriam
inferente, etc. At post Christi adventum multo arctior facta (...) via. E d. l.
3. c 83. Non eadem virtutis mensura a nobis and ab illis exigitur. Idem in
orat. filium Patri esse aequalem, ait, in Evangelio esse, P^aeceptorum and
intensionem and adjectionem.
as they are to Christians. In both senses Christ opposes his precepts to the
old ones: whence it is manifest, his words contain more than a naked
Interpretation. The knowledge whereof conduces both to our present matter and
to many other things, lest we strein the Authority of the Hebrew Law beyond its
reach.

XIV. That War is not against the Gospel-Law. The first Argument.
OMitting Arguments of less value in our judgment, our first and principal
proof, that the Right of War is not wholly taken away by the Law of Christ,
shall be that of Paul, to Timothy. I exhort therefore, that first of all, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3.
supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all
men: For Kings, and for all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and
a Sen. Ep. 73. Philosophiae fideliter dedito^, falso ait contemtores magist
atuum ac ^gum existimari. E contrario ait, nulli adversus illos gratiores sunt:
nec immerito; nullis enim plus praestant, quam, quibus s^ui tranquillo otio
licet. D'gna est, quae legitur, Epistola, ubi and hoc: Hujus pacis beneficium,
ad omnes (...), al^us ad eos p^venit qui illa b^ne utuntur.
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. For this is good and acceptable
in the sight of God our Savior: who will have all men to be saved, and to come
unto the knowledge of the truth. Here we are taught three things; That it is
pleasing to God, Kings should become Christistians: That being made Christians,
they should remain Kings; We pray (says Justin Martyr) that Kings and
Princes, together with their regal power, may also attain unto a right
understanding; and in the Book entitled Clement's Constitutions, the Church
prays Nisi hic interpretari malis, Christianum vitae exitum. Gr. (...). Romans
13. 4.
for Christian Magistrates: Lastly, that this is also pleasing to God, that
Christian Kings should procure for other Christians a quiet life. How so? The
Apostle shows in another place: He is the Minister of God to thee for good,
but if thou do that which is evil, be afraid: for he bears not the sword in
vain: for he is the Minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that
does evil. By the right of the sword is understood all coercive power (as in
the Lawyers sometimes) yet so, that the highest part of it, which is the true
use of the sword, is not excluded. For the illustration of this place much
light may be had from the second Psalm: which, although it were verified of
David, yet more fully and perfectly pertains to Christ, as we learn out of the
Acts and Acts 4. 25. 13. 33. Heb. 5. 5.
the Epistle to the Hebrews. Now this Psalm exhorts all Kings to receive the
Son of God with reverence, i. e. to do service to him, as they are Kings, as
Augustine explains it well: whose words are to this effect, Herein do Kings, as
Cont. Crescon. Gram. l. 3
they are commanded, serve God as Kings; if in their Kingdom they command good
things, forbid evil things, not only pertaining to humane society, but also to
divine Religion. And elsewhere: How Ad Bonifac. Epist. 50.
then shall Kings serve the Lord in fear, but by prohibiting with religious
severity, and punishing offenses against the commands of the Lord? For he
serves one way as a man, another way as a King. Again: Herein therefore do
Kings serve the Lord, as Kings, when they do him that service, which none can
do but Kings.

XV. The second Argument.
A Second Argument is delivered us by St. Paul in the place cited already in
some part, out of the Epistle to the Romans: where the highest power, Romans 13.
such as the regal is, is said to be of God, and is called the ordinance of
God: whence it is inferred, that obedience and honor is to be given to it, and
that from the heart: and he that resists it, resists God. If by Ordinance a
thing were to be understood, which God only will not hinder, as in vicious
acts, then would there follow thence no obligation either of honor or
obedience, especially laid upon the conscience: nor would the Apostle say any
thing, where he so much extols and commends this power, which might not agree
to robbing and stealing. It follows therefore, that this power be conceived to
be ordained by the will of God approoving it: whence it further follows, that,
seeing God wills not contraries, this power is not repugnant to the will of God
revealed by the Gospel, and ob^iging all men. Nor is this Argument avovded,
because the persons that were in power when Paul wrote, are said to have been
enemies to Christian piety: For first, that is not true of all. Sergius Paulus
Propraetor Acts 13. 2.
of Cyprus had given his name to Christ before this time: to say nothing of the
King of Est Edessa in Osroene Nomen Abea^i frequens illis locis. App^et ex
nummis, Tacito, Appiano. Dione, tum in pridem editis, tum in novis Excerptis,
Capitolino.
Edessa, of whom there is an old tradition, grounded (as it seems) on truth,
though perhaps a little mixed with fables. Moreover, the question is not of the
persons, whether they were impious; but whether that function in them were
impious: we say, the Apostle denis that, when he says, the function, even for
that time, was ordained of God, and therefore to be honored, even within the
recesses and secrets of the heart where God alone has Empire. Wherefore both
Nero might, and that King Agrippa too, whom Paul so seriously invites to his
Acts 26.
Religion, might subject himself to Christ, and retain, the one his regal, the
other his imperial power: a power, which without the right of the Sword and of
Arms cannot be understood. As then of old, the Sacrifices according to the Law
were pious, although administered by impious Priests; so Empire is a pious thing
Been hoc exsequitur ad hunc locum Epist. ad Romans Chrysostomus.
, although it be in the hand of an impious Prince.

XVI. The third Argument.
THe third Argument is from the words of John the Baptist, who being seriously
asked by the Jewish Soldiers (many thousands of that Nation served the Romans
in their Wars, as Josephus and other writers clearly tell us:) what they should
do, to avoid the wrath of God, He answered not, that they should forsake War
(as he must have answered, if that be the will of God) but abstain from
violence and falsehood, and be content with their wages. To these words Luke 3.
14.
of the Baptist, containing an approbation of War plain enough, many answer,
The Baptists prescripts are so different from the precepts of Christ, that we
may conceive their Doctrine not to be the same. Which I cannot admit, for these
reasons. John and Christ use the same beginning, and declare the sum of their
doctrine in the same words, Amend your lives, for the kingdom of Heaven is at
hand. Christ himself says, the Mat. 3. 2. 4. 17.
Kingdom of Heaven (i. e. the new Law, for the Hebrews use to style the Law by
the name of Kingdom,) began to be invaded from the days of the Baptist. Mat.
11. 12.
John is said to have preached the Baptism of repentance for the remission o^
Mar. 1. 4. Acts 2. 38.
sins: just as the Apostles are said to have done in the name of Christ. Jo^
requires fruits meet for repentance, and Mat. 3. 8. 10.
threatens destruction to them that bring not forth such fruit. He requires
works Luke 3. 2.
of Love above the Law. The Law is sai^ to have continued unto John: as if,
(...) more perfect doctrine had from him begun. Mat. 11. 13.
And the beginning of the Gospel is Mar. 10. 1. Luke 1. 77. Mat 11. 9. Luke 7.
26. Luke 2. 77. Luke 3. 18.
deduced from John. John himself is therefore greater than the Prophets: being
se^ to give saving knowledge to the people and to Preach the Gospel. Nor does
(...) any where distinguish Jesus from himse^ by the difference of precepts
(only the things delivered by John more gene^ly, and confusedly, and in the
mann^ of rudiments, are more plainly and fully declared by Christ, the true
light: but by this, that Jesus was that prom^sed Messiah: the King of a
heavenl^ Acts 19. 4. John 1. 29. Mat. 3 2. Mar. 1. 8. Luke 3. 16.
Kingdom, who should give the power of the Holy Spirit to them that believe on
him.

XVII. The fourth Argument.
THe fourth Argument seems to me (...) no small weight. If the Right (...)
capital punishments, and of defendin^ the people by force of Arms again^
Robbers Chrysostom. in Sermon. ad pat. sidelem. Propter hos sunt judicia and leges
and supplicia totque poenarum modi.
and Spoilers, be taken away. thence will follow license of wickednes^ and a
deluge as it were, and flood of evils: when as, although Justice be now
executed, that stream is hardly kept within the banks. Wherefore, had it been
the mind of Christ, to bring in such a state of things, as was never heard of,
doubtless he would in most plain and express terms have commanded, that none
should give sentence of death, that none should bear Arms: which command he
has no where promulged: for, the alleged places are very general, or very
obscure. Now equity and common reason shows, not only general words must be
restrained, and doubtful words commodiously explained, but the propriety and
received use of words somewhat declined, that a very incommodious and
incoherent sense may be avoided.

XVIII. The Fifth Argument.
Fifthly, it can be evinced by no Argument, that the Judicial Law of Moses,
expired before the destruction of Jerus^lem, wherewith fell both the form, and
the hope of that Commonwealth; for, neither is any term prefixed to that Law
in the Law itself, nor do Christ or his Apostles ever speak of the Cessation of
it, but as it may seem comprehended in the destruction of the Commonwealth, as
we have said: yea, on the contrary, Paul says, the High Priest was set to give
judgment according to the Law of Moses. Christ himself in the Acts 24. 3.
preface to his precepts says, He ca^ not to dissolve the Law, but to fulfill
it; the sense of which words, as to Ri^uals, Mat. 5. 17.
is not obscure: for the lineaments and shadowings are filled up and
completed, when the perfect species of a thing is presented to our view; as to
the judicial Laws, how can it be true, if Christ, as some do think, has by his
coming taken them away? But if the obligatior of the Law remained, as long as
the Commonwealth of the Hebrews stood it follows, that even the Jews converted
unto Christ, if they were called un^ Magistracy, could not shun it, and the
they ought to judge no otherwise tha^ Moses had prescribed. Methinks, when I
weigh all things, there is not the leaf^ motive for any pious man, that hear^
Christ at that time speaking, to understand his words in any other sense; Thi^
I acknowledge, before the time of Christ some things were permitted, (whether
in respect of outward impunity, or also of inward purity, I need not
determine:) which Christ has forbidden the Disciples of his institution, as,
to put away ones wife for every cause, to seek reveng from the judge upon the
injurious person^ yet, between the precepts of Christ and those permissions,
there is a certain diversity, no repugnance. For he that keeps his wife, and
remits the injury, does nothing against the Law, yea he does that which the Law
wills most. It Is otherwise with the Judge, whom the Law not permits, but
commands to put the Murderer to death, himself becoming guilty of blood before
God, unless in this case he shed it. If Christ forbid him thus to punish the
murderer; his precept is plainly contrary to the law, he dissolveth the law.

XIX. The Sixth, Seventh, and Eighth Arguments.
THe sixth is from the example of Cornelius the Centurion, who received from
Christ the Holy Spirit, an undoubted sign of his justification, and was
Baptized in the name of Christ by the Apostle Peter: but, that he left his
Office of War, or was advised by Peter to leave it, we do not read. Some
answer, whereas he had instruction from Peter concerning Christian Religion, it
is to be supposed that he was also instructed to desert his place. This were
something, if it were certain and undoubted that Christ among the rest of his
precepts had forbidden War. But, when that is no where else expressed, here at
least was a fit place to say somewhat of it, that the age to come might not be
ignorant of the rules of their duty. Nor is it the manner of Luke, where the
quality of the persons required a special change (...) life, to pass it over
with silence; as (...) may see elsewhere. The seventh Argument, Acts 19. 19.
like to this, is taken from the which we began before to say of Sergi^ Paulus;
for in the story of his conversion, there is no intimation of his (...)
nouncing his office, nor of any adm^nition given him to do so. Now, the which
is not related, (as even now (...) said) when it is of most concernment, a^ the
place requires it, is to be conceive not at all to be done. The eighth m^ be
this, that Utitur hujus loci autoritate Council. Afric. Quorum contra furorem
possumu^ non insolita nec a scripturis aliena impetrare praesidia, quando
Apostolus Paulus, sicut in Apostolorum Act. fidelibus notum est, factiosorum
conspirationem militari etiam submovit auxilio. Augustine. Epist. 154. ad Pub^
Neque si in illa arma scelerati homines incidissent, Paulus in (...) sanguinis
suum crimen agnosceret.
Paul the Apostle havi^ understood the Jews plot against him willed it to be
revealed to the chief C^tain: Acts 23.
and when the chief Capta^ gave him a guard of Soldiers to sec^ his journey, he
accepted of it, maki^ never a word to the Captain or (...) Soldiers, that God
was not pleas^ with resisting of force by force. And (...) Paul was a man, who
would himself (...) mit, nor suffer others to omit, no occ^sion of teaching men
their duty 2. Tim. 4. 2.
.

XX. The ninth, tenth, and eleventh Arguments.
NInthly, The proper end of a thing just and lawful, cannot but be just
lawful. It is not only lawful, but we have a precept obliging the conscience,
Romans 13.
to pay tribute; And the end of Tribute is, that the public powers may have
wherewith to defray the charge upon them, for the defense of good men, and the
coercion of the bad. Tacitus speaks Hist. 4.
to our purpose, The quiet of the world Augustine. contra Faust. l. 22. c. 74.
Ad hoc tributa praestamus, ut propter necessaria militi stipendium prae beatur.
cannot be had without Arms, no Arms without Soldiers pay, nor pay without
contribution. Tenthly, Acts 2. 5. 11. So also Acts 28. 18. For there was no
cause of death in me. C. 2. 19. 20.
Paul speaks thus, If I be an offender, or have committed any thing worthy of
death, I refuse not to die Justin Apol. 2. Ut autem puniantur, qui non
convenienter praeceptis illis vivunt, and nomine solo sunt Christiani, and
quidem a vobis, and nos opta^.
Whence I collect, that in Paul's judgment, even since the publication of the
Gospel, there are some crimes, which equity allows, yea and requires, to be
punished with death. Which also Peter shows in the first of his Epistles. Had
the will of God been so now, that capital judgments should cease, Paul might
indeed have made an Apology for himself, but he ought not to have left in the
minds of his hearers such an opinion, as this, that it was no less lawful now
than heretofore, to put offenders to death. Now, it being proved, that capital
punishments are rightly used since the coming of Christ, it is withal proved,
as I suppose, that some War may be lawfully waged, to wit, against a multitude
of armed offenders, who must be overcome in battle, before they can be brought
to judgment. For, the forces of offenders, and their boldness to resist, as in
a prudent deliberation it ha^ some moment, so it diminishes nothing of the
right it self. Lastly, the Law of Christ has taken away the Law of Moses only,
which was the partitio^ wall between the Gentiles and the H^ brews. Ephesians. 2. 14.
Things by nature honest, and by the consent of civil nations, it is so far
from taking away, that it has comprehended them all under the gener^ precept
of all honesty and virtue. But Phil. 4. 8. 1 Cor. 11. 13, 14.
the punishment of crimes, and Arms to keep off injury are accounted laudable
in their Nature, and are referred to the virtue of justice and beneficence. And
here, on the by, we must note their error, who draw the Israelites right to
War, from this alone, that God had granted to them the Canaanites Land. For
this is not the only cause, though it be (...) just one. Before those times,
men of piety, conducted by their reason, waged Wars: and the Israelites
themselves afterward upon other grounds, as David for the violation of his
Ambassadors. Besides, what any one possesses by humane right, is no less his
own, than if God had made an immediate grant thereof; which right is not taken
away (but confirmed) by the Gospel.

XXI. Objections answered. The first.
LEt us now also see, by what Arguments the opposite opinion underprops it
self, that the pious Reader may more easily judge, which of the two is more
firm and weighty. The first is usually brought out of Esay's prophecy Id de
pace quae orbi contigit beneficio Romani Imperii interpretatur Chrylost.
oratione Christum esse Deum: Neque vero praedictum tantum est, stabilem fore,
immotam, atque inconcussam banc religionem, sed cum ea adventuram orbi pacem,
desituras illas in singulis civitatibus plurium potentias, regnaque ipsa, and
unum fore super omnes imperium, ac cjus pleraque pacem habitura, contra quam
ante fiebat, etc. and vid. Eusebius. (...) praepar. l. 1. c. 10.
, who says, it shall come to pass, Es. 2. 4.
that the Nations shall beat their swords into plow-shares, and their spears
into pruning hooks: Nation shall not lift up sword against Nation, neither
shall they learn War any more. But this prophecy, either is to be understood
(as many other) conditionally: Such shall be the state of things, if all people
undertake and fulfill the Law of Christ; to which purpose God will suffer
nothing to be wanting on his part: Sure enough it is, if all be Christians, and
live Christianly, there will be no Wars Lactant: Quid fiet, si omnes in
concordiam consen serint? Quod certe fieri poterit, si pernicioso and impio
furore projecto innocents as justi esse velint. Justin. de Christianis. Non
pugnamus in hosts. Plane ut de Essenis Philo in Orat. Omnem bonum effe
liberum: Nullum inter (...) reperias qui aut sacula, aut sagittas, aut gladium,
aut galeam, out (...) came, aut scutum fabricet; Nullum qui aut arma conficiat
aut (...) nas. Simile est quod Chrysostomus ait ad 1 Cor. 13. 3. Si^ inter
bomines qualis oportet dilectio, nullas fore poenas capitales.
: Or, it is to be understood simply and purely; and thus, experience tells us,
this prophecy is not yet fulfilled, but the impletion thereof, as also of the
general conversion of the Jews, is yet to be waited for. Which way soever you
take it, nothing can be inferred hence against the justice of Wars, so long as
there are who suffer not the lovers of peace to live at peace, but offer
violence and use force against them.

XXII. The second Objection answered.
OUt of the fifth of Matthew sund^ Arguments are deduced; which we cannot
rightly judge of, unless (...) remember what was said before: If Christ had
purposed to take away all capital judgments, and the right of Wars, he would
have done it in words most express and special, by reason of the greatness and
newness of the matter: and the rather, because no Jew could think otherwise,
but that the Laws of Moses, pertaining to judgments and the Commonwealth,
ought to have their force upon the men of that Nation, so long as their state
endured. This being premised, let us weigh the places in their order. The
second muniment of the adverse party is from these words, Ye have Mat. 5. 38,
39.
heard that it has been said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth: But
I say unto you, that ye resist not the injurious person (so the Gr. turns the
original word, Exodus 21 (...) ut and Lucas in Stephani oratione: (...).
.) But whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other
also. Hence do some infer, that no injury is to be repelled or revenged;
neither privately, nor publicly. But this is not the meaning of the words; for
Christ speaks not here to Magistrates, but to those that are injured; nor does
he speak of every injury, but of such as a blow on the cheek: the following
words restrain the generality of the precedent. So likewise in the next
immediate precept, If any man will sue thee at the Law, and take away thy coat,
let him have thy cloak also Id ita exponit Cyprianus de patientia: Ut tuae
oblata non repetas. Irenaeus l. 4. c. 27. Tollenti tibi tunicam, remitte ei and
pallium, sed non quasi nolentes fraudari contristemur; sed quasi volentes
donaverimus, gaudeamus. Et si quis te, inquit, angariaverit mill passus, vade
cum eo alia duo, ut non quasi servus sequaris, sed quasi liber plaecedas. Etiam
Libanius, qui Evangelia legerat, laudat non litigantes de chlamyde and tunica,
in orat. de custodia reorum.
: Not every suit before the judge or arbitrator is forbidden (let Paul be the
Interpreter, who denies not all suits, but prohibites the Christians to contend
in the Courts of Heathens; and that after the Jews example, whose common saying
it was, Whosoever brings the affairs of Israel before the stranger, pollutes
the name of God:) but the will of Christ is, to exercise our patience, that we
should not go to Law about things which may easily be repaired, as a Coat, or
(if it so happen) the cloak also: but that, although our cause be good, we
should omit the prosecution of our right. Apollonius Tyaneus said, It was not
Philostrat. 2. 15.
the part of a Philosopher to contend about a little money. The Praetor (says
Ulpian) approoves his doing, who would L. Item. si S. 1. and D. de al. en. jud.
mut. causa facta.
content himself and sit down with the less of a thing, rather than be troubled
with often suits about it. For this man's disposition, that cannot endure
contention, is in no wise to be dispraised. What Ulpian here says is approved
by the best, the same does Christ command, choosing the matter of his precepts
from among the things that are most honest and m^ approved. But, you may not
colle^ hence, that it is unlawful for a Paren^ or for a Tutor, to defend that
before (...) Judge, without which the Children without which the pupils cannot
to maintained. For the coat and cloak is one thing, the Livelihood another. In
Clement's Constitutions it is said of a Christian man, if he has a suit, let
him L. 1. c. 45.
endeavor to end it, though he bear some damage. As in matters of morality, so
here we say, these things do not consist in a point, but have a certain
latitude belonging to them. So in that which follows, And whosoever shall
compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain: Our Lord said not, a hundred
mile, a journey that would take a man off too far from his own occasions; but
one mile, or, if need be, twain: a walk, not very irksom. The sense therefore
is, in these things which import no great incommodity, we must not stand upon
our own right, but yield, even more than another would require, that our
patience Justi^us Ap^get. 2. Quae dicit, huc pertinent, ut adversus ownes s^nus
pttieates, (...), minime tracundi.
and our benignity may be known unto all men. It follows, Give Just. Apol. eod.
De comm^icandi ve^o facultatib. nostris eam egentibus, and nequid ad gl^iam
aucupandam saciamus, hoe and dixit: Omni pe enti date, etc. Alioi, Communico^
^stra omni ^genli. 1 Timothy 5. 8. 2 Cor. 8. 13.
to him that asks thee: and from him that would borrow of thee, turn not thou
away. If you carry it on infinitely, and without measure, nothing is more hard.
He that provideth not for those of his own house is worse than an infidel,
says Paul. Let us then follow the same Paul, the best interpreter of his
Master's Law, who stirring up the Corinthians to exercise beneficence toward
the poor of Jerusalem: Not, says he, that other men be eased, and you
burdened: but by an equality: that your abundince may be a supply Sen. de
benefic. 2. Dabo egenti, sed ut ipse non egoam. Chrysostom. in loc. Deus pro
sacultote poscit, quatenus habet quis, non quatenus non habet. Q100 ut sect
intelligatur accedant sequentia: Laudat quidem quod facultates exsuperat (nempe
in Thessalonicensibus:) sed hos (Achaeos sc.) non cogit idem facere.
for their want; which sense is also in Xenophon's Cyrus; What I shall see
superfluous in my own estate will serve the necessities of my friends. The like
equity must we use for the interpretation of that precept now in hand. The
Hebrew Law, as it did indulge a liberty of divorce, to prevent the cruelty of
Husbands toward their Wives; so also, for the restraint of private revenge,
whereto that Nation was very prone, allowed the offended party a right, to
exact, not by his own hand, but by the sentence of the Judge, a retaliation: a
Law imitated in the 12. Tables. But Christ, a Teacher of more patience, is so
Si membrum vupit, talio esto.
far from approving that ardent desire of revenge in the person wronged, that
he would not have some kind of injuries to be repelled, either by force, or
Law. What injuries? Such as are tolerable; not, that patience is not laudable
in the more Vid. Chrysostomum dicto jam loco.
grievous, but he is content with a patience more limited. Therefore he puts
the case in a stroke on the cheek, which endangereth not the life, maimeth not
the body, but only signifies a certain contempt of us, which makes us nothing
the worse. Seneca in his Book of a wise man's constancy distinguishes between an
injury and a disgrace, The former, says he, is by nature the more grievous:
this is lighter, and only grievous to the delicate, whereby they are not hurt,
but offended. Again, Contumely is less than injury, which we may rather
complain of, than return: which the Laws also have thought worthy of no
revenge. The same Seneca a little after says, The grief arising from disgrace,
or an affront, is an affection coming from a meaness and lowness of the
spirit, contracting it self for some word or deed against our reputation. In
such a case therefore, Christ commands patience: to turn the other cheek, is
by an Hebraism, to bear patiently, as appears in Es. 30. 6. Jer. 3. 3. Praebere
o^ contumelios. Taci^. and Terentius.
other places: and lest any one object that common sentence, To suffer one
injury is to invite another, He adds, that we must rather bear Chrysostom 7. ad
Romans Haec egregia victoria, plus illi largiri quam velit, and fines improbae in
illo lubidinis liberalitate propriae patientiae transcendere.
a new injury, than repel the former: because there is no evil to us thence,
but that which consists in a foolish Idem de statuis 1. Contumelia non ab
inferentis animo, sed ex judicio eorum qui patiuntur aut fit aut perit.
persuasion.

XXIII. The third Objection answered.
THe third Objection is taken from the words that follow in the same place of
Matthew Mat. 5. 43. 44.
: Ye have heard, that it has been said, Thou shall love thy neighbor, and
hate thine enemy. But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse
you, do good to them that hate you; and pray for them which despitefully use
you and persecute you. Some there be that hold, this love and beneficence
toward enemies and persecutors cannot consist with capital judgments or Wars.
But they are easily refuted, if we do but consult with that saying of the
Hebrew Law. It was commanded the Hebrews to love their Neighbor, that is,
their fellow-Hebrew Cui par proselytus.
: for so Levit. 19. 17, 18.
the word Neighbor is taken there. Nevertheless were the Magistrates commanded
to put Murderers to death, and other capital offenders; nevertheless was the
Tribe of Benjamin, for an abominable transgression, prosecuted in a just War by
all the other Tribes; nevertheless did David, who fought the Lord's battails,
rightly recover the Kingdom promised him, from Isbosheth by Arms. Be it so
then, that the signification of Neighbor is larger now, and conteins every
man; for all are now received into common grace, no people are by God devoted
and given up to destruction: yet will that be lawful toward all, which was
then lawful toward the Israelites, who were commanded to be loved as well, as
all men now. But, if you would have a greater degree of love to be commanded in
the Evangelical Law, let this be granted also, so that this be agreed on too,
that all are not Tertul. adv. Mareion. 4. Secundus gradus bo ita^ est in
extraneos: in proximos primus. Hieronym. adv. Pelag. dialogo 1. Praeceptum est
mihi ut diligam inimicos, and orem pro persecutoribus. Nunquid iustum est ut
itae diligam, quast p^oximos and consanguineus; ut inter aemulum and
necessarium nulla distinctio sit.
equally to be loved, but a Father more than a foreiner. And so the good of an
innocent person is to be preferred before the good of a nocent, the common good
above the private, by the Law of regular charity. Now, from the love and care
of the innocent, Vid. Prove. 24. 11.
both capital judgments and pious Wars have their original. Wherefore, the
precepts of Christ, concerning love and charity to every one, ought so to be
fulfilled, unless a greater and more just and necessary point of charity will
not suffer. That old saying is well known: To pardon all is cruelty, as much as
to pardon none Sen. de Clem. 1. Tam omnibus ignoscere, crudelitas est, quam
nulli: Chrysostom. 1. ad Cor. 3. 12. etc. de paenis hum. agens: Non ex saevitia,
sed, ex bonitate talia faciunt homines. Augustine: sicut est aliquando
misericordia punicns, ita and crudelitas parcens. Valentinianus, Theodosius and
Arcadius, in lege tertia, Cod. Theod de defensorib. Civit. Removeantur
patrocinia, quae favore^ reis and auxiliu^ sacinovosis impertinendo, maturari
scelera faciunt. Totilas apud Procop. Got. 2. Peccare and prohibere poenas
peccantium in pari pono. Joh. 4. 2. Exodus 34 6. Number. 14. 18. Romans 2. 8.
: Add, that we are enjoined to love our enemies after the example of God, who
makes his Sun to shine upon the bad. Yet the same God executes punishment,
even in this life, upon some bad ones, and hereafter will severely punish all.
Whereby is also answered whatsoever is wont to be alleged here out of the
precepts of Christian lenity. For God is called gentle, merciful, and long
suffering: Yet do the Holy Scriptures set forth in sundry places the anger of
the same God against the obstinate Vide hac de re Cyrillum lib. 5. cont. Julian.
, and his will to punish the ungodly: And the Magistrate is ordained the
Minister of this wrath Moses is commended for his exceeding Romans 13. 4.
meekness: yet this same Moses punished the guilty, and that with death We are
often bid to imitate the meekness and patience of Christ: yet Christ (...) he,
who did inflict most heavy judgments, Mat. 21. 44. 22. 7. Luke 19. 12, 14, 27.
Chrysostom. ad Romans 14. narratis malis ierosoly mo rum Christu^ esse qui haec
secerit, audi ipsum praeci^entem, tum per parabolas, tum aperte and exserte.
upon the rebellious Jews, an^ will at the day of judgment condem^ the wicked
according to their desert^ Their Masters lenity was followed (...) the
Apostles, who did nevertheless man use of the power Chryso^ 1 Cor. 4. 21.
Interficiam, mutilabo? Est enim ut lenitatis, (...) severitaus spiritus. Vide
and Augustine. de sermon. Dom. in mo^ lib. 1. and alios quoscitat Gratian. 23. 8.
given them from above for the chastisement of ungod^men, as we read in
several 1 Cor. 4. 21. 1 Cor. 5. (...) 1 Timothy 1. 20.
places.

XXIV. The fourth Objection answered.
THe fourth place, which is objected is, Recompense to no man evil for Romans
12. 17, 18. etc.
evil. Provide things honest in the sigh^ of all men. If it be possible, as
much (...) lies in you, live peaceably with all me^ Dearly beloved, avenge
Tertul. de pat. Quid mibi cum ultione, cujus modum regere non possum per
impatientia^ dol^ris?
not your selves but rather give place unto wrath, for (...) is written,
Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord. Therefore if thi^ enemy
hunger, feed him: if he thirs^ give him drink; for in so doing thou shall heap
coals of fire on his head. Be August. Epist. 154. Hinc autem dictum est, non
resistamu^ malo, ne nos vindicta delectet, quae alieno malo ^aimum pascit.
not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good. But here also the same
Answer offers it self, which was given above. For at what time it was said by
God, Vengeance is mine, I will repay, at the same time were capital judgments
exercised, and Laws written concerning Wars. Moreover, benefits are commanded
to be done (even then) to enemies, being their own Countrymen. Exodus 23. 4.
(...).
These things notwithstanding, there were, as we have said, both capital
punishments, and just Wars upon the Israelites themselves. Wherefore, the same
words or the like precepts, though of larger extent, are not now neither to be
forced to such a sense: the less, because the division of Chapters is not from
the Apostles, nor their age, but of much later time, for the more distinct
reading, and easy allegation of the text. So, the beginning of the 13. to the
Romans, Let every Soul be subject to the higher powers, and that which follows,
was continued with those foregoing precepts against revenge. Now, in this
dissertation Paul says, the public powers are Ministers of God, to execute
wrath (i. e. punishment) upon them that do evil: therein most plainly
distinguishing between vengeance for the public good (which is administered in
behalf of God, and is to be referred to the vengeance reserved to God;) and
that revenge for private satisfaction, which he forbad in the former words.
For, if you will have that vengeance also which is expected for the public
good, comprehended in that ininterdict, what will be more absurd, than for the
Apostle, when he had said we must abstain from capital judgments, presently to
add, The public powers are ordained of God for this end, to exact punishments
in his stead?

XXV. The fifth, sixth and seventh Objections answered.
THe fifth place which some make use of is in the second Epistle to the
Corinthians: Though we walk in the 2 Cor. 10. 3, (...).
flesh, we do not War after the flesh: For the weapons of our warfare are (...)
Chrysostomus hoc loco intelligit, opes, gloriam, potentiam, eloquentiam,
solertia^, ^sationes, as^tationes, sallacias.
carnal, but mighty through God (...) the pulling down of strongholds, etc.
Bu^ this place makes nothing to the matter. For both the antecedents and
consequents do show, that by the name of flesh, Paul understands here the weak
constitution of body, which came under their eyes, and in respect of which he
was contemned. Hereunto Paul opposes his weapons, that is, the power given
him, as an Apostle, to subdue the refractory, such as he used upon Elymas, upon
the incestuous Corinthian, upon Hymeneus and Alexander. This power, he says,
is not carnal, that is, weak: yea on the contrary, he asserteth it to be most
mighty. What is this to the right of capital punishments, or of War? Yea, on
our side, because the Church at that time was destitute of aid from the public
powers, Therefore had God raised up, for her defense, that prodigious power,
which began afterward to fail about the time when Christian Emperors were
given the Church, even as Manna ceased, when the Hebrew people were come into
the fruitful Land. That which is alleged, Ephesians. 6. 11.
sixthly, out of the Epistle to the Ephesians, Put on the whole Armor of God,
that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil: for we wrestle
not against flesh and blood, (supply, only, after the Hebrew phrase) but
against principalities, etc. This place, I say, speaks of the fight which
belongs to Christians, as they are Christians, not, which they may have common
with other men, upon certain occasions. The place of James which is urged,
seventhly, From Iam. 4. 1.
whence come Wars and fightings among you? come they not hence, even of your
lusts that War in your members? etc. This conteins nothing universal: only it
says, the Wars and fights, whereby the dispersed Hebrews were at that time
miserably dashed to pieces, and beaten one by another (some part of which sad
story is to be seen in Antiq. l. 18. cap. 12. and lib. seq.
Josephus) had their rise from causes not commendable: a thing which comes to
pass in our days also, as we see with grief Divitis hoc ^tium est auri. nec
bello suc^, Fagious asta bat^ ^phus ante dapes. T^bul. Lucan (...) O prodigia
(...), nunquam (...) con^ pa^ tu. etc. Cic. de fi^ 1. Ex capioitalibus odia,
dissilia, discordiae, seditiones, bella nascuntur. Mar^, Tyr us. Nunc omnia
bellis plena: ubique enim oberrant cupiditat^, and per omnes terras excitant
appetitum rerum alienarum. Dioge^ dictum huc pertinet: Non enim ex his qui
polentam edunt, (...) sures existunt, aut bellorum auctores. Hicronymus
adversus Jovinianum 2. Diogenes tyrannos and sub^rsores urbium bellaqut (...)
hostilia, vel civilia, non pro simplici victu olerum pomorunique, (...) pro
carn um and ^pularum deliciis asserit oxcitari. Polybius: (...) mus necessariis
contentus, also ad saptendum Magistro non eget.
. As for that which was spoken to Peter, They that take the sword shall perish
by the sword, seeing it properly pertains not to War considered in common, but
to private War (for even Christ himself gives this reason, why he forbad or
neglected the defense of himself, because his Kingdom was not of this world) it
shall be more rightly handled in its own place.

XXVI Of the opinion of the ancient Fathers. The first Observation.
WHen the question is about the sense of a writing, both the following
practice, and the authority of wise men is wont to have much value. This is a
good rule in the interpretation of holy Scripture. For it is not probable, that
the Churches founded by the Apostles, did either suddenly, or all of them
depart from those things, which the Apostles having briefly written, had
explained more largely by word of mouth, or also introduced into the practice
and use of Christians. Now, our opponents that fight against Wars, usually draw
out unto their aid, some speeches of the ancient Christians: to which I have
three things to say. The first is this: No more can be collected out of those
speeches, than the private opinion of the speakers, not the public judgment
of the Churches. It is moreover to be noted, that the Authors of those sayings
love to go single, for the most part, and to teach somewhat of a higher strain,
than others; namely, Origin and Tertullian; who yet are not very constant to
themselves. For the same Origin says, God has given us a lesson in the Bees,
That just and orderly Wars may be waged amongst men, if necessity require. And
the same Tertullian says, That it is good when Offenders are punished no man
denies Idem Tertul. de anima. Quis non praeserat saeculi ^ustitiam, quam and
Apostolus non seustra gladio accinctum accinctum, que pro homine saeviendo
religiosa est? Et ad Procons. Scapula: Non te terremus, qui nec time^us. Sed
velim ut omnes salvos sacere possimus, monendo (...). Potes and officio
jurisdictionis tue fangi, and humanitatis meminisse, vel quia and vos sub
gladio estis.
. And he is at a stand concerning Warfare; for in his De Idolatria, he
proposech the question, Whether Christians may turn Soldiers, and Soldiers
Christians; Where he seems to incline to the opinion against War. But in his De
corona militis, when he had disputed some things against warfare, presently he
distinguishes those that were Soldiers before their Baptism, from others that
after Baptism enter into Arms. Plainly, says he, their case is otherwise, whom
Christian Religion found out after they were engaged in the profession of Arms,
as the Soldiers whom John admitted to his Baptism; as the most faithful
Centurions, whom Christ commends, and whom Peter instructs. Provided, that
after their receiving of the faith Distinctionem quam hic de militia affert,
alibi ad nuptias applicat, tum lib. de Monogamia, tum exhortatione castitatis.
and signing it, they forsake the War, as many have done; or else, by all means
beware, they commit no offense against God. His opinion therefore was, that
they continued Soldiers after Baptism: which certainly they would not have
done, had they understood warfare to have been forbidden by Christ; no more
than South-sayers, Magicians, and other professors of unlawful Tertul. de
idolatria. Ad ecclesiam non admittuntur, qui arts exercent, quas Dei
disciplina non recipit. Aug. de fid. and op. Meretrices and histriones and
quilibet alii publica turpitudinis professores, nisi solutus aut diruptis
tatibus vinculis, ad Christi sacramenta non permittuntur accedere. De histrione
exemplum vide apud Cyprianum Ep. 65.
Arts, were permitted after Baptism to remain in their Art formerly professed.
In the same Book, praising a certain Soldier, and one that was a Christian, he
spares not to exclame, and style him, O militem in Deo gloriosam!
a Soldier glorious in God.

XXVII. The second Observation.
OUr second Observation is, That the Christians have either disallowed or
avoided serving in the Wars, by reason of circumstances and condition of the
times, which would scarce permit Military orders to be executed without some
acts repugnant to the Christian Law. In the Letters of Dolabella to the
Ephesians, extant in Josephus, we see the Jews requested immunity from
expeditions of War; because in such a mixture with strangers, they were not
able to keep their legal rites with due observance: and because they were
constreined to carry Arms, and make long marches upon the Sabbath days. For
which causes, they obtained a dismission from L. Lentulus, as the same Josephus
shows. He declares in another place, that when the Jews were commanded to
depart the City of Rome, some of them were listed, others punished for their
refusal out of a reverence toward their own Country-Laws; for those reasons
which we have mentioned: unto which sometimes a third was added, because they
had a necessity imposed on them to fight against their own Country men. But, to
take arms against those of their own Nation was great impiety, to wit, when
their Country men were persecuted, for observing the Laws of their Fathers.
Nevertheless as often as the Jews could eschew these incommodities, they bare
arms, eve^ under foreign Kings; but, Joseph. 11. Historiae ant quae.
persisting in their Fathers Ordinances, and living according to their
prescript: which they were wont to secure themselves of, by agreement
aforehand, as the same Josephus testifies. To these hazards (...) those most
like, which Tertullian objecteth against serying in the Wars in his time: The
ensign of Christ has (...) Lib. de Idol.
agreement with the ensign of the dev^ nor the oath of God with that of man for
the Soldiers were made to swear by the Gods of the Gentiles, J^ Mars, and the
rest. Again: shall a Christian Lib. de cor. miluis.
keep watch for the Temples, whi^ he has renounced, and eat there when the
Apostle will not permit him? s^ he guard those evil spirits by night whom he
has exorcised by day? a little after: How many other great off^ces may be
viewed in the Camp-Offices which must needs be interpreted transgressions of
our Law?

XXVIII. The third Observation.
THirdly we note, that the Christians of the first times were enflamed with so
great ardour to undertake all things which were most excellent, that they often
embraced divine Counsels for commands. The Christians (says Athenagoras) do
not go to law with them that by violence take away their goods. Salvian says,
it is the will of Christ, that we let go the things ab ut which is any
controversy, that we may be acquitted of the suit. But this, so generally
taken, is perhaps a matter of Counsel, and of a more sublime and perfect way of
life Council. Carth. 4. Episcopus nec provocatus de rebus tran^ litiget. Ad^ A
bros l. 2. Off. c. 21. and Grego^. M. l. 2. Ind. 11. Epist. 58.
, but not under any precise command. In like manner, very many of the ancients
disapprove all oaths, without exception; yet Paul, in a matter of great
consequence, used an oath. Tatian speaks of a certain Christian that refused
the praetorship: and says Tertullian, a Christian loves not to be made an
Edile. So Lactantius will not let a just man (such he would have every
Christian) go to War: neither would he have him go to Sea. And how many of the
old Doctors dehort Christians from Marriage? All which particulars, suppose
they be laudable, excellent, very acceptable to God, yet are they not required
at our hands by the necessity of any Law. And this is sufficient for the
solution of objections.

XXIX. A Confirmation of the lawfulness of War, out of the Ancients.
NOw, that we may confirm our doctrine; first there are not wanting to us
VVriters, and those of the more ancient sort, who think both capital
punishments, and Wars which depend thereon, may lawfully be used by
Christians. For Clemens of Alexandri^ says, A Christian, if he be called to
govern, will be like Moses, a living La^ unto his subjects, and he will render
(...) the good rewards, to the evil punishments. And elsewhere describing (...)
habit of a Christian, he says, it becom^ him to go barefoot, unless perhaps he
be a Soldier. In the Vid^tur scrip^usis liber fin ente sae^ulo secundo.
Constitutions L. 7. c. 3.
which bear the name of Cleme^ Romanus, we read thus: All kill^ is not
unlawful, but only of the innocent yet is that which is just reserved only
(...) the Magistrates. But, private authorities being laid aside, let us come
to the public authority of the Church which ought to be of greatest weight I
say then, that the Church never rejected, nor excommunicated any for serving in
the Wars; Which yet oug^ to have been done, and would have been done, if War
had been repugnan^ to the new Testament. In the Constitutions L. 8. C. 22.
now cited, that writer speaking of such as anciently were wont to be admitted
to Baptism, or rejected from it, says: Let a Soldier requiring Baptism be
taught to abstein from injuries and oppressions: to be content with his wages.
If he observe these things, let him be admitted. Tertullian in his Apologetick
speaking in the name of Christians; We go to Sea, and to War C. 42. C. 37.
in your Company. A little before he had said: We are strangers, and yet we
have filled all places, your Cities, Islands, Castles, Towns, Councils, yea
your Camps also. In the same Book he had related, how by the prayers of the
Christian Soldiers a shower of Rain was obtained from Heaven to refresh the
Army of Marcus Vide and Xiphilinum de hac historia.
Aurelius Emperor. In his De corona he says, That Soldier that threw away
his Garland was more constant than his other Brethren; and shows, that he had
many Christian Fellow Soldiers. Moreover, some Soldiers were not wanting, who
having suffered torments for Christ, even to the death, received from the
Church the same honor with the rest of Martyrs; Among whom are remembered the
three Companions of Paul Add militem quendam a Cornelio Baptizatum, cujus apud
Adone^ mentito.
; Cerialis under Decius, Marinus under Valerian, fifty under Aurelian; Victor,
Maurus, and Valentinus the Master of the Soldiers under Maximianus; Marcellus
the Centurion about the same time; Sevorian under Licinius. Concerning
Laurentinus and Ignatius Africans, these are the words of Cyprian, Being
Soldiers in the secular warfare, but spiritual Soldiers too, whilst they get
the victory over the Devil by the confession of Christ, they have obtained, by
their passion, victorious palms and glorious Crowns of their Lord.

XXX. Further proof out of Ecclesiastical History.
FRom the former testimonies it is evident, what opinion the community of
Christians had of War, even before the Emperors were Christian. If, in those
times, the Christians were not willingly present at capital punishments, it may
not seem a wonder, when for the most part Christians were the persons
condemned. Add hereunto, that in other matters also, the Roman Laws were
harder than Christian lenity would suffer, as appears sufficiently, though we
instance only in the Cujus asperita^em mitigavit Adrianus Imp. ut apud
Spart^anum est. Asperis Romanorum legibus addi possunt quae servum nisi tortum
testimonium dicere vetant.
Silenian Decree of Senate. But, after Constantine began both to approve and
advance the Christian Religion, capital punishments did not therefore cease.
Yea Constantine himself, among other Laws, made one about sowing up paricides
in a sack: which Law is extant in the Tode Tit. de iis qui par. vel lib.
occiderunt.
: though otherwise in exacting punishments he was so gentle, that he is accused
of too much Zonaras: Clementem se os^ndebat iis qui pravam vit^m deseruerant,
quod diceret abscindendum membrum agrotans ac putridum, ne sana contagio
corrumpat, non id quod aut sanatum jam sit, tue (...). Vide and Eusebium. S.
cut de nimia Constantini Christianos, ita de (...) aldi regis questos Dan^s a
pud Saxonem Historicum invenias.
lenity by some Historians. Besides, He had in his Army very many Christians,
as the Histories do teach us, and inscribed on his Ensign the name of Christ.
And from that time was the military oath changed into that form, extant in
Vegetius: By God and Christ, and the Holy Spirit, and by the Majesty of the
Emperor, next after God to be loved and honored by mankind. And at that time,
among so many Bishops, of whom many had suffered very much for Religion, we do
not read of any one, who deterred either Constantine wholly from capital
punishments, and from War, or the Christians from serving in the War, by
threatening them with the wrath of God for the same: when yet there were very
many most rigid keepers of Discipline, and such as would not dissemble or pass
by any thing that pertained either to the Office of the Emperors or of other
men. Such a Prelate was Ambrose in the time of Theodosius, whose words are
these: It is no sin to be a Sermon. 7.
Soldier; but, for a Soldier to fight for the spoil only, that is a sin. And
in another place: Valor, which either in De Offic. l. 1. c. 27.
War defends our Country from Barbarians, or at home defends the weak, or our
friends from robbers, is full of justice. This Argument is to me of so much
weight, that I require no more. Yet am I not ignorant, that Bishops Augustine.
Officium sacerdotis est intervenire pro reis. In ejus Epistolis multa sunt
hujus bonitatis specimina.
often, and the Christian people, by the^ intercessions averted punishments,
especially the capital ones: and, that (...) custom was introduced, that
persons who had fled unto the Church Vide Chrysostomum 16. de Statuis. Council.
Aurelian. c. 3. legem Wisigothorum l. 6. tit. 5. 16. 9. tit. 2. 3.
and taken Sanctuary, were not rendered without promise given to save their
lives: and, that at Easter L. Nemo, C. de Episc. audientia.
, they should be delivered out of prison, whom their crimes had said there:
But, whosoever, shall advisedly consider these, and such like things, will
find, they are indeed signs o^ Christian goodness, taking all occasion of
showing mercy, not arguments of a mind condemning all sentences of death upon
capital offenders: wherefore, those benefits, and intercessions too, were
tempered and limited by certain Quas vide apud Cassiadorum. 11. 40. etc. inter
alia de immunitate Ecclesiastica in Decreto.
exceptions both of times and places.

XXXI. The twelfth Canon of the Nicene Council objected and answered.
SOme do here object against us the twelth Canon of the Nicene Council, which
is to this effect: Such Simeon Magister in ejus Canonis epitome: Qui vi
adhibita vis^ sunt restit isse, sed ab impietate victi sunt, and militiam
resumsere, december per annos abstineantur. Eundem hujus Canonis sensum exprimunt
Balsamo and Zonaras and Russinus l. 10. c. 6.
as have been called by grace, that have showed their first love and faith in
throwing off their belt, and have afterward like Dogs returned to their vomit;
some giving money and bribes to return into their place; let them lie among the
penitents ten years, after they have been three years among the Hearers. But in
them all must be observed the sincerity and measure of their repentance. For,
they that by fear, and tears, and patience, and good works do show their
conversion to be without hyprocrisy, after they have fulfilled their appointed
time of hearing, shall be admitted to the prayers of the Church, and afterward
the Bishop may entertain some favorable thoughts concerning them. But, they
that have indifferently and slightly taken their fall, and think it sufficient
to their conversion, if they have but entered into the Church, shall without any
dispensation fulfill the whole time appointed. The time it self of thirteen
years is evidence enough, that no light or ambiguous fault, but some grievous
and undoubted crime is here meant. And certainly it is no other than Quod
principale crimen, summus saeculi reatus dicitur Tertulliano de Idolatria:
Gravissimum and extremum delictum Cypriane, Ep. 12.
Idolatry. For the times of Licinius mentioned asore in the eleventh Canon,
ought to be understood in this: as it often happens, that the sense of the
Canons subsequent depends upon the precedent; for example, see the eleventh
Canon of the Eliberin Council. Now Licinius, as Eusebius relates, cashiered the
Soldiers that would not sacrifice Sulpitius Severus: Sane tum Licinius qui
adversus Constantinum de Imperio certavit, milites suos litare praeceperat:
abeuntes militia rejiciebat. Ob hanc causam Valentinianus, quia Imperator
postea sactus est, and sub Juliano absecit cingulum. Non dissimile est quod
Victor is icensis narrat, mullos sub Hanericho R. militiam temporalem abjicisse
quia cum Arianismo connexa.
to his Gods: which also Julian after did: and therefore Victricius with others
are read to have cast off the Belts for Christ's sake. So, in for^ times, had
one thousand one hundred and four likewise done in Armenia who are remembered in
the Martyroso gies; and, in Egypt, Menna and H^sychius. And so, in the times of
Licinius many cast off their Belts, of whom were Arsacius, named among the
Confessors and Auxentius, afterward made Bishop of Mopsvestia. Wherefore they
who touched in conscience had once left the Army, had no access unto (...)
again, under Licinius, but by denial of the Christian Faith. Which denial
because it was so much the more grievous, by how much their former a^ did
testify their greater knowledge (...) the divine Law, therefore are these
Apostates more grievously punished the those mentioned in the former Canon who
without peril either of life or fortunes had renounced Christianity. But to
interpret the alleged Canon of Warfare in general, is against all reason: for
the History plainly shows, They, that had forsaken the Army under Licinius, and
returned not unto it during his reign, lest they should violate the Christian
Faith, had their choice given them afterward by Constantine, whether they would
be free from serving in the War, or else return again into their places: which,
without question, many did.

XXXII. Leo's Epistle objected and answered.
SOme do also object an Epistle of Leo, which says: It is contrary to the
Ecclesiastical rules, after repentance, to return unto the secular warfare.
But, we must know, in penitents, as well as in the Clerks and Monks, was
required a Christian life, not of an ordinary strein, but of a singular kind of
purity; that they might be as great examples Leo Epist. 9. ad Rust. Illicitorum
v^niam potistantem oportet etia^ ^ultis licitis abstinere. In Epistola
Episcoporum ad Ludovicum Regem legimus (...) Quilibet tanto a se licita debet
abscindere, quanto se meminit and illioita perpetrasse. In Capit. Calvi: Tanto
quisque masora quaerat bonorum operum lucra, quanto graviora sibi intulit damna
per culpam:
for correction of manners, as they had been before of transgression. Likewise,
in the most ancient customs of the Church, commonly called the Apostolical
Canons, that by this sacred name they might be the more reverently received, in
the 82. Canon it is enjoined: That no Bishop, Presbyter or Deacon follow the
War, and retein at once a Roman office and a sacerdotal Function. For let
Caesar have the things that are Caesar 's, and God the things that are God's.
Whereby it is manifest, Warfare was not interdicted such Christians as did not
aspire unto the honor of the Clergy. More than this, they also were Eusebius
demonstrationum l. 1. duplicem describit Christianerum vitam, aliam (...),
aliam inferiorem, qui in hac sunt eos inter alia iis qui jusle militant agendo
indicare.
excluded from the Clergy, who after Baptism had meddled either with
Magistracies, or Offices of War, (...) may be seen in the Epistles of Syrici^
and Innocentius, and in the Council (...) Toledo. The Clergy, we may be su^
were chosen, not out of ordinary Christians, but of those that had given
testimony of a most exact conversation. Add, that the military, and some of
the civil offices brought with them a perpetual obligation; but, it was not fit
the the persons devoted to the Holy Ministry, should be diverted from it Vide
Canone^ Concilii Moguntini apud Gratianum, titulo, Ne clerici vel monachi.
by any other daily care and labor. Wherefore the 6. Canon too ordains, That
no Bishop, Presbyter or Deacon, administ^ any secular charge: the 80. That
(...) intrude not himself into public administrations: and the 6. among the
African Canons, That he undertake nor the procuration Vide Epist. Hieronymi ad
Nepotianum.
of other men's affairs, or the defense of causes: and Cyprian judges, it is
unlawful such persons should be appointed In Epistola ad Presbyteros diaconos
and plebem Furnis consistentem. Add l. Generaliter, c. de Episc. and Clericis.
Guardians.

XXXIII. The last proofs out of Church-story.
BUt for our opinion we have the express judgment of the Church in the first
Council of Arles, held under Constantine; the 3. Canon whereof determines thus:
It seems good unto us to keep them from Communion, who throw down their Arms
in peace: that is, who forsake the War in the times when the Church is free
from persecution; for the Christians understood this by the name of peace
Tertullianus idolat^ia: Imo quomodo etiam in pa^ militab (...) Idem de fuga
persecutionum: Nostrae: ^ci quod est bellum quam persicu^? Cyprianus Epistela
10. Quando ipsa ante (...) aler nostra Ecclesia pacem de misericordia Domini
prior sumscrit. Epist. 22. Cum Dominus coepe^it ipsi Ecclesiae pacem dare.
Epist. 31. Ecclesiae pacem sust. nendam, i. e. exspectandam. De lapsis,
Disciplinam pax longa corruperat. Sulpitius Severus: Antonino Pio imperante pax
Ecclesiis fuit. Mox Interfectus deinde a inis 38 pax christianis suit. E^n
Constantini aetate: Exinde tranquillis rebus paceperfruimur. Et initio
historiae. Vexalionesque pop. Christiani and mox pacis tempora.
, as appears in Cyprian and others. Add the example of the Soldiers under
Julian, Christians of no mean proficiency, being ready to bear witness to
Christ even to the death; of whom says Ambrose, The Emperor Julian, though an
Apostate, had Christian Soldiers under his command. When he gave them the
word, Draw out for the defense of the Commonwealth, they obeyed him: but when
the word of command was, Draw out against the Christians, then they
acknowledged the Emperor of Heaven. And of the same resolution was the
Thebaean Legion long before, which in the time of the Emperor Diocletian had
received the Christian Religion from the hand of Zabdas the thirtieth Bishop of
Jerusalem, and showed forth an example of Christian constancy and patience
memorable to all posterity, which we shall relate hereafter. Here it may
susfice to set down that speech of theirs, which with solid brevity expresses
the Duty of a Christian Soldier: We offer against any enemy in the world these
our hands, which we think impiety to embrue with the blood of innocent men.
These our hands are expert to fight against wicked men and enemies, they know
not how to cut in pieces pious men and those of our own Country. We have not
forgotten that we took up Arms for our Countrymen, not against them. We have
always fought for justice, for piety, for the safety of the innocent: these
have been hitherto the price of our perils. We have fought for Faith; which,
how shall we keep with yon (they speak to the Emperor) if we preserve it not
with our God? Basil, of the more ancient Christians, thus, The slaughters made
in War, our Ancestors accounted not for slaughters, having them excused who
draw the sword on behalf of piety and virtue.

XXXIV. That all private War is not unlawful, by natural Law.
THat some private War may be lawfully Ex. l. c. c. 3.
waged, as to the Law of Nature, appears sufficiently by what has been said
above, when we showed, it is not repugnant to the Law of Nature to repel force
by force, and defend ones self from injury. But happily some may think it now
unlawful, since the constitution of public Courts of Justiee; for although
these Courts be not from nature, but from humane Ordinance, yet seeing it is
much more honest and becoming, and more conducible to man's quietness, that the
matter should be tried before an indifferent Judge, than that the parties
themselves interessed, who too often favor themselves overmuch, should execute
what they think right, by force; equity and natural reason dictate to us, that
it is our duty to observe so laudable an Institution. Paulus the Lawyer says:
It is not to be granted to the parties to do that which may be done publicly
by the Magistrate, L. non est de R. 1 Cass. l. 4. Var. Epist. 4.
lest it be an occasion of making a greater tumult. And the King Theodoricus
Eundem vide in Edicto c. 10. and 124.
: Hence it is, that the reverence of the Laws was found out, that nothing might
be done by force, nothing by ones own impulse. For what difference between the
clamness of Peace and the confusion of War, if controversies be determined by
force. The Laws call it force, as often as any man requires that which L.
Exstat. D. quod metus.
he thinks due unto him, not by course of Law. Certainly, it must be confessed,
the license permitted before the constitution of Courts of Justice, is much
restrained since. And yet since, it sometimes takes place, namely, where
public Justice is wanting: for the Law forbidding a man to seek his own
otherwise than by course of Law, ought commodiously to be understood with this
clause, where Law and judgment may be had. Now, this is wanting either at the
instant, or for continuance: at the Serve. ad 11. Aeneid. Injecere manum parcae.
T^axerunt debitum sibi. Et sermon usus est iuris, nam manus injectio dicitur,
quoties nulla iudicis autoritate, rem nobis debitum vindicamus.
instant, as, where the Judge cannot be waited for, without certain peril and
loss: for continuance, either by right, or by fact. By right, if one be in
places unpossest, as on the Sea, in a desert, in void Islands, and if there be
any other places wherein there is no Government: by fact, if the Subjects do
not acknowledge the Judge, or the Judge openly has rejected the trial of such
a cause. That we have said, all private War is not repugnant to natural right,
even since the constitution of Courts of Justice, may also be made apparent
from the Law given the Jews. where God speaks thus by Moses. If a thief be
found breaking up, and be smitten that he die, there shall no blood be shed
from him. If the Sun be risen upon Ex. 22. 2. 3. Molin. disp. 100. sect. dubium
vero.
him, there shall be blood shed for him. Truly, this Law, so accurately
distinguishing, seems, not only to induce impunity, but withal to explain
natural right: nor seems it to be grounded in any peculiar divine mandate,
but in common equity: Whence we see other Nations also have followed the same.
That of the 12. Tables is notable, drawn no doubt, from the old Solonis verba:
Si quis de die quod plus quinquaginta drachmu valeleat, suretur, eum jus sit ad
undecim viros deduci; quod si quis noc^ vel minimum quid suretur, etiam liceat
vel occidere.
Attic Law: If a thief steal by night, and be killed, he is justly killed. So,
by the Laws of all Nations, whom we have known, is he judged guiltless, who
has by arms defended his life against a violent assault. This so manifest
consent is testimony enough, that here is nothing contrary to natural right.

XXXV. Nor by the Law Evangelical. Objections proposed.
COncerning the more perfect, voluntary divine Law, that is, the Evangelical,
there is more difficulty. That God, who has more right over our lives than we
have our selves, might have required of us so much patience, as to lay down our
lives, and, when we are brought in danger by the assault of a private person,
rather choose to be killed than to kill, I do not doubt. But, the question is,
whether it has pleased him to oblige us so far, or no. On the affirmative
part, are usually brought two places, which Mat. 5. 39. Romans 12. 19. Ubi Latina
versio habet, Non vos defendentes.
we alleged before upon the general question. But I say unto you, resist not the
injurious person: and Revenge not your selves, dearly beloved. There is a third
place in those words of Christ Mat. 26. 52.
to Peter, Put up thy Sword into the sheath; for they that take the Sword,
shall perish by the Sword. Some add unto these, the example of Christ who dyed
for his Romans 5. 8, 10.
enemies. Nor are there wanting among the old Doctors, who although they
disapproved not public Wars, were nevertheless of opinion that private defense
was forbidden. We have above set down some places of Ambrose for War; and more
of Austin, and more clear, known to all. Yet has the same Ambrose said: And
perhaps therefore Lib. 10. in Luc.
the Lord said to Peter, showing two Swords, It is enough, intimating it was
lawful until the Gospel came, which instructs us in the truth, as the Law did
in Justice. The same Father elsewhere: A Christian if he fall upon (...) armed
thief, cannot strike him again De offic. 3. 3.
that strikes; lest while he defends his safety, he offend against piety. And
Augustine has said: I do not indeed reprehend the Law which permits suc^
Lib. 1. de Lib. arb. c. 5. Epist. 154. ad Publicolum. Cap. 43. and 55.
(thieves and other violent assaulters) to be slain, but how to defend those
the slay them I do not find. And elsewhere: As to killing of men, lest one be
killed, I do not like that course, unless perhaps one be a Soldier, or bound
by public Office, that he does not this for himself but others, having
received lawful power. And that Basil was of the same mind, appears
sufficiently out of his second Epistle to Amphilochius Add Conc'l.
Aurelianensis canonem citat. a Gratiano c. ult. cause. 13. q. 2.
.

XXXV. The lawfulness of private defense confirmed.
BUt the opposite opinion, as it is more common, so it seems unto us more
true, that an obligation is not laid upon us to be so patient. For we are
commanded in the Gospel to love our neighbor as our selves, not above our
selves: yea where equal evil is imminent, we are not forbidden to provide for
our selves Cassiodorus de Amic. Sane nullus aliquo praecepto, vel aliqua
ratione tenetur, salutem animae proximi perditione animae suae; aut corporis
ejus liberationem, citra spem perpetuae salutis, proprii Corporis interitu
procurare.
rather than for others, as we showed above by the authority of Paul explaining
that rule of beneficence. Some perhaps urge against us thus: Although I may
prefer my own good before my neighbor's, yet this has not place in unequal
goods: wherefore my temporal life is rather to be deserted than the invader
permitted to fall into eternal damnation. But thus it may be answered: He that
is invaded has oftentimes himself also need of time to repent, or has some
reason to think so; and that the assailant too may possibly find some space for
repentance before his death. Besides, in a moral judgment, that peril seems
not fit to be regarded, into which a man casts himself, and from which he may
free himself, if he will. Certainly, some of the Apostles, even to the last
times, Christ himself seeing and knowing it, scem to have made their journys
armed with the sword: and that other Galileans traveling out of their Country
toward the City did the same, (...) reason of danger on the way from Robbers,
we earn out of Josephus; Wh has also delivered the same of the (...) senes,
men most innocent and harmele^ Hence it was, that when Christ said Luke 22. 36.
the time was at hand, when he the wanted a Sword should sell his garment and
buy one, presently the Apost^es answered (for there were non^ but Apostles in
that Company:) they had among them two Swords. Moreover, that which Christ
said, although in truth it conteins not any precept, but is a proverb,
signifying very great dangers to be at hand, as appears plainly Verse. 35.
by the opposition of the first (...) which was safe and prosperous; yet (...)
it such, as is manifestly taken from the usual custom, and which the Apostles
esteemed lawful. And surely (...) were not lawful to have Swords (they are the
words of Cicero) if it be not lawful in any wise to make ^se of them.

XXXVI. The Objections answered.
THat precept of Christ, not to resist him that does injury, is not more
universal, than that which follows, Give to every one that asks: which yet
admits of an exception; So that our selves be not too much burdened: yea, to
that precept of giving, no restriction is added, but it is restrained only by
the sense of equity, whereas the precept of not resisting has its explication
adjoined by the example of a blow on the cheek; that we may understand our
selves to be then precisely bound, in case the injury offered us be either a
blow on the cheek, or equal to it; for otherwise it had been fitter to say,
Resist not the injurious, but rather lose your life, than use your arms. In the
words to the Romans, Avenge not your selves: for so it is, (not Defend not your
selves:) as the (...). 1 Judith 2. and 2. 1. Luke 18. 7, 8. 21. 22. 2 These. 1.
8. 1 Pet. 2. 14. Romans 13. 4. 1 These. 4. 6.
word is used in other places, and here the connection manifestly shows: The
words are these, Recompense to no man evil for evil: a description of revenge,
not of defense, this. And Paul supports his precept with a place of
Deuteronomy, Vengeance is mine, I will repay: where the word in Hebrew,
translated Vengeance, has properly that signification, and the sense of the
place will admit no other. That speech of Christ to Peter, contains indeed a
prohibition of using the Sword, but not in the case of defense: neither had he
any need to defend himself: for Christ had spoken on behalf of his Disciples:
Suffer these to go away: that his saying might be fulfilled; Of those whom thou
Jo. 18. 8, 9.
have given me, have I lost none: (...) Christ; for he would not be defended.
Therefore he adds in John, this cause of his prohibition, Shall I not drink
(...) Vet. 11.
the cup which my Father has give^ me? and in Matthew he says, How then
should the Scriptures be fulfilled which say these things ought to be done?
Wherefore, Peter a man of a hot Spirit, was transported, itseems, with (...)
mind of revenging, not of defending his Master. Add, that he took arms against
those that came in the name (...) the public powers; Whom, whethe^ in any case
it be lawful to resist, is a peculiar question, to be handled by us hereafter.
That which the Lord says after, All they that take the sword, shall perish by
the sword, either is a proverb taken from vulgar use; whereby is signified,
that blood draws blood, and so the use of arms is never without peril: or, it
declares Quae Origenis, Theophylacti, Titi and Eu thymii sententia est.
, that we have no reason to prevent God in taking revenge, which he in his time
will duly exact: just as in the Apocalypse, He that kills with the sword, must
be killed with the sword: Here is the patience and the faith Apocal. 13. 10.
of the Saints. Wherewith agrees that of Tertullian: So bounteous a rewarder of
patience is God; that if you commit Adeo satis idoneus patientiae sequester
Deus: si injuriam deposuer is penes eum ultor est; si dolorem, medicus; si
mortem, resuscitator est: quantum patientiae licet, ut Deum habent debitorem.
Tertul.
your injury to him, he is a Revenger; if your grief, a Healer; if your death,
a Reviver. How great is the power of patience, to have God himself a Debtor to
it? And withal, in these words of Christ, seems to be contained a prophecy of
the revenge, which was to be executed upon the bloody Jews by the sword of the
Romans. To the example of Christ, who is said to have dyed for his enemies, it
may be answered, That it is true, all the actions of Christ are full of virtue,
and such as (so far as may be) it is laudable to imitate, and 'twill not want a
reward: yet are they not all of such a sort, that they either proceed from some
Law, or impose a Law on us. For, that Christ dyed for his enemies and the
wicked, was not determined by any Law, but by agreement as it were, and special
Covenant made with his Father: who, upon that condition, promised him not only
the highest glory, but a seed to endure for ever. Besides, Paul Es. 43. 10.
Romans 5. 7.
shows this to be a singular and unparalleld act of Christ: and Christ commands
1 Jo. 3. 16.
us to expose our lives to danger, not for all sorts of men, but for those that
are partakers of the same Discipline. As for the sayings produced out of
Christian writers, they seem partly to contein Counsel rather and a
commendation of a more excellent way, than any strict precept; and partly are
their own private opinions, not of the whole Church. For in the oldest Canons
Can. 45. c. si vero: etc. signif.
, which are called the Apostles excommunication is not denounced (...) against
him, who in a fray at the (...) stroke has slain his enemy, Ob nimium calorem.
for his too much heat and forwardness And Austin, whom we brought on the
Ambros. l. 10. in Luc. O domine, cur me emere subes gladium, qui ferire me
prohibes? Cur haberi praecipis, quem vetas promi? nist (...) ut sit parata
defenslo, non ultio necessa^.
other side, seems to go into this opinion, quaest. 84. in Exodus

XXXVIII. Public War solemn, or less Solemn.
Public War is either Solemn by the Law of Nations, or less Solemn. What I
here call solemn is commonly called just, in the same sense as a just Testament
is opposed to Codicils Ita inter cives erant quaedam matrimonia non justa, non
justi liberi. Paul. sent. l. 2. t. 19. Sic and libertas quaedam non justa. Sen.
de vit. bea. c. 24.
: not that it is not lawful for him that pleases to make Codicils, but because
a solemn Testament has, by the Civil Law, some peculiar effects. This is worth
our observation, seeing many misunderstanding the word just, conceive all Wars
to be condemned as unjust and unlawful, whereunto this appellation of just is
not agreeable. That War, according to the Law of Nations, may be solemn, two
things are requisite: first, that it be waged on both sides by his authority
who has the highest power in the Commonwealth: Secondly, that certain rites
be used, of which we shall speak in due place. One of these, because they are
both required, without the other, does not suffice. Public War less solemn,
may want those rites, and (...) waged against private persons, and ^ave for the
author any Magistrate. And truly, if the matter be considered without civil
Laws, it seems that every Magistrate has right to wage War, as for defense
of the people committed to his charge, so for the exercise of jurisdiction, if
he be opposed by force. But because by War the whole Commonwealth is
endangered, therefore by the Laws of all people almost, it is provided, that
War be not undertaken without the authority of him, whose power in the
Commonwealth is highest. There is exstant such a Law of Plato's Ult. de leg.
L. 3. D. adl. Jul. maj.
; and in the Roman Law, it is called treason in him, who without the command of
the Prince has waged War, or listed Soldiers and raised an Army. In the
Cornelian Law brought in by L. Cornelius Sylla it was, without the command of
the people. In Justinians Code is exstant a Constitution of Valentinian and
Valens: Nulli prorsue nobis insciis atque inconsultis quorumlibet armorum
movendorum copia tribuatur.
None have leave to take any arms without our knowledge and direction.
Pertinent is that of Austin Citat Gratian. c. 23. qu. 1. ex Lib. 22. c. 74.
cont. Faust. Apud Heb^aeos bellum omne quod speciali Dei sussu suscipitur,
vocatur Bellum potestatum.
: Natural order for preserving peace among men requires this, that (...)
thority and counsel in undertaking (...) should remain in the Princes. But,
(...) all sayings how universal soever (...) be interpreted by equity, so must
(...) Law. For first, there is no doubt, (...) that it is lawful for one having
juri^ction, by force of his Apparitors or (...) jeants to constrain a few
disobed^ persons, as often as there is no need (...) greater power to that
purpose, and (...) danger imminent to the Commonwealth. Again, if it be so
present (...) danger, that time will not admit of consultation with him, who
has sup^ power, here also necessity affords (...) exception. By this right
L. Pin^ Live. l. 39.
Governor of Enna a Garrison in (...) cily, having certain information that
(...) Townsmen were falling off to the (...) thaginians, making a slaughter of
then kept the Town. Without such necesity, to revenge the injuries which the
King neglects to pursue, a right of (...) ring is allowed to the Citizens by
the bolder pen of Vict. deju. belli, n. 9. Molin. disp. 100 sect. idem Vict.
Franciscus Victoria but his opinion is by others justly rejected.

XXXIX. Of War waged by inferior Magistrates.
IN such cases, wherein the lower powers have right to make War, the
Interpreters of Law do not agree, whether that War may be called public. Some
say, Yea Ajala deju. bell. l. 1. c. 2.
: some, No Innoc. c. olim de rest. spol. n. 8.
. Certain^y, such Wars are public, if by pub^ick we mean that which is made
by the right of the Magistrate; and therefore, they that in such a case oppose
themselves against the Magistrates fall into the punishments of persons
contumacious against Superiors. But if public be taken in the more excellent
signification for that which is solemn (as it is without controversy often taken)
those Wars are not public, because to the plenitude of that right, both the
judgment of the highest power, and other things are requisite. Nor am I moved
with this, that in such contention also they are wont to take the spoil of the
resisters and give it to the Soldier Livius D. loco.
: for this is not so proper to solemn War, but it may have place elsewhere Vct.
n. 29. Cajet. 2. 2. qu. 40. art. 1.
. And it may also happen, that in an Empire of larger extent, the inferior
powers may have power granted them to begin a War: in which case, the War is
supposed to be made by the highest Power; because, every one is judged author
of that which he gives another Commission to do. That is more Controver^
whether a conjecture of the will of the highest, where there is no mandate,
(...) sufficient. To me it seems not. For (...) suffices not to see, what
would be the pleasure of him that has the highe^ Power, if he were consulted
with in this conjuncture of affairs; but this is rather to be considered, what
he, where the matter admits delay, or is of doubtful deliberation, may desire
should be done without consulting with him, if a Law were to be made about it.
For, although in some particular fact the particular reason cease, which
moves the will of the Sovereign, yet the universal reason holds, which
requires dangers to be withstood. Which cannot be, if every Magistrate draw
unto himself the judgment thereof. Justly therefore Live. l. 48.
was C. Manlius accused by his Legates Or, Lieutenants.
, because without command of the Roman people he had made VVa^ upon the
Gallo-Grecians; for, albeit the Legions of the Galli had served in the Army of
Antiochus, nevertheless after the peace agreed on with Antiochus, whether that
injury were to be revenged upon the Gallo-Grecians, was not at the pleasure of
C. Manlius but of the people of Rome. That C. Caesar for carrying War against
the Germans, should be yielded up to the Germans, was the sentence of Cato; not
so much (as I conceive) regarding justice, as desiring to acquit the City from
the fear of an Usurper; for the Germans had given aid to the Gauls, enemies of
the Roman people, and therefore had no reason to complain of injury done them,
if the Romans had just cause of warring against the Gauls. And yet Caesar ought
to have been content with the expulsion of the Germans out of Gallia, the
Province committed to him, and not to pursue the Germans with War within their
own bounds, especially without any appearance of danger thence, unless he had
advised first with the people of Rome. So then, the Germans had no right to
require him to be given up into their hands, but the people of Rome had right
to punish him: just as the Carthaginians answered the Romans, Whether Saguntum
wa^ assaulted by private or public Counsel, Live. l. 31.
we conceive is not to be made the question; but this, whether it was assaulted
justly, or unjustly: for to our selves is an account to be given by our
Citizens, whether he did it of himself, or by Commission; With you this alone
is disputable, whether it vere a violation of the league or no. Cicero defends
the action both of Octavius and Decimus Brutus, who on their own heads took
Arms against Antonius. But, suppose Antony dese^ved hostile opposition, yet was
the judgment of the Senate and people of Rome to be waited for, whether it
were for the good of the Commonwealth to dissemble what was done, (...) to
revenge it; to come to conditions of peace, or go forth to War. For no man is
compelled to use his own right, which is often conjoind with hazard. Again,
suppose Antonius be declared an enemy, App. c. 4.
yet the deliberation was to be left to the Senate and people of Rome, by whose
conduct especially they would p ease to make the War. Thus the Rhodians
answered Cassius, when he demanded aid according to the league, that they would
send him aid if the Senate would command. Being admonisht by this example (and
we may meet with more) let us remember not to approve of all things, though
delivered by Authors of greatest name; for they often serve the times, or their
affections, and bend the rule as occasion requires? wherefore (...) must take
some pains in matters of this nature to clear the eye of our judgment, and
examine things thoroughly, and no^ rashly draw into example what may rather be
accounted capable of excuse, than worthy of our praise and imitation: Wherein
some fall into pernicious errors. Now whereas it has been said, that public
War is not to be waged unless by his authority who has the highest power, to
the understanding hereof, and of that question that is about solemn War, and so
to many other purposes, it will be necessary to understand what is that highest
Power, and who have it: and so much the more necessary, because in our age
learned men, every one having pursued that Argument rather according to the
exigence of present affairs, than according to the Truh, have rendered the
matter much more difficult, which of it self is not very easy.

XL. Wherein consists civil Power.
THe moral faculty of Governing a City Or, Common wealth.
, which is styled by the name of civil Power, is described in Dionysius
Halicarnessensis by three especial notes, a right of creating Magistrates, a
right of making and abolishing Laws, Servius ad 1. Aen. Omni ditione. Rectius
omni quam omnis: ut significet omni potestate, pace, le gibus, bello. Lib. 4.
Lib. 7. Lib. 2.
a right of decreeing War and Peace; elsewhere he adds a fourth, Courts of
justice; and elsewhere the care of Religion, and calling of assemblies. Others
Thucydides civitatem, quae vere civitas est, vooat, (...).
express themselves otherwise. But if one will make an exact partition, he
shall easily find all that pertains hither, so that nothing may be wanting or
superfluous. For the Governor of a City governs it partly by himself, partly
by others. By himself he is either conversant about universals, or about
singulars. About Universals, by making and abolishing Laws, as well about
sacred (so far as the care of them belongs unto the City) as about civil
affairs. This art is called by Aristotle architectal. The singulars about which
he is (...).
conversant, are either directly public, or private, yet in order to the
public. Directly public are Actions, as of Peace, War, Leagues; or Things, as
Tributes and the like: Wherein is comprehended also that eminent Dominion,
which the City has over the Citizens and their estates for the public use.
The Art about these is expressed in Aristotle by the general name political or
civil, and (...).
is also called the Art of consultation. Private things are such as are
controverted between party and party, which it concerns the public quiet to be
determined by public authority. And this Art is by Aristotle termed judicial.
The things done by another, are dispatched (...).
either by Magistrates, or by other procurators, to which number Ambassadors
are to be referred. And in these particulars consists the civil power.

XLI. What Power is Highest.
THat is called the Highest Power whose acts are not under the right of
another, so as to be made void at the pleasure of another humane will. When I
say of another, I exclude him who enjoys the highest Power (who may change
his own will) as also his Successor Cacheran Decis. pedem. 139. number. 6.
, who enjoys the same right, and therefore has the very same power. Let us
now see, in what subject this highest power is. There is a common subject, and
a proper subject: as the common subject of sight is the body, the proper is the
eye; so the common subject of the highest Power is a City, that is, a perfect
society. We exclude therefore people or Countries that have yielded up
themselves, or fallen to the dominion of another people, such as were the
Provinces of the Romans: for these are not by themselves a City, as now we take
the word, but less worthy members of some great City, as servants are members
of the family. Again it comes to pass, that several Nations or Countries have
one and the same head, which do nevertheless every one make up a perfect
society by themselves: for it is not in the moral body as in the natural; in
the natural, one cannot be the head of several bodies; but in the moral, the
same person, considered in a diverse relation, may be the head of bodies many
and distinct. Whereof this is a certain Argument, that the Royal Family being
exstinct, the Empire Vict. de ju. belli, n. 7.
returns to every people severally. So also it may happen, that more Cities may
be confederated one with another by a most close league, and make certain
System, as Strabo uses to speak and yet, not any one of them ceases (...)
retain the State of a perfect City: which is noted both by others, and by
Aristotle in more places than one. (...) then, let a City, so understood as we
have said, be the common subject of the highest Power: the proper subject is a
person, one or more, according to the (...) and customs of every Nation (...)
apud Galenum lib. 6. de placit. Hip. and Plat.
.

XLII. That the highest Power is (...) always in the people.
HEre is first to be rejected their opinion, who will have the highest Power
every where, and without exception, to be in the people, so (...) they may
restrain and punish Kings, as often as they use their power amiss: which opinion,
how many mischiefs (...) has occasioned, and may yet produce, if it be
thoroughly en^rtain, every wise man sees. We oppose these Arguments against it.
It is lawful for (...) every man to addict and yield himself into private
servitude to whom he pleases, as appears both out of the Hebrew Ex. 21. 6.
Instit. de jure person. sect. Servi aut. Gell. l. 2. c. 7.
Law and the Roman. Why then may not any people, being at their own dispose,
give up themselves to one or more, so as to transcribe the right of governing
them wholly to their Ruler, no part of that right retained or reserved to
themselves? Nor may you say, that cannot be presumed: for we do not here
enquire, what may be presumed in a doubtful case, but what may be done in Gall.
de Arrest. 1. 6. 22. and seq.
point of right (...) vain also are here alleged the incommodities that follow,
or are possible; for what kind of Government soever you shall frame in your
mind, you will never exclude all incommodities or hazards. You must be content,
in every way, to take the good and evil Aut haec cum illis sunt habenda, aut
illa cum cumhls mittenda sunt. Com. Est iniqua in omni re accusanda
praetermisses boni^ malorum enumeratie. Cicero.
one among another. Now as there are many courses of life, one more excellent
than another, and every man is at liberty among many to choose which he does
most affect; so may any people also make choice of what form of government they
please: neither is the right to be measured by the excellency of this or that
form (for diverse men have diverse judgments hereof) but by their At the same
time the City Augusta petitioned Charles the Emperor, that the Decrees of their
Senate might not be of force without the consent of the Masters of the Curiae;
when Norimberga desired the plain contrary thing.
will. And indeed there may arise many causes, why the people may abdicate from
themselves the whole right of commanding, and give it to another, viz. because
being brought into danger of their life, they can find no other way to preserve
themselves; or because being oppressed with want, they can have no sustenance or^
other terms. For if the Campanians (...) old, being subdued by necessity,
subjected themselves (...) Falisei apud Live. l. 5. Samuites, l. 8. Ste Epida^ a
Coreyr^ deserti Corini^is se ^runt, ut protegerentur. Thucyd. l. (...). Popusum
Campanum, urbem que Capuae, agrns, delu^ a Deu^, divina (...) aque omnia, in
vestram P. C. dutonem dedtmas.
to the Roman people in this form: The people of Campania, and the City Capua,
our Lands, the Temples of our Gods, all divine and humane things, we yield up
into your hand, O ye Con'cript Fathers: and fund^ people when they desired to
subj a themselves to the dominion of the Romans Et Venetorum. Bembus lib. 6
were not accepted, as (...) says: what hinders, but that a people after the
same manner may yield up (...) self into the hand of one propotent and
over-mighty man Apud Virgilium legimus, Nec cumse sub leges pacis intqua
Tradiderit regno.
? Moreover, it (...) happen, that some Father of a Family, possessing a large
estate of Lands may please to receive no inhabitant (...) to his possession,
but upon such condtion: or, that some Master having (...) great number of
servants may manu^ and set them at liberty, on condition that they be subject
to his Government and pay him tribute. Which cases (...) not without their
examples. Tacit^ concerning the servants of the Germans, says, Every one is
Master of his own house and estate: The Lord impi^seth and requires of them
(as his farmers) a rent of Corn, or Cattle, or cloths; and the servant so far
is subject. Add, that as Aristotle has said, some (...) are by nature
servants, i. e. fit for servitude; so also some Nations are of this
disposition, that they know better how to be ruled, than how to rule: Which the
Cappadocians seem to have thought of themselves, who preferred the life under
Strabo. 12. Justin. 38.
a King before the Liberty offered them by the Romans, and affirmed, they could
not live without a King. So Philostratus, Lib. 6.
in the life of Apollonius, says, It is a folly to bestow Liberty upon the
Thracians, Mysians, Getes, which they would not gladly accept. And moreover,
some might be moved by the examples of those Nations, which for many ages lived
happily enough under a Government plainly regal Sen. de benef. l. 2. c. 20. de
Bruto locutus: Mthi, cum vir magnu^ fuerit in aliis, in bac re videtur
vehementer (...), nec ex institutione Stoica segestsse: qui aut Regis nomen
extemuit, cum optimus civitatis status sub Rege iusto sit; aut ibi speravit
libertatem futuram, ubi tam magnum praemium erat and imperandi and serviendi;
aut exillimavit civitatem in priorem sormam posse revocari, amissis priflinis
moribus; futur amque ibi aequalitatem civilis juris, and staturas suo loco
leges, ubi vide at tot millia hominum pugnantia, non an servirent, sed utri.
Vide and Bizarrum hist, Genuensi. l. 14. p. 329.
. The Cities Sic multos ex liberis Graeciae Civitatibus in Salamma Cypri, quod
Evagorae regnum erat, venisle narrat Isoc ates.
under Eumenes, says Livy, would not have changed their fortune with any free
City whatsoever. L. 42. Sometimes also the State of the Or, Commonwealth.
City is such, that it cannot be safe, unless under the free Empire of Dion
apud Philostrat. 5. 11. Met^ ne Romani longis dominatibus edomiti nullam jam
far passint mutationem.
One: which conceit many prudent men had of the Roman, as the case stood in
the time of Caesar Augustus. For these causes therefore, and the like, it may
not only possibly, but does usually come to pass, that men subject themselves
to the Empire and power of another: which also Cicero notes in the second of
his offices.

XLIII. The same further proved.
FUrther yet, by a just War (as we have said before) as private dominion may be
acquired, so also civil dominion, or the right of reigning without dependence.
Neither do I speak this only in behalf of the Empire of One, where that is
received, I would not be so mistaken: but the same Arguments are of force for
conserving the Empire of many, where many nobles or states have this same right
of supreme power, and govern the City, the Plebeians being excluded. What, that
no Commonwealth has ever been found so popular, wherein some, such as are
very poor or foreigners, and also Women and Youth are not kept from public
Counsels? Besides, some Sie Samii ^lta in continents oppida tenuere, ut S^abo
docet lib. 14. Sex oppida Halicarnasso attributa per Alexandrum magnum, memoral
Plinius Histor. not. l. 5. c. 29. Idem lib. 33. cap. 4 Lindum insula^ ait esse
Rhodiorum. Tantundem de Caun^ habes, lib. 35. Testatur idem Cicero Epist. ad
(...). Rhodiis iisdem, quod Romanos contra Antiochum juvissent, complures urbes
dono datu^ ait Eutropius lib. 3. nempe Carum and Lycio^um, quae rursus eis
ablatae a senatu. Utrumque est in exceptu Polybii.
States have other people under them, not less subject, than if they did obey
Kings. Whence that question, Is the Collatin people in their own power? and the
Campanians, when they had yielded up themselves to the Romans, are said to be
under the power of others. Many are the examples to this purpose; and they are
all of no value, if we once grant this, that the right of ruling is always
subject to the judgment and will of them who are ruled. But on the contrary,
it is evident both by sacred and profane history, that there are Kings Deuteronomy.
17. 14. 1 Samuel 8. 4. 1 Samuel 9. 16. 10. 1. 15. 1. 2 Samuel 5. 2. 1 Reg. 4. 1. Ps.
144. 2. Luke 22. 25.
that are not inferior to the people, though taken all together. If thou shall
say, says God speaking to the people of Israel, I will set a King over me: and
to Samuel, Show unto them the right of the King that shall reign over them.
Hence is a King called, the Anointed over the people, over the inheritance of
the Lord, over Israel: Solomon King over all Israel. So David gives thanks to
God, for subduing his people under him. The Kings of the Nations, says Christ,
bear rule over them. And that of Horace Regum timendorum in proprios greges;
Reges in ipsos imperium est Jovis.
is well known:

Commands of Kings their subjects move:
And Kings are subject unto Jove.
Seneca thus describes the three forms Ep st. 14. Interdum populus est quem
timere debeamus; interdum, si ea civitatis disciplina est, ut plurima per
senatum tran^gantur, grati^si in ea timentur viri; interdum singuli quibus
potestas populi and in populum data est.
of Government: Sometimes the people are they whom we ought to fear; sometimes,
if the Discipline of the Commonwealth be so, that most things be transacted by
the Senate, the gracious men therein are feared; sometimes single persons to
whom the power of the people and over the people is given. Such are they who,
as Plutarch says, have a command not only according to the Laws, but over the
Laws also; and, in Herodotus, Otanes thus describes a single Empire: to do what
one pleases, so as not to be accomptable to any other; 3. Pol. 14.
and Dio Prusaeensis defines a Kingdom; to have command without control.
Pausanias Messenicis.
opposes a kingdom to such a power as must give account to a superior.
Aristotle says, there are some Kings with such a right, as else where the
Nation itself has over it self, and that which is its own. So, after that the
Roman Princes began to take upon them Institut. de jure not. sect. sed and quod.
an Authority truly regal, the people is said to have conferred upon them all
their Authority and power, and that over themselves, as Theophilus interprets.
Hence is that saying of M. Antonius the Philosopher: None but God alone can be
Xiph. vita M. Ant. l. 4.
judge of the Prince. Dion. of such a Prince: He is free, having power over
himself and the Laws, that he may Lib. 53.
do what him pleases, and what likes him not, leave undone. Such a kingdom was
of old that of the Inachidae a^ Argos In Argiva Trag. Supplicibus, sic
^opregen. regen (...) Aes^hylum: Tu res populi, tuque (...) tota es, Non
judictu subditus (...), Regni (...) sultus ut ara, Vnoque regent cuncta
arbitrio.
; far different from the Athenian Commonwealth, where Theseus Rex ipse Theseus
apud Euripid.
, as Plutarch tells us, acted only the part of a General, and Guardian of the
Laws, in other respects not superior Thesei filius Demophon apud eund. Nec
enim potestas barbarum in morem mihi, Sed justa refera obsequia, dum just
impero.
to the rest. Wherefore, Kings subject to the people are but improperly called
Kings: as after Lycurgus, and more, after the Ephori were established, the
Kings of the Lacedaemonians are said Polyb. l. 4. Plut. in Cleom. Cornel. Nep.
Verba ipsius aut quisquis is est qui vitas illustres scripsit, in Agesilao: Vt
duos haberent Reges nomine magis quam imperio. Alibi: Lacedaemoniorum autem
Agesilaus nomine non potestate suit Rex, sicut caeteri Spartani.
to have been Kings in name and title, not really and indeed. Which example was
also followed by other States in Greece. Pausanias Corinth. The Argives in love
of equality and liberty have -- Haec juris sui Parere domino civitas uni negat:
Rex ipse populus annuas mandat vices Honoris huic illive. --
long since very much abated the regal power, so that they have left the Sons
of Cisus, and his posterity, nothing beside the name of a Kingdom. Such
Kingdoms Aristotle says, do not make any proper kind of Government, because
they only are a part in an Optimacy or Populacy. Moreover, in Nations that are
not perpetually subject unto Kings, we see examples as it were of a Kingdom
temporary Livius Salinator in censura omnes tribus except a una ararias fecit,
ac sic ostendit jus sibi esse in populum ^neur.
, which is not subject to the people. Such was the power of the Amymones among
the Cnidians, and of the Dictators among the Romans in the first times, when
there was no appeal (...) the people: whence the Dictators Edict, as Livy
says, was observed as (...) Oracle, and there was no help but (...) their care
of obeying it: and the force of the regal power, was besieged with the
Dictatorship, as Cicero speaks.

XLIV. Arguments to the contrary answered.
THe Arguments brought on the contrary part are not hard to be solved. For
first, that they affirm the Constituent to be superior to the Constitutel is
true only in that constitution whose effect perpetually depends on the will of
the Constituent; and not in that which at first proceeds from the will, but
afterward has the effect of necessity: even as a woman makes to her self a
husband by consent, whom she must of necessity obey for ever. Valentinian the
Emperor, to the Soldiers who had made him so, when they asked somewhat of him
which he thought unreasonable, gave this answer Sozom. hist. Eccl. lib. 16.
Verba ejus sic refert Theodoretus l. 4. c. 5 Vestrum sun, milites, cum
Imperator nullus esset, mihi tradere Imperii hujus hab^nas, eas ex quo adeptus
sum; de catero non vestrum sed meum dispi^ quid reip. expediat.
: To elect me to rule over you, was in your power, O my Soldiers, but since
you have elected me, the thing you ask is at my pleasure, not yours. You as
subjects ought to obey, I must consider what is fit to be done. Besides, the
Assumption is not true, that all Kings are constituted by the people: which may
be sufficiently understood by the examples of a Father of a family admitting
Tenants on condition of obedience, and of Nations overcome in War, which above
are mentioned. Another Argument they draw out of that sentence of Philosophers;
All Government is for the benefit of them that are governed, not of them that
do govern: Whence they think it follows from the Nobility of the end, that the
Governed are superior to the Governor. But, neither is that universally true,
The good of the governed is the end of all Government: for some Governments are
by themselves for the Rulers sake, as that of a Master: for the servants profit
is there extrinsecal and adventitious; even as the Physicians F^e pertains
nothing to the Medicine it self. Other Governments there are for mutual
benefit, as the Husband's. So, certain Empires may have for their end the
utility of the Kings; namely, such as are gotten by conquest, and are not
therefore to be called Tyrannical, seeing Tyranny, as the word is now taken,
includes injustice. Some also may respect as well his utility that rules, as
his that is ruled; i. e. when an impotent people set over themselves a potent
King (...) their defense. Yet do I not deny, that in many Empires is properly
respected the profit of the subjects; and true it is, which Cicero after
Herodotus, Herodotus after Hesiod has delivered, That Kings were constituted
to the end justice may be had. And yet, it does not follow thence, what they
infer, that the people are superior to the King; for tutelage also was found
out for the Pupils good, yet is tuition a right and power over the Pupil. Nor
is the objection of any moment, if (...) say, the Tutor may be put out of his
charge upon mal-administration of the Pupils estate, and therefore the same
must take place upon the King: for this holds in the Tutor, who has a
Superior; but in Empires, because a progress in infinitum is not granted, we
must by all means make a stop in some person or persons, whose faults, because
they have no Superior Judge, God himself Jer. 25. 12.
testifies that he takes into his peculiar cognizance. And he either does
justice upon them, if he judges it to be needful, or else forbeareth them for
a punishment or trial of the people. Excellently says Tacitus: As drougth
Tacitus: Quemodo sterilitatem aut nimios imbres, and caetera naturae mala, ita
luxum vel avaritiam dominantium tolerate. Vitia erunt donec homines; sed neque
haec continua, and (...) Interventu pensantur.
or excessive rain and other evils of naeture, so bear ye patiently the luxury
or avarice of Rulers. Vices will continue as long as there are men: but,
neither are they continual, and they are recompensed by the intermixture of
better things. And it was a good saying of M. Aurelius: Magistrates judge of
private persons, Princes of Magistrates, God of Princes Xiphilin: Desummo
principatu Deus solus potest judicare. Vitigis rex apud Cassiodorum Causa
regiae potestatis supernis est applicanda judiciis, quandoquidem illa e coe^o
petita est, and soli coelo debet innocentiam. A pud eundent Cassiodorum rex:
Alteri subdi non possumus, quia judices non habemus.
. Notable is the place in Gregorius Turonensis, where that Bishop thus
addresses himself to the King of France: O King, if any one of us go beyond the
bounds of justice, he may be corrected by you: but if you exceed, Who shall
chastise you? For we speak unto you, and you hear us, if you will; but if you
will not, who shall condemn you, but He who has pronounced Himself to be
JUSTICE? Among the doctrines of the Essens, Lib 5.
Porphyry remembers this: That Empire falls not to any man without Gods
Homerus: (...). Ab Jove summus honos. D^odorus Sic. l. r. de Aegyptiis.
Existimant enim non sine divina quadam providentia pervemsse Reges ad summam de
omnibus potestatem. Augustine. l. 5 de Cl. D. Qui Vespasiana vel patri vel
silio, suavissimis Impp. ipse and Domitiano crude^ssimo; and ne per singulos
ire necesse sit, qui Constantino, ipse Apostatae Juliano: nempe, majestatem
dedit, quod (...). Vit ^is apud Cassiodorum: Omnis provectus, maxim Regius, ad
divinitatis ^nera reserendus est. Titi Imperatoris erat dictum, Potestates fato
dari.
especial care, Irenaeus very well: By whose appointment men are born, by his
appointment also Kings are constituted, fit for the people, who in those times
are gogovern'd by them. There is the same sense in the Constitutions which are
called Clement's: Thou shall fear the (...). b. 7. c. 17.
King, knowing that he is chosen by the Lord. Nor does it overthrow these
things which we have said, that we read the people punished sometimes for 2 Samuel 24. 17.
the sins of their Kings: for this cane not so to pass, because the people dd
not punish nor restrain the King, but because they did, at least tacitly,
consent to his faults. Nevertheless it is certain too, without that, God might
use his supreme dominion, which he has over the life and death of every one,
for to punish the King; whose punishment indeed it is, to be deprived of his
Subjects.

XLV. Of mutual Subjection.
OThers there are, who feign un^ themselves a certain mutual subjection, so
that the whole people ought to obey the King governing well; and the King
governing ill, ought to be subject to the people. These men, if they did say,
Things manifestly unjust are not to be done at the Kings command, would speak a
truth, which is acknowledged among all honest men: but this includes no
coaction, or right to command the King. And, had it been the purpose of any
people to divide the power with the King (of which we shall say somewhat
hereafter) such bounds surely ought to have been assigned to either power,
which might easily be distinguished by the difference of places, persons, or
affairs. But, the goodness or illness of act, especially in civil matters which
often have an obscure disceptation, are not fit to distinguish parts. Whence very
great confusion cannot but follow, whilst under pretense of a good or evil
act, on the one side the King, on the other side the people draw unto
themselves, according to their right of power, the cognizance of the same
matter. Such a perturbation of things, so far as I can remember, never any
people was so fantastic as to introduce.

XLVI. Cautions for the understanding of the true Opinion. The first.
FAlse opinions being removed, it remains that we set down some cautions, that
may open a way to make a right judgment, to whom the right of supreme power in
every Nation belongs. Our first caution is, that we be not deceived with the
ambiguous sound of a name, or the show of external things. For example,
although among the Latins principality and Kingdom are wont to be opposed, as
when Caesar says, the Father of Vercingetorix held the principality of Gallia,
but was slain for affecting the Kingdom; and when Pisi in Tacitus calls
Germanicus the Son of a Prince of Romans, not of a King of Parthians; and when
Suetonius says Caligula wanted but a little of turning the principality into a
Kingdom; and when Maroboduus is said by Velleius to have embraced in his mind,
not a principality consisting in the will of those that obey, but a regal
power: Nevertheless, we see these names are often times confounded; for, both
the Lacedaemonian Leaders of Hercules posterity, after they were subject to the
Ephori, were yet styled Kings, as we have said before; and the ancient Germans
had Kings, which, as Tacitus speaks, were Sovereign by the authority of
persuading, Lib. 1.
not by the power of commanding. Lib. 15. Cap. 7.
And Livy says of King Evander, that he ruled by authority rather than
command: and Aristotle and Polybius call Suffetes King of the Carthaginians,
and Diodorus too, as also Hanno Lib. 13.
is called King of the Carthaginians by Solinus. And of Scepsis in Troas Sic
qui vitam scripsit Annibalis: Vt enim Rome consules, sic Carthagine quotannis
annui bini Reges creabantur. To these improperly styled Kings may be added the
Sons of Kings, to whom that royal name was given by their Fathers, retaining
the power in themselves. Such was that Darius, whom his Father Artaxerxes
caused to be judged and put to death. Plutarch. Artax.
Strabo relates, when having joined to them the Milesians into one
Commonwealth, they began to use a popular Government, the posterity of the old
Kings retained the royal name and somewhat of the honor. On the contrary, the
Roman Emperors, after that openly and without any dissimulation they held a
most free regality, yet were styled Princes. Moreover, Princes in some free
Cities have the Ensigns and marks of royal Majesty given unto them. Now, the
Assembly of the States Pralati, nyoceres, missisque potentibus urbes, ut
Guntherus loquitur.
, that is, of them that represent the people distributed into classes, in some
places indeed serve only to this purpose, that they may be a greater Council of
the King, whereby the complaints of the people, which are often concealed in the
Privy Council, may come unto the Kings ear: in other places have a right to
call in question the actions of the Prince, and also to prescribe Laws, whereby
the Prince himself is bound. Many there are, who think, the difference of the
highest Empire, or of that less than the highest, is to be taken from the
conveyance of Empire by way of election or succession. Empires devolved this
way, they affirm to be highest, not those that come the other way. But it is
most certain, this is not universally true; for succession is not the title of
Empire, which gives it form, but a continuation of what was before The right
begun from the election (...) the Family is continued by succession wherefore,
succession carries down (...) so much, as the first election did confe^ Among
the Lacedaemonians, the Kingdom passed to the Heirs, even after (...) Ephori
were ordained. And of such Kingdom, that is, a principality, (...) Aristotle
Pol. 3. 14.
: some of them go by rige^ of blood, some by election: and in the Heroical
times most Kingdoms in Greece were such, as besides him, Thucydid^ Lib. (...)
Notatum id and Dionys. Halicarnass. l. 2. and 5.
notes. On the contrary, the Roman Empire, even after all the power boti^ of
Senate and people was taken awa^ was bestowed by election.

XLVII. The second Caution.
LEt this be the second caution. (...) one thing to enquire of the thing,
another Vide cui vacat Car. Molinaeum ad consuesud. Pa^s. Tit. 1. sect. 2. gl.
4. number. 16.
of the manner of holding it: which is appliable not only to corporal things
but incorporal also. For, as a Field is a thing possessed, so is a passage, an
act, a way. But these things some hold by a full right of propriety, others by
a righ^ usufructuary, other by a temporary right; So the Roman Dictator, by a
temporary You have an example of an Emperor made for a time, in Gregoras, lib.
4. initio.
right, had the Highest power: and some Kings, both the first that are elected,
and they that succeed them in a lawful order, by an usufructuary right; but
some Kings by a full right of propriety, as they that by a just War have gotten
their Empire, or into whose power some people, to avoid a greater evil, have
so given up themselves, that they excepted nothing. Neither do I assent to
them, who say the Dictator had not the highest power, because it was not
perpetual; for the nature of moral things is known by the operations: wherefore
such faculties as have the same effects are to be called by the same name. Now,
the Dictator, within his time, exercises all acts by the same right So that
the people, when they would save Fab. Rutilian, made Petition to the Dictator.
, as a King of the best right; nor can his act be rendered void by any other. As
for duration, that changes not the nature of the thing: though if the question
be of dignity, which is wont to be styled Majesty, this is greater, no doubt,
in him to whom perpetual right is given, than to whom temporary right; because
the manner of the Tenure is of moment in respect of dignity. And I would have
the same understood of these, that before Kings come to age, or whilst they are
hindered by loss of reason or their liberty, are appointed Curators of the
Kingdom, so, that they be not subject to the people, nor, their power revocable
before the appointed time. Another judgment is to be made concerning those
that have received a right revocable at any time, that is, a precarious right,
such as of old was the Kingdom of the Vandals in Africa, and of the Procopius.
Vandal. 1. Aimol. 2. 20. and 4. 35.
Goths in Spain Moris an^iqui vestigium in B^hetriis, vide Marianam l. 16.
, when the people deposed them, as often as they were displeased ^oc de Herulis
etiam prodidit Procepius Gol. 2. de Longobardis Paulus Warnasredi l. 4. and 6.
de Burgundis Ammianus lib. 28. de Moldavis Laonicus Chalco^las, de rege Agalis
apud Af^os Joannes Leo lib. 7. de Norwagis at Guil. Neubrigensis regem ibi
factum quisquis regem occidisset. (...) Q^adis and Jazygibus similia habes in
excerptis Dionis.
; for every act of such Kings may be rendered void by these that have given them
a power revocably; and therefore, here is not the same effect, nor the same
right, as in other cases.

XLVIII. That some highest Empires are holden fully, i. e. alienably.
THat which I have said, that some Empires are in full right of propriety, i.
e. in the patrimony of the Ruler, is opposed by some learned men with this
Argument, That freemen are (...) Hotem. cont. ill. qu. 1.
in commerce. But, as power is either Lordly, or Regal; so also Liberty is
either personal, or civil; and again, either of single persons, or of all
together: for the Stoics too did say, there is a certain servitude consisting
in (...). Dog. Laert. 1 Samuel 22. 28. 2 Samuel 10. 2. 1 Reg 9. 22.
subjection; and in the holy Scriptures the Kings subjects are called his
servants. As therefore personal liberty excludes Master-ship, so civil liberty
opposes regality, and any other dition properly so called. So Livy opposes
them, saying, The people of Rome are not in a kingdom, Lib. 45.
but in liberty: and elsewhere he distinguishes the people enjoying liberty
Thucydides: Pars Thracum libera. Seneca pater suasoria. Non eadem modo in
libera civitate dicendam esse sentenciam, quo apud Reges. Josephus antiq. hist.
l. 13. ad Reges p^losque liberos. Cicero Epist. 15. 4. Populorum liberorum,
regumque saciorum auxilia. Plinius l. 6. c. 20. de Indis: Jam hi montium qui
perpetuo tractu Oceani oram tenent, liberi and regum expertes.
from those that lived under Kings. Cicero Lib. 3. de legib. Annal. 1. Lib. 12.
said, Either the Kings should not have been expelled, or liberty should have
been given to the people really, and not in words. After these Tacitus, The
City of Rome from the beginning was under Kings: L. Brutus brought in Liberty
and the Consulship. Strabo says of Amisus, it was sometime free, sometime
under Kings. And frequently in the Roman De bello and de judiciis recuperatoris.
Laws, foreiners are divided into Kings and free State:. Here then the question
is not concerning the liberty of single men, but of a people. And further, as
for private, so for this public subjection some are said to be, not of their
own right, not of their own power Hinc illa: Quae urbes, qui agri, qui homines
Aetolorum juris aliquondo fuerunt. Et, Estne pop. Collatinus in sua potestate?
Live. lib. 38. and lib. 5.
. Yet properly, when a people is alienated, the men themselves are not
alienated but the perpetual right of governing them, as they are a people. So,
when the freed servant of a Patron is assigned to one of his children, it is
not the alienation of a freeman, but he transcribes and makes away the right he
had over another man. Nor is that more firm, which they say, If a King has
gotten any people by War, whereas he subdued them not without the blood and
sweat of his subjects, they are rather to be taken for the acquest of the
Subjects than of the King. For happily, the King maintained his Army out of his
own private M. Antoni nus ad be lum Marcomonnicum cum (...) ario exhausto
indicere populo nihil vellet, facto in foro Trajani sectione, distraxit vasa
aurea, pocu^ Chrystallina and murrina, uxori^ and suam sericam and auream
vestem, multa ornamenta gemmarum.
substance, or out of the profits of that Patrimony Ideo Ferdinandus Grana
tensts Regni partem alteram, ut stante matrimonio ex Castellae proventibus
quaesitam, sibi vindicavit. Docet Moriana lib. 28. Hist. Hispan.
which follows his principality; for suppose a King has but the usufruit of
that very Patrimony, as also of the right of governing the people which has
elected him, yet are those fruits his own. (As it is declared in the L. in
fidei ^missaria sect. plane. D. ad S. C. Trebell^anum.
civil Law, that the fruits of an inheritance, which is commanded to be
restored, are not restored; because they arise not from the inheritance, but
from the Thing.) Wherefore it may come to pass, that a King may have command
over some people by a proper right Balduino concessere. qui cum ipso in
orientem belli causa venerant, ut urbium, provinciarum, vectigalium, rerum
bello captarum dimidium ipsi cederet.
, so that he may also alienate them. Strabo Lib. 8.
says, the Island Cythera lying over against Taenarus was by his own private
right pertaining to Eurycles Prince of the Lacedaemonians. So, King Solomon gave
to Hirom Ita enim eum Graece vocat Philo Biblius qui Sanchuniatonis historiam
vertit. 1 Reg. 12.
, King of the Phenicians, twenty Cities; not of the Cities of the Hebrews: for
Cabul (which name is attributed to those Cities) is seated without the Hebrew
bounds, Jos. 19. 27. but of those Cities, which the conquered Nations, enemies
1 Reg. 9. 6. ibid. 12.
of the Hebrews, had retained till that 1 Paralip. 8. 14.
day; and which partly the King of Egypt, Salomon's Father-in-Law, had
overcome, and given as a dowry to him, partly Solomon himself had taken in; for
that they were not inhabited by the Israelites, at that time, is proved by this
argument, because after Hirom restored them, then at last Solomon carried
thither Colonies of the Hebrews. So Hercules Idem Hercules Dryopes, qui juxta
Paruassum habitabant, a se victos donavit Apollini. (...) vius ad 4. Ae^eid.
Herculem adversus Lapithas belli socium sibi sumsit Doriensium Rex, part Regni
in mercedem societatis data. Cychreus Salaminis Rex prole carens regnum
testamento reliquit Teucro. Peleus ab Eurylione Phthiae Rege tertiam Regni
partem accepit in doten^; quae hobet Apollodorus. Apud Livium est libro 1.
Proca Numitori regnum legate.
is read to have given to Tyndareus the Empire of Sparta taken in War, upon
Diod. l. 4.
these terms, that if Hercules should leave any children, it should be returned
to them. Amphipolis was given as a dowry to Acamas the Son of Theseus; And in
Homer Agamemnon promises to give Achilles seven Cities. King Anaxagoras freely
bestowed two parts of his Kingdom upon Melampus Lanassa nubens Pyrrho
Epirolarum Regi in dotem ei attulit Corcyram urbem ab Agathocle patre suo bello
captam. Plutarchus Pyrrho.
. Lib. 5.
Justin says of Darius, He gave by Testament the Kingdom to Artaxerxes, to
Cyrus certain Cities, whereof he was Governor. So the successors of Alexander
are to be thought, every one for his part, to have succeeded into that full
right and propriety of ruling over the Nations, which were subject to the
Ammianus de Perside, non exact tamen ad histo^iae fidem: Ex testamento
nationem omnem in successoris unius jura translatam libro. 22.
Persians, or else themselves to have acquired that power by the right of
Victory. Wherefore it is no marvel if they assumed to themselves a right of
alienation. So when King Vale^us Maximus: (...) testam^nti aequitate grat^
Asiam pop. Romano legavit. Florus de ea re: Addita igitur haereditate
provinciam pop. Romanus, non quidem bello nec armis, sed quod est aequius,
testamenti jure (...). Flor. l. 2. Epit. Live. 58.
Attalus the Son of Eumenes had by his testament made the people of Rome heir
of his Goods, the people of Rome under the name of Goods comprehended his
Kingdom too. And after when Nicomedes King of Bithynia dying had made the Roman
people Heir, the Kingdom was reduced into the form of a Cic. secundum in
Rullum: Haereditatem crevimus, regnum Bithyniae. Cic. de lege Agraria: Qui
ignorant Regnum Aegypti testamento Regis Alexandrini, populi Romani esse factum?
Ex Josepho discimus Herodem, Augusto si concedente ut Regnum cui e liberis
vellet relingueret, testamentum aliqu ties mutasse. Antiq. hist. l. 15. and 16.
Alfonsus Arragonius Neapoleos Regnum, ut arms partum, Ferdinando noto suo
reliquit. In eodem Regno urbes quasdam Ferdinandus legavit nepoti. Mariana lib.
30.
Province.

XLIX. Some highest Empires are not holden fully.
BUt in Kingdoms which are conferred by the will of the people, I grant
Imperium non deb. re relinqui ut agros and servas dicit Vopiscus Tacito.
Salvianus: Non ^terat populos quos regebat per testamentum egenis tradere.
it is not to be presumed that it was the will of the people, that an
alienation of his Empire should be permitted to the King. Wherefore, what
Crantzius notes in Unguinus as a new thing, that he had bequeathed Norway by
his testament, we have no reason to disapprove, if he respects the manners of
the Germans, among whom Kingdoms were not held with so full a right. For,
whereas Charles the Great and Lewis the pious and others after them even among
the Vandals and Hungarians have disposed of Kingdoms in their testaments, that
had rather the virtue of a commendation Vide Capitalum (...) conventus ad
Ca^siacum sub Carolo Calvo. Huc refer testamentum Pelagii quo Hilpaniam
reliquit Alfanso and Osmifindae, and de Dania quaedam apud Saxonem. Neque mirum
igitur, quaedam testamenta improbante populo fuisse irrita, ut Alfonsi Arrag^i.
Vide Marianam lib. 10. Et Alphonsi Legionensis, cum (...) filias filio
prae^lisset. Idem Man. l. 12.
among the people, than the force of a true alienation. And of Charles, Ado
specifies the same, that he desired his testament should be confirmed by the
chiefest of France. Whereunto that is like which we read in Livie, that Philip
King of Macedonia, when he had a mind to keep Perscus from the Kingdom, and in
his place to advance Antigonus, his Brothers Son, visite^ the Cities of
Macedonia to commen^ Vide rem similem apud Cassiodorum Lib. 8. Epist. 8. and
seq. Ita pacta successionis mutuae inter Sanctium and Jacobum Arr. gonenses a
proceribus firmata. Mariana lib. 12. and Henrici Navarrae Regis qua Joannem
instituit haeredem. Id. l. 13. and Isabellae Reginae Castellae. Id. lib. 28.
Antigonus to the Princes. Nor is (...) material, that the forementioned Lew^
is read to have rendered the City Rome to Pope Paschal, seeing the Franks might
rightly render to the people of Rome that power over the City, which they had
received from the same people: (...) which people he did sustein as it We^ the
person, who was Prince of the first order.

L. A further manifestation of the second caution.
THe truth of our foresaid note, about distinguishing the height of power from
the fullness of having it, will appear in this, that as many highest Empires are
not, so many not highest are held fully. Whence it is that Vide de Vrgetii
principatu Marianam lib. 12. c. 16.
Marquessates and Earldoms are wont to be sold and disposed of by will more
easily than Kingdoms. Moreover the same distinction shows it self in the
Protectorship Vide cothmannum Tomo 1. Cons. 41. number. 2.
, whilst a King, either by nonage or by disease, is unable to manage his own
power. For, in Kingdoms that are not Patrimonial, the Protectorship belongs to
them, to whom the Public Law, or in defect thereof the consent of the people
Vide Marian. in Alphonso 5. Legionis R^ge. At testamentum Regis Joannis de
tutela and administratione Regni a proceribus improbatum. Mar. lib. 18.
does commend it: in Patrimonial Kingdoms, to them who are chosen by the Father
Ptolomaeus Rex Aegypto Tutorem filio suo reliquit populum Romaenum. Val.
or by the next of Kin. So we see in the Kingdom of the Epirots, which arose
from the peoples consent, Aribas a Pupil-King had Tutors publicly appointed
him: and so had the posthume Son of Alexander the Great by the Macedonian
Peers. But in the lesser Asia, gotten by War, King Eumenes appointed his
Brother to be Tutor to his Son Attalus. So Hiero the Father reigning in Sicily
ordained by his testament whom he pleased to be Tutors to his Son Hierom. Now,
whether a Max. l. 6. c. 6. 1.
King be withal, in his private right, a Lord of Land, as the King of Egypt
Justin. l. 13. Justin. l. 67. Plutarch. de am. frat. Lib. 2. Lib. 15.
was after the time of Joseph, and the Indian Kings which Diodorus and Strabo
speak of; or be not, this is extrinsecal to his Empire, and perteins not to the
nature of it: wherefore, it neither makes another kind of Empire, nor another
manner of holding the same Empire.

LI. A third Observation.
LEt this be observed in the third place, An Empire cease not to be supreme,
although he that is to rule promise certain things Trasanus caput suum, dex^
suam, st scienter setellisset, Deorum irae consecrabat. Plin. Paneg. Adrianus
Imp. jaravit nunquam se senatorem nist ex senatus sententia (...). Anasta fiu,
Imp. juravit servaturum se decreta Chalsedonensis Concilii. Meminere Zonaras,
Cedrenus, alii. Seriores Imperatores Graeci Ecclesiae jurabunt. Vide eun. them
Zonaram Michaele Raugabe and alibi. Vide and in Gotthis Regibus exemplum apud
Cassiodorum. 10, 16, 17.
to the subjects or to God, even su^ things as pertain to the way of ruling.
Nor do I now speak of keeping the natural and divine Law, add also that of
Nations, unto which all Kings are bound, though they promised nothing; but of
certain rules, to which without a promise they were not bound. The truth of
what I say appears by silimitude of a Father of a Family: who, (...) he has
promised his Family to do somewhat which belongs unto their Government, shall
not thereby cease to have, so far as may be in a Family supreme right therein.
Nor is the Husband deprived of marital power, because of some promise to the
Wise. I confess, by this means the Empire is in some sort straightened, whether
the obligation ly upon the exercise of the act only, or also directly upon the
faculty it self. In the first way, the act done against promise will be unjust:
because, as we show elsewhere, a true promise gives hima right, to whom it is
made: and in the other way, it will be null by want of faculty. Nor yet does it
thence follow, that he that makes the promise has any superior: for, in this
case, the act is rendered null, not by superior force but in Law. Amongst the
Persians, the King was Supreme and absolute (...). Plutarchus.
; adored as the Image of God: and as Justin Lib, 10.
says, he was not changed but by death. A King was he that to the Peers of
Persia spoke thus: I Val. Max. lib. 9. c. 5.
have called you together, that I might not seem to use only my own Counsel:
but remember it is your duty rather to obey than persuade. Yet he took an oath
at his entrance, as Xenophon and Diodorus Siculus have noted, and it was not
lawful for him Dan. 6. 8, 12. 15.
to change certain Laws made after a particular form. The same is related of
the Ethiopian Kings by Plutarch. in Themistocle. Diodurtis Siculus lib. 17. and
multo post tempore Procopius Persici belli lib. 1. Vbi insignis ad banc rem
historia exstat. Tamen idem de Lethe castello legem a Rege mutatam refert, sed
non probat.
Lib. 3. Lib. 1.
Diodorus Siculus. And by his relation the Egyptian Kings, who (no doubt) as
well as other Kings of the East had Supreme power, were bound to the
observation of many things: but, if they had done the contrary, could not be
accused living; dead, their memory was accused Leges tyrannorum corpora
insepulta extra fines projici jubent. Applanut Civilium tertio. Andronidus Imp.
Patrem suum Michaelem, quod fidem Latinans sequi coepisset, mortuum sepultura
privavit. Gregoras lib. 6.
, and being condemned they wanted solemn burial: as also the bodies of the
Hebrew Kings Vide Josephum de Joramis duobus, altero Hierosolymorum, (...)
Isratlu Rege, lib. 8. cap. 3. and 5. Item de Joaso Hierosolymorum Rege.
, who had reigned ill, were not buried in the royal Sepulchers: an excellent
temperament, whereby, both the highest power was kept sacred, and yet by fear
of a future judgment, Kings were kept from breaking their trust. That the
Kings also of Epirus were wont to swear, they would reign according to the
Laws, we learn of Plutarch Plutarchus: Solebant Reges in Cassarorum terra, quae
Molottidos pars est, Jovi Areo sacrisisare ac juramenium praestare Epirotis.
Jurabant aut^m Reges se imperaturos sicun dum leges. Epirocae autem se imperium
ejusdem conservaturos secundum easdem leges.
in the life of Pyrrhus. But suppose it be added, If the King breaks his trust,
he shall be dep^sed Vide exemplum apud Crantzium lib. 9. Suedicorum.
? Yet will not the power hereby cease to be the highest, but the mann^ of
holding it weakened by this condition, and the Empire will be as it were
temporary. It is said of the King of Sabaeans, that he was absolute (...).
Agatharchides apud Photium.
and of a most free power, but that he might be stoned if he went out of his
Palace Quod and Artemidoro auctore Strabo annotavit. lib. 16.
. In like manner, an estate of Land, that is held in trust, is an estate, as
well as if it were possessed in full dominion, but it is holden for a time or
at the pleasure of another. And such a Commissory Law or condition may be
annexed not only in the bestowing of a Kingdom, but in other contracts; for
some Leagues too with neighbors, we see, are entered with the like Aut etiam ne
subditi Regem pacta viol^ juvent: aut ne ei pareant. Vide Crommerum Polonicis
19. and 21. Est and exemplum apud Scasnaburgensem in rebus Henrician. 1074.
sanction.

LII. The fourth Observation.
FOurthly it must be noted, Although the highest power be one and undivided by
it self, consisting of the parts above set down, supremacy (...).
being added; Yet may it sometimes happen to be divided Vide Zazium singularium
responsorum lib. 2. c. 31.
, either by parts, which they call potential, or by parts subjective. So when
the Roman Empire was one, it often came to pass, that one Ruler had the East,
another the West, or that three divided the world between them. And so it may
be, that a people choosing a King may reserve some acts to themselves, and may
commit others to the King with full right. Yet is not that done, as we have
showed already, whenever the King is bound up with certain promises, but then
we must conceive it to be done, if either a partition be made expressly Ita
Probi tempore Senatus firmabat principum leges, de appellationibus cognoscebat,
proconsules creabat, legatos consulibus dabat. Vide and Gail. lib. 2. observe.
c. 57. number. 7. and Card. Manticam de tacitis and ambiguis conventionibus lib.
27. tit. 5. number. 4.
, of which we have spoken before; or, if a people, yet free, lay upon their
future Kings a charge by way of an abiding precept; or, if a clause be added to
signify that the King may be compeld or punished. For a precept is from a
superior, superior at least in that particular which is given in precept: and
to compel is not always the property of a superior (for also naturally every
one has a right to compel his debtor) but is repugnant to the nature of an
inferior. Parity therefore at least follows from coaction, and so a division
of the supremacy. Against such a State, as being double headed, many allege
many incommodities: but (as we have also said above) in civil affairs there is
nothing wholly without incommodities; and Right is to be measured, not by that
which seems best to you or me, but by the will of him whence right arises. An
ancient example is brought by Pla^ in his third de legibus: For when the House
of Hercules had built Arg^ Messena and Lacedemon, the King were bound to keep
their Governmen^ within the bound of prescribed Laws; an^ whilst they did so,
the people were obliged to leave the Kingdom to them and their posterity, and
suffer none to take it from them. And to this, not only King and their own
people have mutually (...) venanted, but Kings with other Kings, Exempla sunt
cum plura in historia populor (...) septentrionalium. Vide Joannem Magnum
historia Suedica lib. 15. and 29. Crant^ Suedicorum 5. Pontanum Danicorum 8.
and one people with another people, and Kings with neighbourig States, and
States with neighboring Kings, have entered into Covenant, and promised aid to
(...) other respectively.

LIII. A further explication of the last note, about division of power and
mixture.
YEt are they much deceived, who think the power of Kings divided, when they
will have some of their acts not accounted firm unless they be approved by the
Senate, or some such Assembly. For the acts voided for want of such
approbation, must be understood to be cancelled by the Kings own command, who
ordained this by way of caution, lest any thing fallaciously gained from him,
should pass under the notion of his true and deliberate will. King Antiochus
the third sent such a Boer. ad c. 1. de constable. in Decret. Plut. Apoph. L.
unica. c. quando Imperator. Addel. 1. c. de petitionibus bonorum sublatis.
^escript to the Magistrates, that they should not obey him, in case he should
command any thing against Law: and Constantin published the like, that Orphans
and Widows be not constreined to come to the Emperors Court for Justice, no
not if the Emperors rescript ^e showed. Wherefore this case is like to that of
testaments, which have a clause, that no later testament shall be of force: for
this clause also makes it be presumed, that the later testament proceeds not
from the true will of the maker. Nevertheless, as this clause, so that other by
the Kings express command and special signification of his later will may be
annulled. Again, I do not here use the authority of Polybius neither, who
refers the Roman Commonwealth to a mixed kind of Government; which, at that
time, if we respect not the doings themselves but the right of doing, was
merely popular. For, both the authority of the Senate, which he refers to an
Optimacy, and of the Consuls, whom he will have to be like Kings, was subject
to the people. The same may be said concerning other writers of the Politics,
who conceive it more agreeable to their design, to behold rather the external
appearance and daily administration of affairs, than to weigh the right itself
of the highest power.

LIVE. True examples of the supreme power divided.
MOre pertinent is that which Aristotle has written: Between (...) full
Kingdom Quod (...) vocat; eadem est (...) Soph^ Antigene, Plutarcho (...),
S^aboni (...).
, and a Laconical Dionysius Halicarnassensis de Laconicis regibus: Neque enim
Lacedaemonii pleno jure Reges erant.
which is a mere principality, some other species are interjected. An example
hereof, as I suppose, may be found in the Hebrew Kings; for, of these, that
they ruled, in most things, by the highest right, I think it is impiety to
doubt; for the people desired such a King as their neighbors Putabat populu^
nihil esse absurdi si cum viciniregnareatur, ipsi eandem im pe^ii so^mam
acciperent. Josephus.
had: but the Nations of the East were subject to their Kings in the most
humble way Aeschylus Persis de Rege Persa^um sic loquentem facit Atossam: --
(...). No'um illud Maronis: -- Regem non sic Aegyptus, and ingens Lydia, nec
po^uli Parthorum aut Medus Hydaspes Observant. -- Apud Livum: Syri and Asiatici
(...) hominum servituti nata; a quo non discrepat illud Apollonii apud
Philostratum: Assyri and Medi dominationem etiam adorant. Arist. 3. Polit. 14.
Aesia^ci dominatum aequo a^imo serunt. Cicero de p^or consularib. (...) and
Syris nationibus natis servituti. Sallust. de gentibus o^lentis: Adeo illis
^genita est sanctitas Regii nomi^. Apud Tacitum Civilis Batavis ad Gallos:
Hist. 4. Servirent Syria Asiaque and suet^ Oriens. Nam and in Germania and in
C^llia tum Reges erant, sed ut idem Tacitus notat, precari^ (...) regnandi, and
autoritate suadendi, non jubendi potestate.
. And above we have noted, that the whole Hebrew people was under the King. And
Samuel describing the right of Kings, sufficiently shows that the people have
no power left in themselves against the Kings injuries. Which the Fathers do
rightly gather from that of the Psalm: Against thee only have I sinned. Upon
which place Hierom Idem Hieronymus Epist. ad Rust. de paenitent^a: Rex enim
crat: alium non timebat, alium non habebat super se.
: Because he was a King, and feared not another. And Ambrose: Being a King, he
was in danger of no Laws, because Kings are free from such bonds; neither do
any Laws bind them over to punishment, being secured by their Sovereign power
Paria habet ad ^dem Psalm^m Arnobius minor Vit'ges apud Cassiodorum: Causa
Regiae potestatis supernis est applicanda judiciis, quandoquidem i'la a Coelo
telita est, ita seli Coelo debet innocentiam. Idem legere est apud Isidorum
Pelusiot. Epist. postre^ edita^um. 383.
: against man therefore he sinned not, to whose restraint he was not obnoxious.
I see there is consent among the Hebrews, that stripes were inflicted on the
King offending against those written Laws exstant about the Kings office; but
those stripes among them had no insamy, and they were of his own accord
received by the King in token of repentance, and therefore he was not beaten by
an Officer, but by one whom he was pleased to make choice of, and at his own
pleasure he was eased. As to coactive punishments, the Kings were so free from
them, that even the Law of excalceation, as having in it something ignominious,
was not of force upon them. The Hebrew Barnachmon has a sentence exstant
amongst the sayings of the Rabbis, in the title of Judges: Nulla creatura
judicat Regem, sed Deus benedictus. Ex. 32. 8. Deuteronomy. 1. 17. Psalm. 72. 1. 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. 8. 1 Chronicles. 26. 32. 2 Chronicles. 19. 11.
No creature judges the King, but the blessed God. These things being so,
neverthelels I think some causes were exempted from the Kings judgment, and
remained in the power of the Synedry of LXX. instituted by Moses at Gods
command, and by perpetual succession continued to the times of Herod.
Therefore, both Moses and David call Judges Gods, and judgments are called the
judgments of God, and Judges are said to judge not in the place of man but of
God. (...) the matters of God are plainly distinguished from the matters of the
King where, by the matters of God, the mos^ learned of the Hebrews bid us
understand judgments to be exercised according (...) Gods Law. The King of the
Jews, (...) deny not, exercised by himself certain capital judgments (in which
particulae Matmonides prefers him before the King of Israel) which also is
evinced by examples not a few, both in the sacred Scripture and in the writings
of the Hebrews: Yet certain kinds of causes seem no^ permitted to the Kings
cognizance, viz. of the Tribe, of the high Priest, of the Non capit Propbetam
perire extra Jerusalem. Luke 13. 33. Jer. 38. 5.
Prophet. And hereof there is an argument in the history of the Prophet Jeremy,
whom when the Princes required unto death, the King answered: Behold, he is in
your power, for the King can do nothing against you: to wit, in this kind of
matters. Yea, and the person that for any other cause was impeached before the
Synedry, could not by the King be exempted from their judgment. Therefore
Joseph. Antiqu. 14. 17.
Hircanus, when by power he could not hinder their judgment concerning Horod,
eluded the same by Art. In Macedonia, they that descended from Calanus, as
Calisthones in Arrian says, bare rule over that people not by force but by
Law. The Macedonians, says Curtius, are accustomed Lib. 14.
to the Regal government, yet are in a greater shadow of liberty than other
nations: For even the judgment of life and death was not in the Kings hand. Of
Capital matters, says the same Curtius, by the Lib. 6.
old custom of the Macedonians, the Army did enquire, in time of Peace the
Commons; the power of the Kings prevailed no further than their authority could
move. There is in another place of the same Author another token of this
mixture: The Macedonians decreed according to the custom Lib. 8.
of their nation, that the King should not hunt on foot, without the attendance
of his elect Princes or courtiers. Tacitus relates of the Gothones: They are
now in greater vassalage under their Kings, than other Germans: nor are they
yet deprived of all liberty. For he had before described the principality by the
authority of persuading, not by the power of Commanding: and after he
expresses a full Royalty in these words: One commands, without all
exceptions, not by a precarious right of governing. Eustathius upon the sixth of
the Odysses, where the Commonwealth of the Phaeaces is described, says it had
a mixture of Power, of the King, and of the States Laonicus Cha^cocondylas
taliae ait esse regna Pannonum and Anglorum, l. 2. Arragonum, l. 5. and
Navarrae eodem libro, ubi ait, nec magistratus a Rege creatos, nec praesidia
imposita nisi volentibus, nec quicquam populo imperatum contra mores. Reges
alios esse pleno cum jure, alios sub legibus, etiam Judaeus Levi Gersonides
notavit ad 1 Samuel 8. 4. Mira quae de Taprobane scribit Plinius lib. 6. c. 22.
Eligi regem a populo senecta clementiaque liberos non habentem, and si postea
gignat, abdicari, ne fiat haereditarium regnum. Rectores ei a populo xxx, dari,
nec nisi plurium sententia quenquam capite damnari. Sic quoque appellationem
esse ad populum, lxx. judice dari. Si liberent ii reum, non amplius xxx. (ita
enim legi locus hic debet) iis nullam esse dignitatem, gravissimo probro. Regi
cultum liberi patris, caeteris Arabum. Regem si quid delinquat m^rte mulctari,
nullo interimente, sed aversantibus cunctis and commercia etiam sermonis
negantibus. Servius ad illud 4. Aen. populumque patresque. Quidam hoc loco
volunt tres parts politiae comprehenlas, populi, optimatum, regiae potestatis.
Cato enim ait detribus istis partibus ordinatam fuisse Carthaginem.
. Something like it I observe in the times of the Roman Kings; for then all
matters almost went through the Royal hand. Romulus reigned over us, as he
pleased, says Tacitus. It is manifest, at the beginning of the City Kings had
all power, says Pomponius: yet Halicarnassensis will have something excepted
by the people even at that time. But if we give more credit to the Roman
Authors, in some causes there lay an appeal from the Kings to the people, as
Senoc^ has noted out of Cicero's books de Epist. 100.
Republica, out of the Pontifical books also, and Fenestella; shortly after,
Servius Tullus advanced to the Throne, not so much by right, as by the
favorable breath of the people, yet more abated the regal power. For, as
Tacitus speaks, 3. Annal.
he established Laws, which even the Kings themselves were to obey. The less
cause have we to wonder at that which Livy says, The power of the first
Consuls differd from the regal in little more than that 'twas annual. Such a
mixture also of a Democracy and Optimacy was at Rome in the time of the
Interregnnm, and in the first times of the Consuls. For in certain affairs, and
those of the greatest moment, the will of the people was a law, if the Fathers
would go before them with their authority Plutarchus Coriolano: Populus jus non
habebat aut legem condendi aut aliud quid jubendi nisi Senatus praecessisset
auctoritas. Similem mixturam in Genuatium rep. suis temporibus observat
Chalcocondylas l. 5. Live. lib. 6.
, and (as it were) prepare the bill; which authority afterward, the peoples
power increased, was only for a show, when the Fathers, as Livy and Dionysius
note, began with their voices, but the Assembly did what they pleased. For all
this, in after times there remained somewhat of a mixture, whilst, as the same
Livy speaks, the Government was in the hand if the Patricians, that is, of
the Senate, but the Tribunes, that is, the Plebeians, had a share, to wit, a
right of forbidding or interceding. And so Isocrates will have the Athenian
Commonwealth, in Solon's time, to have been (...)
an Optimacy mixed with a Democracy.

LV. Whether He can have supreme power, that is comprehended in an unequal
league.
UPon these premises, let us examine some questions, which are of frequent use
in the argument we have in hand. The first is, whether He may have supreme
power, who is comprehended in an unequal league. By an unequal League I
understand here, not that which is made between parties unequal in their
forces, as the Theban City in the time of Pelopidas had a league with the King
of Persians, and the Romans of old with the Massilians, and afterward with King
Justin. l. 43. Vol. Max. l. 7. cap. 1.
Massanissa; nor that which has a transient act, as when an enemy is received
to friendship, on condition he pay the cost of the war, or perform somewhat
else: but, that which in the very nature of the agreement gives a certain
permanent prelation to one side; that is, when the one is bound to conserve the
Empire and Majesty of the other; as it was in the league of the Etolians with
the Romans; that is, both to endeavor that the others Empire may be in safety,
and that his dignity, which is signified by the name of Majesty, may be
inviolat Imperii reverentiam dixit Tacitus, and fic explicat: Scde fixibusque
in sua ripa, mente auimoque nobiscum agunt. Lib. 4. Florus: Illi quoque
reliqui, qui immunes imperii erant, sentiebant tamen matnitudinem, and victorem
gentium populum Romanum reverebantur.
. Unto which kind are to be referr certain Rights of them which are now called
Rights of Protection, Advocacy, Mundiburg: also the Right of mother-cities
amongst the Grecians over their Colonies. For the Colonies wereas free, says
Thucydides, as the mother-Cities, but they ought to exhibit Lib. 1.
reverence to their Metropolu, and certain signs of honor. Livy says of the
old Lib. 1.
league between the Romans, who had received all the right of Alba, and the
Latins of the Alban race: In that league the Roman state was superior. Rightly
speaks Andronicus Rhodius after Aristotle: It is the property of friendship
'twixt Nicom. l. 9. c. 18.
unequals, that the stronger have more honor, and the weaker have more help.
We know what Proculus answered to this question, L. non dubito D. de cap.
to wit, that the people is free which is sub ect to the power of no other,
though it be contained in the league, that that people should fairly conserve
the Majesty of the other people. If then a people bound in such a league remain
free, if they be not subject to another power, it follows that they retain
the highest power. And the same is to be said of a King; For there is the same
reason of a free people and of a King, who is truly so. Proculus adds, such a
clause is in the league, to signify, the one people is superior, not that the
other is not free. Superior here is meant, not in power (for before he had
said, the one people is subject to the others power) but in authority and
dignity; which the following words do express by a fit similitude: As we
understand our Clients to be free, though they be not equal to us, neither in
authority, nor in dignity, nor in every right: So also are they to be conceived
free, whose duty it is to have a fair respect to the conservation of our
Majesty. Clients are under the trust of their patrons, so are a people
inferior Vide Cardinalem Tuscbum PP. concl. 935. exemplum habet in Dilimnitis,
qui (...) suique juris Persis militabant apud Agathiam lib. 3. Sic Irene
consilium fuit inter mariti liberos it a parti^ Imperium ut post natos faoeret
dignitate quidem minores, caeterum sui juris plenaeque potestatis. Vide
Crantzium Saxonicorum 10. de urbibus quaesein Austriacorum protectionem dedere.
Herodian. l. 5. Osroenorum and Armoriorum, quorum hi subditi erant, illi amici
and socii.
in the league under the trust of that people which in dignity is superior.
They are under patronage not under rule, as Sylla speaks in Appian Appian.
Mithr.
. Livy Live. lib. 3^.
says, in part, non in ditione: and Cic. Offic. 2.
Cicero, describing those more honest times of the Romans, tells us, they had
patrocinium sociorum, non imperium. With whom agrees well that saying of Scipio
Live. lib. 26.
Africanus the elder: The people of Rome had rather oblige men by favor than
fear, and unite foreign Nations to them by a faithful association, than subdue
them to a grievous servitude: and that which Strabo relates of the
Lacedaemonians after the Romans came into Greece: They remained free, conferring
nothing, beside a friendly aid. As private patronage takes not away personal
liberty, so public patronage takes not away Civil liberty, which without
supremacy of power cannot be understood. Therefore we see these are opposed in
Livy, To be under protection, and To be under command: And Augustus, in
Josephus, threatens the Arabian King Syllaeus, unless he would cease from doing
his neighbors wrong, He would take order, that of a friend he should be made a
subject: of which quality were the Kings of Armenia, who (as P^tus wrote to
Vologeses) were within the Roman dominion; and therefore were Kings, rather in
the sound of the name than really: such as were the Cyprian and other Kings of
old under the Kings of Persia: (...). lib. 16.
Subjects, as Diodorus says.

LVI. An Objection Answered.
PRoculus adds somewhat which seems opposite to that we have said: There
are accused before us some of the confederat Cities, and after sentence of
condemnation we inflict upon them punishment. But, for the understanding
hereof, we must know, that four kinds of Controversies may happen. First, if
the subjects of a people or King, that is under the protection of another, be
said to have done against the league: Secondly, if the people or the King
himself be accused: Thirdly, if the Fellows, which are under protection of the
same people or King, contend with one another: Fourthly, if the subjects
complain of the injuries of their own Rulers. In the first kind, if a fault
appear, the King or people is bound, either to punish the offender, or to give
him up to the party injured: which holds, not only 'twixt unequals, but between
those that are equally confederat, yea and among them that are not at all
confederate, as we shall show elsewhere. He is also bound to endeavor that
damages may be repaired: which at Rome was the Office of the Recuperators
Gallus Aelius apud Festum: Reciperatio est cum inter populum and Reges
nationesque ac civitates peregrinas lex convenit, quomodo per reciperatorem
reddantur res, reciperenturque resque prevatat inter se prosequantur. Live. lib.
23.
. But one of the Associats in the league has no direct right to apprehend or
punish the subjects of his confederate. Wherefore Decius Magius, a Campanian,
being put in bands by Annibal, and carried to Cyrene, and thence to Alexandria,
showed that he was bound by Annibal against the league, and so was freed. In
the second way, the confederate has a right to compel his Confederate, to
stand to the Articles of the league, and, if he will not, to punish him. But
this also is not peculiar to the unequal league: it has place too in that
which is equal. For, that one may take revenge of him that has offended, it is
sufficient, that he be not subject to the offender (of which elsewhere:)
wherefore the same thing comes to pass between Kings, or people not
confederate. In the third kind, as in an equal league, controversies are wont
to be brought before an Assembly Talae conventus vocatur (...).
of the Confederates, to wit, such as are not concerned in the question; as we
read the Grecians, the ancient Latins, and the Germans of old have done; or
else before Arbitrators, or before the Prince of the Association as a common
Arbitrarot: So in a league unequal, it is agreed for the most part, that the
controversies be debated before him who is superior in the league. This
therefore does not prove any power of command: for Kings also do usually try
their causes before judges of their own constitution. In the last kind, the
confederates have no right of cognizance. Therefore when Herod voluntarily
carried to Augustus certain accusations against his sons; You might, said they,
punish Joseph. l. 16. 6. 7, 8.
us your self, both as a father, and as King. And Scipio Vide Polyb. in
legationum ex^pto 105.
, when Annibal was accused at Rome by certain Carthaginians, said, the
Conscript Fathers ought not to interpose in a business of the Carthaginian Val.
Max. l. 4. c. 1.
Commonwealth. And herein (as Aristotle teaches) a confederacy and a
commonwealth do differ, that Confederates Polit. 3. 9.
take care no common injury be done unto them; not that the Citizens of a
Confederate Commonwealth do no injury one against another.

LVII. Another Objection answered.
IT is objected also, that in histories he that is superior in the league is
sometimes said to command; he that is inferior, to obey. But, neither ought
this to move us. For, either it is treated of things pertaining to the common
good of the Society, or of his private utility who is superior in the league.
In common affairs, out of time of Assembly, even where the League is equal, the
custom is for him who is chosen Chief of the league, to have command over his
Confederates, as Agamemnon over the Grecian Kings, the Lacedaemonians over the
Graecians afterward, and after them the Athenians. In the Speech of the
Corinthians in Thucydides we read: It becomes them that are Princes of the
league, not to seek their own particular advantage, but content themselves with
an eminency above the rest in taking care of the common Interest. Isocrates
relates, that the ancient Athenians had the conduct of Greece, and the charge
of all their Fellows, but so, that they left them all their liberty entire.
Isocrates alibi: itae ut imperium habere belli, non dominari se debcre
censerent: Item: Socialiter non heriliter res little curantes.
This the Lati^ call, Imperare to command, the Greek more modestly (...) to
order. The Athenians, when the conduct of the war against the Persians was
committed to them, (...), says Thucidides, they ordered (so the Commissioners
from Rome to Greece were said to be sent thither Plinius epist. 8. 24.
for ordering the state of the free Cities) wh^ towns should contribute money
against the Barbarians, what should provide stips. Now, if he does this, who is
only chief in a league, no marvel he does the same who is superior, in a
league unequal. Wherefore Empire in this sense, that is, the (...).
conduct of affairs, takes not away the liberty of others Rhodii in oratione
apud Senatum Romanum, quae apud Livium exstat l. 37. Graeci domesticis quondam
viribus etiam imperium amptectebantur: nunc imperium ubi est, ibi ut sit
perpetuum optant: libertatem vestris tueri armis (atis habent, quoniam suis non
possunt. Sic post Cadmeam a Thebanis receptam narrat Diodorus lib. 15. multas
civitates Graecas convenisse, Omnes ut liberae essent, sed Atheniensium ductu
uterentur. De ipsis Atheniensibus Philippi Macedonis tempore Dion. Prusaeensis:
quo tempore ductu belli omisso libertatem solam retinebant. Sic Caesar, quos
sub imperio Suevorum fuisse dicit, cosdem mox socios nominat.
. But in those things that concern the proper utility of the Superior, his
Requests are usually called Commands, not by right, but by likeness of the
effect, as the Desires of Kings are so called, and as Physicians are said to
rule their patients. Livy Lib. 42.
: Before this Consul (C. Posthumous) never was any one in any thing a charge or
burden to our Confederates: therefore the Magistrates were furnished with Mules,
tents, and all other necessaries, that they might not command such things from
our Fellows. Mean while it is true, it often comes to pass, that the Superior in
a league, if he much excel in strength, by little and little, usurps an Empire
properly so called, especially if the league be perpetual, with a right of
bringing in Garrisons into towns, as the Athenians did, when they sufferd an
appeal to be made unto them from their Fellows; which the Lacedaemonians never
did. In which times Isocrates compares the Empire of the Athenians over their
Confederates, to a Kingdom. So the Latins complaind, they endured servitude
Hal. l. 6. Live. l. 34. Hist. 4.
under the shadow of a league with Rome: so the Etolians, of a vain show and
empty name of liberty; and the Achaians afterward, that a league in appearance
was now become a precarious servitude. So in Tacitus Hoc ipsum est quod Arato
Plutarchus dicit (...). Molle servitlum, vvcula apud Tacitum hist. 4. Festus
Rufus de Rhodiis: Primum libere agebant, postea in consuetudinem parendi,
Romany clementer provocant bus, pervenerunt. Vide Agathiam lib. 1. ubi
monentur Gotthi quid a Francis cum tempore exspectandum habeant.
Civilis the Batavian complains of the same Romans: We are not Associats, as
heretofore, but are esteemed as slavos: and in another place, A miserable
slavery is falsely named peace. Eumenes also in Lib. 35. Lib. 37.
Livy says, the Fellows of the Rhodians were Fellows in word, indeed subjects
to their Empire, and obnoxious: And Magnetes, that in show Demetrias was free,
but indeed all things were done at pleasure Tales and Lazi Jusi^niani
temporibus. Vide Procopium Pers. 2.
of the Romans. So Polybius notes, the Thessalians had a seeming liberty, but
really were under command of the Macedontans. When these things are done, and
so done, that patience passe^ into a right (of which elsewhere) then either they
which were Fellows become Subjects, or at least there is a partition of the
supreme power, such as we have declared above to be possible.

LVIII. That the highest power may consist with paying of Tribute.
I See no cause to doubt, but they that (...), ut est apud Thucydid.
pay a certain Tribute Persae pecuniam annuam ab Jussiniano accipi^bant, qua
de^e vide Prococopium Persicorum 2. and Gotthicoium 4. Id molli vocabalo
vocabalur stipendium ad tutandas portas Caspias. Turca Arabas montanas pecunia
placant.
either for redeeming of injuries, or to gain safeguard (such as were the
Hebrew Joseph. l. 15. Negabat An tonius rectum elie reg^m vocari ad rat ones
reudendas de iis quae ut Rex fec. (...): ^ta enim ne regem quidem cum fore. Par
esse ut qui honerem ei dederint, et^am potestare quam liberr me uti eum sinant.
Chrysostomus 2. de Eleemosyna: Judaei, ex quo retro ferri res eorum coepere,
Romano attributi imperio, neque in plena, ut ante, erant li e^: neque tamen ita
ut nunc omnino servi, sed sociorum vocabulo honorabantur, regibus suis tributa
a pendentes and ab iis accipientes praefectos. Caeterum in plerisque suis
utebantur legibus, ita ut and popularium delinquontes ipsi punirent secundum
mores patrios.
Kings, and of the neighboring nations after the time of Antonius) may have
the highest power; although this confession of their weakness diminish somewhat
of their dignity.

LIX. That the highest power may be holden in Fee.
TO many it seems a more difficult question concerning feudal obligation, but
it may easily be solved out of that which has been said. For in this contract,
(which is proper to the German Nations, nor is any where found but where the
Germans have seated themselves) two things are to be considered, Personal
obligation, and Right over the thing. Personal obligation is the same, whether
one by feudal right possess the right it self of Governing, or any other thing
also placed else where. Now, such an Obligation, as it would not take away from
a private man the right of personal liberty, so neither does it take away from
a King or people the right of the highest power, which is civil liberty. Which
is most apparently to be seen in the free feuds which they call Franca, which
consist not in any right over the thing, but in personal obligation only. For
these are nothing but a kind of unequal league, (whereof we have spoken) wherein
the one party promises aid and service, the other safeguard and protection.
Suppose also that aid was promised against All, which Feud they now call Ligium
(for that word was of larger signification) this detracteth nothing from the
right of the highest power over subjects: not to mention now that there is
always a tacit condition, while the war is just, of which elsewhere. But, as to
the right over the thing, truly it is such, that the right it self of
governing, if it be holden in Fee, may be lost, either the family being
extinct, or also for some sort of crimes. Yet in the mean it cease not to be
highest: for we must distinguish (as has been said) between the thing it self,
and the manner of having it. And by such a right I see many Kings constituted
by the Romans, so, that the royal family exspiring, the Empire should return to
themselves: which is noted by Strabo concerning Lib. 12.
Paphlagonia and some other.

LX. The Right, and the Exercise of it distinguished.
MOreover, both in Empire and Dominion, we must distinguish the Right from the
Use of right, or the first act from the second. For as an Infant King has
right, but cannot exercise his power; so also one of an alienated mind, and in
captivity, and that lives in the territory of another, so that freedom of
action about his distant Empire is not permitted him: for in all these cases
Curators or Vicegerents are to be given. Therefore Vide Plutarch. Demetrio.
Demetrius, when being in the power of Saleucus he was under some restraint,
forbad any credit to be had, either to his seal, or letters, but appointed all
things to be administered, as if he had been dead.

LXI. Of the war of Subjects against their Superiors. The question L. 1. c. 4.
stated.
WAr may be waged, both by private men against private, as by a traveller
against a robber; and by those that have the highest power against those that
have it likewise, as by David against the King of the Ammonites; and by private
men against those that have the highest power, but not over them, as by Abraham
against the King of Babylon and his neighbors; and by those that have the
highest power over private men, either subject to them, as by David upon the
part of Isboseth; or not subject, as by the Romans against the pirates. Only the
question is, whether it be lawful for private or for public persons to make
war upon them, under whose power, whether supreme or subordinate, they are. And
first, that is beyond all controversy, Arms may be taken against inferiors by
those who are armed by authority of the Highest power: as Nehemias was armed by
the Edict of Artaxerxers against the neighboring Governors. So the Roman
Emperors grant L. votu mc. de Metatorib. l. 12.
leave to the Lord of the soil to force away the Camp-measurers. But it is
inquired, what is lawful against the Highest Power, or the Lower Powers doing
what they do by authority of the Highest. That Is without controversy amongst
all good men; If they command any thing contrary to natural right or to the
divine precepts, what they command is not to be done. For the Apostles, when
they said, we must obey God rather than men, appealed to a most certain rule,
written in all men's minds, which you may find almost in the same words in
Plato: but if for any such cause, or otherwise because it is the pleasure of
the Sovereign, injury be offered us, it is to be sufferd with patience, rather
than resisted by force.

LXII. By the law of Nature, war upon Superiors, as such, is not ordinarily
lawful.
ALl men indeed naturally (as we have said above) have right to keep off injury
from themselves. But, Civil society being ordained for the maintenance of
tranquillity, thereupon arises presently to the Commonwealth a certain greater
right over us and ours, so far as it is necessary to that end. The Commonwealth
therefore may, for publicque peace and order, prohibit that promiscuous right
of resisting: and no doubt is to be made of the will thereof, when without that
the end cannot be attained. For if that promiscuous right of resisting
continue, it will not be now a Commonwealth, but a dissolute multitude, such as
were the Cyclops, of whom Euripides says, Every Euripid. Cyclope.
one gives laws to his wife and children, and, A confused company, where every
one commands and none obeyes De Bebricii similia pro^idit Valerius: Non soedera
legum Vlla col^n placidas aut su ra tenentia me^tes.
: And the Aborigines, who, as Salust relates, were a savage kind of people,
without laws, without rule, disorderly and dissolute: and the Getulians, of
whom he speaks in another place, that they were not governed, neither by
customs, nor by the Law or command of any Ruler. The manners of all
Commonwealths are so, as I have said: It is a general agreement of human
society, says Augustine, to obey Kings. Rex est suo utens jure nulli obnoxious.
Aeschylus. Nam Principes sunt: obsequendum. quippeni? Soph.
To the Prince, says Tacitus, have the Gods given supreme power; to the
subjects is left the glory of obedience. Hic quoque,

Indigna digna habenda sunt Rex quae facit.
Aequum atque iniquum Regiiimperium feras. Seneca. Imperia habentum perferenda
inscitia est. Euripid.

Add that which is in Salust Impune quidvis facere, id est Regem esse.
Pertinent huc M. Antonii verba quae ex Josepho modo adduximus. L. Milites..
irreverens. D. de re milit. Rufus legi. militaribus. cap. 15.
. To do what he will without punishment, that is to be King. Hence it is, that
every where the Majesty, that is the dignity, whether of a people, or of One
that has the highest power, is defended by so many Laws, by so many
punishments: which dignity cannot consist, if the license of resisting do
remain. A Soldier, who has resisted his Captain willing to chastise him, if he
has laid hold on his rod, is cashierd; if he purposely break it, or laid
violent hand upon his Captain, dies. And in Aristotle it is, If one that
bears office beats any man, he must not lift up his hand against him.

LXIII. Nor is it allowed by the Hebrew Law.
IN the Hebrew Law, he is condemned Deuteronomy. 17. 12. Jos. 1. 18.
to death, who is disobedient, either to the High Priest, or to him who is
extraordinarily appointed by God to be Ruler of the people. That which is in
Samuel 1 Samuel 8. 11. Deuteronomy. 17. 14.
of the Kings right, plainly appears to him that looks rightly on it, neither
to be understood of true right, that is, of a faculty to do a thing honorably
and justly (for a far other manner of life is prescribed the King in that part
of the Law, which declares his office) nor to signify a naked fact: (for there
would be nothing peculiar in it, since also private men are wont to do injuries
to private men:) but a fact which has some effect of right, that is, an
obligation of nonresistence Philo in Flaccum: Quando enim defectionis suspecti
fuimus? quando non pacis amantes ab omnibus sudicati sumus? instituta vero,
quibus utimur quotidie, nonne extra reprehensionem sunt? nonne ad concordiam
bonumque statum civitatis conduount?
. Wherefore it is added, that the people oppressed with these injuries should cry
to God for help; to wit, because no human remedies remained. So then is this
called right, as the Praetor is said reddere jus, to do right, even when L. jus
pluribus. D. de just. and jure.
he determines unrightly.

LXIV. Least of all, by the Evangelical Law. The first proof, out of S. Paul.
IN the new Covenant Christ commanding to give to Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, would have the disciples of his institution understand, that no less,
if not greater obedience, with patience (if need be) is due to the Highest
Powers, than the Hebrews owed to the Hebrew Kings: which his best Interpreter
Paul the Apostle explaining more at large, and describing the duties of
subjects, amongst other words has these: Whosoever resists the power,
resists the ordinance of Romans 13. 2.
God: and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. He adds: For
he Verse. 4.
is the Minister of God to thee for good. And again: Wherefore ye must needs be
subject, not only for wrath, but also for Verse. 5.
conscience sake. In subjection he includes a necessity of not resisting, nor
that only that springs from fear of a greater evil, but that flows from the
very sense of our duty, and obliges us, not to men only, but to God. He adds
two reasons: First, because God has approved that order of ruling and obeying,
both of old in the Hebrew Law, and now in the Gospel; wherefore the public
powers are to be so esteemed by us, as constituted by God himself. For we make
those things ours, which we grace with our authority. Second, because this
order serves to our good. But, one may say, to suffer injuries is nothing
profitable. Here do some, more truly I think than appositely to the meaning of
the Apostles, say, these injuries are profitable to us; because the patience
shall not go without reward. To me the Apostle seems to have considered the
universal end proposed to that order, which is the public tranquillity, Been
Chrisostomus: (...). princeps nimirum Evergelium praedicanti. Dedolat ille quod
tu descobtuas,
, wherein also is comprehended the peace of every one. And truly, it is not to
be doubted, but that for the most part we attain unto this good by the public
powers: for no man wishes ill unto himself: now, the Rulers fecilitie
consists in the felicity of his subjects. Sint quibus imperes. Dictam hoc
Sullae aiunt Plutarchus, Florus and alii, unde ^sit August nus l. 3. c. 28. de
Civ. Dci.
Let there be, whom thou may rule, said One. The Hebrews have a proverb: If
there were no Government, one man would devour another alive. Which sense is in
Chrysostom too: Unless Cities had Rulers, we should lead a life more wild than
the wild beasts, not biting only but eating us one the other Est hoc de
statuis lexto: sed and noc Tolletribunolia, and omnem de vita tranquillitatem
abstuler is. Deinde, N^ mibi illos. efer, qui mole usi sunt bonorivus, sed
ipsius instituti vide pulchritudinem, and sapientiam ejus admirabilis qui
primus ejus aucter suit. Idem ad Romanos: Magistratus siabstuleris, perierint
omnia, non urbes stabunt, non agri, non sorum, nec quicquam aluid. Evertentur
omnia, and fortioris esea fiet quilibet infirmier. Idem sensus apud eundem ad
Ephesians. 5.
. But if at any time Rulers are transported by too much fear, or anger, or
other affections diverting them from the way that leaderh to tranquiility, that
is to be accounted among accidents less frequent, and which, as Tacitus says,
are recompensed by the intervenience of better things. Now, Laws content
themselves with bearing a respect to what falls out for the most part, as
Theophrastus said; whereto is pertinent that of Cato, No Law is perfectly
commodious; L. (...) D. de Legib. (...). 3. in fint. D. de pet. h^ered. Live.
lib. 34.
this only is enquired, if it be profitable to the greater part and in the
main. But the things that happen more rarely, are notwithstanding to be bound
up in common rules, because although the reason of the Law in this special
fact especially has not place, yet the reason abides in its generality,
whereunto the specials are to be subject. For that is better than to live
without rule, or that the rule be left to every ones pleasure. Seneca to the
purpose: better it was, that even the just Sin. de ben. cap. 16.
excuse of a few should not be accepted, than that all men should attempt to
make some excuse. Here also has place that speech of Pericles Thucydid. lib.
2. q^icum been convenit illud Ambrofii lib. 3. dc Offic. Eadem singulorum est
utilitat quae universoium. Et illud in jure: Semper non quod privatim interest
uni ex sociis servari debet, sed quod Communi societati expedit. L. Actiones.
sect. Labeo. D. pro Socio.
, never enough remembered: Thus I conceive, that the Commonwealth which is well
in the general is better for particular men, than where private estates are
flourishing, and the public is sick. For he that has his domestique fortunes
well settled, his country being overthrown, must needs fall with it. But he
whose private estate is decayed in a prosperous Commonwealth, is thereby much
more easily repaired. Wherefore, when the public may sustain losses of
particular men, But particular men cannot make amends for the public
calamities, why should we not all join together in maintaining the common
Interest, (...) doing as you do, while you are astonis^ at your private
damage, betraying the Commonwealth. The sense whereof is in brief expressed by
Lib. 26.
Livy thus: The Commonwealth being safe, secures the private estates easily; in
vain shall you keep your own, if you betray the public Plato dixerat legum 4.
Quod commune est connectit civitates, quod singulorum dissipat; quare and
public and privatim utilius est, ut publica magis quam privata curentur.
Xenophon vero: Qui in bells contra ducem seditiose se gerit, facit hoc cum suae
salutis periculo. Eodem and illa Jamblichi pertinent: Non disjuncta and privata
utilitas a publica, i^o in bono communi singular etiam continetur: and ut in
enimalibus caeteraque natura, it a in civitatibus, in totius salute salus est
partium.
. Non among things concerning the public, the principal no doubt is that
order, which we have said, of ruling and obeying: and that cannot consist with
a private license of resisting. I desire to explain this by a noble passage in
Dio Cassius: Truly I think it not becoming, that the Ruler of a City should
give place to his subjects, nor is there hope of safety if they will command,
whose duty is to obey. For consider, what order will be in a family if the
elder be despised by the younger; What method in a school, if the learners care
not for the teachers; how can the sick recover their health, if they will not
in all things be obedient to their Physicians; how can Seamen escape danger, if
the Saylors will not hearken to the commands of their Masters. For by nature it
is necessary and safe for men, that some should govern, and some be subject.

LXV. The second proof, out of S. Peter.
TO Paul let us add Peter as a fit companion: his words are these; Honor 1
Epist. 2. 18, 19, 20.
the King: Servants be subject to your Masters with all fear, not only to the
good and gentle, but also to the froward. For this is thankworthy, if a man for
conscience toward God endure grief suffering wrongfully. For what glory is it,
if when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? but if when
ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently: this is acceptable
Tertullian. de poenitentia. Timor hominis Dei honor est.
with God. And when he confirms this by the example of Christ. The same sense
also is expressed in Clement's Constitutions in these words: Let a servant
fearing God bear a good affection to his Master, though ungodly, though unjust.
Two things are to be noted here. First, that the subjection due to masters,
even to the froward, is also to be referd to Kings: for that which follows,
built on the same foundation, respects no less the office of subjects than of
servants. Second, the subjection required of us is such as carries with it
patience of injuries. So is it usually said of parents:

Ames parentem, si aequ^ est: si non, ser as. Terentius Hec. Nam matris far
injurias me, Parmeno, pletas jubet. Cic. pro Cluentio: Non modo reticere
homines parentum injurias, sed etiam aequo animo far oportet. Habet ad hoc
praeceptum pulchra Chrysostomus tum 2. ad Timoth. cum libro 5. adversus
Judaeos. Pertinent huc and quae Epictetus and post eum Simplicius habent de
duabus ansit.
A gentle parent's dear:
Yet the ungentle bear.
And a youth that had long frequented Zeno's school being asked, What he had
learned there, answered, To bear my Fathers anger. Justin of Lysimachus: Wit^ a
good coutage he received disgrace from the King, as from his father. And it
(...) in Livy; As the hardness of parents, so i^ that of our Country to be
mollified by patience and sufferance. It is said in tacitus, The natures of
Kings must be end^red: and again, We must pray that we may have good Emperors,
and tolerate the bad ^pud persas, laudante Claudiano, Quamvis crudelibus aeque
Paretur dominis.
.

LXVI. Further proof from the examples of the ancient Christians.
FRom this Law of our Lord, the practice Ad quam pertinet Canon 18. Concilii
Chalcedonensis, repetitus Canone 4. Concilii in Trullo: Concilium Tole^num 4.
Capitulum 2. Caroli Calvi in villa Colonia. Synodus Suessionensis canone 5.
of the ancient Christians, the best interpreter of the Law, departs not. For
although very ill men often possessed the Roman Empire, nor were there wanting
who under color of relieving the commonwealth opposed themselves against them,
yet the Christians never adjoined themselves to their enterprises. In
Clements's Constitutions we read, It is unlawful to resist the Royal power.
Tertullian in his Apologetique says: Whence are those Cassii, Nigri and
Albini? Whence are they that set upon Caesar between the two laurels? whence
are they that show their palestric art in stopping his breath? whence are they
that break into the palace armed, bolder than all those Xiphilinus Domitiano:
Insidias autem ei communicato inter se consilio struxere Parthenius praepositus
cubiculariorum, and Sigerius, and ipse e cubiculariis. Martial. l. 4.
Sigeriosque mero^, Partheniosque sonas. Corruptum id nomen non modo hic in
Tertulliano suerat, sed adhuc est in Suctonio, ubi Saturius, and in Victore
vulgari ubi Casperius legitur.
Sigerii (so the MS. plainly, in the library of the most worthy Puteans) and
bolder than the Parthenit? They were of the Romans, unless I am deceived, i. e.
of such as were not Christians. That which he says of the palestrick art
pertains to the death of Commodus, wrought by the hand of a palestrite at the
command of the Prefect Aelius Laetus: than which Emperor yet, scarce any was
more wicked. Parthenius, whose fact likewise is detested by Tertullian, was he
that had slain the Emperor Domitian. To the^e he compares Plautianus the
Praetorian Prefect, who designed to kill Septimius Severus, a very sanguinary
Emperor, in his palace: Against the same Severus, took arms, as on behalf of
the Commonwealth, in Syria Pescennius Niger, in Gallia and Britain Clodius
Albinus: But their enterprise also displeased the Christians, which Tertullian
likewise boasts of to Scapula: We are defamed concerning the Emperors
Majesty: yet could the Christians never be found, either Albinians, or
Nigrians, or Cassians. Cassians were they that followed Avidius Cassius an
eminent man, who having taken up arms in Syria, pretended he would restore the
Commonwealth, undone by the negligence of M. Antonius. Ambrose, when he thought
injury was done, not to himself alone, but to his flock, and to Christ, by
Valentinus the son of Valentinian, would not use the commotion of the people
ready enough to make resistance. Idem Ambros. ep. 33. Vultis in vincularapere?
voluntas est mihi. Non ego me vallabo circumfusione populorum. Imitatus est
magnus Gregorius lib. 6. epist. 1. Si in morte Longobardorumme miscere
voluissem, hodie Longobar dorum gens nec Regem, nec Duces, nec Comites haberet,
atque in summa confusione esset divisa.
Violence, says he, Lib. 5. Orat. in Auxent. Inseruit Gratianus cause. 23.
quaest. 8.
being offered, I have not learned to resist: I can grieve, I can weep, I can
sigh: against arms and soldiers, oven Goths, my arms are my tears. For such
are the muniments of Priests. In any other sort, neither ought I, nor can I
resist. After: It was required of me, that I should restrain the people: I
answered, it was in me, not to raise them; in Gods hand, to quiet them. The same
Ambrose would not use the forces of Maximus against the Emperor, being both an
Arrian and a persecutour of the Church. So was Julian the Apostat, Theodoret.
hist. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 4.
when he plotted the Churches ruin, repressed by the tears of Christians, as
Nazianzen says, adding. This was the only Orat. 1. in Julian.
remedy against a persecutor. And yet almost all his Army was made up of
Christians. Add hereunto, that, as the same Nazianzen observes, that
persecution of Julian, was not only injurious to the Christians, but had
brought the Commonwealth also into extreme danger. We will close up this with a
saying of Augustine, where he explaines the words of Paul to the Romans: It is
necessary for this life we should be subject, Prop. 74.
not resisting, if they (the Governors) shall please to take any thing from us.

LXVII. It is not lawful for inferior Magistrates to make war upon the
Highest.
OUr age has brought forth men, learned indeed, but too observant of times and
places, who persuaded themselves first (for so I believe) and then others, that
the things above spoken have place among private persons, not also among
inferior Magistrates P. Martyr ad Judicum 3. Paraeus ad 13. cap. ad Romans Jun.
Brutus. Danaeus lib. 6. polit. and alii.
: who (as these men think) have a right to resist the injuries of the
Sovereign; yea they sin, unless they do resist. This is not to be admitted. For
as in Logic the intermediate Genus speciale, Sen. epist. 58.
species, if you respect the genus, is species; if the species below it, is
genus: so these Magistrates, in regard of their inferiors are public
persons, but in relation to their superiors are private. For all faculty of
governing, which is in Magistrates, is so subjected to the highest Power, that
whatsoever they do against the will of the sovereign, is destitute of that
faculty, and therefore to be accounted for a private act. For, that saying of
the Philosophers has place here also, Averroes 5. Metaph. tom. 6. Ordinem non
dari nisi cum relatione ad aliquid primum.
There can be no order without relation unto somewhat which is first. Who think
otherwise, to me they seem to introduce such a state of things, as the Ancients
feign to have been in heaven before the the Rise of Majesty, when they say the
minor Gods yielded not to Jove. But the Order (which I have mentioned) and Sic
in familia paterfamilias primus, inde materfamilias, inde filii, mox ordinarii
servi, postremo servi vicarii. vide Chrysostom. 1 Cor. 13. 3.
subalternation is not only known by common sense Unde illud, Omne sub reguo
graviore regnum est: Et Papinii illud, Vice cuncta reguntur, Alternisque
regunt: Et Augustini dictum celebre, Ipsos humanarum rerum gradus adverte, si
aliquid jusserit Curator, faciendum: non tamen si contra Proconsul jubeat: aut
si Consul aliquid jubeat, and aliud Imperator. Non utique contemnis potestatem,
sed eligis majori servire: n^ hine debet minor irasci, si major praelatus est.
Et hoc ejusdem de Pilato, Talem quippe Deus dederat illi potestatem, ut esset
etiam ipse sub Caesaris potestate.
, but proved also by divine authority. For the 1 Ep. 2.
Prince of the Apostles would have us to be subject otherwise to the King,
otherwise to the Magistrates: to the King as supereminent, i. e. without any
exception, beside those things which are directly commanded by God, who
approves patience of injury, forbids it not: to the Magistrates, as sent by the
King, i. e. deriving their power from him. And when Paul requires every soul to
be subject to the highest powers, he included also the inferior Magistrates.
If we look back upon the Hebrew people, where so many Kings were contemners of
divine and human Law, we shall never find that the inferior Magistrates,
amongst whom were very many men pious and valiant, took so much upon them, as
to oppose any force against the Kings, unless they had received from God, who
is King of Kings, a special mandate. But on the contrary, what is the duty of
Peers, 1 Samuel 15. 30.
Samuel shows, when in the sight of the Peers, and people, with accustomed
veneration he attended Saul now ruling perversely. Moreover, the state of
public Religion always depended on the will of the King and Sanedrin. For,
that the Magistrates and people, after the King, promised their fidelity to
God, this must be understood so far as it was in the power of every one. And
more, the images of false Gods, publikly exstant, we never read to have been
thrown down, unless by command either of the people in the free State, or of
the Kings if they ruled. Howbeit, if at any time any thing was done by force
against the Kings, it is related for testimony of divine providence permitting
it, not for approbation of humane fact. The Authors of the contrary opinion are
wont to object a saying of Trajan, when he gave a sword to the Praetorion
Prefect; Hoc pro me utere, si recte impero; si male, contra me.
Use it for me, if I govern well; if ill, against me. But we must know that
Trajan, as appears by Plinio's Panegyric, was very studious to show nothing
regal, but to act a Quod postea imitati Pertinax and Macrinus, quorum orationes
egregias apud Herodianum vide. Dion. lib. 6.
true Prince, subject to the judgment of Senate and people, whose decrees the
Prefect's duty was to execute even upon the Prince himself. Like to this is
that we read of M. Antoninus, who would not touch the public money without
the advice of the Senate.

LXVIII. In case of extreme and inevitable necessity, what may be done.
THis is a greater question, whether the Law of not resisting bind us in
extreme and most certain danger. For even some Laws of God, although generally
expressed, have a tacit exception of extreme necessity: which in the time of the
Hasmoneans was defined by wise men concerning the Law of the Sabbath Whence it
is a common saying, Peril (...) life drives away the Sabbath: and a Je^ in
Synesius gives this reason of neglectin^ the Law of the Sabbath, We were
brought Vide etians verba Jonathan. 1 Macc. c. 9. 44.
into most certain danger of our life. Whi^ exception is approved by Christ
himself as also in another Law of not eating the shewbread. And the Hebrew
masters out of the old tradition, add the same exception to the laws of
forbidden meats and to some other: And rightly; Not, that God may not bind us
over to certain death, if he please; but, because certain laws are of such an
argument, that it is not credible they were given out of (...) rigid a will.
Which holds more strongly in humane laws. I deny not, but even a humane law may
command some act of virtue under certain peril of death, a^ the law of not
deserting ones Vide fose phum ubi de custodibus Saulus agit. Polyb. (...).
Station but we must not rashly conclude, that was the will of the Law, maker;
nor d^ men seem to have taken so much right over themselves and others, but so
far a^ extreme necessity requires it. For laws are wont (and so they ought) to
be made by men with sense of humane imbecility. Now the law of which we speak,
seems to depend upon their will, wh^ first consociate themselves into civil
society, from whom thenceforth a right flows and comes unto the Rulers. And
these, if they were asked, whether their will was to impose upon all this
burden, to die rather than in any case to repel by force the force of their
superiors, I know not whether they would answer, it was their will, unless
perhaps with this additament; if resistance cannot be made without very great
perturbation of the Commonwealth, or the destruction of very many innocent
persons. For, what in such a circumstance charity would commend, may be also, I
doubt not, deduced into a humane Law. One may say, that rigid obligation, to die
rather than ever to repel any injury of superiors, proceeds not from humane
law, but from divine. But we must note, Men at first, not by divine precept,
but drawn of their own accord upon experience of the infirmity of divided
families to defend themselves against violence, closed together in the bond of
civil society: whence civil power has its spring, which therefore Peter
calls a humane ordinance 1 Pet. 2. 13. Romans 13.
, though elsewhere too, it is called a Divine ordinance, because God approved
this wholesome institution of man. But God, approving humane law, is supposed to
approve it as humane, and in a humane manner. Barclay, the most Barclaius lib.
3. adv. Monarchom. cap. 8.
stour defender of Regal Power, descends yet so far, as to grant the
people, and an Insigni parti.
eminent part thereof, a right of defending themselves against immane cruelty;
when yet the same Author acknowledges Lib. 6. c. 23. and 24.
the whole people to be subject to the King. I do easily conceive, the more
value that is of which is conserved, the more equity it is, which give us an
exception against the words of of the Law: nevertheless, indistinctly to
condemn either single persons, or a le^ part of the people, which heretofore
has used the last safeguard of necessity, so, as to have respect in the mean
time to the common good, Vix ausim.
I scarce dare. For David, who, except a few acts, has testimony of a life
exactly conformed to the laws, 1 Samuel 22. 2. and 23. 13.
had about him armed men, first four hundred, and then a greater number; to
what purpose, but to keep off violence, if it should be offered. But withal,
this is to be noted, David did not this, till after he had found, both by
Jonathan's discovery, and by very many other most certain arguments, that Saul
sought after his life; And then, neither invades he Cities, nor takes occasions
of fighting, but retreats and hides himself, sometimes in the wilderness,
sometimes amongst other people, and has a religious care never to hurt his own
Country. Parallel to this may seem the action of the Maccabees. For, that some
defend their arms upon this title, as if Antiochus had not been King but an
Invader, I think it vain; when the Maccabees and their followers, in all the
history, never call Antiochus by any other but the name of King: and rightly,
when long before the Hebrews had acknowledged the Macedonian Power, into whose
right Antiochus succeeded. As for that prohibition to set an alien over the
people, that Law is to be understood of voluntary election, not of what the
people was compeld to do, drawn by necessity of the times. And for that which
others say, that the Maccabees used the right of a people, who had liberty
(...).
to live by their own laws, it is not firm neither: for the Jews, subdued first
to Nebuchodonosor by the law of war, by the same law were subject to the
successors of the Chaldaeans, the Medes and Persians: all whose Empire devolved
to the Justin. lib. 36. Primus Xerxes Rex Persarum Judaeos domuit, postea cum
ipsis Persis in ditionem Alexandri magni venere, diuque in potestate Macedonici
Imperii suere. A Demetri^ cum descivissent, amicitia Romanorum petita, primi
omnium ex Orientalibus libertatem receperunt, facile tunc Romany de alieno
largientibus.
Macedonians. Hence are the Jews called by Tacitus. Vilissima pars
servientium. Tac. Hist. 1. 5.
The most vile part of those that serve, while the East was in the power of the
Assyrians, Medes and Persians. Nor did they covenant for any thing with
Alexander and his successors, but without any condition came under their
dominion, as before they had been under Darius. But if the Jews were sometimes
permitted to have open exercise of their Rites and Laws, this was a precarious
right, arising from the favor of the Kings, not from any law or condition
annexed to the Government. There is nothing therefore that can clear the
Maccabees, besides extreme and most certain danger: to wit, so long as they
conteind themselves within terms of sel^ defense, so, as to retire into
devious places, after David's example, to secure themselves; and not to enter
into batta^ but when they were assaulted.

LXIX. The King's Person Sacred.
MEan while, this caution is to be observed, even in such a danger the person
of the King must be spared: which they that think David did, not out of any
necessity of duty, but out of some higher design, are much mistaken. For David
himself plainly said, No man can lay 1 Samuel 26. 9. Exodus 22. 28. Optat. l. 2.
hands upon the King, and be innocent. Well he knew, 'twas written in the law,
Thou shall not revile the Gods (that is, the highest Judges) nor curse the
Ruler of thy people. In which law the special mention made of the eminent
powers, evidently shows something special to be commanded. (Wherefore Optatus
speaking of this fact of David says, He was hindered by a full remembrance of
the divine commands. Josephus de Davide. sed statim paenitudine ductus,
injustum facinus esse dixit, Deminum suum occidere. Et post: Horrendum, regem
quamvis malum interficere, poenam enim id facienti imminere ab eo qui regem
dedit.
And he puts these words into David's mouth, I was willing to overcome my enemy,
but that I chose rather to keep the Command of my God.) Now, for evil words
that are false, it is not lawful to cast them at a private person: against a
King therefore we must not use them, when they are true. For, as the Writer of
the Problems, which bear Aristotle's Problem. sect. 40.
name, affirms, He that reproacheth the Ruler is injurious to the City
Julianus Misopogone: Sunt enim leges severae pro principibus, ita ut qui in
principtm injuriosus fuerit, is ex animi libidine conculcaverit leges.
. And if the Ruler must not be offended with the tongue, much less certainly
with the hand: whence we also read, that David's heart smote him for violating
the garment of the King; so much did he apprehend the sanctitude of his person.
And not without cause: For since the highest power cannot but ly open to the
hatred Quintil. Declamat. 348. Hanc esse conditionem omnium, qui
administrationem reipub. aggrediuntur, ut ea quae maxim pertinent ad salutem
commanem, cum quadam sui invidia efficere cogantur. Vide ea de re Liviae verba
ad Augustum apud Xiphil. ex Dione.
of many, the Rulers person was with a peculiar fense to be secured. The Romans
made a Constitution that the Tribunes of the common people should be
inviolable. The Essenes had a saying, that Kings are to be accounted sacred
Plutarch. Agide: Nec fas, nec licitum regis corpori manus infer. Insigne
illud apud Hometum:- Nam pro populi pastore timebat, Ne quid ei accideret. Been
Chrysostomus 1 Timothy 1. Si quis ovem jugulet ab eo gregem immi^ui: ut si quis
pastorem de medio sustulerit ab eo totum gregem dissipari. Seneca lib. priore
de Clem. c. 3. Somnum ejus ^octurnis excubiis muniunt: latera objecti
circumsusique defendunt: incurrentibus periculis se apponunt. Non hic est sine
ratione populis urbibusque consensus, etc.
. It is in Curtius, that the nations which are under Kings, reverence their
Kings as Gods. And Artabanus the Persian says: Apud Plutarch Theraistocle.
Amongst our many good Laws, this is the best, that the King is to be
reverenced and adored, as the Image of God the Savior of all.

LXX. Of Christian subjection.
It Is a greater question, whether so much as was lawful for David, and lawful
for the Maccabees, be allowed unto Christians; whose Master so often commanding
his disciples to undertake the cross, seems to require a patience more exact.
Certainly, where Superiors threaten Christians with death for religion sake,
Christ gives them leave to fly; them I mean whom necessary office binds not to
any place: beside flight he permits nothing, And Peter says, Christ, when he
suffered, left us an example to follow; Who did no sin, neither was guile found
1 Pet. 2. 22, 23.
in his mouth: Who when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he sufferd, he
threatened not; but committed himself to him that judges righteously. The same
Apostle bids Christians give thanks to God, and 1. Pet. 4. 13. etc.
rejoice, if they suffer as Christians. And surely, by this patience most of
all, we find Christian religion to have prevailed and spread it self.
Wherefore, in my opinion, the ancient Christians, who, coming fresh from the
discipline of the Apostles and Apostolical men, did more perfectly both
understand and obey their prescriptions, are very much injured by them, who
think the reason why they defended not themselves in most certain peril of
death, was, because they wanted not will, but strength. Imprudent, no doubt,
and impudent had Tertullian been, if, before the Emperors, who could not be
ignorant of the truth, he had so confidently dared to tell a ly: If we were
willing (says he) to use open hostility, should we want numbers and forces? We
have filled your Cities, Islands, Castles, Towns, Camps, Palace, Senate, all
your places, but your Temples. And were our forces unequal to yours, we might
easily make war upon you, when we are so willing to be slain, if our Religion
did as well allow us to kill, as to be killed. Here also Ad Demetrianum.
Cyprian follows his master, and openly proclames; Hence it is, that none of
us, when he is apprehended, resists: nor revengeth himself against your
unjust violence, albeit our people is exceeding numerous. Our security of the
future revenge makes us patient. The innocent yield unto the nocent Ejudem haec
libri primi epistola 1. Intellexit (adversarius) Christi milites vigilare, jam
sobrios and armatos ad praelium stare, vinci non pesse, mori posse; and hoc
ipso invictos esse, quia nec mori timent, nec repugnare contra impugnantes, cum
occidere innocentibus nec nocentem liceat, sed prompte and animas and sanguinem
tradere.
. And Lactantius Lib. 5. Lib. 6. qu. 10. in Jos.
We put confidence in his Majesty, who can as well revenge the contempt of
himself, as the labors and injuries of his servants. And therefore when we
suffer such horrid things, we oppose not so much as a gainsaring word, but
leave vengeance to God. Nor did Augustine look upon any thing else when he
says: Let not the just man especially have any other thoughts in these
matters, but that he may undertake war to whom it is lawful, for to all it is
not lawful. And this is his: As often as Emperors are in error, they make L^
to maintain error against the truth, (...) which laws the righteous are exami^
and crowned. The same elsewhere: Princ^ are so to be borne with by the Common^
Epist. 166.
and Masters by their servants, that by the exercise of patience temporal
things m^ be endured, and eternal things assured Which in another place he
explains by the example of the ancient Christians thus. The City of Christ,
though as ye^ De Civit. Dei. l. 22.
traveling on earth, and having so gr^ multitudes against ungodly persecuton,
did not fight for temporal safety; but, to obtain eternal, refused to fight.
They were bound, they were imprisoned, they were beaten, they were tormented,
they were burned, torn in pieces, cruelly slain, and still they were
multiplied. They could not fight for salvation, unless for salvati^ they did
contemn their safety. And Cyrill^ words upon that of John, concerning the sword
of Peter, are of like sense, and no less to the purpose.

LXXI. The famous example of the Thebean Legion.
THe Thebaean Legion, as the acts do show us, consisted if six thousand six
hundred sixty six Soldiers, all Christians, Who, when Maximianus Caesar at
Octodurum compelld his Army to sacrifise to false Gods, marched away first to
Agaunum: and, when the Emperor had sent some thither to command them to come
to sacrifise, upon their refusal, Maximianus commanded every tenth man to be
slain, by his Sergeants. The command was executed easily without resistance of
any one. Mauritius De hujus Martyris hono^ibus apud Helvetios vide Guillemanum
in veteri scripto de translatione sancti Justini in novam Corbeiam: Unde juxta
fidem Chronicorum sub atrocissima and incomparabili illa decima post Neronem
persecutione passum eum colligimus: quae and prioribus persecutionibus
immanior, dum venerabilem multitudinem Martyrum coelis mitteret, inter quos
etiam praecipuum S. Mauritii Collegium, and innocentiae speculum. De Thebaeis
martyribus Brunsvicum translatis vide Crantz^um Saxonicorum. 7. 16.
the chief of that legion, from whom Agaunum was afterward called Vicus
Mauritii, at that time spoke thus to his fellow soldiers, as Eucherius Bishop
of Lions has related: How afraid was I, lest any one by way of defense (which
is easy for armed men) should attempt by violence to save those blessed men
from death? For the restraint whereof I was preparing the example of our Christ,
who by the word of his own Command put up the drawn sword of his Apostle again
into the sheath: showing, that the virtue of Christian confidence is greater
than all arms; that none should oppose the mortal work with mortal hands, but
faithfully accomplish his undertaken duty with a persevering religion. After
this decimation, when the Emperor gave the same command to the survivors, they
all answer thus: Caesar, we are indeed thy soldiers, and have taken arms for
defense of the Roman Commonwealth: nor have we ever been run-awayes or
traitors; nor deserved any mark of dishonor for our cowardice. And willingly
should we obey these your commands, unless the laws of our Christianity did
forbid us the worship of Devils, and their altars alwaye's polluted with blood.
We see, it was your will, either to pollute Christians with sacrileges, or to
terrify us by slaying every tenth man. You need not make any long search after
us. Know that we are all Christians. You shall have all our bodies subject to
your power: but our souls look up to Christ their Lord, and you shall not lay
hold on them. Then Exuperius the Ensign-bearer of the Legion, is related to
have spoken to them in this manner: My right valiant fellowsoldiers, you
perceive I carry the ensign of secular war: but I provoke you not to these
arms; I call not your virtue and courage forth to these wars: Another kind of
fight is to be chosen by you. You cannot, by these swords, attain unto the
heavenly Kingdom. Afterward, he desires these words should be reported to the
Emperor: O Emperor, desperation, which is most valorous in dangers, has not
armed us against thee. Behold, Similia sunt illa Judaeorum Alexandrinorum ad
Flaccum: Inermes sumus, ut vides. Et tamen sunt qui nos tanquam hosts publicos
hic criminantur. Etiam tas quas ad nostri tutelam parts dedit natura retro
vertimus, ubi nibil habent quod agant. Corpora praebemus nuda ac patientia ad
impetum earum qui nos volent occidere.
we have weapons in our hands, yet do we not resist: because we had rather die,
than overcome; and perish innocent, than live rebell^. And again; We throw down
our arms: thy officer shall find our hands without weapons; but our heart
armed with the Catholic faith. After this follows the slaughter of them not
resisting: in the narration whereof, these are the words of Eucherius Ne justi
punirentur multitudo non obtinuit: cum multum (male editur, mulrotum) esse
soleat quod multitudo deliuquit.
, The multitude availed not to free the just from punishment: albeit the crime
is wont to go unpunisht, when the multitude is the delinquent. In the old
Martyrology the same thing is related on this wise. They were promiscuously
slain with swords; without contradiction: yea, their arms being laid down, they
offered their throats to the persecutors, or their uncovered body; neither
provoked by their own multitude, nor by the motion of arms, to endeavor to
assert the cause of righteousness by the sword; but, mindful of this alone,
that they confessed him, who not reclaming was led to the slaughter, and as a
lamb opened not his mouth; They also, as a flock of the Lords sheep, sufferd
themselves to be torn in pieces, as it were by wolves running on them. Vide
excerpta ex Joanne Antiocheno, ex MS. lib. viri aeterna memoria dignissimi
Nicolai Peiresii.
Valens impiously and cruelly raged against them, who according to the holy
Scripture and the tradition of the Fathers professed The identity of nature of
the Father and Son. 1 Pet. 2. 21.
(...), who, although a very great number, never defended themselves by force.
Certainly, where patience is prescribed us, we see the example of Christ is often
brought in, and even now we heard it alleged by the Thebaean soldiers, as an
example to be imitated by us; the example I say of Christ, whose patience
extended it self even to the Death. And he Mat. 10. 39. Lu. 9. 34.
that so loses his life is truly pronounced by Christ to have saved it.

LXXII. In what cases force it lawful against a Prince.
WE have said, Resistance is not lawful against the highest powers. Now, lest
the Reader think, they offend against this rule, who indeed offend not, we must
add some advertisements. First then, Princes that are under the people,
whether from the beginning they received such power, or afterward it was so
agreed, as at Lacedaemon, Plutarchus Lysandro: Spartiatae regem ad capitis
judicium vocarunt, quod ille declinans fugit Tegeam. Idem Sulla: Quibusdam
regibus Spartiatae regnum ademerunt, ut ineptis regno, quippe abjectis
nihilique hominibus. De Agide injuste, sed damnato tamen, vide cundem
Plutarchum. Mosynaeciregem media puniebant. Mela lib. 2.
if they offend against the Laws, and the Commonwealth, may not only be
repelled by force, but, if need require, punished with death: which befell
Pausanias King of the Lacedaemonians. And, since the most ancient Kingdoms
through Italy were of this kind, it is no wonder, if, after the relation of
most cruel things done by Mezentius, Virgil adds: Then all Etruria flamed
with ajustire: Et aruspex Etruscus in Mezentium insurgent bus: -- Quos justus
in hostem Fert d^r.
And call for the Kings blood to quench the fire. Secondly, if a King, or any
other has abdicated his Empire, or manifestly accounts it as forsaken, after
that time all things are lawful against him, as against private man. Yet is
not he to be judged to desert his estate, who manageth it somewhat negligently.
Thirdly, it is the opinion of Lib. 4. c. 16.
Barclay, if the King alienate his Kingdom, or subject it to another, he
forfeits it. I stop

For such an act, if a Kingdom be conveyed by election or by successory law, is
null: and therefore can have no effect of right. Whence also, concerning an
Usufructuary, to whom we have compared such a King, it seems to me the truer
opinion of Lawyers, that, if he Instit. de usus.. fruitur. L. Usufr. D. de jure
dotium.
yield his right to an extraneous person, his act is nothing. And, as to that,
that the usufruit reverts to the Lord of the propriety, it is to be understood,
in due time. But, if a King really attempt even to deliver up, or subject his
Kingdom, I doubt not, he may be herein resisted. For, as we have distinguished
before, the Empire is different from the manner of holding it: which manner, the
people may hinder from being changed; for that is not comprehended under the
Empire. Hither you may fitly apply that of Seneca in a Lib. 2. contr. 9.
case not unlike: Though a son must obey his father in all things, yet not in
that, whereby he is made to be no father. Fourthly, the same Barclay says, a
Kingdom is lost, if the King be carried with a truly hostile mind to the
destruction of the whole people Paricausa tribunus plebis qui sit, ipso jure
desinere esse talem, ingeniose desendit Gracchus, cujus verba digna lectu apud
Platarchum.
, which I grant. For, the will of ruling, and the will of destroying cannot
consist together. Wherefore, he that professes himself an enemy of all the
people, thereby abdicates the Kingdom; but this seems scarce possible to
happen in a King, that is himself, that rules over one people. It may happen,
if he rule over more than one, that in favor of one people, he may will the
ruin of another, to make Colonies there. Fifthly, if a Kingdom be committed;
whether by felony against him whose Fee it is, or by a clause put in the very
grant of the Empire, that, if the King Vide de regno Arragoniae Marianam l. 8.
do so or so, the subjects be loosed from all bond of obedience; in this case
also, the King falls back into a private person. Sixthly, if a King has one
part of the supreme power, the People or Senate the other part Exemplum habes
in Genuat. repub. apud Bezarum lib. 18. in Bohemia tempore Wences^i historiae
lib. 10. Add Azorium instit. moral. l. 10. c. 8. and Lambertum Scasnaburgensem
de Henr. 4.
, against the King invading that part which is not his, a just force may be
opposed, because so far he has no power. Which, I think, has place,
notwithstanding it be said, the power of war is in the King. For that is to be
understood of foreign war: when otherwise, whosoever has part of the supreme
authority, cannot but have a right to defend that part. When this comes to
pass, the King may also, by the Law of war, lose his part of the Empire.
Seventhly, if in the conveyance of the Empire it be conditioned, that in a
certain case Exempla vide apud Thuanum hist. 131. in narratione anni 1604. and
l. 133. in anno 1605. utrumque de Hungaria: apud Meierum narratione anni 1359.
in Brahamia and Flandria. narratione anni 1468. in foedere inter Regem Galliae
and Carolum Burgundum. Add de Polonia quae hobet Chytraeus Saxonicorum 24. and
de Hungaria Bonsinius Decadis 4. libro 9.
resistance may be made against the King, although it cannot be supposed, part
of the Empire is thereby retained, yet is there retained some natural liberty,
and exempted from the Regal power. And, he that alienateth his right, may
abate of that right by covenant.

LXXIII. How far we must obey an Invader of another Empire.
WE have considered him which has, Vict. de potest. Civ. n. 23. Suarez de
Legib. lib. 3. c. 10. number. 9. Lessius de just. and jurel. 2. c. 29. aub. 5. n.
73.
or had the right of governing. It remains that we speak of the Invader of
Empire, not after by long possession or by covenant he has gotten a right, but
so long as there continues the cause of possessing it unjustly. And truly,
whilst he is in possession, the acts of empire which he exercises, may have
power to oblige, not out of his right, which is none, but from this, that it is
most probable, He that has the right of governing, whether people, King or
Senate, had rather the Invaders commands should prevail and be of force, than
utter confusion be brought in, the Laws and judgments taken away. Cicero
condemns Sylla's Laws of cruelty to the sons of the proscribed, that they
could not seek for honors: Nevertheless, he thought they were to be observed,
affirming (as Quintilian tells us) the state of the City so to be contained in
these Lib. 2. c. 1.
Laws, that it could not stand if they were dissolved. Florus of the same
Sylla's acts: Lepidus went about to rescind the acts of so great a man,
deservedly, if yet he could without great damage to the Commonwealth. And a
little after: It was expedient for the sick and wounded Commonwealth to take
some rest at any hand, lest the sores should be opened and bleed t^ much in the
cure. Howbeit, in things (...) so necessary, and which pertain to the
establishing of the Invader in his unju^ possession, if without great danger
obedience may be denied, it must not be given.

LXXIV. Whether it be lawful to ^d an Invader, or expel him by force? and in
what Cases.
TO this question we frame this answer. First, if the Invador, by unjust war,
and such as has not the requisits according to the Law of Nations, has seized
on the government; nor has there followed any agreement, or faith given him,
but his possession is kept only by force; in this case. the right of war
seems to remain, and therefore it is lawful to act against him as against an
enemy, that may lawfully be slain by any, even by a private man. Against
Traitors, said Tertullian, Apolog. 9. c. quando liceat. lib. 2. In reos
Majistatis and publicos hosts omnis homo miles.
and public enemies, every man's a soldier. So also, against desertors of the
war that run from their colors, all persons, for the common quiet, have a
right indulged to them to execute public revenge. And I am of Plutarch's Qui
ita sentit ib. de sato ad Pisonem.
opinion, that the same is lawful, if, before the invasion, a public Law were
extant, giving power to every one to kill him, that shall adventure to do this
or that, which falls under sight; as, that being a private man shall get a
guard about him, or shall invade the Fort; that shall slay a Citizen
uncondemned, or not by lawful judgment; that shall create magistrates without
just suffrages. Many such Laws were extant in the Cities of Greece, in which
therefore the killing of such Tyrants was to be esteemed Lawful. Such was at
Athens the Law of Solon revived after the return out of the Piraeeum, against
the overthrowers of the popular State, and such as had born offices after the
overthrow of it. As also at Rome the Valerian Plutarchus Publicola. Vt
injudicatum occidere eum liceret qui dominatum concupisceret. Mox addit: Solon
ei qui dominatum invadit deprehenso diem dici vult. at Publicola etiam ante
judicium talem permittit interfici. 2 Chronicles. 2^.
Law, if any one without the peoples will should take the authority of a
Magistrate: and the Consular Law after the Decemvirate, that none should create
a Magistrate without appeal; whosoever had done so, it should be lawful to
kill him. Moreover, it will be lawful to kill the Invader, by the express
authority of the rightful Governor, whether King, Senate or People: As also,
of the Protectors of Children that are Kings, such as Jo^ada was to Joas, when
he dethroned Athalia. Unless in these cases, I cannot yield it lawful for a
private person by force to evpell or kill an Invader of the highest power. The
reason is, because it may be, the rightful Governor had rather the Invader
should be left in possession, than occasion given to dangerous and bloody
Commotions, that do usually follow upon the violating or slaying of those men,
who have a strong faction among the people, or foreign confederates also. Surely
it is uncertain, whether a King or people be willing the State should be so
endangered: and, without know^ege of their w^l, the force cannot be just.
Favonius said: Civil war is worse than unlan full and usurped Government. And
Cicero: Mihi pax omni cum civibus bello civili utilior videtur. C^c. Live. l. 34
To me any peace with our Contrymen seems more profitable than Civil war.
Better it had been, said Titus Quintius, the Tyrant Nabis had been let alone at
Lacedemon Quod P^tarchus in T. Quintii vita sic expl cat: Cum vide^t ct sine
gram altorum Laconum malo con posse tyrannum desicui. Non alienum est ab hac re
quod Plutarchus refert, Laconem quendam cum legisset, Hos, dum Mart parant
dominatum extinguere, saevus Ante Selinunti ^oenia Mars rap^it: Respond sse.
Mento viri illi pe^re. Exspectare enim debuerant ut ipse per se domina sus
conflagraret.
, when he could not otherwise be thrown down, but with the grievous ruin of
the Commonwealth, likely to perish in the vindication of her liberty. To the
same purpose is that of Arist^hanes, A Lion is not to be bred in a City; but if
he be brought up, he must be kept. Verily, seeing it is a most weighty
deliberation, whether peace or liberty be to be preferred, as Tacitus speaks;
and, in Cicero's opinion, it is a politic question of greatest difficulty,
Whether, when our Country is oppressed by an Usurper, all endeavor is to be
used against him, although the Commonwealth be thereby extremely endangered;
Single persons ought not to arrogate unto themselves that judgment which
belongs to the people in common. Nor can that saying be approved.

Detrahimus Dominos urbi servire^ paratae.
We pull the proud Usurpers down,
That Lord it o'r the willing Town Plutaich Catone Maj de Antiocho Magno. Bello
praetextum sumebat, liberare Graecbs l^bertatis non egentes.
.
So did Sylla answer, being asked why he troubled his Country with taking arms:
Appian. civ. 1.
That I may free it from tyrants. Better is the advice of Plato, Cujus verba
Lati e sic posuit Cic. ep. fam. l. 1. Tantum contendire in rep. quantum probare
tu^ civibus possis: vim neque parenti, neque patriae ^fferri o^ortere.
in an Epistle of his to Perdicca; In the Commonwealth, contend so far as thou
can approve thy doings to thy Citizens; it is not fit to offer violence,
neither to thy parent, nor to thy country. The sense whereof is extant in
Salust Bell. Jugurth.
too: For to overruled thy country or thy parents, although thou art able, and
can reform what is amiss, yet is it uncivil; especially, seeing all changes
in affairs of state portend slaughter, flight, and other hostilities. Thomas 2.
2. Qu. 42. art. 2.
says, The destruction, though of a tyrannical Government, is sometimes
seditious Huc and Ambrosii illud non male referas: Adjuvat hoc quoque ad
prosectum bonae existimationis si de potentis manibus eripias inopem, de morte
damnatum eruas, quantum sine confusione fieri potest; ne videamur jactantiae
magis facere causa, quam misericordiae; and graviora infer vulnera, dum
minoribus mederi desideromus. De offic. 2. c. 2. Non long abit illud Stallii
apud Plutarchum in vita Bruti: Aequum non esse ut vir prudens ac sapiens
improborum and desipientium causa in pericula and turbas se conjiciat. Jud. 3.
15. Nehem. 9. 27.
. The fact of Ehud upon Eglon King of Moab ought not to bring us over to the
contrary side: for the sacred Scripture plainly witnesses, He was raised by
God himself, and sent as an Avenger, to wit, by special command. And besides,
it is not manifest, that this King of Moab had not some right of Government
conditional. Against other Kings also God executed his judgments by what hand
he pleased, as by Jehu upon Joram. Lastly, 2. Reg. 9.
it is to be noted, in a controverted case, a private man by no means ought to
take upon himself to judge, but follow the possession. So did Christ command
tribute to be paid to Caesar, because the Money Mat. 22. 20.
bare his Image; that is, because he was in possession of the Empire.

LXXV. Who may lawfully wage war.
AS in other things, so in voluntary actions there are wont to be three kinds
of efficient causes, principal, adjuvant, and instrumental. In war, the
principal is he, whose work is done; in private, a private person; in public,
the public power, especially the highest. Whether, for those that stir not
themselves, war may be raised by another, we shall see elsewhere. Mean while,
this we take for certain, naturally every one may vindicate his own right.
Therefore were our hands given us. But, to profit another in L. servus. D. de
serve. export. Cic. l. 2. Offic. ex Panetio. DD. ad leg. si quis in servitutem.
D. de su^. l. prohib. c. de jure fisci.
what we can, is not only lawful but commendable. The writers of Offices truly
say, Nothing is more serviceable to man, than another man. Now, there are
diverse bonds between men, which engage them to mutual aid. For kinsmen
assemble to bring help, and neighbors are called upon, and fellow-citizens Unde
illud, Porro Quirites, and quiritari.
. Aristotle said Rhet. ad Alex. e. 3.
, It behooves every one, either to take arms for himself, if he has received
injury, or for his kindred, or for his benefactors, Bart. in l. Ut vim. D. de
justi^. and jure n. 7. and 8. Jason ibid. n. 29 Panor. n. 18. Sylvest. in ver.
Bellum. q. 8.
or to help his fellows, if they be wronged. And Solon taught, that the
Commonwealths would be happy, wherein every one would think another injuries
to be his Plutarchus refert: Civ tatum illa felicissi^e colitur, in qua qui
injuriam non sensere, and qui sensere se opponunt, and injuriam caeptantes
puniunt.
. But, suppose other obligations be wanting, the communion of humane nature is
sufficient. No man is unconcerned in that which is humane.

M^nandri dictum est: Injuriarum si improbis auctoribus
Reponeremus ultionem singuli,
Nobis putantes fieri quod fit alteri,
Inter nos juncti conspiratis viribus;
Non praevaleret innocentia impetus
Audax malorum, qui custoditi undique
Jussique paenas quas merentur pendero,
Aut nulli penitus essent, aut pauci admodum?

It is a saying of Democritus: Our duty is, to defend the oppressed with injury,
and not neglect them: for that is just and good. Which is thus explained by
Lactantius: Lib. 6.
God, who has not given wisdom to other living creatures, has secured them
by natural muniments from assault and peril. But to man, because he formed him
naked and frail, that he might rather furnish him with wisdom, he has given,
beside other things, this pious affection, whereby one is inclined to defend,
love, cherish another, and afford mutual aid against all dangers. When we speak
of Instruments, we do not here understand L. cum Cumus. C. de agricolis, lib.
11.
arms, and such like things, but those persons, who act so by their own will,
that their will depends upon another will. Arist. l. 5. de moribus. cap. 10. L.
Gracch. cap. de adul. Sen. 1. cont. 4. Thom. 2. 2. 40. art. 2. Sylvest. de
bello p. 3.
Such an instrument is the son to the father, being naturally a part of him:
such also is a servant, as it were a part legally. Democritus: Use servants as
parts of the body, some for one thing, some for another. Now, as a servant is
in the family, so is a subject in the Commonwealth; and therefore an instrument
of the Ruler. And, no doubt, all subjects naturally may be used for war, but
some are exempted by special Law: as of old servants Servius ad 9. Aen.
at Rome, now in most places Clerks Ac Levitae olim extra belli munia, ut
notatum Josepho. De Clericis vide Nicetam Chro^iatem lib. 6. Caroli Calvi
capitulum in Sparnaco 37. in Gratiano c. clericum. did. 5. and causa 23. qu.
8. Et Canones quidem sic habent: sed quanto illi servati a Graecis quam a
Latinis diligentius, vide Annam Comnenam.
: which Law yet, as all of that kind, is to be understood with exception of
extreme necessity. And so much be spoken generally concerning Adjutors and
subjects: the specials shall be considered in their proper places.

The end of the first Part.
HVGO GROTIVS OF WAR AND PEACE.
II. PART.
I. What are called justifick causes of War. Ex l. 2. c. 1.

LEt us come to the Causes of Wars; I mean justifick: for there are also other
which move under the notion of profitable, distinct sometimes from those that
move under the notion of just: which Polybius accuratly distinguishes one from
3. Hist.
the other, and both from the Beginnings Exordit puguae, dixit Virgilius.
of war, such as the Stagg in the war of Turnus and Aeneas. But although the
difference 'twixt these is manifest, yet the words are wont to be confounded.
For, the causes which we call justifick, Lib. 45.
Li^ in the Rhodians speech has also called Beginnings: Certe vix ulla gens
tam diu constans mansit in spect ^dis belli causis. Polybius apud Suidam, voce
(...), Rom ^ni summopere id curarunt, ne priores ipsi finitimis inferrent
violentas manus. Sed ut semper crederentur in hostem ire ad arrendas injurias.
Ostendit id Dion egregia comparatione Romanorum cum Philippo Macedone and
Antiocho in excerptis Peiresianis. In quibns est, Valde id student Romani justa
ut bella sus^iant, nihilque tale decernant sine causa ac temere.
Certainly ye are the Romans, who pretend that your wars are therefore
prosperous, because they are just; nor do ye so much glory in the event of
them, that you overcome, as in the beginnings, that you undertake them m^
without cause. Eodem sensu (...) dixit Aelianus: and Didorus Siculus, l. 14.
easdem vocat (...) and (...) dixit Procopius Gotth. 3. Dion. Halic. l. 8.
Olynth. 2.
Those justifick causes properly belong to our argument: whereto is pertinent
that of Coriolanus in Halicarnass^nsis: I suppose, it ought to be your first
care, that you take a pious and just cause of war Lib. 12.
. And this of Demosthenes; As in houses, ships, and other buildings, the lowest
parts ought to be most firm: so in actions, the causes and foundations (...).
Sic and (...) belli dixit Julianus 2. de laudibus Constantii
must be true and ^ust. To the same purpose is that of Dio Cassius; Lib. 12.
We ought to have greatest regard of justice; if this be preseut, the war is
hopeful; if not, there is nothing certain to any one, though he have success
at first according to his mind. And that of Cicero De Repub. l. 3.
; Those wars are unjust, which are undertaken without cause: who elsewhere
reprehends Crassus for passing o'r Euphrates, when there was no Appianus eidem
Crasso a Tribunis denunciatum diclt; ne bellum Parthis inferrec nulla injuria
cognitis. Plutarchus de codem: Coiba^ multi indignantes esse aliquem qui
bellatum iret in homines non modo nullius injuriae compertos, sed and pace
defens^. Epist. 96.
cause of war. Which is no less true of public, than of private wars. Hence
is that complaint of * Seneca: Do we restrain homicides and single slaughters?
Why do we not restrain wars, and that glorious wickedness of slaughtering
Nations? Avarice and cruelty know no bounds. By the Decrees of Senate and
people outrages are done, and things piivately forbidden are Idem Seneca de ira
2. c. 8. Progloria habita, quae, quandin opprimi possunt, sceler^ sunt.
publicly commanded. Wars, I grant, undertaken by public authority, have
some effects of Law, as also Sentences: of which here after: but they are not
therefore the less blamable, if there be no cause. So that Alexander, if
without cause he warred upon the Persians and other nations, is, by the
Scythians in Curtius, and by Seneca too, deservedly called a Robber Locus est
de Benef. 1. c. 13. Non male Just. Ma^tyr Apolog. 2. Tantum possunt Principes
qui opiniones vero praeserunt, quantum in solitudine latrones. Philo: Qui magna
furta committunt, qui honesto principatus nomine obumbrant ea quae reipsa nihil
nisi latrocinia sunt.
, by Lucan a Spoyler, and by the Indian wisemen unjust (...). Arrian. lib. 7.
, and by a certain pirate was drawn into the society of his crime. And likewise
Justin relates, that two Kings of Thrace were spoiled of their Kingdom by his
Father Philip, by the fraud and wickedness of a Robber. That of Augustine De
Civ. Dei. l. 4. c. 4. Remota justitia, quid sunt regnanisi magna latrocinia.
is to the same purpose, Take away Justice, and what are Kingdoms but great
Robberies? To such agrees that of Lanctantius: Deceived vith the show of vain
glory, they color their wickedness with the name of virtue Lib. 1. de salsa
relig. De Civit. 4.
. Just cause of taking Arms can be no other, than injury. The iniquity of the
adverse party brings in just wars, says the same Augustine; where by iniquity
(...)
. he means injury (...).
. So in the form of words used by the Roman Herald; I call you to witness, that
people is Sylv. de bell. c. 1. n. 2.
unjust, and does not perform what is right. Ego Vos testor, populum illum
injustum esse, neque jus persolvere.


II. Three just causes of Wars.
THere are, according to most Authors, these three just causes of wars,
Defense, Recovery, Revenge Camillus ad Gallos, Live. l. 5. Omniae quae defendi,
repetique and ulcisci fas sit.
. In which enumeration, unless the word Recovery be taken more largely, is
omitted the prosecution of that which is due to us: which Plato Alcibi^de.
omitted not, when he said, Wars are waged, not only if one be oppressed by
force, or robbed, but also if one by deceived. With whom agrees that of Seneca
Lib. 3. de benes. c. 14.
, It is a most equal word, and conformable to the Law of Nations, Render what
thou owe. And in the Herald's formula it was: They have not given, nor paid,
nor done the things they should. And in Salust, By the law of Nations Live. lib.
1. In Historiis.
I demand those things. Augustine, when he said, Just wars Servius ad 9. Aen. de
Romany: cum volebant bellum indicere, Pater patratus, h. c. Princeps
Fecialium, proficiscebatur ad hostium fines, and praefatus anaedam solemnia,
clara vo^ dicebat, se bellum indicere propter certas causas: aut quia socios
laeserant, aut quia nec abrepta animalia, nec obnoxios redderent.
are those, that Lib. 6. q. 10. super Josue.
revenge insuries, took the word revenge more generally for to take away: as
the following words do show, wherein is not an enumeration of parts, but an
addition of examples: So is a nation or commonwealth to be opposed, which has
either neglected to avenge what was done wickedly by their men, or to render
what was injuriously taken. Upon this natural knowledge the Indian King, as
Diodorus relates, accused Semiramis, that she began a war, having received no
injury. And so do the Romans Live. l. 5. Apodict. 2. c. 2.
require of the Senones, not to fight against them, that had done them no
wrong. Aristotle says: (Men war upon such as have provoked them by injury: and
Lib. 12.
Curtius of certain Scythians, They were manifestly the most just of all the
Barbarians: they took not arms, unless they were provoked Plutarchus Nicia:
Herculem etiam cuncta sub^gisse, dum lacessitus se defendit. Josep^us 17.
antiquae hist. Quin id veniunt ut in nihil bestile cogitan^es violentas
inserant manus, hi sunt, qui invitos cogunt ad arma semet tutatura confugere.
.

III. War is lawful in defense of life; only against an assail^nt: and in
present certain danger.
THe first cause of just war is Injury not yet done, but offered either against
Body or Goods. If the Body be assaulted by present force, with peril of life,
not otherwise avoidable Sylv. in verbo Bellu^, p. 1. n. 3. and p. 2. P. 1. n.
36.
, in this case war is lawful, even with the slaying of him that brings the
danger; as we have said before, when by this instance, as mo^ approved, we
showed that some private war may be just. It Is to be noted, this right of
defense, by it self and primarily, springs from hence, that nature commends
every one unto himself, not from the injustice or sin of the other, from whom
the danger is Bartol. ad leg. ut vim. D. de just. and jure. Bal. in rep. l. 1.
c. unde vi.
. Wherefore although he be without fault, as one that warreth faithfully, or
thinks me other than I am, or is beside himself, or affrighted, as to some
has happened, hereby is not taken away the right of self-defense: it
suffices, that I am not bound to suffer what he offers, no more than if
another man's beast did threaten me with the danger. Whether also innocent
persons, who being interposed hinder my defense or flight, without which death
cannot be escaped, may be slain, is questioned. Some, even Divines, there are,
that think it lawful. And surely, if we respect nature Cajet. 2. 2. art. 6 7.
q. 2.
alone, with her the respect of society is much less, than the care of proper
safety. But the law of Charity, especially the Evangelicall, which equals
another to our selves, plainly permits it not. That saying of Thomas, if it be
rightly 2. 2. q. 64. art. 1.
taken, is true: In a true defense a man is not slain on purpose: not that it
is not lawful sometimes, if there be no other means of safety, to do that on
purpose whence the death of the assailant will follow, but that in this case
that death is not chosen as a thing primarily intended, as in judicial
punishment, but as the only thing remaining at that time; when he that is
assaulted, even at that time, ought to desire rather to do somewhat whereby the
other may be terrified or weakened, than destroyed. Present Hujus distinctioni,
usum egregum vide apud Agathium lib. 4. Apud Thucyd. 8. Phrynichus: Cariturum
invidia si ipse jam in vitae per ipsos adductus periculum, and hoc and aliud
quidvis aggrediatur potius, quam ab hominibus inimicissimis perdi se sinat.
danger is here required, and as it were in a point. I confess, if the
assailant draw his sword, and so that it appears he does it with a mind to
kill, it is lawful to prevent him: For in morals, as in naturals, a point is
not found without some latitude. Nevertheless are they deceived and do deceive,
who admit of any fear whatsoever, as a just occasion of such preventing. For it
is well observed by Offic. 1.
Cicero, Very many injuries proceed from fear, when he that thinks to hurt
another fears, unless he do it, himself shall receive hurt. Clearchus in
Xenophon: Many have I known, drawn either by calumny or supicion, whilst they
fear others, and had rather prevent than suffer, to have done much evil to
those, that attempted not, nor so much as thought any such thing against them.
Cato in his Oration for the Rhodians: What, says he, shall we first execute,
that which we say they designed? Cicero Citat Quintil. lib. 5. Insignis est
illa apud Gellium sententia: Gladia'ori composito ad pugnandum, pugnae haec
proposita sors est, aut occidere si occupaverit, aut occumbere si ussa, verit.
Hominum autem vita non tam inequis neque tam indomitis necessitatib^
circumscripta est, ut ideirco prior injuriam facere debeas, quam nis^seceris,
pati passis. Locum hic habe illud Euripidis.
again: Who ever made this Statute, or to whom Te si, ut ais, interficere vir
voluit tuus,
Voluisse sat erat and tibi, ubi tempus solet.

may it be granted without extreme hazard of all, that one might lawfully kill
him first, of whom he says we was afraid, left himself should afterward be
killed? Pertinent is that of Lib. 1. Lib. 3.
Thucydides: The future is yet uncertain: nor ought any one therefore to make a
quarrel present and certain. The same Author, where he declares the hurt of
Sedition among the Grecian Cities, sets down this for one fault: He was
praised, that first did, what another was about to commit Livius lib. 3.
Cavendo ue metuant homines, metuendos ultro se efficient, and injuriam a nobis
repulsam, tanquam aut facere aut pati necesse sit, injungimus aliis. As Caesav,
who when he seized on the Common. wealth, said he was forced to (...) by fear
of his adversaries. (...) an excellent passage in Appian, civil^ 3.
. To such agrees that saying of Vibius Crispus cited by Quintilian, Quis tibi
sic timere permisit?
Who permitted thee to be so fearful? And Livia in Dio Lib. 55.
says, They escape not infamy, that by way of prevention do the evil which
they fear. Now, if any one offer not present force, but be found to have
conspired or lain in wait, if to prepare poison, if to plot a false accusation,
to suborn witnesses, to corrupt judgment, such a one, I say, cannot be justly
slain: if either the danger may be otherwise avoided; or it be not certain
enough, it cannot be otherwise avoided. For, for the most part, the delay of
time interposed affords many remedies, and many accidents for our rescue;
according to the Proverb, Inter os and ossam. Bann. q. (...). art. 7. dub. 4.
Bald. in l. mul^. C. de lib. cius. Less. lib. 2. c. 9. dub. 8. Covarruv. p. 3.
s. 1. n. 2.
Between the cup and the lip. Yet there are not wanting both Divines and
Lawyers that extend their indulgence farther. But the other also, which is the
better and safer way, wants not the consent of Authors.

IV. Of the loss of a member, and the defense of chastity.
WHat shall we say of the danger of mutilation, and loss of some part of the
body? Certainly, the loss of a member, especially one very needful, being very
grievous, and as it were equiparable to life; besides, it being hard to know,
whether it draw not after it peril of death; if there be no other way to come
off, I may suppose the author of such a peril forefeits his own life, and may
be justly slain by the defendant. In defense of Chastity, it can scarce be
doubted but the same is lawful: when both common estimation, and the divine
law too, equals chastity to life Seneca de benef. 1. c. 11. Proxima ab his sunt
sine quibus possumus quidem vivere, sed ut mors po^ior sit, tanquam libertas
and pudicitia and men's bona. Paulus sententiarum 5. t. 23. Qui latronem caedem
sibi inserentem, vel alium quemlibet stuprum inferentem occiderit, puniri non
placuit. Alius enim vitam, alius pudorem publico facinore defendit. Augustine.
l. 1. de lib. arbit. Lex dat potestatem vel viatori ut latronem, ne ab eo ipse
occidatur, occidat; vel cui^iam viro aut faeminae, ut violenter sibi
stupratorem irruentem, aut post illatum stuprum, si possit, inte^imet.
Therefore Paulus the Lawyer said such a defense is right. We have an example
in Cicero Vide and Plutarchum Mario. Mars quoque deorum judicio absolutus
dicitur interfecto eo qui filiae ipsius stuprum inferebat. Testis Apollodorus
biblioth. 3. Add insignem historiam apud Greg. Turonensem lib. 9.
and Quintilian, of a Tribune of Marius slain by a Soldier. Yea, and women
have often slain the in vaders of their modesty, as histories relate. Chariclea
in Heliodorus calls such an act, a just revenge on behalf of injured chastity.

V. Defense may lawfully be omitted.
WHat we have said before, although it be lawful to kill him that attempts to
kill, yet he does more commendably who had rather be killed than kill; some do
grant, so, that they except a person profitable to many: But, to me it seems
unsafe, to impose this Law contrary to Patience upon all, in whose life others
are concernd. Wherefore I may conceive it is to be restrained to them whose
office it is to keep off force from others; such as are the companions in a
journey undertaken on those terms, and public Rulers, to whom that of Lucan
may be applied:

Cum tot ab hac anima populorum vita salusque
Pendeat, and tantus caput hoc sibi fecerit orb's,
Saevitia est voluiste mori. -- --
Curtius lib. 10. Sed cum tam avide manifestis periculis offeras corpus,
oblitus tot civium animas trabere te in casum.
It Was cruelty to yield himself to death,
So many thousands living by his breath.
VI. Defense is unlawful sometimes against a person very profitable to the
Public.
ON the contrary it may happen, that, because the Invader's life is profitable
to many, he cannot be slain without sin: nor that only by force of Divine Law,
whether old or new (of which before, when we showed the Kings person to be
sacred) but by the very Law of Nature. For the Right of nature, as it signifies
a Law, does not only respect those things which are dictated by that Justice
that is called Expletrix (...) Aristot^li, nimis acclo vocabulo: itaque (...)
idem selicius dixil.
, but contains in it self the acts of other virtues also, as of Temperance,
Fortitude, Prudence; as being, in certain circumstances, not only honest, but
due. Now, to that which we have spoken Charity obliges us. Nor does Vasquez
remove me from Lib. 1. controv. illust. 18.
this opinion, when he says, a Prince who assaulteth an innocent person,
cease to be a Prince in that very act: than which, scarce any thing could be
spoken, either less truly, or more dangerously. For, as dominions, so also
Empires are not lost by delinquency, unless the Law ordain it. But, no where is
found a Law ordaining this concerning Empires, that they should be lost by an
offense against a private man; nor will ever such a Law be found, as I believe;
for it would bring in very great confusion of things. As to that foundation
which Vasquez lays for this and many other Conclusions, That al Empires regard
the utility of those that obey, not of those that govern; grant it were
universally true, it would not serve the turn: for the thing does not
presently fail, whose utility in some part fails. And whereas he adds, that
the safety of the Commonwealth is desired by every one for his own sake, and
therefore every one ought to prefer his own safety even before the whole; this
does not sufficiently cohere. It Is true indeed, for our own sake we would have
the Commonwealth be safe: but not only for our own sake; others are: also to
be regarded. For, it is a false opinion, and rejected by the sounder
Philosophers, to think that Friendship is born of indigence alone Resutat
pernitiosam have opinionem Seneca lib. 1. de Clem. c. 1. and lib. 4. c. 16.
, since of our own accord and by nature we are carried to it. Now, that I should
prefer the good of a great many before my own proper good, Charity advises
often, sometimes commands. Here is pertinent that of Seneca Lib. 1. de Clem.
c. 1.
: Princes and Kings, and whosoever by any other name are Tutors of the public
State, no wonder They are beloved, even above all private Relations. For, if to
men of sound judgment public things are dearer than private, it follows, that
he be dearer also, on whom the public affairs depend. Ambrose De Offic. l. 3.
cap. 3.
: Every one thinks it better to keep off destruction from his Country, than
Lib. 6. de Benef. c. 37.
danger from himself. The foresaid Seneca^: Calistratus and Rutilius, the one
at Plutarchus Pelop^dae init'o: Primum virtutis opus servare servantem caetera.
Cassiodorus de Amicitia: Si manus oculorum obsequio vibratum in aliud membrum
senserit gladium imminentem, ipsa suum minime discrimen attendens, plus alii
quam sibi tim^s, gladium excipit. Post: Proinde qui morte propria dominos suos
a morte redimunt, recte quidem hoc faciunt, si potius salutem animae suae quam
liberationem alieni corporis in causa constituunt. Cum enim eis conscientia
dictet, quod sidem dominis suis debeant exhibere, videtur etiam consonum
rationi; quod suae vitae corporali vitam dominorum debeant anteferre. Deinde
rursus: Dilectione itaque, and maxim pro salute multorum, potest quis
salubriter morti suum corpus exponcre.
Athens, the other at Rome, would not be restored to their home, at peril of
the Commonwealth: because it was better these two should endure one private
loss, than all fuffer a common evil.

VII. It is not lawful to kill another for to avoid a box on the car, or the
like disgrace.
IF one be in danger to receive a blow on the cheek, or the like, Navar. c. 15.
n. 3. Soto lib. 5. q. 1. Sylvest. in verbo homicidium 1. qu. 5.
some are of opinion, he also has a right to defend it by the slaughter of his
enemy. I dissent not, if we respect only expletory justice. For, although
death and a blow are unequal, yet he which prepares to do me an injury,
thereby gives me a right, i. e. a certain moral faculty Apollodorus lib. 2. de
Lino agens: Ad Thebas cum venisset, civisque Thebanus factus esset, ibi interim
ab Hercule percuss^s cithara. Nam cum Linus feriisset Herculem, tratus Hercules
mortem ei intulit, reusque a nonnullis factus patratae caedis, legit in judicio
legem Rhadamanthi, qua insens pronuntiatur, si quis nocuerit ci qui vtm prior
intulerit.
against himself in infinitum, in so much as otherwise I cannot keep off that
evil from me. Charity also, by it self, seems not to bind us here, in favor
of the offender. But the Evangelicall Law has clearly made such a deed
unlawful. For, Christ commands a blow to be received rather than any hurt be
done the adversary; how much more forbids he him to be slain for to avoid a
blow? By which example we are admonished to beware of that saying of
Covarruvias, Humane Covar. p. 3. sect. 1. de Homicid.
understanding, not ignorant of natural right, allows not any thing to be
permitted by natural reason, which very thing is not also permitted by God,
who is Nature it self. For, God who is the Author of Nature, so, that he can
also work freely above nature, has a right of prescribing us Laws even of
those things, which by their own nature are free and indefinite: and much more,
that a thing may be due, which is by nature honest, though not due. But it is
strange, seeing the will of God appears so manifestly in the Gospel, that there
are found Divines, and those Christian Divines, who do not Navar. cap. 15. 4.
Henr. de ir^gul. c. 11. Victor de jure belli n. 5.
only think slaughter to be rightly admitted, that a blow may be avoided; but
also after a blow received, if he that gave it fly; for a reparation of honor,
as they say. Which to me seems very contrary to Reason and Religion. For,
Honor is an opinion of excellency. But, he that bears such an injury, shows
himself excellently patient: and therefore has increase of honor rather than
diminution. Nor is it material, if some men of a corrupt judgment traduce this
virtue with names made for disgrace: for those perverse judgments neither
change the thing, nor the estimation of it. Neither did the ancient Christians
only see this, but the Philosophers too, who said, It is a token of a weak
spirit not to be able to bear contumely, as we have showed elsewhere. Hence
also it is apparent, how unsound that is, which very many Authors Dd. in l. ut
vim. D. de just. and jure Sylv. in verbo Bellum, p. 2. n. 4.
say, That Defense with slaughter is lawful, to wit, by divine Law (for I
contend not about the right of nature:) although one may fly without peril;
because flight forsooth is dishonorable, especially for a Gentleman. But, here
is indeed no dishonor; only a certain false opinion of dishonor, to be
despised by all the Followers of virtue and wisdom. Wherein, I rejoice that I
have, among the Lawyers, Carolus Molinaeus In addit ad Alex. cons. 119.
of the same mind with me. What I have said of a blow and of flight, I desire
should be understood of other things by which true honor and existimation is
not lessened. And what if one should report that of us, which being believed
among good men would touch our Name? He also may be kili'd, say some Petr.
Navar. l. 2. c. 3. n. 376.
: very falsely, and against the Law, even of nature too. For that is no fit way
to defend our Reputation.

VIII. In defense of Goods, to kill a man is not unlawful by the Right of
nature,
COme we now to the injuries whereby our goods are invaded. If we respect
expletory of Justice, I will not deny, but for the conservation of our goods,
the Invader, if need be, may be slain: For, the inequality between these things
and life, is made up by favor to the innocent, and by hatred to the injurious.
Whence it follows, if we regard only that right, that a Thief running away
with stolen goods, if they cannot otherwise be recovered, may be overtaken with
a Gun, or other weapon. Demosthe^es Oratione in Aristocratem.
said: It is very hard and unjust, and contrary both to the written Laws, and
the common rules amongst men, not to be sufferd to use force against him, who
in hostile manner has taken away my Goods. Nor does Charity hinder by way of
precept, the Law divine and humane set aside, unless the thing be of very small
value, and therefore contemptible: which exception some do rightly add.

IX. How far the same is permitted by the Law of Moses.
LEt us see what is the meaning of the Hebrew Law, where with agrees also that
old Law of Solon, which Demosthenes Adversus Timocratem.
mentions, and the Law of the XII. Tables Addi potest lex wisigotthorum l. 7.
t. 1. c. 15. Et Capitulare Caroli M. l. 5. c. 191. Lege Longobarda, qui noctu
alienam cortem ingreditur, nisi ligandum se praebeat, eccidi potest.
taken thence, and Plato's decree in the ninth of his Laws. For all those Laws
meet in this, that they distinguish a Theif by night from a Theif by day. About
the reason of the Law, there is the question. Some Lessius dub. 11. number. 68.
think this is it, that by night he cannot be discerned who comes, whether he
be a Thief or a Murderer: and therefore may be killed as a Murderer. Others
Covarruv. d. loco.
conceive the difference lies here, that in the night, because the Theif is
unknown, there is less possibility to recover the Goods. To me the Lawgiver
seems to have properly respected, neither this, nor that; but to have meant
thus rather, that no man, for Goods, ought directly to be slain: (which would
be done, if, for exexample, I should with a weapon knock him down as he runs
away, that after he is slain I might recover my Goods:) but if my self be
brought into danger of life, then it is lawful for me to avert the danger, even
with the peril of another man's life. Nor is it against me, that I brought my
self into that hazard, whilst I desire to keep or to recover my Goods, or to
take the Theif: for herein no blame can be laid on me, who am about a lawful
act, and do no injury to any one, but use my own right. The difference then
'twixt a Theif by day and by night lies here, that by night there is scarce at
possibility of calling witnesses: and the^fore if the Theif be found slain,
more easy credit is given to him, who says he was necessitated in defense of
his own life to kill the Theif, being armed with some weapon, wherewith he
might do hurt. For, that is required in the Hebrew Law, speaking of a Theif
found Exodus 22. 2.
breaking up, as some translate; others perhaps better, Cum perfossorio
instrumento.
with an instrument to break up, as the word is rendered elsewhere by the most
learned of the Hebrews. To this interpretation we are led by the Law of the
XII. Tables, which fo^bids a Theif by day to be slain, this exception added,
unless he defend himself with a weapon. Therefore, against a Theif by night it
is presumed, that with a weapon he defended himself. And, by a weapon is
understood a sword, a club, a stone, as L. si pignore Sect. surem. D. de furtis.
Caius notes upon this very Law. B^t Ulpian has declared, that what is said
of the Theif by night, If one kill him he shall go unpunished, is to be conceived
to have place, if he could not spare his life without peril of his own, to wit,
in saving of his goods. There is then, as I have said, a presumption on his
side who has slain a L. furtum. D. ad legem Corn. de sicar.
theif by night: but if happily witnesses were present, by whom it is evident,
the slayer of the theif was not brought into danger of his life, then will that
presumption cease, and so the slayer will be guilty of Homicide. Add, that as
well by day as by night the Law of the XII. Tables required, that he that found
the theif should testify so much by an outcry (as we learn L. Itaque. D. ad
legem Aquiliam.
out of Caius) to the end, if it might be, the officers or neighbors might run
thither to bring help, and to bear witness. Now because such a concourse is
more easily made by day than by night, (as Ulpian notes upon the forecited
place of Demosthenes) therefore is more easy credit given to him, that affirms,
he was in danger in the night time. In like manner, the Hebrew Law allows a
maid credit concerning a rape in the field Philo explains it well: that the
place is set for more frequent example sake, not that thereby always the
controversy may be determined. For it may come to pass, as he discourses in his
book of special Laws, that a maid may be ravished in a City, her mouth being
stopped, and in the field one may consent to the act.
, and not in the town, because here she might and ought to have cried out, and
called aid. Moreover, although in other respects there were no difference, yet
this is considerable, that the things that happen in the night are more
obscure, and cannot be so well known what and how great they are; and therefore
are more terrible. The Law therefore, both Hebrew and Roman, gave in precept to
the people, that which Charity persuades, that they kill no man for this reason
only because he steals goods, but in case he that desires to save them,
comes himself into danger. Moses Maimonides has noted, that the killing of
another is not permitted to any man on other terms, than to preserve that which
is irreparable, as life and Chastity.

X. Whether, and how far it is permitted by the Evangelicall Law.
ANd what shall we say now of the Evangelicall Law: that the same is permitted
by it, which is permitted by the Law of Moses; or that, as in other things it
is more perfect than the Law of Moses, so here also it requires of us more? I
doubt not, but it requires more. For, if Christ commands to lose a coat or
cloak, and Paul would have us suffer damage rather than go to law, which is a
contention without blood: how much more would he, that even things of greater
moment be lost, rather than we should kill a man, the image of God, and of the
same flesh and blood with us? Wherefore if our things may be saved, so that
there seem not to be any danger of making slaughter, well; otherwise, we must
suffer loss, unless happily it be such a thing, upon which our life and of our
family depends, and which cannot be recoverd in judgment, happily because the
Theif is unknown, and there is some hope to carry the matter without slaughter.
And although almost all, as well Lawyers as Divines, do now teach, that a man
may Soto d. avt. 8. Less. dub. 11. 4. 74.
be rightly slain by us, in defense of our goods, even beyond those bounds,
wherein Sylv. in verbo Bellum, 2. n. 3.
the Law of Moses and the Roman permit; as, if a thief having taken the thing
fly; yet do not we doubt, but that which we have set down, was the judgment of
the ancient Christians: nor did Austin doubt, whose words are these, How are
Lib. 1. de lib. arb.
they free from sin before God, who, for these things which are contemptible,
are polluted with human blood? No wonder if in this matter, as in many other,
Discipline became looser Hieronymus in vita Malchi: Postquam Ecclesia coepit
habera Christianos Magistratus facta est quidem opibus major, sed virtutibus
minot. Vide c. suscepimus, de homicidio voluntario, etc. de his, distinct. 1.
Pan. c. 2. de Homicid, Less. d. loco.
with the time, and by degrees the Interpretation of the Evangelical Law began
to be accommodated to the manners of the Age. Of old, the form of the primitive
Institution was wont to be retained among the Clergy; at length, to these also
censure was remitted upon the same ground.

XI. Whether the Civil Law permitting one to kill another in his own defense,
give a right, or only impunity.
AQuestion is here proposed by some, Whether the Law, at least the Civil, as
having right of life and death, in what case it permits a thief to be killed
by a private person, does also exempt the person from all fault. I conceive
that is not to be granted: For first, the Law has not right of death over all
the Citizens upon every transgression, but upon a transgression so grievous
that it deferr^ death. And it is a very probable opinion of Scotus, that it is
not just to condemn any one to death, unless it be for those transgressions,
which were punished wi^ death Contra leges quae venantes rusticos morte
puniunt, vide Gregorium Turonensem libro 10. c. 10. Joan. Sarisbur. policratici
1. cap. 4. Pet. Blesensem epist. 129.
by the Law given by Moses; th^s only added; or which are equal to those in a
right estimation. And indeed, knowledge of divine will, which alone quieti the
mind, seems not possible to be had elsewhere in this business, but out of that
law; which surely appoints not pain of death for a thief. Moreover also, the
Law neither ought, nor is wont to give a right, privately to kill, even those
that have deserved death, except in crimes very heinous: otherwise, in vain
were the Authority of Courts of judgment ordained. Wherefore, if at any time
the law says, a thief may be killd without danger of punishment, it is to be
supposed to take away the penalty, not to grant a right.

XII. When a single combat may be lawful.
IT appears by what we have said, that two ways it may come to pass, that a
single combat may be undertaken by private persons without sin. First, if the
Invader grant the other license to fight, and and will kill him unless he will
fight: Secondly, if a King or Magistrate oppose two, that have both deserved
death, one against the other: in which case, it will be lawful for them to lay
hold on some hope of life; but he that appoints the Duel will seem to have not
so well done his duty, since it were better, if the punishment of one seem to be
sufficient, to choose by Lot the party that should die.

XIII. Of defense in public War.
WHat has been said by us hitherto concerning the right of defending ones self
and his goods, perte^eth most to private War; yet so, that it may be applied to
public Ammianus lib. 23. Cum i^ruentibus armis externis lex una sit and
perpepetua salutem omni ratione defendere, nihil ^enitente vi moris. Alexauder
Imp. oratione ad milites apud Herodian. 5. Injurias qui prior insert nihil
habet probabilis coloris: at qui libi molestos arcet ex bona conscien^ia sumit
fiduciam, bonaque ei syes adest, inae quod injuriam non inserat, sed auserat.
, regard being had to the diversity. For, in private war the right is as it
were momentaneous, and cease, so soon as the matter admits of an access unto
the Judge: but public, because it arises not, but where Courts of Justice
either are not, or not exercised, has a continued tract, and is perpetually
cherished by addition of new damages and injuries. Farther, in private war mere
defense, for the most part, is considered: but public powers, together with
defense, have also a right of revenging. Whence it is, that they may lawfully
prevent force, that is not present, but seems impending afar off; not directly,
(that we have showed above to be injust,) but indirectly, by revenging a wrong
begun already, but not consummate: Of which elsewhere.

XIV. It is not lawful to take arms to diminish a Neighbor's power.
THat is in no wise to be allowed, which some have delivered, that by the Law
of Nations, arms may be rightly taken to abate a growing power, which being
increased might be able to do hurt. I confess, in consultation about war this
is wont also to come in, not under the respect of just, but of profitable: that
if the war be just upon some other ground, upon this it may be judged prudently
undertaken. Nor do the Authors cited Bald. lib. 3. de rer. divis.
here say any more. But, that a possibility of suffering force should give a
right of offering force, this is far from all equity. So is the life of man,
that full security is never in our hand. Against uncertain fears, we must guard
our selves by meditation of divine providence, and by harmless caution, not by
doing violence to our neighbors.

XV. Defensive war also is unjust on his part, who gave just cause of War.
AS little are we pleased with this, Alb. Gent. l. 1. c. 13.
which they teach, that also their defense Cost. lib. 5. de Justit.
is just, who have deserved the war; because forsooth, few are content to
return only so much revenge, as they have received injury. For, that fear of an
uncertain thing cannot give a right to use force: whence, neither has a person
accused of a crime, any right to resist by force the public officers willing
to apprehend him, for fear lest he may be punished more than he deserves. But,
he that has offended another, ought first to offer the offended party
satisfaction, according to the arbitration of an upright man: and then
afterward his arms will be lawful. So Ezechias, when he had not kept the 2
Reg. 18. 7. etc. 19.
league, which his Ancestors had made with the King of Assyria, being set upon
by a war, confesses the fault, and submits himself to a mulct at the Kings
pleasure. Having done that, and being after that again provoked by war,
encouraged by a good conscience he withstood the enemies force, and his cause
was supported by the favor of God. Pontius Samnis, after restitution made to
the Romans, and the Author of the breach yielded up; we have, says he,
expiated our fault, and pacified the wrath of heaven, that was against us for
our violation of the league. I know full well, what Gods soever were pleased we
should be subdued to a necessity of restitution, the same Gods are displeasd
with the Romans for their proud contempt of our expiation of the breach. A
little after: Quid ultra tibi Roman, quid foederi, quid Diis arbitris foederis
debeo? Quem tibi tuarum irarum, quem meoru^ suppliciorum judicem feram? Neminem
neque populum, neque privatum sugio.
What more do I owe to thee, O Roman! What to the league, what to the Gods the
Judges of the league? Whom shall I bring unto thee to be judge of thy anger,
and of my punishment? I refuse to people, nor private man. So, when the Thebans
had offered all right to the Lacedaemonians, and they required more, the good
cause passed over from these to them, says Leuctrica prima.
Aristides De Principe Chalepi, qui pacem and residua tributorum obtulerat
Romano Argyropolo Imperatori, vide Zonaram: simile de Cruciferis in Cromero
lib. 17. De Helvetiis qui Caroh Burgundo, de curru ovium pellibus onusto,
ademptoque mercatoribus, satisfactionem obtulerant, vide Philippum Comminaeum,
lib. 7.
.

XVI. The rise and progress of propriety. Cap. 2.

THere follows among the Causes of war, Injury done, and first against that
which is ours. A thing is ours either by a common, or by a proper right. For
the better understanding whereof we must know the Rise and beginning of
propriety, which the Lawyers call dominion. God bestowed on mankind in general
Genesis 1. 29. 30. and 9. 2.
a right over the things of this inferior nature presently after the creation,
and again upon the reparation of the world after the flood. All things, as
Justin Lib. 43.
speaks, were undivided and common Ejus vestigium mansit in Saturnalibus.
to all, as if all had one patrimony. Hence it was, that presently every man
might take unto his uses what he pleased, and spend what might be spent. Which
use of the universal right was then instead of propriety. For, what any one had
so taken, another could not, without injury, take away from him. This may be
understood by that similitude which is in Cicero, A theater is common Seneca de
Benef. 7. 12. Equestria omnium Equitum Romanorum sunt: in illis tamen locus
meus sit proprius, quem occupavi.
, yet the place possessed De finibus, 3.
by any one, may be rightly called his own. Nor was it impossible for that
state to have continued, if either men had persisted in a certain great
simplicity, or had lived together in a certain mutual excellent charity. One of
these, to wit, Communion by reason of an exceeding simplicity Horatius:
Campestres melius Scythae,
Quorum plaustra vagos rite trahunt domos,
Vivunt, and rigidi Getae;
Immetata quibus jugera liberas
Fruges and Cererem ferunt;
Nec cultur a placet longior annua,
Defunctumque laboribus
Aequali recreat sort vicarius.

, may be observed in some people of America; who, through many Ages, without
any incommodity, have persisted in that custom: The other, to wit, communion
of Charity, the Essens Et ab his orti Pythagoristae. Vide Porph^yium, Diogenem
Laertium, Gellium, 1. 9.
practiced of old, and then the Christians, who were first at Jerusalem, and
now also not a few that lead an ascetick life. The simplicity, wherein the
first parents Adam typus humani generis. Vide Originem contra Celsum: neque
nihil huc pertinet quod Tertullianus dixit libro de anima. Natural enim
rationale credendum est, quod anim^ a primordio sit ingenitum, a rationali
videlicet auctore. Quid enim non rationale quod Deus jussae quoque ediderit,
nedum id quod proprie afflatu suo emiserit? Irrationale autem posterius
intellige idum est, ut quod acciderit ex serpentis instinctu, ipsum illud
transgressionis admissum, atque exinde inoleverit, and coadoleverit in anima ad
instar jam naturalitatis, quia statim in primordio naturae accidit.
of mandkind were created, was demonstrated by their nakedness. There was in
them rather an ignorance of vice, than the knowledge of virtue, as Trogus Just.
l. 2.
says of the Scythians. The most ancient of mortals, says Tacitus, lived
without any evil lust Seneca de iisdem epist. 90. Ignorantia rerum innocents
erant. Deinde locutus de justitia, ptudentia, temperantia, fort tudine, addit:
Omnibus his virtutibus habebat similia quaedam rudis vita. Josephus: (...).
, without dishonesty and witkedness, and so without punishment and coercion.
And in Macrobius 2. Ad Somn. Scip. Sap. 3. 24.
, First, there was amongst men simplicity, ignorant of evil, and as yet void of
craft. This simplicity seems to be called (...) Sic and Paulus Ephesians. 6. 24. qui
and (...) dixit, T^. 2. 17.
by the Hebrew wise man, by the Apostle Paul (...), which he opposes (...) to
craftiness. Their only business was the worship of God, whereof the Symbol was
the tree of life Sanctitas superior, Rabbinis. (...), Arethae ad Apoc. De
paradiso vide Eccl. 40. 17. Et de fluminibus paradisi eundem librum 24. 35. and
seq.
, as the ancient Hebrews do expound, and the Apocalypse assenteth Prove. 3. 18.
Philo de mundi creat Apocalypse. 22. 2.
. And they lived easily of those things which the earth of her own accord
brought forth without labor Vide egregium hac de re locum lib. 2. Varronis de
Re rustica, ex D^caearcho: and confer quae ex eodem Dicaearcho habet Porphyrius
de non esu animal um libro 4.
. But in this simple and innocent way of life Men persisted not, but applied
their minds to various arts, whereof the Symbol was the tree of the knowledge
of good and evil Josephu^: Quae acbor crat sol^rtiae and intelligentiae.
Telemachus apud Homerum. -- Omnia novt Quae bona, quae mala sunt, nec sum jam
p^vus ut ante Zeno^ Cittiensi prudentia, scientia bonorum and malorunt and medi
rum. Est id apud Diogenem Laertium. Plutarchus de Communibus notitiis: Quid
nocebit, si ablatis malis nulla erit prudentia, pro eo autem aliam habeamus
virtutem, quae non bonorum ae malorum, sed solorum bonorum sit scientia?
, that is, of those things which may be used both well and ill (...) voca^,
Philo.
In regard of this Solomon Ecclel. 8. 30.
says, God created man right, that is, simple, but they have found out many
inventions (...), ut dicto loco Philo loquitur.
Dion. Prusaeensis, in his 6. Oration; To the posterity of the first men, their
craf^iness and various Late hoc explicat Seneca epist. 90. quem lege: and
Dicaea^chum apud dictos jam scriptores.
inventions were not very conducible: for they used their wit, not so much for
valor and justice, as for pleasure, The most ancient Arts, Agriculture and
Pasture, appeared in the first Brothers; not without some distribution of
estates; From the diversity of their courses arose emulation, and then
slaughter: and at length, when the good were infected by the conversation of
the bad, a gigantick Seneca natural um 3. in fine: Extinctis pariter feris in
quarum homines ingenia t^ansicrant.
kind of life, that is, violent, such as theirs whom the Greeks call (...). The
world being washed by the flood, in stead of that fierce life, succeeded the
desire of pleasure Seneca dicto loco: Illis quoque innocentia non d^bit, nisi
dum novi sunt.
; whereunto wine was subservient; and thence arose unlawful loves Praemiumque
summum ebrietatis libido portentosa ac jucundum nefas. Seneca ib them. Genesis 10.
11.
. But concord was chiefly broken by that more generous vice, Ambition; whose
sign was the Tower of Babel: after which, men parted asunder, and severally
possessed several parts of the earth. Yet afterward also, there remained among
Neighbors a Communion, not of cattle, but of pastures. Because, in the small
number of men, so great was the latitude of the Land, that without any
incommodity it might suffice to the uses of many Ne signare quidem aut par^i
limite campum, Fas erat. Virg. Georg. 1.
: until, the number, as of men, so of cattle, being increased, Lands every
where began to be divided, not among nations as before Genesis 13. and 21.
but among families too. But Wells, De pureis ad Oasim inter multos communibus,
vide Olympiodorum apud Photium.
a thing in a thirsty Country very necessary, and not sufficing many, every one
made his own by seizure. These are the things, we are taught out of sacred
history, agreeing well with what the Philosophers and Poets have said of the
first state of things common, and the distribution of things which followed:
whose testimonies are produced by us in another Marilibero, c. 15.
book. Hence we learn, what was the cause, for which men departed from the
primitive communion of things, first of movables, and then of immovables also:
to wit, because when, not content to feed upon that which grew of it self, to
dwell in caves, to go naked, or clad with rindes of trees, or skins of beasts
Qualem vitam Scritefinnorum nobis accurate describit Procopius Gotthicorum 2.
Add Plinium 12. 1. Vitruvium 2. 1.
, they had chosen a more exquisite kind of life, there was need of industry,
which every one should use in every matter. And the reason, why fruits were not
brought together for common use, was, because of the distance of places,
whereby men were separated; and moreover, the defect of Justice and love;
whereby it came to pass, that neither in labor, nor in spending of the fruits,
was observed due equality. Withal we learn, how things went into propriety:
not only by act of the mind (for they could not know the thoughts of one
another, what every one would have to be his own, that they might abstain from
it, and many might desire the same thing:) but by a certain covenant, either
express, as by division; or tacit, as by occupation Vide quae hac de re ex
Gemara and Alcorano nobisprotulit honos Britanniae Seldenus in Thalassocratico.
. For so soon as communion did not please them, and division was not made, it
ought to be supposed an agreement amongst all, that every one should have
proper to himself, what he seized on Cicero: Ex quo, quia suum cujusque fit
eorum quae natura suerunt communia, quod cuique obtigit id quisque teneat. Quod
similitutudine illustrat a Chrysippo reperta de stad^o, ub^ currendo l^cet
vincere adversarium, non cum detrudendo. Scholiastes ad Artem poet. Horatii:
Quemadmodum domus aut ager sine domino communis est, occupatus vero jane
proprius fit. Varro in Age modo: Terra culturae causa attributa olim
particulatim, ut Etruria Thuscis, Samnium Sabellis.
. It is granted, says Cicero, that every one may prefer himself before
another, in getting things useful for his life, nature being not repugnant
hereunto Cicero Offic. 3. Solon. Divitias ha^uisse velim, sed non been partas
non cupiam. Cicero Offic. 1. Nec vero rei amplifieatio nemini nocens
vituperanda est, sed sugienda semper injuria.
. To which is to be added that of Quintilian Declam. 13.
: On this condition, that what is come into a man's possession is his own,
certainly whatsoever is possessed by right, is taken away by wrong. And the
ancients, when they called Ceres Macrob. Saturn. lib. 3. c. 12.
Legiferam, and her rites Thesmophoria, signified this, that by the division of
lands came up the original of a certain new right Postquam ex agrorum
discretione nata sunt jura. Ita Servius ad illud 4. Aen. Legiserae Cereri.
.

XVII. Some things cannot be made (...) per, as the Sea, taken for the whole or
principal parts: and why?
UPon these premises we say, that the Sea taken either in regard of the whole,
or in regard of the principal parts, cannot go into proper right. Which,
because some do grant it, of private persons, not of dations, we prove, first
by moral reason. For, the cause, for which men departed from communion, here
cease, the Sea being so great, that it can suffice all nations for every use,
for watering, for fishing, for sailing. The same were to be spoken of the air,
if any use might be made thereof, to which the use of the earth were not
necessary, as it is to Hawking Et ad habitandi jus. Tam soli quam coeli mensura
facienda est ait Pomponius, l. si opus. D. quod vi ^ur clam.
: whence it receives law from him, who has command over the Land. In the same
manner we judge of the (...), where is nothing that can admit of culture, and
the only use of fetching sand thence can never be exhausted. There is also a
natural reason, which forbids the Sea considered as we have said, to become
proper: because occupation proceeds not, but in a thing Ideo iugera ^uae
possessorem non habent immetata dixit Horatius.
terminated: and liquid things, because they have no (...), Inquit Aristoteles,
De Gener. l. 2. c. 2.
bounds of their own, cannot be occupied, but as they are containd in some
other thing: as lakes and ponds, and rivers, because they are contained with
banks. Now the Sea is not contained by the earth, being equal to the earth or
greater Ita d^ Oceano sensit Jarchas apud Philostratum, 3. 11.
; whence the ancients say, the earth is contained by the Sea (...), Apollonii
verba apud Philostrat. Sulpitius Apollinaris apud Gelt. Quid potest dici circa
Oceanum esse, cum undique Oceanus circumscribat omnes terras, and ambiat?
Marcus Acilius apud Livium: Oceano, inquit, qui orbem terrarum amplexu finit.
In Senecae Suasoriis dicitur Oceanus totius orbis vinculum terrarumque
custodia: Lucano, Unda mundum coercens.
. Nor may we feign a division: for when first the earth was divided, the Sea,
most part, was unknown: and so no way can be imagined for nations so far
distant to agree upon the division. Wherefore the things which were common to
all, and in the first division were not divided, they do not now pass into
proper right by division, but by occupation; nor are they divided, unless after
they have begun to be proper.

XVIII. Of things that may be made proper.
LEt us now come to things which may be made proper, but are not yet made so.
Such are many incult places Vide Bembum, Historiae 6.
, Islands in the Sea Ut Echinades, quas occupando suas secit Alcinaeon. Thucyd.
lib. 2. in fine.
, wild beasts, fishes, birds. But two things are to be noted, First, there is a
twofold occupation, one by the whole, another by the parts: the former usually
by the people, or by their Ruler: the other afterward by several persons; yet
rather by assignation, than free occupatition. But if any thing, seized on in
general, be not divided among several Lords, it is not therefore to be esteemed
voi^ For it remains in the dominion of the f^ occupator, to wit, the people or
K^ Such are wont to be rivers, lakes, pond^ woods, wild mountains. Next,
concernning Covarr. c. peccatun^. par. 2. Sect. 8.
wild beasts, fishes, birds, it is to be noted, that he who has command over
the lands and waters, may by his Law hinder others from catching and acquiring
the beasts, fishes, and birds: and by that Law are foreiners also bound. The
Dd. in l. cunctos populos. l. de sum. Trin. Covar. d. loco.
Reason is, because to the government of a people it is morally necessary, that
they who mingle with them but for a ti^e (which is done by entering the
territory) render themselves conformable to the Institution of that people. Nor
is that against us, that we read often in the Roman Law, saying, by the Law of
nature, or nations, it is free to hunt and take such creatures. For, this is
true, so long as no Civil Law intercedes; (as the Roman Law left many things in
that primitive state, concerning which things other nations made other
constitutions) But when the Civil Law ordains otherwise, the very Law of
nature dictates, that it ought to be observed. For, the Civil Law, though it
can command nothing which the Law of nature forbids, nor forbid what it
commands, nevertheless may it circumscribe natural liberty, and prohibit what
was naturally lawful, and also by its force antevert that very dominion, which
naturally is to be acquired.

XIX. Over things made proper, men have a right to use them, in time of
necessity: and whence it comes.
NOw let us see, what common right is competent to men over those things, which
are made proper unto some. Which question, perhaps some may wonder at, seeing
propriety may seem to have swallowed up all that right, which arose from the
common state of things. But it is not so. For, it must be considered, what was
the mind of them, who first introduced singular dominions: which is to be
believed such, as has receded as little as might be from natural equity. For,
if also written Laws are to be drawn, as far as they may, into that sense; much
more are Customs, that are not bound up in writing. First then, it follows
hence, that, L. 2. Sect. cum in eadem. D. ad l. Rhodiam. l. quo ^aufragium. S.
quod ait. D. de incend. L. Quemadmodu^. Sect. Item. D. ad L. Aquiliam. Thom. 2.
2. 66. 7. Covarr. c. peccat. 2. sect. 1. Soto l. 5. q. 3. art, 4.
in extreme necessity, that old right of using things revives, as if the things
had remained common: because, in all human constitutions, and therefore in the
Law of Dominion too, that extreme necessity seems excepted. Hence it is, that
in navigation, if at any time victuals fail, what every one has ought to be
brought forth for the common use. And so, in a fire, I may pull down my
neighbors house to save mine: and cut in pieces the tackling or nets upon
which my ship is driven, if it cannot be disintangled Talia non procedunt nisi
ex magna and satis necessaria causa. Ulp. l. Si alius. D. quod vi aut clam. Ubi
sequitur exemplum illud de aedibus intercisis a^cendi incendii causa.
by other means. All which are not introduced by the Civil Law, but expounded.
For among Divines also, it is a received opinion, in such necessity, if one
take from another what is necessary to save his life, he does not commit theft.
Of which de termination this is not the cause, that some allege, that the
owners of the thing are bound by the rule of charity to give it to the
necessitous; but, that all things seem divided amongst the owners, with a
certain benign reception of the primitive right. For, if the first dividers had
been asked their opinion thereof, they would have returned our answer.
Necessity, says Seneca the father, the defense of human imbecility, breaks
every Law Quicquid coegit defendit. l. 4. controv. 27. Exemplis idem Seneca
illustrat in excerptis controversiae 4. Necessitas est, quae navigia jactu
exonerat: necessitas est, quae ruinis intendia opprimit: necessitas est lex
temporis. Cicero Philippica 11. Cassius in sy^iam profectus est, alienam
provinciam, si homi^es legibus scriptis uterentur: his vero oppr^ssis, suam
lege naturae. Apud Curtium est: In communi calamitate, suam quemque habere
for^. Theodorus Priscianus vetus medicus: Expedit praegnantibus in vitae
discrimine constitutis sub unius partis saepe ^actura salutem merc^
certissimans; sicut arboribus crescentium ramorum accommodatur salutaris
abscissio, and naves pressae onere, cum gravi tempestate jactantur, solum
habent ex damno remedium. Prima illa verba ad (...) pertinent, cujus
instrumenti descriptio apud Galenum and Celsum: ac proinde eadem vix
restituenda apud Tertul. de anima.
, understand human, or made after the manner of human.

XX. Three Cautions to be applied to this case of necessity.
BUt Cautions are to be used, that this license be not extravagant. First,
Less. lib. 2. cap. 12. dub. 12. number. 70.
By all means trial must be made first, whether the necessity may be evaded
some other way, as by an address unto the Magistrate, or by endeavoring to
obtain the use of the thing from the Owner by entreaty. Plato permits one to
fetch water out of his neighbors Well, so that he has dug in his own
ground, as far as the chalk, to find water: if he has dug forty cubits
deep, says Solon: where Plutarch adds Subveniendum necessitati non instruendam
pigritiam.
, He thought necessity was was to be succored, idleness not to be maintained.
Xenophon Expedit. Cyri, 5.
in his answer to the Sin^penses: Where we are not permitted to buy, be it
among Barbarians or Graecians, there do we take what we want, not out of
wantonness, but necessity. Our second Caution is, This is not to be allowed, if
the Possessor be pressed with an equal necessity. For in a like case the
Possidentis melior est conditio. L. 5. c. 16.
Possessor has the advantage. He is not a fool, says Lactantius, who
thrusts not a shipwrackt man from his plank, nor a wounded man from his
horse, to save himself: because he has kept himself from doing hurt, which is
a sin; and to avoid this sin is wisdom. Cicero had said: Will not Offic. 3.
then a wise man, if himself be almost famisht, force another man's food from
him, being a man whose life is worth nothing No sure. For my life is not more
deer (...) me, than that disposition of mind, to vislate no man that I may
profit my self. We read in Curtius Metior est causa (...) non eradentis, quam
po^centis ^ienum. Q. Curtius. Adrian. quod. lib. 1. art. 2. c. 3. Covarr. d.
loco.
: Better is the cause of him that delivers not up his own, than of him that
requires what belongs to another. The third is this: Where it may be,
restitution is to be made. Some think otherwise upon this ground, that he who
has used his own right is not bound to restitution. But it is more true, that
the right here was not full, but restrained with a condition of restoring, when
the necessity should be over. For such a right suffices to keep up natural
equity against the rigor of dominion.

XXI. An example of this right in Wars.
HEnce we may collect, how it may be lawful for him, that wageth a pious war,
to seize upon a place situate in a peaceable Country; to wit, if there be, not
an imaginary, but a certain danger, lest the enemy invade that place, and
thence do irreparable damage: moreover, if nothing be taken, but what is
necessary for caution, i. e. the bare custody of the place, the jurisdiction
and profits being left to the Lord thereof: Lastly, if it be with a mind to
restore the custody so soon as the necessity is over. Enna, was retained either
by an evil, or by a necessary enterprise, says Livy: because it is Lib. 24.
evil here, whatsoever is different, even in the least degree, from necessary.
The Grecians that were with Xenophon, having De exped. Cyri. 5.
extreme need of ships, by the advice of Xenophon himself, took up such as
passed by; yet so, that they kept the lading safe for the Merchants, and to the
Mariners gave both food and wages.

XXII. Another right of men over things proper, for their benefit, without
damage to the owner.
BEsides that right of necessity, there is another relic of old communion,
namely, the right of harmeless utility. For why should not one, says Cicero,
when De Offic. 1.
without his own detriment he may, communicate to another, in those things,
which are profitable to the Receiver, and to the Giver not chargeable?
Therefore Seneca says, it cannot be called a benefit, De benef. 4.
to give leave to another to light his fire by yours. We read in Plutarch, It
is not lawful to spoil our victuals, when we Sympos. 7.
have more than enough; nor to stop or hide a fountain, when we have drank our
fill; nor to abolish the way-marks either by Sea or Land, which have been
useful for us. So a River, as a River, is proper to that people, or that
Prince, within whose dominion it runs, and they may make a mill on it, and take
what L. Quaedam. D. de rerum divis.
fish the River yields: But the same River, as a running water, remained
common, as to drinking or drawing of it. Ovid Qnis v^tet apposito lumen de
lumine sumi;
Atque cavum vastas in mare servet aquas?
Ovidius: apud quem and Lycios Latona sic alloquitur, Quid prohibetis aquas?
Usus communis aquarum est?
therefore calls the use of water common, and Virgil says, it is open to all.

XXIII. The right of passages explaned, by Land and Water.
SO also Lands, and rivers, and if any part of the Sea be come into the
propriety of any people, it ought to be open to those that have need of passage
for just causes: namely, because being expelld out of their own Country they
seek void places, or because they desire commerce with a remote Nation, or also
because they contend for their own in a just war. The Bald. 3. cons. 293.
reason here is the same which has been set down above, because dominion might
be introduced, with a reception of such use Serve. ad 7. Aen. Littusq: rogamus
innocuum. Cujus vindicatio, ait, nulli possit nocere. Numb. 20. and 21.
, which profits these, hurts not those: and therefore the Authors of Dominion
are to be supposed willing rather to have it so. We have an eminent example in
the history of Moses: who, when he had to pass through the countries of other
Princes, made this offer, first to the Edomite, then to the Amorite; that he
would go in the Highway, and not divert to private possessions: if he had need
of any thing of theirs, he would pay them the just price. Which conditions when
they were refused, he waged a just Justa bella gerebantur a filils Israel
contra Amorraeos, ait Augustinus. Sic Amyntorem Orchomeni regem obnegatum
transitum interfecit Hercules, notante id Apollodoro. Add legem Longobardicam
lib. 2. tit. 54. c. 2.
war, upon that score, against the Amorite. For harmless passage was denied,
says Lib. q. 4. super Number. ad ca. 20.
Austin, which by the most equal right of humane society should be open. The
Graecians that were with Clearchus: We will go home, if no man trouble us: if
any one do us wrong, by the Gods help we will endeavor to keep it off. Not
much unlike is that saying of Agesilaus, when returning out of Asia he was come
to Troas, he asked, whether they would have him pass as a friend, or as an
enemy: And Lysander asked the Boeotions, whether they would have him pass with
spears charged, or inclined. The Batavians Plut. Apoph. and in vita Agesilai.
Plutarch in Lysand.
in Hist. 4. Plutarch. in Cim.
Tacitus declare to the Bonnenses, If none opposed them, they would march
quietly; if they met with force, they would cut their way with the sword. Cimon
going to aid the Lacedaemonians, led his army through the territory of Corinth:
being reprehended by the Corinthians for not asking leave of the City; for even
he that knocks at another door, enters not without the permission of the
Masters; answered, But you did not knock at the doors of the Cleonaei and
Megarenses, but broke them open, thinking that all things ought to give place
to the stronger. The truth is in the middle sentence, that passage is first to
be requested Veneti and Germanis and Gallis de Marano certantibus iter
praebuere. Paruta II. Iidem Germanis conquerentibus de transuu hostibus dato,
ostendunt id nisi armis impediri non (...): quibus uti non mos sibi, nisi in
hosts manifes^s. eod. lib. Sic and poutifex se excusat, lib. 12.
, and, if it be denied, it may be forced. So Agesilaus Plutarch. in vita ejus.
returning out of Asia, when he had required passage of the Macedonia^ King,
and he had answered, that he would consult: Let him consult, says he, We i^
the mean time will march on. Nor may any rightly except, and say, he fears the
multitude of those that pass. For my right is not taken away by thy fear: and
so much the less, because there are ways of security; as, if the army pass in
divided companies; if E^emplum in exce^o lega tianum 12. apud Bembum 7. Hist.
Ital. Vide and notabilia pacta de transitu inter Fredericum Barba^ossam and
Isacium Angelum apud Nicetam l. 2. de vita ejusdem Isacii aliquot locis. In
s^pe rio Germanic transitum postulans de damno resorciendo cavet. Vide and
Cran^ziu (...) Saxon c. 10. and Mendosam in Belgicis. Caesar Helvetiis iter ^r
pr^vinciam noluit concedere, quod homine iniquo animo existimabat non
temperaturos ah injuriis and maleficio. De bello Gallko lib, 1.
unarmed, (which they of Agrippina said to the Germans, and Strabo notes that
custom anciently observed in the Country of the Eleans:) if, at the charge of
him that passes, he that grants the pass, provide himself sufficient Guards;
if Hostages Exemplum hab^s Procopii Persicorum. 2.
be given, which Seleucus demanded of Demetrius, that he might suffer him to
quarter within the bounds of his Empire. So also, fear of him, against whom, he
that passes makes a just war, is no sufficient reason to deny passage. Nor is
it more to be admitted, if you say, he may passsome way else: for any one may
say as much, and by that means the right of passing world come to nothing: but
it is enough, if, without deceit, passage be demanded, where it is next and
most commodious. Indeed, if he makes unjust war, who would pass; if he lead my
enemies Hoc dicebant Franci, qui in Venetia erant, Narseti Longobardos secum
ducenti, Gotthicorum 4. Alia negati itineris exempla habes apud Bembum lib. 7.
Italicorum. apud Parutam. l. hist. Venet. 5. and 6.
with him, I may deny him passage: and more than so, I may meet him on his own
ground and lawfully hinder his expedition.

XXIV. Of passage for Merchandise, and of Impost.
NOr is passage only due to persons, but to Merchandise also; for no man has
right to obstruct the way of Commerce to any Nation with any other that is
remote; because the permission of Trade is for the interest of human society,
and is not discommodious to any one. For, although some hoped gain, but not
due, departs from any, that is not to be reputed as a loss. Philo In legate. ad
Caium.
speaks to our purpose: On the Sea, all Ships of burden safely pass, according
to that right of Commerce Apud F^orum est. l. 3. Sublatis Comm^ cus, ruoto
foedere generis hamani. Servius ad Geotgic. 1. signisicat necessitate
q^aerendarum rerum homines navigandi peritiam ac studium reperisse. commune
bonum erat patere Commercium maris. Ambrosius in opere de Creatione: Bonum mare
tanquam hospitium fluviorum, invectio Commeatuum, quo sibi diftantes populi
copulantur; quae ex Basilio sumta Hexemeri 4. Mare forum mundi, insulas
stationes in mari, eleganter dixit de Provid. 2. Theodoret. Adjungam his
Chrysostomi ad Stebechium verba: Quomodo autem satis digne quis explicet
facilitatem ad mutua commercia nobis datam? Ne enim itineris longitudo
impedi^tum aliorum ad alios commeatibus adferret, breviorem viam, (...)
scilicet, ubique terrarum disposuit Deus, ut mundum tanquam (...) domum
communiter inhabitants, crebro nos invicem viserimus; and apud se nata quisque
alteri Communicans vicissita, commode accipere^ apud illum abundantes; ac sic
exiguam tenens terrae partem, ita tanqu^ si teneret universam, frueretur ejus
quae ubivis sunt bonis. Licet it^ nunc, tanquam in communi mensa convivarum,
unicuique ea quae sibi apposita dare alteri longius accumbenti, ac contra quae
apud ipsum s^ accipere manu tantum extenta.
, which is between all Nations arising from the desire of natural society;
while they supply one another mutually, with that, which the one wants, and
the other can spare. For envy has never invaded either the whole world, or the
great parts thereof. Another testimony we have from Plutarch, speaking thus of
the Sea: This element has made our life sociable and perfect, that would
otherwise be wild and without correspondence; it supplies our wants with
mutual aid, and by exchange of things needful procures fellowship and
friendship. Wherewith agrees that of Libanius: God has not granted all things
to every land, but has distributed his gifts to several Countries, that men
having need of one another might maintain society for their common good.
Therefore has he made the Merchant, to convey to all, what any place affords.
Euripides Supplicib.
also brings in Theseus, accounting Navigation among the Inventions, which
human reason has found out for the general benefit, thus:

What nature any land denied,
By Navigation is supplied.
But it is a question, whether Tribute may be imposd, by him that rules the
Land, upon merchandise passing by Land, or by river, or by part of the Sea,
which may be called an accession of the Land. Certainly, whatsoever burdens have
no relation to the merchandise, no equity suffers such to be imposed on the
same. Neither can Head-money, put on the inhabitants to sustein the charge of
the Commonwealth, be exacted of passengers. Nevertheless, if either to secure
the goods, or if, among other reasons, for this also, the public be charged,
some Tax, by way of compensation, may be laid upon the Commodities, so that
the measure of the cause be not exceeded. For upon this depends the justness of
Tributes and Toll Vide legem Longobardicam tit. 31. c. 33. and epistolam
Episcoporum ad Ludovicum Regem quae inter capitula legitur Caroli Calvi, c. 14.
. So, Strabo Libro octavo.
relates, that the Corinthians even from the most ancient times, received
Tribute De thure Plinius, 12. 14. Ev^hi non potest, nisi per Gebanitas: itaque
and horum regi penditur vect^^gal.
of the Commodities, which to avoid the compassing of Malea, were carried by
land from Sea to Sea. So, the Romans received a price for the passage of the
Rhene Etiam in pontibus pro tranfitu datur, inquit Seneca.
: and the Lawyers Pereg. l. 1. de jure Fisci cap. 1. number. 22. Aug. cons. 199.
Zabar. cons. 38.
books are full of the like. But oft-times an equal measure is not kept; whereof
the Arabian Phylarchs are accused by Lib. 16.
Strabo, adding, It is a hard matter, amongst powerful and fieroe people, to
compound upon terms not grievous to the Merchant.

XXV. The right of staying for a time, of inhabiting, of having desert places.
TO stay sometime, for health sake, Vict. de Ind. rel. 2. n. 1.
or for any other just cause, ought also to be permitted passengers. For this
too is among the innoxious utilities. Wherefore Ilioneus in Virgil Servius ad
eum loc. Occupantis enim est possessio littor^. unde ostenduntur crudeles, qui
etiam a communibus prohibeant. Loomedon ab Hercule occisus, quod eum Trojae
portu pelleret, Servio ibidem nartance.
, when the Trojans were prohibited to stay on the shore of Afric, is bold to
invoke the Gods as Judges: and the complaint of the Megarenses against the
Athenians, who drove them from their havens Pl^ch. Pericle. (...). Diod. l. 12.
Thucyd. 1.
, against common right, was approved by the Greeks: so that the Lacedaemonians
esteemed no cause of war more just. Consequent hereto is this, that is is
lawful to build a Cottage on the shore, to shelter them for a season, though
we grant the shore to be possessed by the Inhabitants. For, what Pomponius said,
of having the Praetor's decree, that it may be lawful to build on the common
shore or in the Sea, perteins to buildings Quo and illud Poctae: Contracta
pisces aequora sen^iunt,
Factis in altum molibus.

that are permanent. Moreover, perpetual habitation is not to be denied these
foreiners, who being expulsed from their own seats, seek entertainment abroad;
on condition, they submit to the government in being, and to other things
needful for the avoiding of seditions. Which equity is well observed by the
divine Poet, when he brings in Aeneas yielding to Latinus the Militia, Virgil:
Socer arma Latinus habeto, Imperium solemn Socer. Lib. 1. Lib. 17.
and sovereign power. And in Halicarnessensis, Latinus himself says, the cause
of Aeueas was just, if compelld by want of room he came thither. It is the
part of Barbarians to repel strangers, says Strabo out of Era^tosthenes: nor
were the Spartans in this respect commended: and in the judgment of Ambrose
also, they De Offic. l. 3. c. 7.
that prohibit strangers to dwell among them, are in no wise to be approved.
The Eolians admitted the Colophonians, the Herod. l. 1. and 4. Paus. l. 7.
Oros. 7. Diod. l. 5.
Rhodians Phorbas and his Fellows, the the Carians the Melians, the
Lacedaemonians the Minyans, the Cumeans others that came unto them. But, of the
same Minyans, requiring a part of the Empire after they were admitted,
Herodotus rightly says, They were in urious, and Lib. 4. cap. 6.
did what was not lawful to do. And Valerius Maximus says, They turned a
benefit into an injury. Lastly, if within the territory of a people, there be
some desert and barren ground, that also is to be granted to strangers upon
their request, yea it is also rightly seized on by them; because, that ought
not to be esteemed occupied, which is not cultivated, but only as to the
Empire, which remains entire to the first people. To the Trojans were granted
by the Latin Aborigines, seven hundred Acres of hard and rough Ground, as
Servius notes. In Dion Prusaeensis Ad 11. An.
we read, They do no offense, who inhabi Orat. (...).
and manure a part of the land, that he neglected. The Ansibarians in Tacitus
cry Tac. Annal. 13.
out: As the Heaven to the Gods, so is the Earth granted to mortals, and what
is void is public: looking up to the Sun and Stars, they did openly as it were
enquire of them, whether they were pleased in beholding any ground empty and
without inhabitants: They should rather call forth the sea, and overwhelm the
spoilers of the Earth. But these men did ill apply these general sayings to
that particular business. For those lands were not altogether void, but served
to feed the cattle and herds belonging to the Army; which was a just cause
for the Romans to deny them. And no less justly did the Romans of old ask of
the Galli Senones, What right they had to require lands from Live. lib. 5.
the possessors, or to threaten them with War.

XXVI. Of Oaths. How great their virtue is, even in the opinion of Pagans.
AMong all people, and from all time, about promises and contracts, very great
has been the virtue of an oath Sophocles (...): M^ns excitari jurejurande
s^let,
U^na diligenter evitet mala,
Culpari amicis, and Deos offendere.

Our Ancestors, says Cicero, esteemed no bond of faith stronger than this.
Hence it has been always believed, that some heavy punishment hangs over the
head of perjured persous Ut Hesiodus dixit de Juramento: -- Clades Mortalib.
unde
Adveniunt, quoties fallaci pectore jurant.

: So that posterity Vide Servium in excerptis Fuldensibus ad 1. Aeneid.
also paid for the sins of their forefathers: (which was not believed, but of
most grievous crimes:) and even the will without the deed drew punishment upon
it: both which Herodotus confirms by the narration of Glaucus Epicydides, who
only deliberated, whether Lib. 2. ubi hoc carmen Pythiae adfert idem Herodotus:
Ad juramento quaedam est sine nomine proles,
Trunca manus, and trunca pedes: tamen impete magno
Advenit, atque omnem vastat stirpemque domumque

he should break his oath concerning a thing committed to his trust.

And Juvenal rehearsing the same story U. Zachar. 5. 1, 2, 3. and interpret.
ejus loci Chrysostomum de Statuis 15.
so concludes:

-- Such is the pain,
The bare intent of perjury does gain.
Well said Cicero: An oath is a religious affirmation: and what you have firmly
promised, as in the presence of God, is Offic. 3. Est Jusiurandum affirmatio
religiosa: quod autem affirmate quasi Deo test promiseris, id tenendum est.
Lib. de ira Dei.
to be made good. But, that he adds; For now it belongs not to the wrath of the
Gods, which is none, but to justice and fidelity; if by the name of wrath he
understand a perturbation, it is not to be rejected; if any kind of affection
or will to punish, it is not to be received, as Lactantius tightly proves.

XXVII. In an Oath is required a deliberate mind.
LEt us now consider, whence arises the virtue of an oath, and how far it
teaches. First, what is said of promises and contracts has place here also:
that a mind having use of reason, and deliberate is required. Wherefore, if any
one, not conceiving that he swears, utter swearing words, as is related of
Cydippe, that may be said, which Ovid ascribes to her, taken out of Euripides,
I have not sworn; because my mind went not with my tongue Ovid epist. Quae
jurat men's est; nil conjuravimus illa. Eurip. H^ppol. Jurata lingua est: mente
juravi nihil. quia de re honesta ^acenda, nutr^cis verba intellexent
Hippolitus, non de adulterio and incestu. Ovid. ibidem: Consilium prudensque
animi sententia jurat, Et nisi judicii vincula null tenent. mox: Sed si nil
dedimus praeter sine pectore vocem, Verba suis frustra viribus orba tenes. Non
ego juravi; legi jurantia verba: etc.
. But if one, willing to swear, is not willing to oblige himself, he is never
the less obliged; because obligation is inseparable from an oath, and a
necessary effect thereof Soto lib. 8. qu. 1. art. 7. Covarr. ad c. quamvis. p.
1. (...). 5.
.

XXVIII. In what sense the words of an Oath bind.
BUt, if one deliberately pronounce swearing words, yet without a mind of
swearing, some say, he is not bound, yet sins in swearing rashly. More truly,
he is bound to make good his words, whereto he has called God a witness. For,
that act, which by it self is obligatory, proceeded from a deliberate mind.
Consequent to this it is, that although that of Tully be true, What thou have
sworn according to thy mind, not to do is perjury Tullius: Quod ex animi tui
sententia jurasti, id non facere perjurum est. Quo and illud pertinet quod apud
Homerum jurans Ulyssi C^lypso ai^: (...).
; Yet has it this exception, unless he that swears know, or probably believe,
the words are taken otherwise by him, with whom he deals. For calling God to
witness his words, he ought to make the words true, as he thinks they are
understood Augustinus epist. 224. de illo locotus qui e Punicis castris
egressus in castra redierat, inde Romam venerat: Ita non attenderunt qui illum
Senatu moverunt, quid ipse j^ndo cogitasset, sed quid ab illo quibus juraverat
exspectarent. Vide and sequentia. Vide ad hanc ^em pulcre dicta (...)
Trosl^iano Tom. 3. Council editionis Sirmondianae, and apu^ Hi^cmarum in
opusculo de divoitio Lothar^i and Tethbergae ad interrogationem 6. ubi in hanc
lententiam recte de Deo dicitur: Qui non ut juras, sed ut is jurasse putavit
cui juras, audi^ Sic es utrique ^eus. In professione jurata Hebraeorum per
Hispaniam: Si non ea intention persec^ris, sicut a nobis me prositente audita
atque intellecta sunt.
. And this is that which the same Cicero says: What is so sworn, as the mind
of the giver of the oath conceives it must be done, it must be kept. In Tacitus
we read, Trembling and changing the words of the Oath by various arts,
conscious Histor. 4.
of their own wickedness. Augustine: They are forsworn, who, the words being
Epist. 224. Lib. 2. de sum. bono. cap. 31. 1. citatur causa 22. quaest. 5. c.
quacunque.
salved, have deceived their expectation to whom they have sworn. And Isidore:
with whatsoever art of words one swears, God notwithstanding who is a witness
of the conscience, takes it so as he does to whom it is sworn. And this is that
which is meant by the phrase Liquido jurare Donatus ad illud in Andria: Quia si
forte opus ad ^erum jurejurandum mi^i, Non opposuisse, ut liquido possim.
Liquido, pure, and manifest. Nicetas in Alexio fraudem Andronici. Comneni
culpans: Oportuit non quaesita locutione verba adulterare, sed ut concepta ea
fuerant, cloqui. qui and alibi de Alexio contra sensum verba captante: ita
verbis illis insidebat, ut musca vibici. Graviter in hanc regulam peccavit aula
Arcadiana, quae effecit ut Chalcedone occideretur, is qui Constantinopolim,
salute ipsi per jusjurandum promissa, venerat. Zozomen. lib. 5. Appian. de
bello civili lib. 1. Pan. in c. clericus de jurejur. Sil. in verbo jurament. 4.
(...). 23. 6. 17. ibi. Thom. Heb. 6. 17, 18.
. Therefore did Metellus rightly refuse to swear to the Apuleian Law, albeit
there were some that said, the Law, by fault in the preferring of it, was void;
and that the oath to the Law was so to be understood, if the Law were rightly
preferred and made. For, albeit in other promises is easily understood some tacit
condition, which may exsolve the promiser, yet is not that to be admitted in an
oath. Pertinent here is that noble place of the Apostle to the Hebrews: God
willing most abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the immutability of
his counsel, confirmed it by an oath: That by two immutable things, in which
it was impossible for God to Ita recte verti puto illud (...), sicut aperta
locutio vocatur veritas, Dan. 7. 16. and 8. 16. and 10. 1.
deceive, we might have a strong consolation. For the understanding of which
words, we must know, the holy Writers often speak of God (...), and rather
according to that which seems to us, than that which is. For, God does not
truly change his D^crees; yet is he Jona. 4. 1.
said to change and to repent Council. Tolet. 8. c. 2. Jurare namque Dei est a
seipso ordinata nullatenus Convellere: paenitere vero, eadem o^dinata, cu^
voluetit, convellere. Retulit Gratianus in causam 22. q^ 4. explicata vero ut
in textu nostro.
, as often as he does otherwise than the words seemed to found; to wit, by reason
of a condition tacitly understood Senec. vide Not. Quaest. 2. 37.
, that cease, Jer. 18. 8. Examples are frequent to be Genesis 20. 3. Exodus 32.
14. 1 Reg. 21. 29. 2 Reg. 20. 1. Es. 38. 1. Jonae 3. 5, 11.
seen. In which sense also God may improperly be said to deceive us: and the
word (...), that appears in the said place to the Hebrews, is wont to have the
signification of an event frustrating hope, as we may see in sundry Levit. 6.
2. Jos. 24. 27. Es. 58. 2. Ose. 1. 2. Abac. 3. 17. Job 41. 6. Ose. 9. 2.
places. And this proceeds most easily in comminations, because they do not
confer a right on any; in promises sometimes, to wit, where a certain condition
is secretly couched. Therefore does the Apostle name two things, that note
immutability, the promise, because it gives a right; and the oath, because it
repels tacit, and in some sort latent conditions; as we may see, Psalm. 89. 30,
31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36.
Psalm. 89. For, it is another thing if the very nature of the business openly
declare some conditions. Whereunto some refer that which is read, Numb, 14. 30.
But it is more true, that the promised land is by oath appointed to them, not
the persons, but the people, that is, to the posterity of them, to whom God had
sworn, v. 23. And such a promise may be fulfild at any time, nor is limited to
certain persons.

XXIX. An oath deceitfully procured, when binding. Of Joshuah's oath.
BY that which is said, may be understood what is to be judged of an oath
procured by deceit. For, if it be certain, that he who swears supposes
something done, which indeed is notso Ut Hippolytus, de quo modo diximus.
; and Navar. c. 12. n. 13.
that, unless he had believed it, he would not have sworn, the oath will not
bind: But if it be doubtful, whether he would not, even without that, have
sworn the same, he must stand to his word, because the greatest simplicity,
that can be, agrees unto an oath. And hither do I refer the oath, which Joshua
and the Princes of the people of Israel swear to the Gibeonites. Josh. 9.
They were indeed deceived by the Gibeonites, feigning that they came from a
far Country. Yet did it not follow thence, that Joshua and the Princes, had
they known their vicinity, would not have spared them. For, what they said to
the Gibeonites, Peradventure ye dwell among us, and how shall we make a league
with you? may have this sense, that the Gibeonites may be asked, what league
they desire, whether Social, or of dedition: or also, that the Hebrews may
show, it was not lawful for them, with certain people, to enter into a social
league: Deuteronomy. 20. 10.
and not, that they may deny, life might be given to those that yield
themselves. For, the divine Law, which devoted those nations to destruction, by
comparison Imo and ex causa Legi do internecione addita, Ex. 24. 33. Deuteronomy. 7.
4. cessat enim ea causa in illis qui praecepta fillorum Noae suscipiunt, and
tributa pendunt. Ita Malmonides, and Samson Micosi, and Moses de Kotzi in
praecepto jubente 15, and 108.
with another law, was so to be understood, that it had place, except in them,
that being summond were ready to obey. Which is proved, as by other arguments,
so by the history of Rahab Et Gazere habitantium, Jos. 16. 10. Gergesaeos ad
Christi usque tempora superstites fuisse ex Evangelio apparet, Matt. 8. 28. nam
hi ab initio se dediderant; Ideo omittuntur in hostium enumeratione. Deuteronomy. 20.
17. Jos. 9. 1.
, who was spared for her good deserts; and of Solomon, who received the
relics of the Canaanites under Empire and tribute. And to this purpose is
that we read in the Book of Joshua Jos. 11. 19, 20. 2 Samuel 21. 6. De Officiis
l. 3. c. 10.
, That there was not one City of the seven Nations, which made their peace: for
they were hardened, that mercy might not be showed them. Wherefore, since it was
credible, if the Gibeonites had told the plain truth, which for fear they did
not, they should nevertheless have obtained their lives, and saved themselves
on condition of obedience, the Oath was of force, in so much that afterward
most grievous revenge was taken by the hand of God for the violation of it.
Ambrose treating upon this story: Joshua (says he) thought not sit to recall
the peace which he had granted them, because it was confirmed by the Religion
of an oath, lest while he condemned their fraud, he should lose his own credit.
Notwithstanding, the Gibeonites, being now by their dedition become subjects of
the Hebrews, sustained some punishment for their craft; For, they were put
under a certain personal servitude Ut Brutiani olim a Romany, Gellius 10. 3.
Festus verbo Brutiani.
, when, if they had dealt openly, they might have been received into a
tributary condition.

XXX. The words of an oath not to be extended too far.
YEt is not the signification of an oath to be extended beyond the received
custom of speech. Therefore they were not perjurd, who, when they had sworn
they would not give their daughters in marriage to the Benjamites, permitted
the ravished to live with the raptors. For, it is one thing to give; another
thing not to require that which is taken away Nec hortabantur Israelitae, nec
prohibebant, ait in hac historia Josephus. Seneca excerptorum 6. 2. Lex eum
tenet, qui juvat exulem, non qui patiatur juvari.
. Ambrose, of this deed: Which indulgence seems to carry with it a congruous
revenge upon their intemperance, when they were permitted only to enjoy whom
they had ravished, without the solemnity of marriage De Officiis lib. 2. c. 14.
Livius lib. 39.
. Whereto is not unlike, that the Achaians, when the Romans allowed not of some
things done by them, and confirmed by oath, requested them to alter what
themselves pleased; and not bind the Achaians with religion to make the things
void, which by oath they had established.

XXXI. An oath binds not, being made of unlawful matter.
THat an oath may be of force, it is requisite the obligation be Tractat hoc
been Ambrosius de offic. 1. and alii relati in causae 22. quaestionem 4.
Pertinet huc Canon 7. Council. Hilerdensis relati in Tom. 3. Conciliorum
Galliae, and in Hincmari opusculis non pauca.
lawful. Wherefore a sworn promise of a thing unlawful, either naturally, or
by divine interdict, or by human also (of which hereafter) will have no force
at all. Well says Philo the Jew Philo de special. Leg.
: Whosoever, for his oaths sake, goes about any injust action, let him know, he
is not an observer, but an eversor of an oath; which is worthy of great care
and religion, and wherewith honest and righteous things are wont to be
confirmed. For he adds one fault to another; to an oath not rightly made, and
from which it had been better to abstain, he adds an act unlawful. Wherefore,
abstaining from the unjust action, let him pray to God, whose property is to
have mercy, that he may obtain his pardon. For to choose a double evil, when
one may be eased of the one half, is extreme folly and madness, An example
hereof may be given 1 Samuel 25. Lib. 2.
in David, who spared Nabal, whom he swear he would kill. Cicero mentions a
like example in the vow of Agamemnom; Dionysius Halicarnessensis in the
conjuration of the Decemviri about oppressing the Commonwealth. Seneca:
Praestare fateor posse me tacitam fidem, si scelere careat: interim scelus est
fides. Ubi interim valet interdum.
Ambrose Offic. 1. c. ult.
: It is sometimes against duty to perform a promise, to keep an oath. Augustine:
If ones faith be pawned to commit a sin, it is strange to call it faith. Basil
says the same, in his second to Amphilochius.

XXXII. Or, which hinders a greater moral Good.
YEa, although what is promised be not unlawful, but hinders a greater moral
good Quale Honorii de pace nunquam facienda cum Alarico, Zozimo Harr ante. Vide
Council. Hilerd. d. loco. Hincmarum quoque dicto opusculo ad interrogationem 14.
, in this case also the oath will not be of value. The reason is, because we
owe to God proficiency in good, so that we may not take away from our selves
the liberty thereof. Hither pertains a remarkable passage of the forecited
Philo, worthy to be read here: Some are of so hard and unsociable a nature,
either haters of mankind, or enslaved by that cruel mistress anger, that they
grow more obstinate in their ferity of manners by swearing, they will not admit
such a one to their Table or within their doors, they will never do him any
good, they will never receive any thing from him till death. That he says,
some swar never to do good to such or such Vide Baba Kama c. 9. sect. 10. and
ib^ notata a doctissimo. Conslantino. Levit. 5. 6. Mat. 15. 5.
, the Hebrews called this A vow concerning beneficence. The form whereof, as
the Hebrew Masters have it, is agreeable to that Korban in the Gospel, of this
sense: Be it a gift ded^cated to God, whatsoever good thou might ever
receive from me. The vow, the penalty of consecration being added, was judged
very valid by the Hebrew Masters (the worst interpreters in this part of divine
Law) though 'twere made against one's parents: which, in that place, is refuted
by Christ, in whose words to honor is to benefit, as appears by comparing the
place (...)
in Mark, and 1 Timothy 5. 3, 17. and Numb. 23. 11. But against whomsoever it is
conceived, we shall rightly pronounce the oath not obligatory, because, as we
have said, it is against proficiency.

XXXIII. Of oaths about things impossible.
WE need not speak of things altogether Ad impossibil^ neminem obligari.
impossible: for it is manifest enough that no man is obliged unto such. But,
for that which is impossible for the time, or upon supposition, the obligation
is pendent, so that he who has sworn upon a supposition, is bound to do his
best endeavor, to render that possible which he has sworn.

XXXIV. In oaths God is named, and in what sense.
THe form of swearing differs in words, agrees in deed. For it ought to have
this sense, that God may be invoked, to wit, in this manner, God be witness, or
God be Avenger, which two are coincident. For, when a Superior having right of
punishing is called to witness, there is withal asked of him a revenge of
perfidiousness Ambrosius ad Valentinianum ^mp. Quid est jurare, nisi ejus quem
testare fidei tuae praesulem divinam potentiam consiteri? Vide formulam
insignem Chagani Avarorum apud Menandrum exce^ptis Legationum.
: and he that knows all things is a revenger, because a witness. Plutarch
Quaest. Roman.
: Every oath ends in imprecation, if one shall be perjurd. Hither pertein the
old forms of leagus, wherein it was the custom to use sacrifices, as appears,
Genesis 15. 9, etc. As that Roman form in Livy (...) Jupiter ita illum ^ito, ut
ego hunc porcu^. Live. lib. 1. Lib. 21. Deos precatus ita se mactarent, ut ipse
agnum mact asset. Sisciens fallo ita me D^espiter ejiciat, ut ego hunc lapidem.
: Thou O Jupiter so sm^e him, as I do this Hogg. And elsewhere; Praying the Gods
they would so slay him, as he had slain the Lamb. And in Polybius and Festus:
If wit^ingly I deceive, solet Die piter cast me away, as I cast away this stone.

XXXV. In oaths also other things are named, with respect to God.
MOreover, it is an ancient custom to ^wear by other things named, and by other
persons; either because they wished those to be hurtful to them, as the Sun,
the earth, the heaven, the Prince; or because they desired to be punished in the
same, as in their head, in their children, in their Country, in their Prince.
Nor was this the custom of profane nations only, but of the Jews, as Philo De
special. Legitus.
shows. For he says, men that are about to swear, ought not for every matter
presently to have recourse to the maker and father of all things, but to swear
by their parents, by heaven, earth, the universe. Wherewith agrees, what the
Interpreters of Homer note, that those old Greeks were not wont hastily to
swear by the Gods, but by other De Socrate Apollonius apu^ Philostratum 6.
Jurabat per ista, non ut per Deos, sed ne per Deos juraret.
things present, as, by this Scepter: and that the same was constituted by the
most righteous King Khadamanthus, is deliverd by Porphyry and the Scholiast
upon Aristophanes. So we read, that Joseph swore by the life of Pharaoh,
according to the manner of the Egyptians, noted there by Abenesdras; Elisha,
Genesis 42. 15. 2 Reg. 2. 2. Add 2 Reg. 4. 30. Cant. 2. 7.
by the life of Elija. And truly Christ, in the 5. of Matthew, does not, as
some think, pronounce these oaths less lawful, than the other made by the
express name of God: but, whereas the Hebrews less regarded these, out of an
opinion like to his who said, He did not think the scepter to be God, He shows
that these also are truly oaths. For Ulpian too has L. Qui per D. de jurejur.
Ita and Great. causa. 22. quaest. 1. Matthew. 23. 21.
very well said; He that swears by his life, seems to swear by God; for he
swears with respect of the Deity. So says Christ, He that swears by the
Temple, swears by him that dwells therein: and, he that swears by heaven,
swears by him that sits thereon. But the Hebrew Masters of those times
were of opinion, that men were not bound by the oaths made by Creatures, except
a penalty being added, as, if the thing of which the oath was made, were
consecrated to God. For, this is the oath Korban, or of the gift, whereof, not
only in the said place of Matthew, but in the Laws also of the Tyrians, mention
was exstant, as we learn out of Josephus's disputation against Appion Nec
aliunde arbitre^ Orientis papulos dictos Graecis (...), quae vox apud Aeschylum
and Euripidem exstat. (...), apud eundem Aeschylum.
. This error therefore, in that place, Christ opposes. Tertullian says, the
ancient Christians swear by the life of the Prince more sacred than all Genii.
In Vegetius there is a form, above mentioned, wherein the Christian soldier
swear, not by God only, but also by the Majesty of the Emperor, which is next
to God to be loved and honored.

XXXVI. Of swearing by false Gods.
ANd, if one swear by false Gods, he shall be bound Liber Sap. c. 14. ut vertit
Latinus: Non enim juratorum virtus, sed peccantium poena perambulat semper
injustorum praevaricationem. Aug. epist. ad Pub. 154.
; because, though under false notes, yet in a general notion, he looks upon
the Deity: wherefore the true God, if one swear falsely, interprets it to be
done to his dishonor. And we see that holy men, though they never gave an oath
under that form, much less did they ever swear so; which I wonder is permitted
by Duarenus; yet, if the persons with whom they dealt, could not be drawn to
swear otherwise, they contracted with them, themselves truly swearing as they
ought, but receiving from them such an oath as could be had. We have an
example hereof in Jacob and Laban, Genesis 31. 53. This is that which Se^m. 28. de
verb. Apostoli. citatur c. ecce dico, causa 22. qu. 5.
Austin says: Even he that swears by a stone, if he swear false, is Et qui per
lapidem jurat, si falsum jurat, perjurus est. Non te audit lapis loquentem, sed
punit Deus fallentem. Augustine.
perjured. After: The stone hears not thy words, but God punishes thy fraud.

XXXVII. The effect of an oath.
THe principal effect of an oath, is to end controversies, as the divine writer
to the Hebrews says: and likewise Philo, An oath is Gods testimony of a thing
in question: and Halicarnassensis, The last Procopius Persicor. 2. Jusjur andum
quod ab hominibus habetur omnibus ultimu^ atque firmissimum and fidei mutuae
and veracitatis pignus. Diod. 'Sic. (...).
confirmation among men, both Greeks and Barbarians, which no time will
abolish, is that which by oath calls the Gods to be Sureties of their
Covenants. So, to the Egyptians was an oath the greatest assurance among men.
Wherefore he that swears is under a double tie, first that the words agree unto
his meaning, which Chrysippus calls (...), next that the deed agree unto his
words, which he calls (...). He that offends in the former, is said by the same
Chrysippus Hoc (...) vetatur Exodus 20. (...) Levit. 19. ut Hebraei volunt
praecepto jubente 240.
, (...), in the later (...), very distinctly, though the terms are wont
sometimes to be confounded.

XXXVIII. When an oath gives aright to God and man, when to God alone.
ANd verily, if the matter be such, and the words so conceived, that they be
referred not to God alone, but to man, a right doubtless will be acquired by
man out of the oath, as out of a promise or contract, which ought to be
understood most simply and plainly. But, if either the words do not respect
man, by conferring upon him a right; or, if they do respect him, but there is
somewhat which may be opposed against him; then, such will be the force of the
oath, that indeed he can attain no right, yet nevertheless he that has sworn
is bound to God to stand to his oath. An example hereof is in him, who by
unjust fear gave cause to a sworn promise Austin teaches, that an oath
extorted by force is also to be kept for the reverence of God. Epist. 124, 125.
Ezech. 17. 12. 13. 15. Jerem. 29. 7. Tantum temporibus illis juramentum
valebat. Cic. Offic. 3. Tolet. l. 4. c. 22.
. For he attains no right, or such as he ought to render, upon this ground that
he gave cause to the loss. So we see the Hebrew Kings, both reproved by the
Prophets, and punished by God, because they kept not their faith sworn to the
Babylonian Kings. Cicero commends the Tribune Pomponius, who performed what
being compelled by terror he had sworn. So much, says he, in those times did
an oath prevail. Wherefore it was not only the duty of Regulus to return to
prison, how unjust soe'r it was; but of those ten also, whom Cicero mentions,
to Offic. 3.
return to Annibal: for they were obliged by their oath. Tho. 2. 2. 89: art. 7.
and ibi Cajet. Alex. Imol. in c. verum de jurejur. Solo lib. 8. q. 1. art. 7.


XXXIX. Of an oath to a Pirate, or to a Tyrant.
NOr is it thus only among public enemies, but among all: For, the person
alone to whom we swear, is not respected; but He by whom we swear Gregoras:
Perjurium Deo culpam impingit negligentiae.
, God, who suffices to create an obligation. Cicero therefore is to be
rejected, when he says, it is no perjury, if the price promised for life be
not brought unto Robbers: because a Pirate is not a determinate but a common
enemy of all, with whom we ought to have no society either of faith or oath.
Which is also said by him elsewhere of a tyrant; and by Brutus, in Appian, With
a tyrant, the Romans Civil. 2.
have no faith, no Religion of an oath. But, as in the constituted Law of
Nations it is true, and shall be showed hereafter, that an enemy differs from a
Pirate; so cannot that difference have place here, where, though the right of
the person is deficient, God is concernd Plutarchus Lysandro: Qui juramento
hostem circumvenit, is ostendit a se hostem metui, Deum contemni.
: for which reason an oath is called by the name of a vow. Besides, it is not
true which Cicero assumes, that there is no society of right with a Robber. For
'twas well answered by Tryphoninus, that a thing deposited is to restored to a
thief Et ei qui regnum sine jure invasit: quomodo Oroferni depositum redditum a
Prienensibus. Polybius and Diodorus Siculus in excerptis Peiresianis.
, by the very Law of Nations, if the owner thereof appear not. Wherefore I
cannot allow that which is deliverd by some, that he who has promised some
thing to a Robber, may satisfy his conscience with a momentaneous payment, so
that it may be lawful for him to recover what he has paid. For the words, in
an oath, as to God, are to be understood most simply and with effect. And
therefore he that returned secretly to the enemy, and again departed, made not
good his oath concerning his return, as it was rightly judged by the Roman
Senate.

XL. Of an oath to one that is perfidious.
BUt that of Accius -- T. Fregisti sidem. (piam.
A. Quam neque dedi, neque do infidels cui-

, T. Thou have brokeis thy faith. A. Which I neither gave, nor give to any one
that is unfaithful, may be allowed of in this sense, L. sicut in fine. de
jurejurando c. pervenit quod est 3. de jurejur. Add L. Lege sun. in fine D. de
lege Commiss.
if the sworn promise had openly respect unto another promise, which was as it
were an implicit condition to it; not, if the promises be of diverse kind, and
without mutual respect; For then must every one keep that which himself has
sworn. And upon this ground Regulus is praised by this compellation of the Poet:

Thy Memory is lasting, thy Fame grow'th:
'Cause to the unfaithful thou have kept thy oath. Silius.

The Psalmist, where he enumerates the virtues of a good man, adds this:
Having sworn to his own hurt, he changes not. Psalm. 15.


XLI. Of the Heirs obligation.
HEre is to be noted, whenever the person has no right, by reason of some
such defect which we have said, but the obligation is to God, in this case the
Heir of him that has sworn is not bound. Because, as goods pass to the Heir,
that is, such goods as are in the commerce of men, so do the burdens
accompanying the goods pass with them; and not other things, which one owes
out of the duty of piety, favor, or faith. For these do not pertein to that
which is strictly called right among men.

XLII. Two cases wherein the obligation cease.
BUt also where the person has a right, if yet the oath regard the utility of
any one, and he refuses Plautus Rudente: Jurisjurandi rogo gratiam facias.
it, he that has sworn shall not be bound. Neither shall he be bound, if the
quality Similia vide in L. si duat. Sect. Gentium. D. de excus. tut. and apud
Gailium 2. observe. 144. number. 8. and de Arrest. 10. 9. and apud Azor. Instit.
mo^. 5. 22. q. 6. p. 1.
cease under which he has sworn to any: as, if a Magistrate cease to be a
magistrate. Curio in Caesar, to those that had been the soldiers of Domitius,
speaks thus: How could he hold you bound by oath, when having cast away his
authority and left his command, being a private man and a captive, himself was
come under the power of another? And after he says, the oath was voided by
Lib. 2. de bello civ.
the loss of his place. * Capitis diminutione.


XLIII. Of that which is done against ones oath.
IT is a question, whether that which C. dilecto. de praeben. Covar. in d. c.
quamvis p. 2. sect. 2. n. 10.
is done against ones oath be unlawful only, or also void. Of which I think we
must distinguish thus: that if ones faith be only engaged, the act done
against oath is valid, namely a testament, or sale; not valid, if the oath be
so conceived, that withal it conteins a full abdication of power to that act.

XLIV. What Superiors can do about the oaths of their subjects.
THe acts of Superiors cannot so far August. epist. 240, 241.
prevail, that an oath, so far as it was truly obligatory, is not to be
performed: for that is of natural and divine right. But because our acts are
not fully in our Tho. 2. 1. qu. 89. art. 9.
own power, but so that they depend upon our Superiors, therefore may there be
a twofold act of Superiors about that which is sworn, the one directed upon
the person of him that swears, the other upon the person to whom he swears.
Upon the person of him that swears it may be directed, either before the oath
is taken, by making such oath void, in as much as the right of the inferior is
conteind under the power of the superior; or after the oath is taken, by
forbidding it to be fulfilled. For, an Inferior, as Inferior, could not bind
himself, but so far as it should please his Superior: for he had not more
ample power. Thus, by the Hebrew Law, Husbands made void the Oaths of their
Wives, Fathers of C. Venientes dejurejur. c. 1. de prohibit. feud. alien. per
Fed.
their Children, which were not yet in their own power. Seneca Lib. 4. de
Bonefi^. 35.
proposes this question: What if a Law be made, that none shall do, that which
I have promised my Friend I will do? and answers, The same Law defends me,
which forbids me. But, the act also may be mixed of both, as, if the Superior
ordain, what the Inferior shall swear in this or that case, namely, out of
fear, or weakness of judgment, shall be of force, if it be approved by him.
And upon this ground may be defended those absolutions of oaths, which of old
Sueton. Tib. 35. sic and in Hispania diu usurpatum notat Ferdinand. Vasquez de
success. creat. l. 2. sect. 18. L. ult. ad mun. Molin disp. 149. c. si vero:
dejurejur.
were exercised by Princes, and are now, by the will of Princes, exercised by
the Prelates of the Church, for the better securing of piety. Upon the person
of him to whom one swears, the act may be directed by taking away from him the
right which he has gotten, or also, if he have no right, by forbidding his
emolument out of such an oath; and that two ways, either for his punishment, or
for the public good, by virtue of supereminent dominion. Hence also may be
understood, if the party swearing be not of the same country with him to whom
the oath is made, what his or the others Rulers may do concerning it. But, he
that has sworn and promised something to a nocent person as such, namely, to a
pirate, cannot therefore take away from him, in the way of punishment, the
right which he has gotten by the promise: because then the words would have no
effect, which by all means is to be avoided.

XLV. What oaths are properly meant in the charge of Christ against swearing.
HEre it is observable by the way, that the words of Christ and of James
against swearing, do not properly belong to an assertory oath, whereof are some
examples in the Apostle Paul, but to the promissory of a future uncertain
thing. This evidemtly appears by the opposition in the words of Christ: Ye have
heard, it has been said to them of old, Thou shall not forswear thy self, but
shall render to God thy oath. But I say unto you, swear not at all; and the
reason given by James is this, (...).
Lest ye be found deceitful Eum sensum vox (...) apud Hellenistas habet, ut
apparet I^h 34. 30. Man. 24. 51. and alibi.
: for that is the meaning there. The same is proved by the words of Christ; But
let your Communication be yea, yea; nay, nay: which is expressed by S. James
thus; But let your yea be yea; and your nay, nay ubi manifest est figura quam
(...) Rhetores vocant, ut in illo, ex illo Corydon Corydon est tempore nobis.
Et in altero simili: Ad illum diem Memmius erat Memmius.
. Where the first yea, and nay, signifies the promise, the later its
performance. For yea is a word of promising: whence it is explained by Amen,
Apoc. 1. 7. and of the same signification among the Roman Lawyers are the words
(...) and quidni, in answer to a stipulation. For the impletion of a promise,
it is taken in that place of Paul, where he says, All the promises 2 Cor. 1.
20.
of God in Christ are Yea and Amen. 2 Cor. 1. 18, 19.
Hence the old saying of the Hebrews, A just man's yea is yea, and his nay is
nay. On the contrary, whose deeds disser from their words, with them is said to
be yea and nay: that is, their yea is nay, and their nay is yea. So the Apostle
himself expounds it: for when he had denied himself to have used lightness, he
adds, his speech was not yea and nay Festus varias, referens sententias de
significatione vocis naucum, sic scribit: Quidam aiunt ex Graeco (...). levem
hominem significari. Recte in hoc Fes^ loco scrips^ is, ut saepe apud Homerum:
td enim ad v^cem nauci propius accedit.
. Now, if yea and nay signify lightness, it follows, that yea yea, nay nay,
signify constancy. Christ therefore says the same with Philo De Decalogo.
, It is best and most pros^able, and to the rational nature most convenient, to
abstein from swearing, and so to accustom ones self to veracity, that ones word
may be taken for anoath Idem Philo de special. leg. Viri boni oration pro
juramento sit firmo, immutabili, sallere nescio,
. Josephus of the Essens: Whatsoever they say is firmer than an oath: and to
swear is accounted, among them, a thing supersluous. From the Essens, or those
Hebrews whom the Essens followed, this seems received Nam and Hermippus
Pythagoricus Pythagorae Philosophiam ab Hebraeis ductam dicebat, test Origene
contra Celsum. Idem and Josephus Heb^aeus prodidit, and Ja^blichus Pythagoricus.
by Pythagoras, whose sentence it is, Let no man swear by the Gods, but every
one take care of his credit, that he may be believed without an oath Philo: I
am ^nim is a quo jusjurandum exigitur, perfidiae est sulpectus. Sophoclis
Oedipode Coloneae dixerat Oedipus: Nolo te adigere jurejurando ut malum.
Respondet Theseus: Nec plus haberes inde quam vocis sonum. Marcus Antoninus in
viri boni descriptione: Nec opus habens jurejurando. Chrysostom. de statuis 15.
Si ^edis veracem esse eum quicum tibi negotium est, noli ei jurejurandi
imponere necessitatem; quod si scis fore ut mentiatur, ne coge eum and pejerare.
. The Scythians say of themselves to Alexander, as Curtius relates, Think not
that the Scythians confirm their friendship by oath: Colendo fidem jur^.
they swe^ by keeping their word. Cicero pro Roscio Comoedo: Quae poena a Diis
immortalibus p^juro, haec cadem mendaci constituta est: Non enim ex pactione
verborum quibus jusjurandum comprehenditur, sed ex perfidia and malitia per
quam (...) tenduntur alicui, Dii immortales hominibus irasci and succensere
consuerunt. Solonis dictum celebratur: Ea esto probitate, u^ ei magis quam
juramento credatu^. Clemens quoque Alexandrinut dixit viri boni esse, Fidem
promissi ostendere in Verborum ac vit^ stabilitate and constantia. Alexis
Comicus: Mutus mei pro Jurejurando v^lent.
Cicero relates in his Oration for L. Cornelius Balbus, When one at Athens, who
had lived amongst them in great repute for his gravity and sanctity, had
publicly given his testimony, and approached to the Altars to make his oath,
all the Judges with one voice reclamed, and would not let him swear; because
they would not have it thought, that truth depended more upon the religion of
an oath, than upon the word of an honest man. With the saying of Christ well
agrees that of Hierocles upon the golden verses: He that in the beginning said,
Reverence an oath, therein gave a precept to abstain from swearing about such
things, which may be done and not done Been hoc animadvertit Chrysostomus de
statuis 12. Periculosum est de suo actu jurare, multa enim nobis eripit ipsa
rerum natura, subjecta casibus.
, and are of an uncertain issue. For such things are little to be regarded, and
are mutable, and therefore neither are they worthy of an oath, nor is it safe.
And Libanius accounts it among the praises of a Christian Emperor, He is so
far from perjury, that he is even afraid to swear the truth Eustachius ad illud
Odysseae (...), sic ait: In rebus incertia non ad asseverationem Juramentum
adhibendum, sed preces pro bono exitu.
.

XLVI. Of faith given without an Oath.
THerefore in many places, in stead of swearing, it was invented, that faith
should be bound by giving the right hand (which was (...). Diod. lib. 16.
the firmest bond of faith among the Persians) or by some other sign: which was
of that force, that if the promise were not fulsilled, the promiser was
accounted no less Pan. in c. ad Aurel. De his quae vi vel metus causa. Jas. in
lib. 3. (...). surari. D. de jurejur. Myns. obs. 17. Cent. 1.
detestable, than if he had forsworn himself. Principally of Kings and Princes
it is a most usual saying, Their word is as strong as an Oath. For, they ought
to be such, that they may say with Augustus, Bonae sides sum, My credit's good;
and with Eumenes, I will lose my life sooner than my credit Guntherus
Ligurinus: N^do jus and r^verentia ve^bo Regis inesse solet, quovis juramine
major. De Evagora Salaminis rege Isocrates: (...). Symmach. 10. 19. Nunquam
major spes, quam in bonorum Principum sponsioue. Nicetas de Alexio Isaci fratre
lib. 3. Regibus jurisjurandi fides ante omnia alia ponenda est.
. Caesar's right hand is praised by Cicero for firmness in keeping promises, no
less than valor in wars and battails: and in the Heroical times the Scepter
lifted up went for the Oath of Kings, as Aristotle has noted, 3. Polit. 14.

XLVII. OF LEAGUES. They are lawful with aliens from true Religion, by the Law
of Nature.
LEagues are Covenants or Agreements made by command of the highest powers:
wherein the parties are bound over to the divine wrath, in case they break
their faith. It is a famous question, Whether they may be enterd into with
those that are aliens from true Religion: which in the Law of Nature has no
doubt or difficulty; for that Law is so common to all men that it admits not
any difference of Religion. But the question is about the Law Divine: out of
which it is discussed, not by Antoninus, Cajet. Tolet. Molina, Valdesius,
Malderus. Tho. 2. 2. qu. 10. art. 10. Oldr. cons. 71. Decian. 3. cons. 20.
Divines only, but by some Lawyers too, and amongst them by Oldradus and
Decianus.

XLVIII. They are not universally forbidden by the Hebrew Law.
FIrst let us consider of the old Divine Law, and after of the new. It was
lawful, before the Law of Moses, to contract a League with aliens from
Religion, for an offensive and harmless behavior. We have an example in the
League of Jacob Genesis 31. 44.
with Laban: to say nothing now of Abimelech, seeing it is not certain he was
an Idolater. Nor did the Law given by Moses make any change. The Egyptians may
be an example: who were then (no doubt) Idolaters; yet are the Deuteronomy. 23. 7.
Hebrews forbidden to be averse from them. The seven Nations are to be
excepted, condemnd by divine sentence, whereof the Israelites were delegated to
be the executioners. For these persisting in their Idolatry, and refusing to
submit, might not be spared; to whom, by divine decree, were added the
Amalekites. Deuteronomy. 7. 1.
Leagues of commerce also, and such like perteining to the utility of both or
of either Deuteronomy. 25: 17.
party, are by the Law permitted with the profane: for nothing is found to
hinder them. And we have the examples of Leagues which David and Solomon made
with Hiram King of Tyrians: and it is observable, that in the sacred history
the league made by Solomon is said to be made according to the wisdom which
God had given him. Indeed, the Law of Moses specially commands, to do good unto
their Countrymen; Moreover, Levit. 19. 8. Deuteronomy. 22. 1. (...).
the peculiar diet and course of life, prescribed to the Jews, did scarce admit
any familiar conversation with other people. Yet does it not follow hence,
either that it was not lawful to do good to foreiners, or that it was not also
laudable, which the ill Interpretation of later Masters, not rightly, has
collected thenee. And therefore Juvenal says of the Jews, That they would not
show the way to any differing from them in Religion. Where, by the example of
showing the way, are signified easy courtesies and benefits that may be done
without any trouble or charge; such as Cicero and Seneca say are Offic. 1. De
benes. 6. 9.
to be done to strangers, whom we never saw before. To the same purpose is that
of Tacitus of the same Jews; Among Histor. 5.
themselves they are of obstinate faith, and very merciful; to all others they
bear an hostile hatred. So, in the New Testament we often read, that the Jews
have no dealing with other Nations; and Apollonius Mola objected to them, that
they admitted not those, that had different opinions of God, nor had any thing
to do with men of another institution Amici Antio^i apud Diodorum Judaeos
accusant, Solos ex omnibus populis insociabiles esse ex (...), it a ut cae^os
pro hostibus ducant. Sequitur de iisdem: cum nulla gente alia mensam habere
communem, neque been eos aliis velle. Mox eis tribuitur, odium humani generis.
Et apud Philostratum Tyanenfis de Judaeis, vitae genus adeo secretum ab humano
commercis repererunt, ut ne mensam quidem cum aliis communem habeunt. Sicut and
passi^n Judaeis apud Josephum objicitur, (...).
. But, that this is not the sense of the Law, Christ has taught us by his own
example, when, being every where most observant of the Law, he refused not
water from the Samaritan woman. And David long before sought for refuge among
irreligious people, no where reprehended Antiq. 8. 2. Deuteronomy. 23. 6. Jud. 11. 16.
2 Samuel 10.
for it. Solomon in Josephus, dedicating the Temple, and praying, that God in
that place would hear also the prayers of strangers, says, We are not of an
inhuman disposition, nor ill affected to those that are not of our own Nation.
From this rule are to be excepted not only the Nations before mentiond, but the
Ammonites too, and Moabites; of whom it is written, Thou shall not seek their
prosperity (so we turn it rather than their peace) nor their good all thy days.
In which words beneficent leagues with them are forbidden, and not a right of
War allowed; or to be sure (which is the judgment of some Hebrews) peace is
forbidden to be asked of them not, to be accepted when it is offered. Certainly, a
right of War upon the Ammonites is denied the Hebrews, Deuteronomy. 2. 19. Nor did
Jephtha carry arms against them, but after he had tried the ways of an equal
Peace; nor David, till he was provoked by cruel injuries. It remains, that we
enquire about society in War. That this also, before the Law, was not unlawful
with profane Nations, appears by the example of Abraham Idem cum Escole and
Anero foedus fecit. Sic and David cum Achi and Na^so: Solomon cum Aegyptiis:
Asa cum Benadado.
, aiding the wicked Sodomites with his arms. Nor do we find any thing in this
matter generally changed by the Law of Moses. And this we see to have been the
opinion of the Asmonaeans Laus eorum est in Thargume Chaldaico, in libris
Maccabaicis, in epistola ad Haebraeos. Horum exemplum secuti Impp. and Reges
Christian foedera aut cum non Christianis, aut cum non sane Christianis f^cere,
Constantinus cum Gotthis and Vandalis, Justinianus cu^ Longobardis, etc. Adi
Johan. de Carthag. l. 3. De jure Belli Romans Pontificis, c. 1. Julius 2.
Pontisex Turcis usus.
, being both skilful of the Law and very reverent, as it is evident by their
Religious observation of the Sabbath, no other use of arms being permitted, but
only for self-defense. And these yet made a league with the Lacedaemonians and
Romans, by the assent of the Priests and people: yea and publicly offered
Sacrifice for their safety. Instances to the contrary have peculiar causes. For
if beside those that were expressed in the Law, God had signified by his
Prophets, any Kings or Nations to be odious to him, and condemned to an
overthrow; to undertake the defense of them, or to join forces with them, was,
without doubt, impiety. Hither perteins that of the Prophet to Jehosaphat
touching the King of Israel: should thou 2 Paralip. 19. 2.
help the ungodly, and love them that hate Gratianus Valenti patruo contra
Scythas opem petenti scripsit, Fas non esse socialia arma jungere cum eo qui
Dei sit hostis. Zon tras. 2 Paralip. 25. 7.
the Lord? therefore is wrath upon thee from before the Lord. For Michaia the
Prophet had already foretold an unhappy issue of the War. And that of another
Prophet to Amaziah, O King, let not the Army of Israel go with thee: for the
Lord is not with Israel, to wit, with any of the Children of Ephraim. Now, that
this comes not from the nature of the League, but from some peculiar quality of
the person, is evinced even hence; because Jehosaphat was heavily rebuked, a
curse also being added, for this, that for commerce sake he had joined himself
with 2 Paralip. 20. 37.
Ahaziah King of Israel, and had entered into such a society, as David and
Solomon had made with Hiram: whom we have said to have been, for that reason,
partly not reprehended, partly commended. For, what is added, that Ahaziah 2
Paralip. 16. 2, 7.
did wickedly, ought to be referred to his whole life: for which God was
offended Es. 8. 6.
with him, and with all his enterprises, as this history is explained in the
book entitled Clement's Constitutions. Lib. 6. cap. 18.
Moreover, this is to be noted, that their cause, who being sprung from Jacob
had forsaken God well known unto them, was worse than the cause of strangers.
For against those Revolters the rest of their Countrymen were armed Add
exemplum Josue cap. 22.
by a Law extant. Deuteronomy. 13. 13.
Sometimes also Leagues are blamed for some vice of the mind wrence they did
proceed: so was As^ reprehended by the Prophet, for betaking himself to the
society of the Syrian, upon distrust of God; which he had showed in sending to
the Syrian things consecrated. But the same King was reproved too, because he
had 1 Paralip. 16. 12. Ambros. ad Roman. c. 3. Auct. imperf. ad Matthew. c. 16.
placed his hope, not in God, but in Physicians. Wherefore, it does not, from
this history, more follow that it is evil, by it self, or generally, to
contract society with such as the Syrians were, than to consult with
Physicians. For, many things not unlawful are vitiated by the mind, as David's
muster, and Ezechia's showing 2 Samuel 24.
of his treasure. So elsewhere, confidence put in Egypt is reprehended, when it
was 2 Reg. 20. 13. Esa. 31. 1. 1 Reg. 3. 1.
lawful nevertheless for Solomon to contract affinity with the Egyptian. To all
which, this is to be added, that the Hebrews, under the state of the old Law,
had express promises of victory, if they kept the Law; the less need had they
to have Deuteronomy. 28. (...).
recourse unto human aids. Lastly, there are indeed extant in Solomon's
Proverbs, Prove. 1. 15. 13. 20. 22. 24. 24. 1.
Sentences not a few, of shunning the society of wicked men: But these are the
Advisos of prudence, not Precepts of Law; and those very Admonitions, as most
moral sayings, are capable of very many exceptions.

XLIX. Nor are they forbidden by the Evangelical Law.
NOw, the Law of the Gospel has Vict. de Indis rel^ct. 1. n, 15. and 17. Fra.
Arius de bello n. 192. Cajet. 2. 2. qu. 40. art. 1. M^lin. tract. 2. disp. 112.
Matthew. 5. 45. Gal. 6. 10.
changed nothing in this business; yea, it has a more favorable aspect upon
leagues, whereby aliens from Religion, on just cause, are relieved; because, it
has not left beneficence to all sorts of men, upon occasion given, only free
and laudable, but has put it under precept. For, by Gods example, who makes
his Sun to arise upon the good and evil, and sends rain to refresh them both,
we are commanded to exclude no kind of men from our benefits. Tertullian said
well: Lib. 7. c. 3.
So long as Israel only was his people, God did justly command mercy toward
their brethren alone: But after that he gave unto Christ the Nations for his
inheritance, and the ends of the earth for his possession, and that began to be
paid which was promised in Hoseah, They that were not my people shall be my
people, and the Nation that had not obtained mercy shall obtain mercy; from
that time Christ has extended unto all the Law of fraternal benignity,
excluding none from our compassion, no more than from his vocation. Which words
are to be understood, with differenee of degree, that we must be good to all,
but especially to the professors of the same Religion. In Clement's
Constitutions we read, It is our duty to communicate of our goods to all; yet
so, that we have a special eye to the poor Saints Perfecta liberalitas, inquit
Ambrosius offic. 1. 3. fide, causa, loco, tempore commendatur, ut primum oper^
ci^ca domestic^s fidei. Simile est illud Aristotelis; Neque enim par est
aequalem curam subiri pro externis and pro amicis. Nic. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 15. 2 Cor.
6. 14, 15.
. Familiar conversation also with aliens from Religion is not prohibited: no
not with them whose cause is worse, and who fall away from the rule of
Christian Discipline, is all commerce interdicted, but familiar without
necessity, not also that which affords any hope for their amendment. And that
which is in Paul, Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers: for
what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion
has light with darkness? And what concord has Christ with Belial? or what
part has he that believes with an Infidel? pertains to those that feasted in
the Idol-Temples, and so either committed Idolatry, or at least made a show
thereof. This is manifest by the following words, What agreement has the
Temple of God with Idols? parallel to the words in the former Epistle to the
same, Ye cannot be partakers of the Table 1 Cor. 10. 21.
of the Lord, and the table of the Devils. Nor will the argument proceed
rightly from this, that of our own accord we are not to submit to the
Government of the profane, nor contract marriage with them: For in both these
cases appears greater hazard, or certainly greater difficulty, to the use of
true Religion. Add, that these bonds are more lasting, and in matrimony there
is a free choice; when leagues are to be made according to the exigence of
times and places. And as it is no evil to do good to the profane, so neither
is it unlawful to implore their help, as Paul invoked the aid of Caesar and
the Chief Captain.

L. Cautions about such Leagues.
HEre then is no intrinsecal or universal Sylv. verbo bellum. 1. 9. 3. Pan. in
cap. quod super de voto.
pravity, but to be esteemed by the circumstances Vide Oration. Phartazae ad
Lazos apud Agathiam 3. Saxo lib. 9. in verbis Ludovici Regis Francor. ad
Heraldum: Nullam posse animorum intervenirc concordiam dissona sacra complexis.
Quamobrem petitorem (...) primum religion i^ contubernio opus habere, neque
magnorum operum cons^tes existere posse, quos super^ venerationis formula
disparasset.
. For, heed must be taken, lest too much commixture bring contagion to the
infirm: to which end it will be profitable, their seats should be distinct, as
the Israelits dwelt asunder from the Egyptians Neque enim ratione ^aret illud
Alexandridae:
Ego esse vester non queam commilito,
Quando nec Leges, nec mores consentiunt,
Sed multis inter se intervallis discrepant.

. Hither pertains, what we have elsewhere alleged, concerning the Religion of
Jews and Christians in their fellow-soldiership with the Pagans. Again, if by
such society the profane State be like to receive great increase, there will
be no joining with them, except in point of extreme necessity. Wherein has
place, what Thucydides said in a like matter: They that are treacherously Lib.
1.
assaulted, as we are by the Athenians are not to be blamed, if they seek for
safety, and secure themselves, by the aid, not of Greeks only, but Barbarians.
For it is not every right, that is sufficient for the doing of that, which may
be esteemed indirectly, if not directly, hurtful to Religion. Because, in the
first place we must Matthew. 6. 33. Fred. lib. 4, hist. Remens. cap. 6.
seek the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, the propagation of the Gospel. It were to
be wished, that many Princes and people at this day would take into their
consideration that free and pious speech of Fulco Archbishop once of Rhemes,
admonishing Charles the simple thus: Who may not be afraid, seeing you covet
amity with the enemies of God Exemplum i^ Ma^afa apud Nicetam reb^ Isaaci
Angeli l. 2. Welfare the piety of Emanuel Duke of Savoy, who when he was able
to take Cyprus by the aid of the Turk, refused it.
, and to the overthrow and ruin of the Christian name take unto you Pagan
arms, and enter into leagues detestable? For there is little difference between
associating with Pagans, and worshipping of Idols, God being denied. In
Arrianus is extant a saying of Alexander: They are great Offenders, who serve
the Barbarians against the Greeks, contrary to the Laws of Graecia.

LI. All Christians are obliged to join in League against the enemies of
Christianism.
HEre is to be added, since all Christians 1 Cor. 12. 18, 26.
are members of one body, and are commanded to be sensible of one another
pain, as this pertains to single persons, so does it also concern Commonwealths
as they are Commonwealths, and Kings as they are Kings. Nor ought every one, in
his own particular only, but according to the power committed to him, to do
service unto Christ. Now Kings and Commonwealths are not able to do thus, while
an impious enemy overruns all with arms, except they mutually aid and assist
each other Ad hanc rem vide Marianam lib. 30. Parutam l. 4. Bezarum 7, and 12.
, which cannot commodiously be effected without entering a League to that
purpose. Which League has been long since entered, and the Roman Emperor, by
common consent, chosen Prince thereof; Wherefore it is the duty of all
Christians, according to their power, to contribute men or moneys to this
common cause: and I do not see how any can be excused for not doing so, unless
they be engaged at home, and detained by some inevitable war, or other the like
unhappy hindrances.

LII. If diverse Consederates wage ^War, which is to be aided.
THis question also is often incident, If diverse wage war, to which of them he
ought to give assistance, who is consederate to Both. Here first we must
remember, that there is no obligation to unjust wars. He then is to be
preferred who has a just In fidelitate Feudali dicitur: Et si scivero velle te
aliquem just osfendere, and inde generaliter vel specialiter fuero requisitus,
meum tibi, sicut Potero, praesta^ auxilium.
cause of war, if he has to do with one without; yea, if with one within the
league. So Orat. de Megalopo'i.
Demosthenes shows, the Athenians ought to assist their fellows the Messenians,
against their other fellows the Lacedaemonians, if the injury begin from these.
But this is true, so, unless it were agreed, that no aid should be sent against
such a confederate. In the agreement of Hannibal with the Macedonians, it was
an article, Polyb. l. 6.
We will be enemies to your enemies, except the Kings, and Cities, and havens,
wherewith we have league and friendship. Moreover, if the confederates quarrel
upon causes unjust on both sides (which may happen) neither part is to be
taken. So it is said in Aristides: Did they crave aid Leuctrica 5.
against aliens, 'twere easy to answer: but, when one confederate opposes
another, they would not mix in the business. But if confederates make war upon
others, each upon just ground, if aids can be sent to both, viz. men or money,
they are to be sent, as it is done about personal creditors: but, if his
presence, who has promised, be required; seeing he cannot be present with
both, reason determines him to prefer that side, where with his League is more
Vide de Feudis lib. 4. c. 31. Libro 9.
ancient: which the Acarnans tell the Spartans in P^lybius: and to the same
effect is the answer of the Roman Consul to the Campanians, It is meet, our
relations should so be orderd, that no elder friendship and society be violated
Amicis auxilia fer^nda contra hosts, non contra amicos, dicit Ptolomaeus
Athenisibus apud Appianum in Legationum excerptis. Sylvest. in verb. bellum, 1.
7.
. Yet is this exception to be added: unless the younger league have, beyond the
promise, some thing that conteins in it, as it were, a translation of dominion
Vide Radevicum 2. 7.
, that is, something of subjection. For so also, in vendition Edicto Theodorici
c. 138.
, we say the former is to be preferred, except the later has translated a
dominion. So the Nepesins in Livy Lib. 6.
held the faith of dedition more sacred than that of society. Some distinguish
of these things more subtly, but what I have said, as it is more simple and
plain, so I suppose it is more true.

LIII. Of the dissolution of a League.
THe time being expired, the League is Dec. Cons. 407.
not to be conceived tacitly renewed, unless by such acts, which do admit no
other interpretation; For a new obligation is not easily presumed. If one Dec.
Cons. 260.
part has violated the league, the other may depart from it. For the several
heads of the League have every one the force of a condition. For example may be
that in Lib. 1.
Thucydides: They bear the blame of breaking the League, not, who being
deserted betake themselves to others; but they, who perform not really that
assistance which they had promised upon oath. Elsewhere in the same Historian:
If either part transgress their Articles never so little, the Agreement's
broken. But this is thus true, except it were otherwise conditioned; which is
wont sometimes to be, that for every offense it may not be lawful to depart
from the League.

LIVE. Of Interpretation.
IF we look upon him alone, who has promised, he is bound of his own accord to
perform that to which he meant to bind himself. In a promise must be In fide
quid senseris non quid dixer is cogitandum. De off. 1.
considered, what you thought, not what you said, as Cicero has it. But,
because internal acts are not visible by themselves, and somewhat certain must
be determined, lest there be no obligation at all, if every one might free
himself by affixing on his own words what sense he please; by the dictate of
natural reason, he to whom any thing is promisd, has a right to compel the
promiser to that, which right interpretation suggesteth. For otherwise the
matter would have no end, which in morals is accounted for impossible. In this
sense, it may be, Isocrates, when he had discoursed of Covenants in the
prescription against Callimachus (as the most eminently learned Petrus Faber
has rightly amended the place) says, This Common Law we men perpetually use
among our selves; nor Grecians only, but Barbarians too, as he had said a
little before. Pertinent is that in the old form of Leagues in Livy, Without
evil deceit, as those words here are most rightly Vota interpretanda ut
communiter sumuntur, notant Hebraei ad Number. 30.
understood Live. lib. 1. Sine dolo malo, utique ea hic hodie rectissime
intellecta sunt.
at this day. The measure of right interpretation is, a collection of the
meaning out of signs most probable. If there be no conjecture drawing another
way, the words are to be understood according to their propriety, not
Grammatical, which is from their original, but from popular Quem penes
arbitrium est, and jus and norma loqueudi. Been Procopius Vandalicorum 1. ubi
de voce agit Faederatorum. Lo^ga di^s non solet serva^ voces in quibus prim^
datae sunt; sensu vertuntur enim res ipsae quae volunt homines, vocabula illa
primitus imposita rebus nihil curantes.
use. Wherefore the Locrians used a foolish refuge for their perfidiousness,
when, having promised they would stand to their agreement, so long as they
stood upon the earth, and carried heads upon their shoulders, they cast out the
earth put into their shoos, and threw away the heads of other men placed on
their shoulders, as if by that means they could acquit themselves; The history
is extant in Polybius Polyb. 12. Simile quod Boeoti urbem polliciti reddere,
non stantem, sed eversam reddidere. Thucyd. 5. Et quod Mahume^s Sultana^,
Euboea Capta, eum dissecuit, cui caput incolume fore prom serat.
; and some other examples of like falsness in Polyaenus, which need not be
transcribed, because they have no controversy. By such frauds, Cicero De Offic.
l. 3.
said honestly, perjury is bound faster, not dissolved.

LV. How words of Art are to be interpreted.
TO Words of Art Augustine. in Rhetor. ut multa nova tam a technicis and
Mathematicis quam a Philophis cognominantur, accipere debemus, non tam pro
solito usu consuctudinis, quam pro condition praecepti.
, which the people hardly understand, is to be applied the definition of men
skilful in every Art: as, what is Majesty, what is Paricide: which the Masters
of Oratory refer ad statum finitivum. For Cicero Acad. 1.
said truly, Logicians have no vulgar terms, they use their own: and so do
almost all other arts. So, if in an Agreement an Army be spoken of, we shall
define an Army to be such a number of Soldiers, which openly dares invade the
territories of an enemy. For Historians usually do oppose that which is dome
privily, or after the manner of robbers, and that which is done by a just Army.
Wherefore in proportion to the enemies strength, it is to be judged of what
forces an Army does consist. Cicero Paradox 6.
makes it to consist of six legions and the Auxiliaries. Polybius says, the
Roman Army for the most part did contain sixteen thousand of Romans, twen^ of
aids. But a less number also may (...) up the greatness of that name. For Ul^na
says, he is leader of an Army, wh^ L. 2. D. de hu qui not. insamia. Lib. 3. c.
1.
commands but one Legion with the aids: that is, as Vegetius expounds it, ten
thousand foot, two thousand horse. And L^y sets down a kind of just army of
eight thousand. In like sort must we judge of a Navy. So, a Fort Servius ad i.
Aen. Arces dictae ab eo quod est arceo: quod inde hosts arcentur, hoc est,
prohibentur.
is a place which can keep off the hostile forces for a time.

LVI. Interpretation by Conjecture.
COnjectures are usually taken from the matter, and the effect. From the L. si
uno. D. loc. conduct. Ever. in loco a subjecta materia.
matter: as the word day, if thirty days truce be agreed on, ought not to be
understood of natural days, but of Civil: for that is congruous to the matter.
So the word donare, to give, is taken for to transact, according to the quality
of the business. So the word arms, which sometimes signifies instruments of
war, sometimes armed Soldiers, with respect to the matter, is to be interpreted
for this, or that. So he that has promised to render men, ought to render them
alive, not dead; contrary to the cavil of the Plataeans. And they that are
commanded ferrum deponere, satisfy the command in putting off their swords,
though not their steel buttons; upon which Pericles jested. And to march away
freely out of Town, must be understood so, that the way also may be secured:
contrary to what was done by Alexander. And half the ships in the division,
must be understood of whole ships, not cut a sunder: contrary to what the
Romans did to Antiochus. Of the like matters we may make the same judgment.
From the effect we make conjecture, Everh. in loco ab absurdo.
if the word taken in the more received use draw after it any thing against
reason. For, in an ambiguous word, that L. in ambig. D. de Legib.
interpretation is rather to be received, which has no hurt in it. Wherefore
that cavillation of Brasidas is not to be admitted: Thucyd. 4.
who having promised he would depart out of the Boeotian fields, denied the
fields he possessed with his Army, to belong to the Boeotians: as if the word
were meant, not of their ancient bounds, but of warly possession: in which
sense 'twere a vain agreement.

LVII. Some distinctions and rules for interpretation.
MAny words have several significations, one more strict, another more large:
which proceeds from many reasons; either because the general name adheres to
one of the species, as in words of cognation and adoption; also in Nouns
masculin, which are taken for the common too, where common are wanting; or
because the use of ar^is wider than popular use; as deatb, Vide Guice. l. 16.
ubi de pactis Car. 5. ad Mediolanensem Ducatum pertinentibus sermo. Alc. 5.
resp. 17.
in the Civil Law is enlarged to signify deportation, when among the people it
signifies otherwise. Moreover, we must note, that things promised, some are
favorable, some odious, some mixed, or of a middle nature. Favorable are those
which have in themselves equality, and which regard common utility; the greater
this is, and more extended, so much greater is the favor of the promise; as of
things which make for peace, than of those which make for War; and of War
Defensive, than upon other causes. Odious are such as burden one part only, or
one more than the other, and such as contein in them punishment, and make acts
void, and bring in a change of what was before. That which is mixed, as bringing
a change, but for peace sake, proportionally to the good, or the change will be
esteemed sometime favorable, sometime odious, yet, so that caeteris paribus
favor is to be preferred. Upon Gl. in (...) von possunt. D. de Legibus.
these grounds these Rules are to be kept. In things not odius, the words are
to be taken according to the full propriety of popular use, and if there be
more significations, the largest is best; viz. the Masculin is to be taken for
the Common Gender, and an indefinit speech for an universal. So these words,
unde quis dejectus est, whence one is dispossessed, will pertain also to the
restoring of him, who by force is prohibited to come into his own. For the word
taken more largely bears that signification, as Cicero disputes Bart. in lib.
si is qui proemptore. D. de usuc.
for A. Caecina. In the more favorable, if the speaker understand the Law, or
use the Counsel of Lawyers, the words are to be taken more largely, that they
may also include the signification of Art, or which the Law has given. But we
must not recur Vide exemplum in l. cum virum c. de fidei com.
to significations plainly improper, unless otherwise some absurdity or
inutility of the Agreement would follow. Covar. 3. Var. c. 3. n. 5. Tiraq. in
leg. connub. Gl. 5. n. 115.
On the other side, words are to be taken, even more strictly, than propriety
suffers, if it be necessary for the avoiding of iniquity or absurdity: but, if
there be not such necessity, but manifest equity or utility in the restriction,
we must stay within the narrowest bounds of propriety, unless the circumstances
dissuade. But in odious things, even a figurative speech is admitted, whereby
the odium or burden may be shunned. Therefore in donation and remission of
ones right, words, though general, are wont to be restrained unto those things
which were probably thought upon. And in this kind of things, that will be
sometime understood to be occupied, which, it is hoped, may be retained. So,
aids promised from one part only, will be Barb. 4. cons. 62.
understood to be due at the charges of him who shall require them.

LVIII. Whether in the name of Confederates are contained those that shall be
so.
IT is an illustrious question, Whether in name of the Confederates are meant
only those that were so in the time of making the league, or also those that
become so afterward: as in the league made between the people of Rome and
Carthage after the war about Sicily; The Utriusque populi so^ ab utroque populo
tuti sunto.
Confederates of either people shall be secured from them both. Hence the
Romans inferred, although the Agreement made with Asdrubal, of not passing the
river Iberus, profited them nothing, because the Carthaginians had not
confirmed it; yet, if the Carthaginians did approve the fact of Annibal setting
upon the Saguntines, whom the Romans, after the league, had taken to them as
Confederates, that then war might be proclaimed against them, as Violators of
the League. Livy thus declares the Reasons: The Saguntines Lib. 21.
were sufficiently provided for, the Confederates of both parties being
excepted: For it was not added, Confederates that then were, nor that none
afterward should Which was added in the Peloponnesian peace between the
Laccdaemonians and Athenians. Thucyd. lib. 5.
be assumed. Now, since it was lawful to assume new Confederates, who would
think it equity; either that any should be received into friendship upon no
desert, or being received should not be defended: Only it was provided, that
the fellows of the Carthaginians should neither be tempted to revolt, nor be
entertained revolting of their own accord. Which words are almost all
translated out of Polybius. What shall we say in this case? Histor. lib. 3.
It cannot be denied, but the word Confederates, without any violence, may
receive both the strict signification of them who were so in the time of the
League, and the other more large which includes the future too. Wherefore we
must see, by the former rules, which interpretation is to be preferred:
according to which rules we say, the future are not comprehended; because the
question is about rupture of the league, which is an odious matter; and about
depriving the Carthaginians of their Liberty, to use force of arms against such
as were believed to have done them injury: which liberty is natural, nor is it
supposed easily quitted Romani Samnitibus, Sidicinos bello petere volentibus,
petentibusque ut id per Romanos fieri liceret, responderunt: Nihil intercedi,
quo minus Samniti populo pacis bellique liberum arbitrium sit. Live. lib. 8. In
Antiochi soedere est: Si qui sociorum popull Romani ultro bellum inferrent
Antiocho, vim ei arcendi jue esto: dum ne quam urbem aut belli jure tenea^ aut
in amicitiam recipiat. Live. 38. Polybius in excerptis Legationum, 35.
. Was it not lawful then, for the Romans to take the Saguntines into society,
or to defend them being admitted? Surely it was, not by virtue of the League,
but by natural right, which by the League was not renounced: so that the
Saguntines were, in respect of Both, in the same condition, as if nothing had
been agreed concerning their Confederates. In which case, neith^ were the
Carthaginians violators of the League, if they did war upon the Saguntines,
when they judged it to be just; no^ the Romans, if they did defend them.
Plainly, as in the time Pyrrhus, it was agreed 'twixt the Carthaginian and the
Polyb. Hist. 3.
Roman, that if either of them entered League with Pyrrhus, he should so do it,
saving the right of sending aids to him, whom Pyrrhus should invade. I do not
say, that war could have been just on both sides; but I say this perteined not
to the violation of the League Pr^cop. Persic. 2. Dicebat Alamundarus Rex
Saraccnorum, non violari a se quae inter Persas Romanosque convenerant,
quandoquidem ipse a neutra part conventis inscriptus esset.
. So does Polybius, in the question touching aid sent by the Romans to the
Mamertins, distinguish the Querees, Whether it were just, and, Whether it were
lawful by the League.

LIX. One shall not wage war without leave of the other, How understood. And,
That Carthage shall be free.
THe former example was in an equal League, we will set down another in an
unequal: if it were agreed, that one should not wage war without consent of the
other Confederate. This was an article in the League of the Romans and
Carthaginians, Live. lib. 42.
after the second Punic war: and likewise in that of the Macedonians, with the
Romans, before the reign of Perseus. Whereas the word Warring, may both signify
all war, and peculiarly that which is offensive; here we shall take the narrower
signification, that liberty may not be too much restrained. Of the same kind it
is, that the Romans promised, That Carthage shall be free Diodorus Siculus sic
refert excerpto legationum 27, mansura illis Leges, regionem, sacra, sepulcra,
libertatem.
: Which, although, by the nature of the act, it could not be understood of the
fullest power (for they had before let go the right of undertaking war and some
other things) yet did it leave them some liberty, and at least so much, that
they were not bound, at another command, to change the seat of their City. In
vain therefore did the Romans urge the word Carthage, saying the multitude of
Citizens, not the City, were thereby signified (which, though improper, may be
granted, by reason of the attribute, which is more meet for the Citizens than
the City:) For, in the word, free ((...), as Appian speaks) there was a
manifest fallacy.

LX. Of Agreements personal and real.
IT is also a frequent question, pertinent here, concerning Agreements personal
and real. And truly, if the Treaty was with a free people, no doubt but what
was, is promised them, is in its own nature real, because the subject is a
permanent matter. Yea, though the state of a Commonwealth be changed into a
Kingdom, the League will remain, because the body remains the same, though the
head being changed: and, as we have said above, the Empire which is exercised
by a King, cease not to be the empire of the people. An exception it will be,
if the cause appear to have been proper to that state, as, if free Cities
contract a League to maintain their liberty. But, if it be contracted with a
King, the League will not presently be esteemed personal: for, as it is rightly
said by Pedius and Ulpianus, L. jure gentium sect. pactum. D. de pactis.
the person is for the most part inserted into the Agreement, not that the
Agreement may be personal, but to show with whom it is made. But if it be added
to the League, that it shall be perpetual, or that it is made for the good of
the Kingdom, or with himself and his successors (such an addition (...) is
usual, says Libanius in his Oration for Demosthenes:) or for a time defined,
now it appears plainly to be real. Such, it seems, was the league of the Romans
with Philip Livius lib. 42. vide Parut. lib. 5., and 7.
King of Maccdon, which when Perseus his son denied to concern him, a war
followed upon that ground. Moreover, other words, and the matter it self
sometimes, will afford a conjecture not improbable. But if the conjectures be
equal on both sides, it will remain, that the favorable be accounted real, the
odious personal. Leagues made for peace, or for commerce are favorable: those
made for war, are not all odious, as some think; but the (...).
defensive have more of favor, the (...).
offensive of burden. Add hereunto, that in a league for any war, it is
presumed, that regard is had to the prudence and piety of him who is treated
with, as one who seemed not likely to undertake a war, neither unjustly, nor
yet rashly. As to that saying, Societies are Societates: morte finiri. Dec. l.
1. cons. 22.
broken off by death, I do not allege it here: for it perteins to private
societies, and to the Civil Law. Therefore, whether by right or wrong, the
Fidenates Vide Dionys. Hal. lib. 3.
, Latins De Appulis and Latinis idem eod. lib. De Turno and Hordeanio and
Latinis idem lib. 4. Ammianus lib. 26. Persarum Rex manus Armeniis injectabat,
eos ad suam diti^. nem ex integro vocari vi nimia properans, sed injuste;
causando quod post Joviani excessum, cum quo foedus firmaverat and pacem, nibil
obstare debeat, quominus ea recuperaret, qua ante ad majores suos pertinu^sse
monstrabat. Similia de Justiniani pactis cum Saracenis vide apud Menundrum
Protectorem. Add quae Helvetii causantur post mortem Henrici 3. apud Thuanum
l. 97. in an 89. Vide and insignem locum apud Camdenum in an. 72. ubi de
foedere antiquo Gallorum cum Scotis.
, Etruscians, Sabins departed from their league upon the death of Romulus,
Tullus, Ancus, Priscus, Servius, cannot be rightly judged by us, because the
words of the League are not extant. Whereunto that controversy in Justin is not
unlike, Whether Cities which were tributary to the Medes, the Empire being
changed, had changed their condition. For, it is to be considered, whether in
the agreement they had committed themselves to the trust of the Medes. But
(...) Bodin's Lib. 5. c. ult.
argument is in no wise to be allowed, that leagues do not pass to the
successors of Kings, because the virtue of an oath goes not beyond the person.
For, the obligation of an oath may bind the person only, and yet the promise it
self may oblige the heir. Neither is it true, which he assumes, that leagues
depend upon the oath as their firmament, when for the most part there is
efficacy enough in the promise it self, to which, for Religion sake, the oath
is added. The commons of Rome, in the Consulship of P. Valerius, had sworn,
they would come together at command of the Consul. L. Quintius Cincinnatus
succeeds him being dead; Some Tribunes cavil, as if the people were not bound
by their oath. Livie's Judgment follows: That neglect of the Gods, which this
age is guilty of, was Lib. 3.
not yet: nor did every one, by interpreting for himself, make his oath and the
Laws comply with his affections, but rather accommodated his own manners unto
them.

LXI. A League made with a King, is extended to him being expelled, not to the
Invader.
CErtainly, a League made with a King remains, although the same King, or his
succor, be driven out of his Kingdom by his Subjects. For, the right of the
Kingdom remains with him, however he has lost the possession Lucanus de Senatu
Romano: Non unquam perdidit Ordo Mutato sua jura loco.
. On the contrary, if the Invader of another Kingdom, the rightful King being
willing; or the Oppressor of a Free people, before he has gotten sufficient
consent of the people, be assalted by war; nothing will thereby be done against
the league: because those have possession, they have not right So Valens
received not the excuse of the King of the Goths: who said, he had sent aid to
Procopius an Invader. Ammianus says, it was a most vain excuse, l. 27. There
is the same history in the Greek writers, but under the name of Scythians. For
so they called the Goths. So Justinian said, he would not break the League made
with Gizerichus, if he warred against Gelimer, who had taken away both his
Kingdom and liberty from Ilderichus the lawful King. Vide Cardinalem Tuschum
PP. verbo Tyrannus, concl. 309. number. 6. Cacheranum decis. 79. n. 35.
. And this is that which T. Quintius said to Nabis: We have made no friendship
nor society with thee, but with Live. lib. 34.
Pelops the just and lawful King of the Lacedaemonians. These qualities of
King, successor, and the like, in leagues, do properly signify a right; and the
Invaders cause is odious.

LXII. To whom a promise, made to the first, is due, when more have performed a
thing together.
CHrysippus, of old, had handled this question, whether the reward promised to
him, who came first to the mark, be due to both, if they came together, or to
neither of them. And truly, the word first is ambiguous Vide Albericum de
Rosalo de Statutis q. 106. and 107.
, for it signifies, either him who goes before all, or him whom no man goes
before. But because the rewards of virtues are favorable, it is the (...)
answer, that Both concur to the reward: though At the taking of New Carthage in
Spain.
Scipio, Caesar, Julian, dealt more liberally, and gave full rewards to them
that ascended the walls together.

LXIII. How far States are accountable for damages done by their Subjects.
KIngs and Magistrates are responsible for their neglect, who do not use the
remedies, which they can and ought, for the restraint of robbery and piracy:
upon which score the Scyrians were anciently Plut.
condemnd by the Amphyctiones. I remember a question was proposed upon the
fact, when the Rulers of our Country had, by their letters, given very many
power of taking prizes from the enemy at Sea, and some of them had spoiled our
friends, and their country being forsaken wandered about, and would not return
when they were recalled; whether the Rulers were faulty upon that account,
either because they used the service of naughty men, or because they had not
required of them caution. I gave my opinion, that they were bound no farther,
than to punish, or yield the offenders if they could be found; and to take
care, that legal reparation might be made out of the goods of the Robbers. For,
they were not the cause of the unjust spoil that was made, nor were partakers
of it in any wise: yea, they forbad, by their Laws, any hurt to be done their
friends. That they should require caution, they were obliged by no Law, seeing
they might, even without letters, give all their sublects power to spoil the
enemy: which was also done of old. Nor was such a permission any cause, why
damage was done to their friends, when even private men might without such
permission send forth ships of war. Moreover, it could not be foreseen, whether
they would prove evil men: and besides, it cannot be avoided, but we must
employ such, otherwise no Army can be raised. Neither are Kings to be accused,
if their soldiers, either by land or sea, wrong their confederates contrary to
their command, as appears by the testimonies Constable. Galliae Tom. 3. tit. 3.
constitutione anni 1583. cap. 44. vide etiam tomo constit. 3. tit. 2. constit.
^ni 1543. cap. 44.
of France and England. Now, that any one, without any fault of his own, should
be engaged by the fact of his Ministers, is not a point of the Law of Nations
(by which this controversy is to be judged) but of the Civil Law, nor this
general, but introduced upon peculiar reasons against seafaring men and some
others. And on this side, sentence was given, by the Judges of the supreme
Auditory, against certain Pomeranians, and that after the example of things
judged, in a case not unlike, two Ages before.

LXIV. Of the right of Embassages.
AMong the Obligations which that Law of Nations, which we call voluntary, has
by it self introduced, a principal head is of the right of Embassages. For we
frequently read of the sacred privileges of Embassages, the sanctimony of
Ambassadors, the right of Nations, right divine and human due unto them, and
many such like expressions. Sanctum popul^ per secula nomen: Papinius. Sancti
habentur Legati: Pompon. l. si quis D. de Legationib. Itaque eum qui Legatum
pulsasset, dedi hostibus quorum erant Legati, Q. Mucius respondit. ib. Sancta
sunt corpora Legatorum: Var. l. 3. de l. l. Tutique regressus Legato: Papin.
Totilas apud Procopium Got. 3. Barbaris omnibus mos, Legatos venerari.
Aimonius: Exuit hostem, qui Legatione sungitur. Vide and Radevicumin Append. De
Polonis vide Cromerum l. 20. De Turcis Leunclavium l. 8. and l. 17. De Mauris
Marianam lib. 12.
Cicero de Haruspicum responsis: My judgment is, that the right of Ambassadors
is secured both by the safeguard of men, and also by the protection of Law
divine. Therefore to violate this, is not only unjust, but impious too, by the
confession of all, says Philip in his epistle to the Athenians.

LXV. Among whom the right of Embassages has place.
HEre we must know, whatever this right of Nations be, it pertains to those
Legates, which are sent from supreme Rulers, by one to another. For, besides
them, Provincial Legates, and Municipal, and others are directed, not by the Law
of Nations, which is between one Nation and another, but by the Civil Law. An
Ambassador in Livy calls himself the public messenger of the Roman people. In
Lib. 1.
the same Livy elsewhere the Roman Senate Lib. (...).
says, The right of Legation was provided for a foreiner, not a Citizen. And
Cicero, that he may show, Legates are not to be sent to Antonius, says, For we
have not to do with Annibal an enemy of the Commonwealth, but with one of our
own Country. Who are to be accounted foreiners Virgil has so expressed, that
none of the Lawyers can more clearly:

That I suppose a foreign Land,
Which is not under our Command.
They then that are joind in an unequal Cromerus 30.
league, because they cease not to be in their own power, have a right of
Legation: and these also, who are partly subject, partly not, for that part
wherein they are not subject. But Kings, conquered in a solemn war, and deprived
of their Kingdom, with other Royalties, have loft also the right of Legation.
Therefore did P. Aemilius detein the Heralds of Perseus whom he had conquered.
Yet, in Civil wars, necessity sometimes, makes place for this right, beside
the rule; as, when the people is so divided Vide de Legatis Civitatis Toleti ad
Regem Jo. Marianam l. 22. 8. de Flandris Crantzium Saxoni^ 12. 33.
into equal parts, that it is doubtful on which side the right of Empire
lies: or, when the right being much controverted, two contend about succession
into the Throne. For in this case, one Nation is for the time reckoned as two.
So, Tacitus Hist. 3. and Magnentium Zosimus lib. 2. Magnentius ayud animum suum
volvebat deberetne Philippum irritum dimittere, an apud se retinere calcato
jure Legationum. Is Philippus a Constantio venerat.
charged the Flavians, that, in the Civil rage, they had violated, in respect
of the Vitellians, that right of Legates, which is sacred even amongst foreign
Nations. Pirates and Robbers, that make not a Society, cannot have any succor
from the Law of Nations. Tiberius, when Tacfarinas had seen Legates to him, was
displeased that a traitor and plunderer used the manner of an enemy, as Annal.
3. Caesar. l. 3. de bello Civili.
Tacitus has it. Nevertheless sometimes such men, faith being given them,
obtain the right of Legation, as once the Fugitives in the Pyrenean Forest.

LXVI. Whether an Embassage be always to be admitted.
TWo things there are concerning Ambassadors, which we see commonly referrd to
the Law of Nations: first, that they be admitted Donat. ad prol. Hecyra:
Oratorem audire oportere j^ ^tium est.
; next, that they be not violated. Of the former is a place in Livy, where
Hanno a Carthaginian Senator inveighs against Annibal thus: Ambassadors coming
from our Confederates, and on their behalf, our good General admitted not into
his camp: but took away the right of Nations. Which yet is not to be understood
too crudely: for the Law of Nations commands not Vide Camdenum An. 1571.
quaestionum ibi propositarum 4.
that all be admitted, but forbids them to be rejected without cause. There
may be cause from him that sends, from him that is sent, from that for which
he is sent. Melesippus Thucyd. lib. (...).
Ambassador of the Lacedaemonians, by the Counsel of Pericles, was dismissed out
of the bounds of Attica, because he came from an armed enemy. So the Roman
Senate De hoc Romanorum more vide Servium ad 7. Aeueidos. Live. l. 41. Procop.
l. 2. and 3.
said they could not admit Zonaras.
the Embassage of the Carthaginians whose Army was in Italy. The Achaians
admitted not the Ambassadors of Perseus raising war against the Romans. So
Justinian rejected the Embassy of Totilas, and the Goths at Urbin the Orators
of Belisarius, And Polybius relates how the messengers Lib. 4.
of the Cynethenses being a wicked people were every where repulsed. An example
of the second we have in Theodorus called the Atheist, to whom, when he was
sent unto him from Ptolomaeus, Lisimachus would not give audience: and the like
has befallen others, because of some peculiar hatred. The third has place
where the cause of sending, either is suspected Sic And. Burgu^ Caesaris
Legatus in Hispaniam non admissus. Mar. l. 24. 2 Reg. 18. Live. l. 27. Lib. 32.
, as that of Rabshake the Assyrian to disturb the people was justly suspected
by Hezekia; or not honorable, or unseasonable. So the Etolians were warned by
the Romans, that they should send no Embassy without permission of the General:
Perseus, that he should not send to Rome, but to Licinius: and the Sallust.
Messenges of Iugurtha were commanded to depart Italy Carolus Quintus Imp.
Legagatos Galliae, Venetorum and Florentinorum ad bellum sibi indicendum missos
deduci jussit in locum, qui a Comitatu suo abesset triginta millaria. Guicc. l.
18. Bellaius lib. 3.
within ten days, except their coming were to deliver up the Kingdom, and the
King. As for those assiduous Legations which are now it use, they may with very
good right be rejected; for the no-cessity of them appears by the ancient
custom, whereto they are unknown.

LXVII. Of not violating Ambassadors.
OF not violating Menander Protector de Justino 2. Imp. Ille Avarorum Legatos
contra j^s Legationum in vinculis habuit. vide Ern. Cothmannum resp. 32. n. 29.
and seq. vol. 5.
Ambassadors, is a more difficult question, and variously handled by the most
excellent wits of this Age. And first we must consider of the persons of
Ambassadors, then of their Train and their Goods. Of their persons some think
thus, that, by the Law of Nations, only unjust force is kept from the bodies
of Ambassadors; for they conceive privileges are to be understood by Common
right. Others think, force may not be offered to an Ambassador, for every cause,
but on this ground, if the Law of Nations be broken by him; which is a very
large ground: for, in the Law of Nations the Law of Nature is included, so that
the Ambassador may now be punished for all faults, except those which arise
merely out of the Civil Law. Others, restrain this to those Crimes which are
done against the State of the Commonwealth, or his Dignity, to whom the
Ambassador is sent. Which also some hold perilous, and would have complaint
made to him that sent him, and the Ambassador left to his Master's judgment.
There are some too that say, the Kings or Nations unconcerned are to be
consulted with: which indeed may be a point of prudence, cannot be of right.
The reasons which every one brings for his opinion conclude nothing definitely:
because this right, not, like natural right, certainly arises out of certain
reason, but is determined by the will of Nations. Now, it was in the power of
Nations, either absolutely to provide for the safety of Ambassadors, or with
certain exceptions; for on this side may be alleged the utility of punishing
great offenders, and on the other side the utility of Embassages, the facility
whereof is best promoted by securing them as much as may be. We must therefore
see, how far Nations have consented; which cannot be evinced by examples only;
for many are extant on both sides. Wherefore we must have recourse both unto
the judgments of wise men, and unto conjectures. Two judgments I have most
illustrious; one of Livy, another of Sallust. Livy, if the Ambassadors Quanquam
visi sunt commisisse ut hostium loco essent, ju^ tamen gentium valuit. Live.
of Tarquin, who had raised treason at Rome, says: Although they seemed to
have committed that, for which they ought to be in the place of enemies, yet
the right of Nations prevailed. We see here the right of nations extended even
to them that do hostility. The saying of Sallust pertains to the Ambassadors
train, of whom we shall speak anon, not to the Ambassadors themselves: but the
Argument will proceed rightly a majori ad minus, that is, from a thing less
credible to that which is more. He says: Bomilcar the Companion of him, who
came to Fit reus mag^ ex aquo bonoque quam ex jure gentium, Bomilcar Comes ejus
qui Romam side publica venerat. Sal. Jug.
Rome on the public faith, is made guilty rather according to rules of equity,
than by the Law of Nations. Equity, that is, the mere Law of Nature suffers
punishment to be exacted, where is found a delinquent; but the Law of Nations
excepteth Ambassadors and such like, who come upon public faith. Wherefore,
that Ambassadors be made guilty, is against the Law of Nations, whereby many
things are wont to be prohibited, which, by the Law of Nature, are permitted,
Conjecture also goes on this side; for it is more true, that privileges should
be so understood, that they may give somewhat beyond Common right. Now, if
Ambassadors be only secured from unjust violence, therein were no great matter,
nothing of preeminence. Add, that the security of Ambassadors outweighs the
utility arising from punishment. For punishment may be taken by him, that sent
the Ambassador, being willing: and if he be unwilling, it may by man be exacted
of him, as an approver of the crime. Some object, better one be punished than
many involved in war. But, if he that sent the Ambassador approve his deed, the
Ambassadors punishment will not free us from the war. Now on the other side,
the safety of Ambassadors is in a slippry place, if they ought to render a
reason of their actions to any other, but him by whom they are sent. For, when
the Counsels of them that send and receive Ambassadors are for the most part
diverse, often contrary, it can scarce happen but always somewhat may be said
against an Ambassador, that may bear a show of a crime. And though some are so
manifest, that they have no doubt, yet is a general danger sufficient for the
equity and utility of a general Law. Wherefore my opinion clearly is, that it
pleased the Nations, that the Common custom, which subjecteth every one being
in a strange land to the Law of that land, should admit an exception in
Ambassadors, 1. That, as they are accounted, by a certain fiction, for the
persons of their Masters (He brought with him a face of the Senate, the
authority of the Commonwealth, says Tully of an Ambassador:) so also, by the
Senatus facie^ secum attulerat, auctoritatem Reipub. Tull. Phillp. 7.
like fiction, they should be set as it were without the compass of the land:
whereupon, they are not bound by the Civil Law of that people amongst whom they
live. Wherefore if the offense be such one as may seem possible to be
contemned, it is either to be dissembled, or else the Ambassador is to be
commanded to depart Fecit id. Steph. Poloniae Rex Moscis. Thuan. l. 73. An.
1581. Elizabetha Scoto and Hispano Camd Anno 71. and 84.
the Country. Which, Polybius says, was done to him, who had given cause to
the Hostages at Rome to escape away, And hence, on the by, we may learn the
reason, why, at another time, the Ambassador of the Tarentines, for the same
offense, was beaten with rods; namely, because the Tarentines being conquered
begun to be under Sic Carolus 5. Legato Ducis Mediolanensis ut subditi sui,
imperavit ne a Comitatu suo abscederet. Guicciard. indicat. jam loc.
the Romans. If the crime be cruel, and publicly mischievous, the Ambassador
must be sent Dion. Excerpt. Legationum: Cum juvenes quidam Legati a Carthagine
Romam venissent ibique contumeliose quaedam fecissent, missi sunt Carthaginem,
traditique Carthaginiensibus: ab his vero nihil illis nocitum est, sed dimissi
sunt incolumes.
to his Master, with a request, that he would punish him, or give him up, as we
read, the Galls required, the Fabii should be deliverd to them. But, that which
we have said before, that all human Laws are so temperd, that they bind not in
extreme necessity, has place also here, about the Precept of the sanctimony of
Ambassadors. Indeed, that hight of necessity is not in the taking of
punishment, which also in other cases is taken away by the Law of Nations, as
we shall show hereafter: much less in the place, time and manner of taking
punishment, but in the precaution of a great mischief, especially public.
Wherefore that an imminent danger may be withstood, if there be no other
remedy, Ambassadors may be both apprehended and examined. So the Roman Consuls
apprehended Pelopidas in vincula conjectus ab Alexandro Phere^, quod Legatus
cum esset Thessalos ad libertatem concitaret. Plutarch. and lat. Scriptor vitae
Pelopidae.
the Ambassadors of Tarquin: especial care being had of their Vide Serranum in
Henrico. 4.
letters, as Livy speaks, that they might not be lost. But, if an Ambassador
use force of Arms, he may be slain, no doubt: not by way of punishment, but by
way of Natural defense. So might the Galls kill the Fabii, whom Livy styles
violaters of human Law. Therefore in Euripides, Demophon, when the Herald sent
by Euristheus endeavored to carry away the suppliants by force, apposeth him by
force, and when he said, Dare you strike me a Herald sent?
Answers, Yes, if you be violent.


His name was Vide Iliados O.
Copreus, and because he proceeded Sic interpretandum quod Theodahatus Gotthus,
Justiniani Legatis dicit apud Procopium Gotthicorum, 1. Sanctum apud homines
Legatorum nomen, plenumque honoris. Sed hoc jus Legati sibi interdum servant,
quandiu sua modestia Legationis dignitatem tuentur. Ita enim existimant homines
fas esse vel interficere Legatum, si is in Principem ad quem mittitur, sit
injuriosus, aut alienum matrimonium violet. Legati vero, cum ostendissent
longissime se abesse ab adulterii suspicione, quorum ne exitus quidem sine
custode essent, addunt prudenter: Si Legatus ea dixerit, quae audivit a
Principe qui ipsum misit, ea si non sunt commoda, praestare non ipse debet
culpam, sed qui eum misit: Ipsi quippe nihil aliud concessum est, quam
Ministerio mandato fungi. Vide (...) Camdenum indicato jam loco an. 1571.
violently and used force, he was slain by the Athenians, as Philostrastratus
relates in the life of Herod. By a distinction not unlike to this, Cicero
resolves that question, Whether the son ought to accuse the father being a
traitor to his Country. For he will have it to be his duty Offic. 3.
, to avert an imminent danger, but not for punishment of the fact, when the
danger is past.

LXVIII. The Law in favor of Ambassadors binds not him to whom he is not sent.
THat Law, which I have mentiond, of not offering force to Ambassadors, is to be
conceived obligatory to him, unto whom the Embassy is sent; and so too, if he
has admitted it: there being after that time, as it were, a tacit Covenant
between them. Nevertheless, it may, and is wont to be denounced, that
Ambassadors be not sent; if they be, they shall be taken for enemies: as it was
denounced to the Etolians by the Romans, and of Live. l. 27. Idem l. 4.
old by the Romans to the Veientes it was proclaimed, unless they would get them
out of the City they should give what Lars Tolumnius gave: and to the Romans
Lib. 10.
by the Samnites, if they did come to any Council in Samnium, they should not
go away inviolate. Wherefore this Law does not pertain to them through whose
bounds Ambassadors pass without leave; for, if they go to their enemies Siculi
Atheniensium socii Legatos Syracusan^um missos ad Civitates alias cepere.
Thucyd. lib. 7. De Gallorum ad Turcam Legatis quos in Pado Hispani cepere and
occiderunt, vide judicis Perutae lib. 11. Bezari l. 21. De Flandriae Civitatum
Legatis ad Gal^um cap^is a Maximiliano, Crantzium Saxonic. 12. Laudatur
Belisarii Clementia, quod Gelimeris Legatis in Hispaniam missis, and ab
Hispania reversis Carhaginem, quae jam facta erat Romanorum, pepercerit.
Procop. Vandal. 1.
, or come from their enemies, or otherwise make any hostile attempt, they may
even be slain: which the Athenians did to the Ambassadors between the Persians
and Spartans; the Illyrians to the Ambassadors between the Essians and Romans
Thucyd. l. 2. Appian. de bello Illyrico.
; and much more may they be bound, which Xenophon Xenoph. lib. 4. de exped.
Cyri. Arrian. lib. 2. Live. lib. 23.
orderd against some, Alexander against them that were sent to Darius from
Thebes and Lacedemon, the Romans against the Ambassadors of Philip Vide Appian.
in excerptis. Legationum n. 19.
to Anmbal, and the Latins, against the Ambassadors of the Volsci. If there be
no such provocation, and Ambassadors be ill used, not that law of Nations Aliud
sit (...) quis extra fines suos insidias p^nat (...) ali^nu, (...) enim jus
gentium violaretur. Et hoc continetur in Thessalorum oratione contra Philippum
apud Livium. Justin. lib. 29.
, whereof we treat, but the friendship, and the Honor, either of him that
sent, or of him to whom they go, will be judged violate. Justin of the latter
Philip King of Macedon: Afterward he sent his Ambassador with letters to
Annibal, to join in league with him: The Ambassador being taken and brought to
the (Roman) Senate was sent away safe, not in honor to the King, but lest he
should be made a certain enemy, that hitherto was dubious.

LXIX. An enemy, to whom an Ambassador is sent, is bound.
BUt an Embassy admitted, even with enemies Pomponius l. ult. D. de Legatis. Si
q^s Legatum hostium pulsasset, contra jus gentium id comissum esse existimatur,
quia sancti habentur legati. Et Tacit. hoc jus vocat. Hostium jus and sacra
legationis and fas gentium. An. 1. Cic. 1. Verrina: Noune Legati inter hosts
incolumes esse debent? Sen. de Ira. Violavit legationes rupto gentium jure.
Livio, caedes ruptura jus gentium, (...) causa nesanda, cades impia dicitur, in
historia Legatorum quos Fidenates occiderunt. Donatus ad illud Eunuchi:
convenire and colloqui. Sic pronunciandum est, ut quasi dicat, liceat per te,
miles, quod ^iam inter hosts and in bello licet. vide loca producta LXV.
in Arms, much more with enemies not in actual hostility, has the safeguard
of the Law of Nations. Diodorus Siculus said, Heralds have peace in the time of
War. The Lacedaemonians, who had slain the Heralds of the Persians, are said
thereby to have confounded the rights of all men. Livy says, Ambassadors being
brought into danger, there was not left so much as the Law of War. Curtius: He
sent Messengers to compel them unto peace, whom the Tyrians, against the Law
of Nations, killed, and threw into the Sea. Justly is it said: for in war also
many things fall out, which cannot be transacted but by Ambassadors, and peace
it self can hardly be made, and differences reconciled, but by their Mediation.

LXX. Ambassadors may not be wronged by way of retaliation.
THis is a question too, Whether by the right of rendering like for like an
Ambassador may be slain, or ill used, coming from him that has done so. And
truly there are in Histories examples enough of such revenge; but histories, we
know, relate not only things done justly, but those things also that are done
unjustly, angrily, impotently. The Law of Nations provides not only for the
dignity of him that sends, but for the security of him that is sent: Wherefore
there is a tacit contract with him also; and wrong is done to him, though none
is done to his Master. Wherefore Scipio did not only magnanimously, but
according to the Law of Nations, who, after the Ambassadors of the Romans were
ill entreated by Carthaginians, the Ambassadors of the Carthaginians being
brought unto him, and being asked what ought to be done, answered, not as the
Carthaginians have done Diodorus Sic. in excerptis Peiresianis: Dixit Scipio
non esse id faciendum quod ipsi in Carthaginiensibus accusarent. Et Romani ipsi
Legatos jam comperto Carthaginiensium facto, dimiserunt. Vide Appian.
Constantius Titianum a Magnentio ad se missum remisit, quanquam Philippum a
Constantio missum ad se retinebat Magnentius. Zosim. l. 2. Vide and historias
apud Cromerum lib. 19. and 21. and Parutam de Legatis Venetis in itinere in
Gallia^ retentis l. 7.
. Livy Appian de bello Pun. Live. l. 30. Val. M. l. 6. c. 7.
adds, he said, He would do nothing unworthy of the manners of the Roman
people. Valerius Maximus puts the like words, but more ancient, into the mouth
of the Roman Consuls on a like occasion: Hanno, the integrity of our City quits
thee of that fear; For then too, against the right of Legation, Cornelius Asina
was cast into chains by the Carthaginians.

LXXI. The companions also of Ambassadors, and their Goods, are inviolable.
THe Companions also and the Goods of Ambassadors have in their proportion a
kind of sanctimony. Whence it was in the old form of the Heralds, O King, Rex,
facisne me tu regium nuntium populi Romani Quiritiu^? vasa comitesque mcos?
do you make me a Royal messenger of the Roman people? do you privilege my
companions and my Goods? And by the Julian Law de vi publica they are
pronounced guilty, not only that have wronged Ambassadors, but their attendants
too. But these are sacred accessorily, and so far Vide Fraxini Oanaei Epistolas
p. 75. and ^79.
as it seems good to the Ambassador. Wherefore if his Attendants have greatly
offended, they may be demanded of him, that he may yield them: For they are not
to (...) Henrico 4.
be drawn from him by force. When this was done by the Achaians against some
Lacedaemonians, that were with the Roman Ambassadors, the Romans cried out, the
Law of Nations was broken. Whither may be also referred the judgment of Sallust
concerning Bomilcar, which we made use of above. But if the Ambassador will not
yield them, the same course is to be taken, which before we said about the
Ambassadors own offense. Now, whether an Ambassador has jurisdiction over his
own family, and whether his house be a sanctuary Distingui ferme hac in re
solent crimina. Vide Parutam lib. 10. ubi Rex Gallioe hanc ob causam iratus
pacatur. Vide eund. lib. 11.
for all that fly unto it, depends upon the concession of him with whom he
resides. For this belongs not to the Law of Nations. That the movable Goods
also of the Ambassador, which are accounted an accession to his person, cannot
be seized on, neither as a pledge, nor for payment of a debt, nor by order of
judgment, nor (which some allow) by the Kings hand, is the truer opinion. For
all coaction ought to be far from an Ambassador, as well that which touches
his necessaries, as his person, that he may have full security. If therefore he
has contracted any debt, and (as it is) possess no immovables in that place,
He is to be called upon kindly, and if he refuse, his Master; so that at last
that course may be taken with him, which is usual against debtors in another
territory. Nor is it to be feared, which some think, lest, if this be so, none
will be found to contract or deal with an Ambassador: For even Kings, who
cannot be compelled, want not creditors; and among some Nations it was a
custom, says Nicolaus Damascenus, that contracts which were gone into trust
should bear no action, no more than ingratitude: so that men were constrained
either to fulfill the contract presently, or be content with the naked faith of
the debtor. And Seneca wishes all the world were in this condition: Would we
could persuade men to receive De benef. 3. 15.
money lent, only from those that pay it willingly; would no stipulation did
bind the buyer to the seller, nor sealed bonds and indentures were laid up.
Faith should rather keep those agreements, and a mind studious of right. Appian
also says, it Civil. 1. (...) pro eodem dixit Herodotus Clio.
displeased the Persians, to owe money, being a thing obnoxious to deceit and
lying. Aelian Lib. 4.
says the same of the Indians. With whom Strabo Lib. 15.
agrees in these words: They have no judgments but about slaughter and injury;
because a man cannot help it, but he may fall into these: But contracts are in
every ones power; wherefore one must bear with it, if a man break his word, and
consider before hand whom one trusts, and not fill the Commonwealth with
Lawsuits. And it was a constitution Stob. de Legibus.
of Charondas, that none should commence an action, who had trusted another
with the price of his commodity: which also pleased Plato. And it is noted by
Aristotle, that some have no De Lepib. 8. Mor. Nic. 8. 15.
trials about these matter: for they think men ought to be content with the
faith Mor. 9. lib. 1.
which they have taken. And elsewhere, In some places the Laws permit no action
for what is trusted, as if he were only to be dealt with privately, with whom
one has contracted, and taken his word. The objections brought against this
opinion out of the Roman Law, concern not our Ambassadors, but those that are
provincial or municipal.

LXXII. The right of Embassasadors vindicated by War.
Profane Histories Romani ob id bellum suscepere in Senonas. Appianus excerpto
Legationum 4. and 10. in Illyrios and Ligures: Polybius excerpto Legationum
125. and 134. in Issios: Dion. exc. leg. 2. in Corinthios: Livius lib. 2. in
Tarentinos: Dionys. Hal. exc. Leg. 4. Francorum and Germanorum exempla habes
apud Aimonium lib. 3. c. 61. and 88. and Withikindum l. 3.
are full of wars undertaken because of wrong done to Ambassadors. And in the
sacred 2 Samuel 10. Vide Chrysostom. ad Stagirium lib. 3.
story is exstant the memory of the war which David upon that ground waged
against the Ammonites. Nor does Cicero esteem any cause more just against
Mithridates.

LXXIII. Of the right of Burial. The right of burial springs from the same Law
of Nations.
BY the Law of Nations, which has its rise from their will, sepulture is also
due to the bodies of the dead. Dion Chrysostom, amongst manners or customs,
which he opposes to written Law, after the rights of Ambassadors, mentions,
not to forbid dead men to be buried. And Seneca the father, among unwritten
Laws, but mo^ certain than all written ones, sets down this, to bestow earth
upon the dead. The Hebrews, Phila and Josephus, call this the Law of nature
(...) Isidorus Pelusiota. Apud Aelianum est, Cum mortuum condi ipsa imperet
communis natura. Idem alibi vocat (...), terram and sepulturam, hominibus
cunctis communia and ex aequo debita. (...), dixit Euripides, (...) Aristides,
Lucanus hominum ritus, (...) Leges and mundi soedera Papinius, sortis humanae
commercium Tacitus, spem communem Orator Lysias. Sophocles Ajace. idem (...)
dixit in Antigone.
; as it is usual, under the Name of Nature, to comprehend common customs
agreeable to natural reason. He that hinders burial, puts off man, says
Claudian; gives an affront to nature, says Leo the Emperor; is an enemy to
piety, says Isidore Pelusiot. And because these rights common to Civil men,
that they might seem the more sacred, were by the Ancients referd unto the
Gods, we see this right as well as that of Legation frequently ascribed to
them. Therefore you shall find it in Sophocles called (...), a Law of the Gods.
Isocrates Panathenaico.
speaking of the war of Theseus against Creon, says, Who knows not what all
success Adnastus had before Thebes, where attempting to restore the son of
Oedipus, his son-in-Law, he lost very many Argives, and saw their leaders
slain: And himself surviving with dishonor, when he could not obtain leave to
bury the slain, went to Athens with a petition to Theseus the King, that he
would not suffer such men to lie unburied, nor the old custom to be despised,
and the right of all men violated, being established not so much by human
nature as by divine power: Theseus hearing this, decrces to send to Thebes
without delay? A little after the same Author reprehends the Thebans Pacto non
praelio obtentum a Thebanis jus sepeliendi vult Plutatch. Theseo; at praelio,
Pausanias Atticis.
, that they preferred the Statutes of their own City before Laws Divine: and
he mentions the same history in other places Panegeryco, He^nae e^comio,
Plataica oratione: Herodotus quoque Calliope. Diodorus Siculus bistoriarum 4.
Xenophon hist. Graecae 6. and Lysias ea quae est in honorem sepultorum:
postremo Aristides in Panathenaico, qui bellum hoc susceptum a^pro communi
natura hominum.
. So do others. And frequently in good Authors we see eminent titles of virtue
ascribed to this office. For Cicero and Lactantius call it humanity, Ualerius
Maximus humanity and mildness, Quintilian mercy and and Religion, Seneca mercy
and humanity, Philo compassion of human nature, Ulpian mercy and piety,
Modestinus the memory of human frailty, Capitolinus Clemency, Euripides and
Lactantius justice, Prudentius a gracious work. On the contrary, the Donatists,
who forbad the bodies of the Catholics to be buried, are accused of impiety by
Optatus: Spartianus says, such are without reverence of humanity; Livius calls
it cruelty beyond belief of human anger; and Lactantius says, it is wicked wit
in them that made sepulture to be a vain and superfluous thing Apud Papinium,
-- bello cogendus and armis, In mores hominemque Crcon. Homerus dixerat (...).
Idem Iliados (...), Jovem and Deos Achilli iratos fuisse dicit ob male
tractatum corpus Hectoris. Eandum ob causam impius Eteocles, Papinio.
.

LXXIV. What was the first cause of this custom.
WHat was the first cause of this custom of interring bodies, whether enbalmed
before, as among the Egyptians, or burnt, as among most of the Grecians, or so
as they are, which Cicero notes to be most the ancient way, and after him Pliny
Plin. Histor. nature. 7. 54. ubi and hoc: Sepultus intelligitur quoquo modo
conditus: humatus vero, bumo contectus.
, of this all have not the same opinion. For Moschion thinks the occasion was
given from the gigantick ferity in eating men, the abolition whereof is
signified by Sepulture Tunc morte raptos Imperatum Legibus
Mandare terrae, pulveremque insparg^re
Nocdum s^, ne darentur conspici
Abominanda signa pastus pristini.

.

Others think, men did in this manner, as it were of their own accord, pay the
debt, which otherwise nature requires of them even against their will. For,
that the body of man made of earth is due to the earth Job 10. 9. Philo in
Flaccum: Proprium bominibus locum natura terram tribuit, nec vivis tantum, sed
and mortuu, ut eadem quae primos suscepit natales, suscipiat and ex hac vita
exitum. Attamen, ficut nullum est in homine factum laudabile, cujus non
vestigium in alio aliquo animantium genere Deus posuerit, ita and in hac re
evenit. De formicis Plinius lib. 11. 30. Sepeliuntur inter se viventium solae,
praeter hominem. At ipse de Delphinis l. 9. 8. Conspectique jam defunctum
portantes, ne laceraretur a belluis. Et de apibus Virg. Tum corpora luce
carentum Exportant tectis and tristia funera ducun^. Servius: cum exsequiali
scilicet pompa.
, not only God declared to Adam, but also the Greeks and Latins frequently
acknowledge. Cicero out of Euripides: Earth is to be rendered to the earth. And
the same Euripides has elsewhere more fully expressed what we read in Solomon
Eccles. 12. 7. Euripides ex persona These in supplicibus. I am sinite terrae
^uos (...)
Res unde quaeque sumserat primordium
Eo recipitur: spiritus coelo redit
Corpusque terrae: jure nec enim mancupi,
Sed brevis ad aevi tempus utendum datur:
Mox terra repetit ipsa quod nutriverat.
Lucretius similiter de terra:
Omniparent eadem rerum est commune sepulcrum.
Cicero de Legibus 2. ex Xenophonte:
Redditur terrae corpus, and (...) locatum ac situm, quasi operimento matris
obducitur.

, The body returns to the earth, from whence it came, and the soul to God that
gave it. Pliny has also written, that the earth entertains us at our birth,
feeds us being born, and all along our life susteins us, and last of all, when
we are abdicated by the rest of nature, she like a gentle mother embraces us in
her lap and covers us. There are some that hold, the hope of resurrection, as
it were by this monument, was consignd to posterity by the first parents of
mankind. For, that Democritus also taught, Bodies are to be conserved because
of a promise of returning to life, Pliny witnesses. And Christians often refer
the rite of decent burial to this hope, Prudentius Quidnam sibi saxa cavata,
Quid pulcra volunt monume^ta?
Nisi quod res creditur illis,
Non mortua, sed data somno.

.

Why do Marbles cover dust, And Monuments our bodies keep? Because the thing
they have in trust, Is not dead, but laid to sleep.

The more plain and simple opinion is, whereas man excells other living
creatures, it seemed an unworthy thing, that other animals should be fed with
his body, for the preventing whereof, as much as might be, sepulture was
invented. By the pity of men bodies are kept from the invasion of souls and
wild beasts Vide Vaticinium de Jeroboami postorirate impoenam peccatorum ejus.
1 Reg. 14. 11. and Tertullianum de resurrectione. De Aegistho Homerus Odyss.
Ergo nec leviter Gleham (...), Illius volucres lacer^ent ossa conesque. De
Aegistho loquitur, quem, ut adulterum and regni invasorem, Argivi infepultum
abjecerant; cujus tamen reliquias humanior terrae dedit Orestes, ut mox
dicetur. Menelaus de Ajace in Sophocle: Sed ille arenis jactus in pallentibus,
Gratum marinis pabulum alitibus dabit.
Sed hoe quoque ibi prohibet Ulysses, prudentiae exemplar. Sophocles Antigone
in ipsius Antigones laudem: Illa obsitum (...) germanum suum,
Non insepultum sivit, alitibus feris
Canibusque fieri pabulum mordacibus.
Appianus Civilium primo, de interfectis jussu Marii: Nec cuiquam licebat
quenquam interfectorum sepelire, sed viros tam egreglos lace abant aves and
canes. Ammianus Marcell. l. 17. de Juliano: Sollicitusque ne dirae volucres
consumerent corpora peremptorum sine discretion (...) humari mandavit. Apud
Virgilium legimus: -- Non te optima matter
Condet humo, patriove onerabit membra sepulcro;
Alitibus linquere seris. --

, said Quintilian. And Cicero, Vexed by wild boasts, he wanted the common
honor in his death.

God in the Prophets, threatens the Kings he hates, that they should have the
burial of an Ass, that dogs should lick their blood. Nor does Lactantius
consider any thing else in burial, when he says, We will not suffer the Image
and work of God to ly a prey for beasts and birds; And Ambrose his words are
these, You can do no better office for him, who is now past requiting of you:
save him from the fouls of the air, save from the beasts a partaker of the same
nature. But, though such injuries were not, yet for the body of man to be trod
under foot, and broken, seems very unbecoming the dignity of his kind. That in
Sopater's controversies is to our purpose: It is a comely thing to bury the
dead, and by nature it self appointed unto bodies, lest they be vilified after
death if they putrify naked. All the Gods are pleased to indulge this honor to
bodies deprived of life. For, because it is unreasonable, the secrets of human
nature should be exposed after death to the sight of all, we have received a
custom of old, to Inter human bodies, that being laid up in their sepulchers
they may conceal their rotteness. To the same purpose is that of Gregory
Nyssen, That the Sun may not see what is shameful Simili modo Agathias d^
moris esse, Obtegere puerperit pudorem. It a quam nihil natura simus, apparet
in ortu and interitu. Quod ut significarent sapientes Hebraei, vetuere ne
Plebeiae aut summae fortunae qui essent, aliusmodi fasciis involverentur, aut
modo nati aut mortui.
to human nature. Hence it is, that the office of burying is said to be
performed, not so much to the person, as the nature, [Non tam homini, quam
humanitati:] whence Seneca and Quintilian called it public humanity, Petronius
tralatitious. Whereunto this is Consequent, that Burial must not be envyed,
neither to our own, nor our Countries enemies. Of private enemies, excellent
is that dissertation of Ulysses in Sophocles for the burial of Ajax, where we
have this among the rest to Menelaus:

After so many wise words said,
Beware you do not wrong the dead.
Euripides Idem Supplicib. Pecere vobis si quid Argivi male, Cecidere: in
hosts ista vindicta est satis. Et Virg. Nullum cum victis certamen and aethere
cassis. Quam sentententiam citans scriptor ad Herennium addit: Nam quod malorum
est extremum acciditittis jam. Papinius, -- -- bellavimus: esto:
Sed cecidere odia and tristes mors obruit iras.

gives the reason in his Antigone,

Men's quarrels die with their last breath:
For what revenge is after death?
And Optatus Milevitanus renders the same cause: If you had any difference
living, let the other's death kill your hatred. He is now silent, with whom you
quarreled.

LXXV. Burial is also due to public enemies.
WHerefore also to public enemies, all men think Burial to be due Belli hoc
jus (...) vocat Appianus: Belli Commercia Philo. Idem in Flaccum: Etiam qui in
bello occubuerunt, eos homines solent ad sepulturam dare, illi quidem quibus
benitatis and humanitatis plus est, suopte impendio: alit vero, qui edia and in
mortuos extendunt, sub pactis dantes corpora, ne careant eorum quae mos imperat
honor ultimo. De eadem re agens Lucanus hominum ritus in host servandos dixit.
. Enemies do not envy burial, says Tacitus: and Dio Chrysostomus having said,
this is a Law observed among enemies in war, adds, although their hate has
proceeded to the highest degree. Sopater above cited: What war has deprived
mankind of this last honor? What enmity has so far extended the memory of
evil deeds, as to dare violate this Law? Dio Chrysostom cited a little before,
in his Oration of Law: By this, no man judges dead men enemies, nor is anger
and disgrace extended to their bodies. And examples are every where Josephus in
leg b. Sepeliantur and hosts. Agamemnon Trojanos sepelit Iliad. n. Antigonus
Pyrrhum apud Plutarchum. Vide eundem in vita Thesei.
extant. So Hercules sought his enemies, Alexander those slain at Issus,
Hannibal sought C. Flaminius, P. Aemilius, Tib. Gracchus, Marcellus Plutarchus
Marcello. Credas, inquit Silius Italicus, Sidonium cecedisse ducem.
, Romans, to bury them. The same was done by the Romans for Hanno, for
Mithridates by Pompey, by Demetrius for many, for King Archelaus by Antonius.
It was in the oath of the Greeks warring against the Persians: I will bury all
my fellows, being victorious, I will bury the Barbarians too: and frequently in
histories you may read of leave obtained to carry off the dead. We have an
example in Pausanias: The Athenians say, they had buried Atticis.
the Medes, because it was their Religion to Interr all the dead, whatsoever
they were. Wherefore, by the interpretation of the ancient Hebrews, the High
Priest, when otherwise he was forbidden to be present at any funeral, was
commanded nevertheless to put into the earth Idem ex jure Pontificio Romano
Servius notat.
a man found unburied. But Christians so much esteemed sepulture, that for
this, as well as to feed the poor, or to redeem captives, they thought even the
consecrated Vessels of the Church might be lawfully coined or sold. There are
indeed examples also to the contrary, but condemned by common judgment Hune oro
defend furorem, est apud Virgilium. Interpretatur Servius, Inimicorum iram and
post fala saevire cupientem. Apud Claudianum: -- bominemque cruentus Exit, and
tenuem caesis i^vidit arenam. Diodorus Siculus: Ferinum est bellum gerere cum
morluis, qui ejusdem naturae suerint.
.

LXXVI. Whether Burial be due to notorious malefactors.
COncerning these, I see there are causes of doubting. The divino Law given to
the Hebrews, the mistress, as of every virtue, so of humanity too, commands
that they which were hanged on a tree (which was esteemed very Numb. 25. 4:
Deuteronomy. 21. 23. 2 Samuel 21. 26.
ignominious) should be buried the same day. Hence Josephus says, The Jews
have such care of sepulture, that they take down the bodies condemned to
public execution, before Sunset, and commit them to the earth: and other
Hebrew interpreters add, This reverence was given to the divine image, after
which man was made. Aegisthus, who had seconded his adultery with the murder of
the King, was buried by Orestes the son of the murdered King, as Homer relates.
Odyss. 3. L. 1. de cap. punit.
And among the Romans, Ulpian says, the bodies of them that are condemnd to die
are not to be denied their kindred: yea Paulus his opinion is, they are to be
granted to any, whoever they be, that ask them. And Dioclesian and Maximian
Emperors answered thus: We do not L. 2. c. de Relig. Hujus Romanorum moris
mentio est apud Philonem contra Flaccum.
sorbid, that offenders, after execution worthy of their crimes, be deliverd to
the grave. Indeed, we read in histories examples of them that have been cast
out Id (...) dixit Josephus in morte Judaeorum Regis Alexandri. Add Quintil^
declam. 4.
unburied, more frequent in Civil than Foreign wars: and at this day we see the
bodies of some condemned persons to be left a long time in public view: which
manner yet, whether it be commendable, is disputed not by Politics only, but
Divines. On the contrary, we find, they are praised, who gave burial to the
bodies of such as had not permitted the same to others, namely Pausantas King
of the Lacedaemonians, who being provoked by the Aeginetae to revenge the deed
of the Persians upon Leonides, with the like deed, rejected the advice as
unworthy of the Grecian name Apud Papin. Theseus Creontem sic alloquitur: --
Vade atradaturus Supplicia, extremique tamen secure Sepulchri.
. And the Pharisees buried Alexander Jannaeus, who had been very contumelious
against his dead Countrymen Jos. Antiq. l 13. c. 13. and Gorion.
. But if God sometimes has punished some with the loss of burial, he has done
this above the constituted Laws; and, that David kept the head of Goliath to be
showed, was done against an Alien, a Contemner of God, and under that Law,
which extended the name of Neighbor to the Hebrews only.

LXXVI. Whether it be due to those that have killed themselves? to the
sacrilegious and traitorous?
IT is here worthy to be noted, concerning burial of the dead, that the rule
among the Hebrews themselves had an exception of them that had laid violent
Lib. 3. de Bell. Jud. cap. 25. Heges. l. 3. c. 17. Gell. l. 15. c. 10.
hands upom themselves, as Josephus tells us: Nor is it any wonder, when no
other punishment can be appointed them that esteem not death for a punishment.
So the Milesian maids were frighted from voluntary death, and likewise the
Servius ad 12. Aen. Sane sciendum quod cautum fuerat in Pontificalibus libris,
ut qui laqueo vitam finiisset insepultus abjiceretur. ^de ^rito ait informis
Lethi, quasi mortis infamissimae. Ergo cum ninihil sit bac morte desormius,
poetam etiam pro Reginae dignitate dixisse accipiamus. Cassius autem Hemina ait
Tarquinium Superbum, cum cloacas facere populum coegisset, and ob hanc injuriam
multi se suspendio necarent, jussisse corpora eorum cruci affigi. Tunc primum
turpe habitumest, mortem sibi consciscere.
Plebs of Rome sometime, though Pliny Plin. lib. 36. cap. 15.
approve it not. So the body of Cleomenes, who had slain himself, Ptolomy
commanded to be hanged up. And says Aristotle, it Nic. 5. 5.
is commonly received Athenis Aeschinis tempore ejus qui se interfecisset manus
scorsim a corpore sepeliebatur. Aeschin. in Ctesiph. Add Hegesippum lib. 3.
cap. 17. Orat. 65. Vide Stob. ^it. 126. and Sophoc. Ajace.
, that some disgrace be done to them, who have been the Authors of their own
death: which Andronicus Rhodius expounding says, their bodies were forbidden
to be buried. And this among other Decrees of Demonassa Queen of Cyprus is
commended by Dion Chrysostomus. Nor is that any great objection against this
custom, that Homer, Aeschylus, Sophocles, Moschio and others say, That the
dead feel nothing: and therefore can neither be affected with loss nor shame.
For it is sufficient, that that which is inflicted on the dead be feared by the
living, and they by this means be deterd from sin. Excellently do the
Platonists maintain against the Stoics, and whoever else admit the avoiding of
servitude and diseases, yea and the hope of glory, for a just cause of
voluntary death, That the soul is to be retained in the custody of the body,
and that we must not depart out of this life without his command who gave it to
us. To which point, much may be seen in Plotinus, Olympiodorus, and Macrobius
upon Scipio's dream. Brutus was at first of this judgment, and condemned Et
Philosophorum non pauci extra Stoicos. Seneca Epistola 70. Invenies etiam
professos sapientiam, qui vim asferendam vitae suae negent, and nefas judicent
ipsum interemptorem sui sieri. Expectandum esse exitum quem natura decrevit.
Procopius Gotthicorum 4. Violentus vitae exitus res inutilis and plena
insipientis impetus, and illa in mortem ferens audacia, consilio cum careat,
prudentibus judicatur immerito sibi sortitudinis nomen usurpare. Tum vero and
illud cogitandum, ne in Deum sitis ingrati.
the fact of Cato, which afterward he imitated: For he thought it neither pious
nor manly to yield to fortune, and fly away from imminent adversities, which
are courageously to be undergone. And Megasthenes noted the fact of Calanus to
be reprehended by the Indian wisemen, whose doctrines did not suite with such
an end of men impatient of life. The Persians Idem Arabibus visu^ non minus
quam Indis and Persis, e Jobo discas c. 3. 21.
, it seems, were of the same opinion: whose King Dartus says in the Historian
Cult. l. 5.
, I had rather die by another crime, than by my own. Upon this ground, the
Hebrews said to die was to be (...).
dismissed: as we may see, not only Lu. 20. 29. but also in the Greek version,
Genesis 25. 2. and Numb. 20. in fine. A phrase used by the Grecians too.
Themistius, de anima, They say, a man that dies is dismissed, and death they call
a departure or dismission. In Plutarch's consolation the word is used in the
same sense: Until God himself dismiss us. Yet some Variasse Hebraeorum super
hac quaestione sententias cognoscas ex Josepho, ubi de morte Phasaelis and de
deliberatione Herodis agitur. Judaei ad Petronium, Philone recitante:
Miscebimus inter nos sanguinem, morte sponte sumta; tum mortuis ista
imperentur. Ne Deus quidem nos culpet in duo intentos, ut and Imperatorem
revereamur, and sacratas Leges custodiamus. Id autem ita demum efficere
dabitur, si abeamus hinc contemta vita minime vitali.
of the Hebrews, concerning the Law of not Killing himself, except one case, as
an honorable exit, if one see he is like to live to the reproach of God himself.
For, because they hold, not we our selves but God has power over our life (as
Josephus rightly instructed his soldiers:) they think, a presumtion of the will
of God is that alone, which may perfect the resolution of anticipating death.
And to this they refer Samson's example, who saw true Religion exposed to
contempt in the sport made with him; and Readiness, who fell upon his sword, that
he might not be mocked by God's and his enemies. For they suppose he repented,
after Samuel's 1 Samuel 31. 4.
ghost foretold him of his death; which, though he knew would come to pass, if
he did fight, he nevertheless declined not the battle for his Country and the
Law of God, and thence got eternal honor, even by David's Elogy: who also gave
to them that honorably buried Readiness body, a testimony of their well-doing.
There 2 Macc. 14. 37.
is a third example of Razes a Jerusalem Senator in the history of the
Maccabees. Moreover, in the Christian history, we read like examples, of them
Vide Euseh.
that dyed by their own hands, lest by the force of torments they should be
compeld to forswear the Christian Religion; and of Virgins, who that they might
not lose their virginity, Narrat Cicero nobilissimas Virgins se in puteos
abjecisse, and morte voluntaria nefariam tu picudinem depulisse, Oratione de
Pro vinciis Consularibus. Ta le est and quod de Milesiis virginibus memorat
Hieronymus adversus Jovinianum; and epigramma vetus Anthologiae l. 3. Tit. de
^venibus incipiens (...). Narrant and Judaei faeminam in navi ad stuprum
expetitam, cum a marito quaesiisset, an and mari mersa corpora essent
resurrectura, isque id affirmasset, jecisse se in mare. Christianarum autem
mulierum plurima sane habemus exempla. Feminarum Antiochenarum sub Dicclesiano;
Sophroniae sub Maxentio, in martyro ogiis, Zonaca, Sexto Aurelio. Alias
Antiochenas sub Chosroe addit Procopius Persicorum (...). Laudat Virgins, quae
morte pudorem servarant, Ambro^. Hieronymus in Commentariis ad finem capitis
primi Jonae: Vnde and in persecutionibus non licet mihi propria perire manu,
absque (...) castitas periclitatur.
cast themselves into the river; whom also the Church has listed in the noble
Army of Martyrs. But yet, of these, it is worth our pains to see what Austins
Lib. de Civit. Dei c. 26. epist. 61. ad Dul^. and lib. 2. c. 13. contra 2.
Gaudent. epist. Cui addere licet Chrysostomum, Gal. 1. 4. and Concilium
Aurelianense 3. Oblationes desunctorum qui (...) aliquo crimine fuerint
interempti, recipi debere censemus, si (...) ipsi sibi mortem probentur
propriis manibus intulisse. Et tamen is ipse August. l. 1. de Civit. Dei cap.
16. Ac per hoc and quae se occiderant, ne quicquam hujusmodi paterentur, quis
humanus affectus eis ignosc^? Capitulare autem Franc^c. lib. 6. 70. De eo qui
se^sum occidit, aut laqueo se suspendit, consideratum est, ut si quis co^tiens
v^ elecmosynam dare, tribuat, and orationes in Psalmodiis faciat: Oblationibus
tamen and Missis ipsi careant; quia incomprehensibilia s^ judicia Dei and
profunditatem Consilii ejus nemo potest investigart.
opinion is. Another exception also, I see, obtained among the Greeks, opposed
by the Locri to the Phocenses: Diod. lib. 16. Rhodiaca.
That it is a common custom among all the Greeks, to cast away sacrilegious
persons unburied: And so Dion Prusaeensis says, the impious and profane are
denied burial. The same, at Athens, was constituted against Traitors, as
Plutarch relates At Nicetas l. 3. vitae Alexii fratris Isaaci, cum narrasset
mortem Joannis Comneni Crassi, qui per seditionem imperium affectaverat, sic
loquitur: Post corpus inde ablatum, canibus and avibus esca ponitur: quod ab
humanitate alienum ac paene ferinum omnibus videbatur.
. But, to Antiphonte.
return to my purpose, for sepulture denied, the ancients with great consent
have judged, war may justly be undertaken, as appears by the forementioned
history of Theseus, handled by Euripides in his supplices, and by Isocrates in
the place alleged.

LXXVIII. Of Punishments. The Definition of punishment, and the original.
FActs, which are the causes of war, are considerd two ways; as they are to be
repaired, or as they are to be punished. This later part, which is of
punishments, is the more diligently to be handled by us, because the original
and nature thereof not well understood has given occasion to many errors.
Punishment, in general, is the evil of passion, which is inflicted for the evil
of action. For, though certain works are wont to be imposed upon some by way of
punishment, yet those works are to be considered only as troublesome, and
therefore are to be referrd to passions. And the incommodities sufferd by some
by reason of a contagious disease, or a maimed body, or other impurities, such
as are many in the Hebraw Law, to wit, to be kept from assemblies or functions,
are not properly punishments, although for a certain similitude, and abusively,
Lib. de exilio
they are called so. Now, among the things which nature it self dictates to be
lawful and not unjust, this is one, that he who has done evil should suffer
evil: which the Philosophers call a most ancient and Rhadamanthean Law.
Pertinent is that saying of Plutarch, Justice accompanies God, to punish them
that transgress the Law Divine: which all we men by nature use against all men
as fellows. Plato said, Neither God nor man will say, that an offender ought
not be punished. And Hierax, by this as the noblest part, defined Justice, an
exacting Et Hierocles (...). Lactantii dictum est, de ira Dei c. 17. Non exiguo
falluntur errore, qui censuram sive humanam sive divinam acerbitatis and
malitiae nomine infamant, putantes nocentem dici oportere, qui nocentes afficit
poena. Conven^t huc and illud Belisarii apud Procoplum Vandal. 1. Primum
justitiae documentum erit poena exacta de injustis intersectoribus. Add Agath.
l. 5. ubi de Anatolio.
of punishment from offenders. What we have said, that punishment properly so
named, must be renderd to some offense, this is also noted by Augustine; All
punishment, says he, if it be just, is the punishment of sin. Which is to be
understood of those punishments too, that God inflicteth, though in them
sometimes, by reason of human ignorance, as the same Father speaks Augustine:
Latet culpa, ubi non latet poena.
, the sin is secret, where the punishment is not secret.

LXXI. Who should punish an Evil-doer.
REason dictates, that an evil-doer August. Si non reddit faciendo quod debet,
reddet patiendo quod debet. Philo: Peccare dum festinatis, ad poenas ferendas
festinatis.
may be punished, not who should punish him: but that nature sufficiently
shows, it is most convenient to be done by him that is superior: yet does it
not demonstrate this to be necessary, except superior be taken in that sense,
that the evil-doer be thought to have made himself thereby inferior to any
other, and to have as it were degraded himself from the order of men into the
number of beasts subject to man, as some Divines have determined. Tho. 2. 2.
qu. 64. art. 1. and lb. Cajet. Sic and Moses Maimon ad Deuteronomy. 33. 7. Pol. 14.
Democritus: By nature it is ordaind, that the better command the worse. And
Aristotle says, the worse are provided for the use of the better, as well in
naturals as artificials. It follows hence, that at least a guilty person ought
not to be punished by another equally guilty: to which purpose is that sentence
of Christ, Whosoever of you is without sin Jo. 8. 7.
(such a sin) let him throw the first stone. Which he therefore spoke, because
in that age the manners of the Jews were most corrupt, so that they who would
seem most pure were in the mire of Adultery and such like crimes, as we may
perceive To. 2. 22. The same that Christ had said, the Apostle said also:
Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that judge: for,
wherein thou judge^ another, thou condemnest thy self: for the that judge
do the same things. The of Seneca is pertinent; The sentence (...) have no
authority, where he that judges is to be condemned. And elsewhere, The respect
of our selves will make us more moderate, if we consult our selves, whether we
also have not committed the like Pertinet huc and Ambrosi locus sermon. 20. in
Psalm. Beali immac. item Cassiodori 6. 21.
. Ambrose in the Apology of David: Whosoever will judge of another, in him
judge of himself first; neither let him condemn lesser faults in another, when
himself has committed greater.

LXXX. Of the end of punishment
NOcent persons are not injurd if they are punished: yet does it not thence
follow that always they must be punished. Nor is it true. For, both God and and
men forgive many things to many nocent ones, and are praised for it. Famous is
that saying of Plato, which Seneca turns, to this effect: No wise Plato de
Leg. Sen. de clem.
man inflicteth punishment, because a fault is done but that it may be done no
more. For things past cannot be revoked: the future are prohibited. Again, We
will not hurt a man, because he has offended, but that he may not offend; nor
shall punishment ever be referred to what is past, but what is to come: for it
is not anger but caution. Diodotus in Thucydides speaking of the Mitileneans to
the Athenians, says, Although I grant them to have dealt very unjustly, yet I
will not yield they should be slain, except it be expedient. This is true of
men punishing: for one man is so bound unto another by consanguinity, that he
ought not hurt him, without it be for the obtaining of some good Cassiodor. de
Amicit. Quod si manus una casu aliquo forte laedat alteram, illa quae laesa est
non repercutit, nec se erigit in vindictam.
. In God it is otherwise, to whom Plato Gorgia.
ill extends his sayings. For the actions of God may be grounded on the right
of his supreme dominion, especially where the special merit of man is also
found, though they propose unto themselves no end beside themselves: and so
some Hebrews expound that apposite place of Solomon, in this sense, God has
Moses Maim. in directore dubitantium l. 2. c. 13. and Rab. Iram. ad Prove. 16. 4.
made all things for themselves, even the wicked for the evil day: that is,
even then when he punishes the wicked, he does it for no other end, but that
he may punish. Yet, if we follow the more received interpretation, 'twill be
all one: that God may be said to have made all things for himself: that is, by
the right of his sovereignty and perfection seeking or respecting nothing
beside himself: as God is said to be of himself, because he is not (...).
of any. Certainly, that the punishments of some very wretched persons are
exacted by God, not for any thing else, the holy writ testifies, where we read,
that Deuteronomy. 28. 63. Es. 1. 24. Prove. 1. 26.
he takes pleasure in their calamity, that he laugheth and mocketh at wicked
men. And moreover, the last Judgment, after which no Amendment is expected, and
also some secret punishments in this life, as obduration, evince it to be true,
that we say against Plato. Never^ man, when he punishes man, tha^ by nature
equal to him, ought to (...) somewhat Th. 2. 2. q. 108. Silv. in verb. vindicta.
to himself. And this is that which the Schoolmen say, the mind of the punisher
ought not acquiesce in the evil of any one. Yea, before them Plato in his
Gorgias says, They that punish any one with death, or exile, or mulct, do will
it, not simply, but for some good end. And Seneca: We must come to vengeance,
Sen. lib. 2. de ira. c. 32. Idem, c. 22. Exsequar quia oportet, non quia dolet.
Arist. 7. de repub. c. 13.
not as if it were sweet to revenge, but prefitable. And Aristotle says, Some
things are honest simply, some upon necessity, and gives an example of the
later in the exaction of punishment.

LXXXI. In what sense Revenge is naturally unlawful.
WHerefore that which is said, that the pain Mimus: Laeso doloris remedium
inimici dolor. Cicero (...) a^ poena mitigari. Idem dicit Plutarchu^ ex
Simonide.
of the injurd person is cased by revenge or punishment of the offender, agrees
indeed with that nature which man has common with beasts Inde ista Homcrica:
-- illum sera prenderat ira item:
Esserat ipse animum magnum sibi pectore in allo.

, For, anger is, as in beasts, so in man, as Eustathius rightly defines it, a
fervor Inde (...) bilem extinguere,
of the blood about the heart from an appetite of revenge: which appetite is of
it self so void of reason, that it is often carried against those things that
did no hurt, as, against the young ones of the beast thath has offended, or,
against things senseless Sen. de ira l. 2. c. 26. His irasci quam stultum est,
quae iram nostram nec meruerunt, nec sentiunt. Brasiliani, feri homines, de
ferro, ita ut de homine, se vindicant.
, as against a stone thrown at a dog. But such an appetite considered in it
self agrees not to the rational part, whose office it is to command the
affections Vide quae in hanc rem Seneca de ira l. 1. cap. 5.
: and therefore not to the Law of Nature, because that is the dictate of the
rational and social Nature, as such. Now, reason dictates, man must do nothing
to hurt another man, unless it have some good end. And in the pain of the enemy
alone, so nakedly considered, there is no good but false and imaginary: as in
superfluous riches, and many other things of like sort. In this sense, not only
Christian Doctors, but Philosophers too Plato Gorgia. vide de eo Theodoretum
lib. 20. curationis.
, condemn revenge in men. Seneca Lib. 2. de ira. cap. 32.
: Revenge is an inhuman word, received indeed for just, but differs from
contumely in order only: He that returns pain, offends, only he has some
excuse. Yea, if we believe Maximus Tyrius, He is more unjust, who revengeth
himself, than he, who gave the first hurt. Musonius says, To devise how one
may bite him that bites, and hurt him that hurts, is the part of a beast, non
of a man. In Plutarch Dion, he that turned Plato's wisdom to civil acts:
Revenge, by the judgment of Law, is esteemed more just than the offered injury:
but if Nature judge, it springs out of the same disease of mind. Wherefore it
is repugnant to the nature of man, dealing with man, to be satiated with
another pain, as it is pain. And by consequence, the less rational any man is,
the more revengeful. Juvenal. Sat. 13.

Revenge than life it self's a greater good. Sir R. S.

Thus fools Seneca de ira l. 1. 3. Atqui iracundissimi infantes senesque and
agri sunt, and invalidum omne natura querulum est.
at no cause, or at toys, take fire;
The least occasion serves to blow up ire.
Chrysippus his opinion was not such,
Mild natured Thales would not say thus much;
The good old man, that did a neighbor live
To sweet Hymettus, would not fettered, give
Part of that hemlock in his cup infused,
Even to the slave by whom he was accused.
Happy Philosophy! that by degrees
Kills vices first, then souls from error frees.
For to rejoice, when those we hate do smart,
Argues a feeble and a narrow heart:
Which instantly you may from hence collect,
That women Terent. Hecyra. Pueri inter sese quam pro levibus noxiis iras
gerunt.
Quapropter? quia enim qui eos gubernat animus infirmum gerunt.
Itidem mulieres sunt ferme ut pueri, levi sententia.

most of all Revenge affect.
In the same sense Lactantius: Unlearned and unwise men, if at any time they
receive injury, are drawn by a blind and unreasonable fury, and labor to repay
the like to those that offend them. It is plain then, that man is not rightly
punished by man, only for the punishment sake. What utilities make the
punishment right, let us now see.

LXXXII. The utility of punishment is threefold.
HEre is pertinent that partition of punishments, which Plato has in his
Gorgias, and Taurus the Philosopher upon that place, whose words are rehearsed
by Gellius. For those partitions are taken from the end, but that, when Plato
had set down two ends Amendment and Example, Taurus adds a third (...) Tria
haec (...), emendationem, satisfactionem, exemplum, etiam Chrysoft. ponit in 1.
ad Cor. 11.
, which Clemens of Alexandria defines, a retribution of evil, which is referred
to the profit of the exactor. Aristotle Rhet. 1. c. 10.
, who omitting exemplary punishments, puts down this species Plutarchus quoque
eam non omisit, cum dixit: Quae facinus statim subsequuntur poenae non modo in
posterum inhibene delinquendi audaciam, sed and injuria affectos maxim
consolantur.
only, with amendment, says it is used, for the exactors sake, that he may be
satisfied. And this is properly that which the same Aristotle referrs to the
justice, which he calls Commutative. But these things are to be examined more
narrowly. We will therefore say, that in punishments is respected either the
utility of him that has offended, or of him against whose interest the offense
was, or of any other indistinctly. To the first of these ends belongs the
punishment called by Philosophers, sometime (...), sometime (...), sometime
(...): Paulus the Lawyer calls it punishment for emendation, Plato to make one
wise, Plutarch a medicine of the mind, having this effect to make one better by
way of Physic, which works by Contraries. For because all action, expecially
deliberate and frequent, bege^s a certain proclivity to the like, which after
growth is called a habit; therefore with all speed vices are to be deprived of
their allurement: and this cannot be better done, than by embittering their
sweetness with some pain Sen. de ira l. 5. Quemadmodum quaedam hostilia
detorta, ut corrigamus, adurimus, and adactis cuneis, non ut frangamus, sed ut
explicemus elidimus: sic ingentia vitia prava, dolor corporis animique
corrigimus. Annal. 3.
following. The Platonists in Apuleius: It is worse than any punishment, if the
guilty escape unpunished: and in Tacitus we read, The corrupted and corrupting
mind, sick and instam'd, is to be restrained and cooled with remedies as
vehement, as the lusts wherewith it burns.

LXXXIII. Of punishing a delinquent for his own benefit.
PUnishment for this end is by nature lawful for any one that is of good
judgment and not obnoxious to the same or equal vices, as appears by that
castigation which is by words Plautus Trin. Amicum castigare ob meritam noxiam,
Immune est facinus, verum in aetate utile.
. but in stripes and other punishments that contein somewhat of coaction, the
difference between persons that may, or may not, Vide August. Enchlr. c. 72.
is not made by nature (nor could it be made, only reason peculiarly commends
to parents the use of that right over their Children by the neerness of
affection) but by Laws, which for the avoiding of contention, have restrained
that common propinquity of mankind to the next Relations, as may be seen, both
elsewhere, and in Justinians Code (tit. de emendatione propinquorum.) Whither
perteins also that of Xenophon to his Soldiers: If I have beaten any one for
his good, I confess I owe such a punishment, as parents do to their Children,
Masters to their Scholars; And Physicians too, for their patients recovery,
sear and cut. Lactantius lib. 6. Jubet Deus etc. God commands us always to have
our hand over our inferiors, to chastise them daily for their offenses, lest
by our unprofitable love and too much indulgence, they be ill bred and
nourished for vice. But this kind of punishment cannot extend unto death,
except reductively, as negations are reduced to the opposite things. For as
Christ said, it had been better for some, that is, not so bad, if Mar. 14. 21.
they had never been, so to incurable natures it is better, that is, less evil,
to die than to live, when it is certain, they will become worse by living.
Seneca speaks of De ira.
such, when he says, To perish is sometime for the good of those that perish
Jambl. Quomodo suppurat^ melius est uri quam sic manner, ita improbo mori quam
vivere.
Such a one Plutarch says, is hurtful indeed to others, but most of all to
himself. And Galen, when he had said men are punished with death, first that
living they may not hurt, next that others by fear of punishment may be
deterred, adds, And thirdly, it is expedient for themselves to dye, being so
sick and corrupted in their mind, that they cannot be restored to health. Some
think, these are they whom John the Apostle says do sin to death: but 1 John
5. 16.
because the arguments hereof are fallacious, we are taught by charity to have
no man for deplored, and past hope; so that punishment for this end can have
place but very seldom.

LXXXV. Of punishment for his profit who was offended. And of revenge by the
Law of Nations.
THe Etiam hujus rei in feris imago quaedam. Leo in adulterae poenam co^surgit.
Plin. Hist. nac. 8. 16.
utility of him, against whose interest the fault was made, is herein placed,
that he suffer the like no more, neither from the same nor others. Gellius out
of Taurus describes it thus: When the dignity or authority of him that is
wronged is to be maintaind, lest pretermission of the penalty breed contempt of
him, and diminish his respect. What is here said of authority wronged, is to be
understood of every ones liberty or other right, wherein he is injured. In
Tacitus we read, He should provide for his security by a just revenge. That the
injured party may not suffer wrong from the same hand, three ways may be taken:
first, by destroying the person that has offended; secondly, by weaking his
force that he may not be able to do hurt; and lastly, if he be taught by his
own evil to do so no more, which is the same with emendation, whereof we spoke
even now. That the injured party may not be hurt by others, is effected, not by
every punishment, but that which is open, conspicuous and exemplary. If then,
to these ends, and within the bounds of equity, vindication be directed, though
private, if we respect the bare Law of Nature, abstract from Laws Divine and
Human, and from all not necessary accidents to the thing, it is not unlawful;
whether it be made by him that is wronged, or by another, seeing it is
consentaneous to nature that man should receive aid from man. And in this sense
may be admitted, that Cicero, having said, the Law of Nature is that which
comes not from De Invent. 2.
opinion but innate virtue, among the examples of it places Vindication, which
he opposerh to Favor: and that none might doubt how much he would have to be
understood by that name, he defines Vindication, Whereby by defending or
revenging we keep off force and contumely from us, and ours, who ought to be
dear unto us; and whereby we punish offenses Mithridates apud Justinum lib. 38
Adversus latronem, st nequeant pro salute, pro ultione tamen sua, omnes ferrum
stringere. Hoc ipsum (...) vocat in vita Arati Plutarchus. Apud eundem Romulus
de Tatio occiso a Laurencibus: Caedem caede pensatam. Idem Plut. de
Mantinensibus male tractatis ab Achaeis: Et haec quidem ultionis ^quitatem in
(...) hahebant. Belisarius apud Procopium Vandalic. 1. Natu^alis enim est laesi
hominis in eum qui vim intulit inimicitia.
. By this natural right Samson defending himself against the Philistines, says,
He should be guiltless, if he did return evil for evil to them; and after a
slaug^ter made, He defends his doing by the same reason, saying, he had served
them, as they would have served him. The Pla^ans in Thucydides; Justly have we
taken revenge upon them, by the Law received among all men, allowing recompense
to enemies. It is a common Law among men, says Orat. cont. Aristocrat.
Demosthenes, that we may be revenged of him that takes our goods by violence.
And Iugurtha in Sallust, when he had said, Adherb^ lay in wait against his
life, adds, the people of Rome would do tha^ which is n^ good nor right, if
they hindered him from the right of Nations, that is, from re^nge. Orat. pro
quatuor.
Aristides the Orator sait^ (...), and Authors of Laws, and Proverbs and
Orators, and all men (...) approve (...) this; That revenge sho^a be (...) of
(...) that have offerdinjury. The Maccabees are praised by De offic. l. 1. c.
40. Epist. 29. Eundem vide orat. contra Symmachum. Vide Joseph. Antiqu. 13. 1.
de vindicata Johannis morte.
Ambrose for rev^ging the death of their innocent brethren, even on the
Sabbath. The same Father disputing against the Jews making grievous complaint
that their Church was fired by the Christians, says, should I plead the Law of
Nations, I might show how many Churches the Jews set on fire in the time of
Julian' s Empire; where he calls it the Law of Nations, to render like for like
Sic and Live. lib. 1. Cum Laurentes jure gentium agerent. Nec aliter apud
Tacitum Civilis: Egregium pretium laboris cepi necem sratris and vincula mea,
and saevissimas hujus exercitus voces, quibus ad supplicium petitus jure
gentium poe^as reposco. Hist. 4.
. But because in our and our friends affairs we are corrupted by affection,
therefore many families came together into one place, judges were appointed,
and power was given to these alone to avenge the injurd, the liberty which
nature had indulged being taken away from others Lucretius: Acrius ex ira quod
enim se quisque parabat ulcisci, quam nunc conc^ssum est legibus aequis, Hanc
ob rem est homines pertaesum vi colere aequum.
. Demosthenes: It was decrecd, justice should be done, in all these in^uries,
according to the Laws, and not according to every ones lust Tindareus adversus
Orest. apud Eurip. Irata si uxor conjugem occidet suum, Hanc ultor ipse filius
tradet neci, Et rursus illo genitus hanc caedem nova Caede expiabit, sine quo
stabunt mala? Aristid. orat. de pace. Quis enim Graecorum erit reliquus si
propter eos qui jamperiere, superstites alli perpetuo idem malorum serent. L.
nulli C. de Jud. Cassiod. ep. 1. l. 4.
and pleasure. Quintilian: The compensation of injury is not only against Law,
but peace. For there is the Law, the Court, the judge, unless one be ashamed to
seek a remedy by Law. The Emperors Honorius and Theodosius: Therefore are
judgments in force, and the public Laws ordained for the protection of men,
that none may take the liberty to revenge himself. King Theodoricus: Hence was
the sacred reverence of Laws found out, that nothing might be done by violent
hands, nothing by the impulse of a private spirit. Howbe it, the old natural
liberty remains, first (...) places where are no judgments, as on the Sea.
Whither perhaps may be referrd that Vell. Pat. lib. 2. and Plut. in Caes.
act of C. Caesar: who being yet a private man pursued the Pirates, by whom he
had been taken, with such a navy as he could provide in have, and partly
chased, partly sunk their ships: and, when the Proconsul neglected to do
justice upon the captives, himself returning to Sea hanged them up. The same
will have place in deserts, or where they live like the Nomades. So among the
Umbrici An umbros in Italia significatos volunt? Apud Afrorum multos idem moris
fuisse testis Leo Afer lib. 2.
, Apud Stob. de Legibus.
Nicolaus D^mascenus relates, every one was his own Avenger: which also is done
done at this day among the Moscht, some time after an address to the judge. Nor
had Duels and single Combats any other original, which before Christianity were
used by the German Nations Gotthos suos corrigens Rex Theodericus apud
Cassiodorum 3. 23. Remove consuetudiues abominanter inolitas, verbis ibi potius
non armis res iractetur. and 24. Car ad monomachiam recurritis? quid opus est
homini lingua, si causam manus agit armata? Trachoni^is in Orient: Mos omnibus
modis ultionem sumere de propinquorum homicldis. Sen. 1. de Clementia. 203.
, and in some places are not yet enough disused. Therefore the Germans, in
Velleius Paterculus, wonder, when they beheld the form of the Roman
Jurisdiction that they ended injuries by justice, that things wont to be
decided by arms were determined by Law. The Hebrew Law permits the Kinsman of
one slain to kill the manslayer without the places of refuge: and the Hebrew
interpreters do rightly note, that such a recompense, for the dead, may be
required by force; for one self, as in a wound, not unless by the judge;
because, moderation is more difficult where a man's own pain is urgent. A like
custom of privately revenging slaughter was among the most ancient Greeks, as
appears by Theoclymenes Odiss. 6.
words in Homer. But most frequent are the examples hereof amongst them that
have not any common judge. Hence are just wars desined to be those that revenge
L. 2. q. 10. super Joh.
injuries, as Austin says; and Plato approves of force of arms, until they L.
de rep. 12.
that are in fault be compelled to give satisfaction to the innocent and
wronged party.

LXXXVI. The end of punishment is also the profit of All.
THe utility of all sorts, which was the third end, has the same parts with
that which perteins to the wronged person. For, either this is the intent, that
he who has wronged one, may not wrong others (which is brought to pass by
destroying him, or by weakening him, or by binding him so that he may not be
able to hurt, or by amending him:) or, lest others encouraged by his impunity
be troublesome Plin. l. 8. c. 16.
to any other persons, which end is obtained Polybius Leones ob hominum
appetitum crucisixos vidit, quia coeteri metu poenae similis absterrcrentur
eadem noxa.
by conspicuous punishments; which the Greeks call (...), the Latins exempla:
which are therefore used, that the punishment of one may be the fear of many:
that by the kind of punishment others may be deterred, as the Quoniam C. ad L.
Flaviam. l. 1. C. ad L. Jul. rep.
Laws speak: that others may beware and fear, as Demosthenes. The power also
of this Law is in every man's hand naturally. S^ Plutarch Praec. pol. Idem
Pelopida; Prima eademque antiquissima lex eum qui servare potest ei qui salute
opus habet naturaliter magistratum designat. Et Philopomene: Suscepit cives
suos, qui neque legum neque suffragiorunt tempus expectaverant: sed ipsum
sequebantur naturae lege, quae semper po tiorem vult imperare deterioribus.
Similia apud cum habes sine vitae F. Flaminii. Scriptor de causis corrupti
eloqu. de oratoribus agens: Hi ne privati quietem sine potestate (...) cum and
populum and Scnalum consilio and auctoritate regerent. Chrysostom 2. ad Cor. 7.
13 de Mose: Etiam antequam manu populum edu^, dux erat ipsis sactis. Valde
igitur stul e Hebraeus ille ei dixit, Q^ constituit nobis principem ac judicem?
quid dicis? Facta vides, and (...) nomine sacis controversiam? velut si quis
medicum videat optime suo^ tem ac sic opitulantem aegro corporis membro, deinde
ei dicat, Quia (...) constituit medicum, quis sacare praecepit? Ars, mi bone
vir, and (...) tuus: sic and Mosem sua peritia talem fecit. Nam and imperare
non dignitas tantum est, sed and ars, and quidem omnium artium sublim (...).
Tractat idem scriptor hoc ipsum argumentum ad Ephesians. 3. in fine Tua, inquit,
injustitia, tuaseritas me constituit Principem and Judicem. Euripides Iphigenia
in Aulide: Mente qui prudente pollit, (...) magistratum gerit.
says, a good man is by nature designd a Magistrate, and that perpetual: For
by the very Law of Nature he is Prince that does just things. So Tully proves
by the example of Nasica, that a wise man never is a private man; and Horace
calls Lollius Consul not of one year; Which sayings are nevertheless to be
understood in a Commonwealth, so far as the Laws thereof do bear. Of this
natural right Democritus; He that (...) a Thief or a Robber any way, either by
his own strength, or by command, or by suffrage, is innocent. And Seneca: When
I shall command a malefactors head to be cut off, I will be of the same mind
and countenance, as when I smite Serpents Lib. 2. de ira.
and venomous creatures Cl. Neap. a pud Porphyrium l. 1. de non esu anim.
Serpentem and Scorpium, etiam si ipsi ab iis non impetamur, occidimus, ne cui
noceant alii, and vindictam hanc praestamus humano generi. Pythagoras apud
Ovidium Metam. 15. -- Nostrumque petentia lethum corpora Missa neci sale va
pietate fatemur.
. But, whereas both the inquisition of the fact often requires great diligence,
and the estimation of the penalty, much of wisdom and equity, lest, while
every one presumed too much of himself, others not giving place, contentions
should arise, therefore it pleased the just communities of men to make choice
of the best and wisest; such as they esteemed so, or hoped would prove so. The
same Democritus: The Laws would not have hindered every one to live after his
own pleasure, unless one had gone about to offend another. For envy lays a
ground for sedition. But, as above we said of revenge, so in this exemplary
punishment, some footsteps and relics of the old right do yet remain, in
those places, and among those persons, which are not under certain
Jurisdictions; and moreover in some excepted cases. So, by the custems of the
Hebrews, an Hebrew falling away from Deuteronomy. 13. 9. Add locum Joseph. 12. 8.
Mosem Maim. au 13. artic. and dirctoris lib. 3. c. 41.
God and his Law, or misleading any to false worship, might presently be slain
by any man. The Hebrews call it the judgment of zeal, which, they say, was
exercised first by Phineas Numb. 25. vid. 1. Macc. 2. 24, 26. Macc. 2.
, and thence grew into a custom. Lo Mattathias killed a certain Jew, polluting
himself with Greekish rites. So three hundred other Jews were slain by their
Contrymen, as is related in the book commonly called the third of the
Maccabees. Nor was Stephen Act. 6. 57. Act. 23. 13.
stoned upon other pretense, or conspiracy made against Paul: and many other
examples of like sort are extant both in Philo Cujus and hoc in libro de
sacrificantibus: Puniendus talis ut host is publicus omnium, spreta qualio
cunque cum eo necessitudine, ejusque suasiones vulgandae omnibus pietatem
amantibus, ut sine mora accurrant undique ad expetendum de viro improbo
supplicium, firm crede^ sanctam esse rem ejusmodi hominis intersiciendi
appetitum. Et alter locus non minus insignis circa finem de Monarchia.
, and in Josephus. Moreover among many people, both to Masters over their
servants, and Parents over their children, remained a full right of punishing
them, even to death. So at Sparta, the Ephori might put a Citizen to death
without judgment. Thus by what we have said, may be understood what the right
of Nature is touching punishments, and how far it has remained.

LXXXVII. What the Evangelical Law has constituted about this matter.
NOw must we consider, whether the Evangelical Law has more narrowly
circumscribed that Liberty. Surely, as we have elsewhere spoken, it is no
wonder, that some things, which by nature and the Civil Laws are Lawful, are
forbidden by Divine Law, and that most perfect, and promising a reward above
human nature; to the attaining whereof, not undeservedly are required virtues
that exceed the mere precepts of Nature. Castigations Servrum filiorumque
peccata non coercere, peccatum est. Lactant. de ira Dei cap. 18. ubi plura ad
hane rem.
, which do leave neither infamy nor permanent loss, and are necessary in
respect of age or other quality, if they come from those hands, which are
permitted by human Laws to inflict them, (namely, Parents, Tutors, Masters and
Teachers) have nothing repugnant to the Evangelical Precepts, as we may
sufficiently conceive by the nature of the thing it self. For these are
remedies for the mind, not less innocent than medicines ungrateful to the
sense. Of revenge we must have another opinion. For, as it only exsatiats the
mind of the offended person, it is so far from agreement with the Gospel, that,
as we have showed before, it is even naturally unlawful. But the Hebrew Law not
only forbids hatred to be kept against the neighbor, that is, Levit. 19. 17.
one of the same nation, but also commands certain common benefits to be Exodus
23. 4, 5.
conferrd upon such enemies. Wherefore, the name of neighbor being extended by
the Gospel to all men, it is manifest here is required of us, not only that we
hurt not our enemies, but that we do them good: which is also plainly commanded
Matthew. 5. 44. Yet the Law permitted the Hebrews to revenge greater injuries,
not with the hand, but by address unto the Judge. But Christ does not permit
the same to us, as appears by that opposition, Ye have heard it has been said,
An eye for an eye: and after: But I say unto you. For although the words that
follow, properly speak of repelling in jury, (and restrain this license too, at
least in some measure) yet are they to be conceived much more to disallow of
revenge, because they reject the old permission as agreeing to a more Oculum
pro oculo, quae, si dici potest, injustorum justitia est. Augustine. in expos.
Psalm. 108. citatus C. sed differentiae 23. quaest. 3.
imperfect time; n^, that just revenge is unlawful, but because patience is
preferred before it, as it is in the Constitutions of Clement. l. 7. c. 23.
Whereof Tertullian Advers. Marcion. 4. Idem lib. de patient. Christus gratiam
legi superducens ampliandae adimplendaeque legi adjutricem suam patientiam
praesecit, quod ea sola ad justitiae doctrinam retro defuisset.
says, Christ plainly teaches a new kind of patience, forbidding even that
recompense of injury, which was permitted by the Creator, requiring an eye for
an eye, and a tooth for a tooth: (...) the contrary He will have the other
check also to be offered, and the cloak to be yielded after the coat. Plainly
has Christ added these as meet supplements to the discipline of the Creator,
etc. Tertullian was of opinion, that retaliation of injuries was forbidden, not
Christians only, but that even to the Hebrews it was not permitted, as a thing
without fault, but for the avoiding of a greater evil. Which is true, no doubt,
of such a retaliation that proceeds from hatred, as appears by our former
discourse. For, that this is disallowed even by them who among the Hebrews
excelled in wisdom, and regarded not the words only but the purpose of the
Law, is manifest out of Philo; in whom the Alexandrian Jews, upon the calamity
of Flaccus, the Jews oppressor, speak thus: We are not delighted, Sir, with the
revenge upon our enemy; for we have learned out of our holy Laws Vide Origenem
adversus Celsum.
to take pity on men. And hither it perteins, that Christ exacteth of us
indistinctly, to forgive all that have trespassed against us; that is, Matthew.
6. 14, 15.
neither to procure nor to wish evil to them upon sense of our evil; for, to
speak with Claudian,

Who rights himself does wrong, in that he Claud. -- ferus est, Legumque
videtur Vindictam praestare sibi.
draws
Unto himself the office of the Laws.
For which reason Lactantius mentioning that saying of Cicero; It is the first
Cicero de offic. Justitiae primum munus est, ne cui noceat, nisi lacessitus
injuria.
part of Justice to hurt none, except provoked by injury, says, A good
sentence is spoiled by adding two words: and Ambrose says, the same sentence
of Cicero is without the authority of the Gospel. But what shall we say of
revenge, not as it respects the time past, but as it provideth for the
future? Surely this also Christ would have to be remitted: first, if lie Vide
Mosem Maim. citatum ab erudissimo Constantino lib. de damno dato, cap. 3. s. 7.
that has trespassed against us give probable testimonies of a penitent mind
Ephesians. 4. 12. Col. 3. 13. Lu. 17. 3.
. In which places a certain more plenary remission is spoken of, such as
restores the offender to the right of former friendship: whence it follows,
that nothing ought to be exacted of him in the name of a punishment. Moreover,
though signs of such repentance be wanting, that a damage, not too grievous, is
to be slighted, Christ has taught by the Precept of letting go the coat. Yea
and Plato said, evil is not to be returned, Alb^it so^ greater evil be
imminent, and must be sufferd; and Maximus Tyrius has word^ of the like sense.
Musonius said, He would not have an action against any one for contumely
received (such as Christ signifies by a blow on the cheek) no^ would he
persuade any other to concerd about it: for such things are much bett^ passed
by, and forgiven. But if the pu^ting it up draws much danger with it, we ought
to be content with that caution which has least incommodity. For, as Josephus
and other Hebrew Doctors note, the Hebrews themselves had not common use of
retaliation, but the offended party, beside his charges, of which a distinct
Law is extant Exodus 21. 19. (this is simple Lex Wisigotth. 6. 13.
restitution containing nothing penal) was wont to receive, for retaliation, a
pecuniary Vide Constantinum d. c. 8. s. 1. Lib. 20. c. 1.
mulct: which was also done at Rome, as Favorinus notes in Gellius. So Joseph
the foster-father of our Lord Jesus, when he believed his wife had been
unchaste, chose rather to free himself by Aug. l. 2. de adulterinis conjug. Si
autem (quod verius dicitur) non licet homini Christiano adulteram conjugem
occidere, sed tantum dimitte^e.
divorce, than to make her an example: and he is said to have done it, because
he was a just man, that is, honest and gentle. Upon which place Ambrose says,
the person of a just man is not only abhorrent from the atrocity of revenge,
but a verse also from the severity Gail. de pace pub. 8. 3. Lib. 6. c. 10.
of accusation. So Lactantius had said before: Neither may a just man accuse
any one of a capital crime. Justin, of the accusers Justinus, Nolumus, ait, eos
puniri qui in nos calumniantur. Sufficit illis sua pravitas, and rerum bonarum
ignorantia. Ejusdem est: Ne minimum quidem ulcisci quemquam volentes, ut novus
legis canditor praecipit.
of Christians, says; We would not have them punished, who cast calumnies upon
us. Sufficient to them is their own wickedness, and their ignorance of good
things. There remain those punishments which provide not for private but
public good; partly by taking out of the way or restraining the nocent person,
that he may not hurt; partly by deterring others with the severity of the
example: That such punishments are not taken away by Christ we have proved
elsewhere by a most certain argument: because, when he gave his precepts, he
testified that he destroyed not any tittle of the Law. Now, the Law of Moses,
which ought to stand in these things, as long as the Commonwealth, rigidly
commanded magistrates, to punish Exodus 21. 14. Number. 33. 14, 37. Deuteronomy. 29. 13.
homicides and certain other crimes. But, if Christ's Precepts might consist
with the Law of Moses, as it did inflict even capital Pharisaeorum circa poenas
(...) praedicat Josephus. Hinc tot Legum ad publlcas paenas pertinentium
exceptiones, and illud, ut ubi omnino mors inferenda est, infetatur quam
levissime; quod est in Talmude titulo Ketuboth.
punishments, they may also consist with human Laws Augustinus quast. Evangel.
lib. 1. qu. 10.
, which, in this part, do imitate the Divine?

LXXXVIII. An Objection taken from Gods mercy in the Gospel, answered.
SOme, to defend the contrary opinion allege the very great lenity of God^ the
new Covenant, which is therefore: be imitated by men, even Magistrates (...) as
the Vicars of God. This we yield (...) some sort true, but not so far as they
would extend it. For, the great mercy of God manifested in the new Covenant
especially regards sins against the Primitive Act. 17. 36. Romans 2. 25. Act.
13. 38.
Law, or also committed against the Law of Moses, before the knowledge (...)
the Gospel was received. For, the (...) committed after, especially if
accompanied with contumacy, have a comminat^ of judgment far more severe Heb.
2. 23. 4. 10. 29. Matthew. 5. 21, 22, 28.
, than the which was ordained by Moses. Nor only Chrysostomus idem dicit tum in
ora^ione ad Patrem fidelem, tum secunda de jejunio.
in the life to come, but in this life too does God often show his wrath again
such offenses, 1 Cor. 11. 30. And p^ don of these crimes is not usually obtain^
unless man himself do as it were ex^ punishment of himself Peccator ante veniam
d^stere se debet. Tertull. de p^nit. Ambr in Psalm. 37. Chrysostom. in 1. Cor.
hom. 28. Add 2. Cor. 7. 9, and 10.
, 1 Cor. 11. 3. (...) a certain grievous sorrow and afflicting (...) his soul,
2 Cor. 2. 27. The same objectors urge, that at least to the penitents to be
granted impunity. But, to omit that men can hardly be certain when (...)
pentance is sincere; and, that every (...) would escape unpunished, if it were
sufficient in any manner to make profession of repentance; God himself does not
always remit all punishment to the penitent, as appears even by David's example.
Wherefore, as God might remit the penalty of the Law, that is, violent or
otherwise immature death, and yet inflict no small evils upon the offender: so
now also Hieronym. in c. 1. in Naum. Ag^th. l. 5. ex Platone. Synes. ep. 44.
may he remit the punishment of eternal death, and in the mean time, either
himself punish the sinner with immature death, or be willing he should be so
punished by the magistrate.

LXXXIX. Another objection answered, about precision of repentance.
AGain, others find fault, that together with life, space of repentance is also
cut ost. But these men are not ignorant, that pious Magistrates have great care
hereof, and appoint not any one to to be executed, without some time allowed,
wherein he may acknowledge his sins, and seriously detest them. Which kind of
repentance Hieronym. ad Damas. cit. in c. importuna De paenit. Did. 1.
, though works, intercluded by death, follow not, may be accepted by God, as is
proved by the example of the Thief crucified with Christ. If it be said, a
longer life might be profitable to a more serious repentance and amendment; it
may be answered, Men are found sometimes such, to whom that of Seneca Cujus and
hoc est de Benef. 7. 10. Ingeniu talibus vitae exitus remedium est; optimumque
est abire ei, qui ad se nunquam rediturus est.
may be spoken justly: We will do you all the good that can now be done you,
(...) put you to death Lib. 1. de ira c. 16. c. 15.
. And that also of the same Author; There is but one way f^ them to cease to be
evil, that is, to ce^ to be. Likewise said Eusebius the Philosopher. This then,
beside what has been said in the beginning of our work, be answered to them,
who would have either all, or capital punishments, without any exception,
forbidden Christians: contrary to the Apostles doctrine, who having included in
the regal office the use of the sword, as the exercise of Divine revenge, in
another place exhorts to pray, that Kings may be made Christians, and, as
Kings, be a protection to the innocent. This cannot be obtained (such is the
improbity of a great part of men, even after the propagation of the Gospel;)
unless the boldness of some be repressed by the death of others: and thus too,
among so many punishments and executions of the guilty, innocence is hardly
enough secured. Nevertheless, it is not amiss, to propose to the imitation of
Christian Rulers, at least in some part, the example of Sabacon Yea, and of the
Romans, great part, of whom no man, after the Porcian Law, could be put to
death or beaten, except a Traitor, or one condemned by the people.
King of Egypt, for his piety very famous, by whom Capital punishments, with
most happy success, were commuted for tasks, and malefactors condemned to work,
as Diodorus relates: and Strabo says, there are some Nations near Caucasus,
among whom the greatest offenders received not the sentence of death. Lib. 1
Lib. 11. Lib. 12. 1.
Nor is that of Quintilian to be despised, No man will doubt, but if wicked men
may by any means be recalled unto a right mind, as sometimes it is known they
may, it is better for the Commonwealth to save, than to destroy them. Balsamon
notes, that the Roman Laws, which imposed penalty of death, were most of them
changed, by the later Emperors being Christian Vide apud Nicaetum lib. 1.
juramentum Isaaci Angeli Idem Joannis Comneni Imperium sine morte cujusquam
fuisse ait. Vide de Zenone Malchum; and Augugustini epist. 158. and 159. ad
Marcellinum Comitem. Et Chrysostom. 5. adv. Judaeos, ubi de Caini paena.
, into other punishments Ad opera maxim. Augustine. epist. 160. Alicui utili
operi integra eorum membra inserviant. Vide and Nectarii epist. ad Augustine.
quae est 201.
; to the end, a deeper impression of repentance might be made upon condemned
persons, and the continuance of the punishment might serve the more for example.

XC. Three Inferences from the former Doctrine.
OUt of these things last spoken, it may be collected how unsafe it is for a
private Christian, whether for his own, or for the public good, to take
punishment of any wicked man, especially capital, though we have said it is
sometimes permitted by the Law of Nations. Whence the manner of those people is
to be commended, amongst whom such as go to Sea have commission from the
public Power, to pursue Pirates, if they find any; that they may use the
occasion given, not as by their own adventure, be publicly commanded. Not
unlike (...) this, is another custom received in many places, that unto
criminal accusations Chrysostom. de Paenitentia 8. Optimum itaque, ut dixi, etiam
privatas lites antervertere benignis transactionibus, ut amicum dirigas ad id
quod lites sibi propos^tum habent: publicorum autem judiciorum accusationes,
non dicam transigendo abrumpere, sed nunquam tas incipere.
are admitted, not all that please, but certain men, upon whom, by public
authority, that office is imposed: that no man may do any thing at all tending
to the shedding of another blood, but by the necessity of his office. Hither
pertei^ the canon of the Eliberan Synod: If any believer turn informer, and by
his accusation any be proscribed or put to de^h, Our decree is, that he shall
not, no (...) the end, receive Communion. Lastly, this also is understood by
what has been said, that a man truly Christian is not well advised, nor does
it become him, to affect and thrust himself into public Offices An sapienti
capessenda sit respublica, vide Senecam de otio Sapientis.
that have judgment of blood, and think and profess it fit, that power of life
and death over his fellows should be committed to him, as most excellent (...)
all, and as it were a God among men. For certainly, what Christ admonishes,
that it is dangerous to judge of others, because such judgment as we give, must
we Matthew. 7. 1. (...)
in like cases expect from God, is not impertinent in this place.

XCI. Whether human Laws that permit the killing of some men, give the killers
a true right before God, or only impunity among men.
THis is a noble question, and Covarruvias Covar. 4. decr. 12. c. 7. n. 8.
F^rt. tract. de ust. fine legum, illat 11. Vasq. lib. 4. contr. illust. cap. 8.
and Fortunius answer, that such Laws give only impunity: whose opinion is so
displeasing to Ferdinandus Vasquius, that he calls it an ungodly opinion. No
doubt, as we have said elsewhere, the Law may do both, in certain cases; but,
whether it will or no, is to be understood partly by the words, partly by the
matter of the Law. For, if the Law give indulgence to passion, it takes away
human punishment, not the fault, as in case a husband kill his Adulterous Wife,
or the Adulterer Vide August. de Civitate Dei citatum C. quicunque, causa 23.
quaest. 8.
. But if the Law respect the danger of future evil by delay of punishment, it
is to be conceived to grant right and public power to a private man, so that
now he is not private. Of this kind is that Law in Justinians Code, under the
rubric, quando liceat unicuique etc. Where every man has license given him to
oppose force against plundering and pillaging Soldiers, this reason being
added: For it is better to meet with them it time, than to seek redress after
the injury done. We therefore permit you to defend and avenge your selves, and
what is too late punished by judgment we suppress by edict, that none spare a
Soldier, but use his weapon against him (...) thief. And the subsequent Law,
abo^ desertors, says, Let ail men know, the have power given them against
public^ robbers, and desertors, that run from the colors, and all are
ministers of public^ revenge for the quiet of all. To this purpose is that of
Tertullian: Against Tr^tors and public enemies every man is a Soldier Agathias
I. 4. Non solis ducibus alusque potentibus innasci solet atque immorari been
agendi propositum, sed cuique volen'i and licet and honcstum est ejus in qua
vivit Reipublicae malis Commoveri, and public^ utilitates pro suis viribus
promovere. vide supra LXXXVII.
And herein differs the right (...) killing exiles, whom they call Banni^, from
this kind of Laws, because there precedes a special sentence, here a general
Edict, the fact being evident, Quaedam sunt reipab. laesae ad quorum
pronuntiatronem oculi ^cium. Quintil. declamat. 260.
, obtei^ the force of a sentence pronounced.

XCII. What acts are not punishable by men.
NOw let us see, whether all vicious acts are such, that they may be punished
by men. Certainly, all are no^ such. For first, acts merely internal, though by
some chance, to wit, by confession afterward, they may come (...) knowledge of
others, cannot by men be punished; because, as elsewhere we have said, it is not
agreeable to human nature, that from acts merely internal, any right among men
or obligation should arise. And in this sense is to be taken, that in the Roman
Laws: No man is punishable for his thought. Nevertheless Cogitationis paenam
neminem mereri.
, internal acts, as they have influence into external Ita Sayrus I. 3. Thelaur.
c. 16.
, come under estimation, not of themselves properly, but of the acts external,
which do thence receive the quality of their merit. Secondly, men cannot punish
acts inevitable to human nature. For, although it cannot be sin, which is not
done freely; yet, from all sin, altogether, and always, to abstain, is above
human condition. Whence, among the Philosophers, Sopater, Hierocles, Seneca;
among the Jews, Philo De Mose lib. 3. addi potest Aben. Esdras ad Jobum 5. 7.
and Rabbinus Israel c. 8.
; among the Historians, Thucydides; many among the Christians have delivered,
That it is natural to man, to sin. If he must be punished, says Seneca De ira
l. 2. c. 31. Bjusdem est eodem de ira l. c. 14. Nemo invenitur, qui se possit
absolvere. cap. 9. dixerat; Inter caetera mortalitatis incommoda, and haec est
caligo mentium, nec tantum necessitors crrandi, sed errorum amor. Lib. 3. and
20. Omnes mali sumus. De clem. 1. 8. Peccavimus omnes: aliigravia, alii
leviora, etc. Procopius Gotth. 3. in orat. Belisarii; Nihil plane del nquere
neque hominis est, neque id rerum fert natura. Add Basilium Imp. c. 50.
, whosoever is of an evil and maleficent nature, every one must be punished.
And Sopater; If one punish men, as those that may be void of all sin, be
exceeds the measure of that correction which is according to nature: which
Diodorus Siculus L. 11. Idem in fragmentis, Nonoportet per calumnias traducere
infirmitatem humane naturae.
says, is to be injurious to the common imbecility of mankind: elsewhere, to
be unmindful of human infirmity. The forementiond Sopater says, Small faulti,
and of daily incursion, are to be dissembled. Yea, it may be doubted, whether
these may rightly and properly be called sins, when the liberty which in sp^cie
they seem to have, considerd in their generality they have not. Plutarch in his
Selon; A Law must be fram^d according to that which is possible if one will
punish a few profitably, not many to no purpose. Some things also are
inevitable, not to human nature simply, but to this person at this time, by
reason of the body's temper Seneca de ira l. 2. c. 18. Morum varietates,
mixtura elementorum fa^it, and proinde in aliguos magis incumbunt in genia,
prout alicujus elemen^i major vis abundavit. Ahbi haec ea vocat, quae attri^uit
co^ditio ^ascendi and corporis temperatura. epist. 1^.
passing into the mind, or of an old custom, which yet is wont to be punished,
not so much for it self, as for a precedent fault Vide c. inebriaverunt, causa
15. qu. 1.
because either remedies were neglected, or diseases in the mind voluntarily
contracted. Thirdly, sins are no^ to be punish^, which do neither directly nor
indirectly respect human society, or another man. The reason is, because there
is no reason why these sins should not be left to be punished by God, who is
most wise to know them, and most righteous to weigh them, and most powerful to
avenge them. Wherefore such punishment would be executed by men without any
utility, and so not rightly. Here are to be excepted punishments emendatory,
which have this for their cause, that the offender may be bettered, though
happily it concern not other men. Moreover, punishable are not, acts opposed to
virtues, whose nature refuses all coaction; in which kind are mercy,
liberality, gratitude. Seneca Lib. 3. de benef. c. 6. and 7.
handles this question, Whether the vice of an ungrateful man ought to be
unpunished: and brings many things to the purpose, but this especially, which
may be extended to other like qualities; When as it is a most commendable
thing, to make requital of a benefit, it cease to be commendable, if it be
necessary; that is, it loses that excellent degree of praise, as the following
words do show; for one will not more praise a grateful man, than him that
restores a thing committed to his trust, or pays what he owed without a suit.
A little after; It Is no glory to be grateful, were it not safe Idem Sen. d^
ben. l. 1. c. 1. Ita demum turpe est non reddere (beneficia nempe) si and
licet. Pater Sen. contr. 5. 34. Dicis mihi: Hoc sacere non oportet. Huic rei
aestimatio immensa est; itaque nulla vindicta est. August. l. 2. c. 83. cont.
Petll. Sic igitur quod adversus vos Leges consti^ sunt, non eis benefacere
cogimini, sed male facere probibemini.
to have been ungrateful. That of Seneca the father, in his controversies, may
be applied to vices of this kind; I desire not the accused person should be
praised, but absolved Est hoc 4. Contr. simile eodem libro contr. 24. Non
speramus ut probet, sed ut dimittat. Et in Excerptis, 6. 8. Multum interest
objurges an punias. Sunt enim quaedam, ut Cimone ait Plutarchus; deliquia magi^
virtutis alicujus, quam ex vitio crimina.
.

XCIII. That it is lawful to pardon, both before and after the Penal Law.
IT follows that we consider, whether sometimes it be lawful to grant a
pardon. For the Stoics Ut videre est in fragmento a pud Stobaeum titulo de
Magistratu, in oratione Tullii pro Mutaena, and in fine librorum Sen. de
Clementia. Contra eos been Diodorus Sic. in fragmentis, Venia m^lior paenae
exactione. Pro Christianis sententiam dicet Cypr. ep. 52. Alia est
Philosophorum and Stoicorum ratio, qui dicunt omnia peccata paria esse, and
virum gravem non facile flect^ oportere. Inter Christianos autem and
Philosophos Plurimum distat.
deny, but upon a light ground: Pardon, say they, is a remission of due
punishment: but a wiseman gives every one his due. Here the fallacy lies in the
word due. For, if you understand punishment to be due to him who has done a
fault, so that he may be punished without injury, it will not hence follow, if
one punish him not, he does wrong. But, if you conceive punishment so to be due
from a wise man, that it is his duty to exact it, we say, that is not always
so, and therefore in this sense, punishment may be, not due, but only lawful.
And that may be true, both before the constitution of a penal Law, and after.
Before a penal Law ordained, there is yet no doubt but punishment may have
place: because naturally he that is a delinquent is in that state, that he may
lawfully be punished: but it does not therefore follow, that the punishment
ought Julian. de Eusebia: Non enim si qui sunt meriti male tractari, punirique,
(...) perire utique necesse est.
to be exacted; because this depends upon the connection of the ends, for which
punishment was ordained, with the punishment it self. Wherefore if those ends
by themselves, in a moral estimation, be not necessary; or, if other ends, on
the opposite part, occur, not less profitable or necessary; or, if the ends
proposed to the punishment may be attained another way; now it appears, there
is nothing which precisely obliges to the exacting of the punishment. An
example of the first may be in a sin known to very few: the public traduction
whereof may therefore not be necessary, yea it may be hurtful; to which that of
Cicero is pertinent, concerning one Xerxes: It was not fit Ad Quintum frat. 1.
21.
perhaps to dismiss him being brought to judgment; but that he should be
enquired after and brought to judgment, was not necessary. An example of the
second, in him, who opposes to the fault either his own or his parents good
deeds worthy of recompense; for, says Seneca, a benefit superventent suffers
not the injury to appear. Of the third, in him, who is amended with words, or
with words has satisfied the wronged party, so that there is now no need of
punishment to those ends. And this is one part of clemency freeing from
punishment; which the Hebrew wise man respecting says; It becomes (...). 12.
19.
a just man to be merciful. For, because all punishment, expecially the more
grievous, has somewhat, which by it self considered, is repugnant, not indeed
to Justice, but to Charity, Reason easily permits to abstein from it, unless
greater and juster Charity do as it were irrefragably hinder. Sopater has a
place apposite to this matter, where he says, The part of justice, which
reduces contract to equality, wholly refuses all kind of favor; but that
part which is conversant about offenses does not disdain the kind and amiable
countenance of the Graces Cujus sensus partem priorem sic expressit Cicero, ad
Q. fr. 1. 2. Via juris ejusmodi est quibusdam in rebus ut nihil sit loci
gratiae: Posteriorem sie Dion Prusaeensis o^atione ad Alexandrinos; Boni
praesidis est, ignoscere. Favorino ea quae dicitur Clementia apud homines est
tempestiva relaxatio de summo sure.
. Now these three things may occur, either that punishment is by all means to
be exacted, as in wickednesses of the worst example Joseph: Parricidium and
naturam and vitam ^manam violat, it a ut qui id non puni^t and ipse in naturam
peccat. Clementiam liberum habere arbitrium. Sen.
; or, that it is by no mea^s to be exacted, as: when the public good requires
it to be omitted; or, that it is lawful either to omit to exact it; whither
pertains that of Seneca, Clemency has free choice, A wise man then, say the
Stoics, parcit non ignoscit; spares, does not pardon. As if forsooth it were
not lawful for us, with the common people the masters of speech, to call that
to pardon, which they call to spare. Truly, both here and elsewhere, as Cicero,
Galen, and others have noted, a great part of Stoical disputations is spent
about words; which a Philosopher should principally take heed of Verissime
dixit scriptor ad Herennium; Vitiosum est controversiam intendere propter
^minum mutationem. L. 2. quod Aristoteles dixerat: (...). Top. 24.
. After, a penal Law, the difficulty seems greater; because the author of a Law
is in some sort bound by his own Laws; but this is true, so far as the Author
of a Law is considered as a part of the Commonwealth, not as he susteins the
person and authority thereof. For in this later respect, he may take away eve^
a whole Law; because the nature of a human Law is, to depend upon the will of
man, not in its original only, but also in duration. Howbeit, the Author of the
Law ought not to take away a Law, except upon some approvable cause: otherwise,
he will transgress the rules of just Government. Now, as he may totally take
away a Law, so may he unty the bond thereof, as to a person or singular fact,
the Law remaining firm in other respects; and this after the example of God
himself, who as Lactantius says, when he gave the Law, deprived not himself of
all power, but has reserved a liberty to pardon. And Austin says, The
Emperor may revoke his sentence Symmachus lib. 3. epist. 63. Alia enim est
co^ditio magistratuum, quorum corruplae videntur esse sententia, si sint
legibus mitiores; alia divorum Principum potestas, quos decet acrimoniam severi
juris infl^ctere. Idem discrimen inter Regem and Judicem est apud Themistium
o^at. 5.
, and absolve a man guilty of death, and pardon him: he expresses a reason for
it: because He is not subject to the Laws, who has it in his power to make
Laws. Seneca would have Nero think this: No man at all can put any one to death
against Law; and no man, beside my self, can save any. But this also is not to
be done, unless there be good reason for it. And what are good reasons, though
it cannot be precisely defined, yet this is certain, they ought to be greater
after the Law, than those that were considerd before the Law: because the
authority of the Law, which to be kept is profitable, is now added to the
causes of punishing.

XCIV. Causes of freeing one from punishment of Law.
THe Causes of freeing one from punishment of Law are wont to be either
intrinsecal, or extrinsecal. Intrinsecal, when the punishment, if not unjust,
yet is hard, being compared with the fact. Extrinsecal, from some merit or
other thing commending the person; or also, from good hope of him for the
future; which kind of cause will be then most sufficient, if the reason of a
Law, at least particularly, cease in the present fact. For although, to sustein
the efficacy of the Law, the universal reason be enough, where no contrary
reason is; yet, even the particular reason ceasing, the Law may more easily and
with less diminution of authority be disperised with Multa ad hanc rem utilla
congessit Gratian. causa. 1. qu. 7.
. This is most usual in those offenses, which are committed through ignorance,
though not without all fault, or vincible; but by reason of the minds
infirmity, not easily vincible. Upon which offenses a Christian Ruler of men
ought to look with a gentle eye, in imitation of God, who in the old Covenant
indeed required many such to be expiated with certain Sacrifices Levit. 4. and
5.
: but in the new, by words and by examples has testified, that he is ready
Luc. 23. 34. Heb. 4. 15. 5. 2.
to grant pardon of such to those that repent. And truly, that Theodosius
Historiam vide apud Zonaram.
was 1 Timothy 1. 13.
induced by those words of Christ, Father forgive them, they know not what they
do, to forgive the Antiochians, is noted by Joannes Chrysostomus. And hence
appears how ill Ferdinandus Vasquius Lib. 1. c. 46.
said, a just cause of dispensing, that is, of loosing one from the Law, is
only that of which the Author of the Law being consulted would have said, it
was beside his meaning, that it should be observed. For he distinguishes not
between the equitable (...).
interpretation of the Law, and the relaxation of it. Whence in another place
he reprehendeth Thomas and Lib. 1. c. 26. and cap. 46.
Sotus for saying, The Law binds, although the cause particularly cease: as
if they had thought the Law to be the letter alone; which never came into their
mind. All Relaxation of the Law, which may often be given and omitted freely, is
so far from equity properly so called; that neither that relaxation which is
due either out of charity or justice, can be referred thither. For to take away
the Law either on probable or urgent cause, is one thing; another, to declare
the fact not to have been comprehended in the mind of the Law from the
beginning.

XCV. Of War for punishment; and whether war be just for offenses begun.
IT is manifest, that wars are not to be undertaken for every offense: for,
neither do the Laws bestow that their revenge, which is safe and hurts only the
nocent, upon all faults. Rightly says the forecited Sopater, That less and
common transgressions are to be winked at, not revenged. Now, that which Cato
said Gell. l. 7. c. 3.
in his Oration for the Rhodians, that it is not equal any one should be
punished for an intent of doing evil, was indeed well set in that case; because
no decree of the Rhodians could be alleged, but only conjectures of their
fluctuating mind: yet is not this to be received universally. For, an intent
or will, that has proceeded to external acts (for the internal are not
punished by men, as we have said before) is wont to be liable to punishment
Seneca pater in Controversiis: Scelera quoque, quamvis citra exitum
subsederunt, puniuntur. Injuriam qui facturus est, jan facit, ait alter Seneca.
Non exitus rerum sed consilia Legibus v^dicari, Cice^o dixit pro Milone
Periandri dictum erat; (...). Val. Max. de Cn. Sergio Silo damnato: Non sactum
tunc, sed animus in quaestionem deductus est: plusque voluisse peccare nocuit,
quam non peccasse prosuit. Sen. de benef. l. 5. c. 14. Latroest etiam antequam
manus inquinet: quia ad occidendum jam armatus est, and habet spoliandi atque
intersiciendi voluntatem. Live. lib. 42.
. So the Romans decree a war against Perseus, unless he give satisfaction for
holding consultation; and preparing war against the Roman people: for indeed he
had provided arms, soldiers, ships. And this is well noted in the orations of
the Rhodians, which Livy has recorded; It agrees neither with the customs nor
Laws of any Commonwealth, that if one desire the destruction of his enemy, and
have done nothing to effect it, he should lose his life. Neither does all ill
will, though declared by some deed, make room for punishment. For, if sins
finished are not all avenged, much less are they that are purposed and begun.
In many, that saying of Cicero may take place: Perhaps it may suffice, that the
offender repent of his injury. The Law given to the Hebrews, against very many
sins inchoated against piety, or even against a man's life except judgment,
constituteth nothing special: because, both in things divine, as being hard to
be discerned by us, it is easy to err; and the violence of anger is capable of
pardon. But, when so many wives were easy to be had, to injure another bed;
or, when possessions were so equally divided, by fraud to enrich himself with
another loss, was not to be endured. For that, Thou shall not covet, which is
in the Decalogue, though, if you consider the scope of the Law (that is the
spirituality) it be of larger extent (for the Law would have all to be most
pure Chrysostomus ad Romans 3. 13. and ad c. 7. multa habet in hanc rem.
in mind also:) yet, as to the external precept, (or carnal command^nt) it
pertains to the motions of the mind that are discovered by some fact: which
plainly appears by S. Mark the Evangelist, who has expressed that command
thus, Defraud not: when he had set Mar. 10. 19:
down a little before, Do not steal. And in that sense the Hebrew word and the
Greek answering it are found, Mich. 2. 2. and elsewhere. Wherefore offenses
inchoate are not to be avenged with arms; unless both the matter be of great
concernment, and it be gone so far, that either some certain mischief (though
not yet that which was intended) has already followed from such an act, or at
least some great danger: so that the revenge either may be joined with caution
of future harm (of which above, when we spoke of defense) or maintain injured
honor, or withstand a pernicious example.

XCVI. War for violation of Natures Law.
MOreover, we must know, that Kings, and such as have equal power with Kings,
have a right to require punishment not only for injuries committed against
themselves or their subjects, but for them also that do not peculiarly touch
themselves, whatsoever the persons are that do immanely violate the Law of
Nature or Nations. For the liberty, by punishments, to provide for human
society, which at first, as we have said, was in the hand of every man; after
Commonwealths and Courts of justice were ordained, resided in the hand of the
highest Powers: not properly as they are over others, but as they are under
none. For, subjection to others has taken away that right. Yea, so much more
honest is it to vindicate other men's injuries than ones own, by how much more
it is to be feared, that a man in his own, by too deep a resentment, may either
exceed a measure, or atleast infect his mind. And upon this score, Hercules was
praised by the ancients, for setting Countries at liberty from Antaeus,
Busyris, Diomedes, and the like tyrants: traveling o'r the world, as Seneca
speaks of him, not to please his humor, but execute justice: being the Author
of very much good to mankind, as Lysias declares, by punishing the unjust
Diodorus Sicul. de eo sic loquitur: Homines injuslos and Reges insolentes
tollendo beat as reddebat ^ivitates. Alibi dixit: Orbem obiit paenas de iniquis
expetens. Dio P^usaeensis de eodem: Homines malos puniebat, and superborum
regna destruebat, aut in alios transferebat. Aristides in Panathenaico ait ^um
suscepta communi humani gener is cura meruisse in Deosref^rri. Philo de
Legatione: Hercules purgavit terras and maria, certamin^ subiens bominibus
omnibus partim necessaria, partim perutilia, ut tolleret hominum animantiumque
aliorum ea quae exitia^ia aut noxia essent.
. Theseus is likewise praised for cutting off those Robbers, Sciron, Sinis and
Procrustes: whom Euripides in his Supplices brings in speaking thus of himself:

My Deeds have styled me through all Greece,
The Punisher Ibidem dicenti Feciali: Ten'ergo sevit omnibus genitor parem?
Respondet Theseus: Injuriosis. Nam bonos non tangimus. Valor. Max. de codem:
Quicquid ubique monstri aut sceleris fuit, virtute animi ac robore dextrae
comminuit. Lib. 5. cap. 3. Plutarch. in ejus vitae: Pessimis tyrannis Graeciam
liberavit. Item: ^il ipse passus injuriae, pro aliis in homines malos impetum
sumebat.
of wickedness.
So we doubt not, but wars are just upon them, that are impious toward their
parents (as the Sogdians were, before Alexander Plutarch. de fortuna Alex.
beat them out of this barbarity:) upon them that eat Hoc quoque Scythas
Alexander dedocuit.
man's flesh (from which custom Hercules Vide Dionys. Hal. narrantem ut Hercules
hunc morem alitque multa abstulerit, in beneficiis suis Graecos a barbaris non
distinguens. Romanorum non minora in genus humanum merita praed cat Plinius,
30. 1. Non satis aestimari potest, quantum Romans debeatur, qui sustulere
monstra; in quibus hominem occidere religiosissimum erat, mandi vero etiam
saluberrimum. Sic Justinianus principibus Abasgorum edixit ne subditorum pueros
castrarent. Procopius meminit Gotthicorum 4. and Zonaras, Leone Isauro. Et
Inchae in Peruana Reges v^cinos populos, qui moniti non parerent, vi coegere
absistere ab incestis, a marium cum maribus concubitu, a comistione hominum,
aliisque id genus facinoribus: atque eo modo imperium sibi pararunt omnium quae
usquam legimus, excepta religione, justissimum,
compelld the old Galls to desist, as Diodorus relates:) upon them, that
exercise piracy Seneca 7. de Benef. Si non p^ion meam impugnat, sed suae;
gravis est, and sepositus a mea genie suam exagitat, abscidit nihilominus illum
tanta pravitas animi. Augustinus l. 5. de Civitate Dei; Opinantur scelera
facienda dece^i, qualia si aliqua terrae Civitas decerneret, decrevisselve,
genere (...) fuerat eve^enda.
. For, of such barbarians, and wild beasts rather than men, it may be rightly
spoken, which Aristides said perversely of the Persians, who were nothing worse
than the Grecians; War upon them is natural: and, which Isocrates in his
Panathenaick said, The most just war is against the wild beasts, the next
against men like unto those beasts. And so far we follow the opinion of
Innocentius Innocent. c. quod super his. de voto Arch. Flor. 3. p. tit. 22.
sect. 5.
and others, who hold that war may be made against them that offend against
nature Vide Josephum Acostam de procuranda Indorum salute l. 2. c. 4.
: contrary to the opinion of Victoria, Vasquius and others; who seem to require
to the justice of war, that the undertaker be harmed in himself or his
republic, or else that he have jurisdiction over the other party that is
assailed. For their position is, that the power Sylv. in verbo Papa. sect. 7.
Vict. Rel. 1. de Indis n. 40. Vasq. contr. ill. lib. 1. cap. 25.
of punishing is a proper effect of Civil Jurisdiction, when we judge it may
proceed even from natural right. And truly, if their opinion, from whom we
dissent, be admitted, no enemy now shall have the power of punishment against
another enemy; no not after war undertaken, from a cause not punitive: which
right nevertheless very many grant, and the use of all Nations confirms; not
only after the war is done, but even while it endures; not out of any Civil
Jurisdiction, but out of that natural right, which was before the institution
of Commonwealths, and now also prevails, where men live distributed into
families and not into Cities.

XCVII. Three cautions to be observed.
BUt here are to be used some Cautions: First, that civil customs, though
received among many people not without reason, be not taken for the Law of
Nature: such as those were, whereby the Graecians were distinguished from the
Persians: whereunto you may rightly refer that of Plutarch (...). Plutarch.
; To reduce the barbarous nations to more civility of manners, is a pretense to
color an unlawful desire of that which is another. Second, that we do not
rashly account among things forbidden by nature, those things which are not
manifestly so, and which are forbidden rather by Divine Law: in which rank
happily you may put copulations without marriage Asterius Amaseae Episcopus: Qui
hujus tantum seculi leges condentibus obtemperant, impunitam relinquunt
meretricii. licentium. Add locum Hieronymi ad Oceanum. L. si Adulterium. sect.
fratres. D. ad L. Jul. de adult.
, and some reputed incests, and usury. Third, that we diligently distinguish
between general principles, viz. We must live honestly, i. e. according to
reason, and some next to these, but so manifest, that they admit no doubt; viz.
We must not take from another that which is his; and between illations, whereof
some are easily known, as, Matrimony being supposed, we must not commit
Adultery; others more hardly, as, that revenge which delights in the pain of
another is vicious. It is here almost as in the Mathematics, where some are
first notions, or next unto the first; some demonstrations, which are presently
both understood, and assented to; some, true indeed, but not manifest to all.
Wherefore, as about Civil Laws we excuse them that have not had notice or
understanding of the Laws; so about the Laws of nature also it is fit they
should be excused, whom either the imbecility of their reason, or evil
education keeps in ignorance (...); gens hoc legem naturae putat, quod didicit.
Hieron. 2. adv. Jovin. Matthew. 10 15. Luc. 12. 47, 48. Nicom. 7.
. For, ignorance of the Law, as, when it is inevitable, it takes away the sin;
so, even when it is joynd with some negligence, does lessen the offense. And
therefore Aristotle compares barbarians, that are ill bred, and offend in such
matters, to them, who have their palats corrupted by some disease. Plutarch
says, There are diseases of the mind, which cast men down from their natural
state. Lastly, that is to be added, which I set down once for all, Wars
undertaken for the exacting of punishment, are suspected of injustice, unless
the acts be most heinous and most manifest, or else some other cause withal
concur. That saying of Mithridates, concerning the Justin. 38. Non de^cta regum
illos, sed vires ac majestatem insequi.
Romans, was not perhaps beside the truth; They do not punish the offenses of
Kings, but seek to abate their power and majesty.

XCVIII. Whether war may be undertaken for offenses against God.
NExt we come to those offenses which are committed against God: for it is
enquired, whether, for the vindicating of them, war may be undertaken: which is
largely handled by Covarruvias. C. peccatum. p. 2. sect. 10.
But he, following others, thinks there is no punitive power without
jurisdiction properly so called: which opinion we have before rejected. Whence
it follows, as in Church Affairs Bishops are said in some sort, (...). Est id
in constit. praeferentibus nomen Clementis. Cyprianus epist. 30. Omnes enim nos
decet pro corpore totius Ecclesi^, cujus per varias quasque provincias, membra
digesta sunt, excubare. Et de Unitate Ecclesiae: Episcopatus unus est, cujus a
singulis in solidum pars tenetur. Exempla hujus curae universalis passim apud
Cyprianum. Illustre imprimis epist. 67. Add Chrysostom. in laudibus S.
Eustachii.
to have received the charge of the universal Church; so also Kings, beside the
peculiar care of their own states, have lying upon them the care of human
society. The chief reason for the negative opinion, that such wars are not
just, is this: Because God is sufficient to revenge offenses done against
himself; whence it is said, The Gods take care of their own injuries; and, It Is
enough that perjun has God for an Avenger. But, we must know, that the same
may be said of other offenses too. For, God, no doubt, is sufficient for the
punishing of them also; and yet are they rightly punished by men, no man,
contradicting. Some will reply and say, other offenses are punished by men, as
other men are thereby harmed or endangered. But on the other side we must note,
not only those offenses are punished by men, which directly hurt other men, but
those also that do so by consequence, as killing one self, bestiality, and some
others. Now, though Religion by it self prevails singularly to procure God's
favor, yet has it also, in human society, very great effects. And it is not
without good reason, that Plato calls religion the fortress of power, and the
bond of Laws and virtuous discipline Plutarchus similiter, coagulum omnis
socieratis, and fundamentum legislationis. Philoni quoque est, Efficacissimum
amatorium and vinculum indissolubile benevolae amicitiae, unius Dei cultus.
Idem de fortitudine: Summa ac maxima concordiae causa, de uno Deo sensus: ex
quo velut sonte procedit insolubilis and animos inter se vinciens amicilia.
Josephus autem contra Appionem libro: Eandem de Deo habere sententiam, nihilque
vita and institutis inter se discrepare pulcherrimam in animis hominum
concordiam excitat.
. Irreligion, on the contrary is the cause of all iniquity Silius Italicus: Heu
primae scelerum causae mortalibus aegris, Naturam nescire Dei. -- So Josephus
against Appian rendering the reasons why many Commonwealths were ill
established, says, It was because their Founders did not at first see the true
nature of God, and through ignorance of him, and of true Religion, were not
able to settle good Orders in the State.
Jamblichus has a saying of Pythagoras: To know God is virtue, and wisdom;
and perfect happiness. Hence Chrysippus said, The Law is the Queen of Divine
and human things; and Aristotle accounts, among public cares, that about
things divine To the knowledge whereof Justin Martyr inviting the Emperors,
says, (...), This will be a work truly royal. Add quae ba^ Covar^. in c.
possessor. sect. 10.
to be the chiefest Arist. pol. 7.
: and the Romans defined skill in Law to be the knowledge of things divine and
human; And Philo Philo de creat. Magistr.
describes the art of government, the ordering of things private, public and
sacred. All which things are not to be considerd only in some one State, (as
when Cyrus in Xenophon says, his subjects would be so much more obedient Cyri
instit. Lib. 8.
to him, by how much more they feared God:) but also in the common society of
mankind. Take away Piety, says Cic. lib. 1. de natura Deorum. Idem de finib.
4. Justitiam adfert, cum cognitum habeas quod sit summi rectoris and Domini
numen, quod consilium, quae voluntas.
Cicero, and you take away faith also, and fellowship of mankind, and that most
excellent of all virtues, Justice. And hereof we have an evident argument in
Epicurus; who, when he had taken away Divine providence, left nothing of
justice neither, but an empty name Seneca epist. 97. Illic dissen tiamus cum
Epicuro, ubi d cit nihil justum esse natura, and crimina vitanda esse, quia
vitari metus non posfit.
, saying, It had its birth from agreement alone, and endured no longer than
common utility lasted, and that we must abstein from things hurtful to
another, only for fear of punishment. His own words to this purpose very
notable are extant in Diogenes Laertius. Aristotle Arist. 5. de repub. cap. 11.
L. 9. de placitis Hipp. and Plat.
also saw this connection, who speaks thus of a King; The people will the less
fear any unjust usage from their Prince, whom they believe to be religious. And
Galen, where he had said, many questions are made about the wor'd and the
Divine Nature, without any benefit to men's manners; acknowledges the question
concerning Providence to be of very great use both for private and public
virtues. Homer also Odyss. 6. and 9.
saw this, who opposes to men fierce and unjust, those that are of a religious
mind. So Justin out of Trogus praises the ancient Jews for their Justice mixed
with Religion Philo v'ta Abrahami: Ejusdem est naturae Religiosum esse and
hominum amantem: apud eundem spectantur pietas in Deum, and in homines justitia.
; and Strabo commends them for being really just and pious Lactantius: Si
ergo pietas est cognoscere Deum, cujus cognitionis haec suma est ut cum col^s,
ignorant utique justitiam, qui religionem Dei non tenet. Quomodo enim potest eam
nosse, qui unde oritur ignorant? Inst. lib. 5. Idem, De ira Dei. Religioni est
pro^ria Justitia. Lib. 4. C. de Haereticu.
. Furthermore, Religion has greater use in that greater society, than in the
Civil: because in the Civil State part of it is supplied by Laws, and an easy
execution of the Laws; when, on the contrary, in that great Community, the
execution of Law is most difficult, not to be done without arms, and the Laws
are very few: and these too have their sanctimony chiefly from the fear of a
divine power; whence offenders against the Law of Nations are usually said to
violate the Divine. Rightly therefore have the Emperors said, that the
pollution of Religion perteined to all men's injury, as that wherein all mankind
is concerned.

XCIX. Four most common principles of Religion.
THat we may take a more perfect view of the whole matter, we must note, True
Religion, which is common to all Ages, depends especially upon four principles.
1. There is a God, and He is One. 2. God is not any of the things visible, but
of a nature more sublime. 3. All human affairs are under Gods providence, and
governed by his most righteous Judgment. 4. The same God is Maker of all things
without Himself. These four are expressed in so many Precepts of the Decalogue.
For in the first is plainly deliverd the Unity of God: in the second, His
invisible Nature: therefore to make an Image of him is forbidden, Deuteronomy. 4. 12.
As Antisthenes Laudatus Clementi Alexandrino. Ex illo videtur hoc promsisse
Seneca l. 7. c. 30. not. qu. Ipse qui ea tractat, qui condidit, quitos tum hoc
fundavit, deditque circase, majorque est pars operis sui ac melior, effugit
oculos, cogitatione visendus est.
also said: He is not seen with eyes, he is not like to any thing, neither can
be known by an Image^ and Philo Dicit haec apud Philonem Rex Agrippa.
, It is profane to exhibit an Image, by picture or sculpture, of Him that is
invisible; Diodorus Siculus de Mose: Simulacrun non constituit, eo quod Deum
non crederet humana forma esse. Tacitus: Judaeimente sola unumque numen
intelligunt: profanos qui Deum Imigines mortalibus mate^s in speciem hominum
es^gunt.
and Plutarch renders this cause, why Numa De hoc Numae instituto vide and
Dionys. Halicarn.
took away Images from the Temples, Because God cannot be conceived but by the
mind alone. In the third precept is understood the knowledge and care of human
actions, and thoughts too: for this is the foundation of an oath. For, God is
called a witness, even of the heart, and, if one deceive; arevenger too:
whereby both the Justice of God is signified, and his power. In the fourth is
acknowledged the beginning of the world by God's Creation: for the remembrance
whereof, the Sabbath Scriptor respons. ad Orthodoxos, ad quaest. 69. Ut ergo
memoria mundi conditi inter homines servaretur, ideo voluit Deus septenarium
numerum in sacris literis eminere caeteris honoratiorem. Vide and quae
praecedunt.
was instituted of old, and that with a singular kind of sanctimony above other
rites. For, if one had sinned against other rites, the punishment of the Law
was arbitrary, as about forbidden meats; if against this, 'twas capital:
because the violation of the Sabbath, by the institution, contained a denial of
the world's Creation by God. And the world's being created by God tacitly
declares his goodness, and wisdom, and eternity, and power. Now, from these
contemplative notions follow the active, viz. That God is to be honored,
loved, worshipped and obeyed. Wherefore Aristotle said, he that denies, God is
to be honored, or Topic. 1. 9.
Parents to be loved, is not to be refuted with arguments, but with stripes.
And elsewhere. That it is the duty of an honest Topic. 2. 4.
man, every where to honor God. Moreover, the verity of these notions, which
we call contemplative, doubtless may be demonstrated, even by arguments
Tertull. adv. Marc. Anima a primordio, conscientia Dei, dos est. Pittas
naturalis, Diodoro Siculo in Fragmentis. Philo deUnius Imperio: Nihil artem
praeserens casu oritur. Maximam autem artem mundua praesert, te^aturque a sum
perito summeque pe^cto se fabricatum. Notitia, qua Deum esse credimus, hinc
ortum habet. Tertull. adv. Marcion. 1. Nos defendimus Deum primum nat^
cognoscendum, deinde doctrina recognoscendum: Natura ex operibus: doctrina ex
(...). Cyprian. de Idol. van. Haec est sum^ delicti, nolle agnoscere quem ignor
are non possis. Julianus ad Heraelitum: Omnes aute doctrinam numen aliquod esse
persuasi sumus: cor^spiciendum, ad eum p^operandum: credoque sic animos nostros
se habere ad Deum, ut visu praedita ad Lucem.
fetch^ from the nature of things: amongst which, that is of most force, that
sense assures us some things were made; and the things made plainly lead us to
something that was not made. But because this reason, and other the like, are
not apprehended by all men, it is sufficient, that, from the beginning to this
present, in all parts of the world, all men (a^ very few excepted) both of the
simpler sort that would not deceive, and of the wiser sort that would not be
deceived, have consented to these notions: which consent; in so great variety
both of Laws and other opinions, evidently shows the tradition propagated from
the first men to us, and never solidly refuted; and this alone is enough to
procure belief. What we have set down before, concerning God, agrees with Dion
Prusaeensis, where he says, our persuasion of God is either connate to us and
drawn from arguments, c^ else acquired by tradition. Plutarch calls it, An
ancient persuasion, than which no argument can be more sure, being the common
foundation, upon which is built all pity. Aristotle Decaelo l. 3.
, All men have a persuasion concerning the Gods: and Plato Delegib. 10.
speaks also to the same purpose.

C. The first violators of these may be punished.
WHerefore they are not without fault, who, though they be of duller wit than
either to find out or to comprehend certain arguments for these notions, do
reject them, seeing they guide to virtue, and the contrary opinion has no
arguments to support it. But, because we treat of punishments, and those human,
a difference is here to be made 'twixt the notions themselves, and 'twixt the
manner of departing from them. These notions, That there is a God (one or more,
I say not:) and, That he has care of human affairs, are most universal, and
absolutely necessary to the constitution of Religion, whether true or salse. He
that comes unto God, (that is Heb. 11. 6.
, He that has any Religion: for Religion is called by the Hebrews an access
unto God:) must believe that God is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that
seek him Similiter Cicero, de not. deorum. l. 1. Sunt Philosophi, and fuerunt,
qui nullam habere ceuserent humanarum (...) procurationem deos. Quorum si vera
sententia est, quae potest esse pietas, quae sanctitas, quae religio? Haec enim
omnia pure and cast tribu^da Deorum it a numini sunt, si animadvertuntur ab
his, and si est aliquid a Diis immortalibus humane geueri tributum.
. Epictetus: This is the principal part of Religion to have a right opinion of
the Gods, both that they are, and that they do justly order all things. Aelian
says, none of the Barbarians fell to Atheism, but all affirmed, there is a
God, and such a one as cares for us Seneca epist. 95. Primus est Deorum
cultus, Deos credere: deinde reddere illis majestatem suam, reddere bonitatem,
sine qua nulla majestas est.
. Plutarch in his book of common Notions says, the notion of God is none, if
you deny a Providence: For God must be conceived, (...) only immortal and
blessed, but a lover of men, one that takes care of them (...) does them good.
Neither can any ho^ (says Lactantius) be due to God, if he savor not the
godly, nor fear, if he be not angry with the ungodly. And truly, to deny the
Being of God, and to deny his Providence, if we respect the moral consequence,
is all one. Wherefore, upon necessity, these two notions, through so many Ages,
have been preserved, even amongst all Nations whom we have known. Hence
religion toward God is ascribed by Pompo^ius to the Law of nations L. veluti.
de ^stic. and jure.
: and Socrates in Xenophon says, To worship God is a Law, which has force
amongst all men. Which also Cicero De ^at. Deor. lib. 1. and 2. de Invent.
affirms. Xenophon, in his Convivium, averreth, that both Greeks and Barbari^
think all things, present and future, to be known unto the Gods Dion
Prusaeensis orat. 41. vocat, persuasionem quae misit hominibus communiter
omnibus, non minus B^ber is quam Graecis necessariam, ac naturalem cunctis
ratione ^tibus. Et paulo post: Persuasionem valde robustam ac semp^, apud omnes
gentes and coeptam and permanentem. Seneca epist. (...) Tanqu^ Deos esse inter
alia sic colligimus, quod omnibus de Diis opinis (...): nec ulla gens usquam
est adeo contra leges moresque projecta, ut non aliquos Deos credat. Idem de
Benef. 4. 4. Nec in hunc furorem omnes mortales consensissent alloquendi surda
numina and inefficace^ Deos. Add Platonem Protagora, and 10. de leg. and
pulchra quae habet Jamblichus post principium de mysteriis Aegyptiorum, ubi
Deum nosse it a homini ait proprium, ut hinnitum equo.
These notions therefore, whosoever first begin to take away, as they are wont
to be restrained in well governd Cities (as Diagoras Melius Aelian. lib. 9.
was, and the Epicures, who were ejected out of good towns:) so, my judgment
is, they may be restrained Moxus Lydus Crambi urbis inhabitatoyes obsidione
captos mersit, omnes (...), ut qui Deum nullum nossent colerentve. Nicolaus
Damascenus in excerptis Peiresianis.
in the name of human society, which without probable cause they violate.
Himerius the Sophister in his action against Epicurus: Do you then punish me
for an opinion? No, but for impiety. It is permitted to deliver opinions; not,
to oppose piety too. The other notions are not so evident: viz. That there are
not more Gods than one: That none of the things we see, is God: not the world,
not the heaven, not the earth, not the air: That the world is not from all
eternity no nor the matter of it, but was made by God. Wherefore, we find the
knowledge of these, in process of time, obliterated among many people, and as
it were extinct: and so much the more easily, for that the Laws took less care
of this part; without which also some religion might after a sort subsist. The
Law of God it self (given to that people, whom the Prophets, and prodigies,
partly seen with their eyes, partly deliverd to them by undoubted fame, had
instructed with knowledge of these things, neither obscure, nor uncertain)
though it most detesteth the worship of false Gods, yet does it not punish with
death all that are convicted of that crime; but them alone, whose facts are
aggravated by some Deuteronomy. 13. 16. Deuteronomy. 13. 23. Deuteronomy. 17. 2.
singular circumstance: as, him, who has first seduced others; the City, which
has begun to worship Gods formerly unknown; him that worshippeth the stars,
that he may forsake the whole Law, and withal the service of the true Gods
(which is, in S. Paul's phrase, to serve the creature, not the Creator Philo ad
Decalogum de talibus: Su^t autem alii quorum ulterius impietas procedis, qui ne
paria quidem Deo and operibus ejus tribuunt, sed quicquid hono^s excogitari
potest his exhibent, illud communissimum bonum null^ memoratione d^gnantes, id
praetereunt quod solu^ meminisse debuerant, sponte miseri sibi accersentes
quaesi am oblivionem. Sic locum Deuteronomii interpretatur Maimonides Directore
3. 41. Legate. ad Caium.
; for (...) there and elsewhere often has an exclusive signification:) which
thing, even amongst Esau's posterity some time was liable to punishment, as we
may see, Job 31. 26, 27. him also, who offered his children to Moloch, that is,
to Saturn, Levit. 20. 2. But, the Cananites and the neighboring Nations, that
had aforetime fallen to evil superstitions, God did not presently judge fit to
be punished, but then at last when they had filled up the measure of their
iniquities, Genes. 15. 16. So also in other Nations he winked at the times of
ignorance about the worshipping of false Gods, Act. 17. 38. Philo indeed has
rightly said, Every man's own Religion seems best to himself, as that which for
the most part is not judged of by reason, but affection: wherewith agrees that
of Cicero, No man approves Academ. 4.
any course of Philosophy, but that which himself follows. He adds, Most men
are engaged to a sect, before they are able to judge which is best. Now, as
they are excusable, and at least not to be punished by men, who having received
no Law delivered from God, worship either the virtues of the stars, or of
other natural things, or spirits, whether in images, or in living creatures, or
somewhat else; or also the souls of such as have excelled in virtue and
benefits done to mankind, or certain incorporeal intelligences; especially if
they neither have devised such worships themselves, nor do therefore forsake the
worship of the most High God Sacrifices sent by the Kings of Egypt, ^y
Augustus, by Tiber us, were admitted into their Temple by the Jews: as Josephus
and Philo tell us.
; So are they to be numbered among the injurious rather than erroneous, who
either to Cacodemons, whom they know to be such, or to the names of vices, or
to men whose life has been very vicious, do appoint and exhibit divine
honors. And so are they, who worship the Gods with the blood of innocent men;
from which custom, that he compeld the Carthaginians to abstein, is the praise
of The son of Hystaspes, father of Xerxes. Justin. lib. 19. Plutarch. Apophth.
and de sera uum. vind. Idem quaest. Roman. 12.
Darius the Persian King, and of Gelo the Syracusian Tyrant. Plutarch also
relates, that certain Barbarians, that worshipped their Gods with human
sacrifices, were about to be punished by the Romans: but when they excused
themselves by antiquity of the custom, they sufferd nothing, but only were
forbidden to do so any more.

CI. Wars are not justly made against them that will not embrace Christian
Religion.
WHat shall we say of those Arms which are carried against any people for this
cause, that they will not entertain Christian Religion proposed to them? I will
not now enquire, whether it be proposed in such a quality, and in such a
manner, as it ought. Suppose it be: two things we say are to be noted. The
first is this; that the truth of Christian Religion (to wit, so far as it
superaddes to natural and primitive Religion things not a few) cannot be
persuaded by arguments merely natural, but depends upon the history both of
Christ's Resurrection, and of the miracles wrought by himself and his Apostles:
which is a matter of fact, of old indeed confirmed by irrefragable testimonies;
but, of old; so that this is a question of fact, and that now very ancient.
Whence it happens, that this doctrine cannot thoroughly sink in into the minds of
such as, now first, hear it, unless it be seconded by the secret assistances of
God; and these, as they are not given to them that have them for a reward of
any, work, so if they be denied to any or any, or granted more sparingly, this
comes to pass for causes, not unjust indeed, but for the most part unknown to
us and therefore by human judgment not punishable. Pertinent here is the Canon
of the Toletan Council: The precept of the Holy Synod Cap. de Juda^ did. 45.
is, that henceforth none be Josephus ira cense^: Debere quemque libero animi
propo^to Deum colere, non vi coactum.
compelled to believe. For God will have mercy on whom he will, and whom he
will he hardens. For it is the manner of Scripture, when the causes of things
are secret to us, to assign the will of God for the cause of them Servius ad
initium 3. Aen. Quo^iescumque ratio vel judicium non apparet, sic visum
interponitur. Sic and Donatus ad act. 5. sc. 2. Eun. atque in eum sensum poni
Hebraeum (...) notat Abarbaniel.
. The next thing to be noted is, that Christ the Author of the new law his will
and pleasure is, that no man should be drawn to receive his Law by the
punishments of this life, or fear of them Romans 8. 15. Heb. 2. 15. Jo. 6. 67.
Lu. 9. 54. Matthew. 13. 24. Tractat hoc Gregorius Naz. orat. Cum assumtus est a
patre; and Beda lib. 26. Isidorus de Sisebuto Rege; Qui in initio regni sui
Judaeos ad fidem Christianam permovens, amulationem quidem Dei habuit, sed non
secundum sci^iam; potestate enim compulit, quos provocare oportuit fidei
ratione. Transcripsit hoc in historiam Rodericus 2. 13. Posteriores in Hispania
Reges eodem nomine culpant Osorius and Mariana, quem vide 26, 14. 27, 5.
; in which sense that of Tertullian is most true, The new law does not
vindicate it self by the revenging sword. In that ancient book, entitled the
Constitutions of Clement, it is said of Christ: He has left unto men the
freedom of their own choice, not punishing them with temporal death, but
calling them to account in the world to come. Athanasius Epist. ad solitarios.
; The Lord not compelling, but permitting to the will its own liberty, said
unto all, If any one will come after me; and to the Apostles, Will ye also go
away Cyprianus epist. 55. Conversus ad Apostolos suos dixit, Nunquid and vos
vultis ire? servans sc. Legem, qua homo libertati suae relictus and in arbitrio
proprio constitutus, sibimet ipse vel mortem appetit, vel salutem.
? Chrysostom on the same place of John: He asks, whether they also will go
away: which are the words of one laying aside all force and necessity. Nor is
that in the Parable of the Marriage any objection, that the servants are
commanded to compel some to come in, Lu. 14. 23. For as in the parable it self
that word compel signifies the instance Cyprianus de idolorum vanitate hunc
locum respiciens: Per orbem vero discipuli, magistro and Deo monente diffusi,
precepta Dei in salutem darent, ab errore tenebrarum ad viam lucis adducerent,
caecos and ignaros ad (...) nem veritatis ocularent. Ac, ne esset probatio
minus solida and de (...) delicata confessio, per tormenta, per cruces, per
multa poenarum (...) tentantur.
of the Messenger, so also in the moral of it: in which sense a word of the
same signification is taken Lu. 24. 29. and no otherwise Matthew. 14. 22. Mark.
6. 45. Gal. 2. 14. Procopius in the secret part of his history says,
Justinian's Ad eundem Justinianum Epistolam Theodaliadi (...) in Cassiodoro 10.
26.
order was blamed by wise men, that he compelled the Samari^ans by force and
threats to profess the Christian Religion: he adds also the incommodities
ensuing thence, which may be read in the Autho: himself.

CII. Justly against them that deal cruelly with Christians only for Religion
sake.
BUt they that subject to punishments, the Teachers or Professors of
Christianism for that cause, certainly do that which is contrary to reason it
self. For, there is nothing in the Christian discipline (I consider it here by
it self, not as it is mixed with any corruption) which is hurtful to human
society, yea, there is nothing which is not profitable to it. The matter is
apparent, and the Aliens are constreined to acknowledge this truth. Pliny
says, the Christians bound themselves by Sacrament, not to commit theft, nor
robbery, nor break their trust. Ammianus The same Author truly calls Christian
Religion absolute and simple. And Zozimus a Pagan too says, the design of it
is to free men from all wickedness and impiety. And frequently it was
acknowledged by the Infidels to be a Sect injurious (...) offensive to none.
Tertull. Scorpiaco. Justin. Apol. 2. We do you much service, and help you to
keep your Empire quier, teaching, that no man can conceal himself from God,
whether he do good or evil; and that according to his deeds every man shall
enter into life or death eternal. (...) lib. 2. speaking of the Christian
Assemblies, says, nothing was heard in them, but what may make men meek and
modest, and charitable to all their Brethren.
says, nothing is taught in that Religion, but what is just and gentle. And it
was a Byword among the people, Caius Seius is a good man, but that he is a
Christian Bonus vir Caius Seius, tantum quod Christianus. Tertull. Apol. cap.
3. and 1. adv. Not. cap. 4.
. Nor is this excuse to be admitted, All innovations are to be feared,
especially Assemblies: for, neither are doctrins to be feared, though new, if
they lead to all honesty, and to obedience toward superiors; nor ought
Assemblies of honest men to be suspected, and of such who seek not hiding
places, unless they be compelled. Rightly may be applied here, what Philo In
legatione. Similiter and libro de Sacrifica^tibus facunde ostendit quantum
synagogae distent a Paga^ mysteriis. Locus uterque dignus inspici. Simile habet
libro altero centra Appionem Josephus.
relares Augustus said of the Jewish Synagogues: They are not Bacchanals, or
Conventicles to aisturb the peace, but schools of virtue. They that rage
against such, are themselves in such a condition, that they may be justly
punished: which is also the opinion of Aquinas. And for that cause did
Constartin Vide Zonaram. Sim le illud apud Augustinum epist. 50. Maximianus
Episcopus Vagi^ auxilium petiit ab Imperatore Christiano contra hosts
Ecclesiae, non tam sui ulciscendi causa, quam tuendae Ecclesiae sibi creditae.
Relatum est in causam 23. qu. 3.
war against Licinius, other Emperors against the Persians Vide Menandrum
protectorem.
; though these wars pertein rather to the Defense of the Innocent, of which
hereafter, than to the exaction of punishment. Tho. 2. 2. 108.


CIII. Not against them who are mistaken in the sense of Scripture.
AS to them that embrace the Law of Christ for true, but doubt or mistake in
some things, which either are beside the Law, or in the Law seem to have an
ambiguous sense, and have been expounded by the ancient Christians not after
one manner, they that persecute such do very unjustly: as appears both by what
we have said before, and by the old example of the Jews. For these having a Law
established by punishments of this life, did yet never punish the Sadduces, who
rejected the article of the resurrection, a point indeed most true, but in that
Law not deliverd but obscurely, and under a veil of words or things. And what
if it be a more grievous error, and such as before equal Judges may easily be
revinced by authority of Scripture or consent of Fathers? Here also is to be
considered, how great is the force of a settled opinion, and how much every
man's judgment is darkened by Affection to his own Sect, an evil, as Galen
says, incurable. Origin speaks appositely: More easy it is for a man to put
off any other customs, how much soever he is affixed to them, than to lay aside
his accustomed opinion Sequitur hoc Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 2. ubi vero
consuetudo in dogmate inciderit, multo fit immobilior. Nihil enim est quod non
facilius homo mutet quam ea quae religionis sunt.
. Add, that the estimation of this fault depends upon the measure of
illumination, and other dispositions of the mind, which are not in the compass
of man's knowledge. He at last is an Heretic in Austins Lib. de util. credendi.
Locus refertur in cause. 24 qu. 3. Austin adds, that he that believes heretic,
seems not to him the same thing with an heretic. Heresy is the madness of a
more obstinate mind. Vide eundem epist. 162.
judgment, who, for some temporal profit, and especially for glory and
principality, either is the Father, or the follower of new doctrius Scriptor
responsorum ad orthodoxos quaest. 4. Apertum est ex cupiditate gloria aut ex
amulatu qui primos repertores agitaverit, (...) omnes existendi originem
cepisse. Chrysostom ad Gal. 45. (...) The desire of dominion is the mother of
heresy.
. Let us hear Salvian discoursing of the Artans: They are Heretics, but know
it not: Heretics in our judgment, not in their own; for they do so much think
them selves to be Catholics, that they asperse us with the stain of heresy.
Wherefore we are the same to them, that they are to us. We are sure they do
injury to the divine generation, because they make the Son less than the
Father. They think us injurious to the Father; because we believe them to be
equal. The truth it with us, but they presume it is with them. The honor of God
is with us, but they suppose what they believe is for the honor of the Deity.
They are inofficious, but this is to them the chiefest office of Religion. They
are impious, but this they think to be true piety. They err then, but they err
with a good mind Agathias in the first of his histories, where he had spoken of
the absurd superstirious of the Almens, adds They are more worthy of plry
than hatred, for their errors. For they do not stumble and wander willingly,
but being desirous of good and deceived in judging, what they have approved thy
hold fast, whatsoever it is.
, not out of hatred but love of God, believing that they honor and affect the
Lord. Although they have not a right faith, yet they esteem this to be perfect
charity: and how they are to be punished, for this error of their opinion, at
the day of Judgment, none can know but the Judge Chrysostom in his Homily
against Anathematizers: That which is secret let him alone securely judge, who
is Judge of the whole world; to whom alone is known the measure of men's
knowledge, and the quantity of their faith. For tell me, whence can we know,
with what words a man will accuse or excuse himself in that day, when God shall
judge the secrets of men? His Judgments are inscrutable and his ways past
finding out.
. In the mean therefore, as I conceive, God lends them patience, because he
sees them, though not right believers, yet erring through affection of a pious
opinion. Concerning the Mantchees, let us hear him who stuck long in their
mire, Augustine; Let them rage against you, who know not with what labor Truth
is found, and how hard it is to avoid errors. Let them rage against you, who
know not how rare and difficult it is to overcome carnal phantasms by serenity
of a pious mind. Let them rage against you, who know not with what groans and
sighs it is effected, that in any sort God may be understood. Lastly, let them
rage against you, who are deceived with no such error, as they see you are
deceived with. For my part, indeed I cannot rage against you, with whom, as
once with my self, I ought now to bear, and treat you with as much patience, as
my friends showed to me, when I went astray in your opinion, mad and blind.
Athanasius Epist. ad solit.
sharply inveighs against the Arian heresy Deservedly do we hate the Authors of
so ill an example among Christians. See their crueltics in Eusebius of the life
of Constantin, lib. 1. 5, 38. Socrates lib. 4. 29. Procopius Vandal. 1. and
Gotth. 1. and Victor Uticensis. Epiphanius of the Semi-arians; They vex the
Teachers of truth, and confute them not with words but swords, and have
destroyed, not one, but many Towns and Countries. Of such Gregory Bishop of
Rome to the Bishop of Constantinople; It is a new and ^heard of way of
preaching, which beats men into belief.
, because it first used the power of the Judges against Dissenters, and
endeavored to draw unto it self by stripes and imprisonment, whom i^ could not
prevail with by persuasion: and so, says he, it manifests it self, how far
it is from piety, and from the worship of God, respecting, as I take it, that
which is read, Gal. 4. 29. Ad quem locum vide Hienymum citatum c. qui secundum
causa 23. quaest. 4.
Hilary has a like passage in his Oration to Constantin. In Gallia long since,
were condemned by the judgment of the Church, the Bishops, who took order, that
the Priscillianishs might be convicted with the sword: and in the East the
Synod was condemned, which had consented to the burning of Bogomilas, Wisely
said Plato; It is the fittest punishment for one in error, Errantis paenam esse
doceri.
. to be made to learn Seneca in Tragoedia: Quis nomen unquam sceteris errori
dedit? Et de ira, 14. Non est prudentis errantes odisse; alioquin ipse sibi
^dio erit. M. Anton us l 9. Si potes, meliora doce: si non potis, memento in
hoc tibi lenitatem datam. Ipsi dii lenes suut talibus. Chrysostom. ad Ephesians. 4. 17.
Eum qui ignorant neque malo affici, deque accus^ cportet; sed aequum est, ut
discat quae ignorant. Valentinianus, laudance Ammiano Marcellino l. 30. Nec
quenquam inquietavit, neque ut (...) coleretur imperavit, aut illud: nec
interdictis minacibus subjectorun cervicem ad id quod ipse coluit inclinabat,
sed intemeratas reliquit b^ parts, ut reperit.
.

CIV. Justly are they punished, that are irreverent to the Gods they own.
MOre justly shall they be punished, who are irreverent and irreligious toward
those whom they think to be Gods Vide de hac re Egregia apud Cyrillum libro
contra Julianum 5. and 6. Solon, as Plutarch in his life relates, prevailed
with the Amphictyones to make war upon the Cyrrhaeans, because they had robbed
the Temple of Delphi. And so are they rightly punished who falsely take upon them
the name of Prophets. Consule Agathiam l. 5.
And this was alleged among other causes of the Peloponnesian war Thucic l. 1.
between the Athenians and Lacedaemonians, and by Philip of Macedon Diodo^. l.
16.
against the Phocenses; of whose sacrilege Justin Justin. l. 8.
thus; It was athing that ought to be expiated by the forces of all the world.
Hierom on the sixth of Daniel: So long as the vessels were in the Idol-temple of
Babylon, the Lord was not angry (for they seemed to have consecrated the things
of God to divine worship, though by an erroneous opinion they mistook the
Deity:) but after that they pollute the divine things by human uses, presently
punishment waits upon the sacrilege. And truly Austin is of opinion, that God
advanced the Empire of the Romans, because, though in a false way, they were so
studious of religion; and, as Lactantius speaks, performed the chiefest
business of man, though not in truth, yet with a good intention. And we have
said above, that perjuries, even by false Gods, are revenged by the true God.
He is punished, said Seneca, because 7. de benef. 7.
he did it as to God: his opinion makes him liable to punishment. So al^ do I
take that other saying of Seneca: li diverse places the violators of Religion on
3. De Benef. 6.
punished diversely; but every where they are punished: and that of Plato
likewise, De Leg. 10.
where he condemns them as capital offenders.

CVI. Of Communication of punishment. How it passes to partakers of the fault.
WHen the question is about Communication of punishment, either we mean
partakers Tertull. de resurr. carnis; Dicent enim ministors and socios babere
arbitrium ministrandi atque sociandi, and potestatum suae voluntatis in
utrumque, homines sc. and ipsos, iceirco cum auctoribus merita communicare,
quibus operam Sponce accommodant.
of the fault, or others. They that are partakers of the fault, are punished
not so much for another as for their own offense. They then, that command a
vicious act, that give consent required Saulus manibus omnium lapidabat. Aug
sermon. 5. de sanctis cap. 4. similia, form. 1. and 14.
, that aid Institut. de furt. sect. interdum. Edicto Theuderici, c. 120.
, or entertain Hieronym. super parah. Non fur solum, sed ille reus tenetur, qui
surti conscius, quae ente possessore, non indicat. Chrysostom. de statuis 14. Non
enim persuri, sed and qui conscii cum sint, caelant perjuria, criminis tenentur.
, or any other way partake in the crime: that give counsel Vide Instit, and
edict. Theud. d. 1. Androcides ex lege Artica, Qui cons^ dedit eum non minus
voena teneri, quam qui manu rem effec^. Ne^ enim sine consiliores facta
fuisset, ait Arist. de Poet. c. 17.
, that praise and encourage Chrysostom. 1. ad Romans circa fin. Pejor peccante qui
peccantem Laudat. Qui facinorosum adstans hortatur, pro faciente habetur lege
Longogobardica l. 1. c. 9. sect. 25.
; that when by right properly so called they are bound to forbid, do not forbid
Chrysostom. 1. adversus Judaeos: Sic non li modo qui furtum fecere, sed and qui
prohibere cum possent non prohi^, puniuntur, and quidem pari uterque poena. Sic
cum qui sanari agrorum prohibet, teneri quasi vulnerasset, ait idem
Chrysostomus, ad Cor. cap. 7.
; or, when they are bound by like right to help the sufferer of injury, do not
help; that do not dissuade, when they ought to dissuade; that conceal the fact,
which they were bound by some Law to make known: all these may be punished, if
there be found in them such malice as may suffice to the merit of punishment,
according to the rules set down before.

CVI. The Community or Rulers are engaged by their subjects fault, if they know
and do not forbid it, when they can and ought.
THis point will be more cleared by examples. As another Community so also the
Civil is not to answer for the fact of particular men without committing or
omitting somewhat themselves. S. Augustine says well; We must make a difference
between the proper sin of every one, and the common sin of the people, which is
committed by a multitude disposed to it with one heart, and one will. Hence it
was in the form of leagues; If there be a failing by public Counsel Chrysostom.
de stat. 3. Non commune fuisse delictum Civitatis, sed extraneorum and
advenarum, qui cuncta tomeritateac legum ignorantia quam ratione facerent.
Neque vero aequum, ut ob paucorum imperitiam tanta urbs ever ^etur, and poenam
serrent culpae exortes. Ammian. l. 30. de Quadis: Nihil ex communi mente
procerum gentis delictum asseverantes in nostros.
. The Locrians in Livy make remonstrance to the Roman Senate, that the
defection did not proceed from any public determination. In the same Author
Zeno interceding for the Magnetes to T. Quintus and the Legates with him,
besought them with tears, That the madness of one might not be imputed to the
City, but that the Doer might run the peril of his own actions. And the
Rhodians before the Senate separate the public cause from the private, saying,
There is no City which has not sometimes wicked Citizens, and a rude multitude
always. So, neither is a Father bound by the fault of his children, nor the
Master of his servants, nor other Governors, except somewhat that is vicious
adhere to them. Now, among the ways whereby Governouis of other men become
guilty, there are two of especial use, and require our diligent consideration:
Sufferance and Receipt. Of sufferance we determine thus; He that knows a fault
to be done, that is able and bound to forbid it and does not, is guilty. Cicero
against Piso: Nor is the difference much, especially in a Consul, whether
himself by pernicious Laws and wicked speeches vex the Commonwealth, or suffer
others to vex it. Brutus to Cicero: You will say then, Do you make me guilty of
another fault? Yes truly, if it were in you to hinder it Par est delinquere,
and delinquentes non prohibere, ait Agapetus ad Justinian. Quisquis patitur
peccare peccantem, is vires subministrat audaciae, air Arnobius. Qui desinit
obviare cum potest, consentit: Augustinus. Egregie Proclus ad illud Hesiodi,
sape luit populus paenas unius iniqui: ait, (...) qui cum prohibere possit, non
prohibet unius malitiam.
. So, in the Army of the Grecians, where Agamemnon himself and the rest were
under the Common Council, it is right, that the Grecians were punished for the
offenses of their Princes; because it was in their power to compel So is this
explained by Cyril in his 5. book against Julian. Chrysostom in his first
homily to the Antiochians involves them all in the crime: The act, says he,
was done by a few, the guilt is laid upon all. We are all in fear and expect
punishment for their offense: which if we had prevented, and driven them out of
the City, we had been now in safety. Live. lib. 1.
Agamemnon to render the Priest his daughter. It is in Livy, The Kinsmen of
King Tatius beat the Ambassadors of the Laurentes: and when the Laurentes
pleaded the Law of Nations, Affection to his friends prevailed more with
Tatius: thus he drew upon himself the punishment due to them. Here is proper
that of Lib. 1.
Salvian concerning Kings. The Highest power which can restrain the highest
sin, does seem to approve it, if knowingly it be permitted. Thucyd. l. 1. and
6. (...) Dion says in the life of Galba, It is sufficient for private men not
to offend, but Rulers must take care that no other do transgress.
The Veientes and Latins excuse themselves in Livy, that their subjects helped
the enemies of Rome without their knowledge. But the excuse of Teuca Queen of
the Illyrians is not accepted, saying, Piracy was not exercised by herself, but
by her subjects; For she did not forbid them. So, of old, were the Scyrians
condemned by the Amphictyones Plutarch. Cimone.
for suffering some of their men to exercise Piracy. Now, it is easily presumed,
the things are known, which are conspicuous, which are frequent. That which is
done by many, can be unknown to none, says Dion Prusiensis. The Aetolians are
gravely Rhodiaca. Polyb. lib. 2.
reprehended by Polybius, that, when they pretended to be the friends of
Philip, they did nevertheless suffer their men openly to act hostility, and
preferred unto honors the principal actors of it.

CVII. Likewise if they receive then that have offended elsewhere, unless they
punish them or yield them up.
NExt, let us consider of Receipt. Punishments, as we have said, may be
required naturally by any one, to whom no like offense can be objected.
Commonwealths being instituted, it was agreed, that the faults of particulars,
which do properly belong to their own society, should be left to themselves and
their Rulers, to be punished or dissembled at their pleasure. Howbeit, so full a
right they have not, in offenses which in some sort belong to the Society of
mankind; which other Commonwealths and their Rulers have a right to prosecute;
just as in every Commonwealth, any one in some cases, may commence an action:
much less have they that full power in those offenses, whereby another state,
or the Governor of it is peculiarly wronged; and for which therefore He or
She, for their dignity of security, have right to require punishment, according
to what we have said above. This right then, the Commonwealth in which the
delinquent lives, nor the Ruler thereof, can justly hinder. But, seeing
Commonwealths are not wont to permit another State to come armed within their
bounds to exact punishment, nor is that expedient, it follows, that the
Commonwealth, wherein he lives that is found For the knowledge of the cause
ought to precede the dedition. It is not meet to give up men untried, says
Plutarch in his Romulus. The King of Scotland in Camden An. 85. says to Q.
Elizabeth, that he would transmit Fernihust and the Chancellor too, if they
were convicted by a fair trial.
guilty, ought to do one of the two, either punish him according to his desert,
being called upon; or leave him to the judgment of the offended State. For,
this is that which is meant by Dedere.
delivering up, so often mentioned in histories Lucullus required Mithridates
of Tigranes, and for denial made war upon him. Appian and Plut.
. So the other Israelites require of the Benjamits to deliver up the wicked
men, Jud. 20. The Philistines of the Hebrews to deliver up Samson to them as an
Evildoer, Jud. 15. So the Lacedaemonians waged war against the Messenians,
because they deliverd not up a certain man that had slain some Lacedaemonians:
and at another time for not delivering them that had ravished the Virgins sent
to offer sacrifice. So Cato gave his vote, that Caesar should be deliverd to
the Germans, for warring against them without just cause. So the Galls required
the Fabii should be deliverd to them Plutarchus Camillo. Livius lib. 28.
, for fighting against them. The Romans demanded of the Hernici the spoilers of
their fields, and of the Carthaginians, Aniilcar, not that Noble Captain, but
another that stirred sip the Galls: and afterward they demanded Annibal: and
Ingurtha of Bocchus, in these words in Sallust; So shall thou (...) once free
us from the sad necessity of prosecuting thee for thy error, and him for his
villainy. By the Romans themselves were given up those that had done violence to
the Carthaginian Ambassadors, and those that had done the like to the
Ambassadors of the Apolloniatae. The Achaians required of the Lacedaemonians,
that they should be yielded, who had assalted Lanvic, adding, except they were
yielded, the League seemed to be violate. So the Athenians Diodor. l. 16. Val.
Max. l. 6. c. 6.
by their Herald proclaimed, if any one had lain in wait for Philip, and had
fled to Athens, he was to be yielded up. The Boeotions exacted of the
Hippotenses, that they should be yielded up that had killed Phocus. All which
examples yet, are so to be understood, that the people or King be not strictly
bound to deliver up the party, but, as we have said, either to deliver him up,
or to punish him. For so we read the Eleans to have waged (...) upon the
Lacedaemonians, because they did nothing to them that had done the Eleans
injury: that is, they did neither punish, nor deliver up the guilty person
for, it is a disjunctive obligation. Some times, choice Vide foedus inder reges
Angliae and Daniae, memoratum Pontano de Mari. Caerites apud Livium (...) manis
significant lib. 7. Transeuntes agmine infesto per agrum s^ Tarquinienses cum
praeter viam nihil petiissent, quosdam traxisse (...) ejus quae fibi crimini
detur^ Comites: Eos, seu dedi placeat, dedere^ paratos esse, seu supplicio
affici, datures poenas. Quintil. declam ^55. Proximos existimo eos transsugis,
a quibus transfugae recipi^.
is left to them, for the better satisfaction, that demand the offenders.

CVIII. Whether the persons yielded up, and not received, remain Citizens.
P. Mutius Scaevola's opinion was for L. ult. D. de Legate.
the negative: because, whom the people had given up, they seemed to have
expelled him out of their City, as when they interdicted him fire and water.
Brutus is for the affirmative, and Cicero after him: which opinion is the
truer, yet not properly for that Argument which Cicero L. 1. and 2. de Orat.
Top. and pro A. Caecinna.
brings, because, as donation, so dedition cannot be understood without
acception. For, the act of donation has not perfection, but by consent of two
parties: but to deliver up, of which we speak here, is nothing else but to
permit a Citizen to be under the power of another people, to do with him what
they please. Now, this permission, neither gives, nor takes away any right; it
only takes away the impediment of execution. Wherefore, if the other people use
not the right granted, He who is given up will be in that condition that he may
be punished by his own people (which was done upon Clodius yielded Val. l. 6. c.
3.
to the Corsi; and not received by them;) or not punished, as there are many
faults, wherein either way may, be taken. The right of the City (as also other
rights and goods) is not lost, by the fact it self, but by some decree or
judgment, unless some Law will have the fact esteemed for a judged thing; which
cannot here be said. (And after this manner goods also, if they be delivered up
and not accepted, will remain whose they were.) But if the dedition be
accepted, and afterward, by some chance the party return, he will not be a
Citizen, except by a new favor: in which sense, true is the answer of
Medestinus. L. cos qui D. de captiv.


CIX. That the rights of suppliants belong to the miserable, not to the guilty;
with the exceptions.
WHat we have said of punishing, a giving up guilty persons, pertains not only
to those that have always been the subjects of him with whom they are found;
but to them also who after the crime committed have fled any Whither Nor do
those so much-spoken-of rights of suppliants, or examples of places of refuge
(...), Polybio and Malcho in excerpt. Leg.
hinder. For these profit such as a^ oppressed with causeless hatred, not suc^
as have committed that which is injurious to human society, or to other men
Gylyppus the Laconian in Diodorus Siculus, L. 13. biblioth.
speaking of that right of suppliants, says, They that introduced these rights
at first, meant the unfortunate should expect marcy; the injurious, punishment.
After: These men, if by the unjust desire of that which is another, they have
fallen into these evils, must not accuse fortune, nor impose on themselves the
name of suppliants. For that, by right, belongs to them that have an innocent
mind, and adverse for tune Oraculum vetus: Carum occidists, dum vis succ^ere:
nullum
Crimen habes; manus est tibi parior, ac suit ante.

. But the life of those men full of wicked acts, shuts up Duo illa fortunam and
injuriam Menander optime distinxit: (...).
(...).
Philo de Judice: Misericordia infortuniis debetur: at qui deliberata scientia
male agit, won infelix est, sed injusties. Sic M. Antonious mentem vult inspici
ut noris ignorantia in aliquo an consilium suerit. Sic (...), quae ex
ignorantia aut oblivione veniunt; and (...) quae ex consulto fiunt, distinguit
Totilas apud p ocop. Got. 3.
against them all places of refuge, and leaves no room for compassion. Cicero
has a saying out of Demosthenes: We must show compassion to those, whom
fortune, not their Deuteronomy. 19. 1. 23. 15. Exodus 21. 14. 1 Reg. 2. 29. 2 Reg. 11.
13.
own evil deeds have made miserable. So, in the most wise Law, when any one had
been stain by an Axe slipping out of another hand, the Cities of refuge were
open; but the most holy Altar it self was no protection for them that had stain
an innocent man deliberately, or had troubled the Common wealth. Which Law
Philo explaining says: Unholy men have no entertainment De spec. leg.
in the Holy place. And no otherwise the more ancient Greeks. It is related,
that the Chalcidenses refused Pipin received and would not deliver those that
sled to him out of Newstria oppressed by tyranny. Fredegarius in reb. Pipini
1188. And Ludov. cus Pius the Emperor received those that fled to him from the
Roman Church, as appears by his Decree, Anno 817.
to Plutarch. qu. Gr. 32.
yield Nauplius to the Achivi: but the cause is added; for he had cleared
himself from their objections. There was among the Athenians an Altar of mercy,
mentioned by Cicero and others; but for whom? Only for the miserable and
distressed. Aristides says, it was the proper praise Which Mariana ascribes to
the Arragonians. l. 20. 13. The Gep dae in Procopius had rather all perish than
give up Ildigisales to the Romans. Got. 4.
of the Athenians, that they were a refuge and comfort to all afflicted men
every where Aristid. Panathen. Idem alibi. His qui^ locorum infelices sun',
communis eis una est felicit as, bonitas civitatis Atheniensis, per quam
salutis compotes fiunt. Apud Xenopho^ rent Patrocles Phliasius in orat. quam
Athenis habuit: Laudab^ banc urbem quod omnes aut injuria affectos, aut sibi
praemetu^s, (...) fugiss^nt, auxilii compotes fieri intellexeram. Idem sensus
est a Epistola Demosthenis pro Lycu gi liberis. Et vide Sophoc. (...) di^. Col.
Lycurgus Advers. Leocr.
the Orator relates, that one Callistratus, who had done a capital fault,
advising with the Oracle received answer, that if he went to Athens, he should
have right, and that, in hope of impunity, he fled to the most holy Altar
there; and notwithstanding, was put to death by the City, most observant of her
Religion; and so the Oracle was fulfilled. Tacitus Annal. 3.
disallows the custom in his time received through the Grecian Cities, to
protect the wickedness of men, in reverence to the Gods. Princes indeed (says
the same Author) are like Gods: but neither do the Gods hear the prayers of
suppliants, except they be just Sophocles Ione; -- Non enim tangi decet, Manu
nocente numina; at justum fuit Piis patere Templa contra injurias.
. Such then are either to be punished, or yielded, or removed at least. So the
Cymaei in In Lusitania Ferdinand Lord Chamberlain, was taken by force out of
the Church, and burnt, for forcing a noble Virgin. Mariana lib. 21. Vide and de
Asylis librum Viri inagni Pauli Veneti, Societatis servorum quae dicitur.
Herodotus Herod. lib. 1.
, when they neither would deliver Pactyes the Persian, nor durst retein him,
permitted him to depart to Mitylene. Demetrius Pharius, who being conquered in
war had fled to Philip King of Macedon, was required of that King by the
Romans. Perseus King of Livius lib. 22 lib. 37.
Macedon, in his defense to Martius, speaking of those that were said to have
conspired against Eumenes: So soon as, being admonisht by you, I found the men
in Macedonia, I commanded them away, and charged them never to return into my
dominion So Rudolphus 2. Emperor removed from him Christopher Sbovius. Thuan.
A. 1585. Q. Elizabeth answers the Scots, that she would either render Bothwell,
or send him out of England. Camden. A. 1593.
. The Samothracians declare to Evander, who had lain in wait for Eumenes, that
he should quit the Temple. But this right of requiring to punishment, them that
had fled their Country, in these last ages, in most parts of Europe, is used
only in those crimes which do touch the public State, or are of a very heinous
nature. Lesser faults are wont to be past by with mutual dissimulation, unless
As Simler relates in the League of the Helvetii with the Mediolanenses. The
Leagues of the English with the French, appointed rebels and fugitives to be
yielded; with the Burgundians, to be expelled. Camden Anno 1600.
in the conditions of the League it were otherwise provided, and a more close
agreement made. This is also to be known, that Robbers and Pirates, who are
grown so strong that they have made themselves formidable, are rightly received
and defended, as to punishment; because it concerns mankind, that, if they
cannot otherwise, they may be recalled from their evil course by being assured
of impunity; and any people or Governor of people may, if they be able, effect
so good a work. This is to be noted too, that suppliants are defended till
their cause be tried Sic Demophon ad Legatum Euristheos apud Sophoclem; Si
crimen istis aliquot hospitibus struis, Jus impetrabis: vi quidem binc non
(...).
; and if that whereof they are accused be not forbidden by the Law of Nature or
Nations, the cause must be judged out of the Civil Law of the people whence
they come.

CX. How subjects are partakers of the faults of their Rulers, or Parts of the
whole; and how their punishments differ.
WE have seen how the fault passes upon the Rulers from the Subjects, either
ancient or newly come: the fault will like wise pass upon the subjects from the
highest Power, if the subjects consent to the crime, or do any thing by the
command or persuasion of the highest power, which they cannot do without
transgression; of which we shall more fitly speak below, where we shall examine
the duty of subjects. Moreover, between the whole and the parts, the Community
and single persons, the fault is communicated; because, as S. Augustine says,
The Community and the particulars go together, that being made of these; and
the whole being nothing else but the parts, in one. Howbeit, the fault perteins
to the severals that have consented, not to them that were overcome by the
votes of others. For, the punishments of the whole, and of the parts, are
distinct. As the punishment of particular men sometime is death, so it is the
death of a Commonwealth to be overthrown: which is, when the Civil body is
dissolved. Single persons are by way of punishment brought under slavery (as
the Thebans by Alexander the Great, those excepted, who contradicted the decree
of deserting his society;) So also a City undergoes Civil slavery, being
reduced into a province. Single persons lose their goods by consiscation; so,
from a City are taken away things common, as walls, shipping, ammunition and
the like. But, that particular men for the offense of the Community, without
their consent, should lose the things that are proper to them, is injust, as
Libanius rightly shows in his Oration concerning the sedition of Antioch. The
same Author approves the doing of Theodosius Eadem dicit and Chrysostomus de
hac re, in 17. de statuis. In eosdem Antiochenos paria olim constituerat M.
Antoninus Philosophus ut testis est Capitolinus: and in Byzantinos Severus,
demto Theatro, thermis, honor, ornamentisque omnibus; sed and ipsa urbs
Perinthiis data; vide Herodian. 2.
, who had punished a common fault by the interdiction of the Theater, Baths,
and title of Metropolitan.

CXI. How long the right of punishment lasts against a Community.
HEre occurres an eminent question, Whether punishment for the fault of a
Community may always be exacted. So long as the Community lasts, it seems it
may: because the same body remains, the parts succeeding one another. But, on
the other side, is to be noted, that some things are attributed to a Community
first and by it self, as, to have a treasury, Laws, and the like: some things,
by derivation from the particulars. For so we call a Community learned, and
valiant, which has most such. Of this sort is Merit or Desert; for, primarily
it agrees to Aristot. 7. pol. cap. 13.
the particulars, as having understanding, which the Community by it self has
not. Those then being extinct, by whom Merit was derived to the Community, the
Merit it self also is extinguished, and therefore the debt of punishment, which
we have said cannot consist without Merit. It seems to me, says Libanius,
Orat. de seditione Antioch.
you may account it a sufficient punishment, that none of the offenders are now
alive. And the judgment of Arrian's good, condemning Alexander's Wherefore
Julian in the praise of Constantius attributes to him another cause of war, and
says, No war, accounted just, was ever waged for such cause, not by the
Grecians against the Trojans, nor by the Macedonians against the Persians. For
they pursued not old crimes with late punishment of the children; but set upon
those that injured the posterity of men wel-deserving, (...).
revenge upon the Persians, those being long since dead, who had offended
Greece. Concerning the destruction of the Branchidae by the same Alexander,
this is the judgment of Curtius: Had these things been done against the Authors
of the treason, it would not seem cruelty, but a just revenge: Now, the
Children pay for the fault of their forefathers, when as they were so far from
betraying Miletum to Xerxes, that they never saw the place. Like unto this is
the judgment of Arrian in another place about the burning of Persepolis in
revenge of what the Persians had done at Athens: To me Alexander seems to
have done unwisely: for this was no true revenge upon those Persians, who were
dead before. That of Agathocles is ridiculous to every man, who answererd the
Ithacenses complaining of their damages, and told them, that the Sicilians had
once sufferd more from Ulysses. And Plutarch in his book against Herodotus
says, it is not probable, the Corinthians would revenge the injury received
from the Samians, after three generations. Nor is it a sufficient defense of
such deeds, which we read in Plutarch, of the late revenge of God. For the
right of God is one thing, and the right of men another, as we shall show
presently. Neither, if it be just that children should receive honors and
rewards for their Fathers good deeds, is it therefore just that they should be
punished for their evil. For, such is the matter of a benefit, that it may be
without injury conferred on any; not so, of punishment.

CXII. Whether the punishment may pass without Communication of the fault. Two
distinctions here needful.
WE have spoken of the ways whereby community of punishment happens from
community of fault. It remains that we see, whether, the fault being not
communicated, the punishment may. For the right understanding whereof, and that
things really distinct may not be confounded by likeness of words, we must
note, first, that the loss directly given, and by consequence, are to be
distinguished. Directly given I call that, whereby somewhat is taken away from
one, to which he has a proper right; By consequence, that, whereby it comes to
pass that one has not, what otherwise he should have had: to wit, the
condition ceasing without which he had not right. An example is in Ulpian: If I
L. Flumina sect. ult. de dam. inf.
have opened a Well in my grouod, whereby it has happened that the veins
coming to you are cut off: He says, my work has not done damage to you, in
that wherein I have used my own right. And elsewhere he says, there is much
difference 'twixt bearing damage, and being deprived of the gain which hitherto
one has received. And Paulus the Lawyer says Praeposterum esse, ante nos
locupletes dici, quam acquis^^rimus. L. pretia D. ad l. Falc.
: It is preposterous to be said masters of riches, before we have gotten them.
So, the parents goods being confiscate, the children truly feel the
incommodity, but it is not properly punishment; because those goods were not to
be theirs, unless preserved by the parents to their last breath. Which is
rightly noted by Alphenus, when he says, By the Fathers punishment, the
children lose that which should descend from him to them; but those things
remain entire, which were given, not By the Father, but by nature, or some
other way. So Cicero writes, Lib. 2. epist. 11. and 19.
that the children of Themistocles were in want, nor thinks he it unjust, that
the children of Lepidus should bear the same calamity. And that, he says, is
old, and of all Cities. To which custom yet, the later Roman Laws added much
temperament. L. cum ratio. D. de bonis dam.
So, when by the fault of the major part, which, as we have said, susteins the
person of the whole, the whole is in the fault, and for the same loses Civil
liberty, walls, and other things, the particulars who are innocent do also bear
the loss; but in that thing, which perteined not to them but by the whole.
Secondly, we must note, some evil is sometimes imposd upon one, or some good is
taken away, by occasion indeed of some fault, yet not so that the fault is the
immediate cause of that action, as to the right of doing. So he, who by
occasion of another debt has engaged himself, suffers evil Sponde, noxa
praesto est.
; but the immediate cause of his obligation is his promise. For, as he who is
become surety for a Buyer, is not properly bound by the bargain, but by his
promise: so also he who is bound for a delinquent, is not held by the
delinquency, but by his engagement. And hence it is, that the evil to be born
by him receives its measure, not from the fault of the other, but from the
power which himself had in promising. Consequent whereunto is this, that
(according to the opinion which we believe to be the truer) no man can, by his
becoming surety, lose his life: because we determine, No man has such right
over his own life, that he can take it from himself, or engage it to be taken
away by another: though the ancient Romans and Greeks were of another mind in
this matter: and therefore thought sureties were bound This is plain by the
words of Ruben to Jacob, Genesis 42. 37. and in Josephus 2. Antiq. c. 3. Hos va^^s
(...) anima vicarios vocat E^ropius Caligula. (...), (...) sponsores Diodorus
Siculus in excerp. Peir^sianis. Chrysostom. a^ Gal. ^. Sicut homine aliquo ad
mortem damnato, innocens alter pro ill^ se morti devovens illum supplicio
liberat. Augustine. epist. 54. ad Macedonium: Et aliquando qui causa fuit mortis
potius in culpa est, quam ille qui occidit. Velut fi quispiam decipiat
fide^ussorem suum, atque ille pro isto legitimum supplicium luat.
over to capital judgment, (as it is in a verse of Ausonius, and appears by the
famous history of Damon and Pythias;) and also often put Hostages to death, as
we will relate elsewhere. What we have said of life, ought to be understood of
members too; for, a man has not right over them, but for preservation of the
body. Now, if exile, if loss of money were in the promise, and by the others
fault the forfeiture was made, the surety shall bear the loss, which yet in
him, to speak exactly, will not be a punishment. The like is also in that right
which one has depending upon the will of another, as the right of that which
is precarious, respect being had to the dominion of the things; and the right
of private men, respect being had to the eminent dominion, which the
Commonwealth has for the public good. For, if some such be taken from one by
occasion of another fault, punishment is not properly therein, but execution
of an antecedent right in the Taker. So, because Beasts are not properly guilty
of a fault, when a beast is put to death (as in the Law De qua vide Maimonidem
directore dubitantium 3. 40.
of Moses, for copulation with man) that is not truly punishment, but the use
of man's dominion over the beast.

CXII. None is justly punished (in propriety of speech) for another fault.
THese distinctions premised, we shall say, None free from the fault can be
punished for the fault of another. The true reason whereof is not, that alleged
by Paulus the Lawyer, that punishments are constituted for the amendment of men
(for, it seems, an example may be given, without the person of the offender,
yet in that person that is near him, as shall be said presently;) but because
obligation to punishment arises from merit; and merit is personal, having its
original from the will, than which nothing is more ours, whence it is called
(...). Hierom says, Neither are the virtues, Epist. 3. in morte Nepot.
nor the vices of parents imputed to their children. Augustine: God himself
should be unjust, if he should condemn any Epist. 105.
one guiltless. Dion Chrysostom, when he had said, the posterity of
Transgressors were accursed by the Athenian sanction added to Solon's Laws,
concerning God's Law adds; This does not, like that, punish the children and
posterity of offenders: but every one is the author of his own calamity.
Pertinent is the Proverb, Noxa caput sequitur: and that saying of the Christian
Emperors, Punishment must remain there, where the fault is; and, Let sins light
only upon their L. Sancimus. c. de poenis.
authors, and the fear go no farther than the offense, Philo Lib. 2. de leg.
special. Idem lib. de piet. Haud scio an possit ullum pejus induci institutum,
quam si nic malos e bonis genitos sequetur poena, nec honos hahebitur bonis qui
ex malis parentibus nati sunt. Aliter lex quae de suis actionibus quemque
judicat, non ex cognatorum virtutibus laudat, aut ex cor^dem vitiis punit.
says, It is just, that the punishments should rest; where the sins do,
reprehending the custom of some Nations, that put to death the innocent
Children of Tyrants or Traitors Josephus calls such a fact of Alexander King of
the Jews, exaction of punishment more than belongs to man. (...).
. Which custom Dionysius Halicarnassensis reprehendeth also, and shows the
iniquity of the reason pretended, viz. That children will be like their
parents: for that is uncertain, and an uncertain fear ought not to be
sufficient for the death of any. There was one so bold as to dictate this to
Arcadius a Christian Emperor, that the children, in whom the examples of their
Fathers crime are feared, should be involved in the fathers punishment; and
Lib. 2. 8. Victoria de jure bell. n. 38. Graet. Prove. He Is a fool that kills the
father, and spares the ^hild.
Ammianus relates how the Issue was slain, being but very young, lest it should
grow up after the parents pattern. Neither is fear of revenge * a more just
cause. Nothing is more unjust, says Seneca Sen. lib. 9. de ira. c. 4.
, than that one should inherit his fathers hatred. Pausanias, the General of
the Greeks, touched not the children of Attaginus Herod. Call.
, author of the Thebans desection to the Medes; These, says he, had no finger
in the plot. M. Antonius in a letter to the senate: Ye shall pardon the son in
law and wife of L. quisquis. c: ad t. Jul. Majest.
Avidius Cassius (he had conspired against him:) And why do I say pardon, when
they have done nothing? God indeed, in the Law given to the Hebrews, threatens,
he will punish the iniquity of the fathers upon the children; But He has a
most full right of dominion, as over our goods, (...) over our lives too, being
his gift, which without any cause, and at any time, he can take away from any
one at his pleasure. Wherefore if, by an immature and violent death, he cut off
the children of Achan, Saul, Jeroboam, Ahab; upon 2 Samuel 21. 1 Reg. 14. 2 Reg.
8.
them he uses the right of dominion, not of punishment So Rabbi Simeon Barsema,
very truly.
; and, by the same act, punishes the parents in a more grievous manner. For,
whether they survive (which the Divine Law had very much respect unto, and
therefore extends not those threats beyond the children of the third and
fourth Generation, Exodus 20. because a man's Age may be lengthen^ to a sight of
them; and it is certain, the parents are punished with such a specta^, yea, it
is more grievous to them, So Chrysostom obseves, and with him consentech
Plutarch, saying. There is no sorer punishment, than to see those, which had
their being from us, to be miserable by our fault.
the what they bear in their own persons:) (...) whether they do not live so
long, yet (...) die in that fear is no small punishm^ The hardness of the
people, says Te^lian, brought in a necessity of such re^dies, that in
contemplation of their post^ty Alexander apud Curtium. (...) 7. Non oportebat
vos scire quid de his statuissem, quo tristiores periretis.
they might frame themselves (...) bedience. But withal we must note, G^ does
not use this more heavy vengeance except against offenses committed p^perly to
his own dishonor, as false (...) ships, perjurie, sacrilege. Nor did (...)
Greeks think otherwise; For, the crimes which were supposed to make their
posterity obnoxious (which they call (...) Vide Plutarchum Pericle.
) are all of that sort; upon which argument, Plutarch discourses eloquently,
in his book of the late Revenge of God. Aelian Lib. 3. 43.
has an Oracle of Delphi to this effect:

Inevitable Vengeance from above
Falls on the wicked, though allied to Jove;
Still imminent it is o'r them and theirs,
Successively entailed upon their Heirs.
It is spoken there of sacrilege As libanius also says, some of them had been
punished, others not yet, but they shall not escape, neither themselves, nor
their children. He says the like in another Oration set forth by Gothofred.
; and it ^s confirmed by the history of the Tholo^ane gold in Strabo and
Gellius. Like sen^ences we had before of perjury. But to proceed, though God
has threatened ^hus, yet does he not always use that ^ight, especially if some
eminent virtue And a public detestation of the fathers crime, like that of
Andronicus Palaeologus the Emperor, in Gregoras, lib. 5. c 81.
^hine forth in the Children, as we may ^e, Ezech. 18. and is proved by some
^xamples in the now-cited place of Plu^arch. And, since in the new Covenant ^ore
openly than in the old, are decla^ed the punishments, which remain for ^e
wicked after this life; therefore in that Covenant is there no commination
Tertull. de Men: Desivit uva acerba a patribus manducata dentes filiorum
obstupefacere: unusquisque enim in suo delicto morietur.
ex^ant exceeding the persons of the Trans^ressors; to which purpose, though
less ^lainly, is that foresaid passage of Eze^iel. Now for Men, they may not
imitate that vengeance of God: nor is the reason alike: because, as we have
said, God, without intuition of the fault has right over the life; men have
not, but upsome great crime, and such as is the persons own. Wherefore, that
same Divine Deuteronomy. 24. 16.
Law, as it forbids parents to be put to death for their children, so forbids
children to be put to death for the deeds of their parents. Which Law pious
Amaziah for example. Joseph. lib. 2. Philo de leg. sp. lib. 2. ^soc. Busir.
Dionys. lib. 8.
Kings, as we read, have fo^lowed, even in the case of Treason; and the same
Law is very much praised by Josephus and Philo, as a like Egyptian Law by
Isocrates, and a Roman Law by Dionysius Halicarnassensis Who says, that custom
was proper to the Romans, to free the children from al punishment, whose
parents were delinquents. The same is in a Law of the Wisigoths l. 6. tit. 1.
c. 8.
. Plato has a saying, which Callistratus the Lawyer expresses in this sense,
L. Crimen. D. de poenis.
The crime or punishment of the father can instict no blot upon the son. He
adds the cause. For every one bears that lot, which his own doings have drawn
for him; nor is he made successor of another's crime. Cicero says Lib. 4. de
not. Deorum.
; Would any Commonwealth endure that Lawgiver, by whose Ordinance the son or
grandchild is condemned, if the Father or Grandfather be a Delinquent? Hence it
is, that, to p^ to death a woman with child, was accounted a wicked thing, in
the Laws (...) the Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans Philo commends these Laws in
his book of Humanity. L. Imperator Adrianus. D. de s^atu hominum. L.
praegnantis. D. de poenis.
Moreover, if those human Laws be unjust, which do slay the children for t^
parents offenses, more unjust surely (...) the Law of the Persians and
Macedorans, devoting also and destroying the lives of kinsmen Philo said, it
was the manner of tyrants, together with the condemned, to destroy five
famimilies of neere^ relation. See Herodian. lib. 3. and the example at Milain,
when Galeatius was slain, in Bezarus, lib. 14.
, to the end the offenders against the King might fall the more sadly, as
Curtius speaks: a Law, says Ammianus Macellinus He calls it an abominable Law.
Vide and Council. Tolet. 4.
, that excelled all the Laws in the world, in cruelty. Notwithstanding all
this, it is to be noted, if children of traitors have any thing, or can expect
any thing, to which they have no proper right, but the right is in the people
or King, that may be taken from them by a certain right of dominion, the use
whereof, yet, may redound to the punishment of those that have offended. Hither
is to be referd that of Plutarch, touching the Children of Antiphanes a
traitor, that they were kept back from honors Simile reperies in C. in
quibusdam de poenis.
, as at Rome the children of those that were proscribed by Sulla. So, in the
foresaid Law of Arcadius, that is tolerable for the children; Let them not be
advanced to any honor, nor to any offices. What we have said of punishing
children for their parents faults, may be applied also to a people truly
subject (for a people not subject, through their own fault, that is, for their
negligence may be punished, as we have said:) if it be inquired, whether that
people may suffer for the evil deed of their King, or Governor. We do not
mean, if the peoples consent be added Philo of the subjects of the King of
Egypt in Abraham's time, says, All his family were partakers of the pain,
because none was displeasd at the unjust act, but all by approbation were
partakers of it. Josephus, where he relates the prophecy uttered against
seroboam, adds, The people shall be punished too, and be expeld out of that
happy land, and exiled beyond Euphrates, for accompanying the King in his
impiety.
, or any deed of theirs by it self worthy of punishment, but we speak of that
contract, which springs from the nature of that Body, whose Head is the King,
and members were the rest. God indeed, for David's sin, destroyed the people
with pestilence, and truly (as David thought) being innocent; but, it was God,
who had most full and absolute right over their lives. Mean while, the
punishment was not the peoples, but David's; for, as a Christian writer says,
It is the most bitter punishment to Kings Quaest. ad orth. 133.
that do amiss, to see their people suffer. This is all one, says the same
Author, as if he, that has done ill with the hand, should be Beaten on the
back. So Plutarch, in the like argument, compares it to a physicians method, in
curing one part, to open a vein in another. Why men may not do so, we have said
before. The same is to be concluded of punishing particulars (in things proper
to them) that have not consented, for the offense of the Society. And lastly,
the cause why an Heir being liable to other debts, is not liable to the
punishment Paul. IC. L. si poena. D. de poenis. Si poena alicui irrogatur,
receptum est commentitio jure, ne ad haeredes transeat.
of the deceased, is, for that the Heir bears the pers^ of the deceased, not in
respect of me^ which are merely personal, but of goods Cic. 2. de legib. Nulla
est persona quae ad vicem ejus qui e vita emigrav^ p^ pius accedat quam haeres.
which are engaged. Dion Prusaeensis: What the Ancestors owed, their posterity
must pay: for they have not refused the Inheritance.

CV. OF UNJUST CAUSES. Causes of War, some are justifick, others suasory.
POlybius, who first noted the difference, Cap. 22. Lib. 2. cap. 1. Vide supra
number. I. hujus part.
calls the former (...), Pretenses, because they are wont openly to be showed
(Livy several times uses the word Title;) the later he styles by the general
name (...), Causes Sic and Plutarchus distinguit in Galba, and Dion in rebus
Caesaris and Pompeii: and Polybius, ubi de Romanorum bello in Illyrios agit,
excerpto legationum 126. Cum Suetonio, recte illas praetextum, has causas
dixeris. Ita enim ille de Julio Caesare: Et praetextum quidem illi civilium
armo. um hoc fuit: causas autem alias fuisse opinantur. Thucydides alihi
distinguit (...) and (...) ut in A^heniensium motu adversus Siciliam,
praetextum fuit opitulari Egestanis, res ipsa cupiditas Siciliae sibi
acquirendae. Hermocrates in oratione, de Atheniensibus loquens, illud (...)
praetextum vocat, hoc (...) propositum. utrumque est in libro Thucydidis 6.
Appianus etiam (...) vocem usur pat in Mithridatico. Idem Civilium 5. ubi de
rupta pace inter Octavium and Sextum? ompeium agit, dicit (...) causas alia^
in^us fuisse, alias quae praeserebantur. Agathias libro 5. id quod alii (...),
vocat (...), figmentum and obtentum, cui oppo^it (...) in historia Hunui
Zanurganis. Procopins Persic. 2. dicit ftultum esse non libere loqui, ubi dux
est justitia, comes (...).
So, in the war of Alexander against Darius, the Pretense was Revenge of
Injuries which the Persians had done the Grecians, the Cause was desire of
Glory, Empire, and Riches: whereto was added great Hope of facility conceived
from the expeditions of Xenophon and Agesilaus. So, the pretense of the second
Punick war was Lib. 1.
the Controversy about Saguntum, the cause was the indignation of the
Carthaginians for the Agreements, which the Romans in unequal times had
extorted from them, and their courage raised by the prosperity of their affairs
in Spain, noted by Polybius, Likewise, Thucydides judges the true cause of the
Peloponnesian war to have been the Athenians growing Greatness, which brought
them into suspicion with the Lacedaemonians; but the pretense was the
controversy of the Corcyreans, Polideans and other things: where yet, be
promiscuously uses the terms, Sic and libro 5. de Argivis contra Epidaurios
agens, quam prius vocaverat (...) mox vocat (...). Quomodo and Graecum, (...),
Latinum Principiorum vocem, aliasque ejus generis, esse sensus ambigui
notavimus. Scrip tores Constantinopolitani Imperii id quod alii (...), sae pe
(...) vocan, nimi^um ex Achillis historia, qui ad resumenda arma ex Patroclo
sumsit materiam. Livius lib. 7. Lib. 36.
pretense and cause. There is the same difference in the Oration of the
Campanians to the Romans, when they say they fought against the Samnites, in
word for the Sidicines, in deed for themselves; because they perceived, when
the Sidicines were consumed, the fire would pass on to them. And Livy relates,
how Antiochus took arms against the Romans, in show, for the death of Barcilla,
and some other matters; is truth, because he had great hope of success by
reason of the decayed discipline of the Romans. So Plutarch observes, it was
not truly objected to Antony by Cicero, that He was the cause of the Civil war,
when Caesar, resolved upon a war, had only taken the pretext from Antony Haec
quidem praetexto opus habent; spec^em aliquam and deco^um titulum bellandi
dedere Verba sunt in hac historia Plutarchi. Lucans autem: -- Cunctasque
Pudoris Rumpunt fat a moras. Justos Fortuna laborat Esse ducis motus, and
causas invenit armis.


CVI. Wars without any cause are wild and brutish.
SOme, upon neither of these causes, are carried into wars, greedy of dangers,
as Tacitus speaks, for dangers sake. The faults of these men exceed every human
Tacit. Periculorum, propter ipsa avidi. De Alanis Ammianus, lib. 31. Ut
hominibus quietis and placidis otium est voluptabile, ita illos pericula juvant
and bella.
name, and is by Aristotle termed (...), serity. Of these, Seneca: I may say,
it is not cruelty but ferity, which takes pleasure in blood: we may call it
madness; whereof there be sundry sorts, and none more evident than that which
runs to the slaughter of men, and cutting them to pieces. To which sentence,
very like are those words of Ultimo Nicbo. match. Orat. 37. Epist. 4.
Aristotle: Very cruel indeed is he to be accounted, who Lib. 2. de Clem. cap.
7. Idem l. 2. de Irac. 5. de Apollodero locutus and Phalaride: Haec non est
ira, feritas est.
makes his friends his enemies, out of greediness to fight and shed blood. Dion
Prusaeensis: Without cause to be carried into wars and fights, is mere madness,
that seeks mischief to it self. And the forecited Seneca says, No man is so
inhuman, as to wast human blood, or very few.

CVII. Against wars, which have not justisick causes, or not truly such.
BUt the greatest part of those that go to war have suasory causes, and those,
either without justifick causes, or with them. Some care not at all for
justisick causes: of whom that may be said, which is in the Roman Lawyers, He
is a Robber L. pro haerede. sect. ult. and seq. leg. D. de haered petit Talis
Herulorum in Longobardos, (...), bellum sine praetexiu.
, who being asked of the cause of possessing, brings no other, but that he does
possess. Aristotle, of those that persuade to war: Men, that oftentimes regard
not at all, whether it be just or no, to subdue their harmless neighbors. Such
a one Talis Silio Annibal, cui -- pro faedere, proque Justitia est ensis. Talis
Attila, and quibus illud in ore est, Quaeritur belli exitus, Non causa. Et:
Haec acies victum factura nocentem est. Et: In sumnia fo tuna, id aequius quod
validius.
was Brennus, who said, Let the strongest Galli apud Livium 5. in armis ^e jus
far, and omnia fortiu^ virorum est. Lib. 4. de Civi^. Dei c. 6 De ^alib.
bellis Velleius: Bella non causis inita, sed prour eorum me ces suit.
take all. Such a one was Annibal in Silius, Whose right was his sword. Such
also was Attila; and such are all, that use these words:

No matter how the war begins,
If we can bring it to our ends.
To these men, you may fitly apply that of Augustine: To wage war against the
nearest, and thence march on to others, and out of a desire of rule to conquer
Nation^ that provoke you not, what is it to be named, but Great Robbery? In
Cicero Offic. 1.
we read: The height of mind, which is discoverd in dangers and labors, if it
want justice, is so far from virtue, that it is rather immanity Agathias lib. 2.
Qui vero aut lucri causa aut caeco odio, nullam habentes justam querelam,
alienas terras inva ^unt, innoxiis noxii, hi homines sunt and superbi and
improbi. Exemplum nobis dat illustre Menander Protector: Bajanus Avarorum
Chaganus, nulla occasion aut obtentu, ne conatu^ quidem causam vel falsam
contra Romanos Comminisci, inverecunde planeque barbarum in morem exuit pacta.
, and an enemy to all humanity. Andronicus Rhodius; Who, for to gain much,
receive whence they ought not, these are called evil, impious and unjust; such
as are tyrants Been Philo ad Decalogum: Qui vero furum vires nacti sunt, hi
totas praedantur urbes, paenarum securi, quod supra leges eminere videantur.
Tales sunt homines ingenio minime civili, dominatuum and potentatus avidi,
magna surta committentes, qui puleris nominibus magistratuum and imperiorum id
obtegunt quod verius latrocinium appelletur.
, and the Plunderers of Cities. Others do allege causes, as it were, justifick;
which being weighed in the scale of right reason are found unjust: and it
appears, as Livy speaks, not a contention about right, but an offer of
violence. Many Kings, says Pyrrho.
Plutarch, use the two names of Peace and war, not to that which is just, but
to that which is expedient.

CVIII. Fear of an uncertain danger no just cause of war.
AMong the unjust causes of war is fear taken from neighboring power. Which
fear, we have said above, is not sufficient. For, that Defense may be just, it
ought to be necessary: it is not so, unless we be sure, not only of the power
of a neighbor, but of his will: sure, by that certainty, which has place in
matter of morality. Wherefore, their opinion is not to be allowd, who make it a
just cause of war, if a neighbor, hindered by no agreement, build a Castle on
his own ground, or some other fortification, which may sometime do us hurt.
For, against such fears contrary fortifications in our land, and the like
remedies, not warly forces, are to be provided. Unjust therefore were the wars
of the Romans upon Philip of Macedonia, Zonaras Pausan. lib. 1.
of Lysimachus upon Demetrius, unless there were some other cause. I am very
much pleased with that in Tacitus, of the Cauchi: A people among the Germans
most noble, who maintain their Greatness by their Justice; without
covttousness, without impotency; quiet and secret: They never provoke their
neighbors to war, never make inrodes upon others, ^r depopulations: And this is
a principal argument of their valor and might, that they attain not their
superiority by being injurious: yet are they all ready for war, and if need be,
they have an Army present: Great store of Foot and Horse: and famous, even in
times of peace Tac'tus de Cauchis: Populus inter Germanos nobilissimus, quique
magnitudinem suam malit justitia ^ol, s^ cupiditate, sieve impotentia: quieti,
secretique nulla provocant bell^; (...) raptibus aut latrociniis populantur:
idque praecipuum virtutis ac (...) argumentum est, quod, ut superiores agant,
non per injurias assequ^tur; promta tamen omnibus arma, ac, sires poscat,
exercitus; pl^imum viro ^m equcrumque, and quiescentibus eadem fama.


CIX. Of some other unjust causes.
NEither does Utility make equal right with necessity. So, where other wives
enough are to be had, the denial of some Match cannot give cause of war; which
yet Hercules took against Euritus, Darius against the Scythians Et Antonius
Caracalla in Attabanum Parthorum Regem. Vide Xiphilinum. Hist. 4.
Nor is the Desire of a people to change their seat, a just cause of war, that
leaving moorish and desert Land, they may possess a more fruitful soil: which
was the case of the old Germans, as Tacitus relates. No less unjust it is, to
challenge by the title of a new found Land, what is held by another; though he
that holds it be wicked, think amiss of God, or be of a dull wit. For,
Invention is of those things that belong Vict. de Ind. rel. 1. n. 31.
to none; neither is moral virtue, or religious, or perfection of understanding
required to dominion. This indeed seems probable, if there be any people
altogether destitute of the use of reason, such have no dominion, but out of
charity only is due unto them what is necessary for life. For, what is said of
the support Vict. de bello. n. 5, 6, 7, 8. Idem. l. 2. n. 18. Plato de repub.
l. 2. c. 3. Euripid. Hecuba. Live. l. 31. Isocrat. Panath.
of Dominion in behalf of infants and madmen by the Law of Nations, pertains
to those nations, with whom there is commerce of Covenants. Such are not they
that are wholly mad, if there be any such, of which I do justly doubt. Unjustly
therefore did the Grecians call the Barbarians enemies to themselves, as it
were naturally, by reason of their diversity of manners, and happily because they
seemed inferior in wit. Yet, for some grievous sins, and such as oppugn nature
and human society, we deny not but dominion may be taken away. Moreover,
Liberty (...).
, whether of single persons, or of Commonwealths, as if it did naturally and
always agree to all, cannot yield a right to war Vide Council. 4. Toletanum.
Agrippa rex apud Josephum in oratione ad Judaeos, qui ex praepostero repetitae
libertatis sludio Zelotae dicti sunt, sie ait: Intempestivum est nunc
libertatem concupiscere. Olim ne ea amitteretur certatum oportuit. Nam
servitutis periculum facere durum est, and ne id subeatur honesta certatio. At
qui semel subactus deficit, non libertatis amans dicendus est, sed servus
contumax. Atque ipse Josephus ad eosdem: Honestum quidem est pugnare pro
liberate, sed id olim factum oportuit. At qui victi semel sunt, and longo
tempore pa^uerint, si jugum excutiant, saciunt quod desperatorum hominum est,
non quod libertatem amantium. Eadem ferme verba reperies in oratione Comit^
Blanderatensis ad Mediolanenses apud Radevicum 1. cap. 40.
. For, when liberty is said to agree by nature to a man or people, that is to
be understood of the right of Nature preceding all human fact, in this sense
Intelligendum de liberate (...), non de ea quae est (...). Seneca, 3. Contr.
21.
, that one is not a servant by nature, not that he has a right never to become
a servant; for in this sense no man is free. Here is pertinent that of
Albutius: No man is born free, no man is born a servant: these names were
imposed afterward upon every one by fortune. And that of 1 Polit.
Aristotle: It is the effect of Law, that one is free, another serve^.
Wherefore they that upon lawful cause are come into servitude, whether personal
or civil, ought to be content with their condition, as also Paul the Apostle
teaches, Art thou called to servitude? Let it not vex thee. 1 Cor. 7. 21.
Farther, it is unjust, to subdue by arms any, as if they were worthy to serve,
whom Philosophers sometimes call naturally servants. For, suppose a thing be
profitable for one, it does not therefore presently follow, that it is lawful
for me to force it on him. For, they that have the use of reason, ought to have
a free election of things profitable and unprofitable, unless another have
gotten some right over them. The case of Infants is quite otherwise, whose
government, seeing they have not power Jus exercendae (...). Vict. de Ind. n.
24. Ayala de ju. btlli. lib. 1. Covar. c. peccatum p. 2. sect. 9. n. 5. etc. Ad
leg. Hosts D. de capt. l. (...). adl. Rhod.
to moderate their own actions, nature commits to the occupant, or some fit
person.

CX. Of the Title of universal Emperor.
I Would scarce add, that it is an unwise title which some attribute to the
Roman Emperor, as if he had a right of commanding over nations most remote and
hitherto unknown; unless Bartolus, long accounted the Prince of Lawyers, had
ventured to pronounce him an heretic that denies it; forsooth, because the
Emperor sometime styles himself Lord of the world ut in conc. Chalcedon. Act.
11. and 12.
; and because, in Scripture, that Empire, which later Writers call Romania Ut
and Athasius ad Solitarios. Id vix sexta pars erat mundi tunc cogniti.
, is called by name of the word, Philo de legatione; De pluribus utilissimisque
orbus partibus loquor, quas and eminenter aliquis orbem appellet, definitum
amnibus duobus Euphrate and Rheno,
(...). So is that of the Poet, The Roman Conqueror held all the world, and
many like sayings, spoken by way of excess or excellence. And in the same Holy
Scripture, Judaea alone comes often under the title of the world Hieronym. Nomen
terrae etiam cum additur particula omnis, restringi debit ad eam regionem de
qua sermo est.
: in which sense is to be taken that old saying of the Jews, that the City of
Jerusalem is seated in the midst of the earth, i. e. of Discas hoc ex Jos. lib.
3. de bello Jud. Luc. 2. 1. Arist. 7. Polit. 4.
Judea: as in the midst of Graecia Delphi, likewise called the navil of the
world. Nor ought any one be moved with Dante's arguments whereby he endeavors
to prove, the Emperor has such a right, because it is expedient for mankind.
For the commodities hereof are equalld with incommodities. And as a ship may be
made of such a greatness which cannot be governd; so may the number of men and
distance of places be so great, that it cannot admit the government of one.
But, grant it is Silv. verbo Bellum. p. 1. n. 21. Covar. loco citato n. 9.
expedient, there follows not a right of Empire, which arises not but but
either from consent, or punishment. Nay, the Roman Emperor now has not right
over all that of old perteined to the people of Rome. For, many things, as
gotten by war, so were lost by war; some by covenant, and some by dereliction
passed into the right of other nations or Kings Exemplum sum in Hispania, de
qua vide Gomerium in sect. fuerat number. 5. de actioni^.
Again, some Cities fully subdued once, afterward became subject only in part,
of only confederate unequally. All these ways, either of losing or changing
right, are or force, no less against the Roman Emperor, than any other.

CXI. Of the Empire of the Church.
THere have been also, who would assert, Vict. de Ind. rel. 21. and seq. Ayala
l. 1. n. 29.
the Church has right over the Nations of the hitherto unknown part of the
earth: when yet the Apostle Paul himself has openly pronounced, He had 1 Cor.
5. 12.
no power to judge those that are without. And whatsoever right of judging
belonged to the Apostles, though it pertained also, in its way, to earthly
things, yet was it of a heavenly (that I may so speak) not of an earthly
quality; to be exercised, not by the sword and scourge, but by the Word of God
generally proposed, and applied to peculiar circumstances, by the exhibition of
the seals of divine grace, or the denial of them, as it was for the good of
every one: and lastly by vengeance, not natural, but above nature, and therefore
proceeding from God; such as appeared in Ananias, Elymas, Hymenaeus and others.
Christ himself, the spring of ^ll Ecclesiastical power, and whose life is ^he
exemplar proposed to the Church, as ^uch, said, his Kingdom was not of this
world, that is, not of such a nature as other Jo. 18. 36. Matthew. 26. 53. Vid.
Petr. Dam. l. 4. epist. 9. and Bern. ep. 221.
Kingdoms: adding, otherwise after the manner of other Kings he would use the
service of soldiers. But now, although he had desired Legions, he would have
^alled for, not those of men, but of Angels. And whatsoever he did by right of
his power, he did it not by human but divine virtue, even then when he cast the
buyers and sellers out of the Temple. For, the scourge was not an instrument,
but a sign of divine anger; as at other time spittle and oil a sign healing
Abulensis on Matthew. 9. well explains this.
, not a medicine. Augustine upon that place of John: Hearken ye Jews and
Gentiles, Circumcision and uncircumcision; Herkin all ye Kingdoms of the earth:
I hinder not your domination in this world Hilarious Arelatensis. For Christ
came not to invade another glory, but to impart his own: not to take an
earthly Kingdom, but to bestow an heavenly. 1. Tim. 3. 2.
. My Kingdomn is not of this world: Do not ye fear most vainly, as Herod the
Great feared, when he heard of the birth of Christ, and slew so many Infants,
hoping to destroy him, being more cruel in his fear than in his anger. My
Kingdom, says he, is not of this world. What would you more? Come unto the
Kingdom, which is not of this world. Come by believing, and do not rage by
fearing. Paul, among other things, forbids a Bishop to be a striker. To rule by
a necessity imposed, i. e. which proceeded from human force, is the part of
Kings n^ of Bishops, said Chrysostom Act. Apost. hom. 3. epist. ad Tit. hom. 1.
ep. 1. ad These. hom. 4.
. And (...) De sacerdot. lib. 2. Christians are not permited to chastise, by
force, the faults of the guilty. Secular Judges, awing evildoers by the^ Laws,
exercise power over them, and constrain them to obed^ence even against their
will: But we must endeavor to ref^ men, not by compulsion but persuasion.
Neither do the Laws (...) low us power of coercion; and if they did, how should
we use (...) seeing God does not crown those that abstein from evil necess^ly,
but willingly? Wherefore, we must take pains to pers^ sick souls to yield them
selves of their own accord to be ^ured (...) us. A little after. He that
erreth, from the faith, cannot be drawn unto it by force, nor compeld by fear.
And upon Ephesians. 4. We are appointed to teach men, not to command, not to
exercise a coercive power. We are like Counselers, who advise the hearer, not
force him, but leave him his free choice. Ambros. l. 2. de Cain, and Abel. 4.
Sacerdos quidem officium suum exhibet, at nullius potestatis jura exercet.
Citatur c. verbum. de poenit. did. 1.
where, We have not power granted us to restrain men from offenses by authority
of our sentence: i. e. such as conteins in it a powerful execution by a ruling
or military hand, or a deprivation of any human right whatsover Ad reges enim,
non ad Ecclesiam pertinet judicare de feudis, c. novit. de judiciis: de seudis:
de possessionibus, c. causam quae inter. qui filii sint legitime. Reges enim
superiorem in temporalibus minime recognoscunt, c. per venerabilem. eod. tit.
Christus voluit ut Christiani Impp. pro vita aeterna pontificib. indigerent,
and Pontifices pro cursu temporalium rerum Imperialibus legibus uterentur;
quatenus spiritalis actio a carnalibus distaret incursibus, and Deo m^litans
minime secularibus negoti^ se implicaret. C. quoniam distinct 10. etc.
. Hence it sufficient appears, that Bishops, as such, have no right to reign
over men after a human way. Hierom Hieron. in epitaph. Nepotiani. Minus licet
Episcopo quam Regi. Ille enim nolentibus praeast, hic volentibus. Ille terrori
subjicit, hic servi^utl donatur. Cassiod. lib. 11. in epist. ad Episcopos:
Episcopus doceat, ne Judex possit invenire quod puniat. Fredericus primus apud
Guntherum Ligurino de pontifice: Ecclesiam regat ille suam, divinaque jura
Temperet: imperium nobis fascesque relinquat.
Suennonem Daniae regem excommunicatum cum Roschildensis Episcopus Wilhelmus ab
ingressu Ecclesiae oppositu baculi pastoralis arceret, and regii capulis
admoverent manum, fecit quad Episcopicrat, and cervicem porrexit.
, comparing a King and Bishop together, says, The one rules the unwilling, the
other the willing. But, whether Kings themselves may wage war, in the way of
punishment, against those that reject Christian Religion, is above inquired.

CXII. Of a desire to fulfill Prophecies.
THis also I will add (not in vain, bu^ because comparing new occurrences with
old, I foresee much mischief, except care be taken:) that war is not justly
grounded upon a hope conceived out of some exposition of Divine Prophecies Vide
de Theodoro quodam Gratiani tempore Zozimum and Ammianum Marcellinum: de Joanne
Capadoce Procopium Persicorum 2. and Leunclavium Hist. Turc. l. 18.
, For, beside that Oracles not yet fulfilled can hardly be interpreted with any
certainty without a prophetical spirit For the Prophetical books are shut and
sealed up til the appointed time, so that they cannot be understood, Dan. 12.
4, 8, 9. Hierom (...) Daniel; If a Prophet heard and did not understand, what
(...) they do, who, by presumption of mind, interpretet a book sei'd and very
obscure until the ^ime of consummation. Procopius (...) the 2. of his
Gotthicks; I think it impossible for man to find (...) the sense of the
Sibylline Oracles before they are fulfilled. G^ ras in his 5. book; As other
predictions are most hard to be interpreted, because they have many
perplexicies, and aomit serv^ ral explications: so also this Oracle deceived
all, even the Emperor himself, as long as he lived. But after his death, the
Or^ explaned it self. Take heed to your selves, ye over-bold Dvines: Take
liced of overbold divines, ye Statesmen. Word is that place to be seen in
Thuanus. lib. 79. in An. 1583. concerning Jacobus Brocardus.
, the times even of things certain may be hid from us. And moreover, a
prediction, without express command of God, gives no right: for, by wicked
men, or unjust actions, God does oft-times permit the things he has foretold
to come to pass.

CXIII. Of that which is due, not by strict justice, but otherwise.
ANd this is also to be known, if one owe a thing, not by proper justice, but
by another virtue, as liberality, favor, mercy, charity; that, as it cannot be
required in the Court, so neither can it be demanded by arms. For to both of
these ways it is not sufficient, that the thing required ought to be done by
some moral reason, but moreover it is needful there be in us a certain right
unto it: which right sometimes divine and human Laws do give also about the
dues of other virtues, and then a new kind of debt arises perteining unto
Justice. But when that is wanting, war upon this cause is unjust; as, that of
the Romans upon the King of Cyprus for his ingratitude. For, he that has given
a benefit, has no right to exact a recompense; otherwise, it were not a
benefit, but a contract.

CXIV. A distinction of war, unjust in respect of the cause, or of some
accident.
ONe thing more is to be noted, It often Vict. de jure belli n. 2.
falls out, that a war may have a just cause, and yet the action receive some
stain from the mind of the doer: either for that some other thing, not
unlawful by it self, does more the mind than the right; (to wit, desire of
honor Which vice especially flatters us with a show of virtue; but S. Augustine
well advises, saying, It is better undergo the shame of any cowardice, than
seek the glory of such arms: Lib. 3. de Civit. Dei c. 14.
, or some profit, whether private or public, which is expected from the war
considerd apart from its justifick cause:) or else, for that an affection
plainly unlawful is with him, as the joy of one pleasing himself in another
evil without respect of good. So Aristides in his second De societate says,
the Phocenses perished deservedly, but Philip did not well when he destroyed
them, not being studious of religion which he pretended, but ambitious to
enlarge his Empire. Profound ambition and avarice, as Sallust speaks, is one
cause of war, and that an old one. And Tacitus says, Gold and Power are the
principal causes of wars Rupere soedus impius lucri furor, Et ira praeceps.
Sen. Hippol.
. Whither you may also refer that of S. Augustine Contra Faust. l. 22. c. 74.
; Desire of hurting, Cruelty of revenging, an unpeaceable and unplacable mind,
fierceness of rebelling, lust of domineering, and the like, these are the
things that in wars are justly blamed. But these, where a just cause is not
wanting, do indeed argue a crime, Tho. 2. 2. 74. 66. 8.
yet do they not make the war properly unjust; whereupon, neither is
restitution due for the same.

CXV. Of doubtful causes. Whence Doubts do arise in moral matters.
IT is most true, which Aristotle has 1 Eth. N c. 1.
written, that there is not so much certitude in moralls, as in the
Mathematics: because, the Mathematics separate forms from all matters, and
the forms, most part, are such, that they have nothing In his mutatio sil
(...), in aliis (...).
interposed, as between straight and crooked there is no medium; But in
moralls, even the least circumstances vary the matter, and the forms here are
wont to have something Vide Chrysostomum ad 4. ephesians. 2. Morali.
between them, with such latitude, that the access is nearer sometimes to this
extreme, sometimes to that. For so, twixt that which ought to be done, and that
which ought not to be done, is interposed that which may be done, but is
nearer, now to this, now to the other part: whence ambiguity arises often, as
in the dusk air, or in warm water. And this is that which Aristotle says,
Oftentimes it is hard to judge, which is to 3. N^com.
be preferred. Andronicus Rhodius says; It is to discern that which is truly
just, from that which seems so.

CXVI. Nothing is to be done against ones own judgment, though erring.
THis is principally to be observed; that, although a thing be just in it self,
b^ done by one, who having weighed all, thinks it unjust, the act in vicious,
For, this is that which the Apostle S. Pa^ says, Romans 14. 23. To the same
purpose are these words in the same chapter Let every one be fully persuaded in his
own mind. And, Happy is he who condemns not himself in that which he
allows. Ambrose says, It Is sin to do otherwise than ones judgment leads:
and so Augustine: both cited by Gratian c. 28. q. 1. That of Plutarch in his
Timolcon is of like sense: It is required, says he, not only that the thing
done be honest and just, but that it be done with a (...) per swasion, and with
judgment. De Offic. lib. 1.
Whatsoever is not of faith is for. Where faith signifies the minds judgment
about any matter. For, God ha^ given unto men a judging faculty, as a guide
unto their actions, by contemp^ whereof the mind becomes brutish. Now, it
often comes to pass, that the Judgment shows no certainty, but sticks; and
(...) this hesitation cannot be cleared by attent consideration, that if Cicero
must be followed: Their precept is good, that serbid to do any thing, which you
doubt Plin. lib. 1^ epist 19 Quod dubitas, non feceris. Covar. tom. 1. de
Matrim. (...) 2. c. 7. sect. 2. n. 9.
, whether it be right or wrong. The Hebrew Masters say, Abstein from a
doubtful matter. But this cannot have place where one must do one thing of the
two and it is doubted of both, whether it b^ right; for then a man may choose
the which seems to him the least evil. For that always, where the choice is
ine^table, puts on the appearance of good, O^ evils take the least, says
Aristotle: and Nicom. 2. c. 9. Cic. Offic. 3. De malis minima.
Cicero likewise: and Quintilian, The lighter evil obteins the place of good,
when several evils are compared together.

CXVI. How the Judgment in drawn either way.
BUt, for the most part, in doubtful matters after some examination the mind
sticks not in the midst, but is drawn this way, or that, by Arguments Augustine
in his third de Ordine, says, There are two ways, which lead us through the
dark, when things are obscure, the one of reason, the other of authority.
taken from the matter it self, or from the opinion a man has of other men
pronouncing sentence about it. For, here also is true that of Hesiod, It is
most excellent to be able to direct oneself: next, to follow the good direction
of another Minutius in Livy lib. 22. borrowed this of Hesiod, saying, He is the
first man, who can give Counsil, and show what is good; next is he, that obeys
the good Counsil of another; He that can do neither is a man of an extreme bad
temper. Cicero has words of the same meaning in his Oration for A, Cluentius,
Victor. de Ind. rel. 1. n. 12. and de jure bell. 21. and 24. Arist. 1. Top. c.
1.
. Arguments from the matter are deduced from the causes, effects, and other
adjuncts. But to the right discerning of these, there is need of Vasquez
disput. 62. c. 3. n. 10.
some experience and skill; they that have not this, to conform their active
judgment rightly, must hear the Counsils of wise men. For, those things, says
Aristotle, are probable, which seem so to all, or to most, or at least to wise
men: and to these again, either all, or most, or the more excellent. And this
way of judging is most used by Kings, who have not leisure themselves to enter
into the depth of learning;

(...).
The company of wise men brings
Learning and Wisdom unto Kings.
Aristides says, As in questions of fact that is accounted for truth, which is
supported by most and most sufficient witnesses; so those sentences are to be
followed, which are grounded upon most and most worthy authorities. Thus the
old Romans entered into war, not without consulting the College of the Feciales
instituted for that end; nor the Christian Emperors, scarce ever, without
advising with the Bishops, that if any thing did hinder in point of Religion,
they might be admonisht of it.

CXVIII. In doubtful cases, the safer way is to be taken. Three ways to avoid a
doubtful war.
NOw, it may fall out in many Controversies, that on either side probable
arguments may show themselves, whether intrinsecal to the matter, or from
authority. In this case, if the matter be of small moment, the choice, which way
soever it be, seems to be free from fault But, if it be a weighty question,
as concerning the life and death of a man, here because of the great difference
between the things to be chosen, the safer way is to be preferred In istam
partem potius peccato tamen. Ammianus: Lenitas acerbitati anteponenda. lib. 28.
. Therefore, it is better to acquit the guilty than condemn the innocent. The
writer of the problems that bear the name of Aristotle says so Prob. sect. 29.
ubi pro (...), vulgo legitur (...), and contra. Anti-phon. Si e^randum est,
sine jure absolvere, quam per injuriam condemnare est sanctius. Nam in illo
error est, in damnatione insontis facinus.
, and adds the reason which we have already given: For, where one doubts, he
must choose that part, wherein the offense is less. War is a thing of the
greatest consequence, from which very many evils are wont to follow even upon
the innocent: wherefore, when judgments differ, we must incline to Laudator
Silio Ital co Fabius: -- Cauta speculator mente futuri,
Nec laetus dubiis parvisque sacessare Martem.

peace. And, three ways there be to keep Controversies from breaking forth into
war. The first is Conference. Being there are two kinds of discipation, says
Cicero, one by conference, the other by force; and that is proper to man, this
to beasts: we must fly to the later, if we cannot use the former De Offic. 1.
Victor. de jure bell. n. 28. Terentius: Omnia prius experiri quam armis
sapientem decet:
Qui scis, an quae subeam sine vi faciat?
Euripides. Verbi id impetrabo; sui nequeo, manu.
Dionys. Halicarn. in excerptis legationum; Non ante ad res veniendum est, quam
tentata sit verborum via. Menelaus apud Libanium: Homini convenientius, prius
verborum experimentum saccre, quam statim ad arma prosilive.
. Phaneas in Livy says; To avoid a necessity of war, men do willingly remit
many things, which cannot be forced from them by arms Donatus ad Eunuchum:
Pervulgatum est enim, quod summa ^i defenderis quum extorquetur, hoc idem
postmodum remitti remittentis.
. Mardonius in Herodot us blames the Grecians in this respect: Who being of one
language should have determined their Controversies by Commissioners, and not
by battle Coriolanus in Halicarnessensis: If one desire not another, but seek
his own, and upon denial make war, all men confess it to be just. In the same
Halicarnessensis King Tullus: Arms must decide, what words are not able to
compose. Vologeses in Tacitus: I had rather preserve my Ancestors possessions,
by equity than blood, by a fair trial than by force. And King Theodoricus:
Cass. 3. Var. 17.
Then only is it profitable to go to war, when Justice can find no place among
our Adversaries. Another way to avoid war, among them that have no common
Judge, is Compromise. It is not lawful, says Thucydides, to invade him as
injurious, who is ready to submit to an Arbitrator. So, concerning the Kingdom
of Argos, Adrastus and Amphiaraus made Eriphyles their Judge, as Diodorus
relates. Concerning Salamis, three Lacedaemonians were chosen judges between
the Athenians and Megareans. In the now-cited Thucydides, the Corcyreans
signify to the Corinthians their readiness to debate their quarrels before the
cities of Peloponnesus, which they should agree upon. And Pericles is commended
by Aristides, for his willingness to have differences arbitrated that war might
be avoided. And Philip of Orat. advers. Ctesiphont.
Macedon is praised by Isocrates, for that he was ready to permit the
Controversies he had with the Athenians to the arbitration of any impartial
City. Plutarch says, this was the principal office of the Feciales among the
Romans, not to suffer things to come to a war, till all hope of obteining a
quiet end was lost. Strabo of the Druids of Gallia: They were, of old,
arbitrators between enemies, and often pacified them when they were entering
into battle. The Priests in Iberia performed the same Victor. de jure bell
number. 28.
office, as the same Author testifies. Now, Christian Kings and Commonwealths
Gregor as lib. 10. de Alex. Bulgaro: It is uncomely for Christians to make such
bitter wars against one another, when they may find a way of peace, and turn
their arms against the Infidels. Molin. disput. 103. sect. quando inter.
are most of all bound to take this course to avoid war: for, if to avoid the
sentences of Judges that were aliens from true Religion, certain Arbitrators
were constituted both by Jews and Christians; and that is given in precept by
Paul; how much more is the same to be done, that war, which is a far greater
incommodity, may be avoided? So Tertullian somewhere argues, that a Christian
must not follow the wars, to whom it is not lawful, so much as to go to Law.
Which yet must be understood, (according to what we have said elsewhere) with
some temperament. And, both for this and for other causes, it were profitable,
yea in some sort necesary to be done, that some Assemblies of Christian powers
were held, where the controversies of others might be determined by Judges that
are unconcerned; yea, and a course taken to compel the parties Vide exemplum
apud Cassiodorum 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. and Gailium de pace pnb. 2. c. 18. n. 12.
to entertain peace upon equal terms; which use also was made of the Druids To
the Druids, in this respect, and with better right, have succeeded Bishops: See
the epistle of the Bishops to King Lewis. In capitulis Caroli Calvi. vide and
Roderic. Tolet. 7. 3.
among the Galls, as Diodor^ and Strabo have delivered. And we read, the French
Kings, about division of the Realm, permitted the judgment to their peers. The
third way is by Lot Vide August. de doct. Christ. lib. 1. c. 28.
; which is to this purpose, commended by Du^ Chrysostom in his second Oration
against Fortune, and long before him by Salomen Prove. 18. 18. Somewhat near to
Lot is Single Combat; the use whereof seems not altogether to be refused, if
two, whose Controversies otherwise would involve whole multitudes in very great
mischiefs, Scriptor Tragoediae Thebaid^s: Rex sit e v^bis uter, Manen^e regno
quae, ite. Dion Othone: Molto enim satius justi isque est unum pro omnibus,
quam multos ^us causa perire.
be ready to sight one with the other. For, it seems, if not rightly to be done
by them, nevertheless acceptable to the people on both sides, as a less evil.
Meti^ in Livy speaks to Tullus after this manner; Let us take some way,
whereby, without much slaughter and blood of both parts, it may be determined,
which people shall be superior. Strabo Libro 5.
says, this was the old custom of the Grecians; and Aeneas in Virgil Ae 1. 11.
Aequius huic Turno fuerat se opponere morti. Upon like cause Anton^ challenged
Octavius to a Duel. Plutarch. Antonia.
says, it was meet, that the matter should be ended on this wise 'twixt him
and Turnus. Certainly, among other customs of the ancient Franks Vide Cert^
Calvi Capitulum apud S. Arnulphum, and pactionem Aquisgrant^ Ae (...) as ead^m
apud Langobaidus, vid. Paul, Warnasred. l. 1. c. 1^. 4 c. 17. 5. c. 40.
this is at large commended by Agath^ in his first book: whose words are worthy
to be added; If any Contraversies happen to arise between the Kings, they all
muster their force's, as it were to determine the matter by battle, and they
march forth into the field. But, so soon as the Armies have faced each other,
they lay aside anger and embrace concord, persuading their Kings, to put their
differences to trial of Law; or, if they will not do that, to enter into
single combat, and bring the matter to an end, only with their own danger.
Because, it is neither agreeable to equity, nor the orders of their Country,
that they, for their proper hatreds, should weaken or overthrow the common
good. Wherefore presently they disband, and the causes of their quarrels being
taken away peace is reestablished, and muital security assured. So great care
of Justice and love of their Country is in the Subjects: so gentle and yielding
a disposition is in the Kings. Now, although, in a doubtful case, both parts
are bound to seek condition, whereby war may be avoided, yet is he more bound,
who requires Vide Herreram tom. 2.
, than he who possesses. For, that in an equal case, the condition of the
possessor is the better, is a point not only of the Civil but of the Natural
Law. And here is further to be noted, that War cannot lawfully be undertaken by
him, who knows he has a just cause, but has not sufficient proofs, whereby
he may convince the possessor of the injustice of his possession: The reason
is, because he had no right to compel the other to depa^ out of his
possession. And lastly, when both the right is ambiguous, and neither
possesses, or Both equally, there he is to be thought unjust, who rejects
the offered division of the thing in con^versy.

CXIX. Whether war may be just on both sides.
OUt of the premises may be determined that Question agitated by many, whether
War, respect being had of them that are the principal Movers of it, may on both
sides be just. For, the various acceptions of the word just are to be
distinguished Sic Gratianus causa 11. a. 3. post C. Episc. distinguit justitiam
causae, ordinis, animi.
A thing is called just, either from the cause, or according to the effects.
From the cause again, either in a special acception of justice, or in that
general use of the word, as all rectitude is so called. The special acception
is again divided into that which pertains to the work, and that which
pertains to the worker. For the worker himself sometime may be said to do
justly, as often as he does not unjustly, though that which he does (...). Lib.
5. Eth. c. 10. and 11. Rhet. 1. 13. August. lib. 15. de C. D. c. 5. Covarr. etc.
be not just: So Aristotle rightly distinguishes to do unjustly, and to do the
which is unjust. War cannot be on both sides just, in the acception special and
related to the thing it self, as a suit in Law neither; because a moral
faculty to contraries, to wit, both to act and to hinder, is not granted by
nature. But, that neither of the parties warring may do unjustly, is possible;
for no man does unjustly, but he that also knows he does an unjust thing: and
many are ignorant of that. So may a suit be followed justly, that is, with an
honest mind, on both sides. For, many things, both in point of right and fact,
whence right arises, are wont to escape men. In a general acception, just is
wont to be called that which is without all fault of the Doer. And many things
without right are done without fault through ignorance inevitable. An example
whereof is in them, who observe not the Law, which without their fault they are
ignorant of, after the law it self is promulged, and time sufficient by it self
for knowledge has passed. So also in Law-sutes it may happen, that both
parties may be free from injustice and all other blame, especially where both
parties, or either, goes to law not in his own but another name, to wit, by
the office of a Tutor or Guardian, whose duty is not to desert any right though
uncertain. So Aristotle says, in contentions 3. Rhetor. c. 17.
of controverted right, neither is (...), wicked. With whom Quintilian agrees,
when Lib. 2. 8.
he says it may come to pass, that an Orator, that is, a Good man may plead on
both sides. Yea, Aristotle also says, a Judg^ may be said to judge justly two
ways, ^ther Top. 1. 13.
when he judges plainly as he oug^ or, when he judges according to (...)
judgment and conscience. And in another place: If one has judged through
ig^rance, Nic. 5. 12.
he has not done unjustly. Nevertheless, in war, it can hardly fall out, be
there will be at least some temerity and defect of love, by reason of the
weight of this business, which in very deed is s^ great, that, not content with
probab^ causes, it requires grounds most eviden^. But, if we take just
according to some effects of right, it is certain, war on b^ sides may be just
in this sense, as will appear by what we shall say of public ^lemn war in the
next part. And in like manner a Sentence not given according to right, and
Possession without right, have some effects of right.

CXX. ADMONITIONS. For the eschewing of War, Right is often to be remitted.
THough it seems not properly a pa^ of our work, our Title being of the Right
of war, to declare what other virtues give in charge concerning it,
neve^theless, on the By, we must meet (...) this error of such as think, where
(...) Right is manifest enough, war presen^y either must, or always may
lawfully be undertaken. For, the contrary is true, that for the most part it is
more pious and Victor. de ju. bell. n. 14. and 33.
honest to depart from ones right. That we may honestly forsake the care even
of our own life, that we may provide, as much as lies in us, for the eternal
life and salvation of another, has been showed before. Which is especially the
duty of Christians, therein imitating the most perfect example of Christ, who
dyed Romans 5. 6.
for us, while we were his enemies. This does much more excite us, not to
pursue our worldly interests with so much hurt of other men, as Wars do carry
with them. That for every such cause war is not to be waged, even Aristotle and
Polybius do Arist. Polit. 4. Rhet. ad Alex. cap. 3.
advise. Nor was Hercules commended by the Antiens for commencing war against
Pausan. lib. 5.
Laomedon and Augias, because they paid him not for his labor. Dion
Prusaeensis in that Oration which is of War and Peace, says, it is not only
inquired, whether They, against whom we intend war, have done us injury, but
whether the injury be of such moment that it may deserve a war Senec. Suasor.
5. Gallio said, war is to be undertaken, for liberty, for cur wives, for our
children: but for things that may be spared, and of small damage, it is not to
be undertaken. Apollonius said somewhat more to the King of Babylon, in
Philostrat. lib. 23. You ought not dispute with the R^mans about Villages,
which are less than private men's possessions: nor make war, no not for great
causes. Josephus in his 2. against Appian says of his Countrymen: That they
show not their valaur, to get riches, but to preserve their Laws: Other losses
they bear patiently; but when they are forced to depart from their Laws, then
they fight, even beyond their strength, and endure all extremities of war.
.

CXXI. Punitive right especially is to be remitted.
TO omit punishments, many things do exhort us. Consider how many faults
Fathers connive at in their Children. Whereof Cicero has a dissertation in
Dion Cassius. A Father, says Se^ca De clementia 1. c. 14. Augustus said to a
certain Father consulting what he should do to his son guilty of paric^de; He
must be sent away whither his father would. He decreed not prison or torment:
mindful of him to whom he gave advise, and saying, that a Father should be
content with the sof^est kind of punishment. Seneca eod. lib. c. 15. Terene,
Andria: Pro peccato magno paululum supplicii satis est patri. Ph^lo: Patres
abdicationis tristia verba pronunciant, siliosque a domo sua (...) omni
cognatione abrumpunt, ita demum, ubi amorem illum, quem i^gentem ac supra omnia
eximium natura parentibus indidit, fili^ improbitas vicit. Cicero pro Ligario:
Ignoscite, Judices, erra^. Lapsus est: non putavit: si unquam postbac; ad
parentem sic agi^.
, except many and great offenses have overcome his patience, except he has
more to fear than to condemn, will not preceed to extreme severity. Not much
different is that saying of Phineus in Di^dorus Siculus; No Father willingly
takes revenge of his sons, unless the greatness of their wickedness exceed the
natural affection of parents toward their children: And that of Andronicus
Rhodius: No Father casts off his son, that is not beyond measure wicked. Now,
whosoever will punish another, takes upon himself as it were the person of a
Governor, that is, of a Father. Seneca epist. 87. Clementia alieno sanguini
tanquam suo parcit, (...) scit homini non esse homine prodige utendum. Diodorus
Siculus in fragmentis: Non omnes omnino qui deliquere puniendi sunt, sedii quos
malesectorum nihil poenitet. Chrysostom. de statuis 6. Discant omnes qui a fide
nostra sunt extranei reverentiam quae Christo exhibetur tantam esse, ut
cuilibet potestati injiciat fiaenos. Honora Dominum tuum: condona peccata
conservis tuis, ut and ipse multo magis te honoret, ut in ^llo judicii die
vultum tibi ostendat serenum atque clementem, hujus tuae ^enitatis memor. Citat
Gratianus cause. 23. qu. 4. ex Augustino: Duo ista nomina cum dicimus, homo and
peccator, non utique frustra dicuntur: quia peccator est, corripe: quia homo,
miserere. Vide and quae sequuntur.
In this respect Austin says to Marcellinus: Fulfill the office of a pious
Father, You that are a Christian Judge. Julian the Emperor commends the
saying of Pittacus, Who preferred pardon before punishment. Libanius in his
oration of the sedition at Antioch says, He that will be like unto God, must
not so much rejoice in punishment, as in pardon. Sometimes such are the
circumstances of things, that it is not only laudable to abstain from ones
right, but due, in respect of that dilection which we owe even to our enemies,
whether considered in it self, or as the most holy Gospel-Law requires it. So,
we have said, there are some for whose safety, though they assalt us, we ought
to desire death, in as much ^s we know them either necessary or very profitable
for the common good of men. If Christ will have some things neglected, that
suits may be avoided, much more may we believe he would have greater things
neglected, for the avoiding of war, by ^ow much more hurtful war is than a
^ute at Law. It is not only liberal, says S. Ambrose, Ambr. Offic. l. 2. c. 2.
vide Molin. tr. 2. de Just. disp. 103. Lorca dis. 153. n. 11.
but for the most part commodious for a good man to remit somewh^ of his right.
Aristides persuades the Cities to a concession in things of less moment. He
adds the reason: For it is laudable, you know, even in private men, to be of a
facile nature, and bear some less rather than contend. Xenophon in the s^t of
his Greek history; It is the part of wise men, not to go to war, no not for
Causes of great importance. And Apollonius in P^lostratus is of the same mind.

CXXII. Again, of the remission of punishment.
COncerning Punishments, it is our Duty, if not as Men, surely as Christians
Theodosius was moved to pardon the crime of the Antiochians by those words of
Christ press^d by the Bishop (...) anus: Father Forgive them: for they know not
what they do. Chrysostom: 10. de sta^s.
, easily and willingly to forgive trespass^s done against us, as God forgives
us in Christ, Ephesians. 4. 32. Not to be angry, says Josephus Jos. antiq. hist.
2. 3.
, for the mortal offenses of the guilty, approaches near to the divine nature.
Seneca of a Prince Sen. de Clem. lib. 1. c. 20.
; Let him be far more exorable in his own the other men's wrongs. For as he is
not of a noble mind, who is bountiful out of an^thers stock, but he that out of
his o^ store gives to another: so will I call hi^ Gracious, not, that is
gentle in another injury, but, who being spurred to reveng^ his own wrongs,
restrains himself; w^ thinks it Nobleness to suffer injuries, being in the
highest power, and that nothing i^ more glorious than a Prince pardoning his
Offender Chrysostom says, Clemency is an ornament to all men, most of all to a
Ruler. For, to rule himself, and obey the Divine Law, is most honorable to the
highest Governor. In laud Clementiae.
. Quintilian: We will persuade a Prince to desire more the praise of Humanity,
than the pleasure of Revenge. Cicero sets it as the fairest flower in Caesar's
Garland, that he used to forget nothing but injuries. Livia in a speech to
Augustus in Dio: Most are of opinion, that Rulers ought to punish offenses
against the Common weal, but d^ssemble and connive at those against themselves.
Amoninus the Philosopher in his Oration to the Senate Apud Vulcatium Gallicanum
vita Avidii Cassidii. August. in epist. 104. ad Bonifac. Comitem: Remember to
give a speedy pardon, if one has trespassed against thee, and cries mercy. De
Offic. 1. Nihil magno and praeclaro viro dignius placabilitate and Clementia.
, Revenge of his own wrong is never pleasing in an Emperor, which, though very
just, seems very sharp. Ambrose in his Epistle to Theodosius: You have
forgiven the Antiochians the wrong they did your Majesty. And Themistius in
the praises of the same Theodosius to the Senate; It is the part of a good
Prince, to overcome the injurious, not by revenge, but beneficence. The
magnanimous man, according to Aristotle, is not (...), mindful of injuries.
Which is thus in Cicero: Nothing is more worthy of a Brave man, than
placability and clemency. Eminent examples of this excellent virtue are
proposed to us in the Holy Scripture, Moses, Number. 11. 12. and David, 2 Samuel 16.
7. And this has place, then especially, when either we also are conscious to
our selves of some offense, or that which is done against us proceeds from
some human and excusable infirmity, or it sufficiently appears, that he is
penitent who has done amiss. There is a mean (says Cicero) to be observed in
revenge and punishment: and I cannot tell, whether it be not enough, that he
repent of his fault who has provoked us Procopius Vandat. 2. The Offenders
timely Repentance is wont to prevail with the offended party, and obtain his
pardon.
. A wise man (says Seneca) will remit many things: many delinquents, unsound,
yet not uncurable, he will peserve.

CXXIII. War is to be declined, in favor of our selves and our own party.
WE have showed cause to abstein from war out of that love and pity which we
either owe to our very enemies, or rightly bestow upon them: We are now to
consider what reason there is from that care we owe to our selves and ours
Procopius in his second book of the Gotth^cs, says the Goths spoke thus to
Belisarius; It concerns the Commanders of both Nations, not to purchase their
own glory at so great a price as the undoing of their people, but to prefer and
choose things just and sase, as well for themselves as for their enemies.
Diodotus in Thucydides says, Although they are very guilty, yet would I not
have them slain, except it be expedient for us. lib. 3.
. Plutarch in the life of Numa says, After the Feciales had determined, that
the war might be undertaken justly, it was consulted by the Senate, whether it
were for their good. In a certain Parable of Christ's it is said, If one King
intends war against another, he will first sit down (which is the posture of
those that seriously advise about a matter) and consider with himself whether
he with his ten thousand be able to enter battle with his enemy that leads
twenty thousand. And, if he find himself too weak, before the enemy enter his
territories, he will send Messengers of Peace. So did the Tusculans Vide
Plutarch. Camill. So did the King of Armen^a in the time of Severus. Herodian.
l. 3.
, by enduring all things, and refusing nothing, obtain their peace of the
Romans. In Tacitus we read, In vain did they seck a cause of war against the
Aeduans: Being commanded, to bring money and arms, they also brought provision
freely. So Q. Amalasuntha Vide Procop. Vandal 2. and Gotthic. 1. Live. lib. 6.
Lib. 7.
protested to the Ambassadors of Justinian, she would by no means make war. A
temperament also, or midway may be used, as Strabo relates was done by Syrmus
King of the Triballians, who denied Alexander the Macedonian entrance into the
Island Peuce, and withal honored him with Gifts: that he might show his
denial to proceed from a just fear, and not from hatred or contempt of his
Greatness. What Euripides said of the Grecian Cities may be sitly applied to
any other. When they give their votes for war, no man thinks how imminent death
is to himself; but every one destines ruin to another. But if, in the Council,
Their own Funerals had been presented to their eyes, Grecia had not been so mad
to destroy it self with war. It is in Livy: Propose to thy De Mart quoties
itur in suffragia,
Nemo imminere cogitat mortem sibi;
Sed quisque cladem destinamus alteri.
Quod si in Comitiis funera ante oculos forent,
Furiata bello non perisset Graecia.

meditation, and consider thy own strength, and the power of fortune, and the
various Of their own danger most men are,
Unmindfull, when they vote for war;
They think not, death hangs o'r their head,
But wish that other men were dead.
The undone Grecians had not been
So mad, if this they had foreseen.

chances of war. And in Thucydides; The unexpected Accidents in war must be
thought upon, before thou do engage.

CXXIV. Rules of Prudence about the election of Good.
THey that deliberate, deliberate pardy about the ends, not the last but the
intermediate, partly about those things which lead thither. The end is ever s^e
Good, or at least the Avoidance of some evil, which may be in the stead of
good. The things that lead to the one or other, are not desired by themselves,
but as they lead thither. Wherefore in Debates, are to be compared, both the
ends among themselves, and the effective faculty of those things that lead to
the end, to produce the same. (For, as Aristotle has rightly Arist. de animal.
mot.
noted, (...) which bring forth action are of two sorts, from that which is
good, and from that which is possible.) Which comparison has three Rules. The
first is, If the thing under debate, seems to have, in a moral estimation,
equal efficacy to Good and to Evil, it is so to be chosen, if the Good has
somewhat more of good, than the Evil has of evil. Whence Andronicus Rhodius,
where he describes the magnanimous man, says, He will undergo dangers, not for
every cause, but for the greatest. Another Rule is, If the Good and Evil seem
equal, which may proceed from the thing in question, that thing is eligible, if
the efficacy to Good be greater than to evil. The third, If both the Good and
the Evil seem to be unequal, and the efficacy of the things no less unequal,
that thing will be eligible, so that the efficacy to good be greater, being
compared which the efficacy to evil, than the Evil it self is, being compared
to the Good Narses in Procopius makes a prudent use of this rule. Gotthic. 2.
. This have we set down after a more exact manner. But Cicero discourses to
the same purpose in a plainer way, when he says, We must take heed we do not
offer our selves to perils without cause, than which nothing can be more
foolish: wherefore in running hazards, the custom of Physicians is worthy of
our imitation: They apply gentle remedies to light diseases, but in the more
grievous are compelld to use more perilous and doubtful Medicines: Wherefore,
he says, it is a wise man's part to take the De Offic. 2.
opportunity, and the rather, if he may obtain more good by success of the
matter, than he can fear evil upon the miscarriage. In another place, Where no
Epist. ad At. l. 13. 27.
great emolument is possible, and a little mischance will be hurtful, what
need is there to run the hazard. Dion Prusaeensis: Be it unjust and unworthy,
which is Tarsensi altera.
sufferd, Yet must we not therefore, in a contentious humor, expose our selves
to greater incommodities. And again: We seek to rid our selves of burdens that
do sorely pinch us; but if they be portable, and we fear we shall change them
for heavier loads, we compose our selves to patience. Aristides also, Where our
fear is greater Sicula 2.
than our hope, have we not great reason to be cautious?

CXXV. An Example of a Debate about Liberty and Peace.
LEt us take an example from that which Tacitus says was of old consulted of
among the Cities of Gallia, Whether they should prefer Liberty or Peace:
understand Civil Liberty, that is, a right of governing the Commonwealth by
themselves; Which right is full in a popular state, tempered in an optimacy,
especially such wherein none of the Citizens is excluded from honors:
Understand also such a peace, whereby is avoided a destructive war; that is, as
Cicero expresses it, wherein all is in danger to be lost: or, Lib. 9. epist. ad
Attic. epist. 112.
where a right estimation of the future seems to portend nothing else, but
even the destruction of the whole people: Which was the case of the people of
Jerusalem besieged by Titus. No man is ignorant, what Cato would say here, who
chose rather to die than to submit to One: to which purpose is that sentence, It
is none of the hardest virtues to embrace -- Quam not sit ardua virtus
Servitium fugisse manu.
death, to avoid slavery; and many the like. But right reason dictates
otherwise, to wit, That life, which is the foundation of all good things
temporal and eternal, is of more worth than Liberty; whether you take both in
one man, or in a whole people. Wherefore God himself imputes 2. Paral. 12. 78.
it as a benefit, that he does not destroy men, but deliver them up to
servitude. And elsewhere he persuades the Hebrews by the Prophet, to give up
Jer. 27. 13.
themselves to serve the Babylonians, that they may not perish by famine and
pestilence. That then, which was praised by the Ancients, that Saguntum did
being Aug. de Civit: Dei. l. 22. c. 6.
besieged by the Carthaginian, is not to be praised, nor the things that lead
thither. For the internecion of a people in this kind of things, is to be
accounted as the greatest Evil. Cicero in his second De Inventione, sets
down this example of necessity; It was necessary the Casilinians should yield
themselves to Annibal: though that necessity had this adjunct, Except they
would rather perish with hunger. Of the Thebans, who lived in the times of
Alexander the Macedonian, is extant this opinion of Diodorus: Siculus: Being
more valiant than wi^e Lib. 18.
they brought ruin upon their Country. Of that foresaid Cato and Scipio, who
after the Pharsalick Victory would not submit to Caesar, Plutarch passes his
judgment thus: They are to be blamed, as they that lost many and gallant men in
Africa, to no purpose. Gu^do Blandratensis ad Mediolanenses apud Guntherum:
Omnia securi pro liberate feremus:
Sed libertatem contemta nemo salute
Sanus amat; neque enim certae susceptio cladis
Quam vitare queas, nisi cum ratione salutis,
Libertatis amor, sed gloria vana putanda est.
Anaxilaus, whom the Famine constreined to yield Bizantius, made this defense,
saying, Men were to fight against men, or against the nature of things. So
Xenophon. Procopius Go^ says, Men do not praise voluntary death, so long as
any h^ prevails over the danger. Diodorus Siculus having opened (...)
Counsels of the war undertaken by the Sithonians after Ale^ anders death,
says, In the judgment of wiser men, they ^tempted a thing rather glorious than
profitable, making ha^ i^ to danger unnecessary, and not taking warning from
the no^ overthrow of Thebes.
That which I have said of liberty, I mean of other things desirable, if there
be a more just or an equal expectation of a greater evil opposite. For, as
Aristides says well, It is the manner to save the ship, by casting for the
lading, not the passengers.

CXXVI. He that is not much the Stronger ought to remit punishment.
MOreover, in the exacting of punishments, it is most observable, that war
should never be entered into, upon that ground, against him who has equal
forces. For as a Civil Judge must, so he that will avenge wicked acts by war,
must be much stronger than the offender. Nor does prudence only, or Love of his
people require, that One abstein from a perilous war, but Justice too, that
is, governing Justice, which by the very nature of government obliges the
superior no less to care for inferiors, than the inferiors to obedience.
Whereto is consequent, what is rightly delivered by Divines, Cajet. 2. 2. q.
95. art. 8. Molina tract. 1. de just. cap. 102.
that a King, who for light causes, or for to exact punishments not necessary,
and drawing after them great danger, undertaketh a war, is bound to his
subjects to repair the damages arising thence. For, though not to the enemies,
yet to his own people, injury is done by him, who upon such causes involves
them in so great an evil. Livy says, War is just, to whom Lib. 10.
it is necessary: and their arms are pious, who have no hope left them but in
arms. Ovid, thus:

Let not the soldier armed be,
But to disarm the Enemy. Ovid. Fast. 1. Sola gerat miles, quibus arma
coerceat, arma.

CXXVII. War not to be undertaken, but upon necessity, or upon greatest cause,
with greatest opportunity.
THere is then seldom Servius ad illud in 10. Aen. Iram miserantur inanem
Amborum, and tantos mortalibus esse labores. Quia nulla causa tam justa est, ut
propterea bellum geri debeat.
cause of taking arms, which either cannot, or ought not to be omitted: to wit,
when Laws are (as Florus speaks) worse than war. Seneca bids us venture upon
dangers, when we fear no less dangers if we sit still; or greater: so
Aristides, when it appears, our estate will be worse if we be quiet, the we
ought to hazard our selves. Tacit^ says, A miserable peace is well exchanged
for war: that is, when (as the same Author says) either being victorious you
shall be free; or being conquered, as you were: or where (as Livy Live. l. 10.
speaks) peace is more grievous to those that serve this war is to the free.
Not if (as it is in Cicero Cic. ad At. 7. 7.
) this appears to be the event; (...) you be conquered, you shall be
proscrib'd^ if you conquer, you shall be nevertheless a slave. It will be also
a time to (...) arms, if, in a true judgment, where mo^ Right is, and that of
greatest moment, there is most strength. This is that which Augustus Sueton. c.
14.
said, War is not to be ^dertaken, except there be greater hope (...) benefit,
than fear of loss. And, what S^pio Gel. 13 c. 3. Val. Max. l. 7. 2.
Africanus, and L. Aemilius Paul^ were wont to say of injoyning battle, (...)
fitly be applied here, Fight not, without great necessity Plutarch. Gracchis:
Extrae summam necessitatem ferrum infer, nec boni medici est, nec boni
praesidis. Marciani dictum apud Zonaram: Non debere Regem arma movere, quamdiu
pace frui liceat. Aug. 50. epist. ad Bonifacium, Pacem habere voluntatis est:
Bel^m autem debet esse necessitatis, ut liberet Deus a necessitate, and con^ in
pace.
, or great opportunity. This will then chiefly have place, when it is hoped the
business may be done, by terror The Lion despising weapons-good while defen^th
himself by terror alone, and shows that he is compelld. ^lin. Hist. Not. 8.
16.
and fame, with none or very little danger: such was Dion's counsel for
de^ivering Syracuse Diod. l. 16.
. Pliny in one of his Epistles has an expression to our purpose: He subdued
the enemy (which is the fairest kind of victory) by the terror of his ^ame.

CXXVIII. The Evils of War.
WAr is a cruel thing, says Plutarch, De Civit. Dei lib. 19. c. 7.
and draws with it a train ^f injuries and insolence: And S. Augu^in wisely:
Should I go about to declare ^e manifold Calamit^es, and extreme ne^essities,
which attend upon war, (which (...) am not able sufficiently to express) when
^ould I make an end? But they say, a ^ise man will wage war. Rather, if he
^member himself to be a man, he will be ^rry to find a necessity thereof The
Lacedaemonians in Diodo^us Siculus l. 13. Seeing the many enm^es and s^d effects
of war, we think it our duty to testify before God and man, that we are not the
causes of them. See a notable place it Guicciard. lib. 16.
. It is the ^iquity of the adverse part, which enforces (...) wise man to take
arms, which iniquity of ^en, though war did not follow, were to be ^mented.
Wherefore the mischiefs of war, whosoever affectionately confiders, (...) needs
acknowledge it a misery; and if any one can pass them over without grief he is
the more miserable, in that he (...) lost all sense of his misery. The same
Father in another place; It seems a fe^ Lib. 4. de Civicate Dei. c. 15.
Belligerare malu videtur felicit as, bonis necessitas.
to evil men, to wage war, to good men, necessity. And Maximus Tyrius: Although
you take out of war injustice, the very necessity is it self miserable. The
same: (...) is plain, that just men take arms only upon necessity; the unjust,
of their own accord. Whereto may be added that of Seneca: Man must not use man
prodig^ Philiscus admonisht Alexander to feel Aelian. lib. 14. 11.
for glory, but on those terms, that be might not make himself a plague to the
world: meaning the slaughter of people, and desolation of Cities, to be the
effect of a plague: and that nothing is more Kingly, than to take care of all
(...) safety, which depends on Peace. If, (...) the Hebrew law, even he that
had (...) a man against his will, was to fly for refuge: If God denied David,
who (...) the Lord's own battles, the honor (...) building his Temple,
because he had (...) much blood Non permisit templum struere ei qui multa bela
bellasset, pollutusque esset, hostili quidem, attamen sanguine. Joseph. lib.
(...) cap. 4. ubi and plura in hanc sententiam. Plinius lib. 7. (...) 25. After
he had related the battles of Caesar the Dictator Truly (says he) I will not
account it Glory, to have (...) much hurt to mankind, however urged. Philo de
vita M^ Quamuis enim legibus permissae sunt hostium occidiones, (...)
interfecerit, qua nvis just, quamvis ad sui tutelam, quamvis coactus, aliquid
labis contraxisse creditur, propter illam communem a summa causa venientem
cognationem. Quatropter and pur^ (...) quadam opus habebant tales
intersectores, ad eluendum quod commiss^ vid batur piaculum.
: If, among the old Greeks they had need of expiation, who ever without fault
had steined their hand with blood: Who sees not, especially if he be a
Christian, how unhappy a thing War is, and of an ill omen, and with how great
endeavor it is to be avoided, though not unjust? Surely, among the Greeks that
professed Christianity, that Canon was long observed, whereby they were kept
for a time For three years. Zonaras. Basil. ad Amphil. 10. 13.
from the sacred mysteries, who had killed an enemy in any war whatsoever.

CXXIX. OF WAR FOR OTHERS: And first, for Sub ects. And whether an Innocent
person may be yielded up.
WE have said before, that Every man naturally may execute, not only his own,
but another Right. Wherefore the same causes, that are just for him whose
business is in hand, are also just for them that bring aid unto others. Now,
the first and most necessary care is for subjects Procopius Pers. 2. says, He
is not just who does no man wrong, except he defend from wrong those that are
committed to him. Navar. 24. 18.
, whether in the family, or in the Commonwealth; For they are as it were a part
of the Governor, as there we have said. So, for the Gibeonites, who had
subjected themselves to the Hebrew people, that people took up arms under Jos.
10. 6.
the command of Joshua. Our Ancestors (says Cicero) have often waged war for
Ad Quirites.
injuries done to our Merchants and Seamen. Elsewhere: How many wars h^ our
Ancestors undertaken, because our Citizens Vertin. 2.
were said to be injured, our Saylors retained, our Merchants spoiled? The same
Romans thought it necessary to take arms for the same people being become their
subjects, for whom being consederates they would not stir. The Campanians to
the Romans; Seeing you will not, by just force, defend our estate against
violence and injury, you will certainly (...) your own. Florus says, the
Campanians made the league they had before, mo^ holy, by the dedition of all
they had: It concerned the Faith of the Romans, is Livy Lib. 7. Fides agi visa,
deditos non prodi.
speaks, that a people which had yielded themselves, should not be deserted.
Howbeit, not always are Governors bound to take arms for the just cause of a
subject, but so, if, without incommodity of all or most of the subjects, it may
be done. For, the Governors office is rather conversant about the whole than
about the parts and Soto de just. and jure. lib. 5. q. 1. art 7.
the greater the part is, the nearer it approaches to the nature of the whole.
Wherefore, if one Citizen, though innocent, be demanded by the enemy, he may
(no doubt) be deserted Satius judicemus esse, paucos aliquos mala far, quam
immensam multiiudinem, Zonaras.
, if it appear that the Commonwealth is far inferior to the enemies power.
Against this opinion disputes Fordinandus Lib. 1. cont. ill. c. 13.
Vasquins: but if we mark his meaning rather than his words, he seems to
contend, that such a Citizen be not rashly forsaken, when there is a
possibility and hope of defense. For he brings also an example of the Italian
Foot who forsook Pompey, before all was lost, being assured of quarter by
Casar; which act he deservedly reproves. But, whether an innocent Citizen may
be given into the hands of the enemy, for the avoiding of destruction otherwise
imminent to the Commonwealth, Learned men dispute: And it was of old disputed,
as, when Demosthenes produced that renowned Fable of the Dogs, whom the
Wolves, treating with the Sheep about a peace, demanded of them. Not only
Vasquius denies it to be lawful, but He, whose opinion is accused by Vasquius
as perfidious, Sotus. Yet Sotus ^firms, such a Citizen is bound to deliver up
himself to the enemies: and this (...) Vasquius denies, because the nature
(...) Civil society, which every one has enterd into for his own benefit,
does not ^nquire it. But hence it follows only, that the Citizen is not bound
to this by right properly so called; it does not follow, that in Charity he is
not bound to do it. ^or, there be many offices, not of proper justice, but of
Love, which are not only performed with praise (which Vasquius grants) but also
cannot be omitted without blame. And such in very de^ seems this to be, that
one prefer the life of a great innocent multitude before his own Praxithea apud
Euripidem. Si namque numeros, quidque sit plus aut mi nus 'erctpimus animo, non
malo unius domus Commune vinci, sed nec aequari potest. Philo: Iniquum est
totum sieri accessionem partis. V. l. 2. de vit. Mos.
. And therefore Phocion exhorted Diodor. l. 17.
Demosthenes and others, after the example of the daughters of Leus and the
Vide Apollod. in bibliotheca.
Hyacinthides, rather to undergo death themselves, than suffer an irreparable
mischief to de done to their Country. Cicero for P. Sextius: If this had
happened to me sailing with my friends in some ship, that Pirates surrounding
us should threaten to sink us all, except they would deliver me; I would rather
have cast my self into the Sea, to preserve the rest, than bring (...) friends
either to certain death or into great danger of their life. The same in his
third de Fimbus: A good man, wise and obidient to the Laws, and not ignorant of
Civil duties, cares more for the interest of all, than of any one, or his own.
In Livy Lib. 45.
we read it spoken of certain M^ Often have I heard of men that dyed for their
Country; but these men are the fir^ that thought it fit, their Country (...)
perish them. But, this being granted, a doubt remains, whether the innocent
Citizen may be compelled to do that which he is bound to do. Satus denies this,
using the example of a rich man, who is bound (...) the precept of Mercy to
give Alms to the poor, yet cannot be compelled to (...) But, we must note, it is
one thing when the parts are compared among themselves, another when Superiors
are compared to their subjects. For, an equal cannot compel his equal, but
unto that which is due by right strictly taken: yet may a Superior compel his
inferior to other things also, which any virtue commands So, among the
Lucanians, a punishment was appointed for the p odigal: among the Macedonians,
for the ungrateful: for the idle, among the same Lucanians, and the Athenians.
, because this is comprehended in the proper right of a superior, as he is
superior. Less. lib. 2. c. 9. dub. 7. Plutarch. Phoc.
So, in great scarcity of corn, subjects may be forced to bring out what they
have laid up. And therefore, in our controversy, it seems more true that the
Citizen may be compeld to do that which Charity requires. So that Phocion whom
whom we have mentioned, pointing at his most dear friend Nicocles, said, Things
were come to that extremity, that if Alexander should demand him, he should
think he were to be delivered.

CXXX. War may also be undertaken justly for Confederates, for friends, yea for
all men.
NExt to subjects (yea qual in this, that they ought to be defended) are
Confederates in whose Agreement this was comprehended: that is, whether they
have yielded up themselves to the safeguard and trust of others, or have
cove^nanted for mutual succors. He that re^elleth not injury from his Fellow,
if he be able, is in fault, as he that offers it, says Ambrose. As for
Agreements to war, when Offic. 1. 36.
when there is no just cause Vide Simlerum de repub. Helveciorum. The Lord
making war against any, if it be known, that he does it justly, or if it be a
doubful case, the Vassal is bound to aid him. But when it is unanifest, that
He does unreasonably, Let him help to defend him, not to offend another. lib.
2. de Feud. c. 28. Hic sinitur.
, they hol^ not, as we have said above. And this is the reason, why the
Lacedaemonians, before they enterd into the war against the Athenians, permitted
all their Confederates to judge of the justice of the cause: and the Romans
permitted the Greeks to judge of the war against Live. lib. 34. Vict. de Ind. p.
2. n. 17. Cajet. 2. 2. q. 4 art. 1.
Nabis. Nay further we add, the Fellow is not then bound to aid, if there be
no hope of a good issue. For, Society is contracted for good and not for evil.
Moreover, a Confederate is to be defended, even against another Confederate,
unless in the former league there was some more special agreement. So the
Athenians might defend the Corcyreans, if their cause were just, even against
the Corinthians their more ancient Confederates. Another cause there is, on
behalf of friends, to whom though no promise of aid was made, yet in respect of
friendship it is due, if it may be given easily and without incommodity. So
Abraham took arms for his Kinsman Lot: The Romans charged the Anti^ not to use
Piracy upon the Grecians being the Cousins of the Italians: The same Romans often
undertook, (or threatened) wars, not for their Confederates only, as they were
obliged by Covenants, but for their friends Oraculum vetus: Non open juvisti
praesens in morte (...);
Effa^or tibi nils, (...) nisi Templi sinibus (...);

. The last an^ largest relation of men to (...) another is, as they are men.
Which alone suffices to (...) for help. Men were born to help one another,
Cic. de fin. 3. de Offic. 2. L. ut vim. D. de just. and jure.
says Senoca De ira. l. 1. c. 7. de clem. 2. 5.
. And again, A wise man will, as often as he can, relieve the unfortunate
Euripides in supplicibus: -- Praebent saxa perfugium feris,
Areaque famulis: urbibus pressis malo
Tutamen urbes. --

. Fortitude which defends infirmity, says S. Ambrose Offic. 1. 5.
, is full of Justice. Of this above.

CXXXI. Whether man is bound to defend man, and one people another.
HEre it is a question, whether any obligation lies upon one man, or one people
to defend another from injury. Plato's judgment is, that he deserves De legib.
4. E^ Hebraei ita censent. Moses de Kotzi praecept^ jubente 77, 80. Diodor. l.
1.
punishment, who does not keep off force offered to another: which also was
provided for in the Laws of the Egyptians. But first, if there be manifest
danger, it is certain he is not bound; for, he may prefer his own life and
goods before another man's. And in this sense I understand that of Tully: He
that defends not, nor resists injury, if he can, is in no less sault, than if
he forsake his parents, or Country, or Companions. If he can: that is, Without
his own hurt. For the same Author says in another place: Men may perhaps be
left undefended without any blame. It is in Sallust's Histories: All that in
their prosperity are entreated to society of war, ought to consider, whether
they may be permitted then to live is peace: and, whether that which is
requested be pious, safe, glorious, or dishonouraeable. This of Seneca De ben:
2. 15. And elsewhere he says, I will defend a worthy man at the cost of my own
blood, and partake in his danger: And if I can deliver an unworthy man from
thieves by raising a cry, I will not refuse to spend my voice to save a man. De
benef. lib. 1. c. 10. Less. Lib. 3. c. 4. dub. 15.
too is not to be despised: I will succor one that is about to perish, but so,
that I my self may not perish; unless I shall redeem some great person, or
great matter. But then neither, he will not be bound, if the oppressed an no
other way be freed, but by the death of the oppressor. For, if he that is
invaded may prefer the life of the Invades before his own (as we have said
elsewhere) he will not sin who believes or desires that the oppressed should be
of that mind: especially when, on the part of the oppressor or invader, the
danger of an irreparable and eternal loss is greater.

CXXXII. Whether War be just to relieve the Subjects of Another.
THis is also in Controversy, whether it be a just cause of War, for the
Subjects of Another, that they may be deliverd from the injury of their Ruler.
Verily, since civil Societies were instituted, it is certain the Rulers of
every one have attained a special right over their own Subjects. And
Thucydides, among the signs of Sovereignty has put the supreme power of
Judgments Euripides Herachdis: Nos quotquot bujus colimus urbis mania,
Sufficimus ipsi nostra judicia exsequi.
Nec alio illud pertinet; Spartam tibi quae contigit orna:
Nobis fuerit cura Mycaenae:
Et huic non dissimile illud Poeticum: Rescindere nunquam
Diis licet acta D^um. Ov^d. Met. 14. Et Virgil. Aen. 1.
Non illi Imperium pelagi saevumque tridenteus,
Sed mihi sort datum. --

, no less than a right of making Laws and Magistrates. Ambrose gives the
reason; Lest one usurping Amb. l. 1. de Offic.
the charge of another they should raise Thucy. lib. 5.
war among themselves. The Corinthians, in the same Thucydides, think it
Equity, that every one should himself punish those that belong unto him Au
ustin in his second de lib. arbin. says, Although it be a part of goodness to
do good to strangers, yet is it no point of Justice to punish then. Procop.
Vand. 1. It is good for every one to govern well his own charge, and to
appropriate to himself the cares of other men. Vict, de Ind. rel. n. 15. Vict.
de Ind. rel. p. 2. n. 13.
. And Perseus, in his oration to Martius, says, he would not excuse what he
had done to the Dolepes: I have done it (says he) by my own right, seeing they
were of my Kingdom, under my dominion. But, all this has place, where Subjects
do truly offend, or where the case is doubtful. For, to this purpose was
ordained that distribution of Empires. Notwithstanding, where the injury is
manifest, where any Busiris, Phalaris, Thracian Diomedes executes such things
upon his Subjects, that no good man can allow of, there the right of human
society is not praecluded. So Constantin against Maxentius and against
Licinius, other Roman Emperors against the Persians Exemplum simile habes in
rebus Pipini apud Fredegatium in fine.
; took arms, or threatened to take them, unless they would abstein from
persecuting the Christians for their Religion. Yea, supposing arms cannot, no
not in extreme necessity, be taken rightly by Subjects (whereof we have seen
those to doubt whose purpose was to defend the regal power:) nevertheless will
it not therefore follow, that arms may not be taken by others on their behalf.
For, as often as a personal, not real, impediment is put against any action, so
often may that be lawful for one for another good, which was not lawful for
that other; if the matter be of such a nature, wherein one may procure the good
of another. So, for a Pupil, whose person is incapable of judgment, the Tutor
goes to Law or some other; for one absent, even without a mandate, his
Defendor. Now, the Impediment, which prohibites a subject to resist, comes not
from a cause which is the same in a subject and no-subject, but from the
quality of his person which passes not into others. So Seneca thinks, I may
war upon him, who being divided from my Country troubles his own; (as we have
said when we spoke of exacting punishment;) which thing is often joined with
defense of the innocent. We are not ignorant, by reading of histories old and
new, that Avarice and Ambition hides it self under these pretenses; but it
does noth not therefore presently cease to be a Right, which is abused by evil
men. Pirates also go to Sea; and Robbers use the sword.

CXXXIII. Concerning Soldiers of Fortune.
MOreover, as warly Societies enterd into with such a mind, that aids are
promised in every war Iterum Simlerum vide de hac ve. Soto in verb. bellum p.
1.. 10. circa fin.
without any difference of the cause, are unlawful; so is no kind of life more
wicked than theirs, who without respect unto the cause are hired to kill men,
thinking Ibi fas ubi plurina merces.
, There is most right, where is most pay. Which Plato proves out of Tyrtaeus.
This is that which the Aetolians were upbraided with by Philip, and the
Arcadians by Livy l. 32.
Dionysius Milesius, in these words; Mercats are made of War, and the
calamities of Greece are a gainto the Arcadians, and without regard of the
causes arms are carried to and fro. A miserable thing indeed, as Antiphanes
speaks, That men should get their living, by exposing themselves to death Suam
qui auro vitam venditant. Plaut. Bacch. Guntherus: Ae e dato conducta cohors,
and bellica miles Dona sequens, pretioque suum mutare favorem Suetus, and
accepto pariter cum munere bello Hunc habuisse, dator pretii quem jusserit,
hostem.
. What is more necessary to us (says Dion Prusaeensis) or what is more worth
than life? and yet many men are prodigal of this, while they are greedy of
money. But, this is a small matter, Bellinus de re mil. 2. p. t. 2. n. 4.
to sell their own blood, unless they did also sell the blood of other men that
are oft-times innocent; So much worse than the Hangman, by how much worse it is
to kill without cause Seneca not. 5. 18. Who can style it other than madness,
to carry danger about with him and to run upon men unknown, angry without
injury, wasting all in his way, and making slaughter (like wild beasts) of men
that one hates nor.
, than with cause: As Antisthenes said, Hangmen are better than Tyrants,
because they execute the guilty, these the guiltless. Philip of Macedon the
Elder said Diod. lib. 18.
, These men that get their living by making a trade of war, esteem war to be
their Peace, and Peace their war. War is not to be turned into an Art or
profession, being a thing so horrid, that nothing can make it honest, but the
highest necessity, or true charity: as may be understood by what we have said
before. It is not indeed in it self a sin (says S. Augustine) to go to De verb.
Dom.
war, but to go to war for the spoil is a sin, Yea, and for the stipend or pay,
if that alone be regarded, or that chiefly: when as otherwise it is very
lawful to receive pay; for, who goes to war at his (...) charge? says S.
Paul the Apostle. 1 Cor. 9. 7.


CXXXIV. Of just Causes, that wit may Cap. 26.
be waged by those that are under others command. Who they are, and what they
should do, where they are left free.
WE have done with them that are is their own power: there are others in a
condition of obeying, as sons of families, servants, subjects, and single
Citizens if they be compared with the Body of their Commonwealth. And these, i^
Aegid. reg. de act. supern. disp. 31. n. 80.
they be called to debate, or a free choice be given them to go to the war, or
to stay at home, ought to follow the same rule with them that at their own
pleasure undertake wars for themselves or others.

CXXXV. What they should do, when they are commanded to war, and believe the
cause of the war to be unjust.
BUt, if it be commanded them to bear Victor. de jure bell. n. 22.
arms, (as it usually comes to pass;) What then? Why, truly if it be manifest
to them that the cause of the war is unjust, they ought by all means to
abstein. That we must obey God rather than men, is not only a sentence of the
Apostles, Act. 5. 9.
but of Socrates too Plato tells us so in his Apology. And Apollonius opposed
against the edict of Nero that of Sophocles, Jupiter has given me other Order.
; and the Hebrew-Masters have a saying Which also Josephus ascribes to them,
Antiq. 17. No wonder, if we more observe those we have received of God by
Moses, than your Commands. Add Rab. Tanchumam citante Drusio ad lucum Actorum.
, That the King must not be obeyed, when he commands any thing contrary to the
Law of God. Polycarpus said just before his death, We have learned to give meet
honor to the Empires and powers ordained of God, so far as may consist with
our salvation. And S. Paul the Apostle; Children be obedient to your Parents in
the Lord i. e. In quibus Deum offensurus non es. Ita Chrysostomus. S^c accipe
illud Hieronymi, Per calcatum perge patrem, declamatorie dictum, sum umque a
Lurone declamatore apud Senecam. Subditos esse oportet, sed intra limitos
disciplinae. Tertull. Jecirco Romanas leges contemnimus, ut jussa divina
servemus. Silvanus Martyr. Apiid Euripidem dicenti Creonti: Nonne exsequi
mandata sas ipsum jubet?
Respondet Antigone:
Non imperata jure nec jus exsequi. Musonius ita ait; Si qua^ aut patri, aut
magistratui, aut Domino turpia aut iniqua se^ imperanti non paret, is nec
inobediens est, nec injuriam facit, nec peccat, Stob. tt. lib. parent. honorand.
; for this is right. Upon which place Hierom: It is a sin for children not to
obey their parents; yet because parents might perhaps command somewhat amiss,
he added, In the Lord. And he annexed this of servants, When the Lord of the
flesh ^neth a thing diverse from the Lord of the Spirit, Obedience is not due.
And elsewhere, In those things only ought men to be subject to their Masters and
Parents, which are not against the Commands of God. For the same Apostle also
says, Every man shall receive a reward of his own work, whether he be bond or
free. Seneca De benefic. lib. 3. 20.
; Neither can we command all things, nor (...) servants perform. They must not
obey ^s against the Commonwealth: They must not lend their hand to any
wickedness. Sopater: Obey thy Father. If according to right, well: if
otherwise, not so. Strat^cles was irrided, of old, who propounded a Law at
Athens, that whatsoever pleased King Demetrius, might be accounted pious toward
God, and just toward (...). Pliny Lib. 3. epist. ad Minut.
says he labored somewhere to make it evident, That it is a crime to serve
another Examples illustrious both of punishment and praise, See 1 Samuel 22. 18,
19. 1 Reg. 18. 4. 13. 2 Reg. (...) 10, 12, 14. Among the Christians Manuel and
Georgius ref^ the service of killing the Empress. Nicetas. Among the Pag^ are
two noble examples of those that would not obey the unjust commands of Princes,
that of Papinian so famous, and another of Helpidius in Ammianus lib. 21.
Severus would not have them escape unpunished, who obeyed an Emperor in killing
a Senator. Vide Xiphilin. Tertull. de Anima: Plus caeditur qui jubet, quando
nec qui obsequitur excusatur. Vide Gail. de pace pub. lib. 1. cap. 4. number. 14.
in doing evil. The Civil Law themselves, which do easily give pardon to
excusable faults, favor those that must needs obey, but not in all things: for
they except things which have atrocity, which are heinous and wicked in their
own nature, as Tully speaks, and not by the interpretation of Lawyers. Josephus
relates out of Hecataeus, that the Jews which served under Alexander the Great,
could not be compelled, either by words nor blows, to carry earth, with the
other soldiers, to the repairing of Belus's Temple ^t Babylon. But we have a
more proper example in the Thebaean Legion (of which ^bove) and in Julian's
soldiers, of whom Ambrose thus: Julian Augustine: epist. 50. ad Bonifac.
Julianus exstitit infidelis Imperator. Nonne exstitit Apostata iniquus and
Idololatra? Mili^es Christiani servierunt Imp. infideli: ubi veniebant ad
causam Chriti, non egnoscebant nisi illum qui in coelo erat: quando volebat ut
idola ^lerent and thurificarent, praeponebant illi Deum.
the Emperor, though an Apostate, had under him Christian soldiers: whom when
he Commanded ^o Draw out in defense of the Commonwealth, they obeyed him. But,
when he said, Use your arms For Julian abstei^ed not from all violence against
the Christians, then especially ^hen he had gotten any color for it, as he
thought. Jerome to Nepotian calls him, The Cut throat of the Christian Army.
^ug. de Civit. Dei l. 1. c. 52. tells of a persecution begun at Antioch in his
reign, and a certain young man tormented. In the Martyrologies is celebrated the
memory of S. Eliphius a sect and his fellows, whom Julian caused to be
beheaded, Vide and Joan. Anti^ bonum in excerptis ex MS. Peiresiano.
against the Christians, then did they acknowledge the Emperor of Heaven. So
we read of certain Spearmen converted unto Christ, that they chose rather to
die, than to execute the Edicts and judgments against the Christians. 'T will be
all one Victor de jure bell. n. 23.
, if a man be persuaded, it is unjust which is commanded. For, that thing is to
him unlawful, so long as he cannot put off that opinion: as appears by what
we have said already.

CXXXVI. What they should do, when they are in doubt.
BUt, if a man doubt, whether the thing be lawful or no, must he then obey, or
not? Most Authors are of opinion, that he must obey: nor does that hinder, D^
not, what you doubt of: because (say they) Quod dubitas, ne seceris.
he that doubts contemplatively, may in his active judgment be out of doubt;
For he may believe, that in a doubtful matter he ought to obey his superior.
And truly it cannot be denied, but this dissection of a twofold judgment has
place in many actions. The Civil Laws, not of L. damnum. de R. J. L. Liber
bomo. D. ad L. Aquil. L. non videtur.. qui jussit de R. I. Paul. l. 5. sen.
tit. 22.. 1. Leges Long. tit. 96. de (...) effoss. Leges Wistgot. l. 2. tit. 2.
c. 2. L. 8, tit. 1. c. 1.
the Romans only but of other Nations, i^ such a circumstance, do not only gra^
Impurity Chrysostom. de providentia, 3. Many magistrates accused for unjust
slaughter have been punished often: but never was any Executioner called in
question, for they are excused by the necessity laid upon them, proceeding from
the d gnity of the Commander, and the fear of the Obeyer. Ulplan out of Celsus
says, a servant has not offended, who has obeyed his Masters command.
Mithridates dismissed the servants of Attilius, being conscicus of the plot
against his life, u punished; and the children likewise of one that had
revolted from him: Appian. Tiber'us Gracchus was acquitted from the fault of
the Numantin league, because he had offended at the command of another. In v
lent necessitas non est. Seneca.
to those that obey, but also deny any Civil action against them. He does the
damage, say they, who commands it to be done: and he, who must needs obey, is
in no fault. Necessity of the power excuses, and the like. Aristotle himself
in the fist his Ethics, among those that do something unjust, but not
unjustly, annumerates the servant of a Master commanding; and he says, He does
unjustly, from whom the action takes beginning; upon this ground, because the
faculty deliberative is not full, according to that verse Et illud quo Philo
utitur: (...).
;

Those men enjoy but one half of their soul,
Whom their imp r ous Masters words control.
And that of Tacitus: The Gods have given the Prince supreme judgment of Anual.
3. Them stius in his 9. oration, says, Princes are like to reason, soldiers to
wrath.
things: to sub ects is left the glory of obedience. Piso's son (in the same
writer) was by Tiberius absolved from the crime of the Civil war; Because the
son was not able to reject the commands of the Father. Seneca: A servant is not
a Censurer, but a minister of his Masters will. And specially Controv. 3. 9.
in this question of warfare Augastin thought so; for so he speaks: A just
man, if perhaps he serves under a secrilegious Lib. 22. c. 74. cont. Faustum.
King, may rightly fight at his command, if keeping civil order, he be either
sure what is commanded him is not against the Command of God, or be (...) sure
that it is: so that perhaps the King may be guilty of iniquity in his command,
but the soldier innocent in his obedient. The like he says De Civit. Dei, lib.
1. c. 26. and de lib. arbit. l. 1.
in other places. And hence it is a common received opinion, that, as to
subjects, a war may be on both sides just, that is, without injustice Sil. in
verb. bell. 1. n. 9. concl. 4. Cast. in l. 5. D. de Instit. Soto l. 5. q. 1.
art. 7. Covar. in c. piece. p. 2.. 10. Quis justius induat arma, Scire nefas.
, Yet this is not without its difficulty. And our Countryman Adrian Adr.
quaest. quod. l. 2. See an example of those that followed this opinion in
Scafnaburgensis.
, who waste last Bishop of Rome of the Cisalpins, defends the contrary opinion:
which may be confirmed, not by that reason precisely that he brings, but by
this which is (...) urgent: Because he that doubts contemplatively, ought by
his active judgmenta choose the safer part: And it is the (...) part to abstein
from war. The Essens (...) commended, for swearing, among other things, That
they would never do any er^ harm, no not if they were commanded And their
Imitators the Pythagoreans who as Jamblicus testifies, absteined from (...).
Jamb.
war, adding this for the reason, because is so bloody. Nor is it any material
objection, that on the other side there is d^ ger of inobedience. For, when
Both are uncertain (for if the war is unjust, then in avoiding thereof is no
inobedience) that is faultless, which of the two is less. Now, inobedience, in
such matters, is of Baldus 2. Cons. 385. Sotus de Det. secr. memb. 3. q. 2. in
resp. ad 1.
its own nature less evil than homicide and slaughter, especially of many
Innocents. The Ancients tell how Mercury, Vict. de jure bell. u. 25.
being accused for killing Argus at the command of Jupiter, defended himself,
and yet the Gods durst not absolve him Nec Pothinum Prolomaei satellitem
Martialis, cum ait: Antoni tamen est pejor, quam causa Pothini; Hic sacinus
domino praestitit, ille sibi.
. Nor is it of great weight, which some bring on the contrary; That it will
come to pass, if that be admitted, that the Commonwealth will be often undone;
because it is not expedient (for the most part) the reasons of Counsel's should
be published and made known to the people. For, grant this to be true
concerning the suasory causes of war, it is not true of the justifick; which
must be clear and evident, and therefore such as may and ought to be openly
declared Tertull. Caeterum suspecta lex est, quae probari se non vult: improba
autem, si non probata dominetur. Achilles apud Papinium Ulyssi: -- Quae Danais
tanti primordia belli, Ede: libet justas binc sumere protinus irat. Apud eundem
Theseus: Ite alacres, tantaeque precor considite causae. Propert. dixerat.
Frangit and attollit vires in milite causa: Quae nisi justa subest, excutit
arma pudor. Cui par illud panegyristae: Tantum inter ^ma bona conscientia sibi
vindicat, ut jam caeperit non virtutis magis quam integritatis esse victoria.
. And thus do some learned men interthat in Genesis 14. 14. to this sense, that
Abraham's servants, before the battle, were fully instructed by him concerning
the Justice of his arms Herod in Jo sephus tells the Jews after an overthrow in
Arabia: I am willing to show you, how justly we undertook this war, being
compeld by the affronrs of our enemies. For by the knowledge hereof, you will
be greatly stirred up to show your courage. Aegid. Regius de act. supern. disp.
31. dub. 5. n. 85. Bannes 2. 2. 9. 40. art. 1. Molina tract. 2. disp. 113.
Certainly, denuntiations, as we shall show hereafter, were wont to be made
openly, and the cause expressed, that all mankind, as i^ were, might examine and
know the justice of it. Prudence indeed is a virtue (as it seemed to Aristotle)
proper to Governors; but Justice to man, as he is man. Now, in my judgment,
that opinion of Adrian is clearly to be followed, if the subject not only be in
doubt, but is induced by probable Arguments, and inclined rather to believe
that the war is unjust: especially, if it be not defensive, but offensive. And
so it is probable, that the Executioner of a man condemned, either by his
presence at the Trial, or by the confession of the party, ought so far to
understand the case, that he may be afraid he has deserved death Wherefore the
servants of Saul, more honest than Doeg, would not slay the Priests of Nob,
their cause being unheard, 1 Samuel 22. 17. And Ahabs third Captain of fifty would
not hurt Elij ab 2 Reg. 1. 13. And some Executioners, converted to Christ,
afterward used not this office, as unsafe. Vide Martyrol. and (...) l. 1. c. 7.
: which, in (...) paces, is the custom: and the Hebrew Law Deuteronomy. 17.
looks this way, when, in the st^ning of one condemned, it requires the
witnesses to go before the people.

CXXXVII. Such are to be dispensed with, upon payment of extraordinary Tribute.
MOreover, if the minds of the Subjects Silv. in verb. Bellum. p. 101. 7.
circa fin.
cannot be satisfied by Declaration of the cause, it will certainly be the
office of a good Magistrate, rather to impose upon them double Contribution,
than military service; especially when there are not wanting enough Volunteers to
serve. Whose will, not only good, but evil too, a just King may use, as God
does use the ready service of the Devil and wicked men: and as he is without
fault, who being in need of money takes it up at hard rates from an oppressing
Usurer. Yea further, if there can be no doubt made about the Cause of the war,
nevertheless it seems to be much against equity, that Christians against
their wills should be compelled and pressed Soldiers, seeing, to abstein from
war, even when it is lawful to wage it, is a point of greater sanctity; which
was exacted both of Clergymen and Penitents, and to all other persons many
ways commended. Origin to Celsus objecting against the Christians, that they
declined war, shapes this Answer: To Infidels, who would Origin. cont. Celsum.
have us go to war for the Commonwealth, and kill men, we will answer thus,
They that are Priests of your Idols, and Flamens of your reputed Gods, keep
this hands pure for sacrifices, that they may offer them to your supposed Gods,
with hands unbloody, and defiled with no slaughter: nor are your Priests listed
soldiers in any war. Now, if that be not without reason, how much more than
other soldiers, are our men in their way to be accounted militant, as the
Priests and worshippers of the true God, who indeed keep their hands pure, but
strive with Godly prayers, on behalf of those that fight in just Commander?,
and of him that is the just Commando? In which place he styles all Christiars
Priests, after the example of the holy writers, Apoc. 1. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 5.

CXXXVIII. When the arms of Subjects are just in an unjust War.
ANd I am of opinion, it is possible, that, in a war not only doubtf^ but
manifestly unjust, there may be some defense just on the subjects part. For
seeing an Enemy, through waging a j^ war, has not true and internal right
(except for necessary defense, or byconsequence and beyond his purpose) to kill
subjects innocent, and far remote from all blame of the war; (and such are not
obnoxious to punishment;) it follows, that, if it certainly appear, the enemy
comes with such a mind, that he will (...) no wise (though he be able) spare
the life of his enemies subjects; it follows, I say, that these subjects may
stand in their own defense by the right of Nature, whereof they are not
deprived by the law of Nations. Neither shall we say (upon this) that the war
is just on both sides: for our question now is not concerning the War, but
concerning a particular and determinate action; which action, though of one
otherwise having right to war, is unjust, and therefore is justly repelled.

The End of the Second Part.
(...)
HVGO GROTIVS OF WAR AND PEACE.
III. PART.
I. How much is lawful in War. General Cap. 1. Rules. First, Things are lawful
in War, which are necessary to the end.
Who may wage war, and for what causes, we have seen. It follows that we weigh
what and how much Aug. epist. 70. ad Bonisac. com. That you may be faithful in
wars (if you must needs be engaged in them) seck peace. Epist. 205. Even in war
be peaceable. Belisarius in Procoplus Vand. 1. has an excellent speech to his
Soldiers, of Justice in waging War. Orosius says of Theodosius, that (...) war
was begun by a pious necessity, ended by a divine feli^ and neither his fights
bloody, nor his victory insolent and (...) vengefull.
is lawful in war, and in what manner. Which is either nakedly considered, or
upon promise antecedent. Nakedly; First, by the Law of Nature Secondly by that
of Nations. What is by nature lawful let us consider thus. First, as we have
said before, the things that lead to any end in moral matter receive (...)
intrinsic estimation from the end it (...) Vict. de ju. bell. n. 15.
; wherefore we are understood to have a right to those things, which are
necessary to the end of Right to be attained; necessary I mean, by a necessity
taken n^ according to Physical subtilty, but mo^ly: and right I mean, that
which is strictly so called, and signifies a faculty of D^ing in sole respect
of Society. Where^, if I cannot otherwise save my life, it is lawful for me, by
any kind of force, to keep off him that assalts it, though happily he may be
without fault, as we have noted elsewhere: because this right arises not
properly from another sin, but from the right which nature grants me in my
own Defense. And further, I may invade Vict. de jur. bell. n. 18. and 39. and
55.
that which is another man's, without consideration of any fault of his, if any
certain danger be imminent to me from that thing: Yet may I not become Lord
thereof; (for this is not accommodate to that end;) but keep it until I may be
secured; which has been also said 2. Part. 21.
above. So, I have naturally a right to take away from another that thing of
mine which he ^eceineth: and, if I cannot the same, something equivalent; as
also, to obtain (...) debt. Upon which causes Dominion Syl. in v. hell. p. 1.
n. 10. v. pr.
^ollows too, because equality impaired cannot be repaired otherwise. So, where
^unition is just, just also is all force, without which it cannot be exercised;
and ^ust is every thing which is a part of punishment, as the wast made by fire
or other way, being within fit measure, and such as is answerable to the fault.

II. The second Rule, Right is considered, not only in respect of the first,
but aftercauses.
SEcondly, we must know, that our right is not to be considered only by the
beginning of the war, but by causes arising after; as also in Trials of Law,
after the suit commenced, a new right often arises to a party. So, they that
gather to my Assailant, whether Associats or Sub^ects, yield me a right of
defending my self against them also. So, they that mix themselves in a war
which is unjust, especially if they may and ought to know it to be unjust,
oblige themselves to repair the charge and damage, because by their fault they
do it. So, whosoever engage in a war undertaken without probable ground, do
also make themselves obnoxious to punishment, by reason of the iujustice (...)
herent in their act. And thus Plato (...) proves of war, until they that are
(...) be compeld to make satisfaction to the ^nocent, whom they have wronged.

III. The third Rule. Some things follow without injury, which could not be
lawfully intended.
THirdly, we must observe, Many things follow upon the righr of Doing,
indirectly, and without the purpose of the Doer Vide Th. 1. 2. 9. 73. art. 8.
Molinam tr. 2. disput. 121.
, to which there was no right directly and by itself. How this has place in
self-defence we have explained elsewhere. In like manner, that we may recover
(...) own, if just so much cannot be taken, we have a right to take more; yet
under this obligation, of restoring the price of that which redounds. So may a
ship filled with Pirates, or a house with Thieves be b^tered with guns, though
in the same ship or house are a few Infants, women or other innocent persons
thereby endangered Nec reus est mortis alienae, inquit Augustinus, qui suae
possessioni murorum ambitum circumduxit, si aliquis ex ipsorum usu percussus
intereat, Ad Pabl. epist. 154.
. But, as we have noted often, that is not perfectly lawful always, which
agrees with right strictly taken. For, o^times Charity to our neighbor will
not permit us to use strict and extreme right. Wherefore, those things which
happen beside our purpose, and are foreseen that they may happen, must also be
within our Caution, unless the good to which our action tends, be much
greater than the evil which is feared: or, un^ess, when the good and evil are
equal, ^he hope of good be much greater than the fear of evil; which is left to
be determined by Prudence: yet so, that always in (...) doubful case we must
incline to that ^art as the safer, which provides for Another more than for our
selves. Suffer the Matthew. 13. 29. Th. 2. 2. q. 64. art. 2.
^ares to grow, says the best Master, lest while you would pluck them up, you
pluck ^p the wheat too. And Seneca says, It Sen. in fine l. 2. de Clem.
(...) the power of Fire and Ruin to kill ma^y without making difference.
Histories teach us, with what serious repentance Theodosius, by Ambrose's
direction, expiated such immodesty of revenge. Neither is it to be drawn by us
into example, ^f God at any time does such a thing, by ^eason of that most full
right of Dominion he has over us, which right he has not granted us to have
one over another, as we have before noted. Notwithstanding, the same God, Lord
of men by his own right, for the sake of a very few good men, is wont to spare,
even a great multitude of the bad; and thereby testifies his equity, as he is a
Judge, as the Conference of Abraham with God concerning Sodom Genesis 18. 23 and
seq.
clearly shows us. And by these general rules it may be known, how much is
lawful against an enemy Naturally.

IV. What is lawful against them, that send things to the Enemies.
IT is also inquired, what is law^ against them, who are not enemies, or would
not so be called, but furnish the enemies with some things. For, both of old
and of late, we know there has been sharp contention about it, some defending
the rigor of war, others the Freedom of Trade. First, we must distinguish of
the things themselves. For some things there are that have use only in war, as
arms; some, that have no use in war, as those that serve for pleasure; some,
the have use, both in war, and out of war, as money, victuals, ships and things
belonging thereto Athenis (...), i. e. evehi vetita, lina, utres, lignum, cera,
pix. Scholiastes ad Aristophanis Nubes and Equires.
. In the first kind, true (...) that saying of Amalasuintha to Jus^nian
Procopius Goth. 1. Vide Parutam lib. 7.
, They are on the enemies party that supply the enemy with Nece^ for the war.
The second kind has (...) cause of complaint. So Seneca says, b^ will make
requital to a Tyrant, if the benefit will neither give any new streng^ unto him
to do public mischief, nor ^fim the strength he has. That is, which may be
rendered him without the hurt (...) the Commonwealth: for explicati^ whereof he
adds, I will not help him (...) Money to pay his Guard; but if he shall (...)
sire Marbles and Robes, such thin^ hurt not others, only they minister to his
Luxury; Soldiers and arms I will not supply him with; if he shall seek for
Players and Recreations to soften his fierceness, I will gladly offer them.
Ships of war I would not send him, but such as are for pleasure and ostentation
of Princes sporting in the Sea I will not deny. And in the judgment of S.
Ambrose, to give to one Lib. 1. c. 30. De Offic.
that conspires against his Country, is a liberality not to be allowed. In that
third kind of doubtful use, the state of the war is to be distinguished. For,
if I cannot Can. in c. I^a quorund. ad liberand. de Judaeis.
defend my self, unless I intercept the things sent, Necessicy then, as we have
elsewhere said, will give a right, but with the burden of restitution, except
some other cause accede. But, if the apportation of those things hinder the
execution of my right, and he could know so much who brought them; as, if I had
streitned (...) town with siedge, or shut up havens, and were now in
expectation of their yielding or compounding; He shall be liable for the damage
by his fault done me, like ^ne that has taken my debtor out of prison, or has
helped him to escape, whereby I am injured; And according to the Silv. in verb.
Restitutio. p. 3.. 12.
^easure of my loss, his Goods also may ^e seized, and brought under my
command, to the end I may obtain my Due. ^f he has not yet done any damage,
but has been willing to do it, there will be a ^ight, by retention of the
things, to compel him to give Caution for the future, by hostages, pledges, or
some other way. But, if moreover my enemie's injustice toward me be most
evident, and He confirm him in that most unjust war, in this case He will not
only Civilly be liable, but Criminally, as one that rescues a person manifestly
guilty from the Judge at hand; and, for that cause, it (...) be lawful to
determine against him that which is meet for his offense, according to what we
have said of punishments: wherefore within that measure He may also be spoiled.
And, for these reasons, They that wage war, are accustomed to give public
notice See an example hereof in Camden, 1591. 1598. Yet were not such
significations always regarded, but with difference of times, causes, places.
The Hollanders in the heat of the war between Suedia and the King of Polonia
never sufferd themselves to be interdicted the Commerce with either (...) The
same, having war with Spain, intercepted the French she passing to or from
Spain, but restored them. The same Hol^ ders having a Navy before Dunke^k,
suffered not the Engli^ Merchants to enter there.
thereof to other nations, to the end that both the right of their Cause, and
the probable hope they have to execute the same, may appear to all. Now, for
this question: we have therefore referred it to the right of nature, because
out of Histories we could find nothing constituted thereof Many things
perteining to (...) question are in the Danish History of the learned Meursius
(...) and 2. Camdenum vide an. 1589. 1595.
by the voluntary Law of Nations. The Polyb. 1.
Romans, who had brought victuals to the enemi^ of Carthage, were taken by the
Carthoginians, and again rendered upon reque^ Dematrius Plutarch. Demetrio.
, when he possessed Attica with his Army, and had taken the neighboring Towns
Eleusis and Rhamnus, intending to famish Athens, hanged up both the Master and
Governor Not much unlike is that which Plutarch relates of Pompey, in the
history of the Mithridatic war: He set a guard on Bosphorus, to observe if any
Merchants sailed in thither. Whosoever were taken were put to death.
of a ship about to bring in corn, and by that means deterring others got the
City.

V. Whether it be lawful to use Guile in War.
AS to the manner of acting, force and terror is most proper to wars: whether
it be lawful also to use guile, is a question. For Homer, and Pindar, and
Virgil, do all concur in this sentence Homer: five dolo, seu vi manifesta,
clamve palamve. Pindatus: Quidvis agendo scilicet hostica Delenda vis est.
Virgil: Dolus an virtus quis in host requirat? Sequitur ipse Ripheus
justissimus unus Qui fuit in Teucris and servantissimus aequi.
:

Your Enemy, you lawfully may spoil,
Whether by open force, or secret guile.
And Solon, so famous for his wisdom, followed this Rule, and Fabius Maximus
in Silius Silius: Exin vi^ placult dolus.
helps his valor with cunning. Ulysses, in Homer, the exemplar of wisdom,
is every where full of subtle devices against the enemy: whence Lucian
concludes, They are worthy of Lucian. Phil.
praise that deceive him. Xenophon said, Nothing is more profitable in War than
Xenoph. de Cyri Justit. lib. 1. Thucvd. lib. 5.
Deceits; and Brasidas in Thucydides holds it to be a singular commendation to
overreach Belli surta vocantur and apud Virgilium Aen. 11. Plutarch. Apoph.
Polyb. lib. 9.
the enemy; and Agesilaus in Plutarch thinks it very just and lawful. Polybius
is of opinion, that things done by strength in war are inferior to those done
by wit: and out of him Silius brings in Corvinus speaking thus Sil. l. 5.
Bellandum est astu: Levior laus in duce dextra Muhammedis dictum simile:
Elharbu hadiatum. i. e. Pugnae fraudem requirunt. Apud Virgilium in Comita u
Martis, Irae Insidiaeque. Ubi servius: Non tantum virtute, sed insidiis
comitatum se ostendit.
;

-- Less praise I gain
By my strong hand: I war by a strezg brain.
And Plutarch notes, that those severe Laconians were of the same judgment, and
that He offered a greater sacrifice, who had effected his work by strategem,
than by plain battle. The same Author magnifies Lysander Plutarch compares
with him, Sylla, who had in him, as Carbo said, as much of the Fox as the Lion.
D. lib. 1. de dolo L. nihil. de capt. Eustach. ad Iliad. (...). Quast. 10.
super (...)
for his various fleights of war, and reckons it amongst the praises of
Philopemen, that being instituted in the Crotian discipline, he had allayed tha^
blunt and hardy manner of warring (...) deceits and stealths. Ammianus says,
All prosperous events of war are to be praised, without making difference
between Valor and Craft. The Roman Lawyers call it an honest craft, if one
devised i^ against an enemy, and say, it matters no^ whether one escape the
enemies power (...) force or fraud. Among Divines, Augustine: When a just war is
undertaken, is no difference in point of right, whether one fight with open
force, or ly in wait. 1. De Sacerdot.
And Chrysostom; Generals are most praisworthy, that have got the victory by
stratagem. Howbeit, there are not wanting Opinions that seem to persuade the
contrary: some of which we will allege anon. The determination of this Question
depends on that, whether Guilt or Deceit in general be of the number of Evils,
concerning which it is said, Evil is not to be done, that Good may come of it;
or of such as are not evil universally, and in their own nature, but may happily
and in some cases be good.

VI. Guile in the negative act is not unlawful.
IT is therefore to be noted, that Guile either consists in a negative act, or
in a positive. I extend the word to those things L. 1.. Do'um malum. D. de dolo
malo.
that consist in a negative act, upon the authority of Labeo, who refers it to
Guile, but not evil, when one does defend his own or another man's by
dissimulation. Doubtless, it was too crudely spoken by De offic. 1.
Cicero: Our whole Conversation ought to be free from simulation and
dissimulation Lib. contra mend. cap. 10. Tho. 2. 2. q. 40. art. 3. in resp and
q. 71. art. 7.
altogether. For, when as you are not bound to discover unto others all things
that you know, or intend, it follows, that ^o dissemble certain things before
certain Silv. in v. bell. p. 1. n. 9.
persons, that is, to hide and conceal them is very lawful. It is lawful, says
S. Austin Idem in (...). Psalm. It is one thing to ly, another thing to conceal
the Truth.
, to cast the veil of dissimulation sometimes over the face of Truth. And
Cicero himself, in more places Pro Milone. and l. 7. epist. 9. and pre Cn.
Planc.
than one confesses it to be necessary and inevitable Vide Chrysostom. 1. de
Sacerdotio.
, especially to men of place in the Commonwealth. A notable example to this
purpose, we have in the history a Jeremy, chapter 38. For, that Prophet being
questiond by the King about the event of the Siedge, upon the Kings request
prudently conceals the same before the Princes, alleging another cause of thee
Conference, and that a true one too. Hither Genesis 20.
also may be referrd, that Abraham Veritatem voluit celari, non mendacium ^ici.
Aug. qu. 20. in Genes.
calls Sara his Sister, that is, according to the manner of speech used then,
his (...) kinswoman, not revealing his marriage.

VII. Guile in the Positive act, when lawful.
GUile which consists in a positive act, if in things, is called Simulation; if
in words, a ly. Some do thus distinguish between these two, saying, Wo^ are
naturally signs of the mind, things The 1. 2. q. 110. a. 3. in resp.
not so. But on the contrary it is true, tha^ Words, by nature it self and
without the will of men, do signify nothing, unle^ perhaps it be a confused
voice and ina^culate, as in grief, which yet comes ^ther under the appellation
of a thing, the of a word or speech. Now, if this be (...) that this is the
peculiar nature of man above other creatures, that he can express L. Labeo..
ult. D. de sup. Legata.
unto others the conceptions of his mind, and that words were found out to that
end, they do indeed say what is true; but it is to be added, that such an
expression is not made by words alone, but also by nods Pllnius de Aethiopum
gente lib. 6. 30. Quibusdam pro sermon nutus, motusque membrorian est. V. c.
tuae fratern. de sponsal.
and signs, as to mutes, whether those nods have by nature some what common
with the thing signified, or else do signify only by institution. To which are
like those Notes, which do signify, not words figured by the tongue, (as Paul
Non figura, inquit, literarum, sed oratione quam exprimunt literae obligamur,
quatenus placuit non minus valere quod scriptura quam quod vocibus lingua
figuratis significaretur. Valde Philosophice dixit placuit, ut ostenderet haec
valere (...).
the Lawyer speaks) but things themselves, either by some convenience and
agreement with them, as hieroglyphics, or by mere will, as among the people of
China. Wherefore, another distinction must be here given, such as is used to
take away the ambiguity in the Word, Law of Nations. For this law is either
that which has pleased every nation without mutual tie, or that which does
mutually oblige. Thus, Words, and nods, and notes, which we have said, were
found out to signify with mutual obligation (...). Aristot. de Interp. c. 4.
: other things not so. Hence it comes to pass that L. non figura. D. de obl.
and act.
it is lawful to use other things, though we foresee, that Another may
thereupon conceive a false opinion Vide Aug. de doct. Christ. lib. 2. c. 24.
. I speak of that which is intrinsecal, not of that which is accidental.
Therefore an Example is to be pu^, where no nocument As in the fact of Michol,
1 Samuel 19. 16.
follows thence, or where the nocument it self, the consideration of the guile
set aside, is lawful. An example of the former is in Christ, who to his
companions going to Emma^, made as though he would have gone farther; unless we
had rather understand, he Luke 24. 28.
had really an intent to go farther, Except they constrained him to stay; as
God a^ is said to will many things which are not done, and elsewhere Christ
himself is said Mar. 6. 48.
to have been willing to pass by the Apostles rowing, to wit, except he were
e^nestly entreated to come up into the (...). Another example may be given in
Paul, who circumcised Timothy, when he (...) Act. 16. 3.
knew the Jews would take it so, as if the precept of Circumcision, which was
indeed abolished, did still oblige the Isrealites, and as if Paul and Timothy
were (...) that opinion: when yet Paul meant not this, but only to procure unto
himself and Timothy a more familiar way of Conversation with the Jews. Nor did
Circumcision any more, the Law Divine takes away, purposely signify such
necessity nor was the consequent Evil of the present error, after to be
corrected, of (...) great value, as that good which Paul ha^ his eye upon,
namely, the insinuation of Evangelical Truth. This simulation the Greek Fathers
often call (...) So it is to be called, not (...), frauds, says Ch^ysostom in
his first De Sacerdotio. The same in his up^ 1 Cor. 4. 6. This was not fraud,
but a kind of compliance and c^pensation. Hither may be referred David's
counter feit mad^
. (...) which is extant an excellent sentenc^ of Clemens Alexandrinus speaking
of a good man thus: For the good of his Live. l. 5.
Neighbor he will do some things, which otherwise of his own accord, and by a
primary intention he would not do. Of this sort is that in the war of the
Romans, who threw loaves from the Capitol into the guards of the enemies, to
possess them with a belief, that they were not streitned with hunger. An
example of the later is in a feigned flight, such as Joshua gave in Jos. 8.
command to his men, that they might conquer Ai; and other Captains often. For
here, the nocument that follows we Silv in verbo bell. p. 1. n. 9.
prove to be lawful from the justice of war; and the flight it self, by
appointment, signifies nothing although the enemy take it as a sign of fear,
which mistake the other is not bound to acquit him of, using his liberty to go
hither or thither, and with more or less speed, and in this or that posture or
habit. Hither also is to be referred their act who are frequently read to have
used the arms, ensigns, apparel, sails of their enemies. For all these things
are of that kind, that they may be used of any at his pleasure, even contrary
to custom; because the custom it self is introduced at pleasure of every one,
not as by common consent, and such a custom obliges no man.

VIII. Whether Guile by acts signifying by agreement be lawful? The difficulty
of the question.
IT is a harder question concerning those notes, which, as I may say, are
coversunt in the commerce of men, of which sort properly is a ly. For, there
are many places in Scripture against lying. A righteous (i. e. a good) man
hates lying. Prove. 13. 5. Prove. 30. 8. Psalm. 5. 7. Col. 3. 9.
Remove far from me vanity and lies. Thou shall destroy them that speak lies.
Ly not one to another. And this part is rigidly maintaind by Augustine: and
there are among the Philosophers and Poets Aliena vero prol^qui nunquam decet
Sophocles. Mendacium odit quisquis animitus sapit. Cleobulus.
, that have the same opinion. That of Homer is famous;

Whose mind thinks one thing, and his Tongue does tell
Another, I hate like the pit of Hell:
Aristotle said, A ly is of it self soul and vituperable, Truth fair and
laudable. Yet, on the other side is not wanting Authority neither; first,
Scripture-examples Irenaeus learned of an old Priest, and taught, Things, of
which the Scripture passes no censure, but sets them down simply, are not to
be condemned by us. l. 4. c. 50.
of men approved without any note of reprehension; next, the sayings of the
ancient Christians, Origin, Clement, Tertullian, Lactantius, S. Chrysostom, S.
Hierom, Cassian, yea almost all, a^ S. Augustine himself confesses, so
dissenting, that he does nevertheless acknowledge it to be a great question,
dark, and subject to various disputation of learned men. Among the
Philosophers, plainly stand on this side, Socrates and his Scholars, Plato,
Xenophon, and Cicero Plato 1. and 2. and 5. de repub. Xenoph. 4. Socrat. Plut.
de Stoic. comract. Quintil. 12. 1.
somewhere; and, if we believe Plutarch and Quintilian, the Stoics: who, among
the gifts of a wise man, mention a dexterity to ly, when, and as one ought. Nor
does Aristotle seem to dissent in some places: whose (...), by it self, in the
saying before, may be expounded commonly, or the thing being considerd without
circumstances. And his Interpreter Andronicus Rhodius says of a Physician Nic.
7. 3. 4. Nic. 8. (...).
lying to his Patient, He deceives indeed, yet is he not a Deceiver: He adds
the reason: For his purpose is not to deceive, but to preserve the diseased.
Quintilian pleading on this side, says, There are very many things, which are
honest or dishonest, not so much in the doing, as in the causes of them.
Diphilus: Quod pro salute dicitur mendacium
Me judice habere nil potest incommodi
Quaerenti apud Sophoclem Neoptolemo,
Non tibi videtur turpe falsiloquentia?
Respondet Ulysses,
Non, si salus nascatur ex mendacio.
Cui similia ex Pisandro and Euripide adseruntur.

And in the same Orator I read, It is sometimes granted to a wise man to tell a
ly. Eustathius Metropolitan of Thessalonica, upon the second of the Odysses: A
wise man will ly, upon urgent occasion (...), In tempore, ut Donatus loquitur
ad Adelphos 4. 3. Et ipsum fallere in tempore, quidam de Officiis scribentes
rectum putac^. Cicero pro Q. Ligario, aliquod mendacium honestum and miserico^
vocat.
: Where he also allegeth testimonies out of Heredotus and Isocrates.

IX. Not all use of speech, which may be known will be taken in another sense,
is unlawful.
Happily some Reconciliation of so disagreeing sentences may be found out from
the larger or stricter acception of a ly, Neither do we here take a ly, as it
falls from a man unwittingly The Tongue is not made guilty, but by a guilty
mind. And, No man is to be censured for lying, who speaks false, which he
thinks true; because, as for his part, he deceives not, but is deceived.
August. de verb. A ost. Sermon. 28. and Enchir. c. 22.
; as, to ly, and to tell a ly, are distinguished in Gellius Gellius l. 11. c.
11. Mentiri and Mendacium dicere.
: but we speak of that, which is knowingly uttered with a signification that
agrees not with the conception of the mind, whether in understanding, or in
willing. For, that which is first and immediately showed by words and the like
notes, are the conceptions of the mind: Therefore, he does not ly, who speaks
a false thing, that he thinks to be true; but, who speaks a thing true
indeed, which yet he thinks false, He lies. It is then the falsity of
signification, which we require to the common nature of a ly. Whence it
follows, when any word or sentence is equivocal and admits more
significations than one, (whether from vulgar use, or custom of art, or some
intelligible figure) then, if the minds Conception agrees to one of those
signications, a ly is not made though it may be thought the hearer will take it
another way So Abraham spoke captiously with his servants, as Ambrose takes it
and approves it: whom Gratian follows, post. c. si quaelibet. causa 22. q. 2.
. True indeed it is, such a speech rashly used is not to be approved; but it
may be honested by the causes annexed to it; viz. If it pertein to the
instruction of him that is committed to our care, or to the avoiding an
injurious question. Christ himself has given us an example of the former sort,
when he said, Our friend Lazarus sleeps, which the Apostles received as if
'twere spoken of taking his rest in sleep. And, what he had said about Jo. 11.
11.
restoring the Temple, meaning it of his Body, Jo. 2. 20, 21.
he knew the Jews understood of the Temple properly called so. So, when he Luc.
22. 30.
pronised to the Apostles twelve seats of honor and next unto the King, after
the manner of the Princes of Tribes among the Hebrews (and elsewhere, the
drinking Matthew. 26. 25.
of new wine in his Fathers Kingdom) he seems to have known well enough, that
this would not otherwise be taken by them, than of some Kingdom of this life;
Act. 1. 6.
with hope whereof they were full, to the very moment of Christ's Ascension
into Heaven. The same our Lord, by the Ambages of Parables speaks unto the
people, that hearing they might not understand him; that is, unless they did
bring such attention and docility, as was meet. An example of the later sort
may be given out Tacit. Annal. 6.
of profane history in L. Vitellius, with (...) Narcissus was instant, that he
should speak openly, and tell him the plain truth yet he did not so prevail,
but that he gav^ answers doubtful, and inclining whither they were drawn Idem
Tacitus Histor. 3. Incerta disseruit, tracturus interpretationem, prout
conduxisset.
. The saying of the Hebrews Quorum and hoc est: Licet perplexe loqui boni
causa. Citat doctissimus Manasses Ben Israel in suo Coaciliatore quaest. 37.
is pertinent here: If one knows to use the perplexed speech, well; if no^, let
him hold his peace. On the contrary, it may happen, that to use such a kind of
speaking may be not only illaudable, but wicked, as, when the honor of God
Philo de vita Mosis: De factis loquor, quae ad Dei bonorem pertinent, in quibus
solis veracem esse oportuit, eliamsi quis coeterum ing^nip esset mendace.
Veritas enim Dei Comes.
or Love due to our Neighbor Aeschylus Prometheo: Dicam diserte quicquid
audire expetis,
Sermon nudo, non per implicitos modos,
Quo more amicos al loqui verum ac bonum est.

, or reverence to our Superior, or the nature of the thing in hand, exact,
that the thoughts of the heart be made apparent clearly in the words, as in
contracts we have said, that is to be opened, which the nature of the contract
is conceived to require; in which sense that of Cicero may be fitly taken: All
lying is to be banished out of contracts and bargains; taken from an old Attick
Law Lex Attica, (...), Demosth. in Leptinem.
. Where the word, Lying, seems to be understood so large, that it includes also
as obscure speech. But, speaking properly we have now excluded it from the
notion of a ly.

X. The form of a ly, as it is unlawful, consists in its repugnance to the
right of Another.
IT is then required to the common notion of a Ly, that what is said, written,
noted, intimated, cannot otherwise be understood, than in that sense, which is
different from the mind of the Author. And to this larger notion, the stricter
signification of a ly, as it is naturally unlawful, must needs add some proper
difference: which, if the matter be rightly examined, at least according to the
common estimation of Nations, no other seems possible to be given beside the
repugnance with the existing and remaining right of him to whom the speech or
note is directed. For, that no man lies to himself, how false soever he
speaks, is plain enough. Right I understand here, not of every sort, and
extrinseeal to the thing, but, which is proper and connate to this business.
And this is nothing else but the liberty of judging Hence the Hebrews say, He
steals away the heart, who takes away the means of knowing, Genesis 31. 20, 26,
27. and Onkelos and the LXX. there. Robbi David lib. radicum. and Rab. Salomo
in Comment. and Abenesd.
, which Men speaking together are, as 't were by a certain tacit agreement,
understood to owe unto them whom they speak. For this and no other is that
mutual obligation, which men had consented to introduce, so soon as they
instituted the use of words and the like notes: without which obligation, such
an Invention had been in vain. And we require, that, at the time of speaking,
that right sub^ and remain: for, it may fall out, that the right that was may
be taken away by another right supervenient; as a debt, by acceptilation, or
cessation of the condition. It is required further, that the right which is
impaired be his with whom we speak, not another; as also in contracts,
injustice is not, but from the impaired right of the contractors. Hither
perchance you may not amiss refer, that Plato after Simonides reduces Truth of
speech to Justice Lib. 1. de Repub.
; and, that the holy Scriptures oftentimes describe that forbidden ly, by a
testimony or speech against ones neighbor; and, that S. Augustine himself, in
constituting the nature of a ly, puts the intent of deceiving Lactant. instit.
6. 18. ut non mentiatur unquam decipiendi aut nocendi causa.
. And Cicero will have the question of speaking truth referred to the
fundamentals of Justice. Now, the right of which we have spoken, it seems, may
be taken away, as by the express consent of him with whom we deal (as, if one
hat^ foretold, he will speak false, and the other has given leave:) so also by
his tacit consent, or presumed upon good reason, or by opposition of another
right, which, by the Common judgment of all men, is of much more value. Three
things being well understood, will furnish u^ with many illations, conducing
much (...) reconcile the different opinions abov^ mentioned.

XI. Five illations thence, about the Lawfulness of speaking false.
FIrst, although something be spoken to an Infant, or one beside himself, that
has a false signification, therein is not the crime of a ly. For it seems to
be permitted by the common sense of all men, that the simple age of Children be
pleased Lucret.
with fictions. And Quintilian speaking of Children, says, We feign many
things for their benefit. The next reason is, seeing Infants and mad men have
not liberty of judgment, there can be no injury done them, as to that liberty.
Secondly, as often as the speech is directed to him who is not deceived, though a
Third draw from thence a false persuasion, it is no ly: Not ^n respect of him,
to whom the speech is; because his liberty remains entire even as theirs to
whom a Tale is told which they understand to be a Tale; or to whom is uttered a
figurative speech, ironicall or hyperbolicall (which figure, as Seneca 7. De
benef. 21. Senea ibid. Incredibilia affirmat, ut ad credibilia per veniat.
^aith, by a ly arrives at truth, and is called by Quintilian a lying
superjection:) Nor in respect of him who hears it on the by; because the
speaker has nothing to do with him, and so to him there is no ^bligation. Yea,
if himself create to himself an opinion of that which is not said ^o him, but
to another, he has somewhat ^o impute, not to another, but to himself. For, if
we will judge rightly, in respect of him, the speech is no speech, but a thing
of an uncertain signification. Wherefore, neither was Cato Censorius in any
fault, who falsely promised aid to the Confederates; nor Flaccus, who told
others, that the enemies City was taken by Aemilius, though the enemies were
deceived thereby; Live. lib. 34. Appian. Hisp.
the like whereof Plutarch relates of Agesilaus. For, nothing was here spoken
to the enemies; and the nocument that followed thence, is a thing extrinsecal,
and by it self not unlawful to be wished or procured. To this kind Chrysostom
and Hierom Add Cyrillum adversus Julianum lib. 9. circa finem. nec multo
aliter Tertull. 1. and 3. cont. Marcionem.
have referred the speech of Paul, wherewith he reprehended Peter, as too much
Judaizing, at Antic^; For they think Peter understood well enough, it was not
serious; and in the mean, care was had for the infirmity of the Bystanders.
Thirdly, as often as it is certain, He, to whom the speech is, wi^ not take in
evil part the impairing of his liberty in judging, yea will give thanks for
the same, by reason of some commod^ty he attains thereby; then also, a ly
strictiy called so, that is, injurious, is not made: as, He would not commit
These who, upon presumption of the Masters will, should spend some small matter
o^ his, to the end he might thence gain hi^ great profit. For, in these things
which are so certain, the will presumed is a^ counted for the express. And to a
willi^ man, it is certain, injury is not done. So then, he seems not to sin,
who either com^ortech a sick friend with a persuasion not true, as Arria
comforted Paetus, his son being dead; which History is in Plinie's Plin. epist.
3. 16.
Epistles: or adds courage to one ready to lose the battle, by a false
report; that revived by it, he may get victory and safety to himself, and being
so deceived may not be taken Ac sic deceptus non capiatur.
, as Lucretius speaks. Democritus: We must by all means speak the truth, where
it is better. Lucret.
Xenophon; We may deceive our friends for their good. And Clemens Alexandrinus
grants, We may use a ly for a remedy. Maximus Tyrius: The Physician deceives
his Patient, the General his Soldiers, and the Master of the ship the Sailors:
nor is there any hurt in this. Proclus on Plato gives the reason: For that
which is good, is better than the truth. Such is that in Xenophon, That the
Confederates are at hand: and that of Tullus Hostilius, That Xenoph. 4. Socr.
by his command the Albans wheeled about: and that wholsomely, as Histories
call it, of the Consul Quinctius, That the enemies fled in the other wing: and
the like Livius lib. 34.
everywhere in the Historians Agcsilaus being come into Boeotia, having
understood that Pisander was overthrown at sea by Pharnabazus and Conon,
commanded a contrary report to be dispersed among his Soldiers, and putting on
a Crown offered Sacrifice for the Victory, Plutarch, Agesil. [See the History
of the famous Montross, in the battle of Aldern. Lat. p. 112.]
. And in this kind, it is to be noted, the hurt of the judgment is so much
less, because most part it is momentany, and within a little while the Truth is
manifest. A Fourth Instance and near to the former is, as often as He that has a
right supereminent Iliad. 2. Agamemnon Graecorum Imp. Ante tamen Danaos verbis
tentabo (sinit fas) utque cite sugiant aerata class monebo. Plato 3. de rep.
over all the rights of Another, uses that right for his good, whether proper
or public. And this especially Plato seems to have regarded, who grants to
those that have command, to speak false. When he seems to grant the same
sometimes to Physicians Examples of Physicians are alleged by Chrysostom, l. 1.
de Sacerdotio.
, and sometime to deny it, we may perhaps reconcile him to himself by this
distinction, making him understand in the first place Physicians publicly
called to this office, in the Later them that privately assume it to
themselves. Yet God, though he has supreme power over men, cannot ly, as the
same Plato rightly acknowledges, because it is a mark of infirmity to have such
a refuge. An example of unblamable false speaking may perhaps be given in
Joseph Cum s^atribus dispensatoria severitate crimen explorationis inureret,
ait Cassiod. de amicitia.
(Philo approving it) who being Vice-Rey of Egypt feignedly accuses his
brethren, first as spies, then as thieves, not having such an opinion of them:
And in Sal^mon, who gave a Specimen of the wisdom given him by God, when,
before the women contending about the Child, he pronounced those words, which
signified a will of dividing the Child, and yet meant nothing less, but
intended to render her Child to the true Mother. It is a saying of Quintilian,
Sometimes common utility Lib. 2. 18.
exacteth of us, to defend also what is false. A Fifth may be, as often as the
life of an innocent person, or something equal to it, cannot otherwise be
saved; and Another cannot otherwise be averted from perfecting some wicked
enterprise Aug. in 5. ps. relatus a Gratiano in causam 22. quaest. 2. c. ne
quis. Duo vero sunt genera mendaciorum in quibus non est mogna culpa, sed tamen
non sunt sine culpa, cum aut jocamur, aut proximo consulendo mentimur. Illud
autem primum in jocando ideo non est pernitiosum, quia no^fallit; novit enim
ille cui dicitur, causa jocandi fuisse dictum. S^cundum autem ideo minus est,
quia retinct nonnullam benevolentiam. Tertullian in his De pud citia, among the
sins of daily incursion, to which we are all exposed, puts, to ly upon
necessity.
. Such was the fact of Hypermemnestra Splendide mendax, and in omne virgo
Nobilis aevum. Horat. 3. Carm. 2. Ubi scholiastes, Decenter: pulchrum est enim
pro justilia mentiri. Chrysostom of Rahab: O bravely, O laudable deceit, of one
not betraying Divine things, but preserving true piety. Augustine of the
Egyptian Midwives: O the great wit of Humanity, O piously for to save life!
Hierom commends the same Midwives, and believes, rewards, and those eternal,
were given them: upon Ezech. 17. and Es. 56. Augustine is doubtful, upon Exodus
lib. 2. So is Aquinas 2. 2. q. 110. a. 54. and Cajetan there. To status says,
They did not sin. See the learned Masius on Josua, 2. 5.
, who is wont to be praised upon this score.

XII. False speaking, whether lawful toward enemies.
A Larger license, than this we have Lib. 2. de repub. Lib. 2. de Cari inst.
and 5 Socrat. Philo de migr. Ab.
speken of, is given by many wise wr^ers, that determine it to be lawful to use
false speech to enemies. So, to the Rule of not lying, this exception, unless
to enemies, is added by Plato, Xenophon, Philo among the Jews; among the
Christians Chrysostom (...) 1. de Sacerd. Where he says, I^ you call the
Actions of the most noble Captains to the test, you shall find most of their
trophies to be raised by fraud; and that such have more praise than Conquerours
by open force.
. Whither perhaps you may not amiss refer, that extent in holy Scripture, the
ly of the Jabusues 1 Samuel 11.
in the siedge, and something like it of the Prophet Elisha 2 Reg. 6. 18. and
8. to. as the Masorets and the vulgar La^ read it. Tho. 2. 2. q 110. art. 1.
and 3. Co var. in c. quam v. de pactis in 6. p. 1. 5. n. 15. Soto de justitia
5. q. 6. art. 2. Tolet lib. 4. c. 21. l. 5. c. 58. Less l. 2. de justit. c. 42.
dub. 9.
; and of Valerius Leu^, who boasted he had slain Pyrrhus. To the third, fourth
and fifth of those observations newly set down, perteins a place of Eustratius
Metropolitan of Nicaa upon the sixth of the Ethics: Who rightly c^sulteth is
not one who necessarily speitk^ truth; for it may be that one rightly c^sulting
may consult how he may ly on purpose, either to his enemy, to deceive him o^ to
his friend, to rescue him from (...) examples whereof Histories are full of And
Quintilian, If a Robber is to be averted from killing a man, or an enemy to be
deceived for the safety of our Country, says, that which otherwise is to (...)
reprehended in servants, will be commendable in a wise man. Those saying do not
please the Schools of later Age^ who have chosen S. Augustine Against whose
aftersentence in this matter, wrote Rupertus Abbas.
of all the Ancients, to be followed by them almost in all things. But the same
Schools do admit tacit interpretations, so abnorrent from all use, that it may
be doubted, whether it is not better to admit false speaking against some, in
the cases mentioned, or in some of them, (for I take not upon me here to define
any thing) than so indiscreetly to exempt from false speaking these sayings: as
when they say, I know not, it may be understood, to tell thee: And, I have not,
it may be understood, to give thec: and the like, which common sense, rejects
and which if they be admitted will effect, that one affirming may be said to
deny the same thing, and denying to affirm. For, it is most true, that there is
no word but may receive a doubtful interpretation Id. Chrysip. pus defendit
apud Gellium l. 9. c. 12. Et Seneca de Benef. 2. c. 34. Ingens est copia rerum
sine nomine, quas non propriis appellationib. not amus, sed alienis
commodatisque.
, seeing all, beside the significat of the first notion, as they call it, have
another of the second Augustinus de Magistro: Nullum nos signum comperisse,
quod non inter caetera quae significat, se quoque significet.
, and that various, according to various arts, and other senses too by Metaphor
or the like figures. Neither do I more allow of their Device, who, as if they
did abhor the word not the thing call them jests, which are utterd with a
countenance and pronuntiation most serious.

XIII. This is not to be extended to promising words, nor to Oaths.
MOreover, we must know, what we have said of false speaking is to be referd to
asserting speech, and such as hurts none but a public enemy, not to
promising Agesilaus and with him Plutarch distinguish so. To violate leagues is
to contemn the Gods. Otherwise to deceive the enemy with words, is not only
just, but glorious, profitable and de lightful.
. For, upon promise, as before we began to say, a special and new right is
conferred to him, to whom the promise is made: and that has place even amongst
enemies, without any exception of hostility now being; nor only in express
promises, but also in tacit, as in calling see parley; as we shall declare, when
we come to that part, which is of keeping faith in war. And further, that is to
be repeated out of our former Dissertation of Oaths, whether an oath be asser^
or (...), it has the virtue to exclude all exceptions, which might be derived
from the person of him with whom we deal: because we have to do, not with man
only, but with God, to whom we are bound by our Oath, although no right ari^e
to man. In the same place we have also said, that it is not in an Oath as in
other words; wherein, that we may be excused from a ly, are admitted any
Interpretations not altogether unusual; (...) truth is exactly required in that
sense, which the man that hears it, is supposed verily to understand. So that,
their impiety is very much to be detested, who doubted not to assert, that as
Childern with toys, so men are to be deceived with Oaths.

XIV. It is more grievous and agreeable to Christian simplicity, to abstein
from false speech also against an enemy.
WE know also, that some kinds of frauds, which we have said to be allowed
naturally, were refused by some Nations or men: but that was, not out of an
opinion of injustice, but by reason of a certain magnamity, and sometime
confidence Arist. (...). Nic. 4. 1. (...).
of their own strength. In Aelian is extant a saying of Pythagoras, That man
comes nearest unto God in two things: in speaking truth always, and in doing
good to others: and in Jamblichus, Plutarch. Philo in his book, That every
honest man is a free man, says, They are wont to call deceitful and
doubledealers, men of an illiberal and servile mind.
Veracity is said to be the Guide to all good both Divine and human.
Aristotle's Magnanimous man loves to speak truth, and boldly. Plutarch says,
It is a servile thing, to ly. Arrianus Lib. 1.
of Prolome: To him, being ae King, it was more dishonorable to ly, than to
any other. Alexander Lib. 8.
in the same historian; It is unworthy of a King, to speak any thing to his
Subjects, but the Truth. Mamertinus of Julian: Admirable in our Prince, is the
concord of his mind and tongue; He knows a ly is a sin, not only of a low and
little mind, but servile too: and seeing that poverty indeed, or fear, make men
liars, the Emperor that lies understands not the greatness of his fortune.
Plutarco commends Aristides, for his constant nature, holding fast that which
is just, and abhorring to ly, though in sport. Prebus of Epaminondas: He was so
stud^ of truth, that he would not ly, (...) not (...). Which indeed is the more
to be observed by Christians, because simplicity is not Mat. 10. 16. Mat. 12.
36.
only commanded them, but vain speech forbidden, and He is proposed for an
example, in whose mouth was found^ guile. Lactantius; That true and just
Traveller says not that of Lucilius, It is not my property to ly to my friend
and familiar: but also to an enemy and stranger, he will think he must not ly:
nor will he commit at any time, that his tongue the interpreter of his mind
should disagree with his meaning. Such a one is Neoptelemus in Sophocles In
Philoctete Sophoclis, Neoptolemus Ulyssi ad dolos hortanti sic respondet:
, excelling in a generous simplicity, as Dion Prusaeensis has well noted. So,
Alexander said he would not steal the victory. And Polybius says, the Achaians
abhorred from all fiaud against the enemies, because they esteemed that only to
be a true victory, which drew a confession of it from the enemies themselves.
Such were the Romans till the end of the second Punick war.

Ego audiens quae dolto, Laerta sat,
Implere factu a^im multo magis:
Nam sic nec ego sum natus, ut fallacias
Secter, (...) genitor, ut per^bent meus:
At sum paratus vt mera, non frau^bus
Pertrabere rapium.
De Genitore ejus, Achille,
Hor. carm. lib. 4. Ode 6.
Ille non inclusus equo Minervae
Sacra mentito, male feriatos
Troas and l^am Prtami chareis
Falleret Aulam:
Sed palam captis gravis, etc Ubi Scholiastes dicit,
Achillem (...) fraud, sed semper palam Virtutis siducia dimicassc.
Euripides Rheso:
Generosus animus hostibus furtim necem
Inferrenescit.
Aelian: Valor is proper to the Romans, not victory gotten by fraud and
cunning. Whence, when Perseus King of Macedon was deceived by hope of Peace,
the old Senators said, Those were none of the Roman arts; Their Ancestors never
waged war to show their wit but their valor; They left such deceits to the
Carthaginians and Greeks, who accounted it more glorious to ensnare the enemy
than to beat him. And then they added: At present perhaps Deceit may be more
profitable than valor, but a perpetual victory is obtained over his mind, who
is forced to a confession, that he is overcome, neither by art nor chance, but
by plain battle in a just and pious war. And in aftertimes, we read in
Tacitus, That the Annal. lib. (...).
Romans were wont to revenge themselves of their enemies, not by fraud, not
secretly, but openly and in arms. Such also were the Tibarens, who did agree
with the Scholiastes ad 2. Apollon.
enemy about the place and time of battle. And Mardonius in Herodotus says
the same of the Grecians in his time.

XV. It is not lawful to make a traitor; it is, to use him.
LAstly, to the manner of acting this is pertinent: Whatsoever is not lawful
for any one to do, to impell or sol^cite him to do it is not lawful neither.
For example; It is not lawful for a subject to kill his King, nor to yield up
Towns without public Counsel, nor to spoil the Citizens. To these things
therefore, it is not lawful to tempt a subject, that remains such. For
always, he that gives cause of sinning to another, sins also himself. Nor may
any reply, that to Him, who impelleth such a man to a wicked act, that act,
namely the killing of his enemy, is lawful. He may indeed lawfully do it, but
not in that manneer. Augustine well: It is all one, whether your self commit a
sin, or set another to do it for you. It is another thing, if, to effect a
matter lawful for him, one use the offered service of a man sinning without any
other impulse but his own: That this is not unjust we have proved elsewhere by
the example of God himself. We receive a fugitive by the Law of War, says
Celsus L. Transfugam. D. de acq. rerum dom.
; that is, It is not against the Law of War, to admit him, who having deserted
the enemies part, electeth ours Nor are such to be rendered, except it shall be
agreed in the peace, as in the peace with Philip, the Aetolians, Antiochus.
Polyb. in excerp. Legate. 9. 28. 34. Menander protector idem nos docet.
.

XVI. Goods of Subjects bound for the Rulers debt. Naturally, none is bound by
another deed but the Heir. Cap. 2.

LEt us come to those things, which descend from the Law of Nations. They
belong partly to every war, partly to a certain kind of war. Let us begin with
generals. By the mere Law of nature, no man is bound by another act, but the
successor of his goods: for, that Goods should pass with their burdens, was
introduced together with the dominion of things. The Emperor Zeno says, It is
contrary to natural equity, that any L. unica. c. ut null. ex vicanis c. ne
uxor pro mar. and ue fill. pro patre, tot is titulis.
should be molested for other men's debts. Hence the Titles in the Roman Law,
That neither the wife be sued for the Husband, nor the husband for the Wife;
nor the Son for the Father, nor the Father or Mother L. sicut.. 1. D. quod
cujusque univers. nom.
for the Son. Nor do particular men owe that which the Community owes, as
Ulpian has it plainly: to wit, if the Community has any Goods: for otherwise,
particulars are bound as they are a part of the whole. Seneca; If one lend my
Country Lib. 6. de Benes. c. 20. etc. 19.
money, I will not call my self his debtor: yet will I pay my share. He had said
before, Being one of the people, I will (...) Vide Leges Siculas in sine l. 1.
pay as for my self, but contribute as for (...) Country. And, Every one will
owe, not (...) a proper debt, but as a part of the public. Hence it was
specially constituted by the D. L. unica. c. ut null. ex vicun. l. 11. l.
nullam. c. de execut. and exact. lib. 12.
Roman Law, that none of the Villagers should be tied for the other debts of
Villagers: and elsewhere, no possession of any man is charged with the debts of
others, no not with the public debts: and Novel. 52. and 134.
in the Novell of Justinian, Pignorations C. unico de injuriis in sexto:
Pignorationes, quas vulgaris elocutio repressalias nominat. Rectius scribas ut
libri quidam, reprensalias. Id enim voci Saxonicae Withernamii ad amussim
respondet, sed usus alterum recept.
for others are prohibited, the cause being added, that it is against reason
for one to be charged with another debt: where also such exactions are called
odions. And King Theodoricus in Cassiodore Lib. 4. Var. epist.
calls this Pignoration of one for another a wicked license.

XVII. By the Law of Nations Subjects are tied for the debts of the Ruler.
ALthough these things be true, yet by the voluntary Law of Nations it might by
induced, and it appears to have been induced, that, for that which any Civil
Society, or the head thereof, ought to make good, either by it self primarily,
or because in another debt it has also made it self liable by not doing
right; for that, I say, are tied and bound all corporal and incorporal Goods of
them that are subject to the same society or head. And it was a certain
necessity that effected this; because without this, great license would be
given to the doing of injuries, seeing the Goods of Rulers oftentimes cannot so
easily come to hand, as of private men who are more. This then Justinian. de
jure not.
is among those Laws, which Justinian says were constituted by the Nations
Tho. 2. 2. q. 40. art. 1. Molin. disp. 120. and 121. Valentia disp. 3. qu. 16.
n. 3. Navar. c. 27. n. 136.
, upon the urgency of human needs. Howbeit, this is not so repugnant to nature,
that it could not be induced by custom and tacit consent, when even without
any cause sureties are bound by consent alone. And there was hope, that the
members of the same society might more easily obtain mutual right, and provide
for their own indemnity, than foreiners, who in many places are very little
regarded. Besides, the benefit of this obligation was common to all Nations, so
that they which were one time grieved with it, another time might be eased by
the same. Moreover, that this custom was received, appears not only out of
full wars, which Nations wage against Nations (for in these, what is observed
may be seen in the forms of denuntiation Populis priscorum Latinorum,
hominibusque priscis Latinis bellum indico facio. l;. Live. l. 1.
, and in the proposal Vellent, suberent Philippo Regi Macedonibusque qui sub
regno ejus essent bellum indici. lib. 31.
, and the decree Populus Romanus cum populo Hermundulo, hominibusque
Hermundulis bellum jussit: Gell. l. 16. c. 4. quod ex Cincio est in re
militari: and alibi: Hostis sit ille, quique intra praesidia ejus sunt. Live.
lib. 38. and alibi
it self;) but also, where matters are not come to that fullness of war, yet
there is need of a certain violent execution of right, that is, imperfect war,
we see the same to be used A prudent man Nicolaus Damascenus distinguishes
wars from these pignorations, where he shows, that Herod, to whom it was not
lawful to make war against the Arabians, might lawfully (...) pignoration for
the Debts due unto him by contract. Joseph. 6. ant. bist. ubi haec verba. Cum
narrasset quingenta Herodi talenta ^tita, cautionemque de iis expositam id
continere ubi dies praestituta trans^sset, posse ipsum ex omni Arabum terra
pignora capere, hanc expeditionem ex peditionem non esse dicebat, sed justam
debiti exactionem.
. Agesilaus of old, said to Phar^bazus, a subject of the King of Persia
Plutarch. Agesil, and Xenoph. hist. Gr. 4.
, We, O Pharnabazus, when we were the Kings friends carried our selves like
friends toward all his, and now being become his enemies we carry our selves
like enemies. Wherefore, seeing you will be out of the things that are His, we
do justly oppose him in you.

XVII. An example hereof in the Apprehension of men, and of goods.
ONe species of that execution which I speak of, was that which the Athenians
called (...).
Apprehension of men: of which the Attick Law thus, If one have force offered
him, and die, his Kinsman and friends may apprehend men, till either the
Man-slayers be duly punished, or yielded: but it is lawful to apprehend only
three men, and no more. Here we see, for the debt of the City, which is bound
to punish her subjects that have hurt others, ^s tied a certain incorporal
right of the subjects, that is, the liberty of staying where they please, and
doing what they will; so that they may be in servitude, until the City do what
she is bound to do, that is, punish the Guilty. For, though the Epygtians, as
we learn out of Diodorus Siculus, argued, that the body or liberty ought not to
be bound for a debt, yet therein is nothing contrary to nature; and the
custom, not of the Greeks only, but of other Nations prevailed on the other
side. In like manner, to recover (...) Citizen taken captive by manifest in
ju^y, are the Citizens of that City where the injury was done, retained.
Wherefore ^ome at Carthage would not suffer Ari^on the Tyrian to be taken, For,
said they, the same will befall the Carthaginians Live. lib. 34.
at Tire and in other towns of Trade, whereto they often resort. Another specier
of violent execution is (...), Justin. novell. (...) id dicit Demosth. in orat.
pro corona, and Arist. (...). 2.
Pignoration among diverse Nations; which the later Lawyers Bald. 3. cons. 58.
Bart. de repress. q. 5. ad 3. n. 9.
call the right of Reprizals; the Saxtus and the English, Withernam; and the
French, even when it is obtained of the King, Letters of Marc. And this ha^
place, say the Lawyers, where right is denied.

XVIII. Of Reprizals, after right denied. Life is not engaged.
RIght of Reprizals comes, not only if Judgment cannot, within fit time be
obtained against the guilty part, (...) Debtor; but also if in a matter not
doubtful (for in a doubtful matter there is (...) presumption for them who are
elected (...) public judgments:) judgment be given plainly against right. For,
the authority of the judge is not of the same val^ over foreiners, as over
subjects. Even amongst subjects, it takes not away w^ was truly owed: A true
Debtor, (...) he be abslved, yet by nature Spectant huc quae habet Gail. de
pace pub. l. 2. c. 8. n. 7.
remains (...) Debtor, says Paul L. Julianita D. de cond. indeb. L.
rescriptum.. 1. V. de distr. pign.
the Lawyer: A^ when, by the injury of the judge, the Cu^tor had taken away
from the owner a the which was not the debtors, as engage to him, and the
question was put, when the debt being paid, the thing ought (...) restored to
the Debtor, Scaevola proved it ought to be restored. There is this difference,
that subjects cannot by force hinder the execution, even of an unjust sentence;
nor lawfully pursue their right by force by reason of the efficacy of the power
over them: but foreiners have right to compel, which yet they cannot use
lawfully, so long as they may obtein their own by judgment. Upon such a ground
then, that either the bodies or movables of his subjects, who renders not
right, may be taken, it is not introduced indeed by nature, but commonly
received by custom. The most ancient example whereof is in Homer, Iliad. (...)
where Nestor is related, for horses taken from his father, to have driven away
the Cattle of the Elidenses: and in the same narrations, All they were by
proclamation called together, to whom the Elidenses were any thing endebted; to
the end, that every one might have his part. But, that the life of innocent
subjects should be engaged for such a cause, perhaps was believed amongst some
people, upon this principle, that they believed every man had full right over
his own life, and that might be transferd on the Commonwealth: which, we have
said elsewhere, is not probable, nor consentaneous to sounder Theology.
Nevertheless it may fall out, not by intention, but by accident, that they may
be slain, who by force will hinder the execution of right. But if this be
foreseen, by the Law of charity (we have showed other where) the prosecution of
right is rather to be omitted seeing, by that law, the life of man ought to be
more esteemed (among Christ^ especially) than our Goods, as we here
demonstrated already Part. 2. 10.
.

XIX. A distinction, in this matter, 'twixt the Law Civil, and the Law of
Nations.
BUt, in this matter as well as in others, Dec. cons. 352. Bal. l. 3 de offic.
assess.
we must beware, that we confound not those things which are properly of the
Law of Nations, and those which are constituted by the Civil Law or the
agreements of people. By the Law of Nations are under pignoration all subjects
doing injury, who are such by a permanent cause, whether they be natives, (...)
strangers; not they, that are in any Country, passing through it, or staying a
li^ while. For, pignorations are introduced after the example of burdens,
which are brought in for discharging of public debts: from which they are
freed, who only for a time are subject to the Laws of the place. Yet, from the
number of subjects, are exempted, by the Law of Nations, Ambassadors, not sent
unto (...) enemies, and their Goods. But by the Civil Law of States are usually
excepted the persons of women and Infants; and the Goods also of Scholars, and
Merchants. By the Law of Nations, every one has the right of pignoration, as
also at Athens (...).
in the apprehension of men. By the Civil Law of many Countries it is wont to
be asked, in some places of the Highest power, in some of the Judges. By the
Law of Nations, ipso facto, the dominion of the things taken is acquired, to
the sum of the debt and costs, so that the ^sidue ought to be restored The
Venetians used this equity, having taken the ships of Genua, as Gregoras
relates in his 9. Book, saying, They did not spoil any of the lading, which was
corn and fish, but preserved all very carefully, till, the debt being received,
they restored what they had taken, entirely.
By the Civil Law, they that are concernd, are wont to be cited; and the things
are to be sold by public authority, or addicted to those that are concerned.
But, these and other points are to be learned of the Civil Lawyers, and namely
of Bartolus, who has written Of Reprizals. Only this I will ^ere add, because
it belongs to the molli^ying of this right, rigid enough of it self, That
whosoever, by not paying what they ^wed, or by not doing justice, gave cause ^o
pignorations, they are obliged, by natural and Divine Law, to repair their
^osses Plutarch in his Cymon concerning the Scyri^ns: very many of them would
not contribute moneys, but bade them that either received or had taken away
other men's goods repair the loss. Vide Aegid. Regium de actib. supernat. disp.
13. (...). 7. (...). 117.
who are dammaged thereby.

XX. Of just and solemn War by the Law of Nations. Between whom this war is:
and, that it must be denounced. Cap. 3.

ABove Part. 1. 38.
we began to say, that a just war, in approved authors, is often called so, not
from the cause whence it arises, nor from the greatness of the actions, but by
reason of some effects of law. What this war is, is best understood by the
definition of enemies in the Roman Lawyers. Enemies are they, who against L.
hosts de verb. signif.
us, or against whom we do publicly decree war: the rest are thieves or
robbers, says L. hosts. D. de (...).
Pomponius: and so says Ulpian too. Where, what they speak of the Roman
people, we must understand of every supreme power He is an enemy, says Cicero,
who has a Commonwealth, a Court, a Philip 4.
Treasury, consent and concord of Citizens, and some way, if occasion be, of
peace and league. Yet does it not presently cease to be a Commonwealth or City,
if it commit some unjust act, even in Common; nor is a company of Pirates or
Robbers a Commonwealth, though perhaps they keep a kind of equality among
themselves, without which no company is able to consist. For, These associat
themselves to do mischief Turba hominum non lege congregata, sed injustitiae
causa in unum coacta. Procopius 2. Vandalicor.
: They, although sometimes they are not without fault, yet hold society to
maintain right, and they do right to others, if not in all things according to
the Law of Nature (which, among many people, is in part obliterated:) at least
according to agreements made with every other Nation, or according to customs.
So the Greeks, at what time it was accounted lawful to take spoil at Sea,
absteined from slaughters and populations by night, and from stealing Oxen that
plowed, as the Scholiast Lib. 1.
upon Thucydides observes. And other Nations living also upon the spoil, when
they were come home from Sea, sent unto the owners to Tales and illi quorum
Saxo meminit, libro 14. Lib. 11.
redeem (if they pleased) at an equal rate, what they were robbed of, as Strabo
says. Now the principal, in moral matters, is instead of the form; and, as it
is rightly said by Cicero, and Galen, The denomination Cic. de finib. 5. Ex eo
quod maximas parts continet, latissimeque funditur, res tota appellatur.
is given from the greater part. Wherefore the same Cicero speaks too
crudely, saying in his third De Republica, where is an unjust King, or unjust
Senators, or an unjust people, there is not now a vicious, but no Commonwealth.
Galenus talia vocat (...).
Which sentence S. Augustiu correcting says, Yet I shall not therefore conclude
it to be no people, nor Commonwealth, De Civit. Dei l. 19. c. 24.
so long as there remains a rational multitude joined together in a sociable
Communion of things which they love Aristotle says, if one too far stretch the
power of a Few, or of the people, the Commonwealth at first becomes vicious,
afterward none. 5. de rep. c. 9.
. A diseased body is nevertheless a body: and a City, though very sick, is a
City, as long as Laws remain, Courts of Justice remain, and other things
necessary, that foreiners may there obtain right, as well as private men among
themselves. Better spoke Dion Chrysostom, who said, the Law (that especially
which makes the right of Nations) is in a Commonwealth, as the soul in the body
of man: which being taken away, it is no longer a Cicero l. 10. epist. 1. Nec
liges sunt, (...) judicia, nec omnino simulacrum aliquod aut vestigium
Civitatis.
Commonwealth. And Aristides in that Oration wherein he exhorts the Rhodians to
concord, shows that many good Laws may consist, even with Tyranny. Now,
although there be so great a difference between a people how wicked soever, and
them that being not a people come together for wickedness, yet may a change
happen, not only in single persons (as Jephtha, Arsaces, Viriatus, of Captains
of Robbers became just Captains) but in companies also, as, they that were only
Robbers, embracing another kind of life may become a Commonwealth Exemplum in
Mamertinis. Diodorus Siculus in Fragmentis. Augustine. de latrocinio locutus:
Hoc malum si in tantum perditorum hominum accessibus crescit, ut and loca
teneat, seeds constituat, civitates occup^, (...) pulos subjuget, regni nomen
assumit.
, Moreover, who they are that have the Highest power, we have said above;
whence it may also be understood, If any have it in part, for that part they
may wage a just war: and much more they, who are not subjects, but unequally
confederate Ut Dux Lotharingiae, ap^^ Cran: z'um Saxonicis, 12, 13.
, as, between the Romans and their Fellows, though inferior in League, the
Volscians, Latins, Spaniards, Carthagenians, all things of a just War Cajet. 2.
2. q. 40. art. 1.
were exercised, as the Histories inform us. But, that war may be just in this
sense, it suffices not, that it be waged between Highest powers on both sides:
but it is requisite, as we have heard, that it be publicly decreed, and truly
so decreed publicly, that the signification thereof be made by the one party
to the other Cic. Offic. 2. At belli quidem aequitas sanctissime seciali populi
R. jure perscripta est; ex quo intelligi datur, nullum bellum esse justum, nisi
quod aut rebus repetitis geratur, aut den^ntiatum ante sit and indictum. Jos.
Antiqu. lib. 15. (...). Vide Crantzium Saxonic. 11. Nicet. l. 3. and 4.
: whence Ennius calls them promulgata pralia, promulged battles. It is a just
war which is waged by edict, (says an ancient writer in Lib. 1.
Isidore) things being required, or for resistance of Enemies: and Livy put it
in the description of a just war, that it be commenced with an Edict, and in an
open manner Live. lib. 31. Idem cum narraslet Acarnanas agrum A^ticum esse
populatos: Irritatio animorum ea (...) fuit: postea justum bellum decr^is
civitatum ultro indicendo sactum.


XXI. In denouncing war, what is of the Law of Nature, what proper to the Law
of Nations.
FOr the understanding of the places last cited, and other like, about the
promulgation of war, we must accurately distinguish, what things are due by the
Law of Nature, what by nature are not due, but honest; what things by the Law
of Nations are required to the proper effects of the same Law, and what proceed
from the peculiar institutes of some Nations. By Natural Law, where either
force offered is repelled, or punishment exacted of one that has offended, no
denuntiation is required there. And this is Lib. 1. Idem lib. 3 in Pla aeensium
ora^. Pas est ar^e cum a quo hostililt^ ^petimur. Flaminius apud Di^dorum
Siculum in excerptis (...) is: Onnes Deo hominesque est tha tur, in^ a Rege
bellum.
that which Stenelaidas the Ephor says in Thucydides: We must not stand
debating with words and arguments; being injured beyond words. And Latinus in
Halicarnassensis: He that is assaulted with (...) is wont to repel his enemy.
And Aelin out of Plato says, War undertaken to resist violence is indicted,
not by an Herall, but by nature. Hence Dion Chrysolm affirms Orat. ad Ni
comedienses. (...).
, Most wars are made without proclamation. And for no other cause Livy objects
to Menippus prefect of Antioch, that he had slain certain Romans, wa^ being
neither proclaimed, nor so begun, that they had heard of swords or any blood as
yet drawn: thereby showing, either of these two might suffice for a defense of
his deed. Neither is Indiction more necessary by the Law of Nature, if a Lord
will lay hands upon his own goods. But, as often as one thing is invaded for
another, or the debtor's goods for the debt; and much more, if one will seize
upon the goods of them that are subject to the debtor, Interpellation is
required, whereby it may appear, we had no other way to come to our own, or
that which is due unto us. For, that right is not primary, but secondary and
surrogate. So also, before the Supreme Governor may be invaded by war for the
debt or the offense of the subject, there ought to intercede an Interpellation,
that may constitute him in a fault, whereby he may be esteemed to do a damage,
or to be delinquent; according to what we have discoursed above. Yet further,
where the Law of Nature commands not such an interpellation to be made, it is
honestly and commendably Vide Marianam 27. 13.
interposed, to wit, that the adverse party may abstein from offending any
more, or the offense given may be expiated by repentance and satisfaction;
according to what we have said of using means to avoid war Part 2.
. Pertinent here is that Precept Et illud: Extrema primo nemo tentavit loco.
which God gave unto the Hebrews, that they should make offer of Peace to the
City that was to be assaulted: which precept, being specially given to that
people, is, by some, ill confounded with the Law of Nations. Nor indeed was
that any other peace but (...) condition of subjection and Tribute. Cyrus, when
he had marched into the Armenians Country, before he did hurt any man, sent
Messengers to the King to demand Tribute due upon the League, and soldiers:
Supposing that to be more friendly and courteous, than to lead on farther, and
s^r nothing; As Xenophon speaks in that History. But, by the Law of Nations, to
those peculiar effects in all cases is required denuntiation, not on both, but
on the one party. This denuntiation is either Conditionate, or Pure.
Conditionate, where it is joined with Remanding of Things. And, in the name of
Res reperitae the Jus feciale.
Heralds Law comprehended, not only vindication by right of dominion, but also
the prosecution of that which is due upon a Civil or Criminal cause, as Servius
explains it rightly. Thence was Ad 10. Aneid.
that in the forms, To be rendered, To be satisfied, To be yielded: Where, To be
yielded, as we have said elsewhere, is to be understood, unless they that are
called upon, will rather punish the guilty themselves. This requiring of
Things, Plixy testifies, was named Clarigation. That denuntiation Lib. 8.
in Livy is conditionate: That they will with all their power depell that
injury, except it be remedied by those that did it: And in Tacitus: Unless they
specdily bring the offenders to punishment, He will make promiscuous slaughter
Simile est apud Papinium: Aut Danass edice rogos, aut praelia Thebit. Polybius
hoc vocat, (...): Romani veteres, Condicere.
. Pure denuntiation is that which is specially Indiction, or Edict, where
either the other has already begun the war (this is that which in Isidore is
called war to beat off men) or himself has committed such faults as deserve
Exemplum vide apud ^bum lib. 7.
punishment. But sometime the Pure follows the Conditionate, though that be not
necessary, but ex abundanti. Hence is that form: I testify, that people is
unjust, and will not do right Et altera: Quarum rerum, litium, causarum
condixit Pater patratus populi Romani Quintium Patri patrato populi Priscorum
Latinorum, hominibusque priscis Latinis, quas res nec solverunt, nec dederunt,
nec fecerunt, quas tes dari, fieri, solvi oportuit, puro pioque duello
quaerendas censeo, consentio, consciscoque.
. This also is an argument of supervacuous observation, that war has often been
proclaimed on both sides, as the Peloponnesian by the Corcyraeans and
Corinthians, when it is sufficient that it be indicted and proclaimed by either.
Furthermore, from the custom and institutes of some Countries, not from the Law
of Nations are the White Rod Caducaeus. Unde ejus orgo disces ex Plinio, 29. 3.
and Servio ad 4. and 8. Aeneidos.
among the Greeks, the Turfs and bloody spear, among the Aequicolae first, and
by their example among the Romans; the renouncing of friendship and society, if
there had been any; thirty solemn days after demand made; the throwing of the
spear, again Vide Servium ad 9. Aen. Ammianum 19. and quae ad eum notara a
doctissimo Lindenbrogio.
and other things of like kind, which ought not to be confounded with those
that properly belong to the Law of Nations. For a great part of these ceased to
be used, says Arnobius, in (...) Arnob. l. 2. cont. Gentes. Vario. l. 4. de L.
L.
time; yea, in Varro's time, some of them were omitted. The third Punick War
(...) at once indicted and begun. Maecen^ Dion will have some of them to be
proper to a popular State.

XXII. War proclaimed against any one includes his Subjects and Adherents: But,
not as considerd by Themselvet.
MOreover, War indicted against him, who has the highest power over the
people, is witha l supposed to be indicted against all His, not only subjects,
but those too who will join themselves unto him, as being an accession to his
party: and this is that which the later Lawyers say, The Prince being diff^ed,
his Diffidato principe, diffidati sunt ejus adhaerentes. Bald. ad l. 2. c. de
serve. n. 70.
Adherents also are diff^ed. For, to indict war, they call To diff^. Which is
to be understood of that same war, which is waged against him to whom it is
indicted: As, when war was denounced against Antiochus, They were not pleased
to denounce it against the Aetolians apart, because they had openly joined
themselves with Antiochus: The Heralds answered, The Aetolians have declared war
of their Live. lib. 36.
own accord against thomselves. But, the war being ended, if another People
(...) King, for supply of aids, is to be wa^ against, that the effects of the
Law of Nations may follow, there will be need of a new Indiction. For now, he
is not ^ookt upon as Accessory, but Principal. Wherefore it is rightly said,
that, by the Law of Nations, neither the war of Manlius upon the Gallo-Greeks,
nor of Caesar upon Ariovistus, was Idem dici potest de bello sociorum ulysses
in Ciconas Pria^ quondam aux^liatos, de quib. Hom. Odyss. 1. and ibi Didymus.
Lawful: for they were not assalted now, as an accession of a Neighbors War,
but principally: to which purpose, as by the Law of Nations Indiction, so by
the Roman Law a new command of the Roman people was necessary. For, what was
said in the proposal against Antiochus: Was it their will and pleasure, that
Livius lib. 36.
War should be enterd with King Antiochus, and those that followed his party:
(which was observed too in the Decree against King Perseus:) seems truly
understood, Lib. 42.
so long as the War continued with Antiochus or Perseus, and of those that
really immixed themselves in that War.

XXIII. The Cause why Denuntiation is requisite to some effects, which are not
found in other Wars.
NOw, the cause why Nations required Denuntiation to that war, which we have
said to be just by the Law of Nations, was not that which some allege; Alb.
Gent. l. 1. c. 2.
that they might do nothing privily or (...) deceit; for that perteins rather
to the (...) cellence of their valor, than to righ^ some Nations are read to
have appointed their enemies the day and the place of battle As the Romans to
Porsena, says Plutarch in Publicola. The Turks, two days before battle, make
very many Fires, says Chalcochond. 7. Lib. 3. de ira. c. 2. Ayala. l. 1. c. 5.
Capta fieri capientium.
; but, that it might certainly appear, the War was not waged by a prin^
undertaking, but by the will of either people, or their Heads. For, thence are
sprung those peculiar effects, which have place, neither in war against
Robbers, nor in that which a King wageth against his Subjects. Therefore Seneca
spoke distinctly; Wars were indicted against Neighbors, or waged against
Citizens. As to that, which is noted by some, and showed by examples, That ever
in such wars the things taken become theirs that take them; it is true, but on
the one part only, and that by natural rig^ not by the voluntary right of
Nations as that, which provides for Nations only not for those which are no
Nation, or part of a Nation. Besides, they err (...) Alb. Gent. d. l. 2. c. 2.
this, that they think, War undertaken for defense of ones self or ones Goods
needs no indiction; for it does need, not simply, but in regard of those eff^
which we have begun to speak of, and (...) explain anon.

XXIV. War may be indicted and waged together. War indicted for violation of
Ambassadors.
NEither is that true, that War may not be waged presently as soon as it ^s
indicted, which Cyrus did against the Armenians, the Romans against the
Carthaginians, as we said even now. For, In^iction, by the Law of Nations,
requi^eth no time after it. Yet may it come to ^ass, that, by natural right,
some time may be required according to the quality of the business; to wit,
when things are demanded, or punishment required upon the guilty, and that is
not denied. For ^en, such time is to be allowed, where^ that which is required
may commodi^ully be done. And, if the right of Em^assages be violated, it will
not therefore be unnecessary to denounce War; but (...) will suffice to do it
as it may be done ^afety, that is, by Letters: as also cita^ons and other
denuntiations are usually made in places not safe.

XXV. The right of killing enemies Cap. 4.
in a solemn War. The effects of that War in general.
TO that of Virgil Tum certare ^diis, tum res rapuisse licebit.
, Then it will be lawful to hate, and fight, and (...) spoil: Servius
Honoratus, when he had deduced the Original of the Heralds law from Ancus
Martius, and farther from the Aequicolae, says thus: If at any time men or
beasts were by any nation taken away from the people of Rome, the Pater pa^ tus
went with the Heralds, that is, Pr^ who have authority in making of Leag^ and
standing before the bounds, (...) loud voice, pronounced the cause of the War;
and, if they would not restore the things taken; or deliver up the Author of
the injury, he threw a spear, which (...) the beginning of fight; and thence
forbid was lawful, after the manner of War, (...) take the spoil Ante dixerat:
Veteres laedere, res rapere dicebant, etiamsi rapinae nullum crimen existeret:
similiter satisfacere res reddere dicebant.
. Whereby we learn, (...) there are certain proper effects Crantzius
Saxonicorum, 11. (...).
of We indicted between two Nations or the heads, which effects do not follow
(...) as it is considered in its own nature. The agrees very well with what we
noted (...) fore out of the Roman Lawyers.

XXVI. Lawful is distinguished into that which is done without punishment, and
that which is done without fault.
BUt Virgil's Licebit, it will be lawful, Let us consider what importance it
has. For, sometime that is said to be lawful which is right and pious
entirely, though perhaps another thing may be done more laudably; as in that
saying of S. Paul the Apostle, All things are lawful 1 Cor. 6 17.
for me, but all things are not expedient (All things: that is, all of that
kind, of which he had begun to speak, and would speak more.) So, it is lawful
Tertullianus adv. Marcion. 1. Vacat abstinentiae testimonium, si (...)
eripitur. Vide de hac re, and de f^ga in persecutione eund. l. 1. ad ux.
Hieronym. ad Hell. vid: Virgoma^ est meriti, dum id contemnit, quod si fecerit,
non delinquit. Ad ^ammach, Semper grandia in audientium ponuntur artitrio. Non
tibi (...) ponitur necessitas, ut voluntas praemium consequatur. Chrysostom. ad
(...) Cor. 7. (...).
to contract matrimony, but more laudable is single Chastity proceeding from a
pious design, as S. Augustine discourses to Pol^ntius out of the same Apostle.
It is also lawful to marry again; but it is more ^awdable to be content with
one marriage, as Clemens Alexandrinus In the fourth of his ^tromatca: where
among other things he says of one that marries again, He does not indeed
offend against the Law, for there is no Law to forbid it, but he falls short of
that most excellent perfection of the Evangelical life.
rightly explains this question. A Christian husband lawfully may leave his
Pagan wife, as S. Augustine August. lib. 1. de adulterinis conjug. ad Pollentium
cap. 13. and 18.
thought: (with what circumstances this is true, is t^ proper to determine
here;) but he may also keep her lawfully. Ulpian L. 1.. licet. D. de peric. and
com. rei vend.
, of (...) Seller, to whom it is lawful, after appointed day to pour forth the
wine: If (...), says he, when he may pour it forth, (...) does it not^, he is
the more to be prac^. But sometime a thing is called lawful, not which may be
done without violating the rules of piety and duty, but which among men is not
subject unto punishment Tertull. in exhort. ad castitatem: Licentia plerumque
tentatio est disciplinae. Ibid. Omnia licent, sed non Omnia pro salute.
Chrysostom. de poenit. 8. (...). Columella praef. l. 8. Nec sane est vindicandum
nobis quicquid licet: Nam summum jus antiqui putabant summam crucem. Hieronym.
ad Jovinian. Et (...) vere jus summum, summa malitia.
. So, among many people, it is lawful to commit fornication: among the
Lacedaemonians and Egyptians it was also lawf^l to steal^ In Quintilian we read
Lib. 3. c. 8.
: There are some things not laudable by nature, but granted by Law, as in the
XII. Tables, The Creditors might divide the De^ body among them. But this
signification of the word, lawful, is less proper ((...) Cicero observes well
in the fist of his T^sculans, speaking of Cinna: To me, ent^ c^ntrary, he
seems miserable, not (...) in that he did such things, but in that (...) so
behaved himself that it might be lawful for him to do them: though indee^ is
lawful for none to do amiss, but wea^ in our language, calling that lawful,
which is permitted to any one:) neve^theless it is received, as when the sa^
Cicero for Rabirius Posthumus thus (...) speaks the Judges; Ye ought to
consider what becomes you, not how much is lawful for you: for if ye seek only
what is lawful; you may take away out of the City whom you please. So, all
things are said to be lawful for Kings, because they are (...).
exempt from human punishments, as we have said elswherere. But Claudian
informing a King or Emperor rightly says:

-- Claud: Nec tibi quid liceat, sed quid fecisse decebit, Occurrat.
Have in your thought,
Not what you may effect, but what you ought.
And Musonius Ded. lib. 3. and 5.
reproves Kings, who ^se to say, This is lawful for me; not, This becomes me.
And in the same sense we often see opp^ed, What is lawful, and What ought to be
done, as by Seneca the Father Contr. l. 4. (...) 4.
in his controversies more than once Ammian. Marcell. Sunt (...) quae fieri non
oporter, etiamsi licet. lib. 30. Plin. in epist. Opor^ quae sunt inhonestae,
non quasi illic ta, sed quasi puden^a vitare. lib. Cicero ipse orat. pro Balbo:
Est enim aliquid quod non oporteat, ^licet. Idem pro Milone, fas esse ad
naturam, licere ad ^ges refert. Et in declamatione Patris, Quintiliani est,
Aliud (...) spectare, aliud jus^iam, Declam. 251.
.

XXVII. The effects of solemn War generally considered are referrd to the later
sense of lawful, in respect of impunity: And, why such effects were introduced.
Testimonies.
IN this sense then, it is lawful for an Enemy to hurt his Enemy, both in his
person, and in his Goods: that is, not only for him who upon a just cause
vengeth war; and who hurts within the measure, which we have said to be
naturally granted, in the beginning of its book; but lawful on both sides and
wi^out distinction: So that, for that cause, he can neither be punished, being
per^hance deprehended in another territory, as (...) homicide, or thief; not
can War be made against him by another, upon that account. Thus we read in
Sallust: To (...) Sallust: Cui (...) victoria lege belli licuerunt.
all things in victory were lawful by the Law of War. The cause, why it pleased
the Nations to have it so, was this; (...) had been dangerous for other Nations
(...) take upon them to pronounce and determine about the Right of War between
two Nations: for, by that means, they would be engaged in the War of others;
(...) the Massilians said in the cause of (...) and Pompey, That it was above
the Judgment, and above their power, to ^cern whether side had the juster ca^
Moreover, even in a just War, it can ^ardly be known by external marks, what is
the just measure of self-defense, of recovering ones own, or of exacting
punishments; so that, it is much better, to ^eave these things to be examined
by the Conscience of those that War, than to reduce them under the judgment of
others Achaei in orat. ad Senatum apud Livium, lib. 39. Quonam modo ea quae
jure belli acta sunt, in disceptationem veniunt?
. Beside ^this this effect of license, that is, of ^mpunity, there is another
also, to wit, of dominion, concerning which we shall speak hereafter. As to
that license of hurting, which we have now begun to handle, it extends first
to Persons: of which ^icence many Testimonies are extant in good Authors. It is
a Greek proverb out of Eurip. Ione. (...).
a Tragedy of Euripedes, That the blood of an enemy leaves no stain. Therefore,
by the old custom of the Greeks, it was not lawful to bathe, to drink, to
sacrifice much less, in their company, who had slain a man out of the time of
war; but in theirs that had done so in war, it was lawful. And commonly, to
kill, is called the right of War. Marcellus in Livy; Whatsoever execution Lib.
26.
I have done upon the enemy, the right of War defends. In the same historian
Lib. 21.
Alcon says to the Saguntines, I think it better for you to suffer these
things, than your bodies to be slain, your wives and children to be dragd and
ravished before your eyes, by the right of War. The same elsewhere, when he had
related how the Ast^penses were put to the sword, Lib. 28.
adds, It was done jure belli, by the right of War. Cicero for Deiotarus: Why
should he be an enemy to you, by whom be might have been killed by the Law of
W^ by whom he remembered he was made King, and his sons. And for M. Marcellus:
When, by the condition and right of Victory we were all dead men, we were
preserved by the judgment of your Clemency. Caesar to the Haeduans signifies,
They Comment. l. 7.
were saved by his favor, when the Law of War gave him leave to destroy them.
Josephus, in the war of the Jews; It is honorable to fall in War; but, by the
Law of War, and by the hand of the Conqueror Papinius: Nec querimur caesos:
baec bellica jura vicesque Atmorum. Servius in excerptis Fuldens. ad 2. Aen.
Jure belli Politen Pyrrhus occiderat: sed cur ante oculos patris? Spartianus
Severo: praeter eos quos jus belli absumpsit.
. Now, when these writers speak of the Law or right of War, it appears by other
places, they must be understood, not of that which frees the act from all
fault, but of the impunity before mentioned. Tacitus said, Causes and merits
are considerd in peace; in War, the innocent and the guilty fall together. The
same, in another place: Neither did the right of men suffer them to honor that
slaughter; nor the course of War, to revenge it. Nor is the right of War to be
taken otherwise when Livy tells, how the Greeks spared Aeneas and Antenor,
because they had always persuaded unto Peace Senec. Troad. Quodeunque libuit
facere, victori licet. Et in epist. 96. Quae commissa capite luerent, tum quia
paludati fecerunt laudamus.
. Cyprian Cypr. epist. 2. Consensere jura peccatis, and coepii esse licitum
quod publicum est. Ibidem.
; Monslaughter, when private men commit it, is a crimo: when it is publicly
done, it is called a virtue. Not respect of innocence, but greatness of the
cruelty gives impunity to wicked Acti^. So Lactantius says, The Romans did
Legitimate their injuries by their power. And Lucan's Jusque datum sceleri, is
of the same sense, Pharsal. 1.
Law was given to wickedness.

XXVIII. Of Strangers found in an Enemies Country.
THis Law of License is of large extent: for first, it comprehends not only
them that actually bear arms, or are subjects to him that makes war, but also
all that are within the enemies Country: which is manifest by the very form in
Livy, Let Live. l. 37. and alibi passim. Hostis sit ille, and qui intea
praesidia ejus sunt.
him be our Enemy, and they that are within his guards. For, danger may be
feared from them too, which, in a continued and universal war, suffices to make
way for that right of which we speak: otherwise than in pignorations, which, as
we have said, after the example of burdens imposed, were introduced for the
discharge of public debts: wherefore it is no wonder, if, as Baldus notes,
much Ad L. 1. de justitia.
more license be in war than in the right of pignoration. And this which I have
said, has no doubt indeed, as to strangers, who after the beginning and notice
of the War, come into the enemies quarters. But, they that went thither before,
seem by the Law of Nations to be accounted for enemies after some small time
Bem^. 7. hist. Cicero uses that defense in his oration for Ligarius. You have
an example in Livy l. 25. of the Citizens of Campania. Other examples in
Thucyd. lib. 1. and 5.
, wherein they might have departed. For so the Corcyraeans about to besiege
Epidamnum, first allowed strangers liberty to go away, denouncing otherwise
they should be taken for enemies.

XXIX. The enemies subjects may every where be offended. This right extends to
Infants and Women, to Captives, and such as yield themselves without conditions.
BUt, they that are truly subjects of the enemies, to wit, upon a permanent
cause, may be offended every where, by this right of Nations, if we respect
their own persons. For, when War is proclaimed against any one, it is withal
proclaimed against all his men, as we sheud above in the form of indiction: and
so in Live. l. 31.
the decree; Was it their will and pleasure, war should be denounced against
King Philip and the Macedonians which are under his Government Vellent
juberent? Philippo regi Mocedanibusque qui sub ejus regno essent bellum indici.
. Now, he that is an enemy, may every where according to the Law or Nations be
assalted Eurip. ^bicunque prensum jura laedi hostem finunt. Marcian. IC.
Transfugas licet uhicunque inventi suerint, quasi hosts interficere. l. 3. in
fine D. ad l. Corn. de sicar.
. Enemies therefore may be slain on their own ground, on the enemies ground, on
that that belongs to none, on the Sea. But, that it is not lawful to kill or
violate them in a peaceable territory, proceeds not from their own person, but
from his right who has Empire there Vid. Alberic. Gentil. Hispan. Advocat. l.
1. 6. W^chner. in cons. Franconico 92.
. For, civil societies might constitute, that nothing should violently be done
against men in such a Country, unless according to process of Law Apud
Euripidem est: Si crimen istu aliquod hospitibus struis,
Jus impelrabisivi quidem hinc (...) abstrabes.

. And, where the Law is open, there are weighed the merits of persons, and that
promiscuous right of hurting cease, which we have said was introduced among
enemies. Livy relates, that seven Ships of the Carthaginians were in a Haven
under the Syphax's Live. lib. 28. See the like deed of the Venetiant bindring
the Greeks from hurting the Turks in a Haven under the Venetian Government, in
Chalcocondyl. l. 9 Of the Venetians and Turks at Tunis, See Bemb. lib. 4.
dominion, who had peace at that time both with the Carthaginians and Romans;
that Scipio arrived there with two ships, and before he entered the Haven they
might easily have been oppressed by the Carthaginians, but being born in with a
strong wind before the Carthaginians could weigh anchor, they durst not fight
with them in the Kings Haven. But to retutn, how far that license reaches, is
hence understood, that the slaughter of Infants too, and women goes unpunished,
and is comprehended in this right of war. I will not allege here, that the
Hebrews slew D^ut. 2. 34. 20. 16.
the women and children of Heshbon, and that the same is commanded to be done
upon the Canaanites, and upon them whose cause was connexed As the Amalekites,
of whom Josephus in the life of Saul, l. 6. 8. He proceeded to the slaugh^er of
women and children, thinking he did nothing cruel or adverse to human nature;
first, because they were enemies against whom it was done, etc. Psalm. 137.
with the Canaanites; These are the works of God, whose right over men is
greater than that of men over beasts, as we have said other where. That comes
nearer to show the common custom of Nations, that in the Psalm he is called
blessed who shall dash the Infants of Babylon against the stones Parallel
whereto is that of Homer, -- illisaque corporaterrae
Infon^um, sav^ dum conculit omnia Mavois.
Out of the same Homer Severus used these words against the Britains. Nec qui
l'atet abditus int^a Viseer a matris adhu^ fugic^ ^lia fata.
. The Thracians of old, as Thucydides relates, having taken Micalessus, put the
women also and children to the sword. Arrian tells the same of the Mac^donians,
when they had taken Thebes The Romans Scip^o also at the taking of Numantia;
Julians soldiers against the women left at Dacir. Zozim. 3. The same Julian at
the taking of Majozamaltha, without difference of sex or age furiously
destroyed all. Ammian. l. 14. Annal. l. 1.
did the like at I^rgis a town of Spain, as Appian says. Germanicus Caefar is
said by Tacitus to have laid wast with sword and fire the Vi loges of the
Marsi, a people in Germany, and it is added, Neither (...), (...) age moved
compassion. Titus proposed also the women and children^ of the Jews for a
spectacle, to be torn by wild-beasts. And yet these two are supposed to have
been of no cruel disposition. So customary was that cruelty become. The less
marvel it is to hear of old men slain, as of Priam by Pyrrhus. Nor were Captives
Elizaeus in Josephus said it was just to kill captives, by the Law of War.
Therefore Virgil brings in a captive supplicating per patrios mancs, per spes
surgentis Iuli. Withikind. l. 2 tells of seventy thousand Slavonians taken and
slain by Otto.
exempted from this license. Pyrrhus in Seneca according to the custom then
received: No Law spares a captive, or hinders his punishment Troad. In Ciri
Virgil: At belli saltem captivam lege necasses. Hotat: Vendere cum possis
captivum, occiderenoli; Ponit licere. Et Donatus, servos dictos qui servatl
essent, quum eos occidi oporteret jure belli: ubi illud oporteret, improprie
pro liceret, positum videtur. Adelph. act. 2. sc. (...)
. So the Corcyraeans slew the captives out of Epidamnum Thucyd. lib. (...).
; and five thousand captives were slain by Annibal Ap. Annib.
. A Centurion of Caesar's thus addresses himself to Scipio in Hirtius of the
African war, I give you thanks that you promise me life, being your Captive by
the Law of War. Nor at any time is excluded the power of killing such as are
taken in War, as to the Law of nations; though by the Laws of Cities it is
restrained, in some places more, in some less. Moreover, there are frequent
examples of suppliants also slain, as by Achilles in Homer, in Virgil of Mago
and Turnus: which we see are so related, that they are withal defended by that
right of war which we have said. For 1. De Civitate Dei. 2. Annal. 12.
, S. Augustine also praising the Gotths, who had spared suppliants and such as
fled to sanctuaries, says, What had been lawful to be done by the Law of War,
they judged unlawful for them to do. Nor are they always received thar yield
themselves; as, in the battle at Granicum, the Greeks that served the Persian;
the Uspenses in Tacitus, as yet free, begging Mercy: but the Victors would not
hear, says he, and so they fell by the Law of War. Note here again, the Law of
War. So also, you may read, they that yielded and were received without any
condition, were slain Vide Thuanum l. 70. in an. 1580. in rebus Hibern.
; as the Princes of Pometia by the Romans, the Samnites by Sulla, the Numidians
by Caesar, and Vercingetorix: yea this was almost the perpetual custom of the
Romans upon the Commanders of the enemies, whether taken or yielded, to kill
them on the day of triumph Simile apud Reginonem, in an. 905.
, as Cicero Cic. 5. Verrin.
, Livy Live. lib. 28.
, Tacitus Tacit. Annal. 12.
and many others teach us. In the same Tacitus, Galba commanded them to be
decimated, every tenth man slain, to whom he had given quarter. And Caecina
having accepted Aventic yielding to him, put to death Julius Alpinus one of the
Princes, as the raiser of the War, the rest he reserved for the mercy, or the
cruelty of Vitellius.

XXX. That right ill referd to other causes. It reaches also to hostages.
HIstorians Chalcocondylas lib. 8.
are wont sometimes to refer the cause of killing enemies, captives especially
or suppliants, either to talion, or to pertinacy in resisting: but these
causes, as we have elsewhere distinguished, are rather suasory than justifick.
For a just talion Diodor. Sic. Neque enim ignorabant ipsis rebus edocti, cum
bellantium par sit fortuna, alterutris, si male (...) gessissent id expectandum
quod ipsi in victis statuissent. Apud cundem Philomelus Dux Phocensium: Pari
poena exacta effecit ut hosts (...) superbo and insolenti supplicio
temperarent. Vide cundem Diod. de Spendio and Amilc. In exc. Peires.
and properly so called is to be exercised upon the same person that offends,
as may be understood by what we have said above, of communication of
Punishment. But on the contrary, from war, for the most part, that which is
called talion, redounds to the evil of those, who had no hand in that which is
accused. And as to a pertinacious affection to one side, no man judges that
worthy of punishment, as the Neapolitans in Procopius Procop. 1. Gotth.
answer Belisarius: which is then most true, when that side is either assigned
by nature, or chosen upon good ground. Yea, so far is this from being a crime,
that it is a crime to quit a Garrilon, especially by the old military Roman
Polyb. l. 1. and 6.
Law, which here admitted not lightly any excuse of fear or danger. To depart
Lib. 24.
from a Garrison, says Livy, is capital. Wherefore every one as he pleases,
makes use of that highest rigor for his own Interest; and that rigor is
defended among men by that right of Nations, of which we now speak. The same
right has been Plutarch. de claris mul.
also used against Hostages, nor against them only who had obliged themselves,
as by agreement, but against them too, that were deliverd by others. Two
hundred and fifty were once slain by the Thessalians, by the Romans three
hundred of the Volsci. We must note, that Children also were wont to be given
for Diouys. 16. Tacit. An. 1. 1 Maccah. 13. 17.
Hostages, as by the Parthians; which we read was also done by Simon one of the
Maccabees; and women, as by the Romans in the time of Porsena, and by the 4.
Histor.
Germans, as Tacitus relates.

XXXI. By the Law of Nations, it is forbidden to kill with Poison. Of poisoning
weapons and waters.
NOw, as the Law of Nations permits many things, by that way of permission
before explained, which are prohibited by the Law of Nature; so it prohibiteth
some things, which by the Law of Nature are permitted. For to kill (...) man,
whom it is lawful to kill, whether with the sword or with poison is no matter,
if you respect the Law of Nature: I say, the Law of Nature: for indeed it is
more generous to kill so, that he who is killed may have leave to defend
himself: but this is not due to any one, who has deserved to die. But the Law
of Nations, if not of all, yet of the best, is of old, that an enemy may not be
killed with poison; which consent has its rise from a regard of common
advantage; that dangers of war, which began to be many, might not be too much
hightned. And it is credible, that this proceeded from Kings, whose life above
others is defended from arms, but is less secured from poison the the life of
other men, unless it be defended by some reverence of Law and fear of infamy
The Senators to Pyrrhus: That we may not get infamy, if any thing befall you.
Live. lib. 42. Cic. Offic. 3.
. Livy calls it Clandestin wickedness, speaking of Perseus: Claudian, a heinous
act, speaking of the treachery against Pyrrhus rejected by Frabricius; and
Cicero, wickedness, touching the same history. For common examples sake no such
thing is to be admitted, say the Roman Consuls in their letter to Pyrrhus
Gellius ex cl. Quadrigario, l. 3. c. 8. Val. Max. 5. 5: Tac. An. 3.
with arms not with poison are wars to be waged, is in Valerius Maximus: and,
as Tacitus relates, when a prince of the Catti promised the death of Arminius
by poison, Tiberius rejected him, equalling himself in that glory with the old
Generals. Wherefore, they that hold it lawful to kill an enemy by poison Vide
de Venetis Bembum sine libri 3. Bold 2. Cons. 188.
, as Baldus out of Vegetius, respect the mere Law of Nature, but oversee that
which derives it self from the will of Nations. It is a little distant from
such poisoning and comes nearer to force, to infect darts with poison, and
double the causes of death; which Ovid has deliverd of the Getes De Scythis
Plin. l. 11. 53. Scythae sagittas tingunt viperina sanie, and humano sanguine,
irremediabile id scelus mortem illico adsert Levi tactu. De Servius v. supp.
Helmoldi cap. 4.
, Lucan of the Parthians, Silius of some Africans, and namely of the Ethiopians
Claudian. But this too is against the Law of Nations Ideo Ilus Mermerides in
Odyss. d. Ulyssi negat ven^num ad spicula, Veritus vim Divum mo^e ca^entum,
Salish. 8. 20.
, not the universal, but of the Europaeans, and of such as conform to the
Civility of better Europe. This is well observed by Salisberiensis, in these
words: Although I see it used sometimes by Infidels, yet I do not find the
license of poison by any law ever indulged to us. Therefore Silius's phrase is,
To infame steel by poison: for, to poison fountains also (and this too is not
kept secret, or not long) Florus says, is not only contra morem majorum,
against the manner of the Ancients, Lib. 2.
but against the right of the Gods, that is, against the Laws of Nations, which
were wont to be ascribed to the Gods as Authors. Nor ought this to seem
strange, if to lessen dangers there be some such tacit agreements of Warriors,
when of old the Chalcidians and Eretrians, during Strab. lib. 10.
the War, consented together to make no use of darts. But, the same is not to
be determined of corrupting waters without poison Cadaveribus, asbesto, quibus
usus in obsidione Auximi Belisarius. Procop. Got. 2. calce, ut Turcae ad
Dibibram. Nicet. lib. 1. De piscatu 4.
, so that they may not be potable, which Solon and the Amphictyones are read to
have thought just against Barbarians, and Oppian relates as usual in his time.
For that is esteemed all one, as if the stream be averted, or the Veins of the
Spring intercepted Vide Priscum in excerptis legationum.
, which both by Nature and Consent is lawful.

XXXII. Whether it be against the Law of Nations, to use Murderers.
WHether it be lawful by the Law of Nations, to kill an enemy, a Immisso
percussore.
, Murderer being sent against him, is wont to be enquired. To be sure we must
make a difference between Murderers, who violate their faith, either express
or tacit, as Subjects toward a King, vassalls toward their Senior, Soldiers
toward him whom they serve, men received as suppliants, or strangers, or
fugitives toward their Receivers; and between those that are not bound with any
faith; as Pipin Vide Paulum Warnafredi l. 6.
father of Charles the Great attended with one Soldier, passing the Rhene, is
related to have slain his Enemy in his Chamber; which Polybius says was in
like manner attempted against Prolemy King of Egypt by Theodotus an Etolian,
and he calls it a manly boldness. Such also was that enterprise Live. lib. 2.
of Q. Mutius Scaevola Qui Plutarcho (...).
commended by Historians, which himself thus defends: Being an enemy, I
purposed to kill an Enemy. Porsena himself, in this act, acknowledges nothing
but valor. Valerius Maximus calls it a pious Lib. 3. c. 3.
and valiant design, and Cicero praises it in his Oration for P. Sextius. It
is indeed lawful to kill ones Enemy every where, not only by the Law of Nature
but of Nations too, as we have said above: nor is it material, what the number
is of those Justin. lib. 2.
that do, or suffer. Six hundred Laconians with Leonides entering the Enemies
camp, go on straight to the Kings tent. Fewer might lawfully have done so
Valens promised money to him that would bring the head of a certain Scythian,
and so obtained peace. Zozi. 4.'L^v l^b. 27.
. Few were they, that killed the Consul Marcellus being secretly circumvented
Tacit. hist. 5.
; and that were very near stabbing Petilius Cerialis in his bed Live. lib. 2.
Lib. 3. (...). ult. ad l. corn. de Sicariis pun. Vid^ Cromerum p. 113.
Ambrose commends Eleazar Et Joseph antiq. 15. 14. Factum non dissimile
Theodosii in Eugenium est apud Zosimum l. 4. Gallorum in regem Persarum apud
Agathiam: Persarum december in Julianum apud Ammianum 24. and Zosimum 3. Alexii
Comneni in Torusen apud Nicetam Chro^aten lib. 4. de Manuele. Bulgarorum in
Nicephorum Imp. apud Zonarum.
for setting upon an Elephant bigger than the rest, supposing the King sat
thereon. Nor only they that do these things, but they that appoint others to
do them, are accounted without fault by the Law of Nations. Scavola's boldness
* was authorized by those old Roman Senators, so religious in their Wars. Nor
ought any one to be moved with this, that such being taken are wont to be
extremely punished: for that proceeds not from their having offended against the
Law of Nations, but from this, that by the same Law every thing is lawful
against an enemy: and every one, as it is for his own profit, determines,
either more rigourously, or more gently. For so also Spies, who doubtless by
the Law of Nations may be sent, such as Moses sent, such as Jo^a himself was,
being deprehended, were used very ill (The custom is to put spies to death, as
Appian says:) justly sometimes, by these that manifestly have a just caus^ of
Warring; by others, by that license which the Law of war grants. As (...)
those that have refused such offered service, their refusal is to be referd to
their nobleness of mind, and their confidence in their known strength, not to
any opinion of just or unjust. But, concerning those Murderers, whose act has
perfidiousness in it, we must make another ^udgment. Nor do they themselves
only act against the Law of Nations, but they also that use their service. For,
though in other things, who use the service of wicked men against an Enemy, are
judged to sin before God, not before Men (i. e. against the Law of Nations:)
because in that point, customs have overpowred Laws, Lib. 8. epist. ad Ruf.
and to deceive after the manner of the times (as Pliny speaks) is Prudence:
Nevertheless, that custom has stayed beneath the right of killing. For here,
who uses another treachery is believed to have violated the Law, not of
Nature only, but of Nations. This is signified by those words of Alexander to
Darius: Ye undertake i^pious wars; and though Curt. lib. 4. and lib. 14. Apud
Livium est de Perseo: Non justum apparare bellum regio animo, sed per omnia
clondestina grossari scelera lotrociniorum and vene^um. lib. 42. Marcius
Philippus de ^dem factis Persei agens lib. 44. Ea omnia quam Diis quoque invisa
essent, sensurum in exit^s re^um suarum.
ye have arms, ye bid money for the heads of your enemies. And a little after,
Ye have not kept the Laws of War with me. Elsewhere, He is to be pursued by me
to his utter ruin, not as a just Enemy but as a Murderer and Poysoner. That
of Valerius Maximus is pertinent Lib. 9. c. 7.
: The death of Viriatus has a double charge of perfidiousness; one against his
friends, because he was stain by their hands; another against: Q. Servillus
Coepio the Consul, becauso the was the Author of this wickedness, having
promised impunity: and so deso^ed not the victory, but bought it Scriptur de
viris illust: Quae victoria, quta emta erat, a Senatu non probata. Eutropius:
Cum interfectores ejus praemium a Caepione Consule peterent, responsum est,
Nunquam Romany placuisse Imperatorem a (...) militibus intersici. Ubi forte
legendum, a Coepione Consule promissum. Sic quod in (...) rium admissum est,
damnat Marcellinus. lib. 30.
The cause why it was determined so in this case, and not in others, is the
same we set down before, concerning poison; viz. lest dangers should be too
much heightend, especially theirs who are most high. Eumenes said Justin. l.
14. lib. 12.
, he did not believe any Commander would be willing to overcome so, as to give
a very bad precedent against himself. And in the same Historian, when Bessus
had laid hands upon Darius, it is said a matter of example and the common cause
of all Kings Soneca: Regi tuenda est maxim Regum salus. Consules Rom, in
epist. ad Pyrrhum: Communis exe^ and fidei visum est, ut te salvum velimus:
Tao. Lib 11. Curt. lib. 7. Sic laudatur Artabanes occiso Gontharide apud
Procopium, fine Vandalic. 2.
. This therefore is not lawful in a solemn war, or among them who have right to
proclaim a solemn War: but without that, it is accounted lawful by the same Law
of Nations. So Tacitus says, the treachery against Gannascus a revolter was
not degenerous. Curtius says, the perfidiousness of Spitamenes might be the
less odious, because nothing seemed impious against Bessus the Murderer of his
King. So also, to be perfidious to Thieves and Pirates, though not without
fault, is unpunisht among the Nations, because such rogues are hated.

XXXIII. Of ravishing of Women in War.
RAvishing of Women you shall often read in war, both permitted and not
permitted. They that have permitted it considered only the injury offered to
another body; to which, they judged it meet for the Law of arms, whatever is
the enemies, should be subject. Better minded were others, who considered here
not the injury alone, but the very act of inordinate wild lust, and that it
perteins neither to security nor to punishment; and therefore, it ought not to
be unpunisht, no more in war than in peace. This latter is the Law, not of all
Nations, but of the best. So, Marcellus And Lucullus, as Xiphilin relates. See
the edict in Procop. Vand. 1. Aug. de Civit. Dei lib. 2. Live. lib. 26.
before he took Syracuse, is related to have taken care of preserving chastity
even in the enemy. Scipio says in Livy, If concerned him and the people of
Rome, that nothing which is any where sacred should be violated by them: any
where; i. e. among the more virtuous and Civil Nations. Diodorus Siculus, of
the Soldiers of Agathocles: They did not abstain, no not from dishonouring and
forcing Women Appian. Mithrid. de Chiis captis: Mulicres and pueri barbarum in
morem ab iis qui ducebant stuprati. Lib. 6. Va^. hist.
. Aelian, when he had told how the Sicyonian conquerors had prostituted the
Pellenaean women and virgins, exclames, Cruel acts, Oye Gods of Greece, and so
far as I can remember, dishonest even in the sight of Barbarians! And it is fit
to be observed among Christians Belisarius observed it every where, and Totilas
when he took Comes and Rome. Precop. Got. 3. Deuteronomy. 21. 10.
, not only as a part of military discipline, but also as a part of the Law of
Nations, that whosoever has violently injured Chastity, though in War, should
every where be obnoxious unto punishment. For, neither by the Hebrew Law should
any such offender have escaped, as may be understood by that part of it Which
Philo eloquently expounds in his book of Humanity. Josephus, in his second
against Appian, says, The Law took care for captives in war, that they should
not be put to shame, specially women.
, constituted about marrying a Captive, and not selling her afterward. Upon
which place Bacchai the Hebrew Master: It was Gods will, that the Camp of the
Israelites should be holy, not polluted with whoredoms and other abominations,
like the camps of the Gentiles. Arrian, when he had related, how Alexander,
taken with the love of Roxane, would not abuse her as a captive through lust,
but vouchsafed her the honor of Marriage, adds a commendation of the deed.
Plutarch, of the same deed; He did not lustfully abuse her, but, as became a
Philosopher, took her for his wife. And one Torquatus, because he had offered
violence to a Virgin of the enemies, was carried away into Corsica But the
Persian King Chosroes affixt him to the Cross who had ravished an Apamean maid.
Procop. Persic. 2.
by decree of the Romans, as the same Plutarch has it.

XXXIV. Of Wast. The Enemies things may be spoiled. Cap. 5.

CIcero said, It is not against nature Offic. 3. Sueton. Nerone 40. tanquam
occasion nata spoliandarum jure belli opulentissimarum provinciarum. Cypr. de
Mortalit. Sic cum irruptione hostili Civit as aligua possessa est, omnes simul
captivitas vastat. Lib. 31.
to spoil him, whom it is lawful to kill. No wonder then, that the Law of
Nations permitted the goods of enemies to be spoiled, when it had permitted
themselves to be slain. Polybius in the fifth of his Histories says, it is
comprehended in the Law of war, that the fortifications, Havens, Towns, Men,
Ships, Fruits of the Enemies, and all things like, may either be carried away
or destroyed. And in Livy we read, There are certain Laws of War, which are
right to be done or sufferd; namely, for fields to be burnt, houses ruined,
spoils of men and cattle to be brought away. You may find in Historians,
almost in every page, whole Cities overthrown, or walls levelled with the
ground, populations and burnings of the Country. And we must note, such things
are lawful also upon those that yield. The Townsmen, says Tacitus, opening
their gates Annal. 13.
submitted themselves, and all they had, to the Romans: Themselves were spared,
the Town was fired.

XXXV. Of spoiling things sacred and religious.
NOr does the mere Law of Nation^ (the consideration of other duties laid
aside, of which we shall speak below) except sacred things, i. e. Such as are
dedicated to God, or to the Gods. When places are taken by the enemies, all
cease to be sacred Tertullian in his Apologetick: Wars and victories, most
part, consist in taking and overthrowing Cities. Which work is not done without
injury of the Gods. The walls of Cities, and Temples of the Gods par^ake in the
some ruin: the Citizens and Priests equally slaughtered: nor is the rapine of
sacred riches and profane unlike. So many therefore are the sacrileges of the
Romans, as their trophies; So many are their triumphs over Gods, as Nations,
etc.
, says Pomponius the Lawyer Po^. l. cum loca. D. de religiosis.
, The sacred things of the Syracusians, Victory made profane, says Cicero Cic.
Verrina 4.
. The reason whereof is this, because the things which are called sacred, a^e
not indeed exempted from human uses, but are public Marsil. Pata^ in defensore
pacis c. 5. p. 2. Nicol. Boerius Decis. 69. number. 1. B^ssius in crim. de fo^o
competente number. 101. Cothman. cons. 100. number. 30.
; and they are named sacred from the end to which they are appointed. A sign of
this which I say, is, that when any people yield themselves to another people
or King, then also they yield those things which are called divine, as appears
by the formula, which we have cited before Part. 1. (...). 42. page 88. Cui
convenit illud in Amphi^uone Plauti: urbem, agrum, aras, socos, seque (...)
dedevent. Deinde: Dede^, se, divina humanaque omni^.
out of Livy: and therefore Ulpian says, public Right consists also in
sacred things In the necessity of times sacred things were converted to uses of
war, by Pericles, under promise of making restitution. Augustus borrowed money
out of the Treasury of Temples. Appian Civil. 5. Heraclius in extreme need
turned the Church-plate into coin: but afterward restored the price, as
Theophanes relates. See the Oration of Laurent. in Bemb. l. 6.
. Pausanias Pausan. Areadicis.
says, It was a custom common to Greeks and Barbarians, that sacred things
should be in their power, that had taken Cities. And the same Author notes,
that the consecrated Gifts were wont to be taken by the Conquerours: and Cicero
calls it the Law of War. So, Livy says, the ornaments of the Temples which
Marcellus brought from Syracuse to Rome were gotten by the Law of War. And Cato
in his Oration in Salust, relating what things are wont to happen to the
conquered, puts among them the spoiling of Temples Vide Cromerum lib. 17.
Procop. Persic. 2.
. Notwithstanding, this is true, if any divine power be believed to be in any
Image, to violate that, is high impiety in them, that agree in such persuasion;
and in this sense of impiety, or of the Law of Nations broken, are they
sometimes accused, who have committed such things; viz. on supposition of such
persuasion. It Is otherwise, if the enemies are of another opinion; as, the Jews
were not only permitted, but commanded to abolish the Idols of the Nations:
for, that they are forbidden to take them to themselves, is Deuteronomy. 7. 5.
upon this ground, that the Hebrews might the more detest the superstitions of
the Heathens, being admonisht of their impurity by the interdict of a touch;
not, as if the sacred things of Aliens were spared, as Antiquae hist. 4. (...).
and libro contra Ap. altero.
Josephus expounds it, in favor of the Romans, no doubt; as also, in the
exposition of another precept, of not naming the Gods of the Nations; which he
so explains, as if they were forbidden to speak against them; when in truth the
Law sufferd them not to mention them for honors sake, or without abomination.
For, the Hebrews knew, by the infallible Word of God, that in those Images
neither dwelt the Spirit of God, nor good Angels, nor the virtue of Stars, as
the deluded Nations thought, but wicked Devils, enemies of Mankind; so that
Tacitus Tacit. hist. 5.
rightly said, in describing the Jewish Institutions, All things are there
profane, 1. Macc. 5. and 10.
which with us are sacred. No wonder then, if we read more than once, that
Temples of profane worship were burnt by the Maccabees. And Xerxes too, when he
destroyed the images of the Grecians, Ascon. pad. in Verr. 3.
did nothing against the Law of Nations (though the Greek writers much
exaggerate the fact to bring it into hatred.) For, the Persians Diogenes
Laertius in his beginning, says, Images are condemned by the Magi.
believed not any Deities to be in Images, but that the Sun was God, and the
Fire some portion of him. By the Hebrew Law, as the forecited Tacitus rightly,
All were kept from entering into the Temple, beside the Priests. But Pompey, as
he says, entered the Temple by the right of victory; or, as Augustine, De Civil.
Deil. 18. cap. 45.
not with the devotion of a suppliant, but by the right of a Conqueror. Well
did he, that he spared the Temple, and the Things of the Temple, though (as Pro
Flacea.
Cicero plainly) for shame and fear of obuectators, not for Religion; he did
ill, that he entered, as in contempt of the true God, wherewith also the
Prophets do upbraid the Chaldaeans; for which cause too, Dan. 5. (...).
some think it came to pass by the singular providence of God, that the same
Pompey was slain even in the view of Judaa, at Cassium a Promontory of Egypt.
Howbeit, if you look upon the Romans opinion, Nothing was therein done contrary
to the Law of Nations. So Josephus relates, how the same Temple was given up to
destruction by Titus, and adds, It was done by the Law of War Bell. Iud. l.
6. c. 24. and 34. (...).
What we have said of sacred things ought to be understood also of religious.
For these too are not in the possession of the dead, but of the living, whether
a people, or family. Wherefore, as sacred places taken by the enemies, so
religious likewise cease to be such, as Pomponius has written in the place
before, and Paulus the Lawyer L. Sepulchra. D. de sepulc. violato.
; The Sepulchers of the enemies are not religious to us, and therefore the
stones taken thence we may convert into any use. Which yet is so to be
understood, that the bodies of the dead be not treated ill, because that is
against the right of burial, which was introduced by the Law of Nations, as we
have demonstrated above Part. a. n. 73.
.

XXXVI. About acquisition of things taken in war. What is the Law of Nature:
what, of Nations.
Cap. 6.
BEside the impunity of some acts against men, of which we have spoken, there
is also another effect in solemn War, properly arising out of the Law of
Nations. And truly by the Law of Nature, in a just War, those things are
acquired to us, which either are equal to that, which being due unto us we
cannot otherwise obtain; or also, which do infer damage to the guilty part,
within fit measure of punishment, as has been said above. By this right
Abraham, of the spoils he had taken from the five Kings, gave the Tithe to God
And food to his servants, and part of the spoil to his companions. vide
Josephum in hac historia. Hebr. 7. 4. Gea. 14.
, as the Divine Writer to the Hebrews explains the History extant in Genesis.
After the same manner, the Greeks too, the Carthaginians, and Romans,
consecrated the Tenth of the spoil to their Gods, as to Apollo, Hercules,
Jupiter, Feretrius. And Jacob bequeathing a Legacy to Joseph above Genesis 48. 22.
his brethren, says, Moreover I give to thee one portion above thy brethren,
which I took out of the hand of the Amerite with my sword, and with my bow. In
which place The Chaldee interprets it done by Prayers to God, who by a singular
favor preserved Sichem for Jacob and his posterlty.
, I took, seems by a Prophetic way of speaking, to mean, I will certainly
take; and here is attributed to Jacob that which his posterity called by his
name should do afterward; as if the person of the progenitor and his children
were the same. For, this is righter, than with the Hebrews to draw these words
to that spoil of the Sichemites, which was made before by the sons of Jacob:
which being joined with perfidiousness Genesis 34. 30. 49. 6.
was condemned by the piety of Jacob, as we may see in the Story. Now, that the
right of taking spoil was approved of God, within those natural bounds which I
have mentiond, is manifest also in other places. God in his Law Deuteronomy. 20. 14.
speaking of a City conquered after the refusal of peace, says thus: All the
spoil thereof shall thou take unto thy self, and thou shall eat the spoil of
thine enemies, which the Lord thy God has given thee. The Reubenites, Gadites,
and part of the Manassites are said to have conquered the Ituraeans and their
neighbors, and to have taken from them much spoil, this reason being added;
because they called 1. Par. 5. 20, 21, 22. 2. Par. 14. 13.
upon God in the war and God had heard them graciously: As also that pious King
Asa is said, after prayer to God, to have gotten both victory and spoil of the
Ethiopians, that provoked him by unjust war: which is the more to be observed,
because those arms were taken, not by special mandate, but by common right. And
Joshua encouraging the said Reubenites, Gadites, and Manassites, says, Be Jos.
22. 8.
ye partakers of the spoil of the enemies together with your brethren. And
David, when he sent of the spoils gotten from the Amalikites to the Elders of
the Hebrews, (...) Sam. 30. 26.
adds in commendation of his present, Behold, this is a Gift for you of the
spoil of the Lord's enemies. For verily, as Seneca says, it is the glory of
military men De benef. 3. 37.
to enrich one with the enemie's spoils. And there are extant divine Laws about
dividing the spoil, Numb. 31. 27. And Philo de diris.
Philo says, it is among the Threats of the Law, that the field should be
reaped by their enemies, whence would follow their own famine, and their
enemies plenty. But, by the Law of Nations, not only he that wageth war on a
just cause, but every one, in solemn War, and without end and measure, is made
Master of all he takes from the enemy, in that sense, that by all Nations both
himself, and they that have Title from him, are to be maintained in the
possession of such things; Which, as to external effects, we may call Dominion.
Cyrus in Xenophon: It Xen. 5. de instit. Cyri.
is an everlasting Law among men, that, the enemies City being taken, their
goods and money should be the Conquerors. Plato said, The Conquerors get all
that the Conquered had; who in another place, among the kinds of acquisition,
that are as 'twere natural, puts the Polemical for one, having therein the
assent of the forecited Xenophon; in whom Socrates by interrogations Sophist.
Com. 4.
brings Euthydemus to a consession, that it is not always unjust to spoil,
namely, an enemy. Aristotle also says, 1. Polit.
The Law is as a common agreement, whereby the things taken in War become the
Takers Apud Plutarch. in vita Alex. Ea quae victi fuerant, and esse and
appellari debent Victoris. Ibidem. Vincentes etiam ca quae hostium sunt, sibi
acquirere. Diodorus Siculus excerptis Peiresian. n. 467. Quae armis quaesita
essent and parta belli jure, non di^tenda. Etiam Clemens Alexand. ait, res
hostium rapi and acquiri belli jure. Strom. 1. Live. lib. 39. L. naturalem..
ult. D. de acq. rerum dom. tit. de rer. dio.
. Philip in his Epistle to the Athemans: We all do hold Towns left us by our
Ancestors, or gotten by the Law of War. Aeschines: If in War made against us
you have taken the City, by the Law of War you possess it rightly. Marcellus in
Livy says, what he took from the Syracusians, he took away by the same Law.
Things taken from the enemies presently become theirs that take them, by the
Law of Nations, says Caius the Lawyer. Theophilus in the Greek Institutions
calls this acquisition Natural: for, not any cause but the naked fact is
considered, and thence a right springs: as also Nerva the son (the Lawyer
Paulus reporting it) said, the dominion of things began from natural
possession, and some print thereof remains in the things taken in the Land, the
Sea, and the Air; and in things taken in War; all which instantly become
theirs, who first laid hold on the possession. From the enemy are judged to be
taken away, those things also, which are taken away from the subjects of the
enemy. So Dercyllides argues in Xenophon, when Pharnabazus was the enemy of
the Lacedaemonians, Hist. Gr. 3.
and Mania subject to Pharnabazus, the Goods of Mania were in such a case, that
they might be rightly seized on by the Law of War.

XXXVII. When Movable Goods are by the Law of Nations judged Taken: When Lands.
MOreover, in this question of War it has pleased the Nations, that he may be
understood to have taken a thing, who so deteins it, that the other has lost
all probable hope of recovery, that the L. Pomponius. D. de acq. rer. dom. L.
postlim.. postliminio. D. de capt. l. ult. Ib. l. postlim.. in bello. d. tit.
Inst. de rer. divis.. item ea. Inst. d. loco. l. naturalem.. item de acq. rer.
dom.
thing has escaped pursuance, as Pomponius speaks in a like question. And
this so proceeds in movable goods, that they are said Taken, when they are
brought within the bounds, that is, the guards of the enemy. For in the same
manner a thing is lost, as it returns by Postliminium. It returns, when it
comes within the bounds of Empire, i. e. within the guards. And Paulus says
plainly of a man, that he is lost, when he is gone beyond our bounds: and
Pomponius interprets him Taken in War, whom the enemies have taken out of ours,
and brought within their own guards; for before he is brought into their guards
he remains a Citizen. Now, in this Law of Nations, there was the same reason of
a man and of a thing. Whence it is easy to be conceived, that elsewhere things
taken are said presently to become the Takers, ought to be understood with some
condition, to wit, of continuing the possession so far; whence Consulatn maris
c. 283. and 287. Constit. Gallicae lib. 20. tit. 13. art. 24. Corn. de Lap. in
Genesis c. 14. Molin. disp. 118. L. quod meo. D. de acq. vel amit. poss.
it seems to follow, that on the Sea, ships and other things may then be
thought taken, when they are carried away into the Haven, or the place where
the Navy lies: For then, the recovery seems to begin to be past hope. But, by
the newer Law of Nations among the people of Europe we see it is introduced,
that such things are supposed taken, when they have been in the enemies power
for the space of four and twenty hours By land also the same is observed, as
you may learn out of Thuanus l. 113. in an. 1595. Vid. and Alb. Gent. Hispan.
Adv. l. 3.
. As for Lands or Fields, they are not conceived presently to be taken, so soon
as they are sat upon. For, though it be true, that that part of the field,
which an Army has entered with great force, is for the time possessed by it, as
Celsus has noted; Yet, as to that effect which we speak of, every possession
is not sufficient, but a firm possession is required. Wherefore the Romans were
so far from judging the field which Annibal encamped in without the Gate, to be
lost, that at the very same time it was valued at the same price it was sold
before. That field then will be supposed taken, which is so included with
lasting fortifications, that without overcoming them the other party can have
no access. Whence it is a very probable derivation Territorium a terrendis
hostibus. Sic. Flac. a terendo. Var. a terra. Frontin. a terrendi ^ure. Pomp.
Xea. lib. de Vectigal. (...).
of the word Territory, from terrifying the enemies. So Xenophon says, the
possession of land in the time of War is retained by Forts or muniments.

XXXVIII. Things that are not the enemies are not acquired by war. Of Goods
found in the Enemies Ships.
ANd this is manifest, that a thing may be made ours by the Law of war, it is
required, that it have been the enemies; For, things that are with the enemies,
that is, in their Towns, or within their guards, but whose Owners are neither
the enemies subjects, nor of an hostile mind, those things cannot be acquired
by war, as appears, among other arguments, by that saying of Aeschines De male
obita legatione.
that Amphipolis, a City of the Athenians, by the war of Philip against the
Amphipolitans could not become his. For, both Reason fails, and this Right of
changing Dominion by force is so odious, that it is not fit to be produced.
Wherefore, what is wont to be said, Consul. maris c. 273.
that the Goods are the enemies, which are found in the Enemies ships Neither
are the ships of friends to be made a prey because of the enemies goods, unless
it be by consent of the Masters of the ship. L. Cotem. D. de Publicanis.
Rodericus Zuarius li. de usu maris, Consil. 2. (...). 6. And so I think the
Laws of France are to be understood, which subject ships and goods to the prey
for one another. Otherwise the things alone become a prey. Meurs. Danic. lib.
2. So in the War of the Venetians with the Genuans, the Greek ships were
sea^ched, and the enemies hidden there drawn forth. Gregoras lib. 9. vide and
Crantzium Saxon. 2. and Albericum Gentilem Adv^. Hispan. lib. 20.
, ought not to be so understood, as if it were a certain Rule of the Law of
Nations, but that it may show a presumtion, which yet by strong proofs to the
contrary may be overthrown. So, in our Holland, long since, Anno 1338. in the
heat of War, I have found it was judged in full Senate, and upon that judgment
passed into a Law.

XXXIX. By the Law of Nations the things are made ours, which our enemies took
from others by war.
ANd this is without Controversy if we respect the Law of Nations, Things taken
by us from the enemies cannot be challenged by them that had possessed them
before our enemies, and had lost them by war: because the Law of Nations made
the enemies first masters by external dominion, and then us. By which right,
among other arguments, Jephtha defends himself against the Ammonites, because
that Land which the Jud. 11. 23, 24, 27. 1 Samuel 30. 20.
Ammonites challenged, by the Law of war had passed from the Ammonites to the
Hebrews; as also another part, from the Moabites to the Amorites, and from the
Amorites to the same Hebrews. So David accounts that for his own, and divides
it, which he had taken from the Amalekites, the Amalekites formerly from the
Philistines So Resin King of Syria gave a City which was the ldumaeans not to
them, but to the Syrians to be inhabited, as the Masorets read, 2 Reg. 16. 6.
Halicarnass. l. 6.
. Titus Largius in Dionysius Halicarnassensis, when the Volscians requested to
have their old possessions again, gave his opinion, in the Roman Senate, thus:
We Romans believe De Veiis idem in Romulo narrat Plutarchus.
those possessions to be most honorable and just, which we have taken by the
Law of War, nor can we be induced, by a foolish facility to part with the
monuments of our valor, and restore them to those that were not able to keep
them. Nor do we judge such possessions to be communicated only to our
Countrymen now living, but to be left to our posterity. So far are we from
relinquishing what we have got, and dealing with our selves as if we were our
own enemies. And in the answer of the Romans given to the Aurunci: We Romans
are of Halic. l. 8.
this Judgment, what one has gotten of his enemies by valor, he may transmit
to his posterity by right. Livy, after his narration how the land near Luca was
divided by the Romans, notes, That Land Lib. 41.
was taken from the Ligures, and had been formerly the Ethruscians. By this
right was Syria retained by the Romans, as Appian notes, and not restored to
Antiochus Pius, from whom Tigranes the Romans enemy had forced it: and Justin
out of Trogus makes Pompey answer the same Antiochus in this manner: As he
Mithrid. Civil. 1: Lib. 40.
did not deprive him of his Kingdom when he had it, so would he not restore him
to the Kingdom he had lost to Tigranes, and knew not how to keep. And likewise
those parts of Gallia which the Cimbrians had taken from the Galls, the Romans
took for their own.

XL. Of the Right over Captives. Their Condition, and the reason of it.
Cap. 7.
IN the Primitive state of Nature, no men L. Libertus. 1. D. de statu hom.
are servants: yet is it not repugnant to Natural Justice that by the fact of
man, that is, by Covenant or transgression, servitude should come in. But, by
that Law of Nations, of which we now speak, servitude is of larger extent, both
as to persons, and as to effects. For, if we consider Persons, not only they
that give up themselves or promise servitude are accounted for servants, but
all indeed that are taken in public solemn War, after they are brought within
the guards, as Pomponius says. Nor is Transgression L. postlim.. 1. D. de
captiv. L. in bello D. de captivis.
necessary, but the lot of all is equal, even of them, who by their ill fortune
Philo: Multi viri boni variis casibus nativam libertatem amiserunt. Pueros
bello captos abducere (...) vocat Oppian.
, after war is on the sudden begun, are deprehended within the bounds of the
enemies. Nor are they servants only themselves, but also their posterity for
ever: to wit they that are born of a mother being a servant after servitude L.
and servorum. 1. D. de statu hominum. 1 Cor. 5.
. Now, the effects of this right are infinite, so that, as Seneca the Father
said, there is nothing which is not lawful to a Master over his servant. No
suffering, which may not freely be imposed on him; no work which may not every
way be commanded or extorted from him: so that even the cruelty of Masters
toward servile persons is unpunished, unless so far as the Civil Law sets a
measure and a penalty for cruelty, We may observe, says Caius, that Masters,
L. X. D. de his qui sui sunt juris. Instit. de his qui sui.
among all Nations equally, have had power of life and death over their
servants. Then he adds, that limits were appointed Donat. ad Ter. And. A. 1.
S. 1. Quid non justum domino in servum?
to this power by the Roman Law, to wit, on Roman ground. Moreover, all things
which are taken with the persons are acquired to the Master. The servant
himself, who is in the power of another, Instit. per quas person.. item vob.
says Justinian, can have nothing as his own. Whence is refelled, or at least
restrained, their opinion, who say incorporal things are not acquired by the
Law of War. For, it is true, they are not primarily and by themselves acquired,
but by means of the person whose they were. Yet here are to be excepted those
things which flow from a singular propriety or the person, and therefore are
unalienable, as the right paternal. For these, if they can remain, remain in
the person; if not, they are extinguished. Now, all these things were
introduced by the Law of Nations, for no other cause, but that the Takers
tempted by so many commodities might willingly abstein from that extreme
rigor, whereby they might kill those they L. Pupillus. D. de V. S. vide and
Servium ad 5. Aen. ubi originem vocis saltem explicat.
had taken, both at the instant, and afterward, as we have said before. The
appellarion of servants, says Pomponius, is derived hence, that Commanders are
accustomed to sell Captives, and so preserve and not kill them. I said, that
they might willingly abstein: for here is nothing like a Covenant whereby they
may be Compeld to abstain, if you look upon this Law of Nations, but a manner
of persuading from consideration of that which is more profitable. And for the
same cause, this right is also transcribed to others, just as the dominion of
things. The reason why this dominion was extended to the Children, is, because
otherwise, if the Takers should use their highest right, they would not be
born. Whereto is Consequent, that the Children born before that calamity,
unless they be taken too, become not servants. And, the reason why it pleased
the Nations, that the Children should be of their Mothers condition, is,
because servile copulations were neither regulated by Law nor by certain
custody, so that no sufficient presumption could show the Father. So is that of
Ulpian to be understood, The Law of Nature L. Lex Naturae. D. de statu hom.
is this, that he which is born without lawful Matrimony, should follow the
Caius JC. lib. 2. rerum quotidian. Item quae ex hostib. capiuneur jure gentium
stati^ capientium flunt adeo quidem ut liberi homines in servitutem deducantur.
Mother. That is, The Law of general custom drawn from some natural reason, as
we have elsewhere showed that the word Natural Law is taken. Now, that these
rights were not in vain introduced by the Nations, may be understood by example
of Civil Wars; wherein, for^ the most part, we see those that are taken slain,
because they could not be brought under servitude: which Plutarch also has
noted in the life of Otho, and Tacitus in the second of his Histories.

XLI. This right over Captives prevailed not among all Nations, nor does it
prevail among Christians.
NOtwithstanding, we must know, this Law of Nations concerning Captives has
not been always received, nor among all Nations; though the Roman Lawyers speak
universally, styling the more notable part by the name of the whole. So, Deuteronomy.
23. 15. Vide praeceptorum vetantium 180.
among the Hebrews, who were segregated by special Ordinances from the
community of other people, refuge was granted unto servants, namely those (as
Interpreters righly observe) who fell into that calamity by no fault of their
own. And Christians The Essenes also, from whom the first Chr^stians took
beginning. See Josephus.
have generally agreed, that Bart. in l. hosts. D. de capt. Cova^. in c.
peccatum. p. 2. (...). 11. n. 6.
such as are taken in War between them should not become servants, to be sold,
to be forced to work, and suffer the like servile things. Very justly; because
they had, or ought to have, learned better of the Commendator of all Charity,
than not to be kept from the killing of miserable men, except by concession of
a less cruelty. And that this has passed heretofore from the Ancestors to
their posterity, among professors of the same Religion, Gregoras Greporas lib.
4. Mos hic est ab antiquo deductus, ad posteros, propter fidei consortium, ut
res quidem in praedam vertere liceat, homines autem nec captivos facere, nec
interficere ex^ra praeli^ tempus.
has written; nor, was it proper to the Subjects of the Roman Empire, but
common with the Thessalians, Illyrians, Triballians and Bulgarians. Thus has
the reverence of the Christian Law effected this at least, though it be but
small, which Socrates of old, when he would have persuaded the Greeks to
observe toward one another, could not obtein Plato 5. de Repub.
. The same do the Mah^metans also observe among themselves in this point
Chalcocondyl. lib. 3. Leunclav. lib. 3 and 17. Busbequius epist. exoticatum. 3.
, which the Christians do. Yet, even among the Christians, has remained a
custom to keep the Captives, until a ransom be paid, whose valuation is at the
pleasure of the Conqueror; unless a certainty were agreed on. And this right
of keeping the Captives is usually granted all that have taken them, except the
persons of eminent place and dignity; for, over these, the manners of most
Bart. in l. nam. and serve. D. de Reg. gestis. B^er. decis. 178. Constable. Reg.
Hisp. lib. 8. tit. 26. page 2.
Nations give a right to the Commonwealth, or to the head thereof.

XLII. Of Empire over Cap. 8.
the Conquered.
HE that can subject unto himself particular men by personal servitude, no
wonder if he can subject unto himself a community, whether it be a
Commonwealth, or part thereof, by a subjection either merely Civil, or merely
herile, or mixed. Therefore Tertullian said, Empires Apologet.
are got by arms, and propagated by victories. Alexander in Curtius; Laws are
given by Conquerors, received by the Conquered Minio in orat. ad Romanos, apud
Live. l. 35. Cur Syracusas a^que in alias Siciliae Graecas urbes Praetorem
quotannis cum Imp^rio and virgis and securibus (...)? Nihil a'iud prosecto
dicatis, quam armis super at is vos iis has leges imposuisse.
. Ariovistus in Caesar De De bell. Gall.
says, It is the Law of War, that they who have overcome should govern those
whom they have overcom, as they please. Justin Lib. 1.
out of Trogus relates, that the Warriors before Ninus sought not Rule for
themselves but Glory, and being content with honor absteined from dominion;
but Ninus was the first that enlarged the bounds of his empire, and subdued
other Nations; whereupon, it went into a Custom. Bocchus in Sallust, says, He
took arms to defend his Kingdom; for, part of Numidia, whence he had expelld
Jugurtha, was become His by the Law of War. Now, Empire may be acquired to the
Conqueror, either only as it is in a King Alexander after the Battle at
Gaugamel was saluted King of Asia. The Romans said, what Syphax had was theirs
by the Law of War. Ap pian. But, when the Hunni said, the Gepidae were theirs,
because they had taken their King, the Romans denied that, because the Gepidae
had rather a Prince than a King, nor were they in his Patrimony. Menander
Protector.
or other Governor, and then He succeeds only into his right, and no farther;
or also as it is in the people; in which case, the Conqueror has Empire so,
that he may also alienate it, as the people might. And so it came to pass, that
some Kingdoms were in patrimony, as we have said before Part. 1. n. 47.
. Farther, it may be, that the Commonwealth that was, may cease to be a
Commonwealth; either so, that it may be an accession of another Commonwealth,
as the Roman Provinces; or, that it may adhere to no Commonwealth, as, if a
King waging War at his own charge, so subject a people to himself, that he will
have it governd, not for the profit of the people chiefly, but of Lib. 7. de
rep.
the Governor; which is a property of Heril Empire, not of Civil. Government,
says Aristotle, is either for the utility of the Governor, or for the utility
of the Governed; this has place among free men, that among Masters and
servants. The people then, that is kept under such command, will be for the
future, not a Commonwealth, but a great Family Alexandrides (...). Tacitus; non
dominationem and servos sed rectorem and cives cogitaret. Xenophon says of
Agesilaus, that when he conquered Cities, he governd them as free, and did not
enslave them.
. And hence may be understood, what kind of empire is that which is mixed of
Civil and Heril, to wit, where servitude is mingled with some personal liberty.
So we read, people have been deprived of arms, and commanded to have no iron,
but for agriculture; and others have been compel to change their language and
course of life. Moreover, as things which did belong to particular men, are
acquired by the right of war to them, who subject those men to themselves; so
also the things of a Community become theirs who subject to themselves the
Community, if they please. Annibal in his Oration to his Soldiers: Whatsoever
the Komans do Live. lib. 43.
possess, being gotten and heaped up with so many triumphs, All that together
with the masters will be ours. So Pompey, what Strabo lib. 12.
Mithridates had taken and added to his Empire, subdued to the Roman people.
Wherefore also incorporal rights of a community will become the Conqueror's, so
far as he pleases. So, Alba being conquered, Dionys. 3.
the Romans challenged to themselves the rights of the Albans. Whence it
follows, that the Thessalians were wholly freed from the obligation of the
hundred talents; which sum, due from them to the Thebans, Alexander the Great,
having conquered Thebes, forgave them by the right of victory. Nor is that true
which in Quintilian is alleged on behalf of the Thebans, that that only is the
conqueror's which he holds himself: and, incorporal right cannot be holden; and
that the condition of an heir and of a conqueror is different, because the
right passes to the former, the thing to the later. For, ^he that is Master of
the Persons, is also Master of the things, and of all right which belongs to
the Persons. He that is L. qui in servit^te est. de regjuris. L. sic eveniet.
D. ad leg. Jud. de adult.
possessed, does not possess for himself; nor has he any thing in his power,
who has not himself. Yea, if one leave the right of a Commonwealth to a
conquered people, he may take to himself some things which were the
Commonwealths; for, it is at his pleasure, to appoint what measure he will to
his own favor. The fact of Alexander was imitated by Caesar, when he forgave
those of Dyrrachium the debt which they owed to some one of the adverse party.
But here might be objected, Cic. ep. ad Brut. 6.
that the War of Caesar was not of that kind of which this Law of Nations was
established Antonius commanded the Tyrians to restore what they possessed of
the Jews, not granted to them by the Senate, and possessed before the War of
Cassius. Josephus. vide and Beza^um Genuen^ histor. lib. 20.
.

XLIII. Admonitions about things done in an unjust War. Cap. 10.

I Must now return, and take away from those that wage War almost all that I
have seemed to give them, and yet have not given. For I said at first, when I
began to explain this part of the Law of Nations, that many things are lawful
or of right, in that they are done impune, without punishment, and partly
because coactive judgments do lend them their authority; which things yet,
either are exorbitant from the rule of right; whether that rule be placed in
right strictly so called, or in the precept of other virtues; or else at least
may be omitted better and with more commendation among good men. In Seneca's
Troades, when Pyrrhus says, No law spares a captive, or hinders his
punishment, Agammenon replies, What Law forbids not, Pudor forbids to be
done. Where Pudor (or, Modesty) signifies not so much respect of men and
reputation, as of Right and Good, or at least, of that which is righter and
better. And in that sense you may often see Justice joined with Pudor, Plato;
Justice is called the companion of Pudor, and Lib. 12. de leg.
that deservedly. And in another place; God fearing the destruction of mankind,
Ad ineruditum praesidem.
gave unto men Justice and Pudor, the ornaments of Cities, and bonds of
friendship. Cicero so distinguishes between Justice Offic. 1.
and Modesty, that he makes it the part of Justice, not to violate men; of
modesty, not to offend them. With that which we brought out of Seneca well
agrees a saying Lib. 1. de ira. cap. 27.
of the same Author in his Philosophic writings; How narrow is that Innocence,
to be good according to Law Cic. de Offic. 3. Aliter leges, aliter Philosophi
tollunt astutias. Leges quatenus manu tenere res possunt; Philosophi quatenus
ratione and intelligentia.
? How much larger is the rule of duties than of Law? How many things does
piety, humanity, liberality, justice, faith require? all which are without the
Statute-book. Where you see Law is distinguished from Justice; because Law
conteins that which is of force in external judgments. The same difference
Aristotle intimates, disputing Arist. pol. 1. c. 6.
whether the servitude be to be called just, which arises from War. Some
respecting one kind of just (for the Law is a certain just thing) say,
servitude arising from war is just: yet not perfectly; because it may happen,
that the cause of Warring was unjust. So also the Roman Lawyers, what L.
postlim. in pr. D. de cap.
oftentimes they call the right of captivity, they elsewhere call injury, and
oppose it to natural equity; and Seneca says, the Epist. 32.
name of servant came from injury, respecting that which often happens. And the
Lib. 28.
Italians in Livy, retaining the things they had taken from the Syracusians in
War, are called pertinacious to confirm their injury. Dion Prusaeensis, when he
had said, Orat. 15.
Captives in war, if they returned to their own, received their liberty, adds,
as men that were injuriously kept in servitude. Lactantius Austin in his 4.
Epistle, which is to Maicellmus, says, If this earthly commonwealth would keep
Christ's precepts, even wars would not be waged without kindness. Apud veros Dei
cultores etiam ipsa b^lla pacata sunt. Idem.
speaking of the Philosophers; When they discourse of offices perteining to
war, they accommodate their words neither to justice nor to true virtue, but to
this life and the custom of Commonwealths. And a little after he says, the
Romans did injury by Law. First, then we say, If the cause of war be unjust,
although war be undertaken after a solemn manner, all acts that have their rise
thence, are unjust by internal injustice: so that they, who knowingly do such
acts, or do cooperate to them, are to be reckoned i^ their number, who, without
Repentance, cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven. 1 Cor. 6. 10.
And, true Repentance, if time and ability be not wanting, by all means
requires, that he who has given the damage, Number. 5. 6.
whether by killing, or by spoiling things, or by taking the prey, repair the
same Hieron. ad Rust. Nec dif^ertur ultionis sententia, si non reddantur
universa. August. in epist. ad Maced. quae est 54. Si res aliena propter quam
peccatum est, reddi possit and non redditur, poenitentia non agitur sed
simulatur.
. Therefore God says, he hates the fasts of those that detein the prisoners
not justly taken Es. 58. 5, 6, 7.
; and to the Ni^ivites their King proclames, that they turn every one from the
violence that is in their hands, seeing this by natures light, that without
such restitution repentance would be feigned and fruitless. And thus we find
not only Jews Vide Canones paenitentiales Maimonidae cap. 2.. 2.
and Christians to have judged, but the Mahumetans too Vide Leunclav. Tu. cic.
5. and 17. Loss. l. 2. c. 13. dub. 4.
. Now, to restitution are the Authors of war (whether by right of power, or by
counsil) bound, concerning all the things that usually follow war; yea such
things as are not usual, if they have commanded any such, or persuaded, or when
they could hinder, have not hindered. So also Leaders are bound concerning the
things done by their Command; and all soldiers fully, who have concurred to any
common act, as namely the burning of a town; in divided acts, every one for the
damage whereof himself is the only cause, or at least one of the causes. Nor
can I Vasquez. lib. 1. controv. ill. c. 9. n. 17. Molin. disp. 118.. ut vero.
think, that exception is to be admitted, which is added by some, concerning
them that do service unto others, if in them be any part of the fault. For the
fault suffices to restitution without deceit. Some there are, who seem to be
of opinion, that things taken in war, though the cause of war was not just, are
not to be restored; because Warriors, when they enter into war against each
other, are understood to have allowed those things to the Takers. But, no man
is easily presumed vainly to expose his own, and war of it self is far distant
from the nature of Contracts. And, that peaceable people might have somewhat
certain which they might follow, and not be entangled in war against their
will, it sufficed to introduce that external dominion of which we have spoken.
Which also the said Authors seem to determine in the Law of the captivity of
persons. Therefore the Samnites in Livy, We have sent back, say they, the Lib.
9.
things of our enemies taken in prey, which seemed ours by the right of War.
They say, seemed, because that war was unjust, Lib. 8.
as the Sammites had before acknowledged. Not unlike is this, that from a
contract entered without deceit, wherein is inequality, by the Law of Nations
there springs a certain faculty of compelling him who has contracted, to
fulfill his Convenants; and yet notwithstanding is he bound by the office of an
honest and good man, who has covenanted for more than is right, to reduce the
matter to equality. Moreover, He that has not himself given the damage, or
has given it without all fault, but has in his hand a thing taken by another
in unjust war, is bound to restore it; because, why the other should go without
it, there is no cause naturally just, not his consent, not his i^l desert, not
compensation. There is an history pertinent to this in Valerius Maximus: The
people of Rome, says he, when Lib. 6. c. 5.
P. Claudius had conquered the Camerini by his fortunate conduct, and had sold
them under the spear, though they saw the treasury increased with money, and
the bounds of their fields enlarged, nevertheless, because the action seemed
not to be done by their General upon a clear account, with very great care they
sought them out, and redeemed them, and restored their lands Mahumet the Turk
commanded them to be freed, that were in the town of S. Mary in Ac^aia.
Chalcocond. l. 9. Live. lib. 28. Live. lib. 42.
. Likewise to the Phocenses, by decree of the Romans, was also that public
liberty rendered, and the fields that had been taken away. And afterward the
Ligures, who had been sold by M. Pompilius, the price being repaid to the
buyers, were restored to liberty, and ca^e had for the restitution of their
goods. The same was decreed by the Senate concerning the Abderites, the reason
being added, because Lib. 63.
an unjust War is waged against them. Howbeit, if he that keeps the thing
has laid out any cost or pains, he may deduct as much as was worth to the
master to attain a possession despaired of; but if he that had the thing, being
without fault, has consumed or alienated it, he will not be bound, but for so
much as he may be esteemed richer for it.

XLIV. A Temperament about Cap. 11.
the right of killing in a just War. General rules.
BUt, neither in a just War is that to be admitted which is said, He gives
Omnia dat, qui justa negat. Lucan. Offic. 1.
all, that denies me right. Better said Cicero: There are some offices to be
done even to them, from whom you have received injury; For revenge and
punishment must have a measure Tacit. 3. Annal. Pompeius gravior remediis quam
delicta erant. Ausonius; Vindictaque major Crimine visa suo est.
. The same Offic. 2.
Author praises the old times of the Romans, when the Issues of Wars were,
either mild, or necessary. Cruel they are, 2. De Clem. c. 4.
says Seneca, which have cause of punishment, but have no measure. They may,
says Aristides, they may also, who revenge Leuctrica 1.
themselves be unjust, if they exceed the mean. For, he that in punishing goes
farther than is meet, is the second author of injury Laudatur Propertio Minos;
Victor erat quamvis, aequus in host suit. Sed and Ovidio: Leges captis
justissimus auctor Host^ imposuit.
. Now, when killing is just in a just war, according to internal justice, when
it is not, may be understood by what we have said in the beginning of this
Book. For it happens, that one is shin, Vict. de jure belli. number. 36. and 45.
on purpose, or without purpose. On purpose no man can be slain justly, unless
either for just punishment, or as without it we cannot defend our life and our
goods; though this, to kill a man for perishing things, however it be not
contrary to justice strictly so called, departs from the Law of Charity. That
punishment may be just, it is necessary that he who is slain have offended; and
that so much, as may be ayenged with the punishment of death in the sentence of
an equal Judge. Whereof we shall say the less now, because we have said so
much before about punishments. And before, when we spoke of suppliants (for there
are suppliants as well in War as in Peace) we distinguished 'twixt misfortune
and injury. Gylippus in that place of Diedorus (...).
enquires, in which rank the Athenians ought to be placed, whether of the
unfortunate, or of the unjust; and says, They cannot be accounted unfortunate,
who of their own accord, provoked by no injury, had begun a war upon the
Syracusians: whence he infers, Being they had of themselves undertaken the war,
they must also be content to bear the evils thereof. An example of the
unfortunate are They, who are with the enemies, without an hostile mind; such
as the Athenians were in the times of Mithridates, of whom Velleius thus; (...)
Vell. Pat. l. 2.
any one impute to the Athenians this time of rebellion, wherein Athens was
besieged by Sulla, he is too ignorant of truth and antiquity. For, So sure was
the Athenians fidelity toward the Romans, that always and in all things,
whatever was done sincerely, the Romans said was done fide Attica, with Attick
faith. But, at that time the Athenians were in a miserable condition, oppressed
by the force of Mithridates: They were possessed by their enemies, and be sieged
by their friends: They had their minds without the walls, and their bodies
within, yielding to necessity. Which last clause seems taken out of Livy, in
whom Indibilis the Spanyard says, his body only was with the Carthaginians,
Lib. 26.
his Soul with the Romans. Verily, as Cicero speaks, all men having their Pro
Quintio.
life in another hand, more often think, what he can do, in whose power they
are, than what he ought to do. The same for Ligarius; The third time is, when
after the coming of Varus he stayed in Africa: which, if it be a crime, is a
crime of necessity, not of will. And Julian considered this in the cause of the
Aquileians, as Ammianus testifies, who, when he had Lib. 21.
related the punishment of a few, adds, The residue, all, went off free; whom
necessity, not their will, had engaged in the tumult Halicarnass. l. 1. (...).
. The old Commentator upon the place of Thucydides about the Corcyreans
Captives sold; He shows the clemency worthy of Grecian Natures: for it is hard
tok ill Captives after fight, servants especially, who do not war of their own
accord. Moreover we must note, between full injury and mere misfortune often
intercedes some Mean, which is as 'twere composed of both: so that it can
neither be called the act of one knowing and willing, nor merely the act of one
ignorant or unwilling. Aristotle put the name (...) Moral. 5.
upon this kind; we may call it some fault. The same Aristotle; Equity
commands, De art Orat. lib. 1.
that we equal not in^uries and faults, nor faults and misfortunes; misfortunes
are they, which could not be forescen, nor are admitted with a wicked mind;
faults, which might be foreseen, yet are not done with a wicked mind; injuries,
which are done with a wicked mind and purposely Tria haee notarunt vete es, and
(...) illo Homerl versu de Achille, ^iados postremo; (...). Ph^lo, autem in
leg. spec explication (...) ait: Demidiatum esse facinus, ubi non accessit
(...) animi deliberatio. Thucydides lib. 4. credibile est apud Deum quoque
paratam esse veniam his qui bello aut qua simili necessitate tracti liquid
a^mittunt. Cae i^es anud Livium l. 7. Ne appellarent consilium, quae uts ac
necessitas appellanda esset. Aristides Leuctr. 2. Difficilia tempora
excusationem aliquam dant desciscertibus.
. This distinction, by Themistius in the praise of the Emperor Valens, is
applied to our argument, thus: You have made a difference 'twixt an injury, a
fault, and a misfortune. Although you neither study Plato, nor read Aristotle,
yet you put their doctrine into practice. For, you have not thought them worthy
of equal punishment, who from the beginning persuaded the War, and who
afterward were carried with the stream, and who at last submitted to him that
now seemed to have the highest power. But, the first you concondemned, the next
you chastised, the last you pityed Idem Themistiu, alibi adolescentem Impe
^orem vule discere, quid distet (...), est quomodo regem deceat istius ^ereri,
hoc corrigere, post^mum vero solum ultione prosequi. Such was Trajan, eminent
among the Roman Princes, not exactly learned in words, but one that knew wh^ to
do, and did it. Xiphil. M. (...), a singular Prince, showing wisdom, not in
word and opinions, but in temperance and gravity of manners. Herod. Macrinus
did not know the Laws so exactly, as he executed them faithfully. Xiphil. O God
I Give us but such Princes in our times (...)
. So, in Josephus, (lib. 5. belli Jud.) Titus inflicts (...) Punishment upon
the Leader in the Crime, verbal upon the following multitude. M^er misfortunes,
neither deserve punishment, nor oblige to the restitution of the damage, unjust
actions, to both; A m^an fault, as it is liable to restitution, so it often
deserves not punishment, especially capital. What Themistius notes, that the
Authors of war are to be distinguished Vide Gail. l. 2. de pace pub. n. 18.
from the Followers, is frequently Exemplified in Histories. Herodotus Herod.
Call.
relates, how the Grecians took revenge of those, who were Authors to the
Thebans of a defection to the Medes. So were the Princes of Ardea beheaded, as
Livy Live. lib. 4.
tells us; And in the same Author Live. lib. 26.
, Val. Laevinus, Agrigentum being taken, beat with rods and beheaded those that
were Chief in the business; the rest, with the spoil, he sold. The Athenians,
in Thucydides Thucyd. lib. 3.
, repented of their decree against the Mitylenaeans, to put to the sword the
whole City, and not the Authors of the desection only. And Diodorus says,
Demetrius having taken Thebes, put to death only ten of the principal
offenders. Again, in the Authors of War, causes are to be distinguished: Vict.
de jure belli. n. 59. l. 2.
for some, though not just, you are such, that they may impose upon men not
wicked. The Writer to Herennius puts this as a most favorable cause of
deprecation, if one has offended, not out of hatred or cruelty, but out of
duty and right affection. Seneca's wise man, will dismiss his Enemies safe, and
sometimes Lib. 2. de clem. cap. 7.
commended, if they took Arms for honest causes, for faith, for league, for
liberty. In Livy, the Caerites ask pardon Lib. 7.
for their error, that they aided their Kinsmen the Phocenses. The Chalcidians
and others, that helped Antiochus according to their league, had pardon granted
them by the Romans. Cicero says, they are to De offic. 1.
be saved, who were not cruel and barbarous in the War: And, that Wars made for
the glory of Empire, are to be waged with less bitterness. That has place
often, which is in Cicero, concerning the war of Caesar and Pompey: It was a
dark War: a Contention 'twixt most famous leaders: many doubted what was best.
And, what he says elsewhere: Though we were in some fault of human error, yet
certainly we are free from wickedness De Deiotaro ille Cicero: Non ill^ odio
tui progressus, sed (...) communi (...). Sallust in Hist. Caetera m^lt tudo,
V^lgi more magis quam judicio, post alius alium quasi prudentiorem secu^i.
. Just as in Thucydides things are said worthy of pardon, which are done, not
out of malice, but rather by mistake. What Brutus wrote of Civil, I think may
be well referd to most wars, They are more sharply to be forbidden, than
prosecuted. And where Justice does not exact this, yet it is agreeable to
Goodness, agreeable to Modesty King Theuderichus in Cassiodor 2. 41. says,
Those wars succeeded best with him, which were accompanied with most
moderation: for He is a perpetual Conqueror, who is temperate in all things.
, agreeable to Magnanimity. By pardoning was increased the Greatness of the
Roman People, says Sallust: Tacitus: No less Gentleness is to be used toward
suppliants, than stifness toward an enemy. It is a memorable passage in the
fourth Book to Herennius: Well did our Ancesters observe this, to deprive no
King of life, whom they had taken in War. Why so? Because it was not meet to
use the power fortune had given in the punishment of them, whom the same
fortune so lately had placed in the higest dignity. But did he not lead an Army
against us? I will not remember that. Why so? Because it is the part of a
valiant man to take them for enemies, that contend for victory; and to look
upon the conquered, as men: that valor may diminish the danger of War, and
Courtesy may increase the honor of Peace. But would he have done so, had he
overcom? Why then do you spare him? Because I use to contemn such folly, not to
imitate it In panegyrico tamen qui dictus est Constantino Constantii filio: --
caete^i in viatu^ luce privati aliis regibus dedere documentum, ut mallent
amicition colere Romanorum quam exasperare justitiam. Nolim reduci hunc morem;
tamen and Josua reges captos interfecit. Nimi^m haec documenta sunt regibus ad
modestiam.
Perseus, Syphax, Gentius, Juba, and in the time of the Cesars, Caractacus and
others, escaped capital Punishment; so that it may appear, both the causes of
war and the manner of waging it were considerd by the Romans: whom yet Cicero
and others do confess to have been somewhat too sharp in the use of Victory.
Wherefore M. Aemilius Paulus, in Diodorus Siculus, not amiss admonishes the
Roman Senators, in the Cause of Perseus: If they feared nothing human, yet they
should fear divine revenge, imminent over them that use their victory with too
much pride and insolence. And Plutarch notes, in the wars among the Greeks, the
Agide.
very enemies held their hands from the Lacedemonian Kings, in reverence of
their dignity. An enemy therefore, that will regard, not that which human Laws
permit, but that which is his duty, that which is good and pious, will spare
even an Enemies blood: and will put none to death, but to avoid death himself,
or somewhat like death, or else for sins proper to the person, which amount to
capital offenses. And yet, to some that deserve death, he will forgive, either
all punishment, or that of death; either for humanity sake, or for other
probable causes. Excellently says the now-cited Diodorus Lib. 27.
Siculus: Expugnations of Cities, prosperous fights, and whatsoever is in War
successful, more often proceed from fortune than from valor: but, in the
highest power, to bestow mercy upon the Conquered, is the work of Providence
alone Curtius; Alexander, quamquam belli auctoribus poterat irasci, tamen
omnibus venia data.
. Now, concerning the slaughter of them, who are killed by chance, not on
purpose, we must remember, it is a part of mercy, if not of Justice, not
without great causes and such as conduce to the safety of many, to enterprise
^uch a thing, whence destruction may come upon the innocent. Polybius is of
this mind, saying: It is the part of good men, not to wage a destructive Lib. 5.
War, no not with the bad; but so far, that offenses may be repaird and
amended: not, to involve the innocent with the guilty in the same ruin; but
for the innocent, to spare the guilty also.

XLV. Children, Women, old Men, Priests, Scholars, husbandmen, are to be spared.
UPon those premises, 'twil not be hard to determine of the specials that
follow. Let age excuse a child, sex a woman, Lib. 3. 24.
says Seneca in the Books where he is angry with Anger. God himself, in the
Deuteronomy. 20. 14.
wars of the Hebrews, even after peace offered and refused, will have women and
infants spared; besides a few Nations excepted by special command; against
which the war that was, was not of men, but of God; and so 'twas called. And
when he ordered the Madianitish women to be slain, for a proper crime of
theirs, he excepted Virgins that were untoucht. Yea, when he had very severely
threatened the Ninivites with destruction for their most heinous sins, he
suffered himself to be restreined by compassion upon many thousands of that
age, that knew not good from evil. Like whereunto is that sentence of Seneca:
Is any one angry with De ira 2. 9. Lucan. Crimine quo parvi caedem potuere
mereri.
children, whose age Pliny in his natural history 8. 16. says: A Lion, when he
rages, rages upon men sooner than women, and not upon infants, unless
provoked by great hunger. Philo of special laws 2. Many pretenses may be found
out against men of mature age, but against infants calumny it self can find
nothing to say, as being clearly innocents. Josephus notes it in Manaem, as
extreme cruelty, or rather barbarity, that he spared not Infants. Add that
which Bed^ has l. 2. c. 20. of the fer ty of Caraevolla: and a good Law of the
Helvetians in Simler, and the pious commands of Q. Elizabeth in Camden in anno
1596.
does not yet discern the differences of things? If God has done and
determined thus, who may without injustice slay any men of what sex or age
soever without any cause, being the giver and Lord of life Vict. de sure be^,
n. 36.
; what is fitting for men to do, to whom he has given no right over men, but
what was necessary to human safety and the conservation of society? Add here,
concerning children, the judgment of those Nations and times wherein equity
most prevailed. We have Arms (says Camillus in Livy) not against that age,
which even in taking of Cities is spared, but against armed men. And this is
among the Laws of War: he means the Natural Laws. Vita Camilli.
Plutarch speaking of the same thing: There are (says he) among good men,
certain Laws of War too. Where note that, among good men, that you may
descriminate this Law from that which is customary and consists in impunity.
So Florus says, Lib. 1.
It could not otherwise be, without violation of integrity. In another place of
Livy: An age, from which Soldiers in their anger Lib. 24.
would abstein. And elsewhere: Their cruel wrath went on, even to the
slaughtering of infants. Now, that which has place in children always, that
have not attained the use of reason, for the most part prevails in women; that
is, unless they have committed something peculiarly to be avenged, or do usurp
manly Offices. For it is a sex, as Statius speaks, that has nothing to do with
the sword Sexus rudis insciusque ferri. Statius. Neroni hostem vocanti Octaviam
in Trag. reponit praefectus, Faemina hoc nomen capit. Ideo Tucca and Varus
delendos censuere in z. Aen. versus, ubi deliberat Aeneas, an Helenam occidat.
. Alexander in Curtius Lib. 5.
; I am not used to wage war with Captives and Women: he must be armed, to whom
I am an enemy. Grypus in Justin Lib. 38.
. None of his Ancestors, among so many domestic and external wars, did ever
after victory show cruelty to women, whom the softness of their sex exempteth
from perils of War, and the rough handling of the Conquerors. Another in
Tacitus: He carried arms against armed men, not against women. Valerius Maximus
Lib. 9. c. 1.
calls it barbarous and intolerable cruelty which Munatius Flaccus showed to
Infants and Women. Latinus Pacatus says, Women are a sex which wars do spare.
Papinius has the same of old men: They are a company violable Papin: Nullis
violabilis armis Turba sines. Vict. d. loco.
by no arms. The same is to be determined universally of males, whose course of
life abhorres from war. By the Law of War, they that are armed and resist are
stain, as Livy speaks: that is, Lib. 28.
by that Law which agrees with Nature So Josephus says; It is meet, that (...)
Antiq. 12. 3.
fight they be punished that use weapons, no hurt must be done the guiltless.
Camillus at the taking of Veiae proclaimed, that the Live. lib. 5.
unarmed should not be touched. In this rank are first to be placed; Ministers
of Sacred things: for these by the ancient custom of all Nations abstein from
arms, and therefore no force was offered them. So the Philistines, enemies of the
Jews, did no harm to the College of the Prophets Hircanus besieging Jerusalem
sent Sacrifices to the Temple, as the Hebrews relate. So the Goths are praised
by Procopius, who spared the Priests of Peter and Paul without Rome. Gotth. 2.
vide Legem Longobard. l. 1. t. 11. 14.
that was at Gaba, as we may see, 1 Samuel, 10. 5, 10. And so, to another place,
where was the like College, as secluded from all injury of arms, David fled
with Samuel, 1 Samuel 19. 18. The Cretians, Quaest. Gr.
Plat^ch tells us, when they were embroiled in Civil War, saved the Priests
Serve. ad 7. Aen. Nam eum defendebat a bello, si non aelas, saltem religio
Sacerdotis.
from all harm, and those whom they called (...), men that had the care of but
als, Strabo Et Polyb. l. 4. and Diod. Siculus in exc. Peires. Likewise they
that went to the Olvmpian, Pvthian, Nemean, Isthmian Games, in the time of War,
had sa^ guard (...) security. Thucyd. l. 5. and 8. Plutarch. Arato.
notes, when all Grecce in old time was enflam (...) with war, the Eltans, as
being sacred to Jupiter, and their guests, lived in secure peace. With Priests
are justly equald in this respect, they that have chosen a like kind of life,
as Monks and Penitents; whom therefore, as well as Priests, the Canons
following natural equity, will have spared C. de treug. and (...)
. To these you may deservedly add those, who give themselves to the studies of
good learning, and sciences useful to mankind. After these, Husbandmen; whom
the Canons also adscribe. Diodorus Siculus Lib. 2. Bibl.
reports of the Indians to their praise: In ^itells the Enemies kill one
another, but they meddle not with Husbandmen, as ^en that are profitable to the
public. Of the ancient Corinthians and Megareans, Plutarch: None of them did
Husbandnen any haerm. And Cyrus sent a message to the King of Assyrians, That
he was Xenoph. de Cyri. inst. 5.
ready to save those that tild the ground, from all indemnity. Suidas, of
Belisarius: He was so tender of the Countrymen, and took so much care of them,
that, whilst be commanded, none of them ever had any violence offered him. The
Canon adds Merchants; which is not only to be understood of them that stay for
a time in the enemies quarters, but of perpetual subjects: For their life has
nothing to do with Arms. And under this name are conteind also other Workmen
and Artificers, whose gain loves not War, but Peace.

XLVI. Captives, and They that yield, are not to be killed.
THat we may come to them that have born arms, we have before related the saying
of Pyrrh^s in Seneca, that we are forbidden by Pudor, i. e. by respect of
equity, to take away a Captives life; a like sentence of Alexander we had, Ad
Bonifac. epist. 1.
wherein Captives are joind with women. Let that of S. Augustine be added: Let
(...) Will, but Necessity Plutarchus Marcello: Epaminond is and Pelopidas,
neither killed any after victory, nor brought Cities into ^irude; and the
Thebans, it is believed, would not have done what they did against the
Orchomenians, if they had been present. Marcellu followed their example, having
taken Syracuse, as Plutarch there says. See the same Plutarch in his Cato
Uticensis. Procopius Persic. 1. When Ca^ad King of Persia had taken Amida by
force, and much slaughter was made, an old Priest told him, It was not royal to
kill those whom he had taken. Idem Persic. 2. To rage against captives is
contrary to piety. In the same Author is an excellent oration of (...) to his
Soldiers, Got. 2. The Emperor Asexius in Annas Comnenas says to one,
persuading him to kill the Scythian Capti^: Though Scythians, yet they are Men;
though enemies, yet are they worthy of compassion. Gregoras lib. 6. What is
done in the heat of battle is capable of pardon, whatever it be, because at
that time the hand is not governd by reason; but when the d^nger is past, and
there is time to examine and judge, to let the h^nd be (...), and do things
undecent, is a token of an evil mind. See Chalcocondylas, of the landable
custom of the Polonians. Julian in his second Laudation of Constantin, under
whose person he describes a good Prince: Being Conquero^ in battle, he eased
the sword of any further work, thinking it great imp^ to take away life from
one that cease to defend himself.
slay a fighting Enemy. As violence is rendered to him that warreth and
resists, so to one conquered or taken, mercy is now due, especially to one not
likely to trouble our Peace. Xenophon of Agesilaus: He charged his Soldiers,
that they should not punish Captives., as guilty, but keep them, as men.
Diodorus Siculus: All (the Greeks) oppose themselves Lib. 13.
to such as resist; and spare such as submit. In the judgment of the same
Author, The Macedonians under Alexander Lib. 17.
dealt more extremely with the Thebans, than the Law of War would permit.
Sallust, in his Jugurthin History, having related the slaughter of the young men
after they had yielded, says, It was done against the Law of War: which is,
against the nature of Equity, and the manner of milder persons Lactantius l. 5.
Parcitur Victis, and est locus inter arma Clementiae.
. Tacitus Histor. 4.
commends Primus Antonius and Varus, Flavian Commanders, because they never
showed cruelty after battle Aristides de Pace, 2. Hominum est nostri ingenii
resistentes armis (...), prostratos tractare leniter.
. The Prophet Elisha speaks about Captives to the King of Samaria, thus 2 Reg.
6. 22.
: Would thou smite those whom thou have taken captive with thy sword, and
with thy bow Apud Euripidem in Hafaclidis quae renti nuntio, Hostem perimere
vestra, Lex ergo verat?
Respondet Chorus, Quem Mars reliquit praelio superstitem.
Ibidem Euristheus Captivus: Que me necabunt, non erunt purae mauus.

? The Byzantians and Chalcedonians, because they had killed a good number of
Captives, are marked with this Elogy in Diodorus Siculus Lib. 12.
: They did acts of exceeding great Cruelty. The same Author elsewhere calls it
Common-right, to spare Captives Capitol. M. Antonio. Aequitatem etiam (...)
hosts ^stodivit.
: whosoever do otherwise, without controversy (says he) they do amiss. To
spare Captives, is a command of Goodness and Equity, says Seneca De benef. 5.
c. 18.
; and in Histories we find them every where commended, who, when too great a
number of Captives might be burdensome or dangerous, chose rather to let them
all go, than to slay them. For the same causes, they that yield up themselves,
covenanting for the saving of their lives, whether in battle or in a siege,
are not to be rejected The Romans to the Persians in the fort of Petra, Gotth.
4. We take pity on you, while you strive with your yoke, and we would spare you
though you desire death, and save you against your wills, as becomes Christians
and Citizens of the Roman Empire. Vide Serranum in robus Franc. 1. and Henrici
2.
. Therefore Arrian says, the slaughter made by the Thebans upon those that
yielded, was not according to the manner of the Grecians. Likewise in
Thucydides Thucyd. lib. 3.
: Ye received us willing, and stretching forth our hands: and the Gucians use
not to kill such. The Syracusian Senators in Diodorus Siculus; It is worthy of
a Noble mind, to spare a suppliant. Sopater: To save suppliants, is a custem
in-Wars. In towns besieged, 'twas observed by the Romans, before the Ram had
simitten the wall. Caesar Caes. l. 2. de bello Gallico.
denounces to the Advatici, He would save their City, if; before the Ram had
touched the wall, they yielded. Which is still in use, in weak places, before
the Great Guns are fired: in stronger places, before an Assalt is made upon the
walls. But (...) Cic. Offic. 1.
not so much respecting what is done, (...) what ought to be done, delivers his
judgment thus; As you must consult for the good of those whom you have subdued
by force, so are they to be received into protection (though the Ram has
smitten the wall) who lay down their arms, and fly to the mercy of the
Generals. The Hebrew Interpreters observe, That their Ancestors had a custom,
when they besieged a City, not to engirt it round, but to leave one part open
for those that would fly So Scipio Aemilianus at the overthrowing of Carthage,
proclaimed. They should fly that would. Pelybius.
to the end the less blood might be shed at Taking of it. The same Equity
commands, that They be spared, who without conditions submit themselves to the
Conqueror, or become suppliants. To kill them that call for mercy, is cruel,
says Tacitus. Annal. 12.
Sallust Bello Jug.
also, of the Campsanians, who yielded themselves to Marius, when he had
related the slaughter of the young men, adds, It was done against the Law of
War, that is, the Natural Law. The same elsewhere L. 1. de ord. Rep.
, Not men armed, nor in battle according to the Law of war, but suppliants
were slain Livio; jure belli in armatos repugnautesque caedes. and alibi; qui
dedit^ contra jus ac sas bellum intulisset lib. 45.
, Yea, This is also to be endeavored, that they may rather be constrained
through fear to yield, than be slain. This is praised in Brutus; who sufferd
not his men to do execution upon his Adversaries, but surrounded them with his
Horse, commanding them to be spared, as those that would presently be His.

XLVII. Objections answered.
AGainst these Precepts of equity and Natural Law, are wont to be brought
exceptions very unjust: to wit, if talion be exacted, if there be need of
error, if there was an obstinate resistance. But, that these things are not
sufficient to justify slaughter, he will easily conceive, who remembers what
we have set down a fore about the just causes of killing. From Captives, and
those that yield or desire to Vide Vict. de jure belli, n. 49. and 60.
yield, there is no danger: that therefore they may be justly killed, there
must be some antecedent Crime, and that such a one, as an equal judge would
think worthy of death. And so we see sometimes great severity showed to
Captives, and those that have yielded; or, their yielding on condition of life
not accepted; if, after they were convinced of the injustice of the War, they
had nevertheless persisted in arms; if they had blotted their enemies name with
unsufferable disgraces; if they had violated their faith, or any right of
Nations, as of Ambassadors; if they were fugitives. But, Nature admits not
talion, except against the same persons that have offended; nor does it
suffice, that the enemies are by a fiction conceived to be as it were one body,
as may be understood by what is said above P. 2. n. 112.
, of the Communication of punishments. W^ read in Aristides, Is it not absurd
to imitate, De pace 2.
what you do condemn? Plutarch for this accuses the Syracusians, that they
Plut. Timon. and Dione.
slew the wives and children of Hicetas, only for this reason, because Hicetas
had slain the wife, sister, and son of Dion. Moreover, the benefit which is
hoped from terror for the future, perteins not to the giving of a right to
kill; but, if there is a right, it may be among the causes for which that right
is not remitted. And, For a more obstmate affection to ones own side, if the
cause maintained is not at all dishonorable, that deserves not punishment, as
the Neapolitans discourse Lib. 1. Gotth.
in Procopius? or, if there is any punishment thereof, it ought not amount to
death; for an equal Judge would not so determine. Alexander, at a certain town,
when he had commanded all the youth to be slain; because they made so sharp
resistance, seemed to the Indians to wage war Polyan. lib. 4.
after the manner of Robbers: and the King fearing such a blemish of his Name
began to use his victory more mildly. It was better done by the same King, to
spare the Milesians: because he saw they were gallant men, and faithful to
their own party: which are the words of Arrian. Phyto Governor of Regin, when,
for defending the town so stoutly, he was by command of Dionysius drawn to
torture and death, cried out, He was punished, because he would not break his
trust and betray the place, but God would suddenly revenge it: Diodorus Siculus
styleth these (...), unlawful punishments. I am very much pleased with that
vote in Lucan Lucan. -- -- -- Vincat quicunque necesse
Non putat in victos saevum distringere ferrum,
Quique suos cives, quod signa adversa tulerunt,
Non credit fecisse nefas. -- -- --

.

May he be Conqueror, who means to spare
His Fellow-Citizens, that adverse are:
Provided, by the Name of Fellow-Citizens we understand, not those of this or
that Nation, but of that common Country of all Mankind. Least of all is
Slaughter justified by grief and anger for some overthrow received, as we read
Achilles, Aeneas, Alexander, sacrificed to their friends the blood of Captives
and such as yielded This seemed cruel to afterages, as Servius notes up on the
10. of the Aeneis.
. Wherefore Homer justly says of Achilles on this occasion: He resolved on a
wicked act.

XLVIII. The Multitude spared. Hostages spared. Needless fights to be avoided.
MOreover, where offenses are of that nature, that they may seem worthy of
death, it will be a point of Mercy, because of the Multitude of them, to remit
somewhat of extreme right. Of which clemency we have God himself for Author,
who was pleased, that Peace should be offered to the Cananites and their
neighboring Nations, offenders in the highest degree; such a Peace, as allowed
them life on condition of being tributaries. Pertinent here is that of Seneca:
The Severity 2. Deira. cap. 10.
of a General shows it self against particulars: but pardon is necessary, where
the whole Army is revolting. What takes away Anger from a wise man? The
Multitude of Transgressors Quicquid multis peccatur, inultum est. Scholiastes
Inv. ex Lucano. August. epist. 64. Magis monendo, quam minando: Sic enim
agendum est cum multitudine peccantium: ^ritas autem exercenda est in peccata
paucorum.
. And that of Lucan Tot simul infesto juvenes occumbere letho,
Saepe fames, pelagique furor, subitaeque ruinae,
Aut coeli terraeque lues, aut bellica clades,
Nunquam (...) fuit. Lucan.

:

Plagues, Famine, Ruins, Storm, or Fights have sent
So many to their grave: not Punishment.
Casting of Lots was ordained, says Cicero, that too many might not be
punished. Sallust to Caesar: No man exhorts you to cruel punishments, or
bitter sentences, whereby a City is rather wasted than reformed. As to
Hostages, what is to be determined out of the Law of Nature may be seen above.
Of old, when it was commonly believed, that every one had as much power over
his own life as over other things within his propriety; and that that power, by
consent either tacit or express, was devolved from every particular person upon
the Commonwealth; it is the less to be admired, if we read, Hostages (though in
themselves innoxious) were put to death for the offense of the Commonwealth,
either as by their own peculiar, or as by the public consent, wherein their
own was included also. But after that the more true and perfect Wisdom has
taught us, that Dominion over life Vict. de jure belli. n. 43.
is excepted by God, it follows, that by consent alone no man can give to any,
power and right over the life either of himself, or of his Citizen. And
therefore it seemed atrocity to Narses a good General, to take punishment of
innoxious Hostages, as Agathias tells us: (and other Lib. 1.
Authors say the like of others:) even by Scipio's example, who said he would
not show his displeasure upon harmless Hostages Livius, lib. 28. The same sa th
Julian, in Nicetas. l. 2.
, but upon those that had revolted: and, that he would not take revenge of the
unarmed, but of the armed enemy. Now, that among the later Lawyers some of
great name, say such agreements are of force, if they be confirmed Menoch. arb.
q. 7.
by custom, I admit it, if by right they mean impunity only, which in this
argument often comes under that appellation: But, if they suppose them free
from sin, who by ag^eement alone take away any ones life, I fear they are
deceived themselves and by their per^lous authority deceive others. Clearly, if
he that comes an Hostage, be, or were before, in the number of grievous
dclinquents; or, if afterward he has broke his faith given by him in a great
matter; posbly, the punishment may be free from injury. But Clodia, who came
not an Hostage of her own accord Compare the story of Hostages refusing that
burden, and punish for it, in Nicetas, l. 2.
, but by Order of the City, when she had passed (...) and escaped, was not only
safe, but praised for her Virtue by the Etruscian King, as Livy Live. lib. 2.
speaks in this History. We must here add this, all combats which are of no
use to obtem right, or end the War, but have mere ostentation of strength
proposed to them Id est, (...) Graeciloquuntur, (...) Arr. 1.
, are contrary, both to the office of a Christian man, and to Humanity it self.
Therefore Rulers ought seriously to forbid them, being to render in account for
blood unprofitably shed, to Him in whose stead they bear the sword. Surely,
Sallust also has commended Generals, that bought their victories at the least
expense of blood; And Tacitut says of the Catti, a people of approved valor:
Their excursions and (...) fights were seldom Plutarch reprehends Demetriu for
exposing his soldiers to dangers, and thrusting them into battles, (...) of a
desire of glory, than for any Advantage.
.

XLIX. A Temperament about wast, Cap. 12.
and the like. What wast is just. When not to be made.
THat one may destroy the Goods of another, one of these three things is a
necessary antecedent: either such a necessity which ought to be understood
excepted in the first institution of dominion, as, if one to avoid his danger,
throw away down the river a third man's sword, which a mad man is about to use;
in which very case yet, it is the truer opinion, the there remains an
obligation of repairing the loss: or, some debt proceeding (...) inequality, to
wit, that the thing wasted or lost may be reckoned for that debt, as received;
for otherwise there were (...) right: or, some evil desert, whereto (...) a
punishment is meet, or whose mea^ the punishment does not exceed; for, (...) a
Divine of sound judgment rightly notes, that for cartel driven a way, or some
houses Vict. de jure belli, n. 52. and 56. Polyb. lib. 5.
(...), a whole Kingdom should be laid wast, is no equity; which also Polybius
saw, who will have punishment in war not run on in infinitum, but so far, that
Offenses may be in fit manner expiated. And these causes truly, (and only
within these bounds,) bring it to pass, that there is no injury.
Notwithstanding, unless the cause of Profit persuade, it is folly to hurt
another without Good to himself. Wise men therefore use to be moved by their
own Interests. The chief is that, observed by Onesander; Let him Strat. c. 6.
be sure to wast the Enemies Country, to burn and populate; for scarcity of
money and fruits minishes war Philo de vita contemplativa: Solent hosts
vastare and arboribus nudare terram hostistilem, ut hosts eo facilius se
dedant, rerum necessariarum penurid. Idem de diris: Duplex sibi matum
acquirunt, inopiam amic is, copiam hostibus. Herod. l. 1. Pol. l. 4. Front.
strat. 3. cap. 4. Live. l. 5. 3. 34. 40. Caes. de bell, Gal. lib. 6.
as much as plenty increases it. Wherewith agrees that of Proclus., It Is the
part of a good General to cut off the enemies provisions on every side.
Curtius, of Danius: He supposed, by want to overcome his enemy, having nothing
but what he got by rapine. And that population truly is to be born with, which
does in short time humble the enemy to a petition for Peace; which kind of war
Halyattes used upon the Milesians, the Thracians upon the Byzantians, the
Romans upon the Campanians Carpenates, Spaniards, Ligures, Nervians, Menapians;
But, if you rightly weigh the matter, you shall find such things done more
often out of hatred, than prudence. For, most commonly (...) happens, that
either those moving causes cease, or other causes move the other way more
strongly. First, (...) his will come to pass, if we our selves so possess a
fruitful thing, that it cannot bring any fruit to the enemies. Whereunto
properly that Law Divine has respect, which will have wild Trees bestowed upon
works of war, but the fruitful kept for food, the cause being added, that Trees
cannot, as Men do, rise against us in a battle. Which, by similitude of
reason, Philo enlarged also to fruitful fields Philo de creat: ubi legi haec
verba af fingit: Quid rebus manimis quae and mites sunt and mites fruct^ ferunt
irasceris? An vero in morem hominum qui hosts sunt, inimicitiae
significationem arbores produnt, ut pro his quae saciunt aut facere minantur
stirpitus evellendae sint? Quin prosunt victoribus (...); ^piam rerum quas
necessitas exigit, imo, and voluptatem. Non soli ^mines tributa ferunt, sed
meliora arbores statis temportbus, ac tali^ fine iis vivere non detur. Alter
ejusdem locus de Humanitate: Aequitatem suam etiam largius (...) Moses (...) ea
ubertim ac ^beraliter utitur, discedens a ratione utgntibus ad muta animantia,
ab (...) vero ad ea quae e terra nascuntur, etc.
. And Josephus upon the same place says, Trees, if they had a voice, would cry
out that they do unjustly bear the punishments of war, being not the causes of
war. Nor has that of Pythagoras (if I mistake not) any other rise, in
Jamblichus: Do not hurt, nor cut up any mild and fruit-bearing Tree. And
Porphyry describing the manners of the Jews, extends this Law Porphyr: Parci
etiam (...) lex, in terra quamvis hostili, animantibus operum sociis, ita ut ea
occi^ non liceat.
(custom as It hink in terpreting it) even to beasts serving for Countrey-work.
For these also must be spared in war, as Moses has commanded. But the
Talmud-writings and the Hebrew Interpreters add, that this Law is to be
stretched Yet with this exception, unless trees in suburbs hinder the shooters.
to every thing, which may perish without cause, as, if buildings be burnt,
things to be eaten and drank be corrupted. Agreeable to this Law is the prudent
moderation of Timotheus the Athenian Captain, who, as Polyaenus relates,
sufferd no house to be pulled down, nor fruit-tree to be cut up. There is a Law
of Plato in his fifth De repub. That no ground be wasted, no house fired. Much
more will this have place after complete victory. Cicero De Offic. 1. Prodomo
sua ad ad Pont.
approves not the overthrow of Corinth, though the Ambassadors of the Romans
were shamefully treated there: and the same Cicero in another place, says, it
is a horrible, nefarious, odious War, that is made with walls, roofs, pillars,
posts. Livy praises the lenity of the Romans, because having taken Capua, they
were not furious Excellent to this purpose is the letter of Belisarius to
Totilas, wherein he says, It was thought a part of wise and civil men, to erect
fair buildings; to demolish them was the part of those that blush not to leave
to postesterity marks of their foolish cruelty, etc. Vide Procop. Gotth. 3.
in firing and ruining the innocent walls and building. Agamemnon in Seneca
says, He was willing Troy should be conquered, not levelled. Indeed, the sacred
History Equidem fatebor (pace dixisse hoc (...)
Argiva tellus liceat) affligi Phrygae
Vincique voll^; ruere and aequari solo
Etiam argtassem. Se^eca Troad.

tells us that some Cities were by God condemned to destruction: and, that
against the former general Law the trees of the Moabites were commanded Jos. 6.
2 Reg. 3. 19.
to be cut up. But, that was not done by hostile hatred, but in just
detestation of their Iniquities, which were either publicly known, or
sentenced to such punishment by the Judgment of God himself. Secondly, That
which we have said will also come to pass, in a doubtful possession of a
Country, if there be great hope of a speedy victory, whose reward will be both
the Country and the fruit. So the Great Alexander, as Justin Justin. l. 5.
relates, kept his soldiers from the population of Asia, Bidding them spare
their own Gelimer and the Vandals besieging Carthag^, neither took the prey,
nor wasted the land, but were as careful of it, as of their own: Procop.
Vandalic. 2. Apud Helmoldum lego, l. 1. c. 66. Nonus terra quam devastamus
terra nostra est, and populus quem expugnamus populus noster est? Quare ergo
invenimur hosts nostrimet, and dissipatores ^ctigalium nostrorum? Vide Bembum.
l. 9. Parutam hist. 6.
, and not spoil what they came to take possession of. So Quintius, when Philip
spoiled Thessaly with a running Army, exhorted his soldiers, as Vit. Flamin.
Plutareh says, to march as through a Country granted them, and now become
their own. Herod. lib. 1.
Craesus persuading Cyrus, not to give up Lydia to be pillaged by his men,
tells him, You will not spoil my City; not my Goods: For they are not mine now.
They are yours, and the plundering soldiers prey upon you Sen. Theb. Nemo sic.
vastat (...) Quae corripi igne, quae meti gladio jubes, Aliena credis.
. Thirdly, it will be so, if the enemy can have elsewhere wherewith to support
himself: to wit, if the Sea, or another Country be open to him. Archidamus in
Thucydides in his oration wherein he dehorteth his Laecedemonius from a war
upon the Athonians, asks what hopes they have. Do you hope easily to lay wast
the Attick fields by your (...) Army? Suppose you do: Yet have they, both other
Lands under their command (Thracia and Ionia) and the Sea brings them in all
things necessary. Wherefore in such a case it is best, that agriculture also in
the very frontiers be secured. Which we have lately seen was long done in the
Low Country Wars, on condition of paying Contribution to both sides. And that
is consentaneous to the old custom of the Indians, among whom, as Diodorus
Siculus says, The Husbandmen are untoucht, Lib. 2.
and as it were sacred; yea, nigh to the Camps and Troops, they do their work
without danger. He adds, They neither burn the Enemies fields, nor cut up the
trees. After: No Soldier does any wrong to any Husbandman; but that kind of
men, laboring for the common good, is protected from all injuries. And,
between Cyrus and the Assyrian was an Agreement, says Xenophon, That they
should have Peace with the Plough-man, war with the Soldier. So Timotheus
Plutarch in his Greek qu^stions has the same of the Megareans: Procoplus in
the third of his Gotth. of Totilas when he besieged Rome, says He did no hurt
to the Husbandmen through all Italy, but commanded them, as they were wont, to
till the earth with safety, so that they brought him tribute. This says
Cassiodor, is the greatest praise. 12. 15.
let out to Husbandmen the most fruitful part of the land, as Polyaenus says:
Yea, as Aristotle adds, he sold the fruits themselves to the enemy, and paid
his soldiers with the money. Which Appian testifies was done in Spain by
Viriatus. And the very same, in the Belgic war now mentioned, we have seen done
with very great reason and advantage, to the admiration of strangers. These
manners, the Canons C. 2. de treug. and pace. Nic. Damasc. Aelian. 5. 14. Dion.
Chry. orat. 64.
being teachers of humanity do propose to the imitation of all Christians, as
those that owe and profess more humanity than other men: and therefore will
have not husbandmen only, but also the plowing catell and the seed which they
carry to the field, placed without the danger of war: upon such like ground, as
the Civil Laws L. execut. C. quae res pign.
forbid the instruments of husbandry to be taken for a pledge; and among the
Phrygians and Cyprians of old, afterward among the Atticks and Romans Etiam in
Peloponneso. Varr. 2. de re rust. Columel. princip. lib. 6. Plin 8. 45. Aelian.
de hist. anim. 2. cap. ult. Porphyr. 2. de abstinen. Veget. 3. de art veterin.
, to kill the plowing Ox was a heinous matter. Fourthly, it happens that some
things be of that nature, that they have no moment to make or continue war:
which things reason will have spared, even while the war lasts. (...) belongs
that speech of the Rhodians to Demetrius Vide Plin. Hist. Nature. 8. 38. and 35.
10. and Plutarchum Demetrio.
the Town-taker, for the picture of Jalysus, expressed by Gellius afte^ this
manner: Gell. l. 15. 31.
What madness is it for (...) to destroy that image by firing of the houses?
for if you overcome us and take the town, the Image also safe and (...) will be
the reward of your victory: but ^f you besiege us in vain, pray consider (...)
dishonorable it will be for you, because you cannot conquer the Rhodians, to
(...) your spite against a Protogenes. Polyb. l. 5.
dead Painter. ^lybius says, it is the part of a raving mind to spoil things,
which diminish not the enemies strength when they are spoild, nor add any
emolument to the spoiler, such as are Temples, Galleries, Statues, and the
like. Marcellus spared all the Houses of the Syracusians both public and
private, sacred and profane, as if he had come thither with an Army not to
conquer, but to defend them. Cicero speaks it Verrin. 2.
to his praise; and the same Cicero, after: Our Ancestors left unto the
Conquered, what seemed pleasing to them, light to us.

L. Things Sacred and Religious are not to be spoiled.
NOw, as this has place in other ornaments for the reason above mentiond, so a
special reason is added in things dedicate to holy uses. For, although these
things also, as has been said, are after their manner public, and therefore
by the Law of Nations are impunely violated; yet, if no danger may come thence,
the reverence of things Divine requires Polybius in excerp. Peires. When thou
art angry with men, to be impious therefore against the gods is a sign of the
greatest folly. Better it is, said Severus, that God should be any way worshipped
there, than it should be turned into a stable. Lampr. Ann^bal, for religion
sake, spared the temple of Diana at Saguntum. Plin. (...). (...). 16. 2. We do
not take away their Temples from enemies and foreiners. Appian. Of the Religion
of Agesilaus, See the Latin writer of his life, and Plutarch; Who communicates
this praise to many Romans, in Sulla. Vid. Brodaeum 5. Miscel. (...) the Moor,
being no Christian himself, honored the Churches of Christians, which the
Vandals had profaned, against whom he hoped the Christians God, who ere he was,
would show his displeasure. Procop. Vand. 1. Chosioes the Persian, no
Christian, spared the Christians Church at Antioch. Pers. 2. Just (...) also
durst not retein the things Vespasian had brought to Ro^ out of the Temple at
Jerusalem, and being found at Rome Gzerichus had carried into Africa. Vandal.
2. How the ^tans saved the holiness of that place, where the bones of (...) and
Daniels three fellows were buried, is testified by (...) the Jew in his
Itinerary.
, that such buildings and the things perteining to them be conserved; specially
among them, who worship the same God according to the same Law, though
perchance in some opinions and ritos they differ Silv. de bello. p. 3. n. 5.
. Thucydides says, it was the Law among the Greeks of his time, that the
Invaders of their Enemies should abstein from holy places. Alba being
overthrown by the Romans, Livy says, they spared the Temples of the Gods De
Romany Capua capta sic Sillus lib. 13. Ecce ^epens tacito percurrit pectora
sensu
Religio, and saevas componit numine mentes,
Ne st immam taedasque velmt, ne temola sub uno
In cinerem sedisse rogo.

. Against Q. Fulvins the Censor, Livy Live. 42.
relates, it was * said: He enga ged the people of Rome in sacrilege by the
ruins of Temples, as if the immortal Gods one not the same every where, but
some one to be worshipped and adorned with the spoils of others. But Marcius
Philippus Lib. 44.
when he came to Dium to encampe unde the walls of the Temple, gave comm^ that
nothing should be violated in the ^ly place. Strabo Stra. l. 4.
relates, that the Tectosages, who with others had taken away the Delphic
treasure, to paecify the God at home dedicated the same with an addicament.
That we may come to Christians, Agathias commemorates, that Lib. 1.
the Franks, being of the same Religion with the Greeks, spared their Temples.
Yea, and men were usually spared for the Temples sake: which (not to allege the
many examples of profane Nations, this being the common custom Diod. lib. 19.
L. 1. de C. D.
among the Greeks) S. Augustine thus commends in the Gotths Under Alarichus of
whom Cassi door relate this memorable act, 12. 20. That when the Vessels of S.
Peter were brought to him by his men, he sent them back by the same hands, that
they might blot out their sacrilege by their devotion.
that took Rome: Witness the places of the Martyrs, and the Royal structures of
the Apostles, which in that Vastation entertained the Conquered, their own and
altens, flying to them. (...) did the bloody enemy rage: here his jurious
slaughter was bounded: (...) were led by the compassionat enemies, they that
had been spared other where, that they might not fall into their hands that had
not the like compassion. Who yet, though elsewhere cruelly raging, after they
came to these places Not only Christians but Barbarians have been allowed the
benefit of Sanctuary. Vid. Zosim. l. 4. de Tomit. barb.
, where that was forbidden which had been permitted elsewhere by the Law of War,
all the immanity of their rage was refrained, and their desire of taking
Captives cooled. What I have said of Sacred places, is likewise to be
understood of Religious, even of those that are built for the honor of the
dead. For also these, though the Law of Nations indulgeth impunity to anger
exercised therein, cannot be violated without contempt of Humanity. Greatest is
that reason, say the Lawyers, L. sunt personae. D. de religios. Eurip. Troad.
which makes for Religion. Euripides has a pious sentence, as well for
Religious as sacred places:

Who Cities, Sepulchers and Temples wast,
Are Fools, and ruinate themselves at last.
Apollonius Tyanaeus did thus interp^ the Fable of the Giants oppugning heaven:
They offered force to the Temples and seats of the Gods. Statius accuses
Annibal of sacrilege, who set fire on the Altars of the Gods. Scipio having
taken Carthage rewarded his Soldiers with gifts, These excepted, who had
injured the Temple of Apollo Appian. Pun.
. Caesar, as Dion Lib. 42.
says, durst not take away the Trophy raised by Mithridates, being sacred to
the Gods of War. His Religion would not suffer Marcus Marcellus to touch the
things that victory had profaned, says Cicero: and be Vertina 4.
adds, There are some enemies, who i^ war retein the rights of Religion and of
customs. The same elsewhere says, the (...) of Brennus against Apollo's Temple
wa^ nefarious. The deed of Pyrrhus, who had robbed the Treasury of Proserpine,
Livy calls a foul deed and done in c^tempt of the Gods. Such another acti
Hamilco is called impiety and sin against the Gods, by Diodorus. The war of
Philip the now cited Livy calls nefarious Lib. 14.
too, as waged against the Gods both above and below; wickedness also, and
madness. Florus of the same: Philip, beyond the right of victory, spared
neither Temples, Altars, nor Sepulchers The like sact of Prusias is detested by
Polybius, whose words Suidas has preserved, in vocab. Prus.
. Polybius touching the s me story, adds his judgment thus: To spoil things
which will neither be profitable to us for war, nor hurtful to our enemies,
Temples especially, and Images, and the like ornaments in them, is undeniably
the work of a mind mischievous and madded with anger. And in the same place he
admits not the excuse of Talion, or rendering like for like.

LI. The utilities of Moderation.
ALthough it be not properly a part of our design here to inquire what is
useful, but to restrain the looseness of warring to that which is lawful by
Nature, or among things lawful is better; yet will Virtue herself, vile in this
evil Age, be pleased to excuse me, if, seeing she is contemned by herself, I add
esteem to her from the Consideration of profit. First then, that Moderation in
preserving things which do not retard the war, deprives the Enemy of a mighty
weapon, desperation. It is Archidanius's saying in Thucydides, Think the
Enemies Country no other than a hostage, and so much the better, as it is more
fertile; wherefore also spare it as much as is possible, lest despair make them
more hard to be conquered. The same was Xen. hist. Gr. 4. and Plutarch. Agesilao.
the Counsil of Agesilaus, when, against the opinion of the Achaians, he left
the Acarnans a free seeding time, saying, the more they sowed, the more
desirous would they be of Peace. The Satyrist to our purpose Spoliatis arma
supersunt.
:

-- After such harms,
And losses suffered, what remains but Arms?
Livy speaking of the City taken by the Galls: It pleased (says he) the Chief
of the Galls, that all the houses should not be fired: that the remainder of
the City might be a means to soften and bow the heart of the enemy. Add, that
this Moderation, while the war continues, makes show of great confidence of
the victory: and that clemency is apt of it self to move and win the mind.
Annibal in Livy makes no spoil in the fields of Tarentum: It appeared Lib. 34.
(says he) 'twas not done out of the modesty either of the Soldiers or of the
Captain, but to gain the affections of the Tarentines. For like cause Augustus
C^sar in Pannonta absteind from rapine. Dion tells us, why: He had hope by
(...) Lib. 49.
means to win them without violence. To motheus, by that care of his
aforem^tion'd, beside other things, armed at the good will of his Enemies; as
Polybius observes. Lib. 3.
Of Quintius, and the Romans with him, Plutarch, when he had related Titus
Quintius Flaminius.
what we have said of him above, adds; They had the fruit of this Moderation
a little after; For they were no sooner come into Thessaly, but the Cities
yielded to him: and the Greeks inhabiting between Thermopilae wished for him
with ardent desires: but the Achaians renouncing the friendship of Philip
associated themselves to the Romans against him. Of the City of the Lingones,
which in the war waged against Civilis the Batavian and his fellows, by the
conduct of Cerealis, under the Authority of Domitian, had escaped a feared
spoil, Frontinus says: Because, Lib. 5. 3.
beyond expectation, it was inviolate and lost nothing, being reduced to
obedience it gave him seventy thousand armed men. Contrary Counsels have also
contrary events. Livy gives us an example in Lib. 26.
Annibal: His mind Precipitous to avarice and cruelty, carried him to the spoil
of what he could not keep himself, that the enemy might not enjoy it. That
policy was dishonorable and disprofitable to him, both at the beginning and the
end; For, not only the minds of them that sufferd unworthy things were
alienated from him, but of others too; for the example reached Aegid Regius de
act. supernat. disp. 31. dub. 7. (...). 127.
unto more than the calamity did. Surely, it is most true, which is noted by
some Divines, that it is the office both of the Highest powers, and of
Captains, who will be accounted Christians, both in the judgment of God and
men, to supersede the violent direptions and spoiling of Cities, and all like
violences, as those that cannot pass without the calamity of many Innocent
persons, and oft-times little avail to the main of the War: So that Christian
Goodness almost always, ^ven Justice it self for the most pare abhors them.
Greater certainly is the bond of Christians to one another, than that of the
Grecians was: by whose wars, that no City of Greece should be destroyed, was
provided by a Decree of the Amphictyons. And the Ancients deliver, that
Alexander of Macedonia never did repent him more of any thing he had done, than
of the overthow and ruin of Thebes.

LII. A Temperament about things taken. Cap. 13.

NEither ought the Capture of hostile Goods in a just War be judged without
sin, or free from the charge of restitution. For, if you look upon what is done
rightly Vide quod judicavit Innocemius Pontifex apud R^mbum, 1. Victor. de jure
bellin. 55, 56.
, it is not lawful to take or have farther than the enemy is indebted: except,
that also for necessary security things may be detein'd; but, to be restored in
themselves or the price, after the hazard is past. Now, the Goods of subjects
may be taken, not only for the obteining of the primary debt, whence the war
began, but of a debt arising after it, according to what we said in the
beginning of this part. And so is it to be understood, which some Divines
write; Things taken in war Silv. verb bell. n. 10. Vict. n. 51.
are not equalled with the Principal debt: that is, there must be also
satisfaction made, according to a true Judgment, for that damage that was done
in the war it self. So, in the disceptation with Antiochus, the Romans, as Livy
Lib. 27.
relates, judged it equal, that the King, by whose fault the war was raised,
should pay all the cost The King of Polonia alleges this custom for himself in
Thuanus, l. 73. an. 1581. Sic apud Hom. Il. (...) vocein (...) Scholiastes
interpretatur (...).
. It Is in Justin Lib. 33.
, To bear the charge of the war, by a just Law. In Thucydides the Samians are
condemned to pay the expenses of War. And elsewhere often. Now, that which is
justly imposed upon the Conquered, is also by a war extorted from them justly.
But yet we must know, as we have mentioned before, the rules of Charity are of
larger compass than the rules of Law: He that has a flourishing estate will be
guilty, if he thrust his needy debtor out of all he has, that himself may be
paid to the utmost farthing; and much more, if that same debtor came into that
debt through his own goodness, as, if he has been Surety for his friend, and
himself has converted none of the money to his own use. For, as Quintilian's
Father He adds, that a Creditor cannot come with any modesty to the surety,
except he cannot recover of the debtor. Vide C c. ad At. 16. 15.
says, a Sureties danger is to commiserated. And yet, so hard a Creditor does
nothing against right strictly taken. Wherefore Humanity requires, that to
those who are without fault of the war, and who are bound no otherwise than as
sureties, such things be left, as we can want more easily than they:
especially, if it be evident, that they shall not recover Aegid. Regius de act.
superndisp. 31. dub. 7. n. 117.
from their Commonwealth, what they have in that manner lost Ptolomy remitted
to Demettius the son of Antigonus his tent and all pertinents to the care of
his body, with his money, too, saying, Their quarrel was not for every thing,
but for Empire and honor. Plut. in Demet.
. Hither perteins that saying of Cyrus to his Soldiers, after he had taken
Babylon: It will not be unjust for you to possess what you have gotten, but it
will be your Humanity to leave something to the enemies. This is also to be
noted, seeing this right over the goods of innocent Subjects is introduced for
relief, so long as there is hope we shall get our own easily enough from the
principal debtors, or from them who, by not doing right, do of their own accord
make themselves debtors, that while, to come unto them who are without Fault
(though it be granted not repugnant to strict right) does depart from the rule
of humanity. Examples of this humanity are frequent in history, especially in
the Roman; as, when Lands were given to the Conquered on condition they should
come into the Commonwealth: or, when a small part of the Lands for honor sake
was left to the old Possessor Appian. Civil. 2. The old Romans did not take
away all from the conquered, but divided their Lands with them. So did the
Vandals in Afric, and the Goths in Italy, as History shows.
. So, Livy says, the Veientes were mulcted a part of their lands by Romulus:
So Alexander the Macedonian Arrian. l. 3.
gave the Uxians the Lands they had been masters of, for Tribute: So you shall
often read of Cities deliverd up and not spoiled: and above we have said, not
the persons only but the goods of the Inhabitants, are commendably and
according to the pious prescript of the Canons, spared, at least under tribute;
and under the like tribute, is wont also to be granted unto wares, immunity
from war.

LIII. A Temperament about Captives. Cap. 14.

WHere Captivity of men, and Servitude Vict. de jure belli. n. 41. Dec. l. 2.
c. 5. dub. 4. Covar. c. peccatum. p. 2.. 1.
is in use, if we respect internal justice, it is to be limited first after the
likeness of things, viz. that such acquist may be lawful so far as the
quantitity of the debt, either primary or secondary, does admit: except perhaps
in men themselves be some peculiar fault, which equity will bear to be punished
with the loss of liberty. Hitherto then, and no farther, He that wageth a just
war has a right over his enemies subjects being taken, and does validly
transfer it upon others. But, it will be the part of equity and goodness here
also to apply those differences, which were noted above, when we spoke of
killing. Demosthenes in his Epistle for the Children of Lycurgus praises
Philip of Macedon, that he ha^ not made all that had been among his enemies, to
be servants His son Alexander, Thebes being taken, ex: mpted from servivitude,
both the Priests, and those who had not assented to the Decrees made against
him. Plutarch.
. For, says he, he did not think it meet to deal with (...) alike, but judged
of every one according to his merit. But first we must note, the right which
springs as 'twere from suretyship for a City, is not so large as that, which
springs from a fault, against them who are made servants by way of punishment.
Whence a Spartan said, He was a Captive, not a Servant Philo says, Fathers for
their children, and children for their Fathers have often paid a ransom, when
they were either taken away by robbers, or made prisoners of war: whom truly,
the Laws of Nature, stronger than these Laws made on earth, write free men.
Helena says in Theodectes; Who dare call me a servant, that am on both sides
descended from the Gods?
. For, if we look rightly into the matter this general right over Captives in a
just war, is like to that right, which Masters have over them, who, being
compeld by poverty, have sold themselves into servitude: except, that their
calamity, is the more to be pityed, who come not into that condition by any
special fact of their own, but by the fault of Governors. It Is a most sad
thing, says Isocrates, to be made a prisoner of War. This servitude then, is a
perpetual obligation to work for maintenance likewise perpetual. Chrysippus his
definition is very fit for this kind of servants: Sen. de benef. 3. c. 22.
A servant is a perpetual mercenary. And him, who has sold himself being
compeld by poverty, the Hebrew Law plainly compares to a mercenary: and in his
redemption, it will have his work so profit him, as fruits received of a field
sold should profac the old possessor. Much difference therefore there is 'twixt
what is done impunely against a servant by the Law of Nations, and what natural
reason suffers to be done. That of Philemon tends to this.

He that is born a man, although
He serve, is still a man, I trow.
Seneca: They are servants, yea Men: Sen. Epist. 47.
they are servants, yea our Compauions: they are servants, yea our friends:
they are servants, yea our fellow servants. Which also you may read in
Macrobius, agreeing in sense with that of S. Paul; Masters, Coloss, 4. 1.
give unto your servants that which is just and equal, knowing that ye also
have a Master in Heaven. And in another place, he would have Masters forbear
threatening, upon the same argument, knowing Ephesians. 6. 9.
that their Master also is in heaven, who regards not such differences of
qualities. In the Constitutions ascribed Lib. 7. c. 14.
to Clemens Romanus we read, Thou shall not be imperious over thy manservant
or thy maidservant in bitterness of mind Sic and in ep. Barnabae est: Noli
acerbe imperare servo aut ancillae lliae in Christum sperantibus, ne eo ipso
oflend as non timere te communem tibi and ipsis dominum.
. Clemens Alexandrinus Paed. ult.
would have us use our servants as our other selves, seeing they are men as
well as we; following the sentence of the Hebrew wiseman, If thou have a
servant, use him as a brother, for he is such a one as thy self. The right
therefore which is called of life and death over a servant gives the Master a
domestic Jurisdiction, but such as must be exercised with the same religious
care, as the public is exercised. This was Seneca's 1. De Clem. 18. Epist. 47.
meaning when he said, In a bondsman is to be considered, not how much may be
inflicted on him impunely, but how much equity permits, which commands us to
spare even Caprives and those whom ^e have bought with money. And again, L. 3.
de benef. cap. 18.
What matter is it, under what command one is, if it be the highest? Where he
compares a subject to a servant, and says, under a diverse title the same is
lawful over them: which in respect of taking away the life and of what is
pertaining to it, is most true. Our Ancestors, says the same Seneca, judged
our House to be a Epist. 43.
little Commonwealth: and Pliny, The house is unto servants a certain
Commonwealth, and as it were a City. Cato Censorius, as Plutarch relates, if
any servant seemed to have committed a capital crime, did not punish him, till
after he was condemned by the judgment also of his fellow servants. Wherewith
may be compared the words of Job, 31. 13. etc. About the lesser punishments
too, namely stripes and beating of servants, equity, yea and clemency is to be
used. Thou shall not Vide Mosem de Kotzi praecept. jubent. 147. 175. 178. and
collat. leg. Mosis and Roman. tit. 3.
oppress him, thou shall not rule hardly over him, says the Divine Law of an
Hebrew servant, which, the force of neighborhood being now enlarged, ought
(...) be extended to all servants: Deuteronomy. 15. 17, 45, 53. Upon which place
Philo: Servants Philo de special. legib. 2. Cyprian. ad Demetr. Non agnoscu
miser dominum Deum tuum, cum sic exerc^as ipse in hominem dominatum.
are indeed inferior in fortune, but in nature equal to their Masters: now, to
the Divine Law that is the rule of justice, ^ot which agrees to fortune but to
nature. Therefore it becomes not Masters to use their power over servants
frowardly, nor to make it matter for their pride and insolence and cruelty. For
these are signs of an ill disposed and tyrannical mind. Seneca: what is more
foolish than to be furious against men, and yet use dogs and horses gently?
Hence in the Hebrew Law, to a servant Exodus 21. 26, 27.
man or maid, not for an eye only, but a tooth injuriously struck out, liberty
was due Vide Philonem dicto loco. Exodus 20. 10. 23. 12. Deuteronomy. 10. 14.
, Moreover, work is to be exacted of them moderately Sen. epist. 47. Non
tanquam hominibus, sed tanquam jumentis abutimur. Of the Athenians lenity to
their servants, See Xenoph. de repub. Athen. Epist. 47.
, and a human respect is to be had to the health of servants. Which very thing,
beside other, the Hebrew Law provides for, in the institution of the Sabbath:
viz. that some breathing space might be allowed Laborers. Seneca observes in
the word, Paterfamilias, the humanity of the ancients. Do you not see, how our
Elders have taken off all envy from Masters, all contumely from servants? They
named the Master the Father of the family, the servant familiars Epicurus,
friends. Sen. epist. 107. Dion Prus. optimum regem describens; Domini nomen ad^
in bomines liberos non usurpat, ut and in servos eo abstineat. Teitullian:
Gratius est nomen piet at is quam potestatis. Hieronym. ad Colantiam:
Benignitate potius quam severitate exige reverentiam.
. The like piety has Servius Servius ad illud Maronis: Claudite jam nivos,
pueri.
noted in they word pueri, Children, by which they signified servants. For the
work, as we have said, maintenance i^ due to servants. Cato: Provide well for
the family; clothes against cold, food ag^ hunger. There is somewhat, says
S^aeca Sen. l. 3. de beuef.
, which a Master ought to afford his servant, as food and apparoll Cicero:
opera exigenda, iusta praebenda. Atist. (...) 1. Oecon. 5 Sirach. 33. 25. (...).
. The cruelty of the Sicilians El Isaaci Angeli in Siculos captivos memoran^e
Niceta lib. 1.
, who famished the Athenian Captives, is condemned by the historians. Farther,
Seneca in the same place proves, a servant is free in some respect, and has
wherewith to do a benefit, if he has done, what exceeds the measure of servile
duty, what is done not upon command but voluntarily, where service is turned
into the affection of a friend, which he explains at large. Whereto agrees, if
a servant (as it is in Tere^ce) Phorm. act. 1. sc. 1.
defrauding his Genius has saved any thing, or by his diligence at spare tim^
has gotten any thing, that in some sc^ is his own Varro de servis; Studiosio
res ad opus fieri liberalius tractando, aut cibariis aut vestitu largiore, aut
remissione operis, concessioneque ut peculiare aliquid in fundo pascere licent.
. Nor is it material, that the Master may, at his pleasure, take away or
diminish his servants stock; for, he w^ not do what is right, if he do it with
cause; by Cause I understand not only punishment, but the necessity of the
Master; for the profit of the servant is subordinate to the profit or interest
of the Master; yea, more than the wealth of a Citizen to the City. Therefore,
as we read that Clients have contributed to the user their Patrons, and
subjects of their Kin^ so have servants to the uses of their Masters Seneca:
Nunquid dubium est, quin servus cum peculio damini sit? Dat tamen domino suo
munus.
; if a daughter be to be preferred, if a Captive son to be redeemed, or if any
like occasion had fallen out. Pliny, as himself says in his Epistles, granted
leave to his servants to make certain testaments as it were, that is, to
divide, to give, to bequeath within the family. Among some Nations a fuller
right of getting an estate was granted unto servants, as there were several
degrees of servitude. To this internal justice which we expound, the Laws,
among many Nations, have also reduced that external right of Masters. For among
the Greeks, it was lawful for servants ill used (...).
, to demand that they might be sold; and at Rome, to fly unto the statues, and
implore help of the Governors against rigor, or hunger, or intolerable injury.
But, 'twill proceed not from strict right, but from humanity and beneficence
(yet Instit. de his qui sui vel al. L. manumiss. D. de just. and ju.
such as is due sometimes) that after long service and very great, Liberty be
given to a servant. After that by the Law of Nations servitude came in, there
followed the benefit of manumission, says Ulpianus. An example whereof, we
have in that of Terence:

Thou wast my servant: and I made thee free,
Because thou did thy service Andr. act. 1 1. Servibas liberaliter. Ita MS.
recte.
Liberally.
Salvian Lib. 3.
says, it is a thing of daily use, that servants, though not of the best, yet
of honest diligence, be set at liberty; He adds: and be not for bidden to
carry with them out of their masters house, what they gained in their service.
Of which benignity there are many examples in the Martyrologies. And here also
is to be praised Deuteronomy. 15. 13.
the benignity of the Hebrew Law, that commands an Hebrew servant, after a
certain time fulfilled, to be manumitted; and, not without gifts Consuetude id
interpretata, ne minus 30. Siclis delur. vide prac. jubente 84.
; of the contempt of which Law, the Prophets make a heavy complaint. Plutarch
reprehends Ca^o major, because, when his servants were aged, he sold them,
unmindful of that common nature of mankind. A question here is incident, Silv.
verbo servitus, S. 3. Fortunius in l. manumiss. D. de just. and ju.
whether it be lawful for him to fly, who is taken Captive in a just war. (We
speak not of him, who by his own proper fault has deserved that punishment,
but of one that by public action is fallen into this fortune.) It is the truer
answer, that it is not lawful: because, by the common agreement of Nations, he
owes his service in the Name of the Commonwealth. Which yet is so to be
understood, unless intolerable cruel usage impose upon him this necessity.
Another doubt is, whether, and how far, they that are born of servants are
under Dominion by internal right: a doubt, which Less. l. 2. c. 5. dub. 5.
may not be omitted here, by reason of the special consideration of Captires in
war. If the parents by any crime (...) theirs had deeserv'd the punishment
(...) death, their Children which they hoped for, might, to save their lives,
be bound over to servitude: because otherwise they would never be born. (For,
even for maintenance, which they would otherwise want, parents may sell their
Children.) Such is the right, which God allows the Hebrews over the posterity
of the Canaanites. Deuteronomy. 15. 13.
But, for the debt of the Commonwealth, they which were already born, as a part
of the Commonwealth, might be bound, no less than the Parents themselves.
Howbeit, as to them who are not yet born, this cause seems not sufficient,
but another is required: either from Parents express consent together with a
necessity of maintenance, and that for ever; or from the allowance of
maintenance, and that only till the work has paid for all that was laid out.
If any further right is given the Master over these, ^t seems to proceed out
of the Civil Law, favoring Masters more than is enough. Among the Nations,
with whom that Law of servitude by war is not in use, it will be best, that
Captives should be exchanged; next, that they should be dismissed at a
reasonable rate. What this ^s, cannot precisely be determined; but Humanity
teaches, it ought not be so heightened, but that the residue of the Captives
estate may supply him with all Necessaries. In some places, this is defined by
Covenants and Customs; as, among the Greeks of old Mina In the war of the
French with the Spaniard in Italy, a horsman was rede^n'd for the fourth of his
yearly pay, See Mariana l. 27 18. Qu. Gr^c.
, now among Soldiers a months pay goes for a ransom. Plutarch relates, that
heretofore wars were waged between the Corinthians and Megareans mildly, and so
as became men of the same blood. If anyone were taken, he was entertained by
the Taker, as a Guest, and sent home upon promise of a price for his
deliverance. That of Pyrrhus The like goodness of Tiberius a Christian Emperor
toward the Persians is commended by Menander Protector: of Sisebutus by
Mariana, and of Sanctius King of Castile, Lib. 11.
commended by C^ro, argues a more noble mind:

Nec mi aurum posco, nec mi pretium dederitis:
Ferro non auro vitam cernamus utr^que.
Quorum fortuna belli fortuna pep^rcit,
Eorundam libertati me parcere cert^ est.
Apud Ciceronem de Offic.

No gold for me, no price do I require:
To fight it out with steel is my desire.
The valiant men, to whom good fortune gave
Their life, by my gift Liberty shall have.
Pyrrhus, no doubt, believed his (...) just: nevertheless, he thought fit to
sp^ their liberty, who on probal^ ^ause (...) engaged against him. The like act
of Cyrus 2. Cyropaed.
^s celebrated by Xenophon, of Philip the Macedonian after his victory in
Chaeronea by Polybius, of Alexander toward the Vita Them. Strab. l. 7.
Scythians by Curtius, of Ptolomy the King and of Demetrius, contending with
one another not more in war than in benignity toward Captives, by Plutarch. And
Dromichaetes King of the Getes, having taken Lysimachus Diod. Sic. in excerpt.
in war, made him his guest, and prevalid on him so far, that having experience
both of the Getick poverty and courtesy, he chose rather to have such men for
his friends than enemies.

LIVE. A Temperament about acquisition of Empire. Cap. 15.

THat Equity which is required, or that Vict. de jure belli. n. 38. and 59.
Humanity which is commended, toward particular persons, is so much more
required or commended toward Nations or the parts of Nations, by how much more
signal is the injury and the benenefit done to many. By a just war, as other
things may be acquired, so also the right of a Ruler over people, and the right
which the people themselves have in the empire: but (to be sure) so far as the
measure either of the punishment arising from the fault, or the measure of some
other debt will bear. To which is to be added the cause of avoiding extreme
danger. But this cause for the most part is mixed with other, which yet is it
self most considerable, both in constituting peace, and in using victory. For
the rest happly may be remitted out of compassion: but in public danger, to be
secure beyond measure is unmercifulness. Isocrates writes to Philip: The
Barbarians are so far to be subdued, as it shall be sufficient to secure your
own Country. Crispus Sallustins, of Jugurth.
the old Romans: Our Ancestors, being most religious men, took nothing from the
Conquered, but the license to do injury. A sentence worthy to be spoken by a
Christian: wherewith agrees that of the same Author, Wise men wage war for the
sake of Peace, and sustein labor in h^e of ease. Aristotle said more than
once, Derepub. l. 7. c. 14. and 15. Nic. 10. c. 7.
War is ordaind for peace, and business f^ rest. Cicero's meaning is the same,
whose most pious saying it is: War must be u^dertaken, that nothing else but
peace be De ossic, 1.
aimed at. And another like it; For the Tho. 1. 2. q. 40. art. 1. ad 3.
cause are wars to be waged, that we m^ without injury live in peace. Nothing
deferent are these fron what the Doctors ci true Religion teach us, That the
end (...) war is to remove things that trouble (...) Peace. Before the times of
Ninus, as we have noted out of Trogus, it was the manner to defend Alexand.
Imp. Artaxerxi Persae: Manendum cuique intra suos sines nibil novando, neque
debere quenquam incerta spe sublatuns bella incipere, sed suo esse cont^ntum.
the bounds of Empire, rather than to enlarge them; Every King was contented to
reign in his own Courtrey; they did not so much seek their ow^ power, as their
peoples glory: being satisfied with victory, they refused Empire. To which
moderation S. Augustine earnestly De Ci^t. Dei li^. 4. 15.
recalls us, when he says, Let them consider, lest perhaps it be not the part
of good men, to rejoice Cyril in his 5. against Julian commends the Hebrew
Kings for this, that they were content with their own bounds. Am. 1. 13.
in their Empires latitude. He adds: It Is greater felicity to have a good
neighbor for ones friend, than to subdue an evil neighbor that is an enemy.
And the Prophet Amos, in the Ammonites themselves, severely reprehends this
desire of extending dominion by War. To this exemplar of ancient innocence, the
prudent modesty of the Romans made the nearest approach. What were our Empire
at this day, says Seneca, unless wholesome providence had mixed the conquered
with the Conquerours? Lib. 2. de Ira. cap. 34.
Our Founder Romulus (they are Claudius's words in Tacitus) was of so
prevailing Annal. 5.
wisdom, that he made many people Citizens, the same day, they had been his
enemies: He adds, that nothing else undid the Lademonians and Athenians, but
their keeping off the conquered, as Aliens. Livy says, the State of Rome was
advanced by receiving their enemies into the City. In histories are extant,
examples of the Sabins, Albans, Latins, and the rest of Italy: till at last,
Caesartriumph'd over the Galls, and enfranchiz'd them. Cerialis in Tacitus, in
his Oration to the Galls: Ye your selves for the most part command our Legions;
ye govern these and other Provinces; Nothing is separate and shut from you. And
then; Wherefore, Love and embrace that Peace and life, which yo^ the conquered
and we the Conquerours enjoy with equal right. At length, which is L. in orb.
D. de flat. hom, L. Roma. D. ad munic.
most to be admired, They that are in the Roman world, by the constitution of
the Emperor Marcus Antonius, are made Roman Citizens; which are the words of
Ulpian. After that time, as Modestinu^ says, Rome is the Common Country,
Claudian Claudian: Hujus p^ficis debonius moribus omnes, Quod c^ncti gens una
sumus.
;

We all owe this to his pacifick mind:
One Nation has united all Mankind.
Another kind of moderate victory, is, to leave unto the Conquered, either Kings
or People, the Empire which they had, So Hercules dealt with Priamus Seneca
Troad Hostis parvi (...) lacry (...), Suscipe di^u rector h^enas, Patrioque
sede cel sus (...): Sed sceptra fide meliore cene.
; and having overcome Neleus he committed the Kingdom Ael. l 4. 5.
to his son Nestor. So the Persian Kings left the Kingdom to the Kings they had
conquered Herod. lib. 7.
. So Cyrus to the Armenian. So Alexander to Porus Pipiuus to A. stolphus
Longobard.
, Seneca commends it: To take nothing from the Conquered King, but Glory. And
Polybius celebrates the goodness of Antigonus, who having Sparta in his power,
left them the Commonwealth and liberty of their Ancestors, Whereby he obtained
great praises thorough Greece, as it is there related. * De clem. 1. 21. The
whole place is worth reading, where he also calls it a triumph after victory.
Pompey left Tigranes a part of his Kingdom. Eutrop. l. 6.
So the Cappadocians were permitted by the Romans, to use what form of
Commonwealth they would; and many States, after war, have been left free.
Carthage is free and enjoyes her own Laws, say the Live. lib. 32.
Rhodians to the Romans, after the second Punick War. Pompey, says Appian,
left some of the subdued Nations free Vid. Polybium, exc. Legate. n. 6.
. And Mithridat.
to the Aetolians, saying, there could be no firm peace, unless Philip the
Macedonian were driven out his Kingdom, Quintius answered, That they had given
their opinion, unmindful of the Romans custom to spare the Conquered, adding:
The Greater the Conqueror is, the more gentle mind Apud Tacitum est: Zo sini
victo nihil ereplum. Annal. 12.
he bears toward the conquered. Sometime, together with the concession of
Empire, provision is made for the conquerors security. So 'twas decreed by
Quintius Yet was that remitted afterward. Plut. Flaminio.
, that Corinth should be rendered to the Athaians, and a Garrison be put in the
Fort; that Chalcis and Demetrias should be deteind, till they were quitted of
the care of Antiochus. Imposition of Tribute also pertains often, not so much
to the restitution of charges, as to the security both of the Conqueror and
Conquered. Cicero, of the Greeks: Also, Lib. 1. ad Q. fr. epist. 1.
let Asia consider, she had no way to avoid the calamity, both of foreign war,
and discord at home, but by adhering to this Empire: and seeing this Empire
cannot be maintaind without Tribute, Let her be content to buy a firm and
lasting peace with some part of her revenues. Petili^ Hist. 4.
Cerialis in Tacitus, speaks for the Romans to the Lingones and other Galls,
after this manner: We, though so often provoked, by the right of Victory, have
only laid this upon you, that was necessary to preserve peace. For, neither can
the quiet of Nations be procured without arms, nor arms without stipends, nor
stipends without tributes. Pertinent here are other things also, which we have
said before, when we spoke of an unequal league; to deliver up arms Vide de
Persis Agathiam lib. 4.
, ships, not to have any weapons, not to have an Army. But, that their Empire
may be left unto the Conquered, is not only a point of humanity, but oftentimes
of Counsil. Among the institutes of Numa, this is praised, that he sacrificed
Plutarch. qu. Romans 15.
to Terminus without blood, signifying, there is nothing more profitable to a
safe peace, than to keep within ones own bounds. Florus excellently: It is more
hard to keep, than to make Provinces; they are got by force, they are kept by
Justice Livius; facilius parari singula quam teuevi universa. Augusti dictum
apud Plutarchum: (...).
. The Ambassadors of Darius to Alexander: A foreign Empire is full of danger:
it is difficult to keep that which is too great: it is more easy to conquer some
countries, than to hold them: much more readily do our hands receive, than
retein. Appian observes, that many people who desired to put themselves under
the Roman power, were refused by them: and others had Kings by their
appointment. In the jugment of Scipio Africanus, in his time, Rome possessed so
much, that 'twas greediness to desire more, being abundantly happy, if she lost
nothing of what she had already. Wherefore, that form of prayer, whereby the
Gods were entreated to advance the State of Rome, he amended Augustus is
praised in Dion, that he was not ambitious of more, but to keep wha^ he had.
Thuc. 1. Isoc. Pan. Demosth. orat. de che^s.
, praying that they would be pleased, but to preserve it, as it was. The
Lacedaemonians, and (at first) the Athenians, challenged to themselves no Empire
over the Cities they had taken: only, they required them to use a form of
Government accommodate to theirs, the Lacedaemonians under the power of the
Chief, the Athenians at pleasure of the people; as Thucydides, Isocrates,
Demosthenes declare: and Aristotle too, in his fourth De repub. The like was
done, as Tacitus relates, by Artabanus Annal. 6.
at Sel^ucia: He committed the common people to the Chief men, according to his
own use: for a popular Government is free, the domination of a few more near to
royalty. But, whether such Changes make for the Conquerors security, is not of
our inspection. If it be less safe to abstein from all Empire over the
Conquered, the matter may be tempered so, that some part of the government may
be left to them or their Kings. Tacitus calls it a custom of the Roman people,
to have Hist. 2.
Kings also for instruments of servitude Eidem Antiochus inservientium regum
ditissimus. Strabo (...). Lucanus Atque omnis Latio quae servit purpura ferro.
Vid. Panegyr, Mari^. dict.
. So, among the Jews, the Scepter rem^ned in the Sanedrin, also after the
cons^cation of Archelaus. Evagor as King of Cyprus, as it is in Diodorus, said
He would give obedience to the Persian, but as a King to a King. And Alexander
several times offered to Darius Such Kings were of old in Italy, under the
Empire of other Kings. Serve. ad 10. Aen. So among the Turks. Leuncl. lib. 18.
b^g overcome, this condition; that he should rule over others, and be subject
unto Alexander. We have spoken of mixed Empire elsewhere Part. 1.
. To some, one part of the Kingdom has been left, as a part of their Lands to
the old Possessors. Again, when all Empire is taken from the Conquered, there
may be left them, about private affairs, and public to of less moment, their
own Laws Philo in his Embasly to Caius, says, Augustus had as much care to
keep the Laws proper to every Nat^on, as the Roman.
and customs, and their own Magistrates. So, in Bithynia, a proconsular
Province, the City Apamaea had the privilege to administer the Commonwealth
their own way Vid. ep. 93. Plin. and s^q. T^aj. lib. 10. Cic. l. 6. ad A^tic.
epist. and 5. 21.
, as Pliny tells us in his Episttes; and in other places the Bithynian; had
their own Magistrates, their own Senate. And so in Pontus, the Amisen's City
used their own Laws, by the favor of Lucullus. The Gobths also left to the
Romans the Roman Laws. A part of this indulgence is, not to deprive the
Conquered, against their persuasion, of the use of their old Religion Melius est
ibi aliquem coli Deum, quam nullum. Severus. So the Gotths in Procop. Got. 2.
(...) they forced none to their Religion.
. Which as very grateful to the Conquered, so to the Conqueror it is not
hurtful, as Agrippa proves in his Oration to Caius, related by Philo in his
Embassy. And in Josephus, both Josophus himself, and Titus the Emperor object
to the rebels of Jerusalem, that by the indulgence of the Romans, they had so
much privilege in their own Religion, as to keep out Aliens from the Temple,
even at the peril of their lives. But, if the Conquered have a false Religion,
it will belong to the Conquerors care, that the True be not oppressed: which was
the care of Constantin, when he had broken the party of Licinius, and after him
of the French and other Kings. The last Caution is, that even in the fullest
and (as 'twere) herile Empire, the Conquered be used with Clemency, and so that
their Interest be taken in with the Interest of the Conqueror. Cyrus bade the
overcom Xenoph. Cyrop. lib. 4.
Assyrians be of good cheer: They should be in as good case as they had been,
their King only changed; They should have their Houses, Lands, Wives and
Children, as in times past: and if any one should injure them, He and His would
right them. In Sallust we read; The people of Rome conceived it better to get
friends, than servants; and they thought it safer to rule over willing men,
than forced. The Britains, in the times of Tacitus Vit. Agric.
did cheerfully come to the musters, and pay tribute, and perform offices
enjoined them, if they were not injured: Injuries they could not endure, being
subdued into obedience, not yet to servitude. That man of Privern, being asked
in the Live. lib. 8.
Roman Senate, what peace the Romans could expect from them, answered: If you
grant us a good Peace, faithful and firm: if an evil Peace, not lasting. He
adds a reason: Believe it, no people, no man will abide, longer than he must
needs, in that condition that is not pleasing. So Camillus Live. lib. 8.
said; It is the firmest Empire, wherewith the subjects are best contented.
Hermocrates in Diodorus: It is not so honorable Diod. lib. 13.
to overcome, as to use the victory with gentleness and moderation Scythae
Alexandro: Inter Dominum and servum nulla amicitia; etiam in pace, belli tamen
jura serv^. Curt. lib. 7. Salubri Taciti Sententia: Bellorum egregii fines,
quoties ignoscendo ^ransigitur. In Caesatis Dictatoris epistola est: Hac Nova
sit ratio vincendi, ut misericordia and liberalitate nos munia^. The
Lacedaemonians in Thucydides lib. 5. We are of opinion, quarrels are turned in
firm concord thus; not if one; in revenge and taking advantage by his, success,
impose upon others a necessity of sweating to unequal articles: but if, when he
is able to do so, he use as much equity now, as valor before, and compose
matters with as much moderation as may be.
.

LV. Restitution of things unjustly taken away. Objections answered.
THings gotten by unjust War are to be restored, as we have said above; and not
only by those that took them, but also by others to whom the things by any
means are come. For, no man can transfer upon another more right than he had
himself, say the Authors of L. traditio D. de acq. dom. Lib. 5. de benef. cap.
12.
the Roman Law; which Seneca briefly explains, No man can give what he has
(...). He had not dominion internal, who was first Taker: wherefore, neither
will he have it, who derives his title from him; the second then, or the third
Possessor, has received that dominion, which we call external; that is, this
benefit, that every where he is by judiciary authority and power to be
maintained as the Owner: which yet, if he use against him, from whom the things
were by injustice taken away, he will do dishonestly. Such things therefore are
to be rendered to those from whom they were taken away: which, we see, has been
often times done. Livy, when he had Live. lib. 3.
related how the Volsci and Aequi were conquered by L. Lucretius Tricipitinus,
says, the spoil was exposed in Campus Martius, that every one for the space of
three days might know and receive his own. The same Historian, when he ha^
showed, that the Volsci were overthrow^ by Posthumous the Dictator, Part of
(...) spoil (says he) was restored to the Latins and Hernicians, knowing their
(...) goods; part the Dictator sold sub has^, Elsewhere: Two days were given
the Owners to find out their Goods. Polybi^ Polyb. hist. l. 3.
says of L. Aemilius, Conqueror of the Galls: He rendered the prey to those
from whom 'twas taken. That Scipto did the Plut. Apoph. App. Pun. Add Valor.
Max. l. 1. c. 1. n. 6.
same, Plutarch and Appian testify, when, having taken Carthage, he had found
many Donatives there, which the Carthaginians had brought thither out of Cities
of Sicily and other places. This act of Scipio's is expressed at large by
Cicero. The Verrina de signis.
Rhodians restored to the A^henians for Ships of theirs, which they had
recovered from the Macedonians. Goods also, i^ former times consecrated at
Ephes^, Strabo, l. 13.
which the Kings had appropriated, the Romans reduced into their ancient sla^
But, what if such a thing has passed (...) any one in the way of Commerce,
(...) he charge the first owner with the pri^ he paid for it? It seems he may,
so far (...) the recovery of his desperate possessi^ was valuable to him, who
had lost the thing. And if such cost may be required why may not also the
estimation of labor and hazard, just as if one by di^ had brought up something
of anot^ man's lost in the Sea? Apposite to (...) question, methinks, is the
history of Abraham, when being Conqueror of the five Kings, he returned to
Sodom, He Genesis 14. 16.
brought back (says Moses) all the goods, viz: which the Kings had taken:
apposite is the condition which the King of Sodom offers to Abraham, Give me
the Genesis 14. 21.
persons, and take the goods to thy self, viz. for his pains and danger. But
Abraham, a man not only of a pious, but a noble mind Been hoc notavit
Jacchides ad Daniel. 5. 17. Sulpitius de Abrahamo: Reliqua his quibus erepta
erant reddidit. Ambros. lib. 1. de Patriarchis: Ideo, quoniam sibi mircedem ab
homine non quaesivit, a Deo accepit. Non multum hinc distant facta. Pittaci and
Timolcontis: Pittacus Mily^enaeus (...) recuperat^ agria^midia pars con^su
omnium offerretur, avertit animum ab eo in^re, deforme sudi-^ virtutis gloriam
magnitudine praedae minuere. Val. Max. l. (...). c. 5. n. 1. De Timoleonte
Plutarch. vid.
, would take nothing for himself, save only of the goods (for of them is this
narration) as by his own right, he gave a tenth to God, he detracted necessary
charges, and was pleased some portion should be allotted to his partners in the
action. Now, as Goods are to be rendered to the Owner, so also people The Exiles
of Sa^um, after six years, were restored by the Romans. Antonius (...) liberty
those who were brought into servitude in the War of Cassius, and restored their
Goods to the Owners.
and their parts, are to be restored to those who had right of Government; or
to themselves, if they were in their own power before the unjust force. So, we
learn out of Livy Live. l. 2. (...). 1. 72. Xenoph. Hist. Gr. 3. Live. lib. 34.
, that Sutrium was regained and restored in the time of Camillus. The Aeginetes
and Melians had their Towns restored to them by the Lacedaemonians; the Grecian
Cities, invaded by the Macedonians, were freed ^y, Flaminius. The same
Flaminius also. in a Conference with the Ambassadors of Antiochus, thought it
fit, the Cities of Asia, which were of the Grecian name (which Seleucus the
Ancestor of Antiochus had taken by war, Antiochus had recovered being lost)
should be freed: For, said he, the Colonies (...) not sent into Aeolis and
Ionia, to be i^ servitude under the King; but to the end their Race might be
increased, and the most ancient Nation propag^d through the world. There is
also a question made of the space of time, wherein the internal obligation of
restoring a thing may be extinguished. But this question, between Citizens of
the same Empire, is to be determined out of their Laws (if they grant an
internal right, and do not consist only in the external; which is to be
gathered out of the words and purpose of the Laws by prudent inspection:) and,
among them that are foreiners to each other, by sole conjecture of dereliction,
of which elsewhere. Lastly, Ciecro Offi^. 2.
if the right of War be very ambiguous, 'twill be best to follow the counsel of
Aratus Steyonius Quod secie rex Ferdinandus memorante Mariana, l. 29. c. 14.
, who partly persuaded the new Possessors to accept of money rather, and yield
the Possessions; part persuaded the former Owners to the it more commodious to
have a just pr^ for it, than to recover what they h^ lost.

LVI. Of Neuters in War. How they are to be used; and, how to behave
themselves. Cap. 17.

IT might seem superfluous to speak of them, who have nothing to do with War,
seeing it is manifest there is no right of War over these: Yet because by
occasion of the War, many things are wont to be done against these, borderers
especially, on pretense of necessity, we must here repeat what we have said
before, Part. 2.
that Necessity ought to be extreme, that it may give a right over what belongs
to another man: it is required moreover, that the Owner himself be not in equal
necessity: and, where the necessity is manifest, no more is to be taken than
the necessity exacteth; that is, if the custody suffices, the use of the thing
is not to be taken; if the use, not the abuse: if the abuse be necessary, yet
is the price of the thing to be restored. Moses, when the highest necessity
urged him and the people, to pass through the Land of the Idumaeans, first he
says, he would pass along the high way, and not divert into their Cornfieldsd
or Vineyards: if he had need but of their water, he would pay a price for it.
The worthy Captains, both Greek and Roman, have done the like. In Xenophon, the
Greeks with Clearchus promise the Persians to march away without any damage to
the Country; and if they might have necessaries for money, they would take
nothing by force. Dereyllides in the same Xenophan, led his Army through
peaceable places without any detriment to (...) friends. Livy of King Perseus:
Through Phthiotis, Achaia, and Thessalia, with doing any harm in the fields
through which he passed, he returned into his Kingdom. Plutarch of the Army of
Agis the Spartan: They were a spectacle to the Cities, marching through
Peloponnesus fairly, and without hurt, (...) almost without noise The like
testimony Plutarch gives to T^tus Q. Flaminius.
. Velleius reports the like of Sulla: Cicero of Pompey And Plutarch says, when
he heard of his Soldiers license, he s^a ed up (...) words, and punish^ every
one that brake the Seal. and 9 2.
Frontinus of Domitian: Lampridius of the Parthick Expedition of Alexander
Severus. Concerning the Gotths Cassiodor. 5. 10. and 2. 13, 25.
, Hunnes, Alans, that served Theodosius, the Panegyrist: No tumult, no co^on,
no pillaging, as Barbarians use: b^t if at any time he had scarsity, he
patienth endured want, and by parsimony enlarged the provision, which was
streighten'd by number. Claudian Claudian: Tanta quies, tantusque metus
servator honesti
Te moderante suit, nullis ut vinea surtis
Aut seges erepta fraudaret mess colonum.

gives the same praise to Stil^, and Said^ to Belisarius Th's virtue is often
commended in Belisarius by Procopius, his Companies, and witness of his
actions. See to this purpose his excellent speech to his Soldiers near Sicily,
when he marched into Africa, and the narration of his march through Africa,
Vandal. 1. The like praise of the Almains in their expedition to the Holy
Sepulcher, see in Nicetas, Manuele Comneuo. Gregoras, l. 9. commends the same
in the Venetians.
. This was effected by the ex^ care to provide Plin. Hist. Not. 26. 4. Curve
Romani duces p^imam semper in bellis commerciorum curam h^buere? Cassiod. 4.
13. Habeat quod emat, ne cogatur cogitare quod auferat. Similia habet, 5. 10,
and 13.
Necessaries, and by good Pay, and strict Discipline, which Ammian tells us of,
That none should tread upon the Lands of quiet men. And Vopiscus L. 18. Vide
and Ammianum lib. 21.
: Let no Soldier steal a Click, touch a Sheep, pluck a Grape, exact Oil, Salt,
Wood. And Cassiodore: Let them live in the Province, in a civil manner: nor let
their Arms make them over-bold, because the Shields of our Army ought to save
the Romans from all trouble. Add to these that of Xenephon Vop. Aurel.
: A friendly City's not to be compelled to give any thing against their will.
Out of these Sayings you may best interpret that Advice of the great Prophet,
yea one greater than a * Xenoph. Expedit. lib. 6. Luke 3. 14.
Prophet: Do violence to no man, neither accuse any man falsely, but be content
with your wages Ambros. ad hunc Lucae locum: Iccirco stipendia constituta
militiae, ne dum sumtus quaeritur, praedo grassetur. Sunt egregiae ad bane rem
Constitutiones apud Greg. Turon. lib. 2. 27. Frederici primilegom sic resert
Guntherus: Si quis pacificae plebis villasve domosve
Vsserit, ab rasis signabitur or a capillis,
Et pulsus castris post vulnera multarecedet.

. Parallel is that of Aurelian, in Vopiscus now c^ted: Let the Soldier be
content with his provision: let him live of the spoil of the Enemy, not of the
tears of the Province. Nor has any one reason to think these things are well
spoken, but cannot be performed, For, neither would that divine man have given
such a charge, nor wise Lawgivers have required it, if it had been in their
conceit impossible. Besides, we must necessarily grant it may be done, which we
see has been done Sic and Guicciard. disserit, lib. 16.
. Therefore have we brought examples: whereunto this eminent one is worthy to
be added, which Frontinus Lib. 4. c. 1. See Spartian of Niger's severity for a
stolen Cock.
mentions out of Sca^: That a Fruit-bearing Tree, enclosed within the bounds of
the Camp, the next day after the Armies removal was found ungather'd. Livy,
when he had related the ill deportment of the Roman Soldiers in the Camp at
Sucron, and that some of them went abroad by night pillaging the quiet people
of the Country, adds, All this was done by the lust and license of the
Soldier, nothing by Military Discipline. In one of Cicero's Orations De Praet.
Vrb.
against Verres: Thy care has bee^ to pillage and vex the Towns of our
peaceable friends. I cannot here omit the opinion of Divines, which I think
most true: That a King, who pays not his Soldiers Aegid. Regius de act.
supera. disp. 31. dub. 7. n. 95.
duly, is not only bound to the Soldiers for the losses following thence,
but also to his Subjects and Neighbors, whom the needy Soldiers have
plundered and abused. On the other side, it is the duty of those that abstain
from War, to do nothing for the strengthening of him who maintains a bad
Cause; or, whereby the motions of him, that wageth a just War, may be
retarded. And in a doubtful case, they ought to show themselves equal Exemplum
nobile vide apud Parutam, lib. 8. Lib. 1.
to both, in permitting passage, in affording provision for the Legions, in not
relieving the besieged. The Corcyreans in Thucydides say, It is the duty of the
Athenians, if they would not side with any party, either to prohibit the
Corinthians from raising Soldiers out of Attica, or permit them to do the
same. It was objected by the Romans against Philip King of the Macedonians,
that the League was violated by him two ways, both because he did injuries to
the fellows of the Roman people, and because he assisted the Enemy with aids
and money. The same things are urged by Titus Quintius in his Conference with
Nabis: Yet, thou say, I have not properly violated you, and your friendship
and society. How often shall I prove the contrary? In short, Wherein is
friendship violated? By these two things especially: If thou have my friends
for enemies: if thou art a friend to my enemies. In Agathias we read, He is an
Lib. 3.
enemy, who does what pleases an enemy. And in Procopius, He is reckoned
Gotth. 1.
in the Enemies Army, who supplyeth them with what is properly useful for the
War Demost^enes: Qui ea facit and machinatur, quibus ego capi possim, etiamsi
nec seriat, nec jaculum emittat, hostis mihi est.
. L. Aemilius Praetor Live. lib. 37.
accused the Teians for victualling the Enemies Navy, and promising them Wine;
adding, unless they would do the like for the Navy of the Romans, he would
account them for his Enemies. Augustus Plut. Bruto.
said: The City that receives my Enemy, is become my Enemy. It will be also
profitable to mingle League with both sides waging war, so that, with the good
will of both, it may be lawful to abstain from war, and exhibit the common
offices of humanity to both. It Is in Livy: Let them, as becomes neutral
friends, Live. lib. 35.
desire peace, not interpose themselves in the war. Archidamus King of Sparta,
when the Eleans seemed to incline to the Arcadians party, wrote an Epistle to
them containing only this: (...).
It is good to be quiet.

LVII. Of things done privately in public War. Cap. 18.

WHat we have hitherto said, most part, concerns them, who either have command
in chief, or execute public orders. We must also see, what is lawful
privately in War, by the Law of Nature, of God, or of Nations. Cicero Offic. 1.
relates, that the Son of Cato Censorius served in the Army of General
Pompilius, and when, after the dismission of that Legion wherein he served, the
Young Man, in love with war, had remained in the Army, Cato wrote unto
Pompilius, that if he would have him stay, he should give him an oath the
second time; adding this reason, because being dis-engaged from the first, he
could not justly fight with the Enemy. Cicero sets down the very words of
Cato to his Son, whereby he admonishes him, not to enter into Battle; for it
is not lawful, says he, for one to fight the Enemy, that is no Soldier. So
also we read the praise of Chrysantas, one of Xenoph. Cyrop. Plut. Quaest. Romans
39. and Marcello.
Cyrus's Soldiers, who being upon his Enemy, withdrew his Sword, hearing a
retreat sounded. Seneca says: He is called an unprofitable Soldier, who hears
De ira, c. 9.
not the sign given for a retreat. But they are deceived, who think this comes
from the external Law of Nations: for if you regard that, as it is lawful for
every man to seize upon the Enemies goods, so also to kill the Enemy; for by
that Law the Enemies are of no account. Wherefore, that which Cato advised,
comes from the Military Discipline of the Romans: wherein it was a Law, noted
by Modestinus, L. descrtorem. D. de re mil^t.
that whosoever obeyed not his Orders, should be punished with death, though the
matter succeeded well. Now, he also was supposed not to have obeyed, who out of
order, without the command of the General, entered into any fight, as the
Manlian commands do Live. l. 7. Manliana Imperia.
teach us. For truly, if that were lawful, either stations would be deserted,
or (license proceeding) the Army, or part thereof, would be engaged in
unadvised Battles Ita Avidius Cassius causam sententiae suae reddebat: Eveni^e
potuisse ut essent insidiae. Volcatius.
, which by all means is to be avoided. Therefore Sallust, when he describes the
Roman Discipline, says, In war they have been often punished, who against
Authority had fought against the Enemy, and who being recalled made (...) have
out of the Battle. A certain Laconian, when, being upon his Enemy, and hearing
the sign of retreat, he had repressed the blow, gave the reason thus: It is
better to obey my Commander, than to kill my Enemy. And Plutarch says, They
that are disbanded cannot kill the Enemy, because they are not bound by
Military Laws, wherewith they ought to be bound that are to fight. And
Epictetus in Arrian relating the nowmention'd Arrian. 2. 6.
fact of Chrysant as, adds, So much did he prefer the execution of his
Commanders will before his own. Nevertheless, if we respect natural and
internal right, it seems granted to every man, in a just War, to do those
things, which he is confident will, within the just measure of warring, be
advantageous to the innocent party: not also to appropriate to himself things
taken, for nothing is owing to him; unless perchance he exact punishment by the
common right of men. Which last, how it is restrained by the Gospel-law, may be
understood by what we have said before. Part. 2.
Now, a mandate may be either general, or special. General, as in a tumult
among the Romans, the Consul said, Whosoever would have the Commonwealth Serve.
ad. 8. Aen.
safe, fallow me. Yea, and to all particular Subjects is sometimes granted a
right of killing, besides in the way of self-defence, when it is publicly
expedient. Special mandate, not only they may have that receive Pay, but they
C. quando liceat unicuique. l. 1, and 2.
also that go to war at their own charge, and that (which is more) administer
at their charge a part of the War: as they that provide Ships, and maintain
them by their own expenses; to whom, instead of Pay, is wont to be granted
leave to keep what they can take. And how far that may go, without violation of
internal justice and charity, is not without cause inquired. Justice either
respects the Enemy, or the Commonwealth it self wherewith one has contracted,
From the Enemy, we have said, may be taken away the possession of all things
which may feed the War; and this, for security sake, on condition to restore
it: and the dominion too may be taken away, so far as to the compensation of
that, which, either from the beginning of the war, or by what fell out after,
is owing to him that ^geth a just war; whether the things belong to the hostile
Commonwealth, or to particular men, and those in themselves innocent: but the
goods of the nocent, even by way of punishment, may be taken away and possessed
by the Takers. So then, hostile goods will become theirs, who administer part
of the war at their own charge, so far (as to the Enemies) that the measure I
have expressed be not exceeded; and this is to be determined by an equal
judgment. But, as to the Commonwealth, the same will be just by internal
justice, if there be equality in the contract; that is, if the charges and the
dangers be as great, as the probability of the prey. For, if this hope be of
much more value, the overplus must be rendered to the Commonwealth; just as if
one had, at too cheap a rate, bought a Cast, uncertain indeed, but easy, and of
great hope. Yet further, when Justice strictly so called is not offended, there
may be a transgression from that office which consists in the love (...)
others, especially such as the Christian Law prescribes: as, if it appear that
such predation will chiefly hurt; not the generality of the Enemies, nor the
King, nor those that are in themselves nocent, but the innocent; and that so
much, that it will cast them into very great calamities; into which, to cast
even them that are privately indebted to us, were unmercifulness. But, if
moreover that depredation be not of much Silv. in verbo bellum, n. 8. verse. 5.
moment, neither to end the war, nor to weaken the Enemy; in such a case, an
honest man, especially a Christian, ought to think it an unworthy gain, which
is made only of the infelicity of the times Plutarch blames Crassu^ for this,
that he got his wealth out of the fire and war, turning the common calamities
into private gain.
. Sometimes also it happens, that, by occasion of public war, private war
arises, viz. if one chance to fall among ones Enemies, and come into hazard of
life or goods: in which case, the same things are to be observed, which we have
elsewhere said of the lawful manner of self-defence. There is wont also to be
joined with private utility, public authority: viz. if one, Part. 2.
upon great damage received from the Enemy obtain a right to recompense his
losses out of the Enemies goods: which right is to be defined by what we have
said above, of Reprizals. But, if any Soldier or other, even in a just war,
has fired the Enemies houses, wasted their fields, and done other damages of
the like sort, without command, and when their was no necessity, nor just
cause; it is rightly delivered by Divines, that he Silv. in verbo bellum, p. 1.
is bound to repair the damages. Justly have I added, what they omitted,
without cause: for, if there be cause, he will be bound perhaps to the
Commonwealth, whose Laws he has transgressed, not to the Enemy, whom he has
not wronged. Not impertinent is that which a Carthaginian gave in answer to the
Romans, when they required Annibal to be yielded to them: Whether Saguntum was
set upon by private or public counsel, is not the question: but, whether
justly or unjustly. For, we have this controversy with our Citizen, By what
authority he did it; our only question with you, is, Whether it was against
the League or no.

LVIII. Admonitions touching Faith and Peace. The Conclusion.
AS when I treated of undertaking War, I annexed some Admonitions about
declining War, as much as is possible: So will I now also, before I dismiss the
Reader, add a few Advisoes, which are useful both in war and after war,
^onding to the care of Faith and Peace; and first of Faith, both for other
reasons, and for this especially, that the hope of Peace may not be lost. For,
by Faith, not only every Commonwealth is conserved, as Cicero says, but also
that greater society of Cicero Offic. 3.
Nations. This being taken away as Aristotle Aristoteles Rhetor ad Theodect. 1.
15.
truly, Commerce is taken away from among men. Therefore the same Cicero says,
It is a wicked thing, to break ones Faith, without which there is no life. It
is (as Seneca speaks) the most sacred thing Seneca epist. 88.
that is seated in the breast of Man. And this Faith is so much more
religiously to be kept by the supreme Rulers of the world, by how much more
they are exempted from the punishment of their sins here, than other men. Take
away Faith, Cic. pro Q. Rosc.
they will be like unto wild beasts, whose violence all are afraid of. And
Justice truly, in its other parts, has oft-times somewhat of obscurity: but
the bond of Faith is manifest by it self, yea is therefore used that all
obscurities may be cleared. The more are Kings to embrace it; First, for
Conscience sake, and then for their Credit sake and Reputation, upon which
depends the Authority of their government. Wherefore, let them be assured, that
such as instill into them the arts of deceiving, do that very thing which they
teach. That doctrine cannot long be profitable, which makes man insociable with
man; add also, odious to God. Next, in the whole administration of War, the
mind cannot be kept serene and confident in God, unless it always make a
prospect toward Peace. For it is most truly said by Sallust. Orat. ad Caes.
Sallust: Wise men make war, to obt^in Peace. Wherewith agrees that sentence of
S. Augustine: Peace is not sought, the Augustine. epist. ad Bonifac.
war may be exercised; but War is waged, that Peace may be acquired. Aristotle
Arist. 7. pol. 2. and 14.
himself, more than once, accuses the Nations, that proposed to themselves
actions of War, as their ultimate end. Force is a thing that belongs to wild
beasts: an^ this, in War, is most eminent: the m^ diligent care must be used,
to temper (...) with humanity, lest by too near imi^tion of those beasts, we
forget that (...) are men, and lose the softness of our nature The Ambassadors
of Justinian in Procopius (Persic. 2.) address their speech to Chosroes after
this manner: Did we not see you (...) with our own eyes, and pronounce these
words in your ears, (...) should never have believed that Chosroes the son of
Caba^ would bring his Army, and enter forcibly into the Roman (...) ^ontrary to
his Oath; the firmest bond of Truth among men; contrary to his League, the only
hope left to those that are afflicted with war: For what is this, but to change
the life of men into the life of wild beasts. Take away Leagues, there will be
eternal Wars. And Wars without end have this effect, to put men beside
themselves, and divest them of their nature.
. If then a safe Peace may be had it is well worth the forgiveness of injuries,
and losses, and charges: especially among Christians, to whom their Master has
bequeathed his Peace. Whose best Interpreter Romans 12. 18.
will have us, as far as is possible, and as much as in us syeth, live
peaceably with all men. It is the property of a good man, as we read in
Sallust, to begin war with an unwilling mind, and to prosecute it no farther
than he needs must. This one consideration may be enough, but for the most part
also men's Interest and profit carries them to this end: first them, who are
inferior in strength; because long strife with one more mighty is full of
danger; And, as on shipboard, a greater calamity is to be redeemed with some
loss; leaving off anger and hope, deceitful counselors, as Livy rightly called
them. This sense is thus expressed by Aristotle: Better it is, to yield some of
our goods to those that are more potent, than to contend with them and lose all
Philo de constitutione principis: Pax, quamvis cum magno detrimento, bello
utilior. Communis Mars.
. And as to the more potent, Peace is for their Interest too: because, while
their affairs are prosperous (as the now-cited Livy says no less truly) Peace
is honorable to those that give it; and better and safer than the victory hoped
for. For the Common Chances of War must be considered. So says Aristotle, We
must think how many and (...) unexpected alterations do happen in war. And in
Diodorus, in a certain Oration for Peace, they are censured, who glory in the
greatness of their actions, as if it were not Fortunes custom, to dispense her
favors, and successes, by turns. And besides, there is one thing more, which
may be feared most, the Boldness of desperate men, like unto the fiercest
biting of dying beasts Quippe timenda etiam me riem^s lustra Leonis.
. But, if both Parties seem to themselves equal, that indeed, in Casa^
judgment, is the best time to treat (...) peace. (...) est they have Both some
confidence in their own strength. And, when Peace is made, on whatsoever terms,
it is by all means to be preserved by reason (...) that sanctimony of Faith
aforesaid: and with all care must be avoided, not only perfidiousness, but also
whatever exasp^ rates the mind. For, what Cicero said (...) private, you may
apply as well to the^ public friendships, As they are all to (...) maintained
with exact fidelity and Re^gion, so those especially which after c^mities are
made up again and restored.

GOd (who alone can do it) inscribe these things in their hearts, who have the
Affairs of Christendom in their hands; and grant them a Mind intelligent of
Divine and Human Right, and ever remembering that she is elected by God to
govern man, a creature most dear unto himself Chrysostom. sermon. de Elecmosyna;
(...).
.

THE END.
OUT OF THE LIFE OF S. LUDOVIC, HIS CHARGE To his Son.
IF any Controversy or action be raised against thee, inquire into the Truth,
as well on the contrary part as on thy side. If thou have any thing of
another, taken by thy self, or by thy Ancestors, Restore it quickly. Wage no
War against any Christian, but by the Counsel of Many, and when War is
unavoidable. And in War, do no hurt to Churchmen, and those that have done
thee no wrong. If Seditions rise among thy subjects, quiet them as soon as thou
can. See often what thy Officers do, and examine their ways, and reform what
is amiss. Let no soul sin reign within thy Kingdom.

Out of the same King's life written by Joinvil, chap. 89.
THe King's great Counselors reprehended him often for taking so much pains to
make peace among his neighbors: saying, He did ill to end their wars, which
would be for his Advantage. The King answered, You say not well. For, if my
neighboring Princes did see me cheri^ their Wars, they would say I had a p^
upon them, and hate me, and take a time to do me and my Kingdom a mischief.
Moreover, I should provoks the wrath of God against me, who blesses the
Peacemakers. Certain it is, the Burgundians and Lorainers, perceiving the Kings
Goodness and Justice, were so loving and observant of him, that they referred
their differences to his Arbitration. I have often seen them come to him, for
that purpose, to Paris, and other places, when the King was resident.

MEMORIALS OF THE LIFE AND DEATH OF H. GROTIUS.

LONDON, Printed by T. Warren, for W. Lee, And are to be sold at his shop, at
the sign of the Turks-head in Fleetstreet, 1654.

Memorials of the Authors Life and Death.
He that has surv^yed with a judicious eye the various and choice Learning
contained in this Book, cannot but desire to know more of the Author, than what
the Title shows him, That He was, The Illustrious Hugo Grotius. Men are
naturally apt to enquire (as He The writer of Mr. Medes Life.
observes) and to know as much as they can can of the person whose. Actions or
writings have any way drawn their attention. Who is this man, that has written
such things? To write the life of this Man perfectly, were an enterprise for
one more versed both in Books and Men: For Me, it will be enough, to collect
out of the Authors own Writings (And indeed, to describe Grotius, who is so
able as Grotius?) and of some of his friends, what may represent (in some sort)
so excellent a person to my Readers view, and conduce to the perpetuating of
his happy Memory among us Englishmen, to whom he bare a special Affection. And
first we will represent that summary of his first years, which we find in
Meursius 's Athenae Batavae, to this effect.

Hugo Grotius was born at Delf in Athenae Bat. Anno 1583.
Holland, 4. eid. April. Anno 1583. He was of an Ancient, and Noble House. His
Grandfather of the same name was learned above the model of those darker times,
and well skild in the three principal Languages, Latin, Greek and Hebrew. His
Uncle Cornelius Grotius was professor of the Civil Law at Leyden, where he
flourished in the good esteem and favor of the best men. His Father was
Joannes Grotius, Curator of that University: whose Poems are extant, with
Lipsius Letters to him, and Dousa's verses: whose name also has adorned many
learned Men's Books dedicated to Him. Being blessed with this Hopeful son, he used
all pains and care in his good education, and cherished this great Wit so well,
that when he was but eight years old, viz. Anno 1591. He did fundere Anno 1591.
versus, make verses ex tempore, and disputed twice publicly in questions of
Philosophy. Anno 1598. aet. 15. He traveled Anno 1598.
into France in the train of that incomparable person, Joannes
Oldenbarneveldius, Ambassador from the States to the Great Henry; and returned
honored with Royal Bounty, and the Friendship of Illustrious Men; having
before that time begun to set forth notes upon the seven Liberal Arts of
Martianus Capella. When he had after studied some years at Leyden, much
endeared unto Scaliger, his Father fearing the young Scholars mind should, by
the Amenity and delight of human literature and Poesy, be drawn away from more
profitable employment; he was taken off, and ascribed among the Advocates at
the Hague, Anno 1599. and Anno 1599.
soon after pleaded Causes. Yet did not he addict himself so much to that
profession, but that his Genius led him back, and made him often revisit his
former studies of Humanity. For which, he was most dear to the French
Ambassador Buzanvall, to Janus Dousa the Father, and many other Persons of
Honor. About this time the States of Holland began to use his service, in
penning the History of the most famous War in the whole world. Afterward Anno
1607. Commended Anno 1607
by the Suffrages of the Courts, nominated by the States, and elected by the
most potent Prince, the Admiration of all other Princes, Grave Maurice, he
became Fisci Advocatus, Advocate of the Treasury, and behaved himself so well
in this most weighty office, that he received from his superiors a most ample
testimony of his diligence and integrity. Here perceiving the Trade into India
of great Importance to his Country, that he might stir up the spirits of his
Countrymen thereto, he wrote a Book, De jure Commercii Indicani. Again,
observing, after the Truce with the Spaniard, the peace of the Commonwealth
began to be disturbed by certain dangerous Innovators, judging it to be the
Duty of a good Patriot, to oppose himself against their Designs, and to commend
unto All the present State, he set out a Dissertation, entitled, De
Antiquitate Reipublicae Bataviae. After the death of Elias Olden Barneveldius,
a man not less Noble for his good parts, than his family, Our Grotius sufferd
himself to be chosen into his place, Syndic of Roterdam, and so was advanced
from the Bar to the Bench. And then was he sent into Great Britain to
accommodate the difference about the Indian Trade: whence he was dismissed not
without eminent marks of favor from that King of Learning and Religion, and
from the most learned and pious men of that Island, together with this most
pleasing fruit of his Journey, that he there had found the Great Isaac
Casaubon, whom he reverenced before at a distance, and had now enjoyed a more
intimate and familiar conversation with him. About that time the Church being
very sick of the Controversies of Predestination, and of the contention of some
Pastors with the Magistrates about the right of Church Government: in so much
that the States of Holland were by some Contumeliously reproached: Our Author
thought it his Duty to vindicate the Right of the State, and offer his
Medicines for the Cure of those Distempers, and show the way to Peace in those
and other Differences that disturb the Christian World.

Thus far out of Athenae Batavae, a Book containing the Lives of the most
eminent professors and learned men that have flourished in that University, and
much tending to the honor of it. Wherefore it may be a good precedent for our
two famous Universities, and for London (that perhaps may not improperly be
styled a third Academy) and stir them up to do the like. For England has in
this last Age produced men as worthy, as any other, though not so much known
abroad. But, to reflect a little upon what is said already, before we go on:
That so lasting a Wit as Grotius had, should be so soon ripe, is not a little
to be admired. Odi puerulum praecoci ingenio, says the Poet of sentences;
Precocity is a token of a short-lived wit: but 'twas not so in Him. Well did a
great man in France apply to him, what Turnebus formerly had said of Joseph
Scaliger, that he was portentosi ingenii Juvenis; And Daniel Heinsius a great
wit too (me thinks it is happy when such men bear a fair respect to one another,
and do not turn ingenuous Emulation into envious Detraction:) has honored him
with this elogy Heinsius ad Grotium cum ab eo Adamo exule Tragoedia donaretur.
:

Natura nutrix, obstetrixque iquae pri^
Noverca cunctis, Grotio Matter fuit.
Senex Ephebus ille, quem Batavia
Miratur omnis, opt at Hetrusou's: sibi
Omnisque Gallus. Ille dum puer fuit
Vir esse coepit. Namque relliqui viri
Tandem suere: Grotius vir natus est.
Nature, the stepdame to us all,
Grotius may his Mother call.
That old Young man Holland admires,
Italy and all France desires.
We grow up slowly: would you see
One born full Man? Grotius is He.
As he became a man very quickly, and did all things like a Man, so did he last
long, and was never idle. Another Poet Dominicus Baudius in carm. ad Dan.
Heins. Idem Baudius ad Grot. and Heins. O par gemellum amoris antiqua fide,
Morumque nexu, heroicisque laudibus, etc.
speaks thus, of that eminent Pair Grotius and Heinsius: Vobis Dei favore nomen
obtigit
Livore majus, and senecta temporum,
Exsorsque lethi: Parca nullum jus habet
In secla vatum, quos Perennitas sacrat.
Coele stis aura morte deleri nequit,
Nec interire sanguis Heroum potest.
Nihil precari majus aut vobis licet,
Aut saeculo, quam possit ut diu frui
Tanto Deorum munere. O cultum mihi
Par, and colendum semper antiqua fide
Sublime coelo laetus efferam caput,
Votisque nulla summa defiet meis,
Si me benignus eruditorum chorus,
Consentiensque postumae gentis favor
Tali jugo accensere tertium velit.


Of our Author's Martianus Capella which he set forth before he was fifteen
years old, hear the divine Scaliger Jos. Scalig. in Martianum Capellam Hugonis
Grotii.
; Hugo soboles Grotius optimi parentis,
Qui limina nondum tetigit puberis aevi,
Sed mente senili teneros praevenit annos,
Magnum meditans, auspiciis noluit illis
Praeludere, quae vesticipum postulat aetas,
Sed maluit a grandibus inchoare coeptis,
Nam qui penus est, omnis and arca displinae,
Sed quem horridulum injuria squallore vetustas
Omni studiorum nitido abdicarat usu,
Illius ab incude profectus, atque amaeno
Splendore micans, purpurea vest decorus,
Cultusque novo pumice Martianus exit.
Cernisne, ut ovantem lepido flore juventae,
Commendet oum gratia luminis recentis?
Quam sive habuit, restituit Grotius illi:
Seu non habuit, contulit hanc Grotius illi.


The Author himself maks a modest mention of his Capella and some other
writings of his about the same time, in an Epistle to his great friend (and
indeed the great friend of all learned men) Jacobus Augustus Thuanus Grot.
epist. ad Ja. Aug. Thuan. Anno 1601.
: I was exceedingly glad (says he) when I understood, my Capella, Aratus, and
Epithalamium Regium, were not only come to your hands but also well taken; not
that I think those poor endeavors of my Youth do merit the honor of your
suffrage, but (...) I am confident, you have rightly esteemed the Donour's
Affection. My own opinion of Martianus and the other Syntagni is only this,
that they are capable of some exc^ from my Age: for I wrote them when (...) was
very young Diu ante pleuam pubertatem.
. But you are pleased to go farther, and upon these beginnings ground a
judgment of Greater Hope and Growth hereafter. This, I must confess, is my
desire, this is my greatest ambition, t^ be praised by the prais-worthy. As to
the Epithalamium, I am sorry many things are mistaken, of which I have since
ha^ better intelligence: for I composed it b^ conjecture. And I wish I had
inserted some things of the Allobrogick War, (...) the place of some other. I
know not (...) it comes to pass, which I find in my self that my younger
writings are condemns by the judgment of my riper years, and (...) I cease not,
but have a mind to comp^ what will afterward displease my self, have now some
pieces done, others (...) signed, which, when they are set for shall carefully
be conveyed to you. (...) chief care is at present, to collect so^ thing that
may be useful to you in your Annals of France, believing it to be of much
concernment to my Country, if the Actions thereof, by occasion of the
Neighboring Affairs, be eternized in so glorious a Work. And I will take the
best care I can, to answer your desire, by informing you, what time and place
was fatal to the learned Men of our Country. Happy are you, who at your spare
hours (which I am persuaded are but few) can do things above the Abilities of
other men, who make it their only Business. Happy is France, governed by the
Coun^l of Men, that liberally bestow upon the Commonwealth of learning, the
Remainder of their Time which they can borrow from the public Affairs of the
Kingdom, And would I might be so happy once, as to enjoy the presence and
friendship of such men, which I do not despair of, especially hoping for your
Favor. An. ^601. In another Epistle of the same year (...) the same Thuanus,
wherewith he presented him his Adamus Exul (concerning which, by the way, take
this of Janus (...) Jan. Dous. in Hug. Grot. Adamum Exulem Tragoed.
: Mortiferum hic-vetita decerptum ex arbore pomum,
Adami lapsus exiliumque Leges,
Nunc primum en Latio donati atque urbe Quiritum;
Debita quae Civi gloria sola meo;
Qui Phaebo Delphisque suis, nec consule tantum
Patre, sed and Magni nomine dignus ovat.)


To the same Thuanus, I say, our Author thus addresses himself: To You is this
Grot. in epist. ad Jacobum Aug. Thuan.
offered, most illustrious President, who after that light of Scotland have
revived Tragedy. Indeed Buchanan, in other points most excellent, seems to
degenerate from the hight of the Buskin, so that I may say, You are the first
by whose conduct the old Majesty of the Stage is brought back again, from that
Prince of Tragoedians Aeschylus. Give me leave to adore your footsteps, and
receive here a Tragedy, and that a sacred one; to the writing whereof as Your
example invited, so my manifest inequality might have deterred me. For no sober
man, where he desires to excel, would follow Thuanus: to whom who does not so
give the first place, as not daring to aspire unto the second? As for me, I
contend not with any one for Glory, but pleased my se^ in this sacred Argument;
fearing not censure, while I am unsollicitous of praise.

Anno. 1608. He published another Anno 1608.
Tragedy entitled Christus patiens, ar^ dedicated it to Petrus Janninus, the
King of France's Ambassador to the States. A part of his dedicatory Epistle is
very fit to Grotii epist. ad Petrum Janninum.
be read here. Suffer, I pray, the noblest name, and that which will be
perpetually celebrated in the Annals of France, to be inscribed upon this Book:
that Men, by this sign may see, though I cannot be thankful enough, I have not
willingly been unthankful. The truest praise of the French-Nation is Humanity,
especially toward strangers: but your Humanity has exceeded all former limits,
and is not common to the Nation, but proper to your self. You have new-spirited
a young man, commendable for nothing but his love of good learning, and
admiration of eminent persons, and you have not only countenanced him and
encouraged him with gracious words, (which was much:) but of your own accord,
have admitted him (let me not offend your honor in saying so) into your bosom,
as an intimate friend. Moreover, You have laid hold on all occasions to advance
me, with a bountiful, prone, and (I had almost said) Paternal Affection.
Whenever the Affairs of France and greater cares shall recall you from us, it
will be a sad time to All, most to Me; For it will deprive me of the chiefest
part of my felicity: Yet it is a comfort, that it shall never be able to
extinguish, either the memory which you are pleased to retein of me, or the
honor which I have received from so illustrious a Friendship. And, seeing it
much concerned me to have it known, I thought it meet upon that account to make
this public Address, and offer you this Tragedy for a testimony of a mostd
voted Heart. That it might be worthy of you, seeing I could not give it value
from my self, I have taken it from the matter most woeful in in the fact, most
joyful in the effect and fruit, most sacred every way. This alone unites the
divided minds of Christians, striving with one another as much in hatred as
they ought in love, and keeps them still almost invincible, not permitting their
differences to be infinite. No other Argument could be found more agreeable to
your Mind, who long mourn for the lamentable distractions of this Age, and
study to procure, as much as is in you (and very much is in you) the Peace of
the Church; a thing that we can only wish for. For, that, Truth necessary to
salvavation being established, due liberty 'twixt unjust Domination and
unbridled License being granted in other points, the Parties much inflamed by
ambition, avarice, private Interests, and impunity of speaking and doing evil
brought in by wars, may by degrees be reconciled and close in a league; to this
end (I say) the Authority of your King, the Prince of Christian Princes, and
next unto that your lenity and moderation, and of such as you are, yields us
the greatest Hope. Which Hope, may He at length, bring unto an Issue, who is
our Common Redeemer, and has bought us with his own blood, the memory of which
ineffable Benefit, we have expressed in this Tragedy, if not with happy
success, yet with a pious endeavor.

This last passage I was the more willing to communicate to the Christian
Reader, because it shows, that our Author very early entered into that pious
care of the Churches Peace, which he carried with him all along the course of
his life, even to his grave, as we shall observe in that which follows. In his
studies of Piety and Religion he had the domestic Assistance of the learned
and peaceable Divine Franciscus J^mus; whose Opinions yet, our Grotius did
(...) so obstinately embrace, (as the manner of some is to follow their Masters
beyond reason) but that he had an ear for Arminius, one of the public
professors at Leyden about the same time. Because I have mentior'd a name hated
by many (more through prejudice, than upon any true ground) I shall here annex
our Authors Verses upon his death Anno 1609.
, not so much out of an intention to praise the man, as to set forth the Temper
of our Author in his own lively words; Grot. Farrag. libro 3. In mortem Jacobi
Arminii.
Scrutator altae Veritatis Armini
Sublime pectus, anima foeta doctrinae,
Solertiaeque perspicacis exemplum,
Tu nunc ademptus saeeulo tenebricoso
Et semicoecae palpitantium turbae
Claros beatae lucis incolis campos:
Et sive multum debuit tibi verum,
Seu part in aliqua, more gentis humanae,
Et nescientis multa sort naturae,
Te cepit error (Judicent, quibus sacri
Juris potestas, visque tanta nascendi)
Certe superni condicts frequens Lector,
In verba certe non adactus humana
Labi timentis, nec rebellis in sese,
Fers test coelo conscientiae laudem,
Ibi satur quiet, gaudii plenus,
Quaesita quondam discis, and vides, quanta
Involvat homines inscientiae nubes:
Quam nil sit illud, quod vocamus hic scire,
Quo nos superbi tollimus caput coelo,
Calcamus alios, invicemque calcamur.
Hinc tanta bella saeviunt magistrorum,
Hinc odia plebis: interim fugit long,
Nec se videndam dimicantibus praebet
Amica sanctae sancta Veritas Pacis.
Unde ista rabies, and libido pugnandi
Insedit animos? Cur placet Deus, belli
Maceria? Quo tot studia, tot novae parts?
An hostis atranocte pestilens Christi
Insparsit agro semen? an furor pugnax
Mortalitatis, ingenique corrupti
Alimenta quaevis sumit, and Dei cause
Permisect hominem? curiosus an mundus
Dum nil latere patitur, and sequi gaudet
Sciri negata, jure sentit hanc poenam?
Ut illa quondam, dum viam parat coelo,
Structrix superbae molis insolens turba
In mill linguas abiit, atque aberranti
Sermon priscum vocis exuit foedus.
Heu quid paramus? Lectus orb de toto
Grex ille parvus lancinamur heu faede
Iterumque and iterum, scindimurque discordes,
Ridente Turca, nec dolente Judaeo,
Felix remota factionibus Vulgi
Religio simplex, art non laborata:
Quae morte Christi certa dilui culpas,
Hic spem fidemque ponit, and dari credit
Gratis salutem, promerentibus poenam:
Sanctique amoris lene munus exercens
Non curat altum sapere, nec nimis quaerit,
An lege certa veniat omne Venturum:
Exsors malorum quomodo malum nolit,
Velitque Rector: summa quatenus causa
Potente nutu velle temperet nostrum.
Felix and ille quisquis ambitu liber,
Nec vana captans lucra, nec leves plausus,
Coelestiores excitatus ad curas
In astra tendit, and Deum studet nosse,
Qua se ipse pandit, ambulatque suspensis
Periculosas gressibus per ambages,
Non mentientis sila persequens libri:
Cui charitate temperata libert as
Certat manner dissidentibus concors:
Piaeque purus aequit at is affectus
Damnatus aliis, ipse neminem damnat:
Modestiaeque limitem premens, donat
Nunc verba vero, nunc silentium paci.
Haec saepe populo test, saepe privatim,
Haec ipsa fato jam propinquus, Armini,
Adhuc monebas, cum laboribus vita
Longis fatiscens, saeculique pertaesus
Fastidiosi, pertinacts, ingrati,
Indigniore part fractus and languens,
Meliore sospes; illa millibus multis
Monstrata per te regna totus arderes.
Et nunc paterno sidus additum ^emplo
Deum precaris, Det gregi suo lucem.
Hic quanto satis est, hac de^ esse contentum:
Det non loquentes sua reperta Doctores:
Det consonantes semper omnium linguas,
Aut corda saltem: praepotente vi flammae
Caliginosas litium fuget sordes:
Ut spiret unum tota civit as Christi,
Vitamque terris approbet, fidem coelo.


Did we all follow what is here so well expressed; that is, humbly submit to
plain Scripture, not boldly enquire into things unrevealed; more exercise our
charity, and less quarrel about opinions; walk in sincerity of heart before
God, and in uprightness of conversation before men; Certainly it would be much
better with Christendom, than it is at this day. But, the great fault is, that
men lay out their zeal upon a sect, or side; and study not to improve the
Common Truths to the Advancement of Peace and Charity See Dr. Hammonds Treatise
of Fundamentals.
, But more of this hereafter. Among our Author's first works, above is
mentioned his De Republica Batav. of which Himself speaks in an Epistle to
Thuanus, An. 1610. thus: An. 1610.


Grot. Epist. ad Jac. Aug. Thuanum.
This Book of our Commonwealth I send to you, that have framed together not
the French History only, but the History of the whole World, with such
variety of matter, and such elegance of style, that no man could ever have
expected the like from one at greatest leisure. But I send you a slender work
if you look upon the matter, containing not the affairs of all mankind, no nor
of some great Kingdom, but of one Nation included within narrow bounds: nor
all the affairs of this, but a breviate only of the Government. Plainly, here
is nothing for you to love, nothing to praise, besides a mind like yours, viz.
most affectionate to my Country, and not addicted to Innovation, I embrace that
saying of Thucydides: That scheme of Government which every one has received,
it is good for him to preserve. That Is your care in a great Kingdom, ours in a
little Commonwealth. Your immortal work, though it may please all by the
ancient elegance of words, and variety of matter, yet does it not deserve
better of the Readers in any respect, than that it makes them both good men,
and good Subjects. We also will be among the Disciples of this Institution, and
will labor after your example, that our fidelity and liberty in all things may
be approved.

In England our Author began the thirtieth year of his Age on Easter day, An.
1612. and celebrated the same with these following Verses: In Pascha, Anni
1612. Natalem trigesimum. Farrag. l. 3.
Christ tui quondam testis de morte triumphi,
In lucem reduci quae tibi prima suit;
Haec quoque nascentem me post tot saecula vidit
Sancta piis semper, bis mihi sancta dies:
Scilicet ut nequeam, geminato munere, donec
Sum memor ipse mei, non memor esse tut.
Olim quindecimum cum Sol mihi conderet annum,
Ostendit mthi ver Gallia, vere meo.
Contigimus dextram, qua nulla potentior armis,
Quae quod regnabat debuit ipsa sibi.
Nunc bis quindecimum luces mihi noctibus aequans
Phrixeae Phoebus vellera lustrat ovis:
Natalisque meus me ditibus aspicit arvis,
Quae Tamesis puro vitreus amne rigat.
Vidimus hic illum, qui regno maximus, unus
Est regum regno celsior ipse suo:
Qui postquam terris datus est, sapientiae vera
Privatum post hac se decus esse negat.
Hactenus ista. latet sors indeprensa futuri:
Scit, qui sollicitum me vetat esse, Deus.
Duc Genitor me Magne: sequar quocunque vocabor,
Seu tu laeta mihi, seu mihi dura paras.
Sistis in hac vita? maneo? partesque tuebor
Quas dederis. Revocas optime? promtus eo.
Post reges visos, da regum cernere Regem,
Natalemque mihi, sed sine nocte, diem.


A little before he came into England, he had correspondence with Casaubon, and
consulted him about the Churches peace, proposing some expedients to that
purpose. Casaubon in one Epistle returns him this Answer:

Casauboni Epist. 220. Hugoni Grotio. Land. 15. Kal. Feb. 1612.
You have made me happy with your Letters which I lately received: and I cannot
express the pleasure I take in your cares and studies of Peace and Concord. You
see in your Country, how easy a thing it is to stir up contentions among
brethren, how hard to allay them. Think every Country to be Holland. So great
store is there of the lovers of Contention every where: who account it a matter
indifferent, or not so much, whether the Church have any peace or no. It Is a
small thing, not to love concord: I know many, that do suspect and hate no men
more than peacemakers. The more have I admired the piety of King James, who
does so embrace the study of Truth, that he recedes not from the study of
Unity. The same Casaubon in another Epistle to Grotius: Casaub. Epist. 221. 6.
Kal. Febr.
The most wise King, most studious of Peace and Concord, having read your
Letter, exceedingly praised your piety joined with equal prudence. His Majesty
could wish, that all They, who have any hand in the Government of Christian
Kingdoms and Commonwealths, were of your mind: and, he doubts not, it would
be for the great good of God's Church. He also wonderfully approves the counsel
you suggest, of procuring concord by all means, at least among our own. If
this, any way, through Gods mercy, could be effected, the King assures himself,
Many good men, who at this day knowing not whither to turn themselves amidst
our so great discords, do groan under the Popes Tyranny, would provide for the
liberty of their Consciences. I will pronounce nothing of the Papists of other
Countries: but of my Countrymen of France I think I may truly say, the best of
them do wait for the day of the Lord, and from their souls detest the
maintainers of empty superstitions, and of Papal Tyranny. I say more, and I
say it upon good ground: If in our France, Reformation had been carried on,
without so much varying from the form of the Ancient Church, many thousands
more, now most a verse from the Doctrine of our Churches, had been converted.
When I have said thus to our Ministers in France, I found but few, who
preferred not their own preciseness before gentle and moderate counsels. Here,
far otherwise minded are both the King, and every most learned man of the
English Clergy. Many of the Bishops in this Kingdom, men excelling in learning
and piety, I have found, who day and night study the same thing with you, and
give themselves continually to the same Cogitations. And I doubt not, if a
beginning were made, or if any occasion did arise of effecting that, of which
you have most prudently written, both his most excellent Majesty, and the
whole Church of England, and especially the most reverend Bishops, would try
all things, to promote so good a work. His Majesty commanded me, to let you
understand so much, requesting you to continue in the same mind, and to
communicate your counsels to us.

Being in England, our Grotius persisted in his endeavors of Reconciliation,
and presented to the learned Dean of St. Paul's, Dr. Overal, a little Tract, (of
late Cum aliis opusc. Amstelod. 1652.
published) entitled, Conciliatio dissidentium de re praedestinar^ and gratia
opinionum: which the De^ having perused, roturns, with this judgment upon it:

Remitto ad Te, etc. I return to you Jo. Overallus Hug. Grotio, Maii 16. 1613.
your Conciliation, which is very much approved by me, but I fear you will not
approve it to your Antagonists, especially the more rigid Sectators of Calvin's
way: That Zenonian Sect will hardly yield to moderate sentences in these
matters, but will tooth and nail adhere unto that fatal doctrine of
Predestination, in the pure mass, or at least in the corrupt, the Reprobates
(that is, All men besides their absolutely Elect) being excluded from the
Redemption of Christ, and from sufficient Grace, in the intention of God and of
Christ.

After his return into Holland he prosecuted his Consultation for Peace by
Letters to his friends in England, and sent over a Copy of the Decree of the
States for the ending of those Disputes: as appears in another Epistle of
Casaubon's, 1614.

Casauboni ad Grotium epist. Land. 6. Kal. Maii. 1614.
Yours to Dr. Overal I will deliver him my self this day, and ask his counsel
about your Business. He is now, not Dean of St. Paul's, but Bishop of Lichfield,
which preferment was conferred on him by the most gracious King, a month since.
But, such Accidents befall men, this Accession of honor was made the less
joyful to him, by the Stone, or some like disease, wherewith he was taken that
very day whereon he obtained his place. I will prevail with him to write you an
Answer, or, if I cannot, I will fully declare unto you his opinion. The Edict
of the most illustrious States, I read so soon as I had opened your Packet, and
noted therein one or two expressions, which I would have wished a little
otherwise conceived. But I will expect the judgment of others; and then I will
diligently write unto you both my own and their Observations. In the mean, I
cannot sufficiently praise the Design of the most illustrious States, in
putting a restraint upon curious Heads by this Edict Et in Epist. seq. Neque
vero consilium dun. taxat Rex (...) and alii v^i gravissimi probaver^, sed and
formulam quoque ipsam jussie ordinum conceptam. Apparet enim id esse actum, ut
a duobus scopulis in hac doctrina aeque periculosis, hinc Manichaeorum inde
Pelagianorum, popul avertantur: and in ea doctrina confirmentur, quae salutus
nostrae proram and puppim, principium, inquam, progressum and (...), uni Deo
adscribens contemptum tamen bonorum operum non inducat. See the late Kings
Decree, set before the 39. Articles, to the like purpose.
. The Lord bless their work. I have long been persuaded, that the immoderate
desire of men to pierce into the secret Counsels of God, beyond what the
eternal Wisdom has revealed to us in Scripture, is one of the most grievous
Evils of our Time. The ancient Church firmly believed, there are many mysteries
in Christian Religion, of which it is better to be silent, especially among the
Common People, than to dispute subtly. I have written much of that opinion of
the Ancients, when I expounded why the Sacraments are called Mysteries. Which
Argument when I handled, and thought upon the modern Controversies, I could not
forbear to say somewhat of the matter. See, if you please, the beginning of the
564. page.

The Book now cited by Casaubon, is his Exercitations against Baronjus, (Land.
1614.) upon which Work h^ follow Grotius 's Verses, which I set d^ for the
better demonstration of that moderate way these great Scholars followed in the
business of Religion, wishing the example may help to reduce others f^
extravagancies. Hugonis Gretii carmen in Exercit. Baronianas Is. Casaubon.
Annals docti nimium servire Baron
Qui legis, etc.


Thus in English: The Annals of the great Baronius,
Approved at Rome, too too obsequous,
Believe not rashly: The Laborice Book
Was over-awed by an Imperious loo^
Errors cloakt under purple Robe^ No hope,
This long time, that plain True should please the Pope.
O Piety, where art! where is the M^
So valiant against this Age, that can
Defend thy Cause; when Schism a^ Faction,
Passions and Lusts reign o'r Religion
Some to impose one as the Head of All,
To raise Him up, consider not who fall.
Reverehd Antiquity, without her choice,
Is forced against her self to give her voice.
Kings to deprive both of their Life and Crown,
For private Interest to throw Justice down,
New falsehood to commend with an old Name,
This is the way to Riches and to Fame.
Some others too, guilty of Innovation,
Call this a free and a pure Reformation:
To these, received Rites displeasing are,
Lest that to Rome they should approach too near.
Thus Piety afflicted, and long hid,
(Which always to speak Falsehood does forbid,
And sometimes, to conceal Truth;) weeping past
From place to place to find some aid: at last,
Other hands failing, Casaubon divine,
She was not dis-appointed seeking thine.
I have no wealth to give; not the Red Hat:
Alas (said she) my Enemies have that:
Yet have I great Rewards, Good Conscience,
Grateful Posterity, Gods Beneficence.
Thou heardst, and fear^dst not this evil Age,
That Wars against Peace with perpetual Rage.
Hence Athenoeus, and Polybius now,
Those Glorious and younger Works, which thou
Have wrought: and let thy Strabo yield his place,
And all thy Sons of Roman or Greek race.
One more Heroic comes. The former were
Labors of Learning: Piety is here.


Near the same time, he wrote an Epistle to Joannes Hotmannus Vellerius, which,
because it touches Concord and the Decree above mentioned, may fitly be added
in this place.

Hugo Grot. Jo. Hotman. Vellerio, 26. Aug. 1614.
I received by the hand of the Right Honorable the French Ambassador your
worthy Present, viz. Books of excellent Men written on behalf of the best thing
(yet most despaired of) the peace of divided Christianity. To speak my opinion
briesly, I think, if Luther had had the mind of Melancthon, and the Patriarch
of the West the mind of Cassander, it had fared better with the Affairs of
Europe, which is now, for a whole Age almost, miserably shaken with bloody
wars, under the Title of the Gospel. And now, when even those who have deserted
the Roman party, do for a few Controvernes so implacably disagree, what hope
can there be of Concord in the whole Body? Nevertheless, Endeavors in so good
a thing are not without praise, even when they are without success, But, if the
present Age deserve this punishment, to be given up to their own madness, and
will not admit any whohome Counse's, the next Age perchance will be more happy,
and either be studious of peace, or weary of contention. God often brings
matters about unexpectedly. I suppose you have read my Book Cui tit. Pietas
Ordinum Hollandiae, ni fellor.
. It Is doubtful whether my own Countrymen or the Jesuits are more displeased
with it: the Former, because I defend that paradox (as it seems to them) That
in every Church, they may be tolerated, who differ about things not simply
necessary: the Latter, because I call Princes to the inspection and care of
matters of Religion. Both which Points are such, that, if they be not stated
so, we shall neither be able to recover our lost unity, nor to retain this
which we have. That the States of Holland are of the same Judgment with me,
you shall perceive by their Decree. I have taken some pains, that it might not
go forth without testimonies, not only that the Authority thereof might be
more sacred, but also that I might accustom our men to yield somewhat to pious
Antiquity, which by some is frowardly despised. Add unto this what he wrote
the next year to Thuanus: I engaged in this contentious kind of Gratius Thuano,
1515.
writing, not moved thereunto by my own disposition, (for that is not
quarrelsome) but impelled by a certain greater force, viz. by the counsel of
prudent men, and by a desire to serve both my Country and the Church: and truly
the Church more than my Country. For, to tell you the very truth (and who
better deserves to hear the truth?) ever since I began to consider diligently
of the Affairs of Religion, I found their complaints, who called for amendment
in doctrines, in rites, in government, to be most just; but (as it commonly
happens) they went too far, and erred a little on the other hand (...).
. So, whilst they departed from the dangerous confidence of Merits, there
crept in opinions contemning Good Works: in hatred of Superstition, they were
disaffected to all Liturgy, and order of Divine Service: and for fear of
Tyranny (which had been intolerable) they proceeded to the confines of
Anarchy. Wherefore I have always thought it the duty of all good men on our
side, to do their utmost, that by little and little, whatsoever was exorbitant
might be reduced to a Golden mediocrity. Which cogitation I see was fixed in
the mind of Melancthon. Now, there is nothing objected, I will not say, to our
Churches, but to the most famous Doctors of our Churches, more odious, than
that by too much urging certain rigid doctrines, and savouring more of Zeno's
Porch than Salomon's, they assign unto God the causes of sinning, and (...).
by an idle word evert the care of piety. The learned Melancthon saw this, and
having been carried upon these rocks by the violence of Luther, afterward, by
the admonition of Erasmus, steered a better course. Whose footsteps, when some
of our Pas^ insisted in, but being pressed by the vehemence of their Colleagues,
had their only refuge in the goodness of the Magistrates, I associated my self
to them, who conceived it intolerable, that a most pernicious thing should from
this beginning go into example, and that the World should know, Moderate men
could not be suffered in our Churches. When some sharp Doctors in the
Neighborhood made strong opposition against this pious design, and mixed other
matters with this business, only to raise an odium against the Magistrates
pursuing peace; it seemed good, that it should be showed how unjust those
turbulent clamors were, in the consutation of one most eminent among his
fellows, who had in ill manner implored the aid of external power. To this
service was I chosen, not but that many might have done it better, but because
it seemed proper to the office which I then did execute. Nor was I ignorant
what 'twas to provoke VVasps, but being armed with a good Conscience, I
adventured to expose my self to calumnies, which they shall never escape that
will oppose vices aged and robustious. But I give you thanks, and acknowledge
your good will to me, and your wisdom, when you persuade me to abstain for the
future from such contentions. I will indeed, in compliance with your Authority,
and my own inclination both, carefully avoid a^ unnecessary quarrels; because I
see it is (as you write) of very great moment, as well to the health of body,
(which to me is but weak) as to tranquillity of mind. After this he comes to
speak of his historical writings, thus: The History of our War I have
continued to the end, that is, to the Truce. There remains now the labor of
revising and correcting it, almost more troublesome than the writing: I see,
when I had leisure to write more heedfully, I was not well provided with solid
knowledge of affairs: now, when I am able to get a better understanding of
matters, my employments (being many rather than great) do not afford me time to
select words fit for the History. And I much fear, that the work will be
uneaven and broken, and being composed at diverse times, will not resemble the
same Author. What I have written, upon your encouragement I will revise and
amend as perfectly as I can, and then lay it up where it shall have no commerce
with this Age; for it is dangerous to contract with it. Posterity is better
trusted; not because it will be better, but because it will be more kind to the
deceased; for there will arise other objects for envy and malice to work upon.

Anno 1616. Gulielmus Grotius, our Author's Brother, published a Collection of
his Poems. Concerning which our Author, in an Epistle of his prefixed, says:
Hugo Grotius Gulielmo Grotio fratri.
Some will accuse the Variety and desultorious kind of writing. The work indeed
is not of one age. Spring and Summer are several seasons. And a man's mind is
not always in the same temper: some times free and at its own command;
sometimes weary, and seeking where to breath; often by request of friends bound
and confined to a certain subject. Neither do I think it the part of a constant
man, to put the same ccuntenance upon jest and earnest. Moreover, my wit and
Genius being ductile and apt to follow, as it was warmed with the reading of
any Poet, was easily led in the way of imitation. I acknowledge my self in some
places full of Lucans spirit, in other very studious of Manilius, and in other
attempting somewhat more castigate after the pattern of Statius and Claudian,
etc. But for the edition of these poems, I neither say yea, nor nay, but leave
you to your self, and to the Counsils of those, who are most able to judge
thereof. Such as are those Princes of this Art Heinsius and Rutgerlius, and the
most honest and most learned Vossius. However, I rejoice in having such a
brother, who loves not my person only but my writings so fraternally.

We are now coming near to that Eclipse of honor, which overtook this great
light in his own Country: but, before we give you the story of that, you
shall, if you please, behold him shining in his full splendour, in that happy
Elogy or character bestowed on him by his most worthy and most dear friend
now-mentiond, Gerardus Vossius: Jo. Gerardi Vosii carmen ad Hugonem Grotium.
O quam te memorem, optimi parentis
Proles maxima ter-beate Groti!
Tu Pharsalica bella detonantem
Vitae restituis: tuum est quod aeger
Felix nomine Marcianus ille
Jam felix iterum vigere coepit:
Vivsent per te Avienus atque Aratus
Et Germanicus. Alter Aescul. pi
Das vitam and simul acc pis perennem.
Sed ne summa tuae sit ista laudis,
H. Gro^ Poemata.
En silvas similes Papinianis,
En pares elegos Tibullianis;
Non cedunt Senecae tui cothurni,
Nec cedunt Epigrammatum libelli
Musae Bilbilicae aut Catullianae.
Ludunt singula singuli Poetae:
Haec tu cuncta potes, Poeta noster The best Poems of these later Ages were
written by the best Scholar, the immortal Hugo Grotius. The editor of Mr.
Cartwright.
.
Quis non hoc stupeat Batava Siren?
Nondum diximus. Explicas futuris
Bella Belgica seculis suavi
Ex virtutibus utriusque cinno,
Contendens Tacitoque Livioque
Gratior Themidi nec est sacerdos,
Et sollertior expedire caeca
Legum aenigmata. Charta testis illa,
Qua praestas mare liberum Batavis,
Et quae post aliae sequentur illam.
Testis innumera illa, cui fuisti
Salus perfugiumque, turba. Testis
Cata Hollandia, quae sui Patronum
Fisci legerat. Ipsa Diva testis
Quindeno sibi te sacrans ab anno.
Ad haec plura praestites sacrorum
Ipsos sacra doces. Negare livor
Hoc unquam velit? Obstruet sedora
Virtus, and triplici triplex superstes
Mundo pagina: Pietas Ordinum Hollandiae,
qua pios tueris
Primores patriae: atque De imperio summarum potestatum circa Sacra.
qua sacrorum
Isdem post Dominum Deumque nostrum
Jus summum imperiumque vindicasti:
Et De satisfactione, contra Socinum. That de Imperio, was translated into
English, and printed. An. 1651. Of the Authority of the Highest power in
matters of Religion.
qua Christiadum docens salutem
Dispellis nebulas Socinianas.
Haec mirabitur, haec stupebit orbis:
Imprimis quibus ingeni ignea illa
Vis nescitur, and ut sacros libellos,
Et Patrum monumenta dia verses,
Inde a tempore, quo sagacis, annos
Ante vesticipes, ab ore Juni.
Divini hospitio fruens magistri,
Nectar eloquii sacribibisti.
Nec annis gravis otioque abundans
Facis talia; publicis sed usque
District issimus: rebus ante sisci:
At nunc messibus haut quater novenis
Visis, cor oculusque civitatis,
Natali celebris quae Erasmiano est:
Et magnatibus, imperi Batavi
Inclinata super quibus recumbit
Nec Alcidae humeris ferenda moles,
Curarum socius comesque fidus.
Felici omine dicte Magne, quid Te
Sol majus videt? O decus tuorum
Delfi gloria patrii, Batavum
Splendour inclyte, Belgices ocelle,
Orbis delicium, Deique amores.


Now, the story of his Trouble and Imprisonment I shall deliver you as I have
received it from his own pen, in the preface to his Apologetick, written and
published by himself, after his safe arrival in France, as follows:

Hollandiae, west^sia, vicinarumque nationum Rectoribus superioris atque
inferiorn gradus, populoque omni, Hug^ Grotius.
I have this only way left me to open and declare the Truth to all those that
have not their mind subject to their passions. And the plain Truth is this.

Among the Doctors of that Religion, which obteins the name of Reformed, both
among us and in other places, has been a variety of opinions, about Divine
Praedestination, the amplitude of Grace, and the manner of its efficacy, and
about certainty of perseverance, as appears by the Books published. The number
of them that hold Predestination conditionate, Grace universal and resistible,
and peseverance conditionate likewise (some such in former time had been at
Utrecht, Goad, Horn, and elsewhere:) by inquiring diligently into those points
was much increased. Against these other opposed themselves, preaching, that
that Opinion was contrary to the Word of God and the confessions of the Church,
attempting also to out them of their Pastoral office, and bring them under
other Ecclesiastical censures. The accused and prosecuted party were not
wanting to themselves in making their defense, both by their tongues and pens.
The States of Holland and Westfrisia following the Counsil, first of the Judges
of their own upper Bench, and then also of the King of Great Britain, deliverd
by word of mouth and by writing: (when 'twas clear, that the determination of
those Controversies by most voices of the Pastors would make a rent, and much
afflict both the body of the Reformed Religion, and the Commonwealth too, and
that many of the Magistrates (to say nothing now of a great number of private
Citizens, lovers of Virtue and of their Country) were so well affected to the
accused party, that they could not think the condemnation thereof could consist
with the safety of Religion, nor could they use their power to that purpose:)
They judged it best to set forth a Decree of mutual Toleration, charging the
Pastors, that in those Controversies they should bear with one another, and not
handle that Argument, but temperately, and only in order to Godlyness,
preserving among themselves the bond of Christian Charity unbroken. And that
all abrupt points of those questions might be shunned, and no new ones started,
more and more Decrees were made, which pleased very many Godly-learned Men,
both at home and abroad. But, some of the Pastors, assuring themselves of
certain victory by a definitive sentence, and not able to attain unto it
lawfully, the way being obstructed by the said Decrees, did, by Clandestine
Meetings and secret combinations, move the common people to a
Church-separation; and, to gain the countenance of Authority, labored with
some Towns and neighboring Nations, to bring the businese to a Common Synod;
which themselves, as if the seven Confederate Nations were one Nation, call
National: which was against the will of most of the Rulers of Holland, against
the will of the Trajectins and Transisalans and part of Geldria, being afraid
of the ill effects usually caused by determining and defining Questions. The
same were of opinion, that they could not be compelled by those Nations which
were less molested with those controversies, to join with them in the indiction
of a Synod for the said definition: because, every Nation, even after the
Trajectin league had excepted for it self, as other points of supremacy, so
also the right of ordering the Church and public divine service; witness the
league it self, and the succeeding Acts, and the practice continued to these
last times. Nevertheless they affirmed, They would persist in the Reformed
Religion, on these terms, that a liberty of dissenting in those Controversies
should be permitted: for the use of which liberty in a moderate way without
commotions of the people, diverse expedients were proposed. But, whilst this
was under debate, the Adversaries of mutual peace, in some places, invaded the
Temples, cast out their Dissenting brethren, and moreover stood against that
Right, which the Magistrates, in Holland as well as among their neighbors, had
exercised of old, and did exercise to that time, viz. Of having their voices in
the election of Pastors. There were some also, who by their bitter Declamations
and libells defaming the Rulers exposed them to the hatred of the people, and
also used violence against them Maurice Prince of Aurange, having long kept
himself quiet in these Controversies, by the secret arts of some men is
exasperated more and more against Oldenbarneveld Assessor (or, Advocate) of
Holland, a man of most flourishing Authority in the Assembly, from whom long
since at the making of the Truce he had dissented: Withal, he is possessed with
such things concerning the form of the Common wealth (which he had not been
very much conversant in hitherto, being taken up with military affairs:) which
were neither agreeable to the Laws, nor Customs. He then, at length begins to
disallow the Decrees made by the States of Holland for toleration of diversity
of opinions, to forsake the public Churches, and associate himself to the
separating Congregations. And further, without the knowledge of the States of
Holland, he gave Command to the ordinary Soldiers, not to stir in any
businesses arising from those Controversies; when as the States of Holland were
of another Judgment, viz. That obedience from the Soldier was due to their
Decrees, and safeguard to the Rulers of Towns and to public places against all
force and sedition whatsoever. Upon this motive, some Magistrates of Towns,
that had either no Garrisons at all, or such as were, for the said causes,
suspected by the Rulers, by the Decree of the States of Holland increased and
ordered the Guards of their Town: which right also they had heretofore often
used, without contradiction of the States confederate, or the Governor, who is
the Commander of the ordinary Soldiers. The same was done by the Trajectin
Rulers and as well these as the other professed, they would entertain these
Soldiers at at their own charge, over and above the common burdens of the War.
About the same time, the two Benches of Judges, to whom lies an Appeal from the
Towns, begin to decree against the Decrees of the States of Holland, in those
writs whereby they called whom they pleased into question. That, the States of
Holland pronounce to be unjustly done, and the limits of their judiciary power
to be exceeded, as it was often before these times. Some Nations are impelled
by Prince Maurice and others, to call a common Synod (which we have said was
styled National) in the name of the Assembly of the Confederates, and to
disband the military guards of the Towns. Both the Hollandian and Trajectin
Rulers oppose themselves against this attempt, testifying, that 'twas not
Lawful for the Consederates, themselves interceding, to constitute any thing in
those matters by the vote of the major part. They go on to call the Synod
inviting also the Divines of other Nations, but no other than they knew would
join in those opinions, to which the victory was destined. The proposals of the
Hollanders and others for a fair accommodation of the matter were rejected. And
in the mean time Prince Maurice with some Legates (or, Deputies) of the
Assembly of Confederates goes to Trajectum, and against the will of the Rulers
there disarms the Guard: though the Deputies from Holland did what they could
(but all in vain) to hinder it; for they were commanded by their Superiors, to
affect the Trajectin Rulers to their utmost, and if need were, to admonish the
ordinary Soldiers in their service that they should attempt nothing against the
will of the said Rulers, by force, in the things pertaining to the internal
government of that Nation, and to the security thereof, being such as every
Nation by it self had reserved in their own power. The King of France having
received intelligence of the Differences of his friends, dispatcheth Bossizius
to them; who in consequence to the things treated on already by Maurerius, the
same King's Leiger, might pursue all means of reconciliation. In hope whereof,
the Rulers of the Hollandian Towns dismissed their Guards. This was no sooner
done, but eight men, in the name of the Confederate States, from whom they had
no such Commission, commanded Oldenbarnveld (whom the States of Holland a
little before had taken into their protection) and Hogerbet and Me to be
apprehended. Against this, the States of Holland and the Rulers of our Towns
make their complaints. When we were long detein'd in prison, and often examined;
Judges at last, in the name of the Confederate States, are given us. Nor did it
avail us, to show out of our Country Laws and Customs, that the Confederate
States have no Jurisdiction over them, and that the Judges themselves, for many
reasons, were suspected. They go on in their Design, and give us not leave,
neither to revise what things we written in our examination, nor to lay open
the justice of our cause, nor to prove matters of fact pert eining to our
defense, nor to refute the witnesses, nor to use Counsil: Sentence of death is
pronounced upon Oldenbarneveld, of perpetual imprisonment upon Us, of
publication of Goods upon all Three. A year after, without hearing us, followed
an Interpretation of the sentence, whereby we are pronounced Traitors. I can
truly profess, in the sentence against Me, many things were set down beside the
truth, many things expressly denied by Me, some things whereof I was wholly
ignorant, some things of which I was not so much as exami^; so far was I from
being allowed a fair Trial. This, and much more would be very evident, if my
Answers to every Interrogatory in my examination might come to light entire and
sincere, as I do earnestly entreat. Before we were apprehended, at Trajectum
the Noble men and Rulers of the City; whilst we were kept prisoners, all over
Holland, the Decurions, Consuls, Oppidan Judges are removed before their time,
others being put in, against the most sacred Laws. established of old by the
Oaths of the Earls of Holland, and religiously observed many Ages. Before the
Synod (which they called National) and in the time of it, many Pastors who
taught praedestination conditionate (whom they called Remonstrants) are put out
of office. Others Anno 1618.
of them being summoned to the Synod are required to plead their cause before
their Adversaries, who had before condemned them by their secession, by their
declamation in the Church, by the Synod, and by their writings: neither yet is
it granted them to defend their own, and to oppugn the contrary opinion,
otherwise than it seemed good unto the Synod, that is, unto their Adversaries.
They are cast out of the Synod and condemned. There follow cruel Decrees
against the Congregations of the condemned opinion, and against Collection of
Alms for the feeding of Pastors, who being expeld or banished from their
Country, if they return, are clapped up in perpetual prison, their Accusers being
invited by Rewards. Congregations are scattered more unmercifully than the
Edicts would bear, by force, and oftentimes not without blood, to the great
grief of a huge number of very good Men, lovers of Christian piety and of their
Country. This is a true Relation of what was done. Now, I profess I cannot
possibly approve that contempt of the Equity of the Hollandian States in their
Decrees for a mutual Toleration, nor the condemnation of the Pastors and the
things that followed. All which I suppose had been better prevented upon fair
terms, seeing those things could not be profitable to the public and to Prince
Maurice, whose safety and glory (if I mistake not) consists in the good
Affection of the people, those especially, who are devoted and addicted to
their Country, such as I judge them that were cast out of their Magistracy,
and many thousands of the overthrown opinion. But, in all those things whereof
I am accused, nothing was acted by Me on my one head, but by command both of
the States of Holland, and of the Rulers of the Town of Rotterodam, to whom,
and to no other man living, was I bound by my Oath. To whom therefore, when I
showed my Obedience, I was a Traitor to none, but gave that respect both to the
highest and to the inferior powers, which Nature and my Office did require. If
any one thought he had to complain of that which I had done as the Minister of
other men, He was not to proceed against me, but against my superiors. And, if
I had done any thing by my own private undertaking (which is not so) yet was I
not to be judged by my Adversaries, nor by Judges found of purpose against me,
nor by any one who had received power of judging from the Confederate States,
but by the perpetual and my proper Judges, as the Common Laws of our Country
and the proper Laws of Towns (for which Laws we at first took Arms) appoint. As
to my mind and intention, I testify before God and the world, it was no other,
than to maintain that lawful form of Commonwealth under which I was born and
bred, and to procure the unity of the Church by a loving Composure agreeable to
the divine Precepts: to which end, many things I proposed, and many I had in
readiness, when I was carried away to prison. Whosoever judge otherwise of my
Intention, do me injury, and have no just ground of their mistake. My life has
been without stain or spot. The Rulers of Rotterodam, in the time of my Office,
know what Labors I did undergo for the safety and interests of that town. The
Curators of the Treasury can witness, how exactly and without favor or fear I
defended the rights thereof. The Benches of the Judges in Holland have good
experience of my integrity in the prosecution of offenses. They that have seen
me in the Assembly of the States of Holland, and in the Sessions of the
Curators of that Commonwealth, can remember what pains I took, that by
parsimony and improvement of the Tribute there might be a supply of Money. Nor
is Prince Maurice ignorant, how I satisfied his desires in private businesses
which he was pleased to commend unto my care. And, They that were together with
me in the Assembly of the Confederates, are entreated to call to mind, how I
omitted nothing that might conduce, to secure the Public against the enemies
force, to advance the Trade through India, and America, to continue a fair
Amity and correspondence with Kings and other our Confederates and Allies. How
heartily I affected the glory of our Commonwealth, and of all things done
valiantly in defense of it, and peculiarly favored the renown of Prince
Maurice, my Books may testify; which I have partly divulged, and partly
communicated to my friends. For these Offices, if I had expected a Reward,
truly it had not been without example: but I never regarded that, being content
with my salary, and the recompense of a good Name. What Return had I, after all
my service? That for the space of nine months, being grievously sick, I was
kept under a most straight custody, so as I could not so much as once have the
comfort to see my wife or any friend: That, in the habit of a guilty person I
was brought into that Auditory, wherein I had upheld the honor of Public
Justice. That, being shut up afterward in one chamber, I was so closely guarded
with Soldiers, that my wife sometimes had not liberty to go abroad: That those
few Goods I possessed, and (if ever any man) had gotten honestly, were taken
from me and my five Children. Than all which, yet, This one thing is more
grievous, that the ears of my Countreyman and of foreiners are filled with a
false rumor, as if I had conspired and plotted against my Country; because,
it is incredible to most men, that any Man of truth and honesty should be so
used, as I have been. Neither is the injury confined to my person alone, but
part of the odium and Calumny redounds to those that are allied to me by blood
or marriage: who, as public enemies and traitors, in several places, are
persecuted by evil words and deeds. Against all these things, my comfort is in
God, and in a good Conscience, and in the example of very many excellent
Patriots, who for no sin but for solid virtues sake have endured the like
Afflictions. Of late, there is come forth a Latin Book of an unknown Writer,
who says, that, by reason of the injuries done me, I will be in affection, if
not in body, with the King of Spain. This is far from Truth. I know all desire
of Revenge is forbidden Christians. To the King of Spain I am not obliged, nor
do I desire to be obliged. My Body is in France: there I live; and so long as I
remain there, I will be faithful and obedient to the King, as it is my duty.
Toward my Country in the mean time, which has special need of the Kings
friendship, I will preserve the same Affection I ever had, sollicitous for her
safety, liberty and profit, and ready to do Her service, if she can make any
use of me. For which Affection I desire nothing, but that You All of what Order
and degree soever (for I know, many among the Rulers too, by the cunning of
others, are deprived of the true understanding of what was done in our Case)
laying aside prejudices, would be pleased to judge of mine and other men's
Doings, so, as you would have your own to be judged. And, to the purpose, I
humbly beseech God to clear the eye of your mind, that you may see the Truth,
and every one for his part do that which Equity requires; especially, that you
may find out the way of Peace, which at this time is most necessary.

By this Narration, the charitable Reader cannot but be well persuaded of our
Author's Innocence and Patience: Virtues happily conjoined in him, and
appearing also in that Epistle which he sent out of prison to his great friend
Du Maurier the French Ambassador, as follows:

Hugo Grotius. Ben. Aub. Maureri^. 15. Jan. 1621. ex carcere Lupisteni.
To the most Christian King, to his most wise Council, and namely to you I
acknowledge my self more indebted than can be expressed, for the labors
undertaken to ease my calamities, into which I am fallen by the fate of our
Commonwealth. And, although as yet the matter is come to no effect, it is no
small refreshment to me to see so good and so great Men compassionating our
sufferings. The decreed Embassy into France yields now some better Hope: but,
that again is abated by considering how ill-affected they, who are sent
thither, are to us; and how easy it is, with all sorts of calumny, to traduce
those, who have their voice stopped by the walls of a prison, for this reason
chiefly, that the world may not hear, what it concerns them to be concealed.
Having thus long examined my Cause in the Auditory of my own Conscience (more
sacred to me than all Tribunals) in the inmost recesses of my own Soul I find
only this, that my constant purpose was (liberty of opinions in things
disputable being preserved) to retain the Unity of the Church; a thing wanting
neither old nor new examples. I never meant to innovate any thing in the
Commonwealth: it was my hearty endeavor, to maintain their Right, to whom
Nature has made me a Subject, and my office a Servant, and to whom I was
sworn: that Power remaining in the hand of the Confederates, and of the Prince,
which hitherto they had enjoyed, being conferred on them by public suffrages.
They that know the matter, easily understand this to be our only crime, that
we did not act in the Commonwealth according to those Laws which they were
about to constitute for their own Interest. If, upon that account, we are
deprived of our Goods, Honors, Fame, this also is not without example. But the
worst of all is, that, both the infirmity of my body is denied the free air,
and the sadness of my mind the comfort of my friends. Yet, by Gods assistance,
I will endure this, and whatsoever can be imagined more cruel, rather than ask
pardon of those things wherein my mind acknowledges no fault. If there be any
honest way of getting liberty, I would owe it to none more willingly than to
your King and Kingdom; whose infinite merits toward our Commonwealth, I
always have extolled, whose friendship I have commended, whose wholesome
Counsels I have defended from the calumniation of Enemies, both at liberty, and
in my captivity, and the like I shall never cease to do. And, God grant I may
live to transmit unto Posterity, together with those public benefits, this
private one conferred on me, by some Monuments of Learning. That certainly will
be to me the greatest fruit both of my life and liberty. But, if that be above
our Hope, yet whatever shall be performed for me and Hogerbet (whose cause
being most near to mine, I equally commend) will, among our Countrymen of the
highest, midst and lowest order, be most grateful and glorious.

I shall here mention also another Epistle Translated into English, and
printed, Anno 1652.
, a very large one, which he wrote in Prison to the same Du Maurier, to comfort
him after the death of his Wife. A rare Soul he had, who could administer such
excellent consolations to Another, when his own Condition seemed to be most
uncomfortable. But he had a treasure of the best Learning laid up in his
memory, whence he drew as ost and as much as he pleased. That golden work, Of
the truth of Christian Religion, was one of his exercises while he was a
Prisoner, which he then wrote in Dutch verse for the use of his Countrymen that
trade among the Infidels, and afterward put the substance of it into Two
Discourses out of it were printed in English, Anno 1653. 1. Of God and his
Providence. 2. Of Christ and his Miracles.
Latin prose. Another fine piece he wrote likewise in Dutch verse, in the time
of his Captivity, (An Institution of Children baptized) which was done too by
himself afterward in And is of late elegantly translated, and published both in
Greek and in English.
Latin verse. I find moreover in one of his Epistles Epist. 75. Maurerio, p.
176.
, that in his Restraint at the Hague, before the use of his Pen was taken from
him, he was come to the 49. Title of his Florilegy Dicta Poetarum e Stobaeo.
, which Title (says he) contains an express character of that Time. Thus was
he wont (to speak in his own phrase) tristissimum tempus fallere, to sweeten
the bitter days of his Imprisonment. His happy escape out Prison by an
Ingenious Device of his noble and virtuous Wife, is recorded by himself in one
Of his Poems, in these Divine Verses: Grot. Silva ad Franciscum Aug. Thuan.
Nos quoque si quisquam multum debere fatemur
Conjugio. memini, post tot tua vota precesque,
Cynthia cum nonum capto mihi volveret orbem,
Qualem te primum, conjux fidissima, vidi
Carceris in tenebris: lacrymas obsorperat ingens
Vis animi, neque vel gemitu te luctus adegit
Consentire malis. rursus nova vincula, sed quae
Te socia leviora tuli, dum milite clausos
Nos Mosa and tristi Vahalis circumstrepit unda.
Hic patriam toties and inania jura vocanti,
Et proculcatas in nostro corpore leges,
Tu solamen eras. heic jam te viderat alter,
Et post se media plus part reliquerat annus,
Cum mihi jura mei per te, sollerte reperto,
Reddita. tu, postquam jam caeca acceperat alvus
Dulce onus, oppositis libabas oscula claustris:
Atque ita semoto foribus custode locuta es.
Sum pater, rigido si non adamante futurum
Stat tibi, sed precibus potis es gaudesque moveri,
Hoc quod nostra fides lucem servavit in istam
Accipe depositum, tantisque exsolve periclis.
Conjugii testor sanctissima jura, meaeque
Spem sobolis, non huc venio pertaesa malorum,
Sed miserata virum: possum sine Conjuge, possum
Quamvis dura pati. Si post exempla ferocis
Ultima saevitiae nondum deferbuit ira,
In me tota ruat: vivam crudele sepulcrum:
Me premat and triplicis cingat custodia valli,
Dum meus aetheriae satietur pastibus aura
Grotius, and casus narret patriaeque suolque.
Dixerat, atque oculis fugientia vela secutus,
Addit; Abi Conjunx, neque te nisi libera cernam.
Quod mea si auderet famam spondere Camaena,
Acciperet quantis virtutem laudibus istam
Posteritas? nomen non clarius illa teneret,
Admeto regina suos quae tradidit annos,
Quaeque super cineres jecit se arsura mariti,
Digneque tam Bruti thalamis, quam patre Catone
Porcia, and in letum magno comes Arria Paeto.


Being secretly conveyed out of Prison in a Chest, he was brought to a Friends
house, and so away to Antwerp, and thence to France. From Antwerp he writes to
his good Friend Du Maurier, thus:

Grotius Mauterio. 30. Martii, 1621. Antuerpiae, Hagam.
Assure your self, I shall ever be indebted to you for your good will, as much
as if you had brought the business of my Liberty to effect. Your Affection was
never the less, though God prevented you, and took unto himself the Glory of
the Work. And now, the Favors you do me, and offer me, are so great, that if
any could be equaled with the Good of Liberty, They might, which are of much
concernment to my life, safety, and honor. I have chosen my first Refuge in
this City, that I might here explore, whether it be a seasonable time for me to
go into France, while the Embassy of our Countrymen, (I cannot say, of our
Friends) is there. For that reason, I have written to the most honored, the
President Janninus. But, what I expected from him, I find abundantly in your
Letter. Wherefore, by Gods blessing, I will follow your Counsel. Thither will I
betake my self, and render Thanks to my good Friends, that have labored so
much to procure my Liberty. In the next Epistle (from Paris) to the same
Person, he says: Grotius Maurerio. 22. Apr. 1621. Lutetiae.
I learn chiefly by you, how great is the constancy of Goodness, not swimming
in the surface, but sunk into the heart. So incessant are you, in your favors
and graces toward me. This I perceive by their love, whom your love chiefly
has made to be my Friends. Putean and Peiresc, so soon as they heard of my
commlng, ran presently to bid me welcome, and obliged me by their extreme
courtesy. The President Janinus sent his Letters to me, while he supposed I
stayed at Antwerp, overflowing with Kindness, and (which I esteem greatest)
giving as large a Testimony of our Innocence, as could be wished. Thus kind I
found Boissizius also, whom I met at his own house, where he stayed for me,
being about to go to Court. By the advice of them Both, I rest at Paris, ready
to follow that way for the future, which they shall think good, to whose
wisdom, fidelity, and friendship, I do entirely commit my self.

At Paris he was recompensed for his tedious restraint by the sweet
conversation of his learned Friends, Tilenus, Cordesius, Petrus and Jacobus
Puteanus, Franciscus Thuanus, and others of great note. Among whom he dispersed
certain Epigrams concerning his fortunate escape; to One, a most eminent
Person, he sends this following Epistle with them:

Grotius N. N. Lut. 8. Maii, 1621.
Liberty, the greatest Good of this life, and most convenient to Nature, has
this incommodity, that unwary Mortals can scarce keep a mean in the use
thereof. This, I think, happened to me, when I sent abroad the Epigrams, where
with I gratulated my self; as if they ought not to be Captives, when I was
freed. So, they came first into the hands of my Friends, then to yours, most
Eminent Sir, whose censure the most serious works may be afraid of. 'Twas much,
you read them once: but your Desire is to keep them, written with my own hand.
Truly, the most pleasant Flowers have but a short beauty: and things that
commend themselves at first sight, if you eye them much and often, ^eed satiety
and disdain. Yet I must ^fill your desire, seeing without any ^esert of mine,
you have so engaged me ^y your Humanity, that I ought rather to be immodest
than disobedient. Take therefore what you ask: but take them, I pray, not as
Verses, but as a testimony of the divine favor and mercy to me, that was
pleased I should spring from a Chest as from the Womb, and rise again as 'twere
out of my Cossin, and gave me an auspicious token of the life to come, by
delivering me from the confines of a most miserable death.

How joyfully he past his time in France, what a concourse of learned men there
was unto him, what favor he found among the Nobility and Great Officers of
State, and with the King himself, from whom he had Protection, and a Pension
for diverse years; what correspondence he held by Letters with his absent
learned Friends, Peireskius, Salmasius, and others; How he was admitted into
the bosom of the Great Chancellor of Suedia, Oxenstern, and advanced to be
Ambassador into France for that Kingdom; these things (that I may not retard
the Press) I shall leave the Able Reader to pick out of our Author's Epistles
Epist. ad Gallos ex officina Elzevir. 1648. Quemadmodum autem has ad Gallos jam
habes meo beneficio, si vicissim alicui, Grotianiuominis, and bonarum rerum
studioso, libeat, quas ad Belgas, Germanos, Suecos, Danos, Anglos, Italos,
aliosque scripsit fere infinitas, investigare, nec literatis invidere, ingens
bonae frugis, and nobis plurimas ex diversis Europae oris acceptas jam
possidentibus, ac ad edendas omnes paratis, gratissimus futurus est acervies.
Praef. ad Lect.
. Only, you shall hear him tell his Friend Peireskius Vide, si placet, summi
literatorum Amici, Nicolas Peireskii vitam, per Gassendum.
the news of his Advancement, in this loving manner:

Epist. 165. ad Nic. Fabricium Peirescium, Lut. 23. Martii, 1635.
You that have heretofore afforded compassion and faithful comforts to my
Adversity, have heard of the Amendment of my Fortunes with joy, I doubt not.
Though the Fame hereof has prevented my Letter, yet I thought it was my duty
to signify to One who has merited so much of Me, and of all Learning and
Learned Men, that I am sent hither, Ambassador of the Queen and Kingdom of
Sueden: and so being extricated out of the discords both of my Country, and of
Germany, and out of the evils of so long and ambiguous a War, I enjoy the
sweetness of the French air, and of my old Friends: So that nothing is wanting
to my Happiness (as in mortal life) besides the sight of your face, and the
fruition of your discourse. Yet may this want partly be repaired by epistolical
commerce, and partly by serene thought of the secure possession of this our
friendship, etc.

I need not tell the Reader, that has any Acquaintance in the Commonwealth of
Learning, of our Author's Controversy with Dr. Rivet: let their Books be
compared: nor of his Annotations in five or six Folio's upon the whole Bible:
(the largest of them, upon the Evangelists, is by our learned and judicious
English Annotator Dr. Hammond in his Advertisement to the Reader of his
Paraphrase: The most learned and judicious Hugo Grotius, in his admirable
Comments on the Gospels, as also in the posthumous Annotations on the other
parts of the New Testament, which for a great part bear his signature upon them.
, styled Admirable.) Nor need I reckon up other lesser pieces of our Grotius
not yet mentioned, or not yet come forth into the light. As to this noble Work,
out of which we have translated these large Selections, (and left enough to
exercise the diligence of some better hand) the Author mentioning it to
Franciscus Thuanus Epist. 73. Fran. Aug. Thuano, An. 1623.
, acknowledges the help he had from Books out of his Library. And he had need
of the Aid of good Libraries, the Work being so difsused. Nor could he more
freely borrow elsewhere, than from that Library, which was furnished by Thuanus
the Father Vide Testamentum Jac. Aug. Thuani, in com. de vita sua.
, for the benefit of all Learned Men.

How much the Author was addicted to the ways of Peace and Reconciliation,
appears before. That the Reader may see his Constancy in such Christian
Endeavors, and that his example may incline our men to Moderate courses,
'twill be worth the pains to translate hither what he wrote to Joannes Duraeus,
a man that labored much to establish an union of the Evangelical Churches.

Grotius ad Duraum, 11. Sept. 1637. Lutetiae.
I have always wished, and will never cease to wish, that the Churches, which
for most weighty causes have departed from the Pope of Rome, may come to a
nearer Agreement one with the other, and may testify the same conspicuously.
Nor am I ignorant, having also had some experience, how many rubs there are in
the way, and difficulties, from Reasons of State, from the suspicions of
Divines, from the love every one bears to his own opinions, and the desire of
advancing his own way, and of separating himself from others, and keeping a
large distance under pretense of purity. But all these things ought to deterr
no man from effecting a most excellent work, if he be able: if he cannot effect
it, certainly he may have comfort of his Conscience, and please himself in the
thought of so noble an Attempt. Again to the same Duraeus. Both the Ambassadors
of England Grotius Duraeo, Lut. 21. Nov. 1637.
think, as I also do, that these Times will not permit a General Assembly of
Protestants: Times, wherein they do not enjoy so much as that common peace of
humane Society: That it will therefore be best, as the Kingdom of Sueden and
England are joined together in Friendship, and happily e're long will be
confederate; So also that the Churches of these Kingdoms set forth a public
profession of their Concord, and first give the Neighbors of Sueden, the
Danes, and Norwegians, and then others too, an example for them to imitate.
Such a Body of Churches being once constituted, there is hope, their
Neighbors, one after another, will by degrees close with them. And this is the
more to be desired by Protestants, because Many do every day forsake them, and
join with the Romanists, for no other Reason, but because they are not one
Body, but distracted parties, separated Congregations, having every one a
peculiar Communion and Rites, and moreover striving one to disgrace the other
with reproaches. That it concerns the Protestants, these things should be
remedied, especially seeing so great a Conspiracy of their Adversaries against
them, who does not perceive?

Nor was our Author zealously affected only to the peace of Protestants, but
of all Christendom, witness his Via ad pacem Ecclesiasticam Edit. 1642.
, in the entrance whereof he has a sweet Epigram in praise of Moderators, to
this effect, Qui gaudes Batavis, etc. That Roterdam Erasmus stands in Brass;
(Yet this Reward to's worth inferior was:)
That mild Cassander's Works are published,
(Thanks to Cordesius) and by thee are read:
That Nectar drops from sweet Melancthon's vein;
Wicel and Modreve write in the same strein:
That in Spalato's Books good Votes are seen
For Unity: (ill lost are Two of Ten:)
That Great Great- Britains King has wisely done,
In signifying his mind by Casaubon:
Who joy'st in all this, view with gentle look
Our way of Reconcilement in this Book,
Good, if not best: 'Twill please thou may presage,
Though not the Present, yet the Future Age.


Add only this passage of His out of his Answer to Dr. Rivet, where he has
words of this sense:

In Animadv. Gratii pro not is ad Cassandrum. De discrim. pecc.
I have always loved Peace, and do love it, and to it do I direct my labors
both public and private, that we may obtein it: first, between Empires
professing Christ, and then in the Church, which Christ would have to be One.
And I mean Peace without injury to that Truth, which the Scripture and
perpetual Tradition consign unto us. And seeing Peace, though it were made,
cannot be kept without a certain Order of Government, I love also that order,
which the long experience of old times has approved. It cannot be, but the
Lovers of these things, must incur the hatred of them that seek advantage by
wars and discords, such as our Age abounds with. Such enemies of Peace I well
foresaw would rise up against Me and my endeavor of Peace. I easily suffer it,
and comfort my self with the Conscience of my good Design. For the promoting
whereof I have said that, which seemed to me most profitable, according to the
measure of my understanding and Reading, with some Regard also to the times
wherein we live. To the order of Government here named pertains what he speaks
elsewhere: Animadvers. ^it. de caelibatu Sacerdotum.
For, if the perpetual Custom of the Universal Church, introduced (as we may
believe, and the Ancients did believe) by the Apostles themselves, be of any
value, neither can a Presbyter be ordained but by a Bishop, nor a Bishop but by
two or more Bishops. The Contempt of this Holy Order has brought in so much
License, that whosoever can lead the common people by the ears, makes to
himself a right of gathering a new Church Novum coetum, and ut nunc loqui mos
est, Ecclesiam Colligere, Mihi, etiamsi liceret, non liberet. Video quam male
id aliis cesserit. Multiplicarunt numerum, non laetitiam. Grotius in Voto p. 40.
.

Here shall I insert that Elogy of our Grotius which I received from a learned
man * that had the honor to be Mr. M. T. Chaplain to the (then) English
Ambassador, the truly Noble L. Scudamore.
acquainted with him in France. He was a Man wonderfully courteous and affable,
very free in communicating his knowledge in any point of learning, very ready
to give his advice touching any course of study, what Authors were fittest to
be read. His Latin in his discourse was altogether such as we see in his Books,
ready, fluent, easy and unaffected: so that I verily think, no man ever spoke
more fluently in his Mother tongue. He was a most indefatigable Student, and a
man of a singular ready memory, and clearness of judgment: A great Lover of the
Union and Peace of the Church See the beginning of his Votum pro pace.
, an Approver of the Church of England See, of Authority, p. 103.
, as most orderly reformed. He was of a most sweet Christian disposition, far
from any thought of revenge for any Injury. One time coming from an Audience at
S. Germans, the Secretary of Ceremonies being in the Coach with him, it chanced
that in one place a great number of people were in the way seeing an execution.
His Coachman and Postilion driving boldly through the company, the Archers,
which use to attend executions with short pieces, being angry to see the
execution disturbed, made after the Coach, shot his Postilion and Coachman, and
through the Coach, even through his Hat: And the King offering to hang three or
four of them at his gate, if he pleased, he pardoned them All. In his Journey
between France and Sueden he dyed, putting off Ministers that came to him with,
Non novi vos, as they say.

But, how little of probability there is in that saying, or any such like, may
appear by this Narrative of his Death, which I have translated out of Dr.
Casaubon, Mericus Casaub. de usu ve borum, Land. 1647.
as follows:

Because we desire the Memory of this Great Man should be dear to all Lovers of
Virtue and Learning, according to his most High Deserts toward the
Commonwealth of Good Letters, I have easily obtained of My self, to insert
here, and to communicate to the candid and ingenuous Reader, what has come
unto my hands by the help and favor of some Friends, concerning the End of so
excellent a Person, in a Letter of Quistorpius, the primary Professor of
Theology at Rostoch, set forth at Amsterdam.

J. Quistorpii Epistola. Rostoch. Sept. 1645.
You are earnest with me, to relate the last act of that Phoenix of learned men
Hugo Grotius, and how he behaved himself, when he took his leave of this world.
Here take it, briefly thus. He took ship at Stockholm, bound for Lubec. At Sea
he met with a great Storm, and having been beaten with it, and tossed for the
space of three days, he suffers Shipwreck, and is cast upon the shore of
Cassubia sick and weak: Thence, in a very incommodious Journey, and a rainy
season, passing sixty miles and more, he is brought at length to Rostoch. He
diverts to Balemannia, and sends for Dr. Stochman the Physician; who observing
the weakness of his body, by reason of age, shipwreck, and the incommodities of
the journey, presageth the end of his life to be at hand. The next day after
his entrance into this City (which in the old style was the XVIII. of August)
about IX. at night he requesteth me to visit him. I came, and found the Man
approaching near to the agony of death: I saluted him, and signified how happy
I should have been to have had conference with him, had he been in health. His
answer was, Ita Deo visum fuit: Thus it has pleased God. I go on, and advise
him to compose himself to a happy departure, to acknowledge himself a sinner,
and repent of whatsoever he had done amiss: and when, as we discoursed, I had
mentioned the Publican confessing himself a sinner, and praying God to be
merciful unto him, He answers; Ego ille sum Publicanus: I am that Publican. I
proceed, and remit him to Christ, without whom there is no salvation. He
replies: In solo Christo omnis spes mea est reposita: In Christ alone is placed
all my Hope. I rehearsed with a loud voice that German Prayer in the German
tongue, Horr Jesu, wahrer Mensch und Got, etc. He, with closed hands and a low
voice said after me. When I had done, I asked whether he had understood me: He
answers, Probe intellexi: I understand you well. Afterward, I repeated some
passages out of the Word of God, which dying men are wont to be put in mind
of, and I ask again, whether he understood me: I hear your voice, says he, but
hardly understand what you say. Then he became speechless, and in a short time
after gave up the Ghost, just at twelve, midnight. Thus have you the
Catastrophe of Grotius, the last end of this excellent Man's Life. His dead
Body was committed to the Physicians. His Bowels were put in a Vessel of
Brass, and that they might be laid up in the most honorable place of our
principal Church dedicate to the Virgin Mary, I easily obtained of the
Governors. Let him rest in Peace.

I have received from a good hand, that our Author, a little before his death,
declared his Affection to the Church of England, and his Desire to end his
days in the Communion of the same.

These Collections put together in some haste (til One more Able arise to do
honor to this Great Man's Memory) be pleased, Gentle Reader, favorably to
accept from the Translator,

Clement Barksdale.
THE END.
ERRATA.
Page 1. lin. 1. * State. p. 6. l. 3: are often, l. 4. dele *. page 94. l. 6.
was included in. p. 400. CXIII. and so restore the following numbers. p. 448.
l. ult. joining.

SCRIPTURES EXPLANED.
Ps. 19. Romans 7. LAw pure and holy. 10 Genesis 14. 20. Blessed be the most high
God. 15 Deuteronomy. 20. 10. Laws of waging war. 16 Genesis 9. 5, 6. And surely your
blood. 1^ Genesis 4. 14. Whosoever finds me. 1^ Matthew. 5. It has been said to
them of old. 23 Lev. 19. 18. Thou shall hate thine enemy. 23. 329. Lev. 24. 20.
An eye for an eye. 23 Romans 3. 27. Law of works. 24 Romans 7. 14. Spiritual Law.
24 1 Timothy 2. 1. Prayers for Kings and for all. 25 Romans 13. 4. He is the
Minister of God. 26. 27. 47. Psalm. 2. Kiss the son. 26 Act. 26. King Agrippa.
28 Lu. 3. 14. Be content with your wages. 29 Mat. 4. 17. Kingdom of heaven. 29
Mat. 11. 13. The Law continued unto John. 30 Mat. 5. 17. Not to dissolve the
Law. 32 Act. 13. Sergius Paulus. 34 Romans 13. Tribute to whom tribute. 35 Act.
25. 11. I refuse not to die. 35 Phil. 4. 8. Whatsoever things are honest. 36
Ephesians. 2. 14. Partition wall. 36 Esaias 2. 4. Swords into Plowshares. 37 Mat. 5.
38. Turn the other cheek. 39 Mat. 5. 39. If any man will sue thee. 39 Mat. 5.
44. Love your enemies. 43 Romans 12. 17. Recompense to no man evil. 46. 73 2 Cor.
10. 4. Weapons of our warfare not carnal. 48 Ephesians. 6. 21. We wrestle not against
flesh and blood. 49 Jam. 4. 1. From whence came Wars. 49 Exodus 22. 2. If a
thief be found. 68 Mat. 26. 52. Put up thy sword. 69. 74 Lu. 22. 36. Buy a
sword. 72 Joh. 18. 8. Suffer these to go away. 73 Deuteronomy. 17. 14. I will set a
King over me. 91 Jer. 25. 12. God judges Kings. 96 2 Samuel 24. 17. What have
the people done? 98 Dan. 6. 8. Laws unchangeable. 113 Psalm. 72. 1. Judges Gods.
119 1 Samuel 8. 11. Kings right. 138 Romans 13. 2. Whosoever resists. 139 1 Pet.
2. To the King as supreme. 148 1 Samuel 15. 30. Duty of Peers. 148 1 Pet. 2. 13.
Human ordinance. 151 1 Samuel 22. 2. David's armed men. 152 1 Samuel 26. 9. No man
can lay hands. 154 1 Pet. 4. 13. Suffer as Christians. 156 Mat. 10. 39. He that
loses his life. 161 2 Chronicles. 23. Athalia dethroned. 167 Jud. 3. 15. The Fact
of Ehud. 169 2 King. 9. Jehu's fact. 170 Matt. 22. 20. Tribute to Caesar. 170 2
King. 18. 7. Ezechia submits. 197 Genesis 1. 29. Man's right. 198 Genesis 13. and 21.
Wells proper. 202 Heb. 6. 18. Impossible for God to deceive. 224 Jona. 4. 1.
God repents. 225 Josh. 9. Joshua's Oath. 226 Matt. 15. 5. Korban. ^0. 233 1 Timothy 5. 3. To honor: to (...) 231 Genesis 42. 15. By the life of Pharaoh. 233
Mat. 23. 21. He that swears by the Temple. ibid. Ezech. 17. 12. Oath to the
Babylonian. 236 Psalm. 15. Having sworn to his hurt. 238 Mat. 5. 34. Swear not
at all. 242 2 Cor. 1. 20. Yea and Amen. 243 Deuteronomy. 23. 7. League with Idolaters.
247 Deuteronomy. 22. 1. The Jews neighbor. ibid. 2 Chro. 16. 2. Ahazia did wickedly.
251 2 Samuel 24. David's muster. ibid. Mat. 5. 45. He makes his sun. 252 2 Cor.
6. 14. What concord has Christ? 253 1 Cor. 10. 21. Ye cannot be partakers. 245
Mat. 6. 33. First seek the Kingdom. 255 1 Cor. 12. 18. Members of one body. 256
2 King. 18. Rabshake's message. 279 Number. 25. 4. Hanged on a tree. 303 1 Samuel
31. 4. Readiness death. 307 Joh. 8. 7. Whosoever of you is without sin. 311
Proverb. God made all things for himself. 313 Mar. 14. 21. It had been better.
319 1 John 5. 16. Sin unto death. 320 Numb. 25. Phine as zeal. 327 Mat. 5. 44.
Do good to enemies. 329 Mat. 6. 14. Forgive all. 331 Heb. 2. 23. Sins against
the Gospel. 334 1 Cor. 11. 3. Self-punishment. ibid. Matthew. 7. 1. Judge not.
338 Lu. 23. 34. Pather forgive them. 349 Mar. 10. 19. Defraud not. 352 Heb. 11.
6. He that comes to God. 365 Lu. 14. 23. Compel them to come in. 372 Gal. 4.
29. Persecuted him. 378 1 King. 14. Children of Saul. 402 Deuteronomy. 24. 16. Not put
to death children. 404 1 Cor. 5. 12. Those that are without. 417 Romans 5. 6.
Christ dyed for enemies. 435 Jer. 27. 13. Serve the Babylonians. 445 1 Cor. 9.
7. Who goes to war. 462 Act. 5. 9. Obey God rather. 463 Deuteronomy. 17. The
witnesses stone. 470 Matt. 13. 29. Suffer the tares. 479 Lu. 24. 28. He made as
though. 488 Act. 16. 3. Paul circumcised Timothy. ibid. Jos. 8. Feigned flight.
489 Col. 3. 9. Ly not one to another. 490 Mat. 12. 36. Vain speech forbidden.
504 Deuteronomy. 2. 24. Children and women slain. 540 Deuteronomy. 7. 5. Abolish Idols. 555
Deuteronomy. 20. 14. Spoil of enemies. 559 Deuteronomy. 23. 15. Refuge for servants. 570 Esaias
58. 5. Restitution. 578 Deuteronomy. 20. 14. Children and women spared. 589 2 King. 6.
22. Would thou smite? 595 2 King. 3. 19. Trees of the Moabites cut up. 607
Coll. 4. 1. Masters, give unto your servants that which is just. 623 Ephesians. 6.
To forbear threatening. ibid. Exodus 21. 26. 27. Liberty due to a servant for a
tooth injuriously struck-out. 625 Exodus 23. 12. Work to be exacted of servants
moderatly. ibid. Deuteronomy. 15. 13. Servants after a certain time to be manumitted,
and not without gifts. 628 Genesis 14. 16. He brought back all the goods. 643 Genesis
14. 21. Give me the Persons, and take the goods to thy self. ibid. Luke 3. 14.
Do violence to no man. 645 Romans 12. 18. As far as is possible, and as much as
in us lies, we must have peace with all men. 659
An Alphabetical Table of the principal Matters.
A
ABsolute Kings. 113 Absolution. 241 Accusations. 338 Acquisition. 558
Accidents of War. 442 Acts internal. 340 Admonitions. 434. 575 Adherents. 526
Adjutors. 170 Agreements. 269 Agrippa. 28 Aid. 257 Alienation. 105. 109 Aliens.
246 Amalekites. 23 Ambition. 422 Antiens. 56 Antonius. 82 App^ehension. 513
Apostolical Canons. 63 Apostates. 62 Arguments from Moses Law. 10 Army. 106
Arms. 171 Arms of Subject. 472 Arians. 377 Arbitrators. 429 Assignation. 205
Associates. 131 Authority. 77. 92 Authors. 82
B
BArclaius. 151 Barbarians. 255. 356. 414 Benefit. 421 Benignity. 41 Bishops.
60 Brasidas. 263 Burial. 293
C
CAuses of War. 173. 407 Cauchi commended. 412 Carolus Molinaeus. 187 Cain. 18
Capital punishments. 30 Caius Caesar. 80 Carthage. 269 Campanians. 88 Captives.
541. 567. 594 Charity. 453. 478 Christ. 46 Christ's actions. 75 Christ's
Precepts. 24 Christ against swearing. 242 Christ's Kingdom. 418 Christian
goodness. 60 Christian Religion. 370 Christian Soldier. 65 Church-Empire. 417
Chief of a league. 129 Children. 404. 589 Chastity. 181 Civil power. 83 Cities
given. 107 Civil War. 277 Clients. 125 Clemency. 346. 438 Clergy. 63
Commonwealth. 141 Communion. 199 Compromise. 428 Community. 394 Communication.
396 Conversion of the Jews. 38 Contumely. 42 Constantine. 58 Conjecture. 262
Contracts. 292 Controversies. 127 Confederates. 127. 257 455 Conference. 427
Cornelius. 33 Courts of justice. 67 Covarruvias. 186 Crimes. 35 Cunning. 484
D
DAnger 80. 210 David. 152 Damages. 274 Defense private. 70 Defensive Arms.
152. 177 196 Desert places. 218 Dead. 300 Delinquent. 318 Desertors. 340
Deceit. 491 Debts. 511 Denouncing of War. 527 Divorce. 41 Dictators. 93
Division of supreme power. 115 Disgrace. 185 Distinctions. 263 Dissimulation.
485 Dominion. 198 Doubts. 423 Duty. 65 Duel. 195 Due. 421
E
EAster. 60 Edessa. 28 Effects. 534 Efficients. 170 Election. 101 Empire. 29
Empire of One. 89 Empire over the Conquered. 572 Ambassadors. 280 Embassages.
276 Emperor universal. 415 Ends of punishment. 312 Enemies. 301. 480 Equity. 78
Errors in Religion. 375 Evangelical Law. 44. 192 252. 328. Evils of War. 449
Examples of ancient Christians. 144
F
FAthers. 50 False Gods. 234 Faith. 245 Fals-speaking. 497 Feudal obligation.
132 Fear. 196. 411 Fights needless. 601 Force. 67. 162 Form of Government. 87
Foreiners. 277 Fraud. 505 Friends. 455 Fruit Trees. 606 Fugitive. 508 Fullness
of Power. 109
G
GArrison. 543 Giving. 73 God. 45. 362 Gods mercy. 334 Gods right. 69. 479
Goods defended. 188 Goods taken. 562 Goods of Subjects. 509 Gospel-Law. 22
Government. 95. 140 Guile. 483, 484 Guardian. 40. 96
H
HAbitation. 218 Hebrew -- Common -- wealth. 32 Hebrew-Law. 8. 10. 246 Hebrew
Kings. 118 Heir 238 Herald. 285 Hercules. 353 Heretics. 375 History
Ecclesiastical. 58 Highest Powers. 77. 85 Hostages. 542. 601 Human infirmity.
342 Husbandmen spared. 589
I
Jest. 501 Jews. 153 Jewish soldiers. 29 Ignorance. 357 Impunity. 193. 339. 535
Impost. 215 Injury. 39. 177 Inferior powers. 79. 147 Invader. 165 Instruments.
171 Infidels. 253 Interpretation. 259 Informer. 338 Ingratitude. 343 Innocent
person. 451 Infants. 538 John Baptist. 29 Joshua's Oath. 226 Joseph. 500
Irreligion punished. 367. 379 Justice. 31. 174. 576 Judicial Law. 31 Julianus
Imp. 65 Judge. 67. 338 Judgments. 323 Judgment. 424 Just on both sides. 432
K
KIlling. 74. 166. 185 430. 581 King. 89. 91 Kings subject to God, 96. 119
Kings person sacred. 154 Kings right. 138 King expelled. 272 Kingdoms given.
109
L
LAw. 2. 141 Law natural. 2. 214 352 Law of Nations. 5. 320 516. 562 Law
Evangelical. 328 Law Mosaical. 8. 333 Law human. 6 Law divine. 7 Law Civil.
193. 206. 516 Law of war. 561 Lawful. 531 Lamech. 19 Lands taken. 562 Land new
found. 413 Leagues. 246, 247 Life. 69. 71 Liberty. 444 Liberty personal, civil.
104 Love of enemies. 43 Lots. 430 Lie. 486, 487
M
MAgistrate. 77. 79 Majesty. 103 Maccabees. 152 Matrimony. 245 Malefactors. 302
Ma^chees. 377 Member. 181 Merchandise. 215 Messiah. 30 Military orders. 53
Military Oath. 59 Mixed government. 117. 121 Moderation. 581. 604 Moses. 20
Monuments. 296 Mutual subjection. 98 Murderers. 547 Multitude spared. 601
N
NAvigation. 217 Necessity. 78. 149 207. 448. 476 Neighbor. 44 Neighbor's
power. 197 Nicene Council. 60 Notions. 363
O
OAth of Kings. 113 Oaths. 220. 504 Obedience. 143. 157. 467 Obligation. 32.
239 Obstinate resistance. 599 Occupation. 205 Offenses. 350 Offenses against
God. 358 Offenders yielded up. 385 Old men spared. 589 Opinion. 379 Ordinance.
27
P
PAul. 34 Patience. 40. 156 Pardon. 45. 344 436 Parents. 143 Passage. 212 Pay.
261 Partakers. 380. 392 Permissions. 32 Penitents. 63 Peace. 444. 448 Peace of
the Church. 65 Peril. 71 Peter. 74. 498 People. 86. 93. 98 Perfidious. 238
Penal Law. 344 Persecution. 373 Piety. 368 Pity. 331 Powers. 47 Possession. 170
Poison. 544. 545 Progress in infinitum. 96 Principality. 100 Princes. 101
Propriety, 102. 198 Precarious right. 103 Protectorship. 110 Protection. 126
Promise of Rulers. 112 Promising words. 504 Principles of religion. 362
Providence. 365 Prophecies. 420 Prest-soldiers. 463. 471 Proclaming of war. 522
Prey. 560 Public person. 183 Punishment. 309. 400 Pyrate. 236
Q
QUarrel. 180
R
RAvishing. 551 Revenge. 39. 69. 73. 314 Retaliation. 42. 289. 598 Resistance.
73. 139. 162 Recuperators. 127 Religion. 157. 360 Restitution. 197. 210 Reward.
273 Reprizals. 414 Repentance. 331. 335 Relaxation of Law. 349 Receivers. 384
Remission of punishment. 438 Rituals. 32 Right. 134. 477 River. 211 Right
remitted. 434 Royal family. 85 Robbers. 274 Romans. 357 Ruler. 142. 155 Rules
of interpretation. 264 Rules of prudence. 442
S
SAnctuary. 60 Saguntines. 81. 266 Sanedrin. 119 Sacrilege. 304. 403
Satisfaction. 325 Sacred things. 554 Scripture. 375 Scythians. 244 Sergius
Paulus. 28. 34 Scholars spared. 589 Servants. 88 Self defense. 17. 182. 195 Sea
common. 204 Sense of an oath. 223 Servitude. 414 Sepulchers. 557 Ships of
enemies. 564 Single combat. 194 Simplicity. 199. 200 Simulation. 486 Solemn
war. 76 Soldier resisting. 137 Society. 151 Solomon's proverbs. 252 Soldiers of
fortune. 461 Spoil 553. 559 Spies. 448 Speech. 492 Strangers. 537 States. 90
Stronger. 447 Suit. 39 Subjection. 47. 86. 143. 156 Subjects profit. 96
Subjects War. 135 Succession. 101 Superiors. 136. 240 Suppliants. 388. 596
Supremacy. 137 Suffrance. 382 Surety. 398 Succor. 458 Supply. 480 Sword. 26.
72 Swearing. 234
T
TEmperament. 581. 604 Tertullian. 51. 157 Temporary right. 102 Terror. 599
Theseus. 294 Thebaean Legion. 65. 158 Thief. 68. 189 Tithe. 558 Tribute. 35.
132 Trajans saying. 149 Traitors. 166. 304. 508 Truth. 490 Tutor. 40. 96 Turks.
256 Tyranny. 95 Tyrant. 237
V
Valor. 59. 505 Valentian's answer. 94 Vengeance. 47 Unequal league. 123
Voluntary Law. 6. 7 Usufructuary. 102 Usurper. 169
W
WAr. 1 War private. 66 War public. 76 War for punishment. 350 War for
religion. 270 War without cause. 409 War doubtful. 426 War declined. 440. 448
War for others. 451. 457 War solemn. 76. 518 Waste. 553. 604 War unjust. 575
Words of Art. 261 Women. 316. 538. 551. 589
X
XEnophon's Cyrus. 41
Y.
YEa, yea. 242
Z
ZEal. 327
THE END.
Books printed for William Lee, and are to be sold at his shop, at the
Turks-Head in Fleetstreet, together with the Prices of some of them.
ANnotations upon all the New Testament, by Edward Leigh Esquire Master of Arts
of Magdalen-Hall in Oxford. 1650.

A Systeme or Body of Divinity in ten Books, wherein the Fundamental and main
grounds of Religion are opened, by Edward Leigh Esquire Master of Arts in
Magdalen-Hall in Oxford, in Folio 1654. about 240. Sheets.

The Saints Encouragement in Evil times, in 12. 1651. written by the said
Author Edward Leigh.

An Exposition of the Prophecy of Haggee, in fifteen Sermons, by that famous
Divine John Reynolds D. D. in 4. 1649.

An exposition of the Psalms of degrees.

The Young man's Tutor, both writ by T. Stint, in 8.

Heresiography, or a Description of all the Heresies and Sectaries of these
later times, of Ranters and Quakers, by Ephesians. Pagit. 4. with new Additions 1654.

Contemplations, Sighs and groans of a Christian, published by W. Styles
Esquire, of the Inner Temple. 12.

The Saints Comfort in evil times. 12.

Gods revenge against Murder, in thirty Tragical Histories, by J. Reynolds, in
Fol.

Sylva Sylvarum, or a Natural History in ten Centuries. Whereunto is newly
added, The History of Life and death, or the Prolongation of Life: both written
by the Right Honorable Francis Lord Verulam. in Fol. 1651.

The Magnetique cure of Wounds. Nativity of Tartar in Wine. Image of God in
Man.

A^o another Treatise of the Errors of Physicians Concerning Defluxions: both
published in English by Dr. Charleton Physician to the late King. 4. 1650.

The darkness of Atheism dispelled by the light of Nature, written by the said
Author, in 4. 1653.

A Discourse concerning the King of Spains Surprising of the Valtoline,
Translated by the Renowned Sir Thomas Roe, many times Ambassador in Foreign
parts. 4.

The Roman Foot and Denaries, from whence as from two principles, the measure,
and weights may be deduced, by John Greaves of Oxford. 8. 1647.

A Treatise of the Court, Written in French, by that great Counselor De
Refuges many times Ambassador for the two last French Kings, Englished by John
Reynolds. 8.

Am^nta. A Pastoral Translated out of Tarquata Tasso. 4.

The Hebrew Commonwealth Translated out of Petrus Cuneus, in 12. 1653. both
Translated by Clem. Barksdal.

Hugo Grotius, his two Treatises, Of God and his Providence, and of Christ and
his Miracles; together with the said Authors judgment of sundry points
controverted, in 12. 1653.

Certamen Religiosum, or a Conference between the late King of England, and the
late Lord Marquess of Worcester concerning Religion. 4. 1652.

The Battle of Ag^ncourt, fought by Henry the fifth, the miseries of Queen
Margaret, with other Poems, by Mic. Drayton Esquire. 8.

The Odes of Horace, Selected and translated by Sir Thomas Hawkins, in 12.

The Spanish Gallant, instructing men in their Carriage to be beloved of the
People.

Youths Behavior, or Decency in conversation amongst men; with new Additions
of a Discourse of Powdering of Hair, of black Patches, and naked Breasts, 8.
1651.

The Tillage of Light, A Treatise of The Philosophers stone. 8.

The Right of Peace and War, in three Books, written in Latin by the
Illustrious Hugo Grotius, together with the life of the said Author, in
English. 8. large. 1654.

A Sermon of the Nature of Faith, by Barten Holyday Doctor of Divinity, 1654.

The Innocent Lady, or the Illustrious Innocent, written Originally in French
by the learned Father de Ceriziers of the Company of Jesus, rendered into
English by Sir William Lower, Knight, 1654.

A Disputation at Winchcomb in Gloucestershire, wherein is much satisfaction
given in many fundamental points of Religion, in the presence of many Eminent
Persons, 1654.

A brief discourse of changing Ministers Tithes into Stipends, or into another
thing. 1654.

Books printed for W. Lee (and some others) and are to be sold at the Turks
Head in Fleetstreet, together with the prices of the said Books.
THe Christians Warfare againg the Devil, World, Flesh, by John Downam. Fol. 16
s.

Second Epistle of Saint Peter, by Tho. Adams. Fol. 1633. 20 s.

A sixfold Commentary upon Genesis, wherein six several Translations are
compared, by Andrew Willet, in Fol. 16 s.

The Theater of Plants, or a large Herbal, by John Perkinson Apothecary. 2lb.

Orlando Furioso, Englished by Sir John Harrington, with the Translators
additions of his Epigrams, in Fol. 8 s.

Mare Clausum, by John Seldom Esquire, of the best Impression, in Fol. 6 s.

Books printed for William Lee, M. Walbanck, D. Pakeman, and G. Bedell.
REports or new Cases of Law, by John March of Grayes-Inne Barrester. 4. 1648.
2 s. 8 d.

The Attorneys Academy, being the manner of Proceeding in all the Courts of
Records at Westminster and other Courts of Law or Equity. 4. 1647. 3 s.

The learned Argument upon the three learned Readings, 1. By the Lord Dyer, 2.
By Sir J. Brograve, 3. By Th. Risden Esquire.

Writ of Habeas Corpus, in Court of Upper Bench, with the opinion of the Court
thereupon.

The Touchstone of Common assurances, by W. Shepherd Esquire of the midde-Temple.
4. 1651. 5 s. 6d.

The book of Oaths, and the several Forms thereof, both Ancient and Modern, in
8. 1649.

Fleta, an ancient Manuscript of the Laws of England, published in print by
John Seldom Esquire and is to be sold by W. Lee, M. Walbanck, and D. Pakeman. 4.
1647. 8 s. 6 d.

Books printed for W. Lee, D. Pakeman, and G. Bedell, and are to be sold at
their Shops in Fleet Street.
BIblia Sacra sive Testamentum vetus ab Jun. Tremelio and F^a. Junio ex Hebraeo
Latin redditum, and Testamentum Novum a Theod. Beza e Graeco in Latinum
versum, Argumentis Capitum addit is versibusque singulis distinctis, and
seorsum expressis, cum Indice, in 12. 1640. 5 s.

The History of the Civil Wars of France, written in Italian by H. C. Davila.
Translated out of the Original. Fol. 1647. 8 s.

De Priscis Anglorum Legibus, being the Ancient Laws of England, in Saxon and
L^tin, out of the Author (Mr. Lamberis) own Manuscript Copy. 1645. 8 shillings.

Divine Essays, by the honorable Walter Mountague Esquire 4. 1648.

Reports or Cases in Chancery, Collected by Sir George Carry one of the Masters
of the Chancery.

The whole Office of a Country Justice of Peace, with an Abridgment of all the
Acts and ordinances, which any ways concern a Justice of Peace, by William
Shepherd Esquire 1650. 2 s. 9 d.

The Complete Lawyer.

A perfect abridgment of the Eleven Books of Reports of the Reverend and
Learned Knight Sir Edward Coke, sometime Chief Justice of the Upper-Bench,
written in French by Sir John Davis, and now E^glished. 1651. 1 s. 6 d.

The History of the Life and Reign of Richard the third, by George Buck E^que
Fol. 1646.

Learned Reports, perused and approved by Justice Godbole. 4. 1652.

The Office and duty of Executors. 4. 2 s. 4 d.

The Grounds and Maxims of the Law of England, by W. Noy Esquire, both printed
for W. L. D. P. and others. 1 s.

For the sacred Law of the Land, a learned book, written by John White Esquire 8.
1653.

A general Table to all the Reports of my Lord Coke in English, 8. 1652.

These Books following are to be sold by W. Lee, and D. Pakeman at their Shops
in Fleetstreet.
A Collection of all the Statutes frequent in use, with Notes in the margent
and references to the Book-Cases, with an Abridgment of the Residue which be
expired or repealed, by Ferdinando Pulton of Lincolns-Inne, in large Fol. 1640.
38 s.

The first part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, or a Commentary upon
^ttleton. 17 s.

The second part of the Institutes, containing the Exposition of many ancient,
and other Statutes of Magna Charta. 12 s.

The third part of the Institutes concerning Pleas of the Crown and Criminal
Causes. 5 s. 9 d.

The Fourth part of the Institutes, concerning the Jurisdiction of Courts. 7 s.
6 d. all written by Edward Coke Milite sometimes Chief Justice of the Upper
Bench. Fol. 148.

The Reports of that Reverend and Learned Judge Sir Henry Hobard Lord Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, being enlarged and perfected by his own Copy, in
Fol. 1650. 7 s. 6 d.

The 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, and 11. Parts of the Reports of my L. Coke in Fol.

The Abridgment of my L. Coks 11. Reports, by Ed. Tratman. 8. 4 s. 6 d.

The year-Book of Edward the fourth, also, Long Quinto of Edward the 4. both
Fol.

The Register of Writs. Fol. 1634. 17 s.

Henric. De Bracton, De Legibus and Consuetudinibus Angliae. 4. 1640. 12 s.

Presidents, the first and second part, by W. West, in large 4. 10 s.

Crumptons Jurisdiction of Courts. 4.

The Elements of the Laws of England, by Sir Francis Bacon sometime Lord
Chancellor of England. 4. 1639. 2 s.

The Judges Arguments about Ship Money. 4. 1 s. and 2. pence.

Natura Brevium, by Fitz-Herbert.

The Office of Sheriffs, by Wilkinson. 8. 2 s. 2 d.

Four Books of Law, by Sir H. Finch. 8. 3 s.

Doctor and Student. 8. 1 s. 6 d.

A Book of Presidents. 8. 1 s. 2 d.

Littleton and Perkins; together, or single. 16.

The Complete Copie-holder, with the Reading of Copyholds, the first by Sir E.
Coke, the second, by C. Caltrop Elquire. 4. 2 s. 6 d.

The order of keeping of a Court Leet, and Court Baron. 4.

A little Trease of Bail and Mainprize, by E. C. Knight.

A Declaration of Nuisance, concerning dwelling-Houses, with the resolutions of
the Judges of Assizes, upon Questions touching Parishes.

Special and Selected Law Cases, out of the Reports and year Books, concerning
the persons and estates of all men whatsoever. 2 s.

Analecta, formerly called the Country Justice, the sixth Edition, carefully
and truly corrected from the gross Errors of the former Impressions, in 12,
1648. 1 s. 6 d.

Statuta Pacis, containing all the Statutes in order of time, as concern a
Justice of Peace, in 12. 1 s. 6 d.

Kelaways Reports. Fol. 8 s.

The Laws Resolutions concerning Women's rights, in 4 3 s.

The English Lawyer by Judge Dodridge, 4.

Vicesimo primo Jacobt and primo and tertio Caroli. Fol.

An ancient learned Book of the Law called Britton.

FINIS.

