IL PASTOR FIDO, The faithful Shepherd. A PASTORAL Written in Italian by
BAPTISTA GVARINI, a Knight of ITALY. And now Newly Translated out of the
ORIGINAL.

LONDON, Printed by R. Raworth, M DC XLVII.

To the most Illustrious and most hopeful PRINCE CHARLES, Prince of WALES.
SIR,
WHilst I had the honor to serve your Highness, I did it (how weakly soever)
with that fidelity and dutiful affection to your Person, which found your
gracious acceptance, together with some encouragement from your own mouth to
hope a new and more sixth relation to you in the future; the only suit I was
bold to make: as having ever esteemed that to serve your Highness, would of it
self be an abundant reward for having served you.

In the mean time I hold my self bound to pay your Highness some tribute of my
hours of vacancy, presenting to your Princely view for the present this Italian
Pastoral, into which the no less wise then witty Guarini (having grown
unprofitably gray in Travel, Universities, and Courts, as out of the fifth
Act, where he personates himself under the name of old Carino, may be
collected) infused whatsoever of excellent so eminent Schools could teach so
apt a Scholar. His scope therein being, to make a Dernier effort (as the French
call it) or general muster of the whole forces of his Wit before his Princely
Master (the then Duke of Savoy) and withal to insinuate and bring into that
awful presence, in their masking clothes (as I may say) such principles of
Virtue, and knowledge Moral, Political, and Theological, as (peradventure)
in their own grave habits, out of the mouths of severer Instructors, would not
have found so easy admittance to a Prince in the heat of his youth, heightened
with the pomp and flatteries that attend on Greatness, and with the glorious
triumphs and felicities of his royal Nuptials then celebrating: though this
was the same Charles Emanuel who proved afterward in his riper years, by his
Councels and by his Prowess, the Bulwark indeed of Italy, against the
puissance of the great Henry of France himself, your Highness most renowned
Grandfather.

Your Highness may have seen at Paris a Picture (it is in the Cabinet of the
great Chancellor there) so admirably designed, that, presenting to the common
beholders a multitude of little faces (the famous Ancestors of that Noble man);
at the same time, to him that looks through a Perspective (kept there for that
purpose) there appears only a single portrait in great of the Chancellor
himself; the Painter thereby intimating, that in him alone are contracted the
Virtues of all his Progenitors; or perchance by a more subtle Philosophy
demonstrating, how the Body Politic is composed of many natural ones; and how
each of these, entire in it self, and consisting of head, eyes, hands, and the
like, is a head, an eye, or a hand in the other: as also, that men's Privates
cannot be preserved, if the Public be destroyed, no more then those little
Pictures could remain in being, if the great one were defaced: which great one
likewise was first and chiefest in the Painters design, and that for which all
the rest were made.

Just so our Author (exposing to ordinary view an Interlude of Shepherds,
their loves, and other little concernments, with the stroke of a lighter
pencill) presents through the perspective of the Chorus, another and more
suitable object to his Royal Spectators. He shows to them the image of a
gasping State (once the most flourishing in the world): A wild Boar (the sword)
depopulating the Country: the Pestilence unpeopling the Towns: their gods
themselves in the merciless humane Sacrifices exacting bloody contribution
from both: and the Priests (a third Estate of misery) bearing the burden of
all in the Chorus, where they deplore their own and the common Calamity. Yet
in the Catastrophe, the Boar slain; the Pestilence (but this was before upon
that miserable composition with their Gods) ceased; the Priests above all
others exulting with pious joy: and all this miraculous change occasioned by
the presaged Nuptials of two of Divine (that is, Royal) extraction; meaning
those at that time of the Duke of Savoy with the Infanta of Spain, from which
fortunate Conjunction he prophesies a final period to the troubles that had
formerly distracted that State: So much depends upon the Marriages of Princes.

I am not ignorant (Sir) that this famous Dramatick Poem must have lost much of
the life and quickness by being powered out of one vessel (that is, one
Language) into another, besides what difference may be in the capacity and
mettle of the Vessels themselves (the Italian being transcendently both copious
and harmonious), and beside the unsteadinesse of the hand that powers it; And
that a Translation at the best is but the mock-Rainbow in the clouds, faintly
imitating the true one: into which Apoll^ himself had a full and immediate
influence.

Yet because it seems to me (beholding it at the best light) a Lantskip of
these Kingdoms, (your Royal Patrimony) a^ well in the former flourishing, as
the present distraction^ thereof, I thought it not improper for your Princely
notion at this time, thereby to occasion your Highness, even in you^
recreations, to reflect upon the sad Original, not without hope to see it yet
speedily made a perfect parallel throughout; and also your self a great
Instrument of it. Whether by some happy Royal Marriage (as in this Pastoral,
and the case of Savoy, to which it alludes) thereby uniting a miserably divided
people in a public joy; o^ by such other ways and means as it may have
pleased the Divine Providence to ordain for an end of our woe; I leave to that
Providence to determine.

To the Author of this TRANSLATION.
SVch is our Pride, our Folly, or our Fate,
That few but such as cannot write, translate.
But what in them is want of wit, or voice,
In thee is either Modesty, or Choice.
Whiles this restored work at thy command
Casts off the blemish of an artlesse hand.
Secure of Fame, thou justly do esteem
Less honor to create, then to redeem.
Nor ought a Genius less then his that writ,
Attempt Translation; for transplanted wit
All the defects of air and soil does share,
And colder brains like colder Climates are:
In vain they toil, since nothing can beget
A vital spirit, but a vital heat.
That servile path thou nobly do decline
Of tracing word by word, and line by line.
Those are the labored births of slavish brains,
Not the effects of Poetry, but pains.
Cheap vulgar arts, whose narrowness affords
No flight for thoughts, but poorly sticks at words.
A new and nobler way thou do pursue
To make Translations, and Translators too.
They but preserve the Ashes, Thou the Flame,
True to his sense, but truer to his fame.
Foording his current, where thou find'st it low
Let'st in thine own to make it rise and flow.
Wisely restoring whatsoever grace
It lost by change of Times, or Tongues, or Place.
Nor fettered to his Numbers, and his Times,
Betray'st his Music to unhappy Rimes,
Nor are the nerves of his compacted strength
Stretched and dissolved into unsinnewed length:
Yet after all (lest we should think it thine)
Thy spirit to his circle do confine.
New names, new dressings, and the modern cast,
Some Scenes, some persons altered, had outfac'd
The world, it were thy work; for we have known
Some thank't and praised for what was less their own.
That curious hand which to the life can trace
The ayrs, the lines, and features of a face,
May with a free and bolder stroke express
A varyed posture, or a flattering Dress;
He could have made those like, who made the rest,
But that he knew his own design was best.
JOHN DENHAM.

The Scene ARCADIA.
THE SPEAKERS.
SILVIO, Son to Montano, and contracted to Amarillis. LINCO, An old man,
servant to Montano. MIRTILLO, In love with Amarillis ERGASTO, Friend to
Mirtillo CORISCA, A wanton Nymph, in love with Mirtillo MONTANO, The chief
Priest, Father to Silvio TITIRO, Father to Amarillis DAMETA, An old man,
servant to Montano SATYR, An old gotish fellow in love with Corisca DORINDA, In
love with Silvio LUPINO, A Goat-herd, servant to Dorinda AMARILLIS, Daughter to
Titiro NICANDRO, Chief Minister to the Priest CORIDON, In love with Corisca
CARINO, An old man supposed Father to Mirtillo URANIO, An old man Friend to
Carino MESSENGER. TIRENIO, A blind Prophet. CHORUS of Shepherds. Huntsmen.
Nymphs. Priests.



IL PASTOR FIDO. THE PROLOGUE, Spoken by ALFEO, a River of ARCADIA.
IF from old Fame, and peradventure not
Believed at all by you, or else forgot,
O'th Amorous Brook ye heard the wonder ever,
Which to pursue the coy and flying River
Of his beloved Arethusa, ran
(O force of Love!) piercing the Ocean,
And the earth's hidden bowels, to that Isle,
Where underneath the huge Etnean Pile*
Upon his back the kicking Giant lies,
Spitting despightfull flames at hostile Skies,
And leaves it doubtful to the world that is under,
If heaven at him, or he at heaven thunder:
That Brook am I. Though what you have been told
Ye may, your eyes ye cannot doubt. Behold!
Leaving my loved Nymph, and thridding back
That well known way where I had made a track
Through the great waters, I in person rise
And view (with tears of gladness in mine eyes)
That ancient and that venerable earth
From whose cold entrails I received my birth,
Not thrall'd and plundered (as of late) but free
And beautiful as it was wont to be.
O my deer mother! O Arcadia, known
By me thy son, though so long absent! own
Thy deer, and (being improved by travel) now
Thy great ALFEO, and as famed as thou.
These be the streets once so renowned, these be
The woods where the old russet honesty
Did live and die: unto this only nook
O'th iron world, when she her flight had took
From sinful men, the golden age retired.
Here (that which elsewhere is in vain desired)
Freedom unstrain'd, and from suspicion free,
Flourished in peace and sweet security.
An unarmed people had for their defense
A wall of Virtue, and of Innocence,
Stronger then that whose living stones were laid
About great Thebes, whilst he that built it played.
For when tumultuous war flamed most in Greece
And other her more warlike Provinees
Arcadia armed, to this blessed part alone,
This Sanctuary, there was never known
The least Alarm, the least sound to come,
Or of a friends, or of an enemies Drum.
And so much Corinth, Thebes, Mycene hoped
To triumph over their foes, as they were propt
By this good people, and their care were held,
Who were the Care of Heaven, whom heaven upheld.
A blessed mutual bulwark they did prove,
Those to these here, and these to those above:
Those fought with weapons, and these fought with Prayer.
Nor though each here a shepherds habit ware,
And bore the name; yet either in his mien,
Or exercises, was the shepherd seen.
But some would place themselves as spies to pry*
Into the Stars and Elements (the high
Secrets of Heaven and Nature) others here
Were wholly given to chase the fearful Deer:
Others, whom glory had inflamed more,
TO encounter with a Bear, or tusked Bore.
Some swift in running, some were terrible
At Barriers, some in wrestling did excel;
One threw a dart, another drew a flight,
Both hit with cunning the intended white.
Some one thing, some another did affect,
(Each as his mind and fancy did direct)
The sacred Muses Most, Virgins of yore
In high esteem, though now despised and poor.
But how transported hither where the Po
Falls into Dora, is Arcadia now?
This is the cloister surely, this the cave
Of ancient Erycina, and that brave
Aspiring Temple yonder is the same
Was consecrated to great Cynthia's name:
How then removed? What new-come power can so
Transplant a Land, and all the People? O
Royal Infanta, but a child in age,
Yet even already as a Matron sage!
The virtue of your Name, power of your Blood
Great Catherina (now it is understood)
Wrought this; from that great House descended, which
New Kingdoms daily, and new worlds enrich.
Those great effects which we as wonders view,
Are natural and usual things with you.
As by that Sun which from the East does rise,
So many excellent varieties
Are brought into the world, herbs, flowers and trees,
So many beasts, fowl, fish, in earth, air, seas:
So by the living Sun of your bright eyes
(which in the now more worshipped West did rise)
New Provinces from every Clime about,
New Realms, new Laurels, and new Trophies sprout.
Low as my bottom then I bow to you,
Majestisk Daughter of that Monarch, who
Enjoyes an Empire, so August, so great,
That Phoebus in it does both rise and set:
And Wife of him, to whose breast, hand, and wit
Heaven did the walls of Italy commit.
But Alpian rocks are needed now no more,
Bulwarks, nor horrid cliffes to stand before
Fair Italy, securer in your guard
Then in those hills which have her entrance barred.
That bulwark so invincible in war,
You make soft Peace's Temple, where from far
Men come to worship her. Long live as one
Ye Royal pair; this fair Conjunction
Presages Christendom again shall boast
Those many Eastern Scepters she has lost.
This is a field worthy of none but you
(Magnanimous CHARLES) and a field trodden toe
By your brave Ancestors. This Land is great,
Great are your names, great blood in you is met;
Great your designs, your minds, and your aspects,
Great offspring too, and deeds the world expects.
But whilst I prophecy, and Fate prepares
Circles of gold to crown your silver hairs,
Disdain not ( mighty Souls) this flowery wreath
Gatherd on Pindus by those Maids that breath
Life in dead men. Poor offering (I confess)
Yet such as, if Devotion it express,
Even Heaven it self disdains not: And if from
Your smiling heaven a favoring gale shall come,
This Lute which from its gentle warbling strings
Sending still Music to your ears, now sings
Soft Loves, and pleasing Hymeneall Rites,
Shall turn a Trumpet to proclaim your Fights.
Actus Primus.
Scena Prima.
SILVIO, LINCO, With Huntsmen. Sil. GO you that lodged the Monster, as you are
wont
Amongst the neighboring sheepcoats, raise the Hunt.
Rowse eyes and hearts with your shrill voice and horn;
If ever in Arcadia there were born
A shepherd, who did follow Cynthia's Court
As a true lover of her rural sport,
Within whose Quarry-scorning mind had place
The pleasure or the glory of the Chase,
Now let him show that courage and that love,
By following me, where in a little grove
To Valor a large field does open lie,
That dreadful Boar, I mean, that Prodigy
Of Nature and the Woods, that huge, that fell,
And noted'st Tyrant that did ever dwell
And reign in Erimanthus; the fields mower,
The mowers terror: Go you then before,
And do not only with your early horn
Anticipate, but wake the drowsy morn. -- Exeunt Hunts. sounding.
We, Linco, will to prayers, this perilous Chase
(Heaven being our guide) we may more boldly trace.
" That work which is begun well is half done,
" And without Prayer no work is well begun.

Lin. Thy worshipping the Gods I well commend,
But not thy troubling them who do attend
The Gods: The Priests as yet are all asleep,
To whom day springs yet later, where the steep
Surrounding hills a short Horizon make.

Sil. To thee whose heart is hardly yet awake
The whole world sleeps.

Lin. O Silvio, Silvio,
Why did frank Nature upon thee bestow
Blossoms of Beauty in thy prime, so sweet
And fair, for thee to trample under feet?
Had I thy fresh and blooming cheek, Adieu
I Would say to beasts, and nobler game pursue.
The Summer I would spend in feasts and mirth
In the cool shade, the Winter by the hearth.

Sil. How Is this? Thou art not Linco sure; for he
Such counsel never used to give to me.

Lin. " Counsel must change as the occasion does:
If I were Silvio, so I Would do insooth.

Sil. And I, if I were Linco would do so,
But as I am, I Will do like Silvio.

Lin. Fond youth, for a wild Beast so far to roame,
Whom thou must hunt with danger, when at home
One's safely lodged!

Sil. Do thou speak seriously?
How near is it?

Lin. As thou art now to me.

Sil. Thou Art mad.

Lin. Thou art.

Sil. In what wood does he rest?

Lin. Silvio's the wood, and Cruelty the beast.

Sil. Mad I was sure!

Lin. To have a Nymph so fair,
(Rather a Goddess of perfections rare)
Fresher and sweeter then a Rose new blown,
Softer and whiter then an old Swans down,
For whom there lives not at this day a swain
So proud amongst us but sighs, and sighs in vain:
To have, I say, this matchless Paragon
By Gods and men reserved for thee, nay, thrown
Into thine arms without one sigh or tear,
And thou (unworthy!) to disvalue her?
Art thou not then a beast? a savage one?
Rather a senseless clod, a stock, a stone?

Sil. " If not to be in love be cruelty,
" Then cruelty's a Virtue: Nor do I
Repent, but boast, I lodge him in my breast
By whom I Have conquered Love, the greater beast.

Lin. How could thou conquer (silly Idiot)
Whom thou nere try'dst?

Silv. In that I tried him not.

Lin. O had thou tried him Silvio, and once found
In mutual Lovers what true joys abound,
I know thou'ldst say, O Love, the sweetest guest,
Why have thou been an alien to this breast?
Leave, leave the woods, leave following beasts, fond boy,
And follow Love..

Sil. Linco, I take more joy
In one beast caught by my Melampo, far,
Then in the love of all the Nymphs that are.
Keep they those joys unto themselves alone
That find a soul in them; for I find none.

Lin. No soul in LOVE (the world's great Soul)? But fool,
Too soon (believe't) thou wilt find he is all soul:
(Perchance too late;) for " he will be sure before
" We die, to make us all once feel his power.
And (take my word) " worse torment none can prove,
" Then in old limbs the youthful itch of love:
" All tampring then will but exasperate
" The sore. If Love a young man wound, he straight
" Balms him again, hope holds up sorrows head,
" And smiles revive him, if frowns strike him dead.
" But if an aged man those flames endure,
" Whose own defects his own repulse procure,
" Then, then the wound is unsupportable
" And mortal; then the anguish is a Hell:
" Then if he pity seek, it is a curse
" To go without it, and to gain't a worse.
" Ah! hasten not before the appointed day
" The curse of days; for if when thou art gray
" Thou learn to love, 'twill breed a double sense,
" Of thy youth's pride, and age's impotence.
Leave, leave the woods, leave following beasts, fond boy,
And follow Love.

Sil. As if there were no joy
But these Chimera's in a Lovers head,
Of strange Eliziums, by his fever bred!

Lin. Tell me if in this jolly month of May,
When earth is clad in all her best array,
In stead of bladed fields, brooks uncontrolled,
Green woods and painted meads, thou should behold
Bald fields and meads, brooks bound with Ice, the Pine,
The Beech, the Ash, the Oak, the Elm, the Vine,
And Poplar, like inverted Sceletones,
Stand desolate, rattling their naked bones;
Would thou not say, Nature is out of tune,
The world is sick, and like to dye in June?
Now the same horror which thou would receive
From such a monstrous noveltie, conceive
At thine own self. " The all-disposing Heaven
" To every age has proper Humors given:
" And as in old men love absurdly shows;
" So young men enemies to love oppose
" Nature and Heaven. Look Silvio round about,
Examine the whole Universe throughout:
All that is fair or good, here, or above,
Or is a Lover, or the work of Love.
The all-seeing Heaven, the fruitful Earth's a Lover,
The Sea with love is ready to boil over.
See thou yon Star of such excelling hew,
The Suns Postillion? That Is a lover too:
Nor is exempted from her own son's laws,
But feels that passion which her beauties cause.
Perchance this very hour too she did part
From her stolen sweets, and Him that keeps her heart.
Mark what a wanton eye she has! In woods
Rough Bears, the crook-backt Dolphin loves in floods,
And sluggish Whales; That little bird which sings
So sweetly, and so nimbly plyes the wings,
Flying from tree to tree, from Grove to Grove,
If he could speak, would say, I am in love.
But his heart says it, and his tongue does say it
In language understood by his deer Mate:
And Silvio, hark how from that wilderness
His dear Mate answers, And I love no less.
The Cowes low in the valley; and what is this.
But an inviting unto amorous bliss?
The Lions roar in solitary Groves,
Not for their prey, but for their absent Loves.
All things that are, but Silvio, are in love,
The burthen's that: Here, round us, and above,
No soul but Silvio is a foe to joy.
Leave, leave the woods, leave following beasts, fond boy,
And follow Love.

Sil. Had I my tender years
Committed to the care of thy gray hairs,
That thou should thus effeminate my heart
With love? Know thou who I am? who thou art?

Lin. Thou art a man (or should be one) and I
Another; what I teach Humanity.
And if thou scorn that name (which is my pride)
Take heed, in stead of being deifi'd,
Thou turn not beast.

Sil. That monster-taming King,
From whom my lofty pedigree I bring,
Had never grown so valiant, nor so famed,
If first the monster Love he had not tamed.

Lin. See foolish youth, how idly thou talkst now!
Had great Alcides been no Lover, how
Had thou been born? Rather, if he orecame
Monsters and men, to Love impute the same.
Know thou not yet, that to comply with fair
Omphales humor, he not only ware
(In stead of the fierce Lions rugged skin)
Women's soft robes, but taught those hands to spin,
And hold a feeble distaffe, which did bear
The knotty Club? His interludes these were
Between his Acts; And when his ribs were beat
With dear-bought Counquests, he would then retreat
Into her lap (the bay of sweet delight)
As in Love's port to be new built for fight.
" His sighs from his past toils sweet breathings were,
" And spirits strengthening him new toils to bear.
" For as the iron, of it self too rough,
" And of a harsh unmalleable stuff,
" Softened with fire, and gentler metal, strength
" From weakness gathers, and becomes at length
" Fit for the noblest use: so hearts untamed,
" (Which their own stiffness often breaks) enflamed
" With generous Love, and with his sweets allayed,
" Are cleerer, apter for great Actions made.
If thou art ambitious then to imitate
Great Hercules, and not degenerate
From thy high strain, since woods thou do affect,
Follow the woods, but do not Love neglect:
I mean so lawful and so worthy love
As that of Amarillis. I approve
(So far from blaming that as cruelty)
Thy shunning of Dorinda; For in thee
Who standst upon thy blood, 'twere double shame
To scorch thy breast with an unlawful flame,
For injuring thy Spouse.

Sil. What say thou man?
She is not yet my Spouse.

Lin. Was there not than
A promise solemnly received and given?
Take heed proud Boy, how thou provokest Heaven.

Sil. " Man's freedom is Heavens gift, which does not take
" Us at our word when forced vows we make.

Lin. I, but (unless our hopes and judgments fail)
Heaven made this Match, and promised to entail
A thousand blessings on it.

Sil. It Is like that there
Is nothing else to do; a proper care
To vex the calm rest of the gods above!
Linco, I like nor this, nor the other Love.
I was a Huntsman, not a Lover bred;
Thou who art all for love, go back to bed.

Lin. Thou sprung from Heaven, harsh Boy? nor of divine
Can I suppose thee, nor of humane Line.
Alecto's poison thy cold limbs did fashion;
Sweet Venus had no hand in thy creation.

Scena secunda.
MIRTILLO, ERGASTO. Mirt. O Amarillis, Authresse of my flame,
(Within my mouth how sweet now is thy name!
But in my heart how bitter!) Amarillis,
Fairer and whiter then the whitest Lillies,
But crueller then cruel Adders far,
Which having stung (least they should pity) bar
Their ears, and fly: If then by speaking I
Offend thee, I will hold my peace and die.
I Will hold my peace, but what will that do good,
If hills and dales roar for me, and this wood
Which thy deer name can nere forget, from me
So often heard, and carved on every tree?
The winds shall sigh for me, the fountains shed:
Abundant tears, grief mourn, and pity plead.
Or could thou bribe whole Nature with a fee
To silence, lastly Death shall speak for me:
He Will thunder 't out, and to the world proclaim,
I died a Martyr in my true Loves flame.

Erg. Mirtillo, " Love is a great pain at best,
" But more, by how much more it is suppressed.
" For as hot Steeds run faster at the check,
" Then if you laid the reins upon their neck:
" So love restrained augments, and fiercer grows
" In a close prison, then when loose he goes.
Why hidst thou thy flames cause so long from me,
When the effect could not concealed be?
Mirtillo burns: how often have I said?
But inward burns, and will not call for aid.

Mirt. Courteous Ergasto, out of my respect
To her (alas) I did my self neglect:
Nor would my festring passion yet unfold,
But that necessity has made me bold.
I hear a buzzing rumor everywhere
(Which to my heart finds passage through my ear)
That Amarillis shortly weds; nor dare
Ask more, lest so I should my love declare,
Or prove my fear too true. Full well I know
(Nor has Love struck me blind) that in my low
And slender fortunes, it were simple pride
To hope a Nymph so shaped, so qualified,
So raised in wealth, in spirit, and in blood,
Above all these, so gentle, and so good,
Can ere be mine: no, I have taken the height
Of my unhappy Star, my sullen fate
Made me for fuel only, born to smother
In fires I cannot kindle in another.
Yet since Fate's pleased I should affect death more
Then life, at least I Would have her know before,
That she is beholding to me for my death,
And deigne when I sigh out my latest breath
To cast her fair eyes on me, and say, Dye.
This reasonable boon obtain would I,
That ere she go to make another blessed
In having her, shee'ld hear me speak at least,
But once, my deer Ergasto. Now if love
Or pity of me thy soft entrails move,
Procure me this, this physic only lend,
To make the passage easy to my end.

Erg. From one that loves, a just, from one that dies,
A small request: yet a hard enterprise.
Woe be to her, should her stern father hear
That to stolen prayr's she ere had lent an ear!
Or if some baser pick-thank should disclose
It to the Priest her father-in-law! Who knows
But out of these respects she may eschew
Thy company, and yet affect thee too?
" For women are more prone to love then men;
" But to conceal't have more discretion then.
And if 'twere true that she did love thee, what
Could she do less then shun thee for all that?
" She that wants power to help listens in vain,
" And flies with pity, when her stay breeds pain;
" And I have heard it is still the wisest course
" To quit that soon which one must quit perforce.

Mir. O were this true, and could I think it so,
Sweet were my pain, and fortunate my woe!
But deer Ergasto (hide it not from me
So help thee Pan) who may this Bridegroom be
So loved of all the Stars?

Erg. Do thou not know
(I Am sure thou do) that famous Silvio,
Silvio the rich, the gallant and the fair,
The Priest Montano's only Son and Heir?
It Is he.

Mir. O happy youth, whose joy appears
So ripe for harvest in his spring of years!
Pardon me gentle swain, I envy not
Thy happiness, but mourn my own hard lot.

Erg. Indeed there is no reason to envy,
Rather to pity him.

Mirt. To pity? Why?

Erg. Because he loves her not.

Mirt. And has he wit?
Has he a heart? Is he not blind? -- And yet
When I consider with what full aspect
Her starry eyes their influence direct
Into my breast, she cannot have a dart
Left in her quiver for another heart.
But why do they a gemme so precious throw
To one that knows it not, and scorns it so?

Erg. Because the Heavens did through this Marriage
Unto Arcadia long ago presage
Deliverance. Have not thou heard that here
Is paid to the great Goddess every year
Of a Nymph's guiltless blood a cruel and
Unconscionable tribute by this Land?

Mirt. It Is news to me; nor let that strange appear,
Since I my self am but a stranger here,
And since I came (by Fate's decree and Love's)
Almost a constant Burgess of the Groves.
But what strange crime deserved so sharp a doom?
How could such monstrous cruelty find room
In a Celestial mind?

Erg. Of me then know
From the first head the torrent of our woe:
A Story that would tears of pity wrest
From heart of oak, much more from humane breast.
Whilst yet the Priesthood was not tied to age,
A youthful swain of noble Parentage,
Then Dian's Priest ( Aminta was his name)
The Nymph Lucrina did with love inflame.
All creatures of her sex exceeded she
As much in beauty as unconstancie.
She long requited, or at least to sight
(If looks and eyes have tongues) she did requite
The pure affection of the Lovesick lad,
And fed his hopes whilst he no Rival had.
But when a rustic swain her favor sought,
(See now a perfect woman!) in a thought,
She left the former, with one sigh was shook,
With the faint batt'ry of one amorous look:
Her hearts new guest now takes up all the room,
Dislodged Aminta ere he knew for whom.
Hapless Aminta! who from that day forth
Was so abhorred, held of so little worth,
By that ungrate whom he did still adore,
That she would neither hear nor see him more.
If this unkindnesse cut the wretch to the heart,
If he sighed, wept, and raved, to thee who art
Acquainted with Love's pangs, I leave to guess.

Mir. O, 'Twas a torment no man can express!

Erg. When then his tears and prayers he had cast
After his heart, to Dian turned at last;
If ever with pure heart, Goddess (quoth he)
And guiltless hand I kindled flame to thee,
Revenge my faith, which a perfidious Maid
Under safe conduct of her smiles betrayed.
The Goddess (gentler then the Nymph was) hears
The faithful Lover's and her servant's tears
And prayr's: and pity kindling her just ire,
By opposition did augment the fire
Her powerful bow into her hand she took,
And in ARCADIA'S wretched bosom stuck
Arrows of death and catching Pestilence
Invisible, and therefore without fence.
Without remorse they execute her rage
Without respect on every sex and age.
Nor Antidotes nor Medicines here availed,
Nor flying now; weak Art her Master failed:
And often, whilst he the remedy applied,
Before the Patient the Physician died.
The only hope that is left is from the sky,
So to the nearest Oracle they fly,
Which soon returned an answer clear enough,
But above measure terrible and rough;
That Cinthia was incenst, but that the Land
Might be relieved, if by Aminta's hand
That faithless Nymph Lucrina, or some one
For her, of the Arcadian Nation
Were as an offering to Diana slain.
So she, when long sh' had prayed, long wept in vain,
And long expected her new Lovers aid,
To the holy Altars like a Bride arrayed,
And with what pomp Religion could devise,
Was led a miserable Sacrifice.
Where at those feet from which hers fled so fast,
(The feet of her Idolater) at last
Bending her trembling knees, she did attend
From the offended youth a cruel end.
The sacred knife he boldly did unsheathe,
Rage and revenge his nostrils seemed to breathe,
His eyes to sparkle; turning then to her,
Said with a sigh (death's hollow messenger,)
Whom thou have left Lucrina, and whom took,
Learn by this blow: And with that word he struck
Himself, and plunged the knife in his own breast
To the haft: In one both Sacrifice and Priest
Fell bleeding at her feet, whilst she (amazed
To see that dire unlookt for object) gazed
As one 'twixt life and death, nor yet did know
If grief had stabbed her, or the threatened blow.
But when she found her tongue again, and knew
Distinctly what was acted there, O true,
O brave Aminta, (bathing in a flood
Of tears) she said! O Lover, understood*
Too late! who by thy death do give to me
Both life and death. If in forsaking thee
I sinned; lo, I redeem that sin of mine,
Wedding my soul eternally to thine.
This said, that knife fresh reeking with the gore
Of the now loved in death, and purpled ore,
She drew from his pale breast, and in her own
Sheathed it again; then willingly sunk down
Into Aminta's arms, who yet had breath,
And felt perchance that lightning before death.
Such was this pair of Lovers tragic fall,
'Cause he kept too much faith, she none at all.

Mir. O hapless swain, yet happy in his Love,
Having so rich occasion to approve
His spotless faith, and dying to revive
That spark in her he could not being alive!
But what became then of the poor diseased?
Did the plague cease? was Cinthia's wrath appeased?

Erg. It did relent, but was not quite put out:
For the same month (the year being wheeled about)
It burst out with more fury, and did make
A dire relapse: This forced us to betake
Our selves unto the Oracle again;
Which utterd now a sadder doom; That then
And yearly, we to Nights offended Queen
A Maid or Wife should offer, past fifteen
And short of twenty; by which means the rage
Which swallowed thousands, one death should assuage.
Moreover a hard law, and weighing well
The nature of that sex, impossible
To keep; a law in bloody letters writ
On wretched women was imposed by it;
That whatsoever Maid or Wife should prove
In any sort a changeling in her love,
Unless some friend would pay the penalty
In stead of her, should without mercy die.
This dire, this national Calamity
The good old man has hope to remedy
By means of this desired Match; because
The Oracle after some little pawse
Being asked again, what end our woe should have,
To our demand this punctual answer gave;
Your woe shall end when two of Race Divine
Love shall combine:
And for a faithless Nymphs apostate state
A faithful Shepherd supererogate.
Now there are left in all Arcadia
Of heavenly Stock no other slips this day
But Silvio and Amarillis; She
From Pan descended, from Alcides He.
Nor had there ever (to our much regret)
Of those two Lines a Male and Female met,
As now there do: whence the believing Father
Great hopes of good not without cause does gather.
For though the things foretold by the Oracle
Be not fulfilled yet in each particle,
This is the fundamental point; the rest
Is still reserved in Fates own secret breast,
And of the Marriage one day shall ensue.

Mir. And all this do Mirtillo to undo?
What a long swing is fetched! what armies band
Against one heart half murtherd to their hand!
Is It not enough that cruel Love's my foe,
Unless Fate too conspire my overthrow?

Erg. Alas, Mirtillo! grieving does no good,
"Tears quench not Love, but are his milk and food.
'T shall escape me hard, but ere the Sun descend
This cruel one shall hear thee, Courage friend:
" These sighs refresh not (as thou do suppose)
" Thy burning heart; but rather are like those
" Impetuous winds, which in a Town on fire
" The bellows are to blow and fan it higher:
" Love's whirlwinds, bringing to poor Lovers ever
" Black clouds of grief, which showrs of tears deliver.

Scena tertia.
CORISCA. WHo ever saw, what heart did ever prove
So strange, fond, impotent a Passion? Love,
And cold Disdain (a miracle to me
Two contraries should in one subject be
Both in extremes!) I know not how, each other
Destroy, and generate; inflame, and smother.
When I behold Mirtillo's every grace,
From his neat foot to his bewitching face,
His unaffected carriage, sweet aspect,
Words, actions, looks, and manners, they eject
Such flames of love, that every passion
Besides seems to be conquered by this one.
But when I think how dotingly he prizes
Another woman, and for her despises
My almost peerlesse face (although I say it)
On which a thousand eyes for alms do wait,
Then do I scorn, abhor, and loath him more
Then ever I did value him before,
And scarce can think it possible that he
Had ever any interest in me.
O if my sweet Mirtillo were mine own,
So that I had him to my self alone!
(These are my thoughts sometimes) no mortal wight
More bliss could boast of then Corisca might!
And then I feel such kindly flames, so sweet
A vapor rise, that I could almost meet
His love half way; yea, follow him, adore
His very steps, and aid from him implore:
Nay, I do love him so, I could expire
His sacrifice in such a pleasing fire.
Then I Am my self again: And what (say I)
A proud disdainful boy! one that does fly
From me, and love another! that can look
Upon this face of mine, and not be struck!
But guard himself so well as not to dye
For love! Shall I, that should behold him lie
Trembling and weeping at these feet of mine
(As many better men have done) incline
Trembling and weeping at his feet? O no!
And with this thought into such rage I grow
Against my self, and him, that sounding straight
Unto my eyes and fancy a retreat,
Mirtillo's name worser then death I seem
To hate, and mine own self for loving him;
Whom I would see the miserablest swain,
The most despised thing that does remain
Upon the earth; and if I had my will,
With mine own hands I could the villain kill.
Thus like two seas encountering, Hate and Love,
Desire and Scorn in me dire battle move:
And I (the flame of thousand hearts, the rack
Of thousands souls) languish, and burn, and lack
That pity I denied to others. I
Who have in Cities often been courted by
Gallants and wits, to whom great Lords have bent,
And yet withstood vollies of complement,
Squadrons of Lovers, jeered their idle fires,
And with false hopes deluded their desires;
And now enforced t'a rustic swain to yield
In single sight t'a fellow that is unskilled!
O thou most wretched of all womankind
Corisca! Where could thou diversion find
Had thou no other Lover? how assuage,
Or by what means deceive thy amorous rage?
Learn women all from me this housewifery,
Make you conserve of Lovers to keep by.
Had I no Sweetheart but this sullen Boy,
Were I not well provided of a joy?
" To extreme want how likely to be hurled
" Is that ill houswife, who in all the world
" But one Love only, but one Servant has?
Corisca will be no such fool. " What Is faith?
" What Is constancy? Tales which the jealous feign
" To awe fond girls: names as absurd as vain.
" Faith in a woman (if at least there be
Faith in a woman unreveal'd to me)
" Is not a virtue, nor a heavenly grace,
" But the sad penance of a ruined face,
" That Is pleased with one, cause it can please no more.
" A handsome woman sought unto by store
" Of gallant youths, if pleased with one alone
No woman is, or is a foolish one.
" What Is beauty (tell me) if not viewed? or viewed,
" If not pursued? or if pursued, pursued
" By one alone? Where Lovers frequent are,
" It is a sign the party loved is rare,
" Glorious and bright. A woman's honor is
" TO have many Servants: Courtly Dames know this,
Who live in Towns, and those most practice it
Who have most wealth, most beauty, and most wit.
It Is clownishnesse (say they) to reject any,
And folly too, since that is performed by many,
One cannot do: One Officer to wait,
A second to present, a third to prate,
A fourth for somewhat else; so it does fall
Out often, that favors being general
No favors seem: or jealousy thus thrown
To whet them, all are easier kept then one.
This merry life is by great Ladies led
In Towns, and 'twas my fortune to be bred
with one of them; by whose example first,
Next by her rules, I in Loves art was nursed
Up from my childhood: she would often say,
" Corisca, thou must use another day
" Thy Lovers like thy garments, put on one,
" Have many, often shift, and wear out none.
" For daily conversation breeds distaste,
" Distaste contempt, and loathing at the last.
Then get the start, let not the servant say,
H'as turned his Mistress, not she him, away.
And I have kept her rules: I Have choice, and strive
To please them all: to this my hand I give,
And wink on him; the handsom'st I admit
Into my bosom; but not one shall get
Into my heart: and yet I know not how
(Ay me!) Mirtillo's crept too near it now.
He made me sigh, not sigh as heretofore
To give false fire, but true flames to deplore;
Robbing my limbs of rest, my eyes of sleep,
Even I can watch till the gray morning peep
(The discontented Lovers truce); even I
(Strange change!) to melancholy walks can fly;
And through the gloomy horrors of this grove
Trace the sweet footsteps of my hated Love.
What will thou do, Corisca? sue? my hate
Permits not this, nor stands it with my State.
Will thou then fly him? That would show more brains,
But Love says no to that: What then remains?
First I will try allurements, and discover
The love to him, but will conceal the Lover;
I Will use deceipts, if that avail me not;
And if those sail me too, my brain shall plot
A brave revenge: Mirtillo shall partake
Hate, if he spurn at Love; and I will make
His Amarillis rue, that she was ere
A Rival unto me, to him so deer.
Last I will teach you both what it is to move
A woman to abhor where she did love.

Scena quarta.
TITIRO, MONTANO, DAMETAS. Tit. I Speak Montano what I know is true,
And speak to one who knows more then I do.
" Your Oracles are still obscurer far
" Then we imagine: and their answers are
" Like knives, which if they warily be caught
" By that safe part which for the hand was wrought,
" Are useful; but if rashly they be taken
" By th'edge or point, one may be hurt or slain.
That Amarillis (as thou argu'st) should
By Heaven be destined for the general good
And safety of Arcadia, who should rather
Desire and joy, then I who am her Father?
But when I mark the words of the Oracle,
Me thinks with those the signs agree not well.
If Love must join them, and the one does fly,
How can that be? How can the strings which tie
The true-Love's knot be hatred and disdain?
" That cannot be opposed which Heavens ordain:
Since then we see such opposition here,
That Heavens did not ordain it, is most clear.
Had they been pleased that Silvio should have had
My Amarillis, they would him have made
A Lover, not a Huntsman.

Mont. Do not see,
He Is young, not yet seventeen? In time even he
Will feel the dart of Love.

Tit. A dog has got
His love: I know not why a Nymph should not.

Mont. "Youths are inclined more to recreation.

Tit. " And is not love a natural inclination?

Mont. " Before the time it is an unnat'rall thing.

Tit. " Love is a blossom which adorns our spring.

Mont. " Your forward blossoms seldom come to good.

Tit. " They seldom fail where frosts nip not the bud.
But came I hither to dispute with thee,
Montano? I nor can, nor fits it me.
Yet I 'm a Father too of a most deer
And only child; and (if Love do not blear
My eyes) a worthy one; such (under favor)
That many wooed me, and still do to have her.

Mont. Were not this Marriage made in heaven by Fate,
It Is made in earth by Faith, to violate
Which ( Titiro) were rashly to profane
The godhead of great Cynthia, in whose Fane
The solemn oath was taken. Now how ready
She is to wrath, and how incensed already
Against this Country, thou art not to learn.
But I profess, as far as I discern,
And a Priest's mind rapt up above the sky
Into the eternal counsels there can pry,
This knot by the hand of Destiny was knit,
And all those signs which should accompan' it
(Have thou but Faith) will fall out jump and right
In their due time. I Will tell thee more; this night
I in my dream a certain thing have viewed,
Which my old hopes has more then ere renewed.

Tit. " Dreams are but dreams: but well, what did thou view?

Mont. Thou do rememb^^, I presume (for who
Amongst us all is such a stupid wight
As to forget?) that lamentable night
When swelling Ladon (weary of his yoke)
The banks with his rebellious waters broke;
So that where birds were wont to build their nests,
Usurping fishes swam, and men, and beasts,
And flocks, and herds promiscuously taken
The impartial deluge swept into the Main.
That very night (O bitter memory!)
I lost my heart, or rather that which I
More dearly prized, a child, a tender one
In swathing bands, and then my only son.
Both then and since (though he be dead) as deer
To me, as if my only son he were:
The cruel torrent ravished him away
Before the people of the house (who lay
In darkness, fear and sleep buried alive)
With any timely succor could arrive:
We could not find the empty cradle neither,
But (as I guess) that and the child together
Were swallowed by the flood.

Tit. What else can be
Supposed? I think I Have heard (perchance from thee)
This loss of thine before, in very truth
A miserable one, and full of ruth;
And I may say, of thy two sons the Floods
Have swallowed one, the other's lost in the Woods.

Mont. Perhaps kind Heavens in the surviving brother
Will make me rich amends yet for the other:
" It Is always good to hope. Now list me out:
'Twas at the dawning of the morn, about
That mungrell hour which gotten betwixt night
And day, is half an Ethiop and half white,
When having watched out all the night almost,
With various fancies of this Marriage tossed,
Quite overcome at length with weariness,
A gentle slumber did mine eyes oppress,
Which with it such a lively vision brought,
That though I slept, I was awake. Me thought,
On famed Alfeo's bank I angling sat
Under a shady Beech, there came up straight
A grave old man, down to the middle bare,
His chin all dropping, and his grisled hair;
Who with both hands, and countenance beni'ne
Put a naked weeping infant into mine,
Saying, Lo here thy Son, and take good heed
Thou kill him not; then dived into the reed.
With that, black clouds obscured the Heavens round,
And threatening me with a dire tempest, frowned.
I to my bosom clapped the babe for fear,
And cried, Shall then one hour both give and bear
Away my joy? Straight all the welkin turned
Serene, and thunderbolts to ashes burned
Fell hissing in the River, with bows broken
And shafts by thousands, signs which did betoken
Extinguished vengeance; then a shrill voice brake
From the riv'd Beech, which in his tongue thus spoke,
Believe Montano, and thy hope still nourish,
Thy fair Arcadia once again shall flourish.
So ever since in my eyes, mind, and breast
The pleasing figure of this dream's impressed,
Standing before me still in every place;
But above all, the courteous mien and face
Of that old man (me thinks I see him wet)
Which made me coming now, when thee I met,
Directly to the Temple, there with pure
And holy Sacrifice my Dream to insure.

Tit. " Truly Montano, Dreams are Histories
" Of what is past, rather then Prophecies
" Of what is to come: Mere fragments of some sight,
" Or thought of the past day, which prints at night
" A vain reflection of it self, like those
" Which in a cloud the Sun opposed shows.

Mont. " Not always with the senses sleeps the soul:
" Rather when she is free from all control
" Of cousening forms, which do the senses blind,
" Whilst they are asleep, more wakefull is the mind.

Tit. In short: how Heavens have destined to dispose
Of our two children, neither of us knows.
But this is clear to both of us, thine flies,
And against Nature's law, does Love's despise.
And mine (as 't proves) is tied; her self yet has
No benefit of her engaged faith.
Nor do I know whether she love or no:
That she makes others love, full well I know;
And can I think it probable that she
Should others wound, and go her self still free?
Me thinks of late she is altered in her cheer,
Who used all Mirth and Jollity to appear.
" But to put Maids in mind of marrying,
" And then not marry them, is an ill thing.
" As in a curious garden a fair Rose,
" Which (cloystred up in leaves) did late repose
" Under the sable canopie of night
" Upon its mother-stalk, with the first light
" Raises its head, then opes its tender eye,
" Whence whispring Bees suck Nectar as they fly;
" Then to the Sun which on its form does gaze,
" Its purple and perfumed breast displayes:
" But if it be not gatherd then, and stay
" Till it be kissed by the Meridian Ray,
" Before the Sun to the other world be fled,
" Upon its mourning stalk it hangs the head;
" So pale, so shrunk, so without life it shows,
" That one can hardly say, This was a Rose.
" So a young Virgin, whilst her Mothers care
" Shuts and preserves her from the blasting air,
" Shuts her own bosom too against desire:
" But if she find some amorous youth to eye her,
" And hears him sigh, she opes him straight her heart,
" And in her tender breast receives Love's dart.
" Then if by fear, or else by maiden shame,
" She be withheld from showing of her flame,
" (Poor soul!) Concealment like a worm in the bud,
" Lies in her Damask cheek sucking the blood:
" So all her beauty's gone, if that fire last,
" And all her Lovers when her Beauty's past.

Mont. Take courage Titiro; do not embase
Thy soul with mortal fears, but nobly place
Thy hopes above; " Heaven favors a strong faith,
" And a faint prayer nere clomb that arduous path.
" And if all men should pray to Heaven at need,
" And pray with hope, much more should Heavens own
Our childrens Pedigree it is Divine,
" And Heaven that shines on all, will surely shine
" On its own Progeny. Come Titiro,
Together to the Temple let us go,
Together offer, thou a hee-goat there,
To PAN, and I to HERCULES a Steer.
" The Gods who bless the herds, will bless no less
" Them, who the Gods do with those blessings bless.
Trusty Dametas go, and quickly cull
From my fair herd the best and gentlest Bull,
And bring him to me to the Temple straight;
Come by the hill, the nearest way is that.

Tit. And good Dametas, from my herd bring one
Of the best Goats.

Dam. Both shall with speed be done.
May the high Gods pleased in their goodness be
To bless (Montano) this thy Dream to thee,
Even to thy utmost wish: this memory
Of thy lost son is a good augury.

Scena quinta.
SATYR. " AS frosts to Plants, to ripened Ears a storm,
" To Flowrs the midday sun, to Seed the worm,
" To Stags the toyls, to Birds the lime-twig; so
" Is Love to man an everlasting Foe.
And he that called it fire pierced well into
Its treacherous nature; for if fire thou view,
How bright and beautiful it is? Approacht,
How warm and comfortable? But then touched,
O how it burns! The monster-bearing earth
Did never teem such a prodigious birth:
It cuts like razors, like wild beasts devours,
And through a wood like winged lightning scowrs.
Where-ere it fixes its imperious foot,
Cottage and Palace, all must yield unto 't:
So Love, if thou behold it in a pair
Of starry eyes, in a bright tresse of hair,
How temptingly it looks! what kindly flames
It breathes! what peace, what pardons it proclaims!
But in thy bosom if thou do it keep,
So that it gather strength, and 'gin to creep,
No Tygresse in Hircanian mountains nursed,
No Lybian Lioness is half so cursed,
Nor frozen Snake fostred with humane breath.
His flames are hot as hell, bonds strong as death;
He is Wrath's hangman, Pitie's enemy,
And to conclude, Love void of love. But why
Accuse I him? Is he the Author then
Of all those pranks which mortal wights, not when
They are in love, but out of their wits, do?
Women, perfidious women, it is to you
That I impute Love's rancour; all that is naught
In him from you is by infection caught.
He of himself is good, meek as the Dove
That draws the chariot of the Queen of Love:
But you have made him wild; for though ye joy
With your own hands to feed the winged Boy,
Yet do you shut each pore so of your breast,
That in your hearts He cannot build his nest.
And all your care, pride, pleasure ye do place
In the mere outside of a simpring face.
Nor is 't your study how to pay true love,
And wager whether shall more constant prove;
To bind two souls in one, and of one heart
To make the other but the counter-part;
But how your silver hair with gold to hatch,
Then purse it up into a net, to catch
Poor souls withal, and like gold valence let
Some curles hang dangling ore your brows of jet.
How much against my stomach does it go
To see you paint your cheeks, to cover so
The faults of Time and Nature! How ye make
Pale Feulemort a pure Vermilian take,
Fill up the wrincles, die black white, a spot
With a spot hide, where it is, make 't where it is not.
You tie a thread acrosse, whereof one end
Held in your teeth, the other is sustein'd
By your left hand, whilst of the running knot
Your right hand makes a noose to open and shut
Like shaving tongs: This instrument you fit
To your rough downy forheads, and with it
Shave all the down, and the wild hairs which shoot*
Above their fellows, pull up by the root;
And all the while such torment you are in,
That it is at once a penance and a sin.
Nor is this all; your qualities are much
After your faces, and your faith is such
As are your works. For what is there in you
That is not counterfeit and painted too?
Do your lips open? before ye speak ye lie;
And if ye sigh, ye lie most damnably.
False lights your eyes are, and false weights your ears;
Your hearts false measures, and false pearl your tears:
So talk, or look, or think, or laugh, or cry,
Seem or seem not, walk, stand, or sit, ye lie.
Nay, there is more yet, your cousening those
Most who on you do most repose;
Your loving most those who do least love you,
And choosing to die rather then be true;
These are the arts, these are the ways
That make Love hateful in our days.
All his faults then we may most justly lay
On you; or rather on our selves: for they
Sin that believe you. Then the fault's in me
(Perjured Corisca) who did credit thee;
Come hither only for my bane (I think)
From Argos wicked streets, of vice the sink.
Yet thou art so fly, and play'st so well the Scout,
To keep thy deeds and thoughts from tracing out,
That amongst the chastest Dames thou jettst it now,
With honesty stamped on thy haughty brow:
What scorns have I received, what discontent
From this ungrateful woman! I repent,
Yea, blush I was so fond. Example take
By me, unskilful Lovers, how ye make
" An Idol of a face, and take it for granted,
" There Is no such devil as a woman sainted.
" She thinks her wit and beauty without peer,
" And over thy slavish soul does domineer
" Like some great Goddess, counting thou were born
" (As a thing mortal) only for her scorn;
" Takes all that praise as tribute of her merit.
" Which is the flattry of thy abject spirit.
Why so much serving? so much admirations?
Such sighs, such tears, such humble supplications?
These are the woman's arms: Let us express
Even in our Loves valor and manliness.
Time was when I (as lusty as I am)
Thought tears and sighs could woman's heart inflame.
But now I find I erred; for if she bears
A stony heart, in vain are sighs and tears.
We must strike fire out of her breast by dint
Of steel: what fool used bellows to a flint?
Leave, leave thy tears and sighs, if thou would make
A conquest of thy Dame; and if thou bake
Indeed with unextinguishable fire,
In thy hearts center smother thy desire
The best thou can, and watch thy time to do
That which both Love and Nature prompt thee to,
" For Modestie's the charter of the woman,
" Who will not have her privilege made common;
" Nor though she uses it her self with men,
" Would she have them to use't with her agen^
" Being a virtue for the admiration
" Of them that court her, not their imitation.
This is the plain and natural way of Love,
Indeed the only one that I approve.
My coy Corisca shall not find of me
A bashful Lover (as I used to be)
But a bold Foe, and she shall feel I can
Assault her with the weapons of a man,
As Well as with the woman's arms. Twice now
I Have caught this Eel, and yet I know not how
She has slipped through my hands; but if she come
A third time near my boat, I Will strike so home
Through both her gils, that I shall mar her flight
Here she comes forth to Rellief every night,
And I like a good hound snuff round about
To find her track: If I do sent her out,
Have at her coat; O how I mean to be
Revenged upon her! I will make her see
That Love sometimes (though he appear stark blind)
Can from his eyes the hand-kerchief unbind:
And that no woman (though she may a while)
Can glory long in perjury and guile.

CHORUS.
O Powerful Law! which Heaven or Nature,
Writ in the Heart of every Creature.
Whose amiable violence,
And pleasing rapture of the sense
Does byas all things to that good
Which we desire not understood.
Nor the exterior bark alone
Subject to the sense of every one,
Whose frail materials quickly must
Resolve again into their dust;
But the hid seeds and inward cause,
Whose substance is eternal, moves and draws.
And if the ever-teeming world bring forth
So many things of admirable worth,
If whatsoever Heaven's great eyes
The Sun and Moon, or his small spies
The Stars behold, does own a soul
Whose active power informs the whole;
If thence all humane seed have birth,
All plants and Animals; if the earth
Be green, or on her wrinckled brow it snows,
From that immortal and pure Spring it flows.
Nor this alone: On mortal Crown
Whatever restless Spheers roll down;
Whence all our actions guided are
By a happy or unhappy Star;
Whence our frail lives their Qu receive
This Stage to enter, and to leave.
Whatever thwarts, whatever stils
Our froward, and our childish wills
(Which seeming to be Fortune's Play
To give, and take our things away,
The world ascribes to her) has All
From that high virtue its original.
Soul of the World: if it were thou did say
Arcadia should have rest and peace one day,
And like a snake renew her youth,
What man dares question so divine a truth?
If what the famous Oracle
Of two whom Fate should couple did foretell,
It spoke but as thy mouth, if fixed it be
In the eternal depth of thy Decree,
And if the Tripods do not falsehoods vent,
Ah! who retards thy wills accomplishment?
Behold, a scornful boy, a foe
To Love and Beauty: He (although
Extract from Heaven) with Heaven contends!
Behold another youth offends
In love as much, (in vain deserving
To be preferred for humbly serving)
And with his flame thwarts thy Decree!
And the less hope he has to see
His service and his true loves hire,
The cleerer burns his faith and fire;
And he now for that Beauty dies,
Which the other (whom it is kept for) does despise.
Is Jove divided then about his doom?
Has doubtful Fate twins struggling in her womb?
Or does man's mountain-hope, unleveld yet,
New impious Giants in rebellion set
On both sides to assault the Towr of Jove,
By loving, and by shunning Love?
Have we such strength? and ore the Powrs above
Shall two blind Powrs triumph, Disdain, and Love?
But thou high Mover of the Orb, that rid'st
The Stars and Fate, and with thy Wisdom guid'st
Their course, look down upon our tottering State,
And reconcile Disdain and Love with Fate.
That ice, this flame, thaw, quench with heavenly dew,
Make one not fly, another not pursue.
Ah! let not two men's obstinacy stand
Betwixt thy promised mercy and a Land.
And yet who knows? what we imagine is
Our greatest cross, may prove our greatest bliss.
" If on the Sun no humane eye can gaze,
" Who then can pierce into Jove's hidden ways?
Actus Secundus.
Scena Prima.
ERGATSO, MIRTILLO. Erg. O What a walk have I had! At the Race,
The Mead, Hill, River, Fountain, wrestling Place
I Have been to seek thee: Heaven be praised, at last
I Have found thee here.

Mir. What news requires such haste?
Bringst thou me life or death?

Erg. The last's a thing,
Which if I had for thee, I would not bring:
The former, though I have not for thee yet,
I hope to bring. But why art thou ore-set
With thy own sighs? If thou would overcome
Another, overcome thy self at home:
Breathe, and revy't again --. But to proceed
To that which made me seek thee with such speed;
The matter's this: Know thou (who does not know?)
Ormino's Sister? rather tall then low
She is of stature, cherry-cheekt, her hair
Inclined to red, and of a sprightly air.

Mirt. What is her name?

Erg. Corisca.

Mir. Yes, I do
Know her, and have conversed with her too.

Erg. Know then that she (see the good luck on it! What
has been the means to work it I know not,
Or on whose score it comes) is grown of late
With Amarillis very intimate.
Which I perceiving, a relation made
Of thy affection unto her, and praid
Both her assistance and her secrecy
Therein, which she accorded readily.

Mirt. O blessed a thousand thousand times and more
Then all ( Mirtillo) that ere loved before,
If this be true: But prithee, did she say
Nothing at all unto thee of the way?

Erg. Nothing as yet, and I will tell thee why:
Corisca said, she could not certainly
Determine of the way till she might know
Some circumstances of thy love, that so
She might be better able to discern
The inclination of the Nymph, and learn
How to address her self, with subtilty,
Or with entreaties; what it were best to try,
Or what to leave: This was the cause made me
To come so hastily in search of thee.
Therefore from first to last thou shall do well
Thy Love's whole story unto me to tell.

Mirt. I Will do it. But know Friend, to stir again
The bitter memory of Love in vain,
Is like the tossing of a torch about
One's head in the air, thinking to shake it out,
When agitation kindles it, and makes
The flame cling faster to the melting wax.
Or like the tugging of a deep-fixt dart,
By which the wound's made greater, and the smart.
Most true it is, I shall a tale relate
Which will demonstrate the unsure estate
Of Lovers hopes, and that how-ere the root
Of Love be sweet, it bears a bitter fruit.
In that fair season when Day's wheels outrun
The Night's ('it was just a twelvemonth since) this Sun
Of Beauty, this fair Pilgrim came to bring
With her approach as 'twere a second Spring
To my then only rich and happy nest,
Elis and Pisa with her presence blessed;
Brought by her Mother in those solemn days
When Sacrifices and Olympic Plays
Through all the world so famous are kept there
In honor of the mighty Thunderer.
Shows worthy sure of those fair eyes; But those
Fair eyes themselves were far the worthier shows.
Whence I, who till that instant never knew
What flames of Love did mean, at the first view
Of those bright lamps, yielded, and never fought
One stroke against her; for I felt (me thought)
Two fiery balls fly whizzing through my liver
And Beauty (a bold thief) cried Stand, Deliver
Thy heart, Mirtillo.

Erg. O Love's piercing steel,
Which they alone can understand that feel!

Mir. But now to see what cunning Love suggests
Even to the youngest and the simplest breasts!
I made a deer young Sister of mine own
(Who was my cruel Nymph's companion
Whilst she in Elis and in Pisa staid)
Acquainted with my pain. This silly maid
Was all the council Love allotted me
For managing my amorous business: she
With her own garments decks me in great order,
And imps my short hair with a borrowed border,
Then braids it all with flowrs, hanging a bow
And Quiver by my side, and last does show
How I should frame my words and countenance, where
No footsteps of a beard did then appear.
The hour approached, she conducted me
Where my Nymph used to play; and there found we
Some Noble Megarensian Maids, whom Blood
And Love linkt to her, as I understood.
Amongst them was she like Royal Rose amongst low-
Born Violets: And when as they had so
For a good space without more pastime staid,
A Megarensian Virgin rose, and said;
What, at a time for Pastime so renowned
Shall we without our sports be idle found!
And have not (Sisters) we our weapons then
To make mock-fights withal as well as men?
By my advice we will practice our arms now
Against our selves in jest, as we must do
In earnest one day against men: Let Us kiss,
And wage a kissing war; and she that gi's
The best and sav'rest one, shall have for meed
This curious wreath. All laughed, and cried Agreed.
Forthwith, not staying for the word or sign,
These eager Amazons in battle join:
No ranks they kept, no colors knew, nor side,
But all confused, and each each defied.
The Megarensian this perceiving, straight
To the disordered Troops sounds a retrait;
And after says; Let her deservedly
The Judge of all our kisses be
Whose mouth is fairest. With one voice
Of peerlesse Amarillis they made choice.
She sweetly bending her fair eyes,
Her cheeks in modest blushes dies,
To show through her transparent skin
That she is no less fair within
Then she is without; or else her countenance
Envying the honor done her mouth perchance,
Puts on her scarlet robes, as who
Should say, And am not I fair too?

Erg. Blessed man to be transformed at such a time,
As if this accident thou could divine!

Mirt. The fair Judge takes her seat, and now renews
The amorous fight, according to the use
Of war; by lots they march up one by one,
To try their mouths by hers (the Paragon
Of sweetness) or (as I may term it well)
Of orient pearls a perfumed Indian shell,
And the two lips a two-leav'd Coral door
With honyed lock, to open and shut with more
Facility upon the pearly treasure.
O my Ergast' that I could tell the pleasure
Of those sweet kisses! But do thou hence guess it,
That mouth which tasted it, cannot express it.
Extract then all the sweetness which remains
In Hybla-combs, in Cyprian Sugarcanes,
It will be nothing to that world of blisses
I sucked from thence.

Erg. O happy theft! sweet kisses!

Mirt. Sweet, but yet lame; the better half was missing,
The soul which gives perfection to kissing:
For though Love gave them, Love restored them not.

Erg. But had thou not some fear when 'twas thy lot
To kiss?

Mirt. My heart (Ergasto) to say true,
Was at my mouth, and my soul shrunk into
A narrow volume; 'twas one kiss, whence all
My limbs stood tottering like an ill propt wall.
And when I came under the battery,
And within aim of her sure killing eye,
I feared the Majesty of that bright look,
Lest in the very act I should be took
Of theft and guile which I was then about.
But straight her countenance clearing me that doubt
By a serene and unsuspecting smile,
I ventured boldly on. Love stood the while
(Ergasto) like a Be hid in the leaves
Of her lips Roses; and whilst she receives
The kisses of my mouth with hers unmoved
And passive, I the honey only proved.
But when she active likewise grows,
And thrusts out this and the other rose,
(Whether her gayety of heart it was,
Or my good luck, for 'twas not love alas)
When our two mouths snapt like a bone well set,
And like two tallies that are brothers met,
(O my deer sweet and numerous treasure!
Do I out live so great a pleasure?)
Then, then I felt the sharp sweet dart,
The amorous sting piercing my heart.
Which was (it seems) restored me then,
That I might have it hurt again.
I then, as soon as I had found
Her lips had given me my deaths wound,
Was ready, like some desperate gasping wight,
The weapon which had wounded me to bite:
When suddenly her sweet breath, like the blast
Of an inspiring Deity, did cast
An holy damp upon my saucy blood,
Which all immodest and wild heat withstood.

Erg. O Modesty, the block and Remora
Which ever lies in the true Lovers way!

Mirt. Now all of them had had their turns, and come
With thoughts suspended to attend the doom,
When Amarillis judging mine t'exceed
All the others kisses, placed the Victors meed
(That curious wreath) with her own snowy hand
Upon my head. But O! no Lybian sand
Beneath the Syrian dog ere broyl'd so much,
When he both barks and bites; his rage is such,
As my whole heart was then on fire
Betwixt fruition and desire.
And (being never conquered half so much
As when I was a Conqu'ror) such
My boldness was, that from my head
I reached the wreath to her, and sed,
This is thy due, for thee it is meet,
Who with thy mouth have made my kisses sweet.
And she most courteously accepting it,
For her fair hair made it a Coronet,
And crowned mine with another, which before
Upon her own divine temples she wore:
Which is the same I now do bear, and shall
(Heaven willing) to my Funeral,
Withered as it is, to keep in memory
That happy day; but most to signify
My withered hopes.

Erg. Thy case does pity, and not envy claim,
Mirtillo: or hereafter let thy name
" Be Tantalus, for he that jests with Love,
" Or plays with fire, shall pain in earnest prove.
Poor youth! thou took'st up transitory treasure
At too much use, and of thy theft the pleasure
And punishment together did receive.
But did she never the deceit perceive?

Mirt. I know not that, Ergasto; this I do,
Whilst she thought Elis worthy of her view,
She was still bounteous to me of her eye,
And gracious smiles. But my hard destiny
Snatching her thence, unwares to me almost,
I straight came flying hither, where thou know
My Father, though he sojourned long abroad,
Yet still retains his wonted poor abode.
I came and saw (O sight!) my day begun
In such a fair and smiling morn, now run
To its long West. When I appeared in place
The lightning of disdain flashed in her face;
Then did she bend her eyes, and turned away,
These Meteors boad my death, then did I lay.
Mean while, that I should so by stealth depart,
My tender Father took deeply to heart;
And with the grief on it an infirmity
So terrible, that he was like to die.
This forced me back, which proved (alas) in one
Health to the Father, sickness to the Son.
For half a year of a Love-caused fever
I languisht, and I think had languisht ever,
If my indulgent Father had not sought
In time the Tripods Counsel; whence he brought
This Answer, That the Arcadian air alone
Could make me well again. I thereupon
Returned (Ergasto) to revisite her
(O fallacy of that grand Sophister,
The Oracle!) who made my body whole
To cause eternal sickness in my soul.

Erg. Thou have related a strange tale in truth,
Mirtillo, a case worthy of much ruth
Without all doubt. " But often a desperate state
" Has proved the cause that cures as desperate
" Have saved the sick. And now it is time I go
To tell Corisca what from thee I know;
Expect me at the Fountain, there will I
Ere long be with thee.

Mirt. Go on prosperously:
And Heaven at need that pity show to thee
(Courteous Ergasto) which thou shewst to me.

Scena secunda.
DORINDA, LUPINO, SILVIO. She bringing in Silvio's Dog. Dor. Faithful and
fortunate, delight and care
Of my fair Silvio, and as proud as fair.
Thrice fortunate Melampo, that I were
Unto thy cruel Master half so deer!
With that white hand with which he gripes my heart,
He strokes and he feeds thee. He does not part
From thee by night, nor part from thee by day;
Whilst I that so much love him, in vain pray,
And sigh in vain. And that which worse I bear
Then all the rest, he gives to thee such deer
And lushious kisses, one of which would make
Me rich, and I too kiss thee for his sake
Happy Melamp'; O dog sent from above
To steer the erring footsteps of blind Love!
Lead on, sure guide, whither Affection me,
But Nature only, and Instinct draws thee.
But list a little, does not a horn blow
In this near thicket?

Sil. Sogh Melampo, Sogh!

Dor. That is (if Love delude me not) the sound
Of Silvio's voice, who seems to call his hound
About these woods.

Sil. Melampo, Sogh, hogh, hogh.

Dor. It is the very voice of Silvio.
Happy Dorinda, to whom Heaven has sent
The self same thing in search whereof I went!
I Will hide the dog; with that he holds so deer
I may chance buy his love. Lupino!

Lup. Here.

Dor. Go take this dog, and hide thee hereabout:
Conceiv'st thou me?

Lup. I do.

Dor. But come not out
Until I call.

Lup. I wo'n't.

Dor. Nay, quickly man.

Lup. And do thou quickly take some order than,
That if the dog should have a hungry fit,
He may not swallow me up at a bit.

Dor. A Coward? Hence.

Sil. O whither shall I steer
My wretched steps to follow thee my deer
Faithful Melampo? over hill and plain
Till I am tired and foundred I in vain
Have hunted for thee. Cursed be the Do
Thou follow'dst. But behold, a Nymph may know
Some news of him! O vile encounter! This
Is she, who with her importunities
Torments me still: but there is no remedy
Save patience now. Fair Nymph, did thou see my
Faithful Melampo, whom I slipped while-ere
After a Do?

Dor. I ( Silvio) fair? I fair?
Why do thou call me fair, if that I be
Not fair in thy eyes?

Sil. Fair or fowl, did see
My dog? Answer me that: if not, I go.

Dor. So harsh to her adores thee, Silvio?
Who would believe in that sweet shape could nest
So sour a soul? Thou follow'st a wild beast
That flies thee, over rocks; and for a curre
Vexest thy body and thy mind: but her
That follows thee, and thy content does prize
Above the world, thou fly'st and do despise.
Ah! do not follow a wild flying Do,
Let not a tame one (caught already) go.
Do not unbind her.

Sil. Nymph, I came in search
Of my Melampo, not to hear thee preach.
Adieu.

Dor. O fly not, cruel Silvio:
I Will tell thee news of thy Melampo.

Sil. Go,
Thou mockst, Dorinda*

Dor. By that love I swear
That makes me Silvio's servant, I know where
He is. Thou say he did a Do pursue?

Sil. He did: and straight I lost them both from view.

Dor. The Dog and Do then at this present time
Are in my power.

Sil. In thy power?

Dor. Yes, in mine.
'Twas that I said: Do thou think much that she
Should love thy Dog (ungrateful) who loves thee?

Sil. My deer Dorinda, give 'em to me straight,

Dor. Out Shittle-cock, I Am come to a fine state
When beasts endeer me to thee. But indeed
(My heart) thou gettst them not without some meed.

Sil. And reason good, I Will give thee; Let me see --
(I Will cosen her).

Dor. What will thou give to me?

Sil. Two fair Queen-apples I will give to thee,
Which my own fairer Mother gave to me
The other day.

Dor. For apples, I want none:
I could give thee two fairer of my own,
And sweeter too, but that thou carest not
For what I give.

Sil. Then would thou have a goat?
Or Lambkin? (but my Father will not let
Me make so bold with what is his as yet.)

Dor. Nor Goat, nor Lambkin do I care to have:
Thee only, Silvio, and thy love I crave.

Sil. My love? No more?

Dor. No more.

Sil. I g'it thee: so,
Give me my Dog (deer Nymph) now, and my Do.

Dor. Ah, that thou knewst the worth of what thou art
So bounteous of, and spak'st now from thy heart!

Sil. Nymph, mark my words: I find thou talkst to me
Still of a thing called Love; what this should be
I know not: thou would have me love thee; and
I do (as far as I can understand)
With all my heart: thou call'st me cruel; I
Am ignorant of what is cruelty.
How should I please thee?

Dor. In whom hop'st thou, poor
Dorinda? whence do thou expect thy cure?
From such a Beauty as has felt as yet
No spark of that which does all Lovers set
On fire? Art thou my flame, and art not hot?
Do thou breath Love, and what it is know not?
That gentle Goddess whom the Cyprians honor
Took a most beauteous humane shape upon her
To bring thee forth: Firebrarnds thou have and dart,
Witness my flaming and my bleeding heart.
Add wings, another Cupid thou will prove,
At least want nothing to be Love, but love.

Sil. What is this Love?

Dor. When I behold thy eyes,
It is the light of Paradise.
But mine own heart considered well,
It is the very fire of hell.

Sil. Nymph, what a prating is here with thee?
Give me my Dog and Do, now prithee.

Dor. Give me the love first that I bargained for.

Sil. Have I not gi'n it thee? Fie, what a stir
There is to please this woman! Take it: do
What thou will with it. Who forbids thee? who
Withholds it? On what trifles do thou stand?

Dor. Wretched Dorinda, thou do sow the sand,
And fondly undertak'st labor in vain.

Sil. What dream'st thou of? why holdst thou me in pain?

Dor. When thy desire's once granted, thou will go
And leave me straight, perfidious Silvio.

Sil. No
Indeed, fair Nymph.

Dor. Give me a pawn then.

Sil. Name
The pawn.

Dor. Alas! I dare not.

Silv. Why?

Dor. For shame.

Sil. But how then can I give it thee?

Dor. I would
Fain without naming it be understood.

Sil. If thou art ashamed to name it, thou may be
Ashamed to take it.

Dor. Promise it to me,
And I will name it.

Sil. I do promise it:
But thou must name it first.

Dor. Can thou not hit
My thoughts then? I should have conceived thee
If thou had said but half so much to me.

Sil. Thou have more wit then I, Dorinda.

Dor. I
Have more Love, Silvio, and less Cruelty.

Sil. Truth is, I am no witch: if thou would have me
To understand thee, speak.

Dor. O misery!
That which I beg of thee is one of those
Things thy kind mother upon thee bestows.

Sil. A box of the ear?

Dor. To ones that loves thee so?

Sil. Those things my mother does on me bestow.

Dor. Nay, that is not so: But does not she give thee
A Kiss sometimes?

Sil. She neither kisses me,
Nor would have others kiss me. Is 't a Kiss
Thou do desire of me? It is, it is:
Thy blush betrays thee. Come, I Will give it thee:
But first my Dog and Do.

Dor. Do promise me?

Sil. I promise thee.

Dor. And with me will thou stay?

Sil. Why do thou vex me thus? Did I not say
I would?

Dor. Come forth Lupino, do not hear?
Lupino.

Lup. Ogh! ogh! what a brawling's there?
Who calls me? O I am come. It was not I
That slept, it was the Dog slept verily.

Dor. Look Silvio, there is thy Dog, that might to thee
Have read a lecture of Humanity.

Sil. How overjoyed am I?

Dor. Upon this breast
Which thou despisest so he came to rest.

Sil. (O my sweet true Melampo.)

Dor. Setting by
My sighs and kisses.

Sil. (I will certainly
Kiss thee a thousand times, poor Cur! But have
Thou got no harm at all, thou ran'st so fast?)

Dor. Fortunate Dog, that I might change (alas!)
Estates with thee; I Am come to a fine pass
To envy a Dogs life. Bend thou thy gate
Homewards Lupino, I will follow straight.

Lup. Mistress, I go.

Scena tertia.
Manent SILVIO, DORINDA. Sil. (IN fine, thou have got no harm.) Now let me see
Where is this Do which thou have promised me.

Dor. Alive or dead woul'dst have her?

Sil. Strange demand!
Alive after the Dog has killed her?

Dor. And
If the Dog killed her not?

Sil. Alive is she?

Dor. Alive.

Sil. The deerer then the prey to me:
And had my deer Melampo so much art
As not to hurt her?

Dor. Only in the heart
She had a little prick.

Sil. Either thou art mad,
Dorinda, or do mock me. If she had
A prick in the heart, how can she live?

Dor. The Do
I speak of, I am, cruel Silvio:
Hurt by thee, without being hunted; Take me,
I am alive; but dead, if thou forsake me.

Sil. Is this that Do? that prey?

Dor. Even this: why now
Art thou so discontented? Do not thou
Love a Nymph better then a beast?

Sil. My hate
Thou art, brute, liar, vile, importunate.

Dor. Is this the guerdon, cruel Silvio?
Is this the meed thou do on me bestow,
Ungrateful youth? Take thy Melampo free,
And me and all, so thou come back to me:
The rest I do remit. Let me be placed
But in the sunshine thy fair eyes do cast.
Truer then thy Melampo I will trace
Thy steps, and when thou art wearied with the chase
I Will wipe thy sweating brow, and on this breast
(Which cannot rest for thee) thy head shall rest:
I Will bear thy arrows, and thy quiver bear
Through these rough woods; and if there want game there,
Shoot at Dorinda's bosom. At this white
Set thy good bow, when ere it shoots not right.
For I Will be both the prey (if thou think fit)
To keep in ure, and drudge to carry it;
Thy arrows, quiver, and their Butt to hit.
But to whom do I talk? Alas! to thee
That hear'st me not, and fly'st away from me?
But wherefoe're thou fly (cursed Silvio)
Dorinda will fly after thee: although
To hell it self, if any hell there be
Worse then my Love is, and thy Cruelty.

Scena quarta.
CORISCA. FOrtune beyond my wish has favored me:
"And fit it is that they should favored be
" Who not with wishings only seek her favor.
" Powerful she is; and men with reason have her
" In reputation of a Goddess. But
" We must go meet her then, wait a foot
" To find her humors; and must use our own
" Judgment in playing of our game; a drone
" Seldom or never does prove fortunate.
Had not my industry made me the Mate
Of her by whom under the name of friend
I have fit means and safe to work my end,
Where had I been? Some fool would now be shie,
And view her Rival with a jealous eye,
Bearing the open tokens of ill will
Writ in her forehead; and she would do ill:
" For open foes are easier to evade
" Then ambushes that are in friendship laid.
" Wise Mariners by rocks hid in the sea
" Are often deceived: She knows not how to be
" An enemy, that knows not how to seem
" A friend. Corisca's skill shall now be seen
In both: Nor am I yet so simply dull
To think she does not love. Well may she gull
Others with this, not me; who am gone out
A Mistress in the Art. A tender sprout
New peept out of the bark, within whose breast
There Is built for Love already a soft nest,
Long wooed, and wooed by so complete a Lover,
And (which is worst) kissed too over and over,
And yet hold tyte? Believe't (for me) that list.
But my good Genius does me assist;
For look if Amarillis come not here
As sent? I Will walk as if I did not see her.

Scena quinta.
AMARILLIS, CORISCA. Am. DEar happy Groves, and you ye sollitary
And silent horrors where true peace does tarry,
With how much joy do I review you? And
Had my stars pleased to give me the command
Over my self, that I might choose my lot,
And my own way of life, then would I not
For the Elisians groves, about which range
The happy shades, your happy shades exchange.
" For what we foolish mortals Goods do call
" If rightly understood, are Evils all.
" He that has most of them, in truth has least,
" Nor is so much possessor, as possessed;
" Not riches, no, but of our freedom snares.
" What boots it in the springtime of one's years
" To have the Attributes of Fair and Good,
" In mortal veins to lock celestial blood,
" Graces of body and of mind, here fair
" And laughing fields of corn, rich meadows there,
" In fruitful pasture-grounds more fruitful flocks,
" If with all these the heart contentment lacks?
Happy that shepherdess whom some course stuff
Obscurely clothes, yet clean and just enough!
Rich only in her self, and bravely dressed
With Nature's ornaments which are the best;
Who in sweet poverty no want does know,
Nor the distractions which from riches grow:
Yet whatsoever may suffice the mind,
In that estate abundantly does find:
Poor, but content! with Nature's gifts retrives
The gifts of Nature, Milk with milk revives,
And with the sweet which from the Be she gets,
Seasons the honey of her native sweets:
One fountain is her looking glass, her drink
Her bath; and if she is pleased, what others think
It matters not; she heeds not blazing stars
That threaten mighty ones: wars or no wars,
It is all one to her; her battlement
And shield is that she is poor: Poor, but content!
One only care ('it is a sweet care) does keep
Her heart awake; she feeds her Masters sheep
With pearled grass, and with her lovely eyes
Some honest swain, that for her beauty dies:
Not such as men or Gods choose to her hand,
But such as Love did to her choice commend;
And in some favored shady Myrtle grove
Desires, and is desired: Nor feels of Love
One spark which unto him she does not show,
Nor shows one spark with which he does not glow.
Poor, but content! True life! which till the breath
Forsakes the body, know not what is death.
Would Heaven had made me such a one! -- But see,
Corisca! Sweet Corisca.

Cor. Who calls me?
My Amarillis? dearer then mine own
Eyes, or life to me, whither so alone?

Am. No farther then thou see; nor anywhere
Could I be better, since I weet thee here.

Cor. Thou have met her that never parts from thee,
Sweet Amarillis; and now, credit me,
Was thinking of thee, saying in my heart,
If I Am her soul, how can she live apart
From me? When straight I saw thee here: -- but go,
Thou car'st not for Corisca now.

Am. Why so?

Cor. Why? Do thou ask the question? thou do wed
To day.

Am. I wed?

Cor. Yes: and thou keepst it hid
From me.

Am. How can I tell thee that which I
Am ignorant my self of?

Cor. Do, deny,
And wear a mask to me.

Am. Still jest with me Corisca.

Cor. I am jested with by thee.

Am. But speakst thou this for truth?

Cor. I Will swear it is so.
And know thou nothing often indeed?

Am. I know
I Am promised: but that I should be a wife
So soon, is news to me upon my life.
But from whom know it thou?

Cor. From my own Brother
Ormino: and he says, there is no other
Discourse abroad. -- Thou seem perplexed: is this
News to perplex one?

Am. O Corisca! It Is
A hideous gulf: I Have heard my mother say,
We Are then new born.

Cor. Most true: it is our birth day
TO a better life, therefore rejoice. Do fetch
A sigh? leave sighing to that wretch.

Am. What wretch

Cor. Mirtillo: who was present casually
At what my brother told me, and was nigh
Struck dead with grief; and doubtless he had died,
If a good cordial I had not applied,
By promising to break this Match. Which though
I said, only to comfort him, I know
(If need were) how to do it.

Am. Can thou tell
How to break this Match?

Cor. Yes very well.

Am. I prithee how?

Cor. With ease, if thou were but
Consenting likewise, and assisting to it.

Am. Could I suppose this possible, and thou
Would not reveal it, I would tell thee now
A secret that has long burnt in my heart.

Cor. Who, I reveal it? Let the earth first part
And swallow me alive miraculously.

Am. Know then Corisca, when I think that I
Must all my life be subject to a Boy
That hates and flies me, and does take no joy
But in the woods, preferring hunting far
Before the love of all the Nymphs that are,
It makes me male content, and desperate
Indeed almost, although I dare not say 't,
Because my faith I have already given
Unto my Father, and (what is worse) to Heaven,
And break with them I neither will nor may.
But if thy industry can find a way
(Always provided, that my Honesty,
My Faith, my Life, and my Religion be
Preserved) t'untie this knot that galls me so,
To thee my life and safety I shall owe.

Cor. If this were it that caused thy sighing, thou
Had great cause for it Amarillis. How
Often have I said? What pity it is to throw
So rich a thing to one that scorns it so!
A pearl to a swine! why speak not to thy Father?

Am. Shame stops my mouth.

Cor. There Is a disease! I Would rather
For my part have a Fistula, or Fever.
" But 'twill be cured; Overcome it once, 'twill never
" Return again.

Am. That cannot be overcome
" That Is natural: For if I drive it from
" My heart, it flies into my face.

Cor. Alas,
(My Amarillis) often it comes to pass,
" She that through too much wisdom holds her tongue,
" Roars out at last like mad, being thoroughly stung.
Had thou before been willing to discover
Thy mind to me, this trouble had been over:
And now thou have, Corisca's power this day
In all its colors shall it self display.
Into more skillful hands, more faithful then
Mine are, thou never could have fallen. But when
From an ill Husband thou art freed by me,
Shall not an honest Suitor welcome be?

Am. We Will think of that at leisure.

Cor. That good youth
Mirtillo must not be forgot in sooth:
For parts, for spotless faith, for shape thou know
Of all men living he deserves thee most:
And can thou let him dye? O cruelty!
Nor wilt so much as hear him say, I dye?
Hear him but once.

Am. 'Twere better he would rest
In peace, and root a love out of his breast
That Is vain.

Cor. That comfort give him ere he dye.

Am. 'T would rather double his perplexity.

Cor. If it do so, the seeking is his own.

Am. And what must I expect, should it be known?

Cor. How cowardly thou art?

Am. And let me still
Be cowardly in any thing that is ill.

Cor. If thou may fail me in this small request,
Then may I fail thee likewise in the rest
Most justly, Amarillis. So God bu'y.

Am. Nay, stay Corisca, hear.

Cor. Not a word I,
Unless thou promise me.

Am. I promise thee
To hear him speak, provided this may be
For all.

Cor. It shall.

Am. And that he may not know
I was acquainted with 't.

Cor. I Will make as though
Ye met by accident.

Am. And that I may
At my own pleasure freely go away.

Cor. Thou shall, when thou have heard him.

Am. And that he
Shall briefly speak.

Cor. That too is granted thee.

Am. Nor come within my darts length of me.

Cor. Fie,
What a stir 's here with thy simplicity!
To make it sure, he shall not do thee wrong,
I Will tie up all his limbs except his tongue.
Would thou have more?

Am. It Is well.

Cor. And when will thou
Do this?

Am. When ere thou will: Do but allow
Me so much time, as to go home to hear
More certain news about this Marriage there.

Cor. Go; but with caution, and before you are gone,
Hear a contrivance I have thought upon
As thou were speaking: In the afternoon
I would have thee without thy Nymphs to come
Into this shady walk, where I will be
Before for this occasion, and with me
Nerina, Phillis, Celia, Aglaura,
Eliza, Daphne, Silvia, and Laura;
All my no less discreet and witty, then
Faithful and secret Mates. There thou with them
Shall play (as thou art wont) at Blind-man-buffe,
So that Mirtillo will with ease enough
Be made believe, that for thy own passe-time
Thou thither came, and not to meet with him.

Am. I like it wondrous well. But do thou hear?
I would not any of those Nymphs were there
The while Mirtillo speaks.

Cor. I do conceive
'Twas thought upon with good discretion. Leave
The getting them away to my endeavor.
Go: and remember one thing, -- to love ever
Thy faithfullest Corisca.

Am. In her hand
Since I have put my heart, she may command
As much love as she pleases.

Cor. Is she not stiff? We must assault this rock
With greater force; though she resist my shock,
Against Mirtillo's she will find no fence
I Am sure: I know by self-experience
The power of Lovers prayers when they invade
The tender heart of an inclining maid.
If she do yield, I Will make her smart so for it,
That she shall find her sport was not in sport.
Through her dark'st words her heart shall be to me
As visible as in a 'natomie.
I Will ransack all her veins: that done, and I
Made Mistress of her secret, easily
I Will wind her so, and lead her by the nose
To what I Would have, that she shall never suppose
(Much less shall others) that it was my skill
That drew her to it, but her unbridled will.

Scena sexta.
CORISCA, SATYR. Cor. O I Am dead.

Sat. But I was quick.
There Is a trick now for your trick.

Cor. My Amaerillis, I am caught.
O come back.

Sat. She hears thee not.
'Twill now behove thee to be strong.

Cor. O me, my hair!

Sat. I have so long
Stood angling for thee in my boat,
At last the art struck. It Is not thy coat,
It Is thy hair (Sister) this.

Cor. To me
This usage ( Satyr?)

Sat. Yes, to thee
Corisca, or I am mistaken:
That Mistress in the art of making
The fine-spun lies, that sels so deer
False words, false hopes, and a false leer?
She that so often has betrayed me;
She that so many fools has made me
At every turn: the sorceresse,
The cheat Corisca?

Cor. I confess,
I am Corisca; but not she
Now, that was once so loved by thee,
My gentile Satyr.

Sat. Pray since when
Am I gentile? I was not then
When me for Coridon thou did change.

Cor. Thee for another?

Sat. See how strange
She makes it now! I warrant then
This is great news to thee; and when
Thou made me Silvia's Buskins steal,
The Bow of Lilla, Cloris Veil,
And Daphne's Gown, that were to be
The price of love, which promised me,
Thou gav'st another: and when that
Fair wreathe I on thy head did plat,
Thou upon Niso did bestow;
And when thou made me (cold as snow)
Watch many a night out at the Fountain,
The Cave, Wood-side, and foot of the Mountain,
And for my pains did laugh at me,
Did I then seem gentile to thee?
Ah thief! But now as I am here,
I Will make thee pay thy whole arrear.

Cor. O me! Thou dragg'st me like a beast.

Sat. I drag thee like thy self then. Wrest
Thy neck out of the collar now;
Give me the slip if thou know how.
Fox, though thy craft the time before
Did save thee, it shall do it no more.
For this I Am sure thou can not escape,
Unless thou leave thy head in the trap.

Cor. Yet give me so much time I pray,
As for my self to answer.

Sat. Say.

Cor. How can I if thou hold me so?

Sat. It Is likely I should let thee go.

Cor. I Will gage my faith not to go hence.

Sat. What faith? Have thou the impudence
(Perfidious woman) to name faith
To me? I Will bear thee where there has
No Sun, much less the feet of men
Approacht, unto the horrid'st den
Of all this Mountain: there -- (but I
Will act the rest) to mine own joy
And thy dishonor, I will kerve
Such vengeance as thy faults deserve.

Cor. Can thou then (cruel) to this hair (which has
Tied fast thy heart), unto this face (which was
Once thy delight), to this Corisca (then
More dear to thee then thine own life was when
Thou swar'st by that, that thou could find it sweet
On her behalf, even death it self to meet),
Can thou once think to offer injury,
I say, to her? O Heavens! O Destiny!
Whom have I hoped in? whom can I believe
Again?

Sat. Ah Siren! think thou to deceive
Me still? still rock me with thy flattering charms?

Cor. My sweet deer Satyr, do no harm
To her that loves thee. Thou art not a beast,
Nor have a marble or a flinty breast:
Behold me at thy feet! O pardon me
If ever I (by chance) offended thee,
My Idol. By those sinewy and more
Then humane knees, which clasping I adore;
By that rough manly visage; by that dear
Affection which thou once to me did bear;
By the sweet influence of those eyes which thou
Were wont to call two stars (two fountains now;)
By these salt tears which trickle down so fast,
Pity me now, and let me go.

Sat. Thou have
Moved me (I must confess) and I were gone,
If I should hearken to affection.
But to be short, I do not credit thee;
Thou art too full of wiles and tricks for me,
And he that takes thy word, believes his snares:
Beneath this humble show, beneath these prayr's
There Is hid Corisca: Thou can never be
Another. Sruggling still?

Cor. My head, O me!
Ah cruel! stay a little longer yet,
And grant me but one favor.

Sat. What is it?

Cor. Hear me a little more.

Sat. Thou hopest now
With flatt'ries and squeezed tears to make me bow.

Cor. Ah courteous Satyr! will thou kerve in me
Such cruel vengeance?

Sat. Come, and thou shall see.

Cor. And take no Pity of me?

Sat. None at all.

Cor. But art thou firm in this?

Sat. As a brasse-wall.
Is this charm ended?

Cor. O thou base, and not
To be exampled Rogue; half man, half goat,
And all a beast; thou carrion that does stink,
By-blow and blush of nature; If thou think
Corisca loves thee not, thou think the truth.
What should she love in such a comely youth?
That fair Stags head? that chimney-sweepers broom?
Goats ears? that grave of rottenness and rheum
Which once had bones in it?

Sat. This to me,
Thou wicked varlet?

Cor. Even to thee.

Sat. To me, thou scold?

Cor. To thee, thou Goat.

Sat. And with these pincers pull I not
Thy barking tongue out?

Cor. Would thou durst
Come neer't, there is that will scour their rust.

Sat. A paltry woman, and in such
Condition (being in my clutch)
To injure me! and dare me too!
I will --

Cor. Base slave, what will thou do?

Sat. Eat thee alive I will.

Cor. Where be
The teeth to do it?

Sat. Heaven, do thou see
And suffer this! But if I do not
Chastise thee -- Come along.

Cor. I wo' not.

Sat. Wo' not, my Mistress Malapert?

Cor. Wo' not in spite of thy foul heart.

Sat. That shall be seen; Come, or I swear,
This arm I Will from thy shoulder tear.

Cor. Tear my head off, I wo' not go
One foot.

Sat. Art thou resolved so?
Let Us never dispute then any longer,
But put to trial whether's stronger
And faster on, thy neck-piece, or
My arm. -- Thy hands to help too? Nor
Are these (perverse one) enough guard.

Cor. That shall be tried.

Sat. It shall.

Cor. Pull hard.
Satyr adieu, Get thy neck set.

Sat. O me!
How I am shattered! O my head! my knee!
O my backbone! my thigh! what a vile fall
Was here! to get upon my legs is all
I have the power to do. But can it be
That she should fly, and leave her head with me?
O mavelous! ye Nymphs and Shepherds run,
Flock hither to behold a wonder; one
That runs away without her head, by skill
In Magic. Hah! how light it is! how ill
Peopled with brains! How comes it that I see
None of the blood spirt forth? But stay; let me
Peruse it better. O thou stock! thou stone!
Thou have no head, if thou think she has none.
Was ever any man so fooled? See now
If she had not a trick to escape, when thou
Thoughtst her most sure! Thou all made up of wiles,
Was It not enough thy heart, thy face, thy smiles,
Thy looks and speeches falsified were,
But thou must likewise falsify thy hair?
The glowing Amber, and the flowing Gold,
Which you (mad Poets) so extol, behold!
Blush, blush now at your error, and recant
Your threadbare theme; in stead whereof, go paint
The arts of a deformed and impious Witch
Breaking up Sepulchers by night, from which
She steals the hair that upon Death's head grows,
To imp her own, which she so neatly does,
That she has made you praise what ye should more
Then dire Megara's snakie locks abhor.
These (Lovers) are your gyves (I take it) too!
Look on 'em Idiots: and if (as you
Protest) your hearts are fastened to these hairs,
Now every one may without sighs or tears
Come by his own. But why do I forbear
To publish her disgrace? Surely that hair,
Which stuck with stars adorns the azure sky, --
Never so famous was as this; and she
Much more that wore it by my tongue shall be
Made infamous to all posterity. --

CHORUS.
AH! 'Twas a grievous fault in her (the Cause
Of all our sorrows) who, the sacred Laws
Of Love offending, by her breach of troth,
Kindled against this Land the mortal wrath
Of the immortal Gods, which not a Flood
Of general tears, nor so much guiltless blood
" Can quench yet or abate; so high a price
" Unspotted Faith (Expeller of all vice,
" And most undoubted Argument to prove
" A mind descended nobly) bears above.
" And such a care to plant love in his creature
" (By which we deifie our humane Nature)
" Has the eternal Lover. O those blind
Mistaken mortals, who addict their mind
To wealth, (for which affection's basely sold)
Watching the carcass of their coffined gold,
Like a pale ghost that walks about his grave!
Or why should beauty our free hearts enslave?
" These are dead loves; the living and divine
" Is where two souls by virtue do combine.
" No outward object can with reason move
" The heart to love it, 'cause it cannot love:
" Only the soul, 'cause that can love again,
" Deserves a Love, deserves a Lovers pain.
Well may that kiss be sweet that is given t'a sleek
And fragrant rose of a vermilion cheek;
And understanding tasters (as are true
And happy Lovers) will commend that too.
It Is a dead kiss, say I, and must be poor,
Which the place kissed has no means to restore.
But the sweet ecchoing, and the Dove-like billing
Of two encountering Mouths, when both are willing;
And when at once both Loves advance their bows,
Their shafts drawn home, at once sound at the loose,
(How sweet is such Revenge!) This is true kissing,
Where there is one for the other without missing
A minute of the time, or taking more
Then that which in the taking they restore.
Where by an interchange of amorous blisses
At the same time they sow and gather kisses.
Kiss a red swelling lip, then kiss a wrist,
A breast, a forehead, or what else thou list,
No part of a fair Nymph so just will be,
Except the lip, to pay this kiss to thee.
Thither your souls come sallying forth, and they
Kiss too, and by the wandering powers convey
Life into smacking Rubies, and transfuse
Into the live and sprightly kiss their use
Of reason; so that ye discourse together
In kisses, which with little noise deliver
Much matter; and sweet secrets, which he spells,
Who is a Lover; Gibbrish to all else.
Like life, like mutual joy they feel, where Love
With equal flames as with two wings does move.
" And as where lips kiss lips is the best Kiss:
" So where one's loved, to love, best loving is.
Actus Tertius.
Scena Prima.
MIRTILLO. SPring, the years youth, fair Mother of new flowrs,
New leaves, new loves, drawn by the winged hours,
Thou art returned; but the felicity
Thou brought me last is not returned with thee.
Thou art returned, but naught returns with thee
Save my lost joys regretfull memory.
Thou art the self same thing thou were before,
As fair and jocund: but I am no more
The thing I was, so gracious in her sight
Who is Heavens masterpiece, and Earth's delight,
" O bitter-sweets of Love! Far worse it is
" To love then never to have tasted bliss.
" But O how sweet were Love, if it could not
" Be lost, or being lost could be forgot!
Though if my hopes (as mine are wont to be)
Are not of glass, or my love make me see
Them through a multiplying glass; If I
Be not deceived both by my self, and by
Another: Here I shall that Sun behold
Which I adore, impart her beams of gold
To my blessed sight, behold her flying feet
Stop at my sad notes; here upon the sweet
Food of that lovely face I shall suffice
After a tedious fast my greedy eyes.
Here, here behold that proud one on me turn
Her sparkling lamps, if not to light, to burn.
And if not fraught with amorous delight,
So kindly cruel as to kill outright.
Yet were it but just, that after so much pain
As I have hitherto endured in vain,
Thou Love at length should make the Sun appear
To this benighted earth serene and clear.
Hither Ergasto did direct me, where
Corisca and my Amarillis were
To play at Blindman-busse: but I can find
In this place nothing but my love that is blind,
And so deceived, misled by a false guide
To seek that light which is to me denied.
Pray Heaven my hard and envious fate beneath
This sugared Pill now have not hid my death.
This tedious stay afflicts me: " For those
" That go to meet their Loves, each moment shows
" An age. Perchance I have arrived too late,
And made for me too long Corisca wait:
Yet I made haste. Now woe is me! If I
Have done this fault, I will lie down and dye.

Scena secunda.
AMARILLIS, MIRTILLO, Chorus of Nymphs, CORISCA. Am. BEhold the Buff!

Mirt. O sight!

Am. Come on*

Mirt. O voice!
That makes my heart both tremble and rejoice.

Am. What do you do? Lisetta, where art thou
That were so eager of this sport but now?
And thou Corisca, whither gone?

Mir. I find
Now it is true indeed, that Love is blind.

Am. You there that are appointed for my guides
To hand and to support me on both sides,
Before the rest of our Companions come,
Out of these trees conduct me to field-room:
Then leaving me alone amidst the plain,
Amongst our other fellows herd again:
So joining all together, make a ring
About me round, and let the sport begin.

Mir. But what shall I do? Yet I cannot see
Of what advantage this should be to me
In my desires; nor see I my north-starre
Corisca: Succor me blessed Heaven!

Am. O are
Ye come at last? ye wantons, did you mean
Only to bind my eyes? Begin now then.

Chor. Love, thou art not blind, I know,
" But do only appear so
" To blind us: if thy sight's small,
" Thou have, I Am sure no faith at all.
Blind or not, thou try'st in vain
Me into thy net to train.
And to keep out of thy pound,
Off I get, and traverse ground.
Blind as thou art, thou could see more
Then Argus hundred eyes of yore.
Thou could see (blind as thou art)
Well enough to hit my heart.
But I were a fool indeed,
Should I trust thee now I Am freed.
Sport with thee henceforth that will;
It Is a sport with thee to kill.

Am. I, but with too much wariness you play:
Ye should strike first, and after get away.
Approach me, touch me, and ye shall not fly
Me then.

Mir. O ye high Gods! In heaven am I?
Or earth? O heavens! do your eternal rounds
Move in such order, warble such sweet sounds?

Cho. Well, blind Archer, since thou still
Vrgest me to play, I will.
Now I clap thy shoulder hard:
Now I fly unto my guard:
Strike, and run, and strike again,
And thou wheel'st about in vain.
Now I pinch thee, now remove:
And have at thee now blind Love.
Yet thou can not light on me;
Why? because my heart is free.

Am. In faith Licoris, I had surely thought
T'ave caught thee there, and 'twas a tree I caught.
I, do thou laugh?

Mir. Would I had been that tree.
But do I not Corisca hidden see
Amongst those brakes? and she makes signs as who
Should say, that something she would have me do.

Cho. "A free heart makes a nimble heel.
Ah traitor! do thou tempt me still
With thy flattering false delight?
Thus then I renew the fight.
Slash, and fly, and turn, and shove;
And about again blind Love:
Yet thou can not light on me;
Why? because my heart is free.

Am. Would thou were pulled up by the root, base tree:
That I should ever thus be catching thee!
Deceived by the dancing of a bough,
I did suppose I Would had Eliza now.

Mir. Corisca still is making signs to me,
And looks as she were angry: perhaps she
Would have me mix with those Nymphs.

Am. Must I play
With nothing but with trees then all this day?

Cor. I must come forth and speak, or he will not stir --.
To her (white liver) and lay hold on her.
Why do thou gape? to have her run into
Thy mouth? At least, if that thou dare not do,
Let her lay hold of thee. Come, give me here
This dart, and go to meet her fool.

Mir. How near
To impotence is strong desire! O Love!
That thou should make a man a coward prove!

Am. Play but once more, for now I weary grow.
Troth, you are too blame for making me run so.

Chor. That triumphant God survey,
To whom amorous mortals pay
Impious tribute! See him snaffeld!
See him laughed at! See him baffeld!
As a hooded Hawke or Owl
With light blinded, when the foul
With their Armies flock about her,
Some to beat, and some to stout her;
She in vain does rowze and peck
This and that way with her beak:
So we baffle and deride
Thee (blind Love) on every side.
One does pinch thy elbow black;
The Other has thee by the back;
And thy baiting does no good,
Nor thy pecking through thy hood,
Nor thy stretching out thy claws.
" But sweet meats have sour sauce.
" Birds are caught by playing thus:
" So do Nymphs grow amorous.

Scena tertia.
AMARILLIS, CORISCA, MIRTILLO. Am. IN Faith, Aglaura, art thou caught at last?
Thou Would fain be gone, but I will hold thee fast.

Cor. Surely, unless at unawares by main
Strength I had thrust him on her, I in vain
Had tired my self to make him thither go.

Am. Thou will not speak now: Art thou she or no?

Cor. I lay his Dart here by him, and unto
My bush return, t'observe what will ensue.

Am. Thou art Corisca, now it is most clear;
I know thee by thy tallnesse and short hair.
'Twas thee I wished to catch; that I might use thee
Just as I list, and thus, and thus abuse thee;
And thus, and thus. Not yet? But since 'twas thou
That boundst me, do thou too unbinde me now:
Quickly (my heart) and thou shall have of me
The sweetest kiss that ere was given thee.
What do thou stick at? thy hand trembles: what,
Art thou so weary? If thy nails will not,
Let thy teeth do it: come fumbler, let me see;
I can my self untangle without thee.
Fie, how with knots on knots it is perplexed?
The best on it is, thou must be blinded next.
So, now it is loosed: Hah! whom have we here?
Traitor avaunt. I am unspirited.

Mir. Dear
Soul, do not strive to go away.

Am. Unhand
(Forcer of Nymphs) unhand me, I command.
Ay me! Aglaura and Eliza tarry,
Betrayers of my innocence, where are ye? --
Unhand me villain.

Mir. I obey.

Am. This plot
Corisca laid: Now tell her what thou have got.

Mir. O whither fly'st thou Cruel? ere thou go
Banquet thy eyes yet with my death: for lo,
I pierce my bosom with this dart.

Am. Ay me!
What will thou do?

Mir. That which it troubles thee
Perchance (dire Nymph) that any should be sed
To Have done, but thou.

Am. (Ay me! I Am almost dead)

Mirt. And if this action to thy hand be due,
Behold the weapon and the breast!

Am. It Is true,
Thou have deserved it of me. What could move
Thy heart to such a high presumption?

Mir. Love.

Am. "Love never causes rudeness.

Mir. Then conclude,
"I was in love, because I was not rude:
For if within thy arms thou caughtst me first,
I cannot well with rudeness be asperst,
Since with so fair an opportunity
To be audacious, and to use with thee
The Laws of Love, I had such power yet over
My self, I even forgot I was a Lover.

Am. Upbraid me not with what I blind did do.

Mir. I being in Love was blinder of the two.

Am. " Prayer and sweet language discreet Lovers use
" To win their Loves; not theft and cheats, to abuse.

Mir. As a wild beast enraged with want of food
Rushes on travelers out of the wood:
So I, that only live on thy fair eyes,
Since that loved food thy cruelty denies,
Or else my Fate, if like a ravenous Lover
Rushing to day upon thee from this Cover,
Where I had long been famish't, I did prove
One stratagem to save my life (which Love
Prompted me to) then blame not, cruel Maid,
Me but thy self; for if (as thou have said)
Prayer and sweet language only should be used
By discret Lovers, which thou have refused
To hear from me; thou by thy cruelty,
Thou by thy flight made me I could not be
A discreet Lover.

Am. If thou had gi'n her over
That fled from thee, thou had been a discreet Lover.
But know, thou persecutest me in vain;
What would thou have of me?

Mir. I Would have thee daign
Once'ere I die to hear me.

Am. See! as soon
As thou have asked, thou have received the boon.
Now then be gone.

Mir. Ah Nymph! I Have scarcely yet
Powered one small drop out to thee of the great
Sea of my tears. If not for Pitie's sake,
Yet for the Pleasure thou therein wilt take,
List' to a dying man's last accents.

Am. Well,
To shun more trouble, and thy hopes to quell,
To hear thee I Am content. But this before;
Say little, quickly, part, and come no more.

Mir. Thou do command me, cruell'st Nymph, to bind
In volume too too small that unconfined
Desire, which scarcely humane thought (though it
Be as the soul that holds it, infinite)
Has line to fathom.
That I do love thee more then I do love
My life (if thou doubt'st, Cruel) ask this Grove,
And that will tell thee; and with it each beast,
Each stupid stock there can the same attest;
Each stone of these high mountains, which so often
I with the voice of my complaints made soft.
But what need I call any witness else
To prove my love, where so much beauty dwells?
Behold these flowers which make low earth so proud!
Those Stars which nail Heavens pavement! all these crowd
Into one ring: A beauty like that same
Is the high cause and forcer of my flame.
For as by nature Water does descend,
The Fire unto the higher Regions tend
The Air obliquely spread it self, the Ground
Lie still, and heaven about all these turn round.
So naturally do I incline to thee,
As to my chiefest good; so naturally
To those loved beauties (as unto her sole)
With all her winged affections flies my soul.
And he that should imagine he had force
Her from her dearest object to divorce,
Might with as much facility command
The Air, the Fire, the Water and the Land,
The Heavens too from their accustomed track,
And make the Pillars of the world to crack.
But since thou bidst me say but little, I
Shall say but little, saying that I dye:
And shall do less in dying, since I see
How much my death is coveted by thee.
Yet I shall do (alas) all that is left
For me to do, of hopes in love bereft.
But (cruel soul) when I am in my grave,
Some pity then upon my sufferings have.
Ah! fair and loved, and that were once the sweet
Cause of my life (whilst Heaven thought it meet)
Turn those bright lamps upon me, as beni'ne
And pitiful as ere I saw them shine,
Once ere I dye, that I may dye in peace.
Let those fair amiable eyes release
My life, now bitter, which once sweetened it;
And those bright Stars, which my loves torches li't,
Light too my Funeral tapers, and forerun,
As once my rising, now my setting Sun.
But thou more hard then ere thou were before,
Feel'st yet no spark of pity; but art more
Stiff with my prayers. Must I then talk alone?
Wretch that I am, discourse I to a stone?
Say Dye, at least, it nothing else thou wilt say;
And thou shall see me dye. O Love! what way
Can thou not plague me? when this Nymph that is nursed
In cruelty, and for my blood did thirst,
Finding my death would now a favor be,
Even that sad favor does deny to me?
Nor will reply a syllable, or daign
One stabbing word to put me out of pain?

Am. To answer thee if I had promised,
As well as hear thee, this were justly sed.
Thou call'st me cruel, hoping, that to shun
That vice, into the contrary I Will run.
But know, my ears are not so tickeled
With that (by me so little merited)
And less desired) praise thou giv'st to me
Of beauty, as to hear my self by thee
" Styled Cruel; which to be to any other
I grant were vice; it is virtue to a Lover:
And what thou harshnesse call'st and cruelty,
" Is in a woman perfect honesty.
But say, that even t'a Lover 'twere a sin;
Yet tell me, when has Amarillis bin
Cruel to thee? was it then when justice bad
To use no pity; yet on thee I had
So much, that I from death delivered thee?
I mean, when amongst a noble company
Of modest Virgins mingled, thou did cover
With a Maid's habit a libidinous Lover:
And, our chaste sports polluting, did intrude
Amongst kisses feigned and innocent thy lewd
And wanton kisses (such an act, as yet
I blush as often as I but think on it).
But at that time I knew thee not (Heaven knows)
And when I did, my indignation rose.
Thy wantonness I from my mind did keep,
And suffered not the amorous plague to creep
To my chaste heart: on my lips outer skin
The poison stuck, but none of it got in.
" A mouth that is kissed perforce,
" If it spit out the kiss, is never the worse.
But what would thou by that bold theft have got,
If I had to those Nymphs discovered what
Thou were? the Thracian women never tore
And murdered Orpheus so on Hebrus shore,
As they had thee, unless her clemency
Whom thou call'st cruel now had rescued thee.
But she is not so cruel as she ought
To be: for if when she is cruel thought
Thy boldness is so great, what would it be
If she were judged pitiful by thee?
That honest pity which I could, I gave;
Other it is in vain for thee to crave,
Or hope: " for amorous pity she can ill
" Bestow, who gave it all to one that will
" Give her none back. If thou my Lover be,
Love my good name, my life, my honesty.
Thou seek'st impossibles; I am a ward
To Heaven, Earth watches me, and my reward
If I transgress, is death: but most of all,
Virtue defends me with a brazen wall.
" For she that is protected by her honor,
" Scorns there should be a safer guard upon her.
Look to thy safety then, and do not give
Battle to me, Mirtillo: fly, and live,
If thou be wise. " For out of sense of smart
" TO abandon life, argues but a faint heart.
" And it is the part of virtue to abstain
" From what we love, if it will prove our bane.

Mir. " He that no longer can resist must yield.

Am. " Where virtue is, all passions quit the field.

Mir. " Love triumphs over virtue.

Am. Let that man
" That cannot what he will, will what he can.

Mir. " Necessity of loving has no law.

Am. " Love's wounds will heal, which salves of absence draw.

Mir. " We fly in vain what we about us carry.

Am. " Love drives out love like following billows: Marry.

Mir. Strange levitie in me thou do presume.

Am. " If all ways fail, time will thy love consume.

Mir. But first my love will have consumed me.

Am. Is there no cure then for thy malady?

Mir. No cure at all but that which death affords.

Am. Death? let me speak then; and be sure these words
Be as a charm unto thee: though I know
" When Lovers talk of dying, it does show
" An amorous custom rather of the tongue,
" Then a resolve of mind (continuing long)
" To do it indeed: yet if thou ere should take
So strange a frenzy; know, when thou do make
Away thy self, thou murtherst my fame too:
Live then (if thou do love me) and adieu:
I shall esteem thee henceforth most discreet,
If thou take care we two may never meet.

Mir. Sad doom! without my life how can I live?
Or without death end to my torments give?

Am. Mirtillo, It Is high time thou wentst away,
Thou have already made too long a stay:
Be gone; and take this cordial along,
" Of hopeless Lovers there is a numerous throng,
" There is no wound but carries with it pain,
And there are others may of love complain.

Mir. I know I Am not the only man has lost
His Love; but only wretched I am tossed
'Twixt life and death; of whom it may be sed,
That I am neither living, nor yet dead.

Am. Be gone, be gone.

Mir. O woeful parting! O
End of my days! from thee how can I go,
And yet not dye? The pangs of death I Am sure
I feel, and all that parting souls endure.
For mine, it is past into my griefs: Hence I
Have ceased to live, those live immortally.

Scena quarta.
AMARILLIS. MIrtillo, O Mirtillo! could thou see
That heart which thou condemn'st of cruelty,
(Soul of my soul) thou unto it would show
That pity which thou begg'st from it I know.
O ill starr'd Lovers! what avails it me
To have thy love? To Have mine, what boots it thee?
Whom Love has joined why do thou separate,
Malicious Fate! And two divorced by Fate
Why joyn'st thou perverse Love? How blessed are you
Wild beasts, that are in loving tied unto
No laws but those of Love! whilst humane laws
Inhumanely condemn us for that cause.
" O why, if this be such a natural
" And powerful passion, was it capital!
" Nature too frail, that do with Law contend!
" Law too severe, that Nature do offend!
" But what? they love but little who death fear.
Ah, my Mirtillo! would to heaven that were
" The only penalty. Virtue, which art
" The bindingst Law to an ingenuous heart,
This inclination which in me I feel,
Lanc'd with the sharp point of thy holy steel,
To thee I sacrifice; and pardon (deer
Mirtillo) her, that is only cruel, where
She must not pity. Pardon thy fierce foe
In looks and words: but in her heart not so.
Or if addicted to revenge thou be,
What greater vengeance can thou take on me
Then thine own grief? for if thou be my heart.
(As in despite of Heaven and Earth thou art)
Thy sighs my vital spirits are, the flood
Of tears which follows is my vital blood,
And all these pangs, and all these groans of thine
Are not thy pangs, are not thy groans, but mine.

Scena quinta.
CORISCA, AMARILLIS. Cor. SIster, no more dissembling.

Am. Woe is me!
I am discovered.

Cor. I heard all: now see,
Was I a Witch? I did believe (my Heart)
Thou were in love; now I am sure thou art.
And would thou keep't from me? thy closet? tush,
This is a common evil, never blush.

Am. Corisca, I am conquered (I confess't)

Cor. No, now I know it, deny it thou were best.

Am. " Alas! I knew a woman's heart would prove
" Too small a vessel for o're-flowing love.

Cor. Cruel to thy Mirtillo! but unto
Thy self much more!

Am. It Is cruelty that grew
"From pity.

Cor. Poison never was known to grow
" From wholesome root: What difference can thou show
'Twixt such a cruelty as does offend,
And such a pity as no help will lend?

Am. Ay me, Corisca!

Cor. It Is a vanity
(Sister) to sigh, an imbecillitie
Of mind, and tastes too much of woman.

Am. Were
Not crueller to nourish in his heart
A hopeless love? To fly him is a sign
I have compassion of his case and mine.

Cor. But why a hopeless love?

Am. Do thou not know
I am contracted unto Silvio?
Do thou not know besides what the Law says,
It Is death in any woman that breaks faith?

Cor. O fool! and is this all stands in thy way?
Whether is ancienter with us (I pray)
" The Law of Dian, or of Love? this last
" Is born with us, and it grows up as fast
" As we do, Amarillis; it is not writ,
" Nor taught by Masters, Nature printed it
" In humane hearts with her own powerful hand:
" Both Gods and men are under Loves command.

Am. But if that Law my life away should take,
Can this of Love a restitution make?

Cor. Thou art too nice; if women all were such,
And on these scruples should insist so much,
Good days adieu. I hold them simple souls
Will live obnoxious to such poor comptrolls.
" Laws are not for the wise: if to be kind
Should merit death, Jove help the cruel mind!
But if fools fall into those snares, it is fit
They be forbid to steal, who have not wit
" To hide their theft. For honesty is but
" An art, an honest gloss on vice to put.
Think others as they list; thus I conceive.

Am. These rotten grounds, Corisca, will deceive.
" What I cannot hold it is wisdom soon to quit.

Cor. " And who forbids thee fool? our life does flit
" Too fast away to lose one jot of it;
" And men so squemish and so curious grown,
" That two of our new Lovers make not one
" Of The old. We are no longer for their tooth
" (Believed) then while w' are new. Bate us our youth,
" Bate us out beauty, and like hollow trees
" Which had been stuffed with honey by the bees,
" If that by licourish hands away be taken,
" Dry and despised trunks we shall remain.
Therefore let them have leave to babble what
They please, as those who know nor reckon not
What the poor woman Amarillis bears,
Our case alas is differing much from theirs.
" Men in perfection as in age increase,
" Wisdom supplies the loss of handsomnesse:
" But when our Youth and Beauty (which alone
" Conquers the strength and wit of men) are gone,
" All Is gone with us; nor can thou possibly
" Say a worse thing, or to be pardoned thee
" More hardly, then Old woman. Then before
Thou split on that unevitable shore,
Know thine own worth, and do not be so mad,
As when thou may live merry, to live sad.
What would the lion's strength boot him, or wit
Avail a man, unless he used it?
Our beauty is to us that which to men
Wit is, or strength unto the lion. Then
" Let us use it whilst we may;
" Snatch those joys that haste away.
" Earth her winter-coat may cast,
" And renew her beauty past;
" But, our winter come, in vain
" We solicit spring again:
" And when our furrows snow shall cover,
" Love may return, but never Lover.

Am. Thou say all this only to try me sure,
Not that thy thoughts are such. But rest secure,
Unless the way thou unto me shall show
Be a plain way, and warrantable too
To break this Match; I am resolved to die
A thousand deaths, 'ere stain my honesty.

Cor. More wilful woman I did never know.
But since thou art so resolved, be it so.
Tell me good Amarillis, seriously,
Do thou suppose thy Silvio sets by
His faith as much as thou thy honesty?

Am. Thou make me laugh at this: wherein should he
Express a faith, who is to love a foe?

Cor. Love's foe? O fool! thou know not Silvio.
He is the still sow, he. O these coy souls!
Believe them not: the deep stream silent rowls.
" No theft in Love so subtle, so secure,
" As to hide sin by seeming to be pure.
In short, thy Silvio loves: but it is not thee
(Sister) he loves.

Am. What Goddess may she be?
For certainly she is no mortal Dame
That could the heart of Silvio inflame.

Cor. Nor Goddess, nor yet Nymph.

Am. What have thou said?

Cor. Do thou know my Lisetta?

Am. Who? the Maid
That tends thy Flocks?

Cor. The same.

Am. It cannot be
She, I am sure, Corisca?

Cor. Very she,
I can assure thee, she is all his joy.

Am. A proper choice for one that was so coy.

Cor. But will thou know how he does pine away
And languish for this Jewel? Every day
He feigns to go a hunting.

Am. Every morn
Soon as it dawns I hear his cursed horn.

Cor. And just at noon, when others are in the heat
Of all the sport, he does by stealth retreat
From his Companions, and comes all alone
Unto my garden by a way unknown:
Where underneath a haw-thorn hedges shade
(Which does the garden fence about) the Maid
Hears his hot sighs, and amorous prayers, which she
Comes laughing afterward and tells to me.
Now hear what I to serve thee've thought upon;
Or rather, what I have already done.
I think thou know, that the same Law which has
Enjoined the woman to observe her faith
To her betrothed, likewise does enact,
That if the woman catch him in the fact
Of falsehood, spite of friends she may deny
To have him, and without disloyalty
Marry another.

Am. This I know full well;
And thereof some examples too could tell,
Of my own knowledge; Egle having found
Licotas false, remained her self unbound.
Armilla did from false Turingo so,
And Phillida from Ligurino go.

Cor. Now list' to me: My Maid (by me set on)
Has bid her credulous Lover meet anon
In yonder cave with her; whence he remains
The most contented of all living swains,
And waits but th'hour: there thou shall catch him; where
I too will be witness of all to bear:
(For without this our plot would be in vain.)
So without any hazard, or least stain
To thine, or to thy fathers honor, thou
Shall free thy self from this distastefull vow.

Am. I like it rarely: but the way, the way,
Corisca?

Cor. Marry thus (observe me pray)
In The middle of the cave (which narrow is
And very long) upon the right hand lies
Another lesser Grot (I know not whether
By nature, or by art, or both together
Made) in the hollow stone, whose slimie wall
Is hid with clinging Ivy, and a small
Hole in the roof lets light in from above,
(Fit receptacles for the thefts of Love,
Yet cheerful too enough) there thou shall hide
Thy self, and hidden in that place abide
Till the two Lovers come; I mean to send
Lisetta first, and after her, her friend,
Following his steps my self aloof: And when
I shall perceive him stepped into the den,
Rush after him will I. But lest he should
Escape from me: when I have laid fast hold
Upon him, I will use Lisetta's aid,
And joining both (for so the plot is laid
Between us two) together we will make
A cry, at which thou too shall come, and take
The penalty o'th law against Silvio.
Then my Lisetta and we two will go
Before the Priest; and so thou shall unty
The Nuptial knot.

Am. Before his Father?

Cor. Why?
What matters that? Think thou Montano's blood
Will stand in balance with his Countries good?
Or that his sacred function he will neglect
For any carnal or profane respect?

Am. Go to then (setting all disputes aside)
I wink, and follow thee my faithful guide.

Cor. Then linger not (my Heart) enter into
The Cave.

Am. Unto the Temple first I Will go
" To Adore the gods: For unless Heaven give
" Success, no mortal enterprise can thrive.

Cor. "To devout hearts all places Temples are:
It will lose too much time.

Am. " In using prayer
" To them that made time, time cannot be lost.

Cor. Go and return then quickly --. So almost
I Am past the bad way; only this delay
Gives me some cause of trouble; yet this may
Be of use too. Something there would be done
TO abuse my honest Lover Coridon.
I Will say, I Will meet him in the Cave, and so
Will make him after Amarillis go.
This done, by a back way I Will thither send
The Priest of Dian her to apprehend:
Guilty she will be found, and sentenced
To death without all doubt. My Rival dead,
Mirtillo is mine own: His cruelty
To me being caused by's love to her. But see
The man! I Will sound him till she comes. Now rise,
Rise all my Love into my tongue and eyes.

Scena sexta.
MIRTILLO, CORISCA. Mir. HEar ye damned spirits that in hell lament,
Hear a new sort of pain and punishment.
See in a Turtles look a Tigers mind!
She, crueller then death, 'cause she did find
One death would not suffice her bloody will,
And that to live was to be dying still,
Enjoins me, not to make my self away,
That I might die a thousand times a day.

Cor. (I Will make as though I saw him not) I hear
A doleful voice pierce my relenting ear,
Who should it be? Mirtillo, is it thou?

Mir. I would it were my ghost.

Cor. Well, well: but how
(And tell me true) thy self now do thou find,
Since to thy dearest Nymph thou brak'st thy mind?

Mir. As one who in a fever cast,
Forbidden liquor longed to taste,
If gotten, sets it to his mouth,
And quenches life, but cannot drouth:
So I, with amorous fever long
Consumed, from her eyes and tongue
Sweet poison sucked, which leaves me more
Enflamed then I was before.

Cor. " Love upon us no power can have
" But what our selves ( Mirtillo) gave.
" As a Bear does with her tongue
" Polish her misshapen young
" Which had else in vain been born:
" So an Am'rist giving form
" To a rude and faint desire
" That would otherwise expire,
" Hatches Love; which is at first
" Weak and raw, but when it is nursed,
" Fierce and cruel. Take It upon
" My word, an old affection
" Tyrannizes in a breast,
" And grows a Master from a guest.
" For when the soul shall once be brought
" To be fettered to one thought,
" And that, not have the power to move
" A minute from its object, Love
" (Made for delight) will turn to sadness;
" And which is worse, to death or madness.
" Therefore my advice shall be,
" To part thy love to two or three.

Mir. Let death or madness me betide,
Rather then my Flame divide.
Amarillis (though she be
Cruel and unkind to me)
Is my Life and Reason too,
And to her I will be true.

Cor. Foolish Swain! that can not tell
How to make a bargain well.
What? change love for hatred? I
Rather now then do it would dye.

Mir. " Cruelty does faith refine,
" As the fire the golden mine:
" Where were the loyalty of Love,
" If women should not tyrants prove?
In my many sufferings this
All my joy and comfort is,
Sorrows, tortures, exile, gall,
Here Is a cause will sweeten all.
Let me languish, let me burn,
Let me any thing but turn.

Cor. O brave Lover! valiant breast!
More impetuous then a beast!
And yet tamer then a rock
Which endures the Ocean's shock!
" In Lovers hearts there cannot be
" A worse disease then Constancy.
" O most unhappy those in whom
" This foolish I do I finds a room!
" Which shackles us, when we might prove
" The sweet variety of Love.
With this dull virtue Constancy,
Tell me (simple Lover) why
Amarillis? For her face?
Whom another must embrace?
Or do thou affect her mind,
Which to thee is not inclined?
All then thou can dote upon
Is thine own destruction.
And will thou be still so mad
To covet that cannot be had?
Up Mirtillo, know thy parts:
Can thou want a thousand hearts?
Others I dare swear there be,
That would sue as much to thee.

Mir. To be Amarillis thrall
Is more then to command them all.
And if she my suit deny,
All that is pleasure I defy.
I to make another choice?
In another I rejoice?
Neither could I if I would,
Neither would I if I could:
But if possible to me
Such a will or power be,
Heaven and Love before that hour
Strip me of all will and power.

Cor. Thou art enchanted: otherwise
Could thou too thy self despise?

Mir. I must, when I Am despised by her

(Corisca). Cor. Come Mirtillo, never
Deceive thy self: perhaps thou do suppose
She loves thee in her heart, although she shows
An outward scorn. If thou but knewst what she
Talks oftentimes to me concerning thee.

Mir. All these are trophies of my constant love,
With which I Will triumph over the Powers above,
And men below, my torments, and her hate,
Over Fortune and the world, over Death and Fate.

Cor. (Wonder of Constancy! if this man knew
How much he is loved by her, what would he do?)
Mirtillo, how it pities me to hear
These frantic speeches! Tell me, were thou 'ere
In love before?

Mir. Fair Amarillis was
My first, and shall be my last Love.

Cor. Alas!
It should seem then that thou did never prove
Any but cruel, but disdainful Love.
O that 't had been thy chance but once to be
In love with one that is gentle, courteous, free!
Try that a little: try it, and thou wilt find
How sweet it is to meet with one that is kind,
That loves and honors thee as much as thou
Thy sour and cruel Amarillis; how
Delightful it is to have a joy as great
As is thy love, a happiness complete
As thy own wish: to have thy Mistress twine
About thy neck, and her sighs echo thine:
And after say, My Joy, all that I have,
All that I am, and thy desires can crave,
At thy devotion is: If I am fair,
For thee I Am fair; for thee I deck this hair,
This face, this bosom; from this breast of mine
I turned out my own heart to harbor thine. --
But this is a small river to that vast
Sweet sea of pleasure which love makes us taste,
And they alone that taste can well relate.

Mir. A thousand thousand times most fortunate
Is he that is born under so blessed a star!

Cor. Hear me Mirtillo: ('ere I was aware
I Would almost called him mine) a Nymph as fair
As the proud'st she that curls or spreads to the air
Her golden tresses, worthy of thy love
As thou of hers, the honor of this Grove,
Love of all hearts; by every worthier swain
In vain solicited, adored in vain,
Does love thee only, and thee only prize
More then her life, and more then her own eyes.
Mirtillo, scorn her not, if wise thou be;
For as the shadow does the body, she
Will follow thee through all the world: she will
At thy least word and beck be ready still
As thy obedient handmaid: night and day
With thee she will pass the tedious hours away.
Ah! do not wave (Mirtillo) do not wave
So rare a bliss; the perfect'st joys we have
Are those which neither sighs nor tears do cost,
Nor danger, and on which least time is lost.
Here thou have passe-time at thy door, a feast
Upon the table always ready dressed
To please thy taste. Ay me! can thou receive
A greater gift then this? Mirtillo, Leave,
Leave this cold hunting after flying feet,
And her that runs to thy embraces, meet.
Nor do I feed thee with vain hopes; command
Her come, and she that loves thee is at hand,
Now, if thou say the word.

Mir. I prithee rest
Content, my pallat is not for a feast.

Cor. Try but what joy is made of once, and then
Return unto thy wonted grief again,
That thou may say, thou had a taste of both.

Mir. "Distempered palats all sweet things do loath.

Cor. Yet do it in pity unto her that dies,
Unless sh' enjoy the fun of thy fair eyes.
Uncharitable youth, art not thou poor?
And can thou beat a beggar from thy door?
Ah! what thou would another should extend
To thee, do thou now to another lend.

Mir. What alms can beggars give? In short, I swore
Allegiance to that Nymph whom I adore,
Whether she tyrant proved, or merciful.

Cor. O truly blind, and most unhappy, dull
Mirtillo! who is it thou art constant to?
I am unwilling to add woe to woe;
But thou art too much wronged IN faith, and I
That love thee am not able to stand by
And see thee so betrayed. If thou suppose
This cruelty of Amarillis grows
From zeal to virtue or Religion,
Thou Art gulled: another does possess the throne,
And thou (poor wretch!) whilst he does laugh, must cry.
What, stricken dumb?

Mir. I Am in an ecstasie,
'Twixt life and death suspended, till I know
Whether I should believe thee now or no.

Cor. Do not believe me then?

Mir. If I did, I
Had not survived it sure: and I will dye
Yet, if it be a truth.

Cor. Live (Caitiffe) live
To be revenged.

Mir. But I cannot believe
It is a truth.

Cor. Will thou not yet believe,
But force me to tell that which it will grieve
Thy soul to hear? Do thou see yonder cave?
That is thy Mistress Faith's and Honor's grave:
There laughs sh'at thee, there makes of thy anoy
A poynant sauce to thy tired Rivals joy.
In short; there often a base-born shepherd warms
Thy virtuous Amarillis in his arms.
Now go and sigh, and whine, and constant prove
Unto a Nymph that thus rewards thy love.

Mir. Ay me Corisca! do thou tell me true?
And is it fit I should believe thee too?

Cor. The more thou searchest, 'twill the worser be.

Mir. But did thou see it Corisca? woe is me!

Cor. Truth is, I did not see it, but thou may,
And presently, for she her word has past
To meet him there this very hour: But hide
Thy self beneath that shady hedges side,
And thou thy self shall see her straight descend
Into the cave, and after her, her friend.

Mir. So quickly must I dye?

Cor. See! I have spied
Her coming down already by the side
Of The Temple: mark! how guiltily she moves!
Her stealing pace betraying their stolen loves.
To mark the sequel, do thou here remain,
And afterward we two will meet again.

Mir. Since the discovery of the truth's so near,
With my belief I will my death defer.

Scena septima.
AMARILLIS. " NO mortal work successfully is done
" Which with the immortal gods is not begun.
Full of distractions, and with heavy heart
I did from hence unto the Temple part:
Whence (Heaven be praised) I come as light as air,
And strangely comforted: for at my prayer
Pure and devout, I felt from thence, (me thought)
Another soul into my body shot,
Which whispered, Fear not Amarillis, go
Securely on. I, and I will do so,
Heaven guiding. -- Fair Mother of Love, befriend
Her that on thee for succor does depend:
Thou that as Queen in the third Orb do shine,
If e're thou felt'st thy Son's flames, pity mine.
Bring (courteous Goddess) by a secret path
Quickly that youth to whom I Have pawned my faith.
And thou deer cave, till I have done my work,
Suffer this slave of Love in thee to lurk.
But Amarillis, all the coast is clear,
None nigh to see thee, and none nigh to hear;
Securely enter. O Mirtillo, O
Mirtillo, if thou dream'dst wherefore I go! --

Scena octava.
MIRTILLO. I Wake, and see, what I could wish to have been
Born without eyes, that I might not have seen:
Or rather not to have been born. Cursed Fate!
Why have thou thus prolonged my life's date,
To bring me to this killing spectacle?
Mirtillo, more tormented then in hell
The blackest soul is, not to doubt thy grief?
Not to be able to suspend belief?
Thou, thou have heard and seen't: thy Mistress is
Another man's. And (which is worse) not his
Whose by the world's Laws she was bound to be,
But by Love's Laws snatched both from him and thee.
O cruel Amarillis! to undo
This wretched man, and then to mock him too
With that unconstant mouth which once did meet,
And once did call Mirtillo's kisses sweet:
But now his loathed name (which happily rose
Like bitter drink that against the stomach goes)
Because it should not bitterness impart
To thy delight, has spu'd out of thy heart?
Since therefore she who gave thee life, has taken
That life away, and given it again
'T another: why do thou thy life survive,
Wretched Mirtillo? Why art thou alive?
Dye, dye Mirtillo unto grief and smart,
As unto joy already dead thou art.
Dye, dead Mirtillo; since thy life is so,
Let thy pangs likewise be concluded. Go
Out of the anguish of this death, which still
Keeps thee alive, that it may longer kill.
But shall I dye then unrevenged? Sure
I Will slay him first that did my death procure.
I will dispense with my dire love of death
Till I have justly taken away his breath
Who slew my heart unjustly. Yield stout grief*
To anger, death to life, till in my life
I have avenged my death.
Let not this steel be drunken with the flood
Of its own Master's unrevenged blood:
Nor this right hand be Pitie's, till it has
First made it self the Minister of wrath.
Thou that enjoy'st my spoils (what ere thou be)
Since I must fall, I Will pull thee after me.
In the same brake I Will plant my self again;
And when I spy him coming to the den,
Will rush upon him with this piercing dart
At unawares, and strike him through the heart.
But is it not base to strike him out of sight?
It is: defy him then to single fight,
Where valor may my justice prove. But no:
This place is unto all so known, and so
Frequented, that some swains may interpose:
Or (which is worse) enquire of me whence grows
Our quarrel; which if I deny, it is naught
They Will think; if feign a cause, I may be caught
Then in a lie; if tell't, her name will be
Blasted with everlasting infamy:
In whom, although I never can approve
That which I see, yet I must ever love
That which I fancied, and did hope to have seen,
And that which ought (I Am sure) in her to have been.
Dye basely then the base Adulterer,
Who has slain me, and has dishonored her.
I, but the blood may (if I kill him here)
The murder show, and that the Murderer?
What do I care? I, but the murderer known,
Bewrays the cause for which the murther's done.
So this ungrateful woman runs the same
Hazard this way of shipwrak in her fame.
Enter the cave then, and assault him there.
Good, good; tread softly, softly, lest she hear:
That she is at the other end her words implied.
Now (hid with branches) in the Rock's left side
There is a hollow at the steep stairs foot,
There without any noise, I Will wait to put
In execution my design. My foe
Dispatched, his bleeding carcass I will throw
To my she-foe, to be revenged on two
At once. The felf-same steel I Will then imbrue
In mine own blood: so three shall die in brief,
Two by my weapon, and the third of grief.
A sad and miserable tragedy
Of both her Lovers shall this Tigresse see,
Of him she loves, and him she scorns. And this
Cave which was meant the chamber of their bliss,
To her and to her minion shall become
And (which I more desire) to her shame, a tomb.
But you dear footsteps (which I long have traced
In vain) unerring path, lead me at last
To where my Love is hid; To you I bow,
Your print I follow. O Corisca! now
I do believe thee: now thou have told me true.

Scena nona.
SATYR. DOes he believe Corisca? and pursue
Her steps to Erycina's Cave? a beast
Has wit enough to apprehend the rest.
But if thou do believe her, thou had need
Have from her good security indeed,
And hold her by a stronger tie then I
Had lately of her hair. But stronger tie
On her there cannot be then gifts. This bold
Strumpet her self to this young swain has sold.
And here, by the false light now of this vaut
Delivers the bad ware which he has bought.
Or rather, it is Heavens justice which has sent
Her hither to receive her punishment
From my revenging hands. His words did seem
T'imply she made some promise unto him;
Which he believed: and by his spying here
Her print, that she is in the cave, it is clear.
Do a brave thing then: stop the mouth of the cave
With that great hanging stone, that they may have
No means of scaping; to the Priest then go,
And bring by the back-way (which few do know)
His ministers to apprehend, and by
The Law deservedly to make her dye.
For it is not unto me long since unknown,
That she contracted is to Coridon,
How-ever he (because he stands in fear
Of me) to lay his claim to her forbear.
But now I Will give him leave at once to be
Revenged on her both for him self and me.
But I lose time in talk. From this young Grove
I Will pull a tree up by the root, to move
The stone withal. So, this I think will do.
How heavy it is! The stone has a root too.
What if I min'd it with this trunk? and so,
As with a leaver heaved it from below?
Good, good; now to the other side as much.
How fast it sticks? I did not think it such
A difficult attempt as it has proved;
The Center of the earth were easier moved.
Nor strength, nor skill will do this work I, see:
Or does that vigor which was once in me
Now fail me at my need? What do ye do
My perverse Stars? I will, (in spite of you)
I will remove it yet. The Devil haule
Corisca, (I had almost said) and all
The sex of them. O Pan Liceus, hear,
And to move this, be moved by my prayer!
Pan, thou that all things can, and all things art,
Thou once thy self did woe a stubborn heart,
Revenge on false Corisca now, thine own
And my despised Love. I move the stone
Thus by the virtue of thy sacred name;
Thus rowls it by the virtue of the same.
So, now the Fox is trapt, and finely shut
Where she had eathed her self. I Will now go put
Fire to the hole; where I could wish to find
The rest of women, to destroy the kind.

CHORUS.
O Love! how potent and how great thou art!
Wonder of nature and the world! What heart
So dull, as not to feel thy power? What wit
So deep and piercing, as to fathom it?
Who knows thy hot lascivious fires; will say,
Infernal spirit, thou do live and sway
In the corporeal part. But who so knows
How thou do men to virtuous things dispose,
And how the dying flame of loose desires
Looks pale, and trembles at thy chaster fires;
Will say, Immortal God, in the soul alone
Thou have established thy sacred Throne.
" Rare Monster! wonderfully got betwixt
" Desire and Reason; an affection mixed
" Of sense and intellect: With knowing wild:
" With seeing blind: A God, and yet a child:
And (such) thou sway'st the Earth and Heaven too;
On which thou tread'st as we on the other do.
Yet (by thy leave) a greater miracle,
A mightier thing then thou art I can tell.
For all thou do (that may our wonder claim)
Thou do by virtue of a woman's name.
Woman! the gift of heaven; or of him rather
Who made thee fairer, being of both the Father,
Wherein is Heaven so beautiful as thou?
That rowls one goggle eye in its vast brow
(Like a grim Cyclop) not a lamp of light,
But cause of blindness and Cymerian night
To the bold gazer: if that s^e^k, it is
A thundering voice; and if it sigh, the hiss
Of earth-engendred winds. Thou, with the fair
Angel-like prospect of two Suns, which are
Serene and visible, do still the winds
And calm the Billows of tempestuous minds;
And Sound, Light, Motion, Beauty, Majesty,
Make in thy face so sweet a harmony,
That heaven (I mean this outward heaven) must needs
Confess thy form the form of that exceeds:
Since beauty that is dead less noble is
Then that which lives, and is a place of bliss.
With reason therefore man (that gallant creature,
That lords it over all the works of Nature)
To thee as Lady Paramount pays duty,
Acknowleding in thine, thy Makers beauty.
And if he Triumphs gain, and Thrones inherit,
It is not because thou have less of merit;
But for thy glory: since a greater thing
It is to conquer, then to be a King.
But that thy conquering beauty does subdue
Not only man, but even his Reason too,
If any doubt, he in Mirtillo has
A miracle that may constrain his faith.
This wanted (Woman) to thy power before
To make us love when we can hope no more.
Actus Quartus.
Scena Prima.
CORISCA. MY heart and thoughts till now were so much set
To train that foolish Nymph into my net,
That may dear Hair (which by that Rogue was taken
From me) and how to get it back again
I quite forgot: O how it troubled me
To pay that ransom for my liberty!
But 't had been worse to have been a prisoner
To such a beast: Who though he does not bear
A mouses heart, might have mouz'd me: For I
Have (to say truth) fooled him sufficiently:
And like a Horse-leech did him suck and drein
As long as he had blood in any vein.
And now he is moved I love him not; and moved
He well might be, if him I e're had loved.
How can one love a creature that does want
All that is lovely? As a stinking plant
Which the Physician gathered for the use
He had of it; when he has strained the juice
And virtue out, is on the dunghill thrown;
So having squeezed him, I with him have done.
Now will I see if Coridon into
The cave's descended. Hah! what do I view?
Wake I? or sleep I? or am drunk? but now
This cave's mouth open was I Am sure; then how
Comes it now shut? and with a ponderous
And massy stone rolled down upon it thus?
Earthquake I Am sure to unhenge it there was none.
Would I knew certainly that Coridon
And Amarillis were within; and then
I cared not how it came. He Is in the den,
If (as Lisetta said) he parted were
From home so long ago. Both may be there,
And by Mirtillo shut together. " Love,
" Pricked with disdain, has strength enough to move
" The world, much more a stone. Should it be true,
Mirtillo could not have deviz'd to do
Ought more according to my heart then this,
Though he Corisca had enthroned in his
In stead of Amarillis. I will go
The back way in, that I the truth may know.

Scena secunda.
DORINDA, LINCO. Dor. BUt Linco, did not thou know me indeed?

Lin. Who could have known thee in this savage weed
For meek Dorinda? But if I had been
A ravenous hound (as I am Linco) then
I to thy cost had known thee for a beast.
What do I see? What do I see?

Dor. Thou see
A sad effect of Love; a sad and strange
Effect of loving ( Linco.)

Lin. Wondrous change!
Thou a young Maid, so soft, so delicate,
That were (me thinks) an infant but of late,
Whom in mine arms I bore (as I may say)
A very little child but yesterday,
And steering thy weak steps, taught thee to name
(When I thy Father served) Daddy and Mam,
Who like a timorous Do (before thy heart
Was made a prey to insulting Love) did start
At every thing that on the sudden stirred,
At every wind, at every little bird
That shook a bough, each Lizard that but ran
Out of a bush, made thee look pale and wan;
Now all alone over hills, through woods do pass
Fearlesse of hounds or savage beasts.

Dor. Alas!
" She whom Love wounds no other wound does fear.

Lin. Indeed fair Nymph, Love showed his godhead here,
From woman to a man transforming thee,
Or rather to a wolf.

Dor. If thou could see
Into my breast (O Linco!) then thou would say,
A living wolf upon my heart does prey
As on a harmless lamb.

Lin. Is Silvio
That wolf?

Dor. Alas, who else can be 't?

Lin. And so
*Cause he is a wolf, thou a shee-wolf would be,
To try, since on thy humane visage he
Was not enamored, if he would at least
Affect thee in the likeness of a beast,
As being of his kind. But prithee where
Gotst thou these robes?

Dor. I Will tell thee: I did hear
Silvio would chase to day the noble Bore
At Erimanthus foot; and there before
The morning peept, was I from wood to wood
Hunting the Hunter; by a crystal flood
From which our flocks did climb the hills, I found
Melampo the most beauteous Silvio's hound,
Who having quenched his thirst there as I guess,
Lay to repose him on the neighboring grass.
I, who love any thing that is Silvio's,
Even the very ground on which he goes,
And shadow which his beauteous limbs do cast;
Much more the dog on which his love is placed,
Stooping laid sudden hold on him, who came
Along with me as gently as a lamb.
And whilst it was in my thoughts to lead him back
Unto his Lord and mine, hoping to make
A friend of him with what he held so deer,
He came himself to seek him, and stopped here.
Deer Linco, I Will not lose thee so much time,
As to tell all that is past 'twixt me and him;
This only, to be brief, After a long
Preface of oaths on one another strung,
And treacherous promises, this cruel swain
Flung from me full of Anger and disdain,
Both with his own Melampo (to his Lord
So true) and with my deer and sweet reward.

Lin. O cruel Silvio! ruthlesse swain! But what
Did thou do then ( Dorinda?) did thou not
Hate him for this?

Dor. Rather (as if the fire
Of his disdain Loves fire had been) his ire
Increast my former flame. His steps I trace,
And thus pursuing him toward the chase,
I met (hard by) with my Lupino, whom
Before a little I had parted from.
When straight it came into my head, that I
In his attire, and in the company
Of shepherds might be thought a shepherd too,
And undiscovered my fair Silvio view.

Lin. In a wolves likeness amongst hounds? and none
Bite thee? It Is much ( Dorinda) thou have done.

Dor. This ( Linco) was no miracle: for they
Durst not touch her who was their Masters prey.
There I, out of the tents, amidst the crew
Of neighboring shepherds that were met to view
The famous passe-time, stood admiring more
To see the Huntsman, then the hunted Bore:
At every motion of the furious beast,
My cold heart shiv'red in my breast:
At every action of the brave young man
My soul with all her touched affections ran
In to his aid. But my extreme delight
Again was poisoned with the horrid sight
Of the fierce Bore, whose strength and vast
Proportion, all proportion past.
As an impetuous whirlwind in a great
And sudden storm, which all that it does meet
(Houses, and trees, and stones) before it bears,
All it can get within its circle tears
To pieces in an instant: so the Bore
Wheeling about (his tusks all foam and gore)
Pil'd in one heap dogs slain, spears knapt, men wounded.
How often did I desire to have compounded
For Silvio's life, with the enraged Swine!
And for his blood, to have given the Monster mine!
How often was I about to run between,
And with my body his fair body screen!
Spare cruel Bore, (how often did I cry!)
Spare my fair Silvio's breast of Ivory;
Thus to my self I spoke, and sighed, and prayed;
When his fierce dog (armed with a breast plate made
Of hard and scaly barks of trees) he slipped
After the beast, now prouder, being dipped
Thoroughly in blood, and lifted from the ground
On slaughtered trunks. The valor of that hound
( Linco) exceeds belief: and Silvio
Not without reason surely loves him so.
As a chaft Lion, which now meets, now turns
From an untamed Bulls well brandished horns,
If once he come with his strong paw to seize
Upon his shoulder, masters him with ease:
So bold Melampo shunning with fine slights
The Bores short turns, and rapid motion, lights
At length upon his ear; which having bit
Quite through, and lugg'd him twice or thrice by it,
He with his teeth so naild him to the ground,
That at his vast bulk now a mortal wound
Might levelled be with greater certainty,
(Before but slghtly hurt) then suddenly
My lovely Silvio (calling on the name
Of Dian) Goddess do thou give me aim
(Quoth he) the horrid head is thine. This sed,
His golden Quiver's swiftest shaft to the head
He drew; which flying to that very point
Where the left shoulder knits with the neck joint,
There wounded the fierce Bore, so down he fell.
Then I took breath, seeing my Silvio well,
And out of danger. Happy beast! to die
So sweet a death, as by that hand, which I
Would beg my end from.

Lin. But what then became
Of the slain beast?

Dor. I know not; for I came
Away, for fear of being known; but, I
Suppose, the head to the Temple solemnly
They Will bear, according to my Silvio's vow.

Lin. But will thou not get out of these weeds now?

Dor. Yes: but my garments with my other geer
Lupino has, who promised to stay here
With them, but fails. Dear Linco, if thou love
Me, seek him for me up and down this grove:
Far off he cannot be; mean while I Will take
A little rest (do see there?) in that Brake;
There I Will expect thee; for I am ore-come
With weariness and sleep, and will not home
Accoutred thus.

Lin. I go: but stir not then
Out of that place till I return again.

Scena tertia.
CHORUS, ERGASTO. Cho. HAve ye heard Shepherds that our Demy-God
( Montano's and Alcides worthy blood)
This day has freed us from that dreadful beast
Which all Arcadia lately did infest?
And that he is preparing himself now
l'th' Temple for it to perform his vow?
If for so great a benefit we would show
Our gratitude, to meet him let us go,
And join our tongues and hearts together there,
To honor him as our Deliverer.
" Which honor, though it be reward too small
" For such a fair and valiant soul; it is all
" Virtue can have on earth.

Erg. O sad disaster!
O bitter chance! O wound that has no plaster!
O day to be for ever steeped in tears!

Cho. What doleful voice is this that strikes our ears?

Erg. Stars, that are enemies to man always,
Why do you mock our faith? why do you raise
Our hope on high, that when it falls again
The precipice may be with greater pain?

Cho. Ergasto by his voice; and it is he.

Erg. But why do I acuse Heaven wrongfully?
Accuse thy self Ergasto: Thou alone,
Thou, thou against the steel did knock the stone;
Thou layd'st the match unto the tinder; whence
A flame unquenchable is kindled since.
But Heaven does know, I for the best did do it,
And pity only did induce me to it.
O ill starr'd Lovers! wretched Titiro!
Poor Amarillis! childlesse Father! O
Mourning Montano! O Arcadia gone
In a consumption far! and we undone!
In short, most sad, all I have seen! or see!
Or speak! or hear! or think!

Cho. What may this be
(Alas!) that in one accident alone
Includes a general desolation?
This way he bends his course, let us go meet
Him (swains).

Erg. Eternal Gods! is it not yet
Time to abate your wrath?

Cho. Unfold to us
(Courteous Ergasto) what afflicts thee thus.
What do thou moan?

Erg. Your ruin and mine own:
The ruin of Arcadia I moan.

Cho. Alas! why so?

Erg. The very staff, the stay
Of all our hope is broke, is pulled away.

Cho. Speak plainer.

Erg. Titiro's daughter, that sole prop
Of her old House, and Father, the sole hope
Of our deliverance, promised here below,
Above decreed to marry Silvio,
As the only means that should Arcadia save;
That Heavenly Maid, so sober, and so grave,
That President of honor (crowned with Lillies
Of chastity) that peerlesse Amarillis;
She, she (alas! I have no heart, no breath
To tell it you).

Cho. Is dead?

Erg. Is near her death.

Cho. Alas! what have we heard?

Erg. Nothing as yet:
She dies a malefactresse: That, That Is it.

Cho. A malefactresse Amarillis? how Ergasto?

Erg. Caught with an Adult'rer now.
And, if ye stay a little longer here,
Led pinioned to the Temple ye shall see her.

Cho. " O female structures, glorious and most fair,
" But weak withal! O chastity, how rare
Art thou! and shall it then be truly taxt,
No woman's chaste but she that never was akst?

Erg. Indeed, when she that is virtue's self does fall,
We well may doubt the virtue of them all.

Cho. Pray, if it will not too much trouble be,
Tell the whole story to these swains and me.

Erg. I will: The Priest early to day (ye know)
Did with this wretched Nymph's sad Father go
Unto the sacred Temple; with one care
Both moved, to facilitate with prayer
Their childrens desired marriage. For this end
At once their incense did to heaven ascend,
At once their offerings bled, their sacrifice
At once was done with due solemnities,
And such glad auspice, that no entrails e're
Were fairer seen, no flame was more sincere,
And less eclipsed with smoke: moved with such signs,
Thus the blind prophet speaks, and thus divines;
This day (Montano) shall thy Silvio love:
Thy Daughter (Titiro) a wife shall prove:
Go and prepare the Marriage. O absurd,
And vain depending on an Augur's word!
And thou as blind in soul, as in thy eyes!
If thou had said, Prepare her Obsequies,
Then a true Prophet thou had proved indeed.
Yet all the standers by were comforted,
And the old Fathers wept for joy apace,
And Titiro was parted from the place.
When in the Temple suddenly were heard
Sinister omens, and dire signs appeared
Boading Heavens wrath. At which (alas!) if each
Stood there astonished and berest of speech
After so fair beginnings, Friends, judge you.
Mean while the Priests themselves alone withdrew
Into an inner room: and whilst they there
And we without intent in praying were,
Devout and weeping; puffing through the press
The curled Satyr (lo!) demands access
Unto the Priests. I (Porter of that place)
Admit him: He then (O he has a face
To bring ill news!) cried; Fathers, if your Prayer
Find not the Gods, your vows and incense are
Not acceptable, and your sacrifice;
If from your altars an impure flame rise,
Think it not strange, that likewise is impure
Which is committing now hard by your door,
In Ericina's cave: a false Nymph there
Is breaking with a base adulterer
Your laws, and her own faith. Send with me now
Your Ministers, and I will show them how
In The act to take 'em. Then (O humane mind,
When thy Fate's near, how dull thou art! how blind!)
The good Priests breat^'d: supposing 'twas no more
But remove them, and Heaven would as before
Look on their sacrifice beni'nely. There-
Upon they order their chief Minister
Nicandro presently to take that guide,
And bring both Lovers to the Temple tied:
With all his under-ministers he goes,
Pursuing that vile Satyr through a close
And crooked way into the cave. The Maid,
Struck with their torches sudden light, assayed
From where she was to run out of the door,
Which that base dog had stopped (it seems) before.

Cho. And what did he the while?

Erg. He went his ways
When he had led Nicandro to the place.
But (friends) I cannot tell the general
Astonishment that fell upon us all,
When it the Daughter proved of Titiro:
Who taken, in a trice (I do not know
Out of what place) forth bold Mirtillo flew,
And a sharp dart which he was armed with threw
Like lightning at Nicandro: which, if it
The place that it was aimed at had hit,
Had sent him to the shades: But (whether I
May call it Fortune, or agility)
At the same instant the one aimed his blow,
The other stepped a little backward; so
The mortal steel past by, leaving his breast
Untoucht, and in his coat of skins did rest,
Into the which (I know not how) 'twas wove
So intricately, that Mirtillo strove
In vain to pull it out; and so he too
Was taken.

Cho. And with him what did they do?

Erg. He to the Temple by himself was brought.

Cho. For what?

Erg. To try if he would discover ought
Touching the fact in question. Perhaps too
The affront he in their Minister did do
Unto the priestly majesty might some
Penance deserve. Would yet I might have come
To comfort my poor friend!

Cho. What hindered thee?

Erg. The waiters at the altar may not be
Admitted to delinquents: therefore I
Sequesterd from the other company,
Go by my self unto the Temple; where
With many a prayer and devouter tear
I Will beg of Heaven that it would chase away
This sullen storm that overclouds our day.
Deer Shepherds rest in peace, and join with ours
Your prayers, to batter the celestial towers.

Cho. We will, when we have paid to Silvio
That duty first we to his goodness owe.
O ye great Gods! now, now, if ever, prove
Your anger less eternal then your love.

Scena quarta.
CORISCA. EMpale ye triumph-decking Laurel boughs,
Empale my glorious and victorious brows.
Into Love's lists (hedged round about with flame)
This day I came, I saw, I overcame:
This day has Heaven and Earth, Nature and Art,
Fortune and Fate, Friend and Foe taken my part.
Even that base Satyr who abhorres me so
Has helped me too, as if he too did go
Some share with me. How much more happily
Did fortune bring Mirtillo in, then I
Contrived to have brought Coridon? to make
Her crime more show of likelihood to take?
And though Mirtillo's apprehended too,
That matters not; they soon will let him go:
The Adultresse only pays the penalty.
O famous triumph! Solemn victory!
If lying may deserve a trophie, I
Deserve a trophie for my amorous lie;
Which from this tongue and bosom has done more
For me then Love with all his charms before.
But this is not a time to talk: Withdraw
Thy self Corisca, till the doom of Law
Fall on thy Rivals head, for fear that she
TO excuse her self, should lay the blame on thee.
Or that the Priest himself should wish to know
What thou can say, before he give the blow.
" When a mine springs, it is good to stand aloof;
" A lying tongue requires a flying hoof.
I Will hide me in those woods, and there will make
Some stay, till it be time to come and take
Possession of my joys. O! it has hit
Beyond all thought. Success has crowned my wit.

Scena quinta.
NICANDRO, AMARILLIS. Nic. A Heart of flint, or rather none had he
Nor humane sense, that could not pity thee,
Unhappy Nymph! and for thy sorrow grieve
The more, by how much less they can believe
This should befall thee, who have known thee best.
For were it but to see a Maid distressed
Of venerable countenance, and that showed
So virtuous and so excellently good;
One that for heavenly beauty merited
Temples and Sacrifices, to be led
Unto the Temple as a Sacrifice,
Who could behold it without melting eyes?
But he that should consider further, how,
And for what purpose thou were born; That thou
Art Daughter unto Titiro, and shoud
Have married been unto Montano's blood,
(Two the most loved and honored shall I say
Shepherds, or Fathers of Arcadia?)
And that being such, so great, so famous, and
So beautiful a Nymph, and that did stand
By nature so remote from thy death's brink,
Thou should be now condemned. He that does think
On this and weeps not, wails not thy mishap,
Is not a man, but wolf in humane shape.

Am. If my mishap had come through mine own fault,
And the effect had been of an ill thought
As of a deed that seems ill, it had been
Less grievous to me to have death pay sin;
And very just it were I should have spilt
My blood to wash my impure soul from guilt,
To quench Heavens wrath; and since man too had wrong,
Pay what to human justice did belong:
So might I still a crying conscience,
And mortified with a due inward sense
Of deserved death, render my self more fit
To die, and through that purgatory get
Perchance to Paradise. But now in all
My pride of youth and fortune thus to fall,
Thus innocent, is a sad case, a sad --
Nicandro.

Nic. Nymph, would to Heaven men had
Sinned against thee, rather then thou against Heaven.
For satisfaction might be easier given
To thee for thy wronged Fame, then unto it
For its wronged Deities. Nor know I yet
Who wronged thee but thy self. Were thou not caught
Alone with the adult'rer in a vault?
To Silvio precontracted were not thou?
And so thy nuptial faith have broken? How
Then innocent?

Am. For all this have not I
Transgrest the Law: and innocently dye.

Nic. Not Natures law perchance, Love where thou will.
But that of Men and Heaven, Love without guilt.

Am. Both men and Heaven (if all our fortune be
Derived from thence) transgrest have against me.
For what but an ill destiny could bid
That I should die for what another did?

Nic. What was that Nymph? bridle thy tongue (with high-
Flown grief transported even to blasphemy).
" The ils we suffer our own sins pull down:
" Heaven pardons many wrongs, but it does none.

Am. I blame in Heaven only my own star:
But one that has deceived me, more by far.

Nic. Then blame thy self, thy self thou did deceive.

Am. I did when I a coz'ner did believe.

Nic. "They who desire to be deceived, are not.

Am. Do think me naught?

Nic. Nay ask thy actions that.

Am. "Actions are often false comments on our hearts.

Nic. "Yet those we see, and not the inward parts.

Am. "The heart may be seen too with the eyes of the mind.

Nic. "Whithout the senses help those eyes are blind.

Am. "The senses must submit to reasons sway.

Nic. "Reason in point of fact must sense obey.

Am. Well; I am sure an honest heart I have.

Nic. Prithee who brought thee then into the cave?

Am. My folly and too much credulity.

Nic. Thou trustedst with a friend thy honesty?

Am. I trusted a friends honesty.

Nic. Thy blood?
Was that the friend thou would have understood?

Am. Ormino's Sister, who betrayed me thither.

Nic. "'It Is sweet when Lovers are betrayed together.

Am. Mirtillo enterd without my consent.

Nic. How enter'dst thou then? and for what intent?

Am. Let this suffice, 'twas not for him I came.

Nic. It cannot, if no other cause thou name.

Am. Examine him about my innocence.

Nic. Him? who has been the cause of thy offense?

Am. Call her to witness who betrayed me has.

Nic. Why should we hear a witness without faith?

Am. By chaste Diana's dreadful name I swear.

Nic. Thou by thy deeds art perjured unto her.
Nymph, I am plain, I cannot flatter thee
Into a hope which in extremity
Will leave thee more confounded; these are dreams.
" A troubled fountain cannot yield pure streams,
" Nor a bad heart good words. And where the deed
" Is evident, Defense offense does breed.
What do thou talk? thou should have guarded more
Then thy life now, thy chastity before.
Why do thou cheat thy self?

Am. O misery!
Must I then dye, Nicandro? must I dye?
None left to hear? none to defend me left?
Of all abandoned? of all hope bereft?
Only of such a mocking pity made
The wretched object as affords no aid?

Nic. Be patient Nymph, and give me cause to tell,
Though thou did ill, yet that thou suffredst well.
Look up to heaven, since thence thou drawst thy birth;
" All good or ill we meet with upon earth
" From thence as from a fountain does distill.
" And as no good is here unmixed with ill,
" So punishment, that is ill to flesh and blood,
" As to the account we must make there is good.
And if my words have cut thee, it is but like
A faithful Surgeon, who a vein does strike,
Or thrusts his instrument into the wound
Where it is mortallest and most profound
(In being cruel, merciful). Then be
Content with what is writ in Heaven for thee.

Am. O it is a cruel sentence, whether it
In heaven for me, or in earth be writ:
Yet writ in heaven I Am certain it is not:
For there my innocence is known. But what
Does that avail me, if that dye I must?
That Is the straight narrow passage! to be dust,
Nicandro, that is the bitter cup! But oh!
By that compassion thou to me do show,
Lead me not to the Temple yet: stay, stay.

Nic. " Who fears to dye, dies every hour of the day.
Why hang'st thou back? and draw'st a painful breath?
" Death has no ill in it, but the fear of death.
" And he that dies when he has heard his doom,
" Flies from his death.

Am. Perchance some help may come.
Father, dear father, do thou leave me too?
An only daughters father, will thou do
Nothing to save me? Yet before I die
A parting kiss to me do not deny.
Two bosoms shall be pierced with one blow:
And from thy daughter's wound thy blood must flow.
O father! (once so sweet and deer a name,
Which I was never wont to invoke in vain)
Thy beloved Daughter's Wedding callst thou this?
To day a Bride; to day a Sacrifice.

Nic. Good Nymph no more: why do thou bootlesly
Stay thus tormenting both thy self and me?
The time calls on: I must convey thee hence,
Nor with my duty longer may dispense.

Am. Deer woods adieu then, my deer woods adieu:
Receive these sighs (my last ones) into you,
Till my cold shade, forced from her seat by dire
And unjust steel, to your loved shades retire.
(For sink to hell it cannot, being innocent;
Nor soar to heaven, laden with discontent.)
Mirtillo, (O Mirtillo!) most accursed
The day I saw, the day I pleased thee first!
Since I, whom thou above thy life did love,
Became thy life, that thou my death might prove.
She dies condemned for kindness now to thee,
Whom thou have still condemned of cruelty,
I might have broke my faith as cheap: Ay me!
Now without fault, or fruit I dye, or Thee
My deer Mirtill --

Nic. Alas! she dies indeed.
(Poor wretch!) Come hither shepherds with all speed,
Help me to hold her up. (O piteous case!)
She finished in Mirtillo's name her Race.
(Unhappy maid!) -- she breathes yet, and I feel
Some signs of life pant in her bosom still.
To the next fountain let us carry her;
Perchance cold water may recover there
Her fleeting spirits. -- Stay, will not relief
Be cruelty to her who dies of grief,
To prevent dying by the Axe? How-e're,
Yet let not us our charity forbear.
" Men ought to lend their aid in present woe:
" What is to come, none but the Gods foreknow.

Scena sexta.
CHORUS of Huntsmen, with SILVIO. CHORUS of Shepherds, with SILVIO. Chapter Hun. O
Glorious youth! true child of Hercules;
That kilst so soon such monstrous beasts as these!

Chapter Sh. O glorious youth! by whom lies slain and queld
This Erimanthian Monster, (living) held
Invincible! Behold the horrid head,
Which seems to breath death when it self is dead!
This is the famous Trophie, noble Toil
Of him whom we our Demy-god do style.
Extol his great name (Shepherds) and this day
Keep ever solemn, ever holy day.

Cho. Hunts. O glorious youth etc.

Chapter Sh. O glorious youth! that do despise thine own
For others safeties. " Virtue climbes her Throne
" By these steep stairs: and the high Gods have set
" Before her Palace gates labor and sweat.
" He that would land at joy must wade through woes:
" Nor by unprofitable base repose
" Abhorring labor, but from gallant deeds
" And virtuous labor true repose proceeds.

Cho. Hunts. O glorious youth, etc.

Chapter Sh. O glorious youth! by whom these Plains deprived
Of tillage, and of tillers long, retriv'd
Their fruitful honors have. The plough-man now
Securely goes after the lazy plough,
Sowes his plump seed, and from earth's pregnant womb
Expects the wished fruits when the season's come.
No more shall churlish tusk, or churlish foot
Trample them down, or tear them up by the root.
Nor shall they prosper so as to sustain
A beast, to be their own, and others bane.

Cho. Hunts. O glorious youth! etc.

Cho. Shep. O glorious youth! as if presaging thine,
The Have'n to day does in full glory shine.
Such peradventure was that famous Boar
Alcides slew, yet so thy act is more;
It being (Silvio) thy first labor, as
Of thy great Ancestor the third it was.
But with wild Beasts thy infant valor plays,
To kill more monsters in thy riper days.

Cho. Hunts. O glorious youth! etc.

Cho. Sh. O glorious youth! how well are joined in thee
Valor and piety! See Cynthia, see
Thy devout Silvio's vow! behold with white
And crooked tusk, (as if in thy despite)
The proud head armed on this side and on that,
Seeming thy silver horns to emulate!
If then (O powerful Goddess) thou did guide
The young man's shaft, he is in justice tide
To dedicate the Trophie unto thee
By whom he did obtain the victory.

Cho. Hunts. O glorious youth, true child of Hercules,
That kill'st so soon such monstrous beasts as these!

Scena septima.
CORIDON. I Have forborne till now to credit what
The Satyr told me of Corisca late,
Fearing it might be some malicious lie
Devised by him to shake my constancy.
For most improbable it seemed, that she
In the same place where she expected me
(Unless the message which Lisetta brought
To me from her were false) should straight be caught
With an adulterer. And yet (the truth
To say) here is a shrewd token, and it does
Perplex me much, to see the mouth of the den
Just in that manner he related then
Shut and damm'd up with such a massy stone.
Ah false Corisca! too well by mine own
Experience of thy ungracious deeds
I know thee now: stumbling so often, thou needs
Must fall at last. So many frauds, so many
Lies, and vow-breaches might have warned any
(Whom folly or affection did not blear)
That some such fearful tumbling cast was near.
'Twas well for me I tarried by the way;
A happy chance my father made me stay:
Though then I did suppose him foolishly
TO have been a tedious Remora. Had I
Come at Lisetta's hour, I might have seen
Something which poison to my eyes had been.
But what shall I do now? armed with disdain,
Shall I revenge and mischief entertain?
No: I have loved her, and this act does crave
My pity, not my anger. Shall I have
Pity on one deceived me? Me! she has
Deceived her self, leaving a man of faith,
To give her self a prey into the hand
Of an ignoble Swain, a stranger and
A vagabond, that will to morrow be
More wavering, more without faith then she.
Shall I take pains then to revenge a wrong
That carries with it the revenge along?
And quenches all my indignation so,
It Is turned to pity? She has scorned me though:
Sh' has honored me: for she who thus could choose,
Highly commends the man she does refuse.
She scorned me, who the way did never know,
How she should love receive, or how bestow.
Who liked at random still, or had this curse,
If two were offered her, to take the worse.
But tell me Coridon, how can it be,
If scorn of being scorned move not thee
To take revenge; but that to have been crossed
By such a loss should do it? I have not lost
Her whom I never had: My self I have
Regained, whom I unto another gave.
Nor cannot a loss be termed to remain
Without a woman so unsure and vain.
In fine, What have I lost? Beauty without
Virtue: A head with all the brains picked out:
A breast that has no heart: A heart that has
No soul in it: A soul that has no faith.
A shade, a ghost, a carcass of affection,
Which will to morrow turn to putrefaction.
Is this a loss? I will be bold to say 't,
It Is a great purchase and a fortunate.
Is there no woman in the world but she?
Can Coridon want Nymphs as fair as she,
And far more true? But she may well want one
Will love her with such faith as Coridon,
Whom she deserved not. Now if I should do
That which the Satyr did advise me to,
Accusing her of vow-breach, in my breath
I know it lies to have her put to death.
But I have not an heart so Aspine, I,
That with the wind of woman's levitie
It should be moved. Too great a happiness
And honor 'twere to their perfidiousnesse,
If with the trouble of a manly breast,
And breaking of the happy peace and rest
Of an ingenous soul, I were to be
Revenged upon Corisca now. For me
Then let her live: or (to express it better)
By me not die, Live for my Rival let her.
Her life's revenge for me sufficient:
Live let her to dishonor; to repent:
I know not how to envy him, or loath
Her; but with all my heart do pity both.

Scena octava.
SILVIO, ECHO within. O Goddess of the slothful, blind, and vain,
Who with foul hearts, Rites foolish and profane,
Altars and Temples hallow to thy name!
Temples? or Sanctuaries vile said I?
To protect Lewdness and impiety,
Under the robe of thy Divinity?
And thou base Goddess: that thy wickedness,
When others do as bad, may seem the less,
Giv'st them the reins to all lasciviousness.
Rotter of soul and body, enemy
Of reason, plotter of sweet thee very,
The little and great World's calamity.
Reputed worthily the Ocean's daughter:
That treacherous monster, which with even water
First soothes, but ruffles into storms soon after.
Such winds of sighs, such Cataracts of tears,
Such breaking waves of hopes, such gulfs of fears,
Thou make in men, such rocks of cold despairs.
Tides of desire so headstrong, as would move
The world to change thy name, when thou shall prove
Mother of Rage and Tempests, not of Love.
Behold what sorrow now and discontent
On a poor pair of Lovers thou have sent!
Go thou, that vaunt'st thy self Omnipotent,
Go faithless Goddess, save that Nymph whom thou
Have poisoned with thy sweets (if thou know how)
From her swift deaths pursuing footsteps now.
O what a happy day was that for me,
When my chaste soul I did devote to thee
Cynthia, my great and only Deity!
True Goddess! unto whose particular shrine
The fairest souls in all the Earth incline,
As thou in Heaven do all the Stars outshine.
How much more laudable and free from pain
The sports are which thy servants entertain,
Then those of faithless Ericina's train!
Wild Boars are killed by thy Worshippers:
By wild Boars miserably killed are hers.
O Bow, my strength and joy! My conquerers
My Arrows! Let that bugbear Love come try
And match with you his soft Artillery.
They whom you wound do in good earnest die.
But too much honor hence to thee would come,
Vile and unwarlike Boy, to chastise whom
(I speak't aloud) a rod's enough. Enough.
What art thou that reply'st? Echo? or Love?
That so does imitate the same? The same.
Most wished! but tell me true; Art thou he? He.
The son of her that for Adonis once
So miserably pined away? Away.
Well: of that Goddess who was found in bed
With Mars, when the stars shot to see her shame,
And the chaste Moon blushed at her folly? O ly!
What madness it is to whistle to the wind!
Come (if thou dare) to the wide air, I dare.
And I defy thee. But art thou her son
Legitimate, or else a by-blow? I glow.
O! the Smith's son that is called a God. A God.
Of what? the follies of the world? The world.
The Bawd thou art. Art thou that terrible Boy
That take such sharp revenge upon those wights
Who thy absurd commands digest not? Jest not.
What punishments do thou inflict on those
Who in rebellion persevere? Severe.
And how shall I be punished, whose hard heart
Has always been at odds with Love? With Love.
When (Sot), if my chaste breast be to those flames
More opposite then night to day? To day.
So quickly shall I be in that straight? Straight.
What Is she can bring me to adoring? Dorin.
Dorinda, is it not, my little child,
Thou would say in thy lithping gibberish? Ish.
She whom I hate more then the Lamb the Wolf?
And who to this shall force my will? I will.
And how? and with what Arms? and with what bow?
Shall it be happily with thine? With thine.
Thou mean perchance, when by thy wantonness
It is unbent, and the nerve broken? Broken.
Shall my own bow, after it is broken too,
Make war on me? and who shall break't? thou? Thou.
It Is plain now thou art drunk: go sleep. But say,
Where shall these miracles be wrought? here? Here.
O fool! and I am going now from hence.
See if thou have not proved thy self to day
A prophet with the wine inspired. Inspired.
But stay, I see (unless I much mistake)
A greyish thing at couch in yonder Brake:
It Is like a Wolf, and certainly it is one.
O what a huge one it is! how overgrown!
O day of prey to me! What favors are
These, courteous goddess? in one day a pair
Of such wild beasts to triumph ore? But why
Do I delay this work, my Deity?
The swiftest and the keenest shaft that is
In all my Quiver (let me see, -- it is this)
I do select: to thee I recommend it
(O Archeresse eternal) do thou send it
By Fortunes hand, and by thy power divine
Guide it into the beast. His skin is thine.
And in thy name I shoot. O lucky hit!
Just where the eye and hand designed it.
Would now I had my javelin here, to make
An end of him at once, before he take
The wood for shelter: but the place shall yield
Me weapons. Not a stone in all the field?
But why do I seek weapons, having these?
This second arrow lays him at his ease.
Alas! what do I see? what have thou done,
Unhappy Silvio? what have thou run
Thy self into? Thou have a shepherd slain
In a wolfe's skin. O action to remain
For ever overwhelmed with grief! to lie
Under salt water everlastingly!
The wretch too I should know, and he that so
Does lead and prop him up is Linco. O
Vile arrow! viler vow! but vilest Thou
That did direct that arrow, hear that vow!
I guilty of another blood? I kill
Another? I that was so free to spill
My blood for others, and my life to give?
Throw down thy weapons, and inglorious live,
Shooter of men, hunter of men. But lo
The wretched Swain! then thee less wretched though.
Scena nona.
LINCO, SILVIO, DORINDA. Lin. LEan, daughter, on my arm with all thy weight,
(Wretched Dorinda) do.

Sil. Dorinda's that?
I Am a dead man.

Dor. O Linco, Linco! O
My second Father!

Sil. It Is Dorinda: woe,
Woe on thee Silvio!

Dor. Linco, thou were sure
Ordein'd by Fate to be a stay to poor
Dorinda. Thou receivedst my first cry
When I was born: Thou will, now I Am to dye,
My latest groan: and these thy arms which were
My cradle then, shall now become my biere.

Lin. Ah daughter! (or more deer then if thou were
My daughter) speak now to thee for my heart
I cannot, grief melts each word into a tear.

Dor. Not so fast Linco, if thou love me: deer
Linco, nor go, nor weep so fast; one rakes
My wound too bad, the other a new wound makes.

Sil. (Poor Nymph! how ill have I repaid thy love!)

Lin. Be of good comfort daughter, this will prove
No mortal wound.

Dor. It may be so; but I
That am a Mortal, of this wound shall die.
Would I knew yet who hurt me!

Lin. Get thee sound,
And let that pass: "Revenge never cured a wound.

Sil. (Why do thou stay? what make thou in this place?
Woulst thou be seen by her? Have thou the face?
Have thou the heart t'indure it? Silvio, flee
From the sharp dart of her revenging eye:
Fly from her tongues just sword. I cannot go
From hence: and what it is I do not know,
But something holds me, and would make me run
To her whom I of all the world did shun.)

Dor. Must I then die and not my Murderer know?

Lin. 'Twas Silvio.

Dor. How do know 'twas Silvio?

Lin. I know his shaft.

Dor. Then welcome death, if I
Shall owe thee to so sweet an enemy!

Lin. Look where he stands! we need demand no further,
His posture and his face confess the murder
Alone. Now Heaven be praised Silvio,
Thy all-destroying Arrows and thy Bow
The have pli'd so well about these woods, that now
The art gone out thy Arts-master. Tell me, thou
That do like Silvio, not like Linco, who
Made this brave shoot, Linco or Silvio?
This it is for boys to be so overwise:
Would thou had taken this old fools advice!
Answer, thou wretch: What lingering misery,
What horror shall thou live in if she die?
I know thou't say, thou err'dst, and thought to strike:
A Wolf: as if'twere nothing (schoolboy like)
To shoot at all adventures, and not see,
Nor care, whether a man or beast it be.
What Goat-herd, or what plough-man does not go
Clad in such skins? O Silvio, Silvio!
"Soon ripe, soon rotten. If thou think (fond child)
This chance by chance befell thee, the art beguild.
" These monstrous things without Divine decree
" Hap not to men. Do thou not plainly see
How this thy unsupportable disdain
Of Love, the world, and all that is humane
Displeases Heaven? " High Gods cannot abide
" A Rival upon earth: and hate such pride,
" Although in virtue. Now thou art mute, that were
Before this hap unsufferably pert.

Dor. Silvio, give Linco leave to talk: for he
Knows not what power Love gave thee over me
Of life and death. If thou had struck my heart,
The had struck what is thine (mark proper for thy dart.)
Those hands to wound me thy fair eyes have taught.
See Silvio her thou hat'st so! see her brought
To that extremity where thou would see her!
Thou sought'st to wound her, see her wounded here!
To prey upon here, lo she is thy prey!
Thou sought'st her death, and lo she is dying! Say,
Would thou ought else of her? What further joy
Can poor Dorinda yield thee? Cruel Boy!
And void of Bowels! thou would never believe
That wound which from thy eyes I did receive:
This which thy hands have given can thou deny?
Those crystal showrs which issued from my eye,
Thou could not be persuaded were my blood:
What do thou think now of this crimson flood
Which my side weeps? But (if orewhelm'd with scorn
That bravery be not wherewith thou were born)
Deny me not (though cruel soul, yet brave)
Deny me not ('it is all the boon I crave)
When I shall sigh into thee my last breath,
One sigh of thine. O happy, happy death!
If thou vouchsafe to sweeten it with these
Kind words and pious; Soul depart in peace.

Sil. Dorinda, my Dorinda, shall I say
(Alas!) when I must lose thee the same day
Thou Art mine? now mine, when death to thee I give,
That were not mine when I could make thee live?
Yes mine I Will call thee: and thou mine shall be
In spite of my opposing destiny.
For if thy death our meeting souls disjoyn,
My death shall reunite us. All that is mine
Haste to revenge her: I have murdered thee
With these cursed arrows; with them murder me.
I have been cruel unto thee; and I
Desire from thee nothing but cruelty.
I scorned thee in my pride; look! with my knee
(Low louting to the earth) I worship thee,
And pardon of thee, but not life demand.
Take Shafts and Bow: But do not strike my hand
Or eye (bad ministers, it is true, yet still)
But ministers of an unguilty will:
Strike me this breast, this monster hence remove,
Sworn enemy of Pity, and of Love.
Strike me this heart, to thee so cruel. Lo,
My bared breast!

Dor. I strike it, Silvio?
I strike that breast? sure if thou did not mock,
Thou would not shew't me naked. O white rock!
Already by the winds and briny main
Of my rough sighs and tears often struck in vain!
But do thou breath? nor art to pity barred?
Art thou a tender breast, or marble hard?
I would not idolize fair Alablaster,
(Led by the humane likeness) as thy Master
And mine, when on the outside he did look,
A harmless woman for a beast mistook.
I strike thee? strike thee Love. Nor can I wish
For my revenge a greater plague then this.
Yet must I bless the day that I took fire,
My tears and martyrdom. All I desire
Is that thou praise my faith, my zeal, but no
Revenging me. But courteous Silvio,
(That to thy servant kneel'st) why this to me?
Or if Dorinda must thy Mistress be,
Obey her then; the first command I give,
Is that thou rise; the second, that thou live.
Heavens Will be done with me: I shall survive
In thee, and cannot dye, whilst you are alive.
But if thou think unjust I should be found
Without all satisfaction for my wound,
Be that, which did it, punished. 'Twas that Bow:
Let that be broke; I Am well revenged so.

Lin. (A very heavy doom).

Sil. Come then thou mad,
Thou bloody actor of a deed so sad:
That thou may never break thread of life again,
Thus do I break thee and thy thread in twain,
And send thee a useless trunk back to the wood.
Nor you (ill sanguin'd with an innocents blood!)
Which my deer Mistress side so rudely rent,
(Brothers in ill) shall escape your punishment.
Not shafts, nor flights, but sticks, since ye shall want
Those wings and heads which garnisht you: Avaunt
Plumed and disarmed Arms. How well, O Love,
Did thou foretell me this from yonder grove
In a prophetic Echo! O thou high
Conqu'rour of Gods and men, once enemy,
Now lord of all my thoughts! if it is thy glory
To tame a heart that is proud and refractory,
Divert Death's impious shaft, which with one blow
Slaying Dorinda, will slay Silvio
(Now thine): so cruel death, if it remove
Her hence, will triumph over triumphant Love.

Lin. Now both are wounded: but the one in vain,
Unless the other's wound be healed again.
About it then.

Dor. Ah Linco! do not (pray)
Carry me home disguised in this array.

Sil. Why should Dorinda go to any house
But Silvio's? surely she shall be my Spouse
'Ere it be night, either alive, or dead.
And Silvio in life or death will wed
Dorinda.

Lin. Now she may become thy Wife,
Since Amarillis is to marriage, life,
And virtue lost. Blessed pair! Ye Gods (that do
Wonders) with one cure now give life to two.

Dor. O Silvio! I shall faint, my wounded thigh
Feebly supporting me.

Sil. Good remedy
For that! take heart: thou art mine and Linco's care,
And I and Linco thy two crutches are.
Linco, thy hand.

Lin. There it is.

Sil. Hold fast: a chair
Let Us make for her of our two arms. Rest here
Dorinda, suffering thy right hand to embrace
The neck of Linco, thy left mine: Now place
Thy body tenderly, that the hurt part
May not be strained.

Dor. O cruel pricking dart!

Sil. Sit at more ease, my Love.

Dor. It is well now.

Sil. Deer Linco do not stagger.

Lin. Nor do thou
Swag with thine arm, but steady go and wary
It will concern thee. Ah! we do not carry
A Boars head now in triumph.

Sil. Say, my Deer,
How is it now?

Dor. In pain; but leaning here
(My Heart) to be in pain, is pleased to be;
To languish, health; to die, eternity.

CHORUS.
FAir golden Age! when milk was the only food,
And cradle of the infant-world the wood
(Rocked by the winds); and the untoucht flocks did bear
Their deer young for themselves! None yet did fear
The sword or poison: no black thoughts begun
TO eclipse the light of the eternal Sun:
Nor wandering Pines unto a foreign shore
Or War, or Riches, (a worse mischief) bore.
That pompous sound, Idol of vanity,
Made up of Title, Pride, and Flattery,
Which they call Honor whom Ambition blindes,
Was not as yet the Tyrant of our minds.
But to buy real goods with honest toil
Amongst the woods and flocks, to use no guile,
Was honor to those sober souls that knew
No happiness but what from virtue grew.
Then sports and carols amongst Brooks and Plains
Kindled a lawful flame in Nymphs and Swains.
Their hearts and Tongues concurred, the kiss and joy
Which were most sweet, and yet which least did cloy
Hymen bestowed on them. To one alone
The lively Roses of delight were blown;
The theevish Lover found them shut on trial,
And fenced with prickles of a sharp denial.
Were it in Cave or Wood, or purling Spring,
Husband and Lover signified one thing.
Base present age, which do with thy impure
Delights the beauty of the soul obscure:
Teaching to nurse a Dropsy in the veins:
Bridling the look, but giv'st desire the reins.
Thus, like a net that spread and covered lies
With leaves and tempting flowrs, thou do disguise
With coy and holy arts a wanton heart;
" Make life a Stage Play, virtue but a part:
" Nor think it any fault Love's sweets to steal,
" So from the world thou can the theft conceal.
But thou that art the King of Kings, create
In us true honor: Virtue's all the state
Great souls should keep. Unto these cells return
Which were thy Court, but now thy absence mourn:
From their dead sleep with thy sharp goad awake
Them who, to follow their base wills, forsake
Thee, and the glory of the ancient world.
" Let Us hope: our ills have truce till we are hurld
" From that: Let Us hope; the sun that is set may rise,
" And with new light salute our longing eyes.
Actus Quintus.
Scena Prima.
VRANIO, CARINO. Vr. " ALl places are our Country where we are well:
Which to the wise is wheresoever they dwell.

Car. It is most true Vranio: and no man
By proof can say it better then I can:
Who leaving long ago my Fathers house,
(Being very young, and then ambitious
Of something more then holding of the plough,
Or keeping sheep) traveled abroad: and now
To the same point where I began, return,
When my gilt locks are to the silver worn.
" Yet a sweet thing (it needs must be confessed)
" To any that has sense, is his first nest.
" For Nature gave to all men at their birth
" Something of secret love unto that Earth
" Where they were born, which never old does grow
" In us, but follows wheresoever we go.
" The Loadstone which the wary Mariner
" Does as Directer of his travels bear
" Now to the rising Sun, now to his set,
" Does never lose that hidden virtue yet,
" Which makes it to the North retort its look:
" So he that has his native soil forsook,
" Though he may wander far, much compass take,
" I, and his nest in foreign Countries make;
" Yet that same natural love does still retain
" Which makes him wish his native soil again.
O fair Arcadia! the sweetest part
Of all the world (at least to me thou art)
Which my feet trod on, but my thoughts adore!
Had I been landed blindfold on thy shore,
Yet then I should have known thee, such a flood
Of sudden joy runs races with my blood:
Such a Magnetic powerful sympathy,
And unaccustomed tenderness feel I.
Thou then, that my companion have been
In travels and in sorrows, shall be in
At my joys too: it is reason thou should go
My half in happiness, as well as woe.

Vra. Companion of thy travels I have been,
Not of the fruit thereof; for thou art in
Thy native soil, where thou repose may find
For thy tired body, and more tired mind:
But I that am a stranger, and am come
So many leagues from my poor house, and from
My poorer and distressed Family,
Trailing my wearied lims along with thee,
For my afflicted body well may find
Repose, but not for my afflicted mind:
Thinking what pledges do behind remain,
And how much rugged way I must again
Tread over e're I rest. Nor do I know
Who else could have prevailed with me to go
From Elis in my gray unweildy age
(Not knowing why) so long a pilgrimage.

Car. Thou know, my sweet Mirtillo (who was given
As a son to me by propitious Heaven)
Some two months since came hither to be well
(By my advice, or of the Oracle,
To speak more true, which said, The Arcadian air
Was the only means that could his health repair.)
Now I, that find it an exceeding pain
Without so deer a pledge long to remain,
Consulting the same Oracle, inquired
When he would return whom I so much desired.
The Answer was the same I tell thee now;
Unto thy ancient Country return thou;
Where with thy sweet Mirtillo thou shall be
Happy; for in that place (by Heaven) he
Is marked out for great things: But till thou come
Into Arcadia, touching this be dumb.
Thou then, my faithfullest Companion,
My loved Vranio, who have ever gone.
A share in all my fortunes hitherto^,
Repose thy body, and thou shall have too
Cause to repose thy mind: 'twixt me and thee
(If Heaven perform what it has promised me)
All shall be common: no success can glad
Carino, if he see Vranio sad.

Vr. My deer Carino, what I do for thee,
Rewards it self, if it accepted be.
But what at first could make thee to forgo
Thy native Country, if thou love it so?

Car. A love to Poetry, and to the loud
Music of Fame resounding in a crowd.
For I my self (greedy of foreign praise)
Disdained Arcadia only should my Lays
Hear and applaud: as if my native Soil
Were narrow limits to my growing Style.
I went to Elis, and to Pisa then,
(Famous themselves, and giving fame to men)
There saw I that loved Egon, first with Bays,
With Purple then, with Virtue decked always:
That he on earth Apollo's self did seem:
Therefore my heart and Harp I unto him
Did consecrate, devoted to his name.
And in his house (which was the house of Fame)
I should have set up my perpetual rest,
There to admire and imitate the best,
If as Heaven made me happy here below,
So it had gi'n me too the grace to know
And keep my happiness. How I forsook
Elis and Pisa after, and betook
My self to Argos and Micene, where
An earthly god I worshipped, with what there
I sufferd in that hard captivity,
Would be too long for thee to hear, for me
Too sad to utter. Only thus much know,
I lost my labor, and in sand did sow:
I writ, wept, sung, hot and cold fits I had,
I rid, I stood, I bore, now sad, now glad,
Now high, now low, now in esteem, now scorned;
And as the Delphick iron, which is turned
Now to Heroic, now Mechanic use,
I feared no danger, did no pains refuse,
Was all things, and was nothing; changed my hair,
Condition, custom, thoughts, and life, but never
Could change my fortune. Then I knew at last
And panted after my sweet freedom past.
So flying smoaky Argos, and the great
Storms that attend on greatness, my retreat
I made to Pisa (my thoughts quiet port)
Where (praise be given to the Eternal for it)
Upon my deer Mirtillo I did light,
Which all past sorrows fully did requite.

Vra. " A thousand thousand times that man is blessed
" Can clip the wings of his aspiring breast!
" Nor for the shadow of great happiness
" Does throw away the substance of the less!

Car. But who'd have dreamt midst plenty to grow poor?
Or to be less by toiling to be more?
I thought by how much more in Princes Courts
Men did excel in Titles and Supports,
So much the more obliging they would be
(The best enamell of Nobility).
But now the contrary by proof I Have seen:
Courtiers in name, and Courteous in their mien
They are; but in their actions I could spy
Not the least-spark or dram of Courtesy.
People in show smooth as the calmed waves:
Yet cruel as the Ocean when it raves.
Men in appearance only I did find,
Love in the face, but malice in the mind:
With a straight look a squinting heart; and least
Fidelity where greatest was professed.
That which elsewhere is virtue, is vice there:
Plain troth, square dealing, love unfeigned, sincere
Compassion, faith inviolable, and
An innocence both of the heart and hand,
They count the folly of a soul that is vile
And poor, a vanity worthy their smile.
To cheat, to lie, deceit and theft to use,
And under show of pity to abuse,
To rise upon the ruins of their Brothers,
And seek their own by robbing praise from others,
The virtues are of that perfidious race.
No worth, no valor, no respect of place,
Of Age, or Law, bridle of modesty,
No tie of love, or blood, nor memory
Of good received; no thing's so venerable,
Sacred or just, that is inviolable
By that vast thirst of Riches, and desire
Unquenchable of still ascending higher.
Now I (not fearing, since I meant not ill,
And in Court-craft not having any skill,
Wearing my thoughts caracterd in my brow,
And a glasse-window in my breast) judge thou
How open and how fair a mark my heart
Lay to their Envie's unsuspected dart.

Vra. " Who now can boast of earth's felicity,
" When Envy treads on virtues heels?

Car. O my
Vranio, If since my Muse and I
From Elis past to Argos, I had found
Such cause to sing, as I had ample ground
To weep, perchance in such a lofty key
I Would sung my Master's glorious Arms, that he
Should have no cause, for the felicity
Of his Meonian trumpet to envy
Achilles: and my Country (which does bring
Such hapless Poets forth as Swan-like sing
Their own sad fates) should by my means have now
A second Laurel to impale her brow.
But in this age (inhumane age the while!)
The art of Poetry is made too vile.
" Swans must have pleasant nests, high feeding, fair
" Weather to sing: and with a load of care
" Men cannot climb Parnassus cliffe: for he
" Who is still wrangling with his Destiny
" And his malignant fortune, becomes hoarse,
" And loses both his singing and discourse.
-- But now it is time to seek Mirtillo out:
Although I find the places hereabout
So changed and altered from their ancient wont,
I for Arcadia in Arcadia hunt.
But come Vranio gladly for all this;
A traveller with language cannot miss
His way: Or, since thou art weary, thou were best
To stay at the next Inn to take some rest.

Scena secunda.
TITIRO, Messenger. Tit. WHich first, my Daughter, shall I mourn in thee,
Thy loss of Life, or of thy Chastity?
I Will mourn thy Chastity: for thou were born
Of mortal parents, but not bad. I Will mourn
Not thy life lost, but mine preserved, to see
Thy loss of Life, and of thy Chastity.
Thou with thy Oracles mysterious cloud
(Wrongly conceived Montano,) and thy proud
Despiser both of love, and of my Daughter,
Unto this miserable end have brought her.
Ay me! how much more certain at this time
My Oracles have showed themselves then thine!
" For honesty in a young heart does prove
" But a weak sconce against assaulting love.
" And it is most true, a woman that is alone,
" Has a most dangerous companion.

Mess. Were he not under ground, or flown through the air,
I should have found him sure. But soft, he is there
(I think) where least I thought. Thou Art met by me
Too late, old Father, but too soon for thee:
I Have news.

Tit. What bringst thou in thy mouth? the knife
That has bereft my Daughter of her life?

Mess. Not that; yet little less. But how I pray
Got'st thou this news so soon another way?

Tit. Does she then live?

Mess. She lives, and in her choice
It is to Live or Die.

Tit. Blessed be that voice!
Why is she then not safe, if she may give
Her no to death?

Mess. Because she will not live.

Tit. Will not? what madness makes her life despise?

Mess. Another's death. And (if that thy advice
Remove her not) she is thereon so bent*
That all the world cannot her death prevent.

Tit. Why stand we talking here then? Let us go.

Mess. Stay: yet the Temple's shut. Do thou not know
That none but holy feet on holy earth
May tread, till from the vestry they bring forth
The destined Sacrifice in all it is trim?

Tit. But before that --

Mess. She Is watch't.

Tit. In The interim
Relate then all that is past, and to me show
The truth unveiled.

Mess. Thy wretched Daughter (Oh
Sad spectacle!) being brought before the Priest,
Did not alone from the beholders wrest
Salt tears; but (trust me) made the marble melt,
And the hard flint the dint of pity felt.
She was accused, convict, and sentence past
All in a trice.

Tit. (Poor girl!) and why such haste?

Mess. Because the evidence was clear as day:
Besides, a certain Nymph (who she did say
Could witness she was guiltless) was not there,
Nor could by any search be brought to appear.
Then the dire Omens of some threatened ill
And horrid visions which the Temple fill
Brook no delay, to us more frightfull far,
By how much more unusual they are,
Nor ever seen, since the vexed Powers above
Revenged the wrong of scorned Aminta's Love.
(Who was their Priest whence all our woes had birth)
The Goddess sweats cold drops of blood, the Earth
Is Palsey-shook; the sacred Cavern howls
With such unwonted sounds as tortured souls
Send out of graves, and belches up a smell
From its fowl jaws, scarce to be matched in hell.
His sad Procession now the Priest began
To lead to a bloody death thy Daughter, when
Mirtillo seeing her, (behold a strange
Proof of Affection!) profferd to exchange
His life for hers; crying aloud, Her hands
Untie (Ah how unworthy of such bands!)
And in her stead (who is designed to be
A Sacrifice to Dian) offer me
A sacrifice to Amarillis.

Tit. There
Spoke a true Lover, and above base fear!

Mess. The wonder follows: she that was afraid
Before of dying, on the sudden made
Now valiant by Mirtillo's words, replied,
Thus, with a heart at death unterrifi'd,
But do thou think (Mirtillo) then to give
Life by thy death to her, who in thee does live?
It cannot, must not be: Come Priests, away
With me to the Altar now without delay.
Ah! (cried the Swain) such love I did not lack:
Back cruel Amarillis, O come back:
Now thou art more unkind then e're thou were:
It Is I should die. Quoth she, thou act'st my part.
And here between them grew so fierce a strife,
As if that life were death, and death were life.
O noble souls! O Pair eternally
To be renowned, whether ye live or die!
O glorious Lovers! if I had tongues more
Then Heaven has eyes, or sands are on the shore,
Their voices would be drowned in the main-
Sea of your endless Praises, Glorious Dame,
Daughter of Jove (eternal as thy Father)
That Mortals deeds immortallizest, gather
Thou the fair story, and in diamond pages
With golden letters write to after ages
The bravery of both Lovers.

Tit. But who wan
The conquest in that strife of death?

Mess. The Man.
Strange war! which to the victor death did give,
And where the vanquished was condemned to live.
For thus unto thy daughter spoke the Priest;
Nymph, let us alone, and set thy heart at rest;
Changed for another none can be again,
Who for another in exchange was taken.
This is our Law. Then a strict charge he gave,
Upon the Maid such careful watch to have,
As that she might not lay a violent hand
Upon her self through sorrow. Thus did stand
The state of matters, when in search of thee
Montano sent me.

Tit. It Is most true I see,
" Well-water'd Meads may be without sweet flowers
" In Spring; without their verdant honor Bowers;
" And without chirping birds a pleasant Grove;
" 'Ere a fair maid and young without her Love.
But if we loiter here, how shall we know
The hour when to the Temple we should go?

Mess. Here better then elsewhere: For here it is
The honest Swain must be a sacrifice.

Tit. And why not in the Temple?

Mess. Because in
The place 'twas done our law does punish sin.

Tit. Then why not in the cave? The sin was there.

Mess. Because it must be in the open air.

Tit. By whom have thou these mysteries been told?

Mess. By the chief Minister, and he by old
Tirenio; who the false Lucrina knew
So sacrificed, and Aminta true.
But now it is time to go indeed; for see,
The sacred pomp descends the hill! yet we
May for thy daughter to the Temple go
Before they come: "Devotion marches slow.

Scena tertia.
Chorus of Shepherds, Chorus of Priests, MONTANO, MIRTILLO. Cho. Sh. SOl's
sister, Daughter of great Jupiter,
That shin'st a second Sun in the first Sphere
To the blind world!

Chapter Pr. Thou whose life-giving, and more temperate Ray
Thy Brother's burning fury does allay;
Whence bounteous Nature here produces after
All her blessed offsprings, and Air, Earth, and Water
Enriches and augments with Vegetals,
With Creatures sensitive, with Rationals.
Ah, pity thy Arcadia, and that rage
Thou do in others, in thy self assuage!

Chapter Sh. Sol's Sister, Daughter of great Jupiter,
That shin'st a second Sun in the first Sphere
To the blind world!

Mont. Now sacred Ministers the Altars dress:
You likewise Swains, that show your selves no less
Devout then they, your voices all unite,
And once again invoke the Queen of Night.

Chapter Sh. Sol's Sister, Daughter of great Jupiter,
That shin'st a second Sun in the first Sphere
To the blind world!

Mont. Now shepherds and my servants all,
Withdraw your selves, and come not till I call.
Valiant young man (who to bestow upon
Another, life, abandonest thine own)
Die with this comfort: For a puff of breath
(Which by the abject spirit is called death)
Thou buy'st Eternity: and when the tooth
Of envious Time (consuming the world's youth)
Millions of lesser names devoured has,
Then thou shall live the pattern of true faith.
But for the Law commands that thou should die
A silent Sacrifice, before thou ply
Thy knee to earth, if thou would ought deliver,
Speak; and hereafter hold thy peace for ever.

Mir. Father, (for though thou kill me, yet I must
Give thee that name) My body to the dust,
Whereof'twas made and kneaded up, I give;
My Soul to her in whom alone I live.
But if she die, (as she has vowed) of me
What part (alas!) will then surviving be?
How sweet will death be unto me, if I
In mine own person, not in hers, may die!
And if he merit pity at his death
Who for mere pity now resignes his breath,
Take care (deer Father) of her life, that I
Winged with that hope, t'a better life may fly.
Let my Fate rest at my destruction,
Stop at my ruin; but when I am gone,
Let my divorced soul in her survive,
Although from her I was divorced alive.

Mont. (Scarcely can I refrain from weeping now:
O our mortality how frail art thou!)
Son be of comfort, for I promise thee
I will perform all thou desir'st of me:
Here Is my hand on it, and solemnly I swear,
Even by this Miter'd head.

Mir. Then vanish fear.
And now for the most faithful soul make room,
For (Amarillis) unto thee I come.
With the sweet name of Amarillis I
Close up my mouth, and silent kneel to die.

Mont. Now sacred Ministers, the Rites begin;
With liquid odoriferous Gumms keep in
The flame, and strowing frank incense and mirrhe,
Whole clouds of perfume to the Gods prefer.

Cho. Sh. Sol's Sister, Daughter of great Jupiter,
That shin'st a second Sun in the first Sphere
To the blind world!

Scena quarta.
CARINO, MONTANO, NICANDRO, MIRTILLO, Chorus of Shepherds. Car. DId ever man so
many houses view,
And the inhabitants thereof so few?
But see the cause! If I mistake me not,
They Are gotten all together here: O what
A troop! how rich! how solemn! It is sure
Some Sacrifice.

Mont. Give me the golden Ewre
With the red wine, Nicandro.

Nic. There.

Mont. So may
Soft pity in thy breast revive to day
By this unguilty blood (Goddess divine)
As by the sprinkling of these drops of wine
This pale and dying flame revives. Set up
The golden Ewre. Reach me the silver cup.
So may the burning wrath he quenched, which in
Thy breast was kindled by a false Maid's sin,
As with this water (powered out like our tears)
I quench this flame.

Car. 'T's a Sacrifice: but where is
The offering?

Mont. Now all is prepared, there lacks
Only the fatal stroke. Lend me the Axe.

Car. I see a thing (unless my eyes mistake)
Like a man kneeling this way with his back.
Is he the offering? It Is so: Ah wretch!
And over his head the Priest his hand does stretch.
O my poor Country! after all these years
Is not Heavens wrath yet quenched with blood and tears?

Chapter Sh. Sol's Sister, Daughter of great Jupiter,
That shin'st a second Sun in the first Sphere
To the blind world!

Mont. Revengefull Goddess, who a private fault
With public rod do punish: (Thou have thought
Fit so to do, and so in the Abyss
Of Providence eternal fixed it is)
Since faithless Lucrin's tainted blood was thought
For thy nice Justice too impure a draught:
Carouse the guiltless blood then of this Swain,
By me now at thy Altar to be slain
A willing Sacrifice, and to his Less
As true a Lover as Aminta was.

Chapter Sh. Sol's Sister, Daughter of great Jupiter,
That shin'st a second Sun in the first Sphere
To the blind world!

Mont. Ah, how my breast with pity now relents!
What sudden numnesse fetters every sense!
I never was so before; To lift this Axe
My hands lack strength, and my heart courage lacks.

Car. I Will see the wretches face, and so be gone:
For such dire sights I cannot look upon.

Mont. Perhaps the Sun, though setting will not look
On humane Sacrifice, and I am struck
Therefore with horror. Shepherd, change thy place,
And to the Mountain turn thy dying face.
So, now it is well.

( Car. Alas, what gaze I at?
Is 't not my Son? Is 't not Mirtillo, that?)

Mon. Now I can do it.

( Car. It Is he.)

Mon. And aim my blow --

Car. Hold sacred Minister, what do thou do?

Mont. Nay thou, profane rash man, how dare thou thus
Impose a sacrilegious hand on us?

Car. O all my joy Mirtillo! I never thought --

Mon. (Avaunt old man, that dot'st, or art distraught,)

Car. T'imbrace thee in this sort.

Mont. Avaunt, I say
It is not lawful impure hands to lay
Upon things sacred to the gods.

Car. 'Twas they
That sent me to this place.

Mont. Nicandro, stay,
We Will hear him, and then let him go his way.

Car. Ah, courteous Minister! before thy hand
Upon the life of this young man descend,
Tell me but why he dies. This I implore
By that Divinity thou do adore.

Mon. By such a Goddess thou conjur'st me, that
I should be impious to deny. But what
Concerns it thee?

Car. More then thou do suppose.

Mon. Because to die he for another chose.

Car. Then I will die for him: O, take in stead
Of his, this old already tottering head.

Mon. Thou rav'st friend.

Car. Why am I denied that now
Which unto him was granted?

Mon. Because thou
A stranger art.

Car. And if I should prove none,
What then?

Mon. Although thou should, it were all one;
Because he cannot be exchanged again
Who for another in exchange was taken.
But who art thou, if thou no stranger be?
Thy habit speaks thee not of Arcadie.

Car. Yet am I an Arcadian.

Mont. I did never
See thee before (to my remembrance) here.

Car. My name's Carino; I was born hard by:
(This wretche's Father who is now to die)

Mont. Hence, hence, lest through thy fond paternal love
Our Sacrifice should vain and fruitless prove.

Car. O if thou were a Father!

Mont. I am one:
I, and the Father of an only Son.
A tender Father too; yet if this were
My Silvio's head (by Silvio's head I swear)
I would as forward be to do to his
What I must do to this. " For no man is
" Worthy this sacred Robe, but he that can
" For public good put off the private man.

Car. Yet let me kiss him 'ere he die.

Mon. Nor touch.

Car. O mine own flesh and blood! art thou so much
A tyrant to me too, as to afford
To thy afflicted Parent not one word?

Mir. Dear Father, Peace.

( Mon. Alas! we are all spoild:
The sacrifice (O Heavens!) is defiled.)

Mir. That blood, that life which thou did give to me,
Spent for a better cause can never be.

Mont. Did I not say his vow of silence he
Would break, when he his Fathers tears should see?

Mirt. That such a gross mistake I should commit!
My vow of silence I did quite forgit.

Mon. But Ministers, why do ye gazing stay?
Him to the Temple quickly reconvay.
There in the holy Cloister again take
The voluntary Oath of him: then back
Returning him with pomp along with you
For a new Sacrifice bring all things new,
New fire, and new water, and new wine.
Quickly: for Phoebus does apace decline.

Scena quinta.
MONTANO, CARINO, DAMETA. Mon. NOw thou old doting fool: thank Heaven thou art
His Father; for (by Heaven) unless thou were,
To day I Would make thee feel my fury, since
Thou have so much abused my Patience.
Know thou who I am? Know thou that this wand
Does both Divine and Humane things command?

Car. " Let not the Priest of Heaven offended be
" For begging mercy.

Mont. I have sufferd thee
Too long, and that has made thee insolent.
Do thou not know, " when anger wants vent
" In a just bosom, it is gathering strength
" Within and bursts out with more force at length?

Car. " Anger was never in a noble mind
" A furious tempest: but a gentle wind
" Of Passion only, which but stirs the soul,
" (Where Reason still does keep her due comptroll)
Lest it should grow a standing pool, unfit
For virtuous action. If I cannot get
Thee to extend that mercy which I crave,
Afford me justice; this I ought to have
From thee. " For they who laws to others give,
" Ought not themselves without all law to live.
" And he that is advanced to greater sway,
" Him that requires Justice must obey.
and (Witness) I require it now of thee;
^o't for thy self, if thou will not for me.
Thou art unjust if thou Mirtillo slay.

Mont. I prithee how?

Car. To me did thou not say,
Thou might not offer here a strangers blood?

Mon. I did: and said what Heaven commanded.

Car. Good:
This is a stranger then.

Mon. A stranger? what?
^he not then thy Son?

Car. All Is one for that.

Mon. Is It that thou gott'st him in a foreign land?

Car. The more thou seek'st, the less thou't understand.

Mon. It skils not here, where, but by whom he is got.

Car. I call him stranger, cause I got him not.

Mon. Is he thy Son then, and not got by thee?

Car. I said he was my Son; not born of me.

Mon. Thy grief has made thee mad.

Car. I would it had!
^ should not feel my grief, if I were mad.

Mon. Thou art or mad, or impious, choose thou whether.

Car. For telling the truth to thee I am neither.

Mon. How can both these (son and not son) be true?

Car. Son of my Love, not of my Loins.

Mon. Go to;
He is no stranger, if he be thy Son:
If he be not, to thee no harm is done.
So Father, or not Father, the art confuted.

Car. "Truth is truth still: though it be ill disputed.

Mont. " That man that utters contradictions must
" Speak one untruth.

Car. Thy action is unjust,
I say again.

Mont. Let all this action's guilt
Light on my head, and on my Son's.

Car. Thou will
Repent it.

Mont. Thou shall, if thou will not take
Thy hands from off me.

Car. My appeal I make
To men and Gods.

Mon. To God, despised by thee?

Car. And if thou will not hear, hearken to me
O Heaven and Earth! and thou great Goddess here
Adored! Mirtillo is a Forraigner,
No Son of mine: the holy Sacrifice
Thou do profane.

Mon. Bless me good Heavens from this
Strange man! Say then, if he be not thy Son,
Who is his Father?

Car. It Is to me unknown.

Mo. Is he thy kinsman?

C. Neither.

M. Why do thou then
Call him thy Son?

Car. 'Cause from the instant when
I had him first, I bred him as mine own
Still with a fatherly affection.

Ca. From

Mo. Did buy him? steal him? from whence had him?
Elis (the gift of a strange man).

Mon. From whom
Had that strange man him?

Ca. That strange man? why he
Had him of me before.

Mon. Thou mov'st in me
At the same time both laughter and disdain:
What thou gav'st him, did he give thee again?

Car. I gave to him what was his own; then he
Returned it as his courteous gift to me.

Mo. And whence had thou (since thou will make me mad
For company) that which from thee he had?

Car. Within a thicket of sweet Myrtle, I
Had newly found him accidentally,
Near to Alfeo's mouth, and called him thence
Mirtillo.

Mon. With what likely circumstance
Thou do thy lie embroider? Are there any
Wild beasts within that Forest?

Car. Very many.

Mon. Why did not they devour him?

Car. A strong flood
Had carried him into that tuft of wood,
And left him in the lap of a small Isle
Defended round with water.

Mon. Thou do file
One Lie upon another well. And was
The flood so pitiful to let him pass
Undrown'd? Such nurses in thy Country are
The Brooks, to foster infants with such care?

Car. He lay within a cradle, which with mud
And other matter gathered by the flood
Calk't (to keep out the water) like a Boat
Had to that thicket carried him afloat.

Mon. Within a cradle lay he?

Car. Yes.

Mon. A child
In swathing bands?

Car. A sweet one; and it smiled.

Mon. How long ago might this be?

Car. It Is soon cast:
Since the great Flood some twenty years are past,
And then it was.

Mon. What horror do I feel
Creep through my veins!

Car. He Is silenced, and yet will
Be obstinate. " O the strange pride of those
" In place! who conquered, yield not: but suppose,
" Because that they have all the wealth, with it
" They must be Masters too of all the wit.
Sure he is convinced; and it does vex him too,
As by his mutt'ring he does plainly show:
And one may see some color he would find
To hide the error of a haughty mind.

Mon. But that strange man of whom thou tel'st me, what
Was he unto the child? his father?

Car. That
I do not know.

Mon. Nor did thou ever know
More of the man then thou have told me?

Car. No.
Why all these Questions?

Mon. If thou saw him now,
Should know him?

Car. Yes; he had a beetle-brow,
A down-look, middle-stature, with black hair,
His beard and eyebrows did with bristles stare.

Mo. Shepherds and servants mine, approach.

Da. We Are here.

Mon. Which of these shepherds who do now appear,
To him thou talk of likest seems to thee?

Car. Not only like him, but the same is he
Whom thou talkst with: and still the man does show
The same he did some twenty years ago,
For he has changed no hair, though I am gray.

Mon. Withdraw, and let Dameta only stay.
Tell me, do thou know him?

Dam. I think I do:
But where, or how I know not.

Car. I Will renew
Thy memory by tokens.

Mon. Let me talk
First with him if thou please, and do thou walk
Aside a while.

Car. Most willingly what thou
Command'st I Will do.

Mon. Tell me Dameta now,
And do not lie.

( Dam. O Gods, what storm comes here!)

Mon. When thou came back ('it is since some twenty year)
From seeking of my child, which the swollen Brook
Away together with its cradle took,
Did thou not tell me thou had sought with pain
All that Alpheo bathes, and all in vain?

Dam. Why do thou ask it me?

Mon. Answer me this:
Did thou not say thou could not find him?

Dam. Yes.

Mon. What was that little infant then which thou
In Elis gav'st to him that knows thee now?

Dam. 'Twas twenty years ago; and would thou have
An old man now remember what he gave?

Mon. He is old too, and yet remembers it.

Dam. Rather is come into his doting fit.

Mon. That we shall quickly see: Where art thou stranger?

Ca. Here.

Da. Would thou were interred, and I from danger!

Mon. Is this the Shepherd that bestowed on thee
The present, art thou sure?

Car. I Am sure it is he.

Da. What present?

Car. Do thou not remember when
In Jove Olympicks Fane, thou having then
Newly received the Oracles reply,
And being just on thy departure, I
Encountered thee, and asking then of thee
The signs of what thou had lost, thou toldst them me;
Then I did take thee to my house, and there
Showed thee thy child laid in a cradle; where
Thou gav'st him me.

Dam. What is inferred from hence?

Car. The child thou gav'st me then, and whom I since
Have brought up, as a tender Father does
An only Son, is this unhappy youth
Who on this Altar now is doomed to die
A Sacrifice:

Dam. O force of Destiny!

Mon. Art studying for more lies? Has this man sed
The truth or not?

Dam. Would I were but as dead
As all is true!

Mon. That thou shall quickly be
If the whole truth thou do not tell to me.
Why did thou give unto another what
Was not thine own?

Dam. Dear Master, ask not that;
For Heaven's sake do not: too much thou do know
Already.

Mon. This makes me more eager grow.
Wilt not speak yet? Still keepst thou me in pain?
Thou Art dead if I demand it once again.

Dam. Because the Oracle foretold me there,
That if the child then found returned e're
To his own home, he should be like to die
By's Father's hand.

Car. It Is true, my self was by.

Mon. Ay me! now all is clear: This act of mine
The Dream and Oracle did well Divine.

Car. What would thou more? can ought behind remain?
Is it not plain enough?

Mon. It Is but too plain.
I know, and thou have said too much; I would
I had searched less, or thou less understood.
How (O) Carino, have I taken from thee
At once thy Son, and thy Calamity!
How are thy passions become mine! this is
My Son: O too unhappy Son, of this
Unhappy man! O Son preserved and kept
More cruelly, then thou from hence were swept
By the wild flood, to fall by thy Sires hand,
And stain the Altars of thy native Land!

Car. Thou Father to Mirtillo? Wondrous! How
Did lose him?

Mon. By that horrid flood which thou
Have mentioned. O deer pledge! thou were safe then
When thou were lost: And now I lose thee, when
I find thee.

Car. O eternal Providence!
For what deep end have all these Accidents
Lain hid so long, and now break forth together?
Some mighty thing thou have conceived, either
For good or evil: some unwonted birth
Thou art big with, which must be brought on earth.

Mon. This was the thing my Dream foretold me; too
Prophetic in the bad, but most untrue
In the good part: This 'twas which made me melt
So strangely; this, that horror which I felt
Creep through my bones, when I heaved up my hand.
For Nature's self seemed to recoil, or stand
Astonished, to see a Father go
To give that horrid and forbidden blow.

Car. Thou art resolved then not to go on
With this dire Sacrifice?

Mon. No other man
May do it here.

Car. Shall the Son then be slain
By his own Sire?

Mon. It Is law: and who dare strain
His charity to save another man,
When true Aminta with himself began?

Car. O my sad Fate! what am I brought to see?

Mon. Two Fathers over-acted Piety
Murder their son; Thine to Mirtillo; mine
To Heaven. Thou by denying he was thine,
Thought to preserve him, and have lost him; I
(Searching with too much curiosity)
Whilst I was to have sacrificed thy son
(As I supposed) find and must slay my own.

Car. Behold the horrid Monster Fate has teemed!
O Cruel! O Mirtillo! more esteemed
By me then life: Was this it which to me
The Oracle foretold concerning thee?
Thus do thou make me in my Country blessed?
O my deer Son, whilome the hope and rest,
But now the grief and bane of these gray hairs!

Mon. Prithee Carino lend to me those tears:
I weep for mine own blood. (Ah! why, if I
Must spill it, is it mine?) Poor son! but why
Did I beget thee? -- (Why was I got rather?)
The pitying deluge saved thee, and thy Father
Will cruelly destroy thee. Holy Powers
Immortal (without some command of yours
Not the least wave stirs in the Sea, breath in
The Air, nor leaf on Earth) what monstrous sin
Has been by me committed against your Law,
This heavy Judgment on my head to draw?
Or if I have transgressed so much; wherein
Sinned my Son so, ye will not pardon him?
And thou with one blast of thy Anger kill
Me, thundering Jove? But if thy bolts lie still,
My blade shall not: I will repeat the sad
Example of Aminta, and the Lad
Shall see his Father through his own heart run
His reeking blade, rather then kill his Son.
Dye then Montano; Age should lead the way:
And willingly I do it: Powers (shall I say
Of Heaven or Hell?) that do with anguish drive
Men to despair; Behold, I do conceive
(Since you will have it so) your fury! I
Desire no greater blessing then to dye.
A kind of dire love to my natural Gole
Does lash me on, and hallow to my soul,
To death, To death.

Car. Alas poor old man! in troth
I pity thee: for though we need it both,
Yet as by day the Stars forbear to shine,
My grief is nothing, if compared with thine.

Scena sexta.
TIRENIO, MONTANO, CARINO. Tir. MAke haste my Son; yet tread secure, that I
May without stumbling trace thee through this wry
And craggy way, with my old feet and blind.
Thou art their eyes, as I am to thy mind.
And when thou come where the Priest is, there
Arrest thy pace.

Mont. Hah! whom do I see here?
Is It not our Reverend Tirenio? he
Whose eyes are seel'd up earthward, but heaven see?
Some great thing draws him from his sacred Cell,
Whence to behold him is a miracle.

Car. May the good Gods pleased in their bounty be
To make his coming prosperous to thee.

Mont. Father Tirenio, what miracle
Is this? What make thou from thy holy Cell?
Whom do thou seek? what news?

Tir. I come to speak
With thee: and news I bring, and news I seek.

Mont. But why comes not the holy Order back
With the purged offering, and what does lack
Besides to the interrupted Sacrifice?

Tir. " O how much often does the want of eyes
" Add to the inward sight! for then the soul
" ^^^^-gadding forth, but recollected whole
" Into it self, is wont to recompense
" With the mind's eyes the blindness of the sense!
" It is not good to pass so slightly over
" Some great events unlookt for which discover
" In humane businesses an hand Divine,
" Which through a cloud of seeming chance does shine.
" For Heaven with Earth will not familiar be,
" Nor face to face talk with Mortality.
" But those great wondrous things which us amaze,
" And on blind chance the more blind vulgar lays,
" Are but Heavens voice: the deathlesse Gods affect
" To speak to mortals in that Dialect.
" It is their language; mute unto our ears,
" But loud to him whose understanding hears.
(A thousand times most happy is that wight
That has an understanding pitched so right).
The good Nicandro (as thou gav'st command)
Was ready now to bring the sacred Band,
Whom I withheld by reason of a change
That fell out in the Temple. Which so strange
Event, comparing with what happened here
At the same time to thee, 'twixt hope and fear
I know not how, struck and amazed I stand:
Whereof by how much less I understand
The cause, so much the more I hope and fear
Some happiness, or some great danger near.

Mon. That which thou understandest not, I do
Too well, and to my sorrow feel it too.
But is there ought in hidden Fate can shun
Thy all divining Spirit?

Tir. O my Son!
" If the Divine use of prophetic light
" Were arbitrary, it would then be hight
" The gift of Nature, not of Heaven. I find
(It Is true) within my undigested mind
That there is something hidden in the deep
Bosom of Fate, which she from me does keep,
And this has moved me to come now to thee
To be informed more clearly who is he
That Is found to be the Father of the youth
To dye now; if Nicandro told us truth.

Mon. Thou know him but too well, Tirenio:
How will thou wish anon that thou did know
Or love him less?

Tir. " I praise thee O my Son,
" For taking pity and compassion
" On the afflicted: it is humanity.
How-ere let me speak with him.

Mon. Now I see
Heaven has suspended in thee all that skill
In Prophecy, which it was wont to instill.
That Father whom thou seek'st to speak withal,
Am I.

Tir. Art thou his Father, that should fall
To Dian now an Immolation?

Mon. The wretched Father of that wretched Son.

Tir. Of that same Faithful Shepherd, who to give
Life to another, would himself not live?

Mon. Of him who dies his Murthresse life to save,
And Murders me, who unto him life gave.

Tir. But is this true?

Mo. Behold the witness.

Car. That
Which he has told thee is most true.

Tir. And what
Art thou that speak?

Car. Carino, thought to be
Till now the young man's Father.

Tir. Was that he
The Flood took from thee long ago?

Mon. Yes, yes,
Tirenio.

Tir. And do thou style for this
Thy self a wretched Father? " O how blind
" Is an unhallowed and terrestrial mind!
" In what thick mists of error, how profound
" A night of Ignorance are our souls drowned,
" Till thou enlighten them, from whom the Sun
" Receives his luster, as from him the Moon!
Vain men, how can you boast of knowledge so?
" That part of us by which we see and know,
" Is not our virtue, but derived from Heaven,
" That gives it, and can take what it has given.
O in thy mind, Montano, blinder far,
Then I am in mine eyes! What Juggler,
What dazeling Devil will not let thee see
That if this noble youth was born of thee,
Thou art the happiest Father and most deer
To the immortal Deities, that e're
Begot Son in the world? Behold the deep
Secret, which Fate did from my knowledge keep*
Behold the happy day, with such a flood
Expected of our tears, and of our blood!
Behold the bessed end of all our pain!
Where art thou man? come to thy self again.
How is it that thou only do forget
That famous happy Oracle that is writ
In all Arcadian hearts? How can it be
That with thy deer son's lightning upon thee
This day, thy sense is not prepared and clear
The thunder of that heavenly voice to hear;
Your Woe shall end when two of Race Divine
Love shall Combine: --
(Tears of delight in such abundance flow
Out of my heart, I cannot speak.) Your Woe --
Your Woe shall end when two of Race Divine
Love shall Combine:
And for a faithless Nymph's apostate state
A Faithful Shepherd supererogate.
Now tell me thou: This Shepherd here of whom
We speak, and that should dye, is he not come
Of Divine Race (Montano) if he is thine?
And Amarillis too of Race Divine?
Then who I pray but Love has them combined?
Silvio by parents and by force was joined
To Amarillis, and is yet as far
From loving her, as Love and Hatred are.
Then scan the rest, and 't will be evident,
The fatal voice none but Mirtillo meant.
For who indeed, since slain Aminta, has
Expressed such Love as he? such constant Faith?
Who but Mirtillo for his Mistress would
Since true Aminta, spend his dearest blood?
This is that work of Supererogation:
This is that faithful Shepherds expiation
For the Apostate false Lucrina's fact.
By this admired and most stupendous Act
More then with humane blood the wrath of heaven
Is pacifi'ed, and satisfaction given
Unto eternal Justice for the offense
Committed against it by a woman. Hence
It was, that he no sooner came to pay
Devotions in the Temple, but streightway
All monstrous omens ceased; No longer stood
The eternal Image in a sweat of blood,
The earth no longer shook, the holy Cave
No longer stank, and shrikes no longer gave;
But such sweet harmony and redolence
As Heaven affords (if Heaven affect the sense).
O Providence eternal! O ye Powers
That look upon us from yon azure Towers!
If all my words were souls, and every soul
Were sacrificed upon your Altars whole,
It were too poor a Hecatombe to pay
So great a blessing with: but as I may
(Behold!) I tender thanks, and with my knee
Touching the earth in all humility
Look up on you that sit in throned in heaven.
How much am I your debtor, that have given
Me leave to live till now! I have run over
Of my life's race a hundred years and more,
Yet never lived till now, could never deem
My life worth keeping till this instant time.
Now I begin my life, am born to day.
But why in words do I consume away
That time that should be spent in works? Help Son
To lift me up: Thou art the motion
Of my decayed limbs.

Mon. Tirenio,
I have a lightness in my bosom so
Locked in, and petrifi'd with wonder, that
I find I Am glad, yet scarcely know at what.
My greedy soul unto her self alone
Keeps all her joy, and lets my sense have none.
O miracle of Heaven! far, far beyond
All we have seen, or e're did understand!
O unexampled Bounty! O the great
Great mercy of the Gods! O fortunate
Arcadia! O earth, of all that e're
The Sun beheld or warmed, most blessed, most deer
To Heaven! Thy weal's so deer to me, mine own
I cannot feel, nor think upon my Son
(Twice lost and found) nor of my self buoyed up
Out of the depth of sorrow, to the top
Of bliss, when I consider thee: but all
My private joy, set by the general,
Is like a little drop in a great stream
Shuffled and lost. O happy dream! (no dream,
But a Celestial vision.) Now agin
Shall my Arcadia (as thou said) be in
A flourishing Estate: But why do thou
Stay here, Montano? Heaven expects not now
More humane Sacrifice from us. No more
The are times of wrath and vengeance (as before)
But times of grace and love; glad nuptial bands,
Not horrid Sacrifices at our hands
Our Goddess now requires.

Tir. How long to night?

Mon. An hour, or little more.

Tir. We burn daylight:
Back to the holy Temple let us go;
There let the daughter of old Titiro
And thy Son interchange their Marriage vow
To become Man and Wife, of Lovers now.
Then let him bring her to his Father's straight,
Where it is Heavens pleasure, that these fortunate
Descendents of two Gods, should henceforth run
United in one stream. -- Lead me back, Son:
And thou Montano, follow me.

Mon. But stay:
That faith which formerly she gave away
To Silvio, she cannot now withdraw
And give Mirtillo, without breach of Law.

Car, It Is Silvio still, Mirtillo was called so
At first (thy man told me) and Silvio
By me changed to Mirtillo, to which he
Consented.

Mon. True: (now I remember me)
And the same name I gave unto the other,
To keep alive the memory of's Brother.

Tir. 'Twas an important doubt. Follow me now.

Mon. Carino, to the temple too come thou.
Henceforth Mirtillo shall two Fathers own:
Thou have a Brother found, and I a Son.

Car. To thee a Brother in his love, a Father
To him, a Servant (in respect) to either
Carino will be always: And since I
Find thee to me so full of courtesy,
I will the boldness take to recommend
Unto thy love my second self, my friend.

Mon. Share me between you.

Car. O eternal Gods,
" Between our prayers slow-winding paths, what odds
" There is (by which we climb to Heaven) and those
" Directer lines by which to us Heaven bows!

Scena septima.
CORISCA, LINCO. Cor. SO it seems, Linco, that coy Silvio
When least expected, did a Lover grow.
But what became of her?

Lin. We carried her
To Silvio's dwelling, where with many a tear
(Whether of joy or grief, I cannot tell)
His Mother welcomed her. It pleased her well
To see her Son now married, and a Lover;
But for the Nymph great grief she did discover.
Poor Mother-in-law! ill sped, though doubly sped:
One Daughter-in-law being hurt, the other dead.

Cor. Is Amarillis dead?

Lin. It Is rumored so:
That Is now the cause I to the temple go,
To comfort old Montano with this news,
One Daughter-in-law he gains, if one he lose.

Cor. Is not Dorinda dead then?

Lin. Dead? would thou
Were half so live and jocund as She Is now!

Cor. Was It not a mortal wound?

Li. Had she been slain,
With Silvio's pity she had lived again.

Cor. What Art so soon could cure her?

Lin. I will tell
Thee all the cure. Listen to a miracle.
With trembling hearts, and hands prepared to aid,
Women and men stood round the wounded Maid;
But she would suffer none to touch her save
Her Silvio; for the same hand which gave,
She said, should cure the wound. So all withdrew
Except my self, he, and his Mother: two
TO advise, the third to act. Then Silvio
Removing first from her blood-dapled snow
Gently the cleaving garments, strove to pluck
The arrow out, which in her deep wound stuck.
But the false wood (forth coming) gave the slip
To the iron head, and left it in her Hip.
Here, here the lamentable cries began:
It was not possible by hand of man,
Or iron instrument, or ought beside
To get it out. Perchance to ave opened wide
The wound b' a greater wound, and so have made
One iron dive after another, had
Effected the great cure. But Silvio's hand,
Too pitiful, too much with Love unmann'd
The Surgeon was, so cruelly to heal.
Love searches not with instruments of steel
The wounds he makes. As for the lovesick Maid,
In Silvio's hands her wounds grew sweet, she said.
And Silvio said (not yet discouraged)
Thou shall out too, thou shall, cursed Arrow-head,
And with less pain then is believed: the same
Who thrust thee in, can pull thee out again.
By using hunting I have learned to cure
This mischief which my hunting did procure.
A plant there is much used by the wild Goat
When there is a shaft into her body shot:
She showed it us, and Nature showed it her:
(Remembered happily!) nor is it far
From hence. Straight went he to the neighboring hill,
And there a flasket with this Plant did fill;
Then came again to us: thence squeesing out
The juice, and mingling it with Centry root
And Plantain leaf, thereof a pultise made.
O wonderful! as soon as that was laid
Upon the sore, the blood was stanched straight,
And the pain ceased; and soon after that,
The iron coming without pain away,
Did the first summons of the hand obey:
The Maid was now as vigorous and sound,
As if she never had received the wound.
Nor mortal was it; for the arrow having flown
(As hapt) betwixt the muscles and the bone,
Pierced but the fleshy part.

Cor. Thou have displaid
Much virtue in a plant, more in a Maid.

Lin. What afterward between 'em happened
May better be imagined then sed:
This I am sure, Dorinda's well again,
And now can stir her body without pain:
Though thou believ'st, Corisca, I suppose
H' ath given her since more wounds then that: but those,
As they are made b' a diffrent weapon, so
Themselves are of a diffrent nature too.
And such a trick this cruel Archer has,
Of hitting all he shoots at since he was
A Huntsman; that to show he is still the same,
Now he is a Lover too, he hits the Game.

Cor. Old Linco still!

Lin. Faith, my Corisca, still
If not in strength, I Am Linco in my will.
Nor yet, though my leafe's witherd, am I dead:
But all my sap into the root is fled.

Cor. My Rival thus dispatched, I Will now go see
If I can get my deer Mirtillo free.

Scena octava.
ERGATO, CORISCA. Erg. O Day with wonders fraught! O day of mirth!
All Love! and blessings all! O happy earth!
O bounteous heaven!

Cor. But see! Ergasto's here:
How opportunely does he now appear!

Erg. At such a time let every living thing,
Heaven, Earth, Air, Fire, the whole world laugh and sing.
To hell it self let our full joys extend,
And there the torments of the damned suspend.

Cor. What rapture's this!

Er. Blessed woods! whose murmuring voice
When we lamented did lament, rejoice
At our joys too, and wag as many tongues
As you have leaves now dancing to the songs
Of the pleased Birds, and music of the Air
Which rings with our delight. Sing of a pair
Of noble Lovers the felicity
Unparalleled.

Cor. He does speak certainly
Of Silvio and Dorinda? Every thing
I see, would live. " How soon the shallow spring
" Of tears dryes up with us! but the swollen river
" Of gladness tarries with the longer liver.
Of Amarillis, who is dead, there is now
No more discourse: the only care is how
" To laugh with them that laugh; and it is well done:
" Each man has too much sorrow of his own.
Whither (so glad) Ergasto do thou go?
Unto a Wedding happily?

Erg. I do
Indeed. Have heard Corisca then, the wonder
Of The two blessed Lovers? was it not strange?

Cor. I underStood it of Linco now with joy of heart,
Which my great grief does mitigate in part
For the sad death of Amarillis.

Erg. How!
Whom do thou speak of, or speak I think thou?

Cor. Why, of Dorinda, and of Silvio.

Erg. What Silvio? what Dorinda? Do not know
Then what has past? My joy its lineage draws
From a more high, stupendous, noble Cause.
Of Amarillis and Mirtillo I
Discourse (the happiest Pair that this day frye
Under the torrid Zone of Love).

Cor. Is not
Then Amarillis dead, Ergasto?

Erg. What
Death? She Is alive, glad, beauteous, and a Wife.

Cor. Thou mock'st me Shepherd.

Er. No, upon my life.

Cor. Was she not then condemned?

Er. She was, it is true:
But presently she was acquitted too.

Cor. Do I dream this? or do thou dreams relate?

Erg. Stay here a little, thou shall see her straight
Come with her faithful and most fortunate
Mirtillo, from the temple (where they 're now,
And interchanged have their Nuptial vow)
Toward Montano's: of the bitter root
Of their long Loves to gather the sweet fruit.
O had thou seen men's joys spring in their eyes!
If thou had heard the music of their cries!
The temple's still as full as it can hold
Of numbers numberless: Men, women, old,
Young, Prelates, Laymen, are confounded there
Together, and distracted cannot bear
Their joy. With wonder every one does run
To see the happy couple, every one
Adores them, every one embraces them.
Their pity one extols, another's theme
Their constant faith is, or those graces given
To them by Nature, or infused from Heaven.
The laund, the dale, the mountain, and the plain
Resound the faithful Shepherd's glorious name,
O happy, happy Lover, to become
From a poor Swain, almost a God so soon;
From death to life (whilst I speak this) to pass,
And change a winding sheet (which ready was)
For a remote despair'd-of Nuptial,
Though it be much, Corisca, is not all.
But to enjoy her, whom he seemed to enjoy
In dying for her, her who would destroy
Her self, not to excuse, but share his Fate,
(His Mate in life, and not in death his Mate!)
This is such joy, such ravishing joy is this
As does exceed all we can fancy Bliss.
And do not thou rejoice? and apprehend
A joy for Amarillis, that is thy Friend
As great as that which I do for my true
Mirtillo?

Cor. Yes, do thou not see I do?

Erg. O! if thou had present been
Amarillis to have seen,
As the pledge of Faith when she
Gave her hand to him, and he
As the pledge of Love did either
Give or receive (I know not whether)
A sweet inestimable kiss,
Surely thou had died of bliss.
There was Scarlet, there were Roses,
All the colors, all the posies
Art or Nature ere did mix
Were excelled by her pure cheeks,
Covered with a waving shield
By her blushing Beauty held,
Stained with blood, which did provoke
From the striker a new stroke.
And she coy and nice in show,
Seemed to shun, that she might so
With more pleasure meet the blow,
Leaving it in doubt, if that
Kisses were ravished, or not.
With such admirable Art,
'Twas in part bestowed, in part
Snatched from her: And that disdain
Which she did so sweetly fain,
Was a willing No; an Act
Mixed of Conquest and Compact.
Such a coming in her flying
As showed yielding in denying.
Such sweet anger at the abuse
In forcing her, as forced him use
That force again; such art to crave
The thing she would not, yet would have,
As drew him the faster on
To snatch that which would be gone.
O heavenly kiss! Corisca, I
Can no longer hold; God bu'y.
" I Will marry too, The Powr's above
" Give no true joy to men, but Love.

Cor. If he ( Corisca) have told truth, this day
Quite cures thy wits, or takes them quite away.

Scena nona.
Chorus of Shepherds, CORISCA, AMARILLIS, MIRTILLO. Cho. HOly Hymen hear our
prayer
And our Song! The Earth has not
A more happy loving pair:
Both of them Divinely got;
Pull holy Hymen, pull the destined knot.

Cor. Ay me! Ergasto told me true (I see)
This is the fruits (wretch) of thy vanity.
O thoughts! O wishes! as unjust, as vain
And fond. Would I an innocent have slain
To compass my unbridled will! So blind,
So cruel was I? Who does now unbind
Mine eyes? Ah wretch! what do I see? my sin
With the mask off just as it is here within.

Cho. Holy Hymen hear our prayer
And our song! The Earth has not
A more happy loving Pair:
Both of them divinely got:
Pull holy Hymen, pull the destined knot.
See (thou Faithful Shepherd) where
After many a briny tear,
After many a stormy blast,
Thou art landed now at last!
Is not this (behold her!) she
Heaven and Earth denied to thee?
And thy cruel Destiny?
And her Icie Chastity?
And thy degree so far beneath?
And (...) Contract? and thy Death?
Yet Mirtillo (lo!) she is thine.
That sweet face, those eyes divine,
Breast and hands, and all that thou
See and hear'st, and touchest now,
And so often have in vain
Sighed for, now thou do obtain,
As thy constant Love's reward:
Yet thy lips has silence barred?

Mir. 'Cannot speak: I do not know
Whether I Am alive or no.
Or if these things real be
Which I seem to hear and see.
Sweetest Amarillis mine,
(For my soul is lodged in thine)
I from thee would gladly know,
(Tell me Love) are these things so?

Cho. Holy Hymen hear our prayer
And our song! The Earth has not
A more happy loving Pair:
Both of them divinely got:
Pull holy Hymen, pull the destined knot.

Cor. But why do you, you still about me stay,
Arts to deceive the world, arts to betray?
(The body's robes, but the souls rags.) For one,
I Am sure she is cousen'd by you, and undone.
Pack hence: and as from worms ye had your birth,
Return to worms, and strew your grandame earth.
Once ye were weapons of lascivious Love:
But now the trophies of fair Virtue prove.

Cho. Holy Hymen hear our prayer
And our Song! The Earth has not
A more happy loving pair:
Both of them Divinely got;
Pull holy Hymen, pull the destined knot.

Cor. What stick'st thou at Corisca? it is a day
Of Pardons this: then ask without dismay.
What do thou dread? no punishment what-ere
Can fall so heavy, as thy fault lies here.
Fair, and happy pair (the Love
Of us here, and those above)
If all earthly Power this day
To your conquering Fates give way,
Let her likewise Homage do
To your conquering Fates, and you,
Who all earthly Power employed
To have made their Ord'nance void.
Amarillis (true it is)
He had mine, who had thy heart:
But thou only have gained his,
'Cause thou only worthy art.
Thou enjoy'st the loyall'st Lad
Living; and Mirtillo thou
The best Nymph the world ere had
From the birth of Time till now:
I the touchstone was to both,
Tried her chastity, his troth.
But thou (Courteous Nymph) before
Thou on me thy anger power,
Look but on thy Bridegrooms Face:
Something thou will spy therein
That will force thee to show grace,
As it forced me to sin.
For so sweet a Lovers sake
Upon love no vengeance take;
But since thou the flames do prove,
Pardon thou the fault of Love.

Am. I do not only pardon, but respect
Thee as my friend, regarding the effect,
And not the cause. " For poisons if they make
" Us well, the name of sovereign Medicines take;
" And painful lancings for that cause are dear:
So whether friend or foe, or whatso e're
Thou were to me in purpose and intent;
Yet my Fate used thee as her instrument
To work my bliss, and that is enough: for me
'Twas a good Treason, a blessed Fallacy
I Am sure. And if thou please to grace our Feast,
And to rejoice with us, thou art my guest.

Cor. Thy pardon is to me a better feast:
A greater joy, my conscience now at rest.

Mir. And I all faults against me can pardon well,
But this long stop.

Cor. Joys on you both! Farewell.

Cho. Holy Hymen hear our prayer
And our Song! The Earth has not
A more happy loving Pair:
Both of them divinely got:
Pull holy Hymen, pull the destined knot.

Scena decima.
MIRTILLO, AMARILLIS. Chorus of Shepherds. Mir. AM I so wedded then to grief
and anguish,
That in the midst of joy too I must languish?
Was not this tedious pomp enough delay,
But I must meet too my old Remora
Corisca?

Am. Thou art wondrous hasty.

Mir. O
My treasure! yet I am not sure; but go
In fear of robbing still, till as my Spouse
I do possess thee in my Fathers house.
To tell thee true, me thinks I fare like one
Who dreams of wealth, and ever and anon
Fears that his golden sleep will break, and he
Be waked a beggar. I would gladly be
Resolved by some more pregnant proof, that this
Sweet waking now is not a dream of bliss.

Cho. Holy Hymen hear our prayer
And our Song! The earth has not
A more happy loving pair:
Both of them divinely got:
Pull holy Hymen, pull the destined knot.

CHORUS.
O Happy couple! that has sown in Tears
And reaps in Comfort! What a foil your fears
Prove to your joys! Blind Mortals, learn from hence,
Learn (ye effeminate) the difference
Betwixt true goods and false. All is not joy
That tickles us: Nor is all that annoy
That goes down bitter. " True joy is a thing
" That springs from Virtue after suffering.
FINIS.
Presented TO HIS HIGHNESS THE PRINCE OF WALES, At his going into the West,
Ann. M.DC.XLV.
Together with CESAR'S COMMENTARIES.
Sir,
NOw that your Father, with the World's applause
Imployes your early Valor in his Cause,
Set Cesar's glorious Acts before your sight,
And know the man that could so do and write.
View him in all his postures, see him mix
Terror with love, Morals with Politics.
That courage, which when fortune ebbed did flow,
Which never trampled on a prostrate Foe,
Admire and emulate. Before he fought,
Observe how Peace by him was ever sought:
How bloodlesse Victories best pleased him still,
Grieving as often as he was forced to kill.
How most religiously he kept his word,
And conquered more that way then by the sword.
In whom was all we in a King could crave,
Except that Right which you shall one day have.
Yet think (Sir) it imports you to make good
With all his worth the title of your blood.
Presented TO HIS HIGHNESS, In the the West, Ann. Dom. 1646
GRow Royal Plant, born for your Country's good,
The hoped cure of our great flux of blood.
That Union, and that peaceful golden Age,
Which to your Grandsire Buchanan in his Genethliacon to King James, out of which
this is taken.
ancient Bards presage,
And we supposed fulfilled in Him, appears
By Fate reserved for your riper years.
And Thou, self-hurt since that half-Vnion more
Then ever, Britain, thou had been before,
Raise thy dejected head, bind up thy hair
With peaceful Olive, all those things repair
Which fire and sword deface, and call again
To their spoiled mansions thy fled Husbandmen.
They need not fear to come, this Prince's Stars
Promise an end to all our Civil Wars.
Never shall English Scots, nor Scots again
Infest the English with dire feuds, and stain
Their swords in brothers blood, thy Towns lay waste:
But their hands (prompt to War) henceforth make haste
To clasp in an eternal League. And You
(Blessed Parents of a blessed Son) add to
His great Birth equal Breeding; Civil Arts
To Arts of War, and Piety to Parts.
No Ship the Rudder so much turns and winds
As Princes manners do their Peoples minds.
Not Prisons, penal Laws, sharp Whips, severe
Axes, with all the instruments of fear
Can so constrain, as the dumb eloquence
Of Virtue; and the love and reverence
Of a well-governed Scepter shall persuade
Their wills, by great Examples easily swayed.
As when the Arabian Phoenix does return
From his perfumed cradle (his Sires Urn)
Where e're he flies the feathered people throng
With acclamations to salute the young
Admired King, not for his purple Seares
And golden Pounce (the Regal marks he bears),
Nor that he is rarely seen; but 'cause he brings
His Fathers honored ashes on his wings,
And funeral odours, that it may be known
He climbed not till his death his spicie throne:
(This Piety, a Virtue understood
By brutes, attracts them: such a sense of good
Nature that heavenly Steward does dispense
To every living thing that has but sense)
So do the People fix their eyes upon
The King; admire, love, honor Him alone.
In Him, as in a glass, their manners view
And frame, and copy what they see Him do.
That which the murdring Cannon cannot force,
Nor plumed Squadrons of steel-glittering Horse,
Love can. In this the People strive to out-doe
The King; and when they find they are loved, love too.
They serve, because they need not serve: and if
A good Prince slack the reins, they make them stiff;
And of their own accords invite that yoke,
Which, if enforced on them, they would have broke.
And He again, with this more tender grown*
More Father of his People, on his own
Shoulders assumes their burdens, beats the way
Which they must tread, and is the first to obey
What he commands; to pardon others prone,
Inexorable to himself alone.
Neither in Diet, Clothes, nor Train will He
Exceed those banks should bound even Majesty;
Nor rush like beasts to Venus, but confine
His chaste desires to his own geniall Vine.
Who will with Silks his manly limbs un-nerve,
That sees domestic Wool his Sovereign serve?
Who can the married bed too narrow think,
Which holds a King? or drown himself in drink
Under a sober Prince? Who Will dare to import
Beyond Sea vices to infect a Court,
And make his body with excess and ease
A sink to choke his soul in, when he sees
A Monarch curb his pleasures, and suppress
Those weeds which make a Man a Wilderness.
Such golden Tiber saw the peaceful Throne
Of holy Numa, that of Solomon
Palmie Euphrates. 'Twas not the keen blade,
Or the thick quilted numerous Legion made
Those Thrones secure: 'Twas not the warlike Steed,
Nor the sythe-armed Chariots furious speed:
But Wisdom, Mercy, (which no harm will cause)
And Majesty, fenced with unarmed Laws.
Whilst that great Captain, who the World had quelled,
And those proud Lords that Rome in bondage held,
By steel or poison ended their short date
Of power, and blood with blood did expiate.
Frank Nature never gave a better thing,
Nor ever will to men, then a good King;
In whom his own true Image God does place.
This, whether Kings shall in themselves deface
By ougly Vice, or other men by wit
Or force demolish, God will punish it
As a high Sacrilege, and will not see
Himself abused in Effigy.
So cruel Nero, fierce Domitian so,
And the Sicilian Tirants, whilst they throw
Dirt in their Makers face with their black deeds,
Are from the earth cut off, they and their seeds.
So those rebellious servants that durst join
Against their Lords, and impious Cataline
That strove to wrest the sword from them to whom
It was committed by the Laws of Rome,
Pursued to fury and despair, did make
Hard shift by a most wretched death to shake
Their loathed lives off, leaving on their name
The blot and brand of never-dying shame.
These lessons let his tender years receive;
His riper, practice: And let him believe,
It Is not so much both Indies to command,
As first to rule himself, and then a Land.
FINIS.
Page 82. lin. 12. for love read lose.

page 147. l. 5. for more read worse.


