Christians I Have sought from my Nativity:
I lived, I wrote, to show how such to be:
Convinced the World of ^rrors, sins, abuses:
All hate me for it, each one my NAME traduces.
To death they persecute me every where:
How should I other Lot than JESUS bear?
portrait

AN APOLOGY FOR M. Antonia Bourignon:

In Four Parts.

I. An Abstract of her Sentiments, and a Character of her Writings.

II. An Answer to the Prejudices raised against them.

III. The Evidences she brings of her being led by the Spirit of God; with her
Answers to the Prejudices opposed thereunto. To which is added, A Dissertation
of Dr. De Heyde, on the same Subject.

IV. An Abstract of her Life.

To which are added, Two LETTERS from different Hands, containing REMARKS on
the Preface to the Snake in the Grass, and Bourignianism Detected.

AS ALSO, Some of her own Letters, whereby her True Christian Spirit and
Sentiments are farther justified and vindicated; particularly as to the
Doctrine of the Merits and Satisfaction of Jesus Christ.

Non multum Disputandum, Nuda enim Veritas seipsam Validissime tutatur; and
probe intellecta, genuina sua luce tenebras omnes Dispellit. Rob. Leighton.
Archiep. Glasc. Prelect. Theol and Paraenes. p 199 LONDON, Printed for D.
Brown, at the Black Swan, without Temple Bar; S. Manship, at the Ship in
Cornhil; R. Parker, at the Unicorn under the Piazza's of the Royal Exchange;
and H Newman, at the Grasshopper in the Poultry. 1699.

THE PREFACE.
I. I. The ill Entertainment such an Apology will meet with.
SVch, and so universal, are the Prejudices raised amongst all Parties, against
the Writings and Sentiments of A. B. that the Sight of the very Title Page of
this Apology, will make some perhaps throw it by which Disdain, scorning to
look into it; others to take it up in Derision, and ask, What would this Babbler
say? Others to pry into it with an evil Eye, with a Design only to carp at it,
and to pick out here and there some Expressions or Sentiments which differ from
the ordinary Systems, and put them in such a Dress as may excite the Hatred and
Derision of the People.

II. II. The Apologist^ p^^pos^to write it notwith standing. and why?
But being fully persuaded in my Conscience that those Writings do greatly tend
to revive the Life and Spirit of Christianity, which is acknowledged to be so
much decayed and lost amongst all the Parties of Christendom; and knowing that
there are many welldisposed Persons who are frightened from look^ng into them,
because of the odious Representations made of them, and the Prejudices given
them against them; who, if these Prejudices were removed, would certainly
peruse them with Delight, and Profit to their Souls, and would sensibly ^eel
that the True Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and the only way to eternal Life
chalked out in his Life and Sayings, is there plainly and distinctly
repres^nted; I shall therefore in all Sincerity, without Respect of Parties or
Persons, write this Apology: And I do earnestly beg of Almighty God the Father
and Fountain of all Light and Love, that he may be pleased so to illuminate my
Mind with his Heavenly Light, and warm my Heart with his Divine Love, that I
may utter nothing but what flows from or tends to both; and that some Rays of
both may stream through this Writing, to touch the Hearts and Spirits of others.

III. III. Writings not to be despised because they and their Author are evil
spoken of by all.
To dispose Persons to hearken to, and to make a right use of an Apology of
this Nature, it is fit to premise two things.

First, That it needs not prejudice any against A. B. and her Writings, so far
as not to listen to an Apology for both, that they know she is evil spoken of,
said to be an Enthusiast, an Enchantress, a Blasphemer, a Seducer, and the
Devil of a Saint, that her Writings are said to be full of Heresies, Delusions,
and Errors; and that by Persons of all Parties, Papists, Protestants,
Lutherans, Calvinists, Presbyterians, Episcopal Persons, Anabaptists, Quakers,
and even by the Preachers, and Writers, and Learned Men of the respective
Parties; for there is nothing more ordinary than for the most Innocent, and the
most Upright, to be thus treated. Woe to you when all Men shall speak well of
you. This was the Treatment that Innocence and Truth it self met with, our Lord
Jesus Christ. He was made to pass for a Blasphemer, a Sorcerer, a Perverter of
the Law of God. The most Learned, and the most Godly in his Age hated him. They
who in other things stood at the greatest Distance, did agree in this; Herod
and Pilate, the Pharisees and Sadducees, the Jews and Samaritans. So that this
may be rather a favorable Prejudice on her behalf, at least so far as to allow
her a fair Hearing.

IV. IV. Not to read them with an evil Eye.
2. I shall entreat you may not come to read this Apology nor the Writings, to
which it invites you, with an evil Eye. They who come to consider Writings or
Persons with this Disposition, are not capable of understanding them aright
themselves, or of giving a true Representation of them to others. I know no
Person though never so innocent, nor Truth though never so clear, nor Book tho writ
with never so much Plainness, Sincerity, and Consistency, which they who
consider with this Spirit may not mistake, expose, misrepresent, and ridicule.
Nothing more true than our Savior's Words, nothing more confirmed from daily
Experience. The Light of the Body is the Eye; if therefore thine Eye be single,
thy whole Body shall be full of Light; but if thine Eye be Evil, thy whole Body
shall be full of Darkness. It was from those different Dispositions that our
Lord himself, and his Doctrine, met with such different Entertainment in the
World. They who were full of Self-love and Esteem, and desired to love God and
the World both, to please Him and their App^tites too, to get and keep that
Rank in the Esteem of Men, which they thought they merited, and hugged the
Glosses and Senses they had put upon God's Law, by which they had reconciled it
with the following of their own corrupt Inclinations; such, looked on all that
Jesus said and did, with an evil Eye; they never came to hear him but with a
Design to catch him in his Words, and they found out ways to put a hard Sense
upon every thing. The Miracles he wrought, they said, were done by the Power of
the Devil, they accused him of breaking the Sabbath Day, and of countenancing
it in his Disciples; of Blasphemy, in calling himself the Son of God; of Pride,
in speaking well of himself; of a Design to destroy the Law, and seduce the
People by his Doctrine; and they made him an Enemy to Caesar, in calling
himself a King. But the sincere and the single-hearted who came with a pure and
upright Desire and Intention to understand and to follow the Truth, did readily
embrace the Doctrine of Jesus Christ; the entrance of his Words gave them Light
and Understanding; and they were so fully satisfied of the great things of
God's Law, that they were not apt to wrest or mistake his Sayings or Actions in
things of lesser moment, or where he spoke more mysteriously, as well knowing
that he had the Words of Eternal Life. They who come then to consider these
Writings with a single Eye, with a sincere Desire to understand the Truth, and
to do the same, shall know of the Doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether
she speaks of her self.

V. V. The Method and Manner of this Apology.
In writing this Apology we shall give, 1st. An Abstract of her Sentiments, and
Character of her Writings. 2d. Some of the most remarkable Prejudices raised
against her, and her Answers to them. 3d. The Evidences she gives of her being
led by the Spirit of God, with her Answers to the Prejudices opposed thereunto:
(most of the Prejudices of late raised against her, being such as were objected
to her in her own Lifetime, I chose to give her own Defenses, which upon many
Accounts I judge will be more acceptable than what I might offer to say for
her.) 4th. An Abstract of her Life: Unto which shall be subjoined some of her
Letters, which will both serve farther to vindicate her from the Calumnies
raised against her, and may be of great use to these who do sincerely love the
Truth, and desire the Salvation of their Souls. To all such I hope this will
not be unacceptable, there being nothing aimed at but to make us all lay to
Heart this great Truth; Civitates duas fecerunt amores duo. Civitatem mundi,
quae and Babilonia dicitur, amor sui, usque ad contemptum Dei. Civitatem Dei,
quae and Jerusalem dicitur, amor Dei usque ad contemptum sui. August. de Civ.
Dei.

ERRATA.
PAge 6. line 26. for had, read has. p. 7. l. 4. for do, r. di^. ibid. l. 25.
and 26. into, r. in p. 9. l. 42. the, r. them. p. 15. l. 23. love, r. live. p.
16. l. 20. there, r. the. p. 24. l. 39. dele to. p. 28. l. 20. after People, r.
taught. ibid. l. 28 blot out be. p. 29. l. 8 after not, r. from. p. 35 l. 37.
he r. she. p. 39. l. 15. him, r. them. p. 41 l. 29. since, after, r. thereafter
ibid. blot out had. p. 45. l. 42. after with, r. an. p. 46. l. 28. after them,
r. and that p. 51. l. 38. his by, r. by his. p. 56. l. 3. as, r. (...). p 64.
l. 6. not, r. none ibid l 28 after makes, r. appear p. 68 l. 14. converted, r.
covered. p. 69. l. 25. there, r. then p. 73. l. 9. and* r. of p. 74. l. 30.
there, r. their. p. 78. l. 23. after it, r. is. ibid. l 27. though, r. that. p.
80. l. 39. after done, r. God. p. 84 l. 21. that. r. but p. 101 l. ^6 (...) to,
it p. 1^2 l. 33. blot out only p. 1. 3. l. 18 ^ minuendam ibid. l. 35. nutri,
r. neutri. p. 1^8. l. 19. 2. presence, r. prescience. p. 113. l. 32 r.
fatereris. (...) 34. r. Nocendum. ibid. 43. r. divinitus p. 114. l. (...)
iruendum. p. 120. l. 27. after these, r. says she p. 120. l. (...) great, r.
so. p. 13. l. 31 after and, r. lay, p. 134. l. 2^ after ^ccasion, r. to show.
p. 135. l. 18. for that O!, r. O! that. p. 38. l. 8. after withdraw, r. from.
p. 144 l. 13. of r. if. p. 152. l. 12. Consultations, r. Conclusious. l. 19.
loving, r. living. l. 37 object, r. objects. p. 190. l. 1. he, r. they. ibid.
l. 39. dele upon. p. 192 l. 18. his, r. this. l. 40. his, r. this. p. 217. l.
41. Spiri, r. Spirit. p. 213. l. 5. inferior, r. Superior. p. 230. l. 36.
blot out or Conditions. p. 239. l. 6. Epaphirus, r. Epaphroditus. ibid. ^mar.
for Tit. 4. 20, r. 2. Tim. 4. 20 p. 244. l. 39 such, r. how. p. 247. l. 31.
has. r. have. p. 256. l. 33. declare, r. declare. p. 257. l. 37. for had, r.
has. p. 271. l. 39. ye, r. yet. p. 273. l. 9. plea'd, r. pleased. ibid. l. 11.
Smoke, r. Smoke. p. 277. l. 9. blot out to. p. 279. l. 42. substance, r.
subsistence. p. 292. l. 28. alie, r. ally. p. 295. l. 9. Coriathe, r. Coriache.
p. 296. l. 29. Rufus, r. Refuse. p. 307 l. 39. liquitale, r. liquidate. p. 317.
l. 19 fundamentally, r. fraudulently. p. 325. l. 32. after to, r. be. p. 327.
l. 25. with it. r. it with. p. 3^9. l. 35. after she, r. did. p. 331. l. 33
D^ust^uction, r. Destraction. p. 334. l. 27. in r. through. p. 336. l. 21 after
consider, r. them. p. 352. l. 35. blot our to. p. 353. l. 4 Men all, r. all
Men. p. 355. l. 23. pussiman, r. pijssimam. p. 358 l. 14 Narrater. r. Narrator.
p. 361 l. 11. for, r. far. p. 374. l. 4 of his, r. of this. p. 379. l. 12. and,
r. of. p 383. l 24. so though l. so that. p. 384 l. 23, and 24 Corinthus, r.
Cerinthus p. 39 l 31. insecti, r infecti. ibid. l. 34. initi, r. miti. p. 394.
l. 24. Flaterings ^. flatering. l. 28. for being almost brought in o, ^.
bending almost into.

Advertisement.
TWo of Mrs. A. B's Treatises done into English, viz. Solid Virtue, and the
Light of the World; maybe had at the same Places where this is.

AN APOLOGY FOR M. A. BOVRIGNON.
PART. I.
An Abstract of her Sentiments, and Character of her Writings.
I. I. Men ought to consider what is said, and not who says it.
MEN are generally led to take an estimate of Sentiments and Writings, from the
Opinion they have conceived of the Persons who communicate them; and that
grounded upon Circumstances which have no necessary connection with Truth or
Error. The Poor Man's Wisdom is despised, and his Words are not heard. The
Words and Works of Jesus Christ, if they had come from a Scribe or Pharisee,
his Countrymen would have received both him and them; but because they knew his
Extract, the Meanness of his Education, that he had no Learning, and that the
Learned had no regard for him, therefore they despiss'd him. Matt. 13. 55.
Have any of the Scribes and Pharisees believed on him? Is not this the
Carpenter's Son? Is not his Mother called Mary, and his Brethren, and his
Sisters, are they not all with us? Whence then has this Man all these things?
and they were offended in him.

II. II She treated otherwise.
Thus had the Sentiments of A. B. been the Product of some of the Ancient
Philosophers, or of the Holy Fathers, or even of some learned Head in this Age,
they would have met with regard. But because they come from a Woman, void of
all Humane Learning, and declaring that she is taught of God, they are
entertained with Contempt and Scorn, and instead of weighing the Sentiments
themselves, Prejudices are first heaped together, to disparage her Person, and
thereby to breed an Aversion against any thing she can say, though never so true
and useful. This is very far from the excellent Advice given us by Tho. a Kemp.
Of the Imitation of Christ, Book 1. Chap. 5. Sect. 2. which I wish we may all
follow: Let not, says he, the Authority of the Writer offend thee, whether his
Learning be small or great: But let the Love of pure Truth draw thee to read.
Do not enquire, who said these things. but consider well what is said.

III. III. None ought to take Men's Sentiments on Trust from others, especially
Enemies.
It is no less unjust to take the Sentiments of others only upon Trust, from a
declared Enemy to the Person whose Sentiments they are; such you know are sure
to set them always in a false Light, so as to make them hateful and ridiculous.
If you will take the Doctrine of Jesus Christ himself, from the Scribes and
Pharisees, they shall make him to speak Blasphemy, and to be in Compact with
the Devil. Now this is the unjust Measure given by many to A. B. They take her
Sentiments from those only who design to render them hateful and ridiculous,
who, after the manner that they represent them, may as easily expose the most
Sacred Writings. It is just then to hear her self, and not to judge of her
Sentiments by some Expressions or Passages of her Writings, which separately
may seem harsh, but to compare such with the whole Context, and with the main
Scope and Substance of all her Writings, and this will lead you to interpret
them aright. I do not desire that you should take her Sentiments upon Trust
from me more than from others. I aim only to set them in a True Light, in
opposition to the False Representations made of them: And as to my Sincerity
and fair Dealing in it, I appeal to the Writings themselves.

IV. IV. Nor to weigh them by the Systems and Opinion of Men.
Neither is it just to weigh Sentiments by the Doctrines of Men, and to despise
and reject them, if they do not agree exactly with the commonly receiv^d
Systems and Opinions. The Doctrine of Jesus Christ is the Rule we are to walk
by. Men in forming of their Systems are ready to flatter Corrupt Nature. It is
certain in our practice we all do so, and we are well pleased with Doctrines
that may favor us in this. If then her Sentiments be the same in Substance
with the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and do not at all tend to sooth and flatter
our Corrupt Nature, but on the contrary to lead us to mortify and subdue it,
we ought not to reject them, though they do not in all things agree with the
Systems of Men.

V. V. She owns the Scriptures for the Test of all Doctrines, and the Doctrine
of Jesus Christ for the last and complete Doctrine of Salvation, and this the
Butt of all her Writings. Renouv. de l' Espr. Eva. Pref. page 110.
Before we set down her Sentiments, it is to be considered, that as she owns
the written Word of God to be the Test whereby we are to examine all Doctrines
pretended to be come from God, and that none contrary thereunto ought to be
received; and desires, that hers may be tried thereby: So she declares that the
Doctrine of Jesus Christ is the last Doctrine that is to come into the World,
and contains the necessary means of Salvation; and that there is no other way
to Salvation but what he has chalked out to us, by his Life, Precepts, and
Counsels. So that all her Writings and Sentiments aim at nothing, but to
convince Men that they do not follow the Life and Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and
to persuade them to do it, as being indispensably necessary to Salvation.

VI. VI. The Truths of Religion of two sorts, Essential and Accessory.
As to her Sentiments, she makes appear, that the Truths of Religion may be
considered under two Heads. 1. There are some Truths and Doctrines in which the
Essence of Christianity does consist; the Living Knowledge and Practice of
which is necessary to Salvation. 2. There are other accessory Truths, without
the express Knowledge and Belief of which one may be Saved.

VII. VII. The Ground of all, the Holy Scriptures and the Apostle^ Creed.
First, As to the Essential Truths of Christianity, she supposes before all,
the Truth of the Holy Scriptures, and of the Apostles Creed, and that all that
is contrary thereunto, ought to be anathematized; and the Soundness of her
Faith in these, appears by her Profession of Faith and Religion, which she
presented publicly at the Court of Gottorp, in Holstein, which is prefixed to
all her Books, and the Tenor of it is as follows.

VIII. VIII. Her Profession of Faith, prefixed to all her Writings.
Her Profession of Faith.

1. I Am a Christian; and I believe all that a True Christian ought to believe

2. I am baptized in the Catholic Church, in the Name of the Father, in the
Name of the Son, in the Name of the Holy Ghost.

3. I believe the Twelve Articles of the Apostolic Symbol, or Creed; and I do
not doubt of one Article of it.

4. I believe that Jesus Christ is True God, and that he is also True Man; as
that he is the Savior and the Redeemer of the World.

5. I believe in the Gospel, in the Holy Prophets, and in all the Holy
Scriptures, both of the Old and New Testament.

And I will live and die in all the Points of this Belief which I protest
before God, and Men, to all whom it shall concern.

In Testimony of which, I have signed this my Confession with my Hand, and
sealed it with my Seal.

At Sleeswick, the 11th. of March, 1675. [L. S.] Anthoinette Bourignon.

IX. IX. Her Sentiments to be measured by her Confession.
Now this short Confession is the Abridgement and Foundation of all her
Doctrine, and of her Life, and they who are not willing to be imposed upon,
will be so just as to measure and judge of her Sentiments, according to this
Sincere and Public Confession of her Faith, and not according to the False and
Calumnious Representations which some designedly make of them, whereby they
would have her to pass in the World for the Inventer of a New and Fantastical
Religion, and so raise in the Hearts of the People an Abhorrence of her and her
Writings, which aim at nothing but to persuade them to be truly Followers of
Jesus Christ. This being presupposed, here follows.

X The Essentials.
1. Her Accounts of the Essentials of Religion, in her own Words.

Man created only to love God.
1. GOd a. Renouv de L. Espr. Evang. Pref. p. 102.
created Man only to be loved by him, and for no other End. He ibid. p. 6.
had no need of Man, nor of any other Creature, being in himself alone Holy and
Perfect, Independent upon all things, yea, whom all obey in Heaven and Earth,
who is yet able to Create a Thousand Worlds, and an Hundred Thousand kinds of
Creatures, according to his Good Pleasure. But his Good Pleasure was to Create
Man after his own Likeness, that he might take his Delight with him; and as
there cannot be perfect Love, if it be not reciprocal, it was God's Will, that
Man should love his God with all his Power, in Requital of the Love which God
bear to him; and that he should delight in him only, since God would needs take
his Delight with Man, which obliged Man to place all his Affections upon God
alone. Seeing he was created for no other End, he neither could, nor ought in
justice, to turn his Affections toward any other thing than his God, but to
love him only with all his Heart, and with all his Strength.

2. God Light of the World, Part 1. p. 138. Renouv. Pr. p. 12.
creating Man thus to take his Delight with him, Endued for that End with
perfect Liberty and other Divine Qualities.
and that he might voluntarily love his God, he gave him for this End, Divine
Qualities capable of loving him, he created him altogether Free and Perfect; he
would not bound nor limit the Will of Man, whom he would needs make after his
own Likeness, to be his Spouse, and not to be his Slave, or constrained to do
his Will; for all the other Creatures were subjected under his Will; but Man
alone was created altogether Free, like a little God, Sovereign and Ruler over
all the other Creatures, which God had subjected to Man, leaving him Free to
use them well or ill, according to his Will.

3. So Man has damned himself by turning his (...) from, God. i^id pref. p. 10^.
soon as Man turned away his Affections from God, to love himself or the other
Creatures, he became the Enemy of his God, and would not acquiesce in the
Designs that God had for Man to take his Delight with him: And by this means
Man has damned himself, and by ceasing to love God, the Fountain of all Good,
he is fallen into all sort of Evil, which consists in the Privation of all Good.

4. Sin ib. p. 128.
coming upon this Masterpiece of the Works of God, His Misery now.
has rendered Man so miserable, so infirm, ignorant, weak, that all things over
which he ought to rule, do master and mischief him

5. Men ibid. Jesus Christ has obtained Mercy and Grace for them.
are now born Children of Wrath and Perdition, All Men so by Nature, and cannot
recover themselves.
and are therefore assuredly damned by Nature; and nothing but the Grace of God
can save or deliver them from this Damnation into which they have voluntarily
precipitated themselves.

6. After ibid. p. 102.
that miserable Man had thus destroyed himself, jesus Christ, true Eternal God,
and true Man, comes to intercede for him with his Eternal Father, and by his
Merits and Intercession has obtained for this ingrate Creature the Remission of
his Sin, and the Grace to do Penitence for it, and a time and state of Trial
for that End; that by a perfect Repentance he may obtain the Favor of God, to
the End he may return to his Love which he had lost through his own Fault, since
Man was created free, to continue eternally in the Love of God, without ever
falling from it.

7. Whereas ibid. p 103.
Man ought to recover this Love of God by his own Choice and his own free Will,
he must therefore testify, To recover the Love of God, Man must now live a
life of Penitence,
by his Contrition and Penitence, the Regret he had to have lost this Love, and
effectually make use of the Grace obtained for him by Jesus Christ, employing
all the time of his Trial, which is this Mortal Life, to bewail his Sins and do
Penitence for them, since by the great Mercy of God he has obtained the Grace
to do it, and has the Means in his hand to fulfill this Penitence, in the Curse
that the Earth had received by his Sin; so that it must be cultivated, and Man
must gain his Bread in the Sweat of his Face.

8. Man Pierre de Touch p. 3^9.
was so corrupted by Sin, No Salvation in the State of corrupt Nature; and
Jesus Christ only has made us capable of getting out of it.
that he can do no good of himself, more than the Devils. But Man, by the
Mediation of Jesus Christ, has received this Mercy from God, that he may be
converted. But as long as he follows the Corruption of his Nature, he remains
in his Devilish State, and cannot be saved.

9. Man ib. p. 310.
has fallen by withdrawing his Affections from God to place them on the
Creatures. No Salvation without returning to the Love of God.
And no body will be saved, but he who returns to the Love of God, for which he
was created; and they who do, without this Love do perish eternally.

10. Jesus Christ Renouv. de l' Espr. pref. p 25.
having interceeded with his Eternal Father for Mercy and Pardon to Man, Jesus
Christ as our Pledge suffers and merits for Man.
became his Pledge and Surety, that if his Father would yet allow Man a Time of
Trial and Grace, he should do Penitence for his Sins, renounce his corrupt
Nature, and return to the Love of God. And Antechr. dec. part 2 p. 41, 74.
as Man's Pledge and Surety, he took on him our Mortality, and voluntarily
clothed himself with our Miseries; he bore our Griefs, and, taking the Form of
a Sinner, underwent all the Pains due to our Sins, as if he himself had been
the greatest Sinner, and bound to do Penitence, tho he was never guilty of the
least Sin; that by his Merits and Sufferings he might merit for us, with his
Father, the Spirit of Penitence and Conversion; ibid. part. 3. p. 48, 49.
which being united to his Sufferings and his Charity, which are Sacrifices
more agreeable to God than our unclean Offerings, and our Works defiled with
Sin, might be accepted of him.

11. Jesus Christ Pierre de Touch. p. 3 8 Renouv. de l' Esp. Ev. part 1. p.
156.
took our Mortality, Jesus Christ's Life is our Copy how to recover the Love of
God.
out of the pure Love he bore to Men, his natural Brethren, that he might
withdraw them from Sin, and the Way of Predition, into which they all walked.
He became a mortal Man to give us an Example, and to teach us by what Means we
may recover the Love and Grace of God; he did take an infirm Body, subject to
all sort of Miseries and Death, like to ours, that he might teach and encourage
us to do the Works that he had done in his mortal Body; and that we, imitating
him, might enjoy the Pardon and Recovery, which his Merits have purchased for
us.

12. Jesus Christ, Renouv. de l' Esp. Ev. pref. p. 128, 129.
by his Merits and Intercession, None saved by Christ but who obey his
Gospel-Law, and follow, him.
has obtained Pardon for Man, and the Grace of God for all who shall
voluntarily embrace, his Gospel. Law, and for no other; and therefore none can
ever be saved but by the Merits and Intercession of Jesus Christ, which will
never be applied to any but to his Disciples and Followers.

13. Man Pierre de Touch. p. 310.
stands in need of keeping the Commandments of Jesus Christ, The Precepts of
Jesus Christ are all Remedies for Man's Evils.
and the Gospel-Law, because of his Frail y, and because these are all Remedies
of his Evils, and by embracing these Remedies he shall recover the Love of God,
which he had lost through his own Fault.

14. God Renouv. de l' Esp. Ev. avaunt. pref. p. 22.
is the only Fountain of all Good, All Good from God, all Evil from Man,
from whom never any Evil can proceed; and Man is the only Fountain of all
Evil, from whom never any Good can come.

15. The Light of the World, part 3. p. 69, etc.
only Essential Command is a constant Dependence upon God, The One Essential
Command.
and the Resignation of our Wills to him; and all the other Commands teach us
only the Means to attain to this Resignation, and how to remove the Hindrances
of it.

16. The Acad. des Theol. part 1. p. 47, etc.
Essence of true Virtue consists in the Love of God, The Essence of Virtue and
Sin.
and the Essence, of Sin in the Love of our selves and of the Creatures.

17 All Light of the World, part 2. p. 57, etc.
the Actions of God do partake of his three Divine Qualities, Nothing
acceptable to God but what is just, good, and true,
Righteousness, Goodness, and Truth; and nothing we do, can be well pleasing in
the Sight of God if it do not partake of the same, if it be not just, and good,
and true.

18. It Acad. des Theol part 1. p 62, etc.
is not necessary to Salvation to comprehend in particular the Theory of the
Divine Mysteries, Not much specul^tive Knowledge; but Resignation of our
Liberty and Faculties to God, necessary to Salvation.
far less to be wedded to one certain Party rather than another; but that
denying our selves, and turning away our Liberty from the Love of the
Creatures, and from earthly Things, we resign it, and all our Faculties, into
the Hands of God, that he may enlighten, renew, and govern them by his Spirit;
after which, he will produce in the Soul the Light and Graces that he sees
necessary for its Salvation.

This is a Summary of the Essentials of Christianity, as they are represented
by her, and her Morality is a particular Deduction and Application of these
Principles to the Hearts and Actions of Men; and it is so pure and excellent,
that her greatest Enemies have been forced to acknowledge it to be so, that
they might be the less suspected when they blame her in other things.

XI. XI. The Substance of these Truths.
This Account of the Essentials of Religion I have given in her own Words, she
having summed them up in several Parts of her Writings, sometimes under fewer
Heads, and sometimes under more, though as to their Substance they are still the
same. And all her Writings have no other Tendency but to awaken in Men's Hearts
a Sense of those Divine Truths, and to convince them how far they are from them
in their Practice. She aims at nothing but to persuade Men, that they cannot be
saved without the Love of God; that their corrupt Nature now leads them only to
love themselves and the Creatures, which is inconsistent with the Love of God;
that they cannot return to it without denying and mortifying this corrupt
Nature, which Jesus Christ by his Merits and Intercession has obtained Grace
for them to do; and this can be done only by obeying his Gospel-Law, and
following his Example; which no body truly does. This is the Substance of all
her Writings. These Truths she inculcates a hundred and a hundred times. This
is the constant Burden of her Song. Some other Sentiments which she calls
Accessory Truths, she mentions perhaps but three or four times in all her
Writings. And because every Palate does not relish them, shall therefore those
Books be despised and thrown away, which do so lively represent the Essential
Truths of the Gospel? Would we throw away a Box of Pearls, because some
conceited Friend snatched at something amongst them, and squeezing it hard at
our Nose, made it smell as Dung, and then cried out, Fie! all is Filth, throw
all away. Sure, if these be the Great and Essential Truths of Religion, they
who love the Religion of Jesus Christ more than Prejudice or Party, will
greatly value and esteem the Writings of which those Truths are the Marrow, the
Substance, and the All; and will no more be scandalized at them because of the
Snarling of some, than they would despise Pearls because Swine trample on the,
or Holy Things, because Dogs bark at them.

XII. XII. That they are the Essence of Christianity, appears, 1. from
Scripture.
Now, that these are the Great and Essential Truths of Christianity, will, I
think, be readily granted by all. The Holy Scriptures declare unto us, that God
is Love, that they who dwell in Love dwell in God, and God in them; that there
is none Good but God; that the Sum of his Law is to love him with all our
Hearts, and our Neighbor as our selves; that while we love the World, the Love
of the Father is not in us; that Jesus Christ became Sin for us, who knew no
Sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him; that Jesus Christ
is come to bless us, in turning every one of us from our Iniquities; that
unless we repent we shall certainly perish; that in his Life and Death he was
given us an Example that we should follow his Steps; that by Nature we are the
Children of Wrath; that we cannot be his Disciples unless we deny our selves,
take up our Cross, and follow him; that if we be risen with Christ, we will set
our Affections on those things that are above, and not on those things that are
beneath; that they who are Christ's have crucified the Flesh with the
Affections and Lusts thereof; that Knowledge puffs up, but Charity edifieth;
that all Knowledge and all Faith without Charity profits us nothing.

XIII. XIII. 2. From the Fathers. S. Aug. de Doctrine. Chr. lib. 1. c. 3, 4, 5,
9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 22, 19, 35. etc.
Thus S. Augustine, in his Writings, and particularly in his excellent
Treatise, De Doctrina Christiana, Lib. 1. makes a Summary, of the same Nature,
Of the Essentials of Christianity. He considered all Beings under Three
distinct Ranks and Orders: Some which are to be enjoyed, others which are to be
used, and others in the middle between these, and they formed to enjoy and to
use those other Beings. The Things to be enjoyed are those which make us happy.
The Things to be used are those which help us to attain to that which makes us
happy, and to cleave to it. We, who are to enjoy and use those things, being
placed between both, if we give our selves to Enjoy the things which we should
only use, we are stopped in our Course, and come short of our Happiness, being
entangl'd with the Love of things below. To enjoy, is by Love to cleave to
something for its self. To use a thing, is to employ it as a Mean to attain to
that which we love; as Strangers traveling to their Native Country, make use
of Horses by Land, or Ships by Sea, to bring them thither. That which is to be
enjoyed is only God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the Infinite and
Unchangeable Good. We ought to love nothing for it self, but God; and all other
things, only in and for God. Other things are to be used or avoided, as they
are Helps or Hindrances of the Love of God. All who are capable of Enjoying
God, as we are, that is, all our Neighbors, we ought to love them as our
selves, that is, to desire or endeavor that they be brought with us to love
and enjoy God. All Sin and Evil consists in the Loving and Enjoying what we
ought only to use, the Creatures and their Perfections; and the Using what we
ought to Enjoy. Vtendis frui, and Fruendis uti: This has so darkened and
corrupted our Minds, that we are not capable of loving and enjoying this
infinite Good. In order to this, they must be cleansed and purified, which is
as it were a Traveling and Voyaging to our Country. This could not have been,
if Wisdom it self had not stooped to our Infirmity, and clothed himself with
our Flesh, to obtain Pardon and Grace for Sinners, and to give them an Example
in their own infirm Nature. And as, to convey our Thoughts to others, we must
cloth them with Words, though thereby they are not defiled nor changed; so the
Eternal and Unchangeable Word became Flesh, and dwelt among us; the Truth and
the Life became the Way, and brought us the wholesome Physic that is necessary
to cure the Maladies of our Souls, Remedies for every Disease. The Sum of all
is, that the Fullness and End of all the Holy Scriptures is the Love of God and
our Neighbors, the Being that is to be enjoyed, and those Beings which are
capable of enjoying him with us. And that we might know and be able to do this,
the Providence of God has ordered the whole Temporal Dispensation for our
Salvation, which we ought to use not with an abiding Love but a transient one,
as we would love a Way or a Chariot, that we may love those things in which we
are carried, for the sake of that to which we are going. This is the Substance
of that Excellent Book.

XIV. XIV. Her own Declaration, that her great and only Aim is the Love of God,
and that she lays no Stress on the acc^ssory Truths.
It is true, A. B. mentions other Sentiments which are not of the Essence of
Religion; but then she declares they are not necessary to Salvation, and that
we may let them alone, and suspend our Belief of them, if we see no Clearness
and Evidence in them; and that she aims at nothing but to persuade Men to the
Love of God, and to observe the Laws of the Gospel as the necessary Means to
recover it. It is best to hear her speak for her self in this Matter.

I protest, Renouv. de L. Espr. Ev. pref. p. 110, 111, 112, etc.
says she, before God and Men, that I aim at nothing by all my Words and
Writings, but to persuade Men to return to the Love of God, from whence they
are fallen by the Glosses, Explications, or new Inventions of deceitful Men,
who do falsely promise Salvation to those who live and die in their Self-love,
and despise the Practice of a Gospel-Life: Seeing such shall never inherit the
Kingdom of Heaven, when they despise the Designs of God, and the Means and
Graces which he gives them, that they may rise again and deliver themselves
from this Damnation. These are the Practice, of the Gospel-Law, which only can
save them, because of the Frailty of Man's Nature. They will never save
themselves from Damnation if they do not embrace the Gospel-Law, which is the
last and most perfect of all the Laws that God has given or ever will give to
Men: And I do not pretend to teach any other, neither do I teach Errors, as
these Adversaries of the Truth of God do affirm; for God will never change, and
Jesus Christ brings it to us in the last Hour. We must not look for any other,
nor for New Prophets; for he has prophesied all, and taught what Men ought to
do and avoid, even to the End of the World.

It Is true indeed, I speak of several things in my Writings which are not in so
many Words in the Gospel; but these are not things which every one is obliged
to believe, or the belief of which is necessary to Salvation. I write them out
of abundance, and to reinforce the Courage of those who understand and relish
them: But they who do not relish or understand them, may let them alone. Their
belief or unbelief of these things, neither adds nor takes any things from me.
I have obtained all my Design, when I have shown clearly, that no Body shall be
saved but they who shall take up the Practice of a Gospel Life; as God has
revealed to me, leaving every one free to do it if he will, since God forces no
Body, neither do I. I have spoken several times in my Writings, of the Creation
of the World, of the Glorious Estate in which Adam was created, how Jesus
Christ was born of him in his State of Innocence, with many Divine Mysteries
unheard of by Men. But this is but a Cluster of Grapes of the Garden of Eternal
Life, as those sent from the Children of Israel, brought a Cluster of the
Grapes of the Land of Promise, to make them comprehend the Abundance, and the
Fruitfulness of it; even so I have spoken of those high Secret Mysteries which
God has revealed to me, that I might give a Sample of that which God has
prepared for those who observe his Gospel Law. But I do not positively teach
those unknown Wonders as Articles of Faith. I declare them only for to
strengthen my own Soul, and those who sincerely desire to become True
Christians, teaching them also many things which no body has taught hitherto,
because the time was not come to know them, since we read in the ancient
Prophets, that God says to Daniel, Seal up these Words until the last Times;
and in the Revelations there is spoken of a Book closed, sealed with Seven
Seals, which none could open but the Lamb slain. All these things with many
others do sufficiently testify that God would conceal from Men many Secret and
Divine Mysteries till the last Times; for God has done nothing for Men, which
he does not make known to them before the World end.

And if now I declare unto them things which they have not as yet heard, they
ought so much the more to esteem them, and enquire narrowly that they may
discover whether they be true or profitable for the Salvation of Souls, and not
reject or despise them blindly, as Fools do, who condemn all that they do not
understand, uttering Reproaches against those who speak to them for their Good.
And if these Preachers did this out of Ignorance, they would be in some manner
excusable, but it must needs be out of pure Malice that they condemn the
Essential Truths of the Doctrine of the Gospel, which I teach substantially
through all my Writings, bringing only all other things by way of Comparison,
or to make my self be the better understood, that People may by diverse means
recover the Love of God, which all have lost, and even also his Fear. And that
every one may find in my Writings, diverse means suitable to their Dispositions,
I speak much of the Judgments of God, of his Rods and Chastisements which we
are to look for, that if some are touched with Threatenings, and disposed to
return to God by Fear and Trembling, they may embrace these Warnings of the
last Judgments: And if others are rather drawn unto God by Promises, and the
Glory that God has prepared for them after Death; such may meditate seriously
upon them, that by those Considerations they may be inflamed with the Love of a
God so bountiful to his Creatures: And if others are disposed to return to God
by discovering the Falsehoods and Errors which are now in Christendom, I speak
of them abundantly in my Writings: So that nothing is wanting there for him who
truly desires to search, he has certainly the Occasion to find by the reading
of my Writings, seeing there are there means, in abundance, for all sorts of
Dispositions. But the whole Butt, or the White, at which I draw, in declaring
so many Marvels of God, is no other but to show Men that they will not be saved
but by taking up anew the Practice of a Gospel Life, as the Christians of the
Primitive Church did; for God is Yesterday and to Day the same; and Jesus
Christ, that Divine Physician, has brought the last Receipt of his Gospel-Law,
which we must take and swallow until the last Day of Judgment, if we desire to
be saved.

XV. XV. Her Writings not to be despised, though others may have done as well.
Thus she declares, that she aims at nothing in all her Writings, but to
persuade Men to return to the Love of God, and to put in practice the Laws of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, as the only essential and necessary means
thereunto; and whatsoever else is contained in them, is only to bring Men to
the practice of those great Duties, they being differently moved according to
their different Dispositions; and these things they may either embrace or let
alone, according as they find them helpful or not to the Practice of the great
Duties of the Gospel; and the Truth of this appears by the constant Tenor of
all her Writings.

But some are apt to say, This is what is done by many others, by many of the
Practical Writers of Christianity, and what needs so much ado about the
Writings of this Woman? We ought not to deny to others their just Praise, and I
wish that not only many but all the Practical Writers of Christianity did
breath the same Spirit. But because other Writings are good and useful, we
ought not therefore to despise these, if they be so too. In things convenient
for the Body, the Providence of God affords not only what is simply necessary,
but Plenty and Abundance; and what is distasteful to one Palate, will relish
with another, and promote their Health. And why should our Eye be Evil, because
God is Good? If he be pleased to afford us Plenty, and Variety of Spiritual
Entertainment, tending to mortify our Corrupt Nature, and to bring us to the
Love of God, and some of it does not please our Taste, why should we be so
peevish and ill natured, as not only to throw all away that comes from that
hand, but decry it as rank Poison, and forbid any to touch it as they would
escape Damnation, when it may be all the Evil lies in the Malady and Distemper
within us, which it comes to remove; and what we will not use nor relish, may
prove very savoury and healthful to the Souls of others. It is strange to see
the Disposition of Men. The Poets and Plays, both Ancient and Modern, though they
flow from, and greatly tend to cherish the Corruption of Humane Nature, yet the
Learned do Study and Esteem them; but Writings of this Nature, whose only Aim
is to persuade Men to love the Life of Jesus Christ, in their respective
Communions, without setting up a New Sect or Party, and to tell them they do it
not; meets with nothing but Reproach and Contempt, upon a Pretense there are in
them some Sentiments different from the ordinary, though they are most consistent
with the Essentials of Christianity, and are declared not to be necessary to
Salvation. As if we would hate and persecute our best Friend, because his
Clothes differed from ours in their Fashion.

Some peculiar Characters of her Writings and Sentiments.
XVI. XVI. Some peculiar Characters of her Writings and Sentiments.
NOW as that which I have mentioned is the great Design of those Writings, and
for that Reason they ought to be as readily entertained as we do other good
Practical Books; so there are some things observable in them, in the
Prosecution of that great Design of the Renovation of a Gospel Spirit, which in
my Esteem do merit a particular Consideration. I shall mention some of them.

And First, 1. The clear Distinction betweeen the Essentials and Accessories.
that which has been already touched, her making so clear a Distinction between
the Essentials and Accessories of Religion, and her laying so little Stress
upon the last, though she declares that she had particular Discoveries in them,
seems to me a particular Character of her Spirit. They who set up for a
peculiar Knowledge in Divine things, or to reform the Corruptions of the
Church, or to be Guides and Directors of others, they presently insert all
their little Opinions and Doctrines into their Confessions of Faith, make them
Articles of their Creed, Shibboleths of their Party; so that none can be of
their Communion who do not profess to believe them; and they are more zealous
for their particular Forms and Confessions, than for the Gospel and Laws of
Jesus Christ, and are ready to esteem or despise others according to their Zeal
or Coldness for these; and thus, though a Man be proud and covetous and
malicious, and his Spirit quite contrary to that of Jesus Christ, yet if he be
zealous for their peculiar Doctrines and Forms of such a Party, he shall in his
own, and their Esteem, pass for a good Christian; they imagining that God lays
as great a Stress on their Doctrines and Forms as they do themselves, while
they call them the Cause of Christ, the Jewels of his Crown, etc. thus, most
heinously taking God's Name in Vain. Others again, who pretend to divine
Revelation, are still upon Mysteries and Visions. But A. B. does most clearly
and distinctly represent: wherein the Essence of Christianlty consists, L'
Etoile du Matin: p. 40, 41.
makes that the Butt of all her Writings, shows what are the Accessory Truths,
and though she pretends to particular Discoveries in them, yet tells they are not
Articles of Faith, nor necessary to Salvation; that they who see no Clearness
in them, nor Benefit by them, may let them alone, and though we should believe
them never so firmly, yet without a Gospel-Life and Spirit there was no
Salvation.

XVII. XVII. 2. The Relation that the Duties of Christianity have to one
another. Renouv. de l' Esp. Evang. part. 2. n. 81. part 3. n. 39, 48.
2. The Writings of A. B. do clearly show the Relation that the several Parts
and Duties of Christianity have to one another, and the Place that every one
holds in Relation to the Whole, and this is of no small moment to direct us
aright in our Endeavors after a Christian Life and Spirit. We may know many of
the Parts and Duties of the Christian Religion, and seem much Occupied about
some of them, and yet never make any Advances in a Christian Life; all that is
directed by Wisdom, is done for a fit and proper End, and fit and seasonable
Means are employed for attaining of that End. We see the Footsteps of infinite
Wisdom even in the Motions of the brute Creatures. The Birds in the Spring
gather proper Materials and build their Nests, and lay their Eggs, and hatch
their Young; if they should be taken up only about gathering Sticks, without
putting them to any further Use, the Wisdom of their Maker in the Forming of
them would not thereby appear. Now God has given Man an Understanding, whereby
he may discern a proper End for his Actions, and suitable Means by which to
accomplish it. We see in all Trades and Arts they have their proper Ends and
their peculiar Means to attain to them; and if the respective Masters or
Apprentices should be still occupied about some of the remoter Means of their
Calling, without ever directing them to the Attainment of the End of it, or
should think to attain the End without the Use of the necessary and immediate
Means, we would think they had lost their Wits. If they who pretend to rebuild
an House busy themselves only in providing some of the Materials, and
contriving Models, and reading Books of Architecture and hearing Discourses
about it, and lay some Stones of it upon an old runious Foundation, without
ever doing more, or if they think to get the House built without ever digging
deep to lay a good Foundation, or using the other consequent necessary Means of
Building, such but build Castl^s in the Air. Now, though Men are not so absurd
and unreasonable in other things, yet they are so in Religion. They are taken
up with some of the remoter Duties of Religion, without ever aiming at the End
of it, or they think to attain the End without using the necessary Means for
the Attainment of it, and become thereby so darkened in their Minds, as not to
perceive what Relation the Parts and Duties of Religion have to one another.
This then is certainly a remarkable Property of the Writings of A. B. that they
give so distinct a view of the Relation of the several Parts and Duties of
Christianity to one another, and to the whole: How some hold the Place of the
end, and others of the means; some of which are so absolutely necessary in
Man's present State, that without them he cannot attain the End. They make
appear that the great end of Christianity is to bring us back to the Love of
God, and that we can never recover this without the mortifying of our Corrupt
Nature, and that this cannot be effected but by obeying the Doctrine, and
following the Example of Jesus Christ; so that his Commands are all the
necessary Helps of our Frailty, teaching us what way to overcome our Corrupt
Nature, and to return to the Love of God. For the End of the Commandment is
Charity: The Gospel-Law teaches Man Poverty of Spirit, to show Man that
Covetousness has withdrawn him from the Love of God, and that he cannot recover
it without ceasing to covet earthly Goods; and it teaches Men to be humble in
Heart, and to choose the lowest Place; because they have lost the Love of God,
by loving themselves, and thinking themselves worthy of Honor and Glory, while
they merit nothing but Contempt and Confusion. Jesus Christ chose a poor and
mean State in the World, lived in Hardships and Unease, in Reproach and
Contempt, and never did his own Will, but the Will of him that sent him; to
show us what are the things that withdraw us from the Love of God, and what are
the means we must use to overcome them.

XVIII. XVIII. 3. Her most amiable Representation of the Divine Nature.
3. The Writings of A. B. do give us most lovely Representations of the Divine
Nature, such as may serve to inflame our Souls with Love and Wonder, when we
think on the depth and height, and breadth and length of the Love of God in
Christ Jesus, which passes all Knowledge: They show us that God's very Nature
is Love, that there is none Good but God, that no kind of Evil comes from him,
Light of the World part 1. conf 7, 14, 15. part 2. conf. 1. part 3. conf. 1, 2,
18. Renouv. de l' Esp^it. Evang.
but all Good; that it was nothing but Love and Goodness that made him create
Man so wonderful a Creature, that he might communicate himself to him, and
dwell in him by his Light and Love; and that he might oblige him by the
greatness of his Magnificence, made a world of beautiful Creatures to attend
him, and to complete his Happiness and Contentment would needs become like to
him, as he had at first formed Man after his own Image. And so far was he from
designing that Man should destroy himself, that he used all means to prevent
it, Preface, n. 15 etc.
and to keep him from abusing the greatest Natural Gift he could bestow upon
him, Liberty of Will; and which he could not in justice take back again, for
the Gifts of God are without Repentance: That Man's Baseness and Fall did not
alter God's Love, but he resolves to recover him again, and continues
unalterably his first Design of taking his Delight with him; that he accepts of
the Intercession and Mediation of Jesus Christ for that End, and allows Man
Grace, and a Time, and Means of Penitence; that the very Evils that came upon
Man, and upon the Creatures by his Sin, he ordered them all so, as that they
might tend to his Good and his Recovery; thrust him out of a delightful
Paradise into an Earth cursed for his sake, and bringing forth Throns and
Thistles; least the Pleasures of the first should now still bewitch his Heart
the more, and that the Miseries and Vexations of the last might give him
Occasions for Penitence, and make him return to his God; that God has not
forsaken Man, but Man has forsaken his God; that God by all his Works, and by
his Operations in Man, gives him all sort of Occasions to love him: That he is
not content to send us his Servants and Prophets to enlighten us, but he came
himself, and became in all things like to us, (yet without Sin) that he might
redeem and save us: That God tempts no Man, but every Man is drawn away of his
own Lust: That he damns no Man, for he is the Fountain of all Good and can do
no Evil; and the Damnation of a Soul is the greatest Evil in the World: That he
does not permit Sin, but permits Man to make use of his Free Will, which being
the greatest Treasure he could receive, it was not just for God to take it back
again, and if Man abuse it, it is for himself, so he may do with his Hands and
Tongue, which are given him for excellent uses: That as God is not the Author
of any Sin, any Moral Evil, neither by Influence, nor by Decree, nor by
Permission; but it proceeds wholly from Men and Devils by the ill use of the
Liberty and Free Will that God gave them; so neither is he the Author of any
Natural Evil or Malignity that is in the Creatures, he having created all Good
and Perfect; but Sin and the Self will of Man has brought a Malignity into all
things; and therefore it belongs to Man as being the Works of his Hands: That
God lets this Malignity continue now in this Time of Trial, to withdraw Man
from the Love of the Creatures; that at the Times of the Restitution of all
things, he will deliver all his Creatures from the Malignity contracted by the
Sin of Man; and since it is just to render to each one what belongs to him, it
is necessary that they, who will not return to a Dependence upon their God,
have for their Portion this Malignity of all the Creatures to all Eternity, as
being the Work of their own Hands: That in the Love of God consists all Good,
and all Happiness; and in the turning away from that Love, all Evil, and all
Misery, which Men are not now so sensible of; because of the superficial and
transient Delights, with which the Creatures do amuse and tickle them; but upon
the removal of that, they shall feel it to all Eternity. God is not the Author
of Death, but by one Man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin, and Death
has passed over all, because all have sinned.

V^s Deus, una Veritas, una Salus omnium and prima atque summa Essentum, ex qua
est omne quicquid est, in quantumest: quia in quantum est quicquid est, bonum
est. Et ideo ex Deo non est Mors. Non enim Deus Mortem fecit, nec laetatur in
Perditione Vivorum; quoniam summa Essentia esse facit omne quod est, unde and
Essentia dicitur. Mors autem non esse cogit quicquid moritur in quantum
moritur, nam si ea quae moriuntur penitus morirentur ad nihilum sine dubio
pervenirent: Sed tantum moriuntur, quantum minus Essentiae participant. --
Corpus autem minus est quam vita quaelibet quoniam quantulumcunque manet in
specie per vitam manet. -- Corpus ergo magis subjacet Morti), and ideo vicinius
est nihilo. Quapropter Vita quae Fructu Corporis delectata negligit Deum,
inclinatur ad nihilum, and ista est nequitia. -- Id enim amat quod minus est
quam Vita quia Corpus est; and propter ipsum Peccatum quod amatur fit
corruptibile, ut fluendo deserat Amatorem suum, quia and ille hoc amando
deseruit Deum. -- Quod vero Corpus Hominis, cum ante Peccatum esset in suo
Genere optimum, post Peccatum factum est imbecillum and Morti destinatum,
quanquam justa vindicta, Peccati sit, plus tamen Clementiae Dei quam
Severitatis ostendit. Ita enim nobis suadetur a Corporis Voluptatibus and ad
aternam Essentiam Veritatis Amorem nostrum opportere conver^i.. Et est
Justitiae Pulchritudo cum Benignitatis Gratia concordans, ut quoniam bonorum
inferiorum Dulcedine decepti sumus Amaritudine Poenarum crudiamur. S. Aug. de
Vera Relig. Cap. 11, 12, 15
It is, says St. Augustine, God alone, the only Truth, the only Salvation of
all, and the First and Supreme Essence, from whom every thing is what it is, in
so far as it is; for in so far as it is, what it is, it is good; and therefore
Death is not from God. For God did not make Death, neither does he take
Pleasure in the Destruction of the Living; for the supreme Essence makes every
thing to be what it is, and therefore it is called the Essence. But Death
constrains that which dies not to be, in so far as it dies; for if these things
which die, should die altogether, undoubtedly they would come to nothing: But
by how much less they partake of Essence, by so much they die. -- Now a Body is
less than any Degree of Life; for whatsoever retains any Form, has some Degree
of Life. The Body therefore is subject to Death, and so approaches nearer to
nothing; wherefore that Life, which delighting it self in the Pleasures of the
Body, neglects God, inclines to nothing; and this is Wickedness. -- For it
loves that which is less than Life, because it is Body; and because of this
very Sin, that which is loved becomes Corruptible, that it by passing away may
forsake its Lover; because he by loving it had forsaken his God. -- But that
the Body of Man, which, before Sin, was the most excellent in its kind, is
after Sin become so frail and subject to Death; though it be a just Punishment of
Sin, yet it discovers more of the Clemency, than the Severity of God: For
thereby we are persuaded, that we ought to take off our Love from the Pleasures
of the Body, and to turn it to the Eternal Essence of Truth: And herein the
Beauty of Righteousness, and the Favor of Good meet together; that because we
are deceived by the Sweetness of inferior Goods, we might be instructed by the
Bitterness of the Punishments, etc. Thus it is evident that nothing comes
positively from God as an efficient Cause, but that which is positively from
Good; and all Evil and Malignity proceeds from Devils and Men, which God does
yet so moderate and restrain in this time of Man's Trial, as many make Man by
his Grace come to himself and return to his God, O^con di^ tom. 3. c. 13.
and if there be no further hopes of Man, he leaves him to himself, and so
punishes him no otherwise than a Physician does a Sick Man, by leaving him to
his own Folly and Intemperance, when he will neither be ruled by him, nor take
the Physic he has prepared for him. Man does properly damn himself, and he
receives only the Works of his own Hands, Hos 13 9.
O Israel, thy Destruction is of thy self, but in me is thy help: When the Holy
Scripture represents God as denouncing a Curse on the Earth, the Pains of a
Woman in Travail, the Labor and Death of Man, these are charitable Warnings of
some of the natural Consequences of his Sin, to dispose him for them, and that
he might make a right use of them. And when the Scripture speaks of the Wrath
of God, and of the Punishments flowing from it, all this is to be understood in
a Sense agreeable to the Nature of God, as we do those Passages which ascribe
to him the bodily Parts and Passions of Men; and as by thus interpreting those
last Passages, there is no wresting of the Scriptures, but rather their true
Sense expressed, which either the clear Idea that we have of God, or one or two
plain Places of Scripture concerning him, that he is a Spirit and unchangeable,
do sufficiently manifest; so neither are the former wrested by giving them a
Sense conformable to the Idea of the Divine Goodness and Perfections, from
whence no Evil, Disorder, nor Anxiety can proceed, and to those Places of
Scripture which affirm that God is Love, 1 John 4. 8. Is. 27. 4.
and that Fury is not in him. What unsuitable and unlovely Representations some
have given us of the Divine Nature and Operations, and how unfit they are for
inflaming Men with True Charity; is but too evident from Men Writings, and from
Men's Lives.

XIX. XIX. 4. Their Tendency to Union and Concord.
4. Her Writings and Sentiments have a great Tendency to a Christian Union and
Concord amongst the several Parties of Christendom. We all seem to be sensible
of the Evil and Mischiefs of Schisms; and the Hatred, Lying, Evil-speakings,
Strifes, Wars, Fightings, Persecutions, Deaths, which have followed upon them,
are but too fatal Proofs of it, and therefore every Party strives to wipe off
the Blame from themselves, and to lay it on another. But the most useful
Thought is to consider how to heal them. The Course followed by the respective
Parties will never do it. Those of every Party judge that Orthodoxy is only on
their Side, and therefore strive to reduce all to an Union by bringing them to
be of their Party; and thus their mutual Animosities and Divisions are still
heightened. But the Writings and Sentiments of A. B. Lum. enteneb. part 3.
letter 2.
do more naturally and more effectually tend to a Christian Union, they teach
Men to labor after the Spirit of true Christianity in the Use of the outward
Forms and Rites (which are consistent therewith) of the respective Parties
wherein they are, without setting up a New Party, or judging and condemning
another because differing from them in those outward Rites and Forms. She shows
that the Differences of outward Religions, of their Ceremonies and Opinions,
will neither save nor damn; that they are not inseparable from the Essence of
Christianity, which consists in the denying of our selves, the mortifying of
our corrupt Nature, and the following of Jesus Christ; without which we cannot
be saved; that those other things are like the Clothes and Garments, which do
not give Life, but an outward Decency and Convenience; That the one is the
Sword and these other things are the Sheath; and that the Madness and Folly of
the Christian World lies in Contending which of us has the best Sheath, while
the Devil robs us of the Sword, (the true Love of God and our Neighbor) and
laughs at us when we think to overcome him with the Sheath of our outward
Religions, as we would laugh at a Soldier, who would needs fight his Enemy with
the Sheath of his Sword. And so little Regard had she to the Interest of a
Party, that when Lutherans and Calvinists came to be directed by her in the
laboring after a Christian Life and Spirit, she never enquired about their
Opinions, nor bid them abandon the Communion wherein they were. On the
contrary, when the famous Dr. Swammerdam, who was solicited by his Friend
Steno, to go over with him to the Church of Rome and to Italy, did ask her
Advice in it, she did expressly forbid him, telling him there was nothing but
Vanity in the Change of Communions, and that he might labor to be a true
Christian in the Communion in which he was. Did this Spirit prevail amongst the
respective Parties, how strangely would it sweeten our Minds toward one
another? our Animosities would quickly cease, our Difference would fall of
themselves, we would be as far from imposing our Forms and Modes of Worship,
and Confessions of Faith on others, or persecuting them who did not conform to
them, or hating and maligning such as differed from us in their Opinions and
Parties, as we would be from treating after this manner those who differed from
us in the Fashion of their Garments or the Sheaths of their Swords. We would
find the Apostle's excellent Counsel most applicable in all theses Cases. Romans
14. 2, etc.
One believes that be may eat all things, another who is weak (...); let not
him that eats, despise him that ea^^ (...) which eats not, judge him that
(...). One Man esteems (...) Man esteems every Day (...) persuaded in his
own Mind. (...), regards it to the Lord; (...) not the Day. to the Lord he
does not regard (...) He that eats, eats to the Lord, and he gives God
thanks; and he that eats not, to the Lord he (...) not, and he giventh God
thanks. -- But why do thou (...) thy Brother? or why do thou set a naught
thy Brother? for we shall all stand before the Judgment. Seat of Christ. -- For
the Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink, but Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy
in the Holy Ghost. Let us therefore follow after the things that make for
Peace, and things wherewith one may edisie another.

XX. XX. 5. The (...) from (...)
5. The Writings of A. B. serve to vindicate and reseue the Doctrine of Jesus
Christ from the false Glosses which the several Parties of Christendom have put
upon it, and whereby they have made it of none effect. The Corruption of Man's
Nature leads him to please himself and to follow his own Inclinations, and yet
while he does so, he is content to believe that he pleases God and does his
(...); and therefore he puts such Glosses on the Laws (...) Commands of God, as
many reconcile them to his corrupt Practice. Thus she Jewish Church had
advanced to that He^^^hth of Corruption when our Savior came into the World,
that they had glossed away the whole Law of God, and made it of no Effect by
their Traditions: And therefore our Lord Jesus Christ takes care to vindicate
Gods Law from their corrupt. Glosses, and most clearly and plainly to point out
Man's Duty and the Way to eternal Life. But as the World grows older, the
Corruption of Man's Nature increases and becomes more subtle and refined; so
that the Professors of Christianity now adays have as palpably glossed away the
Law of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, as ever the Scribes and Pharisees had done
to the Law of Moses; for which there needs no greater Proof than to compare
their Systems and Explications with the Gospel-Law it self, and their Practice
with their Opinion and Belief. For though their Lives be in nothing like that of
Jesus Christ, yet they believe they are good Christians, and hope to be saved
by his Merits. Now, which is a singular Providence of God, those Writings do
most plainly vindicate the Gospel of Jesus Christ from the false Glosses put
upon it. They plainly show, that there is no Way to Salvation but by the
Mortification of our corrupt Nature and Self-love, and by the Imitation of
Jesus Christ, dying with him to all the Eases, Honors, Riches, and Pleasures
of this World. And though no body does this, yet they think they are good
Christians, though every one seek themselves, their own Glory, and their own
Interest, and have formed Glosses on the Doctrine of Christ that may excuse
them: They are frail, they cannot keep the Commandments of God, they hope to be
saved by the Merits of Jesus Christ, through Faith in him; not considering that
the Laws of Christ are given us because of our Frailty, and as the most
effectual Means to recover the Love of God, and that none will be saved by the
Merits of Jesus Christ, but they who follow his Example.

XXI. XXI. 6. The leading to a true Reformation.
6. Those Writings do strike at the Root of the Corruption of Man's Nature, and
show the Way to a true Reformation indeed. Many have cried out upon the
Corruptions of the Church, and have set up to reform the World; and these
Corruptions being so visible, it was easy for such to draw Disciples after
them. But then, what has their Reformations been, Renouv. de l'Esp. Ev. Saint
Visiere. Nouv. ciel. p. 160.
but a shaking off of some outward Rites, Forms and Opinions, which had been
abused, and taking up others in their stead, as far from the Essence of True
Christianity, and in the mean time gratifying still their corrupt Inclinations,
their Pride, their Love of the World, their sensual Appetities, under the Cover
of their peculiar Forms and Opinions. And still a new Set, discovering the
Abuses of the former, stands up for a New Reformation by another Form of Rites
and speculative Doctrines? Not but that there may have been good Men in all
these Parties; but that this is the Spirit that runs through all, is but too
visible. It is as if People, designing to cut down a Tree whose Sap and Fruits
were full of deadly Poison, should labor to do it only by lopping off some
Branckes, or plucking off some Leaves, sometimes on this side, and sometimes on
the other, while they still cultivate the Tree carefully about the Root, and
what they have done serves only to make it sprout forth on other Sides with the
greater Force and Vigor; or as our Savior shows, it is the making clean the
outside of the Cup, while within it is full of Corruption. Thus Men reform
from some sinful Practices that have an ill Name in the World, but then they
gratify their corrupt Inclinations more freely in other things. Whereas the
Root ought to be struck at, the Heart made clean within, and a Reformation made
by taking up the first Institution of Christ himself, who clothing himself
with our Mortality, that he might lead us into the right Way of Salvation, he
has taken us by the Hand, Joh. 14. 6. c. 10. 9.
telling us, I am the Way, the Truth and the Life: I am the Door, he that
enters by me shall be saved: And whosoever will come after me, must deny
himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me. This is the true Institution of
Jesus Christ, and they who neglect this and seem zealous for other things, are
not true Christians; and they who pretend to reform Religion without bringing
Men back to the first Institution of Jesus Christ, and not straying from its
Rules, make only new Institutions and Religions, no true Reformation.

XXII. 7. XXII. 7. The taking off from a speculative Knowledge of Divine things.
The Writings of A. B. do tend to take Men off from a dry, barren, dead,
superficial and speculative Knowledge of Divine Things, and to lead them to a
solid, living, practical and fruitful Knowledge of them. There is a speculative
Knowledge of things, and there is a sensible and affecting Knowledge of them.
This communicates to us their Qualities, and makes us to enjoy them; and the
other gives us only their superficial Pictures or Idea's. Tomb de la fausse
Theol. p. 1.
Thus when we open our Eyes and behold the Sun, we enjoy his Light and his
Heat; he gives us Delight and Pleasure, he lets us see the Beauty of all the
Creatures round about us; he enlightens our Path, and lets us see where to set
our Feet. But in the Absence of the Light and Sun, when we form to our selves
Idea's and Pictures of them, and give our selves to Speculation and Reasoning
about these; this is but an empty, dead, superficial and barren Knowledge; the
Idea's are true, but they do not give us Light, and Heat, and Delight, and a
View of the Beauty of all the Creatures as the Sun himself did. And if we had
been born blind, and knew nothing of the Light and Sun, but what we had from
the Discourse and Information of others, then our very Idea's and Pictures of
them would be false, and nothing but Chimera's of our own Imagination. The
Analogy holds in Divine and Spiritual Things, as well as in Bodily and Material
ones. There is a solid, substantial, living, and fruitful Knowledge of them;
when God communicates himself to the Soul, and brings along with him his Love,
and Light, and Joy, and Peace. These are all felt by it, as we feel the Light
when it shines into our Eyes. This Knowledge is to be had only from God, as the
Sun and Light can be seen only by themselves: For the things of God knows no
man, 1 Cor. 2. 11
but the Spirit of God. Though the Sun shine never so brightly, yet if we be shut
up with thick Walls round about us, or if our Eyes be blinded we cannot behold
the Light. This is the State we are born in, Joh. 1. 5. 1 Cor. 2. 14.
in corrupt Nature. The Light shines in Darkness, and the Darkness comprehends
it not. The natural Man perceives not the things that are of God, but they are
Foolishness to him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned. Those Impediments and Distempers must be removed, if we would know
God aright, and therefore the Light has embodied himself, and the Word became
Flesh, and dwelt among us, and became in all things like to us, except Sin,
that he might show us how to come to God, not by much Reading, nor great
Learning, nor high Speculations, but by becoming like little Children, by
Simplicity and Singleness of Heart, by Humility and Prayer, by taking off our
Desires from all other things, Mat. 2. 26. and c. 6. 22. Ps. 25. 9. Joh. 8. 12.
and turning our Souls to God. Blessed are the pure in Heart, for they shall
see God. If thine Eye be single, thy whole Body shall be full of Light. The
meek will he teach his Way. I am the Light of the World, says Christ, he that
follows me shall not walk in Darkness, but shall have the Light of Life. The
Divine Knowledge that is thus obtained is solid and living; it satisfies the
Heart, it enflames it with Charity, the Love of God, and our Neighbors; Jam.
3. 17.
this Wisdom that is from above is pure and peaceable, gentle, and easy to be
entreated, full of Mercy and good Fruits, without Partiality, and without
Hypocrisy. There is another Knowledge of Divine Things, which is only
superficial and speculative, and consists in the forming to our selves the
Pictures of Divine Things in the Absence of the Things themselves, and
employing our Thoughts and Faculties about these. If we do this only in so far
as it may be helpful to excite us to the other, and to labor after those
Dispositions that may make us meet for it; it may be a good Handmaid and
Subservient to it. But if we make it our Study, and employ our Time and
Faculties about it, we do as foolishly as they who being hungry and thirsty,
and deprived of the Light of the Sun, should with the dim Light of a Candle go
into a Gallery and view the Pictures of the Light and Sun, and of all sorts of
delicate Wines and Meats, and should draw a great many of these themselves,
each Club contending that their Pictures were the truest, quarrelling and
fighting about them, and and forcing one another to assent and swear to their
Belief and Opinion of them, and hating such as differed from them, and were so
crazed in their Imaginations as to fancy they did eat, and drink, and enjoy
the Light, but when they awake their Soul is empty. Is. 29. 3.
This is that Theology which has overspread the Christian World; for the
cultivating of which, Seminaries are erected, Masters and Professors set apart,
the Youth trained up to handle their Weapons, and to argue Pro and Con, upon
every Head. The very Catechisms filled with the nice Speculations of the
respective Parties, and the People to con their hard Words, and to think
themselves mighty knowing in Religion. In this, thousands of Volumes are
written, and the Opinions and Pictures drawn by former Ages inquired into and
curious Criticisms made about every Line, in the Study of which, Divines employ
their Time and Talents. In this the Preachers multiply Sermons, giving Stones
for Bread, and the People have itching Ears, Ever learning, and never be able
to come to the Knowledge of the Truth; like Physicians and Patients that should
love to talk and hear respectively elaborate Discourses about Receipts of
Physic (the Receipts being plain enough of themselves) without ever applying
effectually to use them. In this, Men employ their eal, to maintain their
Opinions, to form and foster Sects and Schisms, to multiply Debates and
Controversies, to hate and malign those that differ from them, to raise Tumults
and Rabbles, to animate Princes against their People, and People against their
Princes, and to fill the World with Blood and Confusion. Now all the Writings
of A. B. tend to lead Men to that Theology and Divine Wisdom that is to be had
only by deep Humilty of Heart, and Poverty of Spirit, to be learned only in the
School of Jesus Christ, by denying of themselves, and following of him, and to
take them of from that false and superficial Knowledge of Divine Things, which
stands in a perfect Opposition to the other. It makes the Mind incapable of
being enlightened by the Spirit of God, it keeps it in a constant Amusement; it
is that Knowledge that puffs up, and makes us think we know something, 1. Cor.
8. 2, 3. Jam. 3. 15.
when we know nothing as we ought to know; but if any Man love God, the same is
known of him. It is the Wisdom that descends not above, but is earthly, sensual
and devilish; working Envy, Strife and Confusion, and every evil Work. It is of
this, Is. 29. 14.
that God threatened he would destroy the Wisdom of the Wise, and bring to
naught the Understanding of the Prudent. 1 Cor. 1. 19, 27.
Therefore God has chosen the foolish things of the World to confound the
Wise. He chose for his Aposles, simple illiterate Men, and when the Learned
came to him, he despised their Wisdom, Tomb de la fausse Theol. p. 1. let. 1,
2, etc. La Saint Visiere.
sending Paul to School as an Ignorant to learn of Ananias what he ought to do.
And when Nicodemus came to be his Disciple (the only learned Man that came to
be converted by him) he declared to him, with Asseverations, that unless he
were converted and became as a little Child, he could not enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven; to make him understand that his Learning and Wisdom was a
Hinderance to it, that he must turn away from it to embrace the Simplicity of a
Child. What he says to him, he says to all the Learned that shall ever be in
the World. Nicodemus was already turned from Evil to Good when he offered to be
his Disciple; but this was not enough. Jesus Christ declares to him, that
notwithstanding of this, he shall not enter there, unless he become as a little
Child, learning the Simplicity of Jesus Christ, and detesting the Wisdom and
Learning of Men. If the Wisdom and Studies of Men were not Hindrances to them,
why would he have them Simple as Children?

The same Spirit runs through all that Divine Book of Thomas a Kempis, De Imitat.
Christi. L. 3. c. 4^.
of the Imitation of Christ. Lo here an Extract of one Chapter where Jesus
Christ thus speaks to the Soul; Son, let not the fine and subtle Sayings of
Men move thee; for the Kingdom of God is not in Word, but in Power. Take heed
to my Words, which do inflame the Heart and enlighten the Mind, which bring
Compunction and procure various consolations. Never read my Word for this End,
That thou may be esteemed the more learned, or the more wise; but study the
Mortification of thy Vices, for that will profit thee more than many hard
Questions. When thou have read and known much, thou must still return to one
Principle. I am he who teaches Man Knowledge, and gives to Little Ones a more
clear Understanding than what he can be taught by Man. He to whom I speak will
soon be Wise, and will profit much in Spirit. Woe to them that enquire many
curious things from Men, and care little how to serve me. -- I am he who
elevates the humble Mind in a Moment, that it may conceive more Reasons of the
Eternal Truth, than if one studied for Ten Years in the Schools. I teach
without the Noise of Words, without the Confusion of Opinions, without the
Vanity of Honor, without the Debate of Arguments. I am he who teaches to
despise earthly things, to loath present things, to seek and relish eternal
things, to flee Honors, to suffer Reproaches, to place all their Hope in me,
to desire nothing besides me, and to love me ardently above all things.

For a certain Person, by loving me dearly, did learn Divine Things, and spoke
wonderful Things: he profited more by forsaking all, than by studying difficult
things. But to some I utter common things, to some special ones; to some I
appear sweetly in Signs and Figures, but to others I reveal Mysteries in much
Light. There is one Voice of Books, but it does not equally instruct all; for I
am the Teacher of the Truth inwardly, the Searcher of the Heart, the
Understander of the Thoughts, the Furtherer of Actions, distributing to every
one as I shall judge worthy.

Now Writings whose chief Tendency is to lead us to so excellent a Master, to
learn in Christ's School, and teach us how to labor for the Dispositions which
he himself requires of us, deserve to meet with some Regard by those who
pretend to be his Disciples.

XXIII. XXIII. 8. The Plainness and Simplicity of them.
8. Another remarkable Quality of those Writings is, that they are so clear,
and plain, and simple. The Thoughts of the Studious and of the Learned are out
of the common Road of the People, and so are their Words and Language too; and
when they write, they can hardly avoid the Terms of the Schools; and all affect
a certain Eloquence that darkens the Thoughts which we would express, both
because we have not clear Perceptions of those Truths, and we still seek our
selves; and many who have pretended to Divine Inspiration, have written so
Mysteriously, and under such dark Figures, that they cannot be easily
comprehended. But those Writings are so clear, that we may easily and
distinctly perceive the Intent of them, so plain that Children and the most
illiterate People may easily understand them, and so simple that there is
nothing of humane Art or Varnish to be seen in them.

XXIV. XXIV. 9. The convincing Force of them.
9. It is no less remarkable, that there is a convincing Force and Efficacy in
those Writings which does sensibly touch the Hearts of those that read them;
their Consciences bears them witness of the Truth of things as to themselves,
and they are convinced of all; not that all are so who read any of them,
Recueil des Temoignages.
no more than all who heard Jesus Christ himself were affected with his Words,
though he spoke as one that had Authority, and not as the Scribes, though never Man
spoke like him, yet the Pharisees said he had a Devil, but others who heard
him, felt that he had the Words of Eternal Life. So some call this Virgin a
Devil and Enchantress, a mad, whimsical Woman. Others are so convinced of the
Truths of the Gospel contained in her Writings, that they are ready to answer,
she is not mad, -- but speaks the Words of Truth and Soberness. Many, I know,
can bear me Witness, that upon the reading of her Writings they have felt a
deeper Sense of Divine things, and their Hearts and Consciences have been more
touched than by most of other Writings which they have seen. And this can be
testified by Persons of different Parties and Persuasions, by Learned and
Unlearned, and it deserves the more Consideration that they are not written in
a Way to move the Passions in Flights of Devotion, as some would have them pass
for, but in a simple naked Declaration of Divine Truths. All Writings carry
along with them certain Impressions of the Spirit with which they are written,
which we are apt to discern, and accordingly to be affected by them. If Self be
the chief Mover, it will be seen through all the Disguises of the Writer. There Is
a certain Dryness and Deadness in most of Writings and Sermons now adays about
Divine Things, that they do not at all touch the Heart; and even the best of
them savor more of the Head of than the Heart, of the Spirit of Man than of
the Spirit of God, and so they cannot rise higher than their Original; they may
strike and please our Fancy, but they cannot move the Divine Faculties of the
Soul. I cannot give a better Account of this than A. B. does when she complains
that though there was never more Preaching than in this Age, yet never a greater
spiritual Famine; that they do not give Nourishment to Souls, which every Day
wax leaner and leaner in Virtue, and colder in Charity. Nouv. ciel. p. 166. --
170.
She says, The Word of the Preachers cannot be God's Word, for then certainly
it would produce its Effects in well-disposed Souls; for the Word of God is
powerful. It would possess the inseparable Qualities of God, Righteousness, and
Goodness, and Truth; If one of these be wanting, it is not the Word of God.
they may use the Terms and Expressions which Jesus Christ and his Apostles
used, yet that is not the Word of God. They are not called by God, but carried
to the Ministry by Ambition, or some worldly and human Interest. Their Sermons
are nothing else but Apish Mummeries. If an Ape saw an excellent Painter
drawing a curious Picture, and if in his Absence it should take the Pencils and
Colors, and so scratch upon the same Table, it would entirely Daub all, though
it made Use of the same Pencils and Colors, because it wanted the Painter's
Spirit; this Defect marrs all, even what was beautiful there before the Ape
touched it. This is the true Emblem of most of the Preachers and Writers now
adays in Religion. They have the Scripture as the Pallet, wherein are
distinguished the fine Colors of Virtues with which Jesus Christ began the
excellent Portraiture of the Holy Church. They have also the Pencil which is
the Word with which Jesus Christ and his Apostles laid on these fine Colors of
Virtues in Souls; but they want as (that Ape) the Spirit of that excellent
Master, which is Jesus Christ. They have on Paper the same Words which the Holy
Spirit dictated, but they have not the same Holy Spirit to apply them in
Practice to their own Souls, and far less to the Souls of their Hearers.

XXV. XXV. 18. The just and excellent Representation of the Trushs of
Christianity.
10. Those Writings give us such just and clear Representations of the Truths
of Christianity as tend to take us off from Self, and from the Creatures, and
to make us turn unto, and depend wholly upon God, such as does not favor us in
the least Sin, and yet encourages the greatest Sinner to turn to God; such as
leads us to ascribe nothing to our selves but Evil, and nothing to God but
Good: Such as lets us see that nothing can excuse us from obeying the Commands
of the Gospel, and following the Example of Jesus Christ, Renouv. de l' Espr.
Evang. etc.
without which by him t^ere is no Salvation. It is true of Doctrines as well as
Men; By their Fruits ye shall know them: Such Doctrines as tend to sooth Men's
Corrupt Inclinations, to teach them how to love God and the World too; to
gratify their Appetites here, and yet hope to enjoy God hereafter, (I do not
mean in so many express Words, but in their natural Tendency) such certainly
are not of God. Now the Doctrines contained in those Writings have quite
another Tendency, as has been said. There we have such true and lively
Representations of God, as shows us that he is altogether Lovely; of his Design
in creating Man only to be enjoyed and loved by him, without any decree or
purpose of damning the greatest part of Mankind, as may stir us up to comply
with so tender a Love, with so generous a Design; of the horrid Degeneracy and
Corruption of Man now both in Soul and Body, as may make us abhor our selves;
of our Sins their being purely our own deed, without any the least
Predetermination or Concurrence of God, but the contrary, as may keep us from
excusing our selves or laying the blame on God; of the Merits, Satisfaction,
and Intercession of Jesus Christ, as may convince us that Pardon and
Reconciliation with God, and Grace and Means to return to God is to be
obtained, and that only by him; of the Necessity and Nature of the preventing,
concurring, and renewing Grace of God, as may make us continually seek to him
for it, and yield up our selves to be guided by it; of the Nature and
Corruption of our Will, as shows the absolute necessity of denying, it and
yielding it up to God; of the Doctrine and Example of Jesus Christ as may
convince us that our Corrupt Nature cannot be overcome, and we cannot return to
the Love of God without obeying his Precepts, and following his Example. Now
Writings of such a Tendency ought not to be despised and ridiculed by the
Professors and Preachers of the Religion of Jesus Christ; and that they have
this Tendency, I appeal to any who have read any of them without an Evil Eye.

XXVI. XXVI. 11. The Divine Explications of Holy Scripture.
11. Those Writings do contain also many Divine Explications of the Holy
Scripture, not after the way of criticizing and reckoning up the several
meanings and acceptions of a Word, or the various Senses of Inpreters, which a
Man may be well versed in, and yet be altogether ignorant of the true sense and
meaning of the Holy Scripture where he pretends to Interpret it. Renouv. de
L'Espr. Ev. p. 1.
We see all Sciences have a certain Light by which they are discerned, a
certain Disposition of Faculties which makes us capable to understand them,
certain Principles which lead to the Knowledge of them, and when these are
wanting, we grope in the Dark. Children and Boys may understand all the Words
of a Book of Philosophy, of the Propositions in Euclid, and yet understand
nothing of the Truths contained there. To understand the Holy Scriptures and
the things of God, we had need to be endued with the same Spirit, and to be in
the same Disposition with those who wrote them. Now if any will be pleased to
compare the Expositions given in those Writings of some places of Holy
Scripture, with the learned Comments of the Interpreters and Critics of the
Age, I am persuaded that if they be not greatly prejudiced, they will be
convinced that her Expositions come from a more Divine Original, than than the
most of the other; that they give a clearer Light, more worthy of God, and more
suitable to the great Ends of Religion; that in this the Truth of our Savior's
words is manifest, that God hides these things from the Wise and Prudent, and
reveals them unto Babes; and that with great reason she blessed God who preserved
her from drinking in Humane Learning. Of all these, I shall instance one which
deserves a particular Consideration, and that is her Exposition of the 24th.
Chapter of St. Matthew, set down in the First Part of La Lumiere nee on
Tenebres. It is too long to offer to transcribe it here; they who are desirous
to see it, need not want Occasions.

To this I cannot but subjoin the just Cautions she gives, Her Cautions and
Rules, for interpreting of the Holy Scriptures.
and the excellent Rules for the Interpreting of the Holy Scriptures. She makes
appear how rash Men are in glossing the Holy Scriptures, since the things which
concern our Salvation are so plainly set down in them, that they need no
Glosses; and the obscure things cannot be understood, but by the same Spirit
who endited them, La Dern. misericorde de Dieu avantprop.
and not by Humane Wisdom, which is directly opposite to the Wisdom of the Holy
Spirit which descends only into humble Souls. That they who will needs
interpret the Scriptures by Humane Wisdom, n. 135, 136, 139, 140, 146, 147, 148.
fall into great Mistakes; and understand the Terms quite othewise than the
Spirit of God intended. Thus it is said, that God hardened Pharaoh's Heart; the
meaning cannot be, that he hardens Men's Hearts, by making them obstinate in
Evil; for God can never cooperate to any Evil, being the Fountain of all Good.
But he speaks thus to make us know that he leaves a wicked Man to go on in his
Wickedness when he will not be restrained. But on his part, he uses always
Goodness toward them, that he may convert them, both by good Inspirations,
Admonitions, and other proper Means. But when their Free-wills are willful to
persist in Evil, he leaves them to themselves. The main Difficulty there is in
understanding of the Scriptures arises from this, that we do not know the
Qualities of God, and we are ready to attribute to him such as Men have,
imagining that he has a Love for some, and a Hatred for others. And thus every
one is wedded to his own Sense and Opinions, and will maintain them as the
Truths of God. But the best Course is still to take the Holy Scriptures in that
Sense that draws us more and more to the Love of God, and to the Knowledge of
our own Nothingness, and to leave all these things which seem disputable to the
Wisdom of God, reckoning our selves unworthy to be able to comprehend what he
is, how he does his Works, and by what means he saves Men; relying on the Faith
that shows us, that he does all things in Goodness, Righteousness, and Truth,
without amusing our selves with any other thing but to put in practice the
things which he has openly declared to us by his Gospel, which are necessary
for our Salvation; such as Humility of Heart, Self-denial, the Love of God, and
the Love of our Neighbor. It is better to exercise our selves in these solid
Doctrines, than to break our Heads in disputing and desiring to comprehend what
is in God; or how he governs Men: Eodem certe Spiritu and credenda and
intelligenda S. Scriptura quo tradita est. Th. a Kemp.
Better let our selves be governed by him as little Children, than to be
informed how he will govern us. It is to this, says he, that I exhort all the
World, knowing well that all the rest is nothing but Vanity and Amusement of
Spirit: For all the Learning and Curiosities of all the Men in the World cannot
save us; on the contrary, their Doctrines, Learning, and Sentiments, do rather
withdraw us from God and our Salvation. They either furnish us with means of
Self-presumption, or they slacken our Care to work out our Salvation. Those
words of Scripture which seem to say that God reprobates or damns Men, cannot
be understood but by the Signification of them, which cannot be known but by
the Light of Faith; for if we take these words according to our Sense, we
should speak Evil of God, and believe that he is Furious or Evil; which cannot
be, for he is all Goodness, all Peace and Tranquillity, and therefore he who
would not utter Slanders against God, ought not to stick to the Terms of the
Scripture, but in so far as they lead us to love and adore God, or to the
knowledge of our own Nothingness, and Charity to our Neighbor; Micah 6. 8.
Matt. 22. 37, 40.
for God has neither said nor taught to us but the things which tend to these
Truths. Thus when we believe that all Grace and Salvation comes immediately
from God, (as it is true) because we are Nothings; then we honor God, and
acknowledge his Almighty Power, in making so great things by his Grace of
nothing; and we must needs love him also by this Consideration, and beg that he
will continue and increase this Grace; and when we believe that God is so
Gracious toward us, Ezekiel. 18. 27, 28.
that as soon as a sinner shall repent and turn unto him, he will have Mercy on
him; this reinforces our Love to him, in consideration of the Love he bears us,
so mercifully to Pardon us. In these two Senses, we may hold different Opinions
about Grace, and believe that it comes entirely from God, and believe also that
Men may have it when they will, since God never rejects a penitent Sinner. But
whether we hold the one or the other of these in terms which do not tend to
humble us and to acknowledge the Greatness of God, that we may love and adore
him, it is an evil thing, and it is a great rashness for Man to interpret and
corrupt the Scriptures by Terms which authorize a Remissness in Virtue. For
they who will Gloss on the Scripture Words, might say, that God spoke not truly
when he said to Jonas, yet Forty Days and Ninevah shall be destroyed; for the
thing did not fall out according to the Terms, which were not conditional, but
absolute. Yet notwithstanding we ought not to surprise God in his Words, or in
the Scripture Terms; but we ought to draw profit to our Souls from them,
conformably to his Designs, who speaks only for our Profit. He says absolutely
that Ninevah shall be destroyed, because the Inhabitants merited this Sentence;
the Justice of God condemned their Injustice, but how soon they repented and
embraced Penitence, his Goodness and Mercy did also pardon them. We must not
therefore say that God did not speak truly, but that he judged them justly, and
that he afterward mercifully pardoned them; without being nice, or grumbling
about the Form of his Words or Expressions, which are designed only to make us
grossly to understand the things according to our Capacity and Weakness.

These are certainly most excellent Cautions as to the expounding and
understanding of the Holy Scriptures, where the most necessary Duties are most
plainly set down, and obscure things cannot be discovered by human Wisdom, but
by Divine Faith, and by the same Spirit that endited them; where we ought not
to quibble about Words and Ph^ases, but so to consider them as may tend most to
the Love of God, and Charity to our Neighbors, and a deep Sense of our own
Nothingness. S. Aug d^ Doct. Chr. L. 1. chapter 36.
This is the excellent Rule given by S. Augustine, hereafter to be mentioned;
this is the Method which the holy Fathers observed in interpreting the Holy
Scriptures, which makes their Writings so full of Unction, and how desirable a
Blessing is it that they who write Commentaries now adays may be acted by the
same Spirit: but this is thought too mean and simple for the Learning and
Critics of this Age.

XXVII. XXVII. 13. The clearing of Difficulties in a few Words.
12. The Clearing of Difficulties about Divine Truths in a few Words, is
likewise a singular Quality of those Writings. The Learned we see still wrangle
about them to Eternity, writing huge Volumes and confounding rather than
clearing them by a Multitude of Words and Distinctions. The Doctrines about
Grace, Predestination and the Free Will of Man, Acad. des Theol. part 1. chapter 1,
2.
have been tossed unsatisfactorily through many Ages, Multitudes of Volumes
written concerning them, and yet the greatest Difficulties still left
unresolved, both Sides having a Mixture of Truth and Error; the one, that they
might give all to God, taking from Man what he had irrevocably given him; and
the other, that they might reserve this to Man, taking from God and subjecting
to the Caprice of Man, that which belongs to the pure Grace of God, and from
both there do follow Consequences most injurious to God, and most prejudicial
to the Salvation of Men, though disclaimed by the most. Now in two or three
Sheets of Paper of those Writings there is more said for the clearing of those
Difficulties than in whole Libraries of Volumes. This in the ^. and 2. Chap. of
the 1. Part of Academ des Scavans Theologiens, written upon Occasion of
Conferences with and at the Desire of a learned and pious Divine, Mr. Peter
Noels, Canon at Maline, a Jansenist, who had been Secretary to the famous
Jans^nius Yprensis, and had a great Veneration for this Virgin and her Writings
to his Death. I shall mention another Instance of this Nature, of Mr.
Gilleman's, Canon and Archpriest at Gaunt, famous there for some Writings, who
having asked her Judgment of the Doctrine of the Casuists, then much talked of,
viz. That a Man may be saved by Attrition without Contrition, by Sorrow for his
Sins without the Love of God; telling her, that he had writ a large Volume
against this false Doctrine; she told him her Thoughts, and withal, that she
had written her Thoughts lately on the same Matter, which he having obtained
the Sight of, after Importunity, and with a Promise to restore it within three
Days, he read it with Feeling and Admiration, and returning it, said, You have
said more things and more forcible on this Subject in one Sheet, than I have
done in all my Book, which has cost me so much Time, Pains and Expenses, and
therefore I condemn it never to see the Light. It is the 4th. Chapter of the
forecited Book.

XXVIII. XXVIII. 13. The taking Men off from the disputing Theology.
13. Those Writings are worthy of our Regard, in that they tend to discourage
and remove out of the Christian World the Disputing and Controversal Divinity,
and to take Men off from the Spirit of Controversy, which has banished the
Life and Spirit of Christianity from among Men. Some are ready to say that her
Writings tend rather to multiply Controversies than to remove them, La Saint
Vizier. Tomb. de la^auss. Theol. Etoile du Mat. p. 37.
in that they advance so many new Doctrines and Opinios, which were never
formerly heard of. But these need give no Occasion of Dispute; she declares
they are not Matters of Faith, are not necessary to Salvation; they who are
persuaded of the Truth of them, and find them helpful to increase their Love
and Admiration of God, will receive them without disputing about them, and they
who are not persuaded of the Truth of them may let them alone, and so there
needs no Dispute, and no Body will contend with them about them. But those
Writings tend to take Men off from this Spirit; they make so clear a Difference
between the Essentials and the Accessories of Religion, so plainly describe the
first, that all cannot but be convinced of them; and they show that the last
ought not to be any Subject of Debate and Contention: They make appear, that
the Doctrine of Jesus Christ is to be learned by Simplicity and humble Prayer,
and not by Controversy and Debate, and that none are more capable of
understanding it than they who are led by the Spirit; they show that there is
nothing more contrary to the Spirit and Great End of Christianity than the
Spirit of Controversy: That they who are led by it cannot endure that others
should differ from them in some Sentiments about Religion, (even though they
agree in the Essentials and Fundamentals of it) but presently they prosecute
him with all the Spite and Rancour they are capaple of, as the Enemies of God
and Religion, and do all they can to inspire the same Spite and Aversion
against them in all on whom they have Influence: They assix on them hateful
Names, accuse them of Crimes they were never guilty of, Blasphemy, Idolatry,
etc. they treat them with Contempt and Scorn, make them pass for mad and
distracted; the Good in them, or the Truth that appears in their Writings, they
conceal and are grieved at it, and make it pass for what they call in Scorn
Flights of Devotion, or the Effects of a warm Imagination; and they rejoice
when they meet with any thing that can expose them or make them hateful; they
cannot easily believe any thing that is Good in them, but very readily Evil;
they do not consider the great Tendency of their Life and Writings, but cull
out some Instances and Passages of both which may separately seem h^rsh; and
they assix on them the hardest Sense they are capable of, and from these draw
Consequences and form odious Pictures of them; from them they can endure no
hard Words without Rage and Displeasure, but against them they insult and
triumph. In a Word, this Spirit is the complete Reverse of that Charity which
S. 1. Cor. 13. 4, etc.
Paul describes. It suffers little, is unkind, envious, rash, puffed up,
behaves it self unseemly, seeks it self, is easily provoked, thinks Evil,
rejoiceth in Iniquity, but rejoiceth not in the Truth; bears with nothing,
believes nothing, hopes nothing, endures nothing. Now all things being
diffusive of themselves, this Evil exerting it self in the Writings and
Discourses of Men* spreads like a Contagion, and our corrupt Nature being more
susceptible of Evil than Good, is soon seized with the Malignity. Hence comes
that Hatred, Variance, Strife, Evil-speaking, those Revilings, Calumnies,
Sects, Schisms, Wars, Fightings, Persecutions, etc. which have made the
Christian World so much the Sport of the Devil, and the Byword of the rest of
Mankind, Now one would think that by this time Men might be so generally out of
Love with the Humor of Controversy, so offended with the Trick^ of laying the
Stress of Christianity on things wherein it does not consist, and so sensible
of the Mischiefs that both have done to Religion throughout all Christendom;
that those Writings would be generally acceptable, which tend to swee^en Men's
Minds toward one another, to lessen a Concern for Sects and Parties; to give a
clear View of the Essentials of Christianity, and plainly to distinguish them
from the Accessories and Circumstantials, and to lead Men to the Mortification
of their corrupt Nature, and the Recovery of the Love of God, as those Writings
most certainly do.

XXIX. XXXI. 14. The singular Manner of the writing them.
14. The Manner after which those Writings were composed is something singular
and extraordinary. It cannot be denied but that they are writ with much
Clearness, Solidity and Force in all the things that may be useful for the
Salvation of Man; yet they are not the Effect of Study and the reading of other
Books; for she read none, and did not derive her Knowledge either from learned
Men or Books; reckoning their Learning a Straying from the right Way; and that
as the Writing-Master would needs have a Double hire, from those who had
learned to write an ill Hand, to wit, one hire for unteaching them so ill a
Habit, and another to teach them to write well, because he must be at more
Pains with such, than with those who had learned none at all; so she was with
the Learned who came to learn from her in Christ's School, she had a double
Labor, one to unteach them the imaginary Wisdom which they had embraced,
joined with Presumption and Rashness; and the other to make them receive the
true Doctrine of the Holy Spirit, Humility, and the Lowness and Simplicity of a
Child. And as her Writings were not the Result of Study and human Learning; so
neither were they the Effect of Meditation and human Reasoning. We must think
before we write, and take Time to order our Thoughts and consider our Words; we
must blot out, and mend, and add to our first Draughts. But when she put Pen to
Paper she wrote as fast as her Hand could guide the Pen, and what was once
written, was witten without blotting out or Change. And when she returned to
any Writings that she had laid by unfinished, though for some Months or Years,
she did not apply her self to read them over, but having read only five or six
of the last Lines to see how the Period ended, she immediately wrote on with
her former Swiftness, her Sentiments flowing from her as Water does from a
Fountain. She needed not, it seems, the Buckets of Study and Meditation,
wherewith to draw out of the broken Cisterns of others; but she had within her
a Fountain of living Water, still springing up to everlasting Life. As this is
attested by those who were of her particular Acquaintance, and all her
Manuscripts are still extant, written with her own Hand; so a particular
Account is given given of this by Mr. Francken, Merchant at Amsterdam, in his
Testimony concerning her, Recueil. des Temoign. p. 84, 85, etc.
where, among other things, he tells, That a learned Man of Amsterdam, a Doctor
of Law, said to him one Day, that he could not believe but it was some learned
Man who had writ these Letters, and published them under the Name of A. B. as
not being willing to be known; and Mr. Francken assured him of the contrary;
but however he not having had long time to converse with her, he would take
care to inform himself more narrowly, so as to be able to convince him, as it
fell out; for some time since, after he had told him, he had often found her in
her little Chamber with a Piece of Deal Board on her Knees, writing without any
other Thing but the Paper on which she wrote, and the Pen and Ink which she
made use of, and she leaving off to write, upon her Discovering that he was in
the Room (and because she never wrote but with Attention to the Voice of God in
the inward Silence and Recollection of her Spirit) he would take up the Paper,
with her Permission, to read it, and found it was writ so swiftly, that there
would be yet ten or twelve Lines fresh and wet. Having made this Trial of it,
his Friend, he says, was persuaded of it as much as if he had seen it himself,
having full Confidence in his Sincerity from long Experience and Familiarity.

XXX. XXX. 15. The Conformity of her Life and Practice.
15. That which ought greatly to recommend her Writings to us, is the
Conformity of her Life and Practice. It is the general Complaint concerning
those who recommend Virtue and a truly Christian Life to others, that they do
not practice it themselves; that they speak by one Principle and live by
another, and so their Words have little Force, Recueil. de Temoign. La Vie de
M. A. B.
and they destroy Christianity one way more than it is possible for them to
build it up another. I know some have made an ill Use of the Elogies which have
been given of her Life and Spirit by those who were Eyewitnesses of all; like
Spiders sucking Poison from the Flowers where the Bees gather Honey, they
exaggerate some of their Expressions far beyond the Intent of them; and in
Opposition to the Testimonies of those who were living Witnesses of her Life,
they, some eighteen Years after she is dead, will needs draw a Picture of her
that may represent her very ugly, with what Equity and Candor will appear in
its due Place However, any who shall read impartially the Story of her Life and
the Testimonies given of her throughout all the Periods of it, ^ will conceive
better Thoughts of her than what the New Narratives would give of them. They
will see that she lived constantly as one traveling toward Eternity, and
therein studying in all things to conform her Life to that of Jesus Christ in
these and suchlike Instances: She conversed always with God, and no more with
Men than her Duty and Charity required; she led a Life of continual Penitence,
mortifying her corrupt Nature, and never gratifying her sensual Appetites in
any thing: Though she might have enjoyed the Pleasures of her Senses, the
Delights of her Taste and of her other Senses, yet she voluntarily deprived
herself of them to please God: Though she had lawfully acquired Riches, yet would
never use them but for pure Necessity: Though she might have been conveniently
served and honored according to her Condition, yet she despised these Honors
and Services to imitate Jesus Christ, loving rather to live unknown and serve
herself than to be served. There was nothing observed in her Actions contrary
to the Righteousness, Goodness, and Truth of God, but they appeared still to be
accompanied with those three Qualities derived from the Spirit of God. She
never recommended to any the Practice of a Virtue which she did not most
exemplarily practice herself. She was most humble and self-denied, always ready
to serve others rather than be served by them, and to take to her self the
meanest and the least of every thing. She did not affect to be thought humble,
by humble Words, Gestures, Habits, etc. nor did she distinguish her self from
the rest of the World by any singular indifferent Thing; but as to Habit, Diet,
etc. conformed her self to the Customs of the Places where she happened to be.
So great was her Charity, that she brought up some hundreds of Girls,
(maintaining fifty of them at a time) for the space of seven Years on her own
Charges (what was allowed by the Founder being only for ten) employing her
Time, Wealth, Strength of Body and Mind, in Training them up in all Virtuous
Exercises, and distinguishing herself in nothing from them, as to Diet, Bread,
Apparel, etc. Such was her Love to Men's Souls, that she spared nothing to
persuade them to the Love of God, and to Imitate Jesus Christ, and employed her
Time and Wealth in writing and publishing the Truths of God, for that End. She
suffered patiently all manner of Reproaches and Persecutions for the Sake of
Jesus Christ. She had an invincible Firmness and Constancy in what was Truth:
Nothing could shake or alter her. She did nothing to please Men; She had a
constant Equality of Mind in all Conditions; She discovered a wonderful
Prudence on all Occasions. Let any body but read the Testimonies given of her
by those who knew her in her Youth, in her old Age, and in all States of her
Life, as they are set down in Recucil des Temoignages, and particularly that of
Mr. Francken, Merchant of Amsterdam, and they will see how closely she was a
Follower of Jesus Christ in Humility and Poverty of Spirit, in a Contempt of
all earthly Things, in a Life of Labor and Penitence, and in the true Love of
God and the Souls of Men.

Now Writings, whose Substance and Essence contains such excellent Truths as
those I have mentioned in the Account of the Essentials of Christianity, and
which have such remarkable Qualities, and penned by one who lived so her self,
ought certainly to meet with some Regard, and not to be immediately thrown
away, and People frighted from looking into them, because there are in them
some Sentiments which do not relish, and seem to us Extravagant.

XXXI. XXXI. A Sum of her Accessory Sentiments.
But perhaps it will be said that those Doctrines which she calls Accessories
may be dangerous Opinions and damnable Doctrines, and that what she seems to
build with the one Hand, she pulls down with the other; that she makes a
Mahumetan Paradise, Eating and Drinking, and Generation in the Kingdom of
Heaven. How easy a thing is it to give a hateful Turn to ones Sentiments, to
make them pass for impious, extravagant, and ridiculous. I shall therefore set
down here a brief Summary of her Accessory Sentiments, first premising some
things that may dispose the Reader to consider them calmly and without
prejudice.

1. 1. That they are not her own.
She declares they are revealed unto her by God, and that now in the End of the
World, and near the Time of the Restitution of all things, many things which
were more darkly represented in the Holy Scriptures, are now to be manifestly
laid open, L'Etoile du Matin. p. 34.
when the Time of fulfilling all is at hand, and that such things are now laid
before us like a Clustre of Grapes of the Land of Promise, to make us conceive
something of the Beauty and Glory of the Heavenly Jerusalem.

2. 2. Not necessary to Salvation. ib. p. 41, 42 Renouv. part 2. p. 121, 122,
223.
She declares, as has been said, that those Accessory Truths are not necessary
to Salvation, are not Articles of Faith, ought not to be enquired into from a
Spirit of Curiosity, are not designed for all, but for those who being
persuaded of them are thereby stirred up so much the more to the Love and
Admiration of God; and for others they man let them alone.

XXXII. XXXII. 3. St. Augustin's Rule for judging of Sentiments.
3. St. Augustine, has given us an excellent Rule whereby to judge charitably of
Sentiments and Interpretations of the Holy Scripture. Whosoever, says he, De
Doct. Christiana lib. 1. c. 36.
so understands the Holy Scriptures, or any part of them, as that thereby he
does not build up the twofold Charity, the Love of God and our Neighbor, he
does not understand them aright: But whosoever gives such a Sense of them, as
is profitable for advancing this Charity, and yet what he says is not the
particular Sense of the Writer in that place, he does not err damnably, neither
does at all lie: And if he err by a Sense which edifies Charity, which is the
End of the Commandment, he so errs, as if one by a mistake, leaving the
Highway, should go straight over the Field to the Place whither the Way leads.

If these Accessory Sentiments then tend to promote the Great End of Religion,
the Love of God and our Neighbor, though there were no Evidence for them from
the Holy Scriptures, they are neither hurtful nor damnable.

In giving an Account then of her Accessory Sentiments, I shall consider them
under these Heads: Those which relat to. 1. The State of the World before Man's
Fall. 2. The Fall of Man and its Consequences. 3. The Methods taken for Man's
Recovery by Jesus Christ. 4. The Present State of the World. 5. The Future
State, and the Restitution of all things. And because the Series and Chain of
those Accessory Sentiments cannot be well conceived without some mention of the
Essential Ones too, I shall not scruple to do it where it is necessary to
understand the Connection of those Sentiments.

XXXIII. 1. Before the Fall.
1. As to the State of the World before Man's Fall, the Sum of her Sentiments
is as follows.

1. 1. No Deformity in the Works of God.
WHEN God created all things at First, there was no Deformity in any of his
Works, all was Beautiful and Luminous; no Grossness in the Earth; no Whirlwinds
and Hurricanes in the Air; no Tempests in the Sea; Le Nouv. Ciel. p. 34.
no Poison in the Herbs; no Venom in Insects: The Earth was all transparent
throughout, in it were to be seen the Plants, the Stones, and Metals, all
transparent likewise; one might see thorouh it to its Center, as easily as
through the Air; all the Beasts and Plants were all Beautiful in their
respective kinds, no Deformity in any of them, and the Beauty of their Frame
and Contrivance was to be seen throughout, all being Transparent and Luminous:
All things were worthy of God, and were Representations of his Greatness,
Magnificence, Goodness, Beauty, Light, and Fruitfulness in several ways, and
according to their different kinds.

2. 2. Man created to enjoy God and all his Works The Qualities of his Soul.
God having resolved to form a Creature that should love and enjoy him, and in
whose Love he would take Delight and Pleasure; he creates Man after his own
Image, endues him with an immortal Soul breathed from himself, with
Understanding capable to receive him, with a Heart to desire and thirst after
him, and cleave to him, Lum. en. teneb. part 1. let. 15.
with a perfect Liberty and Free Will, to do it heartily and freely, and
without the least Limitation or Constraint: And to oblige him the more to love
him, his most Bountiful God and Lover, gives him for an Accessory. Felicity and
Happiness, the whole Creation; subjects all his Works to him to be his Servants
and to attend upon him, puts all things under his Feet, that he, receiving the
Homage and Delight of all the Creatures, might return the Praise of all to God,
in the constant Love and Adoration of so Bountiful a God, who would give
himself to be loved and enjoyed by him, and would take his Delight with him,
and would give him such a world of beautiful Creatures to serve and attend upon
him.

3. 3. A Body given him where by to rule over the Creation. ibid.
That Man might partake of this Accessory Happiness, and receive the Delight
and Homage of all the Creatures, and rule over them as their Lord and King, he
forms to him a Body as the Case and Organ of his Soul, by which he might
communicate with all the Creatures and rule over them, and endues it with
Faculties and Senses capable to give them Orders, and to take in the Tribute of
their Delights and Pleasures; the Sense of Seeing, to take in their Light and
Beauty; of Hearing, to be entertained with their Melody and Music; Smelling,
to receive their odoriferous Steams; and the Taste, to relish their Sweetness
and Delight; the power of Moving, of Speech and Gestures, whereby to rule and
govern them, he might go to any place and make known his Will, which all
obeyed.

4. 4. The wonderful Glory and Beauty of that Body.
This Body was not created by God after the manner that we see it at present,
but incomprehensibly more beautiful and more perfect, as the Masterpiece of
all Nature, clear, subtle, agile, and transparent; its Skin like Moscovy
Glass; its Flesh like Crystal; its Veins like streams of Rubies; Le Nouv. Ciel
p 44, 45, 51, 74. 92.
its Waters like Diamonds; its Nerves like the Hyacinth; the Substance of the
Fruits its Aliment, that of all good Odours its Excrements, all its Parts
within and without, its Bones, Muscles, Sinews, Bowels, all so bright, framed
with such Art, that all the Beauties of the Universe were nothing to the least
part of it. The Quintessence of all Natural things was the Matter of which it
was formed, and all Nature obeyed it. If he designed to go on the Waters, they
supported him; if to the Center of the Earth, it yielded to him; if through the
Air, it was a Chariot to him: The Sun, the Stars, the precious Stones, and all
the Beauties of the Earth, L'Etoile du Matin. p. 3, 10.
were nothing if compared with the least Beauty of the Body of Man: His Soul
was wholly Divine, his Understanding clear-sighted, penetrating all the Secrets
of Nature, all things Divine and Supernatural.

5. 5. Man capable of producing his like. ibid. p. 33.
Man, when he was created at First, was endued with a Principle of Foecundity,
with a Power to produce his like without the help of another, having within his
Body the Principles of both Natures, and in that respect being a complete and
perfect Man, which Power was actuated upon ardent Acts of Love to God, and a
Desire to produce a Creature like himself, to love and enjoy his Maker.

6. 6. Adam did tlus produce one to whom the Divine Nature united it self.
ibid. p. 32, 33.
Adam, while he was in perfect Innocence, did thus produce one like himself,
who was the Firstborn of every Creature, the Second Adam, and the Son of Man.
And God being desirous to give to Man a full and perfect Contentment in Body
and Spirit, and to dwell with him bodily and visibly, so that he might Converse
with Man as a Friend with his Friend; he therefore not only made Man after his
Image, but he becomes like to Man, he unites himself to the Humane Nature in
the Second Adam, that he might Converse familiarly with Man by an Organ, to be
seen, heard, and felt by him, conformable to his Nature: This is Jesus Christ,
Eternal God, and True Man.

7. 7. He began to be too much immersed in sensible Delights, and the Woman
made to prevent his Fall. ibid. p. ^6, 63, 64, 65.
Notwithstanding of this, Adam, swimming amidst all sensible Delights, (the
Time of Trial given him, being then a State of Delight and Pleasure) began to
lean too much toward them, and to please himself in them, without turning his
Soul so constranly toward God, and so became less sensible of the Motions of
God's Light and Love upon his Spirit, being taken up too much other ways; which
increasing still upon him to prevent his total Degeneracy, and that he might
not sink so low as to place his Love and Affections on things which were only
earthly and material, God resolves to make a Help for him; he for this end
takes one of the Principles of Foecundity out of Man, and therewith forms the
Woman, who being formed more Beautiful than any of the Creatures, and being a
more lively Representation of God, he might love her in God as God's Image,
being endued with a Divine Soul as he was, and so she might take off his
Affections from the other Creatures, and raise them toward God.

XXXIV. 2. Of Man's Fall, etc.
2. As to Man's total Fall, and the Consequences thereof.

1. 1. She Sins, and leads Man to sin too.
ibid. p. 57.
THE Woman who was given for a Help to Man, to keep him from a total
Degeneracy, listening to the Temptations of the Serpent, the most subtle and
beautiful of all the Beasts, turned away from God her self, and led on Man to
do so too; both of them shaking off their Dependence upon God and his Will, and
following their own Wills, and breaking a just and easy Command that God had
given them; forbidding them to eat of the Fruit of one Tree, as an
Acknowledgement of Homage to their Great Creator and Benefactor, and that they
held all of him.

2. 2. The horrid Corruption that flowed from thence to his Soul.
As by turning from the Sun we fall into Darkness and Obscurity, so Man much
more, by turning away from God, and setting his Heart upon the Creatures,
brings an universal Corruption and Misery on himself, and on all the Creatures
which had been subjected to him: Above all, Sin corrupted Man's Soul, did it
the greatest Mischief, L'Etoile du Matin. p. 6, 7, 8. Renouv. de l' Esp. Evang.
avaunt. Pr. p. 16, 17, pref. p. 11, 12, 13.
having damned it eternally, and made it like unto the Devil. For both were
created by God to love him, and when they both withdraw this Love from God, to
love themselves or other Creatures, they are equally become Devils; the one
incarnate and the other spiritual, deprived of all sort of Good, and fallen
into all sort of Evil. So that if Man will consider himself narrowly, he shall
find his Soul defiled with all sort of Sins; filled with Injustice, subject to
Lying, inclined to Covetousness, blown up with Pride, furious with Anger,
Lustful, Gluttonous, Sloathful, Negligent, with all other sort of Sins which
reside in the depth of his Soul. Sin so corrupted his Will, that he had always
a Bent and Inclination to Evil; so that all that comes from the Self-will of
Man is Sin, his Self-will being filled with nothing but Self-love. Sin has also
so corrupted his Reason, that it is no longer capable of discerning and judging
aright of things: It has so darkened his Memory, and confounded his
Understanding, that he takes Evil for Good, and Good for Evil, without Judgment
and Reason. To his Body.
From the Corruption of his Soul, did flow that of his Body; L'Etoile du Matin.
p. 6.
all its Humors and Parts being disordered, his glorious Body becomes filthy,
dark, and deformed in every part of it, contracts that gross Crust of
Corruption which we now carry about with us, and which has seized on every the
least part of it within and without; so that our First Parents were ashamed of
themselves, sought wherewith to cover their Nakedness, and went and hid
themselves. The Senses also became gross, dull, and feeble, could discern
nothing but the outside of things, and the whole Body became full of disorder
within, subject to the ill Impressions of all the Creatures, and at last to
Dissolution and Death.

3. 3. To the rest of the Creatures.
ibid. p. 5.
Man by his Fall, brought also a Corruption and Deformity upon all the
Creatures which had been subjected to him; the Earth became gross and dark,
barren and unfruitful, and all the Creatures became hurtful and mischievous to
Man, and rose up against him who had shaken off his Allegiance to their
Bountiful Creator: The Air stifles him, the Waters drown him, the Fire burns
him, the Earth, Corn, and Trees, deny him their Fruits without his Care and
Labor; the Stars send bad Influences on him, and he is subjected to Cold,
Heat, Hunger, Thirst, Weariness, and innumerable other Evils, being deprived of
the Dominion he had over all things, and subjected unto them.

4. 4. To all Mankind.
All Men in the World are the Natural Offspring of Adam, and do descend from
him both as to Body and Soul, so that they must partake of the same Qualities
with him, Renouv. de l'Espr. Evang. Pref. p 22, 23.
being all his Living Images; and therefore all Men who were in his Loins when
he turned away from God, sinned in him, and do inherit his Corruption and
Misery both of Body and Mind; as, if he had not sinned, he had produced all Men
to Salvation, as God created them. But every Man for himself would have had the
same Liberty that Adam had to remain firm in the Love of God, or to turn away
from it, by placing his Affections on himself, or other Creatures. He might
damn or save himself, during this Time of Trial, and all who had remained
faithful to God would have been saved; on the contrary, all who had withdrawn
their Affections from him, to love any other thing, would have been damned; and
their Posterity would have been in the same State, though Adam had never sinned.
So free and independent would Men have been, during their Time of Trial; which
is that in which we live at present, and must continue till the Day of
Judgment: And then being confirmed in Grace, as the faithful Angels are; they
could never fall away, being perfectly united to God after this Time of Trial.

XXXV. 3. The Means of his Recovery.
3. As to the Means and Method for Man's Recovery.

1. 1. Jesus Christ by his Merits and Mediation obtains Pardon for him upon
Terms, and becomes his Surety.
ALL Mankind had been thus irrecoverably lost and damned, as the fallen Angels
are, if the Son of God, our elder Brother, had not interposed and become a
Mediator between God and them; who being touched with a deep fence of the
wretched State into which Man had plunged himself, he ardently prays and
interceeds with his Heavenly Father, that he would have pity on those his
wretched rebellious Creatures, and his Brethren; that he would be pleased to
pardon them, grant them his Grace, though most unworthy of it, and ^llow them yet
a Time of Trial, becoming Surety for them, L'Etoile du Matin. p. 122. Renouv.
de l' Esp. Evang. Pref p. 21, 25, 30.
that they should detest and abhor their Corruption, deny themselves, and
return to the Love of God. His Mediation is accepted, and upon the account of
his Merits and Intercession, Man is pardoned, Grace is given him of new, and a
Time of Trial allowed him, in which he must lead a Life of Penitence, and
thereby mortify his Corrupt Nature, and return to the Love of God.

2. 2. His Time of Trial is now a State of Labor. Renouv. de l' Espr. Ev. part
2. p. 89, 90, 91, etc.
The Time of Trial given to Man at first, was a State of Pleasure and Delights;
but since the Fall of Man, the Time of Trial assigned him, is a State of Labor
and Toil; and therefore God thrust Man out of a delightful Paradise, and
suffered the Malediction and Curse of his Sin to fall upon the Creatures in a
great measure; that they all might afford him Vexation instead of Pleasure, and
so he might have occasion of doing Penitence, because he had turned away his
Heart and Affections from God, and set them on the Creature.

3. 3. A Life of Penitence enjoined him.
The Son of God having undertaken the Recovery of Mankind, out of pure Love and
Compassion, he provides means and remedies according to the different states of
their Maladies. The First Command he gives Man, as a necessary mean of his
Recovery, Renouv. ^de l' Espr. Ev. Pref. p. 44, 45. etc.
is a Life of Penitence and Labor, to eat his Meat in the sweat of his Face;
but Men multiplying their Sins, he multiplied his Commands, as so many means to
turn them from their Sins, and gave them variety of Precepts to make them think
upon God in all their Actions and Words, so that their Hearts might be in a
continual Elevation to him. But they cleave to the Letter of the Law, without
comprehending the Sense of it, and turned away yet more from the Love of God,
placing their Affections on the Creatures, the Riches, Pleasures, and Honors
of this Life, pleasing themselves with the outside of their Rites and
Ceremonies.

4. 4. Jesus Christ clothes himself with his Mortality, to recover him.
When all other means proved unsuccessful, Jesus Christ tries the last Remedy:
Men were not capable in their Mortal State, of being taught by him in his
Glorious Body. He had obtained of his Father to give them in Spirit, good
Thoughts and Motions, yea, Divine and Supernatural Light; but all this was not
capable to convert them, or to make them sensible they were in a State of
Damnation, because of each one's inveterate habit to follow their brutish
Nature. L' Etoile du Matin. p. 122. 123, etc. Renouv. de l' Espr. Ev. pref. p.
38, 39. 50.
There was need of a Mean, visible and sensible to their Corruption, to move
their Hearts, otherwise they had all been lost without a sense of their own
Misery, all perishing without perceiving it, by a damnable Imitation of one
another; thus all running in the Broad Way to Hell. Having therefore obtained
from his Father, Mercy and Pardon for them upon their Repentance, Jesus Christ
resolves to become a Mortal Man. He therefore clothes himself with our
Mortality, and bringing along with him his Divine Light to enlighten them, and
his Divine Love to inflame them, he becomes in all things like to Corrupt Man,
yet without Sin; he teaches them by his Word, and his by Example, how they
should mortify their Corrupt Nature, do Penitence, and recover the Love of
God; he charges himself with the miseries and frailty that Sin has brought upon
Humane Nature, taking on himself all their Maledictions, and the Punishments
due to their Sins, which he did bear and suffer as if he had been the greatest
of all Sinners, living a Life of extreme Poverty, Labor, Contempt, and Pain,
undergoing a shameful, painful, and accursed Death, and so obtaining Pardon for
all who should thus follow his Steps.

5. 5. We are taught now by the Light of Truth and no need of bodily Vis^ons,
God made his Will known to good Men; to the ancient Patriarchs, and Prophets,
by the Organ of the Glorious Body of Jesus Christ. But since Men were taught by
Jesus Christ in his Mortal Body, there is no need to see or understand by his
Glorious Body. They have received the Light of Truth, so that they need not
bodily Visions, to understand the Will of God. Jesus Christ speaks now to them
in Spirit and in Truth, enlightening Souls with his Divine Light, Renouv. de l'
Espr. Ev. part 2. p. 99.
inwardly by his Holy Spirit, which operates in Souls disengaged from
themselves, and from all earthly Affections, acting in them sweetly and
powerfully, when the Soul is in Peace and Tranquillity of Mind. It hears then as
a soft Wind, which surrounding it with Joy, makes it see what it ought to do,
and avoid both for its own Conduct, and for that of other well-dispos'd People.

XXXVI. 6. The present State.
4. As to the Present State of the World, the Sum of her Accessory Sentiments
are,

1. 1. No true Christians at present.
THAT all Men have corrupted their Ways, and that there are no True Christians
in the World, truly mortified to corrupt Nature, and regenerated in the Love of
God, and the Spirit of Jesus Christ. Acad des. Theol. part 1. cap. 9.


2. 2. Christendom a Babel.
That the present State of Christendom is a perfect Babel, our Language being
confounded; and the Builders do not understand one another. Con^us. des Ouvr.
de Babel.


3. 3 The Doctrine of Jesus Christ glossed away. Tomb. de la fausse Theol. part
1. let. 1.
That we have glossed away the Laws and Doctrine of Jesus Christ by our
Expositions, as much as the Scribes and Pharisees did Moses's Law by their
Traditions.

4. 4. Antichrist reigns now.
That we live presently in the Reign of Antichrist, and that he rules in Spirit
through all the Earth, by his Three Antichristian Qualities, which he sheds
into Man's Nature, Injustice, Malice, and Hypocrisy, L'Etoile du Matin. p 98,
99, 100.
under a cover of Religion; in Opposition to the Three Divine Qualities,
Righteousness, Goodness, and Truth, which Jesus Christ came to plant in the
Hearts and Lives of all his Disciples. That Men seduce one another under fair
Appearances. Antich. Decouv. Light of the World, part 1. p. 31. part 3. p. ^9.
That Sin is masked with Holiness, and covered with Hypocrisy.

5. 5. The Churchmen the Source of all the Evil. Temoign de Verite. part 2 p.
50, 76.
That the Source of all the Evils in the Church, is in the Corruption of the
Pastors and Churchmen, and that the Abomination of Desolation is in the
Sanctuary. That all the Degeneracy of Christians comes from the Degeneracy of
their Guides.

6. 6. God's last Judgments begun.
That the Wickedness of Man now being Universal and come to a height, (greater
than in the Days of Noah) the Sentence of Gods last Judgments is irrevocably
past, and the Plagues are begun and will continue, till that by War, Famine,
Pestilence, and other grievous Judgments, L'Etoile du M^tin. p. 107, 108, etc.
Light of the World. part 1. p. 151, 188. part 3. p. 29.
all the Wicked be consumed from off the Face of the Earth, but this shall be
done slowly, and in a Course of many Years, that many may thereby be awakened
and brought to Repentance.

XXXVII. 5. The State of Things to come.
5. As to the State of Things to come, her Sentiments are,

1. God will renew his Gospel Spirit.
1. THAT God will yet once renew his Gospel Spirit upon Earth, and will fill
well-disposed Souls with the Spirit that Jesus Christ had while upon Earth, and
that the latter Christians shall live in greater Perfection than those of the
Primitive Church did. Renouv. de l' Espr. Ev. Pref. p. 125.
That he will send his Holy Spirit to lay before us those means of Salvation
which Jesus Christ taught us while on Earth, that we may clearly see how far we
are estranged from them, and to give us the Light of the Truth, that we may see
the way to return, and to take up again the same Gospel-Means, and recover the
Dependence of our Will on God, without which none can be saved. And God will
give the full Understanding of all that has been delivered in his Name, from
the Beginning of the World, both by the Holy Prophets, and by Jesus Christ and
his Apostles, or other Saints his Disciples.

2. 2. And will ^ulfil his Propose of living with Man forever on Earth.
The Original Design of God in the creating of Man, being to take his Delight
with him, for which End he not only made Man after his own likeness, but he
also became Man, that he might live with him in perfect Resemblance to all
Eternity) and this being now suspended unto Man because of his Sin, until that
he have accomplished his Penitence to which he is subjected by Sin; yet since
God does not change, Light of the World part 1. p. 145. part 3. p. 83. La
Derniere Mesericorde, p 157, 158.
nor will ever alter his Designs, this time of Penitence being finished, Man
will enter again into Communion with God, as if he had never offended him. He
will speak to God Face to Face by his Humanity, which will be rendered immortal,
as well as is that of Jesus Christ, that they may delight themselves perfectly
together upon Earth, which will then be rendered Paradise, by the lovely
Presence of God, who for this End became Man, and in the End of the World will
come in Glory upon Earth, to Live and Reign for ever with Men; which is as it
were The Sum of all the Designs that God has over Men, and the Alliance he has
often promised to make with Man.

3. 3. And ^enew all his Work into (...) primitive Integrity
All the Works of God are Eternal, and nothing that he has made shall ever
perish. And in the End of this World, at the Coming of Jesus Christ in Glory,
all things shall be renewed and restored into that primitive Integrity, in
which they were at first created. All the Evil that is in the Creatures, the
Fruit of Man's Sins, shall be wholly taken away. All Nature shall then put off
the Corruption, (...)
Darkness, and all the Disorders, with which it had been tainted since Adam's
Sin: All shall become Bright, Renouv. de l' Espr. (...). part 2. p 131, 132, 1^^
Glorious, and Luminous; all Corruption shall be removed from the Body of Man,
and it shall be reestablished in that glorious perfect State in which it was
at first created. And the Soul become perfectly pure, shall take its Delights
with God, and the Body with Heaven and Earth, and all the other Creatures. For
God created them for those Ends, Light of the World part 1. p. 148.
and for no other thing, that Man might have his full perfect Contentment of
Body and Mind in that Life Eternal, wherein Jesus Christ shall reign always in
Body and Soul, with the Bodies and Souls of the Blessed, who shall be united in
Spirit unto God, and in Body unto the Body of Jesus Christ.

4. 4. And the Malignity banished from all.
After the Judgment, when God shall take all Malignity from the Earth, and from
all the Creatures; the Venom from Serpents, Scorpions, and other poisonous
Beasts; Maladies and Infirmities from the Bodies of Men and Beasts, and
Weaknesses from Spirits: Le Nouv. Ciel. p. 127, 128, 129. Renouv. de l' Esp.
Ev^ng. part 2. p. 132, 133. Light of the World part 1. p. 153.
All this shall be reduced into some corner of the Earth, all in a mass, that
these Malignities may act together upon the Bodies of the damned, and that the
Works of their hands be rendered unto them. For God never made any of all these
Evils: He created all things Good. Men only by their Wickedness have given
Malignity unto all created things, and therefore it ought to appertain to them,
and to be rendered to them by the Right of Justice, which will come to pass at
the Judgment; when the Bodies of the Wicked shall rise also, that none of the
Works of God may perish, and shall be sent into that miserable Corner with all
the Evils which shall be removed from the Blessed, and from the Earth, from
Plants, Beasts, and all the Elements; that all these things may serve them only
for Delight and Pleasure, without being able to do any more Evil, as they were
in the Beginning of their Creation, and all their Malignities which they have
contracted by the Sins of Men, shall be rendered unto their Authors.

5. 5. Man restored to his First State. Etoile du Matin. p 93. Light of the
World part 1. p. 169.
God having at the First Creation endued all living Creatures with a Power of
producing their like, and Man in his perfect State, being endued with the same
Power of producing his like, without the help of another, he shall be
reestablished into the same State again: So that in the Kingdom of Heaven
there will be eternal Propagation, but altogether Holy, altogether Pure and
Deified, without concupiscible Appetite, but by pure Acts of Love to God, which
will extend it self to the Production of New Creatures, to the Glory of their
Creator. There there is not Male and Female, they neither marry nor are given
in Marriage, but are as the Angels in Heaven.

XXXVIII. XXXVIII These Sentiments not damnable.
This as a Sum of her Accessory Sentiments, and they who shall consider them
without prejudice will hardly think, that for them she deserves to be treated
either as an Heritick, or as a Mad Whimsical Woman. It has been already said,
that she does not propose them as Articles of Faith, necessary to be believed
by all; that according to St. Augustine, these only are damnable Doctrines
which tend to destroy Charity, the Love of God, and our Neighbor, which it is
evident those Sentiments do not, and it were easy to make appear that many
other Doctrines and Practices do, which pass among many for very Christian.

XXXIX. XXXIX. They clear the Do^ctrines of Christianity.
Besides it is evident that these Sentiments tend to clear and confirm all the
Truths and Doctrines of Christianity, and to endear them to us. They show us
the great Designs of God's Love in the Creation of Man, the excellent State in
which he made him, and the Happiness to which he designed him. They make appear
evidently, that all our Evil is from our selves, and all our Good from God.
They show us the Ground and Reason why Man's Redemption was set about, and not
the fallen Angels; why Jesus Christ took such Interest in Man, became
Intercessor and Surety for him; and why his Mediation was accepted by God his
Father; and why after other means essayed, he at last clothed himself with
Man's Mortality; why the following of his Counsels and Example, is
indispensibly necessary to Salvation. They represent to us the horrid
Corruption that Man is fallen into by Sin, both as to Soul and Body, and all
the Creation by him; and how mad we are to gratify our corrupt Inclinations,
and to love this present World. They direct us to a right use of the Rods and
Judgments of God, and awaken us to a sense of our present State, wherein all
the World lies in Wickedness. They give us a prospect of the World, and of all
the Creation worthy of God. They let us see the Wisdom and Goodness of God in
bringing about his great Designs, though thwarted by the Perverseness and
Rebellion of Man. They give us some glimpse of the unspeakable Glory to which
Man is designed, to partake of the Joys of God, being united to him in Body and
Spirit; and to receive the Delights of all his Works. They show us that
Almighty God designed this World and all the Creation for some great End more
worthy of him, than to serve Devils and Wicked Men as a Theater and Fuel of
their Lusts, and Instrument of their dishonouring him. It is usual for the
Learned to form Theories and Systems of Divinity, whereby to give a clear
Account of the Doctrines of Faith. If Men will be pleased to consider these
Sentiments in this View only, and compare them with the Systems given us by the
Divines of all Parties, they may come to be convinced that they have a greater
Tendency to promote True Christianity.

XL. XL. They are consonant to the Holy Scriptures.
And as they are very suitable to the known Articles of Faith, so they do not
contradict the Holy Scriptures, but seem to be insinuated and pointed out in
them, and to serve to clear Thousands of Passages there, which otherwise cannot
be conceived, as A. B. her self makes appear in several Instances.

1. 1. As to the Beauty of all things.
That all things were created Good and Beautiful at first without any
Deformity, appears both from the Nature of God, and from his Word. He is
Perfect, and therefore cannot make any thing Imperfect. Nouv. Ciel. p. 80.
He is all Good, and can make nothing Evil: All things therefore have been made
by him perfectly Good and Beautiful, for the Workman is known by his Works. A
rare Painter or Writer is known by his Pictures or Writings, though we do not
know his Person; much more is God known by his Works, for he can never fail or
commit a Fault in them, which the most accomplished Spirits amongst Men may do.
This is then an Eternal Truth, that God created all things Beautiful and Good,
which the Scripture also verifies, when it is said, Genesis 1 31.
that God saw all that he had made, and behold it was very Good: Which could
not be, if there were any Evil in it; as a thing cannot be Beautiful if it have
any Deformity. But we see all his Works now are not Good and Beautiful; in the
Air, are Tempests, Whirlwinds, etc. destroying Men by Sea or Land: In it is
obscure Darkness, nothing to be seen through it, if it be not favored with the
Rays of the Sun or Stars. The Earth has a filthy color, that sullies all that
touches it, and is of such gross Obscurity, that we can see nothing in it; and
to make it bring forth Fruit, Men must employ the sweat of their Body, and
after all, it brings forth often nothing but corrupt Fruit; and if it be not
cultivated, only Thorns and Thistles. The Water often swallows and suffocates
Men; its greatest Masses are salt or filthy. The Fire has in it a black Smoke
ready to stifle Men, if they were not succored by the Air; it spoils the Eyes
of those who steadily look on it, and consumes Men, Beasts, and all other
things. These things cannot be created by God as we see and feel them, because
they are neither Good nor Beautiful: By a clear Consequence then, we must
believe that the Air has been created clear, sweet and agreeable, without these
Tempests; and so of the rest.

2. 2. As to the Beauty of Man's Body.
It is as evident that our Bodies have not been created in the State they are
now in, in which there is nothing good and beautiful, no more than in our
Minds; and that they have been formed at first in a glorious State, appears by
this, that it being generally acknowledged that Jesus Christ is to restore Man
to that primitive Perfection both of Body and Mind, in which he was created;
and the Scriptures telling us, That we look from Heaven for our Lord Jesus
Christ, to change our vile Bodies, and to make them like to his Glorious Body;
and we being told that when at his first Transfiguration on the Mount, he was
pleased to give his three Disciples some Prospect of that Glory, and to let
some Rays of his Glorious Body stream forth through his Mortality; it is said,
his Countenance did shine as Lightning, and his Raiment was white as Snow. We
may think how glorious the Body of Man was before his Fall, and shall be when
this Mortal shall put on Immortality, and this Corruption Incorruption, and
Death shall be swallowed up in Victory.

3. 3. As to Man's being created to produce his Kind.
That Man in his first Creation was endued with a Power of producing his Kind,
appears in that at the Creation of Man it is expressly said that Genesis 1. 27.
God created Man, Male and Female, and bid him be fruitful and multiply, and
replenish the Earth. and though it be in the Original, he created them, in the
Plural, and not in the Singular, he created him Male and Female; Etoile du Mat.
p. 64, 68.
yet that does not change the true Sense, since God created in Adam all Men who
were to proceed from him, they were all originally in him. And Eve was not as
yet formed, and he had rested from all his Works before he proceeded to the
Formation of her, how long after it is not known. This seems most evident from
the Story of the Creation, for the Account of the six Days Works is contained
in the first Chapter of Genesis, and that God saw that all he made was very
good; Genesis 1. 31.
but before the Formation of Eve out of Adam, we are told of God's resting on
the seventh Day from all his Works which he had made; of his planting a Garden,
and there making to grow out of the Ground every Tree that is pleasant to the
Sight and good for Food; his placing Man there to dress and keep it; his
bringing all the Beasts of the Field and Fowls of the Air before Man, and
Adam's giving each of them a Name; his finding it now not good that Man should
be alone, Genesis 2 18.
though before he saw all that he had made, and behold it was very good; his
Resolution therefore to make a Help meet for him, and therefore he caused a
deep Sleep to fall upon Adam, and took one Principle out of him, called in the
Scripture-stile one of his Ribs, and so formed the Woman. As from all this it
seems evident that the Formation of the Woman cannot be supposed to have been
upon the sixth Day, without a great Straining of the History; so it appears,
that Adam was at first created in such a State of Perfection, as to need no
Help for the Production of his Kind, and that the Formation of the Woman from
him, was upon his beginning to decline from his God, and to delight himself in
the Creatures, without referring all to God. It is therefore said, It is not
good for Man to be alone; though before, God saw all that he had made, and behold
it was very good. It seems therefore now that all was not good as he had made
it, that Man began to abuse the Free Will that God had given him, to be less
ardent in his Love and Dependence upon God, and to lean toward the Creatures;
and therefore to prevent his total Fall, he makes a Help-meet for him, gives
him a Companion endu'd with an immortal Soul and the living Image of God as
himself, that in Loving this living Image of the Divinity as himself, his
Affection might be raised and strengthened in the Love of God.

4. 4. That Jesus Christ came of Adam.
That Jesus Christ was come immediately from Adam, and that God in him did
assume the human Nature before the Fall of Man, is insinuated by those
Instances in the Holy Scripture, that he is called peculiarly the Son of Man,
Renouv. de l' Esp. Ev. part 2. p. 98. Etoile du Matin. p. 32, 33.
there being none other so but he, the second Adam; that he is said to be the
Firstborn of every Creature, none of the Creatures having produced any of
their Kinds before Adam; that the Lord conversed familiarly with Adam, and
spoke with him Face to Face, and he heard the Lord walking in the Garden and
hid himself. Thus it was God in the human Nature, Jesus Christ, that spoke to
Adam, to Noah, to Abraham, to Jacob, to Moses, to the Patriarchs and the
Prophets. The Interpretations which by latter Writers are given of those
Apparitions, are an evident Straining of the Text; as to say, that it is a
created Angel, a Simple Creature, who says, Exodus 3. 2. -- 6.
I am the God of thy Father, the God of Abraham. -- And Moses hid his Face, for
he was afraid to look upon God. It c. 13 21
was he who in Person did lead the Israelites by Day in a Pillar of a Cloud,
and by Night in a Pillar of Fire, c. 33 9, 11.
out of which he spoke to Moses Face to Face, as a Friend speaks to his
Friend. Thus, c. 33. 2, 3.
after the Idolatry of the Golden Calf, he threatened not to go up any longer in
the midst of them, but to send an Angel before them. And when Moses desired to
see his Glory, Ib. v. 22, 23.
he was covered with the Lord's Hand while he passed by, and permitted only to
see his back Parts, because he could not see his Face and live, (the Weakness
of our corrupt Nature not being able to behold that Glory without being
dissolved) and yet this Divine Body, though covered with a Cloud, made such
Impression by the Rays of its Glory on the Body of Moses, chapter 14. 28, 35.
as that after forty days Conversation his Countenance did shine. And the
ancient Fathers were so sensible that all this could not be said of an Angel,
that many of them were in the Opinion, that the Son of God did assume a human
Body before he was incarnate, and therein appeared to Adam and the Patriarchs;
so Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Irenaeus, etc. A very pious and learned Divine of
the Church of England has of late made appear, Dr. Scot's Christian Life. part
2. vol. 2. p 233 to 258.
that Jesus Christ immediately after the Fall of Man became the Mediatior and
Surety of a New Covenant, and so, under the most high God and Father, did
immediately rule and govern his Church and People; and that therefore, 1. There
was a certain extraordinary Angel, who frequently appeared and spoke to the
Jewish Patriarchs, who is sometimes called Jehovah, who ordinarily assumed to
himself Divine Appellations, and to whom the holy Men rendered Divine Honors,
Vows and Sacrifices; and that he appeared to them in the Form of a Man. 2. That
he was a Divine Person, and no created Being. 3. That he was that Divine Person
that descended upon Mount Sinai, and from thence removed into the Tabernacle,
and thence into the Temple. 4. That he was not God the Father. 5. That he was
God the Son, who appeared to the Patriarchs, Joh. 8. 56, 58. brought Israel out
of Egypt and descended on Mount Sinai, Heb. 12. 16. Ephesians. 4. 8. Psalm. 68. led
them through the Wilderness into Canaan, 1 Cor. 10. 9. dwelt in the Jewish
Tabernacle and Temple, Joh. 12. 41. compared with Is. 6. 1. and was that
Jehovah and Divine Lord and King who under the most high Father presided over
the Jewish Church Ephesians. 5, 14. with Is. 60. 1. Is. 41. 4. and 48. 12. with Rev.
1. 2, 17. and 2. 8. and after his coming into the World he still retained his
Right and Title of King of Israel, Matthew. 2. 2. Joh. 1. 49. and 12. 13. Zech.
9. 9, 14, 15. Joh. 18. 33, 34, 35, 36, 37. Now it being evident, that
immediately after the Fall of Man, Jesus Christ became a Mediator and Surety
for him; that he took the immediate Care of his People, and often appeared to
them in the Form of a Man; is it not as agreeable with the Analogy of Faith and
the Holy Scriptures, to say, he was truly so, than to affirm that he took only
the Appearance of a Man, till he clothed himself with our Frailty and
Mortality. Besides this is a wonderful Instance of the infinite Wisdom and
Goodness of God, that so many of the Angels having fallen from their first
State, and so all Intercourse between God and them broken off, to prevent the
Fall of Man, or if he should fall, that there might be a way for his Recovery,
and that there might be one for whose Sake and Mediation he might pardon Man
and conferr new Graces on him; that therefore the Eternal Son of God should
unite himself to Man's Nature, and become Man, while Man was yet in his
Integrity and Innocence, since afterward the Divinity would not have united it
self to sinful Man, and so all Intercourse between God and Man should have been
broken off, as it is between him and the Fallen Angels.

5. 5. That Sin did strangely deform Man.
That Sin did strangely deform the Body of Man, and that it became quite
another thing than it was before, appears by this, that Man after his Sin, was
asham^d of himself, saw his Nakedness, and was ashamd of it, and sought
something wherewith to cover it; whereas there was no such Shame before, no
more than the Sun can be ashamed that his Light and Glory is not covered with
Clouds and Darkness.

6. 6. And the Creatures.
That Sin has also deformed the Creation, which is to be restored to its
primitive State, is expressly pointed out in the Holy Scriptures, we being told
Romans 8. 20.
that the Creature was made subject to Vanity, v. 22.
and that the whole Creation groaneth and travelleth in Pain together until
now, v. 21.
and that it shall be delivered from the Bondage of Corruption into the
glorious Liberty of the Children of God.

7. 7. That all Men are propagated of Adam, both as to Soul and Body,
That all Men are the Natural Offspring of Adam, as to their Souls as well as
to their Bodies, seems to be a most just and true Sentiment. We see in this
visible World God has endued all living Creatures with a Power to produce their
like, from the meanest Plant to the most perfect Animal. All kinds of Birds,
Beasts, and Fishes produce their Offspring, of the same kind of Body, Life and
Spirit with themselves, endued with the same Power of producing their like,
which Life and Spirit, even the Learned as well as the Vulgar, begin again to
acknowledge to be somewhat else than mere Mechanism. This Production all the
Art of the World cannot imitate, but it is derived down from the first of every
Kind, to the respective Series of Individuals of that Kind, through all
Generations. That all Men do thus derive their Offspring from Adam as to their
Bodies, no body will deny; but the general Opinion of the Learned has been,
that our Souls are immediately created or infused by God into our Bodies, and
that we do not derive them from our Parents, and so from Adam. But as God has
endued Man with a Power of producing the Bodies of his Offspring, so also it
seems evident, that he has endued Man's Soul united to his Body with a Power of
producing Souls united to Bodies, which receive also from their Constituents
the same Power of producing other Souls united to Bodies, and that altogether
like themselves. There is no Contradiction in the Nature of the Thing, and the
Blessing of Multiplying given to Man, is as unlimited as that to the other
Creatures; and the Scripture speaks of the Children in the Parents Loins, and
by this we easily conceive how the Corruption of Man's Nature is communicated
to his Posterity, without any Blemish in the Holiness and Righteousness of God;
for he having created Man Holy and Righteous with a Power to produce his like,
had he continued so, the Souls which proceeded from him, had been so too; but
he being corrupted in his Nature, he could derive no other to his Posterity.
For Propagation is redoubling of the same Being, and of the same State in which
it is. But on the other Hand, if Souls are not derived from the Parent, but
immediately created by God, Children may be less said to be the Offspring of
their Parents than the Young of the other living Creatures are from them; so
that they all do more perfectly produce their Kinds than does Man. But above
all, this will never satisfy as to the other great Truth, That all Souls are
now impure and corrupt from their Original, Ephesians. 2. 3.
and Children of Wrath by Nature, as the Scripture says. It were blasphemous to
say, That God creates Souls impure, ignorant and corrupt, and it is no less
evil to think that God creating them pure and holy, does immediately put them
into Bodies, where they no sooner are, but immediately they are thereby reputed
so corrupt and guilty, as to merit an eternal Separation from God. The devout
and profound S. Augustine was so sensible of the Difficulties in this Matter,
Aug. de* lib. arb. l. 3. c. 21. Item Epist. Hieron. ad de Orig. animarum.
that he was undetermined what Side to take, and professed that he had seen
nothing that cleared them, and he was for bearing with one another as to a
Difference of Sentiment in these Things. It is absurd to conclude this
Sentiment to be false, because we cannot conceive how Souls should propagate
Souls, without communicating of themselves in whole or in part; if the last,
they are divisible and not spiritual; if the first, they should cease to
animate their former Bodies: this is to reason about Souls from the Idea's we
have of Bodies. Do not we experience ten thousand things in the World, though we
cannot conceive how they are? We see the Soul produces Thoughts, and one
Thought produces another, and this in infinitum. Now it is easy for God to
make, that in certain Circumstances the Divine productive Virtue of the Soul
should beget a Thought which has in it a Principle of Activity as it self has,
and that this Principle after its Production should not depend any longer on
the producing Soul, but subsist by it self.

8. 8. That there are no tru^ Christiani.
It has been judged the greatest Uncharitableness for her to declare to the
World, that there are no True Christians, whereas in Truth it is one of the
greatest Acts of Charity. If a number of Persons were desperately Sick, and
their Distempers had so crazed the most of them, that they were not sensible of
their own Sickness and Dangers, though they perceived sufficiently the Illness of
their Neighbors; would it be Uncharitableness to awaken them and tell them of
their Danger, and direct them to the true Remedies? even though some of them were
using the proper means and tending to recovery, it were certainly a Kindness
done them all. She does not say that there are not among Christians, who have
good Purposes and good Desires, and who are good in Comparison of the Wicked,
but none who are truly regenerately into the Spirit of Jesus Christ. Acad. de
Theol. part 1. c. 9.
She says, * To be a true Christian, is, to imitate the Actions of Jesus
Christ, and to obey his Instructions. Thus Jesus Christ says, To enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, we must become as a little Child; Light of the World p. 1.
conf. 2
we must take the last Place; we must do Penitence; we must be poor in Spirit;
we must deny our Selves; we must love our Neighbors as our selves; we must
take the Kingdom of Heaven by force; we must pluck out the Eye, or cut off the
Hand, that offends us; we must leave our Offering, to go and be reconciled to
our Brother; we must love our Enemies, and do good to them that hate us; that
we cannot serve two Masters; we must not care for the Morrow, but lay up
Treasures in Heaven; we must enter by the strait Gate; that a rich Man will
hardly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; that we must take up our Cross and
follow him; that we must give an Account of every idle Word; that God hides his
Secrets from the Wise and Prudent, and reveals them to Babes; that he came not
to be served, but to serve, etc. She appeals to Christians, whether they be
renewed into this Spirit, and makes through all these Instances how far they
are from it, and how few there are who aspire after it: And to make People
believe otherwise, is but cheating Men into Damnation.

9. 9. That Christendom is a Babel.
That the present State of Christendom is a Babel, where the Language is
confounded, and the Builders do not understand one another, is but too sad a
Truth to be denied. If a wise Master Builder design to build a glorious City,
Confus. des Ouvr. de Babel.
and give particular Instructions how the inferior Workmen shall be trained up
for it, and by what Marks they shall be chosen, and what Measures they shall
observe in squaring, fitting, and laying of the Stones; and if the Workmen
shall be trained up by quite different Measures, and chosen for the Office by
other Marks, and if the Workmen do so far mistake their Measures, Rules, and
Instructions, as that some of them say he commanded one thing, and others the
quite contrary; some, that the Stones should be hewn after such a way, and
others after a quite different way, and should live in a continual Debate and
Scuffle; each side contending that they were only in the right, and striving to
draw as many Stones as they could to themselves, and then instead of carefully
and wisely hewing them, and fitting them for the Building, should animate these
Stones with the same Spite against the Fellow Workmen, and Fellow Stones, which
possessed themselves, and with great Fury should throw them at them, and dash
them to pieces against each other, and so render them unfit for ever entering
into the Building: This would certainly be such a Babel, as that nothing could
exceed it. The Parable is so plain, it needs no Explication.

10. 10. That M^^ gloss (...) the Law^ o^ jesus Christ.
To make appear that we have glossed away the Laws and Doctrines of Jesus
Christ by our Explications of them, as much as the Scribes and Pharisees did
M^ses's Law by their Traditions; we need but consider, that as the Pharisees,
though they retained still the Letter of the Law, and were very zealous for it,
Tomb^d la fausse Theol. p. 1. let 1.
yet their Lives were contrary to it; but they could so gloss and interpret it,
as to reconcile it to their Practice: Even so, though the Lives of Christians be
in a far greater Contradiction to the Laws of Jesus Christ, and they retain and
honor the Letter of them still, yet they have learned so to gloss and
interpret them, as to reconcile their Life with the Hopes of Heaven, and the
Favor of God, and their Belief of their being Good Christians. For if they had
not put false Glosses on the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, there is no Christian
who desires to be saved that would live as they do at present; for every one
would see, that he could not be saved after this manner, and that the Lives of
Christians now are quite contrary to those of the Primitive Church, and the
Institution of Jesus Christ. His Words are plain and simple, they need no
Glosses. He tells his Disciples they must not lay up Treasures upon Earth; they
must renounce all they Possess; they must be poor in Spirit; take the last
Place, and deny themselves. Now if they employ all their Life in getting and
keeping of worldly Goods; if they seek after Places and Honors; take their
Delights and Ease; follow their honest Inclinations and please themselves,
their Life would seem a plain Contradiction to the Doctrine of Jesus Christ;
but we have learned to Gloss so, as to reconcile them. It is but the Love of
all these that Jesus Christ forbids, and we are ready to make our selves
believe that our Hearts are not set upon them; as if the Bent of a Man's
Desires and Pursuit could be toward a thing all his Lifetime, and his Heart
not set upon it. Jesus Christ knows well our Weakness and Frailty, that we
cannot be immersed in worldly things without loving them, more than the Body
can lie in Snow without being chilled by it, and that we know not how much our
Heart is glew'd to a thing, till we be separated from it, which is the mean
also to wean our Hearts; and therefore that we might not put false Glosses on
his Doctrine, he has explained it by his own Life, he himself lived in perfect
Poverty, Contempt, and Affliction, was Poor as to Wealth, Friends, Honor,
Reputation, Learning, Greatness, denied himself in every thing that we Love and
Value; and embraced the things that we abhor and dread. But this, we say, was
as our Redeemer, to suffer and satisfy the Justice of God for our Sins, and to
merit for us Mercy and Pardon. It was so, but withal it was to give us an
Example, that we should follow his Steps: His whole Life and Death was a
continual Sacrifice to God, renouncing all things that sensible Nature takes
Pleasure in, that we might learn from him, how to make thus a continual
Sacrifice of our Will and Desires, and Satisfaction to God: Oh! but we think he
knows our Frailty, and that we cannot do this; and we rejoice that he has
suffered thus for us, and we hope in his Merits for Mercy and Salvation: There
is no Salvation indeed but by his Merits, but they are applied only to those
who follow his Example; for he tells us, none can come after him, Matt. 16. 24.
but they who deny themselves, and take up their Cross and follow him; and he
lived after this manner, that he might merit Grace for us to follow his
Example; so that we have no True Faith in his Merits, when we think this
impracticable. But we have another Gloss yet, whereby to indulge and gratify
corrupt Nature. Jesus Christ lived after this manner, not that we should live a
Life actually stripped of all worldly things that gratify Nature and Self, as
his was; but to teach us to be as poor of them in Spirit: If we have them
outwardly in Possession, not to have our Hearts set on them; and if we be
deprived of them, to be contented and resigned to the Will of God. Indeed
Poverty of Spirit is that in which Jesus Christ would have us mainly to follow
him; and if we be poor in Spirit, in the midst of the greatest Abundance, we
are truly his Disciples: But he that is poor in Heart seeks not for Wealth, nor
Pleasures, nor Honors; and if he have them, they are a charge and burden to
him, and he takes no more of them, for himself, than simply serves the
Necessities of Nature, and that of the least and meanest, rather than the best
and choicest. But the reason why Jesus Christ has given us such an Example, and
counseled us to follow it, is, because of our Weakness and Frailty. If we can
be poor in Spirit, in the midst of the greatest Abundance, there is no hazard
of Wealth, no need to abandon it; but our Lord knew how hard it was for a rich
Man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. He himself could have remained poor in
Spirit in the greatest Affluence of worldly things, but he knew it was
impossible for us to do so too; and therefore, in Consideration of our Frailty,
and to give us an Example, he came into the World stripped of all that pleases
and gratifies corrupt Nature, that he might teach us the safest and surest way
to mortify our Love to the World, and to our selves, and to become poor in
Spirit. And that all our Glosses and Explications on this Doctrine and Life of
Jesus Christ are false, appears by the Fruits of them in our Hearts and Lives.

11. 11. That we are in the Reign of Antichrist.
That the Reign of Antichrist prevails in the World at present, few Protestants
do deny: that his Empire is more Universal than is generally believed, appears
from this, that the Devil being properly the Antichrist by counter-acting the
Designs of Jesus Christ, under a Cover of his Religion, and being for him, and
by infusing his Nature and Qualities into Men, he has accordingly, instead of
the Divine Qualities of Righteousness, Goodness, and Truth, with which Jesus
Christ came to inspire all his Disciples; he has, I say, shed among the
Professors of Christianity his contrary Evil Qualities of Injustice, Malice,
and Hypocrisy, under a Cover of Masses, Communions, Prayers, Preachings, and
the other outward Forms of Christianity: This is too evident a Truth to be
denied. And under this Cover keeps Men in a vain Amusement, and makes them
believe they are good Christians, though really in their Hearts they have not one
of the Qualities of the Spirit of Jesus Christ. For instead of loving Poverty,
they love the Wealth of this World; instead of loving Sufferings, they love
their Pleasures, their Ease, and their Contentments; and instead of being
willing to be despised, they desire to be honored, Antichr. Decouv. Light of
the World p. 1. conf. 5.
and so of all the rest. And in L'Antichrist Decouvert, A. B. has made appear
beyond all Exception, that the Spirit of Antichrist prevails among all the
Parties of Christendom, and that thereby the Devil has with more Cunning, and
more irreclaimably possessed Men with his Spirit, and especially the
Well-meaning, so that the Harlots, and openly Wicked, will enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven sooner than they, because their Wickedness being manifest,
they are by the Grace of God more readily converted, whereas in these the
Spirit of the Devil being converted, with the Mask of Jesus Christ, he still
makes them believe that they are guided by the Spirit of God, when they are
really acted by the Spirit of Antichrist.

12. That the Degeneracy of Christendom proceeds from the Degeneracy of its
Guides and Pastors, 12. The Corruption of the Pastors, the Source of all the
Evil.
is but too evident to be denied, and the Evil is more sad and irremedible that
they cannot endure to have it told them. The Corruption of the other States of
Christendom may be spoken of, without exciting so much of Men's Indignation; but
if the Corruption of the Pastors be touched, a Man must look for nothing but
Rage and Resentment: This cannot be spoken of, but presently it is a
Combination against the Priesthood; as our Lord was accused, as designing to
destroy the Law, because he exposed the Corruption of the Scribes and
Pharisees. All Protestants do generally grant, that the Degeneracy of
Christendom, before the Reformation, was chiefly owing to the Degeneracy of its
Clergy; and we being as far from True Christianity now, as formerly, there is
Ground to think the Matter is not much mended. We see what a strange Change the
Holy Lives and Doctrine of a few simple Men wrought in the Conversion of many
Thousands to the Faith and Spirit of Jesus Christ in the Primitive Church, and
how little is to be seen of this now. The reason of this Difference is not
because of their working Miracles, for these serve only to confirm the Truth of
a Doctrine, which being once confirmed, there is no more need of them, but they
are as effectual in all After-ages to those who are firmly persuaded of them;
so that to such as think they would be bettered, if they saw such Miracles, is
applicable that of Jesus Christ; If they believe not Moses and the Prophets,
neither will they be persuaded though one should rise from the Dead: Neither can
this Difference be imputed to the greater Prevalence of Wickedness now, the
World being highly corrupted also at that time, and that to no small Degree. It
is to be attributed then to the Difference of the Spirit, by which they were
animated, from that by which the Pastors of the Church are now generally led.

The things of God are not known but by the Spirit of God; and where God finds
pure and self-denied Souls, he delights to communicate himself to them, and to
make them the Organs of conveying his Light and Spirit unto others, who are not
capable of receiving it immediately themselves. Men's Minds are generally so
extraverted, and turned toward sensible things, that they cannot be affected
with the things of the Spirit of God, unless they be conveyed to them by means
that may affect their Senses; and this is the reason of the great Necessity and
Usefulness of the Pastoral Office. For this Cause the Word was made Flesh and
dwelt among Men, full of Grace and Truth. And when he ascended into Heaven, he
sent the Comforter, who led his Apostles into all Truth, and by their means
conveyed the same Light and the same Spirit into others, and they were filled
with the Holy Ghost; so that it was not so much they who spoke and acted, as
the Spirit of God by them; and there their Doctrine and Lives had a wonderful
effect in the Converting of others, even as one Flame kindles another; they had
a living, not a dead and barren Knowledge of Divine Things; their fervent
Charity did animate all their Words and Actions, and there was nothing
impossible to such a Faith, and such a Charity; this made them pray fervently
to God for his Divine Grace to others, and he would not deny the Requests of
such ardent Charity: And his holy Spirit increasing the Virtue and Efficacy of
their Prayers and Labors, did inseparably join his powerful Operations to
awaken, convert, and purify the Hearts of others. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13. 2 Cor. 3. 3.
This made St. Paul say, When ye received the Word of God, ye received it not
as the Word of Men, but (as it is in Truth) as the Word of God, which
effectually works also in you that believe. And, Forasmuch, as ye are
manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ, manifested by us, written not
with Ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, not in Tables of Stone, but in
fleshly Tables of the Heart. This wrought the Conversion at one time of 3000,
and again of 5000 at one Sermon of St. Peter. This made the Officers, who were
sent to apprehend Jesus Christ, say, Never Man spoke like this; and the
Evangelists of our Lord's preaching, That he taught as one having Authority,
and not as the Scribes, and they were astonished at his Doctrine: For his Word
was with Power, or to speak with St. Paul, in the Evidence and Demonstration of
the Spirit, and of the Power of God; that is, they made the Operations of the
Spirit of God to be felt in the Heart. Moreover, they taught Men by their Deeds
as well as their Words, the Holiness of their Lives; and their Abstraction from
all earthly things did procure Belief to all they said, and let the World see,
that they bid others do nothing but what they firmly believed, and heartily set
about themselves. So that the whole Body of the Church was sound; when to be a
Minister of Jesus Christ, it was required only to embrace an Evangelical Life,
and to give Evidence of the sincere Love they bear unto Jesus Christ, and of
being led by his Spirit.

But wicked and worldly Men crept into the Church, Light of the World part 1.
Conf. 1, 2, 3. 4, 9. Nouv. ciel. let. 5. P. 147. -- 165. La Saint Visiere. chapter
1, 2, 3. Tomb. de la fauss. Theol. part 1. let. 1, 9.
and their number increasing, they got themselves in to be the Pastors of it;
then under an outward Cover of Piety and Religion, Men were turned away from an
Evangelical Life, and led to Damnation: Then the Pastoral Office was turned
into a Trade, whereby Men might gain Honor, or Greatness, or Wealth in the
World, or at least their Living: Then Men fitted themselves for the Pastoral
Office, not by Humility and Purity of Heart, but by Study and Learning; then
the Pastors becoming generally void of the Spirit of God, were deprived of the
true and living Knowledge of the things of God, and retained only the outside
and the Letter, and varnished it over with their Learning and Human Doctrines;
and so the Blind led the Blind: Then instead of the Gospel Simplicity, Schools
and Universities were multiplied, and there was nothing to be seen but Disputes
and Controversies: Then the Pastors being void of true Charity, and of the
Spirit of Jesus Christ, their preaching could have no Divine Force, more than
the Motions of Puppets, or the Words of Parrots: Then they learned to preach
the Gospel by Study and Human Learning, committing the Idea's of it to their
Brain, as Men learn other Trades, and varnish over their Sermons with the same
Words and Expressions that Jesus Christ and his Apostles used, without
comprehending or conveying to others the Divine Sense of them, and what came
from the Brain could go no farther than the Brain; nothing can rise higher than
its Original. Then the great Business of Religion is turned upon the Pastor's
side into an Art of Preaching, where on a Theater he displays his Learning and
Eloquence; and on the Peoples side into the work of Hearing, and when they have
continued daily in those pious Exercises for 20, 30, 40, or 50 Years, they are
for the most part no more truly Virtuous than when they began; whereas, where
the Word of the Lord is, there is Power: Then the Pastors being proud and
ambitious, and envious, and worldly, and sensual, and selfish, they seek their
own things under a Cover of seeking the things of Jesus Christ; their Actions
belie their Words; and for their own Credit they so gloss and explain the
Doctrine of Jesus Christ, as to persuade People they may be good Christians,
and good Ministers of Jesus Christ, and yet gratify their Appetites and
Inclinations: Then being void of true Faith and true Charity, they place
Religion in a System of Opinions and Rites, and though they agree in the common
Principles, yet differing in other things of lesser moment, they thereupon
divide, dispute, and quarrel, form Parties, draw all they can to their Side,
out of a Pretense to the Glory of God, inspire them with Hatred and Fury
against those that differ from them; sooth and flatter the corrupt Inclinations
of those of their own Party, or the Great, and those on whom they depend, and
stir up Magistrates and Princes to War and Bloodshed, to persecute those who
differ from them: And as they make War against one another by their Disputes,
so they make Princes and secular Persons to do it by their Swords. Thus instead
of the Charity, Peace, and Concord, which Jesus Christ left his Disciples, they
beget Hatred, Strife, and Envy among them; and such is their Influence upon the
People, that they head their Passions; and what they hate and call Heresy, so
do they. Instead of the Self-denial and Mortification to the World, which Jesus
Christ and the first Pastors practiced and taught, they teach by their Example
how to gratify Self, and love the World; and yet seem greatly to honor Jesus
Christ, and to be Champions for his Religion. And if the Salt have lost its
savor, wherewith shall the Flesh be salted? And if they who should be the
Light of the World, and the Salt of the Earth, are thus become Darkness and
without Savor, how great is that Corruption! And how great is that Darkness!
Those of every Party do plainly discern this Evil in the Guides and Leaders of
the opposite Parties, but our Self-love blinds and hinders us from considering
it in our selves. This is not to be understood but that there are Pastors of
good Inclinations and right Intentions amongst the several Persuasions, and
therefore what is said ought not to be applied to them; but that this corrupt
Spirit of Pride, Vainglory, (...), Avarice, the Love of Money, (...)
Politics, the pleasing of the (...) Aversion to the Humility, Simplicity,
(...), and Cross of Christ, prevails (...) in all Parties, under a Cover of
(...) Opinions, and so serves still to (...) the more, is a sad Truth that
cannot be (...).

13. That we are in the last Times, (...) Judgment^.
that the Wickedness of Men is as great and universal as in the Days of Noah,
that the Abomination of Desolation is in the Holy Place, that we are now in the
time of the last Judgments of God by which he will sweep the Wicked off the
Earth; and which shall be more dreadful and terrible than any that ever were;
A. B. does so sensibly make appear in her Writings, particularly in the Light
of the World, Light of (...) World (...) 1. Con. 2, 29.
That they are real Enemies to Men's Souls who sco^^ at them, and divert People
from laying them to Heart. She makes appear, that Iniquity is so great and
universal, that there is no (...) Faith nor Law among Men. People study nothing
but to deceive their Neighbors; the Father cannot trust his Son, nor the Son
his Father; the Brother (...) up against his Brother. Friendship is only
feigned; (...) is full of Deceit and Fraud; nothing but Pride and Ambition
reigning in the Hearts of all Men. Judges are without Equity; Priests without
Sincerity; Cloisters filled with Avarice, and the Devout full of Malice; which
has been at all times in some particular Persons, but is at present so
multiplied, that it possesses almost all (...): And Charity is not only wak^d
cold, but altogather frozen and dead in the Hearts of Men. That the Signs of
the last Times are all fully accomplished, particularly those in 2 Timothy 3. 1.
etc. and Matt. 24. That Men's Lives are the open Book in which these Truths are
written, and the Holy Scriptures are the equitable Judge which pronounces the
Sentence. That People scoff at this and no Body will believe it, is a most
certain Evidence of it. For Jesus Christ says, that it shall be as in the Days
of Noah, they were eating and drinking, and marrying, and giving in Marriage,
and knew not until the Flood came and took them all away, etc. She makes appear
how the Abomination and Desolation is in the Holy Place, if Envy were lost, it
might be recovered in Cloisters; if Avarice were dead, it would be revived by
the Priests, Vainglory and Pride is no where so prevailing as among the
Clergy: In a word, Simonies and all other Sins abound in that Place which ought
to be Holy: That these are the Stars which fall every Day from Righteousness
and Truth, for some worldly Interest, or humane Respects. She makes appear,
that Men do not now embrace Penitence, nor desire Amendment, that they rather
grow every Day worse, and cannot suffer that their Faults should be truly shown
them: That at all times there have been wicked Persons, but when all in general
do forget him, it is to be believed that assuredly we are in the last Times,
and that the Judgment is given out, because the Measure is full: That God
cannot suffer an universal Evil, without an universal Chastisement; and now Men
having generally all of them abandoned their God, have, in doing this, given
Sentence of the general Destruction of the World, which shall not be recalled,
because the Will of Man is not inclined to return to God, but rather to be the
more estranged from him, if the Plagues should yet be delayed: That therefore
the irrevocable Sentence is given to purge the whole World by diverse Plagues of
War, Pestilence, and Famine, which are framed of the Three Means, which have
caused Men to abandon God. Their Want of True Love to one another; their Love
of this present Life, and their being addicted to their sensual Appetites; the
Pleasures of the Mouth and Belly. She shows, that many Signs have appeared in
the Heavens; fearful Comets, menacing great Evils; Fire has burnt many Cities;
many have been swallowed up by Earthquakes: That these did affright some at
first, but so soon as the Devil had leisure to make his Adherents study to find
out Reasons, showing that these were Natural things, he has made the fear of
all these Threatenings of God, sent as the Forerunners of his Justice, to
evanish out of Men's Minds; so that no Body is converted to God, nor embraces
the Spirit of Penitence; but they mock at God's Warnings, saying, These are but
Natural things. She asks these Earflatterers, If God ought not to send his
Plagues, but by Supernatural things, and to make Chimera's in the Air? He who
has created al^ the Elements, must he not make use of them to chastise the
Offenses which we commit against him? Is there not need of Natural things to
make our Bodies suffer, which are likewise Natural? The Deludge was made by a
Natural Rain; and the last Plagues will be made Pestilence, War, Famine, and
Fire, all Natural things, because the Heaven, the Earth, and all the Elements
ought to rise up against us to avenge the Offense that we do against their
Creator and ours, etc.

I have transcribed all this, because I think the present Age ought to lay
these things deeply to Heart. It is a most Remarkable Providence, that a simple
illiterate Maid should give Warning to the World of the Approaching of the last
general and dreadful Judgments of God; and give such clear Grounds for it, from
the Word of God, and the State of the World; and declare that she is commanded
by God so to do; and that now, since her Removal, both the Wickedness of Men,
and the Signs and Judgments of God, have been still increasing. There have been
such signal and dreadful Earthquakes in many Places, swallowing up many
Thousands; such universal Wars, destroying there Hundreds of Thousands, the
Fire of which seems only to be covered a while, to break out into a greater
Flame; such pestilential Diseases in many Places, particularly in France,
Scotland, America, sweeping off vast Numbers; and now most grievous Dearth and
Famine, which for One Year scourged France, but for these Three last Years has
most signally visited Scotland, and now this present Year being the Fourth, is
like to come to so great a height as to threaten an utter Desolation, Men's
Hearts failing them for fear; all observe such a general Change of Seasons,
that the Heavens, the Air, the Earth, and all the Elements do frown upon us,
and deny their wonted kindly Influences and Means of Life, so that this last
Plague threatens to visit other Nations likewise; yet the rest of Men, which
are not killed of these Plagues do not repent of the Works of their Hands, so
that we have just ground to apprehend that these are but the beginnings of
Sorrows. Mat. 24. 8.
It is high time for us then to awake out of our Stupidity, to repent and do
works meet for Repentance, that we may not be found among the Scoffers in the
last Days, who say, Where is the promise of his coming? 2 Pet. 3. 3.
For though these were not the last Plagues and Judgments, yet as A. B. says, as
(if I remember rightly) Vincentius of Terrara preached in his time to one City,
That within a few Years the last Judgment would be, and though it was not, yet
many thereby were led to Repentance; so, though these were not the last general
Judgments, yet they will be the last particular Judgments to many Thousands,
and it is a good Office to awaken Men thereby to Repentance.

14. 14. That the Works of God shall not perish, but be renewed.
That the Works of God shall not perish but endure for ever, and shall be
wholly renewed and freed from all Corruption, is expressly declared in the Holy
Scriptures, where we are told Romans 8. 21.
that the Creature itself also shall be delivered from the Bondage of
Corruption, into the glorious Liberty of the Children of G^d: And 2 Pet. 3. 13.
that according to his Promise, we look for new Heavens and a new Earth,
wherein dwells Righteousness. And Rev. 21. 1.
it is said, I John saw a new Heaven and a new Earth; for the first Heaven and
the first Earth were passed away. And Act. 3. 21.
we are told, that the Heavens must receive Jesus Christ until the time ^ the
(...), Renascentia, Secundus Ortus Restauratio.
Restitution of all things, which God has spoken by he Mouth of all his holy
Prophets since the World began. See Is. 65. 17. 66. 22.

15. That Jesus Christ will come and Reign in Glory with the Saints and Blessed
for ever upon Earth appears from many express Testimonies of Holy Scripture.
That Jesus Christ will reign for ever on the Earth with the Blessed.
Thus David Ps. 96. and 98.
invites all Creatures to rejoice and be glad before the Lord, for he comes to
judge the Earth; the World shall be established that it shall not be removed;
with Righteousness shall he judge the World, and the People with his Truth.
Thus Dan. 7. 27.
it is said, that the Kingdom and Dominion, and the Greatness of the Kingdom
under the whole Heaven shall be given to the People of the Saints of the most
High, whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve
and obey him. Thus it is said Zech. 14. 6, etc.
The Lord my God shall come and all the Saints with him. And it shall come to
pass in that Day, that the Light shall not be clear nor dark. But it shall be
one Day which shall be known to the Lord, not Day nor Night -- And the Lord
shall be King over all the Earth; In that day shall there be one Lord, and his
Name one. Rev. 5. 9, 10.
Thou have redeemed us to God by thy Blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue,
and People, and Nation, and have made us unto our God Kings and Priests, and we
shall reign on the Earth. And Rev. 11 15.
The Kingdoms of this World are become the Kingdom of our Lord and of his
Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever. Rev. 21. 2.
And I John saw the Holy City New Jerusalem coming down from God out of Heaven,
prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband; and I heard a great Voice out of
Heaven, saying, Behold the Tabernacle of God is with Men, and he will dwell
with them, and they shall be his People, and God himself shall be with them,
and be their God, etc. see all that and the next Chapter. Rev. 22. 5.
And there shall be no Night there, and they need no Candle, neither Light of
the Sun, for the Lord God gives them Light, and they shall reign for ever and
ever; see Isa. 60. In a Word, she makes appear that all the Holy Scriptures, by
Parables, Figures, and Prophecies, do point out this Kingdom of Jesus Christ
with Men, This being the Sum of the Designs which God has over Men. And that
this is a just and necessary thing, it is unconceivable that God would have
created this beautiful World only for this short Life of Penitence, only for
our Misery, only to serve Devils and Men, as Instruments of their Wickedness
and Rebellion against him, and then should abolish this great Work of his
Hands: Light of the world. part 3. Conf. 7.
That it is most just, that all things be reestablished in their first State;
that all things be restored; that Reparation be made of all the Injuries and
Affronts done to his Humanity, and to those who loved and followed him; and
that all that has been done unjustly be repaired, both bodily and spiritually,
and that on the same Theater; that God having given Man both a Body and Soul,
there must be likewise a Paradise for both; the Presence of God being the
complete Paradise of the one and all this visible World with all things in it
freed from all Malignity, and God dwelling visibly and bodily with Man therein,
the Paradise of the other, which will endure for ever: For God's Recompenses
are not temporal and finite, but eternal, as coming from an eternal God, who
cannot give finite or imperfect Gifts.

XLI. XLI. That those Sentiments are neither inconsistent with themselves, nor
with the Scripture.
These are the most singular of her Accessory Sentiments, and by what has been
said, it appears, that they are neither inconsistent with themselves nor with
the Holy Scriptures, nor with the necessary and essential Truths of
Christianity; that they serve to clear a thousand Passages of the Word of God;
that they tend to promote the Love of God and of all Men, and lead us to
mortify our corrupt Nature, and to despise this present World. A. B. herself
did not at first speak or write of these Sentiments but to some Friends, and
when they had shown them to others, she was troubled, knowing that the Devil
would take Advantage thereby, to make them despise the other Truths necessary
for their Salvation, even as many of our Savior's Disciples, being offended at
a hard Saying of his, Joh. 6. 66.
forsook him and walked no more with him. And I would not have offered to give
a Summary of those her Accessory Sentiments in this Apology, but that they
being now all public in her printed Writings, they who have set themselves to
give an odious Character of her and her Sentiments to the World, will be sure
to dress them up in a Fool's Coat, to excite the People to cry out both of her
and them, Away with them, Crucify them: And therefore I have chosen to give a
simple and true Narrative of them, even of those which seem most singular and
extravagant. All the Works of God are a Mystery; and the most ordinary things,
the Formation of Man now, and all the other Works, would seem to us as strange
if we were not accustomed to see them every Day. Such things are not to be
enquired into, neither out of vain Curiosity, nor from a disputing Humor, Mat.
11. 25.
which begets Presumption and Pride of Spirit; for the Divine Mysteries are
rather to be admired and adored, than curiously searched into by our blind
Reason. Let us make it our great Business to imitate Jesus Christ in Humility
and Self-denial, Joh. 8.
if we would be truly enlightened and delivered from all Blindness of Heart.
Graditur D^us cum Simplicibus revelat se Humilibus, dat intellectum Parvulis,
aperit sensum puris Mentibus, and abscondit Grattam Curiosis and Superbis.
Ratio humana debilis est and falli potest; Fides autem Vera falli non potest.
Th. a Kemp de Imit. Chr. Lib. 4. c. 18. sect 4.
God walks with the Simple, he reveals himself to the Humble, he gives
Understanding to little ones, he opens his Meaning to pure Hearts, and he hides
his Grace from the Curious and the Proud. Human Reason is weak, and may be
deceived, but true Faith cannot be deceived. See Psalm. 18. 118.

XLII. XLII. That this Account is just, and they who give contrary
Representations are not fair.
Now the Account I have given of the Sentiments of A. B. both as to the
Essentials and Accessory Truths of Christianity, is a just and true
Representation which may be more fully and satisfyingly had from her own
Writings. And I shall leave it to all impartial Readers to consider whether the
Character which some have been pleased to give of her Sentiments, as heretical,
blasphemous, ridiculous and extravagant, be just and equal; and if it be not
the Result rather of their Mistakes and Prejudices than a plain and fair
Account of her Doctrine and Sentiments. The excellent Monsieur Paschal, in his
Pensees Chretiennes, gives it as the most essential and distinguishing Mark and
Character of true Religion, that it makes its chief Precept and the great and
essential Duty of Man to be, To love God with all our Hearts; and this, he
says, is the peculiar and singular Character of the Christian Religion in
Contradistinction to all others. And if we shall impartially compare the
Doctrine of Christianity as it represented in the Writings of A. B. with the
Accounts of it delivered to us in the Systems of Divinity of the respective
Parties in Christendom, I think it will evidently appear that it is a most
distinguishing Character of the former, though it makes the Love of God the great
End of Religion, and all the other Duties of it means to bring us to that End;
and that the other though they cannot omit, when they give an Account of
Christianity, to mention this as one of its great Precepts; yet they so shuffle
and confound Doctrines, and give it such a Place in their Systems, as may make
People lay greater Stress on other things, and give them Ground to hope they
may be saved without it, or without conforming our Lives to the Rules and Life
of Jesus Christ which lead to it.

The End of the First Part.
AN APOLOGY FOR M. ANT. BOVRIGNON.
PART. II.
An Answer to the Prejudices raised against her Sentiments and Writings.
I. I. There is a general Disposition to judge rashly.
THERE is nothing more ordinary than for People, upon light and weak Grounds,
to take up Prejudices against the Persons and Sentiments of others, and to
judge rashly and inconsiderately of them; and this is a Fault to which People
of all Tempers are subject. The Learned, the Dogmatical, and the Abettors of
Parties cannot endure any thing that seems to lessen the Credit of their
Sentiments or their Party; they presently raise a Hue-and-Cry, and do all they
can to animate the People. Thus the Scribes and Pharisees were full of Spite
and Prejudice against our Lord Jesus Christ, and inspired the People with the
same Spirit. The generality of Men see with other Men's Eyes, and judge with
other Men's Understandings; they cannot be at the pains to weigh and consider
things impartially themselves, but they trust to the Skill and Sincerity of
those who pretend to judge for them; and such for the most part judging rashly,
and by their Passions lead the Multitude to do so too. Yea, even Persons of
good Inclinations, and who have a true Zeal for God and Divine things, are apt
to commit the same Fault. Thus St. Paul, before he was a Christian, being a Man
full of Zeal, and of great Learning, and hearing that there were Persons risen
up who would destroy the Law and seduce the Simple, and that they worshipped
the first of these Impostors who was hanged on a Tree, and that these new
Upstarts were but a Rabble bigoted with that new kind of Folly, which was like
to hazard the Law of God; and this being told him by all his Masters and
Teachers, the Priests, the People, his Kinsfolks, and Friends, instead of
informing himself without Prejudice of those Men, their Doctrine, their
Behavior, which would have prevented many false Steps, he is carried to
reproach, and hate, and persecute them, that he may maintain the Truth of God,
and cut off Error and Heresy, and the Seduction of the People. Now what has
fallen out in former Times, may fall out in this, and the most innocent Persons
and Writings, may meet with the most universal Reproaches and Prejudices. It is
certainly the Devil's Interest that it should be so, and we see how successful
his Attempts have been in former Ages. He still made it his Business to get on
his side those who set up to be the Guides and Leaders of the People, and by
this means always to oppress, blacken, and discredit Truth and Innocence.

II. II. The Writings and Person of A. B. thus treated.
Now the Person and Writings of A. B. have been loaded with as many Reproaches
and Prejudices as any in this Age; and that both in her Life time, and since
her Death. Wherever she went, the Churchmen of the respective Parties
breathed nothing but Fire and Faggot against her in their Pamphlets and
Pulpits, made her to pass for the worst of Heretics, and her Writings for a
Sink of all Heresies and Blasphemies; and thus it was easy to inspire People
with Rage and Fury, so that if they could have had her to have stoned her to
Death, they would have thought they had done good Service, and no sooner is one
of her Writings translated into English for the spiritual Good of welldisposed
Souls, but immediately some are pleased to sound the Trumpet, and to cry out,
Heresy and Blasphemy, Errors and Delusions; and this is enough to frighten a
whole Island from looking into these Writings, and to breed an Aversion against
those who esteem and value them, because of the Truths of God contained in them.

It was a remarkable Providence that she met with such Opposition from all
Parties, while she lived, whereby as she discovered impartially the Evils of
the respective Sects and Parties into which Christendom is divided; so also she
clearly vindicated her self from being guilty of the Errors and Heresies of
which they accused her, discovered the Impudence of their Calumnies and
Slanders, and removed from well-dispos'd Persons the Prejudices which had been
given them against her. We need only then give a short Account of what was laid
to her Charge, and her own Vindication of herself; by which, her Sincerity, her
Innocence, her distinct and most rational Knowledge of the Truths of Religion,
her Orthodoxy, and the Subservency of her Writings to the great Ends of
Christianity, will I hope appear to all unbiased Readers.

III. III. The unjust Measures of her Adversaries:
But first let us premise the Complaint she makes in general of the unjust
Measures of her Adversaries; how void they were of true Charity and Equity.
What ever Good or Truth was incontestably in her Writings, they concealed it,
they lessened it; whatever was capable of being turned to an Evil Sense, they
perverted it; they picked out half Sentences here and there throughout her
Writings, and on these they put a Sense which she never intended, concealing in
the mean time what went before or after, that might serve to clear the true
sense and meaning of the Expression. Any Doctrine of Christianity that was not
so fully expressed in one Place, they were ready to accuse her of denying it,
though she most clearly asserted it in another. They were ready to catch at her
Words, and to interpret them according to the Niceness of the Schools, not
considering the simplicity and plainness with which she wrote, she being intent
to make known the Truth to all sincere and well-disposed Souls, without
regarding that nice and captious Wits would be ready to carp and quibble upon
this or the other Word, and not allow her to explain her self. In short, the
great End of Christianity being to bring Men to the Love of God, and the
Mortification of their corrupt Nature and Self-will, and this being the Butt of
all her Writings, as is most evident to any who pleases to read them, she makes
appear that her Adversaries cannot be Lovers of the Truth or of God, that their
Aim is not to maintain the Truth and oppose Error; else they would rejoice to
see this great End of Religion to be the Butt and Substance of so many
Writings, and that there are uncontestably contained in them so great a number
of Divine Truths, all tending to this End. They would own and acknowledge this,
they would wish to meet with the Truth every where, even in the things which
seemed to them obscure and disagreeable to it; they would see if these were
more clearly explained in other Places, and if they might well bear a Sense
that were agreeable to this great End of Religion; or if even the Errors which
they thought were contained there, were no ways destructive of the true Love of
God, and so for the sake of them the whole Writings need not be forbidden and
discredited.

IV. IV. Their Spirit and Temper like that of the Scribes and Pharisees.
They may be convinced of the Injustice of the Measure, by considering only how
hard they would think it to have their own Writings so treated; how odd it
would seem to them if one should deal with the Sacred Scriptures after that
Method; and what wretched Conclusions an Enemy of Christianity might thereby
draw from them; and that if it had been their Luck to have been bred up at the
Feet of Gamaliel, among the Jewish Rabbis, or with Porphyr, among the
Philosophers, the Spirit and Measures by which they judge of Persons,
Sentiments, and Writings, would have animated them as much against Jesus Christ
himself; and had they come but Sixteen Hundred Years sooner into the World, and
been leavened with the same Spirit, they should have been listed among the
Philo-Judaeus's and the Porphyrs, and overlooking the Substance of the Doctrine
and Life of Jesus Christ, would have picked out a half Sentence here, and a
Word or two there, and some Passages of his Life that prejudiced Minds would be
readiest to judge hardly of, and wrest them to such a Sense, and give all such
a Turn, as might make him pas for a Blasphemer, a Seducer, a Subverter of the
Law of God, a Teacher of Doctrines that would turn the World upside down; one
Self-conceited, who spoke well of himself, and ill of others who were more
learned and pious than himself; in a word, give such a Character and Narrative
of him, patched up of some shreds of the Story of his Life and Doctrine written
by his own Disciples, and dress him up in such a mock-Robe, as might make him
and his Doctrine the Object of the Scorn and Hatred of the People. I know
People flatter themselves with the Opinion, that it were impossible for them to
have treated Jesus Christ at this rate, as the Scribes and Pharisees in our
Savior's Days imagined, that had they lived in the Days of their Fathers, they
would not have persecuted and killed the Prophets as their Fathers did; and yet
our Lord shows them, they have the same Spirit; though they seemed to honor the
Prophets * by building their Tombs, Matt. 23. 29, 30.
and garnishing their Sepulchers, and saying, If we had been in the Days of our
Fathers, we would not have been Partakers with them in the Blood of the
Prophets. Yet they persecuted those who were then sent amongst them; and that
the same Temper and Spirit reigns now in the world, A. B. makes appear in her
Writings, and her Enemies did discover it in their Practices.

V. V. Prejudices cleared.
But it will be said they had good Reason to treat her as they did: We come
therefore to consider the Prejudices raised against her Doctrine, and they have
not been wanting to represent her as the Grossest of Heretics; but Wisdom is
justified of her Children. And,

1. 1. Of the Holy Trinity.
They accused her of denying the Holy Trinity, and ground their Accusation upon
this, that she did not approve of the Word Person, to express the Distinction
of the Trinity, and used to explain it by Comparisons and Similitudes. Whereas
she declares, That she believes in one Divine Essence, the most Holy Trinity,
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; that the Essence of God is
incomprehensible, Antich. Decouv. part 2. p. 9, 10.
and so is the Mystery of the Trinity; that it is a great Presumption in Men,
who cannot comprehend that which is in themselves, what their Memory,
Understanding, and Will is, yet to imagine they will easily comprehend what is
in God: That our Soul, which is nothing but a silly Creature, is yet invisible
and incomprehensible to us, though it be in us, and though we perceive and feel it
to act and operate, that no Body can comprehend what a Soul is; and yet Men are
so presumptous as that they will needs know what is in God, and what the Three
Persons of the Trinity are, which are in him; and that not for to honor or
love him the more, but that they may be able to talk and dispute well of them,
and to draw evil Consequences from them: Pierce d^ Touch. p. 111, 112.
That God made St. Augustine know that this was incomprehensible by any
Creature, when once walking by the Seaside and laboring to understand it, he
saw a Child running to fetch the Water of the Sea in his Hands into a little
Hole, which he observing and asking the Child what he did, he replied he would
have all the Water of the Ocean brought into that little Pit; at which St.
Augustine smiled, saying, You can never do this, my Child, give over this
Undertaking. The Child replied, I shall sooner do this than you shall
understand what you would comprehend with your Understanding; and then
evanish'd. Antich. Decouv. p. 2. n 314122.
It is true she makes use of Similitudes to express it by, as, That there is in
God the eternal Understanding, the eternal Word, the eternal Love, or Heart; as
there is in Man the Understanding, the Speech, and the Heart: That there is in
Man the Understanding, the Memory, and the Will, which is a Figure of the Holy
Trinity; that God, One in Essence, has in himself Three essential Qualities
which are diverse, Righteousness, Goodness, and Truth; and that nothing can be
done by God but with Righteousness, Goodness, and Truth altogether, and if one
of these Qualities be wanting, it cannot come from G^d, who is indivisible in
these Three qualities; which may be called Persons: That she does not pretend
thereby to give adiquate Notions of the Mystery of the Trinity, which she
declares is incomprehensible; but that instead of the dark, dry, and barren
Speculations of the Schools thereabout, we may consider those Three Divine
Qualities, without which God never does any Work. And to find if we are the
Children of God, we must see if we partake from him of those Three Qualities of
the Righteousness, Goodness, and Truth of God; and if we do not find them all
Three together in our Souls, we ought not to persuade our selves that we are
the Children of God; for as we approach unto him by Love, accordingly those
Three Qualities increase in the Soul; and as we find our Souls to be estranged
from Righteousness, Goodness, and Truth, accordingly we are estranged from God.
In using Similitudes thus to express the Holy Trinity, she does nothing but
what St. Antich. Decouv. part 2. n. 5.
Augustine, and other of the Ancient Fathers have done; and she is far from
saying, that nothing else is comprehended in the Holy Trinity; but that we
ought to be taken up with such useful Considerations of what is in God, rather
than feed our Minds with fruitless Speculations, which tend only to nourish
Debate and Curiosity. And when once some of her Friends told her that the
Churchmen accused her of making the whole Mystery of the Holy Trinity to
consist in the Righteousness, Lavice Continue p. 553, 554.
Goodness, and Truth of God; she answered expressly, They lie in so saying. They
said to her, that she had said in the mean time more than once, that
Righteousness, Truth, and Goodness were the Trinity that was in God; she
replied, I had no design to search into the Depth of this Mystery, and to say
that all did consist in this; but that this was the most profitable and the
most saving Consideration that we could have in the matter of the Holy Trinity,
of which the ordinary Speculations are often rash and unprofitable, and for the
most part injurious to God. Pierce de Touch. p. 114.
She did not desire to use often the Word Person, because she looked on that as
a Word proper to created Beings; that Jesus Christ is indeed a Person in God,
being truly Man as we are. Yet she sometimes expresses the Mystery by the Word
Persons: In Temoign. de Verite, Part 2. p. 199. she says, I do not believe that
there is any Body living upon Earth, who does more honor the most Holy Trinity
than I do. And I believe firmly One only God in Three Persons, as I have done
from my Childhood. -- And how could I deny the Divinity of Jesus Christ, since
it is seen by all my Books that I hold Jesus Christ for True God and True Man
both together, even from the Beginning of the World; which is to honor him
more, than to believe that he is God and Man, only since he was born in
Bethlehem, and charg^d with our Miseries and Sorrows?

VI. VI. Of the Divinity of Jesus Christ.
They accused her also of denying the Divinity of Jesus Christ, though there be
nothing more False, as appears through all her Writings. She declares expressly
in the Profession of her Faith, that she believes that jesus Christ is True
Eternal God and True Man. And in Antich. Decouv. Part 2. p. 66, 67. she says,
That Jesus Christ True Man is also True God, that his Humanity is most strictly
and inseparably united with his Divinity; which is the True God and the Eternal
Word that created all things and and saves in Christ. In the Third Part, p. 26,
27. she tells how Antichrist has led some to deny the Divinity of Jesus Christ,
and not to pray to him; and shows, that he as God and Man can save us
immediately, if we will follow him; that he is the True Eternal God who alone
can save as being God; and he is our Mediator, our Master, our Physician, as
Man, who is become our Pledge and Surety to obtain our Deliverance; so that
they are wretched Creatures, who say they will not pray to Jesus Christ, since
the Salvation of all Men depends on him, and without him no Body can be saved.

VII. VII. As to the Merits and Satisfaction of Jesus Christ.
They affirmed that she denied the Merits of Jesus Christ, or any Satisfaction
made by him for the Sins of Men; and this Calumny they have of late renewed;
affirming that she falls in with the vile Socinian Heresies, and even outdoes
them. What Socinian has ever taught, That Man by his Sin would have perish^d
eternally, and never have obtained Pardon, had it not been for Jesus Christ,
true eternal God, and true Man, and for his Merits, (the Force and Dignity of
which proceed from his Union with the Divinity) and that he has also obtained
for Men, Time, Grace, and Means to enjoy this Pardon, and the Effect of those
Merits; and that he clothed himself with our Mortality, and satisfied for our
Sins on his part; that we, in imitating him, might enjoy the Pardon and
Recovery which his Merits have purchased for us? And yet this is the Substance
of the Doctrine of A. B. upon this Head, as appears through all her Writings;
as in Temoign. de Verite, Part 1. p. 201, 202, she says, Your Preachers say,
that I reject the Merits of Jesus Christ, though in truth I esteem them more than
any Body in the World. I believe I cannot be saved but by the Merits of Jesus
Christ, yea, that none was ever saved from the Beginning of the World but by
the Merits of Jesus Christ; for if Jesus Christ had not merited Pardon for all
Men, with God his Father, after Adam had sinned, all Men had remained in a Lost
Estate, as the Devils have done, because they had no Intercessor with God to
obtain Pardon for their Sins as Men have had; who having Jesus Christ for their
Brother, obtained by his Means the Remission of their Sins. -- I mean not, that
Jesus Christ has not also satisfied for the Sins of Men since Adam, seeing for
them expressly he clothed himself with our Mortality, and came into the World
to Redeem us from Eternal Death, into which all Men had wilfully precipitated
themselves, and sunk themselves into a Forgetfulness of God, living according
to the Motions of corrupt Nature, as the Beasts; which Jesus Christ perceiving,
he came from the Bosom of his Father unto the Earth to recall them: He comes to
show them the State in which they were, and how they had abandoned their God to
delight in other things than in him, and by what means they might recover the
Grace of God to attain to Salvation: And he himself does before them the Works
that they ought to do after his Example: And because they had turned away from
the Love of God, to love the Goods and Riches of this World, Jesus Christ came
in Poverty, that Men might embrace it after his Example: And because Men had
forgotten God, through the Esteem they had of themselves, Jesus Christ came in
all Humility and Sufferings to give them an Example: And because Men had left
off their Obedience to God, to follow their own Wills, Jesus Christ came to
show that he is Obedidient, even to the Death of the Cross, that he might teach
Men how they ought to be subject and obedient even to Death: And Jesus Christ
has done all this, with many other things, for the Love he bear to Men, and
that by such Means he might draw them to his Father; that he might live with
them to all Eternity, giving himself thus in Sacrifice for the Redemption of
his Brethren.

But this Sacrifice was not offered for Men who do not believe in him, and do
not the Works that he did; nor for those who will needs wilfully continue in
their Sins after having known the Law of the Gospel, etc.

And in Antichr. decouv. Part 2. p. 76. They have, says she* sometimes argued
against me, that I deny the Satisfaction of Jesus Christ: But I believe this is
because I do not hold that Jesus Christ has satisfied for Men after the Manner
that they hold it; to wit, that Jesus Christ has satisfied for all Men, and
that they shall be saved by his Sufferings; without being obliged to suffer
themselves; which is a great Error, because the Sufferings of Jesus Christ will
never be applied to any but those who shall follow his Life and Doctrine. --

But because, on the one hand, Men are apt to pervert the Doctrine of the
Merits and Satisfaction of Jesus Christ to encourage the Indulging of their
corrupt Nature, and others to despise it, and think they can save themselves, I
think it will not be unacceptable to show how she discovers the Evil of both,
as in many of her Writings, so particularly in Antechr. decouvert. Part 3. p.
45, 46, etc. Those Persons, says she, (she speaks of those who despise Jesus
Christ, and think they can save themselves without him) perish through Pride, as
well as they who say that Jesus Christ has satisfied all for them. All of them
fall into the same Sin of Pride and Ingratitude, though by different Ways. The
one is proud to believe that he shall be saved by his own Works; and he is also
very unthankful that he will not acknowledge what Jesus Christ has done for
him, requiting his Benefits with Contempt and Irreverence. And the others
commit the same Sin of Pride, in presuming that they are God's Elect, and his
Children, to whom Salvation appertains, tho they do not labor to obtain it;
and they ^^ll also into the Sin of Ingratitude, in that they will nor render
unto Jesus Christ what he has paid for them. They now that he was their Pledge
and Surety, yea, that he effectively paid the Penalties due to their Sins, yet
they will not use any Endeavors to make Restitution to him. Would it not be a
great Ingratitude for a Person to say to him who had paid his Debt, as his
Pledge and Surety, That knowing his Debt is paid he resolves to live in
Idleness, without taking Care to return the same Payment to him who had paid it
for him? Such a Person would be looked upon by us as wicked and unthankful;
while we think our selves the Children of God in doing the same things to the
Person of Jesus Christ. We say he is our Pledge, and by his Sufferings has paid
the Penalty due to our Sins, having died to redeem us; while we will suffer
nothing, nor share in his Pains, being well pleased to have our Debts paid with
the Goods of another.

-- It is, on the other hand, a great Boldness in those who think they shall be
saved by their own Merits without the Merits of Jesus Christ. For if Jesus
Christ had not merited for them the Grace to do well, they were not capable of
having so much as one good Thought or Desire of doing one good Work. So that
all the Grace they have of doing any Good, comes from the Merits of Jesus
Christ, though by Ignorance they despise it, as poor blinded ones who can discern
nothing through the Weakness of their Sight. For if Jesus Christ had not come to
bring Light to the World, no body would have perceived his own miserable State;
and if he had not interceded with his Father, no body would have had the Grace
to receive his Light; so that without Jesus Christ all Men would have remained
lost, through their Blindness, and would never have been able to comprehend by
what Means they ought to return to God, if Jesus Christ had not come to teach
them by Word and Deed. And if he had only taught them by Word as the other
Prophets, no body would have followed him; since they believe even yet that it
is impossible to imitate Jesus Christ, and to follow the Evangelical Life. But
he himself has put it in Practice before Men's Eyes, that after his Example they
must endeavor to satisfy the Justice of God by the Union of his Sufferings,
and of his Charity, which are Sacrifices more agreeable to God his Father, than
our unclean Offerings and our Works defiled with Sin.

If one had mortally offended his Equal, he durst not of himself procure Peace
and the Pardon of his Offense, but he would interpose some Mediator who were a
Friend of the offended Person, to satisfy his just Wrath. But they who would
be saved by their good Works have too much Pride to take Jesus Christ as
Mediator; but, with an up-lifted Head, they address to God whom they have so
often offended; that they rather draw down his avenging Hand upon their Heads
than the Pardon of their Sins; for God resists the Proud, and gives his Heart
to the Humble. If they joined their good Works to the Humility of Jesus Christ,
they might peradventure receive the Mercy of God by his Son Jesus Christ; but
standing up as the Pharisee who thanked God for his good Works, they shall no
more be justified than he was when he went out of the Temple: Because he who is
not clothed with Jesus Christ is not admitted to his Father; since before his
Coming into the World all Men were Enemies to God. So that he who is not
clothed with Jesus Christ cannot be acknowledged for his Friend, far less for
his Son, seeing the Spirit of Jesus Christ is the only Son in which he takes
Pleasure, and not in another. He therefore who thinks to go to God without the
Mediation of Jesus Christ, will be rejected as unworthy and rash, because Jesus
Christ is the only Door of Salvation: They are Thieves who would enter by the
Windows into the Kingdom of Heaven, for that only belongs to the Disciples of
Jesus Christ.

In which those greatly deceive themselves, who believe that they may enter
into it while they despise him or reject his Merits, which have opened the Door
to all those who will follow and imitate him: Yet not to those who esteem Jesus
Christ and his Merits; but with all this, will not embrace Penitence, under a
Pretext that Jesus Christ has satisfied wholly for their Sins, comprehending
even those which they shall commit in time to come, as well as those which they
have committed in time past. In which Error are the most part of those who are
called Christians, yea, amongst others the most perfect. We hear nothing more
ordinary in their pious Discourses, than to say, God is Good, he will save us;
and Jesus Christ died to give us Entry into Paradise. And with these fine
Discourses every one thinks they are sure of Paradise, even though they live and
die in their natural Motions and Sentiments, which is a great Mistake; for God,
though he be good, will save no body but him who shall satisfy his Divine
Justice. The Merits of the Death and Suffering of Jesus Christ will never be
applied but to Souls which are regenerated in the Spirit of Jesus Christ: For
he has not suffered but for those who from a natural Life shall enter into a
spiritual one. For Jesus Christ says, that all Righteousness must be fulfilled.
Now it were not just that they who have forsaken a Dependence upon God to
depend upon their own Wills, should enjoy the Merits of Jesus Christ without
being converted and embracing his Spirit, since he came not but to bring
Sinners to Repentance; and he who continues to persevere in his natural Life
cannot repent, and so cannot enjoy the Merits of Jesus Christ, since it is not
for those that he has suffered or merited, but only for those who by Ignorance
or Frailty have quitted their Dependence upon God, and delight themselves in
the Creatures without thinking they ought to delight themselves in God alone.
They lived in the Darkness of Death without knowing it: Therefore Christ had
Compassion on them, and offered himself to his Father, promising unto him that
they should be converted and do Penitence, provided he brought them the Light
of Truth, by which they might get out of their Darkness and their Errors. In
this Jesus Christ was our Pledge, and answered for our Penitence, with which we
must be saved and not otherwise. --

-- Therefore they form to themselves imaginary Ways in the Air, who think that
Jesus Christ is come to save us in speculative Way, or by some incomprehensible
Mysteries, seeing our Redemption is accommodated to our Capacity. But the
Devil, to divert us from taking the straight Way, through which Jesus Christ
walked, blinds our Eyes with imaginary Things, that we may never come to the
Knowledge of the straight Truth, making some believe that they cannot be saved
by the Merits of Jesus Christ; and others, that his Merits will save them, even
though they use no Endeavors to imitate and follow him. Many other Passages
might I bring out of her Writings, but these may show her Sentiments in this
Matter.

The Sum of her Sentiments comes to this, The Sum of her Sentiments, as to the
Satisfaction of Jesus Christ.
That Man turning away his Heart and his Affections from God, thereby all
Communion between God and Man ceased, and so Man was plunged into an
irrecoverable State of Sin and Misery, as well as the fallen Angels, if there
had been none to interpose for him with God, for whose Sake he should show him
Mercy, there being nothing now in Man that could move God to have any Regard
for him: That Jesus Christ, true God and true Man, infinitely beloved by his
Father, full of Love to him, and of Charity and Compassion for Man, ardently
intercedes with God for him, that he would have Mercy on him. His Father could
refuse him nothing that was consistent with his Righteousness and Truth. It was
not just that he should receive Man into Favor, if he should continue still to
turn away his Love from God to the Creatures and to himself; nor had it been
just and safe to have restored him presently to the same State of Divine
Communion and Joy from whence he had fallen; it was necessary he should feel
first the Evil of Forsaking his God, that so his corrupt Nature might be
mortified, and he established in the Love of God. God then for the Merits and
Intercession of Jesus Christ, pardons Man upon Condition he turn again to the
Love of his God from the Creatures and himself; and for this End he
communicates again to him his Light and Grace, and allows him a Time of Trial
wherein he is to do Penitence for offending his God, that thereby his corrupt
Nature and his Love to the Creatures and himself may be thoroughly mortified,
and he return and be established in the Love of God. Jesus Christ accepts of
the Terms, and becomes Surety for Man that he shall fulfill them, and applies
himself with ardent Love to bring Man back again to God. The Delights of the
Creatures being that which had turned away Man's Affections from God, it was
just and necessary that he should deny himself to them, and make an entire
Sacrifice of all those Delights and of his Lusts after them to the Love of God:
To make which the more easy for him, the Earth was accursed for his Sake.
Jesus Christ coming now to interpose with God, to bring him back to his Duty,
leaves no Means unessay'd to effectuate it; of inward Light and Grace, and
outward Laws and Ordinances, according to Man's State and Circumstances. When
the Corruption of Man's Nature had resisted and bassl'd all those Means, yet
nothing being able to quench his Love, he at last clothes himself with Man's
mortal Nature, puts on all his Infirmities, becomes in all things like to him,
yet without Sin, and, as if he had been the greatest Sinner, does Penitence for
him, denies himself to all Honors, Riches, Pleasures, Sciences, Eases,
Accommodations, Self-seeking, and Self-will, lives and dies in perfect Poverty,
Contempt, and Pain, makes an enitre Sacrifice of himself, his Life, and all
things of the World unto his God; and this, both that by his Doctrine and by
his perfect Example he might show Man what Way to return to God, how to do
Penitence for his Sins, how to deny himself and take up his Cross, and to make
a Sacrifice of himself and all unto God; and by doing all this in Man's Nature,
to show him how practicable it was, and also that for the sake of this pure and
perfect Oblation of himself, done from so great Love to God and Charity to Man,
God might be still moved to have Mercy on Man, to grant him his Grace, and to
accept of his Penitence, united to this Sacrifice of Jesus Christ: What Jesus
Christ has done and suffered for Man on Earth has infinitely heightened his
Merits and the Power of his Intercession with God, so that he obtains for Man,
Pardon, and Grace, and Time to repent, and the being received into perfect
Favor with God, upon his Penitence, as if he had never sinned: Jesus Christ
has satisfied on his part the Justice of God, but they only receive the Benefit
of it who follow his Example in denying themselves, and taking up their Cross,
and do thereby mortify their corrupt Nature and return to the Love of God. It
is in this Sense that we also must satisfy God's Justice, not that we can make
any Satisfaction to God proportionable to our Demerits. Not that we can merit
his Pardon or Salvation; but it being just with God not to receive Man into
Communion again with him till he do Penitence for his Sins, and thereby
mortify his selfish and carnal Affections; not that God stands in need of
this, but that it is absolutely necessary for Man's Recovery, we cannot expect
Salvation without satisfying in this manner on our part.

The Satisfaction of Jesus Christ for our Sins may be taken in two Senses, by
way of Merits, or by way of Discharge: The First way, That he has thereby
merited Pardon, Grace, and Salvation for all who shall follow his Example, is
most true: The Second, by way of Discharge, That Jesus Christ has so fully
satisfied the Justice of God, for the Sins of his Elect, that nothing is
required of them but to believe and rely on his Merits; and nothing due from
them, but by way of Gratitude, as if God stood in need of their Services; or
that they need do, for the mortifying of corrupt Nature, as much only as their
Love and Care for the World and themselves will permit, and trust in Christ's
Merits for the rest. This, I say, is most false, Christ having merited for us
Grace to mortify our corrupt Nature, and Pardon, and eternal Life, if we
return to the Love of God.

Again, there is a twofold Substitution, or the having one in our stead to
satisfy the Justice of God for us: There is a Substitution of Self-love, and
another of Charity, or the Love of God: The First is, when we desire to
gratify our sensual and corrupt Nature, and follow our own Wills and Lusts,
and are very well pleased to hear that there is one has suffered for us, and
satisfied God's Justice; so that we are content to believe in him and hope in
his Merits, going on in the mean time to indulge our corrupt Nature, excusing
our selves because of our Frailty and Weakness, and that we cannot do
otherwise; but our Savior Jesus Christ has made an Atonement for all, and we
hope in his Merits. This is a False, Diabolical, and Antichristian
Substitution, as A. B. makes abundantly appear through all her Writings. The
Substitution of Charity, is when out of a deep Sense of our Baseness and
Undutifulness to God, and the Propensity of our Natures to continue so still,
and to gratify our corrupt Inclinations, we apply our selves by his Grace to
deny our selves, and to make a Sacrifice of all that is dear to us to God, in
leading a Life of constant Penitence; but seeing our Penitence bears not
Proportion to the infinite Greatness and Goodness of that God whom we have
offended, we rejoice to know that there is one of perfect Purity, and in full
Favor with God, who for us has made a suitable Oblation of himself, not to
discharge us from a Life of Penitence, but to obtain Grace for us to do it, and
Acceptance of it with God, and show us how to perform it: To him we fly, and
for his sake we beg for the Acceptance of our imperfect Penitence, and desire
it may be united to his Sacrifice and done in his Spirit, that he, dwelling in
our Hearts by Faith, may communicate himself to us with all his Graces and
Merits. It is in the former Sense only that A. B. declares against the common
Doctrine Of the Satisfaction of Jesus Christ, as if it were a Substitution of
total Discharge, dispensing with the Obligation that lies on us to live a Life
of Penitence, and not at all in the Second.

They who read the Writings of A. B. will see that this is the Sum and
Substance of her Sentiments on this Head, and that any simple Expressions which
seem harsh by themselves are to be interpreted by this Measure. And they who
consider by what Principles the Generality of the Christian World do, I do not
say speculate and talk, but live and act, and what Encouragement the Doctrine
and Glosses of Men has given thereunto; and how, though they live in a perfect
Contradiction to the Life and Spirit of Jesus Christ, yet they hope and believe
they shall be saved by his Merits, will see how necessary and how seasonable it
is to inculcate those Truths upon the Hearts of Men.

VIII. VIII. Of the Satisfaction due by Man.
But because it gives great Offense to some, that she says, Though Christ has
satisfied all for us on his part, yet that the Merits of his Satisfaction will
not be applied to us, unless we our selves do satisfy the Justice of God for
our Sins, and in order to our Purification; I shall set down her Sentiment more
particularly in this Matter: We sometimes stumble at Words and Terms when we
grant the thing it self upon the matter, and it is like this is the case with
many here.

1. Then, Le Temoign. de Verite. part 1. p. 83.
she says, That no Man could merit Eternal Life, though Adam had never sinned;
for all our good Works are but Temporal, and bear no proportion to eternal
Happiness. Heaven and eternal Life is the free Gift of God, which he prepared
for Man before he created him, and so he could not merit it. He does not
therefore bestow it for our Merits, Renouv. de l'Espr. Evang avantprop. n. 35.
but for his great Mercy, and for the Love he bears us: He is no Merchant, and
will not sell his Paradise at any price, but will give it freely; and he has no
need of our good Works or Penitence, but because of our Corruption and
Infirmity we have great need of them, without which we must perish.

2. Preface, n. 33, 40. 47, 67. 103, 138, 139, 140.
That we having forfeited God's Favor and eternal Life, Jesus Christ has
merited for us Pardon, Grace, and Life Eternal, upon Condition that we receive
and correspond with the Pardon and Grace offered, and turn again to God with
all our Hearts, and embrace the Means that are necessary for this End, without
which in Justice, Pardon, and Grace could not be demanded for Man; and for our
Performance of this, Jesus Christ becomes our Pledge and Surety.

3. As such he clothes himself with our Mortality, and undergoes all the Parts
of this Penitence himself, that he might merit Grace and Pardon for Man, and
might strengthen and direct him how to embrace this Penitence, and to follow
his Example.

4. Upon his Intercession, Le Temoign. de Verite. Part 1. n. 59, 61, 64.
and obtaining of Grace and Pardon for Man, the Love of God is not immediately
conferred upon Man, but the Grace of doing Penitence, by which he might recover
it. And this was a great Mercy to Man, than if God had simply pardoned him,
and restored him to his Love, without suffering the Earth to be accursed, or
all to be corrupted by Sin; since it is to be feared Man would have quickly
fallen back again into new Sins, finding himself as before in all sorts of
Delights, such as Adam had. For we see how Men now turn away their Hearts from
God to love the Creatures and themselves, even when they see they are so
wretched, weak, and imperfect, subject to all sorts of Maladies and to Death,
and that all the Creatures now do them mischief, whereas formerly they honored
and obeyed them as their Lord; and though they see themselves and all the
Creatures so filthy, corrupt and miserable, yet they cannot abstain from loving
them to the Prejudice of the Love they owe to God. How much more would Man have
done so, in case he had remained as beautiful and perfect after his Sin, and
all the other Creatures had continued as lovely as before? It is to be feared
he would not have remained in the Love of God, if he had recovered it after his
Sin by the pure Mercy of God without out the Condition of doing Penitence; or
without all the other Creatures their being accursed in him; since we see Men
do yet love this Life that is so miserable, and the Creatures that are so
wretched, and Man feels in himself Contradictions, Griefs, Displeasures, and
all sorts of vicious Passions, which he cannot govern by his Reason; and yet
his Spirit is become so brutish, that it loves those Miseries and
Imperfections, though he find nothing in himself or the other Creatures, but what
is worthy of Contempt and Hatred: Yet he loves and esteems them to the Contempt
of the Love of his God; who knowing the Baseness of Man's Heart, has given him
Penitence as a necessary Mean to withdraw his Affections from this wretched
Life, that he may turn them to his God, who will have Man to love him only. And
for the same Reason he has permitted all the Creatures which were subject to
Man, to contract with him the Malediction of Sin; that by this Mean, occasion
might be given to Man to return to the Love of his God, the only lovely Object.

5. Since this Penitence contains the necessary Means to recover the Love of
God, and we cannot do this so long as we love Self and the Creatures, and this
corrupt Love cannot be mortified so long as we gratify our Senses, and our
Appetites, and enjoy a Paradise here; and our Lusts cannot be subdued without
feeling the Bitterness, Anguish, Griefs, and Pains of them, to extinguish the
Sense of the unlawful Pleasure and Delight we took in them; Penitence therefore
is, 1. The turning away our Hearts and Affections from every thing that hinders
the Love of God. Love not the World, etc. 2. And in order to this, the avoiding
all the Occasions that may foster the Love of other things, and continually
striving against and doing Violence to Self-love, Self-will, and Corrupt
Nature. He that will come after me, says our Lord, let him deny himself. And,
3. The embracing willingly the Anguish, Bitterness, and Pains, the Afflictions
both inward and outward, that must be endured for the purifying of our Hearts,
and bringing us to the Love of God; and let him take up his Cross.

6. Renouv. de l'Espr. Ev. Pref. n. 52.
Jesus Christ has taught us how to undergo this Penitence by his Doctrine, and
by his Example; and follow me.

7. It is most unreasonable to think that we are discharged from this
Penitence, because Jesus Christ did thus live and suffer for us; for we must
have the Spirit of Christ; our Old Man must be crucified with him; we must be
conformed to his Image; we must suffer with him, if we would reign with him.
His was meritorious, and expiatory, and exemplary; ours is absolutely necessary
for our Purification: By his he obtained Pardon and Grace for us, and changed
the Eternal Punishment we deserved, Ibid. n. 35.
into a Temporal Penitence for our Purification and Recovery; and to say we
cannot undergo this Penitence, is to have no Faith in his Merits; to believe
that it is enough that he did undergo this for us, is the greatest Indignity
done him, and the greatest Cheat that we can put upon our Souls; it is to
belie, and be false to our Surety and our Pledge: It is like Bankrupts to
swagger and rant it out with our Creditor's Goods; because our Surety has paid
the Debt for us: It is to make Jesus our Slave to suffer all manner of
Afflictions, Poverty, Reproach, and Pain for us, that we may go to Heaven in
the pleasant and broad Way of Honors, Wealth, and Pleasures: It is to be well
pleased that the Physician has provided wholesome and necessary Physic for our
Recovery, and has taken it himself for our Direction and Encouragement; but
though we be sick to Death we will not taste it our selves, because of the
Bitterness of it, believing that we shall Recover nevertheless, because the
Physician has taken it. Jesus Christ led this Life of Penitence for us in his
visible and mortal Body, that he might show us how ready he is still to undergo
it in every one of us by his Spirit.

8. God has no need of this our Penitence, Renouv. de l' Esp. Evang. avantprop.
n. 34, 35.
but we stand in need of it to recover the Love of God. He does not covet our
Wealth, or Honors, or Friends, or Ease, in that he requires of us to be poor
in Spirit, to deny our selves, to take up our Cross and follow Christ, to
forsake all things, since he created all things for Man, and would be well
pleased he could enjoy them still. But Man is become so miserable that he
cannot enjoy these things without setting his Heart upon them and turning it
away from God; and therefore Jesus Christ has given this his Gospel-Law,
without which no body can recover the Love of God. It is a sad Mistake then to
think that there is no necessity of good Works, but only by way of Gratitude
and Thankfulness to God, as if he had need of our Acknowledgments, or as if we
could make him Presents of our Good Works to thank him; which cannot be said
but in Contempt of the Riches of God, who possesses all in himself and seeks
nothing without himself, and needs not that we should give him any thing; all
the good Works that Men can do, are for no other End but to resist and overcome
the Evils of their Corruption. And they are as necessary for our Salvation, as
Bread is for the Life of the Body; for we cannot be saved without subduing our
Corruption, and no Body can do this but by the means of such good Works, and
such Penitence as stifles and mortifies the Vices and Sins which this
Corruption has brought into the Soul.

9. It is a Pride to glory in our Penitence, Le Temoign. de Verite. p. 1. n. 107
since it is enjoined us for our Sins; it ought rather to fill us with Humility
and Confusion; for in the Beginning it was not so. God created us to live in
all sorts of Delights without any Pain. All this beautiful World was created to
serve for Pleasures to the Body of Man, and God himself was the Delight of his
Soul. But Sin only has changed that excellent Order, and made Man subject to
that over which he ought to rule, because he had withdrawn his Subjection from
God. Our Sins have occasioned the Law of Penitence, which Jesus Christ came to
teach us by Word and Deed. This Penitence does not consist in Undergoing
Pennances chosen by our selves and after our Fancy, Light of the World part 2.
conf. 11.
by which the Devil would drive us headlong and excite us to Vainglory, and
which usually make Men presumptuous, believing themselves to be better than
others, and that God is obliged to them for their good Works, as the Pharisee.
All this proceeds from Self-love; but true Penitence consists in taking
patiently whatsoever God permits to befall us, either to our Body, Estate, or
Mind, and willingly to suffer it in the Spirit of Penitence to satisfy for our
Sins; for every Moment there falls out Occasions of Suffering and and
Submission, so that we need not seek for them. It is necessary that we practice
this Resignation of our Will to God, for accomplishing the saving Penitence
which he has enjoined us, and for the Exercise of all sort of Virtues.

10. Renouv. de l' Espr. Ev. p. 2. n. 105, 106
Since then the Justice of God could not permit that Pardon and Grace should be
given to sinful Man, but upon Condition that he turn away from Sin to God, and
in order to that live a Life of Penitence, and cooperate with the Spirit of
Suffering, Self-denial and Mortification, which God will communicate to him if
he sincerely desire to be saved; it is necessary that Man satisfy this Duty
which is so just before God, and which the Justice of God requires, as well as
the Nature of the thing it self. This is that which she calls Man's Satisfying
God's Justice on his Part; this is that from which the Satisfaction of Jesus
Christ does not procure us a Dispensation, for then he had neither been just to
God nor us; but he merited the Acceptance of it at God's Hands, and Grace and
Strength for us to perform it, and taught us how to undergo it. If People are
nice and captious, and will needs carp at Words and Expressions, as
Satisfaction and the Satisfying the Justice of God, while they understand what
is meant by them, no body will contend with them about them provided they grant
the Truth and Reality of the thing; that no body will be saved by the Merits
and Satisfaction of Jesus Christ, without the Mortification of their corrupt
Nature and the Recovery of the Love of God.

It is good Consideration which is now generally assigned, Et est Justitiae
Pulchritudo cum Benignitatis Gratia concordans, ut quoniam bonorum inferiorum
dulcedine decepti sumus, amaritudine paenarum crudiamur. S. Aug. de Vera Relig.
c. 15.
why God thought not fit as Governor of the World to pardon Rebellious Man
without the Intervention of an expiatory Sacrifice in the Life and Death of
Jesus Christ, that Men might thereby see the Evil of Sin, and God's infinite
Hatred and Abhorrence of it, and so might be diverted from continuing in it or
returning to it. It is for the very same Reason, that God thought not fit to
pardon Man for the Sufferings of Jesus Christ, unless he also follow him in a
Life of Penitence and Sufferings; for we are not so sensible of what others
suffer, neither does it breed in us such an Abhorrence of that which has
occasioned their Sufferings, as when we suffer the like Pains and Evils our
selves, without which we have as superficial a Sense of them as of the Actings
on a Theater. And therefore to give us the more lively Sense of the Sufferings
of Jesus Christ, and to inflame our Love to him, and to work in us the greater
Detestation of Sin and of our corrupt Nature, God thinks fit that we should
feel in our Souls the Evil and the Bitterness of Forsaking him, without which
they can never be purified nor come to see God.

IX. IX. Of a State of Purification after this Life.
There is another Prejudice which has some Affinity to this, and which the
generality of Protestants are prepossessed with, and that is because she
affirms that there is a State of Purification after this Life for such Souls as
are truly converted unto God, and yet are not wholly purified from their
Corruption, and so are not immediately capable of enjoying God. All corrupt
Doctrine has generally some Fond of Truth, with which they mingle many other
things that tend to promote Men's worldly Interests; the Wealth of the Clergy,
and the Dependence of the People. Thus in the Church of Rome they have founded
a Purgatory in a Place near to Hell, where Souls are tormented by a material
Fire, from whence they are delivered by some Soul-Masses, some superstitious
Ceremonies, the dying in a Cordelier's Habit, and a thousand Fopperies of this
Nature. But that Souls which die truly converted unto God, and yet have not
attained to such a State of Purity as to be capable of enjoying him, L'Eroile
du Matin. Let. 25, 26. Le Temoign. de Verite. p 1. n. 53, 66.
shall undergo a State of Purification before they can see God, is more than
probable. The Sum of her Sentiments as to this are, 1. That is evident, none
can enjoy God who are not in a State of so perfect Purity, that there remains
in them no Degree of Corruption neither Actual nor Habitual. For no unclean
thing can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: There is no Fellowship between
Light and Darkness: And they are only the pure in Heart who shall see God. 2.
It is certain that they who are truly converted unto God, are in a State of
Grace and Salvation, though Sin be yet in him, and the Old Adam is not yet dead.
If a Person full of Sins and evil Habits be in his Heart and Desires truly
turned unto God, he receives him into his Grace, though his habitual Sins are not
yet rooted out; much more him who is greatly advanced in the Mortification of
his corrupt Nature, but has not yet attained to a State of perfect Purity. 3.
It is as certain that Conversion and Regeneration are not one and the same
thing. The first being the turning away from Evil to Good, from Sin to God; the
second being the Renovation of the whole Man after the Image of God, a Creature
altogether new, whose Will is wholly resigned to God, who lives no longer but
Christ lives in it. 4. It is in Grace and spiritual things as it is in Nature
and bodily things: All things advance to their Perfection by Degrees, and not
in an Instant. God does all things in Order, in Number, Weight and Measure, and
conformably to the Nature of the Beings he has formed. We are first Children
before we are Men, and we advance by Degrees to the Stature and Wisdom of Men,
and put away Childish Things. But if the Child come forth of the Womb void of
the bodily Life, it remains so still. We are told of Children, and Youth, and
Men in Christ Jesus, and we must not think that all these States are attained
to in an Instant in the spiritual Life no more than in the bodily. 5. It cannot
be denied but that many who are saved do go out of this World truly converted
unto God, but yet not thoroughly renewed and purified; and as, on the one hand,
God will not reject and cast away such Souls as seek him with all their Heart;
so on the other hand in this State of Impurity they are not capable of enjoying
him: And therefore God in his infinite Goodness, Truth, and Righteousness, will
place them in such a State as whereby all their evil Habits may be wholly
rooted out, all their Corruption subdued, all their Filthiness cleansed, and
they purified as God is pure 6. This so great and so extraordinary a Change
cannot be supposed to be wrought in an Instant, nor yet without most sensible
Pain and Labor to the Soul in whom this Change is wrought. The Soul is of a
most sensible Nature, and when freed of this mortal Body that stupifies it, its
Sensibilities must be infinitely more lively and piercing; and therefore the
Sentiment of being deprived of the glorious Presence of God which it ardently
thirsts after, and of having within it Dispositions repugnant to this
Enjoyment, which a Ray from God manifests it to, cannot but give it unspeakable
Pain and Anguish. We see here no sensible Being that is in Disorder can be
restored to its right State without Pain and Trouble; a broken Leg, a
disjointed Member, a Part of the Body ulcer'd, corrupt Humors, cannot be
rectified without Pain and Trouble. It all the Parts and all the Members of a
Body were dislocated, corrupted and disordered, the Pain and Trouble that would
be felt in the restoring of that Body would be unspeakably greater. All this is
but a faint Image of the State of the Soul; all its Faculties are more
corrupted and disordered than it is possible for the Body to be; the
Restitution of which by the Operation of the Divine Grace cannot be performed
even in this State of Stupidity without much Pain and Anguish, but after this
Life when the Soul is fully awakened, it is supported by the Divine Grace to
undergo this Change, but with Dolours beyond Comparison greater. No living
thing can pass from one State to another without great Sensibility, can enter
into a new Element, unto which it is not entirely conformable, without
suffering its Impressions with Pain; weak and sickly Eyes cannot endure great
Light without Pain, nor a weak Body strong Nourishment without Trouble. So a
Soul falling into the Element of Eternity of the Divine Light, and of the Fire
of the Divine Love, if it be yet weak and ill ^sposed, if i^ have yet many
contrary Dis^^sitions, many things to be consumed, many Habits to (...) out;
this cannot be done without great Sufferings. Not that God chastises in Wrath;
nor that he de^^^nts to torment the Soul; but that the Soul, full of contrary
Disp^sitions full of Darkness, cannot receive his Light, nor feel the (...) of
his Love without most sensible and dolorous Sentiments, till by the Force and
Continuance of these Impressions they have banished out all that is contrary to
his Divine Light and Love, which then transforms the Soul wholly into its own
Nature. It is unreasonable to oppose that Passage of Scripture, that the Blood
of Jesus Christ cleanses from all Sins; for the Meaning of it is not, that
because Jesus Christ has shed his Blood, we ought to be cleansed from our Sins
without Mortifications and sufferings, but the quite contrary; for the Blood of
Jesus Christ is the Grace that he has merited by his Blood; whereby we may be
purified from our Sins by Sufferings, and by a Conformity to his Sorrows and
Death: And when this is not fully done here, it continues to be done in the
other Life, as the Soul is capable to admit it, and its Indisposition requires.

This is a Doctrine very agreeable to the Tenor of the Holy Scriptures, which
tell us, that God will render to every Man according to his Works; that no
unclean thing can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; that only the pure in Heart
only shall see God. The Sense of it seems to be imprinted in the Spirits of all
Men, from the Sense they have of the Purity and Righteousness of God and their
Consciousness of their own Impurity. The Heathens, Jews, Turks, and Christians
have been persuaded of it, those of the Ancient Church both Greek and Latin. It
is a Doctrine that most powerfully engages to lead a Life of Penitence here, in
which the Anguish and Pain of Purification is far less sensible, and whereby a
Soul may still acquire new Graces and Capacities of Attaining to a higher
Degree of Glory; whereas the Sufferings of Purification after Death are
unspeakably more sensible, and the Soul is not capable of advancing to a higher
State. It affords also great Consolation to truly sincere and pious Souls who
seek God unfeignedly, but are sensible of the greatness of their Corruption, to
know that God will not cast them off, nor deny them his purifying Grace here
and hereafter, till he have made them fit Temples for himself to dwell in; and
will still so support them in the most dolorous Purification, with a full
Acquiescence in his righteous Will, that they would not desire that it were
otherwise, but will say with Job, Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. I
shall conclude this with a Passage of the most learned and pious Dr. William
Forbes, sometimes Bishop of Edinborough, who disproving the Popish Purgatory,
and owning that the Greek Fathers and many of the Latins were for a State of
Purification after this Life, though he says without Pain; Gul. Forbesii
Considerationes modestae and purificae p. 266, 267
he concludes thus: Ad Contraversiam hanc tollendam vel saltem minnendam
Romanenses Opinionem suam de Purgatorio punitivo, quum nullis certis
Fundamentis nec in Scripturis, nec in primorum saeculorum Patribus, nec in
priscis Conciliis nitatur, ut supra demonstratum est, pro Fidei Articulo nec
habeant ipsimet, neque aliis obtrud int. Protestants etiam, quibus Opinio ista
improbatur, and quidem Jure Meritoque, Hereseos tamen aut Impietatis aperte
eandem ne damnent. Senientiae vero communi Graecorum, atque etiam quorundam
Virorum doctorum in Latina Ecclesia de Purgatorio expiatorio (quod solum
Purgatorii Nomen proprie loquendo meretur) in quo sine Poenis Gehennalibus,
Animae Sanctorum, quorum quasi media quaedam Conditio est, in Coelis quidem,
sed in Coelorum Loco soli Deo noto, magis magisque usque ad Diem Visionis Dei
clarae, fruentes Conspectu and Consortio Humanitatis Christi and sanctorum
Angelorum perficiunt se in Dei Charitate per fervida and amorosa Suspiria, ut
supra dictum est, nutri pertinaciter obluctentur. Sua enim atque ea quidem haud
exigua probabilitate minime destituitur.

There are others who give unjust Representations of her Sentiments concerning
Predestination, Grace, and Free Will; I shall therefore give a just Account of
them from her own Writings, and in her own Words, and no Reader needs think
strange nor load her with Reproaches upon that Head, if he find that in some
things they differ from the Doctrine which he has been accustomed to hear,
there are such differences of Sentiments upon these Subjects, even among
Persons of the same Communion.

X. X. Of Predestination.
As to the Doctrine of Predestination, she says, That God did certainly create
all Men for Salvation, and none for Damnation: That God being infinitely Good
without any mixture of Evil, and his Nature Love, nothing can come from him but
what is Good; but if he had created a Mass of absolutely reprobated, he would
have made Evil things: That Predestination to Damnation could not come from
God, since the Damnation of ^oul is the greatest Evil in the World; that this
had been to give them occasion to curse him to all Eternity, looking on him as
very unjust toward them, for having predestined them for Damnation before
they had received a Being, without having merited or demerited any thing: That
in Truth and Justice such might have said, Tomb. de la fauss. Theol. Part 2.
Let. 3. L'Acad. des scav. Theoi. p. 1. chapter 1.
Why did thou not leave me into nothing, rather than to have created me for
an eternal Damnation? What had I done before I had a Being to render me thus
Miserable? For it had been far better I had never been created, than to have
created me only for Damnation.

How cruel is it to hear that God should predestinate a Mass of Reprobates!
This is to proclaim God wicked in the Creation of Man! For else he would not
have created a Mass of Reprobates to be Miserable to all Eternity, do what they
will; he could not create them for Damnation, but out of pure Malice! A greater
Blasphemy cannot be uttered against God than this! For it shocks all his
Qualities of Goodness, Righteousness, and Truth, without which he can never do
any thing. If he had created one part of Men for Damnation, he should not have
done a just thing; since those Reproabates did not merit Damnation before they
had a Being, and could not in Justice be reprobated without having deserved it:
Neither could he exercise his Goodness in decreeing the Damnation of any thing;
since this Damnation is the greatest Evil in the World. And how should he be
true in reprobating those of whom he says, that his Delight is to be with them,
since they are the Children of Men.

This is inconsistent with the original Design of creating Man, Le Nouv. Ciel.
p. 25, etc.
and the manner of his Formation. He made him to take his Delight with him; and
that Man might love and enjoy his God, he formed him for that End after his own
Image. He created one Man only, and in him all Men. Would he predestinate to
Damnation a Creature whom he made to take his Delight with him, Le Temoign. de
Verite. Part 1. n. 22, 56, 67, 109.
before he had a Being, whom he endued with such wonderful Perfections? Was
this only to damn him the more profoundly? Were not all Men created in one Man
for Grace and Salvation? He took not two Masses of Earth, to create the one of
them for Salvation, and the other for Damnation; but one Mass only, with which
he created one Man only for Salvation, creating in him all the Men that ever
were or shall be; he created them all in general in the State of Innocence and
Salvation, and for this End gave abundance of Graces both bodily and spiritual,
and that equally to all, without Exception of any, giving to all a Divine Soul
and Free Will, that they might be capable of all manner of Good. And seeing he
thus created all Men in Adam, he could not have created any for Reprobation,
but all for Salvation.

Is it not to ascribe vicious Passion to God, Light of the world Part 3. Conf.
22.
to say that he reprobated Man because of the foresight of the Sins which he
would commit after his Creation; and that he predestined him to Salvation,
foreseeing his future Merits? Had God need of Man's Merits to save him? Can all
Men together with all their Merits bring one Ray of Glory to God? Is not this
to go over to their side, who say, that Men shall be elected and saved by their
good Works, and not by Grace only; in which they make God a Liar, who has
promised (as they grant) that he will save us by Grace?

To say that God did not create Man for Damnation, but reprobated Man after
Adam's Sin, which had undone them all, is most absurd. For as all Men were
created in Adam, so they were also all alike fallen in Adam, and all in general
reprobated by the same Sin of Adam; for he could not have a divided Will, one
part of it sound, and another damned; there being but one Man only, and he had
but one Will, in which was included the Will of all Men that should ever arise
from him. And if God had left Adam in the reprobated State wherein he fell, all
Men had equally remained so. And when Adam received the Pardon of his Sin, and
was admitted to Penitence, all Men were still in him, and consequently all were
restored to Favor, upon Condition of performing the Penitence that God
enjoined in Adam. So that God could not leave one part of Men in the Curse,
without dividing Adam, and appointing one part of his Body for Salvation, and
another for Reprobation; since there was but one Man. If there had been two, it
might have been said of Men, what is said of Angels, that one part of the
Angels was damned, and another confirmed in Grace; but that of one Soul and one
Body there should proceed reprobated and saved by the Predestination of God,
this is odious.

They who say that God did not predestinate to Damnation, but only left one
part of Men who were in Adam in Damnation, and did elect another part to
Salvation, do directly contradict the Scriptures; for the Scripture says
expressly, that with God there is no respect of Persons. How could he then
predestinate one part of Men to Salvation, and leave the other part into the
Damnation into which they were all equally plunged; since all had equally
sinned in Adam, and one no more than another? How then can it be that God, who
is no Respecter of Persons, can damn one part and save another, of the same
Mass of Persons, (which have equally contracted the, same Sin) without
Injustice, which cannot be in God? And though he be almighty to save one and damn
another, as those Casuists say, yet he will never do it, for he will never do
any Injustice; For my part, says she, I would not commit the least Injustice
against my Enemies, not against the Devil himself. How much less would God, who
is incomprehensibly more Just than I, do such an Injustice as to damn one and
save another of the Persons who have committed the same Fault, even tho it were
in his Power.

They say, may not a Man do with his own Goods what he will? how much more may
God dispose of Man as he pleases, who absolutely belongs to him! and none can
ask him, why he saves one and lets another perish. This, says she, seems a weak
Argument even in the Comparison; for it is not true that a Man can do with his
Goods what he pleases, he ought to use them according to Justice and Reason;
and if he do otherwise, he will bear his Punishment before God, who will not
suffer Injustice, nor us to abuse our Goods without calling us to an Account at
the Day of Judgment. How much more will God dispose of Men justly, even though
they belong to him? How much less can he commit this Injustice of damning one
and saving another of those who have fallen into the same Fault, and are
equally Guilty? It is true God is Almighty, and can do what he will, but he can
never will to do any thing unjustly, as this would be, which could not be
without respect of Persons, and this cannot be in God.

To say that he expressly predestined one part of them to Damnation, is to say
that he had not so much Righteousness in himself, as that which he requires of
Men; for he says to them, Love your Enemies, do good to them that hate you.
This Counsel would have had no Authority, if he himself had reprobated those
who are become his Enemies. This absolute Reprobation would not be Good, but
the greatest Evil that could be imagined. How could he command Men to do Good
to their Enemies, when he himself would do so great and eternal an Evil, for
the Fault they had committed against him, and that while they were yet in a
State of Penitence, as they are during this Life, where Reprobation shall never
have place, since till the very last Instant they may find Mercy and Pardon.
This Reprobation can only have place after Death, and not during this Life.
Because this is the Time of Penitence, in which, if Men were certainly
reprobated, they could have no part; and it would be a very rigorous and unjust
thing to oblige those to Penitence whom he absolutely resolves to damn. Men it
seems confound the Times when they speak of Predestination, and take the
present for the time to come. For at the Judgment God will separate two masses,
the one of Elect, the other of Reprobates, who shall then assuredly be damned,
because the Time of Penitence will then be past; but during this Life there can
be no predestined Reprobates.

If God has reprobated the Wicked to Damnation, he would not give them so many
secret and inward Warnings to turn them unto him; as all Sinners may know by
experience, that even when by Sin they have turned away from God, they feel how
often he recals them by many Occasions, and by Checks of Conscience. All the
Souls who are damned have been often admonished by God both inwardly and
outwardly; as may be seen in the Holy Scriptures. How often did he admonish
Pharaoh and other wicked Men? If it were true that God had reprobated them, he
would not have been sincere in giving them so many Admonitions to turn them
from their Wickedness, or at least they were all vain Admonitions, since being
predestined to Evil, it was impossible for them to do Good. Must God tempt
Men, or render them more guilty than otherwise they would have been of
themselves?

God has declared that as he Lives he has no pleasure in the Death of the
Wicked, but that the wicked Man turn from his way and live; and that he is not
willing that any should Perish. God then should not be sincere in his words, if
he had predestined some Souls to Damnation; which cannot be said of God who
is Truth it self, always faithful in his Promises; and no sooner is a Sinner
converted, but he receives him with joy, according to the Parable of the
Prodigal, and therefore it is said, there is Joy in Heaven at the Conversion of
a Sinner, more than over Ninety and Nine righteous Persons: All this shows that
God is so far from predestinating any Soul to Damnation, that even he himself
comes to seek and to save those who would damn themselves, as appears by the
Good Shepherd that left his many Sheep to go and seek the One Sheep that had
gone astray, and brings it back on his Shoulders with Joy. After all this, who
can doubt that God has created us all for Salvation, and none for Damnation,
which proceeds only from Men's Self-will, and not at all from the Predestination
or Presence of God?

This Doctrine of Predestination to Damnation is, she says, a most blasphemous
and dangerous Doctrine, robs God of the Honor due to him, shocks all his
Attributes of Righteousness, Goodness, and Truth, renders him very unlovely to
his Creatures; gives those occasion who think they are reprobated to spend all
their Life in blaspheming God, for creating them to Damnation for no Fault of
theirs, before they had a Being, and not rather leaving them into nothing, and
discourages them from all Endeavors of becoming better, since of necessity
they must be damned however; and it encourages those who think they are
predestined to Salvation to a Libertine kind of Life, since they are
persuaded that notwithstanding of this they shall be saved, and God will some
time or other bring them to Repentance.

It seems Men have taken up these Sentiments that they may attribute to God the
Cause of their Damnation, and not to themselves, which is a horrible Pride and
Blasphemy; or to flatter their Wickedness in excusing it by Adam's Sin, and
that they may not fulfill the Penitence that God has enjoined them by him. And
being full of Passions themselves without Righteousness, Goodness, and Truth,
they would give Authority to their Wickedness, by making a God to go before
them, in the matter of their Passions. And as they see those who rule over Men
do according to their Inclinations, disgrace or favor them, so they would make
God as partial, saying, that he damns some, and saves others according to his
Pleasure; which will never be, for God is no more subject to Passions than to
Change.

Yet nevertheless Men are ready to color this Doctrine with Passages from the
Holy Scripture, especially some Expressions misunderstood in the Epistles of
St. Paul. The Apostle Peter when he touches this very Subject, and tells us the
reason of the Long-suffering of God, because he is not willing that any should
Perish, but that all should come to Repentance, he adduces St. Paul's Testimony
to confirm the Truth of it, and tells us that he has said the same in his
Epistles, but withal warns us that there are some things in them hard to be
understood, which the Unstable wrest to their own Destruction, pointing out it
seems to this very Subject. The necessary Duties of Christianity are plainly
set down in the Holy Scriptures, and other things cannot be well understood but
by the same Spirit that endited them; and the Rule already mentioned for
interpreting the Holy Scripture may be of great use, viz. That we so interpret
it as may consist with the known Perfections of the Divine Nature, and may lead
us to the Love of God, and to a sense of our own Nothingness; and if there be
multitudes of Places of Holy Scripture that do plainly lead us to this, and
some few that are apt to be wrested to a Sense contrary to all these, we ought
certainly to interpret them by those plain Passages of the Holy Scripture,
which do clearly represent the Perfections of God. Thus she instanceth in that
Expression, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated, and makes appear, that
to take it in the Sense of an irrespective and absolute Predestination and
Reprobation from all Eternity, is inconsistent with the Nature of God, and the
other plain Directions of the Holy Scripture; which show that God has no
respect of Persons. She says, That all the things of the Old Testament are
Figures of the New, and that Jacob and Esau are the Figure of a Person
sanctified, and of him who lives according to corrupt Nature; of the Soul that
loves its God, and the Soul that loves it self. This is the Esau and Jacob,
which the Scripture understands by those Twins come from One Womb; for all Men
who are born since the Sin of Adam, bring with them into the World the good
Spirit of Jacob, and the Evil of Esau: For God gave Adam his good Spirit when
he created him, and thereafter the Divil by the Consent of the Will of Adam and
Eve produced there his Evil Spirit, so that those two are engendered in the Soul
of all Men before they come out of the Womb: They reside in the Womb of the
Free Will that God has given us, and there struggle before they are in a State
to do Good or Evil, as Jacob and Esau did in their Mother's Womb, which of them
should get out first. All Men proceeding from Adam do derive from him all his
Qualities by Nature and Grace (as the Seed and Plant must still be of the
Nature of the Tree and Stock from whence it comes) an Inclination to Good being
the Instinct he retain ^ of the Grace of God, and an Inclination to Evil the
Instinct which he retained from the Corruption of his Corrupt Nature. So these
two Spirits live in Men before they are born, as we see the natural Instinct of
Beasts as soon as they are formed, as a Duckling come out of the Shell can swim
and duck in the Water without being taught by its Mother; so this Evil Spirit
of Esau gives all Men this natural Instinct to Evil, which they still follow if
the Spirit of Jacob do not constrain them to Good, and hinder them from Evil.
Hence comes the War which Man feels throughout all his Life, and according to
the Victory so is his eternal Lot. This Evil Spirit of Esau always gets first
out of the Wombs of our Free Will, which is rather inclined to the things we
see, than to the Good that is invisible; the Pleasures of our Senses, rather
than the divine and inward Pleasures, which we cannot perceive but at a great
Distance, and through Darkness. This we cannot hinder till we have attained the
use of Reason, when we ought by all means to labor that the Spirit of Jacob
may get the uppermost in dispite of wicked Esau. Those things are true both in
the Nature of these two Children, and in that of the two-Spirits. But Men not
understanding the Scriptures, do wrest and explain them to a Sense
dishonorable to God, and blasphemous of him.

XI. XI. Of Free Will.
But it may be said, if there be no such Predestination, how then comes any Man
to be damned? How came Sin into the World? Can any thing fall out against the
Will of God, and which he has not decreed to fall out? As I live, says the
Lord, I delight not in the Death of a Sinner. Let no Man say when he is
tempted, Academ. de Scav. Theol. p. 1. chapter 1, 2.
that he is tempted of God. O Israel! thy Destruction is of thy self. God did
not decree that Man should sin, nor that he would permit him to sin, but took
care by all means to prevent it; and has spared no Mean to recover him from it.
But Man has wilfully destroyed himself.

God created him out of pure Love to delight himself in him, Light of the World
Part 3. Conf. 2, 21, 22.
and therefore to make this Love perfect and complete, he created him
altogether Free and Perfect. He would not bound nor limit the Will of Man, whom
he would needs make after his own Likeness, to be his Spouse, and not his
Slave, or constrained to do his Will, as are all the other Creatures. But Man
was created altogether Free, as a little God, Sovereign and Ruler over the
other Creatures, and free to use them well or ill, as he would.

If he had received only a limited Will, Le Nouv. Ciel p. 67. Renouv. de
l'Espr. Evang* avantprop. n. 11. 18, 24, 25, 31.
he would have had no Divine Quality for God to take his Delight with him; for
that two Beings may find Contentment together, there must be a Proportion and
Sympathy between them. God cannot take his Delight with any Creature of a
bounded Will, he himself being an infinite God; there must be in Man some
infinite Quality by which he may unite himself to God, and that is an absolute
Liberty of willing, which nothing can constrain. This was the most precious
thing that God could give to Man, for by it he was made like to God; for
otherwise he should have been a limited Creature in whom God could not take
Pleasure. Could God take Delight in a thing so unlike himself? Could so
powerful a God unite himself to such an impotent Creature that had not
Free Will to love him? God having no Bounds nor Limits, could he take Pleasure
in a Creature whose Will was bounded? And could a limited Will attain to the
Love of a God without Limits? This is the only thing that makes Man capable of
being united to God. We see in Nature the Alliance is not true and agreeable,
if two Persons be not united in their Wills in God; if there be Force,
Limitation, or Constraint on either side, the Contentment cannot be complete.
This is the Figure of the perfectly Free Union that the Soul ought to have with
God; and if the Soul were constrained or forced to this Union, God could not
take perfect Delight in it. Where there is Constraint, there can be no perfect
Love; the Free Consent and Cooperation of two united must necessarily concur to
make the Love complete,

As God gave this Liberty to Man when he created him, so he will never take it
from him; for his Designs are unchangable, all his Works are Eternal, and his
Gifts are without Repentance. Both Devils and Men shall have their Free Will to
all Eternity, else they could not do Evil, for God never retracts what he has
once given; he will never retake those Divine Qualities, the Divine Soul and
Eternal Liberty, and cannot bound them, because he cannot be changeable in his
Gifts, nor can he take away what he has been pleased once to give. If it be
established among Men to lay no longer Claim to a thing given, how much more
ought we to hold, that God lays no Claim to the Free Will of Devils and Men, to
whom he voluntarily gave it. The Devils and demned Souls will never use their
Liberty to do well, being so habituated to Evil and in the Element of it; as
the Holy Angels and Blessed Saints will never use their Liberty to do Evil, it
being swallowed up in God.

From hence it is evident, that God did not predetermine Man from all Eternity
to Good or Evil by any absolute Decree; for this is to constrain that which he
would have to be Free, to ranverse the Order he had so wisely established, and
to take from man the most precious thing that he gave him. If he had made Man a
limited Creature, he would have predestined all Men to Salvation, so that
none of them should have perished. For all that God makes absolutely dependent
on him* is always Good without any mixture of Evil; and it can never be that a
limited Creature can do Evil, since God can create nothing that is Evil.

God endued Man with such an unlimited Free Will, that he would not only not
predetermine him, but also not foresee how he should dispose of that Free Will,
that he might not thereby limit it, or oblige Man to do what he had foreseen.
His Power and Wisdom is as great, (yea far more conspicuous) in forming him
thus Free, and letting him fully enjoy the Liberty that he had given him, than
if he had limited him by Foresight and Predestination.

God being Almighty can save or damn as he pleases, and no body can withstand
him, for all are subject to him; but he neither does, nor ever will do it, but
in the Ways which his powerful Wisdom and the Love, he has conceived for Man,
have resolved upon, whom he would needs create like unto himself by the
absolute Free Will he gave him, and would neither constrain him to Good, nor
hinder him from Evil; but would have him his by pure Love, with the free
Consent of his Will, that he might delight in him, and Man also might
voluntarily delight in the Love of his God. Thus we see how Sin came into the
World, and how Man damns himself. God neither willed it nor permitted it, that
he might bring Glory to himself; (a most blasphemous Sentiment) but, against
the Will of God, Man abused the most precious Gift that could be bestowed upon
him, his Free Will, and turned away his Love from God, and placed it on himself
and on the Creature. God does not permit Man to do Evil, but by all Means
restrains him. He permits him only to use the Free Will he has given him; and,
having endued him with an immortal Soul, and an eternal Liberty, he can no more
take away this Liberty without destroying his Nature and making him cease to be
Man, than he can make a Circle to be a Square without destroying the Nature of
a Circle. God, by giving Man Free Will to make him capable of the greatest
Good, is no more the Cause of Man's Sin and Reprobation, than a Cutler would be
the Cause of a Lord's murdering of his Brother, because it was done with a
Weapon which he had made for him of well-tempered Steel, of a sharp Edge, and
for good Uses. It would be a cruel Malice to accuse the Cutler of the Murder;
the Malice is infinitely greater to say, that God created us for Damnation, or
is the Cause of it, because he has given us Free Will.

You see, says S. Augustine, how Vides quantum boni desit Corpori, cui desunt
Manus and tamen Manibus male utitur, qui eis operatur vel saeva vel turpia.
Sine Pedibus aliquem si aspiceres; fatereris de esse Integritati Corporis
plurimum bonum; and tamen eum qui ad nocendam cuipiam, vel seipsum
dehonestandum Pedibus uteretur, male uti Pedibus non negares. Oculis hanc Lucem
videmus, Formasque internoscimus Corporum; -- Oculis tamen plerique pleraque
agunt turpiter, and eos militare cogunt Libidini: Et vides quantum bonum desit
in facie si Oculi desint: Cum autem adsunt, quis hos dedit; nisi bonorum omnium
Largitor Deus? Quemadmodum ergo ista probas in Corpore; and non intuens eos qui
male his utuntur, laudas illum qui haec dedit bona: Sic liberam voluntatem
sine, qua nemo potest recte vivere, opportet and bonum esse and Divinitus
datum, and potius eos damnandos qui hoc bono male utuntur, quam, cum qui
dederit, dare non debuisse fatearis. -- Cum in Corpore ergo Oculum concedas
esse aliquod bonum, quo amisso tamen ad recte vivendum non impeditur, Voluntas
libera tibi videtur nullum bonum, sine qua recte Nemo vivit? -- Non Ibid. Lib.
3. c. 1.
enim quicquam tam firm atque intime sentio quam me habere Voluntatem, eaque
me moveri ad aliqu^d fruendum: Quid autem meum dicam prorsus non invenio, si
Voluntas qua volo and nolo non est mea? quapropter cui tribuendum est, siquid
per illam Male facio, nisi mihi? Cum enim bonus Deus me fecerit, nec been
aliquid faciam nisi per Voluntatem ad hoc potius datam esse a bono Deo satis
apparet: Motus autem quo huc atque illuc convertitur, nisi esset voluntarius,
atque in nostra potius Potestate, neque laudandus cum ad Superiora, neque
culpandus Homo esset cum ad inferiora detorquet quasi quendam cardinem
Voluntatis: Neque omnino monendus esset, ut istis neglectis aeterna vellet
adipisci, atque ut male nollet vivere, vellet autem been. Hoc autem monendum
non esse Hominem quisquis existimat, de Hominum numero exterminandus est. S.
August. de Libero arbitr. Lib. 2. c. 18.
much Good is wanting to the Body where the Hands are wanting, and yet he makes
ill use of his Hands who acts any thing that is base or filthy with them. If
you should see any without Feet, you would confess there is much wanting to the
Perfection of the Body; yet you would not deny but that he, who should use
them, either to hurt any one, or to his own Dishonor, makes an ill Use of his
Feet. With our Eyes we see the Light, and discern the Forms of Bodies. -- Yet
many act Evil with their Eyes and make them the Instruments of Lust; Yet you
see what a Defect there is in the Face without the Eyes. Now where these are
entire, who is the Giver of them but God the Giver of all Good. Wherefore as
you approve of those in the Body, and without regarding those that misuse them,
give Praise to God that gave them: So it is necessary that the Free Will,
without which no one can order his Life aright, must be both Good and also the
Gift of God. And you must confess that those rather are to be condemned that
make ill Use of this Good, than that he should be Impeached who gave it. Since
then in the Body you grant the Eye to be a Good, which yet if it were wanting
there would be no Hinderance to our living well; How can that seem to you no
Good, without which none can live aright? -- For there is nothing that I do so
firmly and intimately feel as that I have a Will, and that by it I am moved to
do this or that. And I see not why I should call it mine, if the Will wherewith
with I do will and not will, is not mine. Wherefore to whom must it be
attributed, if I commit Evil thereby, but to my self? For since God has made
me, and I cannot do any thing well but by the Will; it does thence sufficiently
appear that the Will was given rather for this End by the good God. And unless
that Motion were voluntary and in our Power, whereby the Will is turned hither
and thither, Man would be neither worthy of Praise when he lifts it up to
Things above, nor of Blame when he wresteth aside as it were a certain cardinal
Point of the Will to Things below: Neither were he to be admonished, that
neglecting these temporal, he should seek to gain Eternal Things; and that he
should refuse to live ill, and choose to live Well. But whosoever thinks that
Man is not to be admonished to this, ought not to be suffered among Men.

XII. XII. Of Grace.
But if Man have Free Will, can be do Good of himself without the Grace of God;
or if he turn away from God, can he recover again without God's Grace, or is
God partial in his Grace, denying it absolutely to some, and b^st^wing it on
others? In all this, these are her Sentiments.

As to the first, Acad. de (...) Theol^g p. 1. c. 1.
God is the Author of all Good, and Man can never do any Good of himself, but
by the Grace of God, with which God requires that Man by his Free will should
cooperate, that he may give him more Grace. To conceive how God gives his
Grace to Man, and how he must cooperate therewith, we need but consider the
Order that he has placed in Nature as to the human Body. It is he who forms it
independantly from the Creatures; so that Parents cannot add one Hair to the
Head of their Infant. Yet he brings no Men into the World but by the
Cooperation of two Persons, who are so united as that two Bodies are made one
Flesh; as Hearts and Wills ought to be one in Christ Jesus, for the Forming of
the Holy Church. God might have created all Men of the Dust of the Earth as he
did Adam, or made them generate as Fishes; but he wills this Conjugal
Cooperation, to maintain his Charity among his Creatures, and produces no Men
by any other Way, though he be Almighty. Even so he gives his Grace to Man, that
he may love him and work out his S^lvation. It is he alone who gives this
Grace, and Man contributes nothing to it, nor has ever merired it. Nevertheless
this Grace liberally given, will never produce its ^^^ect, without the Consent
of the Free Will of Man and his Cooperation, though he can add nothing to Grace,
which comes immediately from God, as does also the Generation of Men.

But the Ordinance of God will still stand, and Man ought not to ask the Reason
of it, or to say, that the Grace of God ought to operate alone; or which is
worse, to say that Man can do Good of himself. These are Sayings as rash as
presumptuous, whereby Men would give Laws to God, and would have his Grace to
operate alone. And to attribute to Man the Power of doing Good, without being
prevented by his Grace, is a Pride surpassing that of Lucifer, who would only
equal himself to God; whereas Man who would do Good of himself, preferrs
himself to him, and will not take him for the Co-operator of his Good, but will
assume the Power of doing it by himself.

That we may conceive how all Good comes from God, and that Man can do no good
of himself, we are to consider, that Man being created to enjoy God, and to
enjoy all his Works, is made up of many several Faculties, Capacities or
Vessels, as it were, fitted for receiving and being filled with their
respective Goods from God and the Creatures, and is endued with a Free Will,
whereby he may turn these Faculties to their respective Objects, or turn them
away from them as he pleases. We may conceive this as to spiritual things, by
considering the Case as to bodily things. Thus his Eyes are formed to receive
the Light and all the Objects which it presents. The Light surrounds him, he
opens his Eyes and receives it; or he shuts them, and keeps it out, and walks
in Darkness; or he encompasses himself with a thick Wall that he may not behold
the Light; or he does that which makes them blind, and so his Darkness
comprehends it not. Has he reason to boast himself because he opens his Eyes
and beholds the Light as if he were the Author of it, or had given himself the
Power to behold it; or to accuse the Light, when he shuts his Eyes against it,
or makes himself Blind. The Delight and Good he receives is not from himself,
but from the Light, nor yet the Power of beholding it; and the Evil or
Privation of it is purely owing to himself. Even so God's Delight is with the
Soul, as the Light is to shine into the Eyes, if it turn to him he fills it
with Good; if it turn away from him, it is all Misery and Darkness.

As to the second, if Man now by his own Free Will can in his corrupt State do
Good and turn to God; she says, There is no Good but what comes from God, and
no Good can proceed from corrupt Man, more than pure Wine can come out of a
filthy Vessel full of Uncleanness. The Scripture tell us, a Man takes out of
the Treasure of his Heart that which is in it, Renouv. de l' Espr. Ev. Pref. n.
22.
to wit, from an evil Heart evil Things. For the Heart possessed with
Self-love, cleaving to its Corruption, is filled only with evil Things, from
whence nothing but Sin and Evil can proceed. It is a great Error to think that
Man by his Free Will may save himself since he was corrupted by Sin, Academ.
Theol. p. 1. c. 1.
as well as when he was in the State of Innocence. This is a great
Self-presumption, for Men to boast of a Grace and Virtue, which they have
basely lost by their Wickedness and Sin, which has filled them with all Evil,
and deprived them of all Good; seeing Sin, having separated them from God the
Fountain of all Good, has plunged them into all sort of Evil, which is the
Privation of all Good. Light of the World part 1. Cons. 8.
And he can of himself no more recover God, than he that walks in gross
Darkness can see the Light. And, being corrupted in all his Faculties, he can
no more Love God, than a blind Man can enjoy the Light; and being inclined and
habituated to Evil, his Free Will of it self will not desist nor change from
it. So that without the Grace of God, Man can do nothing, but sin, which he
does of himself; for God does not retract the Liberty that he gave him in
Creating him, which being now bent to Evil, can freely do Evil against the Will
of God, and without his Concurrence of Permission: But he can in no wise do
Good without the Grace of God, not only that which he received a^ his Creation,
but also Grace concurring effectually in all our Actions. So that it is Grace
alone that works in us all our good Works and our Salvation: For Man has
nothing of himself but the Liberty to adhere to Good, which he received at his
Creation, and which will never be taken from him. Yet this Grace is not
sufficient to work out his Salvation, if God do not continually give him new
Grace: For, having once resisted the first Grace, he would never more recover
it; having voluntarily abandoned it; and his Case would have been like that of
the rebellious Angels whom God justly abandoned and suspended his Graces upon
the first Rebellion of their Will, which he might as justly have done to Man,
if the Love he bare him had not far surpassed that to the Angels, which appears
by the Graces he has imparted to him since his Sin; for instead of reprobating
and condemning him to Hell, he gives him new Grace that he may recover again.

As to the third; Acad. de Theol. p. 1. c. 1, 2.
They do not know the Love that God has for Man, who say that their Reprobation
proceeds from the Want of his Grace; for it is never wanting on God's Part,
even toward the most Wicked, and if it do not produce its Operations, it is
because the Sin and Wickedness of Man resists it: Even as the Sun by his Nature
darts his Rays as brightly on the Dunghill as on a Diamond, yet the one receives
more Splendor than the other, because of the Difference of the Objects which
receive them; the same Sun makes the Dunghill to stink and the Diamond to
sparkle, yet he gives no more of himself to the one than the other.

The Property of God is to give continually new Grace to Man, to the Sinner and
to the Just; yet if it do not operate on the Wicked, his Sin hinders it; the
same Grace that makes the Just to shine, makes the Wicked more filthy, he
making Use of it to sin the more. It is impossible for him to perceive this,
because of the Opposition which his Sin makes, rendering him insensible of it,
even as a thick Cloud before the Sun will neither let us see his Light nor feel
his Heat. The Sun never ceases to shine and give heat in all Seasons; and God
does not cease always to give his Grace, but our Opposition hinders the
Operations and Effects of it in our Soul, purely through our own Fault; for if we
were faithful in little things he would place us over great things.

He created Adam in a Grace as bright as the Sun at Noonday; his Soul beheld
and tasted his God. But after that, by his Rebellion he opposed his Will, this
Sin set it self against the Grace of God, as a thick Wall before the Sun, which
hindered the Seeing and Feeling its favorable Influences. God did not cease to
give his Grace to Adam after this Sin as before; but the Wall that this Sin had
built up between God and him, keeps him from seeing God any more, or receiving
his Grace to operate as before.

So long as this Sin is between God and our Soul, its Eyes are blinded, and its
Understanding darkened as to Good, and it knows not whither it goes; and
therefore it was said, Adam, where art thou? after he had sinned: For having
lost the Light of Grace, no body knows where he is, nor can find the Way to
recover it; though Grace is not wanting on God's part, no more than the Sun is
wanting in Light, though he who has a thick Wall between him and it has no more
Benefit than if it did not shine.

It is only by the help of a Candle that he can discern the Objects that are
about him; so it is only sensible Lights and Grace, such as are to be perceived
by the Senses, that can make him discern inward Good; his Heart is so fixed to
the Earth by his Sin, that he cannot perceive Divine things but by the help of
Material ones. And if his Free Will do not choose the Good which he may know by
this Mean, he can never work out his Salvation. -- Thus the Sinner has always
some sensible Grace sufficient to raise him again, as Displeasure for his Sin,
the Disquiet it brings, Remorse of Conscience, or the Fear of his Damnation;
which are so many sensible Graces that God gives him, whereby to call him back
again, making him see as it were by the help of a Candle, the Miseries that his
Sin has brought upon him, with a desire to rise again, and to recover the Grace
of God.

Those sensible Graces are more than sufficient to work out Man's Salvation
after a great many Sins, provided his Free Will be effectualy resolved to
detest and abandon his Sins with a strong Resistance, which breaks down at
least some Stones of the Wall that is opposed to Grace; that he may perceive as
it were by a chink, some small Ray of that enlightening and warming Grace lost
by Sin, which will give him new force to break down more and more of this
Opposition to Grace, if so be the Soul be faithful and force it self according
as the Light manifests it self. It is thus, that the Kingdom of Heaven suffers
Violence, and that the Violent take it by force; for if the Will do not
Violence to it self, to forsake its Sins, when Reason makes it see the Evil
they bring, and it feels Vexation of Spirit, with the fear of Damnation, (all
which are sensible Graces which Sin never deprives him of; no more than of his
Free will to effectuate this Desire of getting out of his miserable State:
Unless his rebellious Will do yet resist these sensible Graces, and wilfully
stifle those Trouble and Fears, because it loves the Pleasure of its Sin, more
than the Love of its God, this will harden the Heart, and so thicken the Wall
of Opposition to Grace, making it at last incapable of being saved.

It is certain God cannot reprobrate any Man without ceasing to be the Fountain
of all Good, and Man cannot save himself, since he is a Nothing who can do
Nothing. His Salvation can never come from himself, no more than his Damnation
can come from God; for he created all Men for Salvation, and none of them shall
perish for want of his Grace, who never fails to give to every one what is
necessary for his Salvation.

It is true, he sometimes makes particular Elections, as of the Blessed Virgin
Mary for the Mother of his Humanity, St. Paul for his Disciple, and some
others; but he does not increase his Grace to them, but according to their
Cooperation with the First, with which they strive to resist vicious
Inclinations, and to break the Wall of Opposition to Grace, that they may
receive inward Light in greater Abundance, which comes into their Souls from
the Abundance of his Grace, so that they can no longer resist it; for their
Sins being removed, Grace has its full Operation, dilating it self into all the
parts of the Soul, and there it consumes all that is Imperfect, yea, the least
Inclinations to Evil; so that Grace dwells and rules in all the Faculties of
the Soul without any Impediment, and at last deifies it, by yielding up
entirely its Free Will unto the full Power and Liberty of its God who gave it.

These are the Souls whom I call the Elect of God, because they can no more
perish; and those whom I call the Elect who have chosen to follow God by the
help of his Grace, are all others who have chosen to follow Good and to forsake
Evil. These last may perish, not having entirely resigned their Free Will into
the hands of God, nor broken down the Wall of Sins which resist his Grace; but
they abide in the Possession of this Free Will, which sometimes enclines them
to Good, oft-times to Evil, cooperating sometimes with Grace, and falling also
sometimes into Sin, from whence they arise again by the effort they make to
break down that Wall of Sin, which they know to be opposite to Grace, by the
Disquiet it brings into the Soul, by checks of Conscience, and at other times
by the Attractions they have to Good, and the fear of Damnation, which are so
many Evidences that they have chosen to follow God by his Grace, for if this
Grace were not, they would not feel Remorse of Conscience, nor a desire to
return to God after their Sin. They are therefore Elect, not that they have
elected themselves, for they could not have chosen God before they had a Being;
but God who always was, may have elected them from all Eternity, since all is
still present to him, both what is past, and what is to come; but he has chosen
them conditionally, in case they cooperate with his Grace, and no otherwise;
leaving their Free Will still to act, without which he forces no Body.

But when he has re-taken the Free Will which those first Elect would yield up
to him, then he constrains them by the force of his Love, and of his Grace; so
that they can no more forsake him: This is not of themselves, but by the force
of his Love, which he manifests to them; binding them to himself by an
inseparable Bond of mutual Love; so that the Soul becomes so united to him,
that it can no more forsake God than he can forsake it without Infidelity,
which can never be in God, nor yet the want of his Grace. And if a Soul sin
after having received much Grace from God, (as it sometimes falls out)
certainly it has not effectually yielded up its Free Will unto its God, but
only used it self to cooperate with his Grace, to which if it abide faithful,
it assuredly works out its Salvation, which it has chosen to do by these
Graces; but if it come in the End to resist them, it may perish,
notwithstanding of much Grace received: For this Election is not Absolute, but
Conditional.

How many great Saints have attained to great Perfection, with this Election of
obeying God, by the help of his Grace? Having co-operated with the Talents
which they have received and gained by them, God has at last set them over all
his Goods; as he has promised in his Gospel to the Faithful, and from the
Unfaithful he causes to take the Talent to give it to him who will put it to
Profit. This falls out daily as to our Souls. He assuredly gives them his
necessary Grace, if they correspond to it, he increases it; and the more they
have, the more they shall receive; their being faithful to one measure of Grace
procures always greater, and that infinitely; for the Bounty of God is great,
that he delights continually to give and to increase his Gifts. But if the Soul
resist the first Graces, it loses them; and hinders the effect of others which
would have followed, had it not been for this Resistance.

To lay the Blame of this Resistance upon God is a great Injury done him; since
he gives liberally without being obliged to it. If he would withold the Grace
of cooperating with it, it were better for him to withold the first Grace
than to render the second Grace of cooperating therewith useless. God does
nothing in vain, if he give Grace to be saved, he gives at the same time Grace
to cooperate to this Salvation; and if Man resist this Cooperation, this is
only from his own depraved Will; for no Body can damn us but our selves. It is
true, the Devils may tempt us many ways, but they can never force our
Free Will. Wicked Men may advise us to Evil, but we are still free not to
believe or follow them. Nothing can constrain the Free Will that God has given
us to choose Good or Evil. We but flatter our selves when we say or believe it.

He flatters himself yet more who believes it is for want of the Grace of God,
that he does no Good, and works not out his Salvation. He deceives himself and
believes Falsehoods, which he may easily discover if he will seriously examine
his own Conscience, and remark how often God has prevented him with his Grace,
which he has resisted. How many good Thoughts God has put into his Mind, which
he has rejected? How many secret inward Motions, which he has neglected? How
many good Books and holy Admonitions which might help him to Salvation, which
he has despised? How many occasions favorable for his Salvation, which he has
used for his Damnation? So many Prosperities, to make him acknowledge the Love
and Care that God had for him! So many Adversities to recall him from his Sin,
and to set him in the way of Salvation! How many diverse Accidents have fallen
out as to Neighbors, which have moved him to Contrition, as sudden Deaths,
Slaughters, Plagues, Fire, and other things, which no Man can avoid!
Nevertheless, all these Graces and Drawings have met with no Correspondence
from Man's Will, on the contrary they turning away from the Creator, have
turned to the Creature to love it more than God. And which is more, they will
lay the Blame of all their Damnation upon him for want of his Grace; a horrible
and insuppertable Abuse! That Man is not satisfied to abuse the Grace of God,
but he will also make him guilty of his Damnation. It is an unspeakable Pride,
when we feel that we resist his Grace every Moment, and yet say, our Damnation
comes from the want of this Grace, instead of giving Sentence against our
Baseness and Wickedness, which we may so sensibly perceive and feel.

It were better to smite the Breast and condemn our selves, than to argue about
the Grace of God, since our own Conscience is an irrefragable Witness that
Grace has been still given us, yea even in the midst of our Sins. How many
amorous pulls has God given our Hearts to withdraw them from Damnation? How
many new Graces for our corresponding with some small Grace; always when we
have cast an Eye to God, and lifted up our Hands, yea a Finger, has he not
drawn us strongly to himself and forgiven our Sins? What Effort did we ever
make to resist Sin, without feeling immediately his Help and his Grace? Who
ever called on him without being helped, or sought him without finding him? No
Body can say it without a Lie, for he always delights to do us Good. Our
Prayers are agreeable to him, and our Complaints are pleasant. He wills not the
Death of a Sinner, but that he be converted and live.

If we do not always feel the Effects of his Mercy, it is because our
Conversion is not sincere, and we seek some other thing than God; and often
think we love him, when we love our selves: And it is no wonder then that we do
not find Grace, for we have nothing and can give nothing either to our selves
or others; God, being the only True Good, and all that is not God is nothing.
We are often sorry that we have sinned without regarding God, but our selves,
considering the Sins as Evil or disagreeable to Men, and this makes us sorry to
have committed them; on the other side, we look on Virtue as beautiful,
pleasant, and honorable; this makes us desire it, for Good is always Lovely of
it self. But in these we do not respect God, to oblige him to give us his
Grace. It is rather a Self-love that makes us desire it. Yet our Wickedness has
the Impudence to say that we seek God and do not find him. Is it a wonder if
such a Soul feels not the Influence of his God, so long as it voluntarily
Delights in the Creatures in Contempt of the Creator.

I cannot express the Resentment I have that we would attribute to God the
Cause of our Damnation, or that it is for the want of his Grace; since I have
found that God has often prevented and recalled me, even when I would have
forsaken him: And if he had not prevented me, I would have thrust my self into
all the ways that lead to Damnation, being gone so far as to say to his inward
Admonitions; I will never have pleasure in thinking always upon this. I would
have withdrawn from God, and he called upon me again, inwardly to make me
remember him; and so soon as I returned to him, he received me lovingly, giving
me stronger Grace to withstand all that would divert me from him. All Men will
find this, if they would enter into themselves, that God has still prevented
them with his Grace, even though they have been most wicked. Why then to Men say,
when they live ill, That they have not the Grace of God, if he never fail to
give it? They ought to say, It is my Fault, for I have certainly resisted his
Grace, instead of obliging him to give me more by my Correspondence.

It is true God gives all; the Will to do good, and to be saved comes from him,
as also the Courage and Constancy to persevere in it. It is God who does all in
us. Sin only is our Work. All Good comes from God, who is pleased to give it
us. If we think we have Good of our selves, we fall yet into a greater Error
than the former; for though God should not give us Grace, he is not obliged to it
by us, for he has no need of us: But to say that we can do Good and work out
our Salvation of our selves, is most false. For how can a Nothing do any thing
that is Good? Man in his Nothing was Nothing. If he be since Something, it is by
the Grace of God.

He who is all Good, out of whom there is no Good, will not communicate himself
to the Soul, but with its Consent he first shows it its Good, he gives it the
desire to desire it; thereafter he offers it. If the Soul accepts it, it enjoys
him; if it refuse it, it remains deprived of it. For God never gives his Graces
by force, nor without the Consent of the Soul; unless it yield up it self
entirely unto him.

God deals with the Soul as an honest Lover who designs to espouse his
Mistress; he serves her, he courts her, he caresses her, and by all means
endeavors to gain her Friendship. If his Love be agreeable to her, she loves
him reciprocally, and fully enjoys his Person, and all his Goods. If she
disdain this Love, and all his Offices of Goodwill, he withdraws and leaves
her, though with regret, having employed in vain to the utmost all sort of means
to oblige her to love him. He endeavors then to forget her, and to efface her
out of his Memory; not that his Love changes, or that he is unconstant on his
part; but because there is no Correspondence or Agreement on the part of his
Mistress. God loves the Soul as a perfect faithful Lover, he shows her the
excellency of his Love, by Rays of inward Light, which do sometimes warm the
Soul with Love to him. He excites her by good Motions; he draws her by some
sweet inward Consolation; he gives her Desires to love him; he prevents her
with many Favors, showing her that he seeks her and would give himself to her
by the Vexations that she meets with in every other thing that she would love.
But if after a long course of so many Favors, the Soul comes to reject them,
and to disdain the Friendship of her God, to wed her self to some other thing,
whether the Love of her self or any Creatures; God then withdraws from her, and
leaves her; not that on his part his Love changes, or can changes; but because
the Soul disdains his Friendship, to which he would have her to correspond,
that the love he bears to her might be perfect, and that he might fully delight
himself in her; not that he can delight in her for her self, being a Subject
too remote from his Greatness, but for the Love he bears himself: But she only
receives all the Advantages of this Love; for so soon as she gives her full
Consent to the Love of her God, she enjoys him and all his Graces in such
Abundance, that if God himself did not hold her in Life, she would expire with
so many Consolations surpassing her natural Strength.

What hinders all Men from enjoying this Abyss of Happiness? Nothing but Sin
alone! And what is Sin? Nothing but the turning away from God, to turn to the
Creatures. they give diverse Names to it, and yet all are but one and the same
thing, to wit, a turning away from God to love the Creature.

Thus I have set down at some length, in her own Words, her Sentiments about
these Matters; wherein she makes appear that all Men were created by God for
Eternal Happiness and to enjoy him, and therefore that God has not by an
Eternal Decree reprobated any Man for Da^^tion, but is desirous that all should
be saved. That he gave Man irrevocably a Liberty and Free Will which he has not
limited by predetermining the Acts of it from all Eternity, or by any other
manner of way; because he would have him to love him freely, and from a most
willing Choice. That Sin came into the World neither by the Will, nor Decree,
nor Permission of God, but by Man's abuse of the Free Will which he had
irrevocably given him, the greatest Natural Gift that could be bestowed upon
him. That Man notwithstanding of his Liberty can of himself do nothing that is
truly Good without the Grace of God, there being nothing Good but what comes
from God. That in his Fallen Estate he cannot of himself return again to God,
without his preventing and concurring Grace. That he denies his Grace to none,
not to the most Wicked. That Man in his Corrupt State not being capable of his
most inward enlightening Grace, he fails not to recall him by sensible Graces,
Providence, Fears of Hell, Remorse of Conscience, good Desires and Purposes,
etc. That God requires Man's Cooperation with his Grace, to which he enables
him, and will thereupon still give him more Grace. That if he deny this
Cooperation with God's Grace he destroys himself, and puts a stop to the
Operations of the Divine Grace. That if he entirely and absolutely yield up his
Free Will into the hands of God, to be wholly directed by him, he then takes
him into his immediate Direction, enters in that Soul and makes his abode with
it, it does not so much live as Christ lives in it, it is one of his absolute
Elect and cannot fall away. Sure they who consider these things without
Prejudice, will see how suitable they are to the Nature of God; how truly they
represent his Power, and Righteousness, and Wisdom, and Holiness, and Love, and
Impartiality, and Constancy, and Sincerity, and Truth, and what a Consistency
there is between his Attributes and his Providence; how clear it is that Man's
Sin and Damnation is owing entirely to himself, and all his Good to God; what
reason we have to be deeply humbled, to distrust and deny our selves, and what
great encouragement to Prayer, to turn to God with all our Heart, and entirely
to depend upon him. They will see how clearly the Difficulties about Providence
are resolved, which are so unaccountable by the other Systems. They who desire
a full view of all this, and an Answer to the Objections made against it, will
find it done with great Evidence and Clearness in M. Poirets Economy Divine,
particularly Tom. 7. De la Providence Vniverselle.

XIII. XIII. Of the Divine Prescience.
Another Prejudice against the Sentiments of A. B. is that concerning the
Divine Prescience, to wit, that God would not and did not absolutely and
determinately foresee the Sin and Fall of Adam; and this some aggravate as a
horrible Blasphemy against the Omnisciency of God, that he did not know or
foresee from all Eternity in a most determinate manner all things that shall
come to pass in the World. Would Men consider things calmly and without
Passion, they would not be so rash in censuring others, and the often
Experiences they may have of the weakness of their own Understandings, and how
often, and how greatly they are mistaken themselves, may make them less
positive and dogmatical than they are. L' Etoile du Matin. p. 157
A. B. says, That God having created Man after his own likeness, he therefore
made him altogether free, without any Exception or Constraint. That he might be
loved by Man most freely and willingly, and that so God might take his Delight
in so free and voluntary a Love from Man. He therefore would not only not
predetermine him in his Actions, but would not limit his Free Will so far as to
foresee how he should dispose of the same. Not but that by his Almighty Power
he could have foreseen and known all; but he would not so far limit the Liberty
he had given, as that it should be necessitated by any such foresight. Even,
says she, as if a Man, because he loves his Wife and finds her Wise, would give
her an absolute Permission to dispose of his Goods without his being desirous
to know how she should do it. Now as this is a Principle that does not in the
least infringe any of the Divine Attributes, so it clears the Riddles of
Providence, and shows how so great a part of the Creation has degenerated, and
Sin and Wickedness overspread the World, and that without any manner of
Concurrence on God's part, not the least Blemish on his unspotted
Righteousness, Goodness, Holiness, and Purity. Whereas in all the other Systems
it is acknowledged by all unbiased Persons, that there are insuperable
Difficulties how to reconcile the Righteousness and Goodness of God, his Hatred
of Sin, his Sincerity and Truth, with the Events and Mysteries of Providence;
and whatever Difficulties are brought against God's absolute Predetermination
to all Men's Actions how wicked and heinous soever, have no less force against
his determinate Prescience of them. The Two greatest Objections against this
Sentiment of A. B. are, that, 1. It enroaches on God's Omniscience. 2. That it
is inconsistent with Prophecies and Predictions of future Events. To clear the
First, It is to be considered that God is infinitely Self-sufficient, and
stands not in need of any other Being in the World, nor the Idea of any other
Being to make him infinitely Perfect. So that all Beings besides himself and
all their Idea's are the result of his Arbitrary Will and Pleasure, and are
therefore formed of such Natures and Perfections, as he in his infinite Wisdom
and Goodness, was freely pleased to grant. It was free then to God to form the
Idea's of other Beings or not, to create them or not, to give them Liberty or
not, to determine, to foresee all their Acts or not, all this was indifferent
to God, who is Self-sufficient and stands not in need of any thing besides
himself. God having created Man perfectly free in his Light and Love, did
foresee in the general all the possible ways, how he might determine the
Liberty of his Acts; but would not determine them nor foresee them determined,
and far less determine or determinately foresee that Man would turn away from
God, and that by such Ways and Actions, all determined and foreseen. Now it
cannot be said that God could not form a Man with such a Liberty. This would be
indeed to deny his Omnipotency, there is no Contradiction in the Nature of the
thing, and therefore it was not impossible to God. Now suppose that God
determined so to do, and actually did form Man in this Nature, then his not
foreseeing determinately how he would dispose of this Liberty is not a denial
of the Omniscience of God. Such a foresight is not an Object of Knowledge. Our
Concerns have no more relation to his absolute Perfections in himself, than the
dim Light of a Candle has to the Sun. His Knowledge of us, as well as his
forming us, is but the effect of his Arbitrary Will. Besides, if it be said
that God cannot make a Contradiction to be true; will we therefore affirm that
such deny his Omnipotence? Not at all, for this is not the Object of it; even
so, to say that the indeterminate Actions of free Agents are not determinately
foreseen, is not to deny Omniscience, because this is not the Object of it;
yea, to affirm the contrary is to ascribe to God a Knowledge that is not
conformable to the Nature of things; for to know a thing determinately, that
is, in its own Nature (...) ever till the free Agent determine himself, is to
know it contrary to its Nature, and not as it is in its self.

The Divine Decrees being the pure effect of his Good Pleasure, without any
necessity in himself, it was free for God, either to decree from all Eternity,
all that he should bring to pass in all Events, and all Circumstances in all
Ages of the World. Or otherwise having established his general Purposes in
creating of the World, to determine himself as to particular Events and
Circumstances in effectuating and bringing about the same according to
Occurrences in the Corresponding of free Agents throughout the series of Ages.
The former looks like the establishing a Fate, to which not only all the
Creatures but God himself is subjected, and by which he has bound up his own
Hands to all Eternity. And it lays an eternal Restraint both upon his Liberty
and Power. If the other be granted, which is most suitable to the Nature of an
infinitely Free, Wise, Good, and Powerful Being, and is the greatest
encouragement to Prayer, and a continual Dependence upon God, then all the rest
of the First Objection falls to the Ground.

The Learned Dr. Henry More, Divine Dialogues Part 1. p. 80, 81, etc.
declares for this Sentiment upon the very same Reasons. He shows that as no
Body thinks the Omnipotency of God maimed, because he cannot do those things
that imply a Contradiction: So if the certain Prescience of uncertain things
imply a Contradiction, it may be struck out of the Omniscience of God, and yet
God will nevertheless be as Omniscient as he is Omnipotent. That this is no
Impediment to his ordering the Affairs of the World, for that eternal Mind that
knows all things possible to be known, comprehends all things, and so has laid
such Trains of Causes as shall most certainly meet every one in due time in
Judgment and Righteousness, let him take what way he will. That the Perfection
of Knowledge is to know things as they are in their Nature, and therefore to
know a free Agent which is undeterminate to either part, to be so
undeterminate, and that he may choose which part he will, is the most perfect
Knowledge of such an Agent and of his Action, till he be perfectly determinate
and has made his Choice. And therefore to know him determined, before he be
determined, or while he is free, is an Imperfection of Knowledge, or rather no
Knowledge at all, but a Mistake and Error: And indeed is a Contradiction to the
Nature of God, who can understand nothing but according to the distinct Idea's
of things in his own Mind. And the Idea of a free Agent is undeterminateness to
one part before he has made his Choice. Whence to foresee that a free Agent
will pitch upon such a part in his Choice, with Knowledge certain and
infallible, is to foresee a thing as certain even then when it is uncertain;
which is a plain Contradiction or gross Mistake.

And as to the Second Objection, that this is inconsistent with Prophesies and
Predictions of future Events, he shows, That there is still room enough for
Millions of certain Predictions, if God thought fit to communicate them so
thoroughly to the World. For though the Souls of Men are free, yet there are
infinite numbers of Actions, wherein they are certainly determined: Such are
the Actions of all those that are deeply lapsed into Corruption, and of those
few that are grown up to a more heroical State of Goodness. It is certainly
foreknowable what they will do in such and such Circumstances. Not to add, says
he, That the Divine Decrees, when they find not Men fitting Tools, make them so
where Prophecies are peremptory, or unconditionate. This he tells, he proposes
by way of Essay, rather than that of Dogmatizing; and when so worthy and pious
a Member of the Church of England, so rational a Defender of the Faith of Jesus
Christ, against the Socinians and Deists, thought fit to offer this as an Essay
for the clearing of those Mysteries, it may teach others to be more Sober in
their Characters and Censures.

But this matter of the Divine Prescience, and of the certainty of Divine
Predictions and Prophecies is at large and most distinctly treated of in M.
Poiret's Oeconomie de la Providence, Chap. 10. upon more Just and Divine
Principles than those which make the Introduction of Sin and Wickedness into
the World, necessary for the Glory of God, for accomplishing his great Designs
on Mankind, and for the Manifestation of his Wisdom, Mercy, Justice, and other
Glorious Attributes; a most cursed and blasphemous Principle. The former are
most Just Representations of the Truth, and Righteousness, and Goodness of God;
the latter most contrary to all of them: A distinct Account of the former
Principles is to be had best from the Book it self, and I am persuaded a
sincere and impartial Enquirer into Truth will thank me for the Advertisement.

XIV. XIV. Of the Possibility of keeping the Commands of God. and of Perfection.
Another Error in her Doctrine, they say, is that she affirms, That it is
possible to keep the Commandments of God, and to imitate Jesus Christ, and to
attain to a State of Perfection. One would think this should nor be reckoned a
Heresy amongst Christian, who profess to believe the Scriptures and the Gospel
of Jesus Christ. She says nothing but what the Apostle says: Of our selves we
cannot think one good Thought, but through Christ that strengthens us, Renouv.
de l' Esp. Evang. avaunt. prop. p. 18, 19.
we are able to do all things. It is true, says she, if we consider only the
Miseries and Weakness of Man corrupted by Sin, the Gospel-Law is impossible,
but not if we have regard to the Power of God's Grace: This Jesus Christ
intimated to his Apostles, when he told, as to a rich Man's entering into the
Kingdom of Heaven, that it was impossible with Men, but not with God; when a
Man shall entirely yield up himself to him to be wholly governed by him, God
will easily operate in him a Gospel-Life; and Jesus Christ has said, if you who
are evil, know how to give good things to your Children, how much more will
your heavenly Father give his holy Spirit to them that ask him! It is false
therefore to say that the Gospel-Law cannot be kept, since it was given for no
other End, and Jesus Christ brought it from Heaven as the only Remedy of all
our Evils, and the only Means of our Salvation; and has said, I have done these
things to give you an Example. And God will never enjoin Man to do any thing
but what he will give him Grace to accomplish. But such is Man's Wickedness,
that he would impute to God his own Faults, and the Blame of his Damnation on
him, as if he were severe and cruel, by laying on him Burdens of Commands that
are insupportable (that Man may thus be justified and God condemned) though truly
Man only is worthy of Condemnation. -- For God still imparts his Graces to him,
and all those Laws are special Instances of his Love to Man, that by them he
might bring him back to the Love of his God for his eternal Salvation. Reno^v.
de l' Espr. Ev. part 2. p. 66, 67, 68.
And in many Places of her Writings she shows the Possibility of Obeying God's
Commands, and the Blasphemy of the contrary Doctrine, from the Design of them
and the End for which God gave them. Open your Eyes, says she, to see this
Light of Truth; That never any Body will be saved, who dies without the Love of
God; and that no Body can love God if he do not hate himself. These are the
Sentences which God has often confirmed to me, and given me Assurance that they
are true, and that all the Laws and Commands which God has given to Men are
only so many Means to make them return to his Love.

-- Now the whole Doctrine of the Gospel is nothing else but so many Means to
withdraw Man from Sin, that he may recover the Love of God. And when this Law
teaches him Poverty of Spirit, it is to show him that Covetousness has
withdrawn him from the Love of his God, and that he cannot return to it without
leaving off to covet earthly Goods. And when it teaches him to be humble of
Heart, and to choose the last Place, it is because he had lost the Love of God,
by loving himself, esteeming himself worthy of Honor and Glory, though he be
worthy of nothing but Shame and Confusion. And he not knowing this, stands in
need of a Doctrine contrary to his Errors and Ignorance, to make him return to
the Love of God which he had lost by his Pride. And when Jesus Christ declares,
that he came not to do his own Will, but the Will of him that sent him; it is
to teach Men, that to fulfill their own corrupt and perverse Wills, they have
left off to do the Will of God and to love him, and that if they do not
renounce their own Wills to follow the Will of God, and thereby to return to
his Love, they cannot be saved.

Behold how Jesus Christ has brought Physic for our Diseases, being desirous
to cure them by Remedies contrary to our Infirmities; and yet these Ignorants
would gloss away the Gospel-Law as if it were impossible to observe it, as they
say it is impossible to keep the Commandments of God, though both these Laws be
nothing else but Remedies for our Diseases.

Christians, Aveagiement des Hommes. p. 60.
she says, are guilty of Ingratitude, when they say they cannot keep the
Commandments of God nor the Laws of the Gospel, since all these are only true
Means to recover the Love of God. For all the Commandments are no other thing
but Means to loose Men's Hearts from Self-Love and the evil Inclinations that
Sin has brought into their Nature. -- All the Commands import no other thing in
Substance, but that Man must always resist his Self-Love, refusing its Desires,
because, being corrupted by Sin, it can desire nothing but what is Evil, or
tends to an evil End; which because Men did not well know, God would show them
in particular what they ought to do and forbear, that they might recover his
Love. -- Now though he has given his Commands because of our Frailty, yet Man is
so ungrate as to say it is impossible for him to keep those Commands because of
that very Frailty, for the Help of which God has given his Commands as Supports
to his Frailty. -- He is Evil in that wherein God is Good, and takes for
Burdens the Helps that God has given him because of his Frailty. For, if he
had not had any frailty, God would never have given him any Laws, since the
Love he bare to God was a Law to it self, and had no need of any other Guide or
Directour.

The Sum of her Sentiments in this Matter is, The Sum of her Sentiment^ as to
the Commands of God.
that all the Laws of God are given to Man as Helps of his Frailty, as Warnings
to show him what Way he has strayed from God, and as indispensable and
necessary Means to recover and bring him back again to the Love of God (even as
if a Father should give his Son, who was become an habitual Drunkard, or lewd
Person, strict Commands absolutely to forbear such Conversation and such Houses
which would infallibly entangle and keep him still in his Sins) that Jesus
Christ has in his own Example as a Man, shown us both the Necessity of this,
and how possible and easy it is to observe them: That no Man can observe them
by his own Strength, but only by the Grace of God; that we are first Children
before we are Men, and our Falls and Stumbles ought not to discourage us, but
we must get up and go forward, and depend upon God, and he will be with us, as
the Child that is learning to walk must not be discouraged by its Falls, but
must get up and go forward, and hold more closely by its Mother: That they who
are truly regenerated may live in Obedience to God, without Sin, but are not
impeccable, may fall from that State, and yet recover it again by the Grace of
God; that to say the Commandments of God are impossible, is to deny the Merits
of Jesus Christ, the Efficacy of his Intercession, the Power of his Grace, the
Usefulness of his Example; to assert the Force of the Devil and corrupt Nature
beyond that of God, to accuse God of the greatest Cruelty in giving us Laws
which it is impossible to observe, and then to damn us for not observing them;
that it is to indulge and gratify our corrupt Nature in following our own
Wills and Inclinations, and taking our Ease and Pleasure here, and yet to give
us the false Hopes of eternal Life and Salvation hereafter, because of some
speculative Doctrines and Opinions, and some fine Words and Complements that we
give to God. Whosoever impartially considers the ordinary Systems that are
given of the Christian Religion, and the Use that the Generality of People make
of them in their Lives and Practice, will easily see that they are exactly
calculated for dispensing with a Man's following closely the Life and Laws of
Jesus Christ, and allowing him to gratify his corrupt and sinful Inclinations
in things that do not sound harsh in the World, and are not hateful before Men,
without using the indispensably necessary Means of mortifying the Love of
himself and the World, and recovering the Love of God.

It will not be impertinent on this Occasion, Dr Henry More s divine Dialogues.
Dial. 5. ^ p. 117. ^
that the most pious Dr. Henry More, in his Divine Dialogues, having set down
his Reasons of hoping for a glorious State of the Church and a Renovation of it
approaching, lays down some Principles, the Practice of which he thinks would
hasten and advance those excellent Times; and his last and chief Principle is,
Faith in the Power of God and the Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, which he has
promised to all Believers, that by this Assistance we may get the Conquest over
all our Sins and Corruptions, and perfect Holiness in the Fear of God; that
through the Spirit of Christ dwelling in us, we are able to be reduced to that
Rectitude of Life and Spirit which our Savior sets out in his Sermon on the
Mount, and elsewhere in the Gospels. It is this Doctrine, he says, that must
renew the World in Righteousness, and bring on those glorious Times. -- For
what Doctrine but this, says he, can reach the Hypocrisy of Men's Hearts, who
under Color of not being able to be rid of all their Sins, will set themselves
against none, or but the least considerable, or will be sure to spare their
darling Sins, and perpetually decline that Self-resignation which is
indispensably required of every true Christian; nay, they will quit none of
them, under Pretense we must necessarily retain a gradual Imperfection
throughout. And they will be sure to pitch on that Degree that is most for
their own Ease and the Satisfaction of their own Lusts. -- It is this Faith, he
says, p. 422.
in the Promise of the Assistance of the Spirit of Christ in the new Birth,
that must renew the World into the Living Image of God, and make all the
Nations of the Earth Blessed, which must bring the new Jerusalem from Heaven,
and will call down God himself to pitch his Tabernacle amongst Men. I can do
all things through Christ that strengthens me. Much more to this purpose is
said there by that excellent Person.

If this be a Doctrine so necessary for renewing the World and awakening Men
out of their deadly bloth and Slumber in their Sins, what need have all the
Pastors of the Church to lay it to heart themselves, and withal to inculcate
it more earnestly on the People. And though perhaps in some particular Churches,
their Sermons, Confessions of Faith, and Catechisms have propagated quite
contrary Doctrine; yet that O! they may not continue to sow Pillows to the
Armholes of Sinners, and blow them up with the false Hopes of Salvation. Woe to
the Watchmen that do so. Let us remember that the Possibility of obeying the
Commands of God, and the Duty of tending always to Perfection through Faith in
Jesus Christ is the Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures, and also of the holy
Fathers. Romans 5. 5.
The Love of God is shed abroad, by the Holy Spirit, in the Hearts of those who
are truly justified: Romans 13. 10.
And this begets the Love of our Neighbor and the fulfilling of the Law. And 1 John 5 3, 4.
this is the Love of God that we keep his Commandments, and his Commandments
are not grievous; for whatsoever is born of God overcomes the World. 1 John 3.
9. etc.
Whosoever is born of God does not commit Sin, for his Seed remains in him,
etc. It is an impious thing to say the Commands of the Spirit are impossible,
Basil. in verba Mos. Attend tibi, etc. We detest, (says S. Augustine Sermon. 291.
de temp.
) the Blasphemy: of those who say that there is any thing impossible commanded
by God to Man, and that the Commands of God may not be observed by every Man.
This Doctrine has no dangerous Consequence, provided, 1. it be not founded on a
Presumption of Man's Strength, but only in the Power and Strength of the Holy
Spirit. 2. That they who have not attained to Perfection, yet are not excluded
from Salvation, if they be in the Way to Perfection and tending to it.

3. That it be not said that in that State there is not a Possibility of
Sinning, yea, and of perishing. 4. That it be acknowledged that this is not a
Perfection of Degrees, free of all Imperfection. Yea, the Scripture tells us
Luke 1. 5, 6.
of some that walked in all the Commandments of the Lord, blameless. But that
the contrary Doctrine has mischievous and most damnable Consequences, has been
made appear.

Were it not better, M. Poiret Oeconomie divine. Tom. 6. p. 467, 468, 469, etc.
says one, how imperfect so ever we are, yet to hearken to those sincere and
generous Souls, that we may be animated by Hope, and strengthened in God, to
become what we are not yet; than to give ear to cowardly Seducers, who as the
guilty Spies in Moses's Time make the Peoples Hearts to melt, and dispose them
by their diabolical Lies and Calumnies to rebel against God, and to return into
Egypt? It is true, say they, the Land is a good Land, flowing with Milk and
Honey, but the Cities are great and strong, and there are mighty Giants there,
and a strong People, we cannot overcome them, for they are stronger than we. It
is true, say they, at present, the State of Regeneration and of perfect
Christianity is an excellent thing, full of Divine Joy and Delight; but it is
of hard Access; there are high Walls of Difficulties; Sin and the Devil are
strongly fortified in the Hearts of Men; there are strong Passions and a
profound Corruption there; we can never overcome this which is stronger than
we, who being so frail, cannot exactly do that which God has commanded us for
that End. These are the execrable Tongues, and the living Interpreters of the
Will of Satan, whom they will curse to all Eternity, who have been so unhappy
as to hearken to them, and to live in Sloth, and be seduced by their Means. Let
us go up, let us go up, said Caleb and Joshua, wisely, let us go up boldly and
possess this Land, certainly we shall be stronger; if we strive to please the
Lord, he will bring us into it, and will give it to us. Let us not rebel
against the Lord; let us not fear those Enemies, we shall consume them as
Bread; God will not defend them, and he is with us; therefore let us not fear
them. Thus we ought to animate all well-disposed Persons and let them see that
the Ways and the End of Christianity are very possible with the Grace of God.
-- If this Method had been taken, the Doctrine of Christian Perfection and its
Practice would not have been so strange and so rare a thing.

XV. XV. Of Impeccability, not to be attained in this Life.
I shall here mention another Accusation, as having Relation to this, from
which she clearly vindicates her self; and that is, That they said she believed
herself impeccable, and that her Friends did so; at least, that she never
actually sinned, no, not in Thought; and that she derived no Guilt and
Corruption from Adam. She vindicates herself from this Accusation in a Letter
to Serrarius. Tomb. de f. Th. part 2. p. 115, 116, etc.
In the eighth Place, you accuse me, says she, very falsely, in saying that I
say, or that I believe I am impeccable, and cannot fall any more; for in Effect
I have no other Fear but that of not abiding faithful to my God; and I cannot
endure those who say or believe that there is a State of Perfection in this
World in which Persons are impeccable. I look on this as a great Error and
Self-presumption. Is it possible that I should hold my self what I blame so
much in others? I say God ought to be served with Fear and Trembling; and I
never demand of others what I do not first my self; If I say that God ought to
be served with Fear, I still do it first; and I am sure if God did withdraw his
Grace from me, I should fall presently.

You have been present several times when I related to many how I fell, after
that I had been from my Youth prevented by the Grace of God; yet being grown
up, I let my self be carried away to follow the Vanities of the World, and
resisted the Inspiration of God, which drew me to the contrary; and because of
this Resistance, I deserved that God should withdraw from me, and I began to
please my self in the Pleasures and Divertisements of the World, and the
Praises of Men; so that this Fall was the Cause that I gave my self to great
Mortifications of Body, to Watchings, Tears and Prayers, for the Space of about
7 Years. This Story was told many times to your Disciples and in your Presence.
Now if I relate so freely how I fell so basely from so exalted a State of Grace
in which God had put me, how could I say or believe that I could not f^ll any
more, or think my self impeccable? since what a Person has done once, they may
do many times. The State of Integrity, in which I was before my Fall, might
rather have rendered me impeccable, than that in which I live after it.

I do not believe that ever any Creature on Earth can be impeccable during this
miserable Life, where there are so many Stones of Stumbling, a S. Peter the
Apostle, a David according to God's own Heart, a Solomon filled with the Holy
Spirit, with so many others, have committed gross Faults and great Faults,
after having received great Grace from God: Should I be so Ignorant as to
believe that I could not fall any more or fail of the Grace of God? I may do it
assuredly every Moment, if I should withdraw my Conversation with God, to
converse with my Senses; for God forces no Body, having given to all Men
Free Will, with which they shall act to all Eternity; and as long as this Will
abides fixed in God, it is impossible that the Person fall; but if this Will
withdraw it self from a Dependence on its God, it falls easily, even though it
had been exalted as high as a Seraphim. For this Cause I said, I have no other
Fear in the World, but that of not abiding faithful to God; because I know that
so long as I shall be united to him I cannot fall; but if I withdraw my self
from him I shall fall at the first Step, as an Infant that cannot walk. And yet
you dare say, that I call my self impeccable, and when I ask where I have said
or written such things? You tell you draw it from my Writings by Consequences.
But I would gladly ask you if in case I had drawn by Consequences out of your
Letters or Words, that you are a wicked Man, would it be lawful for me to go
and publish it from Town to Town, as you do the ill and abusive Consequences
that you say you draw from my Writings, without letting me know where, how, in
what Place, and by what Words I may have given Matter for drawing of such
Consequences, directly contrary to the true Sentiments that I profess.

I know not with what Conscience you can do this, and say that it is for Good,
that you may warn Persons that I believe my self impeccable, and that I exalt
my self and so forth; but though indeed there were in me any such thing, it would
neither be good nor necessary to advertise so many Persons of it. For First my
Imperfections cannot defile them, it is I that must account for them to God,
and my Words cannot wound them, because all those whom you sent to me are
Persons who have their Five Senses, and a good enough Judgment to discern if
what I say be Good or Evil, and to take only that that may serve them for Good,
l^tting the rest alone, so that it is not necessary for you to go tell them the
Faults which your Fancy has imagined. Your procedure is very contrary to that
of Jesus Christ, who said to the People, speaking of the Pharisees, Hypocrites,
do what they bid you, but do not as they do. You will grant I say very good
things, as the Truth is, but you would annihilate that Good, by the Evil, that
you untruly say is mine. The Evil that was in these Pharisees was not powerful
enough to discredit the Good that was in their Words; but you make my imaginary
Sins mount to so high a degree, that they are capable of discrediting all the
Good, even that which you confess to be there. If you were Just, you would make
a right Judgment of what you ought to do and leave; and if you had Goodness,
you would procure to all those Persons the Good that they might receive by the
Light which God gives me, and if you had Truth, you would not persuade them to
believe a Lie in this, that I say I am impeccable.

Thus, as on the one hand she evidently shows the Duty and Possibility of
obeying the Commands of God, and of tending to Perfection by his Grace only, so
she as plainly shows her Abhorrence of the Presumption of being impeccable in
whatsoever state in this World.

XVI. XVI. Of the Inferior Will of Jesus Christ inclined to please it self.
Another Sentiment which gave no small Offense was, that she says, When Jesus
Christ took on him our Mortality, his inferior Will or Self-will was Evil, so
that he behooved never to follow, but always to resist it. This they cry out on
as a Blasphemy and a great Dishonor done to Jesus Christ; but whosoever reads
without Prejudice the Sixth Letter of the Second Part of Solid Virtue, and the
Accessory Letter in the end of that Part, will see how rashly they condemn her.
Solid Virtue. Part 2. Let. 6. Acces. Let.
There she says, That Jesus Christ was united always to his Heavenly Father in
his Superior part, is most true. I have written that he never contracted Sin,
though he contracted all the Maledictions of Sin, after he clothed himself with
our Mortality. But he resolving to become a Mortal Man, subjected himself to
all the Miseries both of Body and Mind, which Sin had brought into humane
Nature, and according to this, he felt in his natural Will a Rebellion to the
Will of God in Sentiment, but never in Consent, and resisted this Rebellion,
which he felt in his Corruption; for he says, I came not to do my own Will, but
the Will of him that sent me. Now if his own natural Will had been so
inseparably united to the Will of his Father, to what purpose would he have
distinguished these two Wills, since they were but one. For he gives us
sufficiently to understand thereby, that his own Will was Evil, since he would
not follow it; but that of his Father which alone he knew to be Good; for there
is nothing Good but God, and Jesus Christ himself had nothing Good in him but
what God did operate there; so that as he was God, he was most Good, most Wise,
and most Powerful; but as Man, he was every way frail as all other Men, since
he voluntarily clothed himself with their Miseries in the Womb of the Virgin,
and became then truly Man of the corrupt Race of Adam: And in this corrupt mass
he felt a Rebellion of his Will against the Will of God, which all Men feel in
themselves. -- And therefore he behooved to resist his own Will, and contradict
it with so much Vehemence, that he sweat Blood in the Garden, where he says
also to show his wrestings, my Soul is heavy even unto Death; and to his
Father, Not my Will, but thino be done, after his own Will had prayed, If it be
possible, let this Cup pass from me; and even being on the Cross, he says, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? -- Could he say in Truth that he was
forsaken by his Father, if he had not found in his Inferior part the
separation of his Will from that of God; he could not believe nor say that he
was forsaken of his eternal Father, since his Superior part was never divided
from him one Moment: For if it had been never so little separated, he had
certainly fallen into Sin as other Men; whereas it may be said to the Praise of
Jesus Christ, exclusively of all other, that he never sinned, and that his Soul
remained still pure and immaculate in the Frailty and Rebellion with which he
charged himself, for the Love he bare to us, doing as a most faithful Brother,
who throws himself into a Sink of Uncleanness to draw out his Brother, whom he
sees perishing without Succor and Help. For Jesus Christ according to his
humane Nature is truly our Brother, come of Adam our common Father, and he saw
in the Bosom of his Father, that we were all lost in the Sink of our Self-will.
Therefore he would needs throw himself into it, to draw us out and save us from
those Dangers. Would you think it a dishonor if your Brother should
voluntarily throw himself into a Sink to get you out of it, when without his
Help we could not Recover, but must perish for ever; would you not rather be
obliged to honor such a Benefactor, and to esteem as Jewels the Filth that he
had contracted to deliver you from Death? How can you think that this is to
dishonor Jesus Christ? -- All those things are so clear that it is a wonder
how Men find Difficulty in them; but they judge of God and his Works as they
would of their Equals, and would attribute Honor to Christ by the Contempt
they have for his Person: Seeing he would not be so valuable in his humane
Nature, if he had not therein a Will rebellious to the Superior part of his
Soul; for in that case he would have had nothing to fight against, and
consequently could not carry the Victory, which belongs only to victorious
Combatants, and not to those who are in Quiet, and without Enemies. And if
Jesus Christ had not charged himself with our corrupt Will, he could not endure
and suffer, for in this case all his Sufferings would have been insensible, by
the inseparable Union with God, who is Impassible as well as Immortal. And of
necessity this Divinity of Jesus Christ behooved to be in some way separated
from his Humanity, for to work our Redemption: For abiding in this perfect
Union with the Divinity, he could not satisfy for Man, since Man himself owes
this Satisfaction to the Divinity; seeing he alone had done Evil against the
Will of God, he also ought to repair it, but God ought not to satisfy himself
for guilty Man, since being Independent on all things, he has no need of Men
nor of their Satisfaction; but Jesus Christ as Man, being the true natural
Brother of Men, would needs for the Love he bare them, charge himself with the
Miseries and Sins into which they had wilfully plunged themselves. And I think,
Sir, you will find in the Scripture that Jesus Christ was even made Sin for Men.

Not that it is to be understood that Jesus Christ ever sinned, or actually
followed the rebellious Will of his humane Nature. -- But the Inferior and
Mortal part gave him Combats and Assaults which Jesus Christ behooved to resist.
-- Jesus Christ also could not in Justice say to Men as he does, Be ye
Followers of me, if it had not been so; since their rebellious Wills could not
attain to the Perfection of a Will altogether holy and united with that of God.
And if God required of Men the Imitation of Jesus Christ, in case he had not
had Rebellion in his humane Nature, he should have required of them impossible
things, as some erroneous Persons would maintain, saying and preaching that it
is impossible to keep the Commandments of God, or the Law of the Gospel, and
though these are Blasphemies against God, many believe them, because this
Doctrine flatters their Corruption, and lets them live quietly in their Sins
and Negligence, on this false Supposition, that they cannot keep the Commands
of God, nor imitate Jesus Christ.

The Will of Jesus Christ himself, his Apostles, and all Persons living in the
World, even though they were regenerated in the Spirit of Jesus Christ, have all
of them their natural Evil-wills, and all their Virtues and Perfections consist
in resisting them manfully, which they must do even till Death; for though they
have overcome their own Wills by force of Resistance, yet it is but asleep or
mortified, and may be awakened or revive by diverse Accidents. Therefore a
regenerate Person himself has still his Self will to fight against even to
Death: Wherefore the Apostle says Our Life is a continual Warfare, and Jesus
Christ makes appear sufficiently that he had his Self-will to resist even to
Death, when toward the end of Life he yet prays, Not my Will, but thy Will,
Father, be done.

But if you cannot understand these things, says she, leave them for those who
shall understand them; take only of my Writings what is good and profitable for
your Soul, and suspend your Judgment as to the rest, till God give you Light;
for there are many things in them which it is not necessary for the Salvation
of many to understand. -- And it is far better to know well how to love God,
than how to speak well of Virtue:

Thus it appears with what Force and Evidence she advances this Sentiment, The
reasonableness of her Sentiment in this.
and yet how far she is from requiring a Belief of it from all as of necessity
to Salvation, how clearly she shows, that it is so far from dishonouring Jesus
Christ, or being contrary to his Purity, (in that State of Trial and
Temptations to which he voluntarily subjected himself) that on the contrary it
manifests the greatness and constancy of his Love to God, the ardency of his
Charity for Men, the firmness of his Adherence to God amidst all Temptations,
the value of his Merits and Satisfaction for us, and the encouragement he has
given us by his Example to resist all Temptations, and to follow his Steps, and
to depend on him for Succor and Compassion, since we have not a High Priest
who cannot be touched with the feeling of our Infirmities, Heb. 4. 15.
but was in all Points tempted like as we are, yet without Sin. In this
Passage, we see also how expressly she asserts our Redemption by Jesus Christ,
and his Satisfaction for our Sins. They who desire this Matter handled at more
length, may find it in Oecon. Div. Part 5. p. 21, to 60. and in the Accessory
Letter abovementioned. I shall here only add, that we ought not to stumble at
harsh Expressions when we know the main intent of them, as St. Paul says,
Christ was made a Curse and Sin, which seems most harsh. There is an ambiguity
in the Words, Evil, Corrupted, and Corruption, which may either signify Sin it
self, or the Effects and Consequences of it. So the Will signifies sometimes
the Superior Faculties of the Soul; sometimes the Bent and Inclination of
sensible Nature to please it self, and in this last Sense one may have a
Self-will evil and corrupted, yet without sinning when he resists it. So the
Sum of her Sentiment is, that Jesus Christ took on him, not the act of Evil,
or Sin, but the Impulsions, the Inclinations, the Temptations, weaknesses of
the Inferior Will, of sensible Nature, not to consent to it in any thing, but
to resist it, and to make all these die in himself by the Power of his Spirit,
and his Eternal Light, and by means most contrary to the Inclinations of
sensible Nature, that he might the more help and encourage his Brethren to the
same Fight and Victory.

XVII. XVII. Of the State of Infants
To some, her Sentiments concerning the State of Children before they have
attained the use of their Reason, is no small stumbling; to wit, That the Will
of Children is bound up in the Will of the Parents, till they have attained the
use of their Reason, and can use their own Free Will themselves, L'Etoile du
Matin. p. 159, 16^, etc.
then they are free to choose Good or Evil, and to be saved, or damn
themselves, according to this Choice. But before they come to the use of
Reason, this Choice is in the Power of their Parents, who may save or damn
them, even as they can give them natural Life or Death; because of the strict
Union and Sympathy between the Body of the Mother and of the Child in the Womb.
If she takes in Poison, the Child dies; if Physic, it is healed; for these two
Bodies are but one and the same Substance divided into two parts. -- This is
true also as to the Soul, so that if a Mother give the Child in her Womb to the
Devil, it is his, till being come to the use of Reason, it resists the Devil,
renouncing him with its Free Will, and abjuring its evil Inclinations to become
the Child of God. -- And if Fathers or Mothers were true Christians, or Persons
regenerated in the Spirit of Jesus Christ, undoubtedly they would produce also
Christian Children in this Regeneration, and till they had attained the use of
their Reason, they would always be God's, by the Free Will of their Parents;
but if they become Wicked of their own Wills after this, they are free to do
it, and their Parents cannot hinder them.

I know many doubt of a Child dying in Infancy can be damned, but it is for
want of Divine Light that they do not comprehend the Works of God, with whom it
is as Just to damn the Child of a wicked one, as it is to save the Child of a
just Man; for he has united inseparably the Will of the Father to that of the
Child, as he has united the Body of the Child with that of the Mother. -- And
if they will condemn this for an Injustice, they may as well hold it an
Injustice that all Men are fallen in Adam, which would be a Blasphemy against
God. -- He created at the Beginning all Men in Adam, as he did all the Trees of
one kind in the first Tree of that kind, etc. and all things with Seeds for to
produce each one their like; which will never change, for the Works of God are
Eternal, being created by an Eternal God; and Man not being capable of using
this Free Will in his Childhood, of necessity it must subsist somewhere to be
preserved, till it may reside in the Person for whom it was created: As we see,
the Free Will of all Men was in the Free Will of Adam, since all are Partakers
of his Sin and Miseries that he brought upon Man; for it is most certain, that
God could not have given to Man an inclination to Evil, which he feels from his
Birth, nor the Miseries of Body and Mind in which he finds himself. For God
being all Good, cannot do any Evil; and we must of necessity conclude that the
Free-wills of Men were in the Free Will of Adam when he sinned. And since all
Christians believe that all Men sinned in Adam, why ought they not by the same
Consequence to believe, that Children sin in their Parents, or are damned in
them.

The Catholics believe that all Children are saved, provided they be baptized,
and that those Children shall be damned who shall die without Baptism, but that
they shall not endure the Pains of Hell, as those who sin with their Free Will.
It is true as in Paradise there are diverse Degrees of Glory, signified by
those Words of Scripture, which say, In God's House there are many Mansions,
there are also diverse Punishments in Hell; but it is not true that all
Children dying without outward Baptism shall be damned: For this is but a
Testimony of the Faith which the faithful Christian has in his Soul, which he
declares to all Men by the means of the Water of outward Baptism; but if this
living Faith is not in the Man's Soul, this outward Baptism will serve him for
nothing. This is the Reason why Anabaptists will not baptize Children; but they
themselves seem to have no more Faith when they are grown up, than when they
were Children, for the Scripture says, He who believes in Jesus Christ, does
the Works that he did, which they do not; which shows they do not believe in
him though they are not baptized till they come to the use of Reason. So the Soul
of Man cannot receive Salvation by the means of outward Baptism, when he has
not in him living Faith, or his Parents for him, if he be in Childhood. The
Catholics then have no ground to believe that all Children who are baptized
shall be saved, and that they who die without Baptism shall be damned, since
this depends upon the Free Will of their Parents; who offering willingly their
Children to God to become true Christians, they are accepted of God by the Will
of their Parents, and will assuredly be saved if they die before the use of
Reason: And if others by their Parents are offered to the Devil, and to Sin,
and die in their Nonage, they will be damned by the Evil will of their Parents,
even though outwardly they receive the Baptism of Water, which without Faith is
null, and Faith without Baptism in diverse cases does save.

We see with what strength of Reason she declares this Sentiment, and though
there were nothing else but the Consideration of our case in Adam, it serves to
confirm it; for there is no partiality in God, no respect of Persons, he acts
by the same Measures, and the same Rules, with Creatures of the same Kind and
Qualities.

The Offense we take at this, The reasonableness of this Sentiment.
proceeds from our Ignorance of God and his Works, and the Desire we have to
extenuate the Guilt and damnable Effects of our Unchristian Care of our
Children. When God created things at first, L'Oecon. Divine, Part 3. p. 299,
300, etc.
he did not establish them in the Disorder in which we now see them, but all
good and excellent in their respective kinds. When he established the
Propagation of Man to come from Man, it was not that they might communicate
Imperfections to one another, but the Perfections he had given them; and God's
wise and admirable Conduct in this, is thus in some measure represented. When
he created free and intelligent Beings, it was not possible but that at first
they must be frail and capable of falling away, for then they had no Habits to
Good, which consisting in frequently repeated Acts, and being acquired thereby;
intelligent Creatures at first were not strengthened in Good, and through their
weakness they might abuse their Liberty and fall away. God having seen this
come to pass in an infinite Number of Angels, and desiring to settle other
Creatures in their room, thought how he might place others who from their Birth
or Being might have Habits to Good, and so being thus established in it, might
not so easily fall away. If then all those Creatures should come from one
Source that were habitually Good, then they who came of them should be born all
with an habitual strength to Good, and they increasing and strengthening their
good Habits, those who descended from them should be yet much more established
and invincible in Goodness, and so on by a continual Gradation. But to
accomplish this charitable Design, the first Creature of that kind must be
produced in the common Lot, without an habitual Firmness, but in a State
actually Good, and such care taken to prevent his Fall, as that God bodily
converses with him. If therefore Man do not correspond to this Care, it is
purely his own fault, who of his Free Will has changed into a Source of Misery
that which ought to have been a Source of Communication of Good. Now the same
Reason for which Men were to come of one another by Propagation, is the Reason
also why the Lot of Children is the same with that of the Parents so long as
they have not the use of their Liberty. If Parents had remained in the
Perfection in which God placed them, and increased in it according to his
Establishment, this had been a great Happiness for their Children, who had thus
been Partakers of habitual Good even from their Original; but if the contrary
did afterward happen, this is neither from the Decree nor Design of God, but
purely the fault of Man, with which God's Decree has no concern. Now suppose
that God has appointed that Men should descend of one another by Propagation,
it follows immediately and naturally without the intervention of a New Decree,
that the Lot and Liberty of the Children should be bound up in the Parents so
long as they are not in a State to make use of it freely themselves. As long as
an Effect is in its Cause, it is one and the same with its Cause: And as long
as it is not like to its Cause, and is not Independent on it, it is also in it;
for it goes out from it, but according as it has it self apart the natural and
necessary Faculties and Functions for its own Constitution, and for its
individual Government, as its Cause has, to be naturally complete. If therefore
it have not as yet the free conduct of it self, (being found to be a free
Agent) it is as yet in regard of that in its Cause or in its Parents. Not that
for some Years after a Child is born, his Free Will is yet in an inherent
manner in his Parents, and that it must flow from them into the Child, when he
is farther advanced in Age. But that the Parents produce a Body and a Soul in a
State imperfect enough, so as yet to need their Care and Operation, so to
speak, for some Years, before the Subject which hitherto is imperfect become
perfect. And so long as it is not, it belongs yet naturally to the producing
Cause, which is obliged to have a care of it, as a part of it self, as in
effect it is. Hence also comes the Right which Fathers and Mothers have of
educating their Children, which is not a Right that is positive or may be
dispensed with, or which simply regards the Body; but a natural indispensible
Right, which much more respects the Soul than the Body.

XVIII. XVIII. Of Reason.
Another great Prejudice raised against her was, that she spoke so meanly of
Reason, did not look on it as the surpeam Faculty of the Soul, nor the Exercise
of it as the best Employment, and thought there were such dangerous Fruits of
Sciences, and humane Learning, and the means of acquiring them. In the Thoughts
of M. Pascal, there are, I remember, excellent Reflections about the Three
different sorts of Grandeur, which have their different Empires, Dignities,
Honors, etc. and may be called Divine, Rational, and Earthly; the Grandeur of
Charity or the Love of God, that of Reason, and that of worldly Empire and
Honor. Alexander and others have excelled in the last, and seem Great to the
Eyes of Flesh; Archimedes and others have excelled in the second, and seem
Great to the Eyes of Reason. Jesus Christ appeared in none of these Grandeurs,
had neither Learning nor worldly Greatness, and was of no regard neither to the
Eyes of the Flesh, nor those of the Great Philosophers, and of Reason; but O!
how Great was he in the Eyes of Charity! how Meek and Humble, and Patient and
Self-denied, in a Life of absolute Poverty, Contempt, and Pain for the Love of
God and Men. Now all the Writings and Actions of A. B. tending to draw Men into
this Kingdom of Charity and the Love of God, which is of a quite distinct Rank
and Order from that of humane Reason, as well as of worldly Greatness, it was
no wonder that she put no great Value on the one more than the other, they
being both unspeakable Hindrances in the way to it, and the second more than
the third.

She shows that there is in the Soul a Principle for above humane Reason, La
Saint Visiere. Tomb. de la ^ausse Theol. Part 1 Let. 12.
and that is Divine Faith, which does not consist in believing only with the
understanding the Twelve Articles of the Creed, which may be done by a humane
Faith, as we believe the recital of some History when a Person worthy of Credit
relates it; this gives not to the Soul any Divine Virtues, which God only can
operate in us. Faith is a Divine Light which God infuses in the Soul, which
makes us to know and desire Eternal things, and despise Temporal. It is not a
natural Quality, as our Reason, but a Divine Quality, which proceeds from God,
as the Beams do from the Sun, as nothing can make us see the Sun, but the Sun
himself. It was communicated to all Men at their Creation, lost by their Fall,
renewed by the Merits and Grace of Jesus Christ. When it shines in our Souls,
it warms them with the Love of God and Men who bear his Image and Likeness, and
produces Charity: And this Charity regulates all our Life, and gives weight and
measure to all our Actions. For Divine Faith is always living and operating; It
partakes of all the Divine Qualities, Righteousness, Goodness, and Truth. So
that he who has Faith in his Soul cannot be Unjust, nor a Liar, nor a Deceiver,
nor Wicked, nor seek his own Interest, his own Glory, his own Pleasure or
Satisfaction; seeing all these respect time and earthly things. Humane Reason
is an Inferior Principle that may indeed convince us that there is a God, the
Author of Nature, who made and sustains all things, but this cannot produce in
our Souls, Faith and Charity, Virtues derived immediately from God, and not
from Nature, or the Understanding of Man, which is a frail Creature limited to
Earth and Time. And to think to know or comprehend God by the natural
Understanding, is a greater Folly than the Heathens committed in worshipping
the Sun.

All Men being now void of humane Faith, take up with a humane Belief, and
divide, and dispute, and quarrel, and hate, and despise one another, without
knowing wherefore, and without perceiving that the Folly they have in
themselves is more to be despised than what they require in their Brother.

The active Exercise of our Reason, when deprived of the Light of Faith, serves
but the more to confound and darken us, it keeps us in a vain Amusement, makes
us neglect the necessary means of obtaining Divine Faith, blows up the Heart
with Pride, makes us despise the most Divine Truths when they do not accord
with our Principles, and value our selves beyond others; though humble ignorant
Persons are more to be regarded, as being more disposed to receive the Light of
Faith, than those Learned who have drunk in the Doctrine of Men. She blesses
God that preserved her from this, for then she should have been incapable of
receiving that of the Holy Spirit. Jesus Christ called the Simple and Ignorant
to be his Disciples and Apostles, it was they whom he trained up to instruct
and teach others the way to Salvation. When a Learned Nicodemus came to him, he
told him, that unless he became as a little Child he could not enter into the
Kingdom of God. He founded no Colleges nor Academies to train up his Followers
in all sorts of Learning, but taught them by Word and Deed to deny themselves
in all earthly things, and to take up their Cross and follow him. True Religion
is preserved or received by the same means by which it is at first instituted
and established.

They who say in another case that Christ being more faithful than M^ses, in
all the House of God, who yet left not a Pin of the Tabernacle unmade, and
therefore he surely could not be wanting in ordering what was fit for his
Church, may examine their own Measures by this Rule.

She says, The Schools and Doctrine of Men have corrupted the true Sense of the
Scriptures, and by their Learning authorize all sorts of Sins; that it seems
the Schools are expressly instituted to forge Cases of Conscience capable of
leading Men to Hell. For what need is there to Gloss the Gospel, and the Life
of Jesus Christ? They are clear Truths which Jesus Christ taught by Word and
Deed, that we must be poor in Spirit, humble in Heart, desirous to suffer
Persecution for Righteousness sake, and to do to others as we would have them
do to us; but to corrupt all these things, the Learned make Glosses, that it is
not against Poverty of Spirit to labor or trade that we may get Money, and
make some Fortune in the World, and to flatter Men the better to their Ruin,
they add by Word, that we must possess Riches as not possessing them; which is
a great Deceit, for Men are not now so disposed as those of the Old Testament,
who received Temporal Goods from God as a Blessing to employ them to his Glory,
not having their Hearts any ways wedded to them, as those of our Time, who
incessantly covet Riches, desiring still more and more. It is an infallible
Truth that all who would be saved must love God with all their Heart. And if we
ask those Divines if it be not lawful for a Man to love his Father, Mother,
Wife, Children, Kinsfolk, Friends, yea his Country, Money, House, Honor,
Divertisements, Meat, Drink, Clothes, and every other Creature; they will
answer, yes; because they love them themselves, and yet imagine they fulfill the
Command of God, of loving him with all their Heart; and to disguise this Lie
the better, they will say, We must not love all these things inordinately,
giving us to understand thereby, that our Hearts may be well divided into so
many different Affections without sinning, which has so authorized the neglect
of the Command of loving God with all our Heart, that no Body thinks it is
needful. They live and die in the Love of all sorts of Creatures and yet think
to be saved; for their Divines have found out Philosophical Reasons to maintain
this.

Yet, Appel. de Dieu. Part 2. p. 58, 59.
she says, what she has written of the Learned, is not that she will despise
Learning or the Study of Sciences and Languages: Since all these things may
serve for the Glory of God, when we will apply them to those Ends; and moral
Virtues give Advantage to divine Virtues. For a well bred Person will still be
more docile in the Practice of true Virtue, than one ill-bred; and one of good
Learning will be more able to understand and receive true Virtue than a rude
and ignorant Person; so that what, says she, makes me fear that few of the
Learned and of the Great shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, is that I see
in effect that very few of them are humble in Heart, and that it is impossible
(speaking naturally) that they should not esteem themselves more than another,
as having more ground for it. And unless by Divine Virtue, a Learned Person
know the Misery and Ignorance into which Sin has plunged him, he can never be
without Self-esteem and Presumption of Spirit, which things God resists, and
does not give them his Grace; for of necessity they must be humble in Heart to
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

But because this Sentiment, The Nature and Order of the Faculties of Man. M.
Poiret. De Erud. Solid, supersic. and falsa.
concerning the Nature of humane Reason, is so contrary to the common Opinion
of the Learned, I shall here briefly represent it in a Light and Method
conformable to our ways of reasoning and enquiring into things; as it is most
rationally and fully accounted for by M. Poiret in his Treatise De Eruditione,
to which I refer those who desire to enquire farther into it for full
Satisfaction.

1. The Original Ends of God's creating Man being to enjoy him and all his
Works, the one as his Essential Happiness, and the other as Accessory, he
therefore gives him an Immortal and Divine Soul and a Material Body, and endues
these with suitable Faculties capable of enjoying this twofold Happiness; the
one material and sensible, his bodily Senses by which he might take in the
Beauty and Delight of all the Creatures; and the other Divine and Spiritual,
his Understanding, by which he might be capable of enjoying God and Divine
things, and of receiving his Light and Love.

2. Those Faculties are passive, and do not by any activity of theirs, produce
their Objects, but only are laid open and turned to them to receive them. Our
Eyes do not form the Light, but only passively receive it and the Beauties of
the other Creatures; and in the Night, though we open and turn them about never
so earnestly, we meet with nothing but Darkness. So is it as to our spiritual
Faculties and their Objects.

3. Those respective Objects when they are present to their respective
Faculties, do make so strong and vivid an Impression on them, that in their
Absence we are capable of forming to our selves in our Minds, Images and
Pictures of them, and of compounding, or dividing, or comparing these Pictures
together, and of forming Propositions and Consultations about them, and
according as these passive Faculties have received due and vivid Impressions,
or faint, or none at all, from their respective Objects, we are accordingly
capable of forming true or false Pictures of them. And this is the active
Faculty which we call Reason.

4. The Knowledge we have by the Impressions from the Objects themselves in our
passive Faculties, is a loving, solid, real Knowledge, making us enjoy the
Object, and the Delight, and Happiness it can give us. The Knowledge we have by
the Exercise of this active Faculty of our Reason, is a dead, dry, barren,
superficial Knowledge, that communicates nothing to the Soul of the Delight and
Reality of the Objects themselves. We see what a difference there is between
beholding the Sun, and forming to our selves Idea's and Pictures of him in his
Absence; the first enlightens, warms, delights, directs us, lets us see the
Beauty of all the Creation; the other affords nothing of this; and if we had
still been Blind and never seen the Light, even the very Pictures of it, we
fancy to our selves, would be false as well as superficial. Now it is just the
same as to the spiritual things; the natural Man perceives not the things of
God, they seem Foolishness to him. His Idea's and Reasonings about them are
like a Blind Man's Reasoning about Colors, and though they were never so Just,
yet they cannot make him Happy, nor to enjoy the Object themselves, no more
than a Man's drawing the Pictures of Light, Fire, Meat, and Drink, can
enlighten, warm, and nourish his Body. Our Souls must be turned to God and
taken off from all other things; And blessed are the pure in Heart, for they
shall see God. The Knowledge we have by Reason then is a superficial, barren,
and dead Knowledge, does not bring to the Soul the true and living Knowledge of
God. They who give themselves up to it, do really deny God, make their Reason
their God, are guilty of a more dangerous Idolatry than they who worship the
Sun; and how universal this Evil is now in the World, he that runs may read.
The true and living Knowledge of God is to be had only from God, our divine
Faculties must be turned to him, and turned away from other Things, that they
may be enlightened by him; they are in our corrupt State more dead and defiled
and vitiated than the weakest or most blinded Eyes, and Reasoning will not
recover them, more than it will give Eyes to the Blind. Physic is
indispensably necessary to heal them, and the Laws and Life of Jesus Christ
transcribed into our Hearts and Practice is the only Remedy for them.

XIX. XIX. Of forming a new Sect.
They accused her that she designed to form a new Sect and Party, and so to
increase the Divisions and Schisms in Christendom; whereas no body did more
deplore the Divisions of Christians than she. She saw that Schisms and Sects
served only to destroy true Charity, the Love of God and Men, and brought in
nothing but Hatred, Envy, and every evil Work, under a Cover of different Forms
and Opinions: She desired nothing but to reunite Christians in one, in the
Spirit of Jesus Christ, and to have obtained that, would have been willing to
have spent to the last Drop of her Blood. She protested a hundred and a hundred
times, that she would establish no Party nor draw any after her, but send all
to Jesus Christ, and to the Practice of the Doctrine of the Gospel. She shunned
the Conversation of Men, and lived always shut up in a Chamber; she wished
never to see any Body, provided they were all united to God. To set up a Sect,
is to leave a Society and a certain public Worship where Persons were once
Members, and to establish another, to which they draw by human Motives as many
Persons as they can, and acknowledge them as Members of it when they make a
verbal Profession of this new Worship, and are joined to those Persons and
their Opinions. Now she established no new Worship, nor new Exercises, nor
Laws, nor Rules that savor of a Sect, but only by her Life and Writings,
called on People to return to the Love of God, and to imitate the Life of Jesus
Christ, in which State they were not, and without which they could not be saved.

In her Letter to M. Reinboth, Le Temoign. de Verite. part 2. p. 45, 46.
Superintendant in Holstein, I am very far, says she, from making a new Church,
as some maliciously slander me, for I bring no new thing, and Novelties are
very displeasing to me. I am careful therefore not to introduce any; but I
labor to advance in a Gospel-Life and to practice it. And all my Writings, and
all I said formerly to well-disposed Persons, aimed only at this, and I forbear
now to speak to them, because I found it was unprofitable. Your Preachers wrong
me greatly when they cry out that I draw their People from them; for in the ten
Months I have been in Holstein, I have not made Acquaintance with so much as
one Person, not so much as with my Landlady; so that I give them no ground to
say or think that I strive to draw People to form a new Church, or teach a new
Doctrine; seeing that which Jesus Christ left us, is the most perfect, and the
last that God will send unto Men. No new thing needs be invented; but we should
labor to perfect our selves in it, and to put it truly in Practice instead of
Disputing about it; for all these Disputes are raised by the Devil, to bring
Hatred, Divisions and Discords amongst Christians, whereas the Church of God
should be united in Peace and Love, in the meek Spirit of Jesus Christ; and it
is now divided in as many Parties as there are different Sects, which is
lamentable, and disturbs the Peace of Christian Souls, and makes that they do
not love one another; though Jesus Christ has so earnestly recommended to them to
love one another: They are all partial, and only love the Party which they have
undertaken to stand by, or defend: This proceeds from an Antichristian Spirit,
and not from the Spirit of Christ.

XX. XX. That she despised not Sermons, Sacraments, Pastors.
They libelled her, that she despised Sermons, Sacraments, Pastors,
Priesthood, and all Government; which were all most horrid Calumnies. This,
says she, (in her Letter to Dr. Nieman, Superintendant in Holstein) is a gross
Calumny; for I wish with all my Heart that both Church and State may continue
in Vigor; for otherwise there would be no Knowledge of God in the Land, nor
Commonwealths maintained. Le Temoign. de Verite. part 2. p. 199, 200 etc.
Seeing Preachings and Sacraments preserve amongst Men the Memory of sacred
things; and States keep their People in their Duty by Justice, or else there
would be nothing but Confusion, and the Good would be destroyed by the Wicked,
if there were no Government and Magistrates to rule and govern them. -- I
indeed despise the Abuse of Churches, and Sermons, and Sacraments, but not the
Use of them, nor the Essence of these, which are established by God, as is also
Government and Magistracy. And there is a great Difference between the
despising a thing in it self, and the Abuse that is made of it. For it is one
thing to say that every Sect abuses the Holy Scriptures, and another to say
that the Scripture is of no Worth, or to despise it because many abuse it. Now
it seems Buchardus would make People believe that I despise all these Holy
Things, when I despise only the Abuse of them, as true Christians ought to do,
who lay to Heart God's Honor: They ought to lament when they see Men to
degenerate as to the Love of God, that they seem to hold merely to the Bark of
the things ordained by God, without squaring their Lives by them.

-- They say I despise the Sacraments and other Offices of Piety; while I
believe there is no body that esteems them more than I do: For the Quakers
accused me, by their defamatory Treatise, That I had an abominable Doctrine,
sending Persons to Churches, Sermons, or Sacraments, or other outward
Solemnities; desiring to infer from this, that I had not the Spirit of God,
since I still esteemed those outward Devotions, and also incited others to make
use of them as Means to approach unto God.

Your Preachers may read what I have written in that Advertisement upon this
Head, so that I need not enlarge my self farther here, but will satisfy them
as to what they say, That in effect I despise the Sacraments and other outward
Devotions, because I do not go my self to the Church nor to the Sacraments; and
they will needs reject all that I say in the Praise of Holy Things, because I
do not observe them my self to give an Example to others; and would infer from
thence, That I speak with Dissimulation in praise of Holy Things, and not
sincerely as I think in my Heart. This convinces me that they no ways know me.
For if they only knew me outwardly, they would sufficiently see that I am
sincere, and not at all feigned or dissembled; so that if I had in my Heart a
Contempt for the Sacraments and other outward Devotions, I would openly declare
it by Word and Writ; for I have overcome the World, and am not afraid to tell
the Truth of what I know.

I have indeed written against the Abuse of the Sacraments and other outward
Solemnities, but I never spoke against the things themselves, seeing they are
good, and have often served me as Means of Union with God. But if I do not go
now to the Church or Sacraments, it is not out of Contempt of Holy Things, but
because I have no longer so great need of outward Means of Union with God as I
had formerly, when the Conversation of Men, and the Diversion of the Cares of
temporal Affairs did divert my Attention from God. I retired then to Churches,
and approached the Sacraments, that I might be the more recollected and united
to God. But since God has given me the Grace to find this Recollection in my
little Chamber, and to entertain my self in Spirit with God in Solitude, I have
not thought it so necessary to use these outward Ceremonies, which sometimes
would serve me for a Distraction to my inward Recollection.

This is partly the Reason why I have left them off; but this is not all: For
if I had the Freedom to go to Church, I would go to it on the Days commanded,
and would receive the Sacrament at the Times appointed: Since I am under the
Ordinances of the Roman Church, Jesus Christ teaches me to obey the Laws both
of God and Men, as he himself did on Earth, obeying Caesar and other
Superiors, though they were sometimes evil, but their Ordinances good, as I have
particularly shown in the said Advertisement. -- But I cannot go to Church
without hazard of my Life, and it is not lawful for me to expose my self to so
evident Dangers, and Necessity has no Law. There are Persons in the Roman
Church who do as your Preachers, and say that I am become a Heretic, and
therefore would think they did God good Service to take away my Life, and have
even watched diverse Occasions to murder me, which God discovered to me
timously that I might avoid them; and if I would yet go to their Churches, I
think I should not come out alive, but they would stone me as they did S.
Stephen, for having spoke the Truth. And being born and brought up in the Roman
Church, it is not permitted me to go to another without sinning mortally
(according to their Ordinances) so that by Force I must stay in Solitude and
not go to Church, which I suffer willingly, and comfort my self that so many
Fathers Hermits were so agreeable to God while they lived in the Deserts, and
did not use the Sacraments nor other outward Solemnities.

And in her forecited Letter to Mr. Reinboth. Le Temoign. de Verite. Part 2. p.
74, 75.
-- As to what you tell me, says she, that you wish I had not touched the
Ecclesiastic State, I could not omit it, since for them particularly that Work
was made ( The Light of the World) and they ought all to thank God that he has
permitted their Faults to be known, that they may amend them while they are yet
in this World. But in order to this, they must really desire to become true
Christians, such as I have described them; for otherwise they will take God's
Admonitions for the Reproofs of a Wife, which they will not endure. I pardon
them, for they do it out of Ignorance, thinking these are Novelties, though they
be the ancient Truths of God, but a little grievous to those who live according
to the Motions of corrupt Nature. For it would always bear Rule, be praised and
esteemed, and cannot endure Reproof, nor bear its Faults, without taking the
Alarm or avenging it self, opposing still the Truth that reproves it, and will
not acknowledge its Fault. This is the Way of a natural Man, who has not yet
overcome himself, in which your Pastors seem yet to be fixed; since they would
blame me for speaking the Truth of the Degeneracy of the Ecclesiastic State,
of which too much cannot be spoken; and they themselves ought to publish it if
they were free of Passions, and regarded more the Glory of God and the
Salvation of Souls. But impartial and disinterested Persons are no longer to be
met with. Every one looks to his own Advantage, his own Glory and Profit; and
when they are in this State I need not wonder if your Pastors blame me, since
I bring them no Profit, Advantage, or Vainglory.

This is not that I will not honor or prefer Churchmen in their Dignities,
since I esteem them as the Lieutenants of God, of which I have spoken
sufficiently in the Advertisement against the Quakers. For I always distinguish
the State from the Person. I honor Priests, Magistrates, Judges, and other
Superiors, because God has established this Order upon Earth, without which.
Men would be much more disorderly. But I cannot honor the Faults of all those
Persons who are placed in State and Dignity, since they seem to me more heinous
in such, than in the Common People; and I remark that Jesus Christ despised
wicked Priests and Judges, more than he did private Sinners; for he dismiss^d
the Woman taken in Adultery, saying only to her, Go, and sin no more. He called
an Usurer to be an Apostle; he suffered a Magdalen, a common Sinner, to kiss
and follow him. But he does not so treat the Pharisaical Priests or Judges and
Superiors, but gives them publicly many Reproaches and Contempts, calling
them so often Hypocrites, whited Sepulchers, Generation of Vipers, and saying
they made clean the outside of the Cup and Platter, but within were full of
Corruption and dead Men's Bones.

And if you had lived, Sir, in the Times of Jesus Christ, and heard him thus
despise and condemn the Priests and Superiors, you would have taken Offense,
that he blamed so particularly the Ecclesiastic State, since you take Offense
now that I blame the Faults which God has made known to be universally in that
State. And if you believe there are amongst others some good Men who are not
guilty of the Faults that I have marked in that Light of the World; it is not
of them that I speak, since I will not blame the Office in it self, seeing God
has established it, and Jesus Christ himself honored it, even in wicked
Persons, whom he reproved for many Faults; for after he had healed the Leper,
he commanded him to go show himself to the Priest. It is not to be believed
that this was to a holy Priest, since he was of the same Synagogue with those
who out of Envy crucified Jesus Christ; but he would teach the Respect and
Honor that ought to be had to the Priestly Dignity, though the Vices of the
Persons placed in that Dignity are much more displeasing to God than the Vices
of others, and they will certainly be more punished in Hell for their Dignities
and Offices which they have unworthily discharged. Therefore I had more ground
to touch the Ecclesiastic State than any other on that Occasion, when I was
conversing with Ecclesiastic Persons: For it would not have touched them so
nearly to have spoken to them of the deplorable State in which Lawyers,
Merchants, Physicians, and other secular Persons do now live, since the Vices
of others could not be corrected by those Churchmen, and they might well
correct their own Vices which I discovered to them to be crept into the
Ecclesiastic State; for they must account for this before the great Judge.

I never repented of having touched on that Occasion the Ecclesiastic State,
since this is the chief Cause of the Degeneracy of Christendom: For if the
Priests had continued true Christians and Disciples of Jesus Christ,
undoubtedly they would yet draw to that State of Christianity a great Number of
People after them. But when we see the Heads of the Christian Church degenerate
from that Spirit, and that they will not so much as hear their Degeneracy
spoken of, what can be hoped for from the People, but that they will become
still worse, as Experience makes appear, etc.

Thus it appears how far she is from overturning or despising Priesthood and
the outward Ordinances, how plainly she distinguishes the Offices and Dignities
from the Persons, the Use of Divine things from the Abuse of them; and that she
as much honors the former, as she exposes the Evils of the latter, and why it
is the Churchmen on all sides raise such a Hue-and-Cry against her. I designed
once to have set down here her execellent Vindication of the Sacraments and
outward Ordinances, and the Dignity and Reverence of the Priesthood from the
Reproaches of the Quakers, in her Advertisement against them. But lest it
should make this Paper swell too much, I have forborne it.

XXI. XXI. Nor rejected the Holy Scriptures.
They accused her that she rejected and despised the Holy Scriptures; from
which she vindicates her self in many Places. This, says she, is the greatest
Falsehood of all; for I said from the Beginning, that if my Life and Words are
not conformable to the said Scriptures, they ought not to believe me: Tomb. de
la fausse Theol. part 2 p. 78 Light of the world. part 1. p. 101. Lum. nec en
tenebr. P. 2. p. 81.
This I have often repeated since, and say it over again now, and on all fit
Occasions, I tell every one that the Sense of the Scriptures is the Nourishment
of Souls. -- It seems to me, says she, a very ill thing to forbid Christians
the Reading of the Bible in the vulgar Tongue, since it must teach us all that
we ought to do and forsake, etc.

The only Good, says she, that remains in the World is, that the Text of
Scripture remains in its Integrity, that the Devil has never had Power to
change and falsify it, but to oppose it only by the Glosses and Inventions of
Men, who endeavor to accommodate it to the modern Corruption, but in vain;
they cannot change it, since they who will follow Jesus Christ may yet find it
entire, and draw in its Fountain all that is written by the Apostles, Prophets,
and other Souls filled with the Holy Spirit. In this the Promise of Jesus
Christ is fulfilled, That Hell shall never be able to pluck it out of the Hands
of the Christians, that it may serve for Food and Nourishment to all true
Believers, who not stopping at the broken Cisterns of human Learning, shall
draw out of the Fountain of living Water to the End of the World.

In a Word, through all her Writings she recommends the Reading of the Holy
Scriptures, looks on it as one of the greatest Miracles of Providence that they
have been preserved uncorrupted and entire, to be a standing Testimony against
the Professors of Christianity, while their Lives are a flat Contradiction to
them. That the Doctrine of Jesus Christ contained in the Gospels is the last
Doctrine that is to come into the World, and fully directs us the Way to
eternal Life, and desires that her Life and Doctrine may be examined thereby,
and no Regard had to it but in so far as it is conformable thereunto; and that
she aims at nothing but to persuade People to embrace in their Life and Spirit,
the Life and Doctrine of Jesus Christ contained in the Gospel.

It is true, she did not give her self to reading of the Holy Scriptures, being
immediately and inwardly taught by God the same Truths which are contained in
them. Every one, says she, ought to use the Means that lead them best to the
Love of God, because the Ways to this Love are diverse, some attain to it by the
Means of reading seriously the Holy Scriptures, others by humble assiduous
Prayers, others by Solitude and retiring from human Conversation, and so of
many others. It is of small Moment to know by what Means others have attained
to this Love of God, provided we take the Means that are most fit for us to
attain to it also.

There are diverse Ways, Tomb. de la fausse Theol. Part 1. p. 17, 18.
as there are diverse Sins which are Hindrances in those Ways, which every one
ought to oppose, according as he knows them to be in himself, without offering
to make one general Law and Rule whereby to lead all to God; for he who is not
immediately instructed by the Holy Spirit, would do very ill, if he should not
make use of the reading of the Holy Scripture, or if he should not search for
those who speak by the Holy Spirit; for this would be to tempt God to Will that
he should instruct all Men immediately, while they are so taken up with, or
wedded to the Affairs of this World. And on the contrary it would be very ill
done, if one should make use of Reading or other outward Means, when he has
withdrawn from all Creatures, and finds the immediate Conduct of God. Such a
Soul would oppose the Holy Spirit, and would hinder the operation of his
Graces, if it should make use of Reading or other outward Means, because in
this State it ought not any longer to act, but to be passive, and follow the
Spirit, who guides it it, without operating any more it self.

In doing this, she is far from despising or rejecting the Holy Scriptures;
when I am with a Friend and converse with him by Word of Mouth, and he answers
me after the same manner, we will not then make use of Writing or Letters, and
yet it cannot be concluded from thence, that I reject or despise his Letters;
this way of Communication by Letters is most agreeable, but it is for the
Absent. They who see and converse with one another make no use of Writing, but
they do not despise it; they have a more speedy and delightful way of
communicating their Thoughts. Thus A. B. having inward and immediate
Conversation with God, had no need of the Scripture for to know his Will, she
learned it from his own Mouth, and enjoyed his Presence, but they who have not
recovered that Divine Conversation, must have Recourse to the Scriptures, and
other outward Means, according as they find them helpful to bring them nearer
to God, till they attain to the Enjoyment of himself.

And this is very agreeable to St. Augustin's Doctrine in his excellent
Treatise de Doctrina Christiana. He Hom^ itaque flde, spe and Charitate
Subnixu^, eaque inconcusse retinens, non indiget Scripturis, nisi ad alios
Instruendos, itaque multi per hac tria in Solitudine sine Codicibus Vivunt,
unde in illis arbitror jam completum esse quod dictum est; sive Prophetiae
evacuabuntur. sive Longuae cossabunt, sive scientia destruetur, etc. Aug. de
Doctr. Chr. Lib. 1. Cap. 36.
therefore who is established in Faith, Hope, and Charity, and inviolably
retains them, needs not the Scriptures, unless it be to instruct others.
Therefore many live in the Desert by these Three without Books. Hence I think
that in them is already fulfilled that which is said; whether there be
Prophecies, they shall fail; whether there be Tongues, they shall cease;
whether there be Knowledge, it shall vanish away.

XXII. XXII. That there are no True Christians, etc.
That she declared so positively, that there are no True Christians at present
upon Earth, and that God would make her the Instrument of renewing the Spirit
of the Gospel is another grievous Prejudice against her; this was often
objected to her, and is answered by her in many Places of her Writings. It was
not Uncharitableness, but great Charity to Men's Souls, that moved her to
declare this to all the World. She was persuaded that none were True Christians
but they in whom the Spirit of Christ did live, whose Affections and Desires
were set only on things Eternal, and not on things Temporal; that one could not
be a True Christian by serving God and Mammon both, by joining the Love of God
and Self-love, seeking to please Men and to please God too. She met with many
of good Inclinations, Tomb. de la fauss. Theol. Part 2. p. 155.
but none who were truly Regenerated. She did well, as she says, to tell this,
and she had done a great Evil in saying the contrary; for to have said so to
others could not have profited them, even though it had been true; it could not
increase their Holiness, but rather give them occasion of Vainglory, Nature
being tickled with little. But when we are told that we are not True
Christians, we have reason to use the means to become so, and to humble our
selves before God, that we may obtain his Grace. If there are True Christians,
they will become no less for this Saying; and if there are none, at least some
will be awakened out of their Security and endeavor to become so. If A. B. had
said, that God by an unchangeable Decree from all Eternity had predestined
the greatest part of the World to Damnation, it might then indeed be said that
she is void of Charity to God and Man: But when she declares that God is not
willing that any should perish, but that all should come to Repentance, and yet
that all Men were living in a Contradiction to the Life and Spirit of Jesus
Christ, she could not do them a more charitable Office than to warn them of
their Danger. Will they say the Psalmist was uncharitable, and damned all the
World, Psalm. 14. 2, 3.
because he tells us, the Lord looked down from Heaven upon the Children of
Men, to see if there were any that did understand and seek God; they are all
gone aside, they are altogether become filthy, there is none that does Good,
no not one. Every Man ought to weigh the Truth or Falsehood of this Saying as to
himself, and see if he can make this particular Exception to the general
Saying, There is no True Christians upon Earth; let him set at the Foot of it,
Except I my self. And if his Conscience dare not write down this Exception, he
has reason to thank the Charity that put him to the Trial, without regard
whether it be true or false as to others, which will avail him nothing so long
as it holds as to himself.

And as to the other part of the Prejudice, That God would make her and her
Writings the Mean of renewing the Spirit of the Gospel. Tomb. de fauss. Theol.
Part 2. p 161, 162.
that God will make her and her Writings the Mean of the Renovation of the
Gospel Spirit: She says, It is God who enlightens Understandings, who warms
Wills with his Love, who produces Charity in Souls; in short, who is the only
Giver of all Good; without any Creatures being able to cause to be born in the
Soul of another the Spirit of Regeneration, which is to live again to God, and
to die to ones self. This is a Masterpiece of the Works of God much more rare
and precious than the Body of Man, and nevertheless he will not do it but by
the means of Creatures, who shall be subject to him and will hear his Voice;
who will make others Partakers of the Light which God communicates to them,
that by it they may be enlightened and know their Errors and the Way to become
True Believers. The Understanding, the Speech, and the Hand of such spiritual
Mothers is the Matter with which God will beget his True Children, making them
comprehend his Truths by the Words, Writings, and Actions of those who shall
receive the Word of God immediately, who are few in number, because Men are now
so diverted in the Affairs and Business of this World, that they cannot hear
the Voice of God, though he speak continually to their Heart. And to supply their
Weakness and the Wanderings of their Spirit, his great Goodness causes to speak
and write by sensible and visible Objects, the things which may render all
those True Believers who truly desire to become so. And that her Writings are
of this Nature, full of Divine and Saving Truths, Simple and Solid, Milk for
Babes, and Meat for strong Men, suited for all Capacities and all Ages; they
manifest themselves, as the Light does to those who are not Blind.

And as to their reproaching her, Temoign. de verite. Part 2. p. 43, 44, 61, 62.
that being a Woman, yet she would presume to instruct the World, when St. Paul
would not suffer a Woman to speak in the Church, and therefore calling her in
Contempt and Old Wife, she said, That for her being a Woman she could not
hinder it, since no Body forms themselves; they must ask God, if they would
know why he created her a Woman and not a Man, that she her self had been
displeased at it, but since God made her know it was his Pleasure, she was
content; for she loved rather to be a little Atom in the Will of God, than a
whole World in her own Will. And when she began to teach by her Writings, it
was by an express Command of God, which she long resisted, for which she begs
Pardon; for she could not resolve on this because she was a Woman, who has
never so much Authority in matter of Doctrine as a Man. -- But she came over
all humane Respects, and exposed her self to all their Mockeries. She says, If
the Truths of God must be rejected because they are dictated by a Woman, all
the Great and Learned that ever were in the World ought also to be rejected,
seeing all are equally come of a Woman. Why should they then despise their
Origin, since God does not despise it, but makes use of them to operate his
greatest Marvels, and always Figures the Church, his Spouse, by a Woman. Women
are as capable of receiving the Graces of God as Men, there being no difference
between their Souls, and the bodily difference respecting Nature only; in which
even Woman ought to be more regarded than Men, seeing when God would needs
become Man, he would have a Woman for his Mother, but not a Man for his Father,
and he has done his greatest Wonders by the means of Women. What Triumphant
Victory did Judith obtain against Holofernes; and Esther in the Deliverance of
God's People? -- And whereas it is said, it is not permitted Women to teach,
the Apostle, she says, ordains the aged Women to teach the younger, and to
instruct their Children and Family in the fear of God, and both in the Old and
New Testament we read of many Women-Prophetesses foretelling things to come.
And the Apostle says, it is an honor to a Woman to prophecy with her Head
covered. She says, they ought to let God spe^k by a Woman, if it be his
Pleasure, since he spoke in former Times to a Prophet by a Beast; that he
bestows his Graces and Wisdom on whom he pleases, and Man ought not to ask him
why he does so. That before God it is not Man or Woman that signifies any
thing, but the Spirit of Righteousness and Truth: That they ought not to regard
whether she be Man or Woman, but whether what she says be Just and True: That
she writes by an express Command of God, doing this as secretly as she can,
shut up in her Chamber: That Men are now less disposed to receive his Divine
Light than Women, since their Hearts are blown up with Pride, to apply all
Glory and Authority to themselves, instead of referring it to God, and cannot
endure that a simple Woman as she, should speak of Divine Things, least their
Learning should be less esteemed. So those Great Philosophers will not let God
do his Marvels by the means of a Virgin, but will oblige him to operate by
Great Divines, 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28.
not remembering that he has said, * He has chosen the weak things of the World
to confound the things that are mighty, and the foolish things of the World to
confound the wise, and base things of the World, and things which are despised,
yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are, that no
Flesh should glory in his Presence. And thus he destroys the Wisdom of the
Wise, and brings to nothing the Understanding of the Prudent; so that it shall
be said, where is the Wise, Where is the Scribe, where is the Disputer of this
World? This they will acknowledge was the way of God's Dealing in former Times,
and why would they have him to alter it now, when the Pastors, Doctors, and
Teachers, the Learned, the Scribes, and the Disputers of the Age, are as full
of their own Wisdom, of their humane Studies and Learning, as ever the Scribes
and Pharisees, the Wisemen and Philosophers were when God raised up Publicans
and Fishermen to confound their Wisdom and Learning by the Simplicity of their
Words.

That it is not St. Paul's Meaning that God may not thus communicate his Light
and Truth to a Woman as well as Men, 1 Timothy 2. 11, 12. 1 Cor. 14. 34, 35.
Preface Apolog^t p. 21, 2^, 23.
for the Good of others, is evident from the Sayings themselves. In his time,
when the Faithful met together, it was not as now, when a Man who has his Head
full of Learning declaims an Hour or two alone, very often with Conceitedness
enough, to the People, who must take for good Coin all that he says is such,
and which he stamps with Passages of Holy Scripture. But then there were mutual
Conferences where each of the Faithful were allowed to tell their Sentiment, or
ask that of his Brethren and Elders; but that all might be done in Order, St.
Paul ordains that their Women might not be of the number of the Interlocutors,
either by telling their own Thoughts, or asking those of others; but that they
should do this at Home, and even there should not pretend to teach their
Husbands, but learn of them. It is evident then, he speaks of ordinary Women,
married, and encumbred with the Cares of their House, who have need to learn,
and yet would be thought very Knowing, and it is a Rule of Decency to avoid
Confusion. But at present they would have St. Paul's Meaning to be, that Women
enlightened by God, in a free State, always employed about Divine things,
should, I do not say abstain from speaking publicly, but even not write in
secret, in their own Houses, the saving Light that God communicates to them,
and commands them; and that when there is no fear of Confusion, since such
being very rare, it is not to be feared that their number will bring Confusion.
This is as far from his Opinion, as Falsehood from Truth, who a little before
allows a Women to Prophecy, (if she have the Gift of it) provided she be
veiled; who knew that Anna spoke in the Temple, and had seen Four Virgins
Prophecy, which were the Daughters of Philip the Evangelist. Thus those
envious Usurpers of the Key of Knowledge and Instruction, are they become such
absolute Masters of it as to oblige God to give it to no Body but to them? A
Passage of the Life of T^res^ is remarkable to this purpose, as they spoke to
her one Day of those Words of St. Paul, and she thought on them, God said to
her, Tell them not to be directed by one single Passage of Scripture, but let
them consider other Places; and ask them, if they will bind up my Hands?

XXIII. XXIII. The Accusation of Pride.
They accused her of intolerable and blasphemous Pride, in speaking well of her
self, in pretending to know the Accomplishment of the Holy Scriptures; yea, and
to understand them better than they who wrote them; that she calls her self a
Mother of True Believers, and that she exalts her self above the Prophets,
Apostles, the Virgin Mary; yea, above God himself. It is easy to give an ill
turn to ones Words, but Charity thinks no Evil, and interprets them by the
whole Tenor of their Life, Spirit, and Sentiments.

1. 1. That she exa^ted her self above Prophets, Apostles. Pierre de Touch. p.
257.
That she exalted her self more than the Prophets, Apostles, the Virgin Mary,
etc. she said was an impudent Lie; for I know very well, says she, that I am a
simple humane Creature as all other Men, come of the corrupt mass of Adam. And
I do not say, that I am either Prophet or Apostle, or Virgin Mary, or God
himself, as this Bucchardus says, but I declare I am a frail Creature as all
others, to whom nevertheless God has sent his Light of Truth to communicate it
to Men.

Did they believe truly that there is a living God, they durst not treat so ill
the things which are declared from God, and cause to be burnt by the Hangman
the Books which the Holy Spirit has dictated, of which they may have Evidence
both from God and Men; for they who see me write, know very well that I do it
without any humane Speculation or Study, and that this flows from my Spirit as
a River of Water flows from its Fountain, and that I only lend my Hand and my
Spirit to another Power than mine. -- Many Persons are Witnesses of this. God
also has given me a more sure Testimony, by imparting to me his Righteousness,
his Truth, and his Charity; for these things cannot come from Nature, which
being corrupt, cannot produce any Good, nor any Divine Virtues; because I am
come from the corrupt mass of Adam, as all the rest of Men, there could not be
in me any Righteousness, Truth, or Charity, which are all Divine and
Supernatural Virtues, which come not into the Souls of Men, but by the work of
the Holy Spirit; for none but God only is perfectly Just and True. And no Body
can glory in the Righteousness, Truth, and Charity that he possesses, without
having a disordered Mind; because these Virtues are no ways in the Person, but
in God alone, who imparts them to whom he pleases. And he who has received any
of these Virtues ought to glorify God, and not to glory in himself for them,
as by the Grace of God I do not glory in my self. And I do not fear that any
Body can prove that I ascribe any Perfection or Virtue any manner of way to my
self; for God has given me too much of the Light of Truth to do this, having
made me see clearly that all Good comes from God, and all Evil from Man and
from the Devil; which two Creatures being equally withdrawn from God, the
Fountain of all Good, are fallen into all sort of Evil. And therefore nothing
can proceed from the corrupt Nature of Man but Evil and Sin; for this cause a
Man can have no occasion of glorying in himself for his Virtues, which are not
his, nor at his disposal. And therefore Bucchardus has said most injuriously in
his Book, that I esteem my self more than the Prophets, Apostles, etc. of whom
I do not know to what Degrees of Grace they arrived, that I should compare them
to the Graces that God has imparted to me. I know well that I am a poor
Creature subject to many Miseries and Infirmities, which makes me often humble
my self before God and Man: But I well know also that God dwells in my Heart by
his Righteousness, Truth, and Charity, and that he makes me govern all my
Actions by the square of these Virtues, which is a sufficient Evidence to me
that it is God who guides me, since the Devil and Nature have nothing of these
Virtues. And therefore there cannot be a surer Testimony that a Soul is guided
by the Holy Spirit, than when it is possessed with the Righteousness, Truth, and
Charity of God.

I imagine if Bucchardus heard that I say, I have the Truth, Ibid. p. 209.
Righteousness, and Charity of Moses, he will condemn me more than ever, having
done it so often through his Book, though I had not there spoken openly of the
Graces which God had given me. But the being condemned by so imperfect a Man,
can do no hurt to my Soul. For God knows, it is he who commands me to do this,
and it matters little whether it please or displease Men; it is enough to me,
when it pleases God. Yet I will not say that I have the same Degrees of the
Virtues, Righteousness; and Charity that Moses had: For God has not revealed to
me how much of them he imparted to him; but I will only say, that my Soul is
possessed in proportion with the same Charity, Righteousness, and Truth that
Moses had; but if he had a Pound of each of these Virtues, and I an Ounce only,
I do not at all know, neither will I ask; for the Virtue of another does not
concern me, it is enough for me that I be faithful in what is committed to me.
If God has given me his Divine Love, I must do all my Actions, and form all my
Intentions for this Love, without seeking in any thing my own, or the
Satisfaction of Men; and if God has given me his Righteousness, I must exercise
this Virtue equally in things great and little, according to my Employ, doing
always justly to every one, even to my Enemies. And God has so planted this
Righteousness in the bottom of my Soul, that I cannot suffer Injustice toward
the Beasts, far less toward any Person. And the Truth that God has imparted to
me is so rooted in my Soul, that I suffer for it all sort of Persecutions. And
though it be hard for me to suffer so much for having told the Truth which God
commands me, I cannot cease to do it. For it is better to obey God than Man.

As to the Accusation of Pride, 2. That she understood the Holy Scriptures
without having read them, etc.
for saying that she underderstood all the Holy Scriptures without having read
them, that it was enough for the Fathers that they understood what Men had need
of then, that God now reveals the Secrets which he would then have kept to be
hid; that the Prophets have indeed declared all that must come to pass, but
neither they themselves nor any others understood their Sayings; that all this
was spoken without blasphemous Pride, appears by the rest of the Discourse, and
the comparing it with all her Writings. That the Prophets had Visions of things
to come, which they themselves did not perfectly Understand, cannot be denied;
that God may give a fuller understanding of them near the time of their
Accomplishment is no absurd nor impossible thing; that he has been pleased so
to do to this Virgin, all her Writings do testify; that she declares this
without Pride, as it appears in all her Writings, so in that very place cited.
Light of the World Part 1. p. 136, 137.
Where she says, Yes, Sir, I may say it with Confusion, that it has pleased God
to communicate his Secrets to me which he has hid from the Wise and Great of
the Earth. If such has been his Will, who can reprove it, or find fault with
that which he finds Good? Is not he the absolute Lord of all things? That which
he will, he can do without Man's being able to contradict it, for no Body is
capable of giving Law to him; he is as Powerful, as Just, and Good, let us only
adore his Designs. Though I were ev^n the most wicked Creature in the World, he
might serve himself of me in what pleases him, and then might damn me in the
end, if I have merited it. All things being subject to him, all must obey him,
the Infernal Powers, as well as the Celestial and Terrestrial. Nothing can
resist his Almighty Arm, I must submit, if God will declare his Marvels by me,
I cannot hinder him. If he will speak by a Stone or Wood, he ought to be heard
with respect.

And as to the Expression in one of her Letters, 3. That she calls herself a
Mother of true Believers. Tomb. de f. Theol. Part 2. P. 41, 42, 43.
wherein she calls her self a Mother of True Believers, for which the
Anabaptists or Mennonists accuse her of blasphemous Pride, she unanswerably
vindicates her self. I do not wonder, says she, that those Mennonists are
scandalized at it, for they do not know from what Fund it is taken; and while
they think I am led by the same Spirit with them, they must needs be
scandalized at the simple Truth with which I express my Sentiments. They think
I would do better to study humble Words, to speak soberly in what relates to
me; and that I ought not to tell so openly the things which God communicates to
me; for they practice the quite contrary to my Sentiments, and yet think they
possess the finest Virtues. They have for a Maxim, to learn to speak humbly;
and have for Rules, to be simply apparel'd, to be strictly united to their
Party, and not to converse nor drink or eat with those who are cut off from it,
and far less to assist them any manner of way. And all these things are
contrary to what God has planted in my Soul. -- To study to speak humbly of
ones self, having a proud Heart, is a great Pride accompanied with Deceit and
Lying: The Pride consists in desiring to be thought Humble before Men, by
speaking humbly; the Lying consists in saying often that which is False; for he
who says he is Weak and has no Good in him, is sometimes so proud at the
Bottom, that he cannot endure that another should have so mean Thoughts of him,
and would be ill content to hear some one say that he has not Virtue, or that
he is not in a State of Perfection.

Do you not remember, Sir, that some of those learned Persons asked you, if I
durst say that they are not regenerated in Jesus Christ, while none of their
Actions do discover this Regeneration? For we see them as much wedded to
earthly things as other Men; for they are well pleased to be honored, and
served, and esteemed by every Body. If they were regenerated, all these Desires
would be dead in them; the Spirit of Poverty, Sufferings, Humility, and Charity
would effectually live in their Souls; for Regeneration consists in dying to
ones self to live to God, and if they were dead to the World, they wuold seek
the things which are above, and no longer those which are on Earth. -- And yet
they who are sunk into the Traffic of the World, and gain as much as is
possible for them; would have it be believed that they are regenerated in the
Spirit of Jesus Christ, though all their Actions be quite contrary to those of
Jesus Christ and his Spirit; for though they speak humbly, and have an humble
Show and Gestures, yet they have a very proud Heart, and then they would have
it believed that they are regenerated, and would take it in ill part if I would
say they are not. -- They do not perceive that it is a greater Pride in them to
say that they are regenerated, than in me to say, that I am a Mother of true
Believers; for he who is regenerated in the Spirit of Jesus Christ, lives no
longer, but Jesus Christ lives in him. -- And a Mother of True Believers, is
nothing but a frail Creature, who may yet sin and undo her self. -- It is a
small matter to be a Mother or Father of True Believers, as to our own
Perfection, this gives us no more. If God give us sufficient Light for the
Conduct of our own Life in particular, or if he give us of it in Abundance to
enlighten others also, this will not add one Degree of Glory to our Soul, but
in as far as we have been faithful Dispensers of the Graces of God. For to be
only the matter of a Father or Mother of True Believers, a Statue or Image of
Wood or Stone would serve as well as a living Person; for as much as God is not
tied to any thing, he can as well speak by the Organ of a Statue of Wood or
Stone, as he did heretofore by Clouds, by a burning Bush; by Thunder; all these
matters cannot boast themselves because God operates by them, for he has
equally Power over all things, and makes use of such Instruments as he pleases.
If he will beget True Believers by my Mouth, he can do it as well as by an
Image carved out of Wood. The Mennonists therefore are very unjust to take
Scandal at the Works of God, after I had explained to them what I meant by that
Word, a Mother of True Believers, that I understood that all those whom God
shall make use of for the Conversion of others, shall be the True Fathers and
Mothers of those who shall become True Believers by their means; and that it is
after this manner that St. Paul said, I have begotten you. The Apostle knew
well that he had not Power to beget Children to God; but he perceived well that
God gave him Light in his Understanding, and Words in his Mouth, and Charity in
his Heart; and that by all these things many would be regenerated, by becoming
True Children of God, and dying to the Flesh, to live to the Spirit.

I have explained this Word of Mother of True Believers, Ibid. p. 58.
by saying, that God by my Organ will give his Light to Men, by which they
shall see their Darkness, and receive the Understanding of the Truth. This
Light with which he will produce True Believers is not mine, though he produce
them by my Mouth, my Hand, or my Spirit, but it is God's, even as our Bodies
are not our Parents, but of God, for they cannot make one Hair of our Head, yet
God calls them Fathers and Mothers, and commands to obey them, under pain of
Damnation.

This one Instance of an Expression so highly exaggerated formerly, and of
late, which I think she vindicates as to the true Sense and Meaning, to the
Satisfaction of all equitable Readers, (upon the supposition of her being
endued with Light by God for the Good of others) this Instance I say may serve
for a Sample to show how unjust Men are in forming Characters of Persons from
shreds of Expressions gathered here and there and put altogether, without
letting the World see the Contexts of them, the main Scope of them, or the
Sense and Meaning given of them by the Persons concerned, and how highly
thereby they sin against the Truth, murder the Reputation of such, impose upon
the rest of Mankind, and beget (and become real Fathers of) Hatred and Aversion
in their Minds and Spirits. Lord open their Eyes, and lay not this Sin to their
Charge.

As we are very apt to take up with false Virtues our selves, 4. That she
extols her self as a Pattern. Joh. 8. 52, 53.
so we are ready to judge rashly of others, and to accuse them of Pride, of
which we our selves are more guilty. Thus the Jews treated Jesus Christ:
Abraham, say they, is dead, and the Propthes; and thou say, If a man keep my
Saying he shall never taste of Death: Art thou greater than our Father Abraham
which is dead? and the Prophets are dead, whom make thou thy self? We see the
Saints have often spoke well of themselves, and yet with the Spirit of
Humility. Psalm. 119. 99, 100.
Thus David says of himself, I have more Understanding than all my Teachers; I
understand more than the Ancients. Thus S. Paul throughout all his Epistles
speaks often well of himself, proposes himself and his Virtue for a Pattern and
Example. So that you see one may speak well of themselves, and not from a
Spirit of Pride or Selfglorying, as our Lord Jesus Christ, David, S. Paul, and
other Saints have done. False Humility speaks meanly of ones self to cover its
secret Pride, and to get the Reputation of being humble. True Humility speaks
the Truth in Simplicity, whether of ones self or others, without regarding that
the World will Censure it as an Effect of Pride and Vainglory. By this Spirit
the Saints were acted, from this Principle A. B. spoke thus of herself, and
that I dare say, with less Pride and Vainglory than others have written
against her.

XXIV. XXIV. O her affixing Doctrines on others, which they deny.
Some accuse her of great Injustice, in affixing Doctrines, Sentiments and
Opinions, upon Parties and Persons, which they do not own: She, say they, makes
Men more guilty than they are; she imputes to particular Persons, to Doctors,
and even to whole Parties, Sentiments, Vices and Sins which they have not, and
of which all think them innocent. With this also the Enemies of Jesus Christ
did reproach him, that he falsely imputed to them Evils of which they were
innocent, as Murder: Thou have a Devil who seeks to kill thee? Joh. 7. 20.
Jesus Christ tells that we must not judge according to Appearance, but
righteous Judgment. In an unregenerate State Men do not know themselves; but
they think they are what they are not, and what they truly are, that they will
not believe, and they wholly disclaim it. The Jews, not doubt, were astonished
when the Prophets imputed to them atheistical, profane, and Epicurean
Sentiments, as the Denying of Divine Providence, and the Immortality of the
Soul, and making their chief Happiness to consist in being wicked. No doubt
they would cry out against them as Calumniators, and imputing to them
Sentiments quite contrary to what they had. It is like this was not their
Doctrine, nor the Sentiments according to which they reasoned, far less the
Subject of their public Instructions. And yet God by his Prophets reproaches
them with it, as if they had taught it in express Terms. Ezekiel. 9. 9. Is. 22.
13, 28. 15.
Ezekiel says of them; They say the Lord sees not. Esaias accuses them that they
had said, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we must die; we have made a
Covenant with Death, and with Hell we are at Agreement; for we have made Lies
our Refuge, and under Falsehood have we hid our selves. Mal. 3. 14.
Malachy: It is in vain for us to serve the Lord, we will call the Proud Happy,
etc. This was not true in the Sight of Men, but it was true in the Sight of
God, who saw that there were no living Impressions in their Hearts of the
Divine Providence, of a happy or miserable Eternity, of the great Happiness of
Virtue, etc.

There are generally two sorts of Principles and Sentiments in Men, which do
widely differ from one another; one by which they reason, and discourse, and
preach, and write Books, and teach Doctrines; and this is their speculative
Principle. The other is that by which a Man acts and governs both his inward
Affections and his Life. This last only is a Man's true Sentiments and
Principle, though for the most part this is unknown to the Man himself. S. Paul,
before his Conversion, and ever he was enlightened by the Holy Ghost, would have
been highly offended with any that should have called him a Blasphemer, a
Persecuter of God, and good Men, and the Chief of Sinners, as imputing to him
Crimes and Sentiments of which he not only thought himself innocent, but that
those very things were Virtues in the Sight of God; though when God opened his
Eyes, he found he had been truly such. So strange is the Blindness of corrupt
Man! Therefore when God would deliver Men from Death, he stops not at the
outward Appearance, and what Men say, and at their dead Reasonings and
Sentiments, who may tell him, We teach Virtue, we preach good Works, we
recommend Mortification of the Old Man, we detest Security and Presumption,
etc. while in effect their Lives are regulated by quite contrary Principles,
and their Hearts live in another Element; and therefore he warns them of that
which is hid within them, and which they do not yet perceive, and tells them,
that though they profess to know him, yet by their Works they deny him, being
abominable, disobedient, and to every good Work reprobate. Now it is according
to this Measure that A. B. speaks of Men and Parties, and of their Sentiments.
When a whole Society lives according to Principles, the contrary of which they
affirm with their Mouths, it is certain this may be imputed to that Society.
When the greatest part of particular Persons in that Society have certain
Sentiments, as to flatter themselves that they are in the State of Grace, or
predestined to Salvation, it is certain that the Society, in the gross, may
be said to have these Sentiments. Vide pref. apolog. Le Temoign. de Verite.
Part 1. p. 90.
If, while they live in a worldly and carnal Manner, yet they commonly believe
they shall be saved by the Use of the Ceremonies and Sacraments, this is to be
reckoned the real Sentiment of the Society in gross, though the Speculations of
some particular Persons and Doctors do not say so. It is the People that makes
the Church, and not a small Number of learned Heads. It is the living and
inward Principles, Inclinations and Dispositions of the Spirits and Hearts of
the People that makes the Sentiments of the Church, and not some vain Theories
of the Learned, which are oft-times dead and barren in their own Hearts. When
in a Society some particular Persons teach expressly evil Doctrines, as the
Justifying of horrid Murders, or that we may be saved without the Love of God,
and direct Souls according to these Doctrines; if the whole Body of such a
Church, knowing this, do not openly and loudly extirpate such a Doctrine by
their Councils or other proper Means, undoubtedly such a Society, and
particularly they who preside in it, are reckoned by God as if they themselves
authoritatively taught and maintained these detestable Maxims. Now if what A.
B. says as to the Principles, Sentiments, and Evils of Parties or Persons be
examined by these Rules, it will appear that she imputes nothing to them falsely.

XXV. XXV. Of wrong Explications of the Holy Scriptures.
Another Accusation brought against A. B. is, that she gives wrong Explications
of several Passages in the Holy Scripture, as her applying that of S. Paul, We
know in part, etc. to a greater Degree of Knowledge and Illumination than God
will give in this last Age of the World. Her understanding the Words of our
Savior, Joh. 12. 23. of his glorious Appearing in the End of the World, when
the Context shows it is meant of his Death and Sufferings; her singular
Exposition of the Lord's Prayer, as containing things that we are to obtain
only in Perfection when Christ comes to reign in Glory. We see what Expositions
the Apostles give of the Scriptures of the Old Testament, and the Fathers, of
both the Old and New, which oft-times seem very different from the Sense that
naturally offers. S. Augustin's Rule, already mentioned, has Place here, That
whosoever gives such a Sense of the Scripture as serves to promote the Love of
God and our Neighbors, which is the great End, though it cannot be made appear
that the Penman of the Scripture did so understand it in that particular
Place, he does not err damnably, nor does he make a Lie. Aug. de Doct. Chr.
Lib. 3. c. 27
But that other remarkable Rule he gives, serves fully to remove this
Accusation. That as to all the Senses that are given of the Holy Scripture,
which are not repugnant to the Truth, it is to be believed they were intended
by the Holy Spirit. That when many Senses are given of the same Words, if it
appear from other Places of the Scripture, that they are agreeable to the Truth
and to Faith, there is no Danger. For perhaps the Author of those Writings did
perceive the same Sense of them; and certainly the Spirit of God, who wrought
by him, foresaw without doubt that this would occur to the Reader and the
Hearer, yea, took care that it should occur. For what more liberal and
bountiful Provision could be made by God in the Divine Oracles, than that the
same Words should be understood in many Senses, all which the other no less
Divine Writings might confirm.

Agreeable to this, M. Weyeri Effata. Eff. 1.
we have a Divine Maxim of a pious Writer of the last Age* That, according to
the State that Man is in, so he understands the Holy Scripture; if he be as yet
in the State of Nature, he explains it of Natural Things; if he have ascended
higher, he understands it of more sublime Things; and the higher State he is
advanced to, he still finds so much the more sublime Testimonies of things in
the Scripture. Inferior things are the Image and Similitude of the superior:
If a Man therefore be in the lowest Degree, the Scripture proposes low things
to him; but if he be placed in superior Degrees, it points out to him higher
things.

When Paul says, Not in Rioting and Drunkenness, not in Chambering and
Wantonness, etc. Romans 13. 19. this concerns a Man according to the different
State of this Life, either literally or spiritually: If he live carnally, it is
to be understood of the visible Flesh: If he lives spiritually, it denotes also
the Flesh, but a more subtle Flesh, to which he must likewise die. But before
he die to it, he must first live to it; but he cannot live to it until he be
first dead to the more gross Carnality.

It is impossible that a Man can conceive this sublime Way of Dying until he
have attained to that Degree, but if any attain it rather in the Contemplation
than as to the true Essence of things, there is great Hazard of Erring.

The carnal Life spiritually understood, is most clearly expressed in that rich
Man who was clothed in Purple, and fared sumptuously; while on the other hand
Lazarus was lying poor, and hungry, and naked, and full of Sores. But what is
the Event? Riches are reduced into the extremest Poverty, and extreme Poverty
is exchanged for the greatest Riches.

We ought to consider that the Holy Scriptures are dispensed by the Spirit of
God, to afford Life and Nourishment for Men's Souls, according to all the
different States of Men, and all the several Ages of the Church, to the end of
the World; and as the same Holy Spirit that endited them gives the true
Understanding of them only to humble and simple Souls, so he gives them
different Degrees of Light and Notices from them, according to the different
States they are advanced to, when it is for their own spiritual Profit only; or
according to the different States of the Church, when it is for the spiritual
Good of the rest of Mankind, and when he is to accomplish the things he has
foretold; and all these Senses are intended by the Holy Spirit, one of them
always being not only true in it self, but also a. Figure and Similitude of
what is to follow, and the full Sense of them cannot be had till the Perfection
and Completion of all things. We see an Image of this in Natural Things. Thus
the Buds of Fruittrees in the Winter-season are very small to Appearance, and
seem nothing but a little dry Excrescence; but when the Spring comes, first the
Leaves break forth, and after them the Flowers and Blossoms, and last of all
the Fruit, which by Degrees advances to Ripeness and Perfection; all which are
not new formed, but were originally in the Bud, even in the Winter-season, and
were discoverable by magnifying Glasses, so they are only an Evolution and
Displaying of what was all formerly shut up in the Bud, according to the
different Seasons. Thus from the small Eggs of Insects there break out first
Caterpillars and small Worms, which afterward casting Skins, put on another
Shape, and at last break forth into Butterflies, or Flies of their respective
Kinds, which is no Transformation, but an Evolution of Parts which were
formerly wrapped up within the Caterpillar, as it were in Swaddling-cloaths (as
Dr. Swammerdam most ingeniously discovers) and were no doubt also originally
within the little Egg. So the same Seed of the Word of God, which to the
natural Man seems dry and insipid, does by the Warmth and Operation of God's
Spirit display different Degrees of Light and Truth, according to the different
Degrees by which the Soul advances toward God, or the Periods of Time in which
things are to be accomplished, the Displaying of one Degree still making Way
for another. Thus God in his Word has prohibited Idolatry; when all the Heathen
Nations were given to the Worshipping of Idols, and the Grossness and Rudeness
of the Jewish Nation was such, that they were easily led to imitate them, the
Commandment was understood no farther. But when afterward in our Savior's
Days they had a sufficient Aversion from the worshipping of outward Idols in
Groves or Temples; but in the mean time their Hearts were set upon Riches and
this Worlds Goods, the Commandment was farther explained, and they were told
that that was Idolatry, and that they could not serve God and Mammon. And as
the Soul is weaned from this Idol and advances to another State, the Spirit of
God does there also discover to it other more spiritual things which it is
ready to worship instead of God, and so the Sense of God's Law is displayed to
it, far beyond what could be at first conceived. So true is that of the
Psalmist, I have seen an end of all Perfections, but thy Commandments is
exceeding broad.

This, with those who are not disposed to cavil, will serve to clear A. B. as
to this Accusation formed against her. And as to the Passages mentioned, as 1
Cor. 13. 8. etc. though ultimately it is to be understood of the Life to come,
yet it is no Absurdity, to say that it may imply also a more plentiful Light
and Communication of God's Spirit in aftertimes. S. Augustine, we see, gives an
Interpretation of it relating even to this present Life. They, says he, who
have Faith, Aug. de Doct Chr. L 1. c 39.
Hope, and Charity, and do firmly cleave to them, do not need the Scriptures
except for Instructing others. And therefore many live by these Three in the
Desert, without Books. Whence I think that Saying is already fulfilled in them;
Whether there be Prophecies, they shall fail; whether there be Tongues, they
shall cease; whether there be Knowledge, it shall vanish away. As to Job. 12.
32. I think it will be granted that the full Completion of it is not yet come
to pass, but is that we look for. As for her Exposition of the Lord's Prayer,
no Body who loves not to carp, will be scandalized at it. Light of the world.
Conf. 28.
She says, That in it is comprehended all that we can ever ask of God for his
Honor and our Salvation; all the Adorations we owe to God; all the
Thanksgivings we can render him; all that we may or ought to ask of him for our
selves or for all others: And therefore tho it contain all the things that
relate to our Pilgrimage in our way to Eternal Bliss, and so may be understood
in that Sense likewise, as she does so interpret it in other Places, yet since
it contains all that we ought to ask of God, and nothing in Perfection is
granted here, and God will not make us ask the things which he has no Mind to
grant, it is most reasonable to conclude that this most excellent Prayer in its
complete and perfect Sense refers to a future State, which he would have us
always to long after, (as the Jews did Jerusalem when they were by the Rivers
of Babylon) and in which we shall obtain in Perfection the effect of our
Requests.

XXVI. XXVI. Of Tautologies and Repetitions.
Some are greatly disgusted because they think her Writings are full of
Tautologies and Repetitions, and without exactness of Order and Method. Had she
put her Thoughts in an orderly System as the Learned do, they might have looked
into them; but when the same things are said over and over again, S^e the Truth
of Christian Religion, By Abad. P. 1. S. 3. c. 2. and 5. Oeconomie Divine. p.
5. Preface.
this passes in their Style for Cant, and they nauseate it. I take Cant for a
multitude of Words without any True and Divine Sense, and not flowing from an
inward Life and Spirit, and of this there is but too much in the World. But the
Writings of A. B. are of another Temper; and no Body will nauseate them upon
this Head, but they who have a secret Disgust for the Holy Scriptures. God's
Ways are not as our ways: When we write, we seek our selves, we strive to
discover our Reason and our Learning, and study what may please the Curiosity,
the Fancy, and the Niceness of others. The Holy Writings are most unlike to
ours, both as to Matter, and Manner, and Method, and Style; they are not
written to please the Learned, the Orator, the Philosopher, the Critic, the
Curious; but to bring down every lofty Imagination, and to mortify our
Self-conceit, to Comfort the Humble and the Afflicted, to give Light and
Knowledge to the Poor and Simple, and to send the Rich away empty. They repeat
again and again the great and necessary things of God's Law, to mortify our
Niceness and Curiosity, and to beat them in upon us by all means, while we
think it enough to know these things, though we are not so happy as to do them.
Now Writings that partake so much of this Spirit, will not be despised on this
Head by any sincere Christian.

XXVII. XXVII. Of her making a Mahumetan Paradise.
Some endeavor to render her Sentiments ridiculous concerning the State of the
Blessed in the Life to come; and they say she establishes a Mahumetan Paradise,
Eating and Drinking, and Generation in the Kingdom of Heaven, making the Earth
to become that Heaven, and that it shall be a Place of all sensitive Delights.
Unto the pure all things are pure; but unto them that are defiled and
unbelieving, is nothing pure; but even their Mind and Conscience is defiled. I
would gladly ask such, if Adam had continued always in the State of Innocence
perfectly Pure and Holy, whether they would have called his State a Mahumetan
Paradise, and a sensual Life. If there were no Concupiscence in Man's Nature,
but a most ardent, pure, and habitual Love of God, the Beauties and Delights of
all the Creatures would serve to inflame the Soul still the more with the Love
of God. There needs no more but to understand her Sentiments, to be convinced
of the impudent Falsehood of their Reproaches.

She says then, That the Earth, and all this visible World being wholly renewed
and restored to that glorious State in which it was at first formed, (of which
in the First Part) shall be the Seat of the Kingdom of God with Men for ever,
where Jesus Christ, God-Man, will reign with the Blessed, both as to his
Divinity and Humanity. That Heaven, as to the Soul, is the Presence of God, and
we are in Heaven, when we are in God, and God is in Heaven as he is in the
Souls of his Saints, as Augustine interprets, Our Father which art in the
Heavens; but as God has given us both a Body and Soul, he has given us also a
Paradise of both, the Soul can have its complete Paradise in the Presence of
God, but the Body must have a material and bodily one, like it self: For this
end, the Earth, and all this visible World, and all that therein is, were
created, and for the same Reason God would have become Man, though Man had never
sinned, that he might live with him both bodily and spiritually, and to make
his Happiness complete. And therefore he being unchangeable in his infinitely
Wise and Good Designs, he will certainly make, not an imaginary, but a real,
divine, and corporeal Reparation of all things to last for ever; for his
Recompenses are Eternal, and will purge away from all the Creatures the
Malignity and Corruption that Sin has brought upon them. And in this State
every individual Saint being restored in Body and Soul to the State in which
Adam was in his greatest purity before the Woman was formed out of him; shall
produce his like of himself alone through all Eternity, from a Principle of the
Love of God, and by an ardent Desire that there may be still more Creatures to
love and praise the Divine Majesty. This then shall not be a corrupt, lustful,
and shameful Propagation, like to that of this corrupt World, but altogether
Pure, Holy, and Glorious; as we see in a manner an earthly Figure of it still
in all the Plants and Trees. Matt. 2^. 30.
In the Resurrection they neither marry nor are given in Marriage, but are as
the Angels of God in Heaven.

Now what is there in all this, unworthy of God, or unsuitable to the State of
the Blessed, or contrary to the Holy Scriptures, or to the Nature of things? It
is certain none of the Works of God shall perish, but all shall be restored to
their primitive Perfection. The Scripture tells us there shall be a new Heaven
and a new Earth. Whose Habitation would the Earth have been if Man had never
sinned, and if the Earth had never been accursed? And whose Habitation shall it
be when it is renewed and made a new Earth? When Men fancied all the Works of
God to be shut up as it were in a round Sphere, and the Earth to be its Center,
and the Planetary and Starry Heavens so many firm and solid Orbs moving round
about it, and the Empyreal Heaven above all, this Sentiment about the Earth
might have been thought absurd. But in the Age we live in, wherein is made
known the vastness of the Universe, and that all the fixed Stars are probably
Suns and Centres of different Systems of the whole, and all the other Planets
as well as our Earth among which it moves, replenished no doubt with variety of
living and intelligent Beings, we have reason to admire the Providence of God
in giving Discoveries to a simple unlearned Woman, of the State and Habitation
of the Blessed, suitable to what is now known of the Frame of the Universe,
which is also fully confirmed from the Holy Scriptures, as was shown in the
First Part; and does so clearly demonstrate the unchangeable Wisdom and
Goodness of God, who having created Man in a Pure and Happy State, and the
Delights and Beauties of this World for his Accessory Felicity; and the Devil
by his Craft and Subtilty having perverted both, and made this Earth for many
Ages nothing but Scenes of Wickedness and Misery; yet God by his infinitely
Wise Conduct and Providence brings about at last the perfect Renovation of Man,
and of his Habitation, the Earth, and of all the Creatures, and makes it an
Eternal Paradise of unspotted Purity and Bliss: Whereas on the other Hand it is
most unaccountable how infinite Wisdom and Goodness, who changes not, after he
had formed Man and this World in so excellent a State, and both are corrupted
by the Devils, should continue the Earth for so many Ages, to be the Theater of
their Wickedness, and then entirely destroy it. Might it not then be said, as
she expresses it, That God had created the Earth and so many reasonable
Creatures, only for the Glory of the Devil and his Adherents, if he did not
renew the Earth, and make it bring forth Fruit for his Glory.

And as to Man's Propagation of his like to all Eternity; if Man had continued
Pure and Holy, I am sure this would not have been thought a sensual State. A
Power to produce a Creature that is capable of loving and enjoying God, is an
astonishing Perfection; only Concupiscence has now so polluted our Hearts that
we cannot think of this, but our Imagination presently defiles it, and we join
it to the sensual Idea's that Sin and Lust have brought into the World, and
cannot conceive how the one can be without the other, judging of things
according to our Corrupt Nature; and we presently cry out, A Mahumetan
Paradise! Which truly discovers only the Filthiness and Corruption of our
Hearts, and not the Impurity of the Sentiment, but only, that to the Impure
nothing is pure. If there were a Creature perfectly Pure and Holy, and if God
endued it with a Power of producing its like, this Production would be no Act
of Concupiscence, but an Act of the most ardent Love of God. This is the State,
she says, the Saints shall be in to all Eternity, which, whatever be of the
Truth of it, is no Mahumetan Paradise; and as there are remarkable Places of
Scripture cited for the Proof of it* so the Reason she assigns is very weighty,
to wit, That all the Works of God are Eternal, and his Gifts without out
Repentance; and if there were no such Production to all Eternity, a very small
number of Men would bless him for rever, whereas so many reasonable Creatures
are become Adherents to the Devil. It must needs be then, that the Generation
of the Blessed multiply eternally, as the Generation of the Miserable has
multiplied temporally from the Beginning of the World.

And why should we think it absurd to say, that Angels do thus produce their
like to all Eternity? We see here in this visible World that all Creatures who
have any Degree of Life, from the highest to the lowest, are endued with this
Power of producing their like; all the Plants and Trees, all the Beasts, Birds,
Fishes and Insects, and the reasonable Creature, Man, both as to his Soul and
Body, as has been made appear; and you know the Rule of Analogy is of great
weight as to all the Works of Nature. And therefore unless we should suppose
God to act unlike himself, as to a higher Degree of living Beings, we have all
the Reason that the Nature and Analogy of things does suggest, to conclude that
Angels also do produce their like, to all Eternity.

XXVIII. XXVIII. The Conclusion.
It is not possible to foresee all the Prejudices that People may conceive, or
that may be suggested to them against the Writings and Sentiments of A. B. far
less to Answer them all particularly, in this Apology. I have considered only
the most Remarkable of those which do usually occur, and have for the most part
set down her own Answers in this, the former, and the following Parts; which
though it has made it the longer, yet I hope it will make it the more useful. I
am not ashamed to Copy; for I write only Narratives and not Originals. If
others write Originals when they pretend to write Narratives, I shall not envy
them. I am only sorry that some are at such pains to deter Men from perusing
those Writings which may be most useful to help them in the way to Eternal
Happiness. If they will not make that good use of them themselves, they need
not hinder others from profiting by them; Thousands perhaps would be awakened
to a deeper sense of the necessity of mortifying and dying to their Corrupt
Nature, who would never be stumbled at the things which they carp at, but pass
them over. Whatever are her singular Sentiments, such as this last mentioned,
you may look upon them all if you please as Dreams and Romances, but since the
necessary Duties of Christianity, and the plain Way to Eternal Life, are so
clearly, so forcibly, and so divinely inculcated, and pressed in all those
Writings, and no stress laid on those other things; O! that the Love of God,
and of Men's Souls, and our own Salvation, may constrain us to the serious
practice of them our selves, and make us carefully to avoid the being an
Offense and Stumbling Block to others. O si tantam ad hiberent diligentiam ad
extirpanda vitia, and Virtutes inserendas, sicuti ad movendas quaestiones! tunc
non fierent tanta mala and scandala in populo. Tho. a Kemp. de Imitat. Christ.
l. 1. c. 3. n. 5.

The End of the Second Part.
AN APOLOGY FOR M. ANT. BOVRIGNON.
PART. III.
Containing the Evidences which she brings, that she was led by the Spirit of
God. With her Answers to the Prejudices against the same.
To which is added, A Dissertation of Dr. De Heyde, on the same Subject.
I. I. Pretense to Divine Inspiration, a great Prejudice in this Age.
IN the Age wherein we live there needs no greater Prejudice against a Person,
his Sentiments, and Writings, than for him to declare that he is immediately led
by the Spirit of God. This is enough to make us reject all he can say, without
any farther Enquiry. We presently conclude he is Brainsick, Hypochondriack,
Melancholy and Crazed, at least as to that Point, however Rational he may be
in other things; or otherwise that he is a Knave, who designs to put a Trick
upon Mankind; and that all who esteem him are as much Fools or Knaves as he.

II. II. For different Reasons.
The Wise and the Learned of the World, and from them the generality of Men are
inclined to think so, upon different Grounds and Principles.

1. 1. Some disbelieve all Revelation
Some disbelieve all Revelation from God, and conclude that as all other
Creatures have natural Powers given them to guide them to the End and
Perfection of their Being, so has Man; and that there is nothing necessary for
him to lead him to the End and Perfection of his Being, but only the right Use
and Improvement of his Reason.

2. 2. Others, Any since Christ and his Apostles.
Others are convinced of the shortness and insufficiency of Humane Reason, to
lead Man to Happiness; and of the Truth and Necessity of Divine Revelation: But
then God having spoken at sundry times and in diverse manners unto the Fathers
by the Prophets, and in these last Days by his only Begotten Son, and all this
being consigned in Writing to be a standing Rule to all Generations, and
confirmed by most satisfying Evidences to be from God; they conclude that we
must not look for any to be thus immediately inspired and enlightened by God
now, by whom he should speak to us, and that any who pretend to it are
Impostours, or Brainsick Persons, who will needs ape what they read or hear of
in the Holy Scriptures, and fancy they are such Persons immediately enlightened
by God, as they read of in those Holy Writings: and to own any now as inspired
by God, is to render the Scriptures useless, to give way to a Private Spirit,
and to all manner of Confusion and Imposture.

3. 3. Both confirmed from false Pretenses to Divine I^spiration.
And both these are the more confirmed in their Sentiments, by seeing the many
false Pretenders to Divine Inspiration, which have been in the World. The Devil
studies always to ape and counteract God, and since he can easily transform
himself into an Angel of Light, he most effectually undermines the True
Religion of Jesus Christ, by appearing to be for it, and under a Cover of
Religion, he insinuates into Men's Minds his Infernal Qualities of Pride,
Hypocrisy, and Unrighteousness; and one of the Disguises under which he acts,
is that of a Pretense to Divine Inspiration, and the being led by the Spirit of
God. And this he has done in all Ages, both before and since the Coming of
Jesus Christ. He raised up among the Jews false Prophets, and that especially
when there were any truly inspired by God, that those last might be discredited
and despised, because of the Impostures of the other: And this is also one of
the Artifices he had used among Christians, through all the Ages of the Church,
and particularly in this last Age, setting up whole Orders and Societies of
Persons who pretend to be immediately enlightened and guided by the Spirit of
God, though the quite contrary appear by their Life and Spirit. And thereby he
not only infatuates some, but makes them also such a Stumbling Block to others,
as to make some of them to despise all Revelation from God, and to look upon it
as an Imposture, and others to be altogether prejudiced against any who may be
truly inspired by God, in this present Age, though the Evidences were never so
Uncontestable and Convincing; however, they own the Divine Authority of the
Holy Scriptures, because the Convincing Reasons which prove it, have not the
Prejudices of a contrary Education to withstand them. And thus the Devil is
become most successful in Disparaging and putting out of Credit with the Wise,
the Rational, and the Learned, all immediate Inspiration by the Spirit of God
in this Age of the World, though it were ever so clear and evident.

III. III. No great Hopes of convincing the first, though enough to awaken their
Consideration, if truly Rational.
As for those who are Enemies to all Divine Revelation, it is a folly to think
of Convincing them that God has been pleased to communicate to any in this Age,
the immediate Knowledge of his Will by the Light of his Holy Spirit; for if
they believe not Moses and the Prophets, Jesus Christ, and his Apostles,
neither will they be persuaded, though one should rise from the Dead. Yet if they
were sincerely, and truly rational, and not fantastically so, it would
certainly astonish them, and awaken their Consideration to see a Chain of
Sentiments, so well connected, so agreeable to True Reason, so worthy of God,
so suitable to his Divine Perfections, so clearly pointing out the Nature and
Duty of Man, the great End of his Being, and the true way to prosecute it, so
plainly unfolding the Mysteries of Providence, and the past, present, and
future State of the World; so far beyond all that ever any, or all of the
Philosophers have said of former or later Ages; and that declared by an
illiterate Woman, void of all Study and Learning, without conversing with Men
or Books, but living retired from the World, in a continual Dependence upon
God, and Elevation of her Spirit to him, and in a Conformity of her Heart and
Life to those Sentiments: And if they are not greatly partial and prejudiced,
they must needs acknowledge that here is the Finger of God.

But they who (...) the Holy Scriptures to be the Word of God, The second
cannot think it impossible or improbable.
and that the Penmen of them were inspired by the Holy Spirit, that Holy Men of
God spoke of old time as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, though there were
then false Prophets among the People, as there shall be now false Teachers
among Christians; they can neither think it impossible nor improbable that God
should even in this Age immediately enlighten and guide by his Holy Spirit,
Souls truly denied to the World and to themselves, and wholly resigned to him.

IV. IV. God created Man to communicate himself to him, and the things of God
cannot be understood but by the Spirit of God. St. Chrysostom. in Prefat. ad Homil.
in Matt.
For God having created Man after his own Image, to love and to enjoy his
Maker, and that he might take his Delight with Man, his Soul was originally
designed for God's Temple and Dewlling Place, that he might reside in it, and
fill it with his Light and Love. And though Man by turning away from God, did
wilfully deprive himself of this Happiness, yet through the Merits and
Intercession of Jesus Christ, God has pity on him, and continues to prosecute
his first Design of taking his Delight with him: And this is the End of all his
outward Dispensations toward Man. Therefore, says St. Chrysostom, We ought in
all things to lead so pure a Life, as that we should no ways need the help of
Letters, but instead of them should use the Grace of the Holy Spirit; that the
Holy Spirit might write upon the Table of our Hearts, as they write upon Paper.
But since we have thrust this Grace from us, let us at least make use of the
second Mercy. But that the first was far more sublime, God makes appear both by
his Words and Deeds. For he spoke to Noah, and Abraham, and his Posterity, and
to Joseph, and Moses not by Scripture, but by himself, because he found their
Hearts Pure. But when all the People of Israel did degenerate into the Sink of
Vices, then Scripture and Tables were given them, by which they were warned.
And we see this happened not only to the Holy Men of the Old Testament, but
also of the New. For Christ did not deliver any Writing to the Apostles, but
instead of Scripture promised to give them the Grace of the Holy Spirit: He,
says he, will teach you all things. And that you may know that this is far
better than the other, hear what the Lord says by the Prophet: And I, says the
Lord, will make a New Covenant with you: I will put my Laws in your Minds, and
write them in your Hearts, and they shall be all taught of God. St. Paul also,
to show the Excellency of this, says, he had received the Law not in Tables of
Stone, but in fleshly Tables of the Heart. But because in process of time many
had strayed from the right way, they needed therefore again that Warning that
is given by Scripture. Consider then what a Degree of Madness it is, that when
we ought to lead a Life of such Integrity and Perfection, as not to need
Scripture, but should yield up our Hearts to the Holy Spirit for Paper to be
writ upon; how is it, I say, if when we have lost this first Dignity, and stand
in need of the lesser, yet we will not use aright even this second Remedy for
our Salvation. Thus he begins the Preface to his Homilies on St. Matt. showing,
that if Men's Hearts were pure, God would speak inwardly to them by his Holy
Spirit; that he has done so to pure and well-disposed Souls both under the Old
and New Testament; and that the Scriptures are a second Remedy which God makes
use of because of the Blindness and Impurity of Men's Hearts. Thus St. Augustine
Aug. de Doct. Chr. Lib. 1. c. 10. 11.
likewise makes appear that the Scriptures, and all the outward Dispensations
of the Gospel do lead us to this, and that a pure Heart, and a good Life are
necessary Dispositions for it. St. John says, that John 1. 1, 4, 5, 9, 14.
In the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God. In him was Life, and the Life was the Light of Men, and the Light shines
in Darkness, and the Darkness comprehended it not. That was the true Light
which lights every Man that comes into the World. And the Word was made
Flesh and dwelt among us, (and we beheld his Glory, the Glory as of the only
Begotten of the Father) full of Grace and Truth. And our Savior says, He John
14 21, 22, 23.
that has my Commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me, and he
that loves me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will
manifest my self to him. And when one of his Disciples asked how he would
manifest himself to them and not to the World; Jesus said, If a Man love me, he
will keep my Words; and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him and
make our abode with him. And the Apostle assures us, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
that the things of God cannot be known but by the Spirit of God, and that the
natural Man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
Foolishness to him, neither can they know them, because he are spiritually
discerned: He tells us likewise, that Romans 8. 9, 14.
they who are in Christ Jesus, the Spirit of God dwells in them; and that if
they have not the Spirit of Christ, they are none of his; and that being led by
God's Spirit, they are his Sons. So that all who are truly regenerated, are led
by the Spirit of God.

V. V. Of which they whom he employs to save others must have a suitable Measure.
They whom God employs for the Good and Salvation of others, he not only endues
them with the Light and Grace necessary for their own Conduct and Salvation,
but also with Divine Light and Wisdom that may make them fit Organs and
Instruments to communicate the same Blessing to others. This is evident from
the Holy Scriptures.

VI. VI. He used to send such when Priest and People were corrupted.
Such is the infinite Goodness of God toward Man, that when he has given Men
his Law, and made known to them their whole Duty, yet when they have generally
strayed from it, and both Priest and People have corrupted their Ways, God has
been pleased to raise up extraordinary Prophets, to let them see how grossly
they had mistaken and perverted Gods Law, to awaken and call them to
Repentance, and to warn them of God's approaching Judgments.

VII. VII. Who had no outward Qualities to recommend them, 1 Kings 19 19. 2
Kings 7. 1, 2. Jer. 29. 26, 27. Amos 7. 14. Matt. 11. 18. Joh 8. 48.
The Instruments that God made use of on such Occasions were generally Persons
who had no worldly nor humane Advantages to recommend them, were neither
Learned, nor Great, nor Rich, nor Honorable, nor Wise in the World's esteem;
but he chose the weak and the foolish things of the World to confound the Wise
and the Mighty. Elisha, a Labourer of the Ground; Amos, a Herdsman; David, a
Shepherd; John, and James, Peter, and Andrew, Fishermen; Matthew, a Publican.
Simplicity and humility of Heart were the chief Qualities which recommended
them to his Choice. They were generally despised, rejected, and condemned by
the People of the Age wherein they lived. Above all, they were persecuted by
the Pastors and Priests who had the Dexterity by their Learning and Subtilty
to wrest and criticize upon their Words and Writings, and turn them into
Heresies and Blasphemies, that they might make the People abhor and persecute
them; and it was in the following Ages after their Death, that Men began
generally to esteem and honor them.

VIII. VIII. They despised not the Word and Ordinances of God, but declared
Peoples Abuse of them.
The Holy Persons thus inspired by God, were far from despising his Word and
the Holy Scriptures; these they could not contradict, for the Spirit of God
cannot contradict himself; but they show People how greatly they strayed from
them in their Life and Practice. They did not contemn his Ordinances, but they
made appear how Temple and all was an Abomination to God, so long as they who
professed to be his People and to worship him by them, did live wickedly and
neglect the weightier Matters of the Law. They were far from making any Schism,
or setting up a New Sect and Party; but they plainly told both the People, and
the Priests and Pastors, their Sins and Degeneracy, and warned them to flee
from the Wrath to come.

IX. IX. The Devil raised up false Prophets to oppose and discredie them.
There were not wanting at the same time false Prophets to oppose and destroy
the Credit of the true, and they wrought Signs and Wonders to procure Belief;
but the Truth and Sincerity of the one was still discernable from the Paint and
Falsehood of the other, by such as were truly sincere themselves: And he that
did the Will of God would know of the Doctrine, whether it were of God, or
whether Men spoke of themselves. They who were truly led by the Spirit of God
lived as they spoke, they required not of others what they did not first
themselves; they did not flatter the People in their Vices, nor promise them
Peace, Peace, when sudden Destruction was near; nor did they seek themselves.

X. X. It is neither impossible nor improbable that the Spirit of God should
immediately enlighten Souls now as well as before the Coming of Jesus Christ
As God did thus immediately enlighten by his Holy Spirit some pure and
well-disposed Souls before the Coming of Jesus Christ, and after his Ascension,
so it is neither impossible nor improbable that our infinitely Good God should
show the same Mercy in after Ages. It is not against his Nature, no more than
it is against the Nature of the Sun to send his Light and Heath through all
where Clouds and Walls do not shut them out, for his Delight is to be with the
Children of Men. Neither has he declared any where that he will not do it; as
for the Curse denounced, Revel. 22. 18. against those that shall add to the
things contained therein, upon which some understand as such a Declaration from
God, as it relates only to that Prophecy, so it lays a restraint on Men only,
and not on God, as appears by comparing it with that of Deuteronomy. 4. 2. 12. 32. If
it be said that no immediate Revelation for the Instruction of Mankind is to be
expected after the Days of the Apostles, because the Will of God, and the Way
of Salvation were clearly and fully declared by Jesus Christ; if this Argument
were good, it would follow that the Doctrine of the Apostles is not to be
received as a Divine Revelation, but in so far as it contains a Relation of
that which was delivered to them by Jesus Christ, whereas it is certain they
delivered to the Church many other things immediately taught them by the Spirit
of God. Wherefore from the Fullness, Clearness, and Perfection of the Doctrine
of Jesus Christ we may well infer that there shall be no Revelation of a New
Doctrine or a New Religion after it; but nevertheless, an immediate Revelation
tending to explain and illustrate the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, to vindicate it
from the false Glosses of Corrupt Teachers, and to awaken and excite Men to
follow and obey it, may be both useful and necessary. The Jewish State did no
more call for his Mercy, than does ours: Have we the whole Will of God and our
Duty consigned to us in Writ? So had they: Was it that from time to time their
Faith and Hope might be strengthened and encouraged in the Approach of the
Messiah? the same need have we, who are bidden hope and look for his Coming
again in Glory, and yet in these last Days there are Scoffers walking after
their own Lusts, and saying, Where is the Promise of his Coming? Was it because
of the great Degeneracy both of the Priest and People, that they needed such
extraordinary Messages and Warnings from God? So do we: Ought we to reject all
who lay any Claim to Divine Inspiration without any farther Enquiry, because
there are in this Age many Impostours, Enthusiasts, who falsely pretend to be
led by the Spirit of God, and are not? So might they: Were they in
Circumstances to discern those who were truly led by the Spirit of God, from
those who were acted by a Lying Spirit? So may we. So that from the Nature of
God, the Methods of his dealing with Men, and the present State of the World,
and of Mankind, this appears to be no impossible nor improbable thing.

XI. XI. There are strong Presumptions that he will do it.
Nay, there are strong Presumptions on the other side, that God will show his
Mercy to Mankind. We are forbidden to believe every Spirit, but are bidden try
the Spirits whether they are of God or not. If none are inspired by God, what
need is there to try any, but to reject all? We are told that in the last Days
God will Joel 2. 28.
pour out of his Spirit upon all Flesh. And when the Apostle S. Peter Act. 2.
16, 17.
applies this Prophecy to the Descent of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles in
the Day of Pentecost, he meant not thereby to limit that Promise to that Time,
as if it had its full Completion, but to show that then it began to be
fulfilled, and that Jesus being now ascended to his Father, and having received
the Promise of the Holy Ghost, had shed forth this upon them. And it evidently
appears that he did not limit it to that Time, but show that that was rather
the first Fruits of it, and that it was to be fulfilled and continued in all
After-ages; he saying expressly, Act 2. 38, 39.
Repent and be baptized, every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the
Remission of Sins, and ye shall receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost. For the
Promise is unto you and to your Children, and to all that are afar off, even as
many as the Lord our God shall call. Which was as it were a Preludium and first
Fruits of what they might expect. For it is not God's Manner to promise largely
and liberally, and to perform meanly and sparingly; and the Number of Persons
on whom the Gifts of the Spirit were poured out in those Days was too small to
fill up the Extent of Joel's Prophecy, especially if we compare it with and
interpret it by other Prophecies of the same Nature, it will appear that this
is a Mercy which God designs to communicate in a higher Measure after the
coming of Jesus Christ than formerly. For he has promised that he will put his
Law in their inward Parts, and write it in their Hearts. -- And they shall
teach no more every Man his Neighbor, Jer. 31. 33, 34.
and every Man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord, for they shall all know me,
from the least of them unto the greatest of them, Isa. 11. 9.
says the Lord. And we are told that the Earth shall be full of the Knowledge
of the Lord, as the Waters cover the Sea. So that the Reason why this is so
little experienced among Christians now adays, is not because the Lord's Hand
is shortened, that he cannot do it, or that this was a Mercy to be shown only to
the first Christians; but because our Sins have separated between us and our
God.

XII. XII. There have been some such in all Ages.
There have not been wanting in the several Ages of the Church, some pure and
holy Souls extraordinarily enlightened by the Spirit of God, as Anthony, and
Paul the Hermit, and many others of the Ancient Fathers of the Desert; and in
the later Ages, Thaulerus, Thomas a Kempis, and some other extraordinary
Persons, as they who read their Lives or Writings without prejudice may see.

XIII. It is generally believed by all Protestants that we are at present in
the Reign of Antichrist; and it is generally owned by all. XIII. The present
and future State of the World calls for it.
That before the End of the World there will be a Destruction of the
Antichristian State, and a glorious State of the Church of Jesus Christ in
Purity and Holiness, without which the Conversion of the Jews and the bringing
in of the fullness of the Gentiles cannot be hoped for. All the Prophecies both
of the Old and New Testament do point at this, Is. 11. 4, 5, etc. c. 12. 2, 3,
etc. c. 60. 1, 2, 19. 21, 22, etc. c. 11. 9, 11. c. 30. 26. c. 44. 3. Jer. 31.
31, 33, 34. Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26, 27. c. 39. 29. c. 47. 1, 12. Zech. 12. 8. Matthew.
11. 11. Rev. 11. 8, 15. c. 21. 2, 3, 4, 6, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17.
and their Description of it is so great and magnificent, that it were absurd
to apply it to any Event has fallen out already; for in Divine Things the
Reality of them does vastly transcend the most magnificent Descriptions that
can be given of them. There is nothing more plain from the Holy Scriptures and
the State of the World, than that the glorious Times foretold by the Spirit of
God are not yet come. And considering the great Corruption of the World, and
how unlikely it is, that by human Wisdom or Reason such a Change will be
wrought (since the World by Wisdom knows not God) there is all Ground to
believe and hope that God will, by an extraordinary Effusion of his Spirit,
bring about so great a Change.

XIV. XIV. Characters of the Spirit of Elias to come.
There being a twofold Coming of Jesus Christ, and a double Completion of
Prophecies in relation to both; therefore as the Preaching of John the Baptist
was the first Coming again of Elias, so many judge the Prophecy imports a
Second Coming, not of his Person, but of some in his Spirit to restore all
things. Dr. H. M. Divine Dialog. Dial. 5. p. 355, 359
Jesus Christ telling us (even after John was beheaded) that Elias will come
indeed and restore all things. To this Purpose a very sincere Enquirer into the
Prophetic Style, takes out of the Prophecies and History concerning Elias and
John Baptist, a Character of that Spirit of Elias that must renew the World:
That its Doctrine must be Mal. 3. 1, 2. 3.
that of casting away all Corruption, Insincerity and Hypocrisy. Is. 40. 3, 4.
5.
Declaring against all Distortion or Perversion of the Simplicity of Christian
Truth by proud or politic Persons; Mal. 4. 5. Rev. 16. 16. Matthew. 17. 10, 11.
which will be no sectarian Spirit: to rend and tear, but a reconciling Spirit
to solder together the Affections of Men: Which will neither abrogate what is
authentic, no^ introduce what is new, but be a Restorer only of what useful
Truths and Practices may seem to have been lost in the long Delapse of Ages.
Kings 18. 8, 9, etc. Matthew. 3. 3, etc.
And perhaps of such clear and plain Principles as may solve the most
concerning Difficulties that human Reason is subject to be entangled with. He
is that Voice in the Wilderness, Prepare ye the Way of the Lord, and make his
Paths straight: that they shall be of a Spirit separate from the World, and
untainted and unsophisticated by the unwholsom Converse of Men: That this
Spirit will appear rough and rude to the World; because it will so freely and
impartially reprehend the World, and declare the Truth in all Plainness and
Simplicity of Heart; with an holy Boldness and Vndauntedness of Courage to
witness to the Truth, and a raising of Men out of a false Security from
external or carnal Respects, as did the Baptists, the Sadducees and Pharisees;
with a vehement Jealousy in behalf of the Purity of God's Worship, against all
Polytheism and Idolatry; and using only the Power of the Spirit from on High,
to oppose all Weapons of any carnal Warfare. Characters which one would think
had been purposely designed for the present Subject.

XV. XV. We ought not to reject all Pretensions to Divine Revelation, nor
blindly to receive any, but to try them.
Thus then we ought to be so far from looking on it as an absurd or impossible
thing that any should be extraordinarily and immediately led by the Spirit of
God in this last Age of the World, that we have Ground rather to hope and look
for it, if God shall find Subjects capable of it. We ought not therefore in
Prudence indifferently to reject all that come to us, as from God, with a Thus
says the Lord, in their Mouths; for by so doing, we may chance to repulse
God's Messengers, and refuse to hear from him that which may be of great
Importance to our Salvation: Nor ought we on the other hand, to receive blindly
all as such, who pretend to be led by the Spirit of God, since many false
Prophets do and shall arise and deceive many; but we ought to follow the
Apostle's Advice, and try the Spirits, whether they are of God or not. Yet this
does not oblige us to go and find out and enquire into the Grounds of every
Pretender, which were an infinite Labor and Expense of Time in an Age that
abounds with Multitudes of Pretenders. We are dispensed from that when the
Falsehood of the Pretension discovers it self by some plain Mark or Sign, as the
wicked or even worldly Life of the Pretender, his Disowning the Holy
Scriptures, or denying or opposing any essential Truth of Religion. But when
there are no such evident Marks of the Falsehood of one's Pretensions to
immediate Revelation, but they are backed with such Considerations, and
attended with such Circumstances as make the Truth of them probable, we are
concerned in Prudence to give our selves the Trouble of Enquiring into them,
and though upon Trial they be found empty, we must not think our Pains lost;
because it is better to be at some Pains in Examining a false Pretension to
Revelation, than to reject a true one, because we would not give our selves the
Trouble to enquire into it.

XVI. XVI. The Pretensions of A. B. deserve this Enquiry.
Seeing then the Pretensions of A. B. to Divine Inspiration are of this last
Sort, and that by the Testimony of one of her most furious Enemies. There are
Persons who have the Reputation of Sense, Probity and Learning, who look upon
her as one immediately enlightened by the Spirit of God, and seeing the Things
that she declares to us are of the greatest Moment, and do most nearly concern
us, we ought in Prudence to hear and weigh the Evidences brought to make appear
that she is immediately led by the Spirit of God, and see whether they be such
as may belong to Impostours or to deluded Persons, and what Marks are given
whereby we may discern those who are truly inspired by God, from Impostours,
false Prophets, and such as either acted by the Spirit of the Devil, or the
Heat of their own Imaginations. I shall set down those Marks and Evidences in
her own Words.

XVII. XVII. A Sum of the Evidences she brings of being led by the Spirit of
God.
Suspect, says she, all that I say to you as from God, in case that you observe
my Life, my Manners and my Actions are not all conformable to those of Jesus
Christ; and that my Doctrine is not entirely like to the Holy Scripture; for if
it is God that speaks to me, he is unchangeable, he never changes; what he said
to his Apostles and his Disciples, is the same thing which he declares now
inwardly to the Soul. There can be no change in God.

Besides this, Lum. nee en tenebr. Part 1. p. 2, 3.
the Word of God is Living and Operative. The Operations that you feel inwardly
of my Words ought to be a sure Evidence to you, that it is God; for it would be
a kind of Idolatry to attribute That to the Creature which belongs to the
Creator. I am a pure Nothing, but God is All in me; he teaches me, he acts, he
speaks in me without Nature's contributing any thing, but as a simple Organ, as
a Pencil contributes to the Art of a fine Painter.

Your natural Spirit is capable of judging this; for where should a little Girl
learn all the Law of God, which is imprinted in the Marrow of my Bones without
Study and without Books? --

-- If I perceive the most secret Thoughts of your Heart, from whence can this
come, but from God only? Consider always what Properties the Spirit of God has
in himself, and the Spirit of the Devil, and do not believe every Spirit; for
this is the Time of the Reign of Antichrist, and he has great Dominion over
the Spirits of Men now, deceiving them with false Appearances under the Pretext
of Goodness and Virtue, and transforms himself into an Angel of Light, to
seduce the Well-meaning. I entreat you to take good heed and remark rather the
Life and Behavior of the Person who says he has Communication with God, than
his Words; for the Devil can speak well of Divine Secrets as when he was an
Angel. He has not lost his Lights, but they serve him for a Hell; therefore he
tempts the best by Divine Lights, but he cannot give them in Effect the
Properties that the Spirit of God brings along with him: Read them with
Attention.

The Properties of God.
He is Truth. He is the Way. He is Life. He who lives in God walks always in
Truth. He who lives in God is conformed to the Life of Jesus Christ. He who
lives in God walks in Sincerity of Spirit and Simplicity of Heart. He who lives
in God fears nothing. He who lives in God seeks nothing. He who lives in God
hopes for nothing out of God, for he finds all in him.
The Properties of the Devil.
He is the Father of Lies, the Master of Inconstancy, the Inventer of
Hypocrisy. He who is of the Devil deals in Lies. He who is of the Devil is
inconstant. He who is of the Devil is dissembled, counterfeit, hypocritical. He
who does an unseemly thing hates the Light, that his Deeds may not be known. He
who is of the Devil seeks Darkness for fear that he be discovered. He who is of
the Devil is haughty, proud, and desirous of Honor. He who is of the Devil has
a Deference to none.
The surest Mark to know true Prophets, Tomb. de la fauss. Theol. Part 1. p.
77, 78.
is to remark if they who call themselves such are true Christians, since of
Necessity they must first be this, before they can be true Prophets. -- Examine
if they have the Qualities of a true Christian, and if they truly know God. --
He who truly knows him, loves him, and he cannot love him without partaking of
his Divine Qualities and being transformed into them: As God is good, righteous
and true, so will he be who truly knows and loves him. If we see in these
Prophets any thing contrary to the Goodness, Righteousness and Truth of God, we
must not believe that they are sent from him, because he who is his Friend is
always transformed into him, and partakes expressly of his Three Qualities,
Righteousness, Goodness and Truth, bringing them forth in all his Works.

They also are not true Christians who are not true Disciples and Followers of
Jesus Christ. To be his Disciple we must do as he did; and to be his Follower
we must depend in all things on God as he depended; and be willing, for the
Salvation of our Neighbor, to endure hard Treatments, Affronts, Pains, yea,
Death. And if they who call themselves Prophets are not possessed with this
Sentiment, they have not true Charity, are not true Christians, nor the
Disciples of Jesus Christ.

-- You may ask me if I do not believe that I am a true Christian; I will
answer, My Belief may perhaps deceive me; but if you do not observe in me the
Qualities of Charity, the Fruits and Gifts of the Holy Spirit, and the Eight
Beatitudes, you ought not to believe it: For these Marks are infallible to a
truly Christian Soul; so that they who have them not, or at least do not labor
to obtain them, cannot be called truly Christian, far less Prophets, say what
they please.

The Affectation of Desiring that People believe them, is a Sign that they seek
their own Glory: For the Prophet of God affects nothing and forces nothing. He
only declares his Commission to him to whom he is sent, as a Messenger that has
no Concern in the Contents of the Letter that he carries. Therefore they use to
make themselves be believed; the Desires they have that their Prophecies may
come to pass, and their Eagerness to act in their Designs, show that they seek
their own Satisfaction; For the Friend of God acts always with Meekness and
Indifferency, leaving all the Success of his Commission to God; and he is as
content with his own Confusion as with his Honor, seeking and aiming at no
other thing but to have satisfied him who sent him.

If those Prophets were of God, Ibid. p. 76.
they would all speak conformably and also with Constancy; for there can be no
mutability in God; what he said to the Ancient Prophets, he says yet now adays
to the Souls which he possesses. They can be no new Prophecies, for God has
for^^old all from ancient Times; but he gives now the understanding and
clearing of these ancient Prophecies to Souls resigned to him. Neither do they
bring new Laws or Instructions, because Jesus Christ has brought the last which
is the Gospel, and he teaches all things in Perfection, and what Men ought to
do and avoid, that they may return to a Dependence upon God, from whence they
have strayed; and this so perfectly, that he has perfectly completed all the
Laws and all saving Instructions: So that if any would teach another thing, he
is a Seducer and ought not to be believed.

But when one comes from God to awaken Men, that they may consider how they are
fallen from the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and how far they are estranged from a
Dependence upon God, making this appear to them by eternal Truths and by so
clear Reasons, that all Men of sound judgment may comprehend it; these things
ought not to be rejected because they are good in themselves, and cannot but
profit those who believe them, though they should come from the Mouth of a false
Prophet, yea of the Devil himself. We ought not then to stick so much at
examining the Instrument from whence those Truths came, to know if it be true
and good, and aim at God's Glory and the Salvation of Souls. For God makes use
sometimes of Persons who are imperfect and vicious, yea, of the Devil himself,
to declare to us the Truth that is necessary for us, that we may not pretend
Ignorance, or blame God for our Damnation, as being wanting to warn us. He
therefore sometimes makes Beasts, wicked and possessed Persons to speak, that
they may manifest his Will to us; but we must not therefore make reckoning of
the Beasts, Devils, and wicked Persons, but Profit by the Things that God makes
known to us by them, when that which they say is good and true.

If a Soul be truly possessed with the Holy Spirit, (...) Acad de^ scav. Part 2.
p. 3.
he discovers himself sufficiently by his Operations. He brings forth there
always his Fruits, he brings thither infallibly his Gifts, by which we may
truly know that it is he. Though he be an invisible Spirit, he is seen and
sensibly comprehended by his visible Works, and by the Operations he works in
the Soul and Understanding of him who possesses him, which may be clearly seen
in the Conversation of the Person who says he possesses him. For he must be
Charitable, Joyful, Peaceable, Patient, Persevering, Good, Gentle, Meek,
Faithful, Modest, Continent, and Chaste. The Holy Spirit cannot be in a Soul
without producing those Fruits, no more than the Sun can be without giving
Light to the Earth, which feels (...) Heat and Splendor, though it does not
comprehend the Essence of the Star. -- There may be Fruits in the Soul
resembling these, which are only Sensualities and Self-love, and Moral Virtues,
though they may take the Name of the Fruits of the Spirit, they are vain, because
they respect only the present time. -- They who do not possess the Holy Spirit
cannot discern if he reside in another, but by the Wisdom of the same Spirit,
which is known by the Holy Scriptures, without which there is nothing but
Darkness and Ignorance. If we would discover that a Soul has True Charity, we
must see if its Works are accompanied with the Conditions of that Charity
described by St. Paul.

That we may give Credit to the Sayings of those who say they are led by the
Holy Spirit, Ibid. p. 13.
we must first see if what they say be conformable to the Holy Scriptures; for
the Holy Spirit is Uniform through all. He inspired the Prophets of the ancient
Law, and thereafter the Apostles and Disciples of Jesus Christ, as he does
Souls living at present upon Earth. There must be a Conformity in Substance
between all those Inspirations, if they proceeded from one and the same Holy
Spirit. All being but the same Doctrine and the same Spirit, in which there can
never be any Deceit; because the Spirit of God is unchangeable, always
consistent with himself; and no Body can be mistaken in following what is
conformable to the Gospel, even to though it were declared by a wicked Person,
yea, by the Devil himself.

But if some one declare some particular thing respecting the Salvation or
Damnation of any, they must see from whence this Knowledge comes. If such have
it by the Light of the Holy Spirit, they must believe it as the Scripture; or
else they be in Hazard of being forsaken by God, for despising the Warnings
which he often gives us by some one of his Friends, whom he makes use of to
declare his Will to those who would not hear it so particularly themselves: As
he did to David by the Prophet Nathan, to declare his Sin to him of which he
was become insensible, and so many others whom he has withdrawn from the way to
Hell, by the Warnings of some Souls enlightened by him; as he does sometimes yet
at present.

A True Prophet never seeks himself, Ibid. p ^^
desires not to please Men, aims at nothing but to satisfy the Will of God,
though it cost him his Life. He speaks of his Commission without fear or respect
of any. He has no soft Words that flatter the Ears, but hard ones that pierce
Hearts. He declares the Truths that reprove Men more willingly than those which
commend them. -- A True Prophet rejoices more to be hated than loved, because
he sees then he is more conformable to his Master, who in doing Good was hated
and persecuted by Men. -- There is not a more certain Mark than the Reproach
and Contradictions of Men, whereby to discern a True Prophet from a False; for
Falsehood always flatters, and so is loved by the People, who are willingly
flattered.

The Holy Spirit can have no regard to what pleases or displeases, Ibid. p. 21.
but to what is pure Truth without respect of Persons. -- And if there remain
any doubt if it is the Holy Spirit who speaks by a Person who says so, we must
try if that Person possess the Twelve Fruits of the Holy Spirit, his Seven
Gifts, and the Eight Beatitudes; so you shall see visibly in them the Holy
Spirit, by his infallible Operations.

Thus you see what excellent and true Marks and Characters she gives, whereby
we may try whether any be truly endued with the Spirit of God or not; and the
more her Doctrine, Life and Spirit are inquired into by the Lovers of Sincerity
and Truth, the more they will abide this Touchstone: And it will still the more
clearly appear that her Doctrine is the same in Substance with the Gospel; her
Life and Spirit a Transcript of it; that the Law of God was written in her
Heart, from whence her Doctrine came as from a Fountain of Living Water
springing up to Everlasting Life, and was not derived from the broken Cisterns
of humane Learning, Conversation, Study, and Books: And that her Words are
sharp and piercing, searching into the Heart and Conscience, and far from
soothing and flattering the Corruptions of Men.

XVIII. XXVIII. M. Pascal's distinguishing Mark of the Divine Authority of the
Christian Religion.
M. Pascal has given it as a distinguishing Mark and Character of the Christian
Religion, in Contradiction to all other Religions of the World, as an Argument
of its Divine Authority and Original, that it makes Charity, or the Love of God
its principal End, and Man's chief Duty, which no other Religion does. And I
think it may be given as a distinguishing Character of the Doctrine of A. B.
its being a true Representation of Christianity, in Contradiction to most of
the Systems of the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, which have been advanced in this
last Age of the World, that she makes Charity, or the Love of God, the great
End of that Religion, and the Precepts and Life of Jesus Christ, the necessary
Means to bring us to that End, and when this is so clearly discovered and
represented to us by an illiterate Child, without the use of any humane Helps,
and our false Glosses, whereby we have perverted the Doctrine of Jesus Christ,
are laid open to us; to ascribe this to Natural Judgment, Heat of Fancy, any
Humane or Diabolical Means, or to think to confound it with our Buffoonry and
Critics, is a Spiritual Infatuation like that of the Scribes and Pharisees.

XIX. XIX. The Prejudices against her being led by the Spirit of God proposed
and cleared by her self. 1. The want of Miracles answered. Tomb. de la fausse
Theol. Part 1. p. 11.
Now all that has been or can be opposed to those Evidences of A. B. her being
led by the Spirit of God, come under these Two Heads. viz. it is either
affirmed that these Marks and Characters are not sufficient Evidences, even
though she had them, or that they do not all belong to her. I shall give you then
her own Vindication of her self in answering some Prejudices relating to these
Heads.

First then, they objected that there could be no sufficient Evidence of her
being led by the Spirit of God, unless she were endued with the Power of
working Miracles. In Answer to which she says.

It is a great Ignorance to desire to see Miracles that we may believe that a
Soul is possessed with the Holy Spirit; for the Devil at this time can easily do
Wonders. Jesus Christ has assured us that in the last Times many false Prophets
will arise that shall do great Signs and Wonders. And we live now in the Reign
of Antichrist. They who ask now for Miracles deserve to be seduced by Satan;
for what need is there of them, since God is not to send into the World a New
Doctrine. The Gospel Law is the last and most perfect of all Laws. Nothing New
will come to instruct Men, except the fulfilling of the Gospel Law, which was
sufficiently confirmed by Jesus Christ and his Apostles, who needed then for
the Hardness of Men's Hearts to work outward Miracles, because of their
Unbelief. For those Persons, Signs were wrought that were visible to their
Senses. But now Men are sufficiently confirmed in the Gospel Law. There are no
Christians incredulous in this Point. And therefore Miracles would serve to no
purpose now, since nothing is taught but what Jesus Christ and his Apostles
taught, and this is believed both by good and bad Christians.

I think you have not the true Touchstone to discern if a Person has the Spirit
of God, Ibid. p. 13.
when you would try him by Miracles; for the Spirit of Satan may do great Signs
and Wonders in the Persons where he dwells. I have seen Persons possessed with
that unclean Spirit who would have done admirable things. Some were Blind for
some Years, and recovered their Sight in an Instant; others were Dumb, and
recovered their Speech by supernatural Means; others did hang and flee visibly
in the Air, before all the People; others were without Pulse and Motion for
some Nights and Days, and in an Instant would arise and walk cheerfully. Are
not here the Dead raised, the Sick healed, the Blind recovered to their Sight,
the Dumb to their Speech, and Bodies suspended in the Air by the Power of the
Devil? How could you judge then by Miracles if a Person be led by the Spirit of
God, or of the Devil?

You will tell me that you would try the Spirit of God by true Miracles, and
not by such as come by the Intervention of the Devil. I ask by what means you
shall discern between these, so long as you have not that Holy Spirit which
would learn you all Truth? Then you would discern all things, and would not
need to ask Miracles to know if another be guided by that true Spirit. For
Faith alone would give you Evidence enough. When the Pharisees asked Miracles
of Christ, and he had done some, they said presently, he had a Devil, and that
he cast out Devils by the Power of Beelzebub who was more Powerful than the
inferior Devils. Do you not think that the same would happen now, and if I
also wrought Miracles, would they not undoubtedly say that I were a Sorceress,
which were even to be feared; since now there is no more need of Miracles,
except to bewitch Men's Spirits with Admiration, our Faith being sufficiently
confirmed, and the Gospel Law verified. There is nothing wanting but that it is
not put in practice; and there is no need of Miracles to assure all Christians
that they cannot be saved without the practice of it, since Jesus Christ and
his Apostles have so strongly affirmed it. One must deny the Gospel to believe
that he can be saved without imitating Jesus Christ, seeing he says, that he is
the way, and that he who enters by him shall be saved, that he also is the
Door; and that we cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven but by him. What
Miracles will you require, Sir, from one who does no other thing but repeat the
same Words which Jesus Christ and his Apostles pronounced, and says no other
thing but that to be a Christian we must have the Spirit of Jesus Christ.

I have done no ill to any Body, nor said any other thing in Substance, but
that Men are fallen from the Faith, and that they have by their Sins drawn down
the Judgments of God upon their Heads; that of necessity we must be converted
to God, and take up the Spirit of the Christians of the Primitive Church, or
otherwise we are not True Christians. All these Truths are so clear that all
Men ought to become silent and confounded by them; silent in that they cannot
belly the Truth; and confounded to see that they are so far from God, and the
practice of True Christians. But being unwilling to yield to this Truth, and to
be ashamed that their Degeneracy is laid open, they will not be silent, but
strive to reproach those who tell this Truth, and tempt them with Foreign
Questions and Arguments, even demanding of them outward Signs and Miracles, as
if they were of the Essence of Virtue, while they cannot give the least Ray of
Virtue to him who works them; for True Miracles come from God, and not from the
Person that does them, who is only his Instrument to show to Men that which God
operates. -- So that you cannot be assured that a Person has the Holy Spirit,
even though he should work outward Miracles, since Judas did them as well as the
other Apostles, and yet was a Devil. We need another Touchstone to know the
Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2. Ibid. p. 26,
for St. Paul says, though we could remove Mountains, and had the Gift of
Prophecy, all this would be nothing without Charity.

It is a great Blindness to seek for Miracles, and outward Signs, that we may
believe that a Soul is guided by the Holy Spirit. It were better to search in
the Scriptures what Gifts and Fruits the Holy Spirit brings always along with
him, and observe if they who say they are endued with the Holy Spirit have in
them those Gifts and Fruits, for then it is certain they are possessed with the
Holy Spirit, for all these things are Supernatural and Divine.

Not that I would exclude True Miracles from Souls that love God; Ibid. p. 27.
for they would certainly do them in this present Time, as much as the Apostles
did them in their Days, if it were necessary for God's Glory, who will always
do the Will of those who love him in all Times and Places: But I have said all
this, to make appear to you that this is the least Favor that God does in this
World to a faithful Soul, that it has the Gift of Prophecy or of doing
Miracles; and that these things ought not to be valued in respect of Faith and
Charity which unite Souls to God. These are True Miracles with respect to the
Souls of their Neighbor, they restore to them Sight, Health, and Life, and
with those Philosophers Stones of Living Faith and Charity, they change earthly
Souls into the pure Gold of Divine Charity. These are the True Miracles which
shall be done in this Fullness of Time, to prove the force of the Holy Spirit,
by the Cure of Souls more worthy beyond Comparison than Mortal Bodies.

The Sum of what she says on this Head is this, That it is not necessary that
every one who is immediately taught by the Spirit of God should prove the same
by outward Miracles; that they are necessary only for the Confirmation of a New
Doctrine: That she declares no other Doctrine than the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
which our Lord and his Apostles have sufficiently confirmed already: That to
demand Miracles now, is to tempt God, and to expose our selves to be deluded by
the Devil; who we are told will in these last Times by his false Prophets do
Signs and Lying Wonders, which without the Spirit of God cannot easily be
distinguished from true Ones: That they are not the surest Touchstones of one's
being guided and taught by the Spirit of God, but the Gifts and Fruits of the
Spirit, particularly Living Faith and Charity; and that by these the Spirit of
God does greater Miracles in converting and healing the Souls of others, than
all outward Miracles on Bodies would amount to: And that in these last Times,
God will manifest the Power of his Spirit by working these Miracles on Souls,
by turning them away from things Earthly and Temporal, to things Heavenly and
Eternal.

There were many of the ancient Prophets of whom we do not read that they
wrought Miracles, and their Prophesies were generally for Aftertimes, and not
fulfilled in their own Days; yet the People were bound to receive them as sent
from God, and there were sufficient Evidences for it in their Doctrine and
Lives. Besides, it was no less than a Miracle, and beyond the Power of Nature,
that she knew the Thoughts of other Men's Hearts and their inward Dispositions,
not that she always did so, but when God thought fit to discover them to her,
either for her own Safety, or for the Good of others. This is oft-times
declared, and Instances given of it, not only by her self, but also by M. de
Cort, Poiret, Tiellens, Francken, and many others. The manner also of having so
clear and comprehensive a Knowledge of Divine Things, without Study,
Conferences, Meditation, or Books, is no less strange and extraordinary.

XX. XX. 2. That all might have been from the Devil or her own Imagination,
answered.
2. It is objected against her being led by the Spirit of God, that many have
had Visions and Revelations and yet not from God, but that they have been acted
either by the Heat of their own Imagination, or by Illusions from the Devil,
who can transform himself into an Angel of Light, and work upon the Fancies and
Imaginations of corrupt Men, so as to make his Illusions pass for Immediate
Communications from God, and therefore she may be reckoned among the
Enthusiasts and Visionaries with which the World abounds. Enthusiast is a Word
which at first had a Good meaning, viz. one truly led by the Spirit of God; but
now generally it is taken for one who falsely pretends to it, and is not. And
of such there are several sorts of false Enthusiasts in the World, though all of
them do not go under that Name. 1. Many there are who indulging still their
corrupt Nature, and being strongly acted by their own Imagination, or by
Impulses of the Devil, pretend to Divine Inspiration, and vent impious, absurd
and corrupt things, as inspired by God. By their Fruits ye shall know them.
Others are become Idolaters of their Reason, make it their God. But the most
ordinary false Enthusiasts are they who least of all will own the Name, those I
mean, who pretend to be Ambassadors from God, and that to resist them is all
one as to resist the Spirit of God, and that their Sermons, and Explications of
the Holy Scriptures are to be received as the Word of God, though in the mean
time they have not the Spirit of Jesus Christ, are far from being enlightened by
him, venting their own Notions, Passions, Errors, and Wranglings for the Word
of God, wresting it to speak as they would have it; and in the mean time hating
and persecuting those who are truly taught of God, and calling them by the
odious Names that belong to themselves.

True Divine Inspiration, so far as we can conceive it, from the
Representations of those who have been truly and immediately Illuminated of
God, may be considered under these Two general Heads: 1. Either God
communicates himself, his Light, and Truth, immediately to the Soul without the
Intervention of any sensible Idea or Image. Or, 2. He makes use of sensible
Images to affect the Soul, and that after different manners, by Dreams,
Visions, Voices, etc. and it is in these especially, and not in the former,
that the Devil labors to ape God and to delude Souls, or that Men are deluded
by their own warm Imaginations, and the Devil's Illusions, or their own Fancies
pass for Divine Visions, etc.

Now that the Motions and Sentiments of A. B. were not the Effect of such an
Enthusiasm, seems evidently to appear from her own Writings. It is best to hear
her self.

That I may satisfy (says she to a great Lawyer) the Question so often proposed
by you, La Lum. nee en tenebr. Part 1. Let. 1
how I understand and speak with God, I shall tell you in Simplicity what I can
say of it.

God is a Spirit; the Soul is a Spirit; they communicate in Spirit; they are
not verbal Discourses, but spiritual Notices; ( Intelligences Spirituelles)
which nevertheless are more intelligible than the best Eloquence of the World.

God makes himself to be understood by the Soul, by inward Motions, which the
Soul understands and comprehends according as it is freed of earthly Idea's,
and in so far as the Faculties of the Soul do cease, the Motions of God are so
much the more intelligible unto it.

The Notices of God are infallible when the Soul is free of all Images, and in
a Forgetfulness of all created things; but they are doubtful when it acts by
Imaginations, and seek Sensibilities, or any other thing that is not purely
God.

The Saints themselves have in this Point committed Mistakes by Visions, vocal
Words, Ecstasies, or other Sensibilities, to which the Imagination contributes.

God is a Spirit, the Soul purified is transformed into him, and has no need of
Words nor of Sight to understand him, more than we need an Eye or a Tongue to
understand our own Conceptions.

It is hard to declare how this is done, it must be hard also to believe it,
and in Effect it is subject to Deceptions and Illusions of the Devil, or the
Imagination, if these inward Notices and Knowledge be not declared by a Person
whose Life and Words are conformable to the Gospel, as being inspired by one
and the same Spirit. The rest of this Letter is transcribed above.

There is nothing more Difficult for Man's Understanding than to discern
Spirits, Ibid. p. 8.
to know if they are of God, or of the Devil, or from Nature; to discern this,
a Divine Light is necessary; for the same things which the Spirit of God
operates, that of the Devil or of Nature may do also.

If the Spirit of God make a Soul say that which is to its Praise, by a Spirit
of simple Truth; that of the Devil will make the same things be spoken through
pure Pride; that of Nature, to get Esteem; being so subtle in its Flatteries,
that it will sometimes utter things to its Contempt, that it may appear Humble
before those who hear them. The same thing may be Holy, Diabolical, or Humane,
according to the inward Intention and Motion of the Soul that operates, which
God alone knows evidently; in which so many deceive themselves who presume to
discern Spirits, and to guide Souls by their own natural Light. These are the
Blind who lead the Blind, and both fall into the Ditch.

I entreat you to remark that the Holy Spirit is not visible to be seen by the
Eyes of the Body where he resides, Ibid. p. 53.
but he manifests himself sufficiently by the Operations which he produces in
those Souls which possess him: They are adorned with all his Gifts and Fruits,
which are sure Marks of his Operations; for neither the Devil nor Nature can
work such Effects, no more than natural Fruits can be brought forth without the
Trees, by which Fruits we discern the Trees; so ought we to discern Souls that
are filled with the Holy Spirit; for to regard only the Bark, which are the
outward Actions and Words, there is occasion of being greatly deceived; for the
Devil covers himself with the Garment of seeming Virtue and Sanctity, and under
this, deceives the most Pious, and the most Learned.

The Twelve Fruits, and the Seven Gifts of the Holy Spirit, ^cad. de S^av.
Theol. Part 2. p. 22, 29.
and the Eight Beatitudes, have always their Operations in the Person who
possesses the Holy Spirit, who cannot reside any where without them, more than
the Sun can be without Light, so that it is in vain to seek other Signs whereby
to discern this Spirit, since these only are the true One^.

So that we may know if a Person be animated by the Holy Spirit, or by the
Devil, or by Nature, by the Operation of his Works; we need only consider them
with a single Eye, with a pure Intention, without Curiosity or Affectation, and
then we cannot be deceived; for God promises, that if our Eye be Single, our
whole Body shall be full of Light; and if it be Evil, it will be full of
Darkness. -- For though a Soul have not in it self the Holy Spirit, yet it shall
have the Understanding enlightened to discover him in others, provided it behold
them with a single Eye, without Dissimulation or Surprise; but in the
Simplicity of a Child, as Jesus Christ says we must be in, if we would enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven.

They who see me write, Pierre de Touch. p. 293.
know well that I do it without any Study or humane Speculation; and that it
flows from my Spirit as Water flows from its Fountain, and that I do nothing
but lend my Hand and my Spirit to another Power than mine. -- And God gives yet
a more sure Testimony, by imparting to me his Righteousness, Truth, and
Charity.

For these things cannot come from Nature, which being corrupted, can produce
no Good, nor any Divine Virtues; because I am come of the Corrupt Mass of Adam,
as all the rest of Men, there could not be in me any Righteousness, Truth, and
Charity, which are all Divine and Supernatural Virtues, which cannot enter into
the Soul of Men, but by the Work of the Holy Spirit.

This gives me a sufficient Testimony that I am led by God, p. 295.
since the Devil and Nature have nothing of those Virtues. And therefore we
cannot find a surer Evidence that a Soul is led by the Holy Spirit, than when
it is possessed of the Righteousness, Truth, and Charity of God: For if we desire
to see Miracles for a Proof, we may be deceived, since the Devil can do
Miracles, or things which seem Supernatural; but he can never have in him the
Righteousness, Truth, and Love of God.

The Good Spirit, Tomb. de la fausse Theol. Part 3. p. 49.
and the Evil, may be known by the Qualities which they have. The Spirit of God
has in him a Peace and Sweetness that comforts the Soul, and draws it to an
inward Quiet. But the Spirit of the Devil disturbs the Understanding, disquiets
it, and robs it of Tranquillity and Rest. The Spirit of God acts sweetly and
strongly in Peace and Tranquillity of Mind. -- All that comes from the Spirit of
God, is always accompanied with the Qualities of God, which are Goodness,
Righteousness, and Truth. And that which comes from the Spirit of the Devil,
carries always the Qualities of the Devil; which are Malice, Injustice, and
Lying. -- The Evil Spirit may sometimes move to do a good thing, to draw Evil
out of it; but that seeming Goodness can never be accompanied with
Righteousness, and Truth, which are the inseparable Qualities of God; which the
Devil may sometimes separately make use of to deceive Men, aping the Works of
God; but he can never do a thing that is Good, Just, and True, altogether;
since this appertains to God only, who cannot be divided in any of these
Qualities.

God does not speak to me by Voices, Pierre de Touch. p. 299, 300.
Thundrings, and Lightnings, as he did of Old to the Prophets; or as he spoke
to Tobit, by Angels in the Likeness of Young Men; or as he spoke to Jacob in
the Vision of a Ladder, upon which Angels did ascend and descend; or as he
spoke to Joseph in a Dream, saying to him, Take the Child and the Mother, and
flee into Egypt: For I durst not rely upon all these things, in which the Devil
and the Fancy of Man may mingle themselves, and make such things be seen and
heard, as if they came from the Spirit of God. But I fix on the solid Truth of
God, on his Righteousness, and on his Love, because in such things the Devil
can have no hold. I have sometimes had Dreams and Visions coming from God, as I
may afterward make appear by Experience; but I do not rely on these Dreams and
Visions, unless the same things that I have seen and dreamed be confirmed unto
me by a secret Notice, (Intelligence) after the manner that I converse
ordinarily with God. For so soon as the Soul is free of all Image, and
delivered from the agitation of its Passions, and the Imagination ceases to
operate; then I hear the Voice of God, and his Reasoning, not with my Ears, but
with my Understanding. And after this manner he makes me see and hear all that
I need to know both for my own Conduct, and that of others; which many have
experienced, and found that I have told them the most secret things of their
Hearts, which neither Men nor Devils could know.

Never amuse your self with Discourses, Tomb. de la fausse Theol. Part 4. p. 57.
Visions, or Revelations made to you or others, if you do not perceive
assuredly that they are accompanied with the Qualities of the Good Spirit of
God, or otherwise you will be easily deceived. Remark always if what you say or
do be accompanied with the Righteousness, Goodness, and Truth of God, and then
you shall assuredly hear God speak to your Soul. -- For if you walk in these
Qualities, you will be in God, and the Devil can deceive you no longer by
Illusions, or false Imaginations; as he will easily do, so long as you do not
possess those essential Virtues of the Righteousness, Goodness, and Truth of
God, in which you ought always to walk, if you would not be seduced by Satan.

The Devil can give Visions, Part 1. p. 69, 70.
Ravishments, or supernatural Ecstasies to Sorcerers; yea, make them foretell
things to come, being a subtle Spirit, and foreseeing afar, and by
conjectures, what will come to pass, and he may make them fall out by the means
of his Sorcerers; who being powerful and numerous, may by their Power and
Authority bring about what has been Fore told. -- Therefore it is fit to
receive nothing for Truth, but the things which lead us to a more strict Union
with God, and Denial of our selves. These things are always Good, even though
they should come from the Devil himself, we cannot be deceived in believing
them.

I can never have the least doubt as if it were an evil Spirit that
communicates himself to my Understanding; Lum. nee en tenebr. Part 3. p. 184.
for the evil Spirit could not in my Judgment produce so good and so constant
Operations, such as the Love of God, and the Hatred of ones Self: Moreover he
could not separate the Soul from the Pleasures of this Life, nor remove from it
the coveting the Riches and Honors of the World; nor give it a full
Contentment in the want of all humane Consolation, nor yet Joy in Hardships and
Contempt. All these things cannot come from the Devil, for he is too opposite
to all these Virtues, and leads ordinarily to all sort of Evil; though at first
he cover them with Virtues. The End of his Operations make appear sufficiently
the Deeds of the Author, and make known the Workman by his Works.

Thus you see how certain Marks she gives whereby to distinguish true from
false Enthusiasm; the Conduct and Inspiration of the Spirit of God from the
Illusions of the Devil, or Ones own Imagination, and how Men may preserve
themselves from being imposed upon by the last: That where a Soul is truly
purified, and the Communications of God's Spirit are to the inferior
Understanding, without the use of the Imagination or Senses, or the imprinting
on them Images, Visions, or Voices, there neither the Devil nor Man's
Imagination can have any hold; that the Devil cannot work on the Imagination of
such, as he does on Wicked and Brain sick Persons: That when Visions, Voices,
and sensible Raptures are communicated to such, that they may be assured that
they are from God, they ought to apply to him in that inward way in which he is
pleased to communicate himself, the Soul being delivered from the agitation of
its Passions, and the Imagination: That the Spirit of God brings along with him
Peace and Tranquillity of Soul, and his Divine Qualities of Goodness,
Righteousness, and Truth, and his Operations are both good and abiding; but the
Spirit of the Devil disturbs the Understanding, robs it of Tranquillity and
Rest, and that which proceeds from that Spirit carries always with it the
Qualities of the Devil, Injustice, Malice, Hypocrisy. These are the
distinguishing Evidences for ones self. And for others, that they may not be
imposed upon by any pretending to be led by the Spirit of God, when it may be
they are guided by the Illusions of the Devil or their own Fancy; that there is
no Hazard of being mistaken, if we follow that only which is conformable to the
Gospel, though it were declared by a wicked Person or the Devil himself; that
there cannot be a surer Testimony that one is led by the Spirit of God, than if
he produce in them his Fruits and Gifts, and impart to them the Divine
Qualities of Righteousness, Goodness, and Charity, and by their means produce
the same good Effects in others: That the evil Spirit may sometimes move to do
a good thing to draw Evil out of it, but can never do that that is Just, and
Good, and True altogether, which comes from God only; and though the Devil cover
his Wickedness at first with seeming Virtues, yet the End of all his Operations
show from whom they come.

Thus A. B. lays no stress on Visions, Ecstasies, Raptures, or other
Sensibilities to which the Imagination contributes, and where the Devil and
Fancy may impose, but upon the immediate Notices of God to the Understanding;
and for the Truth of this and her Sincerity in it, appeals to the Fruits of
God's Spirit, and the Divine Qualities which he had implanted in her Soul, and
by which she constantly steered all her Actions: And that no Body may be
deceived by her declaring things as Truths from God which are not; she desires
they may receive them only in so far as they are conformable to the Gospel, and
then there is no Hazard of being deceived, those Truths being so well confirmed
already, and so necessary for all who would be saved; and in so far as they
lead us to a more strict Union with God, and Denial of ones self. And these are
always Good; though the Devil should declare them, we cannot be deceived in
believing them.

XXI. XXI. 3. That all might be the Effect of a great Natural Judgment answered.
3. It was said, that she was a Woman of a fine natural Spirit, of a clear and
piercing Judgment, and a lively Imagination, and being retired and thoughtful,
it was no wonder though she had clear and extraordinary Thoughts and Sentiments
beyond others; all this might be the Effect of the excellency of her Natural
Spirit, and not from the Spirit of God. This Thought always readily occurs to
those who upon the reading of her Writings are convinced of the excellency of
her Sentiments, and it was objected to her self. I shall here set down her own
Answer.

You ought to have more Charity for me, Tomb de la fausse Theol. Part 2. p.
124, etc.
than to call me Wise, and of a good Natural Judgment, when you judge that I am
Proud, for your saying, serves only to make me more so. I have always said,
that I am nothing but a simple Child, and now I hear Divines and the Learned
say, that I have a great Natural Spirit, which makes me say and write things
which so many Persons do admire. -- I have always referred them to the Spirit
of God, who produces them immediately in me, and now you would have me so
Presumptuous as to believe that all this comes from my self, or from my Natural
Judgment. I should be a wise Girl indeed, if I had found out so many excellent
Truths, without School or Study, without Books, and without Masters. I believe
it is Ignorance that makes you speak so, and that you know not what the Spirit
of God is, nor what a Natural Spirit is; and cannot distinguish that which
comes from Nature, from that which comes from Grace, as not being sufficiently
advanced in the Wisdom of the Holy Spirit.

I am afraid my Judgment may offend you; but I will make it appear to you, that
it is most true, and that you have not yet penetrated nor discovered how the
Spirit of God acts, and how the Spirit of Nature acts; and not having this
Touchstone which discovers fine Gold from the Counterfeit, you easily take the
one for the other: You will needs hold the rank of Masters, whereas it were
your Happiness to be good Scholars. To show that I have more Charity for your
Soul, than you have Ill Will for mine, I will declare what the Spirit of God
is, and what the Natural Spirit is, that you may no longer be mistaken. I will
tell you what Operations proceed from both these Spirits, and how they must be
animated. The thing is clear and certain, easy to be understood by those who
will use their Reason, and they who do not use it are Beasts, for nothing
distinguishes a Man from a Beast but Faith, and Reason.

I set down therefore for the chief Mark and Ground of discerning Spirits, that
the Spirit of God has this Quality, that he never acts and operates but for
things Divine and Eternal, or tending to Eternity; and that the Natural Spirit
never acts nor aims but for things Earthly and Temporal: For all that is from
Nature tends to its Center, which is the Earth and Time, where Nature is
bounded to delight it self, without knowing or tending to any other thing, but
what is conformable to Nature.

When you would know then if it be Nature that directs the Actions of a Person,
remark only if by what they say or do, they aim only at things earthly and
transitory; in this case you may well judge, that they have but a Natural
Spirit, and not the Spirit of God, since this never acts but for Divine things
tending to Eternity. So that when you see Persons labor to gain Money, or to
have Pleasure and Satisfaction in this World, it may be absolutely said, they
have but Natural Spirits, and cannot thereby find God, nor Life Eternal; for
though they flatter themselves, and say, that they trade, only to make a right
use of their Wealth; and study, that they may make a right use of their
Learning; all this is but for Time and earthly Things, proceeding only from the
Natural Spirit that cloaks it self with the Spirit of God, for this Divine
Spirit never tends but to Divine Things.

If you had observed, Sir, that that fine Spirit which you attribute to me, had
been applied to get Wealth or to gain Praise, or to Conversation, to take
Pleasure with Men, you would have had some Reason to say that I had nothing but
a natural Spirit; or if you had discovered in my Words any Ornament of Language
to make me be esteemed Eloquent; or in my Writing any Affectation of speaking
well, that I might be praised; these would be all Marks of a human Spirit. --

I would gladly ask you, Sir, if you have ever seen me acted by this natural
Spirit? First, if I have ever done any thing to gain Money? Or, if I have
desired any sensual Pleasures, or fed my self with Praises, or loved the
Conversation of Men? Have you not rather perceived that I ask nothing of any
Body? For I can say in Truth, that if they would give me Riches I would not
accept of them, for my own Goods are a burden to me, and the two things I hate
in the World are, Honor, and Sin; the Conversations and Divertisements of the
World are a Weariness to me; and if I affected to be praised for my Words or
Writings, I would study to speak well, to write well, and to spell well;
whereas I have nothing but a simple vulgar Language, nakedly to signify my
Thoughts, without Curiosity or any Circumspection. And for my Writings, do you
not see they are without any Study or Ornament, full of Faults of Writing and
Orthography, without any human Regard or Reflection.

Do you think I have not enough of Spirit to correct all these Faults, and to
learn in a little time to write and spell perfectly, that Men might see my
Skill? I am far from these Sentiments; for I would never learn any thing of
Men, because I desired not to be praised by them. One would have freely taught
me Orthography, another Poesy, another the Mathematics, another the Latin
Tongue; and I despised all this, to content my self with writing on my Knees,
on a little piece of Board, the things that God sheds into my Spirit, without
desiring to make any Reflection to see if I wrote well or ill, or if what I say
will please one or displease another, whether they will be well received and
approved, or despised or censured: I have no other aim in Speaking or Writing
but eternal things, without caring for temporal and earthly things; having no
Pretensions upon Earth, but only that of pleasing God, and stirring up my
Neighbor to his Love. This cannot proceed from a Natural Spirit which is
confined to earthly things, and cannot aim to please God, nor at eternal
things; for Nature cannot find its Pleasure and Satisfaction in a God which it
does not see and feel: What is beyond Sense, is not Food agreeable to Nature,
more than precious Stones can be Food for Horses; for neither of these are
Aliments proportioned to the Nature of either: For the Natural Senses will no
more be filled with God and things Eternal, than a Horse will be satisfied with
Jewels for his Food, but he loves the Grass and Hay far better, as Food more
suitable to his Nature.

Even so it is of the Natural Spirit and Senses, they do far more esteem things
earthly and sensual, than God, who is an Invisible Spirit; or things Eternal,
which they do not perceive and feel with their Senses. Whence we may draw a
sure Consequence, that he who does not seek or desire the Goods and Pleasures
which tickle our Senses, has the Spirit of God, and lives supernaturally; and
he who seeks nothing but God and things Eternal, cannot have this from a
Natural Spirit; and when you will needs say that my Writings proceed from a
Natural Spirit, you must prove that they aim at some Profit, Pleasure, or
Praise from Men. If I desired to Profit by them, I would endeavor to please
them, and to gain their Friendship; and if I desired to take Pleasure among
them, I would draw them to me as you do; and if I desired their Praises, I
would speak that which they would willingly hear, and would not say, that they
are not true Christians: For if I would say, that all who have visited me are
virtuous Souls and true Christians, undoubtedly every one would esteem me, and
greatly praise me; but when I do the quite contrary, I show it is the Spirit of
God who acts in my Writings, since they aim at nothing but to make known the
Truth of God, which alone can guide Souls to eternal Life, and that the same
Writings speak nothing but of despising earthly and temporal things.

There cannot be a more evident mark of Distinction between the actings of the
Spiri of God, and that of Nature, than what is assigned by her; the last
tending only to things Temporal, and the other to things Eternal; and that the
Spirit she was guided by had this constant Tendency to God and Eternity, and
not to Honor, Praise, Wealth, or Pleasure, or any Temporal and Earthly things,
appears by the whole Course of her Life and Conversation.

XXII. XXII. 4. That she ascribed all her Mistakes to the Spirit of God
answered.
4. It was alleged as another Presumption, that she could not be led by the
Spirit of God, but by her own wild Imagination, that they say she was ready to
ascribe to the Spirit of God, even all her Mistakes in writing or citing of
Passages of Scripture, naming Peter for Paul, or the like; and for an Evidence
of this, they cite the Story concerning M. Noel, a Divine in Flanders, who when
he first read some of her Writings, they being full of Faults of Orthography
and Language, La vie Continue p. 271.
and not so methodically ordered, and the same things often repeated in
different places, though after a different manner; he offered to put them in a
better Order and Style, without changing the Essence of the Truth; but when she
asked Counsel of God, it was said to her: What rashness is it for Men to offer
to Correct the Works of God. All this may be very true, and yet it does not
follow, that she ascribes all her Mistakes to the Dictates of the Spirit of
God; yea, she plainly affirms the contrary, and that all the Mistakes and
Errors she falls into, are from her self, and not from God.

When you ask, I^ Aveug^ement des Hom* Part 2. p. 172. etc.
says she, If there be any thing humane in my Motions, Words, and Deeds? This
Question seems to me Ridiculous. Since being a humane Creature, as well as
others, I must have natural Motions and Faculties as others have; otherwise I
should be an Angel, or a Statue of Wood, Stone, or Metal, which Instruments God
never makes use of for declaring his Truths to Men. But the Devil has often
spoken by such Oracles. But God spoke by his Holy Prophets, Natural Persons as
others are, who through their natural Frailty did often commit very great
Faults; yea, sometimes gross Sins. Must we doubt if Moses had the Spirit of
God, and that he spoke to his People by him, because he was incredulous, and
rendered himself unworthy of entering into the promised Land? Must we not believe
the Holy Scripture endited by Solomon, because ^e fell into Idolatry? Or ought
we to doubt if David had the Spirit of God, because he fell into Adultery and
other Sins? Truly this would be very extravagant, and render all the Works of
God suspected and doubtful, because of the Trailty of Men. For in the New
Testament, does not the Apostle make this Distinction of his own Spirit from
the Spirit of God? When he says, It is I who says or does this; and elsewhere,
It is the Spirit of God who says it. Even Jesus Christ, had he not the Spirit
of God in him, and the Natural Spirit both? When he prays to his Father, that
his own Will might not be done. If he had not had a Natural Will, he would not
have prayed thus. And it could not be the Spirit of God that made him say: If
it be possible let this Cup pass from me; Nor which made him doubt that he was
forsaken of his Father in the very brink of Death: of necessity these were
simply natural Motions which moved him to all these things, and not at all the
Motions of the Holy Spirit.

Why would they then have me of another Stuff than the Prophets, Apostles, and
Jesus Christ himself; and hinder that my natural Motions should not act any
more in me, after that I have received the Holy Spirit? Must I become
immovable in Body and Spirit, that I may move no longer naturally? Must the
Spirit of God make all the Functions of my Spirit and Body to cease, that he
alone may operate in them? Truly God would make use of a strange Figure,
against his Ordinary, since he always makes use of humane Creatures to speak to
Men, and to make known his Will to them by Organs of those like themselves. And
for this Cause Jesus Christ took a truly humane Body, that by means palpable to
their Humanity, he might make himself to be understood and obeyed. And the Body
and Spirit of Jesus Christ did act humanly. -- And the Apostles acted in many
things according to their natural Motions, and in many things were mistaken;
Acts 12. 12, 13. etc.
for we read that the Apostles being one night assembled, after that they had
received the Holy Spirit, when St. Peter was in Prison; from whence being come
out miraculously, he knocked at the Gate where they were assembled, and the
Maid, Roda, told them he was at the Gate, they thought with one common Judgment
that the Maid dreamed, saying, to her, that she was a Fool. All the Motions
which this Holy Assembly had, could not come but from Nature. Must we conclude
from thence that they had not received the Holy Spirit, or that they had lost
him because of such Mistakes, or because they acted according to their natural
Passions or Functions in this Opinion.

I think we should commit a great Sin to believe any such thing, or to suspect
the Holy Spirit in them, because they are mistaken in some things; for these
Faults and Mistakes are annexed to humane Nature since Sin; which has so
blinded Man's Understanding, that he is oft-times mistaken in that which he
sees before his Eyes: But the Holy Spirit can never be mistaken in any thing,
nor inspire things that are not true. And it would be an abominable thing to
believe it, or to judge that a Person were not guided by the Holy Spirit,
because he is mistaken in some indifferent things. For the Holy Spirit does not
teach the Soul that he possesses all the Circumstances of that which it ought
to do and say; but he teaches it the essential things of Righteousness,
Goodness, and Truth, in all that it ought to do or avoid. And it is the
Business of the Understanding to comprehend and search out the means to attain
to these Ends; whetting its Spirit and all the Faculties of its Soul, that it
may rightly accomplish in all things Righteousness, Goodness, and Truth. And if
those natural Functions were made to cease acting after this manner, the Holy
Spirit could do nothing by the Person, who is the visible and sensible Organ,
an Instrument of God, without which Instrument he cannot make gross and natural
Men to understand him. Therefore the Angels themselves have sometimes taken
humane Bodies, to make themselves be seen and perceived by Men, according to
their natural Sight and Sentiments.

Now it is true that God has given me his Holy Spirit promised by Jesus Christ,
which teaches me all Truth, but yet it is not true, that he teaches me in
particular all the Words that proceed out of my Mouth, nor all the Letters or
Syllables that I write, far less all the Motions of my Body; for this is done
humanly by my own Spirit or my visible Body. For if the Holy Spirit did dictate
to me all the Words that I must pronounce, or all the Words that I must write,
I could never commit Faults in Speaking or Writing, which I do often commit,
not knowing sometimes where to find Words to express my self well, nor
Orthography to write well; which I have declared in my printed Writings,
saying; It is the Spirit that teaches me the Doctrine which I write, but as for
the Faults which are in the Pen or the Words, it is I who commits them, and not
the Holy Spirit; which may satisfy all captious Spirits, who seek to discredit
the Wisdom of God, by the Faults that I might have done Naturally: Since the
Proverb says, that all Men do fail and mistake themselves, and the Perfect are
in Heaven, because there are no Perfections but in God alone.

And it would be to tempt him, to require of a human Creature the Perfection of
all things; since this appertains to God only, and not to Men, who have only a
limited Perfection, every one his Talent; one the Perfection of speaking well,
another of writing well, another of singing well, with other natural Gifts,
which do not come immediately from the Holy Spirit, though he makes use of all
those Gifts, when they may serve for the Glory of God, and when the Person
offers and resigns them up to his Government. For Example: God has given me an
Ability to compose my Writings, and it is his Will that I do it for his Glory,
and the Good of Souls. These things come in Substance from the Holy Spirit; but
it is my natural Hand that writes it, and my natural Spirit that conceives it,
which may commit accidental or material Faults; but there can be no Faults in
the thing it self; every one may assuredly believe and follow that, without
amusing himself whether I have any Defect in the Manner, or if there be any
thing of natural mingled with it, since God makes use of Nature and even of its
Defects, to teach Men to seek those things that are above, and not the things
that are upon the Earth.

For all that fine Learning, and studied Words, yea these Niceties of the
precise Truth of Terms, are things on Earth, esteemed by vain Men, who seek
Praise and Curiosities more than the Essence of the Means of their Salvation,
and the Holy Spirit will not encourage these Niceties, but inspires always
Simplicity. For this Cause I do not reflect upon the Mistake that I often times
commit of naming Peter for Paul, or Wood for Stone. It is enough to me that I
make the Substance of the thing be understood, that Men may return to the Love
of God. And he having permitted me to cause to be printed all my Writings, has
not appointed in what Time, by what Person, in what Place, or by what Means I
might do it. I must therefore apply my natural Spirit to find out these Means.
I have writ of it to my Friends, and advertised them that it was the Will of
God that this should be done for his Gl^^^, And if I had not acted naturally in
this, these Persons could not know this express Will of God, because they are
not yet so disengaged that they may hear the Voice of God. Ought I therefore to
hold my Peace and not to write, because the Holy Spirit does not dictate to me
all the Words, and because I make use of those which I speak in my homely
vulgar Language? And must I prove otherwise than by my Words, that it is the
Holy Spirit who acts in me?

They who consider this without an evil Eye, will, I am persuaded, be convinced
that she is far from attributing her Mistakes and Defects to the Dictates of
the Spirit of God, and that yet it might be very well said to him who was
desirous to reduce her Writings to a greater Exactness, free of all Mistakes,
What Rashness is it for Men to offer to correct the Works of God? For God
thinks fit to choose weak and foolish things to confound the wise and mighty,
and to make his strength appear in their weakness; that when we see the great
and substantial Truths of God declared by one of such Simplicity, without
Disguise and Affectation, without all Human Learning, and the Artifices and
Exactness whereby we recommend our Writings to the World, we may clearly see
that it is not her own Natural Spirit, that by its Industry and Application
searches out and discovers those Divine Truths (though its Defects and Weakness
appear in applying to declare them to the World) but that it is the Spirit of
God. And as they who are very intent upon the cultivating of their Minds with
Human Learning, are very unconcerned as to fine Clothes and other outward
things, about which others are very nice and ready to laugh at their
unfashionableness; so one who is wholly taken up with the great and substantial
Truths of God and Eternity, and intent to impress them on the Hearts of others,
has no regard to niceness of Words and Terms, is not curious to avoid little
Mistakes about lesser and accidental Matters; but earnest only to inculcate to
them the great things of Eternity. And that this was the Disposition of A. B's
Spirit, appears through all her Writings.

It may be Joshuah knew not whether it was the Sun or Earth that stood still;
and Esaias thought that Hezekiah would undoubtedly die of his Disease; and S.
Matthew that Jeremy had written that which Zachary had said, and that there
were two Thieves who up^raided Jesus Christ on the Cross, though S. Luke tells it
was but one of them; and Jesus Christ himself, that there were Figs on a
Fig Tree when there were none. But what, will some say, is not this to take
from the divine Writers their Authority and Force. This is as ridiculous as if
a Man dying for Hunger would not take the Bread offered him, under a Pretext
that he who offered it was mistaken in some Words when he offered it; as that
he said it was baked such a Day, whereas it was on another Day; or that it came
from Peter's House whereas it came from John's; or that the Corn it was made of
came from France, when it was from Germany; from whence the poor famished Man
would fancy that the Bread could not nourish him, that it was not good, that
they who were mistaken in this, might be mistaken in taking, it may be, Poison
or Tares for Corn, or Arsnick for Meal.

But what, ought such Mistakes to be imputed to the Holy Spirit? God forbid!
they belong only to the Creature. And when it pleases the Holy Spirit for so
saving Ends, as to recommend Simplicity, the study of Purification, the
cleaving to the one thing needful; to teach those who desire to be enlightened
by God, that they must leave off the ways of humane Exactness and Speculation,
and of confounding the Understanding with a Thousand barren and needless
Curiosities, which certainly devour much precious time, without making us
well-pleasing to God, or advancing one step in his Love, but have rather turned
us away from it, and occupied and blown us up with these useless Vanities: That
the Holy Spirit, I say, should permit, for so saving an Advantage, some
Mistakes which regard Accidental, Foreign, and Accessory things, to remain some
time in the Instruments which he makes use of most certainly and infallibly in
the things that concern the way to Heaven; What is there in all this that
derogates from the Glory of God, the Salvation of Souls, or the Divine
Authority of those sent by God to guide Man without fail to this supreme End.

The Difference that is observed amongst Persons inspired by God, and sometimes
of the same Person from himself comes from this, that they have not the same
Gifts by Nature, or are not equally enlightened, or the same Person is not so
much at one time as at another, even touching Divine Things, when they are
Accessories. Thus the Apostles knew not from the Beginning that the Gentiles
would be called to the Gospel, and therefore at first they lived exactly after
the Manner of the Jews. But when God gave and increased this Light, they acted
and spoke otherwise; must we conclude from this, that they were first deceived,
or that the Holy Spirit did not inspire them, or did not inspire them aright?
Not at all. But that at first it was not necessary it should be made known to
them, till the saving Doctrine of the Gospel were established among the Jews.
So that we must hence conclude only that the Holy Spirit gives and increases
his Light as he sees it expedient for Men's Salvation. Thus A. B. in her
younger Years had not received the Light which respects the glorious State in
which Adam was created before Eve, and therefore spoke of Adam then according
to the common Opinion, but afterward in a more sublime Manner.

XXIII. XXIII. 5. That she contradicted the holy Scriptures and her self
answered.
5. It was again objected to her, that she contradicted both the Holy
Scriptures and her self, and therefore could not be led by the Spirit of God.
To this she replied; That this cannot be true indeed, if her Writings be
endited by the Spirit of God, who cannot contradict himself; for God is
Yesterday and to day the same, unchangeable, and always equal to himself, from
whom no Variableness nor Contradiction can proceed. But if her Adversary would
examine all the Holy Scripture after the Manner he had done her Writings,
Avertis. contr. le Trembl. p. 8.
he would find many more such seeming Contradictions in the Bible. For indeed
there are many more according to the narrow Apprehension and shallow Judgment
of Men, who being earthly and carnal, cannot understand spiritual things, or
those endited by the Holy Spirit, and they forge in their little Brains Errors
out of most solid Truths, and Contradictions out of the greatest Conformities.

From hence have sprung so many Errors, Schisms, and Divisions in the Church
of God; because every one would understand the Scripture after their own Mode,
they have invented so many different Religions; and each says, This is founded
on the Holy Scripture: though very often they have different Sentiments, and
contradict one another in the same Truths, while every one thinks he
understands them aright. -- Though they are incapable of understanding Divine
Things; for the same Spirit that endited the Holy Scriptures, gives the
Understanding of them; and when the Spirit of Man undertakes to do it, he still
falls from one Error into another, and loses himself in that great Ocean of
Divine Wisdom, which he cannot understand nor comprehend.

-- It does not trouble me that there appears to be Contradictions in my
Writings to the Judgments of Men, since they will hardly find two Prophets
speak the same Words upon the same Matter; and the four Evangelists do not
relate the same Things after the same Manner: Must it therefore be said that
there are Contradictions in the Holy Scriptures, as this Benjamin Furly says
there are in my Writings? -- God commands to honor Father and Mother; and
Jesus Christ says we must hate Father and Mother; adding, that he who does not
forsake Father and Mother, and all things, cannot be his Disciple. How will
this Benjamin reconcile these two Passages. -- For, to honor Father and
Mother, is a thing quite contrary to the hating and forsaking them. And Jesus
Christ says that he is not come to bring Peace upon Earth, but War between
Father and Son, etc. And elsewhere he says, my Peace I give you. -- In one
Place he says, Drunkards and Gluttons shall not enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven; and elsewhere he says, that that which enters into the Mouth does not
defile the Soul.

-- Truth is invincible and does not change, for all that may be thundered
against it; but it is the more established when it is opposed and contradicted
by ignorant Persons, as this Benjamin, who cannot discern Truth from Lying and
from Contradictions.

He confounds one time with another, and will needs give general Rules for all
sorts of Occasions; and when these Rules are not punctually observed at all
times, he thinks that Persons do change or contradict themselves. And if he had
been an Apostle of Jesus Christ when he lived upon Earth, he would have often
reproved him (as at present he does me.) For when Jesus Christ was afraid of
his Enemies, he bids his Apostles buy Swords, and if they wanted money to do
it, that they should sell their Garments; and a little after he commands to put
up the Sword, and threatens that he who strikes with the Sword, shall be
stricken by it. -- If this Benjamin had been in S. Peter's Place when he cut
off Malchus's Ear, he would certainly have been displeased at Jesus Christ, and
blamed him for Inconstancy and Contradiction, because he could not discern the
time when he ought to strike, and when he ought to forbear. -- He reproaches me
that I have written somewhere, that I might say something that is not true,
without lying or sinning. He does not consider that there are material Lies
which are not Sins. -- He would have Words precisely spoken, which are true
according to his Caprice; for it is a chief Article of the Quakers to justify
themselves before Men; for they study precise Words, that they may not commit a
material Lie, and they dare not call a Christian by that Name, without adding
as they call them, fearing to Lie by calling him a Christian when he is not
truly such. --

For my part I am far from these Maxims, for I never regard the pronunciation
of Words, but the Essence of the Truth of the things which I advance. If I
express them in this or that Term, it is all one to me, provided I deceive no
Body, and that I make the things to be understood which I would signify. But
there is this difference between the Spirit that guides me, and the Spirit that
guides that Sect, that they would be esteemed by Men for good Men, and for the
People of God; whereas I am not concerned how they esteem me, for I am content
with the Testimony of my own Conscience, and seek not the Approbation of Men,
far less will I say any Words to the end they may think that I am Just and
guided by God. It suffices me that I know it, and God knows it; for it is
written, He who would please Men is not the Servant of Jesus Christ. Therefore
I will freely speak a material Lie, when I believe the thing is true: for
Example, I have often said that I was Two Years younger than I find I am since
I caused one to search the Register of my Baptism. I grant I have thus made
many material Lies, yet without sinning thereby or lying; since a Lie is a
Deceit or Falseness of the Heart that kills the Soul; which I could not do by
saying that I was Two Years younger; for I aimed not thereby to deceive any
Body, nor to speak against the Truth. I have uttered many such material Lies.
-- I love rather to possess the Essence of Truth in the bottom of my Soul, than
to speak verbally true Words through Hypocrisy.

For what else is it to call Men by the Name of Christians, and to add to it as
they call them than Hypocrisy, and Contempt of the Truth, such as the Jews
had, when they said to Pilate, that he ought to write on the Cross of Jesus
Christ, that he was King of the Jews, by adding to it, as he said; which Pilate
would not add, saying only, What is written, is written; as I also answer to
this Benjamin, when he would teach me to speak Words which are true before Men:
For I know well that all whom I call Christians, are not truly Christians
before God; yet I will not learn from the Quakers to add to the Name of
Christian, as they call them; since this seems to me superfluous, and I have no
other Intention in calling them simply Christians, but to make it be understood
of whom I speak, to wit, that I speak not of the Jews or Heathens, but of those
only whom I call Christians, yet without design to maintain that they are true
Christians. Since I declare elsewhere, that I know no true Christians, it
cannot be understood that I know them for true Christians, because I call them
by that Name; but I conform my self in this, to the Disposition of those who
hear me, and not to the Truth of what they are: Which if I would follow, I
behooved sometimes to call those nominal Christians, Atheists, or
Antichristians, which scarce any Man would understand; therefore to make my
self be understood, I must use common and ordinary Terms, and pronounce them as
briefly as I can; since we must give an account of every idle Word, I ought not
to add uselesly to the Name of Christians, as they call them, since it is
understood well enough of it self, without pronouncing those Words as the
Quakers do.

To make appear how fully she clears her self as to Contradictions which they
were ready to impute to her, I shall here adduce one Instance. Avis salut. p.
84, 85. etc.
I understand, says she, by yours, that my Writings have had some good
Operation in your Soul; but withal that you have found (as it seems to you)
some Contradiction in them, in that I say absolutely, that to be a true
Christian one must abandon all that he possesses, and nevertheless you find in
one of my Letters, that a Man must keep his Goods for his Necessities, since
the World is now without Charity, and they would leave the Just without help in
his need.

Both these things are most true, and do not at all contradict one another; for
a Man must absolutely abandon the Love of earthly Goods, if he would become a
true Christian. Jesus Christ has very often affirmed this Truth in his Gospel,
and said, that he who does not renounce all that he possesses cannot be his
Disciple. I bring no Novelties, when through all my Writings I press this
Necessity of forsaking all things to be a Disciple of Jesus Christ, since Jesus
Christ, his Apostles, and all who have received the Holy Spirit, say the same
thing, and there is but one Truth, which is God, which says through all the
same thing: So that they who speak otherwise, are Liars and Seducers of the
People, who flatter Men to destroy them, under the Pretext of Glosses, and
false Reasons which they draw from the Holy Scriptures, without any Ground. --
This I have declared sufficiently in my Writings, as you have well observed and
approved as you say; seeing I very much blamed a Woman of Friesland, who was
yet careful what she should eat and drink, and wherewithal she should be
clothed, after she had resolved to become a true Christian, as you have
remarked in the Second Letter of the Fourth Part of La lum. nee en tenebres.
And I am still of the same Sentiment, that when one relies upon temporal
things, and will not voluntarily abandon them to follow Jesus Christ, he cannot
be his Disciple; and that Woman will never be one, so long as she is not
disengaged from temporal Goods: Though she be now gone out of her Country with a
design to embrace a Gospel Life, she cannot attain to it, because of the
Affection she has still for her Ease and Conveniences, which proceeds from
Self-love, being anxious for the temporal Part, and fearing Want. And I can
assure all those who are still in that Disposition, that they are not true
Christians.

But when I wrote to one of my Friends, in the 24th. Letter of the Fourth Part
of La lum. nee en tenebr. as you allege, that he ^ought to keep his Goods for
his own Necessities, or that of others; without leaving them to his Friends, or
giving them to the Poor now adays: I had reason to do it, because this Man was
more disengaged in his Soul from temporal Wealth than that Woman, and had
already resolved to abandon them all, so that his Heart was free to possess
them, as if he did not possess them: which a Person wedded to them could not
do, though it seems to him he could, and he will say so with his Mouth; for there
is nothing more deceitful than the Heart of Man, which none knows but God, and
he to whom God reveals it.

And I had reason to advise this Man to keep his Goods, and that Woman that she
should not care for the Morrow, without any Contradiction in my Advices; but in
the Disposition of those Two Persons whom you mention: Since the one was free
to possess Wealth without sinning, and not the other; and a good Physician
ought always to consider the Original of his Patient's Disease, if he would
heal him. For if he ordain the same Physic for all sorts of Maladies, he would
kill more than all the Executioners together. -- So you must not think that
there is a Contradiction in my Two Letters mentioned by you, but that there are
Two diverse Remedies for Two different Diseases; to wit, one Remedy against the
Love or Desire of earthly things; and another against too great Liberality or
Indiscretion.

Again, A. B. says somewhere That no Body ever was or can be saved but by the
Merits of Jesus Christ, and some Pages after in the same Treatise, she says,
that no Body can be saved by the Merits of another: This seems contradictory,
as well as those Two Propositions, the one of St. Paul, and the other of St.
James; Man is justified by Faith without the Works of the Law; and Man is
justified by Works and not by Faith only. This last Contradiction ^s reconciled
by saying that St. Paul understands that the Principle which admits in us that
true Righteousness which God places there, is Faith; and that Works are not
that Principle: But St. James means that that Principle which admits in us the
Righteousness of God, is Faith; but that Faith is not destitute of Works, for
if Faith were without Works, it were a dead Faith, which would justify no
Body. Thus these have no Contradiction, and yet are harder to reconcile than
any Passages of the Writings of A. B. Thus as to the forecited Passage, when
she says, that no Body is saved but by the Merits of Jesus Christ, her meaning
is, that Jesus Christ is the Author and meritorious Cause of the Salvation of
Men, who will accept of this Salvation by the ways that God teaches them; and
when she says, that no Body can be saved by the Merits of another, this
signifies that none who will not cooperate to their Salvation by the ways that
God pre^cribes them, c^n be saved by the Merits of Jesus Christ, or that the
Merits of Jesus Christ will not save those who will not follow the way of
Salvation.

Thus you see how easy it is for critical and captious Spirits to find
Contradictions where there are none; that the Holy Scriptures themselves have
many seeming Contradictions, tho none in Truth; that they who are led by the
Spirit of God write in great Simplicity, regarding the Essence and Substance of
divine Truths, and not the niceness of Terms; and how captious Spirits may
misinterpret them; and divine Truths had need to be read and considered with
the same Spirit that dictates them, at least with a single Eye; for to an evil
Eye they look as the Cloud which guided the Israelites did appear to the
Egyptians, though it was all Light to the first, yet to the last it was all
Darkness and Confusion.

XXIV. 6. It is farther objected, XXIV. 6 That the Predictions set down in her
Writings did not come to pass answered. Joh. a Cruce. Ascensus Montis Carmeli.
Lib. 2. Cap. 19. 20.
If these Communications are from God, how comes it that they have not their
Accomplishment, according as it was prom^s'd to her. The Apostle foretold that
in the last Days there should come Scoffers walking after their own Lusts, and
saying, Where is the Promise of his Coming? For since the Fathers fell asleep,
all things continue as they were since the Beginning of the Creation. For the
removal of this Prejudice, there is adduc'd an excellent Passage of a Devout
Author, which I shall transcribe here likewise, since it gives so great Light
in this Matter.

The Visions and Words of God, says that Author, though they are always true and
certain in themselves, yet are not always so after our way of understanding
them, and that for Two Reasons, the one proceeds from the Imperfection of our
way of understanding them; and the other from the Reasons and Grounds upon
which the divine Words and Visions are established; for oft-times they are
Comminations, and of a conditional Nature, or Condition; for Example, that such
shall amend, such a thing shall be done; though nevertheless the divine Word, to
take it in the Letter, is absolute, and does not express this Condition. These
two things I prove by Authorities of Holy Scripture.

First, it is evident that the Word of God is not always, and does not always
come to pass, after our way of understanding it, because of the weakness and
imperfection of our Understanding. For God being Immense and Profound, it is no
wonder that in his Words and Revelations there is ordinarily a sense and
meaning far beyond our common way of conceiving them, and which shall be so
much the more true and certain in themselves, the less probability and
certainty they seem to us to have. We find very often in the Scripture that the
Ancients found many of the Divine Words and Prophecies to fall out quite
otherwise than they conceived and hoped for after their gross way of
understanding them: For Example.

God said to Abraham, after he had led him into the Land of the Canaanites, I
will give thee this Land. Genesis 13. 15, 17. and he often repeats this to him;
nevertheless Abraham waxed Old, and God did not give it to him: therefore when
God said to him the same Words once again, Abraham seeing no effect of them,
asked him, Lord, whereby shall I know that I shall inherit it? Gen 15. 7, 8.
Then God made known to him, that it was not his Person that should possess that
Land, but his Children and Posterity, and that not till after 400 Years.
Abraham thereby understood that God's Promise was most true in it self, because
God giving it to his Children, and that out of Love to him, this was to give it
to himself. Abraham was therefore mistaken in his way of conceiving it, and if
he had acted at first according to his way of understanding that Promise, he
might have really deceived himself, the Promise not being expressly annexed to
that time. And they who had seen Abraham die without possessing that Land,
after that God had promised it to him, might have remained confounded, and
believed that it was false.

This also befell Jacob, when Joseph made him come from Canaan to Egypt, with
all his House, to save him from the general Famine; God appeared to him in the
way, and said to him, Fear not Jacob, go down into Egypt; I will go with thee,
and I will surely bring thee up again, Genesis 46. 3, 4. Yet this came not to
pass, as we would have taken it, after our way of conceiving things; for we
know Jacob died there: It was in his Posterity that this was to be
accomplished, and it was long after that God brought back his Race. Now he who
had known whilst Jacob lived, that God had made this Promise to him, would
without doubt have believed and thought that Jacob going down to Egypt in Life,
must by the Favor of God come out of it in Life also. Yet he would have been
mistaken, and would have wondered to see him die in Egypt without seeing any
Accomplishment of what he might have hoped for. We may therefore be mistaken in
the Words of God, which yet are most true in themselves.

We read in the History of the Judges, that all the Tribes of Israel being
assembled to fight against Benjamin, and to punish a Crime to which they had
consented, God having appointed who should fight first, they were so persuaded
of the Victory, that having been defeated with the loss of 22000 of their Men,
they were greatly astonished at it, and wept before the Lord till Midnight; for
they couldnot conceive, how having looked on the Victory as so certain, they
should be so greatly defeated. And having asked, if they should fight again?
And God having answered them, Yes; they reckoned at this time the Victory to be
altogether certain: But being put to flight again with the loss of 18000 Men,
they were so amazed that they knew not what to think of it, when they saw that
with 40000, and withal the express Command of God, they could not stand before
26000. But they were mistaken in their way of conceiving God's Word, who would
needs chastise and humble them, by allowing them to fight, yet without
promising them the Victory, except at the third time, when they overcame, but
with much pains, and a stratagem which they behooved to make use of.

After this and many other ways, it falls out that Souls deceive themselves, as
to the Revelations and Word of God, taking it too literally. God's main design
when he speaks, is to show and give the Spirit which is contained and hid under
these Words, which Men after their way of conceiving do not so easily
comprehend, for it is much more ample than the Letter, beyond its Bounds and
Extraordinary. So that whosoever will tie himself to the Letter of God's Word,
and to the Appearances of the divine Visions, do what he will, he cannot miss
to be much mistaken, and to come short of, and be confounded as to the full and
true meaning, because he has followed his way of conceiving, and has not given
place to the Spirit, emptying himself of his own Sentiment; the Letter kills, 2
Cor. 3. 6.
says St. Paul, but the Spirit quickneth. On this Occasion therefore, we ought
to loose our selves from the Letter, and yield to a Faith, which will make our
Sentiments pass for Darkness: For this Faith finds the Spirit, which Sense
cannot comprehend. For this Cause, the Sayings and Predictions of the Prophets
did not succeed to many of the Children of Israel according to their Hope, for
they took them too much in the Letter; and because they came not to pass as
they understood them, they afterward despised them, and would no longer
believe them, so as to mock and make a Byword of what the Prophets said to
them. Even Jeremy himself thought he was much mistaken, when he saw not the
Effect of the good Promises that God had made to his People; Jer. 4. 10.
Ah! Lord God, surely thou have greatly deceived this People, and Jerusalem,
saying, Ye shall have Peace, whereas the Sword reaches unto the Soul. The same
Difficulty of not being able to comprehend the Word of God, according to our
way of conceiving it, befell the very Disciples of Jesus Christ, who had
conversed with him, they were mistaken and thought themselves deceived, witness
the two, who after his Death, going to Emmaus sad and without hope, Luke 24. 21.
said, We trusted that it had been he who should have redeemed Israel, and
beside all this, to Day is the third Day since these things were done. And even
when Jesus Christ ascended into Heaven, some asked him, Acts 1. 6.
if at this time he would restore Israel. The Holy Spirit makes many things be
said in another Sense than Men understand it, as in what he made Caiphas say,
John 11. 60.
concerning Jesus Christ, that it was expedient that one Man should die, that
the whole People perish not; which he spoke not of himself, and understood in
another manner, and for a quite different end than that of the Holy Spirit.

Thus we see we may be easily mistaken by our way of understanding the Words
and Revelations of God. They are an Abyss and Depth of Spirit, which our
natural Sense cannot comprehend. We must free our Mind from our way of
conceiving things, and place it in the Liberty of a Faith which may make it
reckon its own ways of conceiving obscure and dark. There we shall receive the
Abundance of the Spirit, Wisdom, and Understanding proper for conceiving aright
the Words of God, which no Man that is not Spiritual can comprehend or judge
of, they being Divine. He cannot judge even reasonably of them, and if he judge
of them according to the outside, he is not Spiritual: For though they be covered
with this outside, yet he cannot understand them; as St. Paul says, that the
natural Man does not conceive the things which are of the Spirit of God, 1 Cor.
2. 14.
for they are foolishness to him, and he cannot understand them, because they
are Spiritual: But the spiritual Man discerns all things. It is a rashness
therefore to give our selves the Liberty to treat of Divine things by a way of
comprehending them naturally, when they require a Discerning that is
Supernatural to Sense.

Let us conceive this also by some Examples: Suppose a Holy Person sees he is
persecuted by his Enemies, and God says to him, I will deliver thee from them
all, (see Jer. 1. 19.) this Prophecy may be true, though his Enemies kill him,
(as it happened to that Prophet:) therefore he who should understand this
Prediction in a temporal way, should be deceived; for God might have spoken of
the true and chief Deliverance and Victory, which is Salvation, by which the
Soul is victorious and delivered from all its Enemies, in a far more true and
profitable way than the temporal and outward Deliverance. And in this Sense,
that Prediction was more true and ample, than the Man would have conceived it
to be, if he understood it only for this temporal Life: For the Words of God do
comprehend always the principal and most useful Sense, and Man may understand
them after his way according to the less principal Sense, and so be mistaken.
(Add, that if a Person to whom God has given such a Promise, be the Head of a
Family or Society, bodily or spiritual, the Promise may concern his Children,
or those associated with him bodily, and may be fulfilled in them, though as to
the Death of the Head, the Promise is annihilated.) Even so if a Soul desiring
to die a Martyr for God, receive this Word from him, Thou shall be a Martyr, it
may fall out that the Person shall not die a Martyr, and yet the Promise remain
true; for it will be accomplished according to the principal and essential
part, God giving him the Love and Recompense of Martyrdom, making him a Martyr
of Love, giving him a Martyrdom lengthned out in Labors, the continuance of
which will be more troublesome than Death. In which he will accomplish both the
desire of the Soul, and his own Promise; for the desire of the Soul was not
simply that kind of Death, which of it self would signify nothing without
God's Friendship; but to render to God the Service and the Love of a Martyr:
The other, because God will give most perfectly the Reality and Recompense of
this, though by other means. God has promised to fulfill the Desire of the
Righteous, because their Desires are just and true, If therefore God do not
fulfill them during this temporal Life, it is certain he will do it after this
Life, and in a most perfect manner; so that the Promises do still remain most
true.

The second Cause why divine Words and Visions, though always true in themselves,
yet nevertheless are not always certain as to us, is because of the Reasons,
Motives, and Grounds upon which they are built, since they may change, the
Effect does not follow. We must therefore believe that these things will
infallibly come to pass, so long as that shall remain which moves and incites
God: for Example, to punish, as if God said, Within a Year I will send such a
Plague upon this Kingdom; the Ground of this Threatening is a certain
Transgression which they commit in this Kingdom against God. If therefore the
Transgression cease or vary, the Punishment may also cease or be changed.
Nevertheless the Threatening was true, forasmuch as it was founded on an actual
Fault, and it would have been executed, if the Offense had continued. This
appears in what happened to the City of Ninevah, whither God sent the Prophet
Jonah to denounce from him; Yet Forty Days, and Ninevah shall be destroyed.
Which nevertheless was not fulfilled, because the Cause of this Threatening
ceased, which was the Sins of the People, who immediately repented; otherwise
this Denunciation from God would certainly have taken effect. The same thing as
to the matter of divine Threatening we see in King Ahab, whom God threatened by
the Prophet Elias with a great Judgment, Him, his House, and Kingdom. But
because he rent his Garments with Grief, covered himself with Sackcloth, fasted
and lay in Sackcloth and Ashes, humbled and afflicted himself, God immediately
tells him by the same Prophet, that he would not send that Evil in his Days.
Where we see, because Ahab changed, the Threatening and Sentence of God ceased
also.

From hence we must conclude, that though God reveal or speak affirmatively to a
Soul any thing in Good or Evil concerning it self or others; this may change
more or less, or none at all, according to the Change of the Affection or
Disposition of that or these Souls, and according to the Cause and Reason that
God looks to; and this will not be fulfilled after the Manner that we look for
it, even without knowing sometimes wherefore, but God only knows. For though he
say, and teach, and promise things many times, this is not that they are to be
understood, received, or possessed at the same time, but that they are to be
afterward understood, or when it shall be fit to give Clearness in them, or
when the Effect shall follow; as this fell out often even to the Disciples of
Jesus Christ, Joh. 12. 16
of whom S. John says; These things understood not his Disciples at the first,
but when Jesus was glorified, then remembered they that these things were
written of him. There may pass many particular things after this Manner, which
cannot be understood before their Time.

To show this in the Matter of the Promises of God, which are not fulfilled to
those to whom they were made for want of good Dispositions; we read in the Book
of the Kings, that God being provoked against the High Priest Eli, because of
the Sins of his Children whom he did not correct, sent to tell him these Words
by Samuel; I said, 1 Samuel 20. 38.
indeed, that thy House and the House of thy Father should walk before me for
ever, (as to the Priesthood) but now the Lord says, be it far from me. For
this Office being founded on this, that he ought to glorify and honor God,
and God having promised the Continuance of it to him upon the same Ground,
presupposing that on his Part he would not be wanting in his Duty, it came to
pass that Eli coming short in his Zeal for God's Honor, who, as the Lord
complains of him, honored his Sons more than God himself, dissembling their
Sins for fear of dishonouring them; it fell out, I say, that God's Promise
failed him also, which would have been firm, if they had remained firm in their
Piety.

We must not therefore think that Divine Visions and Revelations, though true in
themselves, ought to fall out infallibly as they ^ound, particularly when by
the Order of God they depend upon human things, which may vary, change, be
omitted, or not. Now God knows when Revelations are thus annexed to Conditions
and Dispositions which depend upon Men, and he does not always discover it, and
oftentimes he speaks or reveals the Thing without saying any thing of the
Condition, as he did to the Ninevites, to whom he foretold determinately, that
they should perish within Forty Days. Sometimes also God declares this
Condition, as he did to Roboam* If thou keep my Commandments as my Servant
David, I also will be with thee, and will build thee a stable House as I did to
David.

But whether he declare these Conditions or not, it appears by what has been
said hitherto, that we cannot be assured by the natural Way of Perceiving, that
we are not mistaken in the Understanding of Divine Revelations. They will say,
it may be, Why then does God communicate them? It is to make them be understood
in their Time, by the Order of him who has told them; and he shall conceive
them to whom it shall please God to give the Understanding of them [yea, even
those shall see the Ratification of them who shall be in the Dispositions
requisite and annexed to those Declarations.] Laying aside this, People expose
themselves to great Dangers of Error and Confusion, when they will needs judge
determinately and absolutely of them, by what seems and appears at first
outwardly of them.

The Prophets knew this very well, they who had God's Word in their Mouth, and
to whom it was heavy and grievous to carry it to the People; because a great
Part of the Predictions did not fall out according to the Sense of the Letter
[nor so soon as they looked for them] which made the Prophets so ridiculous,
Jer. 26. 6, 7, 8.
that Jeremy said, I am in Derision daily, every one mocketh me; for since I
spoke, I cried out, I cried Violence and Spoil; but the Word of the Lord was
made a Reproach unto me, and a Derision daily. Then I said I will not make
mention of him, nor speak any more in his Name. And the Reason why Jonah fled
when God sent him to denounce the Destruction of Ninevah, was, that he could
not comprehend assuredly the Truth of the Divine Words, nor determinately
understand their Sense. So for fear they should mock at him, if this Prophecy
came not to pass, he chose rather to flee than to prophecy; and having
prophesied, he abode forty Days without the City, to see if his Prophecy should
be fulfilled; which when it was not, he was so far grieved, Jon. 4. 2.
as to say to God in his Complaint; I pray thee, O Lord, was not this my Saying
when I was yet in my Country? Therefore I fled before unto Tarshish, for I know
that thou art a Gracious God and a Merciful. And the Saint being grieved,
prayed to God that he would take him out of this World. Must we therefore be
astonished if the things that God reveals to his Friends do not fall out as
they might have conceived them, and far less as others understood them? For
suppose God declare unto them some Good or Evil for them or others; if these
things are founded on certain Dispositions of Spirit, the Obedience of those
Souls as to God, and a certain Perseverance, and that this must fall out upon
these Conditions; yet it is not certain for this, that the Event shall fall out
as the Words sound, so long as the Condition and Perseverance are uncertain and
do not appear.

Here is more than sufficient for solving all the Difficulties that may occur
in the Writings of A. B. as to any Predictions. And as to the Promises and
Declarations of God how absolute soever they may seem in Words, yet the
Completion of them is not to be looked for, when there is not a Correspondence
by an entire Conversion unto God, in those to whom they are given. God does not
retract his Promises, but he leaves them to whom they were given, takes his
Talents from them to give them to others, till he find such as will profit by
them. A. B. has declared all that has been said on this Head, Avertis. contr.
le Trembl. n. 96.
in Two or Three Lines. God, says she, is always True and cannot Lie: But Men
do not understand his Language, or do not know the Time of his Predictions, or
they hinder the Effect of his Promises by their Sins or Indispositions.

XXV. XXV. That she was imposed upon by Impostors, is no Argument that she had
not the Spirit of God.
In the last Place it is given as an Instance that A. B. was not led by the
Spirit of God, and that she had not the Gift of Discerning if Spirits were of
God or not, in that she was deceived for many Years by S. Saulien, and others.
It is to be considered, that the Holy Spirit does not confer his Gifts upon
those in whom Self-will does yet reign, and who are guided by it, but on those
only who are dead to their own Wills. When these are endued with the Gifts of
the Holy Spirit, they do not exercise them according to their own Will, or as
they please, but they are resigned to God, that he may do in them, and by them,
when, and how he please. For Example: St. Paul had without doubt the Gift of
Miracles; he struck Acts 13. 20. 28.
Elymas Blind, raised the Young Man that fell down dead, and healed others. And
yet nevertheless when he was taken he made none Blind, that he might escape
from his Persecutors, neither did he miraculously heal Epaphirus, Trophimus,
Timothy. Phil. 2. 27. Tit. 4. 20. 1. Tim. 5. 23.
And even so when the Light of God, the Gift of Knowledge, etc. is given unto
the Saints; they do not therefore discover all things in that Light and by that
Gift, according to their Will; but being dead to their own Will, and resigned
to the Will of God, they discover in that Light of God, those things only which
he is pleased to manifest unto them in it: so that if God in his Wisdom see it
convenient for them that they be ignorant of the Evils of some with whom they
converse, whether to exercise them, or that some external things may be done to
them by these Hypocrites, or for other Ends known to his infinite Wisdom; then
without any Prejudice to the Light of God, or the Gift of Discerning of
Spirits, they shall not know these Hypocrites, till God be pleased to bring
that Gift into act, as to that Matter, which he uses to do when he sees it
necessary either for their own Salvation, or that of others, or for the Glory
of his Name. It is a great Error then for us to think that the Gifts of God are
managed by Men's Self-will, or Self-wisdom, and from hence to conclude, that
that Person to whom the inward Disposition of others was known for some time,
did not only want the Gift of Discerning Spirits, but that also it is from
hence evident that it cannot be known from such a Person's Life and Doctrine
that he was led by the Spirit of God, since he did embrace in others that which
was but Appearance and Imposture only, for Truth: For Psa. 55. 14, 15. Jer. 11.
19. 1 Kings 13. 2 Timothy 4.
David, Jeremy, another true Prophet; they who baptized Simon Magus, Paul (as
to Demas) have sometimes taken the Appearance or Imposture of some Hypocrites
or Liars for Truth: Does it from hence follow that it could not be known by
their Life and Doctrine, that they were led by the Spirit of God? As if the
stress of their whole Life and Doctrine were to be laid upon some one or other
innocent Mistake. Or, as if rather from hence it ought not to be inferred, that
God in his Wisdom saw it expedient that they should be ignorant of the
Hypocrisy of such Persons for some time; and that the Gift of Discerning of
Spirits should be differently directed and applied in those who are acted by
the Spirit of God, according to his Will; who can truly say, Not I live, but
Christ lives in me.

Thus I have given a plain and true Narrative of the Sentiments of Antonia
Bourignon, both as to the Essential and Accessory Truths: And of the Prejudices
generally raised against her; and the just Defenses she makes for her self, by
which she clears and removes them; and of the Evidences she brings for her
being led by the Spirit of God, and not by that of the Devil or Nature, or her
own Imagination; and the Answers given to what is opposed against it. And though
I might have contracted all into lesser Bounds, yet I chose rather to give it
in her own Words, and to let her speak for her self. And now after all, I beg
leave to sum up the Evidence.

XXVI. XXVI. The whole Evidence summed up.
If any pretend to be led by the Spirit of God, and in the mean time are
worldly, or sensual, or selfish, or contradict the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, it
is evident they are not of God. But if any publish to the World a Doctrine that
is Pure and Holy, tending only to mortify Corrupt Nature, and to recover the
Love of God; if it be wholly conformable unto, and the same with the Doctrine
of Jesus Christ and of his Gospel: If they who publish it do still live
conformably unto it, and bring forth the Fruits of the Spirit of God in their
whole Life and Practice, despising all temporal things, and tending only to
things eternal; and manifesting the Righteousness, Goodness, and Truth of God
in all their Actions; if their Words be accompanied with a Force and Power
which reaches the Heart and convinces the Conscience; If they discover often
the secret Thoughts of the Hearts of others, and their Dispositions, even
sometimes though their Persons be unknown to them; If they be Persons full of
Simplicity and Sincerity, having no worldly Aim, doing nothing to please Men,
nor to gain their Esteem, but declaring the Truth in Simplicity, even in things
which they know will be most unpleasing to Men, and will bring upon them
Hatred, Contempt, and Persecution from Men, instead of their Favor and Esteem:
If they are altogether Illiterate, and have acquired no Knowledge by the humane
means of Study, Reading, Conversation, and Meditation; and yet manifest a
clear, distinct, and comprehensive Knowledge of Divine Things, far beyond the
most Learned Divines: If in declaring those Truths to the World by writing,
they flowed from them as Water does from a Fountain, as fast as their Hand
could guide the Pen, without musing or meditating what to write, or changing
and correcting what they had once written, or reading it over again; and yet
all as to the main is of a Thread, most rational, and clear, and consistent,
and no real Contradiction either to the Holy Scriptures, or amongst those
Writings themselves as to the Essence and Substance of them: And if such
declare to the World, that of themselves they are sinful Nothings, of the
corrupt Mass of Adam, from whence nothing can come but Evil; and that all the
Good that is in them, and all the Truths they communicate to the World, is not
from them, but from God and the immediate Operation of his Holy Spirit, who is
pleased to make use of weak and simple Means to confound the Mighty and Wise:
If all these can be truly said of any, these are certainly Evidences that will
abide the Verdict of an impartial Jury; even though there be no visible Miracles,
as John the Baptist, and many of the ancient Prophets did none, there being no
New Doctrine published, but the pressing and clearing of that already declared
and confirmed by Jesus Christ and his Apostles.

Now this is the Sum of the Plea of Antonia Bourignon; and for the Proof of
it, as to her Doctrine and Sentiments, she refers to her Writings, which any
that please may consult; as to her Life and Spirit, to those who were daily
Witnesses of it, (of which there are a Cloud of Testimonies made public,) as
also for the manner of composing her Writings: As to the Force and Efficacy of
them, to those who by their Experience have found and do attest it. And these
are the greatest Evidences that can be given to those who were not
Eyewitnesses, nor have experienced that Efficacy of her Writings themselves.

XXVII. XXVII. What Weight the Testimony of others may have.
And seeing by the Testimony of her greatest Enemies, these Writings are valued
and esteemed by some who have the Reputation of being Men of Sense, Learning,
and Probity, and that there are others highly deserving that Character still
alive, who were Witnesses of her Life and Spirit, and have found so much of the
Divine Power accompanying those Writings, as has made them abandon the Love and
Care of all Temporal things, to mind and prepare for Eternity. And seeing they
are known to be Men of no Hypochondriack nor Enthusiastic Spirit, do not
pretend to immediate Revelations themselves, are not led by the heat of Fancy
or Imagination, but were addicted to all the sorts of rational Learing, and to
the mechanical Philosophy, wherewith the World now abounds; this may so far
Counter-ballance the Prejudices raised by some other Men of Reputation for
Learning and Parts, (who never read those Writings till they came to them with
an evil Eye, with a design to expose, ridicule, and confute them) this, I say,
may so far Counter-ballance that Prejudice, as to incline People not to throw
them away, as unworthy of their notice, but impartially to weigh and consider
what they say.

XXVIII. XXVIII. The Importance of the Matter in those Writings.
And I am the more bold and earnest to persuade this, because they contain the
matters of the greatest Importance in the World: They encourage no New Sect nor
Schism, set up no New Creeds, teach no Disobedience to Superiors, Civil or
Ecclesiastic, no Contempt of the Holy Scriptures or Divine Ordinances; they do
not teach Men to distinguish themselves from the rest of the World by a
Preciseness, in Words, Gestures, Apparel, or other outward indifferent things:
But they clearly manifest the horrid Corruption of our Nature; the
indispensable necessity of the Love of God to be saved; the only means to
recover it by following the Life and Doctrine of Jesus Christ: how contrary all
Men walk to this and yet flatter themselves with their false Glosses on
Christ's Life and Doctrine; and the great and universal Judgments that God is
now to bring upon the World, as he did in the Days of Noah, its Wickedness
being as Universal, and at as great a Height: With many other important Truths
which I cannot now repeat. And as they are of such Weight and Moment, so they
are so clearly and rationally represented as to convince our natural Reason.

XXIX. XXIX. That the accessory things need deter none.
It needs divert none from laying to Heart those great and necessary Truths,
because they may meet with other accessory things which they cannot relish;
they are told they may lay them aside, suspend their belief of them, they may
be saved without them. And whereas it is replied, That they being declared to
be revealed by the Spirit of God, we ought to believe them: It is answered,
That it is not necessary to Salvation to believe that those Writings are
Divinely inspired; many may believe the Divine Essential Truths contained in
them because of their Agreement with the Holy Scripture, and labor to form
their Lives and Hearts accordingly, and yet not be persuaded that she had
immediate Revelation; besides, the same Spirit that declares even those
accessory Truths, declares also that they are not necessary to Salvation, and
that they who do not relish them, and are not bettered by them, may let them
alone. Even as God of his infinite Bounty, has provided not only for the
Necessities of Man's Life, but also variety of Entertainment, of which some is
agreeable to some Palates and naufeous to others: It is not needful that every
Man should eat of all sorts of Food, but it is fit he take that only which is
most convenient for his Health, not despising other Food, because he cannot
relish it, for it may be very agreeable and healthful to others; however he may
let it alone.

God grant us all the Spirit of divine Charity and a sound Mind; Phil. 3. 15,
16.
and that whereto we have already attained, (the Essential Truths we all
acknowledge) we may walk by the same Rule, and mind the same things: And then
if in any thing we be otherwise minded, God will reveal this unto us.

Advertisement.
IN Opposition to all the Prejudices raised against the Writings of A. B. this
may be a favorable one for them, that whereas her Enemies do all they can to
frighten People from looking into them, and would have them to know no further
of them, than what they think fit to put into their Narratives, those on the
other hand who give good Characters of them, aim at nothing thereby but to
persuade People impartially to read and consider the Writings themselves, and
not to trust them upon their Words, no more than those who bespatter them; even
as we Protestants persuade the People to read the Holy Scriptures, and those of
the Roman Church do all they can to hinder them, as being conscious that they
make against them. And as thus the Intention of these Witnesses is much more
Candid and Just than the other; so their Testimony will by all impartial Judges
be esteemed no less Weighty: The one are Eyewitnesses, and the other only upon
Conjecture, Inferences, or Hearsay, and they who thrust in to be Evidences upon
no better Grounds, give occasion to suspect them as false Witnesses, and to put
them to the Oath of Calumny ever they be admitted. And as they had far the
Advantage of knowing the Truth of what they declare beyond these others; so
their Ability to make a right Judgment and their Probity is unquestionable; of
these I shall instance only in two. The one is the great Anatomist and
Naturalist, Dr. Swammerdam, whose Writings are well known and esteemed by all
Enquirers into the History of Nature, and it is certain that that Genius does
not lead to a Brainsick Enthusiasm; but after that he had seen some of the
Writings of A. B. and conversed with her, he was fully persuaded in his
Conscience that she was led by the Spirit of God, and found the happy Effect of
it upon own his Heart and Spirit. The other is Dr. Ant. de Heyde, known also to
the World by some curious Enquiries and Observations in the History of Nature
and in Physic, who for many Years had no small Contempt and Aversion for A. B.
and her Writings, so that it was the force of Truth only, and no favorable
Prepossession that brought him to esteem them, who has now abandoned all
earthly things to follow his Master Jesus Christ, and such powerful a Mean they
were for this End, appears from this following Account, which he permits to be
communicated to the World, being heartily desirous to contribute for the Good
of those who labor under the same Indispositions.

A DISSERTATION OF Dr. Ant. de Heyde, Famous Physician of Middleburg in,
Zealand. CONCERNING The Sanctity and Divine Illumination of Antonia Bourignon.
Translated from the Original Latin M. S.
Quest. 1. If A. B. did lead a Pious and Holy Life? 2. If she was moved by the
Spirit of God to write for the enlightening of others?

I. THAT we may know if A. B. did lead a Pious and Holy Life, I. What Holiness
is.
we must first understand wherein true Holiness and Piety does consist, to wit,
in the Love of God only, and of those things which are Eternal. And seeing two
Contraries cannot be loved at the same time, and the Love of the Creatures and
things Temporal, is opposite to the Love of the Creator and of things Eternal;
it is from hence more clear than the Sun at Noonday, that he who loves God
cannot love the Creatures. Our Savior having taught us that no Man can serve
two Masters, but he must needs hate the one and love the other. St. Paul says
expressly, If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, and
set not your Affections upon those things which are on Earth. Col. 3. 1. 1 John
2. 15.
And St. John warns us, That we love not the World, nor the things which are in
the World; for if we do so, the Love of the Father is not in us.

II. II. To be discerned by Divine Light only.
This is likewise confirmed by the Example of all the Holy Patriarchs,
Prophets, and Apostles, as he who reads the Holy Scriptures will find through
all, so that there is no need to produce Testimonies here. But seeing this Love
of God, and of things Eternal, is hidden in the Heart, and the Heart is known
by God only, it is therefore difficult to know if any truly love God. This
Difficulty is so much the greater, that Hypocrites and wicked Persons can so
craftily counterfeit the outward Actions which are the Signs and Fruits of this
Love, that it is hard to distinguish them. That this Difficulty may be removed,
it is to be observed and considered: 1. That there are nevertheless sure Signs
by which one may be convinced of the Holiness of another, and that he is endued
with the Love of God. For we affirm that Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and the other
Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, were Holy, and that with so much Assurance,
that we look upon it as an Example which we ought to imitate. But 2. it is to
be considered that we cannot know but by Divine Light, and not at all by
Natural Reason, if one be Holy and a Lover of God: And this is bestowed on
those only who are Holy themselves, or at least endeavor in Sincerity of Heart
to become so. To such God reveals his Secrets, in so far as it is fit for them
to know them for their own Conduct, or that of others; as for others who are
not in that State, but care for and seek after earthly things, they really
cannot know if any be truly Holy and a Lover of God or not. Nevertheless they
take upon them to judge magisterially of all things, as if they only did
possess all divine and humane Wisdom; though in the mean time they are ignorant
of the Essence of things, and content themselves with their outside and
surface. So that their Testimony as to Holiness and the Love of God, even of
the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, is founded merely upon their own
Advantage; For they judge that to be Good and Holy which advances this; but on
the other hand they account that to be Evil and Profane which brings them in
no temporal Gain.

III. III. Illustrated by the material Light.
It is just of this Matter as it is of the Light, of which a Blind Man cannot
judge, neither can he form the Idea of it, because his Eyes, by which alone the
material Light is perceived, are ill disposed for it. Yet this does not hinder,
but that he whose Eyes are well-disposed may be certain that he sees the Light,
because when he opens his Eyes, he discovers many things round about him, which
without this Light could not be discerned, and withal he can walk and do other
Works, which would be impossible for him, if he were deprived of that Light:
And when he sees other Men walk resolutely and steddily, and do their Works by
sure Rules, he has reason to conclude that these Men do also enjoy the Light.
This may be easily applied to Spiritual things. For though the natural Man
turning his closed Eyes toward the Divine Light, is Blind in Spiritual things,
neither can he know if one be Holy and have the Love of God, yet this does not
hinder, but that he who has the Eyes of his Mind opened, may be assured that he
himself and others like unto him, are illuminated by God; for when the inward
State of his Soul is discovered to him, and the work of God in his Soul, and
the means that are to be made use of for the preserving and strengthening of
that Work, he justly concludes from hence that he enjoys the Divine Light, and
he, walking in that Light, and abandoning all the Creatures, that he may love
the Creator only, may be certain that he loves God, and is Holy: And observing
the like in others, he concludes that they also do truly love God and are Holy.
Upon such Grounds is founded that Knowledge by which Holy Men do understand
their own State, and the State of other Holy Men. And after this manner are
they persuaded that the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles were Holy Men.

IV. IV. Two sorts of spiritually Blind. The 1. capable of seeing, the 2. not.
Some perhaps may reply to all this. Although Good and Holy Men may mutually know
their own and others State, yet it is not so with those who has not as yet
attained to Holiness and the Love of God. I answer, such imperfect Persons may
be of two sorts, to wit, some know that they are Blind and therefore are
desirous of the means whereby they may see and be enlightened; others, although
they be more Blind, than Moles, yet they do not desire to see; either because
they imagine that they are enlightened and see sufficiently, or for that they
are so sunk into and carried away by the Love of the Creatures, that they have
no thought of the Creator and of things Eternal. Those of this second kind are
so far from being able to know their own State or that of others that they
cannot form any Idea of it, more than a Blind Man can judge of Light and
Colors. Hence it would be to no purpose to endeavor to demostrate to such
that one is Holy, and in the Love of God. But as for those of the first sort,
who know they are Blind and desire the Light, they, according to our Savior's
Promise, shall see. And as they are conscious of their own Blindness, and
anxious about it; so God will reveal unto them the Holiness and Illumination of
his beloved ones, in so far as that may be a Mean of recovering them out of
Darkness into Light, and from Sin to Holiness. So St. Paul was instructed by
Ananias; Cornclius, the Centurion, by St. Peter. And God in all times has
employed Holy Men for the enlightening of others, and for guiding them by their
Examples, Words, and Writings into the way of Holiness. This is the Ground and
Origin of the Divine Ministry, which for this very Reason is highly
necessary, to wit, that they who live holily, and are illuminated by God may
shine and go before others. Even as an Artificer that is skilful in any Art,
goes before his Scholars and Apprentices by working, that they may imitate him.
And as in an unknown way we choose a Guide who may lead us into the right and
shortest way* And as there are certain Signs given whereby we may know if this
Artificer understand his Trade, and if the Guide know well the best and
shortest way, so there are sure Marks whereby we may know if any be Holy and
enlightened by God, and do truly love him. This is a sign; if he seek those
things that are above, and not those things that are on Earth; if he love not
the World, nor the things that are in the World. And although it fall out, and
falls out but too often that Hypocrites and wicked Persons may outwardly so
behave themselves, as if they were truly Holy and in the Love of God, that by
their feigned Piety, the Good may be seduced; yet God will not permit their
Hyprocisie to be always hid, especially when the Salvation of others is thereby
in hazard.

V. V. Five Testimonies of Holiness in any.
It is therefore certain and acknowedg'd by all Men of sound Reason, that it
may be known by manifest and undoubted Signs if any love God and is Holy. So
all Christians are fully persuaded that Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, and the
other Patriarchs, and also the Apostles were Holy Men. This we know, 1. by the
Evidence they gave from their Deeds, Words, and Writings, that they saw clearly
that God, and things invisible, were far more excellent than the Creatures and
things visible, and were thereby engaged to forsake these things and count them
as nothing, and only to seek and love those other things with all their Heart.
Believing that God is, and that he is a Rewarder of those who seek him. To this
Testimony, 2. there is added the Testimony of others, who well knew the thing,
and are not moved by any Self-Interest or Advantage, to give this Testimony;
which gives us so much Assurance that we may acquiesce in it, as we do in the
Testimonies of Historians, Geographers, and Naturalists, in things of which
they have been Eye Witnesses in their respective Sciences. To this add, 3. that
so long as there is nothing made appear contrary to these Testimonies, there is
no reason to call them in Question. 4. We may be certain of the Holiness of
another, and of their Love of God by the Testimony of our own Conscience; for
he who is truly Holy and possesses the Love of God, does rightly infer from the
Conformity of another Actions to his, that that other Person is Holy and loves
God. But he who has not attained to this Perfection, may yet be certain of the
Holiness of others, by observing that their Actions do as far excel and
transcend his, as the Actions of him who sees clearly and walks at Noonday, do
transcend those of a Blind Man, or of one groping in the Dark. But as for those
of an evil Eye, as they are Blind, though they boast that they see, so they are
not in a State of Judging of others. Besides it would serve them to no purpose,
so long as they remain in that damnable State, to know if others be Holy or
not. To these may be added, 5. as a Testimony of the Holiness of any the
Miracles and wonderful Works which such Men do, and the extraordinary Light
communicated unto them by God. But whereas there are also lying Wonders, by
which false Prophets do seduce many, and the Dragon is worshipped by all the
World; and seeing the Devil has great Knowledge, therefore this Testimony alone
without the foregoing, is not enough to ascertain us of the Holiness of any.

VI. VI. All these as to A. B.
But that we may come more closely to the matter in hand; I say, if it can be
made appear that the Evidences and Signs which convince us that the Patriarchs,
Prophets, and Apostles, were endued with Holiness and the Love of God, have
place also as to Antonia Bourignon, then we may be assured likewise, that this
Virgin was Holy, and in the Love of God.

VII. VII. 1. Her verbal Testimony of her self valid, and no sign of Pride.
That Antonia Bourignon testifies this of her self, is not doubted by any who
has looked though but superficially into her Writings: For she bears Witness in
many places of her Sanctity and extraordinary Love of God. So that her
Adversaries take occasion from hence to reproach her, as if it were not suitable
to the Sanctity of Holy Persons that they themselves should publish the Grace
given them by God; and they would most absurdly discredit such a Testimony. As
the corrupt Jews did for the same Reason reject Jesus Christ, because he bore
Witness of himself. But our Savior did so little regard this, that he said
nothing else, but, I have spoken the Truth, and if ye will not believe me,
believe the Works which I do. Thus we see also, that Moses, David, Paul, and
other Holy Writers were not afraid to declare the Grace given them by God.
Which Testimony ought not in any wise to be looked upon as a Token of Pride,
because these Holy Men were convinced that they were nothing, that they were
come of the corrupt mass of Adam, and so worthy of Damnation; that of
themselves they could not think one good Thought, but that all their
sufficiency was of God, and that they had no Good, but what they had received.
Moreover those Holy Men were commanded by God to bear Witness to the Truth of
themselves, that they might stop the Mouths of Gainsayers, and might encourage
the Good to yield up themselves wholly to God, who can do even in the weakest,
when they deny themselves, exceeding abundantly above all that we can ask or
think. For God has no respect of Persons, but he gives to every one liberally.
And that Antonia Bourignon did truly imitate those Holy Men, is abundantly
demonstrated in her Writings, even to the Confusion of Gainsayers; for she was
in that State, that she endeavored always to speak the Truth only, whether it
made for her or against her, not Studying to please Men, as becomes the
Servants of Jesus Christ.

VIII. VIII. The Testimony of her Actions.
But that we may see whether we ought to give Credit to this verbal Testimony
of A. B. we come to consider her Actions. And these were such that throughout
all her Life she sought only God and things Eternal, entirely abandoning all
the Creatures and things Temporal. If you except some Years, in which she
followed the Vanities of the World, not out of Inclination, but that she might
please Men; though even then she did nothing that by Christians now adays is
reckoned to be Evil, or blameworthy: Yet this withdrawing from God did greatly
hurt her; while she enjoyed worldly Delights, she lost the Divine Ones, and
that with such bitter Remorse of Conscience, that she thought her self in Hell.
She got no rest till she forsook the World, the Things of the World and Self,
that she might love God only, and be resigned to his Will in every thing. In
which Resolution she persevered so faithfully, even to the end of her Life,
that she would rather have died a Thousand times, than have desired any
Creature, or followed her own Will in any thing; never undertaking any thing
till she was first persuaded that it was the Good Will of God. As appears every
where in the Writings of Antonia Bourignon, particularly in the Account of her
inward and outward Life, and the Continuation of it; where this is sufficiently
demonstrated: Which Testimony though given by her self, is nevertheless true, as
I have made appear in the Seventh Section.

IX. IX. 2. The Testimony of others.
Moreover this Testimony is confirmed by many Good and I^ous Men who knew
Antonia Bourignon from her Infancy, and did narrowly observe her Conversation:
Many such Testimonies are to be met with, in that Treatise of A. B. which is
called, The Testimony of the Truth. It is worthy of Observation, that these
Testimonies seem to have been published by the Providence of God, that it might
be evident to every one that A. B. led a Pious and Holy Life; and that the
Mouths of malicious Slanderers might be stopped, not only by Two or Three
Witnesses, by whose Mouth every Truth is established; but by such a Cloud of
Witnesses; who assure us that the Thoughts and Words of Antonia Bourignon were
serious and pious, even from her early Infancy; so that observing the change
that Man is subject to throughout all his Life, and that he must part with all
at Death, while he seems to propose to himself, in every thing that he
undertakes, an abiding and perpetual Good: this made her conclude that we were
not created for this wretched Life, but for an abiding, eternal, and blessed
Life; of which she became so desirous, that she counted all bodily Delights,
Recreations, Pleasures, fine Clothes, and all other perishing things, as Dung
and Loss, for the Love of those good things which were Eternal, and would never
fail. And about the Fourth Year of her Age, having learned that our Lord Jesus
Christ and his Apostles did lead a Life wholly free of all earthly and temporal
Cares and Desires, that they might only care and seek for those things which
are above, and are eternal, she looked on such a Life as most reasonable and
worthy of a Man; but observing that the Life of Christians now adays was
altogether contrary to that kind of Life, hence she concluded that they were
not True Christians, and begging that her Parents would have her to the Country
where the Christians lived, she vehemently thirsted to go thither, that she
might lead a truly Christian Life. And though they endeavored to persuade her
that she lived amongst Christians, yet she could not believe this, especially
when advancing more in Years she found that the best among all the Parties of
Christendom, did still love and seek after earthly things; so that their Deeds
were directly opposite to the Deeds of Jesus Christ, and of the First
Christians. While in the mean time our Savior says expressly, That the Disciple
ought to be like his Master, and that he who believes in him shall do the Works
that he did, yea, greater Works than these; as the Children of Abraham do the
Works of Abraham.

X. X. Her Solitude.
As Antonia Bourignon grew in Years, the Love of God and her Neighbor did
increase in her, of which she gave infallible Proofs on all Occasions; for
observing that the Conversation of Men was an effectual Mean to withdraw us
from God, and to deprive us of his Love, she therefore lived as solitarily as
was possible; not that she was Melancholy or Brainsick, for such also seek to
be Solitary, but that applying her self to the Contemplation of God, and of his
Perfections, she might the better continue in his Love. She was otherwise of a
cheerful, sociable, and ingenuous Temper, and understood well how they ought to
carry themselves who desire to be loved by the World; as appeared in the time
that she applied her self to the Conversation of the World.

XI. XI. Her Self^enial.
Moreover she denied her self as to Meat, Drink, Apparel, etc. all things that
were not absolutely necessary for the support of Life; and this, both that she
might not adhere to any Creature, and that she might bestow on the Poor, and
the Sick, what she had beyond her Necessity. And that Antonia Bourignon did
these things, not that she might be seen of Men, like unto the Hypocrites, but
only from the Love of God, and her Neighbor, and things Eternal, appears from
hence, that she did all these things in secret, as much as was possible,
entering into her Chamber, and shutting the Door, prayed to her Father in
Secret, and gave Alms, her Lefthand not knowing what her Righthand was doing:
She showed such a cheerful Countenance, that none but her pious Mother knew
that she fasted.

XII. XII. Her firm perseverance to Death.
That the Deeds and Actions of Antonia Bourignon did proceed from the Love of
God, appears also from this, that she persever'd in them constantly to the end
of her Life; except that short time in which she engaged her self ^n the
Vanities of the World, and no Reproaches, Persecutions, hard Usages with which
she wrestled throughout all her Life, did ever make her s^acken; nor yet the
Deceit, fair Words, and feigned Sanctity of Hypocrites and Impostours, who
continually endeavored by many ways to distract her, and to withdraw her from
the Love of God. So that she had received the Gift of Fortitude from the Holy
Spirit, to such a Degree, that she would not have done any thing against the
Will of God, nor omitted that which she knew to be agreeable to the Will of
God, no not for the whole World. And though she greatly desired Solitude, because
there she had learned to converse with God, and to hear him in a profound
Silence, yet when the Glory of God, or the Salvation of her Neighbor did
require that she should converse with Men, she willingly left that Solitude:
For she ever observed this Rule, to prefer the Glory of God and the Salvation
of her Neighbor, to her own Profit; being always ready not only to lay down
her Life for her Neighbor, but being content also to be blotted out of God's
Book, and with St. Paul, to be an Anathema for her Christian Brethren.

XIII. XIII. The purity of her Virgin State.
Antonia Bourignon finding that Virginity was most acceptable to God, and an
effectual Mean of persevering in the Love of God; she therefore from her
Childhood begged of God that she might be the Spouse of Jesus Christ, earnestly
desiring never to be married to any Man. This she obtained so perfectly from
God, that she never entertained a Thought contrary to it, though she was
oft-times sought in Marriage by Persons who could have afforded her many
worldly Advantages, and her Parents were solicitous to have her married; Yea,
her Father, contrary to her Will, promised her in Marriage to a rich Merchant.
And that she might avoid that Stroke, she separated her self from the World,
and from all Creatures, and about the Eighteenth Year of her Age, having put on
the Habit of a Hermit, she left her Father's House, without taking with her so
much as a Penny, forsaking Wealth, Accommodations, Delights, and all temporal
Things, only for the Love of God. The abandoning of all which, was so
well-pleasing to God, that he wonderfully guided and preserved her, and
delivered her out of the Hands of wicked Men, and committed her to the Care of
such as were truly Good, who were ready to be helpful to her in all things.

XIV. XIV. Of Faith, Hope, and Charity.
That I may not be too tedious, as to the Testimony which others give
concerning the Piety and Sanctity of Antonia Bourignon, I shall only propose
some Remarks as to those Three principal Virtues: 1. Faith. 2. Charity. 3.
Hope. For if there can be sufficient Evidences brought, whereby it can be made
appear that A. B. did possess these, there can be then no doubt but that she
was Holy and Pious. That this may be made appear, it is not needful to examine
each of these Virtues particularly by it self, because they always go together.
There is no doubt then, yea, we may be assured of it, that he who possesses one
of these Virtues, does possess them all. Faith then is the Subsistence of
things hoped for, Heb. 11. 1.
and the Evidence of things not seen: Or, Faith is that Divine Light infused by
God into Man at his Creation, by which he conceives things Divine and Eternal,
which by the natural Understanding are unconceivable. In this Sense, Faith is
communicated unto all Men; for it is that true Light that enlightens every Man
that comes into the World. But this Light is so darkened and hindered to
increase, by the Love of the Creatures and of temporal Things, in which Sin
consists, that Faith, being without Life and Spirit, becomes dead and
ineffectual. To make appear therefore that any has Faith, it is not enough that
he is endued with this first innate Light, because in that Sense all Men have
Faith, while in the mean time all are not Holy. But here we speak of the Faith
which all have not, but they only who do not resist this Divine Light, nor
strive to quench it; and who they are that follow it, and walk in it, and whose
Faith works by Love, must and ought to be made evident by their Works, that
it may appear to be living and not dead. This was the Faith in Abel, Enoch,
Noah, Abraham, Moses, and the rest of the Holy Men, spoken of Heb. 11. who
seeing the invisible God, contemned all visible Things, suffering all manner of
Reproaches, Persecutions, and Torments, that they might ever see and enjoy him,
and this with so great Resolution, as the whole World could not divert them
from their purpose, or separate them from the Love of God, because they knew
certainly that the Hope they had, would never make them ashamed.

XV. XV. That these did live and operate in her.
Now that in A. B. Faith did thus work by Love, with an assured Hope of
enjoying God, appears by all her Life, as has been already shown. And that we
may have the greater Evidence of this, we need read only the Account of her
Life, given both by her self and others. Among innumerable Instances it is very
remarkable, that A. B. took upon her the Care of governing, educating, and
instructing in the Christian Religion, many poor Orphan Girls in an Hospital,
and that without any Tie or Obligation, or any other End, but the Hope she had
of bringing up these Orphins in the Fear of God, and of forming them to be true
Christians; employing in this Office all her Industry, her Goods, and the
Strength both of her Body and Mind. In which Work of Charity, she continued for
Nine Years, confiding so firmly in God, that though she was tossed with infinite
Afflictions, her Refuge was in him alone, and that with such an assured Hope,
that she was never confounded nor frustrated of her End. In such Works of
Charity, A. B. continued even to Death, but with this Caution afterward, that
having found by Experience that most of the Poor, and other Men also, did abuse
Alms, and the other Offices of Charity, to encourage themselves the more in
their Sins, she did dispense the Gifts of Charity more warily, enquiring first
if they might promote the Salvation of her Neighbor, which ought to be our
great aim; and being once persuaded of this, she spared neither Money, nor
Travel, nor her own Life, where she could contribute for the Salvation of
others. But where she saw that her good Works could contribute nothing to this,
she endeavored to live in as much Retiredness and Quiet with God as was
possible, that she might work out her own Salvation with fear and trembling,
being thus truly helpful to all, when a few had rejected her Help. The
Malicious therefore have no reason to accuse A. B. of Avarice, or Cruelty,
because she did not distribute her Goods indifferently to all the Poor; for
this did not spring from so evil an Original, but from true Charity, that she
might not concur by the Poors abusing of her Alms to the multiplying of their
Sins, and so to the aggravating of their Damnation. This proceeded also from
the Care she had that the Goods which God had committed unto her, as to a
Steward, might be faithfully distributed.

XVI. XVI. 3. The contra^y to those Evidences, not made appear.
It was premised in the third place, that we ought to admit the forementioned
Evidences for proving a Person to be Holy, and a Lover of God, as good and
valid, so long as the contrary is not made appear. Now as to the Holiness of
Antonia Bourignon, and her Love to God, that the contrary is not yet made
appear, is evident from this, that no body could ever yet discover that her
Life and Actions were at any time blameworthy, even then, when to follow the
Vanity of the World, she lived for some time distracted from God. But from
hence we ought not to conclude, as some malicious Persons have done, that Ant.
Bourignon and her Friends do affirm, that she neither sinned in Adam nor in her
self; which is most false: For A. B. declares in many places that she, as well
as other Men, was born of the corrupt mass of Adam, and did sin in him. And not
only so, but that turning aside from God unto the World, she sinned in her
self; though she never did any thing that is blame worthy before Men. For she was
fully persuaded that every turning aside from God unto the Cretures, is a Sin
that deserves Damnation.

XVII. XVII. 4. The Testimony of the Conscience of others.
The Fourth Evidence, to wit, that of our Conscience, as to the Sanctity of A.
B. is most abundant; for many Persons of all Parties of Christians, of all
sorts of Ranks, and those most Pious, do decalre that they have felt such
Operations in their Souls by the Presence, the Words, and Writings of Antonia
Bourignon, that they were sufficiently convinced in their Conscience that A. B.
was Holy, and in the Love of God, and that to such a Degree, that this Love
seemed to flow from her into them and other well-disposed Souls, because many
are brought by her to abandon their own Wills and the Creatures, that they may
Love God only, and subject themselves wholly to his Will. And I am persuaded
that her Writings will have such Operations in all those, who shall read them
with a sincere and hearty desire to find the saving Truth, and to endeavor to
walk in it, in so far as they know it. Unless they be so far possessed with
Prejudices, as that they will admit of nothing for Truth, but what is consonant
to their formerly received Opinions, looking upon every thing that differs from
them, or seems contrary unto them, as Lies and Error. This is as if one looking
always through a colored Glass, by which all Bodies would appear to him of the
same Color, should imagine and affirm, that other Men who look with the naked
and single Eye, are perfectly mistaken when they say that they see clearly that
every Body has its own distinct Color.

XVIII. XVIII. The wonderful Works she did, and the Divine Light given her.
Unto these Four Evidences of the Sanctity of A. B. this Fifth ought to be
added; to wit, the wonderful Works that A. B. did, and the extraordinary Divine
Lights that God communicated to her. To reckon up all these we behooved to
narrate her whole Life, and to adduce all her Writings, which are full of such
wonderful Works and Light. Therefore let every one that loves the Truth, apply
to these Writings, and (which soever he shall be pleased to peruse) he will by
them be sufficiently convinced of this matter. But that some Instance of this
may be given, it is to be considered, that this ought to be looked upon as a
great Miracle in A. B. that she so generously fought against her corrupt
Nature, that she wholly subdued it, not by her own Strength, which could do
nothing but Evil, but by the Grace of God, through which the weakest can do all
things. This Miracle ought to be more esteemed than raising the Dead, giving
Sight to the Blind, and such like, which serve only for this present Life, and
therefore may be performed by Men who are not Holy. But to overcome corrupt
Nature is an infallible mark of Holiness, for the obtaining of which all other
Miracles ought to be done, otherwise they avail nothing, but on the contrary do
much hurt. Among the innumerable Divine Lights communicated to Antonia
Bourignon, this is the chief, that she had explained the Truths of the Gospel
more clearly and efficaciously than any has done hitherto, demonstrating that
an Obedience to them is absolutely necessary for Salvation, and rescuing them
from the Glosses and false Expositions by which the Learned have so perverted
the Truths of the Gospel, that almost every Christian promises Salvation to
himself, although he do not walk according to these Truths.

XIX. XIX. The Second Question answered, by answering the First.
Since then it seems to appear sufficiently from what has been said, that A. B.
was Holy, and in the Love of God; it will be now fit to consider the Second
Question proposed, to wit, If she was moved by the Spirit of God to write and
to enlighten others* For answer to this. Question there needs nothing be
adduc'd but what has been said as to the First Question: For it A. B. was Holy
and in the Love of God, she would not have committed so great a Sin, as to
pretend that she was moved to write by the Spirit of God, if it was false, or
if she was not certain that it was most true. But that I may answer something
in particular to this Second Question, it is to be considered, how we may be
assured that any Writing is endited by God. In order to this, let us enquire,
how it appears that the Holy Scriptures were written by Men led by the Spirit
of God, as all Christians do believe.

XX. XX. Natural Gifts cannot make Happy, without a continual Dependence upon
God.
That we may proceed aright in this Enquiry, it is to be remarked, that God
gives unto Men Breath, and Life, and all Things, for in him we live and move,
and have our Being. Nevertheless, he has given to all Creatures the Faculty
whereby to continue in their Being, or to exist. For God is Eternal, and his
Gifts are without Repentance, therefore his Works do never perish; besides they
are endued with a Power of multiplying themselves, and producing their like. It
is true, many things perish, but these are not the Works of God, but Corruption
and Vanity, brought into the World, and yet coming into it by Sin and Lust. But
besides these Faculties of preserving themselves, and producing their like, God
gave to Man the Liberty of turning himself to God, that he might be governed
and ruled by him, or of acting by the Strength already given him, without
asking new Strength from God. If he do so, he departs from God the Author of
all Light and Good; and then such a Man of necessity becomes Miserable, and is
sunk in Darkness, as appeared in the Fall of Adam, and is to be seen daily in
those who follow their own Wills; that is, who act by the Strength once given
them, and will not ask new Strength from God, nor yield up themselves to be
governed by him. But if a Man yield up himself to God, and ask help from him in
every thing he goes about, he will find God ready to help him. Even as one in a
very close Chamber is in the Daytime immediately enlightened by the Sun, how
soon he permits the Windows of the Chamber to be opened, and the more Windows
there are opened, he receives the greater Light.

XXI. XXI. How it app^ars the Holy Scriptures were endited by the Holy Spirit.
From what has been said, it appears that when we say, that the Holy Scripture
is endited by God, we understand thereby that the Holy Men, who committed it to
Writing, did so wholly deny their own Strength, whether innate unto them, or
acquired by Diligence, Learning, and Meditation, that they willingly
acknowledged that thereby they could do no good nor any thing that was
acceptable to God, but did so entirely yield up themselves to be governed by
God, that they no longer lived to themselves, but God did live and operate in
them. Now that we may be assured that the Holy Scriptures were penned by such
Men, we must examine what Operation the Holy Scriptures have in our Souls. When
then we experience that the Thoughts of our Hearts are manifested by them,
which can be done by none but God, who alone knows the Heart; and if this Holy
Scripture be a powerful Mean for loosing our Hearts from the Love of Temporal
things, and drawing them to the Love of God and of things Eternal: For the Word
of God is quick, and powerful, and sharper than any Two-edged Sword; piercing
even to the dividing asunder of the Soul and Spirit, the Joints and Marrow; and
is a discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart; overthrowing every
Imagination and Thought that exalts it self against God: So that an Unbeliever
perceiving that by this Word the inward Thoughts of his Heart are made manifest
and laid open, he is forced to fall down upon his Face and to acknowledge that
it is God who speaks unto him. This one Mark is sufficient to prove the Divine
Authority of the Holy Scripture, and it is so clear that it may be understood
by the most simple, moreover it is most certain and infallible. To this, many
other Marks might be added, which for brevity's sake I pass over, and so much
the rather that they are to be had abundantly from those Writers who have
designedly treated of the Divine Authority of the Holy Scriptures.

XXII. XXII. That the Writings of A. B. were end^ted by the Holy Spirit.
Now that this may be applied to the Writings of Antonia Bourignon, both I my
self and many Persons of Probity have experienced and do daily experience that
those Writings do as clearly lay before us our inward State, as if God were
immediately speaking unto us. Moreover, they do so clearly and so lively set
before our Eyes the Vanity and Nothingness of all Earthly and Temporal things,
and the Glory of Heavenly and Eternal things, that we are forced, unless we
would do Violence to our Conscience, to love and seek after these last things
only, and absolutely to forsake and avoid the other. And there is no doubt but
that all they who sincerely desire to do the Will of God, and to embrace and
practice the Truth which they know, shall experience in themselves the same
Effects from the reading of those Writings, and give Testimony that they are
endited by the Spirit of God.

XXIII. XXIII. They are consonant to the Holy Scriptures, and a Key to them.
Moreover the Writings of Antonia Bourignon are so consonant to the Holy
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, that from hence it appears more
clearly than the Sun at Noonday, that the same Spirit has endited both. Yea,
the Writings of Antonia Bourignon are as a Key, whereby the Sacred Scriptures
are opened and expounded. So that the great Mysteries hitherto understood by
none, are expounded by these Writings, and the Difficulties which hitherto have
been most intricate, are resolved. It is also most worthy of Observation, that
a Virgin, so simple as Antonia Bourignon, should without Study or Meditation
commit to Writing the most solid, clear, and saving Truths. Being moved to
write against her natural Inclination, only for promoting the Glory of God, and
the Good of her Neighbor, without the prospect of any temporal Advantage; but
on the contrary, foreseeing that she must suffer much because of these
Writings, as the Event did confirm; for because she did so clearly and
efficaciously declare the saving Truth, the Churchmen and the Learned of all
Sects and Parties, did prosecute her with Hatred, Calumnies, and Persecution,
even to her Death.

XXIV. XXIV. The Conclusion.
We judge therefore that we have abundance of Reasons and Arguments to conclude
that A. B. was moved by the Spirit of God, to write for the enlightening of
others.

The End of the Third Part.
An Advertisement to the Reader.
THEY who esteem the Writings and Sentiments of A. B. will no doubt be desirous
to know the History of her Life; and they who make it their Business to traduce
and defame her to the World, do make it necessary to be known; thereby to
prevent or remove the Prejudices which they may breed in the Minds of
well-disposed Persons, against Writings which would be so helpful to them, in
the way to Eternal Life.

The inward Sentiments of others cannot be known but from themselves, or by the
Spirit of God, and their Sincerity may appear from the constant Tenor of their
Actions in the whole course of their Lives; and the Story of their Life and
Actions may be had both from themselves, and from those who have been
Eyewitnesses of their Conversation, both Friends and indifferent Persons. The
Testimony of Enemies in bespattering and defaming them, is no more to be
regarded than that of false Witnesses, when there are unquestionable Evidences
to the contrary. It is easy also for those who consider things with an evil
Eye, to give such a turn to the Actions of the Best, as may make them hateful
and ridiculous, witness the Author of Dictionaire Historique and Critique, in
his Character of the King and Prophet David.

The inward Life of A. B. and the outward likewise, for a Course of many Years,
is written by her self, and the Continuation of it to her Death, by a Person of
known Integrity, who was with her for some of the last Years of her Life, and
was helped in it by her own Memorials and those of her Friends, and often led
her to relate unto him her whole Life. Besides, there are some sixty
Testimonies, some private, others public before Judges, Magistrates upon Oath,
of Persons to whom she was well known, which do refer to a good part of the
most remarkable Events of her Life. From these Originals then, I have drawn the
following Summary of her Life, the fuller Account being to be had from those
Writings themselves.

I know there are many who sit in the Seat of the Scornful, and will turn all
this into Ridicule; at which we need not wonder, when even the Penmen of the
Sacred Scriptures d^es not escape their Lash. God's ways are so different from
Man's, that the natural Man perceives not the things that are of God, but they
seem Foolishness to him. We have strong Attachments to Parents, Friends, Wife,
Children, to our Guides, the Learned, the Eloquent, the Great, to Study, and
Learning, and worldly Accommodations, and therein gratify and cherish the
corrupt Inclinations of our Hearts. God will have I^struments formed upon
different Molds. Our Lord would not let them go take leave of their Friends, or
go bury their Father. He engages them to forsake their Wives and Children, or
if they be free, not to be bound. God makes Men forsake their Country, and
their Friends, and go they know not where, upon his Word only. He chooses
Children, Persons without Learning, forbidding them to study or to follow the
Conduct and Wisdom of Men. He chooses them W^^k and Simple, without Authority
or Power, without a Following or Applause, keeps them for the most part in
Solitude, either that they may converse with God, or to preserve them from the
Persecutions of Men, of those especially who call themselves the Church and
People of God; and when he draws them out of it, he lets them be chased from
one Place to another, and at last die in Assliction and Misery. How impertinent
does this Conduct seem to the Wisdom of humane Reason, and yet by these Rules
God has formed Men for his Service in all Ages, Abraham, Jacob, Moses, David,
Elisha, Jeremiah, Ames, ^ohn Baptist, jesus Christ himself, all the Apostles,
and the true Saints who have followed him. When Men then are so wise in their
own Eyes as to condemn this in the Person of A. B. they must know that they
condemn the Conduct of God himself in his Saints, who will thereby have their
Hearts and Wills wholly disengaged from self and all worldly things, and
entirely resigned unto him.

It is not for those Scessers then, that I have written this Abridgment, but
for those who desire in the Simplicity of their Hearts to be helped on in the
way to Eternal Life. Jesus Christ is the way, and we are made believe that his
Life is unimitable. The first Christians followed him in a Life of Poverty,
Reproach, and Pains; in which now we think he neither can nor ought to be
followed. Here Is an Instance of are in this last Age of the World, who, as she
declares to all, that (...) is no Salvation without following the Example a^^
(...) of Jesus Christ, so she made him her constant Pattern, and this her great
Work from the Eighteenth Year of her Age to her Death, and thereby encourages
and invites (...) all to deny our selves, and take up our Cross and follow him.
Give her then of the Fruit of her Hands, and let her own Works praise her in
the Gates.

AN APOLOGY FOR M. ANT. BOVRIGNON.
PART. IV.
CONTAINING An Abridgment of her LIFE.
To which are added, Two Letters concerning the Preface to the Snake in the
Grass, and Bourignianism Detected; by different Hands.
I. I. A. B. her Birth and Parentage.
MRs. Antonia Bourignon was born in the Town of Lisle in Flanders, the 13th. of
January, 1616. baptized in the Parish of St. Maurice, and named Antonia; her
Father was John Bourignon, an Italian by Nation, and her Mother Margaret
Becquart, born near to Lisle; they lived in a married State Thirty One Years,
having Four Daughters, of which Antonia was the Third, and One Son, all of
which died in their Childhood, except the eldest Daughter who lived till the
Thirty Sixth Year of her Age, and was twice married. She died Anno 1647. Her
Mother in July 1641. Her Father married again in October, being more than Sixty
Years Old, and died April, 1648. And Antonia remained the only Heiress of her
Mother, her Sister having died without Children.

II. II. Her Mothers Aversion to her, and why.
When she came into the World, her Mother thought she had borne a Monster,
because her whole Forehead was covered with black Hair even to her Eyes, and
her upper Lip was fastened to her Nose, and so her Mouth stood open; they
concealed her for some Months, and the Hair fell off of it self, and the Lip
was untied by a Surgeon, and she encreast in Comeliness; yet her Mother could
not forget the Aversion she had conceived, and could not love her as she did
her other Children; but slighted her from her Infancy, and could hardly look
upon her; the other Children also treated her rudely, without her Father's
knowledge, who then loved her best of all his Children: But his Affairs kept
him still abroad, except at Meals.

III. III. The serious Thoughts of ^er Childhood.
This rough Treatment made her retire from childish Plays, and be much alone.
God then drew her powerfully to himself, as soon as she had any use of Reason;
all her Thoughts were serious, and her Reasonings seemed not to proceed from a
Child; and having been instructed by her Parents, when about Four Years of Age,
of the First Principles of Christianity, and of all that Jesus Christ had done
and suffered for Men, she was desirous to be informed in what Country the
Christians lived? and professed a great desire to go thither; and when her
Parents mocked her, and told h^^ she was in the Country of Christians, she
said, that could not be, for Jesus Christ was born in a Stable, and lived in
Poverty, whereas they all love to have fine Houses, and fine Furniture, and
much Wealth; and therefore she concluded they were not Christians, and that she
would go into the Country where the Christians do live; but no Body understood
this Language, but turned it into Raillery, and so she was constrained to hold
her Peace.

IV. IV. Her early Conversation with God.
Finding so little Satisfaction in the World, she turned her self unto God by
Prayer, and he being always ready to be found of them that seek him with their
whole Heart, especially little Children, she from her Infancy had daily
Conversation with God, he speaking inwardly to her Heart; and she thought this
Divine Conversation was a thing common to all. Then every thing served her for
an Occasion to Address to God. Thus for Instance, remarking that her Father was
surly to her Mother, and oft-times transported with Anger against her, after
having endeavored to appease him by her childish Embraces, she would retire
apart, and considering how hard a thing it was to be married to a troublesome
Husband, would say to God, My God, my God, grant I may never marry, and she
begged that instead of being married, he would give her the Grace to become his
Spouse. Her Prayer was so well-pleasing to God, that he granted her the full
Accomplishment of it, giving her from her Infancy the Gift of Chastity and
Continence in so perfect a manner, that she often said, she never had in all
her Life, even by Temptation or Surprise, the least Thought unworthy of the
Chastity and Purity of the Virgin State.

V. V. She turns toward the World.
Her Sister was much addicted to the Vanities of the World, and could not look
upon her Retiredness and Aversion from them, without Indignation and
Displeasure, and among her Companions she made all this pass for an Effect of
Stupidity and Dullness. This made her quit her first Simplicity to follow for
some time the Vanities of the World, not that her Heart was set upon them, but
to show that she had enough of Spirit, and was not a Fool as her Sister would
make them believe. Thus the Devil laid Snares for her to entrap her, and the
sweetness of her Humor gained her the Love of the Young People they converst
with, beyond her Sister. Thus she continued to Dress, to frequent their
Company, to recreate her self with them in their Plays, Dances, and other
youthful Divertisements, though in all Honesty, if that may be called Honesty
which turns away the Heart from God, however, it past for such in the World.
Thus she greatly pleased her Parents, particularly her Father, who denied her
nothing whereby she might appear with Advantage in the World. Her Parents were
anxious to have her married, being Rich, and having but Two Daughters, and many
Young Men would have had her for their Wife, but she could never resolve to
marry, having an Aversion to it. Yet she took Pleasure in the Conversation of
the Youth, till they urged her to marry, and then she withdrew from them, and
would discourse with them no more. She began also to take Pleasure in the
Praises and Esteem of Men, because they said she was fair and lovely, whereas
her Mother had still called her ugly, and despised her on all Occasions.

VI. VI. God wit^ draws from her.
But as the World took place in her Soul, God withdrew from it by degrees; so
that she felt no longer that Devotion or Pleasure in Prayer or Solitude, which
formerly gave her so much Contentment. This made her Melancholy, and the more
she endeavored to divert it by Company, the more it encreast: For her Soul was
never at rest, and God who had so much comforted her in Prayer, all the time
that she was despised, now withdrew from her; and her Prayers were without any
fervor. Her Conscience often checked her when she did or said any thing to
please the World, but she had not the courage to withdraw from it. But God had
pity on her who had abandoned him to turn to the Creatures. She oft-times felt
inward Motions from God, and even in the midst of her Divertisements and
Dancings, she had sometimes secret Reproofs from him, piercing her Heart with
those inward Words. Will you forsake me then for another? Will you find a Lover
more complete and more faithful than I am? But a little after, Company and
Divertisements got the Ascendant; and even when she was excited by those inward
Motions to abandon all, she would reply, Then I should never have Pleasure! It
is fit for one to take some Pleasure in their Youth!

VII. VII. New Motions from God, and her Combats thereupon.
Then God seeing that his gentle Motions availed nothing, took more severe
means to recover her, and filled her Spirit with fearful Apprehensions of
Death, Judgment, and Hell; the hearing of the Deaths of others, and Sermons
about Death and Judgment, did before that touch her but very little, like the
Stories of Foreign Countries, and she would not let her self think that she was
concerned in them. But when God was pleased to open her Eyes, and let her see
she must Die, and appear at the great Judgment, then unexpressible
Apprehensions seized her, and all the Day long, when she was alone, she would
say to her self, Poor Creature! What will become of thee? Thou must die; all
the things of the World cannot save thee from this fearful Death; thou can
not escape it* And what will thou say when that Hour shall come? This she often
repeated both in her Mind and by Word. They with whom she conversed observing
her Sadness, endeavored to cheer and divert her, but all in vain: For then she
had a disgust of all Recreations and earthly Pleasures. And when she forced her
self to take Contentment in any thing, she thought it was said to her Heart, To
what purpose take thou Pleasure, since thou must die? For what will this
serve thee before God? But the sensitive part of her Soul was very displeased
to see it self thus afflicted, and said in its mute Language, Thou shall never
be well, if thou put not these Fancies out of thy Head; but will die very
shortly if thou continue in such Apprehensions: This made her leave often for
some time. But as soon as she came to her self, the superior part said, Forget
Death as much as you will; it shall not forget thee. It is a folly to think to
free thy self of it by shutting it out of thy Memory. It will find thee every
where, and does not wait till thou be ready; but comes at its time unlooked
for, and when thou shall think least of it. And if the Idea of it only does so
affright, yea put thy Life in hazard; how will the reality of it make thee
afraid, when thy Soul shall be in Danger. Give place to those Truths, without
flattering thy self with any Reasons.

VIII. VIII. The thoughts of Death fixed upon her Spirit.
These were the Debates which tossed her Spirit without ceasing. She resolved
then to quit all the World, and prepare for Death and prevent it, since it
followed her so hard. But she found great Difficulty to do it, being Young and
in the midst of all worldly Advantages, so that she might promise to her self
as much of worldly Pleasures, Honor, and Wealth, as any of her rank.
Nevertheless the thoughts of Death had yet greater force, when she thought on
the future State. She said to her self, It is very true, Mirth is agreeable,
Pleasures are sweet, and Wealth delightful; but this lasts but for a little
time; Death will come and change all; and all must be parted with, with a
lamentable regret, and it may be an eternal Punishment for a good of so short
continuance. So that perceiving clearly this Truth, she prayed earnestly to
God, to give her Grace to think always upon Death, and never to let it be out
of her Mind for any thing that might befall her; which she obtained, after a
long perseverance in this Prayer. And to fix it the more upon her Spirit, she
went often to the Churchyard, where looking on the Bones of the dead, she said,
See my Body; what will become of thee? Thy own Head, and thy own Hands will be
very shortly thrown into this Company; and she was afraid to look upon them,
and forced her self to approach them, being naturally timorous, and to handle
them, saving, O miserable Creature! Will thou have a Horror for thy self? Draw
near boldly. Thou shall be a Thousand times more vile, when the Worms shall eat
thee; and this will be the greatest Honor that can befall thee to be ranked
with these Bones here.

IX. This gave her a great disgust for the Body which she formerly cherished,
IX. Her Conversion and Peni^ence.
and a hatred, and severity against her self; and after her Sister was married,
she retired from all sort of Company, staid alone in her Chamber, entered upon
a very austere Life, Lying hard, Sleeping little, Fasting much, mingling what
she did eat with Ashes to mortify her Taste, wearing hair cloth next to her
Skin, and afflicting her Body, and praying, and weeping the most part of her
time, for Grief that she had left the sweet Conversation she had with God, to
please her self in the Divertisements of the World. She visited the Poor and
Sick, frequented the Churches and Sacraments, not knowing by what means she
could recover the Favor of God, which she had lost through her own Fault. She
durst scarce sleep in the Night, fearing to fall into Hell while asleep, and
that the Earth would not bear her. So terrible were her Apprehensions of the
Judgments of God, that she durst not shut her Eyes because of her Sins, which
seemed to her so great, that none had ever committed the like, not that she was
guilty of any Crime or wicked Deed, but because she had forsaken the sweet
Conversation that her Soul had with God, to please her self with the
Divertisements of the World, after having received so many Favors from God,
which deserved the Thanksgiving of her whole Life. This appeared to her so
great a Sin, that Hell was not sufficient to punish it. She continued in those
Austerities and Mortification for Seven Years, and would have done so still, if
God had not commanded her when she was Twenty Five Years of Age to leave this,
and lead an ordinary Life. Her Mortifications were not the Effect of a
melancholy Humor, nor accompanied with it; for she was of the most serene and
cheerful Temper, even to her Death. But she chastis'd her self with an inward
Contentment and Tranquillity, out of a Principle of Justice: And her Floods of
Tears flowing from the Love of God, whose Friendship she had lost through her
own Fault, were attended with a secret and most solid Pleasure, founded upon
this, that there was nothing more just than to bewail the Fault of ceasing to
love so Lovely a God. Yet she confessed that she had run too far to an Extremity
in her Mortifications, and that so great, that she would never tell it but to
one, and would never advise any to do as she had done, but only to yield up
themselves to God, and suffer themselves to be exercised by him, and by the
Events which he sends them.

X. Thus she spent whole Nights in Prayer, X. Instructions from God.
often repeating, Lord what will thou have me to do? And being one Night in a
most profound Penitence, she said from the bottom of her Heart. O, my Lord!
What must I do to please thee? For I have no body to teach me. Speak to my
Soul, and it will hear thee. At that Instant she heard, as if another had spoke
within her; Forsake all earthly things. Separate thy self from the Love of the
Creatures. Deny thy self.

XI. She was quite astonished, XI. She would go into a Monastery.
not understanding this Language, and mused long on these Three Points,
thinking how she could fulfill them. She thought she could not live without
earthly things, nor without loving the Creatures, nor without loving her self.
Yet she said, By thy Grace I will do it, Lord. But when she would perform her
Promise, she knew not where to begin, finding her self strongly engaged in the
Love of all earthly things, which she did not observe before, and knew not how
to be disengaged. Having thought on the Religious in Monasteries, that they
forsook all earthly things, and the Conversation of the Creatures, by being
shut up in a Cloister, and the Love of themselves, by subjecting of their
Wills: She asked leave of her Father to enter into a Cloister, of the
discalceated Carmelites, but he would not permit it, saying, He had rather see
her laid in her Grave. This seemed to her a great Cruelty; for she thought to
find in the Cloisters the True Christians she had been seeking, but she found
afterward that he knew the Cloisters better than she; for after he had
forbidden her, and told her he would never permit her to be a Religious, nor
give her any Money to enter there, yet she went to Father Laurens, the Director,
and offered to serve in the Monastery, and work hard for her Bread, and be
content with little, if he would receive her: At which he smiled, and said,
That cannot be, we must have Money to build; we take no Maids without Money,
you must find the way to get it; else there is no entry here. This astonished
her greatly, and she was thereby undeceived as to the Cloisters, resolving to
forsake all Company, and live alone, till it should please God to show her what
she ought to do, and whither to go.

XII. The more she entered into her self, XII. God's Call.
the more she was inclined to abandon all, and to retire somewhere, without
knowing whether her Heart was disengaged from temporal Goods, from worldly
Pleasures, from all Creatures. Yet she did not find her self altogether free
nor entirely united unto God, for she was apt sometimes to turn again to what
she had left. She asked always earnestly, When shall I be perfectly thine, O,
my God? And she thought he still answered her, When thou shall no longer
possess any thing, and shall die to thy self. And where shall I do that, Lord?
He answered her In the Desert. This made so strong an Impression on her Soul,
that she aspired after this; but being a Maid, of Eighteen Years only, she was
afraid of unlucky chances, and was never used to travel, and knew no way. She
laid aside all these Doubts, and said, Lord, thou will guide me how and where
it shall please thee. It is for thee that I do it. I will lay aside my Habit of
a Maid, and will take that of a Hermit, that I may pass unknown.

XIII. Having then secretly made ready this Habit, XIII. She leaves her
Father's H^use.
while her Parents thought to have married her, her Father having promised her
to a rich French Merchant, she prevented the time, and on Easter Evening,
having cut her Hair, put on the Habit, and slept a little, she went out of her
Chamber about Four in the Morning, taking nothing but One Penny to buy Bread
for that Day; and it being said to her in the going out, Where is thy Faith? in
a Penny. She threw it a way, begging pardon of God for her Fault, and saying,
No, Lord, my Faith is not in a Penny, but in thee alone. Thus she went away
wholly delivered from the heavy Burden of the Cares and good Things of this
World, and found her Soul so satisfied, that she no longer wished for any thing
upon Earth, resting entirely upon God, with this only fear, least she should be
discovered and be obliged to return home; for she felt already more Content in
this Poverty, than she had done for all her Life, in all the Delights of the
World.

XIV. She knew no way, XIV. Is discovered and delivered.
nor whither to go. She went out at the Gate that leads to Tournay, and came
thither about Ten a Clock; then past into the Province of Hainault, and coming
through a Village called Bassec, where were arrived that Day a Company of
Soldiers, who were playing in the Marketplace, when she had past by them, and
come to the end of the Village, she met a number of Children at their Play, who
looking on her, began to say it was a Maid, and crying this so loud to one
another, the Soldiers ran to know the Fray, and then taking Horse, they
overtook her in the Fields, and stopped her, asking who she was, and whither she
went. She was surpised, but looking before her, she saw a Church, and hoping
there might be some good Pastor there to deliver her, she said she was going to
the Pastor who would satisfy them. The Commander brought her to the next
Village, Blatton, to the old Mayor's House, promising to have her to the
Pastor's when once his Men were lodged. There he thought to have abused her by
force or enticement, but she told him resolutely that he should first kill her
or she him, and that she believed the Earth would open to swallow him up. The
old Mayor and his Wife defended her, and he threatened to burn the House, and
called his Men to Arms about it, The Maid of the House got out at a Window, and
told the Pastor, who coming into the Chamber where the Captain was, raging like
one mad, gravely rebuked him, and taking her by the Hand, he with his Chaplain,
led her through the Soldiers into his Lodging, the Captain sinking into an
Astonishment against the Wall without stirring; for the Pastor was a grave and
virtuous Man, of great Age, whose Words had struck the Captain and taken away
all his Strength and Spirit. But when this was over, he came with his Men to
the Pastour's House to search for her, and not finding her, and being made
believe she was gone, they galloped toward Mons, thinking to overtake her.

XV. The Pastor asked who she was; XV. The Pastor of Blatton's Esteem of her.
she told the Truth, and that she fled out of the Dangers of the World to
follow Jesus Christ; the good Man wept, and his Soul was confounded, to see a
Child, like her, quit all the Wealth and Pleasures of the World to embrace
Poverty and Hardships, while he after so many Years of Penitence was not come
to such a Disengagement. Ye, he was a very Holy Man who lived in continual
Prayer and Penitence, the Story of whose Life is most remarkable, the sum of
it is thus.

XVI. This Pastor of Blatton, XVI. His Life.
George de Lisle, was designed for the Pastoral Office from his Youth, and
trained up after the ordinary ways of Study and Learning. He had for some Years
exercised the Functions of the Pastoral Charge, after the manner that is
usually done; living after the way of the World in God's Judgment, though
Honestly and without Scandal in the World's Sense, being often in Company as
others of his rank, and there diverting himself, Eating, Drinking, and making
Merry, till it pleased God to touch his Heart, and draw him from the brink of
Perdition, after this manner.

He and the Mayor having been invited on Shrove-Tuesday to make good Cheer with
the Lord of the Manor, after having past a part of the Night in Feasting, as
they came home about Midnight, an enraged Soldier met them, who had sworn to
kill the first he met with, he shot the Mayor, who fell down dead at the
Pastor's Feet, who immediately was inwardly struck by God with these Thoughts.
How is it that thou art not in the place of this Man? And if thou wet there, in
what State could thy Soul be, but that of eternal Damnation; dying in so
wretched a Disposition as the fullness of Meat, Wine, and good Cheer, which thou
have made? O my God, said he, (turning suddenly to God) What Mercy have thou
shown to make me now escape the eternal and certain Damnation of my Soul? I Will
now watch and take care to be in a better Disposition. Which he resolved and
executed from that very Moment, beginning to lead a Penitent and Christian
Life, without ever drawing back from it, to his Death.

First he resolved to live Solitary for some time, to strengthen him in Good,
and having substituted one to wait on his Cure for Six Months, he sought out a
Holy Person by whom he might be directed, who accordingly for Six Months
treated him with great Austerity. And when he returned to his Cure, he
increased and continued what he had begun. He resolved to mortify his Body,
because it was so ready to tempt his Soul, and to punish it for having taken
too much its Ease and Pleasures. Because he had pleased himself with fine
Linen, and fine Clothes, he never wore Linens any more, and girded himself with
a great Chain of Iron, which went twice about and sunk into his Flesh. Because
he had loved to Sleep at Ease in a good Bed, he caused them to bring his Coffin
and a Stone in it for his Pillow, where he lay with his Chain about his Loins
all the rest of his Life. Because he had taken too much Rest, and past
sometimes a part of the Night in Mirth and Laughter, he spent Three Hours every
Night, from Eleven to Two after Midnight, in Prayers and Tears on his Knees,
before the high Altar of his Church, to bewail his Sins, and Men's Blindness and
Hardness. Because he had plesa'd himself with commodious Lodging, he staid in
an Apartment which was almost always full of Smoke. To punish the Excess he
thought he had committed in Eating and Drinking, he not only abstained from
Flesh and Wine, all his Days, but also Seven whole Years from drinking Wine,
Water, or any Liquor, He would have been in the heats of Summer as in a Furnace
all dry, Mouth, Tongue, Palate, Lips peeled, on Fire, and like one in a burning
Fever. He renounced all Studies, and all curious Learning, referving only Two
Books, the Holy Bible, and the Lives of the Saints, in the one of which he read
every Day a Chapter, and in the other a Life; saying of these Two Books, Here Is
the Doctrine, (the Bible;) and here is the Practice, (the Lives of the Saints.)
He had led this Life many Years when A. B. met with him first, being then Sixty
Years of Age, and continued in it Twelve Years more. This Holy Man had received
Power from God over unclean Spirits, and cured many possessed with Devils; a
Lorain Soldier was brought to him afflicted with a Devil; he staid with him for
some Months, and finding himself better, went away; the Pastor exhorting him to
live in the fear of God, least if he should fall again into Sin, the Devil get
more hold of him than formerly. But he giving up himself to all sort of
Licentiousness, the Devil made him more wicked than before, and among other
things, inspired him with such a hellish Rage against the Pastor, that he
resolved to kill him, because he had remonstrated to him that his Life was
Evil. He told it openly, and threatened it for Three Years, and when he came
there to his Winter Quarters, they advertised the Pastor, but he judged it was
nothing but Menaces, and thought himself unworthy to die the Death of a Martyr.
On Good Friday having heard the Confessions of his Parishioners who prepared to
communicate at Easter, and all being gone out, as he was rising from the
Confessional Chair, and prostrate before the High Altar to bewail their Sins,
and his own, and beg God's Pardon; this Soldier lurking among the Seats with
his Carbine, shot at him, who fell suddenly down, calling upon God: The Villain
perceiving that he yet breathed, ran and gave him many strokes with his drawn
Sword in the Head, till he cleav'd it so as the Brains fell on the Pavement.
Some Children who had staid in the Church, ran and published the Murder. He
was carried into his House and lived till the next Morning, though without
Senses. The Soldier died by the hand of Justice without showing any Repentance.

A. B. sometimes asked him about his great Austerities, how he came to continue
them, being so old, since to be well pleasing to God, there is nothing needful
but to love him. He replied, You do not know me: In the Age in which you see
me, I assure you my Flesh is yet so rebellious, that if I did not tame it and
make it suffer, it would yet rise up against my Spirit, it would rule over, me
and carry my Affections to things below, to seek Pleasure and Satisfaction in
them, which would certainly turn me away from the Love of God. I must therefore
keep it in Subjection and Slavery, least it become Mistress.

XVII. But to return to A. B. the Pastor shut her up in a little Apartment of
the Church, XVII Her Consolations when shutup in the Church of Blatton.
where she was full of Consolation, seeing her self disengaged from all earthly
things, and retaining no Affection for any thing but a perfect Union with God.
Next Day he came to see her, and she urging to pursue her Journey to the
Desert, he by no means would suffer her, but having brought her some
Refreshment, went to Mons to acquaint the Archbishop of Cambray of her, who bid
him keep her till he came there; this greatly troubled her, fearing to be
detained, and making her Complaint to God, seeing he said she should serve him
perfectly in the Desert, it was told her, That the time was not yet come, many
Societies of Men and Women must follow her thither, and that she should
reestablish his Gospel Spirit. And when she could not comprehend how this could
be, being an ignorant Child, who had never learnt of any what a Gospel Life
was, and knew none, and had no Authority; it was said to her, Behold these
Trees in the Churchyard, they seem dry Wood without Leaves or Fruit, or any
Appearance; nevertheless, when the Season comes, they shall bring forth Leaves,
Flowers, and Fruit in abundance, without any Body's touching them. So shall it
be of my Work.

XVIII. The Archbishop Vanderburgh came about Three Weeks after, XVIII. The
Archbishop of Cambray comes to see her.
and spoke with her, and was persuaded that she was guided by the Spirit of
God, but would not let her go to the Desert, but obliged her to live a Recluse
there in a little House which the Pastor offered to make for her in the
Churchyard. But the same Day her Parents came thither from Lisle to find her,
and with great Difficulty she was prevailed with to return with them, her
Father faithfully promising to the Archbishop to allow her all freedom to serve
God in the Perfection she desired, without engaging her in worldly Affairs, or
urging her to Marry; the Archbishop being surety he should perform it, and if
not, he would take her into his own Care.

XIX. But after some Months, XIX. She returns home with her Parents.
her Father engaged her again into his Affairs, and on diverse Occasions spoke
to her of Marriage, contrary to his Promise, which greatly troubled her. She
begged leave to return to the Archbishop, which he would not permit. She
exercised her self in visiting the Sick and Poor, in frequenting the Churches,
learned the Offices, and other vocal Prayers in which she found great Devotion,
and confessed and communicated thrice a Week; but she found at length that the
Poor were deceitful, and not thankful to God, but by what they got, sinned the
more. She left off visiting them, yet gave for God all she could. All Creatures
became Hindrances to her, and she gave her self more to Solitude and Silence,
and went seldomer to Church, finding more Recollection in her Chamber. She
could not say her Office, being still interrupted with inward Conversation She
begged of God to know if he had forsaken her, or if she had become sloathful. He
said, I am Spirit, speak to me in Spirit, I will operate now in Spirit and in
Trtuh. Cease, and I will do all. She resigned her self wholly to him, banishing
all Imaginations of her own. And she understood more clearly the Inspirations
of God.

XX. The Religious of the several Orders came to her, XX. Her Confessor.
to warn her of her Danger of being deluded by the Devil for want of a
Director, and each offered their Service. She thanked them, and was warned by
God to apply to her own Pastor, and never had any other Confessor. She
continued in her Retirement and interior Prayers with great delight. The Devil
failed not to disturb her therein by Specter and other Noises. She was greatly
afraid, but addressing to God and pursuing her Prayers; he said, Fear not; I am
with thee. And thus she acquired so much firmness that she feared nothing but
Sin.

XXI. Being still warned to go from her Father's House, XXI. The Reason of
God's choice of her.
and not having obtained his leave, nor finding any disposed to go with her,
she proposed to stay till she knew the Place and Persons that were to follow
her, that she might go seek them, though to the end of the World. It was said to
her, Seek none, but cultivate what shall be delivered and put into your Hands:
Declare only my Designs. It troubled her to declare those Designs out of fear
of Vainglory, and concealed the Graces of God to her, even from her Confessor.
She prayed to God, that he would deliver her from this Enterprise, and choose
another; she being a simple Girl, void of all Force and Authority, every way
weak. He said to her, I will be thy All; My Power is not limited; Give thy
Consent. She said, Wherefore have thou not made me a Man? I would have had more
Advantage and Capacity that thou might serve thy self of me. He answered, I
will serve my self of the vilest Matter to confound the Pride of Men. I will
give thee all that thou shall need; be faithful to me.

XXII. Resolving then to go tell the Archbishop what the Will of God was, XXII.
She ^eaves again her Father's House.
after she had staid for a Year and a half with her Parents, she begged leave
of her Father, on her Knees, and his Blessing, telling him that God had called
her out of the World: Her Confessor, and the Prior of the Capuchins, her
Father's intimate Friend, soliciting him to grant it; but he would not do it,
threatening his Malediction if she should go. The Prior and Pastor told him that
his Malediction could not reach her, being in the Grace of God, and they
desired her to go freely whither God called her.

XXIII. She came to the Archbishop at Mons, XXIII. Her Proposal to the
Archbishop of Cambray.
and declared to him that God had tau^ht her to lead a Gospel Life, and to live
as the first Christians, disengaged from all earthly things, from all
Creatures, and from the Love of her self, and that many would follow her
therein; and begged Permission to take a Place in the Country in his Diocese to
begin it. He asked what she meant by a Life disengaged from all earthly Goods?
We cannot live upon nothing. She said, We will labor the Ground, and have our
Necessaries from the Fields, without asking Money of those who would come
thither. Poor and Rich shall be alike welcome. We aiming at no Commodity on
Earth, but pure Necessaries and to please God. He said, she proposed great
things, and he would think on it, and caused to lodge her in a House of Devout
Maids of Notre Dame, which was better regulated than the Cloisters.

XXIV. Two Days thereafter he sent Pere du Bois, XXIV. Pere du Bois, and some
Ma^^s esteem her.
Superior of the Oratory at Maubeuge, to examine her, who having heard her
Propositions admired them, and was persuaded she was taught of God. Four Maids
of the House observing her Behavior and Retiredness, that she staid alone in
her Chamber, had no Bed, sought no Ease nor Pleasure, eat but once a Day, at
Night, and that mo^tly Bread and Water, desired earnestly to speak with her,
and were so persuaded of her being led by the Holy Spirit, that they resolved
to follow her wherever she should (...).

XXV. The ^^suits being the Directors of that House, XXV. The Jesuits distur^
her.
set themselves to counteract her, though they kn^w not her Design; they bid the
Maids beware of her, said she was guided by an evil Spirit, that one such was
plague enough in a Community: And told her self that the Devil con^ducted her,
that he transformed himself into an Angel of Light; that there needed no other
proof than her living without a Director, and she would ruin her self, if she
did not submit to their Direction. They press^d her by so many Reasons, that
she doubted in might be true. She had recourse to God, but her Spirit being
to^t with diverse Passions, she discerned nothing, being wholly in Darkness. She
went to the Archbishop, who being persuaded she was guided by the Holy Spirit,
thought she ought not to take the Direction of Men. Pere du Bois confirmed the
same. She rested upon this, yet begged leave of the Archbishop to read the New
Testament, that she might discover her Errors, by confronting her Sentiments
with the Gospel. She no sooner began to read attentively the Gospels, than she
perceived such a Conformity with her inward Sentiments, that if she were to set
them down in Writing, she should write such a Book in Substance as the Gospel.
She left off to read more, because God taught her inwardly all that she needed;
and that his Conduct and the Gospel were the same thing.

XXVI. The Archbishop, XXVI. The Bishop grants her desire.
with the Consent of his Council, judging the Undertaking to be from God, gave
her his Blessing and Permission to begin such a Society at Blatton, where a
Widow-Woman had offered a piece of Ground; for which she afterward paid her,
and there was a House begun but not finished, because of the Death of the
Pastor G. de Lisle, and the Churchmen applied with all Vigor to stop it, as
they did. He asked her, Whereupon they would live? She said, upon their little
Garden, and God would provide for the rest. That he never failed those who
served him truly; and if they served him ill, far better that all be dissolved
than to deceive the World by Hypocrisy. He asked, If she would make Vows. She
said, None. He said, Each ones Love was not so strong as to make them persevere
freely. She said, They who have it not, will not come: And if they lose the
Love of God when they are there, it is far better they return to the World,
than to disorder others or make them lukewarm.

XXVII She had communicated to Pere du Bois, XXVII. The Clergy incensed against
her.
upon his importunity, a Writing wherein she represented that God had made
known to her that all the Evils of the Church came from the Churchmen, and that
they must amend, if they would turn away God's Wrath. This Paper was quickly
spread abroad, of which she complained to Pere du Bois, who said he was obliged
in Conscience to do it. All the Churchmen and Religious Orders were so far from
amending there Faults thereby, that it filled them with Hatred and Revenge
against her, uttering many Reproaches, some of them declaring that if they
could have her, they would drown her.

XXVIII. The Jesuits learning the Design she had of re-establishing a Christian
Life in a Community, XXVIII. (...) Bishop retracts his Permission
set on the Archbishop with so much Earnestness, and so many Calumnies against
her, that they entirely changed him, and he retracted his Permission. She
remonstrated to him his Sin in being so easily persuaded by Men to change his
Resolutions, and to oppose what he knew came from God, and forewarned him that
for a Punishment he should die very shortly, as he did about Six Months
thereafter. Pere du Bois persuaded her to go to Liege where she would obtain
her desire, but before she returned, the Jesuits had constrained the poor Maids
to promise by Oath not to follow her, and even not to speak to her. Two of the
best of them Mary Malapert, and La Bar the younger, died shortly after,
through the Anguish and Affliction of Spirit in which they put them. A. B. says
of Mary Malapert, that she was the purest Soul that ever she knew, and the only
Person she ever knew in the World in a State of complete Regeneration and Union
with God; which she enjoyed without knowing it well her self; not but that when
she enjoyed actual Conversation with God, she was then most certain of it; but
when she returned to her Directors, they knew so well to distract her by
outward things, by constrained Rules, and clouds of foreign Thoughts, that she
knew not where she was, nor the true State of her Soul. And one of the three
things for which A. B. always blessed God was, that he had preserved her from
the Direction of Men.

XXIX. Having after this, XXIX. She waits on her Mother at her Death, keeps her
Father's House. He marries, and she retires.
staid for some time at Blatton, and then by Pere du Bois's Advice, with the
Countess of Wallerwal, who living in Caelibacy, and designing to employ her
Wealth to the Glory of God, desired to see her, where she met with nothing but
Distraction; she was called back to Lisle, by the Sickness of her Mother, who
longed to see her before she died. She found her sick to Death, who blessed God
that he had granted her desire, and foretold her what grievous Afflictions were
to befall her. After her Mother's Death, she resolving to retire again, her
Father and Friends urge her that all the Laws both of God and Man do oblige
her, though she had been in a Desert or a Cloister, to come and assist her aged
Father in his Affairs. She was persuaded so to do, and so ordered her Hours of
Recollection and the Times of managing his Affairs, that she did all to his
Contentment. Yet, though Sixty Years of Age, he would needs marry without his
Childrens knowledge, a poor Maid for his Fancy, without either Wit or Virtue.
A. B. staid with them four Months to acquaint her with the Affairs, in which
time she suffered grievously by her. She resolv^d to retire, and desired of her
Father some of her Mother's Goods for her Substance, which he utterly refused.
It is well known that the Laws and Customs of the Low-Co^ntries are quite
different from those of England or Scotland, particularly in this Matter of the
Goods of Husband and Wife; for the Goods of the Wife being either the Portion
given her, or any other Goods given her, or purchased by her self; the Husband
has nothing but the Use and Profit of the Portion during the Wife's Life, and
she may dispose of, and trade with her other Goods as she pleases, and at her
Death the Propriety and Profit also of her Portion and all her Goods, do belong
to her Children or other Heirs, and none of them to the Husband. A. B. related
to her Sister what had past, and that their Father said all their Mother^s
Goods belonged to him. Upon which her Sister's Husband resolv^d to oblige him
by Law, and accordingly presented a Bill to the Magistrate. But he being a Man
of Wit and Credit, drew them into a Process, in which they could not get
Justice; for during it, her Brother-in-Law fell sick and died, upon which she
desisted from that pursuit, and retired to a little House at the Church of St.
(...) near Lisle.

XXX. There she lived alone, XXX. Lives in great Solitude at St. Andrew.
wrought to gain her living, was m^re con^^ted than ever, being rid of the
Affairs of the World, and conversed with no body. A poor Maid brought her Food
once a Week, and very often the Door was not opened till she came again. The
Consolations she received from God in that Place were unexpressible, full of
spiritual Delights: So that she often past whole Days without eating or
drinking, not knowing it was Night. She was so transported with them, that she
asked of God if there was any thing beyond them in Life Eternal. He answered,
Infinitely more beyond Comparison. You ought not during this Life to delight
your self in such Sensibilities. The least sensible Motions of the Soul are the
most perfect, and of which the Devil can take no hold, as he does in the
sensible ones. Thus he delivered her from all corpor^al Sensibilities, to which
she was no more subject, and ^he afterward walked surely in Spirit and in
Truth. And whereas she would fix her Residence in that Place of Delights, he
said to her, Thou shall walk yet in the World and be persecuted and reproached.
Thou shall fly into the Desert through rugged Ways. Prefer my Glory to thy
Contentment. I had no Repose upon Earth.

XXXI. She was troubled there for some time by the pursuit of a foolish Youth,
XXXI. I disturbed by an insolent Youth.
Nephew to the Pastor there, who having seen her, became desperately in Love
with her, and still haunted about her House: She complained to his Uncle, who
having threatened to put him away if he should not desist, he changed his Love
into Fury, and several times shot a Fuzee through her Chamber, and at last gave
out he had married her; and in less than an Hour all Lisle was full of it,
every one spoke of her with Contempt, she knowing nothing of it till her
Confessor sent to ask her, and the Preachers published the Falsehood of it to
the People.

XXXII. After Four Years stay in this Retreat, XXXII. Is forced from thence by
the War.
she was forced to flee in haste, the French coming into this Village to
surprise Lisle. She retired into the Town in the House of a poor devout Maid,
who gave her a Corner in a Garret, where in the Winter she suffered great Cold,
being often covered with Snow in the Morning when she awaked. The Countess of
Willerwall wrote to her earnestly to return to her, which she did, and staid
with her about a Year, till she was called to Lisle, her Father being a dying.

XXXIII. Having done the last Offices to her Father, XXXIII. Does the last
Offices to her Father, and succeeds to her Mother's Goods.
and her Sister being dead Childless, and she remaining the sole Heiress of her
Mother, she was doubtful whether she should meddle with the Succession. She
considered on the one hand, that after having forsaken all worldly Goods to
follow the Poverty of Jesus Christ, she ought not to take them up again; on the
other side, she knew not to whom to leave it, fearing to do Evil, and to
partake in the Sins of those who should possess it. Her Mother-in-Law had
wasted those Goods more than a half for the Five Years she had lived with him,
and though at his Marriage he had 20000 Florins in Cash, yet she had not only
spent that, but great Revenues of his own Goods, and of his first Wife's;
besides the Revenues of his Office, capable of maintaining honorably all his
Family; so that at his Death there was not wherewith to bury him. She would not
be guilty therefore of leaving them to one who would make no other use of them
but to offend God: In this Perplexity she advised with her Confessor, who
thought that she ought to take what belonged to her, and dispose of it in Alms;
remitting her nevertheless to be determined by God. After some Days of earnest
Prayers to God, that he would direct her what to do in this matter, he said to
her, Pursue your Right, take your Goods, you shall have need of them for my
Glory. She claimed then the half of the Goods, due to her by Law and Custom, as
the sole Heiress of her Mother, leaving the other for the Children of the
second Marriage; and was tossed with many Troubles before that Process was at an
end.

XXXIV. Some are ready to interpret this as a hankering after the World, XXXIV.
Nothing in this, contrary to the Laws of God, or Man.
as she foresaw they would, and that her Declaration, that it was the Will of
God that she should possess her Rights, was purely her own Invention to cover
this. We are still apt to measure others by our selves, and to think tht their
Actions cannot proceed from another Spirit and Principle than what we are
conscious ours would flow from in the same Circumstances. But they who consider
the whole tract of her Life, will not be so rash in their Judgment: Worldly
Goods are not Evil in themselves, the only Evil is, that when we possess them,
we are not as though we possessed them not, but our Hearts are set on them; and
therefore God commands either the forsaking or keeping of them, and we ought
either to abandon or possess them, according as our Hearts are apt to be set
upon them, or are wholly mortified to them. A. B. had been habituated to a
State of Mortification to the World, and all earthly things, by an actual
abandoning of it in a course of many Years, God having thus tried her, as he
did Abraham in relation to his Son Isaac, and this was become her Delight and
Element. And when she came to possess them again, it appears through all her
Life that she did it as though she possessed them not, looking on her self only as
a Steward of them, to employ them for her Master's Use, and they as a weighty
Charge to her, which she would gladly have been rid of, employing them wholly
for many Years in the bringing up of Orphans, and never throughout all her Life
taking to her self but simple Necessaries, no more than if she had been in the
greatest Poverty.

XXXV. Being one Day in the Street about her Affairs, XXXV. St. Saulieu accosts
her.
a Man whom she knew not accosted her, and afterward came to her Lodging,
telling her there were multitudes of poor Infants made Orphans by the Wars, in
great Want both as to Body and Soul, and that she might remedy this great Evil,
God having given her Talents and Commodities to undertake so good a Work, and
pray^d her to recommend this Proposition to God, who would make known his Will
to her thereabout. The Man had a great Appearance of Piety, and spoke so
divinely of spiritual Things, that she thought he was taught by the Holy
Spirit. He told her, He was called John S. Saulieu, born near Dorway, that he
had never studied Letters but for his own Perfection; that he had still
conversed with Virtuous Persons, and staid some time with an Hermit, and had
now for his Director the Pastor of St. Stephens, at Lisle; (and a Character
being asked of him, he said he was a Man of an Apostolic Zeal.) He walked on
the Streets with his Countenance still bowed down, without Curiosity. In the
Churches he was almost still on his Knees, as in a profound Devotion: He
visited the Poor and Sick, giving them all he had; and if he had found any
without clothing, in the Winter, on the Streets, he would have gone aside and
taken off his own Garment and given them; he gave many Appearances of
extraordinary Piety, so that all judged him a Holy Person. Many Priests and
godly Persons consulted him in spiritual Matters, in which he was very Knowing,
and gave Counsel to every one. He told her he was dead to Nature, and so
disengaged from all worldly Goods that he could take no Pleasure in them, and
that by Abstinence he had lost the taste of all Meats, so that all were alike
to him.

XXXVI. He continued to solicit her to this Employ, XXXVI. She undertakes the
Care of a Hospital of Orphans.
for a Year and a half, as that whereby she could best promote the Glory of
God. In November, therefore, 1653. about the 37th. Year of her Age she
undertakes the Care of a Hospital of Orphan Maids, founded by one John Stappart
a Merchant in Lisle, some Twelve or Thirteen Years before. She found all
Filthy, and in Disorder. She made all Clean, and put all in Order, and made a
Rule by which all were alike as to Diet, Bed, Clothing, and all other
Accommodations. She eat with them at the same Table, and observed the same
Rule. All went well outwardly, but her greatest Compassion was for their Souls.
She found them as Rude and Ignorant as little Beasts. Girls received into the
House of Fourteen or Fifteen Years of Age, knew not they had a Soul. This gave
her such Compassion that she wished she could take them all into her House. It
increased to more than Fifty, though the Fond was but for Ten or Twelve. And
God gave her spiritually and bodily all that she had need of. And she employed
her own Goods to maintain them, and her Time to instruct them. They learned the
Christian Doctrine, and some Calling to gain their Living, each according to
their Capacity. And she brought all things into such Order, that there was
almost no Trouble in governing this great Family. All was regulated from
Morning till Night without Intermission. They rose precisely at Five; and after
having spent half an Hour in dressing and Prayer, they learned to read and
write till half after Six: Then they went to Church: At Seven they were set to
work, with which they recited the common Prayers: They breakfast at Eight, and
read some pious Book: At Nine they sung spiritual Songs: The next Hour they
past in silence at work: At Eleven they repeated the Catechism: And dined at
Noon: After which they took half an Hours Recreation. And from One to Eight
they past over the same Exercises which they had done in the Forenoon: When
they had supped, at Eight they went into the Oratory to pray; and after that,
lay down in silence, and all the Lamps were put out at Nine. Thus the House was
established in good Order and Discipline, and the Citizens were desirous to
have Servant-Maids out of it, when they had spent some time there, because they
were Honest and Faithful.

XXXVII. A. B. was much afflicted in this Hospital with frequent Sicknesses,
XXXVII. Her frequent Sicknesses there.
which would often seize her suddenly, and bring her to the Gates of Death;
they seemed not to be natural, and afterward the Children confessed they had
endeavored to poison her by Diabolical Powders. Stappart and S. Saulieu came
often to visit her, and seemed greatly pleased with the good Government of the
House. S. Saulieu had had for some Years the Care of another House of Orphan
Boys, which about this time broke up, the Rent being exhausted. He solicited A.
B. to contribute to the building of another. He and Stappart told her one Day
of a Project to take Farms of the City, where he would gain 2000 Florins a Year
in receiving them, if she would be Surety for him. And this would begin a Fond
for such a House. She consented, so he got the Profit of Three Years which came
to 6000 Florins; but no more Word of the Poor, he said all was his, and the
Fruit of his Labor.

XXXVIII. One Day he proposed to A. B. that they might marry together, XXXVIII
St. Saulieu's Persecution of her.
and yet live in Virginity, that he might assist her in the Cares of the House.
She told him, Marriage was not needful for that. He began from time to time to
give little Demonstrations of Friendship, which she did not take notice of,
because of the good Opinion she had of him. But by degrees he discovered
entirely his Passion, telling her this Love must be from God, for he could
never affect any Maid to espouse her, and now Night and Day he was inclined to
marry her, and could not resist God. She showed great Displeasure; and he begged
Pardon with Tears, offering to do Penance, and said it was only a Tentation
had surpised him. Out of Natural Goodness she believed it was so. But whereas
he began the same several times, she would needs banish him the House. Then he
told her, she must be his Wife or he would kill her. She endeavored to reason
him out of his Madness, representing to him the Sanctity of his former
Discourses, the Zeal of his Charity, the Honesty of his Conversation, and the
Reputation he had acquired amongst good Men, asking the Reason of such a
Change. He told her, He was not what he had appeared to be; that having from
his Youth a haughty Mind, he desired to distinguish himself from the People,
which since he could not do by Birth or Wealth, he resolved to put on the
Appearance of Virtue and Piety, as being more esteemed, which made him practice
outward Works of Mortification and Devotion; that he learned to speak after so
sublime a manner of inward things, by reading carefully spiritual Books, and
observing her Words, Sentiments, and way of Behavior: That the first time he
saw her on the Street he was struck with Love of her, and all he had done and
said since, was to insinuate into her Friendship, and to enjoy her by Love or
Force; which he was resolved upon, though he should hang for it. She threatening
to send for the Three Pastors, the Overseers of the House, he said he would
then proclaim she was his Wife, and that he had lain with her, and diverse
Casuists were in the Opinion one might do so, and so with a good Conscience he
might follow this probable Opinion.

XXXIX. A. B. resolving rather to be exposed to the Persecution of evil
Tongues, XXXIX. Her Delivery from him, and his end.
than to the Brutality of this Villain, she acquaints the Pastors, and he
continuing notwithstanding to molest her, knocking at the Gates, and threatening
to break up her Doors and Windows, she applies to the Magistrates, and after
the Affair was examined, he being afraid to be imprisoned, or even hanged for
offering to force the House, he by the Jesuits, among whom he had a Brother,
employs many Friends to solicit the Magistrates and A. B. to cease the
Process, offering to make what Reparation she pleased. So there was an
Authentic Accord made and sealed with the great Seal of the City, the 17th. of
August, 1658. Wherein he retracts the Slanders he had uttered against her,
obliging himself under a great Penalty never to come again into her Presence,
and paying all the Expenses of the Process. After this, he debauched, at Gaunt,
one of the Maids who had been with her, who with Difficulty got him to marry
her, both of them afterward leading a profligate Life, and he stirring up all
the Mischief he could against A. B. But at the end of Three Years he became
mad, and died in rage, denying God, and calling on the Devils to help him,
crying out that he felt the Pains of Hell, and the Torments of Devils. She
afterward often asked of God, Why he permitted her to remain so long in
Blindness as to that Man, while she often knew the State of the Souls of others
whom she never saw? She was told, It was to exercise her.

XL. To prevent the like Dangers, XL. She turns her House into a Cloister.
A. B. would needs have her House shut up as a Cloister, that no Men might have
occasion to come to her, which was done by Order and under Protection of the
Bishop of Tournay. She was now greatly comforted and in quiet, being out of the
Hazard of the Conversation of Men. The Children also lived more satisfied,
learning all things more perfectly. She applied more closely to teach them, and
to observe their Faults. She endeavored to her Power to perfect their Souls,
and to make them capable also to gain their Living, they greatly loved and
obeyed her, and lived in great Concord, though of different Countries and
Tempers, and every one thought those Children happy, and that they were like
little Angels, as they outwardly appeared.

XLI. About Three Years after, XLI. The Discovery of the Childrens Sorceries.
she was thus shut up, one of the Girls of Fifteen Years having done some
Fault, was shut close up for a Penance in the Prison of the House. Within an
Hour after she came into the Workhouse where all the rest were, though the
Provisor had locked her up within Three Gates, and was gone to the Market, and
had the Keys at her Girdle. A. B. upon enquiry, finding all this to be true,
asked her How she got out? She said, A Man had taken her out. And after Dinner
having called her to her, and she giving the same Answer. She asked If she knew
him. She said, Very well, it was the Devil. At this A. B. trembled, saying, The
Devil is a Spirit, not a Man. The Girl said, He comes to me in the form of a
Man, and I calling him to help me when shut up, he opened the Door and took me
out. A. B. asked if she had known this Man of a long time. She said, Yes, all
her Life, that her Mother from her Childhood had carried her to the Sabbath of
the Witches, which is kept in the Night, and that she being a little Child,
this Devil Man was then also a Young Boy, and grew up as she did, being always
her Lover, and caressed her Day and Night. A. B. could not conceive this, for
she had never heard of such things.

She immediately wrote for the Three Pastors, the Overseers of the House, to
whom the Maid declared that she had given her Soul to the Devil, and denied
God, and to confirm the Gift had received a Mark in her Foot, which she did
freely when Twelve Years of Age, though long before this Lover had still
entertained her and carried her to the Sabbaths of Sorcerers in great Castles,
where they met to eat, drink, dance, sing, and do a thousand other Insolences.
She put her out of the House the same Day, fearing least the other Girls should
be corrupted. It grieved her to see the Devil had such Power, and yet she could
not believe that this Bellotte (for the Girl was so called) was a Witch, for
she still thought they were filthy and deformed Creatures, as she had heard
they transformed themselves into Cats or other Animals. She prayed to God to
discover her unknown Sins, and continued in her pious Exercises, believing she
had purged the House of such Persons.

About Three Months after, another Girl of Fifteen Years was going to be
imprisoned for Stealing, she said the Devil made her do it; and she was
immediately put out of the House that it might be purged of such. But Three
Months after, another of Eleven Years was going to be whipped for the same
Fault, and she said do it not, and I will tell who made me do this Evil. And A.
B. taking her to her Chamber, she said it was the Devil; that being Young and
playing with the Girls of the Town, they asked her if she would go with them to
the Dedication, that she should have good Cheer and a Lover, how soon she was
Content, the Lover came on a little Horse, and took her by the Hand, asking if
she would be his Mistress; she consenting, was carried through the Air with
him, and the other Girls, into a great Castle, where they had all sort of
Feasting and Mirth, that she has been there ever since, Three or Four times a
Week: That at the Age of Ten Years she gave her Soul to the Devil, renounced
God and her Baptism, and received a Mark in her Head, which was afterward
found to be insensible; for they put a Pin the length of ones Finger into her
Head without her feeling any Pain.

The Pastors having examined this Girl, thought not fit to put her out of the
House, till it were discovered from whence his Evil might arise. She was kept
in a Chamber apart, and Peter Salmon, Pastor of St. Sauvear, undertook to
examine her daily, and to endeavor her Conversion; and asking her one Day, if
there were any other in the House like to her, she said there were Two who went
with her daily to the Sabbath. They being called, and spoke with separately in
private, confessed ingenuously that they were in Covenant with the Devil. These
Two said, there were yet other Two in the House, and being desired to name
them, each of them named Two different Persons, who being called, confessed, each
of these naming yet Two different Persons who were of the same Crew: So that
from Two to Four, from Four to Eight, it was discovered that all the Two and
Thirty Girls which were then in the House, were all in general, and each one in
particular bound to the Devil, of their own Free Will, having contracted it
diversely; some from their Fathers, others from their Mothers, some had learned
it by little Girls in playing together, as they declared both to A. B. and to
the said Pastor, who put in Writing all they said to him.

A. B. was in no little Perplexit to be shut up in a House, from whence she
could not get out, with Thirty Two Persons who declared they had given their
Souls to the Devil, and that she must eat and drink with them, or what they
made ready. She proposed to dismiss them by degrees, but then feared to be
guilty of the Mischiefs they would do to others, for they confessed they had made
both Men and Beasts die. The Pastors thought it fittest to keep them; said
there were Hopes they might be converted to God, having been engaged to the
Devil before the Use of their Reason, and promised to come every Day to
admonish and exercise them, and pray for their Conversion. This was done for
the space of Eight Months, in which the Girls made great shows of Conversion,
by Tears, repeated Confessions, Prayers, and attending to the Admonitions given
them, but without Sincerity. Their Hearts were wedded to the sensual Pleasures
which the Devil gave them. So that they had not the Desire to change or leave
those wretched Pleasures; as one of them, of Twenty Two Years, said one Day to
A. B. No says she, I would not be otherwise, I find too much Contentment in it
to leave it, I am always caressed: I have been so from Eight Years to Two and
Twenty.

XLII. XLII. Their Declarations.
Pastor Salmon wrote down their Confessions, they declared plainly they had
daily carnal Conversation with the Devil, that they went to the Sabbath, where
they eat, drank, danced, and committed other Sensualities. Each had their Devil
in form of a Man, and the Men theirs in form of a Woman; that they never saw
more numerous Meetings in the City than at their Sabbaths, of People of all
Ranks, Young and Old, Rich and Poor, Noble and Ignoble, but above all, of all
sorts of Monks and Nuns, Priests and Prelates, and that every one kept their
Rank there, as they are in the World. Many of them shed plenty of Tears when A.
B. spoke to them of the Judgments of God, of the Joys of Paradise, and the
Pains of Hell; and when she asked some of the most sensible of them, If those
Tears were sincere; they said, They proceeded from a Grief of having denied
God, and given up themselves to the Devils; but this lasted no longer than they
were spoke to, or thought upon their miserable State, and then presently the
Devil came and asked them if they would leave him, and the Pleasures they had
together, and so caressed them, that they renewed their Covenant with him,
forgetting all their former good Purposes.

She asked, If the Admonitions, Exorcisms, and Prayers of the Pastors did not
deprive the Devil of Power to keep them subject to him. They said, The Devil
mocked at these things, and did ape the Pastors: When they kneeled to pray, he
did so behind them, and with a Book mumbled the same Words. When they preached,
he used the same Gestures, and also threw Holy Water, and Incensed as they did,
aping them always in Mockery.

She asked, How they could pray or sing so many good Prayers all Day, being in
Covenant with the Devil. They said, He prayed and sang with them, because their
Prayers were without Attention; and instead of singing Praises to God, their
Intentions were to sing Praises to the Devil, in which he gloried and valued
himself. She asked, How they could approach the Table of the Lord, and receive
the Sacrament. They said, The Devil incited them to do it as often as they
could, and the greatest Penance she could ordain them was to make them abstain
from the Sacrament, which covered their Wickedness, and made them pass for good
Persons before Men: Besides, the Devil did his most mischievous Deeds with the
Consecrated Bread. She said, All this would assuredly lead them to Hell. They
said, They knew it very well; but the Devil promised them the same carnal and
sensual Pleasures there, that they had with him in this World.

She asked, If they knew indeed that it was the Devil that entertained them so,
and if they knew there was a Hell, and a Paradise before they came into her
House. They said, Yes; for the Devil taught them that, and had often catechis'd
them, and taught them there was a God, a Paradise, a Hell, and a Devil; that
they who did his Will, could never see God, but should be his Companions in
Hell to all Eternity. She asked, How they could belong to the Devil from their
Infancy. They said, This came from their Parents. When Fathers or Mothers give
themselves to the Devil, they give all that is theirs, and it is rare to see,
when they have been offered by their Parents to the Devil, even before they are
born, that they withdraw after they are come to Age, for the Habit in Evil
becomes natural to them; and the Devil entertaining them from their Infancy
with Caresses and sensual Pleasures, he so gains upon them, that they would not
quit him for any thing, after they have been so allured by his Sensualities,
such as all Men could not give them: For he contrives to make them eat all sort
of Meats savoury to their Taste, all sort of Liquors pleasant to their Throat,
all sort of Music to their Ears, of Odor to their Smell, of Ticklings to
their Flesh, so that being brought up thus, it is almost impossible to desire
to leave them; and therefore, say they, we would not change our Condition, for
we find more Pleasure in it than Men can give us.

She bewailed their Misery, and showed them all was but Deceit and Illusion:
For Instance, that they had not eaten nor drunken at their Sabbaths, they would
have been very hungry in the Morning, and eaten with good Appetite great Lumps
of Butter, yea, dry Bread when given them. And if they had been eating such
dainty Meat, they would have disrelish'd such gross Food. They said, They had
nevertheless the taste and pleasure of all these, and therefore would not leave
them.

She asked, How it was possible that Parents should thus offer their Children
to the Devil, and not to God who created them. They said Those who are thus
bound to the Devil, will have no other God but him, and therefore offer him all
they have that is most dear, and even are constran'd to offer their Children,
else he would beat them, and hinder them from being married or having Children;
both which he can hinder by his Adheren^^ That when a Child thus offered comes
to the Use of Reason, he then asks their Soul, makes them deny God, renounce
their Baptism and Faith, and promise Faith and Fidelity to the Devil, after the
manner of an Espousal. And instead of a Ring, gives them some Mark, as with an
Awl of Iron, in some part of the Body, which Marks he renews as often as they
have a desire to leave him, and binds them more strongly by new Promises,
giving them those new Marks for a Pledge that they shall continue faithful to
him: And how soon they come to Age capable of having Children, he makes them
offer the Will they have of marrying to his Honor, and therewith all the Fruit
that can proceed from their Marriage, which they promise willingly, that they
may attain their Designs; otherwise the Devil threatens to hinder them, by all
sort of means from marrying or bringing forth Children.

XLIII. XLIII. No ground to disbelieve this Story, or that the World swarms
with such.
Some can hardly believe that all these Girls could have been in Compact with
the Devil, far less that Declaration of A. B. as from God, that so vast a
multitude of People on the Earth are in Compact with him. A. B. could as little
believe it as any, for she thought none but the vilest Miscreants were such,
till there were undoubted Proofs given her of it. The voluntary Confession of
all the Girls, the preternatural Acts done by them in her Presence, their
Agreement in their Confessions as to their Sabbaths, the manner of Dovoting
themselves to the Devil, etc. Their Declaration of all this to the Three
Pastors, some of them still owning their Confession, (though others were easily
persuaded to deny it again, finding they were caressed by the Magistrates for
so doing) and the Attestation of the Truth of all this by the Three Pastors
(Copies of which are in the La vie Continuee, and the Originals in the Hands of
the Writer of it) are such Evidences as will satisfy all, but they who will
not be satisfied. And as for the other, we need not think it so extravagant, if
we consider that it is Satan's earnest Desire and Ambition to have Men devoted
to him by express Covenant; that the more he have of such, he is the more
capable of doing Mischief to the rest of Mankind than he can do by himself
without them; that he obliges all who are so, to devote to him all their
Posterity; that he still labors to alie and marry them with the Good, that so
he may corrupt their Offspring, that they who are thus devoted to him, being
once habituated to all manner of sensual Delights, can hardly ever will to be
reclaimed again; that in outward Appearance they differ nothing from others,
but put on for the most part the greatest pretenses to Devotion; that when ever
any of them are discovered and tried, if strict Enquiry be made about them,
their number appears incredible; witness the late Trials in the West of
Scotland, those of Sweden, New England, and what the Learned Bodinus tells from
his own Knowledge, That when Pardon was granted to a Sorcerer upon Condition to
discover his Compalices, he discovered so many of all Ranks, that at length he
plainly told there would be One Hundred Thousand in that Country.

XLIV. XLIV. The Parents accuse her to the Magistrates.
About the end of that time, an old Woman of Lisle importuned A. B. to take
into the House a Girl of Nine Years, who being discovered to be one of the
Coven, was immediately thrust out again, telling the old Woman that all their
Secrets were discovered to the Regent of the Hospital. She run about
immediately to the Magistrates, and the Parents of the Children, telling how
their Reputation was quite broken by A. B. by saying they were Witches. She
obtained of the Magistrates that Enquiry should be made into the Life of A. B.
without her knowledge. And the Criminal Clerk took Informations upon Oath in
the Town, and neighboring Towns and Villages, all which served only to make
her Innocence and Purity the more evident; for the Witnesses they had pitched
upon as most animated against her, could depone nothing but what was good and
praiseworthy, and could lay-nothing to her Charge. Which he who received the
Dpositions admired; saying, he knew no Body, who if their Life had been
examined from their Childhood, by Enemies, and with the same Rigor, could have
undergone the Trial so unblameably, without being guilty of something. She was
afterward allowed Witnesses for her Excuspation, and when some of them were
heard, he said, there needs no more, for there is almost enough already for to
Canonize her, and declare her a Saint. All these Depositions are still in the
Register of the Town of Iasle.

XLV. XLV. (...).
On the 9th. of Febraury, 1662. they sent the Lieutenant and Sergeants armed,
and broke open her House, and carried her violently to the To (...), with a
great Noise and crowd of People, who imagined she was seized for a Witch,
because of the Report spread about the Children, where they examined her most
strict^y Six Hours, and made her give an Account of all the Affairs that
concerned the Hospital, which she did with such a presence of Mind, as made her
remember all, and answer most pertinently; so they behooved to acknowledge they
could not find any Fault in her. Yet they brought her before them after the
same manner at several times, without granting her Request of calling her in
the Evening to avoid Scandal. They caused bring the Children also to see what
they could draw from them against her, but they could say nothing against her;
only some of them said, a Servant-Maid of hers had chastis'd one of the Girls
with a Wand, and not long after that she died. So they caused seize the poor
Servant as if she had killed the Girl, and resolved to do so to the Mistress,
under pretext that the Correction was by her Order; but four Persons declared
upon Oath that this was most false and that the Gird died by eating to excess
of green Fruits out of the Lodging. One of the Magistrates said to the
Children, She accuses you of Witchcraft, and going to the Sabbaths; Why do you
not accuse her too. But the Girls, how wicked soever, trembling at such a black
Malice, said immediately, No, No, our Mother, (so they called her) is no Witch,
she goes not to the Sabbath; Our Mother is a Saint, she is all full of God.

XLVI. XLVI. Malefices to take a way her Life.
They conspired in the House to take away her Life by Malefices; the Devil had
Meetings with Twenty Five of them, how to effectuate it, and with their Consent
made an Unguent of diverse matters, of which there were Balls given to put in
her Broth. S. Saulieu was at the Meeting, for he also kept the Sabbaths, and
stirred them up to make her away. One of the eldest of them discovered it to
her, and went with her to one of the Girl's Bed and found the Ball. She
advertised the Pastors, and they the Magistrates, and she was told if she was
afraid, she might remove, and they would place another in her room. She staid
till she discovered Fourteen Children who had of these Balls to destroy her.
She then chose a Regent and retired, entering a Protestation before the
Magistrates, that she did not abandon the Regency having left one in her Place.
When the Magistrates examined the Girls, the eldest declared all the Truth, and
the Magistrates labored to make her unsay it, which she would nor. The others
who denied all, they sent away cheerful, ^^ing one to another, the Magistrates
are for us. Two Days after she retired, the Magistrates thrust the Widow out of
the Regency. The Jesuits got the Oversight of it, there they placed one of
their Maids, they admitted the Girls presently to Confession and Communion,
making them pass for little Saints, and A. B. for Guilty.

XLVII. XLVII. She wi^hdraws to Gaunt and Mechlin.
She retired to Gaunt, and from thence to Mechlin, and formed a Process before
the King's Council at Brussel^, against the Magistrates at Lisle, for the
Recovery of the Hospital, and though it did appear most evidently that she was
Innocent, and that they had acted against her with inexcusable Violence, yet
they would not venture to give Sentence for her against a Party so Powerful,
and far, more Considerable before Men, than was the Innocence of a simple
private Maid: So the Process remains undecided to this Day, and she could no
longer abide in Safety in Lisle, unless in secret.

XLVIII. XLVIII. Is esteemed by Learned and Good Men there.
She staid Four Years in Flanders, at Gaunt, and Mechlin, after she had left
the Hospital, and many well-dispos'd Persons made Acquaintance with her. The
first she spoke with at Mechlin was one Mr. Coriathe, an Archdeacon, who became
afterward Vicar General. At his Request she wrote the first Treatise of her
Life, called La Parole de Dieu. She wrote to him also many Letters which are
printed in the First and Second Parts of La lum. nee en tenebr. She had also
there in the number of her Friends, a Learned and Pious Divine, M. Peter Noel,
Licentiate in Divinity, Priest and Canon, who had been Secretary of the Famous
Cornelius Jansenius, Bishop of Ypres. This Man being of the Sentiments of
Augustine, engaged her in Conferences concerning Grace, where she unravelled in
an admirable manner all the Difficulties which have hitherto been inexplicable
by Men's Spirits. This gave occasion to her writing the Treatise, called
Academie des S^avans Theologiens, because of the great Contests which were then
between the Jansenists and Molinists, concerning Grace, and the great Noise
that was made about the Doctrine of the Casuists concerning Attrition,
Contrition, Probability, and their Morals; wherein her Friends, being all
Jansenists, discoursed to her often of the Excess of their Adversaries, which
she could hardly believe till she went and heard some of their Preachers who
vented sometimes their sine Morality. She was touched with Compassion, for the
Blind that were led, and with Indignation at the Blind Leaders. It pitied her
to see the general Abuse among the Churchmen, the Religious, and the People,
who rested on Trifles and a mere Outside, which the Blindness of some Guides
recommended as a sure way to Salvation, though they never thought of being
purified from their inward and secret Sins, nor of returning to the Love of
God. In this Treatise all these things are handled with great Penetration,
Clearness, and Solidity. Monsieur Noel was persuaded that she was full of the
Holy Spirit, but on the other hand it troubled him to see that the Holy Fathers
had not still the same Light with her in Theological Matters, or as to diverse
Places of the Holy Scripture. She wrote to him several Letters on this and
other Subjects, which are in La Lum. nee en tenebres.

Another of her Acquaintances was M. Gillemans, Canon and Archpriest of Gaunt,
who one Day asking her Opinion of the Doctrine of the Casuists, that one might
be saved by Attrition without Contrition, and telling her he had written a
great Volume against the Jesuits upon that Subject; she told him her Thoughts,
and that she had lately put them into Writing. After having often solicited for
this Paper, he obtained a sight of it for some Days, which he read with such
Admiration, that when he returned it, he said, You have said more things, and
more convinci^g on this Subject, in these Three Leaves, than I have done in all
my Book, which has cost me so much Time, Labor, and Expenses; and therefore I
condemn my Book never to see the Light. This Writing is the Fifth Chapter of
the First Part of Academie des Scavans Theologiens.

She returned to Lisle, May, 1664. where she staid privately for some Months
about her Affairs, for the most part in the House of her Pastor Monsieur
Lamberti, where she wrote the Explication of the 24th. and 25th. Chapters of
St. Matthew, which are in La Lum nec en tenebres. To him she wrote many
Letters, after her first Return to Lisle, in the 23d. and 24th. Years of her
Age, which was the first of all her Writings, and it is called L'Appel de Dieu
and le Rufus des Hommes, Part I.

XLIX. XLIX. Particularly by M. de Cort
But the most faithful and constant Friend she had in Flanders, was M.
Christian de Cort, Pastor of the chief Church at Mechlin, and Superior of the
Fathers of The Oratory there: A Man full of Zeal for God, and Charity for his
Neighbor, and void of all Self-seeking. From the first time that A. B. spoke
to him, he was so touched, enlightn'd, and enflamed by God, that immediately he
resolved absolutely to follow Jesus Christ even to Death, in the abandoning all
Honor, Pleasures, and Wealth of this World, which he promised a little after
to A. B. and performed with an inviolable Fidelity. He no sooner discovered
that God had hid in her the Treasures of his Divine Wisdom, than he took all
Occasions to be instructed by her, and when alone, set down in Writing the Sum
of what had past in their Conversation, but briefly and without order. He
acquainted her with his Resolution to publish this to the World; thinking
himself obliged in Conscience to undeceive others, as by those Divine Truths he
was undeceived himself. But when she had seen his Papers, and read a little of
them, she told him, they would be useful for himself but not for others,
because they often answered the Thoughts of his own Mind, which no Body
perceived but himself; and being solicited by him to compose this Work anew,
returning him his Papers, she her self wrote by way of Conference, the things
which God brought into her Memory, in the same manner as they are now
published, in the Three Parts Of the Light of the World.

L. L. Goes to Holland.
In September, 1667. she went for Holland, at the Solicitation of M. de Cort,
in order to the printing of this Book, her Friends having assured her that she
would not be permitted to do it in Brabant; and she proposed to retire from
thence to the Isle of Noordstrand, where she had bought a Farm from M. de Cort,
the Director of it. She had Debates with her self before she could resolve to
go to Holland, having never been in any Place without the Dependence of the
Church of Rome, and being made believe that all the Heretics, as they called
them, were monstrous and infectious. But having recommended this Affair to God,
she was told, That these common Differences of Religion do not bring Salvation,
but the Love of God only, and Virtue, which we ought to love in all Persons who
aspire to it, without regarding what outward Religion they profess; that she
ought to do Good to all, and to communicate to all, the Light of the Divine
Truth, of what Religion soever they be. This wrought in her Soul such a perfect
Impartiality, that she never afterward enquired of what Religion one was,
provided only he desired to put in practice the Doctrine of Jesus Chrik, and to
recover the Love of God.

LI. LI. ^. sick at Amderdam, and is visited by Persons of all Persuasions.
When they came to Amsterdam, she chose a little House in a very private Place,
to live solitarily in Conformity to the Private, Poor, and Mean State of Jesus
Christ; but a dangerous Sickness seizing her, she permitted M. de Cort to bring
to her a Physician of his Acquaintance, who could not forbear speaking of her
to others, so that in a little time her Fame went through all the Country, and
People of all sorts desired to speak with her. She thought that God might,
perhaps, by this means, open the Eyes of some, make them see the miserable
State of the World, and dispose them to embrace a Christian Life. And indeed
many were moved to this, so far as to incline to resolve upon it. But it was as
in the Days of Jesus Christ, one Day one would follow him, and a little after
withdraw from him, without thinking any more on him, unless it were, it may be,
to defame him or stone him, or cry, Crucify him; Every one had Business and
Excuses which hindered them from Corresponding with the Calls of God.

The Anabaptists or Mennonists, came to her, and seemed greatly to esteem the
Graces of God in her, but she no sooner discovered the Nature and Properties of
Hypocrisy, and the generality of the Corruption even in the most Holy, but
finding themselves included, they all declared against her. She looked on them
as a Set of Persons, who under modest and humble Words, Clothes, and Gestures,
did conceal proud, worldly, and unregenerate Hearts. Of them she writes in La
Lum. nee en tenebres, Part 2.

Serrarius, Famous enough for his Writings and Correspondence, at first highly
esteemed her, proclaimed her as a living Gospel: And all the time he found her
Thoughts agree with his, as to the last Plagues, the Conversion of the Jews,
Re-establishment of the Church, and the Kingdom of Jesus Christ upon Earth, all
went well; but when he found that she was not for the Re-establishment of a
certain Levitical Worship which he fancied, nor made any reckoning of an
Impostor among the Jews, who was risen up in the East, he declared against her,
and studied to effice every where the good Impressions he had given of her. She
clears her self by a public Print, Tomb. de la fausse Theol. Part 2. Letter 14.

At that time Labadie and his Disciples, had as much Esteem for her and her
Writings, as afterward they conceived an Aversion for both: They endeavored
to bring her over to them by M. de Cort, offering great Sums of Money to buy
Noordstradt, and to go with them, but to no purpose. She found he had no other
Light but what Reading, barren Speculations, and some Acts of his own
Understanding gave him; and for a Motive of his Conduct, some strong Conceits
and Motions of his corrupt Passions, without being any ways enlightened by the
Spirit of God, or governed by the calm Motions of the Divine Inspiration.
Therefore he and his, failed not to blacken her on all Occasions, the most
piously and cunningly they could, that the People might reckon her to be an
Instrument of Satan, and abhor her as the Devil himself.

M. Commenius, so Famous among the Learned, being then acquainted with her, had
quite other Thoughts. But his Knowledge had not puffed him up, though it gave him
some Prejudices, which made him propose some Difficulties, in which she
satisfied him. On his Deathbed he bid tell her to give him the last Visit,
saying, O the Holy Maid! Where is she? May I have the Happiness to see her yet
once before I die! All the Knowledge and Sciences I have had, are nothing but
Productions of Reason, and of the Mind of Man; but she has a Wisdom and Light
that comes from none but God alone, immediately by the Holy Spirit. A. B. said
often of him, that she never knew a Learned Man who had a better and more
humble Heart than he. Tomb. de la fausse Theol. Part 2. Letter 1.
I was visited also, says she, by the Socinians, who do altogether despise
Jesus Christ, saying, that it is Idolatry to worship him: And they asked me one
Day, If I believed also in a created God, as Jesus Christ was? I did not much
reason with them, because such impertinent Questions deserved no Answer,
telling them only, that they ought not to come to me with such impertinent
Discourse, so they withdrew themselves. Yet some affirm, that I am of their
Sentiments, from which I pray God preserve me.

Many false Prophets and Prophetesses came to visit her: One showing her his
Sword half drawn, said he was going to behead all the Kings of the Earth, and
would begin at England; and so entering into a little Bark, it is not known what
became of him. Another, John Roth, had made ready Standards for the Twelve
Tribes of Israel, whom he was to re establish, and some well-meaning People
followed him. In some Visits he made her, she easily discovereded the Illusion,
and warned her Friends to beware of him, being expressly told by God, that he
was a presumptuous Man over whom the Devil had much Power. God gave her the
same Sentiments of those of his Cabal, particularly of one Quirin Kuhlman. The
Quakers also would try if they could draw her over to their Sect, but they soon
gave over their Hopes, and one wrote against her, upon which afterward when in
Holstein, she wrote the Advertisement contre les Trembleurs. Thus it seems the
Devil designed to distract or seduce her by all these sorts of Persons. But God
would thereby exercise her, and make her know by experience to what height the
Folly and Presumption of Man can go, when joined with the Illusions of the
Devil, never letting her be deceived by them. He designed also thereby to let
the World see the vast difference between the false Lights of the Devil or the
Imagination, and the true Light that God sends in a way so solid, so clear, and
so little capable of being suspected, since she, by whom he communicates it,
seeks to draw no body after her, aiming at nothing but a simple, retired,
solitary Life, disengaged from all Pleasures, Riches, and Honors, imitating
Jesus Christ, without obliging any body to believe any other thing, as
necessary for Salvation, but the Love of God, and the denying of ones self;
looking on all other Knowledge, and even things of Revelation, as not necessary
for those who have not yet Light and Grace enough necessary to receive them. In
which it is absolutely impossible that Seduction should mingle it self. God
made her also see how far the best cultivated humane Spirits are blinded and
removed from the Kingdom of God, by some Conversations she had with the
Cartesians, both Divines and Philosophers, particularly with the Professors,
Heydanus and Burmannus; upon which occasion she wrote the Twelfth Letter of the
First Part of Tomb. de la fausse Theol. The Philosophers would persuade her,
that in spiritual things she came near their Principles. She told them their
Malady was, that they would needs comprehend all by the activity of Humane
Reason, without giving place to the Light of Divine Faith, which requires a
Cessation of the activity of our Reason; that God may shed or revive therein
that Divine Light, without which not only God is not well known, but even he
and the true Knowledge of him are banished out of the Soul by this activity of
our corrupt Mind and Reason; which is a real kind of Atheism, and rejecting of
God. They were so full of their Idea's, that they mocked at her Remonstrances:
But one of them being a little after seized with a mortal Sickness, in the
Flower of his Age, and God opening his Eyes to let him see his Error, he began
to lament and cry, Night and Day, My Understanding! my Understanding, to what
have thou brought me! Alas, my Reason, in which I so much trusted! what
assistance can thou give me now! Now thou can give me neither Salvation,
nor the hope of it! I must be damned! There can be no Mercy for me. A Friend of
A. B. going to see him in that State, endeavored to comfort him; but the other
finding no Quiet, asked him still, If he thought there was yet any Mercy to be
hoped for his Soul. And then, casting again his Eyes and Arms from one side to
another, began again his Complaints; My Understanding! my Understanding!
Whether have thou guided me? Some of his Friends, amongst others, Steno and
Swammerdam, came often to visit and comfort him; but nothing could calm him. At
last he turns to the Friend of A. B. saying, Go tell that good Soul (meaning A.
B.) to pray to God for me, that I may obtain the Pardon of this Sin, otherwise
I am damned or must suffer a very long Purgatory. O, if I could recover of this
Sickness, I would turn wholly unto God, and would follow quite another Way. But
when this was told to A. B. She answered, He shall not rise again, but he will
die; for if he should recover, he would fall again more profoundly into this
pernicious Error. He died, his Judgment being sound and good, but with Great
Repentance and Contrition, adoring, with great Fervency, Jesus Christ
crucified, to the Greeks and to the Philosophers, Foolishness.

A. B. had such an Horror for this wicked Disposition of the Philosophers,
that she could not suffer it, affirming that God had declared to her expressly,
That this Error of Cartesianism was the worst and most cursed of all the
Heresies in the World, and a formal Atheism or a rejecting of God, in whose
Place corrupt Reason did set up it self. Not that this Idol of corrupt Reason
is not a thing common to all the Learned, and to all sorts of Philosophers, as
well as the Cartesians; but these are incomparably more wedded to it; they
think they are in Possession of it above all, and they will admit of nothing
but by this Way.

After she had been visited by all sorts of Persons who reaped not that Profit
they might have done, God sent her two or three sincere and well disposed Men,
who finding in her Life and Conversation the Means to approach unto God, and to
advance the Perfection of their Souls, left the World, their Business and
Friends, and continued with her all the time of her Life and theirs. All others
withdrew to her great Satisfaction. She said, God had made her see by this
Converse with People of all Sorts whom she had admitted indifferently by his
Divine Order, how few are to be gained in the World, even among the best, and
those who seek the Truth; and that after these Visits, God would never more
engage her to such a Distraction, and that she should lead a retired Life all
the rest of her Days. Which fell out, and she begun it then in Amsterdam, and
did not give access as formerly.

LII. LII. Wrote here some of her Books.
She employed most of this Time to compose many Books, Of which these are the
Principal; The Funeral of False Divinity, in 4 Parts. Upon Occasion of some
Conferences with the Cartesian Philosophers, she wrote the Holy Perspective.
There she wrote also her Outward Life, and the New Heaven and the New Earth. In
the writing of which, she was so ravished that she often forgot her necessary
Food. She designed to have continued these Wonders: But God said unto her,
Leave that Work; Men are not worthy nor capable of it; they will imagine that
they have the Dispositions requisite for that glorious State, but they are very
far from them. Show them rather the miserable State they are brought into by
Sin, under the Dominion of corrupt Nature, and under the Empire of Antichrist
who now rules over them without their apprehending it. Write to them of the
Reign of Antichrist. So she laid by her Pen and that Work, saying to God, I
shall do it, Lord, and wrote afterward the Treatise of Antichrist discovered,
in Three Parts. She began another Treatise, called The last Mercy of God, but
did not finish it, for the Reasons told in the Conclusion of it, and the
Traverses she met with in the Imprisonment of M. de Cort, and her own
Persecutions and Flights kept her from the Pursuing that and other Works which
she had begun.

LIII. LIII. Mr. de Cort cast into a Dun geon by the Jansenists.
Had M. de Cort followed her Counsel, he might have avoided all the Mischief he
fell into; but the Sincerity and Goodness of his Nature would not let him think
that he had such cruel Enemies, especially amongst his Brethren and Friends,
the Priests, Churchmen, and his own Disciples whom he had brought up, and to
whom he had hitherto left and given all; he could not believe that they would
seek to imprison him, or endeavor to poison him, as she forewarned him of
both, and still bid him take heed of them.

The true Cause of this Imprisonment was, that God having touched his Heart to
hearken to the Divine Truths declared unto him by A. B. he resolved not only to
embrace them, but to publish them also to others, designing to retire to the
Isle of Noordstrand, of which he was Director, and had the best Part of it at
his Disposal, and to invite good Men thither, who desired to lead a Christian
Life. This seemed to his Brethren an Apostasy, and the setting up a new
Heresy; they resolve therefore to ruin him. But this Pretext would not do at
Amsterdam or Holstein, and therefore they must devise another.

At Amsterdam there is a Dungeon, where at the Instance of Creditors they
arrest and shut up Strangers who are in Debt, till they have satisfied it.
There are usually ten or twelve Prisoners there, living in Despair as mad,
passing the time in swearing, blaspheming, and committing a thousand Impieties,
and sometimes killing one another, having no Food but a piece of brown Bread
and a little small Beer; and there some of them die in Misery. They thought
this Place would do as well as one of the Prisons of the Roman Inquisition; and
to get him there, this Expedient was thought upon.

Monsieur Gorin, who was truly Monsieur de Saint Amor, who was sent to Rome in
the Affair between the Jansenists and Jesuits; and on that Occasion wrote the
famous Journal of St. Amor, having bought from Monsieur de Cort some Lands in
Noordstrand, who had assured him that he would have Eight per Cent. of yearly
Revenue, and if it did not yield that, promised to restore him his Principal,
and to take back the said Lands, and by a Trick he got him to sign a Paper for
this; in which Paper the principal Sum was set at 12000 Florins French Money;
and when M. de Cort said the Price of the Lands was only 8000 Florins, Gorin
said, it is true, but 8000 of Dutch Money make 12000 of French; and so the good
Man replying, he did not know the Value of the Exchange, hastily signed the
Writing when he was taking Horse at Paris, whither he had gone to see his good
Friends, the Jansenists, who were then persecuted, and to whom he would have
given all his Lands if they had asked them. So Gorin being Procurator for the
other French Jansenists who had bought Interests in Noordstrand, resolves to
demand his Principal and more, as having got only 4 or 5 per Cent. of yearly
Revenue, and he knew M. de Cort had not Money to re-imburse him. The other
Partners consent, and especially the Fathers of the Oratory at Mechlin, who had
not yet deprived themselves of the Possession of M. de Cort's Goods, and
thought this would be a Mean to perpetuate it. The Matter stood thus; M. de
Cort had purchased a considerable Interest in Noordstrand, besides the Tithes,
and the being the Director of it, he being persuaded that God would make that
Island a Place of Refuge for his Persecuted Servants, and looking then on the
Jansenists as such, he drew them out of France, Flanders, and Holland, into
this Isle, of which he sold them Parcels: And he himself having contracted
Debts in making of this Purchase, the Fathers of the Oratory at Mechlin urged
him to leave all his own Possessions and Rights there, to their Congregation.
He consented, provided they would pay his Debts which he had contracted in the
Acquisition. This they promised to do; but, to authorize their Right, they
would have it by Way of Contract, as if they had had given him such Sums for
his Possessions (though he never received any) and made him leave out the
Condition of Paying his Debts, for that they would have him trust their World;
alleging that otherwise his Creditors might fall upon them all at once to
their Ruin. Thus they entered in Possession; and when they would pay none of his
Creditors, he makes a Revocation of this Contract of Sale, as fraudulent, to
which the Grand Council at Mechlin consents, provided he satisfy the Fathers
within a Year and a half, and the same is ratified by the Duke of Holstein, the
Prince of the Island. Thus he was ready to free his Possessions of all their
Pretensions against them, and to retire thither with'those who loved the Truth.
But their Avarice, and Hatred of him as a Deserter, made them conspire his Ruin.

The 7th of March, 1669. M. Gorin, or St. Amor, came with two others to make a
friendly Visit to M. de Cort in his Lodging. Within two Days he came again, and
M. de Cort being absent, he spoke with A. B. who offered to give him his
principal Sum for the Lands he had of M. de Cort, at which he seemed well
satisfied. The same Day he obtained an Order for seizing his Person upon the
Pretenses already said. Within two Days he invites him friendly to come to the
House of John de Swaan, to treat with the Partners about the new Dike he
designed to make in Noordstrand, and having the Sergeants ready, he was
immediately seized and made Prisoner at the Instance of M. Gorin.

LIVE. LIVE. Her Concern for him, and his Deliverance.
Though the Fathers of the Oratory possessed all his Revenues, they sent him not
one Penny in his Misery. A. B. offered sufficient Bail, solicited to have him
Prisoner in the Townhouse, obtained Orders from the Duke of Holstein, to his
opposite Party, to set him at Liberty, that both might answer at his Courts,
their proper Judge; spared neither Procurators nor Advocates; wrote for his
Justification, to all concerned, pleading with a force of Reason and Equity,
worthy of the greatest Civilian; but all in vain. They sought to seize her as
the only Person that supplied him with Food and other things, and she was
forced to leave her Lodgings and conceal her self. She wrote him many Letters
for his Conduct and Consolation; and being spent with Labors and Afflictions,
and praying earnestly to God to assist him whom no Creature would help, it was
told her, That he would be his Advocate and deliver him; upon which she left
off to solicit any. When Bail was offered, they got still some new Pretensions
to arrest him. God made use of the same means for his Liberation. One of his
Creditors, Mugenhove, took a Remorse for this Arrest, and calling together his
Brethren and ^isters, Coheirs, brought them to sign a Paper for his
Deliverance, which was presented to the grand Officer at Amsterdam, M.
Hasclaer, who finding it singed with so many Hands thought it was a general
Warrant, and gave Order to set him at Liberty, which was done, after a
miserable State of Six Months, by which God purged his Soul, and gave him so
absolute a Patience, Tranquillity, and Resignation to his Will, that he seemed
quite another Man. He immediately past over to Holstein, his Enemies being
enraged at his unexpected Deliverance.

LV. LV. They Pe^^n him in Holstein.
But their Malice ceast not there: About Six Weeks after, he came to Holstein,
there came to him a Stranger, pretending to be sent from one of his Friends at
Hamburg, to see Noordstrand, and to be a Lover of the Truth. And after having
entertained him kindly for some Days, speaking of some bodily Indisposition he
had contracted in the Prison, and of the Gravel; the Stranger said he had a
most singular Powder for it: He was prevailed with to take it, and at the
second time was struck next Morning with an universal Palsy, making Signs that
he was poisoned by the Stranger, who had got away early in the Morning, and
past over in the first Boat; he died some Days after, November, 1669.

LVI. LVI. Her long Sickness.
About this time A. B. was seized with a long and grievous Sickness, which
brought her often to the Gates of Death. She could not move her self, nor often
express her Needs. Her Friends, who were but one or two, durst not go see her
in the Daytime, least she should be discovered. There was none to assist her
but a sloathful Maid, who let her suffer a Thousand Necessities. About this
time the Murderer came to ask for her, and bad tell her he was come from her
Friend from Noordstrand, with Letters from him, and something to tell her by
word of Mouth. No sooner did one of her Friends break it off to her, than she
was seized with an Aversion and a Divine Warning, and bid them beware to let
him come into her Chamber, but remove him presently out of the House. Some
Weeks after, she got the sad News of M. de Cort's Death, the only Assistance
she had in the World. This at first made her complain to God, but upon a
Warning from him, she said to him who had brought her the News: Since it was
the Will of God so to permit it, I am content and satisfied, and I desire not
that it should be otherwise.

LVII. LVII. M. de Cort had left her his Rights to Noordstrand.
M. de Cort being dead, they levelled all their Rage against A. B. whom he had
constituted his Heiress, when he was formerly in Noordstrand, Anno. 1668. When
walking one Day solitary in the Fields, as he was wont, and offering up his
Prayers to God, and asking what he should do with that Isle, it was answered
him thrice, as with an intelligible Voice, Give this Isle to Anthoinette
Bourignon. He believed at first some Body near him might have spoke so, but
looking round about him on the Plain, he was certain that no Body was near him.
Then going quickly into his Lodging, he wrote the Testament with his own Hand,
laying up one Copy of it sealed among the Registers of the Isle, and sending
another by Post to Amsterdam, in a Letter to A. B. praying her to examine it,
and alter it as she pleased. She threw it on the Table without opening it,
saying to her Friends, I have nothing to do with a Testament, for my own Goods
are a Burden to me, and so it remained sealed long after his Death. This
greatly afflicted him when he returned to Amsterdam, and when she told him
there would be no want of Persons to accept his Testament, he said, Not such as
I wish: For if I leave my Goods to the Oratory, they will not pay my Debts; and
if I leave them to my Friends, they will destroy one another with Processes,
and every one will take what he can in Confusion. She said, Let us speak of
other things.

LVIII. LVIII. They persecute her therefore
This served them for a Pretext to pursue her, and they thought to get her shut
up in the Place where he had been; therefore they pursue the grand Officer for
setting M. de Cort at Liberty, that to be free of them, he might put A. B. into
the same Place. They had many Meetings and Contrivances on this Subject. It had
been easy to execute all against a poor Languishing Creature that could not
stir; but God hindered them both by Motions of Piety, and the Fear of God which
he inspired in to the grand Officer, and by discovering to her in her spirit,
their Plots when they were contriving them. She told her Friends who were with
her; I see, says she, in my Spirit such and such Enemies met together, who
devise how to seize me: They have sent for the grand Officer; such propose to
him that I am Heiress of M. de Cort, he has a right to seize me, and treat me
as M. de Cort was, otherwise they will pursue him. He hears them, he wavers
somewhat; but I perceive yet in his Heart Piety, and the Fear of God, that
hinder him from yielding to the Solicitations of my Enemies: this was so true,
that the grand Officer declared more than once all the same things to two of
her Friends. After the Death of M. de Cort, she wrote to Brabant, that if any
of his Kinsfolks would be his Heir, provided they would pay his Debts, she
would quit that Inheritance, and yield them all her Rights. But it was told
her, that neither any of them were capable of doing it, neither did they desire
to meddle with it, so that she was obliged to do it for the Honor of his
Memory, and for the Payment of his Creditors, which she still offered to do, if
they would liquitale their Claims, and give her Access to his Inheritance.

LIX. LIX. She goes to Holstein.
But her Enemies Malice still increasing, she found it necessary to seek to
preserve her Life by flight, and being so sick and weak that she could not
stand, she was carried in the Night to the other end of the City, to a
Merchant's House, where she was hid Eleven Months, with no less Hazards than
those she had escaped, being left without Help, and without Necessaries, when
she could not rise of her self. Yet God was pleased to give her Health by
degrees, and returning to her first Lodging, she published some of her Books;
and then went from Amsterdam to Harlem, after she had petitioned to be allowed
to stay under the Security of a Habcas Corpus; and it being made known to her,
That it was the Will of God she should go to possess Noordstrand, she took
Shipping for Holstein at Enchuysen, a Town in North-Holland, Four of her
Friends going with her, they landed at Tonningue in Holstein, the 13th. of
June, 1671. and in July, went to Sleswick, where she lived peaceably for some
time under the Duke's Protection. Many Nobles and Officers both of the Court of
Holstein, and Denmark, came to see her, and discourse with her of spiritual
things, and did highly esteem both her and her Writings.

LX. LX. The Quakers write, and she Answers.
About this time, the Quakers published a Book against her, in low Dutch, to
defame her, and within Three Months the Answer was composed, translated into
Dutch, and printed at Amsterdam, under the Title of An Advertisement against
the Sect of Quakers: Where she makes appear how far they are from being led by
the Spirit of Jesus Christ, and does so plainly point out their Spirit, that as
to the general Temper of their Sect and Party, they may therein see themselves
as in a Mirror: It contains also the Foundations of all sorts of States,
Order, Justice, Manners, and Commerce amongst Men, and gives a perfect Idea of
a True Christian, or a Regenerate Person.

LXI. LXI. Some Anabaptists of Friesland come to her.
When the War broke out at that time between France and Holland, several
Persons of Friesland, to the number of Twenty, who were convinced of the Truth
of her Writings, but were not disengaged enough from the World, came to
Holstein to live with A. B. and to embrace, as they said, an Evangelical Life;
their Design might be justly suspected, since the Incommodity of War had made
them abandon the World. But since, in the Parable of the Gospel, the King
received to his Feast those who came there by Constraint, so she would not
refuse these, though it appeared there was Constraint mingled in their Procedure.
This is properly the Compel them to come in of the Gospel, and not that Men
ought to constrain one another by force, to embrace some Religion which they
judge best; Which is entirely Diabolical, and cannot please God, who requires a
free and willing Service; for the most Essential Part of Religion, is an Offer
of our Liberty, our Will, and our Heart unto God, and not a forced Act of a
Person, who might say to God; Lord, I render thee such and such a Worship and
Service, but it is much against my Will, they constrain me to it, and I would
not do it, were it not to avoid barbarous Usage, and to gain some Money,
Pleasures, and Honors. This is the Disposition of Heart, to which those
detestable Murderers of Conscience and Religion do reduce Men, and which they
call, the Conversion of Heretics, and the Compel them to come in of the
Parable. Whereas that Constraint of the Gospel, is nothing but the Declartion
of God's Judgments upon good Men, who would needs stay in the World, and that
these shall partake of its Plagues and Scourges which God will pour out on all
the Earth.

XLII. LXII. Their Behavior.
A. B. caused 'em to hire a great Lodging for those Persons, in the Town of
Susum resolving to leave Sleswick to stay with them, to see if they were
disposed to embrace a truly Christian Life. She came thither in July, 1672. but
instead of finding Persons disposed to embrace a Gospel Life, she was
astonished to see a Company of People who seemed to be come as to a Country
Fair, to eat, drink, do nothing, to observe no Rules, nor good Manners, nor
Discretion; t^ seek every one their own, their Ease, and what accommodated them
best, the best things, their Fancy, and their own Will: each desired to be best
treated, most spar^d, most honored, and which was worst, none would unlearn
this soft LIfe, nor deny themselves to embrace another. She soon saw that this
would not agree with the Designs and Will of God, and after some trial of them,
she rid her self of them by degrees; all of them engaging in the World, the
Flesh, and earthly Things, more than ever, and the most part of them became her
Enemies and Slanderers where ever they went. On this Occasion she wrote many
Letters, where she makes appear the Qualities and Dispositions which one must
have to become a True Christian, and the Indispositions which render Persons
incapable of this; they make up the Book called, The Stones of the New
Jerusalem. She wrote also upon the same Occasion, The Blindness of Men
nowadays; which contains the History of these Frieslanders, and refutes the
Errors to which the most part of the Mennonists or Anabaptists are subject, as
these were.

About this time also she wrote, for her Friends, the First Part of the
Treatise of Solid Virtue, where she lays down the Grounds of the Apprenticeship
of a Christian Life, of the Imitation of Jesus Christ, of Virtue, and of the
Conflict we must undertake against all the Insults of the Devil. She designed
to cause her Books to be printed in her own House, and therefore brought from
Holland complete Furniture for a Printing-Office. But one little Essay, gave
her Enemies Occasion to persecute her to a high Degree.

LXIII. LXIII. The occasion of a new Persecution.
A Young Man of the Reformed Church of Altena, near Hamburg, being ill treated
by his Pastors, and forbid the Lord's Supper, for reading and expressing his
Esteem of some of her Writings, took occasion to search for her, and came to
Husum; which so vexed these Gentlemen, that under the Name of the Visiter of
their Sick, they published Two Treatises in High Dutch against her, and put
them in the Gazettes, accusing her both of Heresy, and of an evil Life. She
perceiving that the Devil designed to pre-occupy Men against the Truth, by the
Defamation of her Person in a Country where she was not known, and in a Tongue
which she did not understand, writes a Book, which she causes to be translated
and printed in her own House in High Dutch, under the Title of The Testimony of
Truth; where she makes appear the Injustice of the Calumnies and Accusations,
and that the true Cause why they persecuted her, was, that no Body would he^r
the Truth which reproves and disturbs them in the ^^joyment of their Pleasures,
Honors, and Ambition, wherein the Churchmen and Pastors are as much or more
engaged than the rest of Men; and shows that she has no Aim but to lead Persons
to Jesus Christ, not to her self, nor to any Sect new or old. To this, she
joins a Collection of authentic Attestations of Persons who knew her in her
native Country (many of them being upon Oath before Judges) and of those who
were with her; that she might stop all the Ways by which they would defame her,
and render in her Person the Truth of God hateful and contemptible.

LXIV. LXIV. The Pastors of Holstein are alarmed.
This made a terrible Alarm. It was not written against the Lutheran Pastors,
yet those of Holstein took it to them. M. Ouve of Flesburg, and Burchardus of
Sleswick, animate the rest by their Writings, Preachings, and Discourses, they
Stir up the People against her, who would have massacred her if they had found
her in the Streets; they stir up the Judges and Magistrates, impute to her a
thousand horrible Crimes worthy of Death, as Blasphemy, the Overturning of
Christianity, and of all States, both Civil and Ecclesiastic; they charge her
with a thousand Heresies, tell that such and such Heretics were burnt alive,
and such after their Death, and she was worse than them all. Some among them
would not dip their Hands i^ innocent Blood, particularly M. Reinboth,
Superintendant and Pastor of Duc, a Man of Honesty and Conscience, who would
let none of the Pastors under his Care, vent their Spleen against her, while
he lived; but Dr. Nemo, who succeeded him, was not so moderate.

LXV. LXV. She is persecuted at Flensbourg.
The Pastors of Susum and Sleswick obtained of the Court and Magistrates, a
Sentence to forbid her Printing-Office, and then an Order to take Informations
concerning her and hers at Husum; but they could find nothing but that they
were good People, and lived a good, just, chaste, and exemplary Life. Yet they
continued their Pursuits. She retired out of the Jurisdiction of the Duke of
Holstein to Flensbourg, till the Cloud were over. She was but few Days there,
though in the greatest Privacy; when the Pastors were advertised, and it being
at Christmas when the People show more Zeal and Devotion than ordinary, and the
Pastors preach oftener, all their Sermons tended to inspire the People with a
Spirit of Rage and Horror against this Woman; so that the Mob in their Fit of
Zeal would have thought it great Service to God, to have ^orn in Pieces such a
Person if they could have found her. So she returned to Sleswick the 5th of
January, 1674. The next Day the Pastors came to have found her, and the
Magistrates came and broke up her Coffers, examining the Widow, that came with
her, at their Townhouse, and removing her out of Town with a Rabble. Upon
which A. B. wrote a Letter to them, complaining of their Injustice, forbidding
her Friend to give it till he was about to go out Town. How soon they read it,
they put him in Irons in a Dungeon, to live on Bread and Water for five Weeks,
making him pay Two Crowns a Week for his Treatment, which she behoved to send,
else he must perish in the Prison. (...) brought him by the Hangman the^' a
Guard to the Place of Execution, and caused to be (...) her Books which they
found in the Coffer, and the Letter before him, wishing they had her to burn
there with them; and the Hangman led him out of the Town, and they banish^d him
all Holstein. The Pastors read an Ordinance of the Magistrates from the
Pulpits, forbidding to lodge any of the Friends of this Maid, or to keep any
Correspondence with them. The Animosity was no less every where. The Roman
Priest, the Jesuit of Frederickstadt, wished he might furnish Fuel to burn
her. Peter Gerard Patin, Priest of the Oratory at Mechlin, who staid at
Noordstrand, and possessed it for the Society and others of the Oratory,
detainned her Goods, rejoiced in her Persecutions, and made several Attempts to
rid themselves of her.

LXVI. LXVI. At Husum, and robbed of her Printing. Press, Books and Pap^rs.
When she returned to Husum, she had a little Security there. The Churchmen
continued secretly their Pursuits to destroy her: And where they become a Party
they are an inexhaustible Source of Enmity; and, as all the People count them
holy Men, at least zealous for the Truth, so they never want Men enough ready
to devote themselves to the Execution of their unjust Passions. When they
forbad her to print any more there was in the Press, unfinished in Low and
High Dutch, the Treatise of Solid Virtue, and since it treated of no
Controversy, she might have finished the Sheets that were wanting, but she did
it not. However, Surmises being made to the Pastors that the Press was going,
they obtained Orders from the Court, that the Fiscal of Sleswick should seize
the Press and what (...) to it; and under Color of this, by the Instigation or
the Pastors and other Enemies, he came with Fury, Feb. 2. with Force to assist
him, entered the House with Insolence, Cries and Menaces, broke up the Chests
and Chambers, searched through all, took not only the Press and what belong^d to
it, but many thousands of Books come from Holland, a Hundred Reams of
White-Paper, her Papers and Books which concerned her Goods; her Process, her
Books of Rentals, Obligations, Titles, Papers of the Executory of M. de Cort,
being two Days a pillaging, and all the Rabble about them. All was had to the
Townhouse of Susum, and from thence transported in ten or twelve Carts. The
Fiscal tore the Books in the Streets, and gave them to any Body that pleased to
have them; crying, Here Is the ungodly and blasphemous Books of Anthoinette. Her
Loss amounted to more than Six thousand Florins.

LXVII. LXVII. General-Major Vanderwyck, appears for her.
Yet the Pastors, insatiable in their Persecutions, continued their Complaints
at the Court of Gottorp, complaining that she was suffered still to write and
speak, and that any were permitted to go near her; the Duke wearied with their
Importunities, Consents that she shall be put in perpetual Imprisonment, and
the Order is sent to General-Major Vanderwyck. He was a Man of Probity, and one
that feared God, and by a remarkable Rencounter, those very Persecutions had
brought him to know and esteem her; for the Soldiers who were Sentinels at the
General's Gate, having caught some flying Leaves of her Book, when they were
transporting them in Carts, the General coming in, took out of one of their
Hands one of these Sheets, which was of the Treatise of Solid Virtue, he
thinking it had been a Gazette; but having read it, he was so astonished, and
so touched, that he sighed for the Injustice done to those good Persons, of
whom he had never heard any thing spoken but ill. Is this, says he, the
Doctrine and the People of whom they speak so much Evil, and whom they treat at
this rate? From that time he loved them. When he received this Order, he was so
much touched with Indignation and Grief, that he immediately went to ask the
Prince the cause of his Commission, and if he had heard the Accused in their
own Defense. The Prince said, not, but the Pastors would not give him rest, and
said so much ill of her, that he must needs remove the Occasion. But the
General excused himself from executing the Order, said he could not do it in
Conscience, and that his Highness should consider, that even the Heathens
condemned no Body without having first heard them; that he should not let
himself be so much pre-occupied by those Pastors, as to hear them only, and
give Sentence on their Word, without hearing the other Party. The Prince was
touched with it, and well pleas^d he had hindered so unjust an Execution, and
immediately he generously revoked the Sentence which the Pastors had surpised
from him by their cunning Lies. A Pattern for all Princes to imitate.

LXVIII. LXVIII. The Pastors write against her.
The Pastors finding they had not Audience enough at Court, resolve to make
the World ring with their Slanders and bloody Reproaches against an innocent
Maid. Burchardus writes a Book called Christian and Solid Remarks on the
blasphemous Errors of Antoinette Bourignon; which she answered by a Writing,
Entitled, The Touchstone. M. Ouwe wrote another Pasquil, called Apocalipsis
Haereseos, etc. but he is so beside himself, that he fights with his own
Shadow, and there could be no better Answer to him than to let him alone. All
their Writings and Calumnies can never alter the Heart of a good Man that is
truly touched with a sense of Divine things. One Line of Truth is more Powerful
than all their Sophistries. One of their Designs in writing, was to engage her
to answer, that they might have a Pretense to seize her, she being forbid to
publish any thing, and this they threatened to her Friends. She resolved to go
where she might be in more Security.

LXIX. LXIX. She lives in great Sec^ecy and Hazard at Sleswick, the People
being inflamed by the Pastors.
In the middle of the hard Winter, 1674. which was so Extraordinary both for
Frost and Snow, she went to Sleswick, where she was in as great Hazard as at
Susum. The late Exploit against her, and the Calumnies and Sermons of the
Pastors had alarmed all the People. They thought her some strange Monster of a
Woman who had written Books which were burnt in some Places, and confiscated in
other, and against which the Pastors thundered with so much Zeal, and concluded
her worse than the Heretics that had been burnt. To receive her into their
Houses they thought was to take in one worse than the Devil, and they would not
have failed to turn her out to the Streets again. The People were eanest to
enquire for her every where, and even as she past sometimes, though unknown, they
would be inclined to think that it was A^thoinette, tho they had never seen
her, and knew only that she was a French Woman, and unmarried, and so nimble a
Fugitive that she would be whiles here whiles there, as it were by a Charm,
without knowing how. She was for^'d to change from one House to another, for
she was no sooner come into any, but they would presently think, perhaps this
was Anthoinette, and became so prying and inquisitive, that she was still
necessitated to seek out another. At last a Friend hired for her in his own
Name, a little Chamber being but the half of a Room, divided in two by so thin
a Wall, that all that was done or spoken was heard in the other, where lived
Persons pre-occupied with the common Fame and Animosity. There she remained
under the Protection of God alone, lying, during the Nights of a cold Winter,
on the Floor, without putting off her Clothes, without Bed, Straw or Covering.
Nevertheless, the Peace of God filled her Heart with Joy to see that her State
and Treatment was a Copy taken from the Original of the Life of her Suffering
and persecuted Savior, who because he declared the Truth, was so persecuted by
the Priests and Pharisees, as to be obliged to flee here and there, so that he
could not enjoy the Advantage which the most miserable Beasts have, who have
safe Retreats, Holes, and Nests, while he had not where to lay his Head. Here
she wrote the Treatise called The Touchstone: She was then in an extreme want
of all things. Her Friends were all disperss'd in Holland, Husum, Noordstrand,
and elsewhere. Her Mother-in-Law caused confiscate her Goods and Revenues at
Lisle to the King of France his Profit, under a Pretense that there being War
between France and Holland, she was in an Enemies Country; which was false, she
having left Holland before the War was proclaimed. She gave them to the
Hospital of Lisle, which she had governed to free them from this unjust
Confiscation.

LXX. LXX. The scattering the Sheets of her Books, discovers the Calumnies of
the Pastors.
Lies prevail but for a time, and however Men have been pre-occupied, yet at
last they desire to be rightly informed, and so it fell out here. Those of
Judgment and Understanding were desirous to know at the bottom what the
Doctrine of that Maid was, against whom the Pastors were so enraged. The
pillaging of the Books, and the scattering Sheets of them here and there,
contributed much to this. Both great and small found thereby, that she had been
greatly wronged. The Inns and Private Houses were full of these Leaves,
wrapping up their Tobacco and other small Wares, so that many who had occasion
to read them, were so convinced of the Truth, as to pronounce her Innocent, and
the Pastors Guilty of wronging her by their Calumnies. At the Court they began
to speak well of them, and to read them. The General declared openly for them,
the Grand President, M. Kielman, and others began to esteem them. Some in a
Conversation at Court having said that if the Accusations of the Pastors were
Falsehoods, she ought to have answered them: Another answered, that nothing
ought to be inferred from her Silence, she being forbid to write against them,
and that if his Highness should permit her to answer, she would do it very
quickly. The Duke said, if it depended upon his Permission, he gave it
willingly. The President caused her to be acquainted with this; and immediately
she caused to be delivered to him a fair Copy of her Answer, The Touchstone. He
read it with great Satisfaction, and gave it to many of the Court. They were
thereupon persuaded of her Innocence. The President offered to cause her Press
and Books to be restored. She said, all this would serve her for nothing, so
long as they kept her out of her Inheritance at Noordstrand, which the Fathers
of the Oratory unjustly occupied; also she offered to satisfy all the
Creditors as it should be found just. The President promised to assist her in
it.

LXXI. LXXI. The Court gives her Protection.
Thus she breathed a little more freely; the Prince took her again into his
Protection, her Friends who were scattered, returned to her again. She staid in
a convenient Lodging with four of them peaceably from the Year 1675. to the
next. The Churchmen of Holstein were not a little enraged to hear of giving her
Possession of Noordstrand. They renewed their Clamours at Court, and when they
could not get it stopped, they suggested to clog it with a thousand
Restrictions; sometimes, that she should possess it upon Condition of printing
nothing; sometimes that she should not publish her Doctrine; her People should
not speak of it to any Body; she should be answerable for all the Words and
Actions of her Friends, and such like, under Pain of losing all her Goods. When
she showed the Invalidity of these Projects, they proposed others, the Nullity
of which she as evidently made appear. So that at last the President said he
was weary of these Priests and their Absurdities, still renewing their old
Complaints, without being willing to hear Reason. On this Occasion there passed
several Letters between A. B. and the Superintendant Nieman: But he would y^eld
as little to Reason and Equity as he thought it dishonorable for a learned
Doctor to yield to a Maid, in spiritual Things. These Letters to him are in the
Second Part of The Testimony of the Truth.

LXXII. LXXII. She gives in a Confession of her Faith.
The President finding him to be as unreasonable as the rest, saw there was
nothing to be done with them, and advised her to make and present to his
Highness a short Confession of her Faith, because Great Men are not taken up in
the Reading of Controversies, and so her Replies and Duplies with the Priests
would be of little Use: But a short Confession of Faith would confound their
Lies and convince the Prince. She did so; and it is already set down in the
First Part of this Apology. After this, People were entirely persuaded of her
Innocence, and that the Pastors Accusations were Slanders, though they ceased
not to say that her Profession was contrary to her Sentiments; and would catch
at, and tear out Pieces of Sentences in her Writings to prove it; but it is
evident that what they do or can cite out of her Writings, contrary to the
Articles of this Confession, is fundamentally dismembered and falsely
interpreted; and the Consequences they may draw from her Writings, contrary to
this Confession, are false Consequences, which she wholly disclaims; and if
there be any thing obscure and ambiguous in her Writings, it may and ought to
be taken in a Sense and Signification agreeable to this Confession, which is
the Key, the Rule, the Substance and the Abridgment of all her Writings.

LXXIII. LXXIII. The Church men prevail.
Yet the Churchmen prevailed so far at Court as to protract the Affair of her
Establishment at Noordstrand, and to make them relent, and at last give over
their Inclination to do her Justice; upon which, she openly declared her
Sentiments to the Court in Writing, That God had expressly sent her into the
Country of Holstein, that she might there lead a retired and Christian Life
with her Friends; and that he promised to take in his Protection the Country
that should receive her; and to shed his Blessings there, while hi^ Plagues
should be felt over all the Earth: That for this Effect she desi^ed they would
let her go into the Isle of Noordstrand, to the Succession of M. de Cort, which
the Orator^ detained unjustly from her; and that she might there enjoy the
Liberties and Privileges which his Highness had granted to the Partners of that
Isle; that she had nothing to do with the Pastors of Holstein, her Enemies,
that she and (...) would let them and their Hearers do and say what ^^ey
pleased; that while they gave Offense to no body, but lived honestly and
justly, and even brought temporal Advantage to the Inhabitants of the Country,
and had nothing but just Designs, they ought not to oppose them, fearing
thereby to oppose God: That otherwise God would take Vengeance on them; and
that she was much afraid that he might punish the Country and the Inhabitants
in the same Manner that she had been and might yet be treated by them. It is
like the Discourses of the Pastors made all this vanish, but they could not
put off what followed some Months after. However, she resolved to wait with
Patience to see if they would grant her just Requests.

She applied herself to take a particular Care of forming the Souls of those
who were with her according to the Will of God, both as to spiritual and
temporal. She wrote for their spiritual Direction, besides many particular
Letters, one common to them all, which is the Second Part of The Renovation of
the Evangelical Spirit; and for their outward Behavior, began to write the
Treatise called Sound Advices, and also The Rules of Christians, which last is
joined to the Treatise called The Stones of the New Jerusalem. As she
prescribed them nothing of herself, she asked God his Will as to the Government
of outward Things, for which he gave her particular Rules, which are already
put into English in the Preface to The Light of the World. p. 19.

Shortly after this, the Court was forced to remove, the King of Denmark and
his Troops passed over all the Country, and the President being then secured,
the Pastors applied to the King's Council, who then took the Government of the
Country, to cause her to be seized; she immediately after went for Hambourg
with one Maid, leaving her Friends in the House which she had bought but some
Weeks before; and the King's Armies came into the Country and ravaged every
where; and they who would not tolerate a Servant of God, who could do them
nothing but Good both for Body and Soul, were forced to suffer private and
public Hardships, which were long and severe enough.

LXXIV. LXXIV. She goes to Hambourg.
She came to Hambourg, the last of March, 1676. where there was Appearance she
might live long enough retiredly, in a Place whose Freedom, Greatness, and
Trade, keeps them from taking exact Notice of Strangers and private Persons
that live there. The first Traverse she met with, was that she could find no
where a free Chamber, where she might live retired; so that after having waited
all Day, she was forced to go lodge in a Soldier's House, who offered her a
little Chamber, where she staid fifteen Months for want of a Retreat elsewhere.
In the Spring time she applied herself to make a little Garden of a Court which
was useless to the Lodging, and accommodated it very well and profitably. She
repaired and whitened her Chamber and a Part of the Lodging, washed her own
Linen, and served herself in every thing except the Buying of Provisions, not
daring to go abroad lest she should meet with some of her Acquaintaince. She
was most exact in all the outward things which Necessity and good Order
required, and said, this pleased God more than the most sublime Contemplations,
which often gratifies Self-love, and thereafter gives Occasion of Disorder and
Displeasure to the Soul, by the Confusion that Negligence has brought in
outward things. Whereas outward Labor even in the meanest things, humbles the
Heart, simplifies it, begets an entire and exact Submission to God, a laudable
Charity and Care for our Neighbor, and a certain Repose and Contentment of
Soul, which did more satisfy S. Joseph in being a Carpenter, than were the
Doctors of the Law, in preaching in Moses's Chair. She told how S. Terese
having begun to write one of her sublimest Works, and having interrupted it for
to Spin, when her Religious Nuns begged she would continue to write, she
answered them, that she must first have done with her Distaff. This A. B. told
sometimes smiling, to those who would persuade her not to employ her self in
outward Labors, that she might bestow all her Time in writing spiritual Things.

LXXV. LXXV. Her Exerc^se and Writings there.
She wrote then the Second Part of Solid Virtue, and the excellent Preface to
The Renovation of the Evangelical Spirit, and the Preface before The Blindness
of Men now adays; for she resolved to prepare all her Writings to be published;
after that God had made known to her that such was his Will; for by them the
Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached through all the World. There were several
Persons who came to her at this time from several Parts, and being convinced of
the Truth, offered her all the Services they were capable of. And she offered
them always unto God, that she might know how to behave with them. She was
again surrounded with Afflictions on all sides. In Sleswick her Friends were
robbed, beaten and wounded by the Soldiers and Rabble, and forced to leave the
Lodging and flee into the Woods, and from thence through the Snow into the Town of
Kiel. In Noordstrand the Peasants stole the Beast and other Goods she had
bought with her Money, her Friends there neglecting to sue after them. She
herself at Hambourg was seized with some Fits of Sickness which brought her
very low. And perceiving that some Friends who were then with her, were
troubled with the Thoughts of her being to be taken from them shortly by Death;
she said, Why do you make such Reckoning of me? I am nothing but a human
Creature. Fix upon God, and cleave to him. From him you must call for Help, him
you must strive to please. You are to have no Concern at all for me as to my
Person: It is to God only and to his Spirit that you must cleave. If I come to
die, what matters it? You must not for this leave off in the least to cleave
unto God and continue faithful unto him. If you trust in me, you will deceive
your selves. I may die as any other Person. And if God did not still preserve
my Life, as by a Miracle, amidst so much Weakness and Perils, I should have
been dead already a thousand times.

They were so persuaded of this particular Protection of God, that it made them
too confident that God would yet preserve her Life for a long time One of them
said to her, I do not believe that you can die so soon, whatever Evil befall
you. And I, says she, do certainly believe I may die even at this Moment. What
reason have you to believe the contrary? Because, replied he, God has given you
Promises which are not yet fulfilled, and we are sure that God will not be
wanting in his Word. He has promised, that you shall have Children who shall
imitate you; that you shall re-establish his Gospel Spirit upon Earth among Men
and Women; that a great Number shall follow you to the Desert, and out of the
Hurry of the World, and such like Promises, which not being yet fulfilled, it
follows you cannot die yet, since the Work for which God raised you up is not
yet done; and God will not forsake his Work. She answered, God will not give
over his Work, neither will he fail in his Promise, but I have already seen
enough that may save the Truth of his Promise though I die; I have seen the
Accomplishment of it in part, by the first Fruits, though not so perfectly. God
has already given me several Children, I have some of them who are gone to him.
I have seen some of them follow me in Retiring from the World, and hear me with
all their Heart, and that of all sorts; though they have neither been in so great
Numbers nor so perfect. Nevertheless this is enough, to have seen by the first
Fruits the Truth of the Promises of God, which on his Part he never fails to
fulfill entirely: But when Men do not correspond thereto, God leaves them,
retakes from them his Gifts, and seeks out other Subjects fitter to receive the
Accomplishment of what he promises: Whereas Men at present do render themselves
unworthy of it, and will not acknowledge nor receive the remarkable Graces that
God offers them. I greatly fear lest God withdraw his Gifts from them, and turn
himself to others; so I cannot assure you that I shall not die shortly. On the
contrary, when I consider the Ingratitude and Unthankfulness which Men show for
the Favors of God, I doubt if God will not shortly take me out of the World.
But added she, suppose God withdraw me, what is your Concern with my Person?
You ought not for this, to leave off to seek God, to cleave to him, to do the
best that is possible for you, to enjoy his Spirit, and then you shall have no
more need of my Person, for there is nothing in me to be esteemed, nor sought
after, nor followed, but the Spirit that guides me.

LXXVI. LXXVI. She is persec^ted by the Pastors there.
So long as her Enemies knew not that she was at Hamburgh, she lived peaceably
enough; but it coming at last to the Ears of the Lutheran Pastors, they were
the more affected with it, that one or two of their Hearers relished the Truth
of her Writings, which put them into an extreme Jealousy, the predominant
Passion of Churchmen. They set Spies on her Friends who went to see her, and
having thereby found her Lodging, and being certainly informed of her being
there, they assemble in Consistory, and conclude to depute two of their number
to Morrow Morning, to represent this to the Magistrates, that they might
preserve the City and Religion from being infected with so great an Evil. A. B.
was advertised of this, and conveyed about Ten a Clock at Night to a little
Garret, beside a poor Man, having sent her Manuscripts before her. On the
Morrow the Council sent four armed Sergeants to bring her to the Townhouse,
but did not find her. She staid fifteen Days in this little Garret, from whence
she wrote Letters to encourage her Friends. But her Enemies persisting in their
search for her, she resolved to go to Friesland, to a Baron who had invited her
thither. So she parted from Hamburg the 26th. of June, 1677.

LXXVII. LXXVII. Goes to Lutzburg, in Friesland.
After several Troubles in her Journey, she came at last to the Lordship of
Lutzburgh, in East-Friesland; and being well received by the Lord of the Place,
sent for her Friends to Sleswick, who had endured much from the Rage of the
People and Pastors there. Reflecting on the Place where she was, she judged it
proper to live in according to the Designs of God, who had already said to her:
The Perfection that I desire, is to have your Heart entirely looss'd from all
the Goods of the World 2dly. From all the Creatures. 3dly. From the Love of
ones self, and to desire nothing but God alone. To live in a forgetfulness of
all the World. To shut up your selves in some Place apart. To offer and give up
your selves entirely unto God. Not to aim at any good things upon Earth. To
live all in common on the same Revenue, and the same Entertainment. And that
without any other Engagement or Bond but the Love of God, and without any other
Rule but the Holy Gospel. To receive all Souls who are fit and disposed for it,
without regarding whether they have temporal Means or not, and this after the
same Manner with the Christians of the Primitive Church. God had also said unto
her formerly upon Occasion of this Petition which she often put up unto him.
Lord, what will thou have me to do? Separate your selves entirely from Men.
Keep silence. Possess nothing in Property, the Earth is sufficient to maintain
your Life. Do not entertain your Body but with its own Labor. Never give it
any thing but its Necessity. Let nothing be in the Lodging but that the use of
which is necessary. Continue always in Simplicity and Poverty of Spirit. Have
no Priests but for necessity. Let nothing be divided among you, but let all be
common without Preference. Manure the Ground. Be united as I am with my Father.
Let it be your only care to loosen Souls from the Earth. I will take care of
the rest.

LXXVIII. LXXVIII. Her Employment, and Writings there.
She accepted the Care of a Hospital, with which the Baron was charged by his
Ancestors, for a Retreat to Stran ers and the Persecuted; and to her great
Satisfaction she was freed of this Charge by a Letter from the Baron, after
having born it about two Years with Trouble, and without any Fruit for the
Glory of God. There came thither some Strangers from Holland, Hamburgh, and
elsewhere, to lead, as they said, a Christian Life with her; but really they
gave her only much Trouble, by bringing Dispositions quite contrary to that
Design. So they returned whither they pleased. While she and hers enjoyed any
Health, they applied themselves to the care of Household Affairs, to a Country
Life, to Husbandry, the feeding of Beasts; she sometimes to write, and others
to translate her Writings; or put them in a Condition of being printed. She was
visited by many Persons, even of Quality, who came more than once, and from
several Places to converse with her. She wrote here the Letter which makes the
Body of the First Part of The Renovation of the Gospel Spirit; and the
Introduction that is prefixed to it. She finished there the Second Part which
she had began formerly, and began the Third which is not finished, she being
employed in it when the last Persecutions and Death came upon her; she made
ready also the best part of her Manuscripts for the Press.

LXXIX. LXXIX. Long Sickness.
She had there two long Sicknesses, the first a continued Fever for some
Months, and the other a violent Quartan Ague which lasted for sixteen or
eighteen Months. When she was at the worst, two of her best Friends who were
with her, fell sick also unto Death, but God upheld them; they were all three
exposed to the Mercy of some wicked Servants who had horrible Projects against
them, if God by the Warnings he gave her, and by the Arrival of some Friends
from Amsterdam, had not prevented it.

LXXX. LXXX. Persecuted anew, by her Servant's Sorcerers.
Those Servants began by robbing all that was in the Lodging, which they
confessed they consumed in their nightly Sabbaths. After this, they resolved in
their Sabbaths, at the Solicitation of the Devil, to murder her by Night, and
her two Friends that was then sick. They declared they had been pressed to it by
some who had promised them a Thousand Crowns; that for six Days they were
watching an Occasion, and for three Nights came to the Door of the Apartment
where she was, armed with Swords and Hatchets to execute the Design. That they
gave it over one of the Nights, because they could not agree whether to begin
at her, or her two Friends; and the two other Nights they found the Door shut
which they had left open; and thereafter some Friends came, they confessed they
had tried often before to poison her with Diabolical Powders amongst her Meat,
and that of her Friends; not doubting but that might be the cause of their
continual Maladies.

LXXXI. LXXXI. By those who pretended to protect her.
After this, came the last Persecution that befell her, of which the Author of
the Continuation of her Life, thinks fit to give only a general Account,
without mentioning the Particulars, hoping that God may give Repentance to some
of those who had a hand in it. The Occasion was this: She had caused to be
brought from Holland of the Effects that belonged to her Friends to the Value
of many thousands, which were lent in this Country under her Name, thinking, it
may be, that this would serve to make them protect her, that they might the
longer enjoy these Advantages; and she could not credit the Suggestions made to
her, that perhaps they would endeavor to pick a Quarrel with her, that they
might have a Pretext to keep her Goods, after they had treated her ill and
chased her away. This seemed the quietest Time she had yet enjoyed; the Fever
had left her, though Weakness confined her for the most part to her Bed, and
there was nothing but Assurances of Friendship, but underhand it was quite
another thing.

-- Quid non mortalia pectora cogis,
Auri sacra fames? --
LXXXII. LXXXII. The Pretense for it, and the true Cause.
She had at Hambourg some Enemies who hated her mortally; they prompt a Child
of eight or nine. Years of Age to utter many Falsehoods against her and her
Friends, because he had staid with them, they made him say he had been pressed
by severe Chastisements to declare certain things to the Disadvantage of some.
Which were pure Falsehoods invented because of six stripes with a Wand which his
Master gave him for some little Faults without the knowledge of A. B. and that
many Weeks before the pretended Fact of the rigorous Treatment, which they
suggested to him to complain of. However, how soon this is heard of in
East-Friesland it was enough to turn all into a Civil or Capital Crime, into
Criminal Tortures inflicted privately by Order of that Maid, against the Right
of Authority; for which her Person and Goods ought to be arrested: And Letters
were sent to the Magistrates of Hamburg to cause the Child to depone
judicially, and send the Act to them, that the Crime might not go unpunished,
and to other three to abet this, and that two of them would come straight to
East-Friesland and insist against her, demanding to seize her Person, and
arrest her Goods, assuring them of Success. The Magistrates judged it unworthy
of their Notice, but a Lutheran Priest took the Deposition by Writing, and in
all the eight Articles it contained, there was not one thing against A. B. but
a Friend of hers, whose Reputation and Probity sufficed to preserve him from
Suspicion of any base thing. When she heard of all, she said, Ah, this was
unhappily lent Silver: Then said, I find I must absolutely leave this Place
quickly. And though she knew not where to retire, yet she took Courage, and God
gave her suddenly Strength to walk, which she had lost for more than a Year.

LXXXIII. LXXXIII. Goes to Franeker.
She parted from thence secretly into Franeker, in West-Friesland, which is
under the jurisdiction of the States General; taking one Friend along with her,
there she turned in into a House of one of her Acquaintance, sending her Friend
to Amsterdam, that he hiring a Lodging there, she might afterward retire to
it. So she was resolved to pass the Winter there; but the Inconveniency of the
Lodging brought such an Alteration on her Body, that her Fever returned with
greater Violence, with a Flux and a continual Vomiting, October, 8th. St. Vet.
her Malady increased daily. She prepared to die, spoke to those of the Lodging
about her Burial: That they should cause her Body to interred in the most mean
and simple manner, as if she had been a simple Maidservant, and that quickly
and without noise. She spoke many things addressing her self to God, but those
of the House not understanding French, could give small Account of it. Those of
the Lodging being taken up about their Affairs, after they had waited on her
for some Days, LXXXIV. Her Death.
committed her to the care of two old Women, who had no regard for her. She
became every Day weaker, and her Disease increased, so that the 20th. of
Oct^ber, St. Vet. Anno. 1680. her Soul was separated from her earthly
Tabernacle, having lived 64 Years, 9 Months, and 14 Days.

LXXXV. LXXXV. Her Character.
1. Antonia Bourignon was of a middle Stature, and Slender; her Countenance was
agreeable, her Complexion brown, her Forehead without Wrinkles, her Looks full
of Ingenuity; her Mien, her Speech, her Address without Affectation and
agreeable. She had a lively Spirit, a quick Ear, a strong Sight, a good Memory,
a clear Judgment.

2. Though she was of a healthful Body and a cheerful Mind, of an agreeable
Temper and lively Spirit, had abundance of temporal Goods, and all the
Advantages that could be desired to lead a pleasant and honorable Life in the
World; yet in the flower of her Age she despised all these to follow Jesus
Christ in a Life of Poverty, Contempt, and Trouble, and persevered in it till
Death; maugre all the Scorn, Oppositions, Hardships, and Discouragements she
met with.

3. In all things she studied to be poor in Spirit, and still chose for her
self the meanest and the least things, when she might have had the best, and in
the greatest Abundance. Her Diet was sober, without Abundance or Delicacies:
She made no difference of Meats, except that she shunned those which were too
dear, or which were more for gratifying the Palate than for necessary
Nourishment. She was modest in Apparel, without affecting Singularity,
accommodating her self to the Custom of the Place where she was, only she took
care to imitate the Lowliness of Jesus Christ, and therefore never chose the
finest Stuffs, Linens, etc. but the coursest and cheapest. To these, her
Lodging and Accommodation were suitable, a little Chamber, a few old Chairs, a
little Table, and sometimes a piece of Board upon her Knees to write upon, her
Bed and its Furnituee of the same kind, yet all neat and cleanly. She always
served her self, and was never served by others, but in case of necessity; but
most ready to serve others whether Poor or Rich indifferently, if this only
could be of any Profit to the Soul, or if any urgent Necessity called for Help,
no Service was then too mean for her, and to spare others she would readily go
and do the meanest Offices, even to wash the Dishes, scour the Pots, take off
the Ashes, wash the Linen, sweep and clean the House, not excepting any Employ
how low soever, provided Health, good Order, or other Reasons did permit it.

4. Yet, in all these, she never set to her self any particular Rules, and
advised her Friends never to amuse themselves with particular Rules of some
outward Customs of humble Habits and pious Countenances, which some Persons and
Sects do observe to show they are Devout and Spiritual, as to wear their
Apparel only of such a Fashion, or such a Color, or such a Stuff, or to choose
particular Meats, or the like, whereby they distinguish themselves from the
rest of the World, as being more Holy and more Virtuous than they. This, she
said, begets in such an Esteem of themselves and a Contempt of others, Matthew.
26. 48. 73.
is real Hypocrisy and the greatest Pride, and far from the Doctrine and
Practice of Jesus Christ, who could not be distinguished from his Disciples by
his Enemies when they came to apprehend him, without a Sign from Judas of his
kissing him; nor his Disciples from the rest of the People, but when their
Speech bewrayed them.

5. She was most diligent in her Affairs, did all things both for the Body and
Soul, with Foresight and good Order, without letting any thing be spoiled, but
put all to some good use, being always well employed in something, and acting
in all things with as much care as a faithful Steward; and that in little
things as well as great. She would never undertake a thing hastily, nor go
about with it Precipitation, not to have it soon done but to have it well done.
She took time first to recommend it to God, and being once persuaded that it
was agreeable to his Will, she did it leisurely, but with Perseverance, as God,
she said, did all his Works, Doucement and Fortement, this, she said, was good
both for Body and Soul, and advanced any Affair better than too much Vehemence.

6. She was so little concerned for to be esteemed and honored by Men, that
their Praises and Reproaches did equally touch her as little as if she had
never heard of them, seeking nothing in the World but that God might be
honored, and the Souls of Men saved. Her Business and her Thoughts never aimed
to procure Honor, Ease, Wealth, or Pleasures for her self or others. All her
Pleasure was to delight in God in her Solitude, out of the Conversation of Men,
and to bring to light what he gave her for the Salvatian of Souls: This made
her stay, for the most part Solitary, in her Chamber, and even when she was
taken up in sowing or any other Work, she loved still to be alone to keep her
Spirit always united to God, and if the Salvation of her Neighbor had not
required it, she would certainly have broken off from all Society.

7. Though Solitude was a thousand times more agreeable to her than any Company,
yet she would part with it, and make her self as it were a State of continual
Labors and Cares for the good of others, purely for the Love of God, and the
Salvation of Souls. So entire was her Resignation unto God, that what she once
knew to be his Will, though contrary to her Inclinations and Quiet, though she saw
she would meet with nothing but Contempt, Reproach, and Persecution in it, yet
she made a Sacrifice of all to follow it.

8. Her constant Rule was Righteousness, not only to render to every one in
outward things what appertained to them, but it extended to all things, to
those of the Soul as well as of the Body. She did not despise the Good that was
in her Enemies, nor excuse the Evil that was in her Friends. She never judged
according to Passions, but according to Equity. She would not be Partaker of
other Men's Sins.

9. Truth was the Rock on which she stood firm, and to which she did adhere and
cleave without Respect of Parties or Persons; so that they who opposed it,
might well hurt themselves, they could not shake her, and though all the Learned
in the World would have set themselves against her, she would have regarded it
no more than if they had been Children, being so established in the Truth. So
free was she from all humane and worldly Respects, that she would not for all
the Wealth, Friendship, or Terrors of the World omit to declare the Truth, if
the Glory of God required it.

10. The Love of God was the Element in which she lived: She delighted in him
only, despised all earthly things for him, and adhered to him so strongly, that
she would do nothing without his Divine Will.

11. All her Life was a constant Proof of her Charity to Men. From this Spirit
she employed her Time, Labor, and Goods, for many Years, for the Good of the
Souls and Bodies of a multitude of Orphans. She took all care to communicate to
the World, even against Men's Will, and endeavors to the contrary, the Light
that God gave her for the Good of their Souls, denuding her self of all
Accommodations, and su^fering all manner of Reproaches, and Har^ships, that she
might do them the greatest Good, and bring them to God.

12. And such was her Perseverance and Fortitude in this, that all the Scorn,
and Contempt, and Hardships, and Persecutions that she met with in a Course of
many Years, did not shake nor alter her.

13. She was so disinteress'd, so far from seeking her self, that she would
never seek for any, nor draw any Body over unto her Sentiments, and would not
let those who were with her, strive any ways to draw in others, even though they
by this way had been able to bring over the most Powerful and the most Learned
in the World, and from whom she and hers might have received ^ore of outward
Advantages and Support. Her Rules for her self and Friends were; Seek none, let
God operate in Souls, otherwise all will be nothing but the Works of Men's
hands, which will perish. As she had no other Butt, but to send all to God, so
she would have no other thing for the Motive and Principle, but the being moved
by God.

14. She had always a serenity and cheerfulness of Spirit, a tranquillity of
Mind, and Joy that even appeared outwardly. And whatever Emotion she might be
seized with upon some extraordinary Accident, or some great Fault committed by
others, yet it was soon ^ver; and she no sooner entered into her Chamber, or her
Solitude, but she returned again with great Tranquillity. She usually said, That
she hated nothing but, Honor and Sin.

15. Her Patience and Resignation was singular in the Sicknesses, Pains, and
other Adversities which be^el her, and her bearing with the Faults and
Infirmities of those who were with her; though upon Occasions her Zeal and
Fervor made her rebuke them earnestly, especially when they sinned wilfully
and maliciously: For they who were of good Inclinations, and sinned through
Infirmity or Ignorance, she bear with them, or corrected them with great
Mildness and Lenity; but if any who had been often admonished, did sin wilfully
and maliciously, she did rebuke them vehemently, and being moved with a lively
Zeal, set her self against their Iniquity: and we see it was usual for the most
Holy to do so, Moses, Paul, and others, yea, and Jesus Christ himself.

16. Her Faith in God did uphold her on all Occasions, never doubting of the
Truth of his Word, waiting his Time for the fulfilling of it, and looking still
to the things which are not seen, and which are eternal.

17. Her admirable Knowledge in Divine Things, appears by all her Writings, and
the manner of acquiring it, was no less Admirable, not by the means of Books,
Schools, or Men; (as was evident to all who conversed with her, Temoign de
Vertie, Part 1. p. 146.
and appears from all her Writings) But all my Books, says she, and Library
consist in the Conversation of my Spirit with God, and my School is to learn to
purge my Soul from Sin, and to withdraw its Affections from all earthly things,
that it may love only those which are Eternal. The manner also of composing her
Writings, as has been already mentioned, was no less singular and
extraordinary. Her Knowledge was singular also in other things, as there was
occasion for it; particularly in the Law, in the Matters of Right and Justice,
so that the greatest Lawyer could not have more distinctly deduced an Affair,
nor urged it with stronger Reasons, as appears in the Affairs of M. de Cort,
and of Noordstrand.

18. Her Humility and Lowliness did shine forth in her Actions, so that they
who conversed with her do declare, they could not observe in her any thing of
Pride or Self-esteem. Yet this was not expressed by artificial humble Words and
Gestures, which affect the Reputation of being thought so, and cover the
greatest Pride, but by an unaffected Poverty of Spirit, and giving the Glory of
all Good to God: And the very things which her Enemies adduce as Instances of
Pride, were great Evidences of the contrary.

19. Simplicity and Sincerity of Heart were her nature; there was no Guile in
her Spirit; she not only would not deceive Men, but also would not deceive her
self; and because of this single Eye, her whole Body was full of Light; for God
makes wise the Simple.

20. She often blessed God for three Things: 1. That he never let her drink in
the Doctrine of Men; for this, she said, would have made her incapable of
receiving that of the Holy Spirit. 2. That he had not engaged her in a married
State; for then she would have lost the Liberty of cleaving to God only. 3.
That he gave her Peace and Tranquillity of Mind in all Rencounters; for
otherwise she would have often times stumbled or fallen in the so many different
Accidents and Miseries to which she was exposed.

21. Her Life was a continual Prayer, Tomb. de la fausse Theol. Part 3. Letter
1. nu. 17, 18.
her Spirit being always turned toward God, whether she was writing, or
working, or eating, or walking, or in her Chamber, or traveling; every thing
gave her Occasion of begging his Help, or to bless him for his Favors, or to
adore and celebrate his Perfections.

22. As she heartily regrated the Divisions of Christendom, so she advised
those of her Friends who had withdrawn themselves from the World to lead a
Christian Life, not to make new spiritual Assemblies and Meetings. She said,
Christians ought always to entertain one another with spiritual Things; and
that all their Words and Works should be Sermons for edifying and animating one
another to Virtue, and to the Perfection of their Souls. She bid them purge
their Souls from Sin, and labor to acquire true Virtue, and to preach to
themselves and others by their Life. Not but that she thought public
Assemblies were necessary for those who were still taken up about Worldly
Affairs, and who would apply the whole time of their Life in temporal Affairs,
if there were not some Times appointed for Prayer, or some Places for hearing
Instruction. Nor did she think public Assemblies unlawful when they sincerely
sought the Glory of God: Nor that they who were truly regenerated themselves
and endu'd with Divine Light to instruct others, ought not to teach them. But
she gave this Counsel to her Friends, both that they might avoid the Scandal of
Forming a new Sect, and the drawing upon themselves unnecessary Persecutions
and Hatred in Places where such Assemblies were not tolerated, and that they
might not be tempted to Vainglory, Curiosity, and Destruction, by offering to
teach others before they were well taught themselves for their own Perfection,
or by desiring to learn from others that which they did not practice.

23. Being asked concerning the Eucharist, if she held Transubstantiation, or
Consubstantiation, or a figurative Representation only; She said, These were
all unprofitable Speculations, about which Men dispute to no purpose, and yet
none of them can tell how this Mystery is. Neither is it necessary for
Salvation, nor for the Fruit of true Communicating. As for me, says she, I
never apply my self to these Formalities, but in Simplicity I lift up my Heart
and Spirit unto God, and place my self always as in his Presence, and I
communicate, uniting my Design, and my Intention with that of Jesus Christ, and
in his Spirit, without troubling my self with other Particularities, provided
my Spirit be united to his, and in a true Disposition of conforming my self to
him, and of following him.

24. Though she had the Liberty to Converse with many, Yet, Avis salut. let. 133.
she said, she saw it not fit, since Men now are so accustomed to see affected
Gestures and counterfeit Virtues, that they cannot receive True Virtue, says
she, unless it be accompanied with that Surliness and those Hypocritical
Gestures which I abhor; for God will not lead me by these Ways. He gives me a
Tranquillity of Mind, and a Joy in my Soul, that even appears outwardly. I have
no insolent Laughters, but a continual Joy that oftentimes chears those who
converse with me, when they know that my Joy does not proceed from any human
Satisfaction, but from my Conversation with God. But they who do not understand
these things, do imagine that one who has received the Holy Spirit should be
still melancholy, sad and serious to the utmost Degree, thinking that he ought
not to do or speak the least thing that Men see or know; painting out Virtue
like to a hideous Old Wife wasted with Penitence; though all these things may be
done in Hypocrisy and a Study of Self-esteem. But the Spirit of God gives
Liberty to those whom he governs, (rendering them sincere, affable, and
friendly, without any Dissimulation,) to treat with an open Heart with the
Friends of God, without any Reserve or Windings, but freely and openly, though
with Prudence toward the Wicked: This is to be simple as Doves and wise as
Serpents, and to beware of Men, as says the Scripture.

But her Character is to be had best from her Writings, and from the Spirit
that guided her.

The End of the Fourth Part.
A LETTER CONCERNING The Preface to the Snake in the Grass, and Bourignianism
detected.
SIR,
I. I. The Occasion of the Letter.
YOU tell me that you have seen a written Apology for A. B. and that you
thought strange to find no Mention there of the Preface to the Snake in the
Grass, and Bourignianism detected. Sir, I am persuaded that the Writer of the
Apology did that upon a good Design; he saw how hard it was to reason with Men
in Passion and not become angry too, or inflame them the more: He thought it
was best not to answer, and yet to answer them; and by this Means to preserve
the Quiet of his own Mind, and yet give them a fair Occasion to reflect upon
their own Mistakes. Yet since you say, that Zeal for the Truths of the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, and Charity to Men's Souls, especially those who may have
conceived Prejudices from their Misrepresentations, and to the Authors
themselves in particular, do require a more particular Application to these
Writings. I shall therefore freely and plainly tell my Sentiments of them, with
that Candor and Charity to the Persons concerned, that, I hope, they will take
them for the Reproofs of a Friend, and so count them better than the deceitful
Kisses of Flatterers, or the groundless Plaudites of unthinking Persons, who
are more taken with an Air of Confidence, and a bold Way of Representing
things, than with Truth and Reality.

II. II. Necessary Qualifications in Writers of Narratives und Characters.
They who take upon them to write Narratives, and to give the World Characters
of the Sentiments, Spirit, and Writings of any Person (as those two Authors do
of A. B. the one in some Instances only, the other more fully) ought to have
these Qualifications, if they would do it aright. 1. They ought thoroughly to be
acquainted with the Writings and Sentiments, before they can give a just and
true Account of them, things being cleared, expressed and owned in one Place
that are not so in another. 2. They ought to consider the great Scope and
Design of the Writer, and the Means by which he prosecutes it, and (it both the
one and the other be good and excellent) to give his Words and Sentiments in
other things as favorable an Interpretation as they will bear, suitable to the
main Scope and Substance of the Writings: If they be Things wherein they have
no Knowledge nor Experience, they ought neither to judge nor censure them; and
if there be even Mistakes in lesser Things, they ought not to aggravate nor
ridicule them, but to extenuate and cover them for the sake of the main things
that are so excellent and praiseworthy. This same Rule also is to be observed
in ^udging of the Lives of Persons, to consider the main Scope of them, whether
it be Time or Eternity; and the Means by which they prosecute that great End,
and not rashly to judge or give a Character of them, from some outward Actions
which may be good or evil according to the inward Principle they proceed from.
3. They ought to look upon the Sentiments and Actions they would judge of, with
a simple, unprejudiced Eye, otherwise they cannot judge aright, they look in
colored Glasses, and so deceive both themselves and others who listen to them.
4. Narrators ought to be faithful and sincere, not falsifying in the least, nor
singling out Pieces of Sentences or Purposes, or some Circumstances of Actions,
studying thereby to blacken them, and designedly concealing what would serve to
clear and justify them, but faithfully and honestly narrating the whole.

III. III. These wanting in the Authors of the Preface to the Snake in the
Grass, and Bourignanism detected.
Now, I am sorry, I must say that in this Affair those Authors have been
greatly wanting as to these Requisites, and so were very unfit for such an
Undertaking. 1. They were Strangers to the Life or Sentiments of A. B. the one
neither knew nor had read any of her Writings, but such as were done in
English; and the other had read few or none of them, till he applied himself to
confute them; and though he never knew her himself, will now, Eighteen Years
after her Death, essay to blacken her by most horrid Imputations; though her
Innocence and Purity be sufficiently attested by Persons of unquestionable
Credit and Integrity. 2. In their Narratives they have neither regarded nor
mentioned the great Scope of all her Writings, which is to persuade Men to the
Love of God, and to convince them that they are estranged from it: Nor the
Means by which she prosecutes this End; the leading Men to the Imitation of the
Life of Jesus Christ, in Mortifying their corrupt Nature, and living a Life of
Penitence. And how she makes it appear they do it not. Nor does the Doctor in
the Character of her Life of represent the great Scope thereof, the Traveling
toward Eternity; nor the Means she used in order thereto. 3. It is visible,
That what they have read of her Writings, has been with an evil Eye, with a
Design to carp at them, to pick out such Expressions, as might serve them to
render her and her Writings hateful and ridiculous to the World. They who
compare their Narratives with her Writings, will easily be convinced of this,
when they find them skipping over the most excellent Matters, and fixing only
upon such Things as they thought capable of being perverted and empoisoned by
their false Turns and malicious Glosses; while hundreds of indifferent Persons
have acknowledged that they could not read any of her Writings without being
touched with a serious Sense of Divine Things; and that they see the practical
Part of Christianity represented in them with a Clearness beyond any that is to
be seen in most practical Writers. And, 4. It is no less evident, that they
have not been faithful and ingenuous, but have either singled out some mangled
Sentences, concealing the Context that might clear them, or tacked together a
Number of Passages of different Places, to make them ridiculous, or most
untruly translated them; of which I shall hereafter give some Instances.

IV. IV. The first Author's rash and spiteful Charge against A. B.
One would have thought that the Author of the Preface to the Snake in the
Grass, who exposes others for their furious, spiteful and foul Language, and
gives a necessary Caution, That in Answering his Book, they should not after
their usual Fashion carp at some Ward or Expression, and neglect the whole
Substance of the Matter; and who had sufficient Caution given him in the
Preface to the Light of the World, not to affix such a Sense to any single
Expressions or Passages of A. B ^s Writings, as runs contrary to the whole
Tenor of them, and to a Protestation concerning the Summary of her Sentiments,
with Respect to the Essentials of Christianity there inserted; for thus the
best Authors may be traduced, by the most shameful Manglings, malicious
Interpretations, deceitful Calumnies, injurious Consequences, etc. One would
have thought that after all this, he should not have followed these Measures
himself; and yet we find him palpably forming the high Charge of: 1.
Blasphemous Pride: 2. Overturning all Priest hood and Ordinances of the Gospel:
3. Incharitableness and damning all the World: 4. The misrepresenting the
Design and Import of the Gospel: 5. The perverting the Doctrine of the Gospel:
6. A Contempt of the Holy Scriptures; and lastly, of wild and barbarous
Notions, against her, upon the same False and Disingenuous Proceedings, and not
abstaining from the Furious and Spiteful Words, Cloven Foot, the Devil of a
Saint, Mad, Crazed, Bigoted. How false this Charge is, how ill founded, how
contrary to the Temper of her Spirit, and the strain of her Writings, the
Author might have observed from her own Writings, if he had considered without
Prejudice or Passion; and may now further see in the Apology: I need not fully
resume the Particulars, but only touch upon and direct him to the Places where
he may have Satisfaction concerning them.

V. V. A. B. Vindicated from the 1, Of blasphemous Pri^^.
She is vindicated from the 1. of Blasphemous Pride, in the Second Part of the
Apology, p. 166, etc. where it appears, that she is far from exalting her self
above the Prophets, or Apostles, or Fathers, far less above Jesus Christ
himself; that she acknowledges her self a poor, frail Creature of the corrupt
mass of Adam, subject to Sins and Infirmities, who greatly straied from God in
her younger Years, that of her self she has nothing but Evil, and that all Good
comes from God; and that since it may please God in the latter Ages of the
World, by some of his Servants, more clearly to explain and unfold the hidden
Prophecies and Parables of the Old and New Testament when the time of their
Accomplishment draws near; it will not be found, that those, to whom God shall
please to make such Discoveries, are thereby exalted above the Prophets, or
Jesus Christ himself; or that they, by owning and declaring them, do exalt
themselves: Thus A. B. when she speaks of God's Graces to her, does it with the
greatest Humility as is evident from these very Places cited by the Author,
whence he culls his half Sentences, where she assumes to her self no
Prerogative above the most Wicked of all Creatures, or even a Stone or Wood,
wherewith, she declares God might have served himself in declaring of his
Marvels, if it had been his Pleasure, whom yet she cannot resist, since he
pleases to declare his Marvels by her, and that he may damn her (if she has
merited it) in the End, being absolute Lord of all things; to this Purpose her
own Words in the 136, and 137 p. of the Light of the World, are fully cited in
the 169 p. of the Apology: And thus also p. 132 of the Light of the World. I
would be very presumptuous, says she, to believe that these so clear
Interpretations come from my self. Yea, on the other hand it should pass for an
Instance of great Self-denial, and humble Resignation unto the Will of God, in
any who will, even by the Command of God, declare themselves to be the Organ of
his Spirit for more clear Explications of those things that have been formerly
expressed in dark Similitudes and Parables, when they know assuredly that they
will meet with nothing but Scorn and Reproach from Men upon that Account. And
if this be the Case of A. B. as the Third Part of the Apology gives strong
Presumptions for it, and many are persuaded it is, then her Declaration of the
Truth of this is no Instance of Pride, or that she exalts her self above
others, but a great Instance of Self-denial and humble Resignation. To this,
Parole de Dieu. p. 127.
Purpose she expresses her self: I must not, says she, because of the Reproach
and Confusion I may meet with, conceal that which God will have published and
observed. It does not become a poor Worm of the Earth to give Laws of God. He
knows by whom and how he will operate, without regard to out Meanness and
Unworthiness.

As to that other Proof of her Blasphemous Pride, taken from the high
Characters given her by others whom he calls her Bigoted Disciples, some of
them twenty Years after her Death, (as that in the English Preface to the Light
of the World) it is a new way of Reasoning, owing, I think, purely to the
Author: Yet there, she is not preferred to the Blessed Virgin; for though to be
the Organ of the Light and Spirit of God is more than to be the Organ or Mother
of his humane Body; yet to be the Organ both of Spirit and Body, is more than
to be the Organ of any one of them; and this is not denied to the Blessed
Virgin. When, because of the high Characters given her by some while she lived,
it was objected to her, that she affected the Praise of Men, and suffered M. de
Cort, Temoig. de verite. Part 2. p. 47.
and others, highly to extol the inward Graces that God imparted to her: She
said, That if such had felt the Operations of God in their Souls by her means,
as M. de Cort, and some others had done, they would have said the same; that
they did not praise her Person (in which there was nothing praise worthy) but
the Light and Truth of God, which they saw and heard by her means. This, she
said, did not puff her up, since the Works of God, which she remarked, did
humble her Heart, the more she discovered them; for I discern, says she, the
Spirit of God from that of Nature, and see clearly that all that comes from God
is Good, and all that comes from my self is Evil, so that I have no Ground to
glory in my Evil, and I know no Good out of God, this Rule keeps me steady from
fall^ng into Vain^glory. Ibid. p. 59, 60.
-- It is no wonder that some judge, that I please my self with the Praises of
Men, in suffering that Preface to be published; when they will needs measure me
by themselves, they cannot judge otherways but that I take Pleasure to hear my
own Praises, feeling in themselves, that they could not hear their own Praises
without vain Complacency; and measuring every one by themselves, every one
thinks, another is as he himself is: A Thief trusts no Body, thinking that
another is as much Thief as himself: A lewd Person cannot believe that another
would live in Continence, when he has a fair Occasion to satisfy his Lust; and
so a proud Person cannot believe that one would hear their own Praises without
having their Heart puffed up with Pride, because he himself cannot hear his
Praises, without deriving Vain glory from them. This befalls all those who live
still in the Sentiments of corrupt Nature. -- But I am, says she, by the Grace
of God, arrived at that State, that the Praises and Reproaches of Men are all
one to me, and I make no more reckoning of the one than of the other, because
of the small Esteem I have of the Judgment of Men, who often praise that which
they ought to despise, and despise that which they ought truly to esteem.

If, I^id. p. 81, ^^.
says she, M de Cort has said in his Preface that I have more Light than all
the Authors that he had ever read, this does not infer that he would place me
above the Prophets, Apostles, or Jesus Christ himself, as you allege) but he
would only declare that he received more Light by my Discourses, than by
reading of all the Authors he had ever seen, yea, even the Scripture it self,
since it is obscure in some places; whereas our daily Conferences gave him more
Clearness, and my Practice made him penetrate the true Sense of the Scriptures,
in which he had read many things, whereof he understood nothing at all. If the
Author had not been hasty to condemn her, but had calmly heard and considered
what she had to say for her self, he would not perhaps have past so hard a
Censure, but would have been convinced, that the most humble may speak well of
themselves, and suffer others to do so too, and that without the least Tincture
of Pride or Vainglory. If we would first set our selves to cast out the Beam
out of our own Eye, we should then see clearly to take the Beam out of another.

VI. VI. From the 2. That she overturned Priesthood. etc.
The Second Accusation, that she overturned Priesthood and the Ordinances, is
evinced to be as palpable a Mistake, as the former, in the Second Part Of the
Apology, page 154, 155, etc. It was no fair dealing in the Author to pick out
some few Words of a Passage, and not relate the whole, as it is in p. 54. of
the First Part of the Light of the World. And whereas you ask, says she,
whether all these outward Devotions, which are now in use in Christendom, are
good and saving, I doubt it very much; for Christ taught no such Varieties of
Devotions as we see now adays, but he taught solid inward Virtues, as Faith,
Hope, and Charity, these are the Instructions of Jesus Christ, but they who are
at present called Churchmen, teach no other thing but to resort to Churches, to
frequent Sacraments, and to say a great many vocal Prayers by rote and number;
and with these outward things they make them believe that they are True
Christians, which cannot be, since Christianity consists in an inward spiritual
Life, for it is Divine and not Humane. Which Words might have born a more
favorable Construction, than the overturning of all Priesthood and the
Ordinances of the Gospel; they, being truly levelled against the Corruptions of
the Ordinances, and might have been so understood; especially if the Author had
considered, that A. B. had never yet been without the Bounds of the Roman
Communion, whose Churchmen all Protestants do accuse of laying the Stress of
Religion too much upon the Varieties of their outward Devotions and Ceremonies.
And when it is told, that A. B. has written an express Apology for Pastors, the
Pastoral Office, and the Public Ordinances; it is, I must say, a singular way
of answering, to reply, that those Enthusiasts are all Contradictions to
themselves, and opposite to one another, as if one could not blame the Abuses
of the Priesthood and outward Devotions, and yet stand up for the Office of
Pastors and the Ministry, without a Contradiction. Sure the Holy Scripture is a
good President, which establishes these, and yet condemns the Abuses of them
in a thousand Places, calling the Pastors, Deceivers, Dumb Dogs, Hirelings,
Hypocrites, Thieves, Wolves, and many other Names of this nature. S^ Is. 1.
God abhors his own Institutions when corrupted. Churchmen have their
Corruption as, well as others, and to flatter them in them, is but to sow
Pillows to their Armholes. When the Pastoral Office is turned into a Trade,
whereby Men chiefly propose to get a Living, and Reputation in the World, when
the great End of it is despised, and the Duties of it done superficially, in
order to these other Ends: This is a Priestcraft that should be decried, and
they who have the greatest love to Christianity will be most forward to do it;
and it is in this Respect only that A. B. condemns the Abuses of the Priesthood
and the outward Ordinances, and not the Function and the Offices themselves.

VII. VII. From the 3, Of Uncharitableness, etc.
The Author's Third Point of her Incharitableness, and damning all the World,
is cleared in the Apology p. 63, 161, etc.
. A. B. declares that God would have all Men to be saved, and that no Body can
be saved without being regenerated into the Spirit of Jesus Christ; (the Spirit
of Charity, Humility, and Poverty) and without leading his Life; and that in
the mean time all generally have stray^d out of the Paths of his Life, and are
Strangers to his Spirit: If this be a certain Truth, then to cry aloud and give
warning of this, is an Act of the greatest Charity: If mortal and pestilential
Diseases had overspread the whole Earth, and the Contagion were universally
derived from Parents upon the Children, and the most part were insensible of
their Disease, and could hardly be persuaded that they were sick; if
notwithstanding it should please God to raise up a skilful and infallible
Physician, who had provided certain and undoubted Remedies, taken them first
himself, and left plain Directions how to use them, and great numbers at first
by following his Rules and Example had fully recovered their Health: If yet in
process of Time the generality of Men, few or none excepted, left off to follow
the Precepts, would not be confined to such strict Rules of Physic, (as to
Air, Diet, Company, Self-will, etc. as if they were all contagious) and thought
the Physician's Rules and Example unpracticable; but yet made a Fashion of
honoring him, and proceeded so far as to restrain the grossest outward
Eruptions, which would make them loathsome to their Neighbors, tho inwardly
they still labored under mortal Diseases, and could hardly be convinced of it.
Would it be thought want of Charity in any to give loud Warning of this to the
World? If any had recovered, or were upon the recovering Hand, would they think
themselves greatly injured by any who should say, that now there were none in
Health, and they did not see how any could recover after the manner the, lived
now? They would rather think it might well be said so, the Number being so few,
that they might be called none at all, and this might perhaps excite and awaken
some of those who remained still insensible of their State, to take the true
Measures for their Recovery: That this is a true Figure of the Spiritual State
of the World at present, is but too evident. If God has declared in different
Ages of the World, Genesis 6* 12. Ps 14. 3. Mic. 7. 2.
that all Flesh has corrupted his Ways; that there was none that did Good, no
not one; that the good Man is perished out of the Earth, and there is none
Upright among Men: And at the same time there might have been some few who
sought God with all their Hearts, God's Saying was not to damn, but to rescue
from Damnation; Why may not the same be now declared, if the World be in as bad
a State. I am sure the Incharitableness and Damning lies on the other side. If
any pleases to read the entire Passages out of which the Author has culled his
half Sentences, it is like they will have other Impressions of her Spirit, than
what he would give them. She shows, what is the true Doctrine of Jesus Christ.
Light of the World, Part 1. p. 47.
And therefore, says she, I fear there shall be so few Souls at present saved,
because few or none follow indeed this Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and there is
nothing more true than that without doing this, we cannot be saved, as you also
acknowledge. ^emo ig^ de ve^i^e, Part 2. p. 71.
It were better, as she says, for every on^ to search their own Hearts, and to
discover if they really possess the Qualities, which the Spirit of Jesus Christ
has, than to dispute whether there be yet any True Christians upon Earth;
seeing this touches no Body in general, but every one for himself ought to
labor to become a true Christian, without being so curious to know, whether
his Neighbor be so or not; since though all the Men of the World were so, and
I were not, this would avail me nothing. The Design of such Words, is not, that
we may nicely and critically quibble upon the Words, but that we may
impartially search our own Hearts, and see what Truth there is in them as to
our selves.

VIII. VIII. From the 4, Of (...) the Design (...).
One could hardly have imagined, that the Author could have formed his fourth
Accusation, of her misrepresenting the Design and Import of the Gospel, and
founded it upon the Passages he cites. She says, the Design of the Gospel is,
to recover Men to the Love of God; and that the Laws and the Life of Jesus
Christ, are the necessary means to that End. She never understood it, that all
use of Riches was forbidden; or that Riches without any more were an infallible
Sign of not being a Christian; but that we ought to be poor in Spirit, even
when we have Riches, and if they prove an Impediment to that, rather to abandon
them, than not to aspire to the other. The first Passage the Author cites to
prove his Charge, is a Saying of hers, when a Child of Four Years, occasioned
by the difference she then observed betwixt the Lives of them about her, and
the Character she had then learned of Jesus Christ, which, taking her own Sense
of them, do not in the least differ from the true Design and Import of the
Gospel. This, says she, is an Eternal Truth, that the Spirit of God, loves and
desires nothing but things Eternal, and the natural Spirit only loves and seeks
after things Temporal: This was clearly shown me from my Childhood, and
therefore at the Age of Four Years, I was desirous to go and find out the
Country, where the Christians lived; reasoning with my little Judgment, that
those could not be True Christians, who seek after, or desire the Honors,
Pleasures, and Riches of this World; but that they ought only to seek after
things Eternal. In the other Place, she is speaking against the excessive Pomp
of the Church of Rome. The Practice of those, says she, who are Members of
Rome, does sufficiently evidence to me, That the Holy Spirit cannot be the
Author of those things which are contrary to the Practice of Jesus Christ: We
see the Prelates attended with Servants, and Coaches, and Trains, like to
Secular Princes, their Houses and Furniture do surpass them; (this the Author
leaves out) if they had Faith to believe that God being Man, was poor and
despised, they would blush for Shame, (as all other Christians) to make
themselves thus to be honored. All which might have been said, without so
harsh a Censure, from a Protestant Minister, as that she had mistaken the whole
Design and Import of the Gospel. I thought still that to desire, and love, and
make one self to be honored, had been Pride and Ambition; as well, as to
desire Riches, is Covetousness; and that it had been inconsistent with the
Spirit of the Gospel in Churchmen as well as in others. Our Author in the next
Impression of his Preface, by his way of Reasoning, may bring in our Savior,
mistaking the Design of his own Gospel, when he says, Woe to you that are Rich,
how hard it is for a rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: Woe to you
that are full: Woe to you that laugh: Woe to you Pharisees, for you love the
uppermost Seats in the Synagogues, and greetings in the Markets, and to go in
long Clothing, and to have the uppermost Rooms at Feasts; he may as
consequentially infer, that the Rich, and such as live Plentifully, and make
themselves to be honored, are acccording to Christ's Doctrine, in a State of
Damnation; as that according to A. B's Doctrine, all Prelates, and all
Christians who have Servants or Coaches, or make themselves to be honored, do
all run blindly to Damnation: But if he can put such a Sense upon our Savior's
Words, as is consistent with the Use of Riches, and giving honor to whom it is
due; why may not he heartily construct her Words, without inferring that she
destroys all Relations among Men.

The Author's Friend, it seems, has no regard to Truth, when he makes him
inconsiderately publish so many Falsehoods. The Jesuits never cheated A. B. of
any of her Estate; she left not M. Poiret a Penny, and he always was, and still
is, as sound and sober in his Mind and Reason as the Author.

IX. IX. From the 5, Of her denying the Satisfaction of Jesus Christ.
But the most grievous Accusation, and that in which he most triumphs, is the
5th. that she miserably perverts the Doctrine of the Gospel, falling in with
the vile Socinian Heresies, and even outdoing them; and that she absolutely
denies and disputes against any Satisfaction made by the Death and Sufferings
of Jesus Christ: From this, her own Writings fully vindicate (...), as is made
appear in the Apology p 86, 87, etc.
. The Socinians its known, deny the Foundation of all Merit in Jesus Christ,
his Divinity and Personal Union with the Godhead; they deny the very saving
Means and Remedies that flow from his Merits, viz. the inward renewing and
sanctifying Grace and Operations of Jesus Christ purifying the Soul; they deny
the Disease it self that needs these Remedies, viz. the vast and unspeakable
Corruption of our whole Natures both inward and outward, derived upon us by
Adam, and greatly increased by us. All this A. B. utterly abhors, and declares
on the Contrary, that Jesus Christ is true Eternal God, and true Man; that he
is the Mediator between God and Man, the Savior and Redeemer of Mankind, that
none ever was or shall be saved, but by his Intercession and Merits; that he
became their Pledge and Surety, and effectively paid the Penalty; that he
clothed himself with our Mortality, and gave himself in Sacrifice for the
Redemption of his Brethren; that from his Life, his Actions, his Sufferings,
and Death, do flow all the saving Means both outward and inward, that are
necessary for removing the horrid Corruption of Mankind, both as to Body and
Soul; for destroying in us all Evil, all Wickedness, and the Image of the
Devil; and for recovering us unto and perfecting us in Holiness; and in the
Love and Image of God. This is the Essence of the true Orthodox Christian
Doctrine, as to the Merits and Satisfaction of Jesus Christ; and the Reason why
many of her Expressions are so misunderstood upon this Subject, seems to be,
that she endeavored to undeceive such as soothed and flattered themselves in
the looseness and irregularity of their Lives, (from the Pretense of the utter
Impossibility to keep the Commandments of God, and the full Satisfaction of
Jesus Christ, and the Penalties paid by him) by declaring distinctly, that as
Jesus Christ had done enough on his Part for their Salvation, procuring them
Pardon and Time to repent, and Grace to return to the Love of God; so they must
do what is required on their Parts, repent and return to the Love of God, and
the Instructions and Commands Jesus Christ left with them, are the necessary
Means to bring them to it. If we would reign with Christ, we must suffer with
him. It is well known that the vulgar way of explaining this Doctrine, had too
great a tendency to the Flattering of corrupt Nature, that the Doctrine of the
Antinomians is now owned by many, and as to Men's Practices, it seems to be the
Principle of all: What need is there then to caution against so damnable a
Principle? And grant once that none can be saved by Jesus Christ, but they who
follow his Life and Doctrine, and the Sentiments of A. B. will allow, the
Doctrine of the Satisfaction of Jesus Christ to be received in the highest
Sense, that may show God's Indignation against Sin, his Compassion to Sinners,
his Regard to the Holiness and Authority of his Laws, and may lay a powerful
Obligation upon Men not to trample upon them. In this manner the Doctrine of
the Satisfaction has been explained and cleared by the Reverend Dr.
Stillingfleet, Dr. Outram, Dr. Scot, and others, and I know none who Esteem the
Sentiments of A. B. who would not thus cordially embrace it. How unjust and
injurious the Author is in this Matter to A. B. evidently appears by the 6th.
and 8th. Letters, of the Third Part of Lum. en tenebres, the last whereof is
subjoined to this Apology among some others translated into English.

The Occasions of these Expressions cited by the Author, upon which he grounds
this Accusation, is a peculiar Sentiment of A. B. That such is God's Love to
Mankind, and his Delight with the Children of Men, that he designed to become
like to Man, as he had made Man like to himself, that there might be mutual
Contentment in a mutual Likeness; and he might live spiritually and bodily with
Men to all Eternity, even though Man had never sinned; yea, that he united
himself to the humane Nature from the Beginning in the first Born in Adam See
Ap^logy, p. 59, etc.
, and after that Man had plunged himself into Sin and Misery, he became in all
things like to him, yet without Sin, that he might redeem and save them. Now
the only difference between this and the generally received Doctrine, lying in
these two, that God would have become Man though Adam had not sinned, and that
he united himself to Man's Nature even in the Beginning, (which the Author if
he pleases may look upon as Dreams, since no Body says they are necessary to
Salvation) she might well have used these Expressions cited by the Author,
without denying thereby any Satisfaction by Jesus Christ. Light of the World p.
139.
She gives good Reasons, for saying, that God had no need to become Man to
redeem us; he is not subject to any Necessity; that he might have suffered Man
to perish eternally, and created a Thousand Adams, and a Thousand earthly
Paradices, with the same Perfections in which he created the first, out of
Nothing: She does not deny that Jesus Christ, coming to redeem Man, must
suffer, (and so the Texts the Author brings to prove this are needless) but
affirms, that God would have become Man, though Adam had not sinned: And the
Reason why she says he would needs suffer and die by Accident, for the
Instruction and Relief of Men, is because she was persuaded that Sin came into
the World by Accident; by Man's abuse of his free Will, against the Will of
God, and contrary to the first and essential Designs that he had in creating
Man, which was, that he might take his Delight with him, and not that Man might
sin, and thereby give him an Occasion to magnify his justice and Mercy. And
God's primary Design in becoming Man, was, that he might make an eternal
Alliance with Man; and Man^s falling into Sin, gave Occasion to his prosecuting
his first Design by a State of Humiliation and Suffering, that so he might
recover Fallen Man.

Although Jesus Christ did highly glorify God, by the Divine Virtues of
Meekness, Patience, Charity, etc. manifested by him in his Sufferings, yet
certainly the unworthy Treatment he met with in the World, from those whom he
came to save, must needs be Matter of the greatest Grief and Sorrow to those
pious Souls that beheld it, and to all that ever knew it; and therefore it is
no wonder, though that Day, in the beholding whereof, the Fathers in the ancient
Law are said to rejoice, be interpreted, of the Day of his second Coming in
Glory, and not of his first Coming to Suffer.

The Author is greatly mistaken in what he calls her second Argument, as if she
affirmed that none of the Holy Prophets spoke of Jesus Christ's Coming to
Suffer; for all that she affirms, is Light of the World. p. 142.
That if you read attentively the Prophets, you will find they speak much more
of his Coming in Glory, than of that in Reproach. And there has been Occasion
given of mistaking the Passage cited by the Author in the End of the 22d. p. of
his Preface, by the Trnslation of it, for it imports no more in the Original,
but that, of the Holy Prophets, who foretold the Coming of Jesus Christ in the
Flesh, many of them did not speak of his Sufferings.

X. X. From the 6, Of her Contempt of the Holy Scriptures.
The Author is most injurious to A. B. in alleging, for a 6th. Accusation,
that she joins with the Quakers in the Design of leading Men from the Use of
the Holy Scriptures: The Contrary is most evident in all her Writings, as
appears from the Apology p. 159, etc.
. She thinks the Scriptures contain the true spiritual Food and Nourishment of
Souls; and the Preservation of them in their Purity, notwithstanding their
Contradiction to Men's Lives, in whose hands they are, to be a standing Miracle;
and the Doctrine of Jesus Christ to be the last and most perfect Doctrine, that
is to come into the World, and the Standard by which all others are to be
examined and tried; and desires no body may receive her Sentiments, but in so
far as they are agreeable thereunto; and condemns the Practice of the Roman
Church, in withholding the Use of the Scriptures from the People, as a heinous
Injustice and Impiety. Though she does not think, that God has bound up himself
only to this way of communicating his Light, but may when he pleases,
immediately communicate the same to any Person without the Use of the Holy
Scriptures, and such Persons may forbear the reading of them, as she did,
without despising them, as one needs not be taken up with reading his Friend's
Letter, when he is immediately conversing with him. And for an Evidence of it,
she appeals to the Truths which she declares are communicated to her by God, if
they are not the same in Substance with those contained in the Holy Scriptures.

XI. XI. From the 7, Of her wild and barbarous Notions.
The Author comes next to some of her Opinions, which she her self has often
declared are not necessary to be believed, and which if Men please, they may
count them Dreams and Fancies. He calls them wild and barbarous, and indeed as
he conceives and represents them, he would make some of them appear Extravagant
enough; though a candid Interpretation of them will render them both amiable and
useful. Thus, what Wildness or Barbarity is there, in Asserting that Jesus
Christ and his Church are one, that it is his Spirit internally animating,
influencing and informing the Souls of Men, that makes them Members of his
Mystical Body, which is the Church? or in Asserting that the last Judgment, by
which she means the Universal Plagues by which God will in a Course of many
Years destroy the Wicked from off the Earth, is at hand See the Apology. p. 72.
etc.
? Few who seriously consider the State of the World will think this a wild and
barbarous Notion, but the Scoffers who walk after their own Lusts, and say,
Where is the Promise of his coming? She maintains no Mahume^an Paradise Ibid.
p. 180. etc.
, but such a one as Man would have enjoyed in the State of Innocence, when as
yet he had no Lust or Concupiscence. Unto the Pure all things are Pure, but
unto them that are defiled and unbelieving, is nothing Pure, but even their
Mind and Conscience is defiled. She says, with our Savior, That the Saints
after the Resurrection neither marry nor are given in Marriage, but are as the
Angels in Heaven. She condemns human Learning no farther than it fosters Pride,
Amusement, Self-conceit, and the Lust of the Eye, or Curiosity, and destroys
Charity and the Love of God. There is no greater Absurdity in saying that Jesus
Christ thought fit to appear in our human Nature, void of human Learning, no
Mathematician, no Philosopher, nor Critic, than to say that he appeared poor
and despised of all, not having where to lay his Head, since he thought fit to
deny himself of all that we make the Object of our Vanity and Concupiscence.

XII. XII. The undiscreet Treatment of M. Poiret.
What the Author is pleased to say of M. Poiret, that he was crazed, and is
still so reputed, being utterly false, can do him no Hurt with such as are
either acquainted with himself or his Writings; but it shows that Men's Passions
will make them rashly utter false and extravagant Things, which they themselves
do not believe. For the Author himself in the next Page reckons him among the
Men of Sense and Learning, who have written in Defense of A. B. abroad. It is
no wonder then, that some in Britain admire his Books, for (he is no
superficial rambling Writer) as they discover more than an ordinary Degree of
Sense and Learning, so they direct to the solid Knowledge and Practice of true
Christianity. Freed from the false Glosses of Parties and the Disguises of
Self-Love and corrupt Nature: the Charge of his denying the Divine Prescience
is cleared in the Apology *. page 127, etc.
They do also endeavor to make him odious, by publishing an Expression which
they say he used in a private Conversation with two Gentlemen of their
Acquaintance. M. Poiret himself says, it is not easy for him to remember the
Conversations he has with all who come to see him; nor if he had such an
Expression to any, but that, if he had, those Gentlemen may think he had Reason
for what he spoke, and he is well pleased that all the World know it; that as
he is fully persuaded that God is, so he is persuaded that A. B. was
illuminated and inspired by his Holy Spirit. Both these are Truths, but it does
not follow that he looks upon both as of equal Moment, or that he believes them
upon equal Grounds.

XIII. XIII. The Fury of his Zeal wrong levelled.
After the Author has formed so grievous and unjust a Charge, laying aside a
Christian Temper, he proceeds in his 8. Sect. to sound the Trumpet, and excite
others to Fury and Indignation; and in his late Book of the History of Sin and
Heresy, p. 33. he repeats over the same Charge, with all the hard Words that
Spite and Fury could invent, and insinuates his Fears of a Growing Sect and
Party. It is strange to see Men more alarmed and enraged against Enemies
created by their own Fancy, than they are against real ones. If the Author of
the Preface were once out of the Heat that his Imagination has put him in, it
were easy, I should think, to convince him that these he calls Bourignianists
are no such Enemies as he has fansied to himself. I can assure him, they do
heartily own that our Reconciliation with God is obtained only by the Merits
and Satisfaction of Jesus Christ; That the Word of God contained in the Holy
Scriptures is the Standard by which we are to try and examine all Doctrines;
That no Inspiration can come from God that does not fill the Soul with
Humility, and Charity; or, That instills, under the Sheeps Clothing of Devotion
and Piety, any Heresy, or any thing that tends to Schism, or to withdraw
Obedience from their lawful Bishop, or to set up new Sects; and that
Corruptions in the Church are better amended by living in the Communion of it,
and there, by good Example, to reclaim, than by open Desertion, to set up
opposite Factions, which heightens Animosities, embitters Spirits, renders them
deaf to one another Advices, and often proceeds to Blood and Slaughter, as the
Author of the Preface does so rationally conclude it, in the Marks he gives to
distinguish between Inspirations from God, and Diabolical Enthusiasm. And if
there be any thing in the Writings of A. B. contrary to these, or to the
Doctrine of Jesus Christ, they do openly disown and disclaim the same, and
stand up for them no farther than they tend to promote the great Interests of
Christianity, Truth, Holiness, and Peace.

XIV. XIV. The Doctor the Author of the Narratives, the Occasion of all this
Noise^
I come now to speak with the Author of Bourignianism detected, who might have
allowed one of the Writings of A. B. to be put in English, and recommended as
useful to advance the Interest of true Christianity, without making such a
Noise about it; yet it no sooner comes to his Hands, but he presently raises
the Hue and-Cry, Delusions and Errors, and magnifies it into a new and growing
Sect, that he might get himself a Name, and have the Glory to encounter, and,
as he hoped, to defeat it. But the Doctor is not so dreadful an Enemy as he
would seem at first Onset; they who bluster most are not always the most
dangerous. They who have read the Writings of A. B. and find that the Marrow
and Substance of them are the Essential Truths of Christianity, and that her
singular Sentiments (which she says are not necessary to be believed) do not
contradict those Essential Truths, do justly wonder what has moved the Doctor
to raise all this Dust and Clamor. I know he once professed a great Veneration
for Thomas a Kempis his Book de Imitatione Christi; (but he being a Mystic,
and one who seems to own his being immediately enlightened by the Spirit of God;
it may be the Doctor despises him now, as in his late Letter he declares he has
long since turned off such Conversation) and a deceased Friend of his had not
only a great Esteem for that Book, but also for others of the same Nature, such
as the Life of M. de Renti, etc. The Person I mean, was the most pious and
learned H. Scougall, of whom the Reverend Dr. Burnet, now Bishop of Sarum, gave
so deserved a Character, in his Preface to Bishop Bedal's Life, and with whom
he prevailed to let him publish his Devout Treatise of the Life of God in the
Soul of Man (to which he was pleased to prefix a Preface, and to subjoin a
Discourse of his own, of a Spiritual Life) which little Book also contains an
excellent Idea of the Divine Life in the Soul, and particularly a Notion of
Faith far above the Common, and approaching as near as any I know to that of A.
B. viz. that it is a kind of Sense, and feeling Persuasion of Spiritual Things,
and has the same Place in the Divine Life, that Sense has in the Natural. Now
the Doctor professing a great Esteem for these Writings, and acknowledging that
they contain the Marrow and Substance of Christianity; and the Writings of A.
B. being the same in Substance, and she requiring no Regard to be had to her
accessory Sentiments, but in so far as any should find them useful for
increasing in them the Love of God; some think it unaccountable, why the Doctor
should fall so foul upon her for her accessory Opinions, and does not rather
honor her for the sake of the main Truths, and more favorably and heartily
construct the others.

XV. XV. Great Caution to be used in judging of Spiritual Things.
There are Variety of Dishes in spiritual as well as in bodily Food, and that
may be very agreeable and healthful to one Palate, which another cannot relish;
why should the Doctor then set up to be a Taster to all the World; and because
his nice and learned Palate cannot relish some course and homely, though very
substantial Fare, should he therefore cry out, There is Death in the Pot, and
frighten all others from tasting of it, as far as his Testimony can have
Influence? We do not use to drive our Flocks from a good Pasture, even though all
the Herbs in it be not equall^ nourishing. They who have a true Sense and
Relish of Divine Things, if they were reading the Writings of A. B. would be so
affected with the Divine Truths contained therein, as they would quite pass
over the accessory Opinions, they would run to the Pearls and gather the
wholesome Food, and apply themselves only to Things which direct them to the Love
of God and the mortifying of their corrupt Natures. The Doctor should have
considered the Woe pronounced against all them by whom Offenses do come, and
not rashly have laid a Stumbling Block before his Brethren, and by his abusive
and unlovely Characters endeavored to raise Prejudices against, and frighten
many from A. B's Writings, where they might have reaped so much Good and
Profit, and been brought to a true and lively Sense of Divine Things.

XVI. XVI. The Falseness of the Charge of a Sect.
The Doctor is unjust in his Title Page, where he calls his Narratives The
Delusions and Errors of A. B. and her Growing Sect. I know no such Sect in the
World. A. B. was grieved there were so many Sects already, so far was she from
designing to make a new one: I know none who esteem her Writings that are
formed into any Sect. I know of no separate Meeting, nor new Rites, nor other
Symbols, that distinguish this Sect. There be Romanists, Calvinists, Lutherans;
there be of the Episcopal and Presbyterian Persuasions, who esteem those
Writings as they do other good Books, yet they form no new Sect or Party; there
are none farther from the Spirit of a Sect than they, unless this be called a
new Sect, to endeavor after the Spirit of the Primitive Church, viz. an entire
and brotherly Union in Divine Charity.

XVII. XVII. His Uacharitableness to his Countrymen.
He is neither kind nor just to his Country men, in telling the World the
Infection has seized many in Scotland, and some of the better Sort, who have
been reputed Men of Sense, Learning and Probity. They might have read those
Writings as they do other good Books, without being branded for Heretics and
Sectarians; he might have discovered what he thought to be Delusions or
Errors, without defaming his Countrymen, or bringing up an evil Report upon
them; his Books might have instructed and confuted them, without pointing them
out. I am persuaded the Doctor would think it a crying Sin to proclaim those
Persons to be Thieves, Robbers and Murderers, though I think his saying so,
would do them no great Hurt; and if he would consider things calmly, he would
find it no less, and perhaps a greater injustice to tell the World they are
become Heretics, Blasphemers, Idolaters, and new Sectarians, and so thereby,
as far as in him lies, to murder their Reputation, make some to despise and
abhor them, and excite others to persecute them as Men unworthy to live: But,
as a Conqueror, he was resolved upon to a Triumph, and to add to the Glory,
they must be led at his Chariot.

XVIII. XVIII. In both the Narratives he fights with his own Shadow.
The Doctor has taken up two long Narratives in fighting with his own Shadow;
the first, in proving that we ought not to believe the high Characters which M.
de Cort, M. Poiret and others give of the Person and Sentiments of A. B. upon
their bare Word; and the second, that we are not to believe the Characters she
gives of herself and her own Sentiments, upon her own Testimony, without
sufficient Enquiry and Evidence: And in both these, I know none will contend
with him. In the First, he would make Men believe, that the great Business of
her Friends is to recommend her to all the World, by a great many Elogies of
all Sorts, that Men all might extol her and adhere to her for the Making up of
a New Sect. In the Second, he gives this Idea of herself, as if her great
Design was to boast that she was endued with all Sort of Prerogatives, that she
might draw Souls to follow her, as if she aimed to be the Head of a Party in
Religion, and to draw Disciples after her. Now there is nothing more false than
all this, for the Friends of A. B. had no other Aim, but to seek after the
Truth as it is in Christ Jesus. 2. And having found the Truths of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, most purely and savingly represented in the Writings and
Conversation of A. B. they do highly valu^ them, and endeavor to conform their
Hearts and Liv^ unto them. 3. They desire that these Truths in (...) Purity and
Force may be communicated unto others, (...) the Glory of God and the Salvation
of their Souls. 4. And therefore thought themselves obliged to vindicate the
Author from the many Aspersions, Calumnies and Reproach^^ cast upon her at the
Instigation of Satan, by wicked and malicious Men, by declaring what they had
seen and known for many Years of this Virgin, that so the Weak mig^t (...) be
frighted away from the Truth by the malicious (...) of Slanderers. As for A. B.
herself, the bent of her (...) was to live retired with God, and to conceal
rather (...) publish his Graces to her Soul; and thus she did for (...) than
fifty Years, and would have done so still, had (...) God commanded, and
Providence ordered her such (...) sions as obliged her to publish these Truths.
1. (...) present there are no true Christians upon Earth. 2. (...) what Means
the Spirit of true Christianity is to be (...) according to the true Precepts
of the Gospel which (...) disguised by the Glosses of Men. 3. That they who
(...) not sincerely labor after this, would be shortly (...) by the just
Judgments of God. The various (...) and Objections that were brought against
her, (...) to declare several other Truths in Vindication of (...) and
Doctrine; and thus she is obliged to declare to (...) that God, who makes Use
of weak and simple Me (...) confound the Wise, had sent her to make know^ (...)
Truths of Jesus Christ to others, that by the (...) God those Things are done
in her, from the doing of which they excuse themselves, as if they were
impossible; to others she was oblig^d to speak of God's Mission, his Call to
teach others, and the Gifts and Capacities he bestows for that End; and that
there might be no Obstacle in her to hinder others from embracing the Truths of
Jesus Christ, she clears herself from the reproachful Calumnies and Lies formed
against her, by the contrary Virtues and Favors which God had bestowed on her,
and by the unquestionable Evidences and Testimonies of those to whom she was
well known. This is true Matter of Fact, and these were the Occasions and
Reasons which led both her and her Friends to speak of the Graces of God
bestowed on her.

XIX. XIX. His Disin genuity in his Narrations
The Doctor's first Narrative contains his Character of A. B. taken, as he
says, from her Friends, with his Inferences from it; and then his Collection of
the Reasons why they have such Sentiments of her, with his Censure of them. In
the First, there is not one Instance of a fair and ingenuous Narration, but
many of great Injustice, Disingenuity, and foul Dealing, most unbecoming a
Writer of Narratives. For,

XX. XX. Appears in his unjust Way of forming her Character.
1. 1. By p^ecing together half Sentiments from different Places.
The Method he follows, palpably discovers that his great Aim was to blacken
her. If one designed to make a beautiful Person appear ugly, he could not do it
more effectually, than if he should first deprive her of all Life and Spirit,
then take off the Skin of the Body, and dismember it all in Pieces, and quite
invert the Order of its Parts, and take withal only some Bits of it to set them
together, and at last bespatter all with Filth and Spittle, crying, Here is the
Woman. And such is the Doctor's singular Way of making Characters. They who
have reaped great spiritual Advantages from the Writings and Conversation of
any Person, do speak of such a Person with more Esteem and Admiration, than
others who not having had such Experiences will think their Expressions
extravagant, especially when half Sentences are taken out by themselves, and
pieced with others at a great Distance from them; and yet this is the Doctor's
Way of making up the Character of A. B. skipping from one Book to another, from
one Chapter to another, to pick out the half Sentences that might be
serviceable to his evil Design. In the rest of his Narrative, he takes out
little Passages of her Life, here and there, without narrating ingenuously the
true Circumstances of them, he dresses them up with his fine Reflections, and so
exposes them to the World as a Character of her Life. The Answer he gives to
this in his Letter to his Friend at London, Art. XIV. is frivolous, and needs
no Reply; it shows only how willing he is to say any thing rather than
ingenuously confess a real and a heinous Sin.

2. 2. By borrowing pieces of it from her avowed Enemies.
The Doctor's foul Dealing appears farther in making up this Character by
borrowing Pieces of it, not from her own or her Friends Writings, but from
those of hers and their avowed Enemies; (as the next Day some of the Doctor's
Temper and Acquaintance will, it may be, take her Character as given by her
Friends upon his Word, and so fill it with horrid Untruths). Thus he takes Nar.
1. p. 75.
a Part of their Character of her from the Author of the Leipsick Transactions,
which Part is shown to be a most abominable Falsehood in the Monitum ad Acta
Erudit. Leips. and what Regard is to be had to the Testimony and Judgment of
the Collector of the Leipsick Acts in this Matter, appears by the Account of a
Friend of his, who speaks thus of that Subject: Firmiter persuasus sum fuisse
Bourignoniam Virginem pussimam, etc. I am firmly persuaded that the Virgin A.
Bourignon was most pious, and her Heart the Temple of the Holy Spirit; her
Doctrine, as to the main, is holy and sound, and her Books most worthy to be
perused by the Serious. As to her Sentiments concerning some Mysteries, she
wrote, no doubt, according to her Persuasion, and it savours nothing of Folly
or Enthusiasm, if you shall read her Writings without Prejudice ^and a
sectarian Infallibility, even though you be of another Opinion your self. I
impute it to human Weakness, if she thought that no Body would be saved but
they who embraced her Sentiments; yet she herself uses to distinguish between
the Sentiments about the Mysteries of Religion, and the Doctrine of Godliness.
The Collectors of the Leipsick Acts have passed a severe Censure against her
and our Author (M. Poiret). Yet I knew the Author of that severe Censure wrote
according to his Persuasion. I got, at a public Auction, that Copy of the
Works of A. B. which the Author of the Censure made use of; and, with great
wonder, I observed the Weakness of Man. The Author was a wise Man, of great
Judgment and Sincerity; but what cannot Prejudices do, that grow up with us? I
found many Places marked with a little Line on the Margent, which if you
consider them alone, cannot but make the Doctrine of A. B. look suspicious, yea
blasphemous; but if you join them with what goes before and follows after in
her Writings, they have an excellent and pious Sense. The Author, who while he
lived was most dear to me, and whom I am bound to honor now he is dead, had
such Prudence, Judgment and Sincerity, that he would never have made such
Exceptions, if the preconceiv'd Opinion of a Sect (as it daily happens t^
others) had not bewitched him; nevertheless, I am persuaded that if he had
lived till now, he would have come to see his Error. This is the Judgment of
Dr. Christianus Thomasius, Counselor to the Elector of Brandenbourg and
Professor of the Law in the University of Hale in Saxony, and is published in
one of his Discourses before the Treatise De Eruditione solida, etc. which he
caused to be reprinted in Germany, and I wish with all my heart that Doctor
Cockbourn and his Friend may impartially consider it, and it may please God to
open their Eyes, and let them see their Mistakes.

3. 3. By obtruding false Translations.
So zealous is the Doctor to blacken her, that to complete the Extravagancy of
the Character, he ventures to translate their Words falsely, and even of those
False Translations, will tack together two half Sentences that are more than a
Page distant in the Original, as if they had been written in the blasphemous
Way that he represents them in one Breath. Thus, Narr. 1. p. 4. lin. 7, 8, 9.
he makes the Author of the Continuation of her Life say of her, She is the
divine Sun of Righteousness: (and with the same Breath) She is pure Truth, and
the only Truth that can guide one to Heaven and eternal Life: As if he had
affirmed both of her, and both in one Period; whereas they are in two different
Paragraphs, and neither of them spoken of her. The first is a Petition put up
to Almighty God, by the Author of the Vie Continuee, p. 599. That he would
please to fix him in the Heaven of his Truth, that the Dragon might not be able
to cast him upon the Earth by his Violence, nor by his Artifice; That, says he,
I may then always receive the Light of the Divine Sun of Righteousness, in
which thou have placed thine Handmaid. And then in the next Section, when he
had appealed unto God the Searcher of Hearts, concerning his Integrity in
seeking after Truth, and his Impartiality in examining the Life and Writings of
A. B. concerning his Readiness to disprove, if he could, with all the
Application of his Mind have found any thing in them favoring Corruption or
Sin, or contrary to the Glory of God, etc. he continues his Appeal in these
Words; Is it not with the utmost Sincerity of my Heart, that I protest openly,
that the Words of eternal Life have been with an incomparable Purity, Clearness
and Solidity in this Soul which thou have sanctified, and are yet in her
Writings: Certainly the Way that is recommended there, as necessary to
Salvation, is the only and true Way (this is the Life and Doctrine of Jesus
Christ) and there is no Danger to give up our selves to it entirely; for this
is Truth it self, This is the Truth, This is the pure Truth Thus we see there
cannot be a more palpable Disingenuity, in citing and translating, than this
is, which can bear no Apology, b^t an ingenuous Acknowledgment of the
Pevarication. Again, Nar. 1. p. 9. lin. 18. he makes M. de Cort complain, that
no body makes Prayers to her, in the Times of Universal Scourges. The O^iginal
is ( ni la point fair prier) and the true Translation is, they do not desire
her to pray. I shall not enquire what Sense the Doctor would have the Reader
put upon his Translation, but must say, that he himself should not have
aggravated his Guilt by calling that a close and literal Translation (Art.
XIII. of his Letter) when he cannot be ignorant, that it is both a false and a
foul one. Again, Nar. 1. p. 17. he makes the Author of the Preface Apologet.
prefixed to her Life, page 97. say, that A. B. was the purest, most
disinterested and self denied Soul, and the most resigned to God, that ever was
upon Earth. The Words in the Original are, Or je puis dire avec verite, -- que
M. Bour. estoit une ame des plus pures, des plus degagees, etc. and the true
Translation thus, that she was one among the Souls which have been most pure,
etc. his false Translation would have him to exalt her above all humane
Creature; the true, lists her only among the Saints of the first Form, among
the hundred forty four thousand which follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes.
Rev. 4. 14
Again, Nar. 1. p. 74. forming an Argument against her Chastity, from a Passage
of her Life, and her own Account of it, La Parole de Dieu, n. 158. (and by the
way I must say, that no Lover of Purity would have perverted this Passage to
the Sense that he has done, nor is there any thing in the Embraces of Parents
and Children, that can be supposed to defile the Imagination of a Soul such as
hers was in a truly regenerate State, and in a profound Recollection and
Communion with God) he falsely translates the^ last Part of it: The Original
is, Je pensay de concevor cinque Personnages, que je tiens gens de bien: The
true Version, I thought I conceived Five Persons whom I reckon to be good Men.
But the Doctor must render it Five comely Persons, that it might serve his
Design, and afford Matter for impure Jest.

4. 4. By affirming things as said of her without giving Evidence.
It is no fair dealing in a Narrater, to affirm things as spoken or written by
others, in his own Words, without giving Evidence for them. But the Doctor in
his own Words tells us, P^eface,. 2.
That if she may be believed, Christ only laid the Foundation for her Works,
and did no more but prepare the way for her Design. That the last and greatest
Manifestation of the Divine Wisdom, Power, Love, and Goodness, was reserved to
her, and therefore she is and must be a greater Person than Jesus Christ
himself. And, p. 3.. 3.
says he, if we will take the Words of the Anonymous Author of La vie
Continuee, and some others, this Woman was above all that is Humane. -- That God
designed she should be the greatest Blessing that ever was conferred on
Mankind. -- That they set her on the same Level with Jesus Christ. That they
draw a Parallel betwixt him and her, and do make him the Type of her, and not
him but her, the last and highest Expression of God's Love to Mankind. -- And
that all her Words and Writings are Sacred as Scripture it self, and ought to
have the same Authority. For these and such like Expressions, p. 5.. 4.
he should have given us his Vouchers; for the Places cited by him, import no
such thing; but we are hopeful, no impartial Reader will believe the Doctor in
these, upon his own bare Credit and Authority, after the Sample he has given of
his way of writing Narratives.

5. 5. By drawing Consequences contrary to their Principles, which their
Sayings do not infer, and they expressly disclaim.
It is against natural Equity, as well as Christian Charity, to draw hateful
Consequences from, or put Senses upon the Sayings and Writings of others, which
may load them with Reproach and Hatred: Which the Sayings do not necessarily
infer, but are capable of a more benign Interpretation; which are against their
known Principles, and openly and sincerely disclaimed by them. But such is the
Doctor's way. The Persons whom he traduces, having a deep Sense of the Divine
Truths of God, and of the Gospel of Jesus Christ contained in the Writings, and
shining forth in the Life and Spirit of A. B. were persuaded that all who would
peruse them with sincerity and simplicity of Heart, would find great Profit to
their Souls, and therefore they recommended them with much concern to others,
but were far from intending to affirm those things, to which the Doctor
perverts their Words; Nar. 1. p. 18.. 10. etc.
or the odious Consequences which he widely draws from them: As, that A. B. is
the greatest that ever was born of a Woman, above all the ancient Patriarchs,
to be preferred to Moses and the Prophets, to John the Baptist and the
Apostles, and at least ought to be honored equally with Jesus Christ, who is
said to be God Blessed for ever; that she was as much without Sin as he, and
her Body of a better Frame: -- That it is a clear Consequence from what they
say, That she must either have always been personally united to the Deity, and
so to be esteemed God-Woman, or else that her Body and humane Nature were not
real, but a mere Phantome, by which God was pleased to declare his Will to Man:
That all her Words and Writings, are of the same Authority with the Sacred
Scriptures. -- That there ought to be a Commemoration of her in the public
Liturgies, as well as of our Lord Jesus Christ; and instead of the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, now we should say the God of A. B. and the
Spirit that spoke by her. The Persons cited by the Doctor, do abhor such
Consequences; their Words compared with the rest of their Writings will not
bear them: And in the Sense he puts on them, they disclaim them as none of
theirs. Every Body can best explain their own Sense and Meaning, and what is
apt to be misunderstood in one Place, Equity requires that we interpret it by
another, where a Man does more distinctly express and explain his Mind in
relation to that very thing. The Doctor knows how M. Poiret vindicates himself,
in his Answer to M. Juricu's Critique of him, La paix de bonnes ames. p. 186
etc,
M. Jurieu, says he, is offended that I have an Esteem for A. B. though I have
less Attachment to her, than he has to Calvin, and many of his Hearers have to
him. I have never regarded through all but the Wisdom and Truth of God, and it
was always indifferent to me, by what means God would make it known to me, by a
Man, or a Woman, by one Learned or Unlearned, by a Catholic, a Calvinist, a
Lutheran, etc. I will approach to it, not because of the Organ that God makes
use of, but because of the Truth that he communicates thereby. It would be
ridiculous to insult over a Person of Sense, who goes to a Fountain, as if he
went thither out of Love to the Wooden Pipe. Yet as to me this is the admirable
Procedure of M. Juri^u. etc. Thus M. Poiret clears himself, in his Answer to M.
Jurieu, and if the Doctor will accept of it, I shall give him his Vindication
of himself, in a Letter to a Friend, upon Occasion of the Doctor's First
Narrative. As, says he, I never recommended Mrs. A. B. for any other Reason,
but because she proposes the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, with all Clearness and
Purity, and draws Souls to none but to him, so it is against Truth and Equity,
what the Narrator says of me, in Opposition to St. Paul, who desired to know
nothing but Jesus Christ Crucified, that I, it seemed, desired to know nothing
but M. A. B. To recommend an INstrument that leads to none but Jesus Christ; is
that to recommend this Instrument in Opposition to Christ, or to him who
recommends none but Christ? By this Reasoning, neither Saint (...), nor any
other, ought to be recommended. Be^^^, I have published many Books, wherein I
have not (...) one Word of her, as usually I do not speak of (...) any, unless
they speak of her to me first; and (...) I gave of her were extorted by the
(...) Slanders, and Persecutions of her Adversaries. (...) was very far from
exalting her above Jesus (...), (as he would insinuate against the Truth) but
sinc^ I saw that good Souls might be deprived of that s^ving Profit, which they
would reap from her Writings if they were diverted from them, by the Evil
Impressions of Defamers; I only aimed simply to bring them to an even Balance,
by this Consideration, that there are other Persons convinced that she (M. A.
B.) was quite another Person than she is represented to have been by her
Defamers, who never conversed with her, ^^ver knew her, and whose Character of
her (while they decry one who had no other Design, but to recommend the
Practice of the Doctrine of Jesus Christ) is contrary to Righteousness and
Charity Whereas the recommending of such Persons, and the interpreting Heartily
all they say, is by St. Paul, ascribed to Charity. And as for any Personal
Attachment to Mrs. A. B. I am so free from it, as I have already publicly
declared, That if the Universal Defamation of her, might serve to advance the
Glory of God, and the Salvation of Men, I should be well pleased that she were
calumniated every where, without Reply. Thus for M. Poiret.

XXI. XXI. The Dr's great Mistake as to the Regard required to the Testimony of
Men.
After the Doctor has patched up her Character, and given his Comment upon it,
he is at great pains, Artticle XII. to prove that which no Body denies, viz.
That we ought not to receive A. B. as so highly dignified of God, and her
Scheme of Religion, and System of Opinions, as divine, and absolutely necessary
to be followed, upon the bare Authority and Testimony of those Men whom he had
formerly quoted. For as to the embracing her System of Opinions, as absolutely
necessary, they do not require any such thing. A. B. her self does expressly
declare, That she does not require any to believe the Truths she writes,
because she says they are revealed to her by the Spirit of God, but to examine
if they be not the Truths of the Gospel of Jesus Christ; she would have Men
take up the Spirit of the first Christians, and let the good Seed of the
Doctrine of the Gospel spring up in their Souls, and not her Doctrine: For she
has no particular nor new Doctrine, as to the Conduct of Men's Souls*; and that
when she adds any thing in her Writings, that does not concern the Doctrine of
the Gospel, See Apology, p. 14. etc.
they ought to lay it aside till God give them a more clear Understanding of
it. And as to her Friend's Testimonies, they were designed in some measure to
balance the bold and impudent Censures and Calumnies of her Enemies, and to
excite Men to examine and weigh her Writings impartially, and not to suffer
their Minds to be forestalled by Prejudices, or to judge rashly and
inconsi^erately of things before they know them. So the Doctor might have
spared this Narrative, and it may be all that is to follow; for his only
Business ought to have been to let the World see, that what she calls the
Doctrine of the Gospel, and necessary to Salvation, really i^ not so, or that
her other Sentiments do destroy it; for, provided that Men be persuaded of the
Truth of this, that none can be saved without the Love of God, and will follow
the only way to come at this, the mortifying corrupt Nature, and following the
Life and Doctrine of Jesus Christ, she is content to undergo all reproach her
self, and that all her other Sentiments and Doctrines pass for Dreams and
Romances. If the Doctor say, as he does in his Letter Artticle XV. that he
finds nothing good in her Writings, but what is common and handled in every
Practical Treatise, and the Subject of daily Sermons. Well, might not the
Doctor have suffered her Books to pass among Practical Treatises, and even to
be preferred to most of them, by such who see the Doctrine of Christ more
clearly and purely represented in them, than in others, without the Glosses of
corrupt Nature; and feel a Divine Force, Power, and Spirit accompanying them;
who see in them the horrid Corruption of our Nature, and of our Wills, clearly
laid before them, the Christian Virtues most lively represented, and most
excellent Directions how to copy them out according to the great Original,
Jesus Christ.

XXII. XXII. The true Reasons why A. B. was highly esteemed, not adduced by the
Doctor. Nor those adduced, sufficiently disproved: As 1. her Sanctity.
The other Part of the Doctor's Narrative, is spent in disproving the Reasons
why A. B. is so much admired, and said to be divinely inspired, etc. and I am
sorry that his Passions or Prejudices do as much darken his Reason, and
withold him from candor and fair dealing here, as in the former. The Reasons
which they bring, are to be had more truly from her and their Writings, and are
set down in the Third Part of the Apology; and some of those mentioned by the
Doctor, were never brought by them as Reasons why they thought her divinely
inspired, but upon other Grounds; of which afterward.

The first he considers is her Sanctity, which he says, is nor always attended
with extraordinary Illuminations; and then inferrs, that suppose her to be
truly and extraordinarily Holy, she is not therefore to be reckoned to know the
Mind of God in all things, by immediate Revelation; all which is readily
granted: But make once the Doctor's Supposition, and then add, that the Person
so truly Holy declares, that God is pleased to communicate his Light
immediately unto her, and that without all humane Helps; and that upon trial it
be found, that what she declares is the same with the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
and what God has already revealed by his Spirit, this I think may be reckoned a
weighty Evidence of Divine Inspiraration; for a Person so truly Holy would not
lie, nor would God suffer such a one to be so deluded. The Doctor singles out
every Reason by it self, and would prove, that suppose it were true, the
Consequence is not just, and so rejects the Consequence drawn from them
altogether; which is just as if one should reason that 2 and 4 and 6 do not
make 12, because 2 makes not 12, and 4 makes it not, nor yet 6, Ergo, etc.

In the rest of this Article, he has a long Discourse to show, How far Saints
should keep their Distance, and be clothed with Humility, and how others
should beware of running into excess when they honor them, not to exalt them
to an equality with God, nor near it; we ought to honor those whom God has
honored, yet only so as to make them the subject Matter of honoring God. A.
B. and her Friends, do perfectly join with the Dostor, what goes beyond this,
they abhor it. Where there is no Humility, there is no Sanctity; for that is
the Foundation of this; but we may be greatly mistaken, to call that Humility
which is the greatest Pride, to speak meanly of our selves, when it appears by
all our Actions that we are not so in our Hearts: the Saints may declare the
Grace of God to themselves with the greatest Humility, ascribing all to God,
and seeing the more their own Nothingness. As David, Paul, etc. and what A. B.
says of her self, may proceed from the same Spirit, notwithstanding of all the
Doctor's Reasons. That her Friends publish blasphemous Encomiums of her, and
are guilty of Idolatry, as to her, is a bold, unjust, and malicious Calumny,
which they utterly deny.

In the XV. Article, he justifies his Zeal against her and them, for exalting
her above the present State and Capacity of humane Nature, only, that all her
metaphysical Whimsies, which M. Poiret is passionately fond of, might be
received for Divine Truths. I have already replied to this, that neither A. B.
nor M. Poiret, do bid any believe what he calls Whimsies to be Divine Truths,
but only entreat Men to be True Christians, and if they please, they may look
upon all her other Thoughts, that have no immediate relation to this, to be
really metaphysical Whimsies. It is a wrong Imagination of his, that that make
her impeccable, or at least never to have actually sinned. See Apology, p. 137.
She asserts the contrary her self, and they believed no such thing, as I have
already shown. M. de Cort's Expression, (As if Adam had never sinned in her)
implies no such thing as the Doctor inferrs from it, but that during the time
he conversed with her, he observed in her such a complete and solid Virtue,
that he thinks, she could not have been in a purer State, though she had not been
born of the corrupt mass of Adam, as indeed she was. So this is the Subject of
another Consideration, whether by the Grace of God, a Person may be advanced to
such a State of Virtue, as not actually to commit any Sin, neither in Heart nor
Life, though they be born of the corrupt mass of Adam, are not impeccable, and
have been guilty of many Sins.

In the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Article, The Doctor not faithful in relating
the Proofs of her Sanctity.
he proceeds to show. That the things they instance in her, are not certain
Proofs of Sanctity; and first excuses himself, that he offers to judge and
censure her Actions. If he satisfy himself, I shall excuse him; but can find
no excuse for his Misrepresentations, and giving these as the greatest Proofs
of Sanctity, adduced by her Friends, which neither she nor they reckon to be
such, viz. Affected Solitude and Retirement, Celibacy, Fastings, Watchings,
Humiliations, wearing of Sackcloth, a contempt of the common Ornaments of her
Sex, with such like Austerities, and great Raptures, and Ecstasies in Devotion;
and declaring, that he perceives no singular Instance of Sanctity mentioned by
them, beside those: For it was easy to observe from the Accounts given of her,
that she lived as one constantly traveling toward Eternity, and as such,
studied in all things to conform her Life to that of Jesus Christ. I shall not
here recount the many Instances of this, which a^e to be seen in the First Part
of the Apology See Apology, p. 42, 43.
, and in the Character given of her, in the end of the Apology; but shall refer
the Doctor to the Places cited on the Margent, in which Places he will see some
Instances of true Sanctity, which he did not think fit to notice, how
observable soever they be in her own Writings, and in the Accounts that are
given of her by those who knew her in her Youth and Old Age, and in all the
Stages of her Life, in the Temoign. de la Verite; and particularly in that by
Mr. Franken Merchant in Amsterdam.

In the Eighteenth Article, he speaks as if A. B. and others, in comparing her
Life with that of Jesus Christ, thought that there were an Equality, without
giving any Evidence for it; the thing is utterly false, both she and they
affirm only, that she was a Follower of Jesus Christ, she makes the Essence of
Christianity to consist in the Imitation of Jesus Christ, and in all her
Writings lays before us his Life and Spirit for our Imitation, in a way more
divine and forcible, than the general way of sermonizing: And if her Virtues
were truly Transcripts of the Life of Jesus, it is very Just that they be
represented to the World as such, that so it may appear, that it is the Devil
and our corrupt Nature only that makes us believe that he is not imitable, and
that by such an Instance we may be stirred up to be true Followers of Jesus
Christ.

In the next Article, he has a long Discourse upon Solitude: Because, he says,
it is recommended as a special Act of Sanctity by the Example and Sentiments of
A. B. and because it has been much debated by Heathens and Christians, by
Ancients and Modern, yet few, says he, have offered a just Decision of the
Matter: I was in good Hopes this should have been done by him, yet at last he
will not determine which of the States, the Active, or the Contemplative is
fittest: but then he thinks, A mixed State the happiest, (which is plainly every
Bodies State) and gives his Reasons for it, and corrects a vulgar Error
concerning the Clergy, as if they all ought to be Men of Study and Retirement,
which, he says, is a great Mistake, since they are to show the Possibility of
the Divine Laws, by their Practice, and he who can hear himself praised without
Vanity, and accused without Wrath, can accept of good things when they are
offered, without a brutal Joy, and yet never be out of Humor when are they
wanting. -- Such a one prosecutes the End of his Calling better, and his
Conversation does more good, etc.

A. B. considers and determines this Matter upon other Principles, and by
another Spirit. It is not which of the States makes a Man a Drone or a Drudge,
in which a Man may enjoy himself best, or do most good; acquire Knowledge and
Experience; give himself to Study or to Business: Which are the Measures by
which the Doctor determines. But, she says, we are all traveling to Eternity,
and our great Business, both as Men and Christians, is to give our whole Love
to God; and to keep our selves unspotted from the World; that every one is
obliged sincerely to examine their own Hearts and Consciences, and whatever
they find to be a Hindrance to the Love of God, by all means to avoid it, and
whatever they find to be to them a necessary Help to it, to embrace it; that
the Corruptions abounding in the World make it very hard for some to converse
with it, and not become Partakers of their Sin; that many are so weak or so
easy to be surprised by the Temptations it offers, that they find it for their
Safety as much as they can to avoid them by Solitude and Retirement; that
Babylon is presently over all, and God calls to all his Children to come out of
her, least they be Partakers of her Sins, and so of her Plagues also. That
nevertheless, God has different Ways of bringing Souls unto himself; and
therefore what Method one follows, and finds for his Eternal good, he is not to
impose upon others, nor are others to despise him.

XXIII. XXIII. His Reasons against her Sanctity disproved; and she vindicated
from, 1. That of a light and vain Conversation.
In the 20th. Article, the Doctor brings, as he thinks, certain Proofs, that
she had no Sactnity.

1. That till the 18th Year of her Age, she ran into a vain and light
Conversation, by which she lost her Conversation with God; where, in his
Judgment, he shows a flat Contradiction in the Preface to the English Reader,
of the Light of the World; because a few Lines before he had affirmed this, he
had said, that from her Childhood she had inward Conversation with God, as if
any could lose a thing they never had, or never lose it because they had it
from their Childhood: However, this he thinks proves, That she could not be
anointed by the Spirit of God to declare his Will; for if it had been so, it is
no ways likely he would have left her so soon to her self, or suffered her to
be corrupted, whom he had appointed to be so great a Light, especially when
that which tempted her was but the Censures and Misconstructions of other Men:
What, could not the Spirit of God break through this Temptation? Was her Grace
too weak to resist it? Must so Holy a Person do Evil, merely to pass for a Wit?
The Doctor reasons upon other Principles different from those of the rest of
Mankind, when he comes to speak of A. B. Were not David and Solomon separated
from the Womb? Did not their Graces and Sanctity appear early? Did they not
fall into grievous Sins? Is this a Proof that God did not anoint them to
declare his Will? Could not the Spirit of God break through their Temptations?
etc. But moreover, it is to be considered, that it was no gross and scandalous
Sin, by which she lost her Conversation with God, and yet notwithstanding she
lived a Life of great Mortification for it, for several Years.

2. 2. From following her own Humor without any regard to the Principles of
Religion.
His next Proof is, that even after this, which is pretended to be the Time of
her Conversation, She did not determine the great State of her Life, by Motives
and Principles of Religion, but by her own Humor; she resolved upon a Celibate
Life, only because she would not be crossed, etc. But the Doctor sets this in a
false Light, as he does every thing else that concerns her. The true Case is
this, when she was a Child, it troubled her to see her Father sometimes so
rough to her Mother, and when he was in Wrath, she would run and embrace his
Knees to appease him, and then would retire and pray, that God would never
suffer her to marry, but that he would take her for his Spouse. This was before
her turning aside from God, to divert her self with the Vanities of the World.
In the 18th Year of her Age, she was struck with a deep Remorse for her
straying from God, and led a Life of most severe Penitence for Seven Years; so
that other Considerations did then affect her, and draw her to a State of
Celibacy. As for the Doctor's immodest Insinuations upon this Occasion, I shall
leave it to his own Conscience to check him for them; but for the other Reason
he gives for her Celibacy, That she undervalued all she saw, and could find
none of Merit enough to deserve her, etc. its purely his own Invention, without
the least Ground given for it, in her Life or Writings, or any manner of way,
and will be judged by every enquiring Reader, to be a malicious and wilful
Calumny.

3. 3. From her Disobedience to^her Parents.
A Third Evidence against her Sanctity is, says he, her Disobedience to her
Parents; contrary to whose express Commands, she was importunate to go into a
Cloister, and when that would not do, stole away from her Father's House
privately. He exaggerates this matter greatly, but is not aware of one Reason
he brings, which determines the Case clearly on her side; If the Case had been,
says he, about turning Christian, she ou^ht to have done it, even without a
particular Revelation, whether her Father would or not. The Case was the very
same with her, and a particular Command from God to strengthen it: She saw she
could not become a true Christian, without abandoning the World, and that while
she was in her Father's House, she could not sufficiently disingage her self
from it, and therefore resolved to obey Jesus Christ, who bids us forsake
Father and Mother and all that we have, for his sake. Our Lord called James and
John, the Sons of Zebedee, from waiting on their Father, and they forsook all
and followed him.

4. 4. From Covetousness, because of her Law Suits.
The Doctor triumphs greatly in his Fourth Instance, her suing her Father at
Law, to divide his Goods with her after his Second Marriage; which does not
agree, he says, with common Measures of Grace and good Nature, because it
proceeded from an inordinate Love of the World, and could not be managed
without great disrespect to her Father. The Doctor's Passions make him so
disingenuous in every thing that relates to this Virgin, that it will nor be
thought strange to tell that he is manifestly so in this Instance. Mr. Poiret's
Reply to this being so full in the forementioned Letter to a Friend, I need
only adduce it for her Vindication, and this the rather, because the Doctor
thinks that the Reason why he who continued her Life, takes no Notice of this
Passage, (though she gives an Account of it herself) was, because he knew not how
to justify it. It is not true, says he, (M. Poiret) that I had any Interest to
defend the Life and Actions of Mrs. A. B. by a Legacy which she left me, (as
the Narrator says) she did not leave me in Legacy to the Value of a Penny. But
there is nothing more contrary to Truth, as well as to Justice and Charity,
than what he says of the Lawsuits of Mrs. A. B. with her Father, and Step
Mother; I pray God he may not have acted maliciously, against his Knowledge, in
the Judgment that he would have the English and Scots to make of her Civil
Actions, whose Civil Laws are different from those of her Country. It may be,
it would be a Crime in England, or Scotland, for a younger Daughter, after her
Mother's Death, to require by Law, of her Father, the Goods of her deceased
Mother. But in France, where among Citizens, in the matter of Succession, there
is no Distinction between Son or Daughter, elder or younger, it is the Law and
Custom in many Places, That after the Decease of the Mother, her Goods are
taken from the Administration of the Father, and put under other Curators, to
be after equally divided amongst the Children: And in Mrs. A B's. Country the
Law is, That the Widow-Husband cannot marry again, until he first divide with
the Children of the first Marriage, and give them their Mother's Goods, and to
refuse this, is to violate Law and Justice; now this is what the Father of A.
B. did, whose Injustice our Doctor thinks fit to justify, and for this end, to
suppress, change, and fal^ifie the Circumstances of the Affair, against the
Truth of what he had read of it.

To render Mrs. A. B. faulty and impious against her Father, he speaks nothing
of the Laws or Customs of the Place, Vie exter, ^ 49.
(though they were expressly mentioned in her Ac^count of the Affair) according to
which the Father is the Breaker of them, and the Daughter would have them
observed. He say, the Father would have maintained her in his House; but he
does not tell that his new Wife whom he had taken clandestinly, tho she was but
a poor Girl, without Wit or Virtue, studied to waste and consume the Goods of
A. B. persecuting her, for the Four Months she staid with her Father, in so
continual and cruel a manner, as cannot be expressed. (...).
Mrs. A. B. saw and experienced, that this was inconsistent with her
Recollection, and contrary to the will of God. He says, that Mrs. A. B. was
picqued, because her Father refused her Money, but does not tell that her
Father was then in a most plentiful Condition, ibid. n. 57.
that as for her self, she had not a Penny, that she asked only what was
necessary for her: That he (irritated by his Wife) was so cruel as not to
assist her with a Penny when she was dangerously Sick; that for want of
Convenience she was obliged to lie under a Roof, when the Snow and Cold
deprived her even of the Nights rest, Vi^ exter, n. 52, 54.
so that Strangers were moved to give her Alms. He would have it to be
understood, that she entered into a Law Sure against her Father, of her own
head, and therefore says, that her Sister was already dead, and that her
Brother-in-Law persuaded her to proceed, hoping afterward to wheedle her out
of it, all which is false. Her Married Sister was yet living, and lived Five
Years thereafter, and about Four Years after her Husband. ib. n. 5, 49, 51.
The half of the Mother's Goods belonging to the Sister and her Husband, they
resolved to require their Father to deliver them, to whom they did not
appertain; ib. p. 180.
and it was only by way of Concomitance and Adjunction, that Mistress A. B.
intervened in it, it not being Just that she should wrong her Brother-in-Law,
and Sister, by refusing her Assent to this Affair, and it appears that she came
in but accessorily; for how soon her Brother-in-Law died, she wholly desisted
from it. ib. and Part de Dien n. 9. p. 163.
So that the Question comes to this:

If in a Place where the Laws require that a Father, before he marry again,
leave the Goods of the deceased Wife to the Children that he had by her, a
Daughter of more than Twenty Years of Age, persecuted by a Mother-in-Law, who
wastes her Goods, does commit a Crime, when, (after having asked in vain, but
only simple Necessaries, from her Father who is in a plentiful Condition she
consents, that her elder living Married Sister and her Husband, should apply to
the Judges, to demand their own Goods which are wasted, and a Portion for this
Maid, while they constantly refuse to allow her the least share, for the
necessities of Life, so as to leave her generally without any Help, even in her
Maladies, how dangerous soever they were, or might be?

No Man living hitherto, not even any of her greatest Enemies, had so much as a
Thought to give her the least Reproach for it; and this is the Reason why he
who continued her Life, had no ground nor thought of making any Apology for
this. Fifteen or Twenty Years after this, a certain Doctor lifts up himself to
accuse her for this of Impiety, and an inordinate Love to the World, and that
she had neither Law nor Reason on her side, and glories publicly in this fine
Discovery, which ought rather to fill him with Confusion before God and Men,
considering the Artifices wherewith he has disguised and perverted the Matter
of Fact; God's forbidding to meddle with other Men's Matters; and the wretched
Injustice with which he takes part against the Right of oppressed Innocence. --
Having given an Account of the just Reason she had to resume the Sure after her
Father's Death, he thus concludes, As there was nothing in this, but what was
according to Divine, Natural, and Civil Equity, and since Mrs. A. B. affirmed,
that she acted in this by the Will and Motion of God, and against her
particular Inclination, and in short, since the Effect makes appear, that she
made use of her Goods for the Glory of God, and the Advantage of the Poor, in
the Erection of a Hospital, which subsists to this Day, and to which she left
all her Goods: What is here in all this, that deserves not to be esteemed in
the Judgments of all good Men? So far M. Poiret.

The Doctor is unjust, when he would have it pass for an Invention of M.
Poiret's, That she was commanded by God to pursue her Right, and that she
should need it for his Glory, etc. -- He knows that M. A. B. declares Parole de
Dieu. p. 67.
that she was expressly moved to it by God. And the Sincerity that appears in
all her Life and Actions, and that Poverty of Spirit which she still possessed
in the midst of Abundance, may convince any unprejudiced Person of the Truth of
her Declaration; and that she was not acted by an inordinate Love of the World.

That this was not inconsistent with her Abstractedness from the World, as it
appears by an excellent Resolution which she gave on another Occasion, Vie
exter, p. 186.
the Extract of which you see in the Third Part of the Apology, N. 23. p. 227.
So he who continues her Life does sufficiently evince it in the Place cited by
the Doctor, (though not with that Justice and Candor that might be expected from
a Narrator) Av^s salut. p. 86.
by some Reflections upon God's Dealing with her in that Matter, such as, that
this happened after he had made Trial of her hearty Sincerity by a twelve Years
actual Disingagement from the World; that it was against her Will, but by God's
express Command, that she resumed her Goods; that she possessed them in a most
real Disingagement, and employed them in God's Service only, and concludes with
this Illustration of the Matter, Vie Continue^ cap. 12. p. 128, 129.
If we had not seen Abraham pass three Days with Peace and Tranquillity of Mind,
in the Resolutions and actual Preparations to kill his Son; if we had not seen
him ready to stab him, and putting the Knife to his Throat, we could not have
known, and he himself could not have certainly known whether his Affections
were so disingaged from his Son, as to give him wholly to God. But after this
Proof, God gives him back that which he might afterward possess according to
God. It is such an Abandoning of all, that God requires of all true Christians
(though not of all after the same Manner) after which he restores unto them their
abandon^^ Goods, or not, as he sees fit; and if he give them, they are a Charge
to them who possess them then, when their Disingagement is true, they possess
them then as Goods which are not theirs, but given them of God, that they may
employ them for God only, who allows them to take of (...) their simple
Necessaries and no more; all the rest ought to be for him and on his Account.
This is what truly befell M. A. B. who on this Occasion received and dispensed
God's Goods with an exemplary and unviolable Fidelity, and spared no Pains to
maintain what was God's, because he had declared, that such was his holy Will.

The other Branch of the Doctor's Accusation, as to Coverousness in her suing
her Right to the Isle of Noordstrand, is no less unjust than the former; and
his Account of it is not fair nor ingenuous* Temoign. de Verite, Part 2. p 3^2,
303
M. de Cort left her sole ^eiress by his latter Will, without her Knowledge or
Consent, when he was far distant from her in Noordstrand, and when she
testified an Aversion unto it, her own Goods being a Charge to her already; he
told her, with Grief, there was none else that ^e could trust with it, for if
he should leave it to the Fathers of the Oratory, they would not pay his Debts;
it to his Relations they would destroy one another with (...) Suits. The Doctor
might have taken the true Narrative of it where it was to be had, and not from
M. Bayl^s Dic^^onaire Critique, if he had given her own Defenses against his
malicious Accusation when it was brought against her with the same Spite and
Fury, by Benjamin Furly the Quaker; he might have spared all his Insults, or
the Reader would have found them to be very ridiculous. Her Defense is to be
had at large in the Place cited Avertis. contre les Tremb. p* 213, etc.
on the Margent, in her own Words, the Substance whereof, in short, is this:
That it could not be Covetousness that acted her in that Business of
Noordstrand, since she was told it was burdened with Debts more than it was
worth, and was therefore refused by his Blood-Relations, when she proffered it
unto them with the same Conditions she her self held it: That she had given
sufficeint Testimony of her Detachment from the World, when at the Age of
Eighteen she voluntarily abandoned all that she might have possessed with rich
Parents; and when afterward she had an express Command from God, to assume her
Goods; she took them only as a great Charge and Burden to her, not knowing how
to employ them according to the Will of God; that she was herself satisfied
with simple Necessaries, and employ^d all in the Glory of God, and in Charity
to her Neighbor, that she spent herself, and Goods and Cares in training up
young Girls, sometimes Fifty at a Time, providing both for their Souls and for
their Bodies, etc. She afterward adds, That he ( Benjamin Furly) wrongfully
accuses me, that I seek worldly Goods, and that I possess my own Goods in
Co^etousness, and also those of others, viz. th^se of the deceased M de Cort. I
know not what this Covetousness would serve for, since I have resolved to live
soberly without all Attendance or Service, which I have no more desired since I
possessed my own Goods, than I did before; and would not do, even though I should
possess Noordstrand, yea though I should possess a whole Kingdom: Because the
Resolution I have to imitate the Lowness of Jesus Christ, is more valuable in
m^ judgment, than all the Wealth, Pleasures, and Commo^^^^es in the World:
Which Resolution I will never alter, and therefore I have no need to covet this
World's Goods, to make my self Great, or to take my Delights here; for I look
for them after Death, and when it shall be lawful to enjoy all sorts of
Contentments: but it is not lawful in this Valley of Tears, which is the time
of Penitence.

XXIV. XXIV. (...) etc.
The Doctor's 5th. Instance to disprove her Sanctity is considered already: And
now since the Doctor is an intimate Acquaintance of Mr. (...), and well vers^
in his Dictionaire, Histor. and Critique, he being one of his great Vouchers,
whom it seems he approves in his (...) of treating Divine Things and Persons,
he still (...) honorably of him, though Men of another Character, (...) as Dr.
Tillotson, and Dr. (...), how far soever they seem to be out of his Road,
cannot escape his la^h: I would entreat him to compare his own Character of A.
B. with Mr. Bayle's of the Royal Prophet and Psalmist (...)* and he will find
that though he has been very solicitous in drawing of her Picture, not to render
her very Lovely, yet if he compare it with his Friend's Picture of (...), it
will be found, that what appeared to him, as he says, (...) ugly Scabs and
Ulcers, are really Marks of Beauty ((...) taken in his own Sense) in Respect of
the Lineaments his Friend gives the other: There is hardly any Crime or Vice,
wherein he does not make him exceed the worst King of his Age, and that
throughout all his Life, and yet he says, it cannot be denied that he was
inspired by the Holy Spirit, because he wrote the Psalms. If the Doctor approve
of his Critique, he confounds his own, if not, how can he pretend Zeal for God
and the Authority of his Holy Word, and yet make him one of his most familiar
and most intimate Friends, cite the Authority of his Book on all Occasions, to
justify his Narratives, which good Men are ashamed to say they have looked
into, as well because of the Impudicity of it, as of his impious Undermining of
the Sacred Scriptures, by studying with the most malicious Art, utterly to
discredit the Writers of them, as Men void of All True Virtue.

XXV. XXV. 2. Her Knowledge of secret Thoughts not disproved.
In the XXI. Article, the Doctor very weakly disproves her Knowledge of secret
Thoughts, by denying the thing, as being asserted only by M. de Cort: Whereas
there be several Instances given of it by Mr. Franken, Mr. Van de Velde,
Tiellens, and others, in Temoignage de la Verite. It is true, God is the only
Searcher of Hearts, but it is neither against Reason nor Scripture, that one
should know the Thoughts and Heart of another, when God is pleased to reveal it
to him, and that the Thoughts and Dispositions of the Hearts of some, were made
known by God to Mrs. A. B. and declared by her, is more than once testified
both in her Life, and in the Temoign. de la Verite.

XXVI. XXVI. 3. Her foretelling things to come not disproved.
As to the XXII. Article, as the foretelling of things to come, is no
infallible Sign of Divine Inspiration, unless it be joined with the real
Holiness of the Person, and the Purity of the Doctrine: So, that things do not
immediately come to pass in the time and after the manner that we think they
have been foretold, is no sufficient Proof that they who foretold them are
false Prophets, as appears in the Third Part of the Apology Apology, p. 230.
etc.
. Jonah foretold that Ninevah should be destroyed within Forty Days, and yet it
was not destroyed: And though he says, she told things very positively, which are
not yet come to pass, yet that does not infer that she was not inspired by God;
her Meaning as to the last Judgments, is touched upon already, and is mistaken
by the Doctor: Besides, we are to consider, that those inspired by God, have
their Minds so filled with the Representations of Divine and Future Things,
that they appear to them near even at the Door. So St. Paul speaks of the last
Judgments, and of Christ's Coming in the Clouds, and of their being to be
changed, who were then upon the Earth at his Coming, as if all were to be
accomplished in his own Days.

It is much that has obliged the Doctor to say one good Word of her, sure the
Matter must be very notorious, that he had not the Confidence to pass it by,
and conceal it: He says Article XXIII. It must be acknowledged, that she speaks
and writes more plainly and intelligibly than any of the Mystic Sect, and is
somewhat more on the Moral than others of that Gang. But as if it were against
the grain to say any thing that might seem in the least to commend her, he
dashes all again, by telling, That her high Flights were effects of Fancy
rather than Judgment, as not having much Reason and Meditation. That her
Notions are Sublime, but so are a Bedlamites. Well A. B. will not quarrel with
any, who distinguishing the Accessories from the Essentials of Christianity in
her Writings, do firmly adhere to, and practice the first, though they look upon
the last as Dreams or metaphysical Whimsies: For she requires no Body to
believe them, if they see no Clearness in them, she lays no Stress upon them.
He undertakes to prove that her Notions do neither hang well together, nor are
consonant to the Scriptures, and pawns his Reputation for the Performance: But
he did not well to hazard what he so highly values, where the Probability of
losing was so great.

XXVII. XXVII. 4. The Supernatural Means of her Knowledge not disproved.
In the XXIV. Article, He is at a stand what Reply to give to the Account of
the Supernatural Means by which she came to her Knowledge, without Reading,
without consulting Men and Books, and even without Meditation. He says, It must
be owned that she consulted Men and Books very little, for she had both in
great Contempt: And yet within Eight Lines he says, That her sublime Thoughts
were suggested by her Conversation with others, by Sermons which she heard, and
by Conferences with Confessors, Priests, and Learned Men. The Doctor who is so
ready to fasten Contradictions upon others, would do well to clear himself of
them, here he seems to contradict himself, with his Pen in his Hand. O, but,
says he, no matter how she came by them, unless they be Solid and True. But if
they be both Solid and True, it is certainly worth the while to consider both
them and the Source of them. His Calumny of her despising the Scriptures, is
already answered. It had been good the Doctor had given us a Specimen of the
fine Thoughts of the metaphysical mean Person of his Neighbor Parish; he has
been unkind to his Acquaintance there, that he never let them know of this fine
Wit; he might have given a Narrative of him in Bourignianisin detected. As for
the Singular Talents of his Weaver, he may meet with such in every Parish.

XXVIII. XXVIII. (...)
One of his great Talents in his Narratives, lies in making long Common Places,
and then giving such a turn to some Expression of A. B. or of her Friends, as
may amuse the Reader, and make him think that they act, or write, contrary to
the Virtues or Divine Truths, about which he has been preaching, or are guilty
of the absurd things he has been exposing; and when he comes to the
Application, he speaks not Truth in one Article; but h^s the Art of darkning
and confounding things, instead of putting them in a true Light; this appears
in his XXV. Article, as well as in all the former. It is not true, that the
Appearance of Comets is given as a Reason for having Mrs. A. B. in so high
esteem; for they were not mention^d as Signs of her, but as Presages of the
approaching Judgments of God which she also declared, concerning which the
Author of the Vie continue, c. 3^. n. 5, 6
had good Reason to regret that the Devil should prevail so far, as to get
Books and Sermons published, to efface our of Men's Hearts the Fear of God's
Judgments, which might arise from the Considerations of such wonderful
Appearances, (...)
by t^lling that Comets are Natural things, and so there is no Reason to be
apprehensive of them; as if the greatest (...) were not inflicted by natural
Means; as that Author there considers to excellent Purpose. And as A. B. does
in the Place cited on the Margent, Many Signs, says she, have appeared in
Heaven, in the Sun, in the Stars, fearful Comets, menacing great Evils, which
did affright, some at first: But so soon as the Devil had leisure to make his
Adherents study to find out Reasons, showing that these were but Natural
things, he made the Fear of these Threatenings of God, sent as the Forerunners
of his Justice, to evanish out of their Minds, etc. -- It seems Men mock (now)
at God's Warnings, calling them Natural things. -- The Deluge was made by a
Natural Rain, and the last Plagues will be made by Pestilence, War, Famine, and
Fire, all Natural things. But the Devil to divert us from believing that these
things are the Beginnings of the last Plagues, makes it be said by his
Adherents, That these are Natural things; that no Body may turn to Repentance.
So nothing could occur more naturally in the writing of the Life of such a
Person, giving warning of such approaching Judgments, than to excite Men also
to consider Gods Warnings from the Heavens. From all which, there was not the
least Ground for the Doctor to make the Inferences which he does, or to call
his Brother Fool, not fearing the Danger incurred by so doing. But the Doctor
with his Friend, the Author of Pensces diverses sur les Cometes, will tell us,
They are all the superstitious Observers of Comets, who look upon them as
Presages of Divine Wrath, and that Eclipses were sometimes as formidable; and
Comets now come to be better understood. And in all Appearance, the better they
are understood, they will become the more dreadful and terrible, not only as
Presages and Warnings of God's Judgments, but also as the most dreadful and
immediate Instruments of them.

XXIX. XXIX. Just Remarks upon what (...) of the (...)
As the true Reasons for which A. B. and her Writings are esteemed by some, are
not at all weakened by the Doctor, but rather confirmed, so neither is the
Testimony of M. de Cort, and M. Poiret, being Men led by Truth, more than
Passion or Fancy) by all that he alleges to the contrary. What she said at the
Age of Four Years, being so weighty a Truth, and the Text of her whole Life, is
most deservedly laid before the Doctors and Teachers, by the Author of her
Life, and the (...) that every good Man will make of it, will be, to s^arch his
own Heart, and not to lesten the weight and due Impression of any of God's
Calls, even out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings.

What he says to disparage the Purity of her Soul, as well as of her Life,
shows only the Disorder of his own Mind, who from Spiritual things, studies to
excite in himself, end others, impute Imaginations. Unto the (...) all things
are pure. The Contradiction he finds out in M. Poiret, lies only in his own
Fancy: Jesus Christ, the Saints, the Holy Scriptures, do certainly send forth
an Odor of Truth, Charity, Holiness, Chastity, and of all Virtues; but this is
not perceptible but only by them who are rightly disposed, and who truly seek
God: Whereas they who love Falsehood and Impurity, are so far from feeling those
Impressons, that their Passions are rather excited to the contrary; as appears
by the Enemies of the Gospel. So the Writings and Conversation of A. B. might
make Divine Impressions of Charity and Purity upon some, and yet the Spite, and
Malice, and evil Passions of others, might be thereby the more enflamed; and
that this is neither a Falsehood nor a Contradiction, daily Experience does
testify.

As to the Passage cited out of the Preface to M. Narra. 1. p. 75.
Poiret's Divine Aeconomie, whosoever shall read it at length, as it is in the
Preface it self, will find the Thought so just and so excellent, that he will
see the Doctor has bewrayed only the Weakness of his own Understanding in
censuring of it. We see the Art that is now most magnified for finding out the
Truth, and upon which the Mathematicians do so much value themseves, (and I
hope the the Doctor is a Friend to the Mathematics, though not to the
Metaphysics,) is that of shutting out all Idea's foraign to the thing in
Question; that the Mind may search after the Truth, without Respect to its
former Conceptions of it, upon which the Truth does not at all depend.

If there be unquestionable and sufficient Evidences of the Divine Illumination
of a Person; Ibid. p 76.
this is not a sufficient Ground to despise them, or to disparage the Judgment
of others who think well of them, that there are many things in them which
appear unto us wild and uninrelligible. God may reveal things under most
mysterious Figures, altogether dark and hidden from us, and yet before the
Consummation of all things, may make them plain and evident; as we see in
Ezekiel, Daniel, and the Revelations: We must not therefore despise them,
because we have unquestionable Evidences of those Persons their being inspired
by the Spirit of God. So, rather than with the Doctor, to speak Evil of the
things which I do not know, I will conclude, Quae intellexi, optima sunt; puto
item and quae non intellexi.

XXX. XXX. Some Remarks upon the Second Narrative.
I have detained you so long upon the Doctor's first Narrative, that I shall
need to say little of the second, for what answers the first serves for an
Answer to the second also; where he has done nothing toward the satisfying
Peoples Expectations, which he raised by his big Promises. I shall let it pass
with three or four Remarks only.

1. 1. He persists in his false Representations.
He continues still to give false Representations of her. It is not true, that
she pretends to a Sanctity above the Prophets or the Apostoles, a Sanctity next
to that of God; nor to a comprehensive Knowledge Natural and Divine, and all
manner of speculative Truths, nor to the Knowledge of all matters of Fact, at
what distance of Time and Place, or how secret sover; nor that she contradicts
her self, as if she asserted sometimes, that both the Divine Truths which she
declares, and all the Words by which she utters them, were inspired by the
Spirit of God, and sometimes the first only; nor that she makes Jesus Christ a
Type of her; nor that she is the Mother of all that shall be converted unto
God; her Sayings import no such thing, when they are considered without
Prejudice in her own Writings, as is made appear already.

2. 2. In his Curtailings and Glossings.
Notwithstanding of the Narrator's great Sincerity, and that he intends to set
down her own Pretenses in her own Words, without adding to, or diminishing
from, or curtailing any Passage which may be necessary to qualify the Meaning
of them; yet so earnest is he to make her odious, that he forgets himself, and
either by truly curtailing the Passages, or by his Comments on them, he makes
her speak quite otherwise than she intended: So that they who would not judge
rashly, may please to read them in her own Writings without the Doctor's
Curtailings and Glosses. Nar. 2. p 4. Light of the World. Part 2. p. 84.
Thus as to his false Glosses, when he says, My Thoughts, Words, and Actions,
must have the Three Qualities of Righteousness, Goodness, and Truth, else I
should be as a sounding Brass, etc. Does this infer that she arrogates to her
self a Sanctity above the Prophets and Apostles, and next to God himself? Souls
truly regenerate, are Partakers of the Divine Nature, Christ lives in them;
Piety cannot be true, as he himself grants, without a Perfection of Parts, though
not of Degrees, without an Universal Conformity to the Will of God, so that
their Thoughts, Words, and Actions, must be both Just, Good, and True; now as
one Star differs from another in Glory so do regenerate Souls. Her Words then
imply no more, but that God had truly renewed and regenerated her by his Holy
Spirit, and not that she exceeded all others in Sanctity, as his malicious
Gloss would have it. Light of the World, Part 1. p. 92. Nar. 2. p. 5.
Thus when she says, I do not remember I ever committed any Faults, but when I
believed the Counsel of Men. It is far from her Meaning that she was born
without Sin, or that Original Corruption was perfectly cured in her, as appears
by all her Writings, and by that very Place cited: but that as Plants and Trees
seem all Dead and without Life, in the Winter-Season, till the warm Spring make
them all bud anew, and discover the Life and Spirit that was in the Root, so
Men's natural Corruption, which seems dead and mortified, is awakened and exerts
it self, according to the diffirent outward Occasions, conformable to the
Variety and Difference of People's Inclinations, and that this was her weak
side, by which her Self-love and Vanity did exert it self.

Again, when she gives a convincing Reason for what she says, or speaks of her
self with the greatest Humility, or limits general Sayings, so as to confine
them to her true Sense and Meaning, all this he very cautiously keeps out, and
conceals, as appears in the Citations, out of the Light of the World in the 9,
11, 17, 20, and 21st. p. of the Narrative. Thus where she wonderfully
Illustrates how the Holy Spirit communicates to pure Souls such a comprehensive
Divine Light and Knowledge, as cannot be expressed by many Words; the Doctor
industriously skips it over, and joins the foregoing and following Sen^ences
together. I have need, says she, to express my self by humane Reasons and
Comparisons, because otherwise they could not understand me; for the Holy
Spirit speaks so succinctly, that one Word makes me comprehend many things. He
gives Subtility to the Understanding to conceive great things, by one of his
small Motions. It is just as if one were in a fine Room well adorned with
Variety of Furniture and Rarities, but there were no Light in it whereby to see
all these things: In such a Case it would need a great many Words, to make him
who had never seen them, understand in particular all the fine Things and
Furniture that were in the Room, telling him here be such and such Pictures,
such Tables, such Seats, and such like things; and yet we could not make him
comprehend well the Beauty of this Furniture and Rarities: But if a Light were
brought into the Room, though it were but that of a Candle, in a Moment, it would
give more Knowledge of all the things that are in the Room, than all the
Discourses that were uttered to make them known. So it is with the Light of the
Holy Spirit, when it enters into a Soul, it makes it know and comprehend all
things, very clearly. Nevertheless, these things cannot be seen by Souls, who
are yet in the Darkness and Obscurity of their own Passions; many Words and
Discourses must be used, to make them understand the Rarities that are in the
Works of God. So far A. B. All this is left out by the Doctor, except only the
first and last two Lines the rest did not serve his turn; he designed to
confound and darken all, and they gave too distinct and convincing a Light.
They who shall be pleased to peruse that whole Conference, will see how little
Ground there is for his scurrilous ^ests, if we consider the thing in Thesi,
without relation to A. B. that when the Spirit of God does immediately
enlighten a Soul, he does not endite all the precise Words that it ought to
make use of in explaining that Light and Truth to others, only that he brings
along with him the Gift of Wisdom, to express it self so as to make the Divine
Truths to be understood. It cannot be mistaken then as to the Substance, and
Essence of the Truths, though it may be, as to Faults of Speech through its own
Weakness and Ignorance, which Faults come from it self, and not from the Holy
Spirit: And yet it is not the Will of God that it should be taken up about the
Correcting of these Faults, both because this would divert its immediate
Attention from God, and make it lose the Divine Light, and withal his immediate
Force and Power is seen in its Weakness.

Again, in the 17th. p. of his Narrative, when he cites a part of this 18th.
Conference, of the 2d, Part of the Light of the World. to prove that she
pretended to know all matters of Fact whatsoever; he leaves out that which
serves to qualify the Meaning of it. Light of the World Part ^. p. 39.
All that is needful in this, says she, is to disingage our Soul from earthly
Affections, and to resign it to the Will of God; then he go^verns and
illuminates it in such sort, as that it cannot be ignorant of any thing that it
ought to know: For as for simple Curiosities we ought never to ask or desire
them, but only that which is well-pleasing to God or profitable to our
Neighbors; the Knowledge of which things, God does not deny to Souls, who are
faithfully dedicated to him. Thus the Spirit of God made known to Peter, the
matter of Fact of Ananias and Saphira; and to Elijah, that of Gheazi; where is
there Occasion from this, for all the Narrators idle Jests, in the 19th. and
20th. p. of the Narrative?

3. 3. Makes Questions upon a false Supposition.
The Doctor starts a great many Questions upon a false Supposition, p. 31. it
being already told in the English Preface to the Light of the World, that not
M. de Cort, but M. A. B. did write all the Conferences of the Light of the
World, which are now published.

4. 4. He opposes the Truth, and joins with the Pelagians.
I am sorry that he seems to have drunk in the Hetetodox Sentiments of his new
Friends, and to declare himself so much Pelagian as to deny all kind of Union
betwixt a regenerate Soul and God: For one of the Articles of his Impeachment
of A. B. seems to import no less; for he accuses her because she asserts, that
there was some kind of Union betwixt her and God, and that he dwelt with her,
in some ineffable and incomprehensible manner. I thought that all God's Woorks
had been incomprehensible, and that if he dwell in any Soul, it is in an
ineffable manner: And Jesus had said, if any Man love me, he will keep my
Words, and my Father will love him; and we will come unto him and make our
Abode with him; and St. Paul declares that Christ lived in him; and that if any
Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his: I thought all this did
import some kind of Union betwixt a regenerate Soul and God.

If any will please to read the half Sentence, if you knew me, you should also
know God, in the Original it self, they will see how far she is from his
Insinuations of Parallelling her self with Jesus Christ, Light of the World
Part 2. Conf. 13. p. 85.
or making her self equal with God. If, says she, I should say things contrary
to the Gospel, do not believe me: For you ought not to believe any thing
because I say it to you, but only because it is really true: And if you knew
me, you should also know God; because he is one and the same Spirit in all
things. 1 Cor. 6, 17.
So far as you shall discern Righteousness, Goodness, and Truth, in any Person,
so far shall you discern God living in them, and no farther.

The Doctor wilfully mistakes her Meaning in the other Passage he cites, D. C.
Nar. p. 36, 37.
( Light of the World, Part 2. Conference, 17. p. 128, 129,) and keeps out of
the midst of it, that which clears it most. She makes not a Distinction betwixt
a Doctrine as from of a prophetical Spirit, and as immediately from God, as he
would insinuate, but that what God thought fit to declare more darkly by the
Prophets, now about the time of their Accomplishment, he declares them more
manifestly, with such Clearness and Reasons, as bring along with them their own
Evidence: And that he communicates now a Light, not of prophesying things to
come, but of showing the approaching and present Accomplishment of what has
been foretold already. The Prophecies, says she, of the Ancient Prophets will
all of them very shortly be fulfilled; there is no need of any longer having
obscure Prophecies, because we are fallen into the last Times, wherein all the
Prophecies shall cease, and we shall see them all entirely accomplished, and we
shall not receive any more new ones; because the King of all the Prophets will
himself, govern his People, and will give an entire Accomplishment to all that
has been prophesied of him; so though, Sir, you shall not need to say, that you
hold these Truths from a Prophet, because the Work does always bear witness who
the Workman has been. Thus A. B. in the midst of the Passage which the Doctor
has cited. No doubt when the Doctor began this Narrative, he resolved to be
Ingenuous, and to curtail no Passage that might qualify her Meaning. But when
he writes against A. B. it will not do with him.

Naturam expellas furca licet, usque recurret. 5. 5. A just Character of M
Poiret, and the Narrator's unchristian dealing with him; considered.
M. Poiret being still alive, the Narrator should have dealt by him as a
prudent Man, and a Christian Pastor; he should have pleased to tell him his
Fault, and endeavored to restore him in the Spirit of Meekness; if there were
any Defects and Errors, I am persuaded he would have found him easily convinced
of them, for he is none of the cracked, whimsical, bigoted Heterodox and
Blasphemous Fouls, which he and his Friend represent him to be: He is a
Protestant Minister whom Providence has discharged from the exercising of his
Office, by the Dissolution of his Congregation, through the Miseries of Wars;
he has a sound Mind, a solid Head, a clear Understanding, a penetrating Reason
and Judgment, a cheerful Temper, and a sincere Mind: He is not wedded to any
Party or Person, farther than they are united to the Truth as it is in Christ
Jesus; he values the Writings of A. B. because they contain the true Doctrine
of Jesus Christ rescued from the false Glosses of corrupt Nature, and because
her Life and Spirit were conformable to her Writings; he most firmly believes
and adheres to all the Articles of the Christian Faith, and labors to have
them transcribed in his Heart and Life, and values no other Sentiments nor
Reasonings but as they tend to promote the Interests of Christ's Gospel. The
unjust and unaccountable Representations given of him by the Narrator and his
Friend, have made me give you this Character of him, and that this is a true
one, his Writings are irrefragable Evidence; which whosoever disparages,
betrays only the wrong set of his own Heart and Understanding.

As for that Letter which has given Occasion to the Doctor's hasty
Excommunication of him, and made him inconsiderately rank him with Mahomet,
Ebion, and Corinthus; it ought to be considered,

1. That it was in a manner extorted from him, by one who some time before, had
gone over to the Church of Rome, and because his Change was disaproved by A. B.
being enraged at her, endeavored to divert well-meaning Persons from harkening
to the Truths of the Gospel contained in her Writings, because it was not
foretold in the Holy Scriptures, that God would communicate his Graces to a
Woman, for the Renovation of his Gospel Spirit, M. Poiret upon this Occasion
applied himself to show both the Absurdity and Falseness of the Exception,
which otherways, it may be, would never have entered into his Mind.

2. That the Doctor here again falls into his ordinary Method, of connecting
very distinct Passages together, and leaving out that which would put them into
a right Light, as is evident from the Letter it self, and falsely translating
some part of it, as that Adam some time after his Creation, had brutal
Inclinations; for there is no such Expression there.

3. That M. P. considers the thing only in, Thesi, what Evidences the
Scriptures give of God's purpose and design to make Womankind the Instrument of
his Light and Spirit to the World, when the other Sex, Man, through his Pride
and Wisdom, had rendered himself incapable of it.

4. That if the Narrator had been so just as to have shown the Principles upon
which M. Poiret proceeded, I am sure no candid Reader would have subscribed the
Doctor's Sentence. They are to be gathered from Temoign. Tem. des S. Ecrit. p.
387, 388.
des S. Ecrit. That God is resolute in all his designs, and will at last bring
them to pass; The counsel of the Lord stands for ever, and the thoughts of his
heart to all generations: That God made Man for true Happiness in the Enjoyment
of his God, and that he persists in this design, through all Generations: That
Adam beginning soon after his Creation to turn away from God to the Creatures,
God, to prevent his total Fall, resolved to give him a Help-meet for him, a
Woman, in whom the divine Image should shine; that his Soul might be thereby
raised unto God: That this first Eve, thwarting his design, by turning Man
farther away from God, yet he still persisted in his design, resolving to put
his divine Image in a Woman, and by her, as by a second Eve, to reduce the
Generality of Mankind; Ibid. p. 402, 4^3.
and that accordingly he gives the Promise of the Enmity between the Seed of
the Woman, and that of the Serpent, Gen 3. 15. That Jesus Christ coming in the
Flesh is pointed out in this Prophecy by these words, I will put; for it is he
who speaks in a glorious Body, and shows that he will be the Source of the
Enmity against the Devil and Sin, that is, the Author of Grace, Sanctification,
and all divine Strength and Virtue that we need against the Enemy: That the
Serpent's Head not being yet bruised, Jesus Christ must be supposed farther to
fulfill this Prophecy, by making a Woman his Organ or Instrument for exciting
again and promoting among Men this Enmity against the Devil, etc. Now what is
there in all this that deserves Excommunication, as a Blasphemer, and a vile
Heretic, not worthy to live? Blasphemy is, to speak Evil of God; and Heresy,
pertinaciousl^ to teach that which turns away from the Love of God: and this is
very far from either.

5. The Doctor ought to treat others with Meekness and Charity, and Equity,
lest he himself be tempted, and fall into the same Condemnation with which he
unjustly reproaches others. D. C's Essays, part 2. page 163, 164, 165.
When he considers the Reasons why God was pleased to permit Sin, which is so
disagreeable to himself, and so pernicious to his Creatures, he tells us, God
has not concealed from us the Reason of this Conduct; his own Glory is the End
of all, and by Sin his Glory is exceedingly manifested. As he manifested the
Omnipotency of his Power by creating many things out of nothing, so he
demonstrates the infinity and vast wonderful reach of his Wisdom, in that he
can bring Good out of Evil. How could we have known God's wonderful Patience,
his Meekness, Long suffering and Forbearance, and his strict and severe
Justice, in distinguishing the merits of Persons and Things, if Sin had not
entered into the World? What adorable Instances of Love, Mercy, and Goodness,
would have been wanting, if Sin had not given occasion for them? If Sin had not
happened, where would there have been place for the Mercy of God? Who would
have dreamed of the stupendous Love of God toward Mankind? It might have been
suspected, without Sin, that God, and all other things, were under some
inevitable Fate; but now it appears that he is free, that he can do what he
pleases, and that all things are managed by his Wisdom. If the Revelation of
the Gospel be admitted, God has had more Honor, and been more glorified by the
Fall of Angels, and the Sin of Man, than by the Creation of the World.

I have staid long, says he, upon this; but it is pardonable, seeing the
importance and intricacy of the Subject required it; and seeing some have
written Volumes upon this alone, which very few have cleared to Satisfaction.

And the sum, you see, of the Doctor's Resolution is, That God decreed and
resolved to permit Sin and Wickedness in the World, because by his way of
managing it, it would tend most to his Glory, and his Perfections and
Attributes would not have been so conspicuous without it. Father, forgive him,
for he knows not what he says. I doubt not but the Doctor has written all this
with a good Intention, but upon the matter it is Blasphemy with a Witness, and
a very unfit Resolution for convincing of the Atheists and Deists. Non ipsa
peccata (says St. Augustine) vel ipsa miseria, perfectioni universitatis sunt
necessaria, sed animae in quantum animae sunt quae si velint peccant; si
peccaverint miserae fiunt. A. B 's Writings, which the Doctor so much despises,
do clear the Mysteries of Providence far more to the Honor and Glory of all
the divine Attributes, and to the Conviction of our Reason; as many, who do
read them without prejudice, are fully persuaded.

6. 6 The Narrator's Mistakes as to the comparison betwixt Jes. Christ's First
birth and the Renovatio^ of his Gospel Spirit.
But, to return to the Narrative, as to what he says of a Parallel drawn up by
A. B. betwixt her and Jesus Christ. his Misrepresentations and Mistakes lie in
this, That she calls it a Comparison not a Parallel, there being a great
difference between these two. In how many public Sermons have the Sufferings
and Virtues of King Charles the Martyr been compared with those of his Master
Jesus Christ? Will it be said that the Preachers intended to make a Parallel
betwixt them, or to make Jesus Christ the Type of him? 2. The Comparison is
between the second Birth of Jesus Christ, or the renewing of the Church, and
his first Birth; and not betwixt him and A. B. He may speak, as she says, out
of a Bush, or out of an Ass, but his Spirit is still to be regarded through
all; she is but the Organ, the Instrument, and the Conduit; but the Spirit,
Life, and Power, the living Waters, and the pure Truth, come from Jesus Christ.
3. Though there were no more but this one Expression in the Comparison, it were
enough to show how far she is from making a Parallel as to what relates to her
self: The Child Jesus, says she, gathered Disciples after him: the second also
will draw a great number of persons to be Disciples of the first. 4. There are
few serious Christians, who do not believe that there will be a renewing of the
Church of God before the End of the World, and that Jesus Christ will live in
her by his Light and Spirit. Now there being a great Analogy in the Works of
God through the several Ages of the World, a prudent serious Christian will not
scoff at the making a Comparison betwixt the Renovation of his Gospel Spirit in
the World, and the first establishing of it.

7. 7 His rash Censure of things he does not understand.
As to what he says in his Tenth Article, her own Defenses are already given in
the Apology. As I shall never desire to mock at and speak evil of things that I
do not know, so, had the Doctor lived among the Pharisees at the time of the
Birth of Jesus Christ, he would have made it as much the subject of his Scorn
and Raillery, that it was said, a Virgin betrothed to a Husband had conceived a
Son only by the power of the Holy Ghost, as now he diverts himself and others
with his light and foolish lests in relation to this Virgin. To turn an
innocent Raillery in Conversation, which had nothing in it of any impure Idea,
Narr. 2. p. 49.
and uttered 30 years ago by a Person of known Gravity, who never staid with A.
B. though he greatly esteemed her, and with whom her other Friends had never any
Acquaintance; to turn this, I say, into an impure Jest, and fix it upon her and
her Friends as their ordinary Conversation, shows only how impure, as well as
malicious, the Imaginations of some are, who catch at all occasions to turn the
most innocent things that way. Turpe est Doctori, etc.

8. 8. His (...).
It is a dangerous thing, it seems, to come near the Narrator when he is in his
Majesty, for then he lays furiously about him. The Author of The State of the
Philadelphian Society had a modest Reflection upon the Doctor's boasting that
he would overturn the Quakers, Philadelphians, Quietists, and Pietists, as well
as the Bourignianists, all at one blow. The Doctor treats him with a great deal
of Insolence and Scorn, though what he said stands good after all that the Doctor
has yet replied. The Doctor says, that the Church of England and the
Presbyterians do not stand upon the same Foundation, nor resolve their Faith by
the same Rule, yet themselves say they do it; viz. by the divine Authority of
the Scriptures, and the Practice of the purest Ages of the Church: which was
all the Postscript affirmed. What that Author said of the internal Light of the
Spirit of God, being so rationally stated in the Treatise it self in opposition
to all Enthusiastical Delusion and Imposture, and made appear to be ownd by all
the Reformed Churches, and particularly by the Church of England. I am sorry
that the Doctor shows himself such an Enemy to the Grace and Spirit of God, as
to flout at it, and to scoff at Authors and Writings which he does not know.
There are many who look upon the Writings of A. B. as excellently representing
the Essentials of Christianity, yet they do not believe her other particular
Sentiments, but commend her Discretion in the manner of their delivery. Now he
who that Author hopes may undertake to give a true Character of her, may be of
that number: and so the Doctor might have spared all his Declamations about his
Vtopias and Hennepins.

The Doctor concludes with an uncommon strain of disdainful and boasting words.
(...).
If he persist to amuse Men with his Narratives, as he has already given a
proof with how little Ca^dour he manages them, and confounds and ^^akens the
Truth instead of clearing it, so he may be disappointed of his Designs and miss
his Aim, come short of the Glory and Name he aspires after, and make the
Writings of M. A. B. to be more valued and esteemed in the World, (in which I
am sorry he should think himself unhappy;) for the more narrowly they are
enquired into by sincere and serious Persons, their Worth will the more appear,
and they who clearly see the great and essential truths of Jesus Christ
contained in these Writings, will never be shaken by his Narratives: and let
him calumniate as he will, it will still more and more appear, that God has
chosen the weak, base, and foolish things of the World to confound the Wise,
the Learned, and the Mighty; and the Writings of that despised and pious Virgin
M. A^t. Bo^^ ignon will be admired and esteemed, when it will be quite
forgotten that ever there were such Writings in the World as the Preface to the
Snake in the Grass, and Bourign. Detected. It may please God to open his Eyes,
and to let him see what Mistakes his Passions and his rash and hasty judging of
things, have made him run into and what mischief he does unto the true interest
of Christianity; how he entertains and diverts the Scoffers, and the Profane,
and lays a stumbling block in the way before many serious Persons, to turn them
away from that by which they might reap unspeakable spiritual profit to their
Souls, by his giving such Characters of Persons and Writings which aim at
nothing but to persuade People to the Love of God, and for that end to follow
the Example of our Lord Jesus Christ in a Life of Penitence and Mortification
of our corrupt Nature; which desire none to sollow the Instrument of these
Writings but Jesus Christ only nor believe any thing upon her Authority, but
upon his only, and as it is conformable to his Gospel; nor to have any regard
for her particular Sentiments, as not being necessary to Salvation, and which
do not at all tend to make a new Sect, or divide Christians, or separate them
from their lawful Pastors, but to unite us all in the Spirit of Jesus Christ.
If he seriously pursue this great Design himself in the true Fear of God, his
Prejudices will vanish as a Mist before the Sun. That God may grant him this
Grace, and that he may instantly ask it of him with a sincere and humble heart,
is the earnest and daily Prayer of,

SIR, etc.
POSTSCRIPT.
HAving seen a Letter of M* Poiret's to a Friend, I here send you an Extract
out of it; by which you will see with what a Christian Spirit he considers the
Doctor's unworthy Usage of him.

Nil moror quod in me ita debacchetur Narrator, dicta in sensus horridos and
blasphemos interpretetur, aversionem suam summumque odium testetur adversus me
qui hominem incognitum, resque ejus tetigi nunquam. Quaestio mihi suit cum
aliis circa rem quae ipsum non concernit. Contendebant nonnulli, licet
veritates egregiae. donaque non vulgaria in A. B. ejusque scriptis essent, eam
tamen non esse audiendam, siquidem e Scripturis non pateat Deum velle homines
per sominam docere, provocabantque uti hoc ostenderetur: provocatus, qui alias
tacuissem, ostendere conatus sum Deum in Scripturis declarasse quod placeat
ipsi in ultimis temporibus soemina aliqua sive foemineo sexu uti, tanquam
instrumento, quo lumen Christi, di in^sque veritates evangelii multis
efficaciter communicet ad unam Dei glori^m, hominumque salutem: atque hoc est
meum illud crimen. q^od omni haeresi ac insaniae anteponit, and ob quod ipsemet
ad rabiem usque videtur in M. A. B. and in me insanire. Si men's ille Theologa
esset aut Christiana, diligeret me quamvis inimicum, and ex Christiana indole
omnia in meliorem partem tentaret interpretari; quae in bonum utcunque capi
possunt, licet incommode enunciata, charitate sua tegeret; si qui errores and
defectus non poss^nt a charitate sua excusari, misericordia moveret eum pro
errante Deum deprecari, ut per Gratiae lumen mihi subveniret; tum homines
caeteros ad eandem erga me charitatem commovere, memor ipse propriae suae
infirmitatis, timensque ne si in eos, qui opinione sua ceciderunt, insolentius
insurgat, permittat Dominus, superbae insolentiae osor, eum profundius cadere,
quam ab ullo alio factum sit. Verum nil simile in ejus scriptis, in quibus e
contra, tantum demonstrat coram omnibus sibi animum ess^ malevolum, de
inventione mali gaudere quaerentem, quaevis aliis been dicta depravantem,
irrisorem, bonorum adversarium, and ut omnes istis qualitatibus infecti sint,
efficere gestientem; quod sane doleo, licet non invito animo hanc amplector
occasionem, osorem ac inimicum m^um dilectione and benedictione prosequendi,
rogans Deum ex animo ut ipsi sit propitius, eum e malis suis eripiat, donetque
luminoso, miti ac humili spiritu servatoris nostri, cujus misericordia ego
quoque sum indigeo.



A Second LETTER CONTAINING Some short REMARKS upon Bourignianism Detected,
Second Narrative, and the Author's Letter to his Friend.
SIR,
I. I. The Occasion and Design of the Letter.
Though I am sensible that I have very good Reason to be diffident of my self,
and to entertain always a profound Sense of the weakness and fallibility of my
Understanding, and of my unfitness to pass a Judgment on the Performances of
great and learned Men, yet since you have put that Honor upon me, as to desire
once and again, that I should give you my Sense of the Reverend Dr. Cockburn's,
2d. Narrative, and the Letter annexed, I might justly challenge my self Guilty
of a piece of Rudeness, if I denied your Request; and therefore I resolved not
to decline doing that which perhaps might afford you a little innocent
Divertisement.

I have always, I think, owned to you, that I am an impartial Enquirer after
Truth, and I hope, if my Heart deceive me not, I shall through the Divine
Grace, be ready to embrace it, and rejoice in it, wherever I find it. And it
is my humble Petition to the Father of Mercies, the God of Light and Truth,
that he would never suffer me to espouse the Interests of any Persons or
Parties any farther than they have Truth and Goodness on their side.

A general Verdict on the whole of the Doctor's Performance, might be
dispatched in a few Lines, but I suppose, this would not be Satisfying, and
therefore I conclude, that giving you my Thoughts, together with the Reasons of
them, in some particular Instances, will be more agreeable, and more fully
answer your Expectations.

II. II. Remarks upon Doctor Cock bourn's Letter to his Friend:
The perusal of the Doctor's Letter to his Friend, gave me Ground to make the
following Reflections, which I shall impart to you with all the Succinctness
that is possible for me, and you may judge of the Justice and Reasonableness of
them: 1. 1. H. judging others, condemns himself.
Whatever Comments Enthusiasts may make on providential Events, yet they whom
the Doctor calls M. B's. Admirers and Followers, who do not pretend to be
inspired Persons, are not very forward to interpret the Language of these
Dispensations. However, I find, the Doctor Letter, p. 2.
himself, notwithstanding the Censure he passes on the bold and temerarious
Pretenses of Enthusiasts, to know the secret Reasons of providencial
Occurrences, scruples not to fall a guessing and even determining of the Intent
and Meaning of that Dispensation which has lately befallen himself. He is very
suspicious that A. B.'s. Disciples may have entertained some secret Triumphs in
their Bosoms on the Account of his being forced to retreat to Holland, and is
at some pains to abate the Joy of these imaginary Jo Poeans. But for any thing
I know, he is out in his Conjecture, and might have spared himself the Trouble
of what he wrote on that head. I very much doubt, if our being put in more
advantageous Circumstances for accomplishing the Designs that we are very (...)
and intent upon, and which we may fancy to be very useful, be a good Assurance
to us of the Countenance and peculiar Interposal of Divine Providence in our
Favors.

2. 2. Unjust (...), and (...).
The Doctor Page 9. c. ^ page ^^.
in these Passages where he tells us what are, and what are not the Grounds of
his appearing against A. B. has several very pretty and just Reflections. Such
generals go well away with every Party. It is the Justice of their Application
that will be disputed. Yet I question the Truth of some of his general Maxims;
such as, for Instance, that true Piety, like Gold, is current every where, and
at all times. I am sure it was not so in the Days of our Savior and his
Apostles. The great thing that has engaged his Zeal in this Attack, is his
supposed Discovery of Errors, Heresies, and Delusions. The mutual Charge of
pernicious Doctrines, is what has set the several Sects by the Ears. The
Doctor indeed advances his Charge against A. B. to a very great height,
affirming that the whole Scheme of her Principles has a Tendency contrary to
the Christian Constitution. This Assertion, I know, will oblige some to tell
him, that it would seem he had not yet well digested his Thoughts on that
Matter. However, if he solidly evince this, he will do a great Kindness to
many, who for the Present think that they are not wholly ignorant of the
Designs and Tendency of the Christian Constitution. In the mean time, the
Doctor modestly acknowledges that he is not infallible.

3. 3. The Doctor in Danger by becoming h^s own Interpreter.
In the preceding Narrative Page 30.
the Doctor had asserted, that neither the Virgin, nor any other Saint, was so
much honored by the Roman Church, as A. B. is by her Followers. Now I presume
that one of the greatest Instances of Honor, paid by that Church to the
Virgin, is their making Addresses t^ her frequently, and in these same Terms
that they do to God himself. And since the Doctor translated that Passage in M.
de Cort's Letter concerning A. B. thus, No Body makes Prayers to her, was it
not reasonable to infer, that he intended his Readers should believe that A.
B.'s Friends paid the like Deference to her? I am sure a great many Readers
took it in that View: However, now he retracts it, yet I wonder how he comes to
call his Translation of the Passage, a literal and close one, which indeed is
none at all. The Words are these -- Et maintenant, dans les Affairres
publiques, dans les fleaux universels, dans tous^ces Perils, ne la point
consulter, ne la point fair prier? Ni l'employer? Certainly the true and
literal Translation of that Period is No Body makes or obliges her to pray.

4. 4. Not just in making of Characters.
I think the Doctor does not sufficiently discharge the Censure that the brings
in Number. XIV. It supposes that there are a great many good things in A. B's Life
and Writings, and certainly there are, and to a far greater number than the
things that are more singular, and not so agreeable to all. And why might not
these have been taken to make up, at least, some Strokes of her Picture? But
the Doctor will needs have her to be absolutely Black and Deformed, and is very
angry that all others do not think of her as he does. There are some Faces and
Shapes, that to some, appear very agreeable, which others imagine to be full of
Deformities and Unhandsomness, and they will pick Quarrels at every Part and
Lineament, though really there may be no just Ground for so doing, and the true
Reason of the Dislike may be the false Measures which Men have set up in their
own Fancies, whereby to judge of either Natural or Moral Beauties.

5. 5. Makes a Controversy where there is none.
The Doctor, in my Opinion, states the Controversy very invidiously, p. 14.
There is a Debate, says he, whether A. B. is to be preferred before Fathers,
Prophets, and Apostles? A. B. never claimed to any such Preference, she owns
and honors these Holy and Eminent Persons, as the Messengers of God, and the
Organs of his Spirit. She acknowledges the Doctrine of the Apostles and
Prophets to be the Standard of all other Doctrines, and of her own too. All
which might be verified from an Hundred and an Hundred Passages of her Books;
And why should the contrary be peremptorily asserted?

6. I wish from my very Soul that the Doctor's Remarks, A. B's Writings
valuable for their Plainness, Simplicity, and Disinterestedness.
p. 15. were true, namely, that what is good in A. B's Writings, is handled and
recommended in every Practical Treatise, and is the Subject of almost daily
Sermons. But I am afraid, it will be found not with that Plainness, Simplicity,
and Disinterestedness; for we have the Christian Graces and Virtues, ordinarily
so crusted over with the fulsome Varnish of a gaudy Eloquence, or so blunted
and dispirited by the Flatterings, Constructions, and Glosses put upon them,
that we neither see them in their true Beauty, nor feel the Divine Force and
Vigor of them, but have them with any Face our deceived Fancy pleases to put
upon them, and being almost brought into any Compliance with our corrupt
Natures, so as they are nothing bettered by them. The Doctor in my Opinion is
Injurious to A. B's Friends, in representing them to the World, as egregious
Undervaluers of Sermons. Such as press and urge the great Design of our
Religion, they dearly value, and I believe the Doctor himself will pay no great
regard to these Discourses that are merely calculated to recommend the petty
Interests and little Opinions of a Party, as if they were the great things, the
Cause of God, etc. or that are visibly the Product of Vanity and Ostentation.
Indeed the Names of Resignation and Self-denial, are not new, yet I believe the
Import of them may be unknown to not a few. And I doubt not but vast numbers,
who pretend to look into the Scriptures seriously enough, are still ignorant of
the Nature of them, and insensible of their Obligations to them.

I wonder extremely how the Doctor could forget that false Notions of Religion
do oftentimes draw such a vail over the Understandings of Men as hinders them
from discerning the Import of the Duties of the Gospel. The frightful and
tragical Expostulations that I meet with in this and the following Page, are, I
must say, nothing but calumnious Insinuations, and go all upon the wild
Supposition, that there is a new Name, a new Authority besides, and above that
of Jesus Christ and his Apostles obtruded on the World, which they whom he here
Levels at, do infinitely abhor.

7. 7. The Doctor's Prenciples not friendly to St. Paul.
The Improvement that the Doctor makes of the Twelve Apostles, as being the
Twelve Foundations of the New Jerusalem, bids fair to seclude St. Paul, who was
none of the Twelve, and gives Ground to think, that if the Doctor had been in
those Days he would have entered his Protestation against him, and cried out,
How comes a new one to be added, are the other decayed? Or did not God foresee
what is necessary? Will Men offer to mend the Work of God? But St. Paul built
on the same Foundations, and so A. B. pretends likewise to do, and on Jesus
Christ the chief Corner Stone. Etoile du Matin. p. 23.
Hear her self, Since Jesus Christ is the only Foundation of the true Church,
and whosoever does not build on this Foundation, builds upon the Sand, etc.

8. 8. His Rudeness to A. b's Friends.
I would fain know upon what Grounds the Doctor affirms, p. 20, 21. That they
who favor A. B. do it on M. de Cort's, and M. Poiret's simple Authority, and
why he accuses them of a lazy, unreasonable, and overhasty Credulity? Does he
think that they either wanted the Exercise of, or did not employ their rational
Faculties and Discretion in this Matter, or that they were not at the Pains of
any mature and serious Deliberations about it? These and a great many more of
the Doctor's Complements seem, in my Opinion, to be pretty Rude, and to savor
too little of good Breeding or Charity.

9. 9. His Rudeness to the Philadelphian.
The Doctor makes good Company with the Philadelphian. Yet, I think, he ought
to have returned him the Civility of the Two Illustrious Epithet of Ingenious
and Learned, wherewith he adorned him in his Postscript, and not to have
treated him so coarsly as he does. I am of the Mind that the Philadelphian by
the same Foundation on which all the Parties he mentioned pretend to stand, and
by the same Rule according to which they resolve the Principles of their Faith,
understands the Holy Scriptures. And it is evident, I think, that these he
instances in, do pretend to resolve their several Principles into the Word of
God, as their Foundation and Rule, whereas the Doctor, as I take him, seems to
mean by them, the Improvements and Deductions which the several Parties make in
their own Favors, both from Scripture and Reason, and argues against the
Philadelphian in that View. I think moreover, that when the Doctor in the heat
of his Opposition against Pretenses to Inspiration, argues thus, as if it were
impossible or unheard of, for one to be deluded, and yet not to be sensible of
it, or to exclaim against a thing, of which he himself is as guilty as any,
puts a Sword in the Hand of the Deists, whereof they may very dexterously turn
the Edge against such as were unquestionably inspired, since they who truly
bore that Character, did very much cry out against false Prophets, and many of
them I believe, did not justify their Pretenses to Inspiration by working
Miracles. In fine, I think, the Doctor needed not have made such a Bustle about
the Import of neither a Friend nor an Adversary, since it seems obvious, that
the Philadelphian meant no more than one who is neither a fond Friend nor a
fierce Enemy.

III. III. Remarks upon the second Narrative.
I proceed next to glance at some things in the Doctor's Second Narrative: He
introduces it with a very fair Promise, assuring us that he will set down her
own Pretenses, in her own Words, without adding to them, or diminishing from
them, or courtailing any Passages which may be necessary to qualify the
Meaning of them. This, if he keeps to it, is a very honest and candid
Resolution. And indeed could he assure also, that he will put no other Meaning
on her Words but her own, nor distort them to a Sense that she never intended,
he might then very plausibly invite his Readers to depend on his Citations,
without needing to consult her Writings. But I much doubt if this can be
expected from one who examines in the View, and with the Design, that the
Doctor does: We know that a great many, who pretend to make free and impartial
Enquiries, gloss or rather pervert the Holy Scriptures themselves in favor of
their own Prejudices.

That I be not uneasy to you, I shall only touch on a very few things, and by
my Animadversions on them, you may judge if the Doctor be as Candid and
Impartial as he pretends to be, or has kept his Promise.

1. 1. A. B's Pretenses to Sanctity not so high at he describes them, for she
does not exalt her self above the Prophets, etc.
He charges A. B. as arrogating to her self a Sanctity above the Prophets and
Apostles, without the Alloy of humane Passions or Infirmities, a Sanctity which
is next to it, or rather the same with that of God himself. Now let any free
and disinteressed Spirit determine if the Passages which the Doctor adduces,
will amount to this Assertion, I would ask him, Is it not our Duty to have
Truth, Righteousness, and Goodness, in all our Thoughts, Words, and Actions?
And if so, is it not attainable by the Grace of God? And if A. B. by this Grace
attained to some singular Measures of them, ought that to have been made her
Crime and Reproach? Does she arrogate any Truth, Righteousness, or Goodness to
her self, as the Cause and Author? Where does she say, That she arrived at
these Heights of Sanctity that the Blessed are possessed of? For I think that
to pretend to these, were to assume to ones self a Sanctity without the Alloy
of humane Passions or Infirmities. But why does the Doctor assert, That a
Sanctity without this Alloy, is the same with that of God? Is not the Sanctity
of Angels without it? Shall we then say, that theirs is the same with that of
God? Further, are not the Actions of such as are made Partakers of the Divine
Nature, in the Apostle's Phrase, more than humane; that is, Do they not come
from a higher and more noble Principle than what is merely Natural?

And when a Soul has attained to this Bliss, when Christ is formed in him,
when he is the Master, and Guide, and Inspirer of his inward Man, must it be
accounted Blasphemy or a Rivaling the Deity, to say that his Actions are not
Humane. This is certainly all that is meant by that Passage which so
scandalized the Doctor. A. B. owns indeed, that by the Divine Grace she arrived
at great Measures of Sanctity, but yet such as others might attain to by a
faithful Dependence on that same Grace; and she encouraged all that conversed
with her, generously to aspire after it. What if she had delivered her self in
the Words of the Psalmist? I am undefiled in the Way, I keep God's Testimonies,
I seek him with my whole Heart, I also do no Iniquity, I walk in his Ways.
Would the Doctor have quarrelled it? Is not this the Character of every truly
Righteous Person?

The Doctor, p. 5. after a scornful Preamble, She does not pretend to be
without Sin or Corruption.
brings an injurious Aspersion upon A. B. he will have it, that either she was
born without Sin, or that Original Corruption was perfectly cured in her, and
so that she was not as others liable to Sin, without external Temptations. How
is this proved? Why, because she says, For my part, I can say in in Truth, that
I do not remember I ever committed any Faults, but when I believed the Counsel
of Men: Now, if I have any Sense, this Passage overturns what the Doctor would
establish by it; For does not our yielding to outward Temptations, evidently
suppose that there is something within us that complies with them, and what is
that but our Original Corruption? For, I think, it is very plain, that if
Original Corruption were perfectly cured in us, there would be nothing within
us on which outward Temptations or evil Counsel could get hold. Achan's taking
the goodly Babylonish Garment which he saw among the Spoils, and Judas's
complying with the Offer of Thirty Pieces of Silver, did discover the covetous
Dispositions of their Hearts: When I believe and listen to the evil Counsels of
another, and thereupon commit Faults, this seems clearly to demonstrate that
there is something within me that likes, and agrees to the wicked Suggestions
that are made to me, which plainly implies a Depravation. Very often it comes
to pass that outward Temptations do awaken and discover some latent and hidden
Corruption, or wicked Inclination that the Person was not sensible of before.
Doubtless St. Peter did not know that latent Cowardice and Infidelity that were
in his Heart, till the outward Temptation gave him the Discovery of them; so
that though it were true that one did never actually sin but by means of outward
Temptations, yet it will not therefore follow that he has no internal
Corruption, or that he is exempt from that Degeneracy of Nature, that is common
to all the fallen Posterity of Adam. The Doctor for all that he talks here,
since he reads A. B's Books, could not be Ignorant, that she frequently
acknowledges the Degeneracy of her Nature, and that she was of the same Make
and Frame with the rest of lapsed Mankind. Take this one Passage for the Proof
of it. Solid Virtue. Part 2. p. 71.
If I had not known, says she, that my own Will was Evil and Corrupt, I should
never have learned to resist it, since there is not any thing more agreeable to
our Natures than accomplishing their proper Wills. To be perfectly cured of
Original Corruption, is the Privilege only of the Blessed. Even they who were
sanctified from the Womb, did, while they were in this Life, feel, and were
obliged to resist the Importunities of corrupt Nature.

The Doctor adds, She owns her Failings.
That neither here nor any where else, does A. B. give any Instances of her
Faults, except some Levities before she was Sixteen years old; and, that she
does not any where own the having Sin. I entreat that it be remarked, That what
the Doctor here diminishingly calls some Levities, was by him egregiously
aggravated in his first Narrative, Sect. xx. Here he can find no Instances of
her Faults, and there he thought he discovered too many. Here he represents her
as no where owning that she had Sin; there he introduces her confessing, that
she had run into a vain, light, and idle Conversation, following the Pleasures,
Recreations, and Divertisements of the World. And this Scene of her Life, when
he thought it seasonable for him so to do, he delineates in all the shapes of
Horror, telling us 1 Narrat. p. 49.
, That she suffered an Eclipse for some years -- Pride and Ambition, Sensuality
and Covetousness, prevailed on her, that she resisted the Spirit of God, and
walked contrary to the Dictates of her Conscience, video meliora -- In effect,
he turns her into what Forms he pleases; sometimes she must be a Goddess, and
at other times a very Devil.

I judge that it will be evident to any impartial Person, In that very passage
cited by the Author.
that the Doctor has dealt very unfairly by that Passage which he cites at the
close of page 5. I shall set it down entire. I spent, says she, most of my time
all alone in my Chamber in Prayer, and Tears, and great Grief, for my having
thus followed the [ ways of the] World; Vie exter. p. 150.
I entered upon a very austere Life, using hard Beds, Fasting, Watching, and
wearing Sackcloth, that so I might chastise my Body; I visited the Poor and
Sick, I frequented the Churches and Sacraments, not knowing by what means I
might be restored to the Favor of God, which I had lost by my own Fault. I
could not sleep at night, fearing lest I should go down to Hell, for I was
afraid of the Judgments of God, that I dared not shut my eyes because of my
Sins, which appeared to me so great, as none had ever committed the like: not
because I had done any [ wicked or] evil Actions, for all Men esteemed and
honored me; but because I had parted with the ravishing Intercourses which my
Soul had with God, that I might take my pleasure in the Divertisements of the
World, after I had received so many Favors from God as merited my
Acknowledgments throughout all my Life. This Sin appeared to me so great, as
Hell had no Punishment answerable to it. I should think it had been impossible
for any body, after having perused this Passage, to write at the rate the
Doctor does, without firmly resolving to cross all the Dictates of Ingenuity
and Candor: Is this then no where to own that she had Sin? and to justify
every thing that she said or did? Are there no Instances of Faults given here?
or does the Doctor think, that following the World, or turning the heart from
God, though but for some time, and not in the highest degrees, are but little
veniai Levities? Are there here no penitential Acknowledgments made neither
general nor particular? What would the Doctor have? Are there not here
ingenuous Confessions of very great Faults? and a very deep and sensible Sorrow
for them? Does she not highly aggravate them, both as to the Guilt they
included, and the Punishment they deserved? And does she not, on the account of
them, put in Practice the Severities of Mortification and Self-denial? Is the
Doctor angry because she was not a greater Sinner, or would her being so have
recommended her the more to him?

The Doctor translates Page 6.
that period, He most injuriously mistakes and translates some of A. B's words.
point que J'eusse fait aucunes manuvaises actions, very disingenously thus,
That she had never done Evil; whereas he should have turned it, you see, Not
that she had done any wicked or evil Actions. It is manifest, that there is a
vast Difference between Never having done evil, and Not having done any wicked
Actions. The Doctor's Translation, which is neither literal nor true, though it
serves his present turn, makes A. B. pretend to an absolute Innocence and
Guiltlessness; but by the other, which is a just one, the Reader easily sees,
that her Words import only, That she had not done any outward Actions that were
gross and scandalous. But then it is very possible that one may be guilty of
having done a great deal of Evil inwardly, and in his heart, though he had never
committed any gross and visible Immoralities. And that this is the true Sense
of the Passage, is evident not only from the scope of this whole Paragraph, but
particularly from the Reason that she there assigns, namely, That eveevery one
esteemed and honored her: they did so, because they discovered nothing in her
outward Carriage but what was modest, sober, and agreeable. And I think none
that consider well what they read, will make any Scruple to admit this as a
sufficient Reason for what she asserted, though the Doctor insinuates some will.
And thus though A. B. refuses that, in the Circumstances in which she then was,
she had not done any Actions that were visibly scandalous, yet with the same
breath she acknowledges very penitently, that she was guilty of very great
Evils in suffering the World to gain Ground on her Heart. Now though the Doctor
promised his Readers at the beginning of his Narrative, that he would give them
A. B's Pretenses in her own Words, and not curtail Passages; yet let any that
is unbiased, judge if he has done so here, and whether the Nice and
Inquisitive have not need to consult her Writings, and rather believe their own
Eyes than his partial Accounts: and whether in fine, though he engages in his
Letter, page 28. that he will be as faithful in relating matters of fact,
according to his Knowledge, as if he were a Witness upon Oath; whether, I say,
this Promise of his can be a sufficient Security for relying on his Testimony,
if it be found that he falls frequently into such Inadvertencies or
Misrepresentations as these?

The Doctor sets down the Return which she made to the Charge of M. Serarius
very faintly. Put malicious glosses upon others.
I will impart to you some Periods of it. Tomb. dela Faus. Theol. part 2. let.
14. p. 115.
In effect, says she, my only Fear is, lest I should not continue faithful to
my God, and I cannot bear with them who say or believe, That there is a state
of Perfection in this World, wherein Men are impeccable. I look upon this as a
great Error, and Self-presumption in them. And then he tells M. Serarius how he
was present when she rehearsed before several Persons the account of the great
defection of her Youth, which she here relates again with a fresh Sorrow, and
in very exaggerating Terms, though the Doctor affirms that in all this Passage
there are no penitential Acknowledgments, neither general nor particular. And
afterward she adds, Or si je raccount si librement comment, etc. Ibid.
Now if I so freely relate, how grossly I fell from so exalted a State of Grace
as that wherein God had placed me from my Infancy, how can I [ be supposed to]
say or believe that I can no more fall, since what one has once done, he may
do many times? And after having asserted that no Creature can be impeccable
during this miserable Life, where there are so many stones of stumbling, and
instanced in Peter, David, and Solomon, she says, Ibid.
Can I be so ignorant, as to believe that ^ can no more fall, or decline from
the Grace of God? I am certain I may do it every moment, if I would retire my
self from my Intercourse with God, and entertain my self with my Senses. I
know, so long as I remain united with him, I cannot fall; but if I should break
off this Communion, I should fall the first step I made thereafter, as a young
Child that cannot go. Does she not here plainly own her Lability, Weakness, and
Insufficiency, that of her self she could not be without sinning, no, not for a
moment: that she, as well as all others during this Life of Temptations, is
continually liable to Falls; and that her only fear was, lest she should
discontinue her Fidelity to God? But is this to arrogate to her self a Sanctity
without the Alloy of humane Passions or Infirmities, and which, as the Doctor
afterward has it, Page 7.
is not exceeded, but only equaled by that of Jesus Christ? It is his ordinary
course, all along in the Commentaries that he makes on A. B's words, to run
into intolerable Excesses. In effect, the Glosses he puts on them do in a great
many places palpably destroy the Text, and gives them a Meaning that she never
intended. I believe the Doctor would take it very ill to have his own Words so
dealt by. I must here take notice of a Passage of his Letter, Page 2.
which sounds as highly at least, as any that he quotes out of A. B. on the
Head we are now considering. Indeed, says he, I was never so profane as to
forget my Dependence on God. Now it is certain, that one never sins, but when
he forgets this Dependence; and to say, that Sin is the forgeting of our
Dependence on God, is a very proper Definition of it. Here then the Doctor
arrogates to himself an absolute Innocence. I know he intended no such thing;
but yet you see, the words very easily bear this Meaning.

I shall not now enter upon the Enquiry, into what heights of Purity and
Holiness God may by his Grace advance such as are truly regenerate, and who
continue faithful to him. This, I know, will fall under the Doctor's
Disquisition more properly afterward: But whatever these heights may be, they
do not contradict that Passage of Holy Scripture he mentions, nor supersede the
use of the Lord's Prayer. I thought fit to discuss this Section of the Doctor's
Second Narrative at some length, because he frequently raises a great deal of
Dust about what he insists on in it. I shall touch on a few other Passages more
passingly.

2. 2. A. B. ^as made no Additions to the Essentials of Christianity.
A. B. does not pretend to have made by her Discoveries any Additions to the
Essentials of the Christian Religion: this she every where disclaims, and
affirms that the Holy Scriptures contain a full and perfect System of them: She
says indeed, that the things which were revealed to the Authors of the Sacred
Books more generally and more darkly, are discovered to her more fully, more
clearly, and more particularly, but that they are such as do not strictly
concern the Essence of Christianity; though also she pretends to rescue even
these things from the false and deluding Glosses which the self-flattery of Men
has put on them. Now dato sed non concesso that this were so, I do not see
that her owning of it is, as the Doctor alleges a Nar. p. 11.
, a preferring her self unto, or setting her self above the Prophets and
Apostles; for it is certain that the Apostles had more clear and more full
Revelations of the Christian Economy made to them than were made to the old
Prophets: but I hope by their owning this, they did not claim a preference to
them. This is an invidious stating of the matter: all that can be justly
inserred from such a Pretense is, that it has pleased God, for great and wise
Reasons, to manifest himself more to one than to another; but then the
Instrument he makes use of has no ground of boasting or selfexaltation, as A.
B. tells very often.

3. 3. Her Expression about Moses's Chair no mark of Pride.
She confidently asserts, says the Doctor 2 Nar. p. 11.
that God has given her the favor to sit in Moses's Chair; and that she has
more right to it than any of the Doctors or Pastors who now pretend to it. Had
the Doctor set down the Passage to which he here refers wholly as it is, it
would have looked with a more acceptable Aspect than in the tour that he gives
it. In number 288 of the Book that he cites, the Spirit of Burchardus is
compared with that of Moses. Moses, says she, exhorted and taught the People
to observe all the Commandments of God, whereas Burchardus affirms that Men are
too infirm to keep these Commandments; and because I teach that we must keep
them if we would be saved, he is moved with Anger against me: then follows the
Passage which the Doctor notices, -- By which it appears Pierre d^ Touch, p.
286.
that I am more in Moses's Chair than is Burchardus with all his Promotion,
seeing he teaches the contrary to what Moses taught, and I teach the same
things Moses taught, -- And all these Graces which God has imparted to me,
sufficiently evince that I am by him set in Moses's Chair, by being in his
Doctrine and Sentiments. Where it is, I think, very evident, that the Reason
why she asserts her being in Moses's Chair is not a vainglorious Affectation
of, or pretending to a Magisterial Superiority over others, but because she
taught Moses's Doctrine as to keeping the Commands of God: And, in effect, all
that she means by being in Moses's Chair, as the perusal of the whole Section
will convince any candid Reader, is nothing else but having Moses's Spirit and
Sentiments. Nothing of all this appears in the Passage as it is curtailed by
the Doctor.

4. 4 Her Pretenses to Knowledge not such as he describes them.
A. B. does not pretend, as the Doctor will have it, page 14. number. iv. to the
Knowledge of all manner of speculative Truths, not to be sure of the nice and
vain Subtilties of the Schools, which are mostly but the Inventions of corrupt
and airy Heads, but only of these that are solid and useful, and might tend to
advance the Souls of Men in true Goodness. Neither does she pretend to the
Knowledge of all matters of fact, but of these only, (as the Passages quoted *
by himself do expressly bear,) 2 Nar. p. 15.
that were needful to be known for her own and others Conduct, and therefore
not of such as would tend only to gratify Pride and vain Curiosity, and carnal
Interests of Men; and consequently, though we should suppose that A. B. had the
Spirit of God, yet it will not follow that she would be useful to the Doctor
for easing the Minds of curious Girls, by showing them what was written in the
Book of Fate, as he very piously jests, page 18. He falls very foul on M. P. (^
Narrat. p. 49.) as if he and others descended to the light and wanton
Railleries of the Profane, for relating a much more innocent Jest, though I think
his half Page looks liker that sort of Wit. The Doctor seldom narrates any
thing A. B. said or did, or was said of her, but he pushes it to an Excess, and
carries it to a height that was never intended. However, I suppose he will not,
neither indeed can he deny the possibility of the thing, since the Holy
Scriptures furnish us with a great many Instances of God's having discovered
the secret Dispositions of the Souls of Men, and other matters of fact to
illuminated Persons: All then he can aim at, must be to evince the Nullity of
this Pretense as to A. B.

5. 5. That she requires the same respect to her Sayings as to the Scripture,
is false. 2 Nar. p. 20, 22.
To say* that A. B. requires the same Respect to her Sayings as to the
Scripture, is, in my opinion, to do her very great Injustice; for since very
plainly and frequently she acknowledges and asserts that the Sacred Writings
are the Standard and Rule by which all other Doctrines must be tried and
examined, it is evident, that in so doing she owns a peculiar Respect and
Deference to be due to the Holy Scriptures, which neither hers, nor any others
Sayings ought to pretend to. Lum. en ten. part i. page 2.
Look, says she, with a suspicious eye upon any thing I declare unto you as
coming from God, in case you find my Doctrine not entirely agreeing with the
Holy Scripture. Whence it is plain, that she would have her Sayings to be tried
by the Holy Scriptures, and that the value of what she says is to be determined
by its Conformity to them. This, one would think, is not to put the Scriptures
and her Sayings in the same balance, or to require an equal respect to be paid
to both. The Doctor, now that he peruses A. B's Writings, could not but remark
this and a great many more Passages to the same purpose. How comes it then to
pass, that he brings not in these into his Accounts of A. B.? Why this would
spoil the design that he has conceived of exposing her to the World altogether
in black and horrid shapes. But, says the Doctor, what she delivered must be of
the same Authority with the Holy Scriptures, because God is the Author of it.
But though we should suppose A. B. to be truly inspired, yet his Consequence will
not follow: and the Reason is, because, as one very pertinently expresses it,
Quae a Deo procedunt, ejusdem sunt veritatis, etc. Things that proceed from God
are of equal Truth, but not of equal Authority; for though some things may be of
God, yet if any Person do not know, or doubt if they be such, they have not the
same Authority nor Right to such a Persons Obedience, as those things whose
divine Origin is allowed by universal Consent: although when it is evident to any
person that any thing is revealed to them by God, they are bound to pay the
same Obedience to things thus revealed, as to God himself. Several Books that
are now universally received into the Canon of Scripture were for some time
doubted of in the Primitive Church: it is certain that the questioned Books,
though really of Divine Original, were not of the same Authority with these that
were by unanimous Consent acknowledged to be Divine.

6. 6. The Doctor draws unjust and invidicus Consiquences, 1. Instance.
If the Doctor can hit on any Period in A. B.'s Books, that can give the least
Color to an invidious Consequence, he is sure to make it serve his turn, but
without any Regard to that Candor that might be expected from him. Of this we
have a remarkable Instance, page 32. n. 7. I shall give you the whole Passage
to which he refers, as it is, Light of the World Part 2. p. 85.
If, says she, I should say any thing contrary to the Gospel, do not believe
me; for you ought not to believe any thing because I say it to you, but because
it is really true. And if you knew me, you should also know God, because he is
one and the same Spirit in all things, so far as you shall discern
Righteousness, Goodness, and Truth in any Person, so far shall you discern God
living in them, and no farther. So that its never good to follow Persons for
themselves, but to follow the Righteousness, Goodness, and Truth, which you
shall discover to abide in them. Now to discover the Vanity of that Improvement
which the Doctor makes of this Passage, let it be considered, that when things
which import Excellency are attributed both to Jesus Christ, and to Christians
his Followers, it is undeniable that we must alter our Idea's of these things
according as we differently apply them either to him or them: Our Lord calls
himself the Light of the World, and he is so in a Supernatural manner, because
he is the Divine Source and Original of all spiritual Light, he in whom are hid
all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge. Matt. 5. 14.
This same very Title, he gives all his faithful Followers: But will any Body
imagine that it is applied to them in that same Sense in which it is understood
of him? No sure, for we conceive of them only as subordinate Luminaries which
receive all their Light and Heat from the Son of Righteousness. And when St.
Paul assures Timothy., that by doing what he recommended to him, 1. Tim. 4. 16.
he would save both himself and those that heard him, we must not entertain the
same Idea of Saving, when we apply it to Timothy, that we have when we
attribute it to Jesus Christ. Just so, though our Lord uses, concerning himself,
Words to the same Purpose with these which A. B. has in this Period, yet we
must not imagine that they are of the same Import, or that she intended they
should. Indeed the very Scope of the Passage plainly enough determines that she
meant no more but this; if you were acquainted with me, and saw my Life and
Practice, you would see that I imitate and transcribe in my Conversation, the
Divine Qualities of Truth, Righteousness, and Goodness; for God who by his Holy
Spirit, works uniformly in all his Children, imprints these Characters of
himself on them all, and as much of these as you discern in me, so far do you
discern God in me, and your seeing me exemplify them before you in a lively
manner, will be an Inducement to you to imitate them, and so to know God truly;
for then we truly know God when we imitate his Perfections. If the Doctor had
not been visibly in a Disposition to Cavil, he would not have put a Gloss on
this Passagess that it cannot bear, without doing it open Violence, nor omitted
what was so evidently necessary to qualify the Meaning of it. Neither can I
divine, what but this could have moved him to imagine that the Passage which he
here cites, do import that A. B. asserted some kind of unaccountable Union
between God and her. I can see no Union that she can pretend to, but to be
taught, guided, and influenced by his Spirit. And will he call this an uncouth
thing? How can he digest that Passage of St. Paul, He that is joined to the
Lord is one Spirit.

Such an invidious Tour he gives Page 32.
the Passage that follows, Second Instance.
as if A. B. disdained that her Doctrines should be published as from one of a
prophetical Spirit; that was too mean, says the Doctor. Now the Perusal of the
very first Period of it, even as it is curtailed by himself, will sufficiently
discover the Fallacy: Light of the World Part 2. Conf. 17. p. 128, 129
I am not says she, Prophetical as the Ancient Prophets were, who spoke of
very obscure things. Whence it is plain, that the Reason why she denies her
self to be Prophetical, was not, because she declined that Character as too
mean for her; but whereas the Prophets delivered themselves in dark and obscure
Terms, God, she pretends, enabled her to speak of Divine Things more clearly
and more distinctly, and that this is her Meaning, the last Clause of the
Passage abundantly evinces. There is no need, says she, to say that I have a
prophetic Spirit, when God gives Reasons and Comparisons to explain it after
the manner of Men.

7. 7. The Doctor's Ignorance of A. B.'s Princ^ples appears. 2. Nar. p. 33. n.
7.
When the Doctor affirms, * that the Reason of this singular Grace to A. B. is,
because by the Eternal Purposes of God's Counsel, she was designed to be the
Organ of the Holy Ghost, he bewrays that he has not as yet digested well her
Principles; for she owns not any personal Decrees to have been made from all
Eternity, neither is the least Ground given him from the Passages he here
cites, for asserting them with Regard to her self. The Doctor's Inferences from
many Passages of the Writings of A. B. are very often as wide as his was who
would needs prove that there must be a Pope; because in the Beginning of
Genesis, it is said, Ia Principio.

But here I must stop; my Circumstances will not allow me to employ my Thoughts
any more at present on this Subject. I intended indeed to have gone through the
whole, and particularly to have animadverted on the Improvements which he makes
on two or three Passages, which as he represents them, look somewhat Frightful;
but the Preparations that I am obliged to make in order to take my Staff in my
Hand, as himself speaks, keep me so hurried, that I have little time for sedate
Thoughts; though if I understand that the Prosecution of this Matter, would do
you a Pleasure, and can have so much leisure, I may yet perhaps resume the
Design.

IV. IV. A (...) Surv^r of the Doctor's whole Performance; with Reflections on
his undisercet Zeal.
But that I may give you my Sense of the Doctor's Performance in brief, there
are some things, that to the best of my Thoughts, he excessively aggravates,
some he palpably misrepresents, and in other some he is down right mistaken. He
charges A. B. with a great many ill things, he imagines that he has evinced
the Truth of the Charge, and upon this Supposition, which I must needs say is
precarious, he heats himself into a Transport, and falls a pelting of her with
the most opprobrious Language that an angry Zeal is wont to inspire. He
satisfies himself that to justify the Rudeness of this Treatment, it is
sufficient to tell his Readers briskly, 2 Nar. p 55.
Who should hinder the thrusting back with Contempt and Scorn, an overforward
and blasphemous Arrogance, one who without any Reason, without any Warrant,
Divine or Humane, demands a Place above Prophets or Apostles, and all who were
truly inspired; nay, who insults over Jesus Christ himself, assumes the Honor
and Power that he has been in Possession of from the Beginning of the World,
and who pretends to be more competent to carry on a Victory over the Devil and
his Train? If the Grounds on which the Doctor builds these Assertions be not
yet solidly established, I think he begins his Triumph too soon, and if he
believes really that they are, then, in my Opinion, he needs not be at the
pains of writting any more Narratives; for enough is already done to beget in
the Hearts of all honest Christians, an eternal Horror and Dislike of A. B. It
is beyond Contradiction plain, that no Body can adopt these Positions without
an open and barefaced Renounciation of Christianity. The Doctor indeed acts a
very pretty Play, but it ends tragically enough to some. A. B. and such as
favor her, are brought on the Stage as formally disclaiming the Redeemer of
the World, as divesting him of his unquestionable Prerogatives, and clothing a
mad Woman, a Visionary, with them. Certainly this is the most bloody and
criminal Charge that can be laid at the Door of such as profess the Christian
Religion; this is to represent them as having turned downright Apostates from
it, as trampling under foot, and crucifying afresh, the Divine and Adorable
Author of it. But then if this dreadful Accusation be false and illgrounded, if
they, against whom it is brought, do infinitely detest such an abominable
Villainy, if they set no Person on the same Level with the Son of God, but would
appear against such sacrilegious Pretenses with as much Zeal as the Doctor
himself, if they own that no Victories can be obtained over the Devil and his
Train but only by the Almighty Grace and Power of Jesus Christ, and that he
alone, and none other, is competent to triumph over the Powers of Darkness; and
in fine, if they adhere to the Foundations of the Apostles and Prophets, and to
Jesus Christ the chief Corner Stone, and disclaim, as false and unsound, what
is not built thereupon and conform thereto, I say if these things be so, as
most certainly they are; How can the Author and Spreader of such injurious
Calumnies, excuse himself from a Degree of Uncharitableness, that cannot be
well parallelled? To act the Scene in a Corner had not looked so very ill
natured, but to act it publicly before the Face of the whole World, and
thereby to expose these he levelled at as much as in him lay, not only to
Contempt and Derision, but also to Hatred and Persecution, is such a Flight of
Zeal, as, in my Judgment, cannot pretend to the Qualities of peaceable and
gentle, easy and impartial. But did not the Doctor engage to give us A. B's
Pretenses in her own Words? Where then does she pretend to be more Competent to
carry on a Victory over the Devil than Christ himself? Lette^ p. 21.
Where does she assume to her self his Honor and Power; or claim a Place above
the Apostles and Prophets, and all truly inspired Persons? Must he conclude Men
irrecoverable, because they will not be reduced from their supposed Errors by
Noise and Banter? All, to the best of my Understanding, that A. B. pretends to,
is only to be an Instrument in Christ's Hands, and that no otherwise than by
publishing these Truths, that he by his Spirit communicated to her, and which
his Power and Grace alone was afterward to make effectual. Now let it be
supposed, but not granted that it was so, What Disparagement is it to our
Redeemer, to make use of a poor contemptible Creature in order to accomplish
great Designs? Was it any Dishonor to him, that his Apostles in his Name and
Power, converted more to the Christian Religion, and wrought more Miracles than
he did himself, when he dwelt in mortal Flesh?

V. V. 5. The Writer apologizeth for himself.
Perhaps it may be thought I am biased in Favors of A. B. and therefore not
so capable to discern that Latet Anguis in Herba. I am sure, if I am so, my
Prejudices are of no old Date, they are not yet so rooted, but sober and just
Reasonings might discuss them, and reclaim me from my Mistakes; neither, I
think, can it be said that they have been fortified from any prospect of
Reputation or worldly Interest. But whatever my Prejudices may be, I can
sincerely declare, that what determined me to have an Esteem for this Person's
Writings, was a Conviction, that they not only recommended the great and
essential Duties of the Gospel, distinguished them from the Accessories,
discovered the Mischief of Sects and Parties, and the Vanity of laying Stress
on nice and airy Speculations, but also because they suggested solid Principles
which might serve as an Antidote against the Infusions of Atheists and Deists,
Pelagians and Socinians, Antinomians and Fatalists, and false Pretenses to
Inspiration. And though I met with some things in them that seemed a little odd
and startling, yet I choosed rather to suspend my Judgment, (since even her
self does not impose them on any) than forego what appeared to me so very solid
and useful.

Some LETTERS OF M. ANT. BOVRIGNON.
Whereby her True Christian Spirit and Sentiments are farther justified and
vindicated, particularly as to the Doctrine of the Merits and Satisfaction of
Jesus Christ; as is to be seen in the Third and Fourth Letters. All of them are
most worthy to be perused by those who sincerely love, and impartially seek
after the Truth and the Salvation of their Souls.
LETTER I. Concerning the Love of God.
Written to a Pastor at Mechlin; and is the 15th. of La lum. nec en tenebr.
Part I.
SIR,
I. I. God alone Lovely; Motives to the Love of God: 1. He is the Fountain and
Accomplishment of all Good.
I Know not how one of sound Judgment can love any other thing but God, seeing
there is no created thing that is worthy of our Love, as he is, being the
Fountain of all Good, Wisdom, the Giver of all Wisdom, the Beauty that creates
all Beauty, the Righteousness of the Righteous, the Goodness of all Goodness,
the Accomplishment of all Perfections; in short, the only Object worthy of our
Love, without whom nothing is Lovely, neither in Heaven nor in Earth. Nothing
without him can satisfy our Soul, nothing can content it, nothing can give it
Perfect Pleasure, nothing can make it happy, neither now nor hereafter. It is
he who created us; it is he who preserves us; it is he who will judge us.

If Good of its own Nature is always Lovely, why then does not the Soul employ
all its Powers to love the Original, the Perfection, and the Consummation of
all Good, which is God?

II. II. 2. The Soul's Likeness to him.
If Likeness beget Love, how can your Soul, which was made after the Similitude
of God, live without loving him? What other Lovely Object can it find without
God, whom only it resembles? What Original or Pattern is there among all
perishing Things to this Divine and Immortal Soul, which cannot find its like,
but in God himself?

III. III. 3. Of the Benefits bestowed by him upon the Soul and Body.
If Benefits do oblige even Nature it self to love its Benefactors, how ought
the Soul to love its God, when he has given it all that it posseseth, and has
promised infinite and eternal Goods, beyond Comparison, in the Life to come? He
has given the Soul, which he created of nothing. He not only made it after the
Similitude of the Angels of Heaven, but after the likeness of God himself, so
that all Souls are by Creation made little Gods. Could this God of Love give
unto Man greater Goods and Gifts to make himself be loved by him, than this
Divine Creation of his Soul, Immortal as himself? The Body, which he formed to
be the Keeper and Sheath of this Soul, could it have more Perfections? Is there
any thing in Nature more Admirable than the Body of Man, animated with all the
Powers of the Soul, with an Understanding to conceive, with a Memory to
remember, with a Will to act; so that the very Body is in some manner an Image
or Resemblance of the HOLY TRINITY.

IV. IV. 4. The Provision he has made both for Soul and Body.
Could God give unto Man more and greater Gifts than he has done to oblige him
to love him? For after having given him a Being and Life, he upholds and
maintains it with all necessary things, which he has likewise created for the
Entertainment of this Man, to whom he has subjected so many Creatures under his
Power, having made him Superior over all the living Creatures, and given him
Authority as the Masterpiece of the Works of God, the Earth for his
Footstool, the Air to breath in, the Fire to warm him, the Water to refresh
him, the Fruits to nourish him, the Flowers to recreate him; in short, all the
visible and material things that God created were only for the Body of Man.
What must he have laid up for his Soul, which is beyond all Comparison more
valuable, as being Divine, created after the Image of God? If he has made so
many admirable Things for the entertainment of the Body, which must die and
remain for so short a time upon Earth? Should not all those Gifts, all those
Benefits, oblige Man to love such a Benefactor? Seeing he has not received, and
can never receive any true Good without this Giver of all Good.

V. V. 5. His Mercy to become the Savior of Man.
How can he be without loving him, when he considers his Love, which was not
satisfied with having freely imparted unto us so many Gifts; but after that
this ungrateful Man had abused so many favors, by turning away from his
Creator to join himself to the Creature, valuing the Gifts more than the Giver,
presuming to merit yet more, he rebels against his Orders, will needs out of
Ambition of Spirit know more than it pleased his Creator, and breaks his
Commandment that he might equal himself unto him? This God of Love, who in a
Moment could have punished all these Ingratitudes by an eternal Damnation unto
which he had banished the fallen Angels, loved Man more than the Angels; and
having more regard to the Love he bear him than to his Disobedience, he pardons
his Sin, and forgives his Fault, upon Condition of a temporal Penitence.

VI. VI. 6. His Inacrnation.
This Testimony of Affection, from a God toward his Creature, does it not
deserve that it love him? He farther obliges it by more powerful Means: For
that he might make them see that his Delight is to be with the Children of Men,
he becomes Man, visible and sensible as themselves, not being satisfied to have
made Man after his Image and Likeness; but God is made after the Image and
Likeness of Man, yea, he becomes truly Man to teach them how to love him by
material Words and Deeds, conformable to their humane Capacities.

VII. VII. 7. His Annihilation.
Could God testify more Love for Man, than to abase himself, yea, to
annihilate himself (to speak according to our Language) and to cloth himself
with humane Nature? What Judgment could conceive greater Testimonies of his
Love? Or what Means could be fallen upon, more powerfully to oblige Man to love
him, than to become like to Man in Nature, to become his Equal in Condition,
not preferring himself to the meanest Men; to converse and be familiar with
them as their Brother and Companion; yea, he subjects himself unto, and obeys
Man that he might gain his Friendship, he serves him, even to the washing of
his Feet, and though Man offend him, he prevents him always with Friendship; lets
a Judas kiss him who contrived his Death; and at the time he came to deliver
him up to his Enemies, he even calls him his Friend.

VIII. VIII. 8. His becoming a Teacher and Prophet.
And for an Evidence that he makes Man his Friend, he declares unto him his
Secrets and all that he learned from his Father; and all this to engage Men to
a reciprocal Love. He eats and drinks with them, draws them by his sweet
Conversation, teaches them familiarly all the necessary Means to love him,
gives them a Law all of Love, which contains no other thing but the Love of God
and our Neighbor. All his Gospel contains nothing but the true Means to fulfill
this Law of Love. He so earnestly presses this Love, that he threatens with
eternal Damnation if we do not love him with all our Heart, with all our Soul,
and with all our Strength. Could he express more powerfully the Desire he has
that Man love him, while he draws him even by force to his Love?

IX. IX. 9. His becoming a Priest.
And to make this Force altogether Lovely, he charges himself with the Burden
of Man's Sins, resolving, out of the Love he bear him, to suffer in his own
Body the Punishments due for them. He suffers Hunger, Thirst, Weariness,
traveling through so many Places to seek Man, and to help him in his
Penitence, that he might have no other Care out to love him. Is it possible
that Man should not acknowledge such a Love? Is he so unnatural as not to love
such a Benefactor, who obliges him by so many, so painful Proofs of his Love,
that they seem to exceed the Bounds of Reason?

X. X. 10. That he gave his Life, even for his Enemies.
Who ever saw Love arrive to such an Excess of Goodwill for the Person beloved?
For a GOD to debase himself, to subject himself, and to suffer for his
Creature; that which no Body would do for his Equal, and it would be no small
Love for one to give his Life for his Friend: Which JESUS CHRIST gave for Man
who was his Enemy, having overcome his Malice by the Excess of his Love: And
the more that Man is transported to deal hardly with him, he is led the more to
love him, laying down his Life voluntarily the more to oblige him by the
Consideration of such a LOVE, that surpasses all Understanding. that a GOD
should be inclined to love a Worm of the Earth, of which he has no need, and
which is led even to outrage and offend him, instead of being inclined to love
him?

XI. XI. 11. The Advantages of Divine Love.
Ingrate Creature! Wilt not thou yield to this LOVE? Cruel to thy Self! Enemy
of thy own Good! Wilt not thou bow under this Yoke which is so gentle and
lovely? Its Captivity is Liberty; its Service is a Kingdom; its Pains are
Delights; its Labors are Repose; its Griefs are Contentments. This LOVE
satisfies the Soul, fills it with all Happiness, comforts it and adorns it,
keeps it always cheerful with its Beloved, nothing can offend it. What
Happiness, what Joy, what Peace, what Delights to the Soul that possesses this
Love! It fears nothing, it hopes for nothing, it seeks nothing, it finds
nothing Lovely without this LOVE.

XII. XII. 12. The Vanity of the earthly Love of Riches.
How blind and ignorant is he who loves the Wealth, the Honors, and the
Pleasures of this World! He is never content, nor satisfied! For Riches bring
along with them a Thousand Cares and Disquiets, with an unsatiable Thirst,
which fastens the Soul to Earth and to Metals, and turns it away from God.

Honors are yet more vain than Riches, Honors.
for they are nothing but Fantastical and Imaginary, which give nothing to the
Soul that loves them but an empty swelling of Pride, which makes the Heart
break at the least change of Fortune, which vexes and torments them continually
with the fear and care of Losing them; and though they did possess them lawfully
and securely, yet they are nothing but a Smoke of Vanity, since we are nothing,
and all they who honor us are equally Nothings. What Folly is it to look for
Glory from all these NOTHINGS, and to love Honors so vain, and of so short
Continuance?

Pleasures, Pleasures.
such as they may be, give very little Satisfaction to Man in general, because
they are of so short Continuance, in particular, for that they are so vile and
earthly, unworthy of the Nobleness of our Soul, which is Divine and Spiritual;
for to take Pleasure to eat and drink, is to level our selves in this Point
with the Beasts, and often to hurt both Soul and Body; seeing these Pleasures
do sometimes breed Excesses, prejudicial to the Health, indisposing both Body
and Mind, which pay very dear for the Pleasures which they pretend to have in
Meat and Drink. All the other Pleasures of the Body are always insatiable to
him who would please his Five Senses; the Eye will never be satisfied with
Seeing, the Ear with Hearing, and so of the rest; if Reason do not govern all,
they will still importune us, yea become Insolent and Unsatisfiable: To love
Play, is loss of time; to love Hunting, is Weariness; to love Company, is
Disquiet: The more we would oblige them, the more they are dissatisfied. And
what shall we have after having satisfied all our Senses, and given to our Body
all the Pleasures that it desires? Nothing but Weariness and Remorse of
Conscience, which will torment the Soul, especially at Death. We may lawfully
use these things, but not love them; for they are no wise worthy of our Love.

XIII. XIII. 13. Nothing Lovely but God.
There is nothing LOVELY and that can satisfy our Soul, but GOD ALONE: Neither
was it created for any other End but to love its god, and to cleave to him
only. All other Goods are false and deceitful. Since we cannot live without
LOVE, Why do we not love this GOD, who is ALONE LOVELY? So much the rather that
he desires it, that he has obliged us to it by so many Gifts, and that he
continues them every Moment, and will continue them even to our Death?

14. 14. Without him all is Folly and Misery.
From whom do we look for our Happiness, but from God who will judge us? If we
have served the World, it will pay us with Ingratitude; if our selves, we have
nothing but Weakness and Miseries. I can see no other Happiness but that of
LOVING GOD; all the rest is vain and perishing: Riches, Wisdom, Pleasures,
Honors, are nothing but Smoke, if they aim at any other End but this of LOVE.
All the rest is nothing but Emptiness, Filtihness, and Inconstancy, unworthy of
being loved by a Soul so Noble and Divine, the Lawful SPOUSE of GOD, and the
COHEIRESS of JESUS CHRIST. Is it not sad, yea Abominable, that it should join
it self or commit Adultery with the Base things of the Earth, forsaking its
Faithful BRIDEGROOM, who loves it so perfectly, and who has done such admirable
things to engage it to his Love, yea to consent only to let it self be loved by
him according as he desires; but that it should thrust away from him to love
and cleave to the Earth, Winds, Metals, Flesh and Blood, how depraved is its
Judgment! Which makes me often sigh, when I see this Ingratitude of the
Creatures toward their Creator, whom I beg that he may open the Eyes of their
Souls, to see the true Means of their Salvation. In the mean time I continue,

Sir, Your most humble Servant, Antho. Bourignon.
Gaunt, March, 15th. 1667.
LETTER II. Of PRAYER, wherein it consists. Of set Prayers and Exercises, and
their Use. Of CONTINUAL PRAYER, its Nature, the absolute Nec ssity of it for
overcoming our Enemies, both unvard and outward; for obtaining the Grace of
God, for attaining unto Perfection, and how to persist in it, without
Interruption.
This Letter is the 7th of Tomb. de la Fausse Theology, Part iv.
My dear Friend,
SInce you have resolved to deny your self, and no longer to follow your
Sensualities, you have need of Continual Prayer, that you may be enabled to
perform you good purposes. For when the Devil has once had Power over a Person,
and made him love and follow his Sensualities, he does not easily depart from
him, not being willing to quit the Fortress of which he has once been
Governor; but he keeps it by force, and against the Inclination of the Person
who would thrust him out of it: so that he must oppose him by force. It is of
such Devils that Jesus Christ says, That they go not forth but by Fasting and
Prayer: not that Jesus Christ and his Apostles had not Grace from God powerful
enough for casting out all sorts of Devils; but when they have once gained a
Power over the Will of Man, and he has consented to all the Suggestions of the
Devil, he will not go out but by the force of Fasting and Prayer, seeing he has
gained the Man's Soul by Sensualities and the Neglect of Prayer.

2. He must of necessity be thrust out by means directly contrary to those
which he has made use of for getting entry into Souls. When they have obeyed
the Devil in following the Sensualities of corrupt Nature, they must afterward
renounce the same Sensualities by Fasting and Abstinence; otherwise they will
never cast out this sort of Devils. And if they have hearkened to the
Temptations of the Devil instead of the Inspirations of the Holy Spirit, there
is a necessity of continual Prayer to cast forth this kind of Devil, seeing he
has continually entertained the Spirit with vain Thoughts, the same Spirit must
entertain it self continually with God, otherwise it can never thrust out this
kind of Devil.

3. And therefore I exhort you unto CONTINUAL PRAYER, that you may overcome
this Enemy of your Soul, and chase him out by the help of Prayer, which is a
powerful Armor against all the Furies of Hell.

4. In the mean time I must show you what PRAYER is, before you can perform it
aright; for we often take some fine words that we have read, or heard of
others, to be Prayer, as in this Country they use to read or sing Psalms when
they would pray, and in other places they say so many Pater Nosters, Ave
Maria's, or some other Prayers written in some Books, or they learn the words,
that they may repeat them when they would pray.

5. All this ought not to be termed Prayer, since these words and these Psalms
may be said without making any Prayer to God: and that one may pray in saying
Psalms, he ought to have the same DESIRES which they had who made them, and to
say the same words with the same Desire that they had in saying them;
otherwise, this cannot be PRAYER, but rather idle Words, which do not profit:
yea, by these Words Men do often reproach God, or they utter Lies or Mockings.
For to say a Psalm of David which he uttered when he was penitent, when he
fasted and prayed washing his Couch with his Tears, while they who sing these
things are very often filled with Wine and delicious Fare, spending whole
Nights in Riot and Luxury, is not this to mock God, and to lie in his Presence?
So do they also who say the Lord's Prayer, or any other Prayers, without having
Desires suitable to the Words which they pronounce.

6. They will say that God is their Father, without being willing to obey him
as Children. That his Name be hallowed, while indeed they dishonor and despise
him, loving rather their own Will and Honor than God's They say, Let his
Kingdom come, when they desire nothing but to reign in this World, where they
would wish still to live, if God would give them Prosperity. And by word they
say, His Will be done on Earth, as it is in the Heavens, while they will not
resign themselves to the Will of God in any thing, but endeavor to accomplish
their own as much as is possible for them. And while they pray to have daily
Bread, they labor and study to have Abundance, and maugre God, they will needs
have more than the daily Bread for which they pray. They pray likewise, That he
would forgive them their Sins, while they love them, and will needs go on to
commit them more and more every day. And, That he would deliver them from evil,
while they pursue and do the Evil from which they say they would be delivered.
And while they pray to God, That he would deliver them from Temptation, they
feed it, follow and obey it.

7. Behold how Men do mock God by such Prayers, and lie in his Presence! I do
not therefore desire that you pray after this manner, for it avails nothing;
and you cannot thereby obtain the Grace of God, but rather a greater
Condemnation: for God will not be mocked, and he takes no pleasure in vain
Discourses. He only searches the Reins, and tries the Consciences, being the
Searcher of hearts, and not the Hearer of our feigned words. The Gospel
likewise tells us, That we must not pray as the Pharisees, who thought to be
heard for their much speaking, and advises to shut our door when we would pray
to our Father in secret, assuring us, that our Father knows what we have need
of, without our much speaking.

8. It is not then these kinds of Prayers to which I export you, my Child, but
unto CONTINUAL PRAYER, which must ARISE FROM THE HEART. Every moment you have
need of Strength and Assistance from God to resist the Devil, the World, and
the Flesh; and though you have undertaken to overcome them, yet in effect you do
it not, but you are often overcome by them. You stand in (...) then of
supernatural Strength, which you cannot obtain but by Prayer, which, if you
understood it aright, would be very easy, and would become habitual to you.
And as you have continual need of Assistance from God, so also you have need of
continual Prayer.

9. You must therefore embrace it, and NEVER AGAIN LEAVE IT OFF, if you would
subdue your Enemies; otherwise you can never overcome them, but they will
alway^ tyrannize over you against your Inclination and Will. I doubt not but
you have often prayed to God to be delivered from your Enemies; but these
Passing-Prayers are not sufficient for resisting an Enemy so common (or
continual) as is the Devil, who every moment assumes new Vigor, and is never
wearied in tempting and surprising us, seeing this Enemy is never at rest, and
never ceases to do evil. He will indeed sometimes leave us in quiet in the time
of Prayer; but no sooner is it finished than he returns, and off times with
more Vigor than before: and thus he regains what he had lost during Prayer.

10. This is the Reason that he is never affrighted with the Prayers that we
make Morning, Evening, Before and After Meat, or at other express times which
we set apart for Prayer, though these Prayers be performed with Attention. The
Devil withdraws indeed for that little time: but, as when a Friend absents
himself for some time from his Friend, he returns to him, from his Voyage, with
greater Expressions of Friendship than he had before his Departure, and
oft-times makes some new Alliance; so does the Devil with the Man who gives
himself to Prayer by custom: for he believes he has pleased God, after having
said his ordinary Prayers; and when they are over, he lets loose his Spirit to
the Cares after earthly Goods, or to take his Pleasures and Recreations,
without minding God.

11. This is not, that I would blame Morning and Evening Prayers, or those at
Meat, or any other express time which Men set apart for Praying; for this is
commendable for those who live in the World, who being so distracted and
diverted in their Affairs and Business, if they set not apart certain times for
Prayer, it is to be feared that they would never find any leisure to think upon
God: they do therefore very well to set to themselves a Rule, and to appoint an
express time for their Prayers, that they may sometimes think upon God, and may
not forget themselves amidst their worldly Affairs.

12. But as for the Children of God, and those who tend to Christian
Perfection, they ought to pray continually, and never to cease, because the
Devil never ceases to tempt them: and the more they desire Perfection, the more
are they assaulted with Temptations, and they have the more occasion for
continual Prayer; sometimes to beg Assistance from Heaven, sometimes to thank
God for his Graces, sometimes to bless and honor him. So that there never
passes one moment of the day wherein he who observes narrowly the Dispositions
of his Soul, has not some occasion to pray unto God. He will find it ALWAYS
NECESSARY TO PRAY CONTINUALLY, because he has continual matter for it, by the
occasions which befall us, both inwardly and outwardly.

13. For if we converse with Men, they sometimes will praise us, so as to give
us occasion of Vainglory; at other times they will despise us, so as to make
us angry, or sullen, or to despise or hate them: and when we have any business
with them, Avarice slips in, or we seek our selves. A prosperous Event will
make us rejoice, or will puff us up: an Adversity will make us sad and
melancholy: and thus a thousand other Accidents which do daily befall us
outwardly, do continually afford occasion to have Recourse unto God by Prayer,
to ^eg of him his Grace, and strength to uphold us that we fall not into Sin
amidst so many diverse Rencounters, which do outwardly befall us, and much more
inwardly. For if we did consider well the diverse Agitations and Motions of the
Passions of our Souls, we would there find infinite Evils which we must resist.
This of bridling our vicious Inclinations, is a continual Employment for him
who applies to the Perfection of his Soul; and he will find ALWAYS MATTER FOR
PRAYER TO GOD, and for begging his help and assistance, without which we cannot
fight against so many visible and invisible Enemies. He must give himself to
Continual Prayer, or else live and die their Slave, and be always miserable.

14. I do not desire that you should have your Spirit continually bent unto
Prayer after your ordinary way; for this would wrong your Head, and would forge
a thousand Imaginations which would neither be necessary nor useful. But I
would have you to call upon God always when you have need, and to bless him as
often as you receive from him any Grace and Assistance, seeing it is an
Ingratitude not to thank him for every particular Gift that he bestows upon us;
since gratefulness for a Benefit obtains always new Favors from God, and he
desires that we should call upon him in our Needs, promising to succor and
help us. If God desires that we pray unto him, why should we not do it? He
says, Seek, and ye shall find; ask, and ye shall receive; knock at the door of
Mercy, and it shall be opened unto (...)

15. How comes it then, my Child, that you cannot overcome your Enemies, since
God on his part has given you so many Promises, which on his side will always
be infallible? It must needs be said, that the Failing is on your side; and I
cannot see what it can be but that of Continual Prayer which you do not
sufficiently understand; and you think to overcome your Enemies with your own
Strength, which you will never do. You have indeed given them power to hurt you
by your own Will; but it is not strong enough to chase out your Enemies. There
is needful now AN ALTOGETHER PARTICULAR GRACE OF GOD, WHICH WILL NOT BE GIVEN
YOU BUT BY PRAYER, and that CONTINUAL.

16. I will tell you what PRAYER is, that you may understand it, fearing lest
it seem to you too hard to be embraced, though there is nothing more sweet and
agreeable: But Men's Imaginations make it appear difficult, yea impossible, to
some, because they have never discovered what Prayer is. Some attribute it to
many vocal words; others to Speculations [or Meditations] of the Spirit, which
they call Mental Prayers. But believe me, it is neither Words, nor Speculation,
that makes Prayer. But TRUE PRAYER consists in the Conversition of Spirit that
Man has with his God, when his heart speaks to him, and asks the things that he
has need of; or blesses him and thanks him for, his Favors; or praises his
Greatness, Goodness, Love, and the other Qualities which Man observes in his
God. This Elevation of Spirit, or Conversation that he has with God, makes up
true Prayer, without which there can be no true Prayer, though they call by this
Name many diverse things, which it were impossible that Man could do
continually, as Jesus Christ has said, that he must always pray, and never
faint.

17. He could not have appointed Man to do impossible things, as continual
Prayer would be after the manner that they would understand it. For if to pray,
a Man behooved to be always in Churches, all the other things necessary for the
support of Life would perish, and Man would die for want of them. And if to
pray he must be always on his Knees, the Body could not suffer this continual
Fatigue. And if he behooved always to meditate fine Speculations in his Spirit,
he would break his head: or if he must speak Prayers continually, he could
neither sleep, eat, nor drink. So that it is not to be believed that God
demands of Man any other continual Prayer but that of the Conversation of his
Spirit with God, which may be done continually, while working, drinking,
eating, writing, yea, even while sleeping; seeing he who has entertained his
Spirit with God all the day long, does certainly rest with him while sleeping,
because the Spirit having walked with its God while awake, it reposes it self
likewise with him when sleeping. And usually the vital Spirits are full of that
which they love, and that which has been seen and heard in the day time, is
represented unto the Spirit in Sleep. So that he who converses with his Spirit
elevated unto God by day, loses very little of the same Conversation during the
night; and even sometimes God communicates himself unto him by Dreams.

18. By which it appears, that it is very possible to pray continually, as
Jesus Christ has taught us: yea, there is nothing more easy and agreeable. For
my part, I could not live without this continual Prayer, and Death would be
more sweet to me than to be one hour out of it, because all sorts of Pleasures,
without this Conversation, are to me Vexations, and mortal Afflictions. For
this cause I abide always in it, and I do not think that you have seen me go
out of this Conversation to delight in other things. By which you may see that
it is very possible to pray always, and never to cease: and that it is even
good and pleasant, seeing he who is in this continual Prayer is never
melancholy: which you may also have observed as to me, amidst so many different
Events, and occasions of Grief.

19. Give your self therefore to this Continual Prayer, and by it you shall
overcome both your inward and outward Enemies. You shall have Joy and Peace in
your self, and you shall learn all that you have need to do and avoid Do not
apply your self to contemlate the great Wonders of God, or his Conduct toward
Men, nor the other Mysteries of God or of Religion; but practice this Continual
Prayer according to your need, speaking to God continually. If you are in
Temptation, beg his Assistance: if you are in Ignorance, beg Wisdom from him to
fulfill his Will: if you are weak, Strength: and if you receive his Graces,
bless him and thank him for this Favor done to you a Sinner. And thus you
shall have continual matter of having your Spirit lifted up to God, in which
TRUE, PRAYER consists. By this, you shall habituate your self by degrees to
speak unto God, and to converse with him in Spirit; and at last he will speak
unto you, and you shall be here united unto him, looking for a perfect Unity in
Eternity. Which she wishes you, who remains,

Your very affectionate in Jesus Christ, A. B.
From the place of my Retreat Apr. 7. 1671.
LETTER III. That the Spirit cannot rule where the Flesh rules.
That to him, who has mortified the old Adam in himself, it is most easy to
imitate Jesus Christ; and that it is difficult only to him who would live
according to his Natural Inclinations.
This is the 7th Letter of the Third Part of La lum. nee on tenebr.
My dear Child,
1. I Do not wonder that your Friends say, It is impossible to imitate Jesus
Christ, so long as they live according to their Natural Inclinations; for it is
a certain Truth, that a natural Man cannot live according to the Spirit of
Jesus Christ. He must be regenerated, and the old Adam must die in him; for the
Spirit cannot reign where the Flesh reigns; seeing they are two sworn Enemies,
and cannot agree together, no more than Heat and Cold: This it is that makes
Thunders and Lightnings in the Air when the Cold and Heat meet together; the
same befalls Souls cold in Charity, when they feel themselves touched by the
Arrows of God's Love, or the heat of his Anger.

2. If it be said to a carnal Person, that he ought to love God with all his
Heart, with all his Soul, and with all his Strength; you shall see him
presently break out in Words, and throw out as it were fiery Flames of Anger to
maintain that he loves God; while in effect he loves nothing but himself. And
if it be told him that he cannot love God while he loves himself and the
transitory things of this World, he well let fly like Claps of Thunder against
him who lays before him this Truth; because he neither knows nor conceives it,
and his natural Inclinations cannot take pleasure in loving that which they do
not see nor feel, such as God and eternal Things, which are invisible to his
Carnal Eyes.

2. We must of necessity die to the Flesh, that we may live to the Spirit,
otherwise we shall never comprehend Spiritual things: There are two Natures in
us, the one is Divine, and other Humane: The Divine Nature loves things
Eternal; and the Humane Nature loves things Temporal: The Divine respects
nothing that is earthly, and the Humane respects nothing that is heavenly;
because each of these tend always to their Center: The Divine part in Man, aims
and tends to Divine things; and endeavors to serve God, who is its Principle
from whence it comes; and the Humane Nature aims and tends always to Earth,
from whence it takes its Original, and cannot be pleased in any other thing.
This is the Reason why they who live according to their Nature say, That it is
impossible to imitate Jesus Christ; which is most true as long as they will
needs continue to live according to their Nature: For it was corrupted by Sin,
since which time, it can produce nothing but all sort of Evil, it being
impossible for it to do any Good, or to have one good Thought. For this Cause,
Job had good Reason to curse the Day of his Birth; for none of the Beasts would
be so miserable in their Nature, as is Man, if he had not in him a Divine
Nature.

4. All must grant this, and say with your Friends, that it is impossible to
imitate Jesus Christ, seeing he lived supernaturally, having subjected his
Humane Part to his Divine, and made his Flesh die that he might live to his
Spirit, and despised Temporal things that he might embrace Eternal. But I would
gladly ask all those Natural Persons, if they desire to do the same things? And
if they have put to Death the old Adam in them, that is, the Inclinations of
corrupt Flesh? And if they have labored with all their Power to revive in them
the Spirit of the new Adam, which contradicts the Sensualities of the Flesh?
Which appears by the Person of Jesus Christ, who overcame all Natural
Sensualities.

5. It may be, they will say, that it would be impossible for them to attain to
such a Perfection as Jesus Christ had; while they will not part with so much as
one of the Affections which they have for their Pleasures or Sensualities, that
they might follow him at a distance: For they do not so much as desire to
imitate him, far les to tend to his Perfection. They believe indeed by an
imaginary Speculation that Jesus Christ has satisfied all for them; and they
will not believe by a Divine Truth that he has merited for them by his
Sufferings, the Grace, and the Power to imitate him, because they do not desire
to do it; for they love rather to remain in the Corruption of the old Adam,
than to be quickened into the new, which is Jesus Christ.

6. Thus it is that those poor Souls flatter themselves to their Ruin, while
they say, that they cannot imitate Jesus Christ, nor live without Sin because
of their great Frailty. This is as much as to say, that they resolve not to be
saved, and they resolve to die in their Sins; for there are only two ways, the
one of Salvation, the other of Damnation; and Jesus Christ is that which leads
to Salvation. He who will not walk in the same Way in which he walked, cannot
find Life, but without all doubt shall die for ever. Therefore, my dear Child,
do not give way to the Discourses of those poor blinded ones, who have filled
their Understanding with Errors; but walk according to the Light that God has
given you, and labor to be born again in the Spirit of Jesus Christ our
Savior. Withdraw from the World, since he says, that he prays not for the
World, but for those whom his Father has given him out of the World. Those who
are of the World, are they who love the transitory things of the World, and
will not part with them to imitate Jesus Christ. They are rich in Will, and
proud in Heart, loving their fleshly Sensualities, while they flatter
themselves by saying, that it would be impossible for them to imitate Jesus
Christ, and to live without Sin because of their great Frailty; which if they
understood aright, they would use means to overcome it; and he who felt his
Heart cleave to Riches, would not possess them, but would put them far away
from him, as some of the Heathens did, who threw all their Money into the Sea,
fearing least it should deprive them of the Liberty of their Mind: And if a Man
found himself so frail as to fall into the Sin of Pride, he would shun Offices,
Greatness, and Honors, that he might follow the Poverty and Lowliness of Jesus
Christ and if h^ found himself so frail as that he could not eat and drink
delicate things, without falling into the Sin of Gluttony, he would take the
coarsest Meats and Drink proportionably, to support the Weakness and Frailty of
Nature, weaning it from all Sensuality or fleshly Apperite. But Men do not feel
themselves too frail to iudulge their Body in all its Appetites and Pleasures;
and they will needs make themselves believe that they are too frail to abstain
from Sin, or to imitate Jesus Christ.

7. This Sentiment is so Erroneous, that I would be ashun'd to refute it, were
it not that I see so many Souls possessed with it, especially among those of
Calvin's Reformati^on, who live and die in this Belief, that Jesus Christ has
satisfied all for them, that it is impossible for them to do good or to imitate
Jesus Christ. This it seems is inculcated unto them from the Cradle, since in
effect we see that all their practice is founded upon it, while they live
according to the Motions of corrupt Nature, and with this believe that they
shall be saved by the Merits of Jesus Christ, without striving to imitate him;
since they are taught, that it is impossible to do this. And though this is a
false Theology, yet every one follows after it, leaning upon a broken Reed.

8. For that Man of whom I spoke to you formerly, said, that it was impossible
for him to do any good Work, yea, to say the Lord's Prayer with Attention, no
more than they with whom he conversed, whom he had often asked, if they could
say it, with Attention; and they all answered, they could not. It is to be
remarked that they were Merchants of great Trade and Spirit, who found out all
sort of Inventions for gaining of Money with great Dexterity and Care, and
their Spirit was not disengaged for saying the Lord's Prayer with Attention:
For where their Treasure was, there was their Heart; and the Attention cannot
be perfect in two so contrary things at the same time; but if they had purged
their Souls from coveting earthly Goods, and as carefully applied their
Understanding to speak unto God, and to hear him, without doubt they might not
only have said the Lord's Prayer with Attention, but might also have attention
seriously upon continual Prayer, which Jesus Christ has so much recommended to
us, saying, that we ought always to pray, and never to cease.

9. But those poor Ignorants think to please God with fair Words as they please
Men, by saying, that they are too frail to do any Good, far less can they
imitate Jesus Christ; for these Excuses will condemn them: For if they were
truly sensible of their Frailty, they would avoid the Occasions of Sin, and use
the Means of Poverty, Humility, and Patience, that they might imitate Jesus
Christ; for he did nothing when he was upon Earth but that which another would
do that were animated with the same Spirit that he was: For the same God has
through all the same Power, and can do by the Body and Spirit of other Men,
that which he did by that of Jesus Christ.

10. For in as much as he is God, his Power is not limited, provided that Man
give no ^indrance to it by his Free Will: So that if one at present did submit
his Will to that of God, as Jesus Christ did; he would certainly feel the same
Operations of Divine Virtues that he felt in his Soul, and would likewise do
the outward Miracles that he did, if there were need for them; for the Spirit
of God is not lessened, and his Power was not limited to the Person of Jesus
Christ only, seeing he says, that his Delight is to be with the Children of
Men. He does not speak of one singular Man, but of all Men who submit their
Wills to his, and renounce the Corruption of the old Adam, to be clothed with
the new, which is Jesus Christ.

11. Those will find sufficiently by Experience, that it is very possible to
imitate Jesus Christ, yea, that it is easy and agreeable when they are denuded
of that old Adam: For Jesus Christ himself says, that his Yoke is easy, and
his Burden light. This Truth it self cannot lie, that it should be true that
it is impossible to bear this Yoke: But carnal Persons do certainly lie, while
they say, that it is impossible to imitate him, since he did nothing as Man but
that which another Man may do, being possessed with the Holy Spirit; for G^d is
impassible, and cannot have endured the Sufferings of (...) Christ: It was his
Humanity only that suffered, assi^^ by the Grace of God, which will not be
denied to tho^^ that ask it; seeing God is the common Father of all Men, and
promises to give his Holy Spirit to them that ask it. His Promises are
infallible, the Scripture assures us of this, saying. Heaven and Earth shall
pass away, but my Words shall not pass away, bringing the Comparison of an evil
Father, who would not give his Son a Stone instead of Bread, nor a Serpent for
a high Fish; asking them, How then shall not your hea^^^ Father give his Holy
Spirit to him who asks him?

12. Truly, my dear Child, I can scarce reason more to make appear those
Truths, which are so clear. I have spoken of them several times, and they still
bring me new Arguments to maintain the Corruption of our miserable Times,
wherein Men have invented so much silly Stuff, whereby to flatter such as
themselves, and to make them live and die in the Sentiments of corrupt Nature,
falsely persuading them that they cannot attain to the Perfection of Jesus
Christ, that they may not use any Endeavors to attain to it; for it would be
in vain to endeavor that which is impossible. Therefore we see Men to the E^^y
of one another, give up themselves to Pastimes take their Pleasures, and heap
up Riches, as if they were created for this, looking for Salvation as it were
in Recompense for their Sins: Which is very sad, and will make many to be
deceived at Death, who in this Life think that they are good Christians,
because they have not committed the gross Sins of Theft, Whoredom, or
Drunkenness, and have frequented Churches and Sacraments, prayer much, and
given much Alms: All this will avail nothing before God, if we are not animated
with the Spirit of Jesus Christ.

13. For God will know no Men but those who at Death shall be clothed with the
Spirit of Jesus Christ, which is Charitable, Humble, poor in Spirit; in short,
adorned with all his Virtues; and to be a Christian, one must imitate him, as
he himself has said: For his Doctrine is not a History to be read or heard out
of Curiosity; but is all Lessons which we must retain to put them in practice,
else we shall falsely bear the Name of Christian, which signifies no other thing
but a Person dead to the Flesh, to live unto the Spirit; or one who has
renounced the Corruption of the old Adam, to live renewed into the Spirit of
Jesus Christ.

14. It is far more safe to believe that Jesus Christ, by his Death and
Sufferings, has merited for us the Grace of dying to our selves, that we may
live unto him, than to believe that he has satisfied all for us, while we rest
upon this false Pillow, abiding in the Sentiments of our Nature, eating,
drinking, and doing all other things according to our Sensualities. This is the
broad Way that leads to Pe^dition, and many there are who walk in it; but you,
my dear Child, take the narrow Way that leads to Life, even though there be few
that walk in it. Every one will bear his own Burden. If your Friends will not
walk in it, leave them rather than follow them, seeing Jesus Christ says, that
we must can off the Member, or pluck out the Eye that offends us; and that he
who leaves not Father, and Mother, Wife, and Children, for his Names sake, is
not worthy of him. I do not require of you the Perfection that Jesus Christ
had; but that you tend to it, and aspire after it, as much as is possible for
you: In doing of which you will oblige her to love you, who subscribes her self.

Yours, wholly in God, Antho. Bourignon.
Amsterdam, July, 1^th. 1670.
LETTER IV. That God does not pardon Sin without Penitence.
To the same: Wherein is declared that Men fall every Day of new into Adam's
Sin, turning away from God to love the Creature, and that they can never be
saved without being revived into the Spirit of Jesus Christ, who has merited
for us the Grace to imitate him.
This Letter is the Eighth of La lum. nee en tenebr. Part iii.
My dear Child,
1. I Wonder how it is possible that your Friends should say, that I reject the
Merits of Jesus Christ, and that I do not look upon them as the Means of our
Salvation; seeing that I do not look for Salvation for my self but by the
Merits of Jesus Christ, who came into the World to redeem us, after that we had
been all lost by Sin, and by it sold and delivered up into the Power of the
Devil.

2. For Sin is no other thing but a turning away from God to turn toward the
Creature. The Angels did first thus turn away, when they saw themselves so
Beautiful and so Perfect, they were pleased in themselves desiring to be like
unto God: And thus they became Devils, Enemies of God, and of all his Works,
looking on them with Envy and Jealousy, laboring as much as was possible to
destroy and corrupt them. Therefore the Devil tempted Man as soon as he
perceived his Creation, that he might hinder the Designs which God had of
taking his Delight with him; and Man, by the Instinct of the Devil, turned away
from his God to regard the Creatures, in regarding of which he coveted and
loved them, against the Prohibition of his God, thus withdrawing himself by his
Will to cleave to the Satisfaction of his humane Nature, which we do yet daily.

3. And this turning away from God is called Sin, which brought forth Death to
the Soul of Adam, and to all Men in him, seeing Adam had in his Loins all the
Men that are since, or shall be born by his Seed in Generation: And by this
means all Men have perished in him, having contracted the Corruption that we do
yet feel in our Nature; for though God did pardon Adam, and Men in him, his Sin
as to the guilt; yet he did not remove the Miseries of Spirit, and the
Corruption of Flesh, which the same Sin had brought upon him; seeing even to
this Day we feel Inconstancy, Ignorance, and Wickedness in our Spirit, and
Corruption, Pains, and Death in our Flesh.

4. God cannot have made all these things; since they are Evil, and he can do
nothing but Good, being himself the perfect Goodness, from which no Evil can
ever proceed; but he has left to Adam and his Posterity, the Miseries which
their Sin had brought forth, that thereby Penitence might be done for it during
this Life, which is our time of Trial: For seeing the Justice of God could not
promise the Pardon of Sin without Satisfaction, it was needful by a straight
Justice that the same Flesh which had taken Pleasure to turn away from him,
should likewise suffer Pain that it might return unto him.

5. But Men, since Adam, instead of accepting of this Penitence, and suffering
willingly the Miseries of this Life, to satisfy the Justice of God, rebelled
against him, and endeavored to charm their Miseries; by striving to reject
Sufferings, and to take their Delights instead of Penitence, and thus they
straied more and more from God, so that at last they quite forgot him to
delight in themselves. God of his Goodness raised up Prophets from time to
time, as Moses and others, to withdraw Men from these Errors: He gave them Laws
and Ordinances that they might discover their Sins and amend them by returning
unto him, and repenting that they had forsaken him; but very few heard his
Voice, and many hardened their Hearts, chosing rather to adhere to themselves
and follow their Sensualities, than willingly to take up the Penitence ordained
by God for this short Life; so that all Men in general have at last corrupted
their Ways, and walked according to the Concupiscence of the Flesh, in a
forgetfulness of God, and thus have all merited Damnation, and that
incomparably more than Adam; since he fear^d God, and repented how soon he
heard his Voice, not daring to appear before him out of great Confusion for his
Sin.

6. But Men after him, have voluntarily damned themselves, and given the Devil
Power to rule over their Souls, whom they do insensibly obey more than God: for
while they follow their natural Will, they do indirectly follow that of the
Devil, seeing these two Wills of the fallen Angels and of Men are equally
rebellious against God: and those Men who follow the Will of their corrupt
Flesh, may be well called the Devil's Angels; for one is always his Angel whose
Will he does: if he submit his Will to God's, he is the Angel of God; for Angel
imports Subject or Obedient. Those Men who obey the Law of the Gospel, are the
Angels of Jesus Christ: for this Cause the Scripture says, that the Son of Man
will come attended with his Angels, which are not pure Spirits, according to
the Angelical Nature, but Men who have followed the Will of Jesus Christ.

7. This being so, he may be well called our Savior; for if he had not come at
last into the World, all Men had perished. He alone is the Foundation of our
Salvation since Sin; and I confess before all Men, that the Light of Faith
teaches me that I could not be saved without the Coming of Jesus Christ upon
Earth; and I will always ascribe my Salvation to the Merits of his Sufferings.
So far am I from rejecting them, as your Friends do blindly believe. And I have
much more reason to say that they reject the Merits of Jesus Christ, since they
say that they have not Grace to imitate Jesus Christ, while they look only to
the Power of their corrupt Nature, without making use of his Sufferings, which
have merited for us the Grace to be able to imitate him, yea to obtain the
Perfection of God himself, if we will apply his Merits to our Soul, and let his
Spirit fill it, since Truth it self says to us, Be ye perfect, as your heavenly
Father is perfect. Jesus Christ will require nothing of us that is impossible,
no more than his Father; but he says, Seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it
shall be opened to you; ask, and ye shall receive. This does not teach us that
we cannot attain to the Perfection of Jesus Christ, but even to aim at that of
our heavenly Father.

8. Remark well, my dear Child, the Sentiment of your Friends, and you will
find that it cannot come but from the Devil; and this under a good Pretext of
ascribing their Salvation to the Merits of Jesus Christ. For if they truly
believed that his Sufferings have merited for them the Grace of God, they could
not in Truth say, that they are too weak to imitate Jesus Christ; since this
Grace of God gives strength to the Weak to overcome the Corruption of our
Nature, from which we ought never to ask Advice if we may imitate Jesus Christ:
For if his Apostles and Disciples had asked Advice from their Wives, their
Children, Fathers, and Mothers, Brethren and Sisters, undoubtedly they would
not have counfell'd them to forsake them that they might follow Jesus Christ;
since no man hates his own Flesh, which seeks its own Advantages: so that if
the Apostles, and Disciples of Jesus Christ had asked Counsel of their Flesh,
and their Selfwill, if they could follow Jesus Christ, they would never have
been Apostles nor Disciples, seeing without the Grace of God we can do nothing
but know our Frailty and Weakness.

9. But since Jesus Christ is come into the World to reconcile us unto his
Father, and to bring us back to him by his Grace, there is no longer any cause
of Fear on God's part. We may do what we will, by the assistance of this Grace,
which is never denied to him who seeks and asks it; so much the more that Jesus
Christ is come to merit it for us by his Sufferings, but not to merit Salvation
for us while we continue to cleave to our corrupt Nature: by which we may see
clearly the Falsehood of that Doctrine, that Jesus Christ has satisfied all for
us, after the manner that so many understand it; for this makes them sleep the
sleep of Death: since they reject the Grace that Jesus Christ has purchased for
us of his Father, to embrace the means by which we may overcome the Flesh and
live unto the Spirit of Jesus Christ, follow his Example, and imitate his
Virtues, that hereafter we may follow him in Eternity, where none shall enter
but he who shall be clothed with the Spirit of Jesus Christ.

10. This is that of which I was desirous to warn you, for fear that you let
your self be deceived by false Appearances, hearing those poor blinded ones so
often repeat, that Jesus Christ has satisfied all for us, and say that I reject
his Merits by teaching that of necessity we must imitate him if we would be
saved. This might well surprise some weak Spirits, who would think that they
did Honor to Jesus Christ in saying that he had merited all for them, and that
they are too weak to endure any thing. But this cannot surprise one of sound
Judgment, who will very clearly perceive that I esteem the Merits of Jesus
Christ, since to them I ascribe my eternal Happiness.

11. For if Jesus Christ had not interposed with God his Father for our
Reconciliation, never any Man had been saved, since every one of them would
have turned away from God to cleave to their natural Sentiments, of which they
were become Idolaters, to love them with all their heart, as they were obliged
to love God, having changed the Love of God into that of our fleshly
Sensualities. Of necessity there behooved to be a MEDIATOR between God and Man
to make this RECONCILIATION, and to obtain the PARDON of so great a Fault.

12. We were all guilty of High Treason against God, and justly condemned to
eternal Punishment, unable to deliver our selves from it, having lost the Grace
of God, and become his Enemies: There was nothing to be hoped for on our part
for obtaining Mercy; for we even knew not our Miseries, so far were we from
having Strength to help them, or Assurance to beg of God his Grace, whose
Enemies we had made our selves by our Sins. There was no ground of hoping for
Mercy by our selves; therefore JESUS CHRIST, as our Advocate, undertook our
Cause, and procured this Pardon, not as the Ddvocates at the Tribunals of this
World, who plead that they may gain Money; but as a divine Advocate, who aims
at nothing but his Father's Glory. He offers to pay himself the Penalties due
to our Sins, that his Father might in justice pardon the Guilt of them, and
take us again into his Favor, which he has assuredly obtained; for Light and
Grace have been given us by Jesus Christ, otherwise no body would see from
whence he had strayed by Sin, nor whether he had gone by the forgetting of God.

13. It is the Light only which Jesus Christ brought upon Earth that has made
us see both the one and the other: for after that he had obtained the PARDON of
our Sins as to the Guilt, by his Merits only, who was innocent, and subjected
himself to Sufferings and to Death, that he might reconcile us with God, and
deliver us from the Power of the Devil, to which we had voluntarily subjected
our selves; this bowed the heart of God, to speak after our way, and forced his
Will unto Mercy toward us. This Grace was grace was granted unto us by God
only for the Merits of Jesus Christ, of his Death, and his Sufferings, without
our Intervention: So that Jesus Christ may for this be truly called our
Savior; for he alone has saved us from the death of Sin, and recovered us from
eternal Damnation, into which we had miserably fallen through our own Fault and
our Sins: for it was impossible for Man to recover himself from so grievous a
Fall.

14. He would have remained to all Eternity in his Damnation without remedy,
since he saw not the means by which he might be reunited to his God: But Jesus
Christ brought Light unto them when he came into the World, and has made them
see by his Deeds and Words the things which had withdrawn them from God, and
what things they must do that they may return unto him: for he was not
satisfied to have obtained Grace for them, but he would also procure their
Salvation, which cannot be obtained without the cooperation of our own Will,
because we are created by God free Creatures. He cannot take back that which he
his once given. So that though God was able to create us of nothing, without our
own Will, before we had a Being, yet we cannot be saved without the
cooperation of this Free will which he has given us; for Adam could not be
saved after his Sin without his accepting of the Penitence due unto it: even so
Jesus Christ cannot save Men by the Merit of his Sufferings, and of his Death,
if they will not take the Remedies for their Evils.

15. He is indeed the Physician who prepares Physic for our Souls, and takes
it himself in our presence; but if we will not swallow it our selves, it will
have no operation upon us: This we ought well to consider, if we would know how
Jesus Christ has suffered for us, and how his Merits will be applied unto us:
for, to believe foolishly that the Merits of Jesus Christ will save us, without
our cooperation, is a very dangerous Mistake, seeing God could not pardon the
Sin of Adam, who had committed but one Disobedience, without obliging him to so
long a Penitence, how could he save us who have committed so great a number of
Sins, unless we will embrace for them the Sufferings which Jesus Christ has
taught us, since the Scripture assures us, by Jesus Christ, that unless we do
Penitence we shall all perish.

16. How can we refute this Truth by saying, That we are too frail to imitate
Jesus Christ? This is directly to reject his Merits, since they have merited
for us Pardon, and Grace to amend our Sins, and to do Penitence for them. They
who after so many Favors say that they are incapable to imitate him, despise
his Merits, and will not have them applied unto them, rejecting them as
insufficient to give them strength to do well; which is false: for there is
nothing wanting to us on God's part. He says, Be faithful in few: things, and I
will set you over many things. We have received by Jesus Christ the Light of
Truth, which is not a small Grace, since by it we can discern Good and Evil,
and in what state our Soul in.

17. If we were faithful in this Grace of Knowledge, we would obtain that of
amending our Faults, and resisting Vice; and after being faithful to this
Resistance, we would obtain Grace to renounce all together, the Inclinations of
our Nature, and to die unto the Old Adam that we might live unto the New, which
is Jesus Christ. This is to have no Faith nor Belief in Jesus Christ; for if we
did believe that he has merited for us the Grace of God by his Death and
Sufferings, it would be impossible to say or believe, that we are too frail to
be able to imitate him.

17. Your Friends reject my Sentiments, as if I rejected the Merits of Jesus
Christ; and they do not see that it is they themselves who do indeed reject
them, while they say that they esteem them. This cannot proceed but from a
great blindness of Spirit, that they do not sufficiently-discover it; and in
this they are much to be lamented, since they cannot be saved in this Belief,
because Faith without Works is a dead Faith, in which while they remain, they
will never obtain Salvation, seeing a living and operative Faith is necessary,
which cannot be recovered but in the imitation of Jesus Christ; for otherwise
no body can recover the Grace of God, which he has merited for us, for those
only who will embrace the Gospel Law, for it only teaches us how to return to
God, and points out all the things which have withdrawn us from him.

18. If the Gospel Law did not tell me that I must be poor in Spirit, I would
never have known that the Goods of the World could withdraw me from God; and if
the same Law did not tell me that I must be humble in Heart, I would have
remained in the Pride in which Nature begot me; and if the same Law did not
teach me that I must deny my self, take up my Cross, and follow Jesus Christ, I
would never have known that the Love of my self drew me away from the Love of
God, or that my natural Inclinations did incline me to Sin: I would never have
done Violence to them that I might take the Kingdom of Heaven by force; but
having learned in the School of Jesus Christ the Truth of my Duties, I will
follow them, and walk in the Light that he has purchased for me by his
Sufferings, and will not lean upon the Opinions of blinded Men, who take Lies
for Truth; for I know well, that for me the Gospel Law was made, and that
without the observing of it I cannot be among those whom the Father has given
unto Jesus Christ, and for whom he prays unto his Father. I hope you also will
be of that number, my dear Child, that having been in this World united in the
Spirit of Jesus Christ, we may be united together with him for ever. Which she
wishes, who remains

Yours wholly in God, A. B.
Amsterdam, Jul. 15. 1670.
LETTER V. A Traveller to Eternity minds not earthly things.
To a Child of God, who did not sufficiently comprehend that the Cares of this
Life, were an Hindrance to the Perfection of the Soul; and was troubled to hear
me say, that it behoved me to tarvel alone to Eternal Life, seeing he was
desirous tobear me Company: Showing him that all the things of this World are
vain; and when we make it our Business to acquire them, or to please Men, we
are not to look for an Eternal Reward.
This is the Twelfth of La lum. nee en tenebr. Part iv.
My dear Child,
1. I Know that you are troubled to hear me say, that I am all alone in the
World, since you desire to accompany and follow me. Your Desire is good in
this, but my Proposition is true, that I am all alone in the way through which
God leads me. You ought not to be troubled to hear the Truth, but rather to
discover what must be done to accompany me.

I TRAVEL TOWARD ETERNITY, and I see all the World traveling toward the Land
of their Banishment, which is this miserable World, after which every one
aspires; for I have not yet found one Person who seeks nothing but eternal
things only.

2. All Men of sound Judgment say, that they aspire after things Eternal, while
their Thoughts, Labor, and Studies, are taken up about what respects the Earth
and Time. Is it possible that they can have such a Blindness of Spirit, as to
believe that they desire eternal things when they despise them? ^or ^e who
seeks after the Goods of this World, gives a sure Evidence that he despises
Eternity: Since it gives a full Satisfaction to the Man who desires it, and he
can no longer desire any other thing. For all that is Temporal and Transitory,
seems to him Dung and Filth; of which he makes use of the least ^e can, and
would flee in the Air toward Eternity, without any wise touching the Earth, if
his Body were not of so (...) Matter, and obliged to take such gross Food for
its (...) But they who travel toward the World, are still desirous of Silver
and Gold, that by this means they may make themselves to be served and
honored, that they may take their Delight in Eating, Drinking, Walking,
commodious Apparel, in adorning their Houses with fine Movables, and rich
Ornaments, that they may satisfy their Five Natural Senses, of Sight, Hearing
Smell, Taste, and Feeling.

3. So that it is no wonder that a Person who travels toward Eternity, finds
herself alone in the way; since all the Men that we see now, do so desire and
seek after all these things, studying and laboring with all their Power to
obtain them, and they will not despise or forsake them for all the Reasons that
can be told them. They would indeed have Eternity, without resolving to forsake
temporal things; though Jesus Christ tells us: That we cannot serve Two Masters
without being unfaithful to the one or the other. They wrest this Passage
according to the Sensuality of their Inclinations, and they will needs follow
them, and have eternal Life also; which is impossible. Therefore I do not
understand Men now, neither do they understand me; and for this Cause we cannot
stay together.

4. I must indeed out of necessity be among Men: But as soon as it shall be
possible for me, I will leave them to follow the way that God points out to me;
and leave them to follow those ways which they will needs choose for their
Damnation. I will not say, my dear Child, that you walk in this way of
Damnation, since you have an effectual Desire to be saved, and to accompany me:
But you are yet traveling toward the World which is not as yet crucified in
you; you do not yet know how one must die to it in all things. I am therefore
troublesome to you in RESOLVING TO WALK ALONE; and you give me more trouble to
oblige me to follow you, in traveling toward the Earth and Temporal things,
where I cannot accompany you without continual Strife and Debates; for there is
not a temporal Action or Word which is not blameworthy in this way that leads
to Eternity: For I should no sooner hear you speak of things which respect the
Earth only, but I would reprove you for them as idle Words and unprofitable for
Eternity. And if by your Actions you should labor for earthly things, I would
complain of your Employ, and reckon your Labor to be vain.

5. You see how I would be a Burden to you, and you would be insupportable to
me. And therefore our Journey would be melancholy and troublesome both for you
and me, and worse than that of two Persons who did not understand one another
by Signs nor Words. Nevertheless your Company does not offend me, for I love it
because of the good Desires which you have; neither will I reprove you by way
of Correction or Reproof, but out of good Inclination for your Perfection;
which I love as my own. But your Nature will feel Troubles thereby, which
perhaps would be insupportable to you, or would wrong your Health.

6. For I YIELD IN NOTHING TO NATURE, knowing well that it is corrupt, and
begets all sort of Sins, which kill the Soul, and make it lose a Blessed
Eternity: Of necessity we must contradict it and deny all its Desires; or
otherwise it will lead us to all sort of eternal Miseries, which few Persons do
conceive. For we see every one follows his own Will without thinking that he
does Evil, for they do not sufficiently perceive that our SELF WILL BRINGS
FORTH ETERNAL DEATH, as in Truth it does; which I see by the Eyes of Faith. And
Jesus Christ has also taught us it when he says, that he who does not deny
himself cannot be his Disiple. I cannot find more express Terms to make Man
understand that he must not follow his own Will, but absolutely deny it all
that it asks. Nevertheless, we see that the best inclined now adays think
themselves happy that they can follow their own Will, which is always inclined
toward earthly and tempo^al things, and never toward Eternity, which is unto
it invisible and incomprehensible.

7. For this Cause I can never Accompany one who travels toward the World, and
follows his own Will: I must still w^lk alone, so long as I shall not find
others, being like a desolate Widow, who has no Companion, nor Consolation in
this World; which is even very grievous to Nature: Because it is always
sociable, and is pleased with the Society of those like to it, which I have not
as yet met with in this World, having being always obliged to travel alone, for
I have found none to join my self unto, though I have still sought after them,
and informed my self, where are THOSE SOULS WHICH TRAVEL TOWARD ETERNITY,
without having hitherto discovered any.

8. I have conversed with the Religious and Devout Persons of our side, and
have found them all seeking after earthly things; for if they study and preach,
it is to recommend themselves to Men, or to get their Living. And secular
Persons, who are engaged in the Practice of Physic or in Merchandising, do all
to gain Money, or to acquire Honor and Pleasure in this World: So that none of
those can accompany me in the way to Eternity; and therefore I must walk alone,
or turn backward to the way of the World: Which I will never do, choosing
rather to die alone in the way of Salvation, than to follow a crowd in the way
of Perdition; seeing the great number of the damned would never ease my Pain,
but rather increase it by the increase of the number of damned Souls.

Therefore I will continue in the way to Eternity, though I should travel ALONE
in it even to Death, choosing rather to be alone with Jesus Christ, than in a
great Company with the World and Hell. I know indeed, my dear Child, that you
do not desire to follow the World or Hell; but in effect you still follow them
so long as you yet seek any other thing than Eternity. You think you will not
seek any other thing, since you have resolved to quit the World: But believe
me, so long as you yet seek to please Men, and that you are afraid to displease
them, you are still in the way of the World: And so long as you take pleasure
here in the Honor or Prosit of the World, you cannot relish the Delights or
the Repose of Eternity. And if you have yet an Esteem for Wealth, it is certain
you are not come to the Knowledge of eternal good things, for these make one
always to despse earthly Goods, finding them to be vain and unworthy of our
Love.

9. By which you may certainly discern if you are in the way of Eternity, or in
that of the Earth and Time; according as your Aims and Designs tend unto the
one or the other. This is a general Rule for ALL Men of the World, by which
they may measure if they are in the way to a BLESSED ETERNITY, or in that which
leads unto a MISERABLE ETERNITY, by examining if their Cares, Desires, and
Affections are toward earthly things, or indeed toward things Eternal.

10. Not that one must live in Idleness in this World, for he ought continually
to labor in it, to accomplish the Penitence that God has enjoined us. But our
Labor ought to respect Eternity, the Glory of God, the Salvation of our Soul,
or that of our Neighbor; and all that is without this, is Evil. For if one
labor for this World, he receives here the Recompense of his Labor; and
therefore he has no more to pretend to for Etern^ty. For otherwise, God would
not be just; seeing he who has labored that he may gain Money, having gained
it, has received the Reward of his Labor, and has no Right to pretend to any
other thing; for he desired no other thing. If you labor that you may get an
Office, and you obtain it, your Labor is well rewarded by the obtaining of
that Office. If you labor in Traffic and Business, that you may gain Money,
and if this succeed according to your Desires, you must not look for any other
Recompense but the Money that you have gained. If you study that you may
accomplish your self before Men, you are rewarded by the Praises which they
give you, and the Esteem they have for you. You see all that a Person can
pretend to who labors for the Earth and for Time. God cannot in Justice give
him a Blessed Eternity, when his Labors have no other End but the Earth,
toward which he travels all the Days of his Life; as we see all Men do now,
and they think themselves Wise and Happy when they dexterously seek after their
Advantages in this World: For he who does it not, is despised by them, and
looked upon as a Fool.

11. This is the way in which all Men do travel, wherein it would be impossible
for me to follow or imitate them; for I look upon all these things as Follies
and Amusements of Satan. For what can it profit a Man if he attains to some
Office or Benefice, or that he has heaps up Money that he may take his Delights
in this World? Death puts an end to all; and the Praises of Men which he has
acquired by improving himself, are nothing but a blast of Wind, which drives
away the Ashes of our Corruption by forgetfulness out of their Memories: And
the poor Soul finds it self deprived of eternal Glory, which it can never
recover after this transitory Life, which is the only way to a blessed or
miserable Eternity. It is a Folly and Deceit to hope for it. He must content
himself with the Earth, which he loved; and with Men whom he desired to please.

12. Behold, my dear Child, what Recompense the Earth and Men can give them for
all the Services which they shall render them; nothing but the Pain and Sorrow
of being forced to abandon them, and Remorse of Conscience for having sought
after earthly things, and traveled toward a deceitful and transitory World.
For my part, I see all these things as clear as the Sun; I will therefore
despise and forget them, that I may think only upon durable Goods, whcih will
never end. If you will accompany me, you may do it; for God has created you
free, placing you between Fire and Water, that you may choose which you please
best. The Fire will warm you with a Desire of having Riches, Pleasures, and
Honors in this World: And the Water will make you to embrace Penitence, that
you may resist the Devil, the World and the Flesh, which are the Three Enemies
of your eternal Bliss. You have already taken up a Resolution to travel toward
Eternity, and to quit the way of the World; which in effect you do not as yet
perfectly do. Therefore you cannot accompany me, until you shall be altogether
free from earthly Goods, and shall have quitted the Desire of pleasing Men: For
these things would always make you stumble in our Journey.

13. For sometimes a Man must lose or spend earthly Goods upon Occasions
respecting Eternity; which would be troublesome to you so long as you have yet
any Affection for these Goods. And in the way to Eternity we must often
displease Men. Therefore Jesus Christ says, that he who would please Men, is
not his Disciple. And elsewhere he says, that he came not to bring Peace upon
Earth; but War between Father and Son, Brother against Brother, Husband against
Wife, etc. to show that he who would travel toward Eternity, must fight
against all those who travel toward the World, even though it were against his
nearest Kinsfolk and Friends.

For if one would sh^ken that he may please them, he will never arrive at
Eternity; for they will still hold us in the way, without coming to the End.
For our nearest Relations are the most powerful Enemies that we meet with in
traveling toward Eternity, when they will not accompany us; we must therefore
quit the Desire of pleasing them; for this Cause Jesus Christ said, that he who
forsakes not Father, Mother, Sisters, Brethren, and all things for his Name, is
not worthy of him. Whereby he shows what Foundation of Virtue those ought to
have, who would travel toward Eternity.

14. They ought first of all, to offer unto God all the Goods which they
possess, to be employed only for his Glory, and no longer according to our
Desires, or that we may follow our Sensualities. Secondly, A Man must leave off
the Desire of pleasing Men, since in pleasing them of necessity he must
displease God; because their Desires are altogether different from those of
God, and respect only their own Interests; and therefore they cannot approve
that we should abandon the World, and its Riches, and Pleasures, of which they
partake, so long as we possess them to satisfy them. You see why it is that we
must lose their Friendship, if we would have God's, and undertake this War into
which Jesus Christ is come to engage us against the Flesh and our nearest
Relations.

15. People think that it is well done to preserve Peace among them; which I
grant so long as they will travel with us in the way to Eternity. There is
nothing more desirable in this World than Peace and Concord between Friends and
Neighbors. But when they detain or hinder us from traveling toward Eternity,
we must break that Peace, which ominates nothing but the Wrath of God. For it
is one of the Signs of his last Plagues; when Men shall promise to themselves
Peace and Security, then (says the Holy Spirit) is the Time of their utter
Ruin. Thus it befalls a Person who undertakes to travel toward Eternity, and
will maintain Peace with those who yet travel toward the World. We must
declare WAR against them, if they retard or hinder us from advancing toward
Eternity; for their Friendship is not so considerable as our Eternal Salvation,
which they cannot give us, but they may serve as a mean of our Damnation. For
these two Points, the Love of Riches, and the Desire to please Men, have been
the Occasion of the Eternal Ruin of a great many, even well-meaning Persons.

16. For so long as we have yet an Affection for earthly things, we cannot
travel toward Eternity. We must be altogether free, and aspire only after our
blessed Country, taking for our Necessity the least that is possible for us of
earthly things, that we finish our Voyage; the least of Honor, of Offices, of
Money, of Apparel, of Meat and Drink, that we can. And with this we shall
indeed travel together toward Eternity, adn cheerfully perform the Voyage. For
though we should find in our way Labors, Cares, Sufferings, Persecutions,
Contempt, Reproaches, Prisons, or Death; all this will seem Light to us in the
Hope of that Eternal Blessedness. For if he who travels after the World, thinks
himself happy in gaining Money by his Pains, Cares, or Labors; how much more
ought he who looks for the Eternal Reward in traveling toward Eternity. He
will be loath to stop to gather up the Sand of Gold and Silver, which would be
very heavy to him in traveling toward Eternity. I advise you therefore to
cast it far from you; and then, I will take you by the Hand, that we may the
better accomplish our Journey. In expectation of which, I remain

Your faithful Friend in God, A. B.
Amsterdam, October. 23. 1670.
FINIS.

