GVZMAN, HIND AND HANNAM OUTSTRIPT: BEING A Discovery of the whole Art,
Mystery and Antiquity of THIEVES AND THEEVING: WITH THEIR Statutes, Laws,
Customs and Practices.

TOGETHER WITH Many new and unheard of CHEATS and TREPANNINGS.

LONDON, Printed and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard. 1657.

The Preface to the Reader.
Men's natural inclination is always prone and addicted to so great rashness,
that though vice of it self is so abominable and blameworthy, notwithstanding
there be too many who openly praise it, and account it their honor to practice
it. Thence it comes to pass that theft, being a pernicious vice and
forbidden by the Laws, does not cease to be followed by many, who to defend
themselves from the reproaches which may be laid against them, allege that the
Lacedaemonians a people very severe and just, permitted the use thereof to their
youth; that the Egyptians held those for able men that could steal best. That
for the same subject the Poets in their writings have bragged of the subtilty
of Mercurius, and of the cunning of the goddess Laverna who was the Thieves
Patroness. Briefly, that this profession is made commendable by the crafty
tricks of many that have exercised it, such as were Prometheus the father of
Deucalion, Cacus and Autolicus, the one the son of Vulcan and the other of
Mercury, Arsaces King of the Parthians, Denis Tyrant of Sicilie, The Emperor
Nero, Leo son of Constantine Copronimus, Fulvius, Flaccus Censor, Ninus King
of Aegipt, to whom Justin ascribes the invention of so fine a trade, and a
great many others with who^ the books of Authors are filled. To which we may
add, that even the most understanding men are not free from this vice, if it
be certain (as says Simplicius) that the Prince of the Peripatetiques
(Aristotle) stole that which he has from the most excellent of those that went
before him. That Virgil drew all his richest inventions from Homor, Hesiod and
Theocritus, and that Cicero boldly furnished himself with the doctrine of the
Stoiques Academiques and Epicures.

But for all this, it cannot be but that natural reason must put down all
these vain opinions, because according to Aquinas, Theft is quite contrary to
that love which we owe to our Neighbors, and with-all to Gods Law and man's
Law. And to this effect beside that in Exodus and Leviticus it is expressly
forbidden, it is yet also detested by the Apostle S. Paul, where speaking to
the Ephesians he says, Let him that stole steal no more: but let him rather
labor and work with his hands. Also the people of old taking notice of this
truth ordained against Thieves several sorts of punishments, especially the
Grecians and the Athenians, as Ludovicus Vives does very well observe, who says
that the Emperor Frederick the third was the first that condemned them to the
Galleys: Ovid speaks to this purpose that Scyron one of the renowned Thieves
of his time was thrown headlong into the sea by Theseus, Procrustes killed by
Hercules and Sysiphus cut in pieces. Virgil that Pedant Balista was stoned for
his thefts; and the divine Arious, that the King Agreement caused Brunellus the
cunningest Thief that ever was to be hanged for having boldly stolen
Angelicus Ring and Scripants horse. I pass all the other examples that I might
allege: to tell you in a word, good Reader, that this book discourses not
here so much of the Antiquity of Thieves and of their cunning slights, as to
teach thee to eschew them, for if it be true that the wounds of Darts which are
foreseen from far, are not so hurtful as those which are shot at us
unawares. I assure my self that the Reader will use it as an instrument to
avoid the snares which lewd fellows ordinarily lay for honest men,

Farewell.
THE ANTIQIVTIE OF THIEVES
CHAP. I. In which the Author compares the miseries of Prison to the pains of
Hell. The Author would not have been so vehement, had he been in one of our
English prisons, which for the most part are made rather places of ease and
delight then punishment.

THe terror of Hell which is set forth to us in holy Writings, does so resemble
to us the miseries which are endured in prison, that if this had not that hope
which the other wants we might attribute unto it the title of a true Hell,
seeing that in this which is most proper to them, the one and the other have a
mutual and full correspondence, which makes me to wonder much at the
unprofitable diligence with which some late writers distill their brain's to
find the means how they may properly represent unto the world the horror of
that terrible mansion, when they might have attained to the end of their
purpose in showing only the desperate life which people suffer in prison,
which shall be perfitly known with its extreme misery, if first of all we
particularly treat of the torments which are perpetually exercised in Hell.

The Authors, who write upon this subject, bring the pains of Hell to two
points; the first and chief of which is their depriving from the essence of
God, which they call essential pain, it being that, which properly contains
all the torments that can be imagined in Hell. And that same is so extreme and
so cruel, that if the soul had in the other world as many pleasures and
contentments as the thought of man could imagine, being deprived of God, it
could not have any thing which had one only shadow of comfort. Because that
God being the root and the fountain of all goodness, and all contentments
and delights, which are in the world being stored up in him alone, it is
evident that with him the soul shall have all consolation which is possible to
be imagined and that without him it shall be plunged into a bottomless depth
of sorrow and confusion, with which and with the certainty that it has, that
its griefs shall never be ended, it curses its being, its birth and its life.

The other pain which the damned suffer in Hell is the accidental pain, so
called because it is joined to the former as an accident, which serves to make
the apprehension of the damned more sensible, throwing them headlong into the
bitter sight of their misery. To this is joined the detestable company of
Devils, the horrible and frightfull lodging, the several kinds of torments,
the continual lamentations, the disorder, the confusion, the fire, the
brimstone, the darkness and a thousand other afflictions, of which, and of
the depriving of Gods being and presence, that wretched and perpetual Hell is
composed.

And as touching the variety of officers, that bear rule in this dark
dungeon; we know already that in that great battle which Saint Michael the
Archangell had against Lucifer, for the throne and the glory of the Creator,
not only the same Lucifer fell from Heaven, and from the highest of his
perfection to the lowest and hollowest gulfes of Hell: but also a great number
of evil angels with him, who were copartners with him in his rash and
accursed purpose. And these although they do equally partake with him in the
pain essential, which is being deprived of God, have nevertheless some
difference amongst themselves: whether it be that everyone is of one kind, as
says a Doctor of the Church, or whether for that they had more or less
consent in his malice. Because that without doubt those who obstinatly defended
the pride of Lucifer fell with him into the deepest place of the earth which is
the center of the the world where divines do place Hell. And those who were
not so vehement; but only approved his purpose with a certain and determinate
fellow-liking, fell not so low: I will say that the accidental pain of them
was not so great as that of these others. And of this sort the accidental
pain of these spirits was made several according to the degrees of the malice
which they had in their sin. And though that in Hell there is no order, as
Job says; there is notwithstanding a certain government and order among these
spirits vnder-placed and divided into several companies with diverse degrees
and qualities. So as the good Angels in the heavenly Jerusalem are divided by
their order into Angels, Archangells, Thrones, Powers, Cherubins, Seraphins,
and other holy dignities.

All the Legions of Devils which fell from Heaven remained subject to the
Archangell Michael, who has commandment and empire over them all. As also
according to some men's opinions, every good Angel of Princes has commandment
over one Legion. And beside the obedience which all of them owe to Saint
Michael, as to their Captain General under God, they have also among them
their Prince of malice, to whom they are subject and obey, and upon him depend
diverse Lievetenants and Governors, who wholly divide the government of all
the hellish malice, every one of them having under his charge the disposing and
good order of his band. Neither less nor more than in a well ordered Camp,
where there is a great multitude of Soldiers, the body of the army is divided
into several Regiments, as are the General, the Camp-master, Captains,
Ensigns, Sergeants, Corporalls and others of this sort, who order the
Soldiers and the army. And as there are sundry Offices of these, some being
foot, others horse, some Musqueters, others Pikemen, and finally of several
employments: there are also among the evil spirits several Offices and
places, some tempting by Covetousness, others by Riotousnesse, others by
Ambition, and finally, every particular sin has its appointed and
determinate Officers, having all of them equally; one only end and scope to
carry souls to Hell.

In this Divellish army there are some Devils, that never come out of Hell,
but are evermore shut up within it, receiving the souls which enter in
thither, and giving to them a place and kind of torment which their sins
deserve. There are others who are ever wandering, compassing the earth to and
fro, and searching for souls to carry them into Hell. Nevertheless let no man
think that these have any power or authority to bear away one soul to Hell,
nor these others to shut up in their dark dens, unless it be by the
express commandment and particular commission of God. And so much concerning
these hellish Officers.

As for its largeness, it is such, that all sorts of sinful souls enter into
Hell, and it is ordinarily full fraughted and peopled with Blasphemers,
Perjured persons, Murderers, Adulterers, Envious persons, and to conclude with
all sorts of Evill-doers: who although they have in common the essential
pain, which is the wanting of God, and are all of them in Hell, yet they have
several rooms and torments according to every ones deserving, sithence it is
certain that the pain of him that owes little shall not be so great at all
as the pain of him that owes much, and that the just Judge chastises and
recompenserh every one according as he deserves.

To all this variety is added the extreme confusion of Hell, the disorder, the
unquietness, the unruly carriage, and continual agitation, with which they are
always tormented seeing it is evident, that where rage and despair reigns,
there can be no friendly fellowship nor agreement.

This estate, practice and disposition of the horrible pit of this hellish
lodging is the lively pourtraict of that desperate life, which men suffer in
prison, in which the beholder shall find so in tire and so mutual a
correspondence that there is not almost any other difference between them but
in the name Because that first to the essential pain of Hell, which is the
depriving of Gods powerful presence, the want of liberty has correspondence,
which with a just title we may call a pain essential, for so much as it is the
queen of all the apprehe^sions and motives of sorrow, which are able to afflict
a good wit.

And as in that, the soul being deprived of God, it is also deprived of all
worldly pleasures, even so in this (to wit in prison) it enjoys not any thing
which has the least shadow of content. Because that although a prisoner were
clothed with purple, served as a King, fed with the most delicate vitailes of
the world, his Chamber hanged with cloth of gold, that he were entertained
with all sort of Music, visited by his parents and friends, all this, nor all
that could be desired more could bring him any kind of comfort. On the
contrary he should have less, because that all things avail nothing but to
awaken his appetite and make him desire that which others enjoy, and to which
he cannot attain. Whence proceeds the increasing of his want (of liberty)
and consequently his pain.

The harshnesse and force of depriving (of liberty) may be easily, known by
its contrary, this being infallible that the depriving of one thing shall be
by so much evil as the possession of it shall be good. And liberty being the
most precious Jewel of the soul, and the greatest perfection, which the
unbounded Author of this, has engrafted in the reasonable creature; it is
certain that the depriving thereof shall be the most cross and insufferable
of all others. That liberty is that which guides and directs man's actions
to diverse ends, without enforcing them and with pleasure, choosing, and
commanding, experience teaches this, in which the supreme work-master would
distinguish man from other living creatures, whose end obtains by a natural
instinct, which leads them, as by a bridle, to the appetite and delight in
it, and that it is so powerful, and makes man so absolute, that his
understanding having proposed the good, the perfect, the honest and the
delectable, he may resolve with himself to love it or not to love it at all,
since that none but God may ask a reason of this so absolute commandment,
Natural Philosophy tells it. Whence and from many other reasons, which I
could bring, it is clearly perceived that there is not any thing in the world,
to which the essential pain of Hell can more properly be compared, than to
the depriving of liberty, seeing it brings man to such extremity, that he
abhors himself, his being, his rank, and his estate.

He knows well this truth which I write, who has sometimes been in prison,
laded with chains and with irons, subject to the rage of that terrible abode,
cursing (though Noble and well borne) his being, his condition and Nobleness,
grieving to be that which he is, and wishing to be a great deal meaner. In
midst of which despair he envieth the peaceable condition and tranquillity,
of the Commons, and could wish to have been borne of the most base dregs of
the people. He curses his actions and his studies, the points of honor which
his parents taught him, the understanding which he has, thinking with
himself, that if he were a private man, he should not at all see himself in so
miserable and so extreme a perplexity, and that this would not be little
enough for him, if despair left him amongst the folk of that same sort and
nature: but it goes on refining and consuming him in the fire of impatience,
in such sort, that it draws him out of his reasonable being, and brings him
to that of a brute beast, and to the most base and infinite kinds of them,
that groaning for liberty, he envieth the bird that flies, the Dog that
barketh, the Pismire that travelleth, and desires to be one of them. And the
venom of this fierce beast stays not there, for tying harder the cords of a
poor prisoner, it draws him out of the rank and file of living creatures,
making him desire to be a tree, an image or a stone, bringing him to nothing,
and making him bewail that ever he was borne in the world. By which it is
clearly seen that the want of liberty making so unhappy a change in man, as
to throw him headlong from the highest and most perfect of his inclination and
appetite, to the basest and lowest, and from the image and likeness of God, to
nothing; this is the most strong and most rigorous pain that can be imagined,
and that which truly does better represent the essential pain of Hell.

To the accidental pain do correspond the innumerable afflictions and
calamities, which follow the depriving of liberty, amongst which are the
stink of the prison, the disorderly frame of the buildings, the defamed
company, the continual and huge lewd voices, the diversity of nations, the
differing humors, the shame, the persecution, the disgrace, the mocquerie, the
cruelty, the blows, the torments, the poverty and the miseries without
number, which are suffered in prison, of the which, and of other depriving of
liberty the lively pattern of Hell is framed and composed.

As touching the executioners and officers, no man will deny but that all the
earth is full of incarnat Devils, more obstinate and more accursed in their
kind than those of Hell, the most part of them being fallen, as Lucifer and
his followers, from the Heaven of honor. I will say that for the deserving,
and sins which they have committed, the Angel Saint Michael, who is the
Justice, has drawn them from the fellowship and dwelling of the good, and
they seeing themselves beaten down and dishonored, have taken upon them the
office of Devils, to avenge themselves of the poor innocent souls, running
day and night through the streets, markets and public places of the City,
smelling out and searching for people to lay them in prison. And these are they
who commonly are called Sergeants, who drag a poor man to prison with such
rage and tyranny, as these in the perpetual Hell could not utter more. And if
we be able to find any difference between them, it is this, that the Devils
of Hell fly from the sign of the Cross; but those of the prison love,
reverence and adore that happy sign, in such sort, that he who would deal
well with them, and somewhat turn their rigor into a little pity, it is
necessary that he have always the Cross in his hands, for at what time he
shall leave it, they will torment him ten times more than his sin can
deserve: but they having met with him, they say a Pater noster for the soul
which they take, until they come to da nobis hodie, and they go not at all
any further.

These Devils are those who walk commonly through the streets, and places of
the City, seeking for souls in the most secret corners, the multitude and
trade of whom is so great, that I do not think there are more Legions of
Devils in Hell, than there be Sergeants in the Commonwealth. Amongst them there
be some that go on horseback, who have charge to travel into the Country,
unto places far remote from the City, and to bring men into prison from
places most solitary and quiet. These, for that they being of a more haughty
nature than the others, we may call Orientalls from the Region of fire, and
these are called Archers or Messengers, the Legion or company of whom has for
their Chieftaine or Captain a great Devil whom they call Provest.

There are other Devils in this Hell, the inferiors of the aforenamed, who go
ordinarily by tens or twenties in a company, disguised and masked, to spy if
they can catch one poor soul by treachery, they are so cowardly so
effeminate and dastardly, that they meet sometimes to the number of forty and
all to take one man, and yet they dare not adventure to take him their selves
alone, without the assistance and aid of a Devil with a long gown, who
usually accompanies them. They go always atter'd, torn and naked, and this
is the lowest and most infinite Legion of all as the Hob-goblins under ground,
whom the people have been accustomed to call Apparitors.

Every Legion of these Devils have an infinite number of halfe-divells who go
disguised and covered through the City, Spanish apparitors what sort of people.
taking notice of all that is done there, with great subtlety and craft. They
take and change every day a thousand forms and shapes, showing themselves in
every company in a several manner; at one occasion going like contrymen,
in an other like strangers, by and by of one profession, and by and by of
another. These are they who with great slight and subtlety discover the
price, after the same manner as the lying dogs do the partridges, bringing the
aforesaid Devils to the proper place of the soul, which they would take, and
pointing it out as with the finger: and these we call Spies, and amongst them
they are called Recorders.

There be other Devils, who are esteemed more noble and more courteous, whose
office is to repeal penalties, commissions, requests, to bail a soul, and to
take the burden on themselves, answering for it every time that the Judge
asks for it. And though it be in their keeping, they give it always time and
place to solicit its own affairs, to visit its Judges, and to plead its
cause, using with it some pity and friendship. Finally they have a nature
mingled with goodness and malice, and they are between Devils and Angels,
whom by reason of the familiarity which they have with man, we may call them
Airie Devils; and these the common people call doore-keepers.

All these aforesaid devils, and others whom I leave to mention for avoiding
prolixitie, are found in the world, every one of whom goes several ways,
leading souls into the Hell of prison, and all of them, after the manner of
evil spirits are divided into diverse Legions and troops. Yet notwithstanding
they torment not the souls because they enter not into Hell themselves, only
they deliver them to Lucifers Lieutenant the Iayler, and return incontinent
unto their walk; for to give up their account to their Captain, of the
tentations which they have practiced that day, and of the number of souls
which they have carried that day to prison, every one of them reckoning up the
inventions and wiles which he has practiced in his hellish Office. There be
also other devils which never go out of the prison, nor have any other
employment, but to torment the poor souls which enter in thither. And those
are so tyrannous, so cruel and so wicked, that they satisfy not their enraged
hunger but by sucking the blood, and the life of the poor captive that falls
among their hands: albeit they suffer him to breath so long; while they have
emptied his purse. And these be the under porters and servants of the Iayler,
who, as a Prefident of that dreadful dwelling, receives the prisonner from the
hands of the Sergeant and writes in his book the day of his entering, his
accusation, his name and the name of that Devil that has taken him.

These shut-up Devils have no power nor authority to torment a soul which
the others do bring in, nor these others to take them, but by the command of
Justice declared by some honorable Officer, who with reason and truth by a
signed writing charge these unclean spirits to take such a soul.

As for the rest it may well be proved that every Sergeant has power to lead
a man to prison, even so as every Devil may bear a soul to Hell, seeing that
there ordinarily enters thither an infinite number of prisoners, and every one
imprisoned by his several Judge: some answer before a Judge with a long gown,
others before one with a short gown, without reckoning, many other officers of
Justice, who as good Angels have authority and power to exercise it, who have
their appointed and praticular Devils, who execute their commandment and will.

As touching the diversity of the lodgings and places of their abode, the
curious shall see many differing in the prison, every one fitted for the
prisoners delight. For he who is not criminal, and who is Noble is usually
lodged in the lightsomest chambers and neatest contrived: but understand that
the Nobleness of a prison consists in a good purse. Those that be of a
meaner quality and deserving are fitted in certain dark and black chambers,
where smoke and cinders continually bearesway.

The prison has yet this property of Hell, to take in all sort of sinners and
criminals, being usually peopled, and full of Thieves, Ruffians, Cut-purses,
Panders, Whoores, Murderers, Perjured men, Bankrupts, Cheaters, Usurers, and
Sorcerers, in as great variety as the living creatures that entered into Noah's
Arc, so that entry is not denied nor the gate shut against any.

Of this remarkable variety the confused multitude of a prison is composed
with a thousand other circumstances which accompany it, which because it is
altogether disorderly and without bounds Ishal not be able to reduce it to one
term or name, nor to give it a definition which Universally comprehends all
the miseries of this dreadful dwelling, if the curious Reader will not be
contented with the Analogy and proportion which it has with the perpetual
Hell. The which being supposed as a thing most proper to a prison, we shall be
able to describe it by its properties and by experience, saying, that a prison
is no other thing but a land of calamity, adwelling of darkness, a habitation
of misery or an eternal horror inhabited without any kind of order. It is a
confused Chaos without any distinction, it is a bottomless pit of violence which
has nothing that is in its own center, it is a tower of Babylon where all
speak and none hear, it is a medley against nature, in which is seen the
peace and agreement of two contraries, mingling the Noble with the infamous,
the rich with the poor, the civil with the criminal, the sinner with the
just, it is a communaltie with agreement; one whole by accident, a composition
without parts, a Religion without orders or Laws, and a body without a head.
The prison is the grave of Noblenesle, the banishment of courtesy, the poison
of honor, the center of infamy, the quintessence of disparagement; the hell
of good wits, the snare of pretenses, the paradise of cousenage, the martyrdom
of innocence, the cloud of truth, the treasure of despair the fining-pot of
friendship, the wakener of rage, the bait of impatience, the mine of treasons,
a den of Foxes, the refuge of vengeance: the punishment of force, and the
headsman of life. There he that yesterday was great, to day is mean; he that
was happy in the City, now starveth there; he that was richly clad, is stark
naked, he that commanded, obeys; he that had his court full of caroches and
rich saddles, finds not now one more to visit him. There civilitie is turned
into insolence, courage to subtlety, shameless outfacing into virtue,
blasphemy into valor, flattery into eloquence lies to truth, silence to noise
modesty to boldness, knowledge to ignorance, and order to confusion: And to
end the misery of that unluckie place: I concludein saying that it is a
forest full of wild beasts, in which the one teareth the other, eating his
heart and drinking his blood, so that no scruple of conscience, fear of God,
suspicion of love, compassion or other respect whatsoever which can have any
shadow of virtue or of goodness is able to hinder them. There one weepeth and
another sings, one prays and another blasphemeth, one sleeps, another
walks, one goes out, another comes in, one is condemned, another absolved,
one pays, another demands, and frnally one shall hardly find two of one
exercise and will. One will be eating in a corner, another will piss behind
him: and in the middle of them another shall pull off his shirt and strip
himself stark naked. Every one is employed in his particular exercise, they
not having any other hour or time appointed for that save their will, which
being disordered, free in its actions, produces them without any let or shame.
In that which concerns the sustenance of life, there is no order kept there
among them, because that hunger is their appetite, their time of meals
always, their table the bare board, their sauce the nastinesse and filthy
stink, and their music sneesing and belchings. The hangings of their
chambers are all mourning, with some borders of spiders-cloth (cobwebs), their
seats the ground or some stone greased with two inches of fat Bacon. The
Dishes where they eat are always enemies to cleanliness, to serve for a
pot-lid and other uses more base, and for spoones they are served with five
fingers spotted like Jasper, and having their nails of a huge length. As for
their drink, the industry of man teaches them to make a pit in the top of
their Hat, and to drink in it more greasethan wine. And if peradventure there
be found among them a pot or kettle, it shall be, according to the order and
custom of the prison, battered without a handle, nor without vernish, and has
past the first year of apprentiship, and has been used in the most base
offices, serving for a pisse-pot, for a Flagon, for a vinegar bottle, for an
oile-pot and a basin. As for napkins, they take their skirts, or the outside of
their breeches, and for a tablecloth the wrongside of a poor old cloak,
threedbare and fuller of Beasts than that linen cloth which S. Peter saw in
Damascus. In their garments they keep a great uniformitie, going all of them
clothed after the manner of Lent, and with S. Austins habit, but so tattered
and pucker'd, and so fitted to the passions and necessities of their bodies, so
that without breaking their cod-piece point they want not a perpetual
looseness to satisfy their flux of the belly. They live Apostollically,
without scrip without staff and without shoes, having nothing superfluous nor
double: contrariwise there is so great simplicity that they cover all their
body with one only shirt, where of many times they have no more save the
sleeves, and they never leave it off till it can go alone of its own accord.
If Momus should come into the prison he could find nothing to reprove them
for, because one may see them to the very intralls. The comb, tooth-pickers,
brush, handkerchiefe, looking-glass, sope-balls are banished from this place:
of which poverty grows so great an abundance that in their head, beard,
stomach and flanckes a camel might be hidden. We cannot say that there is any
kind of vices in the prison, because that idleness the mother of them has no
entry there, because they are all careful and watchful to search for that
which is necessary for life: and their overplus time they spend in exercising
themselves on diverse instruments of Music having the itch for the Mistress
of that virtue.

They have also their appointed hours for the military Art, in the which they
fight with their bodily enemies, whence they retire evermore with the victory,
bearing continually for triumph and trophies the blood on their nails. They
live in Evangelicall hope never troubling themselves with the care of that
which they should eat or drink to morrow. Their ordinary comfort is the
faith and hope which they have to come out of prison one day, and put an end to
their miseries. With this comfort they live, ever dying, putting cataracts and
deceiveable imaginations before the eyes of their reason. And if by chance the
time of their imprisonment ends, and Justice gives assent that some one of
them go forth, then the Devil is so careful and so watchful troubling and
quelling his liberty, that it seems to him there are no gates through which
he can get out. One withholds him asking a debt thirty years old, another
the succession of one of his grandfathers, and another shows a band more
ancient than the deluge. And when his diligence and means have delivered him
from his enemies without, these within doors begin to thunder out another
song, for one demands of him five shillings which he lent him eleven months
ago, another that should pay for a pot which he brake to him, another draws
forth a bill of reckoning, asking him for ten eggs and a sallet which he paid
for him. This man demands that he should pay him the good-morrow's which he
has given him, another the good nights, one asks his Cap, another his
Doublet, another his Shoes and all lay hold upon him. And when he escapes
this importunate swarm of Bees, these tunes begin to deaf his ears; the
Iayler demands of him the rights of the prison, his entrance, his going forth,
and the time that he has tarried there, for his sleeping, his talking, his
eating, his sneesing and his coughing, and all the time that he has lived
within there, making more scores in his book than an Astrologer on the
erecting of an Horoscope. And when he has given him that which he demands of
him without reason, he asks his gloves, his Iayle fees, his slippers, his old
shoes and a coife for the maide-servant. The Dog asks him to pay for his
watching and barking that he has kept for him while he slept, the Cat for the
pains she has taken to clear his chamber from Mice and Rats, one pulls him
on this side and another on that, and all catch hold of him like briers, while
they have left him dry, plucked bare, thronged and as naked as his mother bare
him.

This in brief terms, is the miserable practice of this living pattern of
Hell, withal its circumstances, in every one of which there is matter enough
to make a long and profound discourse. That the Reader may bethink himself
hereof, that being affrighted at the hardness thereof, he may avoid the
dangerous inconveniences which are presented every day to a man as long as he
is at liberty: for if he fall once into the Devils hands, and beforced to
pass through the wicket of Hell, though his cause were his protector, he
should wait for S. Michael; and if Justice were his protector, he should ever
remain burnt with the mark of Hell, into which who so once enters, he
leaves the best thing that he has amongst Pluto's hands. And albeit that he
enter there fuller and richer than the Queen of Saba when she came to see King
Solomon, he shall come forth more lanke, more dry and more feeble than the
seven kine that Pharaoh saw in his dreams. (*)

CHAP. II. Of a pleasant discourse which the Author had in Prison with a famous
Theife.
TO the end that none be deceived with this proverb which most men hold for a
Maxim, when they say, That all noveltie is well pleasing; because that albeit
Logic should not condemn this proposition as false, experience would
discover its deceit: for I do not think that there is any one in the world
that has found the prison pleasant, even at the first time that he entered
therein. I may say of my self, that when I was there, though it was new to me
I found not any thing that I liked; on the contrary, the pleasure which
novelties bring with them was turned into notable admiration and extreme
pain, seeing that which willingly I would not have seen, and talking of that
which least pleased me. I spent the first days even as all those, who enter
into that place have been accustomed to pass them, which is to consider the
lodgings, to be vexed at the company, and to shun the familiar conversing with
the prisoners. And I might have past all the time of my imprisonment in such
like employment, if it had lien in my power to do it, because that the company
invited me not to acquaint my self. But the necessity being accompanied with
exceeding great curiosity which prisoners have, when any one enters newly
into prison, tied me to frame my self to the usual fashion of these people,
from whom I had a sufficent report of the subjects and qualities of that
habitation, without other paines-taking than to give them the hearing, because
that by it a discreet man shall know more sins in four days than a Confessor
in a hundredth years. In the conclusion with a fair show and some pieces that
I had in my purse I purchased the good will of all the rabble, in such sort,
that there was not any man of what rank soever who did not esteem much of me,
and participated not with me the most inward of his conscience. But the
continual company of this tedious conversation troubled me, in such sort that
I was not mine own, nor had I the liberty to spend one quarter of an hour by
my self alone. So lessayed by a thousand means to rid my self from the
headstrong importunities of those undiscreet people, but it was not possible
for me to free my self, without taking the office that I had got over them.
Wherefore I was desirous to try, if in this martyrdom, seeing I deserved no
such thing, I could find some pleasure to divert my mind and entertain them.
So continuing my no less accustomed than troublesome occupation, sitting one
day upon a bench which was in the Chapel of the prison, in the company of
three or four of these gallants, hearing some difficulties, whereof they were
come to consult with me upon the ten Commandments, I heard the Echo of a
sorrowful voice, which called me pitifully. All the standers by were amazed;
one of them ran to be informed of this vnlooked-fornewes, but the speedy have
of him, which sought for me, prevented the curiosity of him who was gone out
to know the news; for scarsly had we heard the voice, when after it, entered at
the door one of my religious followers (held in great esteem amongst those
people who were none of the holiest) with his color changed, his visage bathed
with tears, without a Hat, his arms crossed, sighing and beseeching with
great humility the company, that they would let him be alone with me,
amplifying his request by the shortness of time, as the principal remedy of
mishap. They departed the place, and he seeing himself alone and with freedom
to discover his thoughts to me, without any other preface, preamble,
advertisement or courtesy, he said to me.

Sir, to day is my feast day, and they have made me a gift of a clarke of a
harbor, with a Cardinals Hat: what remedy shall I be able to find for so
great a mischief. Verily this dark speech of his words, together with the
manner of telling it, held me somewhat in doubt, because I knew not how to
comment upon so uncouth a language followed with so many sighs and groans.
Nevertheless making a little stay at these words and already guessing that
which it might be, I believed that he had got this hat at some pot of wine, and
that out of the abundance thereof this noble dignity had climed up to the
head. So smiling I said to him: My friend, the Post that has brought you this
news, is he of a douzen or of twenty? It is not of twelve, nor offoure,
unhappy man that I am! answered he, for I am not drunk, nor ever was I in all
my lifetime, and would to God that all the world were so retired in this action
as I am: but as the Proverb says, some have the name, the others have the
effect. And you do not well to make a poor unhappie wretch that asks your
counsel in his extreme affliction. His answer to the purpose redoubled my
astonishment, and not being able to hit at that which this might mean, I said
to him somewhat in anger; Make an end then to relate to me the cause of your
pain, and hold me no more in doubt with your dark speeches or ridles. Now I
know, Sir, said he, that ye have not studied Martial terms, nor you
understand not as yet Galunatias his style, so it will be hard for you to
understand the coming together of two solid bodies with the perspective of
red flowers in a white field. From this second answer I fully resolved that he
was not drunk, but foolish, and as to such a one, I agreed with him to all
that he said, although I understood him never a whit. And taking the subject to
reason with him upon the same reasons, I asked him, who made him a Cardinal
and why? To which he answered me thus. You should understand that some officers
of the three and of the five of Topo and Tango upon the Seventh and the Go met
me one Sunday at midnight and finding me with the As de bastons the lot would
that they should run a hazard, These theevish words of the trade are afterward
made clear.
and I remained with the money. They were deceived, and desiring to revenge
their wrong, they went to Scipion, declaring an Universal head which they had
seen in my hands, upon which they made long informations by the Signeuers
Aequinoctialls: and at the end of a rigorous examination which they had of me,
they found me not good enough to be Pope, they left me the office of a
Cardinal. You ought to account your self happy, I answered him, having so
great a dignity, seeing that few obtain it, and these with great pains and
travel. I would quite it, withal my heart, says he, and that without
pension, if any one would receive it for me, and I would moreover bind my
self to him to pay for the seals, because to speak the truth, it is a charge
too heavy for me, and he that gives it, has not any good reputation among the
people, nor many friends in the City; and this is the cause that I make no
great account of it. And do not think that in saying, that I will no ways
accept of it, I can help my self of this pain: for it is not in my power,
nor in theirs who receive the like charges to be able to refuse them, sithence
dignities are bestowed by deservings, and albeit that men refuse them, they are
made to take them by force, that no man may refuse them nor make resistance by
too great humility, they bind it upon him as if he were a fool. Truly my
friend, said I then to him, you ought to account your self happy and very
fortunate, for such an election, this being supposed that it is made for
deserving, and not for favor. Very fortunate, says he, assuredly I am,
howbeit an unworthy sinner, but nowise happy, for if I were, I should not be
very fortunate. With this answer I began to see clearly, that he was neither
foolish nor drunk: but that dissembling he covered his words of this his
chatting, and resolute to leave him with his -- I rise speaking to him some
harsh words, to which he answered with great humility, saying, Sir I beseech
you to stay your choler a little: for it is not without a mystery, that I have
spoken to you in a riddle, and believe me that in this I have had no other
intention, but to hide my mishaps from some -- who usually watch harkning after
the life of another, to report them to their copsemates. But now seeing that I
can utter it to you without fear I will explain my self, being well assured
that a man of so good a wit as you are, will not be offended to hear my
weakness, and will not deny me your good counsel which out of your charity
I promise to my self. So know that Cardinal is that which to day at noone one
hit me over the shoulders: The Clarke of harbor he that receives such as
are condemned to the Galleys: those of three, are some of our company, are
some that watch the street, when any theft is committed, and these have the
third part: Those of Five are some honorable persons, or at least held for such
by the common people, who hide and keep the theft in their house, and for that
the fifth part is given to them. Now you shall know that by misliking I being
one night in a list that was made, the booty was so little, that there was not
whereof to make neither fourth nor fifth, and I being the man that put himself
in greatest danger I was willing to go away with all, promising to redress
the bygone fault in another more gainefull occasion. Those of Seven, and Go, I
will tell my companions found not this satisfaction to the purpose, which I
gave them, because that absolutely they would have their share. I seeing that
it was altogether impossible, for that I had already eaten it, turned the
process to a quarrel, and laying hold on a baton which is the As that you
have heard, gave one of them a sound blow over the head, who seeing himself
wounded, and his companions cheated, went to S. Scipion who is the Major, and
accused me that I was a theife at Crochet, which is an instrument wherewith we
open all manner of doors, and following the accusation they made me be laid up
in prison. The Lords of the Court, whom we call Aequinoctialls, To be whipped at
the Cartstaile.
condemned me to go the accustomed rounds about the streets, and afterward
to serve his Majesty in the Galleys of Marseilles. Which execution should be
made this same day at noone; I tremble because ten a clock is struck already.
If ye have any remedy to give me, ye will do a great work of mercy, because I
fear that the Hangman having stripped me, Burnd on the shoulders.
and finding five marks about me which were unjustly given me, doubtless he
will make me take a shorter journey. The wretch had proceeded thus far with
the explaining of dark speech, ere ever I could break off his discourse, so
great was the astonishment which his entangled metaphors left me in, and ending
his story with a deep sigh, which came from his very soul, he fell half dead
between my arms. He being come to himself again, I began to comfort him the
best I possibly could, counselling, for the last remedy to appeal to the
Court, hoping always for more mercy, from the highest seat of justice, than
from the inferior Judges Scarcely had I ended my words but three or four of
his companions, dying for laughter entered at the Chapel door, saying to him
that the news which they had told him were false, and those lashes were
imaginary, that it was a trick of his enemies maliciously invented to trouble
and vex him. With this news the poor wretch came again so suddenly to his
first estate, that save there remained some remembrance of his first taking it
to heart, he cut more than five and twenty capers in the air, with a thousand
turnings of good liking, and his companions began to play upon him, in which he
paid them home their change, with so witty answers, that he left me a great
desire, to keep him with me all alone, and at leisure to know at length his
vocation and office, and the clearing of some obscure words which he usually
mingled in his discourse; so I entreated him, but he knowing that I had such a
desire, in requital of the patience with which I had heard him, and of the
good counsel, which I had given him in his need, he promised to give me a good
account of his life, of his parents life, and the changeable successes which
happened to him in his trade; with all particulars which could be learned
amongst those of his office, and having appointed me a place at two in the
afternoon, we went to dinner. (*)

CHAP. III. To whom the Thief relates the Nobleness and Excellency of Theft.
THe good Andrew (for so he was called) was not at all slothful to be at the
place appointed, nor to declare to me the History which I had requested with
so great a desire: for half an hour before that, which we had appointed, I
found that he waited for me with extreme impatience and so great, that almost
without saluting me, he began to relate his History, saying. Know, Sir, that
if from the time of your birth ye should have gone searching through all the.
Universities of the world for some one, who with more ground, experience and
learning then I could inform you of that which ye desire to know, it were
impossible to find him: seeing that in this which touches (and let this be
spoken without vanity) the understa^ding of the riddles of Mercury
Trismegstus, and other dark Philosophers, and to be, as they say, of the right
hair and feathers, I will not yield it to any man in the world. With this and
other secrets reserved to my own only discretion I have found out the
Philosophers stone and the true Elixar of life, with which I turn poison into
medicine, the course cloth into cloth of gold, and hunger into fullness and
satietie more than sufficient, without putting any thing to it of my goods,
save the turning of a hand. I do not deal as a thousand other ignorant people
of our days, who being blinded by the gainful end which the practice of the
great Philosophers-stone promises them do adventure rashly to spend all to
find nothing, and to undo a hundred thousand effences to find one fifth both
uncertain and false, whose excess and curiosity have none other end but
infamy, misery and poverty, and finally a shameful death: for as much as
those who have consumed their own goods and the goods of their friends, to
search for that which they have not found, utter their rage with strokes of
hammers upon the seven metals, which are the cause of their overthrow. And
which is worse, with all the trials and unhappy ends of Alcumists, there is
not any man to whom curiosity will not awaken the appetite, and provoke the
will every time that he hears any man talk of this art. Mine is not of this
kind, and therefore less subject to the fancies and idle imaginations of
Gebor Arnaut, Raymond Lully and other great Advancers of the art, whose
knowledge consists in not to be understood; it is easy, plain and without
any mixture. Nevertheless be who he will that shall exercise it, it is
necessary that he be wise, prudent and well advised, because that wanting or
failing in one whatsoever it be of these things, a man shall easily lose in an
instant all that he has gained in all his life. This noble art also has not
Aristotle's principles, because that as well he as all others that follow him,
imagined that nothing could be made of nothing: this being true that in this
our Art, all things are made of nothing; and if we may attribute any principle
of them which he propounds in his Physics, it is the privation only, seeing
that from it alone we come to the possession of infinite wealth. As for our
tools, I confess there are some, forasmuch as there is notrade that can be
without them, but nevertheless they are so easy and so cheap, that we well
nigh make them our selves, after they are made, they last time out of mind.
The ground then to busy one of our trade, is only the good courage and sound
disposition of his body and limbs, and with this alone a man becomes his
crafts-master, without any other ornament -- And do not think that this Art,
having so poor a beginning as nothing, is shamful or infamous, for it is the
most noble, the (...) absolute and the most privileged of all those that are
in the world, so far forth that acknowledges nor respects neither King nor
knave, nor cares it for all the Monarchs of the earth, nor for the
Ecclesiastike power, nor for the Secular: but rather all pay tribute and
travels for him. Its fields are fruitful in dry grounds, it gathers the fruit
without sowing, it has no traffic with any, and demands of all, it lends
to no body, and all are indebted to it, its harvests grow without rain, and
there is not any thing whereof it takes not the tithes. There comes not any
fleet from the Indies, nor great ship from the Levant, whereof it not make show
to be partner, there is not a Guine Merchant, that is not its debtor, and
finally, it catches up all. And which ought to be most valued in this precious
Art, is the great case with which it is exercised, in which it exceeds all
other Arts, that are till these our times found out in the world, the end of
which is contrary to that of this, because that is perfected in the doing, this
in undoing, and to undo being more easy than to do (as the Philosopher
says) doubtless it is but that our Art is easier than all others whose end is
obtained with great pains, travells and difficulties.

Honest Andrew had proceeded further in the praises and excellency of his
trade, if I had not broke him off with an extreme impatience, the titles of
honor and nobleness which he gave it seeming to me altogether improper, as
well for that it is of it self imfamous, as for the innumerable dangers which
usually happen to them, who undertake such like traffiques: wherefore I said to
him; I do not know, Andrew, how nor by what reason you your self reckon up to
me these Arts so noble, so easy and so profitable, seeing that you have
related to me the perilous extremities in which you have been, which your
poverty and calamity assure me to be of little profit and of great misery
which is therein, that makes me to marvel very much at your persevering in
your unhappy trade, ere you were made wise by the experiences past. You have
reason (he answered) and I confess that many hazards and disgraces light upon
us, but one Ox eats more than a hundred Larks, I will say that one good
encounter shoulders out many disgraces, which have not in so great number as
you think, and though they were, it is not possible for us to give over this
trade but by death, because this Art has I cannot tell what with it, that it
is like one sick of the Dropsy, who the more he drinks the more he thirsts,
and of one only act there becomes a habit, qui difficile removetur a
subjecto, which is hardly removed from the subject. And I know well that you will
like my doctrine well, being so learned a man as you are, seeing they are
accustomed to dispute among the Philosophers if this maxim of Aristotle (who
says Expluribus actibus generatur habitus, of many actions is begot a habit)
be Universally true. And some say that of one only action a habit may be bred,
which should be understood of moral actions, and those of worser sort: I will
affirm that to breed a continual custom in sinning, one only action is
sufficient: but to do well, there is need of many. The reason is clear, for
that the will of man being disposed to sin, because it is called fomes
peccati, the fuel of sin, and for the miseries drawn upon it in its
conception, one action alone leaves in it a certain inward disposition with
which it becomes easy, and disposed to like actions; but the desire being so
marred, corrupt and ill disposed to receive virtue, there needs not only one
virtuous action, but many, if any disposition or custom of doing well should
remain after it. By which you may judge that albeit a thousand disgraces fall
upon us it were almost impossible for us to forsake our trade, nor change our
life, having already turned it into a nature, and if this should be done, it
should be needful to make the world a new again, more or less all wool is
hair, we are all of us of one brotherhood, no man is content with his state,
he that has most desires more, that which costeth little agrees best with
us, and all (as the Proverb goes) like well.

But mishap be to that infortunat man who pays for all; for as the Proverb
says, the Gallows are for all such, we rub all men, and for those sins
some are hanged, others are rich. Happy are they who rob Hippocrates-like, I
will speak as the Physicians, whose faults the earth covers, so that no man
is able to accuse them, nor ask restitution of his life, and of the money
which they have publicly robbed and in the view of all the world. And though
some of these be spiritual men, others temporal, notwithstanding all meet in
the same way, and shoot at one mark: for there be also horseleeches which
suck the world sweetly, and wring their neck, with a sad dumpish countenance,
and a fair show color their ambitious designs with godly words. And for
them, it is said in the Proverb, the Devil is behind the Cross. There are
others also, who though they wring not the neck, nor speak so much of God,
apply nevertheless the jurisdiction of their offices in favor of him that
gives them most; who being lap't in long wide gowns making them to be
respected there is not a man that dare to give the^ a word, nor show by any
sign the evil satisfaction that they have by them: but the wretched person
that neither has God in his mouth, nor bark wherewith to hide himself, if he
be not very wise and prudent all the persecutions of the world hang about him
at once, all men spit in his face, and he is the mark of all the abuses in the
world: wherefore blame not our Art before you understand it; for you should so
offend all the world and perhaps your self, since no man lives without fault.
How much more if you knew what sweetness there is to gather the fruit where
one has not planted, and to find the in gathering in his garner and in his
cellar, himself having neither field nor vineyard, you would even lick your
fingers at it. Is this a small matter I pray you, that a man rises in the
morning not having penny nor farthing, nor knowing yet whence to have it for to
nourish his family, and yet ere night he is worth ahundred crowns, and knows
not whence they came? Is this a small matter in greatest sloth and necessity
to find apparel cut and slasht without paying either for stuff or making? Is
there any such Nobleness in the world, as to be a Gentleman without rents, and
to have other men's goods so his own, as that he may dispose of them at his
will, without costing him any more but to take them? Do you think it a small
matter to be a Merchant without a stock, to gain two hundredth for nothing,
without crossing the seas, going to fair or market, not caring if the Merchant
turn banque-rupt, if the year be barren or plentiful, if wares be dear or
cheap? And if ye will take our trade by way of reputation or credit, does it
seem a small thing to you, to find one who will insure us our life,
whatsoever we do, and to have at our beck some Judges, who save us from the
lash from the Galleys, from torture and from the Gallows only with a single
and wel-assured promise to satisfy them with the gain of our next theft? And
that they do this not only for us, but for our friends, kindred and
acquaintance? Abuse not yourselfe, and acknowledge that there is no life more
assured in this world than ours, for instead of one displeasure that we have,
there are infinite pleasures and contentments to be enjoyed. And lo thus much
for my profession and trade. *

CHAP. IIII. To him the Thief relates the life and death of his Parents and
the first disgrace that befell him.
AS for my race, you shall know that I am a man borne of a woman, in a town of
this world, whose name I lost in a sickness which I had in the year six
hundred and four. My, father was called Peter and my mother Hope, people,
though mean, honorable and virtuous, of good reputation and praiseworthy
manners. And as for the goods of fortune, they were not so great, that they
were able to give bribes, nor marry Orphans out of their means, nor so mean,
that they obliged themselves to ask alms, nor to subject themselves to any
man, but they were people that knew how to live, and that had bread to eat,
and clothes to put on. In all the course of their life there was nothing found
that they could be reproched for, nor whereof they could be reproved, because
they heeded no other thing (particularly my mother) but to keep their honor
and the good esteem which they had gained, for which and for the free doom
and fair conditions of their proceedings and conversation, all the world
honored and loved them. But as virtue is ordinarily envied, and honest people
persecuted, there was no want of malicious and wicked people, who by false and
rash calumnies darkened the brightness and glistering of their good works and
the cleannes of their life. They were accused (I say) to have robbed a Church,
to have spoiled the Vestrie with the ornaments and chalices, and which is
worse, to have cut off S. Bartholomews hand, who was upon an Altar, which they
said was of silver. An accusation as malicious as false, especially, for my
mothers part, whose devotion toward the Saints was so great, that when she
went to Church, if my father had not pulled her out by the hair, or the Sexton
had not shut the door against her, there was no means to make her come out of
the Church, although she had been three days without meat, and her devotion
was so known to all the people, that she never came forth to the street, but
a thousand folk prayed her to say some Ave Maria for women with child, sick
and other afflicted persons, having all of them great faith in her prayers. But
as there are traitors enough to condemn a just man, and in this age innocence
serves to no purpose, if it be not favored, for so much as the Laws go as
it pleases Kings, it came to pass that notwithstanding the reproaches which
they gave in against the witnesses, more than sufficient to refute the malice
of the accusers, and to manifest the innocence of the accused, they condemned
them to die, and together with them a brother of mine, and my mothers Nephew.
Verily the case was strange and scandalous, though false, and their death
unjust: but whatsoever the cause I do not envy them the profit, which let
them eat with their bread, they shall not go to Rome for penance, for there
is a God in the world that sees all things, and seeing he punishes that he
will not suffer one hair of the just to perish, it belongs to him to avenge
the wrong done to his servants, for so I may call them, yea even Martyrs, since
they constantly, suffered death for the love of God, they being accused of
faults which they had not committed. A trick, finally that they being poor,
they were constrained to pay with their life, that which they were not able
with their goods. I only may praise my self that I found some mercy with the
Judges, in consideration of my young years, and of the small experience that I
had; yet the favor they showed me, was a grace with sin: because Justice
left me my life, with condition that I should be the executioner of these
Martyrs. I was very unwilling and did all I could, not to commit so execrable
a crime as that is, to take away their lives that had given me mine: but it was
impossible to excuse me, but by losing my life with them. Wherefore I
considering that a another would do that, which I refused, and of the other
side the persuasion of my friends who with a great charge upon my conscience,
counseled me to do it, that so the whole kindred of my parents should not be
lost, and that there should remain some one in the world who might pray for
them; I put on a resolution to do that which for any other respect I would
never have done. But this is my comfort, which is not a little one to me, that
my father gave me his blessing at the hour of his death forgiving me all that
I could have committed in this world, against the respect and reverence, which
I owed him, giving me also some wholesome counsels, and recommending to me
virtue and the fear of God, above all that I should ever strive to be like my
parents and that I should show my self such a one as those of whom I was
descended. With these reasons and some others I remained greatly comforted, and
resolved to end my prison with their life. I was left an Orphan, young, alone,
or ill accompanied, and without counsel, without knowing what side to turn me
to, for to maintain that life which these gentlemen had left me, because that
the cockering and good cheer in which my mother had bred me, had been the
especial cause of my undoing, she suffering me to live idly and lazily.

Nevertheless I seeing that the memory of the good past brought me no profit,
and that if I should live and eat bread it ought to be with the sweat of my
brows, I determined to look out for a master whom I might serve, or some
handie-crafts-man with whom I might learn some trade, which was all in vain,
because that the accident of my parents being in fresh memory, and their
infamy yet late, I found not one that would receive me into his house, nay not
so much as to be a groom of his stable: wherefore I was forced to leave the
country, and to go try my fortunes in a strange country. What country is
that (I asked him then) in which your parents dwelt, because if I be not
deceived in the discourse of your relation, you have changed its right name as
also its surname, and your own? Command me not, I beseech you, answered he, to
break a solemn oath which we of our profession have made amongst our selves,
which is never to reveal to any man our own country, nor our parents name,
this being supposed that it avails little to the truth of my history to know
it, and though it seems to you that it is no mystery to conceal it, believe
me you aredeceived for so much that thereis nothing more dangerous in our Art,
than to tell a man's true name, as well as of his country, as of his baptism,
seeing that as you know, albeit we be fallen a thousand times into the hands of
Justice, and that we be as many times convicted of some crime, we only
changing our name, we ever make it appear that this is the first time that we
have been taken, and the first crime whereof we have ever bin accused, and no
man knowing the name of our parents, nor of our country they cannot be
informed of our lives and manners, nor our parents receive any shame from our
disgrace seeing that as you may oftentimes have seen, when they condemn a man
the first words of his sentencesay; such a one, of such a place, the son of
such a man and such a woman is condemned to be whipped or hanged such a day,
month and year, from which proceeds nothing else, but sorrow to him that
dies, and dishonor to his parents. If this be so (said I to him) you have
reason to hid it, and this being supposed that is not for your avail to telit,
and it avails not me to know it, let us leave it, and follow your History.
It fell out then (said he) that about four leagues from the place of my
birth, I put my self apprentice to a Shooemaker, it seeming to me to be the
most gainful of all trades, especially in France, where all those that walk
go at it were post, even as if Justice were running after them, and where all
Shoe themselves against nature, that which is contained being greater than
that which contains that is to say, the foot greater than the shoe, whence
it falls out that the shoes last a very short while. I opened then mine eyes
thither and bend my mind to this trade for that beside the gain it was the
most easy. But as from my infancy my parents had taught me to rip, it was not
possible for me so suddenly to change the habit which I had already, turned
into nature, and so six weeks past ere I could learn to set one right stitch.
From this ignorance my Master took occasion to disdain me, breaking some
lasts on my head, to see if they could leave some impression beside the
continual abstinence with which he punished me, some of his friends having
said to him that it was a singular remedy -- and quicken my wit. This life
seemed not good to me nor to be desired, wherefore I resolved to forsake it,
and lay out for another more peaceable, knowing particularly in my self some
motions of Nobleness, which inclined me to things higher and greater than to
make shoes, wherefore I conclude with my self to search all means possible
to bring me into the house of some man of quality and rich, being assured that
with the fair conditions and readiness that I had, my service should be
wellpleasing to my Master. Verily the resolution was good, and the thoughts
honorable and noble; but so lame, maime and without force for want of means,
and apparel to setthem forward seeing that it is most certain, that if with
my hands waxed, my apron and other marks of a Shoemaker I should have
presented my self at the gate of some Knight, they would not have suffered me
to enter

This difficulty held me some few days in perplexity without knowing how to
enter upon my enterprises, notwithstanding making a virtue of necessity, being
vexed at the miserable life which I led, I determined to draw Physic out of
the disease, and honey from the Bees stings, and endeavoring to revenge my
self on the Spainsh lether and all shooe-makers. To this effect there came a
notable boldness in my mind, yea and profitable enough and sure, if fortune
who then was my enemy had not over-thrown my designs and myinventions, I
considered that if I stole any thing out of the house, my shift should have
been discovered in an instant, and I as a stranger and friendlesse, been ill
dealt withal, particularly, with the hatred which my Master bare toward me,
and the harshnesse with which they are wont to punish household thefts in
France. So rising on Friday morning early than I had been accustomed, rubbing
my hands with wax and also my face, I went with my apron girt to me, and my
hands all bedawbed, to run through all the shops of the town, especially
those that were best acquainted with my Master, and telling to every one that
were in the shops, that the Gentleman staid at my Masters for a pair of boots
of the eights, to put them on incontinent, I asked for one boot to try if it
would fit him that desired them. None made any difficulty to give me it,
thinking that a man could not be served with one boot alone, otherwise the
most part of the shooe-makers knew me, and these who had never seen me were in
a minute so well satisfied with my presence, that if the first finder out of
the trade had come, they could not have given him more credit. With this
invention I went almost through all the shops of the town, ever heeding to
ask for a boot of the same size, and last that the first was of: And the
invention fell out so to the purpose, and with so great ease that in half an
hours space, I gathered me then two hundred boots all of one size, and of one
fashion, which having tied up in a sack, I laid them on my shoulders and
betook me to the way. The fact lay dead without suspicion almost two hours,
but seeing that I came not back again, norreturned the boots which I had
carried away, nor took that which I had left, all of them suspected that which
truly fell out. And so this time being past, more than a hundred apprentices
were at the door where I dwelt, every one asking for his boot, which my
Master and some few of his neighbors, who loved me not very well, seeing they
told the Justice, who dividing themselves through the three gates of the City,
met me not very far from one of them, because the weight of my burden
suffered me not to get out of fight as I could have wished. They brought me
back to the town, and proceeding against me for the fact yet hot and fresh
in mind, they condemned me to walk four hours through the accustomed
streets (that is to be scourged) with three years banishment.

CHAP. V. Of the first Thief that was in the world and whence theft had its
beginning.
ALthough this noble Art had no other excellency but the antiquity of its
beginning and the Nobleness of the first finder out thereof, it might suffice
to the end that every good wit should approve it for to be the most Noble of
all those which are practiced at this day in the world, the first inventour
thereof was one of the fairest Angels that was, whose beauty, dignity and
greatness was so extolled and high, that the most curious of his perfection
found no other title more proper to exalt him than that of the Morning Star,
Governor of the dawning of the day, the Sun's Ambassador. This then was the
first Thief that was in the world, or before the world, if it be true that the
Angels were created before time, who overcome by an ambitious desire,
adventured rashly to rob God of his glory. But he was degraded because
Justice took him in the fact, and seazing upon all the goods that he had,
condemned him to perpetual prison, and together with him all his associats.

The second Thief that ever was in the world was our first father Adam, as
bold as the Angel, yet not so blame-worthie for being not so malicious in his
sin, and of less knowledge, albeit I cannot be persuaded that he was ignorant
of the obedience, which he owed to his Creator, having knowledge infused in
him. Nevertheless overcome by the importunate reasons of his wife, and
tormented with an ambitious curiosity he was desirous to steal the knowledge
and wisdom of God. But it fell out as badly to him as to the Angel, so that
his fleeing and hiding himself served him to no purpose, for the Judge having
asked him, and he not being able to deny the fact, for that he was taken in the
fault, his state of innocence and original justice was taken away, he and all
his race remaining condemned to spend their life with sweat, travel and
mishaps, and his wife to bring forth her children with sorrow. And if you ask
me why God did not equally punish these two thieves, being guilty of treason,
and having attempted one and the same kind of theft which is the divine
perfection. It was to this purpose that I have heard spoken by a great doctor
and Preacher of the Church; because if God had punished man with the same rigor
that he punished the Angel withal, he had destroyed an entire nature, seeing
that all men sinned in Adam and so the world had remained imperfect. But in
punishing the Angel, this inco^venience followed not, because many other
Angels remained in heaven, and all the nature of Angels sinned not, and this is
the cause why God was not so severe to man as to the Angels: but you shall
better learn this curiosity from some other, who knows it better than I do.
It is sufficient that those aforesaid Thieves were the first that brought theft
into credit in the world. And we cannot say, that poverty and necessity
stirred them up to steal, because the first was the noblest and mightiest of
all the Angels, and the second was the first of all men, King of the living
creatures, and absolute Lord of the earth. From thence is brought in the
deceit which to the day, this world sees, believing that poverty was the
finder out of theft, seeing it is riches and prosperity, because the love and
desire of honor and riches grows so much the more as it is increased, as a
Poet says very well. Ambition being an unsatiable fire, in which how much more
wood is laid, so much the more it is inflamed, and a Dropsy, in which the more
one drinks, the more he thirsts. Even so in those great thieves, the great
riches and prosperity which they had, was the cause of their unruly appetite,
and unsatiable ambition, for that they desiring that which they had not, they
could not attempt any other theft, but the glory and wisdom of God, seeing
they possessed all the rest. Whence you shall understand, that to steal and
rob is in a sort natural to man, and that it goes by inheritance, and
propagation in all the lineage of men, and not by cunning. For if it be true
that we all are partakers of Adams sin, his sin being nothing else but to
rob God of his knowledge, it is evident, that there is in us an inclination,
disposition and natural desire to rob and steal. From Adam this profession
was extended to all his posterity, being always kept on foot amongst the
most noble and best qualified of all his children. So Cain, as jealous of this
original virtue, would needs steal from his brother Abel the grace and
particular favor with which God received his oblations and sacrifices. Jacob
cunningly robbed the blessing from his brother Esau, and it went well with him.
David the wife of Vriah. Achab though himself a rich King stole Naboths
Vineyard. And finally Nimrod by theft subdued all the Inhabitants of Assyria.
And if leaving these and other Thieves almost innumerable, which holy writing
relate unto us, we take the examples that humane histories rehearse unto us,
we shall see that this singular Art has been always preserved among the
Nobility, since Paris stole Helen, ravished before that by Theseus; The same
Theseus stole Ariadne, and Jason Medea. The Lacedaemonians, of whose policy and
good government Plutarch makes honorable mention had this laudable and
virtuous custom of stealing, and he that was most cunning and subtle in that
Art, was in greatest account and estimation amongst them. The very mothers
taught their children, while they were but little ones, to steal, holding it
for an infallible point of policy, that they could never be good and brave
soldiers, if they had not been cunning and well experienced thieves. I will
not tarry now to tell the name and reputation which Vircat got himself by his
thefts, nor the renown which Crocota deserved by them in the time of Augustus
Caesar, for I should never have done. *

CHAP. VI. The thief follows his history proving that all men of what
quality so ever are Thieves.
THis Noble profession of stealing has evermore (as I have said) been held in
high esteem amongst the greatest and best qualified men of the world: but as
there is no kind of virtue nor nobleness, which is not envied by the vulgar,
it became in time so ordinary and common that there was not so very a Butcher
or Porter who would not imitate the Nobility in their thefts. Whence and from
the little discretion and exceeding great boldness that then was amongst
people, it was one time so disdained and disliked that those who did openly
follow it, were punished with shameful pains and accounted infamous. But as
all things of the world have their contrary weights; time would needs find a
remedy for this abuse, seeking means to steal without punishment, and so
disguised, that not only theft seemed not vice, but was esteemed a rare and
singular virtue. To this end many brave spirits invented the diversity of
Offices and charges which to this day are exercised in the world, every one of
which serves for a mask or cloak to make his harvest and enrich himself
with another man's goods. And to the end that you may not judge my words rash,
nor my proposition too bold, run, I pray you, over all states that are in the
Commonwealth, and you shall find that we all are the children of Adam. For I
thus argue. That man that has an Office of a thousand Crowns of rent, without
any other living, pension or patrimony, and holds a house for which he pays
eight hundredth Crowns a year, keeps a horse and two Pages and a footeman,
his wife and two waiting Gentlewomen, his children and a Master to teach them,
who to keep all this train has need of more then a thousand crowns every
year, yet notwithstanding with all this charge he is found at the years end
with two suites of apparel, free from debts and with five hundredth crowns of
gain, and yet it rained no more on his field than on other men's, nor has he
inherited any thing of any of his parents or friends. Ergo a Thief. A Tailer
that eats more than it cost him, and at six years end gives ten thousand
crowns portion in marriage with his daughter, never meddling with other trade
save his needle and his sheeres. Ergo a Thief. A Shoemaker that keeps six
prentices in his shop, and works but four days a week; and those not wholly
at three years end that two tenements builded in the fairest streets of the
town, every one of which is worth two him three hundredth pounds of yearly
rent, without any other stock, but that of his leather Ergo a Thief. The
Clerk who for every sheet of paper that he writes has but a shilling, and
who writes scarcely, six months of the whole year, which are hardly ended
but he is seen to have his Velvet stools, damask courtains, silke-hangings,
and other rich ornaments, which never came to him by heritage. Ergo a Thief.
Of the same kind you shall find in all Offices giving you to understand, that I
do not speak here of the good and honest, but of the lewd and baser sort, who
blinded with profit and gain tread under their feet the fear of God, the
love of their neighbor, and the truth of their own conscience (who force the
poor and needy to take six pence for that, which they sell in their shops for
twelve pence) and it is, I say, of those by whom the evils, that I have
mentioned ought to be understood. And by reason that the great attention with
which you do harken to my reasons, discovers the desire that you have to
know all that can be said upon this subject, I will show briefly the invention
and deceits which the naughty Tradesmen use for to rob and steal.

The Tailer steals asking a third part more of cloth, then there needs to
make a suit of: and when he that puts it out to making, presuming to be wise
enough for the Tailer, would be by to see it cut, he vexes him, and casts a
mist over his eyes marking four hours along the piece and overthwart, and
when he has at last dazeld him with a great many strokes and lines with his
chalk, he throws a false ply under the sheeres with which at the cutting of
a pair of breeches one breech abides with him for his gain, besides buttons,
silk, lace, and lynings.

The linen Weaver steals in asking more yarne than the web has need of,
laying fifty else instead of five and forty and with the remainder of many
broken threeds he pincheth out the length, which makes worth to him the eight
part, all which he steals.

The Cord wainer restores with his teeth that which he steals with his --
biting and drawing thin the leather, so that of one pair of shoes which one
gives him to make, there rests to him at least an upper lether or a heel
for a third. And if the lether be his own, he sets on a rotten soale with
rotten thread, to the end it may be the sooner spoiled and fall off, which I
think but stealing.

The Physician and the Surgeon both steal, the one appointing and the other
applying plasters, which feed the disease and make it worse to the end that the
time of the cure continning long, the fees may be the greater and the more.

The Apothecarie steals with a quid pro quo -- putting in one drugge for
another, and taking that which is cheapest, not considering what humor should
be purged, and what virtue the drugge has which he applies, in which he
steals the honor and reputation of the Physician, and the sick persons life.
And if happily any call for an oil which he has not, he will not fail to give
of that which he has for oil of -- or other costly oil which any shall have
asked them, that they may not lose the credit of their shop.

The Merchant steals in putting out his money upon use, taking more than the
statute allows, and writing down in his book such a debt, which, it may be,
shall be thrice paid,

The Notary steals with an (etc. Et coetera) a whole Lordship, and if there
be a question of any criminal process, the Scrivener for money that he shall
take of a forfeit, will sell the soul of the poor innocent.

The Counselor and the Attorney steal selling a thousand lies to the poor
client, making him to understand, that he shall win his cause, albeit they see
clearly that he has no right at all; and many times it falls out that the
Lawyer agrees with another to sell the parties right and part the gain
between them.

The Judge steals Justice from this man, having pity on him, who by some
bribe shall have already corrupted him, wresting violently the texts of Bartole
and Baldus for his own profit.

The Drugster and other Merchants, that sell by weight steal, putting under
the scale a very thin plate of lead, where they put that which they would
weight, with which they show that there is more then weight, albeit there be
many ounces, and when they do not that, with their little finger they touch
the tongue of the balance with which they make the scale sway to what side
they will.

The Vintner steals a hundredth thousand ways, mixing and blending one wine
with another, beside the water that he puts amongst it, and when his wine
by the force of so much mingling and watering has his strength, he hangs
amongst the lees a little bag full of Cloves, Pepper, Ginger and other
spices, with which he makes it still seem to be good.

The Butcher also steals blowing up his meat with a Cane, that so they may
seem the bigger, and that he may sell them at a deerer rate than they are
worth.

The Treasurer steals the third part, yea the half of a pension, when a
poor needy man asks him, because that he, who should receive it, being
drowned in debt or charged with some urgent necessity, denies not to give the
half, nor makes he any conscience to demand it.

The Marshall steals taking a poor harmless man, and laying him in hold
never telling him for what, and at the end of three or four days that he
keeps him in a chain, sends a Devil of those that belong to the prison, to
tell him that he is accused for making of false coin, and that there are ten
witnesses who have given evidence against him: but that for the respect of some
of his friends, he will set him at liberty some evening, if he will give him
a hundredth Crowns to give content to the witnesses, and to make them in some
sort to hold their tongues, whereby the poor wretch being sore affrighted,
sells all to the shirt on his back to be rid of so great affliction.

The Courtier steals the report of a favorite, ascribing to himself that
which another receives: because being loaded with feathers, brusling up
himself, poised and straighter than a spindle he goes to the Court, and
hearing, at the gate, or in the Court-yarde where the Pages wait, some news,
he returns to see his friends, and gives them to understand, that the King
drew him aside, speaking secretly to him two hours, and amongst other things
he told the news that he brings.

The Perfumer steals mingling the perfumes and multiplying the Musk with a
Cowes liver rofted, the Amber-grees with soap and sand, and the Sivet with some
Butter.

The Priest steals, faying four Masses instead of forty for which he has
bin paid beside the money that he receives for yearly Masses for the dead,
Answers and other duties which he never remembers.

The Religious (Monks and Friars) steal whole patrimonies, assaulting with a
grave countenance and a wry neck a poor sick man at the point of death, and
laying before him a mountain of doubts and burdens of conscience, turning and
stirring them up to pious deeds, applying to their own Monastery all that
which he was bound to restore, without ever making any scruple of conscience to
leave half a dozen of Orphans defeated of their inheritance, and the sick
man's wife to live upon alms.

The Preacher steals, picking from S. Thomas and S. Austin the best of their
works, and having robbed them to their very thoughts, felleth in the Pulpit
their doctrine as though it were his own making himself the inventor and
author of that which belongs not unto him.

The Blind man steals the half of every song that he sings, because that
having received money from him that bids him sing, and it seeming to him
that he is gone from him three or four paces, he begins again his first
tune, and asks a new that some body would make him sing another.

The Beggar steals telling a thousand lies to him that gives the alms,
saying that he has bin robbed, that he has been sick, that his father is in
prison, and counterfeiting himself lame, with which he pulls from men their
alms.

Finally, all do steal, and every handy-crafts man has his own invention and
particular subtlety to this effect: but seeing there is no rule fo general,
that has not its exception, we may exclude from the number of Thieves all
those that have a good conscience, as foote-men, Hostlers, Cooks, Sergeants,
Iailers, Under-jaillers, Panders, Bawdes, Ruffians and Whores.

CHAP. VII. Of the difference and variety of Thieves.
ALl the Thieves aforesaid are called discreet, because that every one in his
place striveth to cover theft the best he can, transforming it into Nobility
and virtue, and this manner of stealing is the safest and most secret. Of these
there is as great variety and difference, as there are several Offices in the
Commonweal, yea there are other Thieves who steal openly and without mask:
who, although they are not so many in number as the former, are notwithstanding
more, and their differences are as many as there are inventions to steal, which
being redacted into a shorter number, are divided into Robbers, Staffadours,
drawers of Wool, Grunets, Apostles Cigarets, Dacians, Mallets Cut-purses,
Satyrs, Devont, and Governors of the House.

The Robbers steal upon the high ways and solitary places with great cruelty
and tyranny, because that seldom do they rob without killing, fearing to
be discovered and followed by justice. The means and slights that they have to
coin to their purposes are diverse: for sometimes they will follow a man
fifteen days never losing the sight of him, waiting while he go out of the
town. And the better to overreach him one of the company goes disguised in
a Merchants habit, a guest of the same Inn, with a certain pack of old
cloth, or some other invention, giving to understand that he is a strange
country Merchant, and fears to travel alone. With this lie he falls into
discourse with the poor Merchant or passenger craftily getting out of him,
that which he desires to know, and learning whence he is, whether he goes,
what Merchandise he carries, or what business he goes, about, and when he is
to be gone, whereof giving notice to his companions, they lie in wait for him
at some place most convenient for their purpose. Others make themselves lurking
holes behind some bushes, grown up to the thickness of a wood, and when they
perceive a far off, or by some spy, a passenger, they lay in the middle of the
way a purse made fast, some show of money, or a little budget, that in the
mean time while he alighteth and staieth to take it up, they may come timely
enough to take from him that he carries. Others being hid in the most secret
places of the high way, send one of their company in Carriers clothes, who
seeing the Passenger approach stays to look on him, and making show to know
him and to have some letters for him, and holding him in talk, busieth him in
such fashion, that the others have the time and means to surround him. Others
lying somewhat out of the way, faigne a lamentable and pitiful voice, with
which they tie the passenger to stay, and to go see what it is, and while he
that makes this moan deceitfully declares his grief, the ambush leapeth out
that strippeth him to his shirt.

Your Staffadours are a second sort of robbers, little differing from the
former, though more courteous, and not so bloody; those go calmely into the
house of some Merchant, and not finding him there, seek for him at great
leisure, at the Exchange, in the fields, at Church, and in the middle of a
thousand people, draws near to him softly talking in his ear, making as
though he would communicate to him some business of great importance, and
showing him a Dagger, says, this Dagger demands a hundredth crowns, brought
to such a place, such a day, and if you do it not, you shall die for it. The
poor Merchant sore affrighted by such words dares not to miss, for fear to
be killed.

The Wooll-drawers take their name from the theft they practice, which is to
snatch cloakes in the night, and these have no other cunning save the occasion:
they go ever by threes or foures between nine or ten a clock at night, and if
they do find a fit opportunity they let it not slip. Most commonly they come
forth to snatch cloakes in the darkest and rainest nights, and to them places
which they see is most quiet and most out of the way, at least upon the one
side, to the end that the neighbors may not come forth (at the outcryes and
noise which the robbed are commonly wont to make) and take them. These same are
accustomed sometimes to go in Lackeyes clothes to come in to some Mask or
feast, making show to look for their Masters, and with this liberty, they
meet with a heap of cloakes, that the Gentlemen use to leave in the Hall,
being sure that no body will meddle with them they in the view of all in the
place, nimbly take up two or three on their shoulders, and get them gone with
them, saluting all those whom they meet, with Cap in hand.

The Grumets take their name from the likeness that they have to those young
boys in ships, who clime up with great nimblenesse, by the tacklings to the
top of the Mast; and the sailers call them Cats or Grumets. Those that bear
this name steal by night, climing up lightly, by a ladder of ropes, at the end
of which they have two little hooks of iron, to the end that throwing them up
to the window; it may catch hold there and they easily get up and empty the
house. These run about the City and the Country, stealing not only gold and
silver, but also Wheat, Rye, Barley, Oats, and finally all that ever they do
find, and when they have played their prize, they cunningly tie a line made
fast to the point of the little hooks, which, after they are come down, they
drawing, the two hooks are raised and the ladder falls, without ever leaving
any print or mark of the theft.

The Apostles take their name from S. Peter, because that even as he bears
the keys of Heaven, so also they ordinarily carry a pick-locke or universal
key with which they open all manner of doors, and because of too much noise,
that the lock may not rattle, and awaken the people a sleep, they put in a
plate of lead with which they break it in pieces, so that they who lie
nearest can perceive nothing.

Those whom they call Cigarets, have for their particular office to haunt
Churches feasts and public assemblies, at which they cut off the half of a
cloak, cassock sleeves, half a gown, the quarter of a jumpe and finally
whatsoever they find, for of all these they make money.

The Devout are Church-theeves, because there are no Easters, Pardons, nor
Jubilee which they visit not: they are continually on their knees in the
Monasteries, -- having their beads in their hands, to cloak their knavery,
waiting their time, either under some Altar, or behind some table, on the eeve
of some solemn feast, to the end that they may get out by night. -- and to
spoil the image of all the ornaments about them. In this sort of theft they do
moreover adventure into the Monasteries of the Religious as well as into other
Churches, because that as they are charitable, and fear to be accounted
disorderly, they seldom put a thief into the hands of justice, and for all
the mischief that he commits a man gets out of their hands, chastised with
one only discipline all about the Cloisters by a procession of Monks who
charge him, after his amendment, to fear God.

The Satyrs are men living wild in the fields, that keep their holds and
dwelling in the Country and forsaken places, stealing horses, kine, sheep and
all kind of cattle which by occasion come in their walk.

The Dacians are cruel, merciless people, held in our commonweals in less
account than the other thieves: these steal children of three or four years
old, and breaking their arms and legs lame and disfigure them, that they may
afterward sell them to Beggars, Blind folks and other vagabonds.

The Overseers of the house have this name from the particular care that they
have to look out for provision of bread, meat, and other victuals to feed
their companions, and as there is not any thing in the world that a man loves
better than to eat and drink, the inventions and means that thieves have,
are so several and so exquisite that it is impossible to tell them all. Some
are accustomed three or four to meet in the twilight at night and taking a
bottle of five or six pottles with a fourth part of water in it, they go to a
Tavern bidding them fill the bottle with the wine in the house, and having
agreed for the price, the poor Vintner begins to measure while it be almost
full, then they make show of a desire to taste it, if it be the wine that they
bought at the beginning, and scarcely have they tasted it when bending their
brows, casting up their eyes and wrying their nose they cry out at the
wretched Vintner, saying that he is a thief and a deceiver, who has changed
them their wine. The poor fellow seeing that his oaths and curses avail
nothing, is content to take his wine again and to take out the bottle the
measures that he had put in, by which means they have a fourth part left so
well seasoned that it may pass for wine of six pence a quart. Other whiles
they go five or six in company to the Tavern with two great pots so like
the one to the other, that very hardly can there any difference be perceived
between them; they carry the one empty and the other full of water under his
cloak, and biddes them fill the empty one with the best wine that they have,
never taking care for the price, and it being full, the one of them takes it
under his cloak, and the other stays reckoning with the Vintner, holding his
purse in his hand and making show to pay him: being upon these terms, the
others come in, and ask alowd whether or no they shall suppe there, which the
Vintner seeing, allured presently by the gain that he shall make if they
suppe at his house, persuades them to stay, and they take his counsel
determining to go to the Cooks to buy some joint for supper, and to call
back the rest of their comerads, leaving the pot full of water to the Vintner,
that he may keep it in the mean while till they come back, with which he
remains contented and well assured, thinking hith himself, that though they
never return, the pot notwithstanding shall remain with him for his gains.

As for the provision of flesh, poulterie and other things they have a thousand
inventions, whereof I will tell you one only which happened long ago to one of
my copsemates. It was, if I rightly remember, on a holy Saturdayes market, in
which they sold great store of Hens, Partridges, Rabbets, Pullets and other
things against the feastivall day. Three of the company went out to seek for
provision, dividing themselves every one to his own walk, the two met with a
Countrey-Clown loaded with Capons and Partridges, which were in the market; one
of them drew near to buy up all that he had, and cheapning a quarter of an
hour with the Clown, agreed to give him ten Nobles for all his ware, giving
it to his fellow to carry it home, and he stayed behind with his hand in his
pocket, making as if he would pay him. He searches both the sides, of his
hose, drawing out first a great purse, next a little one, afterward a
hand-kercher tied in knots with some papers folded up, with which he enchanted
the Clown, and gave his companion time and leisure enough to get him out of
sight, and at last not finding in all his budgets the whole sum, he bids the
Clown follow him and he should pay him. The Clown was content, and begins
to follow him with diligence, and almost on the trot, because that as my
Companion had an intention, to get out of sight crossing the streets and lanes
he walked a-pace with posting speed. But seeing himself so closely followed
by the Clown he went into the Cloister of the Austin Friars, where there were
some Friars confessing folks, and having made a devout prayer, he turned
himself toward the Clown, saying to him, My friend, the provision that you
have sold me is for this House, and that Father, who is there a confessing is
the Proctour, I will go tell him that he must pay you; and speaking thus, he
comes to one of the Confessors with the Clown after him, and turning a little
aside he put six pence into his hand, and whispers him in the ear saying,
Father, this country man is one of my acquaintance, and comes hither to be
confessed, he lives six miles hence, and he must of necessity go back to his
house this evening, I beseech you to do me the favor to confess him out of
hand and let him go. The good Father obliged by the alms given aforehand,
promised him, that when he had ended the penitents confession whom he had at
his feet, he should dispatch him presently. With this answer, he called to
the Clown, and said to him, friend, the Father will dispatch you by and by,
when he has made an end of confessing this man, to which the Father added go;
not hence, I will give you content presently. With these words my companion
parted from them, and the Countryman staid, reckoning on his fingers the money
that he should lay out on shoes, hat and other trifles which he minded to
buy as well for himself, as for his family out of his Poultry money. The
penitent makes an end of his confession, and the father makes a sign to the
Clown to draw near; the Clown was not in so trembling a perplexity, with so
great have as those who come to confession, which the good father was much
offended at, it seeming to him that he had little devotion and less humility
to be confessed. The Clown stood bolt upright, looking heedfully upon the
Confessor, to see if he should put his hand in his pocket, and the Confessor
looked upon the Clown in like manner, astonished to see him stand with so little
devotion. Notwithstanding excusing him because of simplicity which is
ordinary to these Country people, he biddes him, kneel. The Clown at the
beginning made some resistance, thinking it to be an extraordinary ceremony
for one to kneel to receive money, nevertheless at last he did it though
grumbling. The father bids him make the sign of the Cross, and say his
confession, whereat the Clown lost all patience, believing the Confessor to be
out of his wits, and standing up begins to mumble within his teeth and to
swear with great obstinacy. This assured the Confessor that the Clown was
possessed with a Devil, and having made the sign of the Cross begins to
conjure him, putting S. Austins girdle about his head, and saying some devout
prayers, with which the Clown went out of his wits, taking the good Father by
the surplis and casting him down upon the ground, demanding aloud money for his
poultry. The father supposing that he had all the fiends of Hell together upon
him, begins to say, the Letanie with a weak and affrighted voice, and to
commend himself to all the Saints in the Almanacke, praying them to aid him.
At the clamor and noise, the whole Convent began to be troubled, all the
Monks coming out in procession with the Cross and the Candlestickes, casting
holy water on every side, and believing that there was a Legion of Devils in
the Church. They came thither where the Confessor was at debate with the
Clown, who still was asking money, for his Poultry, and the Prior having asked
the Confessor concerning this accident and having also heard the Clownes
reason, the justice of them both was discovered with my Companions wicked
deed. In the endsome devout persons who were in the Church, paid the Clown his
moneys who went back contented unto his house.

CHAP. VIII. The Thief continues the differences among Thieves with three
disgraces that befell him.
THe Cut-purses are the commonest Thieves of our Commonweal, who have an
endless deal of means and ways to steal. All their study consists in
thrusting their hand in the pocket of whom they approach, and cunningly to draw
his Purse from him (he not perceiving it) with all that he has in it. These
haunt the Churches, Sermons, Faires, Assemblies and public meetings, that
they may work their feate in the throng, he that takes the purse gives it
presently to another that is by him, that if he should be taken with his hand
in his pocket, he might prove them liars and clear himself before all the
world.

I will tell you a witty trick which I once plotted, though it fell out but
badly by me, seeing that the heedfulnesse, with which you hearken to me, makes
me know that you are not weary to hear me. The last year there came to
London a Merchant of Italy, rich, courteous and of good carriage, who being in
rouled by our spies I took the charge upon me to deal with him. I rose that
day betimes in the morning, lest I should lose the occasion, and after I had
dogged him through many streets, Lanes and Churches (for he was verily a good
Christian) we came to a crowd of Merchants wont to be kept in the Exchange
about eleven a clock, seeing him alone, I came to him, talking to him of a
bargain very profitable and certain, which made him open his eyes, and listen
heedfully to my reasons. Then seeing him thus fitted to my inventions, I winded
him gently into a Maze of dissiculties, in such sort, that I never ceast to
declare to him the business, nor he to learn the circumstances. My Camerade
then drew near making show as if he knew me not; and to be desirous to
interpret the traffic for him which I had propounded, whereupon the Merchant
began to take no more heed to me, and I to think evermore of him. I put
secretly my fingers in his pocket to try the depth and breadth thereof, and
perceived that it and its Masters little care gave me free liberty to put in
all my hand. I did so and at the first essay, I drew his purse, at the second a
silver Watch, which he carried tied to a small gold-chaine, with which I might
have bin content if stealing could be limited. I was resolved to try the third
time, to see if I could draw thence a Holland hankercher, which before he had
showed edged with curious bonelace, but I could not be so nimble to draw it,
nor my Companion to hold him in talk, but he felt me, and running to save his
pocket with his hand he could not miss but meet with mine, wherewith being
vexed and suspicious, he presently knew that he had lost his purse and his
Watch, and not finding them he took me by the neck, crying A thief A thief.
I foreseeing the evil that might befall me (for Astrology is very necessary
for a Thief) had given the purse and Watch from underneath my cloak to my
companion, as soon as ever I had drawn it, who was but only two steps from
me: Wherefore with the assurance that I had, that he would find about me that
which he sought, I scorned all he said, giving him the lie a thousand times.
The Merchant holding me fast by the collar, with a loud voice calling for his
purse, in such sort that he made all upon the place to gather together. But my
Camerade seeing that my honor run a great hazard, if the business should be
proved amongst so many people, secretly calls a crier who was at a corner of
the place, whom he made cry, If any one had lost a purse and a silver Watch,
that he should come to him, and give true tokens thereof, he would restore them,
and withal departed the place. Hardly was the sound of the first cry heard but
my good Italian let me go, entreating me with great humility to forgive him
the rash judgment conceived of me, which I did at the request of the company,
and presently got me out of sight. He went as nimble as a Roe to seek for the
crier, and having found him he gave the true tokens of his loss, but he that
had bid him do it could not be found any more; and so I escaped this dangerous
accident.

The Duendes a Larins so called for the likeness that they have with the
spirits of this name, begin to walk through the town in the evening, and
finding some door open, they enter softly, hiding themselves in the Cellar, in
the stable, or in some other dark secret place, to the end they may throw out
at windows all that is in the house, when those within are fast a-sleepe. I
adventured once to play such a pranke, and turn my self in an Angel of
darkness, but I was deceived. It fell out then, that one night on the Eeve of
a high holy day I went to seek my fortune, my mishap made me meet with a
door half open, into which thrusting my head I saw that all my body might
enter, I went up a pair of stairs to a great Chamber well furnished and
fitted, and thinking that it was a safe course for me to hide my self under a
bed, while these of the house were gone to rest, I did so. After four hours
that I had laien all along on the flower, I heard a noise of folks, coming up
suddenly into the Chamber, you need not ask if I was heedfull to see who they
were, and by and by with the light of a Candle I saw the feet of two footmen
and one maid laying the cloth with great diligence, and were making of a fire,
because the Master of the house was to suppe there. The table furnished with
sundry dishes of meat, four or five sat down, besides the children that
were in the house. I was then so affrighted and confounded, that I think
verily if the noise of their voices and the great number of children had not
hindered them, they might have heard plainly the beating of my joints, because
my buttockes beat so hard one against the other, that I think the noise might
have bin heard half a mile off. By mischance there was a little dog, that
run about gnawing the bones that fell from the table, and one of the children
having thrown him a bone, a Cat that watch't under the table was more nimble to
catch it with which she run away to hide her under the bed, the dog grinning
and pressing to take the bone from her, but the Cat could so well use her
claws and defend her prize, that having given the Dog on the nose two or three
blows with her paw, there began so great a skirmish, and there was such a
hurly burly between them, that one of the waiters took a great fire-shouell
that was in the Chimney and cast it so furiously under the bed, that if, as it
gave me over the nose with the broad side, it had lighted on me with the end,
it had killed me outright. The blow was so great, that I was above half an
hour ere I could come to my self, but it made the Cat come out like a thunder
from under the bed, and the Dog stayed grinning and barking with such a fury
that neither fawning nor threatening of mine could quiet him, whereat the waiters
at table were so vexed that they began to chase him out, throwing firebrarnds at
him, which made him come out from under the bed, and leave me there in the
pangs of death. The Dogs noise was done, and there began another in my guts,
so violent, that to stay the sudden rumbling of a flux in my belly, which the
apprehension and fear had moved I was constrained to sneeze thrice, and with
the force of my sneezing to wrong my breeches by the liberty of that unjust
violence. These two noises met together, and making one of two, increast so
much the force, that it made all at table rise, and take off the Candles, to
see what was this novelty. They pulled me out, but I could give no reason that
could be heard, nor humble suing that could be admitted, so I remained subject
to the rigor of their vengeance, they stripped me stark naked and binding me
hand and foot, they began to scorch me with a lighted Torch not without loud
laughing, and after they had satisfied their furious passion, they put me in
the hands of Justice, out of whose power I escaped signed and sealed.

The Mallettes are a sort of thieves who hazard themselves upon great perils
and inconveniences, for they are made up in a bale, basket or dry fat, faining
that it is certain Merchandise sent over, which they make some one or other of
their friends in Merchants apparel carry from one house to another, that when
night comes and every one being fast a sleep, he cutteth the cloth with a
knife, he breaks forth to empty the house. I was one of those when the
fourth disgrace befell me, because a friend of mine having counterfeited to
have four bales to be laid by night in a rich goldsmithes house, counseled me
to be pack't up in one of them, covering the sides thereof with cloth and webs
of fustian. The goldsmith made no difficulty to receive them, for so much as he
had not them in keeping but a little while, and that he thought, if the owner
in the mean time should happen to die, some one of them might fall to his
share, so he made them to be laid in his backe-shop, whereby I was well assured
to work my feate. I waited while night with such desires as that plot
deserved, which notwithstanding fell out to my disgrace; for three or four
prentises meeting that night in the house, of intention to tarry there upon
occasion of the bales, resolving to lay them together, and lie upon them. After
supper, every one withdrew himself. The prentises fitting the unhappy bed, or
to say rather, the bale, in which I was in the middle of the others, on which
they began to sleep so soundly, that one might have drawn them a mile and
never awakened them. I being impatient of the exceeding great weight that I
felt, not daring to stir my self more then I had bin dead; and on the other
part the little breath that I had, being choked, I began to stir my self a
little, and seeing the unmovable weight of that which was on me; I certainly
believed that they had laid a bale upon me; with which imagination, and the
extreme anguish that I suffered, I drew a sharp knife, and thrusting it up, I
made a great hole in the tillet of the bale, and a huge deep wound in the
buttocks of him that lay upon me. He rose like a thunder raising his voice to
the heavens, calling for neighbors help and the Justices aid, thinking that
some one of his companions would have killed him. The confused noise of all the
neighbors, and the alarm was so great, that ere the Master of the house had
lighted a candle, the Justice beating open the door came in, and find the
poor wounded fellow in his shirt bleed and faint, and the other vexed and
confounded, takes the deposition of him that was wounded never taking notice of
the bale, nor coming neereit, thinking that it was not needful to know the
place where he was hurt. But the goldsmith, who attentively hearkened to the
Justice, and beheld the circumstances of the fact, seeing the poore-hurt fellow
all bloody, supposed that the bales and the cloth in them might be bloody and
spoiled and he bound to pay them, and with this unquietness he came near to
look on the bale, and seeing it cut thrust in his fingers to try if nothing
was spoiled, and he mist not to find my bearde. I could very well have bitten
him if I had thought it had bin the best of my play, but I lay quiet, thinking
that he would never guess what it was. He held the torch nigher to the hole,
and stooping to see that he had touched, the wax began to melt and drop upon
my face, which forced me to remove a little, and him to mar all, crying
aloud. Thieves, Thieves. The Judge came near, who was yet making one write the
deposition of the hurt man, and opening the bale, they found one within it.
They carried me to prison, whence I came out at the seventh day after at a
carts tail well accompanied, beside other favors that they did me, whereof
the greatest was to condemn me to the galleys.

All the aforesaid Thieves have ordinarily their spies at Exchanges, Faires and
common Markets, viewing all that go and come, and learning what money they
carry, how much, and in what sort, where they leave it, and in what hands, to
give notice thereof to the company. And herein there is such diligence, and so
great care, that there comes not any stranger to the town, but in a quarter
of an hour after he is registered in our book with all his qualities: to wit,
whence he comes whither he goes, and what is his traffic: and if there be
any negligence herein, the spies that have these places of the City in their
charge, lose the profit and gain that should come to them that day, out of the
common purse, beside a shameful reproof which our Captain gives them in
presence of all the other Thieves. (*)

CHAP. IX. Wherein the Thief relates his witty diligence to free himself
out of the Galleys of Marseiles.
YOu may think, I had no great maw to that journey, which these Gentlemen
commanded me toward Marseils, since there could be no pleasure in that which is
done upon constraint. Nevertheless I obeyed with great resolution, hoping that
fortune would offer some good occasion to set me at liberty: so all my study
and care was only to find out the means to attain to this end. And having
tried many which came to no effect, he practiced one which might have happened
well, if fortune had bin content with my past troubles, and had not made me
fall any more in the try all thereof. The invention then was on this wise. The
Captain of the Gallie, where I was slave, being exceedingly in love with a
Lady of good rank, and she in no wise loving him, he tried all means (though
impossible) to bring her to his bow, and as is usual with Lovers to be the
more inflamed when they find their beloved hard to be won, the Ladies extreme
coldness was burning coals to the Captain, in such sort that he never
enjoyed rest but when he was talking of his love. I having got knowledge by the
report of a slave that went daily to my Masters house, there to carry water,
wood, and other necessaries, determined to try my fortune, and not lose the
occasion. So I spoke him kindly, promising him that if he would faithfully aid
me, that he might hope assuredly for his liberty, whereof I would as well make
him certain as of mine own. The good Antony, (for so the slave was called,)
put so much trust in my words, hearing me speak of liberty which I had
promised him, that waited but for the hour to be employed in that which I did
entreat him, and he thought there was not time enough; hoping with great
impatie^ce, that I should declare to him that, which he was to do for me: who
seeing him so well minded on my behalf, and otherwise silly, faithful and
true, I showed him my resolution, recommending to him secrecy, and wisdom
above all things. I said thus unto him, My friend Antony, know that it is long
since I have desired to impart a secret to thee, which I will tell thee of: but
as all things require wisdom, patience, and the occasion, I have not done
till now; because I thought it not fitting till now to do it: as also, because
not being so satisfied (as I am this present) of thy goodness, feeing, as the
Proverb says, one should eat a bushel of salt with his friend ere he trust
him. Thou know well our Masters love with this Lady that dwells by the
great Church, and how much he is out of kelter for her, yet never having
received one favor of her, after so long time spent in her service, and so
many Ducats spent in vain for love of her. Now if I should find a mean and
assured invention, to make him without the spending of one shilling, or
troubling her doors enjoy his pleasure, what reckoning would the Captain make
of this service, and what reward would he give him who should bestow on him
that which he so earnestly desires? Verily (answered Antonie) I hold for
certain that he would turn fool at his contentment, and not only would he
give thee thy liberty, but also to all those for whom thou shall ask. Go to
friend, said I, if thou have any particular acquaintance with some one of them
who are most familiar and best liked in the Captains house, thou must acquaint
him with this business, that he may tell him, and assure him that I will
doubtless do that I promise, and I counsel thee that it be not delayed. The
content which Antony received was so great, that without bidding me farewell,
nor answering me one word, he went from me like a lightning, entreating a
soldier of the Gallie, that he would bring him into the Captains house, to
talk with him of a matter of great importance. He was there, and could give
order for my business, that half an hour after, the Governor of the house
came to the Master of the Gallie, charging him to send me with a soldier to
the Captain, because he would see me. The quick effect which Antonies
diligence wrought, gave me extreme great contentment, and made me hope that so
good a beginning would bring my designs to a happy end. Finally, I was at my
Captains house, tattard, torn, and naked, and with a great chain tied to my
foot. He coming to meet me, as if I had bin a man of great rank, and laying
his hand upon my shaven head, began to talk kindly to me, asking me what
countryman I was, what was my name, and why I was condemned to the Galleys.
And I having answered him in a dissembling manner, and lying the best I could,
he drew me aside, to a corner of the Chamber, asking if that which Antony had
promised him, was certain, Sir, answered I him, I know not what he has said,
nor what promise he has made, yet I will tell you, that if he has spoken
according to that which I told him, all is true, without failing one tittle.
Sir, I told him, that if you would promise to release me out of this distress
which I endure, and to give me my liberty freely and wholly, I should make you
enjoy the love which you desire with so great passion and which so torments
you, I promise you moreover and assure you, that making this condition with
you, if I perform not my promise you shall my head cut off, or throw me into
the sea. Thou bindest thy self greatly (said he with a smiling countenance,
already desirous to see the effect of my promise) but if thou art a man of so
great knowledge and skill, that thou can do this for me, this Gallie wherein
thou art shall be thy fortune, for I shall not only be content to give thee
thy liberty but I will make thee one of my household servants, and the best
respected of them all. But tell me, after what manner can thou do it? Sir,
you shall know (said I) that I was bred with a great Astrologer, who under
pretense to cast Horoscops and Nativities dissembled his Magic with so great
craft, that there was not any one in the world that suspected him. He made use
of me in some of magical experiences, supposing because I was young and of a
dull wit I would understand nothing of the secrets of his Art. But he was
deceived there, because though I seemed foolish and ignorant, yet I had an eye
on all his trials, and I studied them so well, that many love secrets stuck
in my memory, amongst which I have one most certain and approved, with which
if a woman were harder then the Adamant, I will make her softer then the wax.
In such sort that the secret which I propound to you is Magical, not natural,
and it is requisite to have some hairs of the party beloved, to put it in
execution; with which, and with some Ceremonies that must be performed, the
Gentlewomans heart will be so set on fire, that she shall take no rest, but
when she is with or thinks of her beloved. Notwithstanding this must be done
in the night, at the waxing of the Moon, and in the fields, there being but
only three in the company, and these stout and resolute, that cannot be
dismayed nor frighted, fall out what may, or whatsoever they see. If, says the
Captain, that to further the business there needs no other thing but a good
heart, we shall easily have our desire, for though all Hell should stand before
me, it were not able to make me give back so much as one step, nor once to
change my color, or countenance: and for the hairs that thou have mentioned,
I will give thee as much as thou shall desire. I know Sir, (answered I) by your
face that your natural inclination is very fit for Magic, and if you had
studied it, you would work wonders by it. So now seeing the time favors us,
and that you have the Ladies hair, let us not suffer this waxing of the Moon
to pass with bringing our business to pass. You may go out on horseback,
and he also that shall accompany you, as for me, though ill bestead with the
weight of this chain, I will not forbear to go a foot. All shall be in
readiness (says the Captain) against thursday night, and since experience
has made thee Master in this Art, prepare thee well and study that which thou
ought to do, to the end that our design may not be lost by negligence or
little care; and for the present get thee back to the Gallie; for I will send
to thee by the governor of my house who shall be the third of our company, a
faithful man, courageous and valiant, and if there need any thing to this
purpose, thou may in the mean time provide thee, for I will take order that
all be paid that thou shall buy. With this good answer I parted from my Master
more joyful and merry then the flourishing Spring seeing my business thrive
so well at so good a pass, and being returned to the Gallie I found my good
Antony, who waited for me with great impatience to know what I had bargained
with the Captain, and upon what terms my affairs stood, to whom I related
all that we had agreed upon, and the kindness that he received me withal in
accepting my promise, assuring him that when I was in favor, the next thing I
asked should be his liberty. Hardly had I begun my discourse, but I perceived
the Governor of the Captains house entering the Gallie, his visage inflamed,
his eyes staring and dansing, and he running, as he had quickesilver in his
heels, asked where I was, and having perceived me, and drawn me aside, he
said to me, I am Governor of the house to the Captain of this Gallie, who
has commanded me to come hither, and to know of thee all that shall be
necessary for the business that you talked of, dispose and appoint at thy
pleasure, for I have money for all, and because that I may offer thee something
in my own behalf, take this crown of gold which I give thee as a token of that
friendship which shall be between us, and I assure thee that thou shall have a
good friend of me at the Captains hands. But as reason would thou must answer
me with mutual acknowledgment, in doing some thing for me. You shall bind me
much Sir, (I answered him then very humbly,) having disparaged your self so
much in regard of him, who is so far unequal: consider in what my weakness
and my poverty can serve you, for I will perform it with all my soul. I will
not, says the Governor, that thou hazard thy soul, because it is Gods, but I
would feign entreat thee, that with thy secrets and thy skill thou would
help me to purchase the favor of a Gentlewoman of good rank whom I have
loved now these five years, and because I am of somewhat a meaner condition
then she there is no mean to make her hear me, and if it were possible to
give two blows with one stone it would be be an extreme great contentment to
me, and thou should bind me to thee, not only as a friend, but as a slave.
Now the Moon is waxing, and the time very fit, so that I think there is no
need to make any more ceremonies for my mistress than for the Captains, and
if you must have of her hair, see here are some, for it is above a year that
I carried them about me, keeping them as relics. And drawing a paper out of
his pocket put one of her locks into my hand. I who desired no other thing but
that the third of our company should be also so besotted, that the business
might fall out well, I was in a manner beside my self with contentment, which
I could not hide nor dissemble without showing some signs in my countenance of
being troubled, by which he took occasion to ask me what it was that troubled
me. To whom I answered, Sir, I fear that if the Captain should know that I
do any thing for you he would be vexed with me, and I should lose this good
opportunity in which lies no less then my liberty; this consideration is
that which troubles me, not want of desire to serve you. And who will tell it
him, says he then? The Devil, answered I, thatnever sleeps, but happen what
may, I am resolved to serve you, though I should lose the Captains goodwill,
seeing it is the first thing that you have commanded me. As for that which
concerns the Captains business and yours, you must buy a new sack, a small
cord, and another big one of Hemp, four else long, a new knife, a chain
and a brush, and these you shall buy without making any price, that is to say,
that you shall give for them whatsoever the Merchant shall ask without beating
of the price: and assure your self, that within a seven-night, you shall enjoy
your love with great liberty. Thou give me greater content with this answer,
says the Governor of the house, than if the King had given me a pension of a
thousand crowns a year, do that which thou promisest, and thou shall see
what I will do for thee. And embracing me kindly he went away full of hope and
joy, leaving me the most contented man of the world, seeing that if in this
prison I had sought an occason which might have fallen out better for my ease,
it had bin impossible for me to find it, for as well my Captain as the
Governor of the house were so blinded besotted and fooled, that if I should
have called the day night they would have believed it. On the contrary my
heart throb'd a thousand ways, considering into what a maze I should thrust my
self, if the business succeeded not, nevertheless I made a virtue of
necessity, using that remedy which is ordinary with these that are in any
extremity, which is bold nesse and resolution. With this good courage I waited
for the Thursday, which came more joy full and fairer then the Spring, though
it was slow, because of the desire they had to enjoy their Mistresses, and mine
to get out of the harbor by the cheating tricks that I put upon them, it
seemed to us the longest day of all the year. Every time the clock struck,
they despaired, fearing to miss the telling of the hours, as these do who
hope for a thing that they earnestly desire; and after this care they were in
anextacie considering what they would do in the possession of their loves, as
if they had already verily past the night and overcome the difficulty. This
doubting and hammering of theirs served me well to my purpose, that they might
not perceive the gulleries that I put upon them, and the smoke that I sold
them. Whereby I find that those who paint Love blind, have great good reason
for them, because that, if they not bin so, they would have perceived all my
promises to be nothing but wind, and that the means which I propounded to
them were for no other end but to gull. them. *

CHAP. X. In which he proceeds to relate his invention, begun with some
discourses of Love, between the Governor of the house and this Gallieslave.
THenight being come which be a day for me, inlightning the heaven with
infinite numbers of stars so bright and resplendent, that they dazeled the
light of the day, and filled my soul with joy: when my honest Governor enters
the Gallie, brave, Gallant and clothed with the best apparel that he had,
because that amongst other directions that I had given as well to him as to his
Master, the chief was that they should be fine and brave, as being a thing
most requisite and necessary for Magic skill; and having saluted me with
close embracements he said to me, friend, that thou may know that I can do
what I will at the Captains hands, and that I want not goodwill to help thee,
thou shall know that through my entreaty he gives thee leave to leave off thy
chain for this night, and it may be, for ever, that thou may walk with
greater liberty, and perform thy business and what is necessary for it, and
though the Captain made some difficulty, I dealt so earnestly that I obtained
this favor in earnest of that which I desire to do for thee. I who then was
more knavish and more dissembled then soolish, fellinto some suspicion
imagining that this liberality offered ere it was desired, was fained, and but
only to try me, wherefore I answered him, Sir I thank you for the care you have
had of me obtaining of my Master that he will take off my chain, a favor
which I would kindly accept, if it were possible, but it is not, because I must
not change the estate that I am in, nor one point of that which is of my
estate; it being necessary that he, who shall make this trial, must make in
the same estate and apparel that he is accustomed to wear: and so I may not
go but in mine own clothes and with the chain because otherwise we shall do
nothing. The Governor was not a little contented with my answer, being assured
that there was in me no kind of deceit nor malice, but the pure and simple
truth, and pitying me believed assuredly, that there was more passion in my
words then Justice, he embraced me the second time saying, friend, God who is
wont to give the salve according to the wound, has brought thee to this
Gallie, that by it thou might come to the knowledge of my Master, and enjoy
the special favors which thou should promise to thy self from his
liberality, if the business fall out well. How well? answered I him, has the
Captain any suspicion that I would deceive him? No by the world answered the
Governor, seeing that though thou would do it, thou could not: but it is
the great desire that we both have to soften the hardness of these she-Tygers,
and to turn them to our love, that makes us think that impossible which is
easy for thee to do, and this is usual amongst Lovers. I never was one,
(answered I, and though I should be more in love then was Narcissus, I should
never persuade my self that day were night, that oxen fly, and other
fantastical imaginations, that haunt Lovers, which rather may be called
follies and idle thoughts then love-passions. It well appears that his darts
have not struck thee, says the Governor, for if thou had tried them, thou
would not have spoken with so great freedom and so little trouble. Know
friend, that Physicians rank this disease amongst Melancholic passions, into
which the diseased falls, believing that which is not, and framing a thousand
fantasies and visions which have no other ground but their perverse and
corrupt imagination, which works the same effect in Lovers, giving them an
impression of jealouse, to an other of disdain, to an other of favor, making
a mountain of nothing, all which is bred of a burning desire which they have
to possess that which they love. But to be willing to persuade this unto him
who has not tried it, is to desire to draw water with a sive, and to weigh the
earth. I am no Doctor, Master Governor, I answered him, nor yet Batcehler,
because being left young, friendlesse and poor, I lived also without knowledge,
having only four words of Latin. Nevertheless by the use of reason well
known of all sciences, I understood the small reason that Lovers have to be so
often troubled upon so small occasion as they are troubled, because of necessity
their affections tend to two points, to wit, that the woman must be good or
evil faithful or disloyal. If she be good, faithful and answerable to your
affection in mutual love, it is a great folly to be jealous over her: if she
be unfaithful and known for such a one, there needs no other counsel, but not
to trust her nor love her. Whence may be concluded that all the accidents to
which you say lovers are subject, are the overflowings of folly, and wants of
wit, it being a notable extravagancie to love one that hates, this being
supposed that hatred cannot be the subject of love, nor love of hatred, seeing
we ordinarily love them that bind us thereto by their love. If it went by
experience, says the Governor thou will lose thy cause, because usually they
hate these that love them best, taking the sight of a dying man for the
occasion of their hate, and it is a voice in them now a days turned into a
nature, to shun those that follow them, and to abhor those who adore them, as
the Captain and I have hitherto made a long and unhappy trial. Think not so
Master Governor, I answered, that you have made a good conclusion; for if you
will have the patience to hear me, I will make you see clearly in what your
arguments fail, and know that love cease not to love nor hatred to hate,
there being no law of nature, and he that fostered you in this philosophy, has
fed you with bad milk, because that Love alone not being accompanied with
other circumstances, which are to be proportionable and reasonable is not all
the motive of an other love. That Princess of noble blood should be tied to
love a Porter, that dies for her, only because he adoreth her. I deny your
proposition, she is no wise bound to do it, nor her well to affect him, the
object that might move her not being in him. As a Prince hates to the death a
poor damsel, because she depiseth him, being unwilling to give consent to his
wanton love, whence it may be gathered that neither the Porters love shall in
any case tie the Princess will, nor Damsels scorn shall breed hatred in the
Princes mind. Seeing that in love is found the good, the profit and pleasure
which are the hooks with which the will is taken, then it is the motive of
love, and the Lady shall not be able to hate him, who loves her upon these
conditions, but therein being unequalitie and dishonor, she may do it. You
shall more clearly perceive this in hatred, because when a man dies for a
Gentlewoman, and she hates him exceedingly, this hate is not that which
inflames his love, but the account she makes of her honor and the fear of
shame if she should consent to the pleasure of him that loves her, which
consideration makes her cool and backward and him extremely passionate.
Whence it is concluded, that the woman offends not in hating him that
worships her, nor any man ought to hate such a woman that disdaineth him. This
thy Philosophy, my friend, answered the Governor, is framed of moewords than
learning, and I could refute it by plain reasons, if time did afford us
leisure, but the hour is already come, and the Captain will look for us,
only I would entreat thee to be mindful of me as a friend, making thy
enchantment of equal power with the cruelty of the Gentlewoman of whom I have
spoken to thee. Away with this care, Sir, answered I, for I will do it in such
sort, that though your Mistress were harder-hearted and more frozen then the
Alps, she should be turned into a Mountain of fire, hotter then Mount Aetna
of Sicile. I believe so, said the Governor, but I cannot choose but wonder why
thou being so cunning a fellow did not enchant the Judge to be in love with
thee and not have condemned thee to the Galleys. If this secret were good for a
man, said I, a hundred years a go I had bin a Duke or a Governor of some
Province, if I had not bin a Monarch. It is not good but for women, because he
that first found it out, gave it this virtue only. That alone suffices me,
says the Governor, if with it I can soften that adamant, but with the hope
that thou have given me, I hold the victory as certain, and I hinder my self
that I do not see to morrow already. With these words we came to the other
side of the harbor where my kind Captain waited for us with great impatience
and unquietness, by whom I was very well received, and he asking me why the
Govern our had not taken off my chain, as he had charged him, I answered him
the same things, which I had before answered the Governor, wherewith he was
exceeding well contented. They leapt both on horse back, and I followed them at
leisure, because of the weight of my chain, and being about a league from
Marselles we arrived at the place appointed. They lighted down, and tying their
horses at a tree, we with drew our selves to gether to the place where our
trial was to be made, and taking them with some necessary ceremonies, and
telling them what they should say, I made a Circle on the ground whispering I
cannot tell what strange and uncouth words, and turning my self often,
sometimes to wards the East, sometimes to the West, with some ceremonies so
unusual, that they made the Captain and his Governor of the house both of
them astonished and fearful. At half an hours end after that I had gone
turning about like a fool, I made the Captain go within it, charging him to
say after me, who was so obedient and so forward to all that I would have him,
that if I had then cut off his mustaches, he would have believed that it was
needful for the enchantment. I made him strip himself, teaching him to say
certain words to every parcel of his clothes which he put off, which he
pronounced so exactly that he lost not one syllable, believing that if he had
missed in one jote he should have marred all this business, With this
ceremony I stripped him to his shirt, he never making any show of fear nor
suspicion, being assured that he was safe enough by the presence of the
Governor, who was much astonished to see them finished, it seeming to him that
there should neither be time enough nor enchantment sufficient for himself.
Pity so moved my heart that I could not take off his shirt, having compassion
of his innocence, because it was then the coldest time of all the winter, and
either through fear or cold, such a vehement quivering and shaking of all his
joints took him, with such a chattering of his teeth, that the noise thereof
might have bin heard half a mile from the place. I comforted and encouraged
him, with the shortness and quick dispatch of the enchantment, and the assured
possession of his love, injoyning him in the mean time to be silent, and
telling him that if he spoke but one word, we should be presently in less then
the twinkling of an eye all of us in Barbary. He then being in this plight,
that is to to say, naked in his shirt, I gave him a knife in his hand,
commanding him to make some stabs toward the four quarters of the world, at
every one uttering some words, and for the conclusion I made him go into the
sack. That which I then saw with mine eyes was a wonder and a miracle of God,
because I always imagined, that as he was going into the sack he should
suspect something, and that all mine invention should come to nothing: but a
little lamb is not more obedient normore mild than he was, because that
without any resistance or show of mistrust, he went in, being still assured by
the presence of his Governor, and the ignorance he had of his loves; Which was
good for me; for if he had known that the Governor was to be incha^ted also,
he had never gone into the sack. Finally having packed up the poor Captain, I
laid him along upon the ground with his belly upwards, tying the sacks mouth
with a cord that was by me, and speaking still to the Governor to encourage
him, and wishing him to have patience a quarter of an hour the enchantment was
to last. So having left him in this taking, the Governor and I went aside
about a stones cast who said to me in an exceeding great pelting chafe, I will
lay a wager that thou have forgotten something of my business, for here I see
neither sack nor knife for me, as for the Captain. Here is no need of a
sack, said I, because your Magical experiences are made stronger or weaker,
according to the greater or lesser cruelty that Gentlewomen have: and the
Captains being exceeding disdainful, I have made the enchantment of a sack
for her which is the strongest of all. Oh! brother, says the Governor, what is
this that thou have done? mine is hardhearted, disdainful a Tiger and a
Lioness: for the Captains, though she loves him not, notwithstanding shows
him some favor, and if it goes by disdain, we need a hundred sackes, not one
only what shall we do? Be quiet Master Governor, said I then seeing him
afflicted, for there is a remedy for all but death; for that which is not in
one thread shall be in a hundred. I will make with the hairs and the cords a
hanke which shall have no less force then the Captains sack, and for as much
as your Mistress is so cruel as you say, I will add thereto a small matter
which shall make her, that she shall never be able to take rest while she see
you. It is that which I look for, my friend, answered he, let us martyr her in
such sort, that my love may torment her thoughts and her memory, and perform
my business quickly, before my Masters be ended. Speaking thus we came to the
root of a tree, the place at which I had told him that his incha^tment should
be made, and in an instant making a circle, and reaching him what he should
do, I made him go into it stark naked to the skin, because I had need of a
shirt. Having him there in this fashion, I took his Mistress hairs, and
twisting them with a cord I made a big roll, with which I tied his hands to
the stumpe of a tree, showing him the mystery that was hid in every ceremony,
and I would feign also have tied his feet, if I had not feared that he should
have suspected this to be rather the fact of a Robber then of a Magitian, but
as his hands were enough for my purpose I would do no more. Finally having made
the^ dumb naked and bound, defended from the sharpnes of the cold air with the
only fire of Love, that burned in their heart, there was no body that could
hinder me to give two or three knocks at the lock of my chain with a hammer
that I carried in my pocket and taking their horses and clothes I got me out of
sight and, being armed like another S. George I took the high way to Lions.

CHAP. XI. In which the Thief relates the disgrace that happened to him,
about a Chain of Pearl.
WIth the victory of this dangerous journey. I took the high way toward the
town of Lions, joyful to see my self free, and the owner of four and twenty
double pistolls, which I found by the hazard in my Masters pockets with which
and with their clothes being brave and gallant I went into the town, and
falling in love with as many brave Dames as were there: I talked of love to all
that I met with, and receiving particular favors of some, because my presence
and my clothes assured them that I was a man of some great house and of good
rank. True it is that to keep them in this error, and to hold my self in the
good account with which I had be gun, I oftentimes visited the Merchants of
greatest credit, telling them, that I looked for some Merchandise from Venice,
and promising to deal with, I made them in love with me, and they trusted my
words as much as my outside and my honest looks did deserve. By which and by
counterfeit nobleness, some Gentlewomen took occasion to be as far in love
with me, as Thy sbe was with Piramus, to whom I gave correspondence in the best
manner, though I understood that I was not so blinded with love but this
colored good will, and these fained sighs tended rather for my moneys then for
any good quality or beauty, of mine. But as there is nothing that can resist
the kind allureme^ts by which a woman makes war against him, whom she
minded to deceive I suffered my self a little to be carried away by amorous
shows of a Gentlewoman of the town, merry, pleasant and who entertained me
best though she was none of the fairest: who making show that she was taken
with my love, in a short time emptied my poor purse, leaving me like an Image
wrapped up in velvet. I pressed also to bind her by allmeanes possible
answerable to her fained affection, not so much for my contentment, as for that
she was provided with fine knackes, which she had bin accustomed to ask of any
new lover such as are chains, rings bracelets, and above all a chain of
Pearl, so big, round and bright, that at the very sight of them any man of
courage would desire them: This friendship at first was very hot, and had a
prosperous gale of wind, but as soon as she perceived the weakness of my
purse, she struck the sails of her good will, and began to look upon me with
a cross and sour countenance, an accident which in some sort pur me in doubt,
and made me distrust that I should never work my feate, which I had projected
at the beginning of her loves. So before that any falling out or vexing should
rise between us, relying upon the kind offers which a little before she had
made me, making me understand, that not only her goods, but also her very life
should be sacrificed to my friendship; I requested her to pawn her chain or her
Pearls for to contribute with her for the expenses of the kitchen, assuring her
that I looked for two thousand Ducats from a living which I had in my country.
But as they are old and subtle in their trade so they are also in their
distrust, and so she excused her self, saying that the Pearls and the chain
were pawns of a friend of hers who was to come and redeem them the next day,
and that her honor should be greatly endangered if she had them not in
readiness. There needed no small art to cover the annoy which that crafty
answer bred me, nor little wit to turn into jest such a plain denial. So
without making any show, or answering one word to that purpose, I fell a
laughing most heartily over her shoulders, saying to her, that it was a device
that I had framed to try her good will and to see if she would indeed confirm
that which she had promised by her words, and drawing out of my pocket a
counterfeit letter of Exchange, I made her read it that she might see the
power that was given me to take up eight hundred Ducats from a rich Merchant of
Lions, whom she knew well, wherewith coming to her self from her rugged
coyness, she fell again into her smiling humor, giving me a few light
blows on my cheek, calling me distrustful and mocker. I went away from her
with a thousand embracings, making her believe, that I was going to receive a
part of that sum, and God knows what my heart was. But as poverty has ever
bin the mother of inventions, amongst many others which my imagination afforded
me, I choosed out one which was to sell my horse at any rate whatsoeever, being
content only to have money to live upon but three days, at the end of which I
minded to have a fling at her Pearls, and so to get me out of the way. But it
happened quite contrary to me; I went to catch the wool but I came back
fleec't which was the just judgment of God, and a righteous punishment of my
fault. For though the Proverbesaith, He that steals from a Thief wins a
hundred years of pardon: yet the theft that is done to women of this kind, is
not put upon this account. But it should be rather held for a great offense,
because that for the moneys they receive they sell their honor and reputation
which cannot be redeemed withal the treasures of the world. It came to pass
then, that I returning in the evening to her house, and making my pockets
jingle with the money that I had received for my horse, she met me with
embracings, so smiling and kind, that with her fauning and flatteries, she
made me almost believe, that the refusal she had made me of her Pearls, had
been but a trial and proof, which she would make of my affection. Finally
order was given for making supper ready, with which and the tricks that I
minded to put upon her, at the coming of my money, I resolved to change her in
such sort, that in her first sleep, I should have the commodity to assault
her, and she never to perceive it. But my desires had not so good success as
I thought, because that such women know more then the Devil, particularly she,
who as an old beaten beldame in her trade, there was no ambush nor deceit,
which she had not pried into. So the more I urged her to drink, so much the
more she proved coy and backward. Supper ended with all the joy that I could
feign, and the hope which that good occasion promised me, we withdrawing our
selves into her chamber, she began to untire her self with as much slownesse
as it had been her wedding night. But I desirous to arrive at the haven of my
intention, to make her more careless and less suspicious I went to bed first,
faining my self unable any more to withstand sleep that urged me so eagerly.
My disgrace was such, that she distrusting the sum, that I had bragged to
have received, and taking occasion by my dogs sleep she would search my
pockets to try if all was gold that glister'd, and if the nuts were answerable
to the noise. But finding there was so little money that it would scarcely
furnish out the next days expense, she began to be vexed and to have an ill
opinion of me. At all this (though snorting) I was more watchful and more a
hunting then a Cat when she watches a Mouse, spying in what place she laid her
Pearls, that I might fish them incontinent when she was fallen asleep. She
lay down sad and confounded, thinking on the small sum of money, that she
had found, and oft-times sighing. Whereof I would in no wise ask the cause, as
knowing it well enough, and not desirous to let her from sleeping which I so
much desired and longed for. So a quarter of an hour after, which was the time
that in my conceit, she was past all thinking of it any further, I thought of
mine own designs, weighing well all the inconveniences which might fall out,
amongst which I considered the suspicion, conceived by her to be most
difficult, it seeming to me that she would not sleep but by halfes, and that
seeing the least appearance of that she imagined, she would raise the house
with her cries, and put all the neighbors in arms. But amongst many
inventions, there came a subtle one in my mind, and most fit for the purpose
to this fact, which was, not to hide the Pearls in any part of my clothes, but
to swallow them one and one, being assured that having past them through my
body they would come forth more clear and bright then of before, and that in
this manner though all came to the worst, the Justice would set me free not
finding the Pearls about me. This thought, in my opinion seemed admirable
good, and thinking that she was asleep, seeing she sighed no more, nor showed
any more her unquietness. I rose as softly, as was possible, going barefooted
and at leisure to the place, where she had left her Pearls, and having found
them, I began to swallow them one after another, though with some difficulty,
I being narrow throated, and they very big. My ill luck was that while I was,
about to swallow the last, it stuck in my weazand so unhappily, that it could
neither go foreward nor backward, I was forced to cough with some violence,
and to awake her with my coughing, she calls upon me with tears and
astonished, and I dissembling the best I could the hinderance of my weazand,
answered her that I was seeking for the Chamber Pot with which she was well
apaid for a while, though not satisfied with my answer, it seeming a thing
unlikely to look on the cupboord for the Chamber Pot, which was usually set
under the bed, wherefore casting with her self the means to satisfy her
suspicion, without making any show of distrust, she counterfeited an exceeding
sore pain in ber belly uttring great cries, and calling to her two maids
that were in the house for light, and some warm clothes: she held in her
dissembled pain for the space of half an hour, supposing that would be
enough to take from me the suspicion of her cunning slights. About the end of
which, she rises from bed like lightning, and looking round about the room
with a lighted candle and where she had left her Fearles, and no finding them,
without speaking ever a word, or asking any other reason then what her
imagination persuaded her, she begun to beat her face with her fists, that
incontinent she filled her mouth with blood, uttering after that loud and
shrill cries, that in less then a quarter of an hour, above two hundred
people were assembled, and amongst them the Justice, who breaking open the
doors of the house, came up furiously, finding me in my shirt, and her in her
night attire, with her baire about her ears and her face scratcht, calling to
me for her Pearls most furiously. The Judge commands that every one should
hold their peace, that he might be informed of the fact, and take the
deposition of us both, and he having begun with me, I gave him content with
very humble words, so that neither his threatenings nor entreaties could draw
any other answer from me. Nevertheless the Judge seeing the woman's vehement
complaints and bitter tears charged that my clothes should be searched which
was executed with such care and diligence, that hardly a moate of the Sun
could have been hid in them, and they not finding there the Pearls all of
them with one accord judged me to be innocent, and condemned her as subtle,
shameless, and dissembled. She seeing then that they all spoke against her,
and misregarded her complaints, cast her self down at the Judges feet,
tearing her hair, and rending her clothes, and uttering such strong cries,
that the Judge knew not what to think, nor what resolution to take, and
consulting of the matter with those he brought with him, he resolved, that it
having been verified that she had the Pearls when she went to bed, they
should be searched for, in all the most secret corners of the Chamber, they not
being found, they should send for an Apothecary, that should give me a potion
mingled strongly with Scammonie, to the end that if I had swallowed them, I
might cast cast them up again. The Judges sentence was put in execution, and
having done their diligence proposed about the Chamber, and not finding the
Pearls, they were forced to come to the last remedy, which was the Physic,
they which forced me to take in full health without the Physicians appointment,
and against my will, and though I did all that was possible for me to vomit
them, there was no mean to make me do it, so a vehement strife being awakened
in my guts I was compelled to give way to the Pearls, and to tarry my self in
prison, enjoying the favors which these Gentlemen Justices are wont to bestow
upon those that fall into their hands. *

CHAP. XII. In which the Thief relates the last disgrace that befell him.
IT was about six a clock at night, when my Andrew made an end of telling me
his disaster about the Pearls, and I desiring to know the last that kept him
then in prison, I entreated him to tell me it from point to point, without
missing any thing remarkable: wherein he being willing to give me content he
answered joyfully in this manner. If God would have pleased that this should be
my last disgrace, and if it had been as soon ended as I shall end the
discourse thereof I should have thought my self happy; but I dare not trust
to my hard luck, because that it being accustomed to persecute me, I do not
believe that it will ever cease to use me unkindly with new torments. Know
then that the Justice of Lions having condemned me in two hundred lashes of the
whip, through the streets accustomed, for such malefactors, and marking me
with the town mark, they banished me the town with shame enough, allowing me
but three days only to dispatch my business and go into banishment: during
which days I thought upon a thousand Fantastical discourses, bethinking my
self, how I might repair the poverty that had overtaken me after so great
abundance. And after I had bethought my self of a thousand plots, never a one
of which pleased me, the Devil put one in my head, which was the trouble that
I now am in. I bethought my self that the same day that I was whipped, a famous
Thief came after me, whom the Judge had condemned to the same pain, a young
man of good disposition, and of a vigorous courage, witty, and one of the
cunningest Thieves that in all my life I had dealt withal, but unhappie as
well as my self. I acquainted my self with him to try, if between two
wretched Caitives we could find some comfort in so great a mishap, and
communicating one with the other our intent and thoughts, we resolved to make a
journey together to Paris. But before we were fully resolved of all things
fitting for the voyage, we had a consultation about our poverty, and infamy,
descanting upon the means which we might make in so great mishap, and thinking
it was not safe for us to embarke our selves in so great a city as Paris, not
having means to live on there, and by which to busy our selves, at least
while we were known. And after thathe had given me the hearing a long while,
and he defully heard all the reasons and designs which I propounded, he said,
Master Lucas (for that was the name which I had at Lions) the inventions that
you show me are good and worthy of such a spirit as yours: but they be hard
and difficult questions. Wherefore leaving them for another occasion, I will
tell you one, which if it fall out well, it may well be that we shall get out of
this misery. This is that we may use diligence to find in this City of Lions
some Merchant that has trade and correspondence at Paris, from whom we may
get a letter directed to his friend, and having found him, you shall tell him
secretly, that you will make up some packes of Merchandise in this town to be
transported to Flanders with some money, and leave all, at Paris in the hands of
some sure man, that it might be kept safe, while you go to Antwerp, where you
shall make as if you have a Cozen germane, to try the price, and how your
Merchandise may be past off; and that having never been at Paris, nor made any
acquaintance to whom you might recommend your packes, you shall entreat him to
write to some Merchant of his friends, that he may keep them for you. For so
much, I suppose, he will not refuse you, and if he agrees to it, let me
alone. You shall see how I will rule my hands? If that be all that hinders you,
said I, I will find them that shall give me a thousand letters, and not one
only though I am now disgraced, and with infamy yet bleeding, I would have you
to know, that there was more than four that will do some what for me, and that
this is true you shall see by and by. With these words I went from him, and
going to a Merchants house of my acquaintance, asking of him a letter, after
the form that my camerade had told me, with which I returned exceeding
content, and putting it into his hand, he kissed it a thousand times, praising
my diligence and credit, and so at last we came to Paris with it, where we
being retired to a Chamber of the suburbs, we made two Packes, with some pieces
of coorse canvasse, the rest full of sundry things, such as old shoes, old
clothes, rags, and such other wares, and my Camerade put himself in the
third, wherein I packt him up so neately and handsomely, that neither his Pack
nor the other two seemed to be nothing else but camlots or Fustians. Our Packes
being made up, I went to give the letter to the Merchant to whom it was
directed, who received it most gladly offering me all his house. After this we
agreed that I should send the Packes at eight a clock at night, to save the
custom other dues to be paid by the Merchants, amongst which entered that of my
companion, if not full of camlots, yet at least of cords, ladder, hook, file,
lantern, knife and other military tools, with which to make war for
necessity, and rob the Merchants money. He then being entered and all in the
house asleep, because it was past eleven a clock he slit the canvasse with a
knife, and coming out he searched all the corners of the house, throwing out
at the windows some apparel and silk gowns with that seemed to him to be of
the least, which I gathering up in the street with great diligence, the Devil
would have it, that the watch in the mean while came by, with so great silence
and dissimulation, that they gave me no leisure to hide our booty, which I was
gathering up, nor to betake my self to the slight. And as there was no great
need of questioning me for to know my cops-mates, fith these wares could not
fall from heaven, they perceived that my Camerade was above, whom, after they
led me to the prison, they imprisoned also for the same crime. He went out a
fort' night ago, being condemned to the Galleys for ten years, and I fear
not much less, if the mercy and bounty of the Judges have not some pity of
me. *

CHAP. XIII. Of the Statutes and Laws of Thieves.
BY the discourse which I have made of my History, says honest Andrew, I have
noted that you did not like well that I called our Company a Common weal, it
seeming to you that we are governed only by the desire we have to steal,
without any other law or reason, which is clean contrary, seeing that amongst
us is done nothing which is not ruled by reason laws, statuts and ordinances,
punishing those that otherwise exercise our art. We have in the first place a
captain and Superior, all sorts of whom thieves obey, and he disposes of their
thefts which they should act, na^ing these who seem to him the fittest for the
purpose, and choosing the cu^ningest and wisest of the company for the most
difficult and dangerous thefts. And in this there is so good order kept, that
there is no man amongst us that forgets one only point of his duty, nor that
passes the bounds of his commission undertaking that which is in another man's
charge nor meddling with greater matters than his capacity can compass. And
know this that it is the most esse^tiall point of our common wealth, by the
disorders whereof all others are undone This captain examineth him that comes
newly unto the company giving him three months of novice-ship, to try his
courage inclination and ability, in which time, he propounds to him some witty
questions as be these; to hang up some little thing without ladder, pole or
line; to steal a man's horse as he is riding on him upon the way; To snatch a
way a Courtiers band amongst a hundred people, and many other things of this
kind. And having known his inclination and capacity, See Cap. 7. p. 54.
he givs him the office of a robber, of a Grumet, of a Cutpurse, or any other
whereof he is found to be most capable. You will not deny but that this manner
of proceeding is a great state point, just reasonable, and so necessary for the
Common wealth, that because it has not bin practiced, so great disorders are
seen every where in it, seeing violence can promise no other good end. I will
tell you that estates and offices should be given to every one, according to his
natural inclination, without enforcing or tying him by any respect to another
thing than to that which it desires, not following that which troubles, to
wit, unquietness and mishap. For I held it impossible, that she whom her
parents shall put in a Cloister against her will, for want of money to marry
her, can live in peace and contentment. As also he will never prove a better
husband, who for the only pleasure of his parents, and against his mind is
tied in marriage, and so of other employments. We have a notable example of
this good order in the Lacedaemonians state, a curious people, civil and wise,
who suffered their children to grow up in liberty, without putting them upon
any employment, nor to store up their appetite to any other estate, than to
that to which their mind prompted them, and when they came to age and
discretion they might choose of themselves the mean to live by most proper and
most befitting their natural inclination, and thence it proceeded that all
their actions were so well ordered and so perfect. After this manner our Common
wealth is governed, and with this law our captain rules the capacity of those,
who come newly unto him, bestowing on him the office and manner of stealing
according to the disposition that he has taken notice of in him in the months
of his novice-ship.

This Captain is an old man, wise, well experienced and finally exempted from
the trade, as being one whose force and nimblenesse having failed for the
practice, he exercises the Theorie with us teaching us the method and precepts
of stealing. To which end he makes us meet together once a week in a certain
place appointed for the purpose, where he binds us to give a strict account
of all the thefts and accidents that have happened therein, reproving sharply
those who are negligent and prove unprofitable, praising the vigilant and
subtle. This is done ordinarily on Saturday night, on which day he appoints
all that must be done the week following, sharing out to every one the places
that he should keep in, and the thefts in which he should be employed, taking of
the^ all a strict oath of faithfulness, and punishing the offenders, the first
time abridging him of that part of the theft which belongs to him, the second
depriving him of the place of six months, and if he be incorrigible and
stubborn, he puts him into the hands of the Marshall. If he falls in a fault
by negligence and carelessness, as it may be by coming to late to his place,
to go elsewhere, or let slip some occasion in not laying hold of it, he is
deprived of a weeks benefit, and taking from him the office of a Thief, he
puts him in the office of a Spy, or of a watchman, for the time that our
Council shall appoint.

Of all thefts in the first place is allotted the fifth part to him, that
spares the whip to us, banishment, the Galleys, the Gallows, and that which
remains of the tenths for pious uses, which are, to succor the sick and
needy of our company, to release prisoners, and to ease the disgraces of
those that have no money.

We receive no women in the company, unless it be in case of great
necessity, and when it cannot be otherwise, because by nature they cannot
keep secrets, and they being unable to eschew this inconvenience we are bound
upon great pains not to reveal unto them, how, from whom, and when we have
stolen.

He that commits the theft has equal share with the Captain for pains and
danger that he has put himself in, his accomplices have the third part, and
the Spies the fifth.

As for the honor and respect which is due to every one, there is such an
order kept, that no wrong is done to any one of the company, every Officer
having his rank and place appointed in all our meetings, assemblies and
consultations.

For the first are the Robbers, See Cap. 7.
next the Stafadours, then the Grumets, after these the Hobgoblins, then follow
the wooll-drawers, the Mallets follow them, and last the Apostles, Cigarets,
Cutpurses, and Caterers.

Over all these a kind of Thieves bear sway, called among us Liberalls, whose
office is to undertake some strange points, as to black their faces with ink
or kennell dirt, to hang Garlands of horns at men's doors, libells or such
like, and these are the wittyest of all the company, and those who as it were
endued with the best wit and invention, weigh and foreseeing all the
difficulties that can happen in a dangerous case.

None of the company may make any quarrel, noise or contention with another,
about any matter whatsoever, unless it be fained or subtle, to avoid any
suspicion, that may be offered.

We may not eat twice two of us together in one and the same Tavern or
vitailling house, except it be once in the sev'night, to the end that if any
thing come in the way to be stolen there we may breed no suspicion amongst
them that should see us there.

We are forbidden also to go together through the city or to speak familiarly
one to another, unless it be to fall a quarrelling, and to make some false
blow at one another, to draw people together, that upon the occasion of our
quarrel the Cutpurses may make up their hand.

Every professor of the company carries his badge and secret mark, by which
he is in an instant known of us all, understanding by this order, how many
there are of an office in every street and part of the town. So the Robbers
beareal ways a glove handing and made fast by one finger. The wool drawers
button their doublet by intercession that is to say, Cap: 7. ibids
they button one and miss the next. The Staffadours stroke their mustaches
and their beard at every space, sometimes thrusting their finger into one of
their nostrils. The Cut-purses have a little white mark in their hat-bands.
ibids.
The Malletes bear their cloak after a certain fashion, and finally every
particular office has its particular token by which it is known among the
company.

When any woman of the company is married every profession gives her five
Crowns to augment her portion, keeping nevertheless such an order, that she
may not be married but to one of her own trade; that is to say, the Daughter
of a Robber with a man of the same vocation or calling. And if by chance some
Cutpurse should marry his Daughter with a Robber, Staffador or Grumet, he is
bound to give him a hundred crowns in portion more then ordinary, because his
son of Law is of greater and higher Office then the father is.

We make a vow of patience and suffering, promising to be courageous and
constant against torture, though we be seldom put to it, because (as I have
told you) all that is salv'd with the fifth part.

And to the end that all the places of the town may be sufficiently provided,
it is enacted that every professor that shall come newly to a place, should
put there some mark, showing thereby the number of Thieves which are in that
part: so the first that comes layth a die in some secret corner, and yet well
known to those of the company, with the Ace turned upwards; The second that
comes, turns the die to the deuse point, the third to the trey, the fourth
to the quater, and so the others to the sise, and being come to that number,
the same Office stays in the same place, because that according to our laws
we cannot be above six in one and the same place: and when any one goes away
he turns the die upon the number of thieves that remain, in such sort, that
they being six, the first that goes away turns the Die to the cinque point,
the second to the quater, the third to the trey, by which number he that is
behind of the Thieves is known.

We are bound to nourish and sustain all the creeples, blind, sick, and those
whom their extreme old age excuses from stealing.

None of us may wear cloak, hat, breeches, doublet nor any thing else that
was stolen, nor sell gold, silver or jewels in that town where they were
stolen, under pain of a great and exemplarie punishment.

We are commanded to carry always a false beard in our pocket, with plasters
of sundry sorts, to disguise us in an instant, when occasion shall require. As
concerning Religion we are half Christians, because that of the two
principal Commandments of Gods Law we keep one, which is to love God; but in
no case our neighbor, because we take from him that he has.

Next we receive and allow of the two parts of penance, which are Confession
(because now and then we confess) and Contrition: but of the third, which is
satisfaction or restitution we not so much as make mention, or talk.

FINIS.
Imprimatur

Thomas Weeks.
February 5. 1637.

