THE Paschal OR Lent-Fast APOSTOLICAL and PERPETUAL. At first Delivered in a
SERMON preached before His MAJESTY in LENT, and since enlarged. Wherein the
Judgment of Antiquity is laid down.

Published by His Majesty's special Command.

With an APPENDIX, containing an Answer to the late printed Objections of the
Presbyterians against the Fast of LENT.

BY PETER GUNNING, D. D. Regius Professor, Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty,
and Master of St. John's College Cambridg.



London, Printed by R. Norton for Timothy Garthwait, 1662.

TO His Most Excellent MAJESTY Our Sovereign Lord CHARLES the IId By the Grace
of God, The most High and Mighty Monarch of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
etc.
Most Gracious and Dread Sovereign,
THe subject matter of this Discourse (the holy Fast of Lent before Easter)
which has always been a Sacred Solemnity of Your Royal Court, and has for
nineteen years (one whole Cycle of those Solemnities) been driven hence
together with Your Majesty, and at length by the blessed hand of God together
with Your Sacred Majesty restored unto us; was forthwith by Your pious care in
its first Periodical Return, owned in your Royal Proclamation and Example the
last year: and by your meanest subject and servant maintained in a Discourse
Preached before Your Majesty. But the same observance of Lent was forthwith in
the same week, by a nameless and false Pamphlet scattered at the very gates of
Your Court, maligned and opposed; and became soon after matter of deliberate
contest and debate, At the Savoy.
as part of that which was thought fit to be excepted to in the public Liturgy
or Common Prayer Book, and propounded by some to be altered. The depending of
which debate and Controversy, and the employment, which by Your Majesty's
gracious Commission I had part in, to consider of that, with many other
particulars in the Common Prayer Book, and the expectation of the utmost which
could be brought against that Primitive and Religious Fast, which lately now we
have received in Print; has necessitated this Discourse, (delivered at first
in a Sermon in Your Royal Chapel, and by Your Majesty Commanded to be
published, and by the Warrant of Your permission, since enlarged) to choose
rather to expect the Beginning of this Lent, then to appear at the ending only
of the former. It now, not unseasonably, as I hope, presents it self to Your
Sacred Hands, and flies to Your Royal Protection, who are most Truly the
Defender of that Holy Faith, whereof* this and other Solemnities of the Church,
are the Fence and Mound. The Royal CONSTANTINE (in whom first, God did most
eminently fulfill his holy Promise of giving to his Church Kings to be her
Nursing Fathers) began that course, with which your Sacred Majesty set forth:
writing unto all the Churches in his Empire; and that undoubtedly from the
Advice of the first and most sacred Ecumenical Council of NICE (then sitting,)
For the Religious and uniform observation of the holy Feast of Easter with the
(...) he calls them.
Appointed Fasts that precede it. In which his IMPERIAL Letters he did instruct
the Churches of his Empire, that Eusebius. l. de vit. Constantin. c. 16, 17, 18.
Theodoret. l. 1. c. 10. Socrates l. ^. c. 6.
this holy solemnity of Pasch, as comprising both the Feast and Fast, had from
the very first day it self, wherein our Lord did suffer upon the Cross, been in
the Church ever observed unto that present year. (And for the years following,
no Adversary will or can deny it to have continued.) How after that example,
Your Majesty's own Royal Ancestors have even in ancient Ages preserved here,
and transmitted to posterity This Holy Feast and Fast, is in part shown in the
following Treatise; and the Ages to come shall not be silent of Your Majesty's
Princely piety herein. What Athenagoras a primitive Apologist for our
Christianity, Athenagor. legate. pro Christianis in sint.
prayed unto Almighty God for the Emperors Aurelius, Antoninus, and Commodus,
we with infinitely greater Reason pray for Your Sacred Majesty, the most
Christian Catholic Defender of our Holy Faith and Church, pouring out
supplications [on our Fasts and Feasts, and all other daies] for Your Majesty's
happy Reign over us, that according to Your most just Rights, The Father to the
Son may ever continue to Transmit Your Kingdoms (with Your Piety,) that Your
Royal Dominions may be more and more extended: and all prosperous success ever
follow You; That we living a godly, quiet and peaceable life, may readily and
cheerfully serve and obey You. So prays

Your Sacred MAJESTY'S most humble and Loyal Subject and Chaplain, PETER
GUNNING.

A Table or Index of the several matters contained in the Treatise and the
Appendix.
A Caution how Scriptures ought to be interpreted, page 23 What meant by the
Bridegroom, p. 4. to 8 What sense of those words [When the Bridegroom shall be
taken away] p. 15, to 17 The Fathers sense of this Text, In those days they
shall fast, p. 240 Why the duty of fasting is called (...), p. 236 Five proofs
that our Lords words in the Text, include also those Recurring fasts of the
Bridegrooms being taken from us, p. 17, to 23 Our Lord himself often used
Fasting, p. 1, 2, 3, p. 218 The Apostles themselves often used Fasting, p 19, 28,
p. 219 Some things we know most certainly the Apostles did, of which yet there
is no one example recorded in Scripture, p. 24. 27
The Paschal Fast Apostolical, p. 27 to 99, p. 100 to 109, p. 133 to 138, p.
449 to 460, p. 479 to 486 The Judgment of the first Age after S. John's
decease, p. 27 to 40 The Judgment of the second Age, p. 40 to 43 The Judgment
Of the third Age, p. 43 to 60 The 24 Paschal Epistles of Theophilus and S.
Cyril attesting, etc. p. 51 to 54, 63 to 67 The Judgment of the fourth Age, p.
60 to 72 The Judgment Of the fifth, Age, p. 72 to 82 The Judgment Of the
sixth, Age, p. 82 to 89 The Judgment Of the seventh, Age, p. 89. to 98 Some of
the numerous testimonies of Authors of the following Ages, p. 99 Arguments
complicated of several truths, whence this conclusion is collected firmly, p.
100 to 109 What force universal Practice alone has to inser an Apostolical
Tradition, p. 133 to 138 The universality of the practice through all places,
p. 163 p. 139 The testimony of ancient holy men of our nation, p. 117,-18,-19
The Testimonies of the enemies of the Church, page 113 to 116 The Paschal Fast
not instituted by Telesphorus, but elder then him, p. 125,-6,-7 The
Interpretation of that much agitated T. of Irenaeus, p. 461 to 467 Its rendering
strangely wronged by our Adversaries for their advantage, p. 470 to 473
S. Austin's judgment, p. 60 to 63, p. 120 to 124, p. 133 to 136 Vincentius
Lirinensis his 3 Rules pressed, p. 113 The Asseveration of some one or two
Fathers, no sufficient proof of an Apostolical Tradition, p. 132 Instance of
some Apostolical Traditions, p. 530
Objections answered, p. 146 to 160

Those of the Presbyterians especially, in the whole fifth, seventh and eighth
Chapters of the Appendix.

An Answer to that which the Presbyterians object out of Irenaeus, p. 461 to
479 An Answer to 3 Texts of Antiquity not objected or mentioned by the
Presbyterians, viz. One of S. Chrysostom's, one of S. Hierom's, one of Victor
Antiochenus, p. 487 to 495 An Answer to the Presbyterians Objections out of
Antiquity at large, Chap. 7 How Socrates in pursuance of the Novatian Canon of
Indifferency, spoke loosly (and differently from the Church) of the Churches
Set-Fasts and Feasts. c. 7 An Answer to the rest of the Presbyterian
Objections, and to their pretense of an Act of Parliament, Chap. 8 Of the
pretense of tender Consciences, p. 239
Fasting Defined, p. 434, 183, 189 Why Saturday in many ages and places no
fasting-day, p. 237 Fasting often most healthful for the body, p. 158, 9 In
what sense this Fast commanded, and in what sense not commanded, but
recommended* p. 136, p 496 In what sense the observance of 40 days was of
constitution only Ecclesiastical, p. 487 to 495 In what regard the 40 days of
the Quadragesima were of Apostolical recommendation. c. 6 The number of 40
days* p. 161* 2, 3. How the 40 days may be said to be an Imitation of the
Lords Fast, Chap. 8. of the Appendix. The ancient observation of Good Friday,
p. 467. The Ancients in the number of their days of stricter fasting imitated,
p. 448 Daniel's fast, p. 168 to 170 The stricter fast of the great week before
Easter, p. 48. p. 96 Lent the Fast of the Spring fitly, p. 160 Some strictures
of the Fathers elogies, or praises of fasting, p. 215 to 226 Nine reasons
alleged for the so great Encomium's of the Fathers, given of fasting; p. 227
to 234. The eight Requisites or rules how fasting is to be performed, p. 171 to
215 The conjunction of it with Repentance, p. 174 to 187 The conjunction of it
With watchings, humi-cubations, etc. 195 to 198 The conjunction of it With
Justice. p. 198 The conjunction of it With Alms, p. 199 to 202 The conjunction
of it With prayers, hearing of Gods Word, etc. p. 202 The ancient rule of fasts
that excluded flesh, excluded wine also, p. 193 Fasting not the principal duty,
p. 236,-7 Moderation in fasting to be observed, p. 155,-6,-7. p. 164 to 170
Four reasons which excuse from fasting, p. 157
Concerning the Fast of 40 hours, p. 462 to 469 Of the Churches Fasts in
general* Chap. 1. of the Appendix. The distribution of the Fasts of the Church
into their several kinds in respect of their Institution, Chap. 2 Of the
several Fasts of the Church (or also other religious fasts) as to their measure
of time, Chap. 3. How the Paschal or Lent-fast is, as has been shown,
Apostolical, Chap. 4 The ancient Fasts of the Stations, vix. of the fourth and
sixth days, of the week* p. 441 to 444 The Fasts of Ember-weeks before the
Ordinations, p. 438 to 440 The Fasts of the Vigils, p. 437 The Fasts appointed
by Christian Princes, and whiles yet there were no Christian Princes, by
Bishops, p. 436 Fasts or (...) or superpositions till the dawn of the next day,
or Cock-crowing p. 446. Fast of 1 day, 2 days, 3 days, 5 days, 7 days, 15
days, 3 weeks, 6 weeks, 40 days, p. 446 to 449
Admonition to Him, that will think fit to reply, p 514, and p. ult. They which
condemn Anniversary set-feasts evidently condem the practice of the purest
primitive Church, and are found condemners of the Apostles themselves by an
undeniable Record* p. 477,-8 The judgment of the Ancients concerning such, as
opposed the Ch Set-fasts, Chapter 9 The judgment of 4 Reverend Prelates of our
Church, Chap. 10 The table of the names of the chief days of Lent, and of some
following in the Ea^ and Western Churches.
S. LUKE 5. 35,-38. But the days will come, when the Bridegroom shall be taken
away from them, and then shall they fast in those days. And he spoke also a
parable unto them, No man puts a piece of a new garment upon an old: if
otherwise, then both the new makes a rent, and the piece that was taken out of
the new, agrees not with the old. And no man puts new wine into old
bottles: else the new wine will burst the bottles and be spilled, and the
bottles shall perish. But new wine must be put into new bottles, and both are
preserved.
THe Scribes and Pharisees says St. Luke, St. John's Disciples says St.
Matthew, St. John's Disciples and the Pharisees together says St. Mark, came
to our Savior, and by way of exception said, Why do the Disciples of John and
of the Pharisees fast often, ((...)) but thine fast not? They did not, because
they could not say; but thou fastest not. Not the Devil himself might deny,
what he had felt, that the Lord had (as John himself had not at any time, and
Moses and Elias but by his strength) fasted 40. days and 40. nights. His
frequent exercise of fasting is witnessed in two mystical Psalms understood of
Christ, Psalm. 69. v. 9, 10. The zeal of thy house has even eaten me, etc. I
wept and chastened my self with fasting, and that was turned to my reproach.
And Psalm. 109. v. 23, 24. My knees are weak through fasting, my flesh is dried
up for want of fatness; I became also a reproach unto them. The context of
which verses and the ancient Fathers Commentaries on those Psalms are our
warrant that David in spirit spoke them of Christ. On Psalm. 69. St. Hilary thus
writes: This Psalm contains the prophecy of the sufferings of our Lord, where
(besides the gall they gave him to eat and the vinegar to drink, v. 21.) the
abstinence of his fasting was turned to his reproach, when tempted by the
Devil, he is bid turn stones into bread, and carried up into a mountain, he is
contumeliously tempted to worship the Devil. Arnobius also says, those words
are spoken of our Lord Jesus Christ, whom the zeal of Gods house did eat; and
his abstinence from eating, receiving nothing 40. days and as many nights, was
turned to his reproach. St. Hierom and Theodoret in the like manner understand
the Text of Christ's fasting. The other Psalm. 109. v. 23. Theodoret thus
understands of Christ, (...) ((...)) of his abstinence and severities to
himself: witness also says he the bar. ley loaves and the ears of corn in his
Disciples hands: St. Hierom also upon that Text, bids such as were conversant
in fasting to be comforted, Siquidem and Dominus hoc fecit -- Non habebat
delitias corporis, sed Dei Spiritus -- Tales diligit mil^ Christus, qui
jejuniis vacent quia in jejunio victoria est: for that the Lord himself, says
this Psalm, did fast, and was not filled with the delights of the body, but of
the Spirit of God; and Christ delights in such soldiers of his which give
themselves unto fasting, because such overcome when they fight* St. Augustine
and Bid confirm this interpretation. So true it is, says St. Basil, S. Basil
Ser* 1. of Fasting.
that our Lord Jesus fortified the flesh which he took on him for us by
fasting, and taught us by fastings to overcome. Ut in sponso nostro
investigemus, etc. says St. Hierom, S. Hierom Epistold ad Eustochium.
that in the Bridegroom himself we may see what virtue holy fasting has.
Howbeit in both those Psalms no sooner is mention made of our Lords fasting,
but it is added, that it was turned to his reproach. And here in my Text his
Disciples not fasting is turned to his reproach. Why do the Disciples of John
fast often, and likewise the Disciples of the Pharisees, but thine eat and
drink? Reprehendenda jejunii jactantia, says St. Hierom: The answer to them
might have been a just reproof for not fasting from vain glory. But our meek
and gracious Lord, (...), says St. Chrysostom upon the words. He gives them
no such rebuke as O ye vainglorious and impertinent persons. But he who had in
much gentleness forborne to command his Disciples such severities, as himself
practiced, with the same lenity returns only this gracious answer, Can you
make, etc. v. 34, 35. together mildly defending himself and his Disciples
(though as yet they fasted not,) and yet the holy duty of fasting also. But
doing all this by remitting the Pharisees (...) John's Disciples whom they had
brought with them, and advanced their example in the first place, and remitting
John's Disciples as it were tacitly to their Master John, to something which
they might remember John had said unto them (Joh. 3. 28, 29.) ye your selves
bear me witness, that I said I am not the Christ, etc. He that has the bride
is the bridegroom. The case was much different 'twixt the Disciples of the Law
only, (the Scribes and Pharisees) yea those of John also, and the Disciples of
Christ. The Law was a Schoolmaster of severities, but to bring them unto
Christ; John was an Harbinger sent by preaching of penance to prepare the way
for the Bridegroom; neither's Disciples were the children of the bride-chamber,
or the honorable followers of the Bridegroom, but Christ's only. John came
neither eating nor drinking, and sometime the Pharisees therefore say he has a
Devil, and now ye upbraid his Lord with John's Disciples and discipline as more
divine; howbeit he that is least among the children of that bridechamber is
greater then John himself: His office, his honor, his privilege, and
assistances greater. What many Kings and Prophets and righteous men desired to
see, and rejoiced in spirit to foresee, but had not with their eyes beheld, the
King in his beauty; nor heard his wisdom, and what John your master, saw and
told you that he rejoiced to see, and to hear the Bridegrooms voice, Blessed
are their eyes for they see, and their ears for they hear; And you have not
considered this mysterious marriage of the Church to the Messiah, her Maker and
Husband, her Redeemer and Spouse; the Prophets of old negotiated, invited, and
as it were, wooed, and searched what, and what manner of time this blessed
season and fullness of time should be, and what the joy of these espousals. The
Bridegroom himself is now come down from heaven in his wonderful Incarnation,
in his Nativity he came forth fairer then the children of men, as a Bridegroom
forth of his chamber rejoicing (for the love of his Spouse) as a Giant to run
his course. His coming forth was ( a summo coelo) from the highest heaven in
the hour of the WORD's being made flesh, and his running about is ad summum
coelum, to the height of it again, to the right hand of his Father, in his
Ascension. Mean while the solemn contract and espousals Theophy lact. upon the
words, Mat. 9. (...) ( quam dixerat, (...)) (...).
betwixt him and his Church is in his present preaching proclaimed. And he
spoke this parable, A certain King made a marriage for his son, (Matthew. 22. 2,
etc.) and he sent forth his servants, (Wisdom sent forth her maidens) not
fasting now indeed, as that is not seasonable for nuptial invitations, saying, I
have mingled my wine, etc. All things are now ready. And when those servants
for such their employment have scarce time to eat, quarrel you them, that they
find no season to fast? Sent I am to Publicans and sinners a Physician, and
therefore I eat with them. To my Disciples and as many as receive me believing
on me, the Bridegroom of their souls (the expectation, desire and joy of all
nations) and therefore at present they fast not with you: (...), says S.
Chrysostom upon the words, By these things our Lord shows, that their not
fasting then was not an Indulgence to their belly, but a matter of wonderful
economy. But the time will come when this solemnity of joy of these espousals
shall be turned into a funeral mourning; when the Bridegroom shall be even for
the debts of his Spouse and redemption of her life taken from them: And they
shall weep and lament and fast, and the world shall rejoice. But he being
returned, and having taken to himself a kingdom, these present espousals which
God foretold by the prophets Hosea and Isaiah, which had been treated by all
the Prophets that had been since the world began, and now proclaimed in the
acceptable year of the Lords preaching, and sealed to by the Father at his
resuscitation from the dead, expect their consummation in the marriage of the
Lamb at the last day, when he shall gloriously bear his Spouse with myriads of
holy Angels into his Fathers house, there to reign with him in his Kingdom
everlasting; mean time as upon the Espousals he became chargeable with his
Spouses debts, and has discharged them on his Cross, and after that discharge,
was taken from Prison and from Judgment, and has washed her in his own Blood,
and has given her the pledge of his Holy Spirit, and clothed her with the
double garments of his Righteousness; so also is she called by a new Name which
the mouth of the Lord did name, from his name Christ she is called Christian
first at Antioch; and farther, our Lord Jesus knowing, that after his taking
from her, religious fasting also is a necessary guard for her safety, and a
salutary means for the further purifying and adorning of his Spouse, therefore
as upon the allegation of John's Disciples Christ taught his Disciples also how
to Pray; so here as John's Disciples had been taught to fast, he teaches his
the time and season when they should fast, yea and they will fast; only in this
solemnity of his Espousals and of his Bride-chamber, these the principal guests
and friends of the Bridegroom, sons of the secretest admission, But without a
parable spoke he not unto them (the multitude*) and when they were alone, he
expounded all things to his Disciples Mar. 4. 34. and v. 10, 11. and when they
were alone, they that were about him with the Twelve asked of him the parable,
and he said unto them, Unto you it is given to know, etc. but unto them that
are without, all these things are done in parables.
his Apostles, no wonder if he do not, and ye cannot make them fast. Their
present joy is above it, and their habitual strength as yet beneath it, and
their present assistence from the presence of the Bridegroom himself enables
and supports them without it. Nevertheless to this marriages celebration,
garments every way agreeable, perfectly new, are to be provided, and wine both
new and old to be filled, and to be preserved, and vessels of grace and future
glory to contain that liquor; But as yet they are in part old garments, not
thoroughly renewed by the Spirit, they are old bottles (...) some regenerate
persons are here (v. 37.) so called for their but begun and imperfect
renovation, as some babes in Christ are called carnal, ((...)*) 1 Cor. 3. 1.
Bottles and garments here men are compared to, as Jerem. 13. 12, 13. Psa. 31.
12. Jer. 43. 12. Epicharmus Comicus* (...)*
and the duty of fasting is (...), as yet an unwrought, unthickned piece, at
least not by the Fullers Art purged and washed from the abuses wherewith the
Pharisees had disteined it. for (...), says S. Basil in his first Sermon of
Fasting. Fasting is an ancient Gift, elder then the Law -- it is a jewel of the
ancient Fathers -- reverence its gray hairs, it is coaetaneous with mankind.
(...) fullones etiam veteres vestes ac sordidatas renovant ac repurgant, says
Erasmus* in Mat. 9. yea Hesychius (...).
Add hereto, that the fastings of believers in Christ, in so far as they were
to answer to their frequent recurring set fasts, were yet an unwrought and
unpolisht discipline, as which were to be celebrated chiefly on the times of
the Passion of Christ, as S. Chrysostom says. They are also a new, strong,
working, and spiritful wine, apt to break weak vessels. Not therefore because
in themselves they need not, but because they cannot yet bear it; not that the
Lord, less then you, approves of that new wine, but because he provides that
such good wine should not be spilled which will drink pleasant when it is old,
Ecclus. 9. 10. and shall be preserved throughout all ages of the Church on
earth; lest also the bottles should break, and the rent and breach of these
garments, instead of being made up, should be made wider by the
unseasonableness of this prescription: therefore their Lord and Master, who
breaks not the bruised reed, presses not as yet this discipline. S. Chrysostom
on these words Mat. 9. (...). My Disciples are not yet become strong, but as
yet need much condescension, and it is not meet to impose a load of injunctions
on persons so aflected.
But the time will come when the Bridegroom shall for a time be taken from
them, and the Spirit sent down unto them, and when they are renewed with
strength from above, then shall they fast in those days. And both that holy
discipline of religious Fasts, and these vessels of honor shall be preserved
by each other. And that the Spirit may so come unto them, it is expedient,
says he, that I go away from them, and the time will shortly come.

In the Answer of our Lord so meek and divinely wise, you may observe these
three parts:

1. A Declaration, or promulgation of somewhat present which they were not
aware of. 2. A Prediction of some things to come, which they as little
understood. 3. A mixed prescription in part and prediction in p^, a
constitution, counsel, and encouragentent of a holy, religious exercise of
fasting.

I. A Declaration of the present Espousals of Christ, Behold a greater then
Solomon is here, a crown weightier then that wherewith his Mother crowned him
in the day of his espousals, also a greater then Pharaoh's daughter is here,
the holy Church of God: (...), says St. Chrysostom and Theophylact upon the
words. And the least of these despised Apostles great above him, then whom
there had not risen a greater among them that were born of women. He was sent
before to cast up and prepare his way, these the nearest friends and followers
(...), as those 30 companions brought to be with Samson the Bridegroom, (
Judges 14. v. 11.) and as the Spouse the Queen of Heaven ( Ps. 45. 15.) has
her virgins that bear her company in the bride-chamber: These are they that
ride as it were in the same chariot with the Bridegroom, says Phavorinus, that
walk in company with, and nearest to him in the way, (...), The sons of the
bride-chamber are the Apostles, as vouchsafed partakers of their Masters joy,
and of every heavenly good gift, and of all pleasure, Theophylact on Mat. 9.
and this the acceptable year of the Lord, the very time of love, ( Ezekiel. 16.
8.) so upon the words of the Lord, Mat. 9. Christianus Druthmarus. Quando ista
loquebatur, tunc ipsa fiebat conjunctio, quoniam per suam praedicationem
colligebat eandem sponsam suam: When Christ spoke these words, then was this
conjunction made, for by his preaching he gathered together that his Spouse
(the Church.)

II. The Prediction or presignification of some things to come, (...),
Chrysostom on the words Mat. 9.
as,

1. That the time should come when the Bridegroom should be taken from them,
Ablatus and oblatus quia voluit, Him the Scribes and Pharisees shall kill and
crucify, and he shall lay down his life for his sheep, give himself for his
Church, and grave her on the palms of his hands, and set her as a seal on his
heart, and on his arm, and hide her in the clefts of the rock, and vanquish
death and hell, and him that has the power of hell in her behalf.

2. That soon after that the time of the true Pentecost shall come, when these
Disciples as they shall need these arms; so shall be made new and strong
garments, new and strong bottles, and shall be filled with new wine like the
bowls of the Altar, ( Zech. 9. 15.)

3. That therefore he must go away, that the Holy Spirit may come, and then
shall they be endued with power from above.

III. A mixed constitution or Precept in part, and Prediction in part, of what
these Scribes and Pharisees came to expostulate with him, The holy duty of
Fasting.

1. In its Substance, (...), most certainly they shall fast.

2. In the circumstance of its due season and time, (...), then, (...), in
those days, or in those very days.

3. In its settlement upon its right basis and reason, which gives the
indication also of its true season, viz. the taking away the Bridegroom from
them for their sins, and for the sins of the whole world.

4. The imprudence and danger in importunity both to the substance of the duty
and to the subject; from the incapacity of the subject as yet, and improportion
to the duty.

As to the 1. The substance of the duty, our Lords care of establishing this
holy exercise of Fasting, is described here 5. ways:

1. By leaving it under his prescript Law ((...)) they shall fast, (as, thou
shall not steal) ( they shall hear my voice, Joh. 10. 16. shall render him the
fruits in their seasons, Mat. 21. 41.)

2. His prediction also that the Christian Catholic Church would be willing,
forward, and observably eminent in that exercise, (else it had been no answer
satisfactory to their alleged visible practice) they will fast, as ((...)) Him
ye will receive, Joh. 5. 43. (...), they will fast; as ((...)) v. 35. the days
will come; both are predictions when the chief servants of his house will see
this holy exercise exemplified in set rules of practice.

3. By laying a further necessity of prudence, both here v. 38. and Mark 2. v.
22. ((...)) Men must put up this new wine into fitted vessels, says the Master
of the household, and of the vineyard, lest in after ages men being lovers of
pleasures, and their love of God waxing cold, some servants of the house might
be for casting away this wine, for that there is indeed in their Masters house
other that is better and drinks pleasanter (in whose house is both new and
old*)

4. His excusing none of his from this duty, save such only as are not yet able
to perform it, (...), Mark 2. 19. they cannot fast.

5. His farther care for the conserving of this duty, which he compares to new
wine, together with the vessels, even to the day of the consummation of his
nuptials, (...), and both are preserved. The liquor in and by the vessels
fitted for it, and the vessels meet and preserved for the Masters use with and
by the liquor.

In the 2d, The season or time of the duty, he teaches first, That there is a
time for all things, a time to mourn or fast, and a time (of bridals) to dance,
As David also danced when, he brought home to himself the Ark, the type of the
Bridegrooms presence, 2 Samuel 6.
a time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing.

2. That the time of the greater joy is not always the time of the greater
strength: These were together, the children of the bride-chamber, and old
garments.

3. The time of greater actual assistances from God is not always the time of
greater habitual strength of grace inherent. These Disciples were rendered safe
by the presence of the Bridegroom, but were not yet other then in great part
old garments and bottles (...), Theophylact in locum.


4. The time or season for this duty of fasting is taught here negatively, 1.
Whilst they were such weak ones they could not fast. 2. While the Bridegroom
was with them it was not seasonable to call them to ordinary fastings. 3. While
the Bridegroom was with them they needed not to fast, both because his gracious
presence afforded them extraordinary assistances (...).
; and because his tender indulgence exposed them not to great and extraordinary
temptations whilst himself was with them: 4. (...), not presently, not
straightway desirable, v. ult. Christ by this parable, signified, says
Erasmus, that men are not on a sudden to be haled to a more austere life, but
to be inu^ed thereto by certain steps or degrees. Theophylact upon my Text,
(...), etc. (...).
((...)) (...).

Affirmatively, Then shall they fast: 1. When the Bridegroom shall be taken
from them. All the ages of the world before, since the promise of the seed of
the woman, were the season of the expectations, needs, desires, and longings
for this Bridegroom, O that thou were as my brother that sucked the breasts of
my mother, (Cant. 8. 1.) O that thou would rent the heavens and come down,
(Isa. 64. 1, with v. 4.) All the ages since his Being upon earth, are the
seasons of our looking upon him, whom by our sins we have pierced, and our
waiting and looking for his second appearance in glory: the Time only of
Christ's presence on earth, (to whom he was nearly present) was the season of
the joy of his Bride-chamber, to all admitted within it especially. 2. When
they shall be made new garments, and new vessels; when the the Spirit shall
have come unto them. 3. When the Bridegroom shall be taken from them they shall
fast for these causes: 1. As having then so true cause of sadness: 2. As having
then need by all means to fortify themselves against all dangers and
oppositions in discharge of their work: 3. (...)*
As having their faith (the root of good works prayer, fasting and alms)
confirmed by the Death, Resurrection and Ascension of the Lord St. Hierom in
Mat. 9. Donec -- per passionem meam novum Hominem indutus, non potest severiora
jejunii and continentiae sustinere praecepta* ne per austeritatem nimiam, etiam
credulitatem, quam nunc habere videtur, amittat. Christianus Druthmarus in
locum. Cum fuerint novi [utres] facti per meam doctrinam, confirmati per
passionem, resurrectionem, and ascensionem, per adventum Spiritus sancti, tunc
observabunt omnia dura and aspera: and ambo conservabuntur, and discipuli, etc.
4. As having seen the example of their Masters humiliations and sufferings,
patience and fortitude, and the Disciple is not above his Master.

In the 4. and last part, the imprudence and danger from the opposite
importunity, is argued from six considerations:

1. From the incapacity of the subject, as yet they cannot fast, ( Mark 2. 19.)

2. The unseasonableness, if they could (...), Chrysostom in Mat. 9.
.

3. The disagreeableness to the subject if they should ((...), v. 36.) it
agrees not with the old The rigidity and stifness of this unwrought plece
(besides its newness and* strength) agrees not with the old, says Erasmus.
.

4. In what it is detrimental to the subject, ((...)) it takes from the
garment, and the rent is made worse The ancient Translations, Ne tandem novum
vetus trahat, ne robore suo ^rahat illa vestem infirmam; ((...) quaedam and
Divisio in mente discipuli recentis and infirmi: aut schisma and separatio a
reliquis fratribus.)
.

5. In what is therefrom detrimental to the duty it self, it bursts the
bottles, and the wine is spilt. An evil report is brought upon the duty of
Fasting Non effunditur in bibi^ionem, sed in perditionem.
.

Lastly, The sad conclusion and catastrophe, The bottles perish, which else
might have held still the best liquor, though not yet capable of the newest and
strongest The bottles perish, and that by the very wine it self put into them,
(a restoring wine in it self) and the wine perishes* and that ^y the vessels
which were meant to contain and preserve it.
.

The parts you see being very many, for so much as our Saviors answer here rests
principally on the right timing of this duty: I shall insist presently on the
second part,: the time or season, which is first in every duty ((...)) then in
those very days.

For the understanding whereof, we must first enquire what those other words
mean to which they refer, viz. (...) when the Bridegroom shall be taken from
them, Which were set to contain these 4. following senses agreeing well with,
and insinuating each other.

1. In the days of his death and burial, they shall mourn and fast, according
to Ioh. 16. v. 20. a little while and ye shall not see me, ye shall weep and
lament, but the world shall rejoice Innocentius 1. Epistol^ ad Eugubinum
Episcopum. Nam utique constat Apostolos biduo isto and in marore fuisse, and
propter metum Iud^orum se occuluisse: quod utique non dubium est in tantum ^os
jejunaste bidu^ memorat^, ut, etc.
.

2. In the recurring annual memorials of the Bridegrooms taking away, the
Churches Paschal Fast of Lent, beside the weekly stations ( Stationum
semijejunia) which the Church ever observed, except 'twixt Easter and
Pentecost, or in the Feast of the Bridegrooms Nativity. These stations were the
4th and the 6th day of the week, fasted till 3. a clock in the afternoon,
according to Cornelius's fast, Act. 10. But these Sub arbitrio, non ex imperio,
of free devotion, not of strict injunction, as the Church professed (by the
acknowledgement of Tertullian).

3. In what time soever our sins or also Gods Judgments call us to mourning, or
fasting, or repentance, public or private; And this is also in too full a
sense the Bridegrooms departing from us. So it was said to Saul for his
disobedience, The Lord is departed from thee, 1 Samuel 28. v. 16.) and I^r. 6. v.
8. Be thou instructed O Jerusalem lest my soul depart from thee. This same
Bridegroom, our Lord, who says, ( Hosea 2.) I will betroth thee unto me,
warns them also c. 9. v. 12. Woe unto them when I depart from them. This sense
also Theophylact teaches us to be included in this Text (in Mark 2.) (...):
when Christ the Bridegroom shall be taken from him being lapsed, to wit, into
sin, then he fasts and repents that he may heal his sin. S. Hierom calls this
the Tropological sense of these words: Iuxta tropologiam autem sciendum quod
quamdiu sponsus nobiscum est, and in laetitia sumus, nec jejunare possumus, nec
lugere; cum autem ille propter peccata a nobis recesserit, tunc indicendum
jejunium esse, tunc luctus recipiendus: when the Bridegroom shall depart from
us by reason of sin, then must a fast be indicted, then must we take up a
mourning, when our Bridegroom has withdrawn himself in just displeasure for
our sins, (as Wisdom will not abide in a body subject to sin, Wisd. 1. 3.) We
must seek his return and favor by fasting, weeping, and supplications, Psalm.
143. 3, - 8.

4. (...), when the Bridegroom shall be taken up away from them, in his
Ascension, after his departure into heaven, so (...), tolli, may signify, to
be taken away up, and so is the rendering of the Syriack in this Text; and so
the Greek Father Theophylact understands it of the time after his Ascension
Theophylact in Luc. 5. (...). Idem in Matthaei cap. 9. v. 15. viz. on the same
words, (...). Christianus Druthmarus on the same words Mat. 9. (Cum auferetur
ab eis sponsus) Illud tempus ostendit, quo ipsus in coelum ascendit; quia
quamvis semper cum illis esset spiritualiter, tamen corporali praesentia ab eis
recessit. Venerable Bede upon my Text, shows that all the time from the
promise of the Seed of the woman unto the Incarnation of the Bridegroom; and
all the time after his Ascension, and departure into Heaven, was and is the
time of the absence of the Bridegroom, and the season of the Churches mourning
and longing for his first or second coming. The time only of his conversing
upon earth among men, the privileged time of the Churches joy on earth His
words are these, Notandum vero, etc. We must note that this mourning for the
Bridegrooms absence, began not now first after the death and resurrection of
the Bridegroom, but was observed throughout the whole time of the world before
his Incarnation, for those first times of the Church before the Virgins
bringing forth a Son, had holy men, which earnestly longed after the coming of
Christ's Incarnation; and these times since Christ escended up into heaven, have
the Saints which mourn for and desire his second Appearance to judge the quick
and the dead. Neque hic defiderabilis [defiderii] Ecclesiae luctus requievit
aliquantum, nisi quandiu hic cum Discipulis in carne versatus est. Nor was
there any rest to the Church from thi^ her mourning of her desires, save only
that while Christ conversed upon earth with his Disciples.
So after the history of his Ascension, Acts 1. the Apostles frequent fastings
are recorded, Acts 13, and 14. 2 Cor. 6, and 11. chapters. After his Passion,
Resurrection, and Ascension, the annual and weekly memorial Fasts of his holy
Passion should thenceforth begin and continue to be celebrated, and other
frequent religious seasons of fasting.

Of these 4. senses, the 2d only, because it brings with it a recurring duty
upon men as constant as the years return, labor actus in orbem; one Aerius, a
Iovinian, or Vigilantius in all ages, till of late, has been found to make
exception to.

I shall therefore first insist to show that our Lords words ought so to be
understood, as to include also those recurring memorial fasts of the
Bridegrooms being taken from us, stata, revoluta jejunia. And secondly what
they are.

As to the first, that these words are so to be understood as including some
set and returning fasting days, is evident,

1. For that otherwise our Lords words would not be, as they are, an apposite
answer to their objection. It is excepted by them; that the Disciples of the
Pharisees, and likewise of John, did fast ((...), Mat. 9. and (...), Luke 5.)
much and often (...), says Hesychius. (...) densum, frequentatum, (...)
assidue crebro. (...) densa, assidua, (...) frequento, says Glossarium vetus
Cyrilli: all which shows they alleged their very frequent, diligent, and as
it were continual fastings.
which it is known the Pharisees did weekly and annually in fasts by continual
frequency recurring; (And so did John's also; for my Text says, (...), they
did both fast in like manner: As to the frequency which they joined in, to
object, though not as to their sincerity, which the Pharisee considered not
here) twice in the week, says the Pharisee, Luke 18. 12. and Epiphanius lib.
1. haeres. 16. tells us what days those were, (...), the second and fifth days
of the week, Mundaies and Thursdaies. On the former, because on that day Moses
had gone up from them into the Mount; the latter, because on that day Moses
returning down from the Mount, brake the Tables of God, for their sin: and
annually also, beside the fasts recorded in the old Testament, (to wit, the
fast of the day of Atonement, Levit. 16. and Esthers fast, Esther 9. v. 31.
which was on the 13th of the month Adar, and the fasts of the 4th, 5th, 7th,
and 10th months) others also probably which they had received: unto all which
the predicted devotion of Christ's Disciples in those days when they should
fast, would not be correspondent, nor satisfactory to the objection made, if
they were not to keep certain, set, and often recurring times of fasting. Not the
Pharisees disciples twice a week, and many weeks in the year, and Christ's
Disciples only at the very time of his Passion, and lying in the Grave once, as
he died but once, and after that only accidentally, extraordinarily, without
any fixed returning, observable solemnity. No: they shall, they will fast, in
nothing behind the very devoutest in that duty; as the Pharisees therefore say
of themselves that they did fast, (...), Mat. 9. and Luke 5. so the holy
Scripture records the Apostles fasts after the Bridegrooms taking away, in
equal terms, ((...), 2 Cor. 11. 27.) In fastings often, or many times, in
watchings often, and 2 Cor. 6. 4. ((...) where (...), must be repeated) in much
or often watchings and fastings, Upon which Text S. Chrysostom says, by these
words S. P. signified his labors, how he labored going up and down and
working (with his hands) and the nights in which he taught, or also his working
in the nights* (...). and with all these labors, neither did he neglect to
fast.
St. Chrysostom also on S. Matt. 17. v. 19, - 21. says ((...)) therefore the
Apostles also fasted almost continually; yea, touching these certain fasts for
the Bridegrooms taking away, we shall hear it witnessed anon, and Apostolos
observasse, that the Apostles also did keep them and S. Paul expects of
Christian people, as well Lay, as others, men, and women, as well married
persons, as single, that they should at times, (...), Vacare jejunio and
orationi, Give themselves to attend upon fasting and prayer, and that there is
a (...) or season for it, there he teaches 1 Cor. 7. 5.

2ly For that it is said both in St. Mark 2. and in St. Luke here: not only
(...), but (...), with an article of (...), as if you would say, in those same
days Nor in this matter is this Article (...) any where omitted, but where
(...) is omitted also, as in St. Matthew c. 9. and if the MS. R. read it in one
place, in that day, Marc. 2. yet still it is with the article interposed,
(...), which reading they which follow, (as I do not) may well refer it to the
day of Christ's Death and Passion.
As in the Septuagint Greek of Esther cap. 1. v. 2, 3. (...), on those same
days on which Ahashuerus had been once inthroned, he (as Herod on his
birthday) made a feast unto all his Princes in the 3d (as in every) year of
his reign. So Philo the Jew in his book of the Religious, anon to be cited,
uses these very words, (...), speaking of certain yearly recurring days.

3ly Our Lord Christ speaks here of such fasts, as at present he did not expect
nor require from the children of his Bride-chamber, his Apostles, nor blame
them for the omission of them. It being not now (as he reasons himself) a
season agreeable for such fasting of which here he principally speaks in answer
to their cavil: But extraordinary emergent Fasts the Lord did now expect from
his Apostles, and sometime blamed their omission of them, when extraordinary
occasion and interest of their Lord against his enemy called for them For he
whom Satan had bound, etc. might well by prayer and fasting be loosed and
delivered, even within the time of the festival joy of Christ's Espousals, and
that by these children of the bride-chamber.
So Mat. 17. 20, 21. He charged his Disciples with unbelief, (that is at least
defect of duty surely) as the cause of their not having done that ( viz,
casting out the Devil) which he told them at the same time, could not be done,
but by prayer and fasting. Therefore our Lord speaks there of such an
extraordinary fast, which there and then he might expect from them; therefore
the Lord here in the words of my Text, where he speaks of Fasts not then to be
required or expected of them, must not be understood to speak principally and
in the first place, much less only, of extraordinary, emergent and occasional
fasts; but necessarily of set, solemn, and recurring fasts, to which as then he
did excuse them for the while of his presence with them; but which, when the
Bridegroom should be taken from them, should be justly expected of them.

4ly For that our Lord Christ speaking of those, with whom he promised to be
unto the end of the world, viz. in themselves, and in those who should believe
in him through their word, and of fasts relating to a public universal cause,
the taking away of the Bridegroom in his Passion; therefore the Lord spoke also
of a solemn public fast, upon one cause or subject never to be repeated; but
the duty to continue all years to the end of the world, till the Bridegroom
should return unto his Spouse and take her into his Fathers house. Now
impossible it is, that any such should be public and to continue, and relate
to any such fixed and universal cause, but this of our Lords Passion, through
perpetual ages to be remembered by public memorial fasts, which cannot be
continual, nor accidental; therefore by set, solemn, and recurring fasts; so as
we have seen that cause, the memory of our Lords Passion to have given
foundation universally to all ages and parts of the Catholic Church, both for
her weekly stations ( Stationum semijejunia) on the 4th and 6th day of the week
till 3. a clock; and of her annual, Paschal or Lenten Fast about the time of
her Lords Crucifixion. And whereas our Lord has said of his Disciples, which
are or shall be such indeed, that in those days, ((...)) they shall and will
fast: what the Church does and has done ever since, that foretold by the Lord
(when he said they would then fast) must needs be the best interpretation of
what the Lord said they would do. He said it: in those days they will fast;
has the Church done what he said they would? or will any say nay? Learn we the
Churches days on which she ever since has, and does, and professes that she
will fast, and we must needs have the true meaning of this prediction, in these
words of her Lord, who could not be deceived, In those days they will fast.

5ly Be therefore my fifth reason this following, Christians will not fast
(none can expect they will) on any public, set, solemn days of fasting,
(which was the thing here called for by the Scribes from their own alleged
example, and that of John's Disciples also) except they do agree upon such
days; But if every man was to be left to understand what he please by these
words, The days when the Bridegroom shall be taken from them, (as Aerius had
his sense of them, and Iovinian his, and Vigilantius his, and none bound to the
Churches sense of them) we should have no means left us possibly to agree, and
so to meet on any days at all by force of these words, or any other one
universal cause; and so should we never meet in any public solemn fast at all;
no, not for so public fixed a cause as the taking away of the Bridegroom once
for the sins of the whole world.

The Churches teaching then her sense of her Lords words, by her rules,
comments, and practice, must silence these men, as her Lords prediction of her
practice did silence the Scribes and Pharisees, yea and some other better
meaning Disciples (St. John's) also, cunningly drawn in (as is usual) by the
enemies of the Lord, and his Church, to join in expostulations, cavils, and
quarrels against them.

Reason, and experience, and the direction of all wise men in the Church of God
(ancient and modern) the house of Wisdom, Councels, Reverend Fathers and
Writers, and our Since the Reformation Lib. Canonum Eccles. Anglican* Anno
1571. -- Videbunt ne quid unquam doceant pro concione quod a populo religiose
teneri and credi velint nisi quod consentan^um ^it doctrina veteris au^ Novi
Testament* quodque ex ill^ ipsa doctrina Catholici Patres and veteres Episcopi
collegerint.
Church in particular, have directed and commanded us not to interpret
Scripture in things of public concernment to the Churches rule of believing,
and doing, but as we find it interpreted by the holy Fathers and Doctors of
the Church, as they had received it from those before them. For that the
leaving of every man to make any thing of any Text, upon any device out of his
own head, to the founding any new and strange doctrine, or practice, as
necessary therefrom; or to the opposing of any constantly received doctrine,
or practice of the Church Universal, (for in other matters they may happily
with leave quietly abound in their own sense*) leaves all bold innovators
(which can but draw away disciples after them) to be as much lawgivers to the
Church by their uncontrolable law-interpreting, as any Pope or Enthusiast can
or need pretend to be; and has been, and ever will be to the end of the world,
the ground of most Heresies, and Schisms brought into the Church by men, who
departing from the teaching and stable interpretation of the Church, in their
own instability and science falsely so called, pervert the Scriptures to their
own and others (their obstinate followers) destruction.

Here therefore I first join issue, that the Church has observed these days
of the Paschal fast (as 'twas called in the Ancient Church) Called also by some
Antepaschale jejunium, meaning the same thing.
or Lent-fast (that is, from the Saxon Dialect, Spring-fast) lenc^en. Sax. The
Spring, (...) Lent.
ever since the times of these children of the Bride-chamber, the Apostles of
the Lord, and ever since the taking away of the Lord, the Bridegroom.

2. That the Church has done this, has observed this Paschal-fast, as from
the Apostles, grounding their practice upon instruction Evangelical; and
particularly also upon this Text now before us, The time shall come when, etc.
And then ((...)) in those days they shall fast.

1. For the Churches visible practice from the Apostles times, if our Brethren
shall say, Show us express example written in the following Scriptures, which
may interpret this text so; or we are at liberty for the sense, and practice:
they must be told, what they cannot but freshly remember, that so said the
Brethren the Anabaptists: one express example of baptizing Infants after that
Sanction, John 3. 5. and Commission, Matthew. 28. v. 19. whereby to interpret
such Sanction and Commission. An express command (as the Church thinks) to
baptize all Nations, would not hold them. So said the Socinians for their no*
necessity of baptizing at all in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost. Show us one example in all the following Scriptures, Acts, and
Letters of the Apostles of that form observed. A direct command (as we would
think it) could not bind up their liberty of interpreting it otherwise. The
history of all the following ages of the Church after the Apostles is little to
them compared with the word of God, in their own sense. All those following
were but men, and these (in their giving out the sense of the Scripture) are
more!

For our parts, we finding the Bridegroom, the Lord himself, thus referring us
to the practice of his known Disciples, the children of the Bride-chamber; In
those days they will fast, (not only they will teach on what days men should
fast:) and the Bride her self, whose cause is most concerned in it, declaring
to us her practice, and assuring us she had received that her Practice from
those friends of her Bridegroom, and children of his marriagechamber, the
Apostles; that Bride also being, as we know, the Queen standing at his right
hand, the Mother of us all; whose authority is above all mothers, (and yet each
mother's is from God over her children;) we I say joining in obedience with all
those who have this Church for their Mother, are assured that we obey, and have
God for our Father, and his Spirit not to leave her (in her leading us) without
certain conduct into all truth of necessary faith, or bounden practice, that
is, certainly to secure her from every of the gates of Hell, never to prevail
against her.

We have the Church our Mother to hear: and as to the point, we would hear of:
Nos habemus talem consuetudinem, and Ecclesiae Dei: We have such a custom, and
so have, and had the Churches of God. If any man against all this list to be
contentious, we still have learnt not to let fall our appeal to the customs of
the Churches of God. As St. Paul has shown us by his example, that against
contradictors it is best to do, 1 Cor. c. 11. v. 15, 16. Let our Brethren
therefore either show some Church or age before their own of yesterday, where
this was not the custom of Christian people; or else devise some other sense
also of that Text of St. Paul, concerning the Churches customs; or let them
acknowledge it an Apostolical note of contentious persons, (to whom he
elsewhere says belongs tribulation and wrath, Romans 2. v* 8, 9.) to oppose
their interpretations and exceptions against such custom of the Churches of
God, as this Paschal Fast, or Fast of Lent, in remembrance of the taking away
of the Bridegroom of the Church, can manifest it self to be.

Now, albeit my premises neither contain, nor need to contain, more then that
the Church in all ages observed this Fast of Lent, called Paschale jejunium,
and that from the Apostles themselves, their own Evangelical Instructions of
her, and particularly in this Text also which she received from their
Evangelizing: yet in as much as I have occasionally before mentioned, that the
Apostles themselves also observed this Paschal Fast, I shall not content my
self to bring witness that they delivered it to the following times, or only
that it was practiced in their own times, (of which I shall speak in my 2d
testimony) but also together that themselves did practice and observe it. For
the proof whereof; although it might be sufficient to argue from their
delivering it to the Church, that therefore they observed it themselves; (for
surely they laid not on the Church any burden of precept which themselves with
one of their fingers would not touch, or not teach perfectly by their example
first:) For as it was said of the Lord, Act. 1. 1. all things which Jesus began
both to do and to teach, (as he did in the exercise of fasting) so also the
Apostle says of himself and the other Apostles, when he did warn the
Philippians of some that walked so, as that their God was their belly, he
says, be ye followers of us, and mark them that walk so, as you have us for an
example, c. 3. 17, 19. and 2 Thessalonians. 3. 9. that we might give our selves to you
for an example to follow us. Yea these very disciples of the Pharisees, and of
John, not only alleged first their own example of frequent fastings, but even
S. Mark says of them, c. 2. 18. (...), they were at this time fasting, when
they came to the Lord and made this exception to his Disciples, for their not
so fasting.
Yet my argument for it shall be, not any logical collection, but a direct
testimonial asseveration; premising only first: That it is undeniably certain
(from the instance which I have touched before concerning Baptizing in the Name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost) that something the
Apostles themselves did most certainly do, and constantly (as well as all ages
of the Church after them;) of which yet, besides the first commission (which is
not practice,) no one example of any of the Apostles practice at any time is
recorded in all the N. T. and yet was it done (we are most sure) by every
Apostle, and constantly. This premised, I think it sufficient to produce other
Ecclesiastical unquestioned record to prove the paschal fast was observed by
them: and I allege the witness not of any single Father only (though written
by one pen,) but of the Church it self within the first century of years, or
age, after the departure of the last of these honorable children of the
Bride-chamber, S. John the Apostle and Evangelist; who died in the 2d year of
Trajan, and the Churches Testimony by me to be produced, stands recorded by
TERTULLIAN, who lived within 100. years of the Apostle S. John's departure: the
Churches witness by Tertullian recorded against Himself and his fellow
Montanists, in whose behalf He so contends as follows with the Church, and the
Church against Him and His.

The Record is in Tertullian's Book of Fasts, de Iejuniis c. 1, 2. where he
thus writes, Arguant nos [Psychici, i. e. Catholici: for so he contumeliously
calls the Christian Catholics, ascribing to Montanus, Priscilla and Maximilla
novam prophetiam, and spiritalem disciplinam] quod jejunia propria custodiamus,
etc. -- Novitatem igitur objectant, de cujus illicito praescribant, aut
haeresin judicandum, si humana praesumptio est; aut pseudoprophetiam
pronunciandum, si spiritalis indictio est; dum quaque ex part anathema
audiamus, etc. Nam quod ad jejunia pertineat, certos dies a Deo constitutos
opponunt -- certe in Evangelio illos dies jejuniis determinatos putant, in
quibus ablatus est sponsus, and hos esse jam solos legitimos jejuniorum
Christianorum, abolitis legalibus and propheticis vetustatibus. -- Itaque de
caetero indifferenter jejunandum, ex arbitrio, non ex imperio, pro temporibus
and causis uniuscujusque. Sic and Apostolos observasse, nullum aliud imponentes
jugum certorum and in commune omnibus obeundorum jejuniorum. And c. 13.
Praescribitis constituta esse solennia huic fidei, Scripturis, vel traditione
majorum; nibilque observationis amplius adjiciendum ob illicitum innovationis.
State in illo gradu si potestis; ecce enim convenio vos and praeter Pascha
jejunantes, citra illos dies quibus ablatus est sponsus, and stationum
semijejunia interponentes, and mero interdum pane and aqua victitantes, ut
cuique visum est. Denique respondetis haec ex arbitrio agenda, non ex imperio,
Movistis igitur gradum excedendo traditionem, cum quae non sunt constituta,
obitis. Quale est autem ut tuo arbitrio permittas, quod imperio Dei non das?
And c. 14. Si, etc. -- Cur Pascha celebramus annuo circulo in mense primo? cur
quinquaginta exinde diebus in omni exultatione decurrimus? Cur stationibus
quartam and sextam Sabbati dicamus, and jejuniis Parasceuen? Quanquam vos etiam
Sabbatum siquando continuatis, nunquam nisi in Pascha jejunandum, secundum
rationem alibi redditam, etc. Thus Tertullian now professing himself a follower
of the new Prophet Montanus, quarrels the Church and her children, as carnal
persons, for not admitting the new-commanded fast of Montanus, and he manages
that his quarrel in these words, They ( viz. the Christian Catholics) accuse
us that we observe fasts of our own, peculiar to our selves -- They object
therefore unto us novelty, and prescribe against the unlawfulness of that,
saying, that it is either to be judged Heresy; if presuming as men, we so
dogmatize: or we to be pronounced false prophets, if we indict these fasts, as
from the Spirit; whilst on either hand we hear them denounce an Anathema
against us: For as to what pertains to Fast they oppose, that there are certain
days constituted by God. They surely think, that in the Gospel those days are
determined for fasts, in which the Bridegroom was taken away, and that those
days only are now the legitimate days of Christian Fasts, all legal and
prophetical old observances being antiquated or abolished -- Therefore as to
other fasting, it is to be indifferent, according to every man's occasions, and
causes, at his own judgment, not of command: [ viz. as Montanus pretended
command from God.] And that thus the Apostles observed the rule of fasting,
imposing no other yoke of certain or set fasts to be kept of all in common. And
c. 13. ye prescribe against us, that the solemn times for this matter, are to
be believed already constituted in the Scriptures, or in the Tradition of our
Elders, and that no further observance is to be superadded, for the
unlawfulness of innovation. Maintain this your ground if you can [O ye
adversaries of the prophet Montanus] for lo I convince you, even your selves
fasting, beside the Paschal *Fast, Beside those days in which the Bridegroom
was taken away; interposing also your selves the half-fasts of the stations,
Thus he being in darkness of forgetfulness, as out of charity, considers not
the evident reasons of the stations, the 4th and 6th day of of the week, from
those words which the Church urged of the Bridegrooms being taken away, which
is the very ground and reason which afterward Epiphanius ( de Compend. fid. c.
22.) and S. Augustine also ( epist. 86.) do build them on.
and your selves otherwhiles also, as each pleases living on mere bread and
water. Lastly you reply, that these observances, [ viz. these last of the
stations of Wednesday and Friday, and otherwhiles living with bread and water]
are practiced according to ones choice, not from command Isidorus Hispalensis.
l. offic. c. 42. Shows that the weekly observance of those days in fasting,
was not a precept lying on all; in these words: Praeter haec autem legitima
jejuniorum Tempora* omni sex^ ^erid propter Passionem Domini a quibusdam
jejunatur.
. Ye have therefore quit your ground, by exceeding the tradition, while you
observe fasts which are not constituted (or commanded.) And worthily you permit
that to your own pleasure, which you yield not to Gods command, ( viz. by his
prophet Montanus.) And c. ^4. If it be so [as was urged out of Galatians c. 4.
^. 10.] Why observe we Easter every year in the first month? Why 50* days
thence forward do we pass in all exultation? Why apply we the 4th, and 6th day
of the week to stations? [or meetings for prayer, portional-fasting, and
Sacrament,] and the day of Christ's Passion to fastings? And although you at
some time may join Saturday to Friday in fasting, yet that never but before
Easter Day, for the reason elsewhere rendered. Thus far Tertullian.

The reason why he singles out Good Friday for a peculiar fast amongst the rest
of the days of the Bridegrooms taking away, himself renders in his Book of
Prayer chap. last, when not yet a Montanist, in these words: Sic and die
Paschae, q^o quasi communis and publica jejunii religio est, So on the day of
Christ's suffering, wherein is observed the common, and as it were, public
religion of the fast Agreeably whereunto Sozomon speaks l. 7. c. 19. On the day
before that Saturday, [ viz. Good Friday] which the people fast very devoutly
in remembrance of our Saviors Passion. (...) And this is that (...) that one
day into which the least devout among Christians shrunk up their fast. As
Iren^us witnesses in his Epistle to Victor. and Methodius in Con^ivio virgin.
orat 3. (...), On the Fast Day of Christ's Passion [who is our Passeover] it is
forbidden us at all to remember the provision of food. S. Cyril of Jerusalem
in his 18. Catechism, mentions his auditors weary labor, by the intention of
the Fast of the parasceue [or Good Friday] and the following watch.
.

Thus by acknowledgement of the Churches enemies, and friends, she practiced,
taught and contended against her adversaries touching this fast, and those
words of her Lords, In those days when the Bridegroom shall be taken from
them, then shall they fast. With this constitution of the Lords, she resisted
the Montanist's new set fasts, pretending from the Spirit, and the word within
them. His testimony I have first produced, as including the Churches own
witness, and the Apostles own observance. Next for the observance of Christian
people, that of S. Mark (though he not an Apostle, but Evangelist) his
teaching, as is probable, and certainly practiced in the Apostles own days.
The record is made by PHILO in his Book, (...), of the Religious; (and so
Gregory Nazianzen calls the Christian believer by the same name, (...), Orat. in
S. Pentecost.
who must needs have conversed with St. Mark, and these Religious at
Alexandria, and came, says Eusebius, into speech with St. Peter (whose
Disciple S. Mark was) at Rome, l. 2. c. 16, 17. in the days of Claudius the
Emperor. He in that Book of the Religious, says Eusebius in the forecited
place, describes certain Apostolical persons religious life of the Hebrew
nation ((...),) having not only seen them, but accurately taken knowledge of
them; describing there such their conversation as is to be found in the
Christian Religion only, says Eusebius; and he adds, (...), according to the
Gospel; and such religious fastings, says the same Eusebius, which have
descended down accurately the same even unto our times; which more eminently
were exercised: (...), in fastings, and whole nights watchings, and attentions
unto the word of God, at the solemnity of the Passion of our Savior, (...),
testifying of them those things which accurately are observed after the same
manner with us only, and even until now. And moreover, that he there describes
the first preachers of the Doctrine of the Gospel, (...). It is manifest, says
he, to every one that Philo comprised in that writing, customs delivered in
the beginning from the Apostles. These religious persons in and about
Alexandria, (...), are frequent in assembling for the space of 7. weeks, (as we
now begin our Paschal fast the 7th week before Easter, that we may exempt the
Sundaies, and yet leave a full number.) (...), (a) As Gregory Nazianzen orat.
40. in Sanctum Baptisma, calls the fast of Len^ (...).
(^aith Philo, using the very words of my Text) (...). This says Eusebius:
they held a pure and holy virginal observance: for it is preparatory to the
greatest feast, which begins a solemnity of 50 days -- Mightily they resist
at this season the bewitchings of pleasures; in those days, (...), there is no
wine brought into their tables, and their meal is clean free from all meat that
had the life of blood --. And of some of that time he writes that after supper
they celebrated an holy whole-nights vigill; which we know was much the custom
of the East and West Churches on Easter-eve. This annual solemnity of
numberless religious persons through 7. weeks before the high solemnity of
Easter (the time of the Bridegrooms taking away and return) is an observance,
which no Essen^s, or other Jews ever observed, no^ indeed any other people at
that time of the year before the Christians; therefore Eusebius did well judge,
that it could be understood of Christians only, and that, as he says from
evident demonstrations Eusebius. ibidem. (...).
Now may ye hear Philo's own words, in that his Book, interpreted by himself.
For what Philo says, (...), their celebration of 7. weeks, their preparation
to their greatest feast, this what it is in Philo's language, himself lets us
know in his book of the ten words: That which the Hebrews (says he) in their
own language call Easter (or (...),) (...), The one day that is chiefly eminent
in all the year. But how spent they their seven weeks preparation to the feast
of Easter? In purity, fastings, and abstinences, and when the feast came,
(...), they sang Eucharistical Hymns unto God their Savior: (...), as Philo
there decl^res.
but at all times (...), they have God in perpe^ual remembrance -- and twice
every day (viz. in common, in the public) they are wont to pray in the morning
and the evening. Thus has Philo, contemporary to the Apostles, recommended to
us, not in my judgment only, but of Eusebius, as you have seen, and of St.
Hierome, Co. (...). ^* ^. c 3^.
the piery of those first Christians in Egypt, and recorded their Paschal
Fast, in as evident manner as could be expected a learned writer, himself not a
Christian, should commend Christians; for the very force of truth, and the love
that he had to set forth what was excellent in his Contrymen.

My third proof and authority shall be from witnesses living partly in the
Apostles times, (those children of the Bride-chamber) partly soon after their
times, while their practice and instructions were fresh in memory; from holy
Bishops and Martyrs, some of them ordained by the hands of Apostles themselves.
From their agreement even in their differences otherwise, from their concord
even in some sor^ of controversy among them, during some years. In that
difference, I mean, found first twixt Polycarp the auditor and Disciple of St.
John, and by his own hands ordained Bishop of Smyrna, (which Episcopal charge
he concluded with a glorious Martyrdom) and together with Thraseas Bishop of
Eume^nia, these on the one side, and Anicetus a Primitive Bishop of Rome and
Martyr living at the same time, with other Western Bishops (deriving from St.
Peter, as Polycarp from St. John) on the other side, about whose difference
Polycarp came unto Rome to Anicetus, as Irenaeus witnesses; Anicetus professing
to follow the rule received from St. Peter and St. Paul by the instructions of
his predecessors, Xystus, Telesphorus, Hyginus and Pius: and Polycarp
professing to follow what St. John and other of the Apostles had practiced,
(...), these are the very words of Irenaeus himself concerning Polycarp, (whom
he had seen and heard) That Anicetus could not persuade him to vary from what
he had observed ever with John the disciple of our Lord and the rest of the
Apostles with whom he had conversed or spent his time. I^en. apud Eusebius. l. 5.
c. 24. But their difference was managed with perfect peace and love, and
inviolable communion. The same difference again some years after revived,
(about the ninety seventh year after St. John's death) but not with equal
calmness and amity 'twixt Polycrates Bishop o^ Ephesus, with other Asian
Bishops, and Victor Bishop of Rome, (next successor to Elutherius, unto whom
Lucius our first Christian King of Britanny sent letters) with others of the
West. Polycrates pleading the authority of St. John, (...) (says he) who had
rested on the Lords bosom, and of St. Philip, (...), one of the Twelve
Apostles, who fell asleep at Hierapolis, also he alleges the example of
(...), of two daughters of St. Philip, Virgins in their old age; and another
daughter of his, not that, but a holy woman likewise. These different from the
four Virgin daughters of St. Philip the Evangelist.
And Victor with his on the other side pleading the authority of the tradition
of S. Peter and S. Paul ((...), Sozom. l. 7. c. 19.) These were the contenders.
The agreement (which I mentioned) was constantly this. It was agreed on all
hands, 1. That they both had received from the Apostles a Tradition for the
celebrating of the Anniversary feast of Easter, which they called (...). 2.
That on the Eve of that Easter Day certain preceding fastings were to end,
(which were the same, that in Tertullian were afterward called jejunium
Paschale) Polycrates and they of Asia are contending (...)* That from tradition
ancient [ in those early dayes] they deemed that they ought to observe the
feast of the Salutary Pasch (or Easter) on the fourteenth day of the month, as
being of duty altogether on that day, upon whatsoever day of the week it ^ell,
to put an end to, or dissolve their fastings. On the other side (which was
Victors) it was alleged, (...). No such custom to observe on that manner in
the rest of the Churches throughout the whole world, they [ viz. the rest of
the Churches throughout the whole world] observing from Apostolical Tradition,
which came down to that time [ viz. about the 97th after S. Iohn] that only on
that day, which should be also the weekly day of the Resurrection of the Lord,
they ought to dissolve or end their fastings. If (...) [(...)] (...), then were
they by Apostolical tradition to have fasts preceding that day. (...)* And they
all with one sentence declared -- that on the Lords day only (Easter day) we do
observe to end our Paschal Fasts. Eusebius. l. 5. c. 23.
You see both parts agreed in my conclusion, that the feast of Easter Day was
to conclude certain fasting-daies, and all this is witnessed in Eusebius l. 5.
c. 23, 24. Difference there was: 1. About what day should be that Easter Day,
and conclusion of their fasting-daies, they having indeed received different
traditions. S. John and S. Philip finding it useful in those parts of Asia,
where many Jews inhabited, by condescension to observe the Christian Easter on
the same day with the Jewish Easter; letting them to see, that we as festivally
remembered Jesus Christ our true Passover, and our deliverance by him, as they
expected one to come. But S. Peter and S. Paul where no such cause was
prescribed, as meet, not to disjoyn their anniversary from their weekly
memorial-day of Christ's resurrection Touching this a Council was held in
Palaestina, wherein Theophilu^ Bishop of C^sarea presided, and Narcissus Bishop
of Jerusalem: another Council at Rome wherein Victor presided: another in
Pontus, wherein Palma a^ the senior Bishop presided: another Council in France,
wherein Irenaeus was President: another in the Province of Osdreena. Eusebius. l.
5. c 23. etc. 25. Narcissus, Theophylus, and Cassius Bishop of Tire, and Clarus
Bishop of Ptolemais, and the Bishops with these assembled, (...), handled
largely of the Tradition of the Paschal season, which had come down to them
from the Apostles by succession.
.

2. Particular Churches then differed (none doubting, but on Easter Day they
were to end their fastings, yet) about the degree and rigor of the fasts, and
number of the fasting-daies. In which matter, different constitutions of
bodies, and minds, in different countries, might call for different allowances
from the very first. Socrates recording the diverse Customs of observing this
Fast in diverse Churches, says thus, l. 5. c 22. (...)* Advertising us as of
sundry customs in diverse nations, so also of sundry causes of those customs
in different nations.
But which of them once doubted, differed or disagreed touching this, Whether
an Easter Day were at all to be kept, or, Whether any such Paschal Fasts were
at all to be observed, As Socrates ibid. having recounted the different usages
about the number of the days of this Paschal Fast; adds, (...)* other such
different usages there were about the Synaxes, (or public meetings for
Communions) viz. whether Saturday also, Wednesday, and Friday, as well as the
Lords day: but yet all agreed of Synaxes, that they ought to be, yea, and that
every Lords day at least.
whose time of ending only was their controversy? and yet the time next before
Easter still agreed on for the Fasts. (As they now in our times which vilify
the one, vilify the other also). The Antepaschal Fast and Paschal Feast were
so inseparably conjoined, that in many of the ancients, Pascha, signifies both;
as in Tertullian l. 2. de Iejuniis c. 13. Convenio vos and praeter Pascha,
citra illos dies quibus ablatus est sponsus stationum semijejunia
interponentes. He there expounding Pascha, by the days in which the Bridegroom
was taken away. And C. 14. Nunquam nisi in Pascha jejunandum, and so that of
Timotheus Alexandrinus, (...) Pasca jejunare. Ambros l d* Elia and jejunio hoc
jejunium (Quadragesim^) Domini Pascha includit.
For this cause Irenaeus (who says himself had seen Polycarp, S. John's
Disciple) satisfying Victor in his Epistle to him, tells him, that not only
concerning the day it self of Easter, there was controversy, (...), but also
touching the manner it self of the Fast, therein supposing it without
controversy, that the Fast it self, (though some differed about the form of
it) was, but was with difference, observed long before, as well as the day of
Easter. For so it follows in his words, (...). And such variety in those that
observe the fast was not now first in our days, but long before, in their times
who lived before us. And yet before that difference also, he there records,
that there preceded an agreement, a simple and plain custom ( viz. for those
that had health and strength) which some not accurately enough retaining,
changed into that which followed after. His words are, (...). Now Irenaeus writ
this about the 97th year after S. John's death; That long before his days there
had been that difference, and before that difference, there had preceded a
simple and plain custom of the form of fasting, which they (who brought in the
difference) changed into what followed. Before that difference, which was long
before, the space of 97 years after the Apostles, what uniform custom could
there precede in the Christian Church, and not be from the Apostles own times?
and yet the following difference also agreed to a Paschal Fast. So as Irenaeus
had good cause to conclude that his discourse, as there he does to Victor:
(...). The very difference of their fasting commends or establishes the
agreement of their faith, viz. that yet they all by their several fasting,
professed to believe on that death and passion of the Bridegroom, the memorial
whereof, their agreeing to fast in the days next before Easter (rhough
disagreeing about the number of the days, or the rigor, or the time, both of
Easter, and so of the Fasts) did unanimously profess.

In the Second Century of years after the death of the last of the Apostles
(the children of the Bridechamber) I allege first the Canons called
Apostolical, not so called as made by the Apostles themselves, but by
Apostolical Bishops, (not seldom called in the language of the Ancients (...),
witness THEODORET and others) as next, or near successors unto the Apostles.
The first fifty of which Canons are probable to have been made in the foregoing
Century, and the latter thirty five in this Century. (Excepted only the (...),
or assumentum corruptly added to the last.) And all the eighty five confirmed
by the sacred Sixth General Council, Can. 2d. The eighth and sixtyninth of
which Canons command, That every Bishop, Presbyter and Deacon, celebrate after
the vernal Equinox, (...), the holy Easter day; and that they fast, (...)
(...), the holy Lent: And at other times the 4th and 6th day of the week, where
though the Sanction of spiritual penalties was added by these successors of the
Apostles; yet that 6th general Council in Trullo, doubts not, but the matter it
self pressed they had received from the Apostles; and therefore both the first
general Council of Nice, Can. 5th, and the 6th general Council, Can. 55. and
the Provincial Council of Laodicea (it self also confirmed in the 4th general
Council) Can. 45. refer themselves to, and mention the (...), or (...), The
holy Fast of Lent, as a thing known and established before the first of those,
in the universal Church, and yet not established by any foregoing General
Council, yea, or so much as any Provincial; and therefore there being no other
universal cause possible to create such a foregoing universal establishment,
beside Tradition Apostolical, it must needs, according to St. Augustine's rule,
as well as by the probability of these Apostolical Canons, have come from the
Apostles.

This is confirmed in the same age by Origen's manner of mention of this Fast;
who not only in his eighth Book against Celsus, mentions the (...), or weekly
memorial-Fasts of the Bridegrooms taking away, and Pascha, as that which all
Christians had received, and were ready to answer for, if objected by Celsus;
but also in his tenth Homily upon Leviticus (and sunt Origenis, says Gerard
rightly of these Homilies) thus witnesses, Habemus enim Quadragesimae dies
jeju^iis consecratos; quartam and sextam septimanae dies; quibus solenniter
jejunamus. And all this he calls, abstinentiam Christianam, the abstinence of
Christians, (which must needs have the first teachers of Christianity for its
authors) we have the days of Lent consecrated to fastings, the fourth and sixth
day also of the week; on which we fast solemnly, says Origin.

My third Witness in this age, is DIONYSIUS, the Bishop of Alexandria, who
lived in the middle of that age, successor of S. Mark, and contemporary to S.
Cyprian, he in his Epistle to Basilides the Bishop, records the Fast before
Easter, as universal, as the joy and Feast of Easter, (which I have evidently
proved above, was from the Apostles) His words are, (...). It will be confessed
of all agreeably, that we ought to begin the feast ( viz. of Easter) and joy,
until that time humbling our souls in fastings -- They truly which make too
much haste, and before well toward midnight, break their fast, we blame as
regardless, and not masters of their appetite, giving over the race a little
before the goal -- Such indeed who are much wor^ by the fasts, and toward the
end, as it were saint, we easily pardon, if they eat sooner. and in the same
Epistle he mentions in special manner the 6. days of fasts, to wit, those of
the last week not alike observed of all.

In the 3d Century of years after the death of S. JOHN, CONSTANTINE the GREAT,
(whose witness seems to have been of his information from the Bishops of the
Christian world assembled in Nice) in his Epistle to the Christian Churches
(recorded both in Eusebius writing his life, l. 3. c. 17, 18. and Socrates, l.
1. c. 6. and Theodoret, l. 1. c. 10.) he writes thus: (...) -- and then a
little after he subjoyneth, (...) -- c. 20. -- (...). All, or at least the
greater part of Bishops being assembled together, [ viz. at N^ce] where there
was also disquisition of the most holy day of Pasche -- After that order, which
we have kept from the first day it self of the Passion of the Lord, [ viz. anno
Christi 33.] until now, the same observation to be continued unto the ages to
come also -- For our Savior has delivered one solemnity, to wit, the day, [or
time] of his most holy passion, the day of our freedom, and would that his
Catholic Church also should be one -- A little after he subjoyns the appointed
fastings. Now this is the wel-becoming order, which all the Churches of the
West and of the North, and of the South parts of the world do observe, yea, and
some also of the Eastern Churches -- Neither is it seemly in so great a
holiness, [of observance] there should be any difference* -- And copies of this
Letter the Emperor sent to every Province.

My second witness in this Century is S. BASIL the GREAT, the Archbishop of
Caesa^ea in Cappadocia, in his second Sermon of fasting *viz, at the time of
the Lent-fast* (...). For neither does the despite of Devils dare any thing
against him that fasteth. And the Angels guardians of our life do more
studiously abide by such who have their souls purified by fasting. And more
especially now when the edict (of this Fast) is proclaimed throughout all the
world. -- There are Angels who in each Church register those that fast. -- Art
thou rich? do not contumeliously entertain the fast -- nor send it away
disgraced from thy house -- lest it accuse thee before the Lawgiver of the
Fasts, [of the fasts he says not only of fasting, God is the Lawgiver, and his
Sermon is here of the Lent-fasts] (...). And lest it bring upon thee from that
accusation a manifold mulct, either from weak estate of body, or some other sad
accident -- -- (...). Suffer affliction as a good Soldier, and strive thou
lawfully that thou may be crowned, this knowing, that every one that striveth
for masteries is continent in all things -- [one accusation he recounteth] that
a man should be convinced to have cast away the great weapon of fasting:
Fasting is the beginning of penance or repentance, the continence of the
tongue, the bridle of anger, the banishment of lust. -- Fasting is our
assimulation unto the Angels, the temperament of life. And in his Sermon
preached in the beginning of Lent, ( Homil. 1. de Iejunio) (...). The Lord who
has brought us unto this revolution of this time, grant unto us as combatants
entering upon this beginning, to show forth the firmness and intention of
perseverance, that we may attain unto the day, which is proper for rewards. Now
it being the day of the commemoration of our Saviors Passion: and in the world
to come, of retribution. -- Daniel a man of desires who fasted 3. weeks, and
learnt the Lions to fast, [their prey being before them.]

The next witness is S. GREGORY NAZIANZEN in his forty first and second
orations, (...). We have fasted [speaking of the fast in Lent] because we
fasted not from the tree of knowledge, having been overcome thereby: for fasting
was an old command, and coaeval with us. It is the paedagogy of the soul, and
the moderation of sensual delight, which is very m^tly enjoined us, that what
we l^ by not observing that precept of fasting, we may recover again, observing
it: yesterday I was crucified with Christ, to day as it were glorisi'd with him
-- This is the Easter of the Lord* the Easter, and again I say the Easter, the
honor of the Trinity, the feast of feasts, and solemnity of solemnities, as
much exceeding all, not those only which are humane, and come from us on earth;
but also the other feasts of Christ himself, and which are celebrated relating
to him; as the Sun excels the stars -- By our passions we imitate his Passion,
etc. And Oration the 4th, (...) ((...)) (...). Christ fasted a little before
his temptation, we before the Paschal feast, the matter of fastings is one [ in
both.] This has in us the force of mortisying us with Christ, and is the
purifying preparation to the Feast. And he indeed fasted 40. days; for he was
God; but we proportionate this to our power, though zeal persuade some to leap
even beyond their strength This S. Gregory Nazianzen his 74. Epistle written to
Celeusius the Judge, who (as it may seem by this Epistle) in the time of the
Churches public fastings, in stead of Fasting propounded obs^ene shows to
delight the people. (...) [(...), so the sense requires, and so Billius, who
had the use of MSS. R interp ets it, qui non jejunes] (...) Now I will speak
the things which become our friendship, and this season, [ viz. of fasting] you
O Judge as not fasting transgress the Law. And how shall you be a preserver of
humane Laws, who con^emn the Laws Divine? ^urge your own Tribunal, lest of
these two things one happen, either that you be an evil man, or appear such. To
set before the people fil^hy shows, is to publish your self upon the stage.
The sum is, O Judge, know, that you are to be judged, and you will offend less.
I had nothing better to give you then this counsel.
.

The fourth witness of this age is EPIPHANIUS In expositione fidei Catholicae;
(...). And also in Compend. fidei c. 22. (...). The same Church [ viz.
Catholic of which he speaks] has been wont to observe Lent, continuing in
fastings; but the 6. days of the week before Easter all the people continue in
dry [o^ stricter] diet. Again they celebrate public meetings (or synaxes of
Communion) all those 6. days As our Church also prescribes assemblies, and
Communion-service also, every day in this great week.
-- And on the 4th day of the week, and on the day before the Sabbath [ viz. on
Friday] they are in fasting unto the ninth hour; [ viz. our 3. a clock in the
afternoon] for as much as on the 4th day the Lord was taken, [that is, money
taken for his taking] and on the Friday He was crucified. And the Apostles have
delivered that on these days fasts should be celebrated, to the fulfilling of
that which was spoken, that when the Bridegroom shall be taken from them, then
shall they fast in those days. And in Heresy. 75th (...) (...). And in the
days of the Paschal-fast, [or the week at least of it before Easter,] when
with us there are lyings on the ground, purities, afflictive sufferings,
prayers, watchings and fastings: They [the Aerians] from the morning feed
themselves with flesh and wine, filling their veins, and deride us, laughing
and mocking at such as celebrate the holy service of this week -- So that he
shows hereby his mind, and his unbelief.

The fifth witness of this age is the renowned S. AMBROSE Bishop of Millan in
his 4th Book upon S. Luke (S. Ambrose's most undoubted work) Siquis Evangelii
gloriam fructumque Resurrectionis optat adipisci, mystici jejunii praevaricator
esse non debet, quod and in lege Moses, and in Evangelio suo Christus utriusque
Testamenti autoritate praescripsit fidele virtutis esse certamen. If any man
desire to obtain the glory of the Gospel, and the fruit of the Resurrection, he
ought not to be a transgressor of the mystical fast, which both Moses in the
Law did, and Christ in his Gospel has prescribed; by the authority of both
Testaments, a space for the faithful striving of virtue. The same Author in
his Book de Helia and Iejunio; Non autem omnis fames acceptabile jejunium
facit, sed fames quae Dei timore suscipitur. Considera: Quadrage sima totis
praeter Sabbatum and Dominicam jejunatur diebus. Not every hunger makes an
acceptable fast, but that hunger which is undertaken from the fear of God.
Consider: A Lent is fasted with us all days, except Saturday, and the Lords
day. Now of this Fast of Lent, he says in his 23. Sermon, Dominus Jesus
Christus hunc eundem numerum jejunii consecravit. -- And Sermon the 36. Hunc
quadraginarium numerum non ab hominibus constitutum, sed divinitus consecratum
-- haec autem non tam sacerdotum praecepta, quam Dei sunt. And in Sermon the
25. Dominus enim Diabolum posteaquam 40. dies jejunavit, evicit; non quod non
and ante jejunia eum vincere potuisset, sed ut ostenderet nobis tunc nos
Diaboli posse esse victores, cum 40. dies victores jejunando desideriorum
carnalium fuissemus. -- Non enim, fratres, leve peccatum est sidelibus indictam
Quadragesimam and jejunia consecrata ventris voracitate dissolvere; scriptum
est, Qui dicit se in Christo manner debet, sicut ille ambulavit, and ipse
ambulare -- Ille qui peccatum non habebat, Quadragesimam jejunavit: tu non vis
Quadragesimam jejunare, qui peccas? ille inquam peccatum non habebat, sed pro
nostris jejunavit peccatis. The Lord Jesus Christ has consecrated this same
number of lasting -- This Quadragesimal number not constituted of men, (...)
consectated from God -- Now these are not so much the precepts of the Priests,
as of God. And Sermon 25. For the Lord after he had fasted 40. days overcame
the Devil, not but that he could have overcome him also before [or without]
fastings: but that he might show unto us, that then we can overcome the devil,
when by forty days we have been through fasting victors over our carnal desires
-- For neither, O brethren, is it a little fault to break by greediness of the
belly, the Lent indicted to Believers, -- the consecrated fasts. It is written,
He that says he abides in Christ, ought himself also so to walk, as he walked.
[ viz. as Nazianzen above attemperating his example to our strength.] He that
had no sin, fasted a Lent, and wilt not thou who sinnest? He, I say, had no
sin, but fasted for our sins. Again in his 60. Sermon. which is on the day of
Pentecost, (a Sermon which all agree to be his, or Maximus Episcopus
Taurinensis's, and the odds is little which it be, for that either of their
authorities is great enough.) Sic enim disposuit Dominus, ut sicut ejus
passione in Quadragesimae jejuniis contristaremur, ita ejus resurrectione in
Quinquagesimae feriis laetaremur. Non igitur jejunamus in hac Quinquagesima;
quia in his diebus nobiscum Dominus commoratur; non inquam jejunamus praesente
Domino, quia ipse ait: Nunquid possunt silii sponsi jejunare, quandiu cum illis
est sponsus? For so has the Lord appointed, that as for his Passion, we should
mourn in the fasts of Lent, so for his Resurrection we should rejoice in the
50. days following; therefore we fast not in this 50. days, because in these
the Lord is with us, we fast not, I say, the Lord being present; because he
has said, Can the children of the Bridegroom fast so long as the Bridegroom is
with them? Lastly, this same S. Ambrose in his Sermon. de Iejunio and Helia, thus
preaches toward the end of Lent, Propitia Divinitate ecce jam pene transegimus
Quadragesimae indicta jejunia, and praecepta Domini abstinentiae devotione
complevimus. Behold, through the mercy of God we have past through the indicted
fasts of Lent, and have fulfilled by the devotion of abstinence the commands of
the Lord.

A sixth testimony of this age, is that of THEOPHILUS Patriarch of Alexandria,
who in his first Paschal Epistle thus writes: Eoque omnis impraesentiarum
adsumatur labor, ut and eos qui paululum negligentes sunt, and nosmet ipsos
aeternae gloriae praeparemus -- and homines provocantur (terrarum humilia
deserentes) cum Ecclesia primitivorum Dominicae passionis festa celebrare --
Non est ergo, non est haereticorum ulla solennitas -- Igitur Dominicum Pascha
celebrantes sanctis scripturarum purificemur Eloquiis -- -- Curemus diversa
vitiorum vulnera -- Sic poterimus imminentium jejuniorum iter carpere,
incipientes Quadragesimam a tricesima die mensis Mechir, and hebdomadam
salutaris Paschae, quinta die mensis Pharmuthi, finientesque jejunia secundum
Evangelicas traditiones vespere Sabbati, decima die Pharmuthi: and illucescente
statim Dominica, festa celebremus undecima die ejusdem mensis, jungentes and
septem reliquas hebdomadas sanctae Pentecostes: ut cum iis qui Trinitatis unam
confitentur Divinitatem, in coelis praemia recipiamus in Christo Jesus Domino
nostro. To that end let all our labor be taken at present to prepare both
those which are something negligent, and our selves unto eternal glory -- And
thereby men are provoked (forsaking the low things of the earth) to celebrate
the solemnities of the Lords Passion with the Church of the primitives [or
first-born] -- Therefore Heretics acknowledge not any solemnity -- let us
celebrating the Pasche of our Lord be purified by the holy words of the
Scriptures -- Let us cure the diverse wounds of vices, etc. -- And so may we
enter the fasts at hand, beginning Lent from the 30th day of the month Mechir
[and therein] the week of the Salutary Pasche on the 5th day of the month
Pharmuth, and ending the fasts according to the Evangelical Traditions on the
evening of the Saturday, being the 10th day of Pharmuth: and on the next
Lord's Day the 11th of the same month let us celebrate the feasts; adjoining
also the 7. following weeks of the holy 50. days; that with them who confess
the one Godhead of the Holy Trinity, we may partake of the rewards in heaven,
through Christ Jesus our Lord. So also in his 2d Paschal Epistle: Pascha
celebrare habentes, Quadragesimae exordium ab octava die mensis, qui secundum
Aegyptios vocatur Pharmenoth; and ipso praebente vires, attentius jejunemus,
hebdomadae majoris, i. e. Paschae venerabilis die 13. mensis Pharmuthi
fundamenta jacientes; ita duntaxat ut juxta Evangelicas traditiones siniamus
jejunia intempesta nocte, die 18. supra dicti mensis Pharmuthi -- and
praehentes nos dignos communionis corporis and sanguinis Christi. Having to
celebrate Easter, let us begin our Lent from the 8th day of the month, which
with the Egyptians is called Pharmenoth; and God giving us strength let us
fast more carefully on the Great week, howbeit so, that according to the
Evangelical Traditions, we end the fasts late at night, on the 18th day of
Pharmuth -- Rendering our selves worthy receivers of the communion of the body
and blood of Christ. And in his 3. Paschal Epistle he writes thus: Quotquot
sanctum Pascha celebramus, continentia atque jejuniis latorem legis amicum
nobis esse faciamus -- Ornantes nos scientia Scripturarum quasi solennibus
vestimentis -- -- fugantes omnem negligentiam, and rumpentes moram, ut alacri
cum discipulis ad Salvatorem pergamus incessu, dicamusque ei: Ubi vis paremus
tibi Pascha? -- ad solennitatem properemus atque dicamus; mihi autem absit
gloriari nisi in cruce Christi. Dabit, inquam, dabit laborantibus gaudium, and
jejunantibus benedicens loquetur: Erunt domui Iudae in gaudium, and laetitiam,
and in solennitates bonas, and laetabimini. As many of us as celebrate the holy
Pasche, let us as celebrate the holy Pasche, let us make the Author of the Law,
a friend unto us by continency and fastings -- -- adorning our selves with the
knowledge of the Scriptures as with solemn garments, chasing away all
negligence, and breaking off delay, that we may cheerfully go with the
Disciples to our Savior, and say unto him, Where will thou that we prepare
unto thee the Passover? -- Let us make haste to the solemnity, and say, God
forbid that I should glory save in the Cross of Christ, then he will give, he
will give, I say, joy to them that labor, and blessing them that fast, will
say; [the fasts] shall be to the house of Judah for joy and gladness, and joyous
solemnity, and ye shall rejoice.

A seventh witness is S. HIEROME in his Epistle to Marcella, Nos unam
Quadragesimam secundum traditionem Apostolorum toto anno, tempore nobis congruo
jejunamus. Montanistae tres in anno faciunt Quadragesimas, quasi tres passi
sint salvatores, non quod per totum annum, excepta Pentecoste, jejunare non
liceat; sed quod aliud sit necessitate, aliud voluntate munus afferre. We fast
one Lent within the compass of the whole year, according to the Tradition of
the Apostles, in a season fit [for our mysteries.] The Montanists keep three
Lents in the year, as if three Saviors had suffered. Not but that it is lawful
to fast throughout the whole year, except in the 50. days; but it is one thing
to fast by necessity, another thing to bring a gift of ones own will. Again in
his 2. Book against Iovinian: In foribus Evangelii Anna silia Phanuelis univira
inducitur, semperque jejunans. Et Dominum virginem longa castitas longaque
jejunia suscepere. -- Acriora daemonia docuit [Dominus] non nisi oratione and
jejunio posse superari. -- -- est Dominus, qui 40 diebus Christianorum jejunium
sanctisicavit, qui beatos appellat esurientes and sitientes, [Luke 6. 21.] In
the very doors of the Gospel we meet with Anna the daughter of Phanuel, that
had been the wise of one Husband, and her long purity, and long continued use
of fastings received [in her arms the Lord, the Virgin -- The Lord has taught
us that the fiercer sort of Devils cannot be overcome but by prayer and fasting
-- It is the Lord, who has sanctified the fast of the Christians in 40. days,
who calls them happy, which hunger and thirst. The same S. Jerome in his
Comment. upon Jonah. c. 3. Ipse quoque Dominus verus Jonas missus ad
praedicationem mundi, jejunavit 40. dies, and haereditatem nobis jejunii
derelinquens, ad esum corporis sui, sub hoc numero nostras animas praeparat.
The Lord himself, the true Jonas sent to preach unto the world, fasted 40
days, and leaving us the inheritance of the fast, under this number, prepares
our souls for the eating of his Body. The same St. Hierom says in his Comment.
on Isaiah the 58. Dominus 40. diebus in solitudine jejunavit, ut nobis solennes
jejuniorum dies relinqueret. The Lord fasted 40. days in the wilderness, that
he might leave unto us the solemn days of the fasts.

My eighth witness of this age shall be S. CHRYSOSTOM, who in his 3d and 16th
Sermons ad populum Antiochenum, (which 16th Sermon, he preached in the 3. week
of Lent) (wherein now we are) (...) (...), says he, we have passed the second
week of the fast, (in which time he preached to the people day by day) (...).
This spiritual summer of this fast now appearing, let us as Soldiers wipe off
the dust from our arms. (...). In the time of Lent, it is the manner of all to
ask, how many weeks each one has fasted; and you may hear some answer, two,
and some three, and some answer that they have fasted all the weeks. And in his
11th Lent-Sermon upon Genesis, (...), [(...)] (...). Wherefore in every thing
due measure and moderation is best. -- According whereunto therefore concerning
this season also of the holy Lent, we shall now find it to have been ruled out
unto us. For as in public conveiance of travelers, there are certain stages
and innes, that the passengers wearied may rest themselves, and intermitting
their labors, they may again set upon their journey -- In like manner here
also in holy Lent THE LORD HAS INDULGED these two weekly days [the Saturday,
and the Lords day] to such as undertake this course of this fast, like certain
stages, or innes, shores, or havens, that both the body may be a little relaxed
from its labors of the fasting, and the mind comforted; that when these two
days shall be past over, they may again with cheerfulness, set upon this their
good and profitable traveling in this way. (...). Set on this journey which
leads unto Heaven, this strait and narrow way -- Keeping under thy body and
bringing it into subjection -- And the ground and teacher of all these things,
fasting will be unto us; fasting, I mean, not that of most men, but that which
is the accurate fast, viz. the abstinence not from meats only, but from sins.
For the nature of fasting only, is not sufficient to deliver such as betake
themselves unto it; except it be done agreeably to its law. -- Let us learn the
laws of fasting, how we ought to fast, that we run not uncertainly, nor beat
the air, nor fight with a shadow whilst we fast -- These things I have said,
not that we may dishonor fasting, but that we may honor it.

GREGORY NYSSENE, the Brother of S. Basil the Great, is my 9th witness in this
age in his 2d Oration of the Resurrection, (...). Matthew added the time when
it began to dawn toward the first day of the week: The night, says he, was so
far passed that it was now the time of cock-crowing, which gives warning that
the light of the approaching day is at hand. [Speaking of the day of Christ's
Resurrection] For this cause also at this time, [ viz. far in the night before
Easter-day] and not in the very evening of the Saturday [but (...), as Cyril of
Alexandria says in his 8th Paschal Homily, far in the night] we DISSOLVE OR
END THE FASTINGS, and begin the joy, the custom, that obtains withal men,
consenting hereto.

My last witness of this age is AURELIUS PRUDENTIUS hymno Septimo jejunantium.

Helias crevit tali observantia,
Vetus sacerdos ruris hospes aridi:
Ioannes hujus art is haud minus potens
Dei perenni praecurrit Filio:
Hanc obsequelam praeparabat nuntius,
Mox affuturo construens iter Deo, --
Pridem caducis cum gravatus artubus
Jesus dicato cord iejunaverit.
Inhospitali namque secretus loco,
Quinis diebus octies labentibus
Nullam ciborum vindicavit gratiam.
Hoc nos sequamur, quisque nunc proviribus,
Quod consecrati tu Magister dogmatis
Tuis dedisti Christ sectatoribus.
After mention of Elias and John Baptist's fastings as forerunners of Christ's,
he adds, that Jesus also in the time of his flesh, did with a devoted heart
fast, separating himself from men in the inhospitable desert, and took no
refreshment of food through eight times five days. That which thou O Christ,
the Master of our consecrated Religion, did deliver to thy followers, that
let each of us now, according to our several measures of strength, follow. And
because of the difference of men's strength, agreeably to what Ire^us had said,
that there was difference (...), about the sort or measure of fasting; so this
author Prudentius also in hymno octavo poss jejunium, though he had said that
Christ delivered the fast to his followers, yet says:

Laxus ac liber modus abstinendi
Ponitur cunctis; neque nos severus
Terror impellit, sua quemque cogit
Velle potestas.
A free manner or measure of abstaining is propounded to all, not any one by
severe terror enforced, but every man's strength is a law to his nill.

In the fourth Century after the death of S. John the Apostle, I produce first
S. AUGUSTINE; who though in his 86. Epistle he say, that he finds no* where
written in the Books of the New Testament, any precept of the Lord or the
Apostles defining on what days we ought to fast (albeit he says, he finds
there fasting commanded,) yet he forthwith purposely explains himself in these
words, Non in^, at jam supra commemoravi, in Evangelicis and Apo^. cis literis,
etc. Evidenter praeceptum, that is, abstracting from all interpretation by
traditions Apostolical (of w^ sort, in many places, he acknowledges many to be
obliging) in the writings only, of the New Testament, he says, he finds not
evidenter praeceptum quibus diebus. No where expressly, or evidently prescribed,
what days, viz. no such express precept, nor evident text, but what may need
against contradictors, the Catholic Churches interpretation, which is the
thing we contend for. For the same S. Augustine in his 119. Epistle to
Ianuarius tells us of this very fast of Lent enough to our purpose.
Quadragesima sane jejuniorum HABET AUTHORITATEM and in veteribus libris, and EX
EVANGELIO, etc. -- In qu^ ergo part anni congruentius observatio Quadragesimae
constitueretur, nisi consini atque contigua Dominicae Passioni? The Lent truly
of fastings HAS AUTHORITY both in the old Books, and FROM OUT OF THE GOSPEL --
In what part therefore of the year more aptly could the observation of Lent be
constituted, then in that which is conterminous and next unto the Passion of
the Lord? ( viz. the time of the year wherein the Bridegroom was taken away.)
And having fetched the ground and authority of the fast of Lent from the Gospel,
he then adds in the following part of the same Epistle, Ut quadraginta illi
dies ante Pascha observentur, Ecclesiae consuetudo roboravit, That those forty
days before Easter, be observed the custom of the Church has strengthened or
corroborated. Yea, the same S. Augustine in the aforesaid 86. Epistle objected,
teaches us the ground of certain other set fasts, to be the days wherein the
Bridegroom was taken away. His words are these, Cur autem quarta and sexta
feria maxim jejunat Ecclesia [ viz. Catholica] illa ratio reddi videtur, quod
CONSIDERATO EVANGELIO, ipsa quart^ Sabbati -- concilium reperiantur ad
occidendum Dominum fecisse Iudaei, -- Deinde traditus est ea nocte, quae jam ad
sextam sabbati, qui dies passionis ejus manifestus est, pertinebat: Now why the
Church [Catholick] fasts especially on the 4th and 6th day of the week, that
reason or account seems to be rendered, that the Gospel being considered, on the
4th day of the week the Jews are found to have held a council for the killing
of the Lord. -- That afterward he was delivered up in that night which
belonged to the 6th day of the week, which manifestly is the day of his
Passion, says he: which reason from Epiphanius also ye heard before And S.
Augustine again in the (...) 86. Epistle: Passu^ est Domi^, quod nullus
ambigit, sext^ sabbat^, quapropter and ipsa sexta recte jejunio deputatur:
jejunia quippe humili^atem significant. Unde dictum est humiliabam jejunio
ani^am meam: The Lord suffered (which no man doubts) on the 6th day of the
week, wherefore the 6th day of the week also is appointed for fasting: for that
fasting signifies our humility; whence it is said, I humbled my soul with
fasting. (...), not (...), Ps. 69. 10.
That for the weekly: now for the anniversary solemnity of Christ's passion,
(which in no place had its solemnity without fasting) We learn from St.
Augustine in the 118. Epistle to Ianuarius, that if it was not first
constituted by some General Council (as for certain it was not, but in the
Church universally received long before the Council of Nice, before which there
had been no General Council, save that of the Apostles themselves) then it is
retained, as commanded and appointed from Tradition Apostolical. His words are
these: Illa autem quae non scripta, sed tradita custodimus, quae quidem toto
terrarum o^le observantur, dantur intelligi, vel ab ipsis Apostolis, vel
plenariis Conciliis, quorum est in Ecclesia saluberrima autoritas, commendata
atque statuta retineri, SICUTI QUOD DO MINI PASSIO and resurrectio and ascensio
in coelum, and adventus de coelo Spiritus sancti anniversaria solennita^e
celebrantur. But those things which we keep being not written, but delivered
down, which are observed throughout the whole world, are given us to
understand, that they are retained, as commended and appointed EITHER FROM THE
APOSTLES THEMSELVES, or from plenary, [ h. e. general] Councels; whose
authority in the Church is most wholesome; as for example, that the Passion of
the Lord, and his Resurrection and Ascension are celebrated in anniversary
solemnity; Thus S. Augustine. But the anniversary solemnity of Christ's Passion
was not first from any plenary or general council; therefore according to S.
Augustine's Catholic rule, it was delivered from the Apostles. By which
testimony also you may perfectly discern, how S. Augustin's [ Non invenio in
literis evidenter praeceptum, I do not find it in the writing of the Gospels or
the Apostles, etc.] is nothing contrary, in S. Augustin's judgment, to the
fast of Lents derivation from the Apostles: nor to that authority (although not
evident precept) which S. Augustine himself fetched from out of the Gospel, for
it. It is the same S. Augustine, who in his roll of Heresies, haeres. 53. has
registered it as one part of the A^rians superaddition to the Arrian heresy,
that they taught, nec statuta solenniter celebranda esse jejunia, sed cum
quisque voluerit jejunandum ne videatur esse sub lege: They denied that the set
fasts ought solemnly to be celebrated, but that every one is to fast then, when
himself shall please, lest he should seem to be under the Law: which Damascen
expresses yet more particularly (in his Book of Heresies) that this Aerius bad
that the fast of the 4th and 6th day of the week, and of the 40 days, and
Easter, should not be observed, nor any set fasts, Certis statisque diebus --
negat enim se lege teneri: No set or stated fasts, for that, he says, he is
not under the Law.

My second witness of this age shall be S. CYRIL the renowned Patriarch of
Alexandria, and most eminent member of the third General Council, (to the
Patriarchs of which See, it was entrusted by the first General Council, that
they should yearly signify before hand to the rest of the Churches (as well as
their own) the true time of Easter. This S. Cyril therefore in his 7th Homily,
de festis Paschalibus, thus gives public notification of the time: (...).
Beginning the holy Lent from such a day, and ending the Fasts on the 3d day of
the month Pharmuthi, on the Saturday evening, ACCORDING TO THE APOSTOLICAL
TRADITIONS.

Again, in his 15th Homily, de festis Paschalibus, (...). Beginning [this year]
the holy Lent from such a (...), and ending the Fasts on the 7th day of the
month Pharmuthi, late at night, according to the Traditions Apostolical.

And Homily 20th de (...). Pasch. (...). So, so let us keep a pure fast,
beginning the holy Lent from such a day, ending also the fasts on the 7th day
of Pharmuthi [ h. e. just 40 days after; as also above in the two forecited
testimonies] late or far in the evening, According to the Traditions
Apostolical.

Thus thrice he clearly refers the Fasts of Lent to Tradition Apostolical, as
the same S. Cyril in nineteen other of his Homilies de Festis Paschalibus
(preached in so many several years) refers the same Fasts of Lent to Tradition,
Appointment, or Instruction Evangelical.

Homil. 4. de Fest. Paschal. (...).
Beginning the holy Lent from the 26. day of the month Mechir [as it were our
February] and (within this Lent) beginning the week of the salutary Pasch (or
great week before Easter) on the first day of the month Pharmuthi (or April)
and ending the Fasts According to the Evangelical Constitutions, on the
Saturday evening, which is the 6th day of the same month Pharmuthi [which is
punctually 40. days after the beginning on the 26. of Mechir: the Egyptians
reckoning 30. days in every moneth] and keeping the Feast [ viz. Easter day]
on the next day, the dawning Lords day, which is the 7th day of that month
Pharmuthi: an^exing immediately after also the seven weeks of the holy 50 days
solemnity.

And Homily the 6. de Fest. Paschal. (...).
Beginning the holy Lent from, etc. superseding the Fasts on the 11th day of
the month Pharmuthi on Saturday evening, According to the Evangelical
Tradition.

Again Homily 9. de Fest. Paschal. (...) (...). Beginning the) (...) Lent from,
etc. and ending the Fasts on the 7th day of Pharmuthi, upon Saturday evening,
AS THE EVANGELICAL PREACHING BIDS.

And Homily 10th de Fest. Paschal. (...).


Beginning the Holy Lent from, etc. and ending the Fasting days on the 29th of,
etc. late at night, According to the Evangelical Tradition.

And so Homily 25th, and Homily the 26th, and Homily the 27th, you have the
same testimony with the tenth, in the same words (in three other years.)

And Homily 11th (...).


Beginning the holy Lent upon, etc. and ending the Fasts on, etc. [just forty
days after] late in the evening, According to the Evangelical Preaching.

And so Homilies 12, and 13, and 14, and 16, and 17, and 18, and 21, and 24,
and 30th, you have the same testimony with the 11th, in the same words (in nine
other years.)

And Homily 22. (...). Beginning the holy
Lent from, etc. and ending the Fasts on the 19th day of the month Phumuthi
late at night, According to the Traditions Evangelical. The same testimony in
the same words you have Homily the twenty third.

And Homily 28th, (...). Beginning the
holy Lent from, etc. and ending the Fasts on the 11th of Pharmuthi, late on
Saturday night, According to the Preachings Evangelical. The same testimony you
have Homily the 29th.

In all twenty two times, in twenty ^wo Homilies, on twenty two several years,
S. CYRIL the PATRIARCH proclaims to the Church the Fasts of Lent, according to
Traditions, Appointments, or Instructions Evangelical, or Apostolical (as he
says.)

My next and third witness of this age, is THEODORET, contemporary to S. CYRIL,
lib. 3. Haereticarum sabularum, c. 4. (...). Speaking of the Quartadecimani, he
says, Understanding amiss the Apostolical Tradition -- they celebrate the
memory of the Passion, as it happens, [ viz. on what day of the week soever the
Quartadecima luna does fall.]

A fourth witness of this age is Maximus Episcopus TAURINENSIS, in his 36th
Sermon, Sacrarum literarum exempla protulimus, quibus approbamus hunc
quadragenarium numerum non esse ab hominibus constitutum, sed Divinitus
Consecratum, neque terrena cogitatione initiatu^, sed Coelesti majestate
praeceptum -- haec non tam sacerdotum sunt praecepta quam Dei, atque ita qui ea
spernit, non sacerdotem spernit, sed Christum.

We have brought forth the examples of the holy Scriptures, by which we make
good, that this number -- forty, ( viz. of Fasts) was not constituted of men,
but consecrated of God: nor initiated by humane cogitation, but commanded by
the heavenly Majesty. -- These things are not so much the precepts of the
Priests, as of God; and so he that despises them, despises not the
Priesthood, but Christ.

The fifth is LEO the Great, Bishop of Rome, who in his third Sermon of Lent,
says on this wise, Merito doctrina Spiritus sa^li ^c eruditione im^uit populum
Christianum, ut ad Paschale festum quadraginta dierum continenti^ se
praepararet. With good cause has the DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY GHOST initiated the
Christian people with this instruction, that they should prepare themselves to
the Feast of Easter [that is, to the return of the Bridegroom] by the
abstinence of forty days. And in his sixth Sermon of Lent, Ut Apostolica
institutio quadraginta dierum jejuniis impleatur, non ciborum pa^citate
tantummodo, sed privatione maxim vitiorum. That the APOSTOLICAL INSTITUTION
may be fulfilled in the fast of forty days, not by sparing from our diet only,
but especially by abstinence from sins. And in his fourth Sermon of Lent, Quia
dum carnis ^ragilitate auster^or observa^o ^elaxatur, du^que per va^ias
actiones vitae hujus (...) ^o dis^enditur, ^esse est de (...) pulvere ^am
R^ligiosa co^da s^descere: IDEO MAGNA DIVINE INST^UTIONIS (...) (...) EST, ut
ad (...) mentium (...) (...) (...) (...) dierum exercitatio mederetur, (...)
quibus aliorum temporum culpas, and pia opera ^rent, and jejunia casta
decoquerent: For as much as while an austerer course of life is relaxed through
the frailty of the flesh, and anxious care grows upon us through the various
actions of this life, it cannot be, but that even religious hearts themselves
should gather some soil from the dust of this world; therefore it has been
PROVIDED BY THE SALUBRITY OF THE DIVINE INSTITUTION, that for the repairing the
purity of our minds, the exercitation of forty days should heal us; in which,
both pious works might redeem [ i. e. retract] and chaste fastings might
consume the faults of our other times. The same author in his ninth Sermon of
Lent, speaks on this wise: In quibus [ Paschalis jejunii diebus] Merito a
Sanctis Apostolis per Doctrinam Spiritus Sancti majora sunt ordinata jejunia,
ut per commune consortium Crucis Christi, etiam nos aliquid in eo, quod propter
nos gessit, ageremus, sicut Apostolus ait: si compa^imur, and
conglorisica^imur. In which [Paschal Fasts] with good cause severer fastings
were Ordained of the Holy Apostles by the Doctrine of the Holy Ghost, that by
[the fellowship of his sufferings] our conformity to the cross of Christ, we
also should have something, we should do in or concerning that which he did for
us, as the Apostle says; If we suffer with him, we shall also be glorified
with him. And in his fourth Sermon elsewhere of fasting, Inter omnia,
dilectissimi, Apostolicae instituta Doctrinae, quae ex Divinae institutionis
^onte ma^arunt, dubium non es^, influente in Ecclesiae principes Spiritu
sancto, hanc primu^ ab ^is (...) fuisse conceptam, ut sancti observa (...)
(...) omnium vi^utum regulas inchoare^t. Amongst all the Institutions of
Apostolical Doctrine (my beloved) which have issued forth from the fountain of
Divine appointment, there is no doubt, but that this observance with the first,
was conceived by them (the holy Ghost sending his influence upon those Princes
of the Church) that men should begin the rules of all virtues with the
observation of holy fasting. But I subsume, that if any conceived observance of
holy fasting was amongst the Institutions Apostolical, none is by any pretended
to be before the Paschal Fast. Therefore himself speaks to this same sense in
his fifth Sermon of Lent: Quando opportunius, dilectissimi, ad remedia Divina
recurrimus, quam cum ipsa nobis sacramenta redemptionis nostrae temporum lege
referantur, quae ut dignius celebremus, salu^errime nos quadraginta dierum
jejunio praeparemus? When more opportunely (my beloved) have we recourse to
divine remedies, then when the Sacraments themselves of our redemption, are by
the revolution of times brought about again to us, that we for the health of
our souls may prepare our selves with the fast of forty days for the more
worthy celebration of them? And in his twelfth Sermon, Appropinquante,
dilectissimi, solennitate Paschali, sic est praecurrenda consuetudo jejunii, ut
nos quadras ginta dierum numerus ad sanctisicationem corporis and mentis
exerceat -- unde in Coelestibus Ecclesiae disciplinis multum utilitatis
asferunt Divinitus instituta jejunia: The solemnity of Easter now approaching
(my beloved) the custom of the Fast is so to be praemitted, that the number of
forty days may exercise us for the sanctification of our body and mind -- so as
that in the heavenly disciplines of the Church, the Fasts instituted by God
bring [to us] much advantage.

The sixth witness of this age is CHRYSOLOGUS in his eleventh and twelfth
Sermons; Ecce tempus, quo miles procedit ad campum, recurrit ad Dei jejunia
Christianus, -- Quod quadragesimam jejunamus, Non est humana Inventio;
Autoritas est Divina. Et est mysticum, non praesumptum. Behold the time, in
which the soldier goes forth into the field, and the Christiam has recourse
unto the fasts of God -- That we fast a Lent, Is not of humane Invention, but
of Authority Divine; and it is mystical, not presumptive. And in his 166th
Sermon of the Fast of Lent, he lets us know why he calls it mystical: Ecce
Quadragesimae jejunium, quod devotione solenni, die crastino, suscipit
Universalis Ecclesia. -- Quadragenarius iste numerus sacratus a seculis. --
Quadraginta diebus ac noctibus expiaturus terram coelestis imber effunditur --
Attendite fratres quantus sit quadragenarius numerus iste, qui and tunc coelum
terris aperuit abluendis, and nunc fontem baptismatis orbi toti pandit,
gentibus innovandis -- Qui nos quadragenariis jejuniorum cursibus evocat, and
perducit ad coelum. Behold the fast of Lent, which with solemn devotion, to
morrow, the Universal Church begins -- That number of forty days consecrated of
ancient ages -- In forty days and nights rain was poured forth from heaven, to
expiate the earth -- Consider, brethren, what is that number, which both then
opened heaven for ablution of the earth; And now to all the world opens the
Fountain of Baptism Now in the solemn lastings before admis^ion of the
Catechumeni, competentes unto Baptism, S. Justin Marty^ even in his tlme, about
fifty years after S. John's death, witnesses that the Church was w^nt to join
with the persons to be baptized, in the lasting, (...). They are instructed to
pray and ask of God with fasting, the pardon of their former sins, we [the
company of believers, and before-baptized Christians] PRAYING AND FASTING WITH
THEM; and after that they are brought by us where the water is* and are
regenerated after the same manne^ we our selves were before regenerated, Justin
Martyr, Apolog. 2. pro Christianis.
[wont to be solemnly celebrated in the night before Easter-day] for the
renewing of the Nations -- which by the course of forty days fasts, calls us
forth, and brings us onward to Heaven.

In the Fifth Century after the death of S. John the Apostle, we produce first
CAESARIUS, Bishop of A^les, in his first and second Homilies of Lent, where he
thus speaks, Hom. 2d Rogo vos, fratres charissimi, in isto legitimo ac
sacratissimo Quadragesimae tempore, exceptis Dominicis diebus, nullus prandere
praesumat; Nisi so^e ille, quem jejunare infirmitas non permittit; quia aliis
diebus jejunare aut Remedium, aut praemium est. In Quadragesima non jejunare
peccatum est. Alio tempore qui jejunat accipiet I^dulgentiam. In his diebus qui
potest, and non jejunat, senti^t poenum -- Bonum est jejunare, ^atres, sed men's
est eleemosynam dare. Si aliquis utrunque potest, duo sunt ^ona. -- Ut per
totam Quadragesimam, and usque ad si^em Paschae, Cas^itatem (Deo aux^liante)
(...) in illa sacrosanc^ sole^itate Paschae, ^titatis luce v^stiti, ele^mosynis
dealbati, orationibus, vigili^s, and jejuniis v^lut qui^usdam coelestibus and
spiritualibus M^rgaritis or^ati, non so^um cum amicis, sed etiam cum ^imicis
pac^ici, liber^ and secura conscientia ad Alta^ta Domini accedentes, corpus and
sanguinem ejus, non ad judicium, sed ad Remedium possitis accipere. I entreat
you, most dear brethren, that in this commanded and most sacred time of Lent,
none presume to dine [or break the fast] except on the Lords days therein.
Except, if there be any whose infirmity permits him not to fast. [ Viz. not to
fast at all, or not so many days:] because at other times to fast, it is either
a remedy, [when undertaken as a holy revenge on our selves for sin,] or else
has its reward, [when on other pious or charitable occasions:] But in Lent not
to fast is a sin. In other time he which fasts [ viz. as he ought] shall
receive indulgence. In these days of Lent, he which can, and does not fast,
will bear his punishment. -- It is good, my brethren, to fast, but it is yet
better to give alms; if any can do both, they are a double good. -- -- I
admonish you, that you keep your selves in chaste purity throughout the whole
Lent, and unto the end of the Feast of Easter, through the help of God, that so
in that most holy solemnity of Easter, you being arrayed with the light of
purity, and with the white garments of Alms-deeds, and adorned as it were with
certain heavenly and spiritual pearls of prayers, watchings, and fastings, and
being at peace, not only with your friends, but also your enemies, with a free
and quiet conscience ye may approach to the Altars of the Lord, and partake of
his Body and Blood, not to condemnation, but to your souls health. Which same
he declares in his first Homily of this Fast of Lent; Mortificatione praesenti
futura mortis sen^entia praevenitur; and dum culpae author humiliatur, culpa
consumitur; dumque exterior afflictio voluntariae districtionis infertur,
tremendi judicii offensa sedatur; and ingentia debita labor solvit exiguus,
quae vix consumpturus erat ardor ae^ernus. By this present Mortification [if
rightly performed] the future sentence of death is prevented; and while the
sinner is humbled, the sin is consumed: while he inflicts on himself the
outward affliction of voluntary severity, the wrath of the dreadful judgment
is appeased: So a little pains dissolves great sins, which eternal burnings
otherwise would scarce consume. Whilst this our Author calls the Fast of Lent,
legitimum and sacratissimum Quadragesimae ^empus, in which for men that are
able, not to fast, he says, is a sin, you may perceive by his following
discourse, that he so calls here Lent legitimum jejunii tempus, as the catholic
Church in Tertullian called the same days of the Bridegrooms taking away, DIES
LEGITIMOS IEIUNIORUM CHRISTIANORUM (l. de jejuniis c. 2.) declaring her self
there to mean the days commanded by a Law from the Apostles; and as Tertullian
himself calls the Lords Prayer legitimam orationem [praemissa legitima
oratione.] For had Caesarius here intended to have called this fast
sacratissimum and legi imum in quo non jejunare peccatum est, only as commanded
by a Law Ecclesiastical: he could not have contradistinguish'd thereto (as he
does,) in that consideration, all other days besides; there being in his time
other fasting days besides Lent, commanded by the Church: therefore this time
of Lent was in some higher sense Legitimum jejuniorum tempus, in quo non
jejunare peccatum est. The Historians, who (...) also in this Age, are two
especially: 1. Aurelius Cassiodorus, the compiler of the Tripartite history
from the translation of Epiphanius Scholasticus, of three former Greek
Historians, whom he had set on work to translate them, and himself had woven
them into one continued Discourse: And the second Evagrius. This latter l. 2.
c. 8. notes certain Heretics of Alexandria (...), which showed not reverence
to the time of the solemnity of our Saviors Passover [the Christian Pascha]
which included the memorial of his Passion and Resurrection. And l. 6. c. 12.
he tells us of Gregory the Bishop, that he did communicate unto the Soldiers
the holy Body of Christ on a certain day (of the great week,) For it was says
he, (...), a very venerable day, approaching near unto the day of (Christ's)
holy Passion. So that he accounted more days then one for the memory of the
Bridegrooms being taken away about that season, to be venerable, and days of
communicating the people for the holiness of the day of Christ's Passion, to
which others approaching are held, it seems, also ((...)) exceeding venerable.
And this appears to be and have been the language of the Eastern Church, as you
may see in their (...), and in the ancient Liturgy called S. Chrysostom's
(...) etc. (...), etc. And again, (...). O Lord Almighty, who etc. who of thine
unspeakable providence, and great goodness, have brought us to these very
venerable days for the purifying of our souls and bodies, for the continence
of our sensitive passions, for the expectation of the resurrection, who through
forty days, etc. Grant unto us also of thy goodness, to fight this good fight,
to finish this course of this fast, etc. to break the heads of the invisible
dragons, and to stand up victors over sin, and to arrive to adore the Holy
Resurrection irreprovably -- And again: O Lord our God, who have brought us to
these very venerable days, etc.
The other Historian Aurelius Cassiodorus l. 9. c. 38. Histor. Tripartit*
writes thus: Ad Hebraeos idem Apostolus dicit, mutato enim sacerdotio
necessario legis mutatio fuit; non igitur Apostoli, nec Evangelia accedentibus
ad praedicationem jugum servitutis imposuerunt: sed festivitatem Paschae, and
alias celebritates [cum primis Christi Passionis, ut mox sequitur] honorandas
esse dixerunt. Quapropter quum diligunt homines hujusmodi celebritates [ab
Apostolis dictas Honorandas] quod in eis a laboribus requiescant, singuli per
provincias, sicuti voluerunt [viz, pro modo] memoriam salutaris Passionis
antiquitus ex quadam consuetudine celebraban^. The same Apostle says unto the
Hebrews; the Priesthood being changed, there was necessarily also a change of
the Law. Neither the Apostles therefore, nor the Gospels imposed any yoke of
servitude upon those that came to their preaching; But they ( to wit the
Apostles) said that the Feast of Easter and other solemnities [amongst which
other the Passion of Christ is with the first, as follows here also] are to be
honored. Wherefore whereas men love such solemnities [ viz. bid by the
Apostles to be honored of men because in those they have rest from their daily
labors: Those of each country through their several Provinces celebrated as
they would viz. for the manner from a certain custom, viz. of each countrey]
the memory of the salutary Passion from the Ancient times. Now this same
Cassiodore does declare ( l. 1. c. 10,) that this celebrity of the Passion of
Christ (celebrated ever with fasting) with its (...), its conterminous
preceding days, was in ancient times called Quadragesima, and observed by the
most holy Bishops, even such as wrought miracles; for he tells us there of holy
Spiridion, who was one of the most eminent of those Bishops, who made a
representation as it were of the Apostolical company in the first General
Council of Nice: (...). Among those Bishops there chiefly did excel Paphnutius
and Spiridion. This Spiridion Bishop of Trimi^hous a City of Cyprus, a holy
man, and worker of miracles, all which Socrates witnesses ( l. 1. c. 5. and
8.) But of them Cassiodorus thus records, Qualis autem [Spiridion] circa
peregrinorum susceptionem fuerit, hinc apparet: Instante ^am Quadragesima,
quidam ex itinere venit ad eum, quibus diebus consueverat cum suis continuare
jejunia, and die certo comedere, medios dies sine cibo consistens, videns it
aque peregrinum valde defectum: perge, inquit suae filiae, Lava peregrini
pedes, and cibos appo^e. Cumque virgo dix^sset, nec panem esse, nec alphita,
quarum rerum solebant nonnihil habere reconditum propter jejunium, orans primum
veniam, quam petens, fil^ae suae jussit ut porcinas carnes, quas domi salitas
habebat, coqueret, etc. What manner of man this Spiridion was, as to the
entertaining of strangers, appears herehence: when now Lent was instant, there
came to him a certain stranger weary from his journey on those days, upon
which he with his had been wont to continue their fasts, and to eat after
certain days only, passing the days betwixt without food: he then seeing the
stranger much spent with his travel, he says to his daughter, Go and wash the
strangers feet, and set victuals upon the board; and when the virgin replied,
that there was neither bread, nor barley flower in the house: of which yet they
were wont to have some in store, as provision for the fast; he first praying
pardon, bad his daughter boil some Hogs-flesh, which they had in the house
salted, etc.

My fourth witness of this age shall be Dorotheus Archimandrita (not he whose
age is much elder, but his pretended works much more uncertain) Doctrina 15.
(...) (...). THE HOLY APOSTLES for our Ghostly help, and the benefit of our
souls, HAVE CONSULTED TO DELIVER DOWN UNTO US this in special manner, and very
signally, that we should render, as it were, the tithes of our life [or time]
these same days [ viz. of Lent] and to consecrate them unto God, that so we
may be both blessed in our works, and may year by year obtain merciful pardon
for our sins of the whole year [passed:] and they (the Apostles) by their
common suffrage sanctified or set apart for us from the 365. days of the year
these 7. weeks of fastings: [the same number we heard from Philo the Jew,
observed by the Religious of Egypt under S. Mark] for so have they set a part
7. weeks. Yea the ancient Fathers have added to them one other week also both
to fit us before hand, and to exercise us when about to enter into the labor
of the following fasts; and also that they might make up the honorable number
of a holy 40. days fast; which our Lord did fast. For 8. weeks, if you
substract from them the Lords days and the Saturdaies (that one only the vigil
of Easter Day excepted, which alone of all the Saturdaies in the year, is kept
as a most sacred and honorable fast) make up 40. days. But 7. weeks without
the Lords days and the Saturdaies are 35. days. To which if you add that
Saturday, which is the holy Vigil of Easter, and also the half of that
illustrious and enlightened night, [as S. Cyril also directed the Lent-fast not
to be ended before the (...), before it be far in the night] the sum will be
36. days and an half; which accurately is the tenth or tithe of the 365. days
of the year, etc. This is that tenth or tithe, as we may so say, of the whole
year, WHICH THE APOSTLES HAVE SANCTIFIED OR SET APART for our repentance as a
time of our purifying from our sins of the whole year -- BEHOLD GOD HAS GIVEN
TO US THESE HOLY DAYS, that if any one with diligence and sobriety and
humiliation be careful therein to repent, he may be purged from his sins of the
whole year, and his soul eased from their burden, and so may come pure to the
Holy Day of the Resurrection; and being become a new man through the repentance
of these holy Fasts, he may partake of the holy mysteries not to condemnation
[but to life;] and may keep the feast of the holy 50. days throughout,
religiously toward God, with spiritual joy and gladness.

The fifth Authority of this age, shall be that of the Fathers of the
Provincial Council of Agatha, Canon the 12. Placuit etiam ut omnes Ecclesiae
Filii (exceptis diebus Dominicis) in Quadragesima, etiam die sabbati,
sacerdotali ordinatione, and districtionis comminatione jejunent. It is also
decreed, that all the sons or children of the Church do fast in the Lent, all
except the Lords-daies, under commination of severity by this our Sacerdotal
Decree, even on the Saturdaies also. Where that which they added of their own
sacerdotal ordaining, was the sanction of severe penalty, and the taking in the
Saturdaies to the Fast, probably against their former custom, in compliance
with their neighbor, greater Church of Rome; as the Council of Eliberis in
Spain had done before them, Canon the 26.

The sixth and last Authority of this Age, is that of Concilium Braccarense
primum Can. 16. Si quis quinta feria paschali, quae est Coena Domini, hora
legitima post nonam jejunus, etc. If any one on the 5th day of the Great week
before Easter, which is called Coena Domini, [for that the Lord on that day did
institute the holy Eucharist] shall not continue his fast unto the legitimate
hour, viz. celebrating the holy Eucharist fasting after 3. a clock in the
afternoon, but shall keep the solemnity of that day secundum sectam
Priscilliani, according to the Sect of the Priscillianists, etc. let him be
Anathema. Where their great severity of an Anathema, and their recounting the
violatours of that day of the Paschal Fast, as symbolizing with Heresy and
Heretics, seems to charge such as sided against the Paschal Fast, as
Epiphanius had before charged the Aerians for the same cause (Heresy the
75th,) with (...), or unbelief.

In the sixth Century after the death of S. JOHN, I first produce the witness
of ISIDORE Bishop of Sevil in Spain l. 6. Originum c. 19. Observatio
Quadragesimae, quae in universo orb INSTITUTIONE APOSTOLICA observatur circa
consinium Dominicae Passionis. The observation of Lent which is in the whole
world observed BY INSTITUTION APOSTOLICAL about the times of the solemnity of
the Passion of the Lord [ viz. the time of the Bridegrooms taking away.] The
same Author in his Comments on Exodus 39. Quid autem sibi velit, quod Moses 40.
diebus jejunaverit? -- Quadragenario enim numero and Moses, and Elias, and
ipse Dominus jejunaverunt. PRAECIPITUR ENIM NOBIS ex lege and prophetis, ET EX
IPSO EVANGELIO, quod testimonium habet a lege and prophetis, unde etiam in
monte inter utramque personam medius salvator efsulsit, etc. Now what may it
mean, that Moses fasted 40. days? -- That number of days both Moses and
Elias, and the Lord himself, did fast, for also it is commanded unto us from
the Law, and the Prophets, and FROM THE GOSPEL IT SELF, which receives witness
from the Law and the Prophets. Whence also on the Mount 'twixt those two
persons, our Savior shined forth in the midst. The same he declares more at
large l. 1. de offic. Eccles. c. 36. Iejuniorum tempora secundum Scripturas
sacras quatuor sunt, in quibus per abstinentiam and lamentum poenitentiae,
Dominus supplicandus est, and licet omnibus diebus orare and abstinere
conveniat, his tamen temporibus amplius jejuniis and prnitentiae inservire
oportet, PRIMUM IEIUNIUM QUADRAGESIMAE EST, quod a veteribus libris c^pit, ex
jejunio Moysis, and Eliae, ET EX EVANGELIO, quia totidem diebus Dominus
jejunavit, monstrans Evangelium non dissentire a Lege and Prophetis. -- In qua
quidem part anni congruentius observatio Quadragesimae constitueretur, nisi
confini atque contigua Dominicae passioni? There are four times of fastings,
according to the holy Scriptures, in which we must make our supplications unto
the Lord, with abstinence and the wailing of penance; and though it be meet
that we should at all times pray and abstain, yet must we at these times
especially attend on fastings and penance. The first or chief is the Fast of
Lent, which had beginning in the Books of the Old Testament, from the fasts of
Moses and Elias, and FROM OUT OF THE GOSPEL ALSO, for that so many days the
Lord did fast, showing that the Gospel did not disagree with the Law and the
Prophets -- In what part then of the year should the observation of Lent be
more congruously placed, then on that time of the year, which is near and
contiguous unto the Lords Passion? The same Isidore in the 6. Book of
Derivations chap. 19. Temporum autem, quae legalibus ac Propheticis
institutionibus terminatis statuta sunt, ut jejunium 4ti, 5ti, 7i, and 10i
mensis: vel sicut in Evangelio dies illi, in quibus ablatus est sponsus. Of the
times which were appointed by Institutions Legal and Prophetical, which now are
ceased, were those, the fasts of the 4th, 5th, 7th, and 10th month: or such as
are in the Gospel, those days in which the Bridegroom was taken away. Which
Bridegroom being the Lord, and his taking away, his Death and Passion, this our
Author has often enough told us what is that Fast, which belongs thereto. Lastly
therefore the same Isidore l. 1. de offic. Eccles. c. 43. Haec and alia multa
sunt, quae in Ecclesiis Christi geruntur, ex quibus tamen quaedam sunt, quae in
Scripturis Canonicis commendantur, quaedam non quidem scripta, sed tamen
tradita custodiuntur. Sed illa quidem quae toto terrarum orb servantur, vel ab
ipsis Aposlolis, vel ab autoriate principali Conciliorum Instituta
intelliguntur, SICUT DOMINI PASSIO ET RESURRECTIO and Ascensio in coelum, and
adventus Spiritus Sancti, quae revoluto die anni ob memoriam celebrantur. These
and many other things there are, which are observed in the Churches of Christ;
whereof yet some are those, which are recommended in the Canonical Scriptures,
and some, which are observed not being written, but yet delivered by Tradition.
Howbeit those things truly, which are observed in the whole world, are
understood to have been instituted either by the Apostles themselves, or from
that (next) chief authority of Councels, as are the celebrated anniversary
memorials of the Lords Passion, and Resurrection, and his Ascension into
Heaven, and of the coming of the holy Ghost. Upon the like words whereto in S.
Augustine, I have noted before, that these solemnities are (in the Catholic
Church, the city of our Solemnities, Isa. 33. v. 20.) found before any
Institution for them in any General Council: and therefore according to S.
Augustine and Isidore, no other beginning of them is to be looked for, as
neither can any be found, but from the Apostles.

The second witness of this sixth Age shall be S. GREGORY the GREAT Homil. 16.
in Evangel. Quadragesimae tempus inchoamus, etc. Cur ergo in abstinentia
Quadragenarius numerus custoditur, nisi quia virtus Decalogi per libros 4.
Sancti Evangelii impletur? -- Quia Decalogi mandata persicimus, cum profecto 4.
libros sancti Evangelii custodimus. -- Praecepta autem Dominica per Decalogum
sunt accepta. Quia ergo per carnis desideria, decalogi mandata contemp, mus,
dignum est ut eandem carnem quaterd^cies affligamus. A praesenti etenim die
usque ad Paschalis solennitatis gaudia sex hebdomadae veniunt. -- Ut qui
^obismetipsis per acceptum annum viximus, Auctori nostro nos in ejus decimis
per abstinentiam morti^icemus. Unde fratres charissimi, sicut offerre in lege
jubemini decimas rerum, ita ei offerre contendite and decimas dierum.
Unusquisque in quantum virtus suppetit, carnem maceret, ejusque desideria
affligat, concupiscentias turpes interficiat. We begin the time of Lent, etc.
Now why is the number of forty observed, [in this fast] but because the force
of the Decalogue [or ten words] is fulfilled by the 4. Books of the holy
Gospel? -- Because we then perform the commandments of the Decalogue, when
indeed we keep the 4. Books of the holy Gospel. The commands of the Lord are by
the Decalogue received; because therefore we have contemned the commands of the
Decalogue through the desires of the flesh, it is meet that we afflict the same
flesh by 40 times. -- For from this present day unto the joys of the Paschal
solemnity there are 6. weeks coming. -- That we who through the year passed
have lived [too much] to our selves, should mortify our selves to our Creator,
in the tenth of the year through abstinence. Whence most dear Brethren, as ye
are bid by the Law to offer the tenths of your substance; so contend to offer
to him also the tenths of your days. Let every one as much as his strength
serves, macerate his flesh, afflict his appetites, and slay his filthy lusts.

A third Record of this Age may be the 4th COUNCIL of TOLEDO c. the 6, 7, and
10. Comperimus quod per nonnullas Ecclesias in die sextae feriae Passionis
Domini, clausis Basilicarum foribus, nec celebretur officium, nec Passio Domini
populis praedicetur, dum idem salvator nos^er Apostolis suis praecepit dicens:
Passionem and mortem and resurrectionem meam omnibus praedicate; ideoque
oportet eodem die mysterium Crucis, quod ipse Dominus cunctis annunciandum
voluit, praedicari, atque Indulgentiam criminum clara voce omnem populum
postulare, ut poenitentiae compunctione mundati* Venerabilem diem Dominicae
Resurrectionis, remissis Iniquitatibus suscipere mereamur; corporisque ejus and
sanguinis sacramentum mundi a peccato sumamus. Quidam in die ejusdem passionis
Dominicae ab hora nona jejunium solvunt, conviviis adhibentur; and dum sol ipse
eadem die tenebris pallia^us lumen subduxerit, ipsaque elementa tur^ata,
moestitiam totius mundi ostenderent, illi jejunium tanti diei polluunt,
epulisque inserviunt. Et quia totum eundem diem Universalis Ecclesia propter
Passionem Domini in moerore and abstinentia peragit, quicunque in eo jejunium
praeter parvulos, senes, and languidos, ante peractas Indulgentiae preces
solverit, a Paschali gaudio depellatur, nec in eo Sacramentum Corporis and
sanguinis Domini percipiat, qui diem Passionis ejus per abstinentiam non
honorat. In omnibus praedictis Quadragesimae diebus -- opus est s^etibus ac
jejuniis Insistere, corpus cilicio and cinere induere, animum moeroribus
dejicere, gaudium in tristitiam vertere; quousque veniat tempus Resurrectionis
Christi, quando oporteat jam Allelujah in laetitia canere, and moerorem in
gaudium commutare: Hoc enim Ecclesiae Universalis consensio in cunctis terrarum
partibus roboravit. We have understood, that in certain Churches on the 6th day
of the week before Easter, the day of the Passion of the Lord, the Church-doors
are shut up, and no office celebrated, nor the Passion of the Lord preached
unto the people; although the same our Savior commanded his Apostles to preach
his Passion, Death, and Resurrection unto all people; and therefore the mystery
of his Cross, which the Lord would have shown forth unto all men, ought on that
day to be preached: and all the people ought earnestly to ask [of God] the
pardon of their sins, that being cleansed through the compunction of repentance
they may attain to receive the venerable day of the Lords Resurrection, having
their sins remitted; and being clean from sin, may receive the Sacrament of his
Body and Blood. Some on the same day of the Passion of the Lord break off their
fasts at 3. a clock in the Afternoon, and betake themselves to entertainments,
(or banquets) and while the sun it self on that day being hid, withdrew its
light, and the Elements being troubled, showed forth the sadness of the whole
world; they profane the fasts of so great a day, and serve themselves with
feasting. For as much then, as the universal Church keeps that whole day in
sadness and abstinence for the Passion of the Lord; whosoever on that day,
except little children, old men, and the sick, shall break the fast before the
supplications for pardon are finished, let him be debarred from the Paschal
joy, and not receive therein the Sacrament of the body and blood of the Lord;
who did not honor the day of his Passion with fasting. -- On all the foresaid
days of Lent it is behooveful, that we should give our selves unto weeping and
fasting, and cover our body with sack. cloth, and ashes, and cast down our soul
with sorrow, until the time of Christ's Resurrection be come, when first, we
must sing Hallelujah with joy, and change our sadness into rejoicing; for that
the consent of the Universal Church has strengthened this observance. [He
says only: strengthened by the consent of the universal Church; which does not
denote the first beginning.]

The fourth Record of this Age, is the 8th COUNCIL of TOLEDO, held 20. years
after that former; chap. the 9th, Detecta est Ingluvies horrenda voracium [
quorundam] quae dum ^raeno parsimoniae non astringitur, RELIGIONI CONTRAIRE
MONSTRETUR; Dicente enim Scriptura, Qui spernit minima, paulatim decidit. Illi
tanta edacitatis improbitate grassantur, ut COELESTIA ET PAENE SUMMA contemnere
videantur, etenim cum Quadragesimae dies anni totius decimae depu^entur, etc.
-- Illi vero quos aut aetas incurvat, aut languor extenuat, aut necessitas
arctat, etc. A horrid gluttony of certain greedy persons is detected, which
while it suffers it self not to be held in by the bridle of parsimony, is
CONVINCED TO BE OPPOSITE TO RELIGION. For the Scripture saying, He that
despises little things shall fall by little and little; these men by their so
great improbity of gluttony, make such outrage, that they seem to contemn
things Heavenly and almost of chief concernment. For whereas the days of Lent
are recounted the tenth part of the whole year, etc. -- But as for such other
whom either age does bow, or sickness consumes, or necessity streightens [such
the Council excuses.]

A fifth and last Witness of this Century is IOANNES MOSCHUS IN PRATO
SPIRITUALI c. 79. (...). He had [a servant] named Pisticus, which did
communicate with the holy Catholic and Apostolic Church; this Pisticus
received the Communion, (as the custom of the country was to receive) on that
5th day of the week, which is called the holy Fifth, [ viz the Thursday of the
holy week, for so it seems in the language of the Catholic and Apostolic
Church it was then called and held holy] Now it came to pass after the holy
Easter, that Pisticus, etc.

In the seventh Century, (which is the last I shall now travel through)
VENERABLE BEDE our Countryman offers himself the first Witness, in his
Homilia Aestivalis on Dominica Exaudi; Sicut enim imminentibus solenniis
Paschalibus Quadragesimam jejuniorum observantia celebravimuus, sic eisdem
peractis quinquagesimam non sine certa causa mysterii, fes^a devotione agimus
-- Utramque sane hanc solennitatem, scilicet and Quadragesimae, and
Quinquagesimae, NON QUORUMLIBET HOMINUM, SED IPSIUS DOMINI AC SALVATORIS
NOSTRI, patriam nobis sanxit autoritas. As in the approaching of the Paschal
solemnities, we celebrated a Lent with the observance of Fastings, so those
being finished, we observe a 50. days solemnity with Festival devotion, not
without a ground of a certain mystery therein. -- Indeed both these
solemnities, viz. the Quadragesima and Quinquagesima [the 40. days of Lent,
and the 50. days following] NOT THE AUTHORITY OF ANY MAN, BUT OF THE LORD
HIMSELF OUR SAVIOR, has established for us to observe in this our country
[or city of God, the Catholic Church.] The same Venerable Bede in his Comment
on Matt. the 4th, and again in his first Homily of Lent, lays down the same
position here ensuing, and the same also with S. Augustine and Isidore
foregoing, viz. the words of Bid also are these: Quadragesima jejuniorum habet
autoritatem -- and ex Evangelio. -- In qua autem part anni congruentius
observatio Quadragesimae constitueretur, nisi confini atque contigua Dominicae
passionis? The Fasts of Lent have their authority -- also from the Gospel -- In
what part therefore of the year more agreeably might the observation of Lent be
ordained, then on that, which is bordering upon, and contiguous unto the
Passion of the Lord? And on Dominica Exaudi: Dominus praedixit, quia discipuli,
ipso secum conversante, jejunare non possent, ablato autem eo jejunarent -- ait
illis; Veniet autem dies, cum auferetur ab eis sponsus, and tunc jejunabunt --
Constat profecto, quia post ablationem ejus spontaneis sese subdidere jejuniis.
The Lord foretold, that his Disciples, whilst he was conversant with them,
could not fast; but should, when he should be taken from them. -- The days
will come, when the Bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then shall they
fast -- It is evident indeed, that after his taking from them, they submitted
themselves to willing fastings. This I here allege; because Bid makes this
practice of the Apostles the exemplification of some of the Churches following
set, annual-fasts. In his Homily upon the Tuesday after Palm Sunday, he thus
speaks of the Parasceue, which we call Good Friday: Cum accepisset acetum [
Dominus,] dixit; Consummatum est: hoc est, sextae diei, quod pro mundi
refectione suscepi, jam totum est opus expletum; sabbato autem in sepulchro
requiescens, resurrectionis, quae octava ventura erat, expectabat adventum.
When the Lord had received (on this 6th day of the week before Easter) the
vinegar, he said, It is finished: that is, the whole work of the 6th day, which
I have undertaken for the new creation of the world, is now consummated. [Even
as it appears in Genes. the 1. that on the same 6th day of the week, wherein
God made man at the first, he finished all his works] And on the Sabbath he
rested in the grave, waiting for the coming of his Resurrection which was to be
the 8th day. An evidenter praeceptum, in the new Testament we do not find for
the 6th or for the 8th days observation; But the Church has so interpreted
for the one, these words of my Text, When the Bridegroom shall be taken from
them, then shall they fast The Church in Tertullian l. d. jejuniis: see above
p. 28. and Epiphanius haeres. 75. see above p. 48.
; And for the other, the 8th (or Lords day) that of 118. Psalm, This is the day
which the Lord has made S. Athanafius l. d. sabbat. and circumcisione* (...).
: and that of Apoc. 1. 10. I may conclude the witness of Bid, with what he
concluded this Fast, ( Hom. in Dominica Palmarum.) Ecce jejunium Quadrage
simale, Domino auxiliante, jam plurima ex part complevimus. Testis est
unicuique conscientia sua: quia quanto districtius se sanctis his diebus Domino
mancipasse meminit, tanto amplius gaudens, sanctum Dominicae R'surrectionis
tempus expedat -- Quicunque ergo, fratres dilectissimi, continentiae armis
accincti ab initio jam Quadragesimae cum tentatore superbo certare coeperunt,
videant caute ne coepta deserant, priusquam host prostrato, ministeriis
donentur Angelicis. Behold we have now through the help of God, finished for
the most part this Fast of Lent; every man's conscience bears him witness, that
by how much more strictly he remembers that he has humbled himself before the
Lord, on these Holy Days, with so much the more joy he expects the holy time
of the Lords Resurrection -- Whosoever therefore of you, my most beloved
Brethren, have now, from the beginning of Lent, being fortified with the armor
of abstinence, encountered the proud tempter, let them now take good heed, that
they forsake not what they have enterpris'd, till having vanquished the enemy,
Angels come and minister unto them: [alluding to that ministry unto Christ,
Mat. 4. 11.]

Our second Author in this Age is THEODULPHUS Bishop of Orleans (part
afterward of the Council of Franckford,) in his Epistle to the Priests, n. 37.
Ipsa autem Quadragesima cum summa observatione custodiri debet, ut jejunium in
ea, praeter dies Dominicos, qui Abstinentiae substracti sunt, nullatenus
resolvatur -- Nulla in his occasio sit resolvendi jejunii, quia alio tempore
solet jejunium charitatis causa dissolvi; isto vero nullatenus debet. Quia in
alio jejunare in voluntate and arbitrio cujuslibet positum est: in HOC VERO NON
IEIUNARE, PRAECEPTUM DEI TRANSCENDERE EST; and in alio tempore, jejunare
praemium abstine^i acquirere est: in hoc vero praeter insirmos ac parvulos
quisquis non jejunaverit, poenam sibi acquirit; QUIA EOSDEM DIES DOMINUS and
per Mosen, and p^r Eliam, ET PER SEMETIPSUM, sacro jejunio consecravit. The
Lent-fast it self ought to be kept with all observance, that therein except the
Lords days, which are subtracted from fastings, the Fast be in no wise broken
-- Let no occasion be taken of violating this Fast; for that at other times our
fast is wont to be dissolved upon occasion of charity, Or kindness of reception.
but in Lent it ought not so to be wont. Because at other times to fast, is
committed to every ones will and choice; but in this time not to fast, IS TO
TRANSGRESS THE PRECEPT OF GOD. At other times to fast acquires a reward to him
who so abstains; but at this time, whosoever fasts not, except little ones, or
those which are infirm, does procure unto himself punishment; because THE LORD
both by Moses, and by Elias, AND BY HIMSELF has consecrated those same days
to fasting. Ibid. Qui nullatenus jejunare credendi sunt, si ante manducaverint,
antequam vespertinum celebretur ossicium. -- Abstinens vero in his diebus
omnium deliciarum esse debet. Whosoever eats before the evening-office be
celebrated, is not to be deemed to have fasted -- In these days we ought to
abstain from all delights.

The third Witness of this Century, shall be IOANNES DAMASCENUS, lib. de
Haeresibus, concerning the Aerians or Eustachians, Aeriani ab Aerio Pontico;
fuit autem sacerdos, Eustachii Episcopi [ Ariani] silius, -- jejunium feria
quarta and sexta ET 40 DIEBUS SERVARI, and pascha celebrari prohibet. Stata
haec damnat omnia -- Quod siquis jejunium servare velit, id ab eo certis
statisque diebus servari negat opor^ere, sed quando volet. Negat enim se legi
teneri, negat etiam quicquam inter Presbyterum and Episcopu^ interesse. The
Aerians are so called from Aerius Ponticus; he was a Priest, the son of
Eustachius [an Arrian Bishop] who forbids the observation of the fasts of the
4th and 6th days of the week, and that OF THE 40. DAYS, and the celebration
of Easter. All these set fasts or feasts he condemns -- If so be any one will
keep a fast, he denies that that ought to be done by him on any certain or set
days, but when he will. For he denies that he is bound by a Law, [in that
matter;] he denies also that there is any difference betwixt a Presbyter and a
Bishop. Here he is enrolled in the black Catalogue of Heretics (and Heresy is
always against somewhat Apostolical) who pertinaciously denied set Fasts, and
particularly this Fast of Lent. If any shall think this severity peculiar to
this Age, and author of the Greek School beginning, let him consider beside
what I have produced above from Epiphanius and S. Augustine, the catalogue of
Heretics made also by Philastrius Bishop of Brixia (about the year of Christ
380) De Paschalis Festi hae^esi. Asserentes 14a luna celebrandum esse Pascha,
non sicut Ecclesia Catholica celebrat -- Et cum hoc faciunt, diem non dominicum
semper custodiunt Paschae, non computantes horas and dies [ dies viz.
praecedentes] -- Et ex hoc errore non cognoscunt diem Paschae Domini nostri
VERAM ET SALUTAREM, UNAM ORBI TERRARUM STATUTAM, ET CONFIRMATAM A DOMINO. He
reckons certain Heretics, who affirmed that Easter was to be celebrated, not
as the Catholic Church celebrates it -- Not always observing the Easter on
the Lords day, not computing the hours and days [ viz. preceding Easter, which
are the days we speak of] -- And from this error they are ignorant of the
true and salutary, only day of Easter, APPOINTED FOR THE WHOLE WORLD, AND
CONFIRMED OF THE LORD.

The fourth Record of this Age is the MAGNUS CANON ANDREAE ARCHIEPISCOPI
CRETENSIS; for which as the Triodium of the Greek Church does witness, there
was appointed a peculiar solemnity on the 5th day of the 5th week in Lent, the
history whereof is this: Andreas Hierosolymi^anus, who in the end of the
foregoing Century was sent by Theodore Patriarch of Jerusalem, to assist in the
6th General Council, became afterward in this Century the renowned
Metropolitan of Crete, and composed a holy office, which in this Century he
brought into the Greek Church, and it has continued therein all Ages sithence,
and had a peculiar day appointed for it, which they called the solemnity of the
Great Canon, ((...)) which they placed on the Thursday seven night before Easter
((...)) A composure he had made (as the Triodium of the Greek Church to this
day witnesses) out of the histories of the whole old, and new Testaments,
which consisted of the grounds, patterns, and encouragements of this Paschal
Fast of Lent, partly to be read publicly, and partly to be sung in their
service, when now the Fast of Lent had continued almost 5. weeks, and drew
toward the end, and yet the chief part of it remaining to be performed, viz.
the Parasceue and Sabbatum of the 5th week, (which they called Lazari
praeparatoria, and Sabbatum Lazari) and the following (...), the great and holy
week, called anciently by Epiphanius (...), and more anciently by Dionysius the
Patriarch of Alexandria, who sa^e there Bishop in the year 248. (...) ((...))
the 6 principal days of the Fasts. To encourage them therefore after so much
performed, to what remained behind, he composed, and they have retained, and do
read and sing, (...) (...). They read and sing this great Canon, containing
insinite contrition, and excitation to ^lee unto God, by repentance, by tears,
and confession, etc. (...) they were appointed on this 5th day of the (...)
week of Lent, to sing and to read this for these ends; For in as much as the
holy Lent then draws toward end, that men should not become weary or negligent
in the finishing of these spiritual combats, this very great (Bishop of Crete)
Andrew, as one that anoints or strengthens the Combatants, stirs up their
generosity by the histories of this great Canon, that they may courageously run
forward to the race before them. Agreeably therefore and fitly is this called
the Great Canon, as containing great compunction, and appointed for the Great
Fast of Lent. This best and greatest Canon, together with the exhortation of
the holy Mary of Egypt; This our Father Andrew, first [soon after the year of
the Lord 700.] brought into Constantinople -- O my soul emulate thou zealously
holy men in compunction, propitiate Christ by Prayers and sastings, by purity,
and holiness. Christ conversing on earth in our flesh has left thee, O my
soul, his pattern and example -- The Lord [it is] who fasted 40 days, -- O my
soul, be not discouraged, if the enemy assault thee, repel him far from thee
by prayers and fastings. -- Give thou unto me, O thou my only Savior, a heart
contrite, and poverty of spirit, that I may have these to offer unto thee, as
an acceptable sacrifice. Thus far the Triodium from that Andrew Bishop of Crete.

Thus have we passed through the seven first Centuries after the death of S.
John (the last of those children of the Bride-chamber) all the Ages not only of
the truly called General Councels, but of any, that any Church in the world
ever pretended to be such, (except the Church of Rome only, which has more
then doubled the number to her self.) so that if this Paschal Fast had so
generally passed in all ages, as derived from the Apostles, and had not truly
been so derived; some one of the General Councels at least (in stead of their
supposing and strengthening that hypothesis) had noted the Imposture and false
witness, so openly concerning Apostolic Tradition, of which the Church
Universal is the Keeper, and perpetual Pillar.

I shall not trouble my self and you, to give you the testimonies of the
succeeding ages; because of their redundant number, and because they are
confessed on all parts, and will not be required by any adversary, and also are
removed farther from the Fountain, and prime antiquity Such as are the
Testimonies of Rabunus Mauru^, Archbishop of Meniz about the year 847. l. 2. de
Institutione Clericorum c. 18. Observatio Quadragefima, quae in Universo orb
INSTITUTIONE APOSTOLICA servatur, circa confinia Dominica Passionis The
observation of Lent, which is kept in all the world from Iustitution
Apostolical, about the times near unto he Passion of our Lord, [the time of the
Bridegrooms taking away.]

And Theodorus Studites, Anno 826. Sermon. Chat^chetic. 72. in quaria feria
Hebdomada. majoris, Fratres Patresque, sacer est hodiernus dies atque
venerandus: etenim hinc auspicatur herus pro nobis supplicia sustinere crucis,
ut fert hoc Davidicum dictum, Quare fremuerunt gentes etc. convenerunt in unum
adversus Dominum, and adversus Christum ejus. Siquidem convenere simul
sceleratum in Dominum confilium agitantes, etc. Veterator Judas, etc. Idem
Catechetic. 71. appellat feriam sextam ante (...), Lazari praeparatoriam, quia
Parascue est ante Lazari resuscitati memoriam.

S. Bernard in his first Sermon of Lent, Hodie, dilectissimi, sacrum
Quadragesimae tempus ingredimur, etc. Non nobis singularis est haec observatio;
una omnium est, quicunque in eandem fidei convenient unitatem. Quidni commune
sit Christi jejunium omnibus Christianis? An respuere tristia volumus, and
communicare jucundis? Si ita est, indignos nos cap^is hujus participatione
probamus. Qualis est iste CHRISTIANUS, qui minus devote suscipit j^junium, QUOD
TRADIDIT IPSE CHRISTUS. To day, O most beloved, we enter on the holy time of
Lent, which is not an observance peculiar unto us* but one and the same to all
Christians, as many as agree in the unity of the same Faith. And how should not
this Fast of Christ be common to all Christians? Will we reject the part that
has any sadness, and communicate only in the pleasureable? If it be so, we
prove our selves unworthy to partake with this Head. What sort of Christian is
he, who has no devotion to this Fast, WHICH CHRIST HIMSELF DELIVERED? And in
his third Sermon of Lent, Rogo vos, Fratres dilectissimi, tota devotione
suscipite Quadragesimale jejunium, quod non sola abstinentia commendat, sed
multo magis Sacramentum. [ Scilicet ut Fetrus Chrysologus Ravennatium episcopus
hom. 11a appellat jejunium non praesumptum, sed mysticum, and Clemens Alexand.
(...) Nam si devote usque modo jejunavimus, utique sancto hoc tempore
jejunandum nobis est multo devotius: Si quid enim additur ad solitum
abstinentiae modum, nunquid non valde indignum est, ut nobis onerosum sit, quod
Ecclesia portat Universa nobiscum? Hactenus usque ad nonam jejunavimus soli:
nunc usque ad vesperam jejunabunt nobiscum Universi Reges and principes, Cle^us
and populus, nobiles and ignobiles, simul in unum dives, and pauper. Sed quid
de his loquor, quos habemus in hac jejuni^ observatione consortes; quasi non
multo excellentiores habeamus in ea duces, immo and consecratores? [ Moysen,
Eliam, and Iesum Dominum adducit] jam vero si commendant jejunium praesens
Moses and Elias, quamvis magni, tamen conservi nostri, quantum commendat illud
Jesus Dominus noster, qui and ipse diebus totidem jejunavit? Qualis ille est
non dicam Monachus, sed Christianus, qui minus devote jijunium suscipit, QUOD
EI TRADIT IPSE CHRISTUS? Denique tanto devotius imtandum nobis est,
Dilectissimi, Christi jejunantis exemplum, quan^o certius est propter nos eum
jejunasse, non propter seipsum. Is it not a very unworthy thing, that that
should seem burdensome unto us, which the universal Church bears together with
us? Hitherto we have fasted alone unto the ninth hour, now together with us
even unto the evening there will be found to fast all Kings, and Princes [ viz.
that are of the Church] Clergy, and people, noble, and common people, the rich
and the poor all together. But what speak I of those, which we have companions
in this observance of the Fast, as if we had not much more excellent Captains
or leaders therein, and consecrators [of this Fast?] -- [And after his instance
in Moses, Elias and our Lord Jesus he adds] Now if Moses and Elias, who
although great, yet are our fellow-servant^, commemd this Fast, how much more
does our Lord Jesus, who himself also fasted so many days? Of what sort (I say
not Monk but) Christian is he, who less devoutly performs this Fast, WHICH
CHRIST HIMSELF DELIVERS TO HIM? So much more devoutly ought the example of
Christ's fasting to be imitated by us, my Beloved, by how much it is more
certain, that Christ fasted not for himself, but for us.

Arnoldus Carnotens^s l. de jejunio and tentationibus (inter opera S. Cypriani)
n. 4. Iejuniis vitiorum semina siecatur, petulantia marcet, concupiscentiae
languent, fugitivae abeunt voluptates. -- Iejunium, si discretione regatur,
omnem carnis rebellionem ^domat, ^yrannidem gulae speliat and exarmat. Iejunium
extraordinarios motus in cippo claudit and arctat, and appetitus vagos
distringit and ligat. n. 7. Forma igitur jejuntorum proposita fixoque exemplo,
postquam 40. dierum abstinentiam Dominus consummavit, etc n. 9. SICUT IN IPSIUS
(CHRISTI) VOLUNTATE FUIT CONSECRARE IEIUNIA, ita and in potestate suit tempore
opportuno sumere cibum. -- Et abstinentiae and refectionis penes ipsum erat and
arbitrium and saculias.


Within the foresaid primitive Ages I am not ignorant of what I have omitted,
and is wont to be alleged by others, as the supposed constitutions Apostolical
by Clement in the 5th Book in chap. 13th and 20th: and the supposed Epistle of
Ignatius to the Philippians, the dubious Sermons of S. Augustine de Tempore,
and many of those which are doubtful among S. Ambrose's Sermons, and other
Authors: For that I have produced none, but such, as of whose genuine title,
authority, and antiquity I was my self satisfied. The testimonies which I have
alleged are such as are direct and simple; others there are of great force,
complicated of several truths asserted in the primitive times, from whence
would follow our conclusion: Those truths are three: First, that Easter or the
night beginning Easter, was ever to the Church a more solemn time of baptizing,
then others. The second, that generally the Church taught and directed the
Catechumeni to prepare themselves by premitted solemn fastings for the
reception of holy Baptism. Thirdly, that the Catholic Church, or company of
Christian Believers did join themselves in the days of fastings and prayers,
as with the Penitents, that sought Absolution; so also with the Catechumeni,
and Competentes, which sought Baptism. From which Assertions, if proved, it
follows, that a Paschal Fast before Easter was ever observed in the Church (as
of duty of Repentance for our selves, so) of duty of Charity toward others. In
all which duty, without all doubt the Apostles had not failed to instruct them.

As to the first of those Propositions, That Easter was ever to the Church a
more solemn time of Baptizing, Tertullian says, lib. de Baptismo, ^. 19. Diem
Baptismo solenniorem Pascha praestat; Cum and Passio Domini, in quam tingimur,
adimpleta est: nec incongruenter quis adsiguram interpretabitur, quod cum
ultimum Pascha Dominus esset acturus, missis discipulis ad praeparandum:
Invenietis inquit hominem aquam bajulantem. Paschae celebrandae locum, de signo
aquae ostendit. Easter brings a more solemn time for Baptism; when also the
Passion of the Lord, into which we are Baptized, is (remembered, as then)
fulfilled. Nor incongruously shall any one interpret that to have been done
significantly, which our Lord did, when he sent forth his Disciples to prepare
for his celebrating the last Passover. Ye shall find, says he, a man bearing
a pitcher of water [Follow him.] Designing to them the place of celebrating the
Passover from the token of Water. That reason above of Tertullian, Because we
are Baptized into the Death and Passion of our Lord, he seems to have learnt
from Ignatius in his undoubted Epistle to the Ephesians: (...). For our God
Jesus Christ was conceived, -- born, and baptized, that afterward he might
through his Passion purify or sanctify water, [ viz. for the use of holy
Baptism.] So in the Church the solemnity of Christ's Passion, (which ye have
heard from Constantine's Epistle to the Churches, from the Instructions of the
Bishops of the Christian world met at Nicaea) was ever celebrated in the
Church, (...), from the very day on which Christ suffered, and that (Christ
himself delivering (it and teaching it to his Church, (...)) did accordingly
precede the solemn time of Baptizing; which that early Age of the Church may be
thought probably to have learnt from grounds laid by S. Paul, Romans 6. 3, 4.
Know you not that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were
baptized into his Death? therefore we were buried with him by Baptism into
Death, that like as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father,
so we also should walk in newness of life. And Coloss. 2. v. 12. having been
buried with him in Baptism, wherein also ye were raised with him through the
faith of the operation of God, who raised him from the Dead, This custom of
the first Ages of the Church was also followed in the succeeding Ages, as
appears by S. Ambrose, Tractatu de Hortat. ad Virgin. Venit Pascha dies: in
toto orb Baptismi Sacramenta celebrantur, etc. Uno die sine aliquo dolor
multos filios and filias solet Ecclesia parturire. The day of Easter is come,
the Sacrament or mysteries of Baptism are celebrated in all the world, etc. In
one day without any pangs the Church [Virgin, and Mother] is wont to bring
forth multitudes of Sons, and daughters. S. Cyril in his Catecheses at large
shows the same.
.

The 2d Proposition, That generally the Church taught and directed the
Catechumeni to prepare themselves by premitted solemn fastings for the
reception of holy Baptism, as appears by Tertullian in the same place, l* de
Baptismo, where after he had said ( c. 19.) Diem Baptismo solenniorem Pascha
praestat, cum and Passio Domini in quam ting^mur adimpleta est: he adds about
the beginning of the next chapter (chap. 20.) Ingressuros Baptismum
orationibus, crebris jejuniis, and geniculationibus, and pervigiliis orare
oportet, and cum confessione omnium retro delictorum. Those which are so about
to receive holy Baptism, [ viz. on the Feast of Easter before mentioned] it
behooves to prepare themselves by frequent prayers, fastings, geniculations and
watchings, and with confession of all their sins. Which fastings and
pervigilia, or whole nights watchings before the Pascha are this Paschal Fast;
and the great Vigils of the Eve before Goodfriday, and the Eve before
Easter Day and some others before them. Yea an elder then Tertullian, Justin
Martyr in his Apology to Antoninus the Emperor: (...). Now after what manner
we have consecrated our selves to God, being renewed or become new creatures
through Christ, we will declare. -- As many as are persuaded, and do believe,
that those things which are taught by us are true, and undertake, that they are
able so to live, they are taught WITH FASTING to pray and ask of God pardon of
their former sins. -- After this they are brought by us, where water is, etc.
This custom also of the Primitive Church may be supposed probably to have had
for its pattern S. Paul's own fasting three days, wherein he did neither eat
nor drink, says the Text, Act. 9. 9. and his prayers, v. 11. before that
Ananias was sent of the Lord to baptize him, and that so was he baptized, v.
18. The like in the following chap. the 10th Cornelius his fasting preceding
Cornelius's baptism. And the first preacher of Baptism, was before that a
preacher of Penance. This custom of the first Ages was continued also in the
following Leo the Great, Sermon 4 of Lent, where he calls those days of the
Paschal Institution, Dies mysticos and purificandis animis atque corporibus
sacrat^us institutos: Mystical days, and of more sacred Instit^tion for the
purifying of souls and bodies. And in his Epistle to the Bishops of Sicily,
(...) sanctificandi and srequen^us (...) imbu^ndi [ antequam baptizentur.] They
are to be sanctified by Fastings, and to be instructed by frequent preachings
[before they are baptiz'd] S. Cyril of Jerusalem Catech. 1. (...). Have thou
^pent so many years in vain troubling thy self about the world, and will thou
not attend 40. days for thy own souls sake? -- through ascetical exercise of
thy heart, pu^ifie thy vessel, that thou may receive the more grace. -- If
thou labor little; thou receivest little. ibid. (...).
Yea, Tertullian goes farther, l. de Iejuniis c. 8. Ipse mox Dominus baptisma
suum, and in suo omnium jejuniis dedicavit. -- Praest^ ui^ [ Deminus] exinde
jejuniis legem, docuit etiam abversus di^iora daemonia jejuniis praeliandum.
Quid enim mirum, si eadem operatione spiritus iniquus educitur, qua sanctus
inducitur? The Lord himself dedicated his own Baptism, and in his own the
Baptism of all Christians by Fastings. -- From thence he prescribed the law for
Fastings, he taught also, that against the fiercer evil spirits, we must combat
by fastings. For what wonder, if, by the same operation, the wicked spirit be
cast out, through which the Holy Spirit is brought in? Only here we may
advertise our selves, that our Saviors Fasts went not before his Baptism,
because he needed no purifications before, or in his Baptism; but by his holy
Body sanctified the waters, as for his illustrious presence elsewhere, the
Scripture calls the place the Holy Mount, 2 Pet. 1. 18. But his Fasts followed
after his Baptism to teach us the way of performing, what in our Baptism we
through his might and grace undertake, viz. of overcoming the Devil, tempting
especially Baptized persons by the world and the flesh. So S. Ambrose l. de
Elia and Iejunio c. 1. Certamen nostrum jejunium est -- Sed ille ante est
praeliatus, ut vinceret, non quod ipse egeret certamine, sed ut nobis formam
bellandi praescriberet, and postea daret gratiam triumphandi. Fasting is our
combat -- but he combated before, that he might overcome; not that he needed
any fortifying, but that he might prescribe to us a form of fighting, and
afterward might give to us the grace of Triumphing.

The 3d Proposition was: That together with the Catechumeni preparing
themselves by fasting for Holy Baptism, the Fideles or company of Christian
people, viz. the Church it self did generally join in fasting, as the Mother in
bringing forth her children does it not generally without her own travail and
pain, till she being delivered of her children, joy and festivity succeed in
the place of sorrow and fasting. So as the same catholic Church also is known
to join her fastings and prayers, with the fastings and prayers of penitents
that seek for her Absolution; and of candidates that offer themselves to her
Ordination. And the former of these is done at this same time of the Fast of
Lent, in the beginning whereof they receive the Injunction of their penance,
and toward the end whereof, viz. on the (...), called also coena Domini, and
Maundy-Thursday, they received Absolution And one of the Churches times of
Ordination is always in Lent also.
. But to return to our Instance of the Churches Fasts joined with the Fasts of
the Catechumens or Competentes, who sought for holy Baptism; according to that
rule of St. Paul, teaching her to mourn with them that mourn, Romans 12. v. 15.
and his own practice, who when he had told us, 2 Cor. 11. 20, 27. that he was
in fastings often; he adds in the next verse save one, Who is weak and I am not
weak? who is offended and I burn not? But my proof hereof from the Primitive
practice of the Church in the Age next following the Apostles, shall be that,
before cited, of Justin Martyr in his 2d Apology, (...). As many as are
persuaded and believe, etc. are taught to pray, and to ask of God, with
fasting, pardon of their sins past, WE ALSO PRAYING WITH THEM, AND FASTING WITH
THEM. Then are they brought by us where water is, etc. and they are regenerated
-- And the chief of the Ministers officiating the Prayers and the Eucharist,
and all the people expressing their consenting suffrage by their Amen, those
that are with us called Deacons give unto every one of them that are present to
receive of the consecrated Bread, Wine, and Water. (...). Whereof it is not
lawful for any to be partaker, but he that believes the things which are
taught by us to be true, and that is washed in the Laver of Regeneration for
the forgiveness of sins. Now as the time of the Mothers travail with child is
not confined to one day only, so neither was the Churches fasting and prayers
for the Catechumen's baptizing. Witnesses whereof in the first ages are the
Asian Churches, who maintained their cause from S. John, and S. Philip; and the
Western, who maintained theirs from S. Peter, and S. Paul; and both agreed,
that the fasting before Easter was more then of a day. For so says the one
(...), on whatsoever day the fastings or fasts are to be ended: ((...), not
(...).) And the other says thus: (...), and again, (...). on this day we
observe, or are wont to end the Paschal Fastings, or Fasts: ((...), and (...),
not (...) or (...).) This contest and agreement of those Primitive Churches (in
the year of our Lord Christ 196) is recorded in Eusebius's Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c.
23. Thus having proved those three Propositions from undeniable authorities
even within the first 300. years, the Collection from them is evident, and
certain, that the purest ages of the Church, and nearest to the Apostles, did
without any other beginning, then from the universal Teachers of the universal
Church, viz. the Apostles, observe a yearly Paschal Fast of certain days
before Easter; or that I may express it in Leo's words, not hitherto cited, in
his 11th and 12th Sermons de Quadragesima. Appropinquante autem sestivitate
Paschali, adest maximum sacratissimumque Iejunium, quod observantiam sui
universis Fidelibus sine exceptione denuncia^: (of which he there a little
after says, In coelestibus Ecclesiae disciplinis multum utilitatis afferunt
Divinitus instituta jejunia.) The feast of Easter approaching, there
approaches also [before it] the chiefest and most sacred Fast, which commands
the observance of all Believers without exception [ viz. at their pleasure,
without necessity] -- Much is the profit of these heavenly disciplines of the
Church, Fastings appointed of God. Or in the words of an ancienter Father in
the first 300. years, Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, in his Epistle to
Basilides a Bishop, where blaming some, who fasting not at all, till they came
to the two last days of the Fast, (...). (Words which I have not before
cited.) These men, says he, when they come to the two last days, they keep
them indeed, and them only wholly in Fasting, viz. the Parasceue and the
Saturday, and think they do perform some great and illustrious thing, if they
fast then unto the Morning [of Easter Day.] whom I think in no wise to have
performed equal Ascetical course of Fasting, with those who have exercised
themselves in more days of fasting. In the same Epistle he blaming also,
(...), such as break off their Fast before the end of the last day of Fasting,
he gives the reason before-cited in the same Epistle from the confessed
universal Practice, (...) [(...)] (...). It will be confessed by all agreeably,
that [^o ought they to begin the joy of the day of Easter] as unto that time
humbling their souls by Fastings.

If all this persuade not our Brethren, who yet pretend to reverence the
Witness of the first 300. years, beside my simple, and complicated Testimonies
from the Fathers of the first 300 years, produced at large: I desire to be
told, if there were no such universal practice of an Annual Paschal Fast in the
whole Primitive Church, whence it could be, that the holy Church of Smyrna in
the 66. year after S. John's death, should in her unquestioned Epistle to the
Church in Philomelium, and to the holy Catholic Church of all Nations ((...).)
describe to the Churches in every place of the world, the day of the carrying
of S. Polycarp to the place of his trial and Martyrdom in these words, (...),
ON THE GREAT SATURDAY, [ viz. of the Great week before Easter] except they had
known that the Churches in every place of the world understood, in but that one
words mention, the celebrity of that day, (which never was celebrated but with
fasting?) See all this in Eusebius. l. 4. c. 15. Whence also it could be, that
Tertullian now become Montanist in his Discourse with and against the Church
Catholic, takes it twice for language understood by them, to call the Fast of
Friday and Saturday before Easter Day, PASCHA Vos and prae ter Pascha
jejunantes, c. 13. l. de I^juaiis, Sabbatum nunquam nisi in Pascha jejunandum,
c. 14.
? (Not the Feast certainly; therefore certain Fasts before Easter) l. de
Iejuniis c. 13, 14. As that before he became Montanist l. de Oratione c. 14. he
calls our Good Friday DIES PASCHAE, ( Die Paschae quo communis and quasi publica
jejunii Religio est.) THE PASCHAL DAY, (not the great day of the Paschal Feast;
therefore certainly the great day of the Paschal Fast,) Whence also otherwise
Origin ( l. 8. contra Celsum,) and Tertullian ( l. de Iejuniis c. 14.) and
Dionysius Alex. (in Epistola ad Basilidem) should call in those first ages,
speaking of the Churches Fasting, every yearly Friday before Easter PARASCEUEN?
an Appellation, which adhered to it only from our Lords Passion. ( Stationibus
4am and 6am Sabbati dicamus and jejuniis Parasceuen, says Tertullian there.)
Whence also otherwise that famous Dionysius of Alexandria in the prealledged
Epistle should mention in that week 4. other fasting days, while he blames
some (...), which fasted not the 4. days foregoing the Parasceue, and the Eve
of Easter? Whence also should the same Father otherwise record in the same
Epistle, all the days of that great week by the name of (...), THE SIX DAYS
OF FASTINGS? Whence also otherwise should Irenaeus call a certain time before
Easter, by the name of (...) (in his Epistle to Victor?) Whence also otherwise
should Methodius ( l. de Conviv. Virgin. orat. 3.) call that which is with us
Good Friday, (...), THE DAY OF PASCHE, AND OF THE FAST? And it is known that
the day following these 6. days had in the same Primitive Ages, most
honorable Appellations.

For the Synodical Epistle of the Council held at Antioch against Paulus
Samosatenus, written to Dionysius Bishop of Rome, and Maximus of Alexandria,
(which were all the holy Pa^iarchs absent) and to all Provinces, ((...)) (...),
unto all our fellow-Ministers, the Bishops, Priests, and Deacons throughout the
earth, and to the whole Catholic Church under heaven. Therefore surely they
spoke what they knew was a known appellation in the whole Christian world, when
they describe a certain day of the year by this name, (...), ON THE GREAT DAY
OF EASTER. (This is found written as about the 168th year after S. John, so
also recorded in Eusebius Histor. Eccl. l. 7. c. 13.) Which (...), is that
which Philo Iudaeus had expressed in his Book of the Religious (Christians) of
Alexandria by the name of (...), the greatest of the Feasts, and is answerable
to the (...) in the Epistle of the Church of Smyrna (above alleged) the Great
Saturday, which is the Eve of Easter. Yea the whole 40 days foregoing, the
69th Canon Apostolical, (made in the same Age, wherein those two Dionysius's
lived) calls (...), the holy Quadragesimal Fast; and Origin Homil. 10. in Lev^.
16.
in the same age Quadraginta aies jejuniis consecratos. Whence I say otherwise
should all these Appellations, (which are the Records of things,) be found the
Language of the several Churches, in the most famous Bishops and Writers of the
first 300 years, when they speak for the most part to the Catholic Church
throughout the whole earth; if it had not been within the first. 300 years, a
common notion of the universal Church, from one and the same universal Practice
(without any other so much as pretended universal cause of its beginning,
beside Apostolical teaching) of an honorable, holy, and great solemnity of a
Paschal Fast? (that is, the Fast of Lent which I have shown to be in the mother
Dialect of our English, but the Fast of Spring, as by the laws of the Church
Universal, both this Paschal Fast, and Easter were to be celebrated soon after
or about the Vernal Equinox.) This last way of proof I have insisted on, for
their sakes, who pretend reverence to the first 300 years, (wherein they know
the Records Ecclesiastical are but few comparatively;) and yet are not ashamed
against all this evidence to note all recurring set Fasts, and particularly
this of the Paschal or Lent fast with the brand of Superstition, or Judaical
observance; blindly and at adventure applying thereto that of the Apostle, of
the observance of days and months, and times and years. As if the first day
of the week, commanded to be observed under peril of sin, and obliging the
conscience of all Christians And not the (...) day mentioned in the 4th Com.
were not A DAY, (and the observance of the Lords days, the observance of some
days) as well as Good Friday, or any other day, or days of Fasts; or had any,
Evidenter praeceptum, or express commandment in the N. T. to come in the place
of the 7th day, or were not as much liable to some men's ignorant application of
Romans 14. v. 5, 6. One man esteems one day above another, another esteems every
day alike. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. He that regards a
day regards it to the Lord; and he that regards not a day, to the Lord he
regards it not. What ever fair Answer they with us (we hope) will give to this
Text, as not including any disparagement at all to the Lords day, the same will
let (...) understand, how rashly they have condemned the observance of other
Feasts, and Fasts of the Church, from their own mistaken consequences drawn
from Scriptures understood in their own sense, without reverence and regard to
the Churches teaching, despising together all those three great instruments of
Christian truth and sobriety, which Vincentius Lyrinensis professed to have
learnt from the greatest lights of the Christian Church in and about the 3d
holy General Council of Ephesus, for the avoiding of Heresy and Schism; viz.
Antiquity, Universality, or also consent of the generality of the Doctors of
the Church.

Next I proceed to another sort of proof, fetched from the Witness of the
Enemies of the Church and Gospel. Where I begin with Lucian the Scoffer, (about
the 65. year after S. John's decease:) who appears in his writings so well
knowing of Christian affairs, that he is by some thought to have been an
Apostate, if ever he were of any Religion. He besides his scoffing at our
Savior as a crucified sophister, In Peregrino, (...).
and deriding our swearing by the most High God, and the Son of the Father, and
the Spirit proceeding forth from the Father, One of Three, and Three of One As
he makes us to speak.
(his words are in Philopatri, (...);) He in the same Philopatr. according as
we have heard from S. Chrysostom, (Homil. 16. ad populum Antiochenum;) that
upon usual enquiry, how many weeks of Lent any Christian had fasted, (...),
some would answer two, others perhaps, three, and others all, The Montanists
especially affected to keep two weeks of fasting excepting the Saturday and the
Lords day, that is, ten days, as Tertullian witnesses, l. de jejuniis, and
Sozomen l. 7. c. 19. (...) [(...)] (...) and others, good and Catholic
Christians kept but two weeks (exempting also two days in each week, as S.
Chrysostom would, that they should do) by reason of their measure of strength*
that they were not well able to keep more: and these S. Chrysostom seems to
mean (for he reprehends them not,) by his (...).
So Lucian it seems had met with some of the former sort; and thus he speaks in
the forementioned Book: (...). You should be a Christian from your fashion:
[for so many called the Christians (...).] They report of themselves, that they
continue 10. days fasting, and keep whole night-watches in Hymns and Psalms.
-- Leave them therefore, adding in the end of their Hymns, that much-used
close, beginning from the Father: thus early after S. John's death, [even] the
enemies of the Church observed the Christians manner of more then one weeks
fasting, and whole-nights watchings in Hymns and Doxologies: whereas neither
Christians, nor any other Religion in the world, in these Ages, observed a many
weeks fast with whole-nights-watchings and hym^odies, but only the Christian
Paschal Fast; and this Lucian scoffs at, as amongst the Characters of the
(...), the Christians; and has now found followers amongst the Christians
themselves. In the last days there shall come [ viz. in more abundance]
scoffers, (2 Pet. 3. 3.)

The next, but more moderate Adversary, is ACESIUS, a Bishop of the Novatian
Faction in the time of the first General Council of Nice; which holy Council
both mentioning, and supposing as well known to all the Catholic Church, the
Fast of Lent, commanding Synods to be held twice a year in every Province,
throughout the Church universal, (...). The one BEFORE LENT, that all disquiet
of minds being taken away, a pure offering may be offered to God, [ viz. at the
end of the 40 days, on the day of Christ's Resurrection.] And the same sacred
Council also putting an end to the ancient Controversy of the time of Easter,
(and consequently of the time of the Paschal Fast) as Theodoret witnesses l.
4. Hist. Eccl. c. 20. in these words: (...). It seemed good to the Synod, that
all men should celebrate the solemnity of Easter at one and the same time.
Constantine the Great, and the happy nursing Father of the Church in that Age,
and he, who assembled and patronized that first Council Ecumenical, sent for
this Acesius, the Novatian Bishop, demanding whether he assented to the two
Decrees of the Council; 1. Concerning the Faith of Christ's Deity, and the 2.
concerning the time of the solemnity of Easter, (...). Acesius replied, O
Emperor, the Council has determined no new thing; for so have I received from
old time, EVEN FROM THE BEGINNING, FROM THE TIMES OF THE APOSTLES, both that
definition of Faith, and that time of the solemnity of Easter, ( Socrat. l. 1.
c. 10.) where still we must remember, that in the language of the Ancients,
Pascha includit Iejunium, Easter includes the Paschal Fast preceding, as S.
Hierom above has taught us.

A third Witness of Adversaries, is that of the (...), or Quartani; (a distinct
Sect from the Quartadecimani) For these Constantinus Harmenopulus l. de Sectis,
registers in his Catalogue of Heretics for this cause, (...)* (where he uses
the word (...), as Cyril of Alexan: above so often, (...).) These Quartani keep
the solemnity of Easter, not dissolving the Fasts, but choose to fast also [ i.
e. continue their Fast] on Easter Day, as we do on the 4th day of the week,
viz. until 3. a clock in the afternoon. This, if not against Apostolical
Tradition, could not have entitled them to have place, amongst the Sects
Heretical.

If we would now speak of our nearest friends, and their more welcome
testimonies: in a conference held in a Synod in England, Anno Dom. 666. (found
in the tomes of the Councels) where two Kings were present, and Bishops from
Scotland and Ireland, in their Debate concerning the Paschal solemnity, (which
as I have showed includes the preceding Paschal Fast; as Irenaeus also
acknowledges the Differences about the one, to have accompanied the Differences
about the other, even long before his time, Eusebius. l. 5. c. 24.) the one part
thus pleaded, Quod ne cui contemnendum and reprobandum esse videatur, ipsum est
quod beatus Evangelista Ioannes, discipulus Specialiter Domino dilectus cum
omnibus quibus praeerat Ecclesiis, celebrasse legitur. -- In quo tanti
Apostoli, qui super pectus Domini recumbere dignus fuit, exempla sectamur; cum
ipsum sapientissime vixisse omnis mundus neverit. Which [our manner of Paschal
C^lebration] lest any man should think contemptible and reprovable, we aver
it the same, which the blessed Evangelist John, the beloved Disciple of the
Lord is read to have observed, together with all the Churches over which he
presided. -- Herein therefore we follow the example of so great an Apostle,
whom the Lord did deign to rest in his Bosom; whom all the world also knows to
have lived most wisely. [Which was the same plea in effect, that Polycarp in
his time had made to Anicetus, and Polycrates in his time to Victor.] The other
part is said thus to have replied, Tunc Wilfrid jubente rege ut diceret, ita
exorsus est: Pascha quod facimus, inquit, vidimus Romae, ubi beati Apostoli
Petrus and Paulus vixere, docuere, passi sunt, and sepulti, ab omnibus
celebrari: hoc in Italia, hoc in Gallia, quas discendi vel orandi studio
pertransivimus, ab omnibus agi conspeximus. And there it follows: Hoc Africam,
As^am and Aegyptum, Graeciam and omnem orbem, quacunque Christi Ecclesia
diffusa est per diversas nationes ac linguas uno ac non diverso temporis ordine
geri com^erimus.
Then Wilfrid, the King commanding him to speak, thus began: The Pasche, which
we observe, we have seen so celebrated at Rome by all, where the blessed
Apostles Peter and Paul lived and taught, were martyred and buried: thus in
Italy, thus in France, the same we have found in the same order of time to have
been observed in Africa, in Asia, and in Egypt, throughout all Nations and
Tongues, wheresoever the Church of Christ is diffused. Neque haec EVANGELICA ET
APOSTOLICA TRADITIO legem solvit, sed potius adimplet. -- In quam observantiam
imitandam, omnes S. Ioannis successores in Asia post obitum ejus, and omnis per
orbem Ecclesia conversa est: and hoc esse verum Pascha, hoc solum fidelibus
celebrandum, Nicae^o Concilio non statum noviter, sed confirmatum est. -- Unde
constat vos, Colmanne, neque Ioannis (ut autumatis) exempla sectari, neque
Petri, cujus traditioni scientes contradicitis; neque legi, neque Evangelio, in
observatione vestrae Paschae congruere. Neither does this EVANGELICAL AND
APOSTOLICAL TRADITION break the Law, but rather fulfill it. -- Unto the
imitation of which observance all the Successors also of S. John in Asia after
his death, and all the Church throughout the world conformed: and that this
only is the true Paschal Celebrity for all Believers, was not decreed as new by
the Nicene Council, but confirmed [as old] -- Whence it is manifest, O Coleman,
that you neither follow the example of John, (as you think) nor of Peter, whose
Tradition you wittingly contradict, nor are ye congruous to Law or Gospel in
the observance of your Easter.

In the Ecclesiastic Laws of King Canutus c. 16. Siquis, etc. celebrandum
Quadragesimae violarit jejunium, compensatio in duplum augetur. If any one
shall violate the Fast of Lent, which ought to be celebrated, he shall make
double satisfaction. Ercombertus, one of our English Kings also, (as Sigebertus
in Chronico records) Iejunium 40. dierum observari principali Autoritate
praecepit, A. D. 640. quae ne facile a quoquam possit contemni, in
transgressores dignas and competentes punitiones proposuit. He commanded the
Quadragesimal Fast to be observed by his Royal Authority A. D. 640. which lest
any one should lightly contemn, he decreed against the Transgressors worthy and
competent punishments. In Concilio Cloveshoviae under Cuthbertus Archbishop of
Canterbury, Can. 18. Statutum est ut -- jejuniorum tempora nullus negligere
praesumat; sed ante horum initium per singulos annos admoneatur plebs, quatenus
LEGITIMA UNIVERSALIS ECCLESIAE SCIAT and observet jejunia. It is decreed, that
none presume to neglect the times of Fastings, but that every year the people
be advertised before the beginning of them, that so they may know and observe
THE RULED FASTS OF THE UNIVERSAL CHURCH. So much for our own Country in
ancient Ages.

I have reserved to the last place of Testimonies (as I began with that of the
Churches contest with the Montanists in Tertullian their Patron) that of a
Catholic contest in the Churches behalf by S. Augustine with the Manichees in
Faustus their Defender. So that beside my 4 Testimonies above produced out of
S. Augustine, p. 60. -- 63. we add this here (out of its time) for its peculiar
fitness to conclude with, l. 30. contra Faustum Manichaeum c. 3, -- 5. [
Faustus objici^] Quid vero and de illo dicemus, quod sane frustrari quis
audeat, aut negare; cum constet hoc inter omnes, and aeque per orbem terrarum
quo^annis, omni cum studio celebretur in conventu Catholico? Dico autem
Quadragesimam, quam qui inter vos ^ite observa^dam putaverit, abstineat necesse
est ab omnibus his, etc. Quid ergo and, vos charissimi, ritum hunc Daemoniorum
vivitis, cum haec a vobis PASSIONIS CHRISTI celebrantur mysteria, and
seductorii spiritus fraud decipimini, and in hypocrisi loquimini mendacium,
and cauteriatam habetis conscientiam vestram? Quod si horum nihil vos; nec nos
igitur -- Si Quadragesima sine vino and carnibus non superstitiose a vobis, sed
DIVINA LEGE SERVATUR, videte, quaeso, videte, etc. [Augustinus respondet] Audi
ergo, etc. qua mente and confilio hoc adversum vos capitulum proferamus; non
quod a carnibus abstineatis: nam hoc, a quibusdam, and primi Patres nostri
secerunt, sicut commemoras -- CHRISTIANI, NON HAERETICI, SED CATHOLICI,
edomandi corporis causa, PROPTER ANIMAM, ab irrationalibus motibus amplius
humiliandam, non quod illa ess^ immunda credant, non solum a carnibus, veru^ a
quibusdam etiam terrae fructibus abstinent: vel semper, sicut pauci: vel certis
diebus atque temporibus, SICUT PER QUADRAGESIMAM FERE OMNES, quanto magis
quisque vel mi^us, seu voluerit, seu potuerit. Vos autem ipsam creaturam nega
is bonam, and immundam dici^is, etc. -- qua in re Creatorem earum sine dubio
blasphematis. Hoc est quod pertinet ad doctrinam Daemoniorum -- Videtis ergo
multum interesse inter abstinentes a cibis propter sacratam significationem,
vel propter corporis castigationem; and abstinentes a cibis, quos Deus creavit,
dicendo quod eos Deus non creavit; PROINDE ILLA DOCTRINA EST PROPHETARUM ET
APOSTOLORUM: haec Daemoniorum mendaciloquorum. Faustus thus objected: what now
shall we say to that, which certainly no man can elude or deny, since this is
manifest amongst all, and is celebrated in the Catholic Congregation
throughout the world, every year, with all carefulness? I speak of Lent, [or
the Quadragesimal Fast] which whosoever shall judge, that it is rightly
observed amongst you, he must needs abstain from giving us any of these words,
etc. What then do you also, O dearly Beloved, live at that time after the
manner of Devils, when THESE MYSTERIES OF THE PASSION OF CHRIST are celebrated
by you [ viz. in the Quadragesimal Fast] and are ye also deceived with the
fraud of the seducing spirit? and do ye speak lies in hypocrisy? [which S.
Augustine had objected to the Manichees] and have ye also your conscience
seared with a hot iron? But if none of this be to be said of you, then neither
is it to be said of us. -- If a Lent be by you observed with abstinence from
wine and flesh, and yet without superstition, yea BY DIVINE LAW: see ye, see, I
pray, etc. To this S. Augustine thus Replies c. 5. Hear you therefore, with
what meaning and intent we allege against you this chapter [1 Timothy 4. 1, --
6.] not because ye abstain from flesh; for this our first Fathers also have
done from some sorts of flesh, as you mention. -- CHRISTIANS, NOT HERETICS,
BUT THE CATHOLICS abstain not only from flesh, but also from certain fruits of
the earth, for the keeping under their body, for their souls sake, and the
humbling thereof from unreasonable motions, (not because they think those meats
unclean.) And this abstinence they observe either all the year, as some few: or
on certain days and times, AS ALMOST ALL IN THE TIME OF LENT. For the measure
[of more severe, or remiss Fasting] as every one is either willing or able. But
you [O Manichees] deny the Creature it self to be good, and pronounce it
unclean -- wherein without doubt you blaspheme their Creator. This is that
which belongs to the doctrine of Devils. -- You see then there is much
difference 'twixt such as abstain from meats, for a sacred signification [ viz.
of the Fasters unworthiness of Gods creatures, and of the Humiliation of their
souls] or also for the chastisement of their bodies; and those others [the
Manichees] who abstain from meats, which God has created, alleging that God
has not created them. THEREFORE THAT DOCTRINE [OF OURS IS THE DOCTRINE OF THE
PROPHETS AND APOSTLES; but this of yours is the Doctrine of Devils speaking
lies. Thus far St. Augustine. The same judgment by occasion of the Manichees
S. Austin makes l. de moribus Manichaeo^um c. 13. Vestram a vino and carnibus
abstinentiam -- Si ergo parsimoniae gratia and c^ercendae libidinis, qua es^is
talibus, and potu delectamur and cap^mur, audio and probo. Sed non ita est. As
to your abstinence from flesh and wine -- If it be performed for the cause of
^obriety, and for the (...) of lust, whereby we are wont to be taken, and
delighted with such me^ts and drinks, I admit, and approve of it: But yours is
not such Idem. l. ad Adiman^um Manichaei dis^ipulum, l. 14 Abstinentes a cibis
quos Deus creavit. Hos enim proprie designat [Apostolus Paulus] qui non
proptere^ temperant a cibis ^alibus, ut aut concupiscentiam su^m refranent, aut
Infirmita^i alterius parcant; sed quia ipsas carnes immundas putant, and earum
Creatorem Deum esse negant.

Idem l. de Haeres ad Quod vult Deum Haeres. 82. A Iovinian^ quodam Monacho
Haeresis Iovinianistarum or^a est, aeta^e nostra -- Haec docebat etc. -- nec
aliquid prodesse iejunia, VEL A CIBIS ALIQUIBUS ABSTINENTIAM. There has ^isen
in our Age from a certain Monk called Iovinian, a Heresy of the Iovinianists
-- He taught, etc. -- and that neither Fastings, OR ABSTINENCE FROM CERTAIN
MEATS does at all profit.


Does he deny, what Faustus affirmed of the Catholic Churches observance of
Lent, throughout the world, as a celebration of the memory of Christ's Passion,
[the taking away of the Bridegroom, in those days of his taking away] and that
Divina lege? Yes, if that be to deny it, when he affirms, that what was
objected, was indeed (notwithstanding the misapplied objection of abstaining
from meats, etc. and of seducing spirits) Doctrina Prophetarum and Apostolorum
The Doctrine of the Prophets and of the Apostles.
The same, which elsewhere this holy Father teaches, (besides the above cited
2d Epistle to Ianuarius, Quadragesima sane jejuniorum habet autoritatem and ex
Evangelio) in his 2d Book also, de Doctrina Christiana c. 16. 40 diebus
jejunare monemur. Hoc lex, cujus persona est in Mose: Hoc prophetia, cujus
personam gerit Elias: HOC IPSE DOMINUS MONET, qui tanquam testimonium habens ex
lege and prophetis, medius inter illos in mon^e, 3. discipulis videntibus atque
stupentibus claruit. We are admonished to fast 40 days; this the Law, whose
person Moses bare; this the Prophets, whose person Elias sustained; this the
Lord himself admonishes us, who as receiving witness from the Law and the
Prophets, shone forth in the midst 'twixt those two in the Mount, the 3
Disciples beholding with astonishment. And on Psalm. 110. Dies illi Paschales,
praeteritis diebus Quadragesimae, quibus ante resurrectionem Dominici corporis,
vitae hujus signi^icatur moeror, solenniter grata hilaritate succedunt. --
Quadragenario numero, quo and Moses, and Elias, ET IPSE DOMINUS jejunaverunt:
PRAECIPITUR ENIM NOBIS and ex lege, and ex prophetis, ET EX IPSO EVANGELIO,
quod testimonium habet a lege and prophetis. Those Paschal days do solemnly
succeed with welcome Festivity to those lately ended days of Lent, in which
before the time of the Lords Resurrection is expressed the sorrow of this life.
-- In the number of 40. days both Moses, and Elias, AND THE LORD HIMSELF did
fast; FOR IT IS COMMANDED UNTO US both from the Law, and from the Prophets, AND
FROM THE GOSPEL IT SELF, which receives witness from the Law and the Prophets
And that by this 40 days fast S. Austin in all these places means the Paschal
fast, with reference to the Pascha following it: see it his sense tra^at. 17.
in Iohannem. Cum labor celebramus Quadragesimam ante Pascha, cum latiti^ vero
tanqua^* accep^ ^ercede quinquagesimam post Pascha.
.

Thus considering, that this most worthy and renowned Father S. Augustine is
wont to be objected to us in one Period not understood by the Objectors, and
above answered by us abundantly, p. 60 and 63, and is with our Brethren in
double honor beyond most other Doctors of the Church, we have therefore
allotted him (for their more full satisfaction from him) a double place in our
Testimonies, of which we have produced 9. from his unquestioned writings.

Now having encompassed you with so great a cloud of witnesses, you may discern
what truth is in the oppositions that are made to this Paschal Fast of Lent.
That which passes with many for most current, is which some Authors after the
800th year of Christ have spoken of Telesphorus the 7th Bishop of Rome, in the
40th year after the Death of S. John. For some being not able to deny such (at
least) Antiquity of the Fast of Lent, they were willing to feign it instituted
by Telesphorus. The foundation of this error, (that so imposed upon some grave
Writers after 800 years,) was a forgery and interpolation practiced upon that
ancient and renowned Record of Church History, the Chronicle of Eusebius. Into
which in the page 198. ad annum MMCXLVIII, after the story of Chocebas, was
thrust in contrary to all the Copies Manuscript, contrary also to the copies of
Marianus, Bid, and Isidore, that Telesphorus ( viz. in that year) did
institute the Fast of Lent. And in pursuance of their forgery they did proceed
and devise to thrust into the same Chronicle of Eusebius, ad annum MMCLVIII,
contrary unto the Faith of all ancient copies, that Pius the 9th Bishop of Rome
did institute the celebration of the Paschal Feast* Two opposite sorts of
persons drinking down willingly, and sputtering abroad these Reports: the one
deeming thereby to honor highly those ancient Bishops of Rome, (though their
authority were not such in those Ages, as that from their authority and
prescription, such universal customs should be taken up in all places, and
following Ages of the Catholic Church) whereas indeed these holy Bishops did
themselves but receive, and obey, with the rest of the Church, this Institution
of the Paschal Fast, and of Easter, received also before their times, as I have
shown. The other, some at home among our selves, thinking hereby to disparage
the Institution of the Paschal Fast, and Easter; as if they came from Rome
only, though anciently. To proceed therefore to convict this Forgery, beside
the Testimonies of Fact, which I have produced, elder, not only then Eusebius,
but also then Pius, or Telesphorus: concerning the copies of that Chronicle of
Eusebius, you shall hear what Joseph Scaliger, who made it his business to
peruse them, and to Comment on the Book, does witness. First, as to Lent
pretended to be instituted by Telesphorus; in the 198. page of his
Animadversions upon the Chronicle of Eusebius, ad annum MMCXLVIII. Ad vocem
Chocebas: he thus testifies: Post hanc Pericopen [viz. Chocebas dux Iudaicae
factionis nolentes sibi Christianos adversum Romanum militem far subsidium
omnimodis cruciatibus necat. page Eusebii 167] intruserunt editores de
Quadragesimae jejunio a Telesphoro instituto. Nostrum consilium est scriptorum
codicum sidem sequi; QUORUM NULLUS ITA HABET, neque Marianus, neque Beda, neque
Isidorus. After this Section concerning Chocebas, they which put forth the
Edition of Eusebius's Chronico^, have thrust in thereunto, that the Fast of
Lent was instituted by Telesphorus; but our purpose it is to follow the faith
of the Manuscript copies, [from whence all printed editions do pretend to
proceed] of which NO ONE HAS THAT THING, nor Marianus, nor Bid, nor Isidore.
And as to the Feast of Easter pretended to be instituted on the Lords day by
Pi^s the first, the same Scaliger in his Animadversions upon the Chronicle of
Eusebius, p. 201. ad annum MMCLVIII. thus witnesses: Quae Pio attribuuntur in
Editionibus de Resurrectionis Dominicae die Dominico celebrandae institutione,
ea in nullo veterum codicum comparent. Sed Marianus a Beda, Beda a libro Hermae
apocrypho insua Chronica traduxerunt, and ab illis in Eusebianum textum ab
editoribus admissa sunt. Nos ab initio prosessi sumus, nihil nisi ex
auctoritate scriptorum codicum hic inno^aturos, quod a nobis hactenus summa
^ide and religione observatum suisse, eos, qui Editiones cum libris Scriptis
contuleri^t, judices fer^* That which in the Editions is attributed to Pius, as
the institutor of the [annual] Feast of Christ's Resurrection on the Lords day,
that no where appears in any ancient copy: but Marianus had it from Bid, and
Bid from the Apocryphal Book of Hermas, whence by some it was taken into the
Text of Eusebius. We from the beginning have professed to vary nothing, but by
the authority of the Manuscript copies; which that we have performed hitherto,
with the greatest faithfulness and religion, I make them my judges, who shall
compare the printed Editions with the Manuscript copies. This was to be said,
not for the diminishing the honor of those two holy Bishops of Rome
Telesphorus and Pius; of the former whereof Irenaeus ((...), says S. Basil l.
de Sp. sancto c. 29.) thus writes, l. 3. c. 3. (...) ((...)) (...)*
Telesphorus succeeded Xystus, and gloriously fulfilled Martyrdom. The same
might be shown of Pius, (the next Bishop save one to Telesphorus) who was
martyred two years after S. Justin Martyr. Yet this honor of such Institutions
belongs not to them, as their own successors also acknowledge; viz. that the
Institution of the Paschal Fast was from the Apostles delivery; and that of
Easter on the Lords day from the Apostles also, particularly from S. Peter and
S. Paul, as Victor himself also Bishop of Rome, and Martyr in the Primitive
Ages does plead: (...), They did not think it meet to dishonor the Tradition
of Peter and Paul, Soz. l. 7. c. 19.

Another conceit by some is taken up, as if the Fast of Lent were not the
Paschal Fast, because Tertullian does not any where call the Paschal Fast
Quadragesima* so endeavoring from a negative argument, of one Authors not
using that one word, which they call for, to divide those fasts, that they
might weaken their forces. But first, it is the Paschal Fast that is prefixed
in our proposition, see page 24. where secondly, I have shown also, that the
Paschal Fast being confessedly by the Laws of the Church, the Spring-fast, to
attend the vernal Equinox, as all ancient Books and Rules do witness, ((...)*)
the Lent. fast is but the Saxon for that Spring-fast. And of the word (...);
Quadragesima, (beside the (...) mentioned in Irenaeus's Epistle to Victor,
elder then Tertullian, of which more hereafter, and Origin not many years after
Tertullian, his Habemus Quadraginta dies jejuniis consecratos, of which before)
that this was by the Ancients delivered, as the same with the Paschal Fast. [I
speak not here of a precept unto all of strict fasting 40 days until each
evening.] I first allege the 69th Canon Apostolical, the Authors of which Canon
call it (...), Cum labor quadragesimam ante Pascha -- quinquagesimam post
pascha celebramu^, S. August. tract. 17. in I^h.
the holy Quadragesimal Fast of Pasche. The great Athanasius in his Epistle ad
Orthodoxos, writes on this manner: (...). These things were done in the holy
Quadragesimal Fast it self about the Pasche, or near Easter, when the Brethren
[ i. e. the Christians] were in fasting. -- (...)* Nor did they reverence the
Lords day it self of the holy Feast. And he here supposing a great violence
offered to the Churches order, thus stirs up the Christians in the same
Epistle, (...)* Be ye therefore moved also I beseech you -- lest after a while
both the Canons, and the faith of the Church be destroyed; for both are in
danger, except speedily God by you reform the transgressions, and the Church be
vindicated. For not now first were the Canons and Rules of the Church
delivered, but they have been fairly delivered down and firmly of our Fathers;
nor did the Faith now first begin, etc. That therefore those things which have
been preserved in the Churches even until our times, from them of old, may not
now be lost in our days, etc. Be ye stirred up, Brethren, etc. This I have the
rather set down at large, because in that great abundance of 10. witnesses in
that one age of the Council of Nice, I have not hitherto alleged ought from
Athanasius; and here my chief use of him is, to show, that from the very first
beginnings of Christianity, he had received no other Paschal Fast then that of
(...), the Fast Quadragesimal; whereof the Great week was indeed a distinctly
eminent and principal part, but a part, as appears als^ by all the Paschal
Homilies of Cyril of Alexandria, in number 22. by me above alleged. Yea,
Socrates himself, who is thought the least friend to this Fast of Lent, [as he
is miserably abused in English by false translation, and himself in part
mistaken, as we shall show hereafter in the Appendix;] yet l. 5. c. 22. (...).
Where he grants, that both those in Rome, and those in Illyrium, and in all
Greece, and in Alexandria, kept a Fast of many weeks, [not one only] whether
six, or three; and that Fast they called (...), or Quadragesimal, and he called
(...), the Paschal Fast. And a little before, (...), the Paschal Fastings.

If happily it be the sense of some words of Epiphanius, that the Quadragesimal
Fast, or (...) did determine before the beginning of the Great week of
Fastings, which is often called (...), (although Petavius deny that to be the
sense of Epiphanius; I shall not contend; but say, that if such was his sense,
he was almost singular therein. And that from his professed value of the
Pseudo-Apostolical Constitutions, which have borrowed the name of Clement, as
Collector, who never saw them, nor some ages after him; I have reason to
suppose, that Epiphanius took up this opinion, from the 5. l. 12. cap. of those
Pseudo. Apostolical constitutions, which first broached this conceit. Whereas
the sacred 6th Council Ecumenical can. 2. (though giving high honor to the
Canons Apostolical) rejected in express terms the Authority of those
Constitutions. (...), etc.
Having thus cleared the consent of the Generality of the Fathers, and the
great number of undeniable witnesses by me produced, in the first 7. Ages,
after the decease of the last of the Apostles, so uniformly witnessing, that
the Paschal Fast of Lent was ever observed in the Church, as from the Apostles,
and from Evangelical Instruction; I desire to know what is sufficient if this
be not, to prove a Tradition Apostolical? if any shall hope to render the use
of the Fathers useless, as to make any evidence herein; because forsooth they
can allege, that some one Father or other has sometime called somewhat,
Tradition Apostolical, which indeed was not: I answer, It was the Generality of
the consent of other Fathers to the contrary, (at least the silence of all
other Fathers therein, and many of those primitive Ages of the Church knowing
nothing thereof) that let us us then know such not to have been Tradition
Apostolical; which in our cause is all otherwise. Where (beside the uniform
custom, and solemn practice of the Church of all Ages and places, for some
Paschal Fast, close upon the Vernal Equinox, which we therefore call the Fast
of Lent or Spring) the positive Testimony of those Fathers has been showed so
general and consenting, that perhaps themselves who oppose this, will discern,
that they do full ill service to Christianity, if they consider what now I
shall propound unto them, for the strength of mine, and weakness of their
Allegation. And that in brief is this:

As the Asseveration of some one or two Fathers of the Church, in the behalf of
the Canonical Authority of the Books of the Maccabees, or of the 3d Book of
Esdras; (I not needing at this time to name any other) which yet from the
generality and consent of the rest of the Fathers, we know notwithstanding
sufficiently, not to be Canonical; (yea I add the positive rejection by some
one or few Fathers, of the Epistles of S. James, and S. Jude; which yet we know
from the Generality and consent of the rest of those ancient Writers, certainly
to be Canonical) is no bar to the sufficiency of the Testimonies of the
Churches Records, to make undoubted evidence, which Books of Scripture are
Canonical, and which are not: so as that he who should reject that evidence,
would disserve our common Christianity in a very high and dangerous degree: So
the Allegation of some one or few Fathers for something as Tradition
Apostolical, which yet is not, (yea the possible Rejection by some one
Socrates, or other Ecclesiastical writer Vincentius Lirinensis c. 39. Quicquid
unus vel alter Patrum, quamvis ille sanctus and doctus, quamvis Episcopus,
praeter omnes au^ etiam contra omnes senserit, id inter proprias and occultas
and privatas opi^iunculas, ^ communis, publicae ac generalis sententiae
autoritate secre^um fit: whatsoever one father only (or a second) albeit he be
both holy and learned, shall opine beside or against all the rest: that is to
be severed among the singular, obscure and private opinions from the authority
of the common public and general judgment.
of something from being Tradition Apostolical, which yet is) is no bar or
hinderance, but that we may rest assured, that we have made undoubted evidence
concerning the Tradition Apostolical of this Paschal Fast of Lent, from such
generality and consent of Testimonies of the Fathers of those seven Ages next
the Apostles, which we have produced.

Furthermore (if ought further need be said) let us now suppose a while, that
no one of the Testimonies above by me collected, made any mention at all, in
express terms, that this Paschal Fast of Lent was a Tradition Apostolical; that
no one Author of all those had said in any word, That it was from God, or
Christ, or the Apostles; but that only they testify, that the universal Church
had ever practiced it; what force such practice alone, so well witnessed, has
in it to infer my conclusion, That it was from the Apostles, I will now proceed
briefly to show.

S. Augustine is the man, who is brought to say, (but nothing against what we
say, nor other then what we have said,) Non invenimus in literis Novi
Testamenti evidenter praeceptum of this or any other certain days of necessary
fasting; and hereupon, as S. Basil of another matter spoke, ( l. d. Sp. Sancto
c. 10.) (...).

They clamor and call for Demonstrations from written Testimonies This was the
very objection of Socrates, concerning the Fast of Lent, l. 5. c. 22. against
both the one side, who pleaded their observance from S. John the Apostle, and
the others, who pleaded theirs from the Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul, which
when Socrates had recited, he adds: (...). But none of these, says he, can
show a demonstration concerning these things from their writings, or from the
written word. So that Socrates his very objection and ground is answered in
these following pages.
and send away, (with disgrace) as nothing worth, the unwritten witness of the
Fathers: and c. 27. (...), etc. But they cease not, up and down clamouring,
that this is not witnessed in any written word of God. Yet the same S.
Augustine (beside that he professed to find Authority for it, ex veteribus
libris, and ex Evangelio, out of the Old Testament, and out of the Gospel;
though not Authoritatem Evidentem Praecepti, yet Habet, says he, Quadragesima
jejuniorum authoritatem, and in V. L. and ex Evangelio; had he found it neither
evidently, nor obscurely, or at all, in the written word of God; yet he would
never have allowed the opposers, to have abused so his words to their
conclusion: as shall now appear from his Doctrine, not in one, but many of his
undoubted works, never retracted, nor in their Allegations from him
contradicted.

This holy Father thus writes, speaking of a certain custom of the Church: l.
2. de Baptismo contra Donatistas, c. 7. Quam consuetudinem credo ab Apostolica
Traditione venientem; (Sicut MULTA QUAE NON INVENIUNTUR IN LITERIS EORUM, neque
in conciliis posteriorum, and tamen quia per Universam custodiuntur Ecclesiam,
non nisi ab ipsis tradita and commendata creduntur.) Which custom I believe to
have come from Tradition of the Apostles; (as* MANY THINGS, WHICH ARE NOT FOUND
IN THEIR WRITINGS, nor in the Councels of following times, and yet because they
are observed through the Church universal, are believed to have been by them
delivered and commended. Ibid. l. 4. c. 6. Illa consuetudo, quam etiam tunc
homines sursum versus respicientes, non videbant a posterioribus institutam,
recte ab Apostolis tradita creditur. That custom, which even then men looking
back upward, did not observe to have been instituted by any following Ages, is
rightly believed to have been delivered from the Apostles. And again, c. 23.
Quod universa tenet Ecclesia, nec Conciliis institutum, sed semper retentum
est, non nisi Apostolica autoritate traditum rectissime credimus. That which
the universal Church observes, and was not instituted by Councels, but has
been ever retained, we most rightly believe to have been no other then a
Tradition from Apostolical Authority.

To this his Thesis, if you will subsume his Hypothesis, see it above p. 62.
Sicuti quod Domini Passio, etc. anniversaria solennitate celebratur. As for
example, says he, that the Passion of the Lord is celebrated in Anniversary
solemnity. (Which we have shown not to have been first instituted by any
General Council.) Which he there reckons up, Inter illa, quae non scripta, sed
Tradita custodimus; quae quidem toto terrarum orb observantur. Again, that he
thought somethings may be non evidenter praecepta ab Apostolis, not evidently
commanded by the Apostles, nor yet in their writings at all commanded, and yet
commanded by the Apostles, and rightly so believed; see his words, l. 5. de.
Baptis. con. Donat. c. 23. Apostoli nihil quidem exinde praeceperunt, sed
consuetudo illa ab eorum Traditione exordium sumpsisse credenda est: sicut sunt
multa, quae universa tenet Ecclesia, and ob hoc ab Apostolis praecepta been
creduntur, quanquam scripta non reperiantur. The Apostles indeed commanded
nothing in this matter, but that custom is to be believed to have taken its
beginning from their Tradition: as there are many things, which the universal
Church observes, and for this cause are rightly believed to have been commanded
by the Apostles, although they be not found written. Here you see commanded by
them, and not commanded by them, in several senses; Therefore his otherwhere,
non evidenter praeceptum, is by himself reconciled here to himself, in the many
other Testimonies above produced. Upon these grounds therefore Epist. ad
Ianuarium 118. cap. 5.
S. Augustine elsewhere pronounces, that to dispute against that which the
Universal Church observes, Insolentissimae est insaniae. S. Basil perfectly
agrees hereto, l. de. Sp. Sancto c. 29. (...). But this also is Apostolical:
Hold fast the Traditions, which ye have received, whether by word, or by
Epistle: [2 Thessalonians. 2. 15. Upon this Text S. Chry. sostome also says. (...).
] of which especially this present is one, which they, who from the beginning,
did constitute or appoint it, delivered to those that followed after, the usage
proceeding on ever together with time, and rooted firmly by long custom in the
Churches. Cap. 27. He tells us of certain things received in the Church, (...),
from a tacit and mystical Tradition; and gives instance, (...); As in Baptism,
the [explicit] renouncing, or profession to forsake the Devil and his Angels,
or Ministers [and so his works] (in express words at the place of Baptism) from
what Scripture is it? Add to these Leo the Great, of near time to S. Augustine,
Sermon. 2. de jejunio pent. Dubitandum non est, dilectissimi, omnem observantiam
Christianam, eruditionis esse Divinae, and quicquid ab Ecclesia in consuetudine
est Devotionis receptum, de Traditione Apostolica, and de Sancti Spiritus
prodire doctrina -- manifestissime pa^et inter cae^era Dei munera jejuniorum
quoque gratiam, etc. It is not to be doubted, O most beloved, but that each
observance of Christian people ( viz. of the generality of Christians) has
been taught from God, and what ever has been [so] received by the Church into
the practice of her Devotion, does derive it self from Tradition Apostolical,
and from the teaching of the holy Spirit. -- It is most manifestly evident,
amongst other the gifts of God, the gift also of the Fasts, etc. Again in his
Epistle ad Dioscorum Alexandrinum; His, qui consecrandi sunt, jejuniis and
jejunantibus sacra benedictio conferantur. Nam praeter autoritatem
consuetudinis, QUAM EX APOSTOLICA NOVIMUS VENIRE DOCTRINA etiam sacra, etc. Let
the holy Blessing be given to those, which are consecrated, Fasting. For
besides the Authority of the [Churches] custom, which we know does come from
Apostolical teaching, the holy doctrine also, etc. Fulgentius Ferrandus
Diaconus of the next Age in Paraenetico ad Reginam, regula quinta: Et omnis,
qui se ad Ecclesiam pertinere gloriatur, legibus vivat Ecclesiae; Maxim his,
quas antiquitas roboravit. Unde etiam consuetudo sine lege, quam tamen
Ecclesiae sanctae traditio custodiendam jugiter posteris tradidit, eadem
Reverentia videtur custodienda, and nullatenus amoven^a, si non est ^idei verae
contraria: And let every one, who glories, that he belongs unto the Church,
live by the laws of the Church; especially those, which Antiquity has
confirmed. Whence also custom without a law, which yet the Tradition of the holy
Church [Universal] has delivered to be observed by posterity for ever, seems
that it ought to be observed with the same Reverence, and at no hand to be laid
aside, when it is not contrary to the true Faith. It were easy to add numerous
Testimonies from S. Jerome, Epiphanius, Tertullian, Chrysostom, and others;
but these are sufficient. Only be it here well noted, that neither S.
Augustine, S. Basil, Leo, Ferrandus, or others here, do speak of matters of
Faith, or of essential duties moral, or of the Essence of Sacraments; all which
we are taught indeed by the consent of these same Fathers, to be contained
expressly in the holy Scriptures: (and so their Testimonies in that behalf are
reconcilable with these:) But of ritual observances, which being visible, and
as it were legible in the Universal Churches constant practice, needed not to
be set down in her written rule. Or those which are therein set down, not
necessarily, so evidently, but that they might need the Interpretation of such
the Churches Practice.

The Hypothesis here to be subsumed, that the Paschal Fast of Lent was ever
observed in the Church Universal, I may here well assume to my self, to have
sufficiently proved, in the Testimonies already vouched throughout this whole
Discourse. To all which 'twas yet much more easy to add numberless proofs of
that matter of Fact, and Practice Ecclesiastical, Such as are these, Socrates
l. ^. c. 22. (...). Amongst the rest, he particularly recounts (...). Sozomen
l. 7. c. 19. (...). Palladius Historia Lausiaca cap. 20. concerning Macarius
the contemporary ^f Pachomius, (...) [ viz.] (...) [(...),] (...). Cassianus
Collat. 21. c. 27. Ait Diverso more. i. e. sex, vel septem hebdomadibus per
nonnullas provincias Quadragefimam celebrari: SED UNAM RATIONEM. EUNDEMQUE
MODUM IEIUNIORUM diversa hebdomadarum observatione concludi; by enim, (inquit)
sibi 6. hebdomadarum observantiam prasixerunt, qui putant die quoque Sabbati
jejunandum. Sex ergo in hebdemada jejunia persolvunt, quae eosdem 6 and 30 dies
sexies revoluta consummant. His tripartite history also l. 2. c. 12. Epistola
synodica: cum omnibus ab Initio Pascha Custodientibus [but Iejunium Domini
Pascha includit, says S. Hierome.]
then to have alleged such witnesses, as has been done already, throughout 7.
Ages; which together with the Practice universal have testified, in the
Question of Right, as well as Fact, That this observance of the Paschal Fast
had its Institution from the Apostles, from Christ, from God, and the Gospel;
That it stands by Tradition Apostolical and Evangelical. If many among them
have averred not only an Institution and Tradition Apostolical, and
Evangelical, but also a Precept from the Apostles, etc. they have done that ex
abundante, (by an overflowing measure) to what was the Proposition by me
undertaken to be proved; viz. page 24. That the Church has ever observed this
Paschal Fast, since the time of the taking away of the Lord, the Bridegroom;
and since the times of the Children of the Bride-chamber, the Apostles of the
Lord. And 2dly the Church has done this, has observed this Paschal Fast, as
from the Apostles; grounding their practice upon Instruction Evangelical,
Tradition Apostolical. Now how it is a Truth (to be noted also) that so many of
the above-alledged witnesses, as do assert it to be a Precept Apostolical or
Divine, do not only a fortiore prove my Hypothesis, (as is evident) but also ex
abundante assert, that which is more; the Catholic Church in Tertullian's time
which he opposed, when he wrote his book de Iejuniis, may from what is there
set down, have sufficiently instructed us. When as chap. 2d the Church opposes
to Tertullian, Certos dies a Deo Constitutos, viz. illos dies in Evangeliis
jejuniis determinatos, in quibus allatus est sponsus; and hos esse jam solos
legitimos jejuniorum Christianorum. That there are certain days constituted by
God; that those days are in the Gospel determined for Fasts, in which the
Bridegroom was taken away; and that those only are now the legitimate days of
Christian Fasts. And yet the same Church there avoucheth also against
Tertullian, that the Stations of the 4th and 6th days of the week, amongst the
days dedicated [wch also we know to have reference to the Bridegrooms taking
away.] Ex Arbitrio agenda, non ex Imperio, cap. 13, 14. are days propounded to
be observed by the Christian peoples free Devotion, not of Obligation or
Precept. And this Tertullian freely acknowledges to be, as they had said, in
these words: Quae [ stationes] and ipsae suos quidem dies habeant, quartae
feriae and sextae; passive tamen current, neque sub lege Praecepti. which
[stations] have their days also, the 4th and 6th days of the week; but yet
are current only, in being observed generally, but not under a bond of Precept.
And this his following Question put to the Church supposes: Quale est autem, ut
tuo arbitrio permittas, etc. speaking of those stations. How consistent is it,
that you permit to your selves Liberty in the observance of those days? From
all which I collect, that the Church did profess a constitution Evangelical of
certain days, which only are legitimate; and yet, at least in some,
acknowledged no bond or obligation of Precept. The same Epiphanius seems to
have understood in Compend. Doctrine. where he distinguishes the Churches common
observances, so as that some were (...), by precept or command, (...),
recommended, as it were, to be embraced by the free choice of peoples Devotion.
I enquire not here, which of those two Epiphanius taught the Fast of Lent to
be; but only collect from these two Authorities, that there may be some
Traditions Apostolical, which may be Traditiones consilii, and not Praecepti.
Not intending hereby, to determine, that the Tradition of the Paschal Fast was
not of Precept; but to declare, how it is true, which is said, that those many
Testimonies among the Authorities above-alledg'd, which call the Paschal Fast,
a Precept, either of God, of Christ, or of the Apostles, observed ever in the
Church, do ex abundanti prove my Hypothesis, (the Tradition from the Apostles
and perpetual observation in the Church) and more. Whether the opposers bare
Denial even so much as of the perpetual practice in the Church, (from which if
granted, it cannot be denied but that the other will follow) to be rightly
collected from those Testimonies, be sufficient, let Epiphanius be heard, who
beside all that I have already alleged from him, having said in his Expositio
Fidei Catholicae, cap. 22. (...). [Albeit there he says, (...).] On the Lords
days this holy Catholic Church does not fast -- not at all, no not in the
Quadragesimal Fast of Lent itself [of which Lent ne had said, the same Church
is wont to observe the Lent persevering in fastings. (...). The 6. Paschal
days [ viz. the 6. last and principal days of fasting] all nations perform in
dry, [or stricter] diet. Against the opposers of all this in the 75th Heresy,
he makes this Rejoinder: (...) [(...)] (...). And concerning these 6 Paschal
days [ viz. of especial Fasting] how they [the Apostles] command, that either
nothing at all, or bread and water and salt be received, and in what manner the
day is to be observed, and how the Fasts are to end toward the dawning of the
Lord's Day, is evident. Now whom think we is most knowing of these matters?
whether this deceived man [ Aerius,] who lived but now, and is as yet
surviving, or the Martyrs which have been before us, holding before our time
this Tradition in the Church, and they having received it from their Fathers,
and their Fathers again having learnt it from those which were before their
time; as the Church having received it from her Fathers, retains the true
Faith, and the Traditions even until this time. Let now therefore this man's
conceit concerning the Pasche fall again to the ground. In like manner
Vincentius Lirinensis, comparing the Martyrs or confessors witness, with
Innovators, writes thus, c. 8, 9. Illud etiam est nobis vel maxim
considerandum, quod tunc apud ipsam Ecclesiae vetustatem, non partis alicujus,
sed universitatis ab iis [Confessoribus, etc.] est suscepta defensio. -- Omnium
Sanctae Ecclesiae sacerdotum Apostolicae and Catholicae veritatis haeredum
decreta and definita sectantes maluerunt seipsos quam vetustae Universitatis
fidem prodere -- Magnum hoc igitur eorundem Beatorum exemplum, planeque
Divinum, and veris quibusque Catholicis indefessa meditatione recolendum, qui
in modum septemplicis Candelalri septena Sancti Spiritus luce radiati
clarissimam posteris formulam praemonstrarunt, quonam modo deinceps per singula
quaeque erroris vaniloquia, sacratae vetustatis autoritate, prophanae novitatis
conteratur audacia. And c. 9. Nosque Religionem, non qua vellemus ducere, sed
potius qua illa duceret, sequi oportere: id quod esse proprium Christianae
modestiae and gravitatis, non sua posteris traducere, sed a majoribus accepta
servare. Quis ergo tunc universi negotii exitus est? 1. -- Re^enta est scilicet
antiquitas, explosa Novitas. That now is of us to be especially considered,
that then in the very Antiquity of the Church, those (Confessors) undertook the
Defense not of any part, but of the whole universal Church it self. -- When
following the Decrees and Definitions of all the Priests (or Bishops) of the
holy Church, who were the HEIRS OF THE APOSTOLICAL OR CATHOLIC TRUTH, they
chose rather to betray themselves, then the Belief of the Universality of the
Church, following Antiquity. -- Therefore this great and surely Divine example
of those blessed men, is by an unwearied meditation to be remembered of all true
Catholics; in as much as they enlightened with the seven fold light of the holy
Ghost, after the manner of that Candlestick with its seven Lamps [upon the bowl
of it, Zech. 4. 2.] have showed forth a most clear example to Posterity, after
what manner for time to come, through all occurring vain doctrines of error, by
the Authority of sacred Antiquity, the boldness of profane Novelty may be
crushed. And c 9. It is our duty not to lead aside Religion, whither we please,
but rather to follow it, whither soever it leads: That being the property of
Christian modesty and gravity, not to transmit their own devices to Posterity,
but to hold fast the things they have received from their Ancestors. What then
was the issue of that whole contention or business?.] viz. Antiquity was
retained and Novelty exploded. If therefore, nothing, as is said, had been
hitherto proved, but the universal practice of this Fast, without instance of
any beginning of its Tradition; of what force it ought to be, that very ancient
holy Synod ( Synodus Gangrensis) celebrated A. D. 319. a little before the
first Ecumenical Council of Nice, and it self confirmed afterward by the 4th
General Council of Chalcedon, and the 6th General Council of C. P. declares by
its sentence Canon 19th (...). If any of the Religious without corporal
necessity shall of their pride dissolve the Fasts delivered from Tradition,
unto the community [of Christians] (or to be observed by all in common) and
which are observed by the Church, by a complete determination of his mind
rejecting them, let him be Anathema. The merit of which sentence Hormisdas a
holy Bishop about the year 514. in Epistola ad fratrem Possessorem, does thus
declare, Quando induit obedientiae Humanitatem opinionibus suis velata
superbia? quando acquiescunt paci, contentionum stimulis assueti? sola
certamina aventes de Religione captare, and mandata negligere -- Una pertinacis
cura propositi, rationi velle imperare, non credere. Contemptores auctoritatum
veterum, novarum cupidi Quaestionum, solam putantes scientiae rectam viam,
qualibet conceptam facilitate sententiam. Eo usque tumoris elati, ut ad
arbitrium suum utriusque orbis putant inclinandum esse judicium. When will
pride vailing it self within its own [private] opinions put on the Humanity of
Obedience? When will they, which are accustomed to the gallings of contention
acquiesce, or submit themselves to peace? who seem desirous to lay hold on
nothing of Religion, but occasions therefrom of Contentions, and to neglect
commands -- The only care of such a a pertinacious purpose is, that it has a
mind to give law unto Reason, not to obey or believe it. such are contemners of
the Authorities of the Ancients, desirous of new questions, deeming their
opinion, taken up upon any easy ground, the only right way of science; and are
lifted up to that swelling of pride, that they think the Judgment of both parts
of the world, East and West, is to be bowed to their pleasure and sentence.

Yet will we not lastly refuse to hear the Pleas even of Novelty and
Singularity it self, against this Doctrine of the Churches public times of
Fasting. And their first Objection is, that this Paschal Fast (or any like) are
set Fasts; and therefore superstitious. Were it some Fast only upon incident
and extraordinary occasion, a Providential Fast, as they speak, they could
allow it; but a set Fast is a fixed public mark, and constant eyesore to
them. To which, our Answer we will frame first from Evangelical Instruction.
When that holy pattern of Widows Anna in the Gospel ( Luke 2. 36, 38.) her self
a Prophetess, and a Widow about 84 years of age, whereof she lived 7 only with
one only Husband from her Virginity, departed not from the Temple, but served
God with Fastings and Prayers night and day: Were her Fasts only providential,
extraordinary and occasional? or were they superstitious? Where they not a
regular, set holy Discipline of Fasting? i. e. almost continual, and differing
from the Churches set Fastings (for the Community) only in the greater
frequency? If they shall say, But she prescribed this Fasting to her self: And
why may not the Church of God, (a more devout Virgin yet, then she a Widow)
prescribe to her self? Thus for good purpose there stand in the very doors of
the Gospel the Fasts of Anna, the daughter of Phanuel; Tertullianus l. de
Iejuniis c. 8. In limine Evangelii Anna Prophetis, filia Phanuelis, quae
infantem Deminum and cognovit, and multa super ^o pradicavit, etc. -- post
^gregium titulum veteris, and univirae viduitatis, jejuniorum quoque testimonio
augetur, ostendens in quibus officiis assideri Ecclesiae debeat and a nullis
magis intelligi Christum, quam semel nupti^, and saepe jejunis. In the entrance
or door of the Gospel stands Anna the Prophetess the Daughter of Phanuel,
which both acknowledged her Infant-Lord, and spoke concerning him many things,
etc. -- After that egregious title of praise from her Widowhood of many years,
and one only Husband; she is also magnified by the Testimony of her fastings,
showing by what offices we ought to attend the Church, and that Christ is by
none sooner understood, then by such as have been wives of one husband, and
widows of often fastings. Where it is his Debeat only, that ^avours of
Montanism. The like has S. Hierom of Judith in his Epistle ad Furiam, Legimus
Viduam confectam jejuniis, and habitu lugubri sordidatam, quae non lugebat
mortuum virum, sed squalore corporis spons^ [ Christi] quaerebat adventum. --
Vincit viros foemina, and castitas truncat libidinem [ viz. Holofernem]
habituque repen^e mutato ad victrices sordes redit, omnibus seculi ^ultibus
mundiores. -- Sed and talia frequentiora nostris jejunia sponsi dolebant
absentiam, quarebant praesentiam. We read of that Widow ( Judith) much spent by
fastings, and in her mourning habit, neglecting her body, who did not so much
mourn for her deceased husband, as by the neglecting of her body seek the
Advent of (the Lord) her Bridegroom -- A woman overcomes those men [of war] and
chastity beheads Just; and then again suddenly changing her habit, she returns
to her victorious Fasts, and neglectings of her body, neater ornaments then all
the Dresses of the world.
of John Baptist, the son of Zachary, and of our Lord Jesus, the Son of God. Of
this our Anna S. Hierom writes to the widow Salvina, de Servanda viduitate:
Habes tui ordinis, quas sequaris, Judith de Hebraea historia, and Annam filian
Phanuelis de Evangelii claritate, quae diebus and noctibus versabatur in Templo
and orationibus atque jejuniis thesaurum pudicitiae conservavit. You have, whom
you may imitate, those of your own order, Judith from the Hebrew history, and
Anna the daughter of Phanuel, from the Clarity of the Gospel, who was
conversant nights and days in the Temple, and by Prayers and Fastings
preserved the treasure of her chastity. S. Ambrose in like manner, l. de
Viduis: Vides qualis Vidua praedicetur, unius viri uxor, ae^atis quoque jam
probata processu: vivida Religioni: Cui diversorium in Templo, colloquium in
prece, vita (...) Ie^unto: quae dierum noctiumque temporibus, modestae
Devotionis obsequio, cum corporis agnosceret senectutem, pie. a^is tamen
nesciret aetatem; quae viduitatem NON OCCASION TEMPORIS, non imbecillitate
corporis, sed virtutis magnanimitate servaverit. You see what manner of Widow
here is commended, the Wife of one Husband, tried and approved by the progress
of many years, [from youth to a very old age:] yet vivid as to Religion, whose
commoration was in the Temple, her Colloquie Prayers, her life spent in
Fasting: who by the Obsequious and unwearied Devotions of her nights and days,
though she could not but feel the old age of her body, yet her piety was no
ways decrepit, or enfeebled: who kept her Widowhood not from any occasion and
reason of the time, [as of any instant necessity: and so her Fastings not
occasional] not from any imbecility of body, but from the Magnanimity of her
virtue.

2. Was not Cornelius in the course of his ordinary piety, (as is most
probable) fasting till the 9th hour? Act. 10. Who as he was a devout person,
and toward God, (praying as it were continually and rich in almes-giving
toward the people; so in the austere sobriety of his own body, (...), he was
fasting until the ninth hour, and praying at the ninth hour; (an usual hour of
prayer with Gods people, Act. 3. 1. Dan. 9. 2.) because at that hour he was to
pray, he was fasting to that hour, our three a clock of the afternoon S.
Hieronym. l. 2. adv. Iovinian. Cornelius Centurio, ut Spiritum Sandum acciperet
antequam Baptisma, eleemosynis meruit crebrisque jejuniis.
(Whence the Church has measured her stations of Wednesday and Friday's fast)
And you have above the Answer of God by his Angel to Cornelius.

3. Did not St. John Baptist, whose food was such only, as the wilderness set
before him, cibi oblati a^ eremo, who came neither eating, nor drinking, fast
in his ordinary course of Ascetical discipline, Chrysologus de Iejunio
Quadragesimal. Sermon. 13. Ioannem viderat [Diabolus] urbium deli. ias squalentis
erem. habitatione m^asse, moll^iem carnis v^stis asperitate calcasse, agresti
cibo mundi totam fraenasse luxuriam -- Et tamen non ei dixit si Fili^ Dei es.
At ubi Dominum vidi^ jugiter j^junantem, proclamat* si Fili^ Dei es. Signum
panis petit qui signum jejun^i pertim^scit. Signum panis petit, ut jejunii
tremendum sibi ^esugiat signum.

Tertullian. l. d. Pudicit. c. 6 Onera legis usque ad^hannem, non Remedia.

S. Hieronym. l. 2. adv. Iovi^ian. A diebus Ioannis Baptistae jejunatoris and
Virginis, regnum Coelorum vim patitur, and violenti diripiun^ illud. Cyril
Alex. Hom. ^. d. Fest^ Paschal. (...);


And so his disciples (...);

4. The Teachers and Prophets at Antioch, Act. 13. were they not first jointly
fasting in their ordinary course of their ministry, v. 2. And then afterward,
v. 3 after the especial command received from the Holy Ghost for separating
unto Him Barnabas and Paul celebrated another fast upon the arising occasion?
(...). And so* the Church has since done in her ordinary course of Fasts
before her Ordinations: In fine that some do but vainly pretend to be wiser
then the Church in reproving her Set times of fasting, because set and fixed
annually, S. Cyril of Alexandria, a far greater Patriarch and wiser person,
seems to me to have well proved, Hom. 1. de Festis Pasch. (...), etc. If
Solomon were wise, who says there is a time for all things, and a season for
every thing, why should we not confess* it reasonable* that this season
[speaking of the Paschal Fast] is the enemy of all wickedness? -- Go to
therefore, let us call all the Lovers of Godliness to this annual Combat. The
Prophet saying, Blow the Trumpet in Sion, sanctify a Fast, etc. Let us lift up
the Churches holy Trumpet, etc. And after S. Cyril, S. Augustine in Psalm. 21.
Quoties Pascha celebratur; nunquid toties Christus moritur? sed tamen
anniversaria Recordatio quasi repraesentat quod olim factum est: and sic nos
facit moveri tanquam videamus in Cruce pendentem Dominum. As often as the Paschal
(Fast) is celebrated, does Christ so often dye? Nay, But the Anniversary
Remembrance, as it were, represents unto us that which long since was done, and
makes us to be so affected, as if we saw the Lord hanging on the Cross.

A second Objection. Even those set Fasts might not displease us, if they were
not commanded, but left free. Resp. But how can they be set for, and celebrated
by the Public, even the whole Church, how shall they agree on any time and
place for all, except they all be by some Prescription overruled? Again for
Command, Fasting being confessedly a duty, commanded even in the N. T. ((...)
says my Text) that the Church has power to determine as to time and place,
themselves acknowledge, even all who allow the Church any Authority at all.
They which give her least, grant her this: yea they grant it to themselves, who
deny it to the Catholic Church. Was the Fast of the Ninevites less accepted
of the King of Heaven, or less powerful for their deliverance from the wrath
then impendent, because proclaimed by the decree of the King of Nineveh and his
Nobles? Jonah 3. 7. So I ask of that commanded by the good King Iehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20. 3. 4. Was the Fast of the Rechabites ( Ier. 35.) abstaining through
so many generations, by a perpetual Fast, from wine (though no where commanded
them by God) less approved, yea or rewarded by Gods especial promise, because
commanded by Ionadab their Father? Was the Church of the Jews of greater
authority over her children, when she obliged her children in feasts and fasts
(not appointed by God) (as the feasts of Purin, and Dedication and the Set
Fasts of the fifth and seventh months, Zach. 7. 5.) then the Catholic Church
now has over her children Haec sunt sesta 4. ista communissima, quibus Iudaei
tempore prophetae Zachariae jejunarunt, and adhuc anni^ fingulis ordinary
summarieque jejunant, Buxtorf. Synagog. Judaic. c. 25. p. 457.
? Is not obedience an addition of another act of virtue to that of Fasting? (
viz. of justice as well as abstinence, of humility and gentle tractableness as
well as severity to themselves?) Among the causes of fasting, the humbling of
our proud hearts being one chief, he that makes this objection; Because it is a
commanded Fast, has doubly need of the Fast, to teach him humility S.
Hieronym. Epistola ad Celantiam, quae est 14a. Qui probabiliter ac scienter
abstinentiae virtutem ^enent, eo asst gunt carnem suam, quo animae frangent
superbiam ut quasi de quodam fast igio contemptus sui atque arrogantiae
descendant, etc. They which retain the virtue of Abstinence according to
knowledge, and allowedly, to that end afflict their flesh. that they may break
the pride of their soul, that they may come down as from a certain height of
their arrogance and contempt (of others).
as well as the denial of his appetites; to teach him to regard both the
Bridegroom and the Bride, Christ his Father, and the Church his Mother, Foelix
necessitas, quae ad meliora impe^, says S. Augustine of it. They have great
need to be so commanded, who fast, and fast not, both for debate. You cannot
(...), make them fast, says my Text, v. 35. when the Bridegroom is with them.
Non potestis facere, vel adigere ad jejunandum, This shows the days would
come, when they might be made or obliged to fast; but not by obligation of the
old Law given to the Jews, which thenceforth was to cease; therefore by Christ's
new Law, whereby he bad that new wine should be put into new bottles.

But thirdly, Says not S. Paul; Stand fast in the liberty, wherewith Christ
has made you free, Gal. 5. 1. Resp. But then S. Paul subjoyns in the same
chapter ^. 13. Only use not yo^ liberty for an occasion to the flesh; and S.
Peter enters his Caveat also, 1 Ep. 2. 16. As free, and not using your liberty
as a cloak of maliciousness; as it is for certain used, when that liberty,
which the Apostle expressly declares to be from the Ceremonial Law, from which
Christ has freed us, is alleged for our freeing our selves from Christ's own
precepts and constitutions, and his Churches, and his Officers, whom he has
empowered under him: see Gal. 5. 1. with v. 2. Stand fast in that liberty, viz.
from the yoke of Circumcision and the like, yea from all that would impose
fasts upon you, whether Montanist, or other new Heretics, or Consistory, or
any other, who is not this Bridegroom, or his Bride the Church, and her
Spiritual Governors (who in Tertullian's time, as he acknowledges, indicted
Fasts) or Christian Kings and Princes, whom when God has set to be the nursing
fathers of his Church, he has given to her such to order also her bodily diet
and fasting.

Fourthly, They object, The memory of Christ's Passion (the Bride-grooms taking
away) should be perpetual, not annual only, or weekly. True, And so his
Resurrection, we trust; yet you have a weekly memorial of it of Gods
appointment, the Lordsday, yea and Annual also (whether you less like that or
no.) But our Faith, not our Fasting, is the best memory of his Passion. True,
but it is so far from color of Truth, that these two should be set* opposite
one to the other, that our Lord argues some of little faith from their
no-fasting, upon just cause for the Bride-grooms Interest, see Mat. 17. 20, 21.
God saw them both conjoined in Nineveh, and the one flowing from the other. So
the people of Nineveh believed God, and proclaimed a Fast, Jonah 3. 5.

The next objection is that of humane nature: The Fast of Lent seems to us a
hard task, and a heavy burden laid on men's shoulders. Resp. This objection
could not be more improperly laid against any Master, or any Text, or any
Interpreter of this Text, then against this our gracious Master, and especially
in this his Constitution here prescribed, and the Churches Interpretation of
it. How tender, how considering was he of the infirmity and weakness even of
his own chosen Apostles? excuses that in them, which John did not in his. He is
careful that no bruised reed, no old bottles should be broken by any's zeal,
that in the old and attrite garment the rent should not be made worse (nor the
Schism in the Church:) Yea therefore is our Lord thus indulgent to his
Disciples infirmity in this matter (says S. Chrysostom on Mat. 9.) because he
would show them example, who were by him to be sent forth for the Masters,
Teachers and Spiritual Governors of the whole world; that they should gently
lead those which were with young, and drive as all the Flock could go. (...).
These things spoke he, giving therein law and rule to them his Disciples, that
when they should receive the whole world as their Disciples, they should deal
with them with all gentleness and condescension. -- And thence S. Chrysostom
himself for himself thus collecteth: (...). Let us not therefore in the
beginnings exact all things of all men, but according as they are able to bear.
Therefore it is, that in every age, the Church and the Successors of these
Apostles have had in this matter regard to the weakness of men's bodies, yea and
minds also. This shall appear in all her Prescriptions; how careful, in the
first express written Law we meet with, that she promulgated for it, Canon
Apostol. 69 (...). If bodily weakness hinder not. S. Basil the great in his
Asceticks, ad (...)* ad (...), etc. To comprise under one and the same rule all
that are exercised in piety, is a thing impossible; one measure is a
sufficiency to one, another to another, according to the habit or constitution,
or need of the body, for one man has need of more and stronger food because of
his labor, etc. And (...). The Rule of Abstinence is best measured according
to the power of every ones body. And for minds likewise, the Church well knows,
that there will in all ages be some babes in Christ, some young men, some
Fathers: some buds, some blossoms, some ripe fruits: some old, some new bottles
and garments. Hence it is from the Churches tenderness and condescension, and
not from the uncertainty or variety of Tradition, that we read in all Ancient
Authors that variety allowed or indulged; so that though it was required of
all, who had strength of body, to fast some days, or weeks in those days of
the Bride-grooms taking from us, in the Paschal Fast, yet witness Irenaeus and
Tertullian, and S. Augustine for the Western Church; Dionysius Bishop of
Alexandria, Epiphanius of Cyprus, and Socrates for the East, there are clear
Records, how in this Paschal Fast some fasted more days or weeks, some fewer:
some within the Abstinence of the 40 days, choosing out 15 days (in the
East:) others (in the West) 21 for more strict Fasting. Yet so as that from
all, of both Churches, abstinence from pleasures and Feasts, otherwise lawful,
was expected, through all the 40 days (in honorable memory of the
Bride-grooms own 40 days fast for us;) and some days proper Fasts. Whilst
others also (among them) as stronger vessels, held the stronger liquour of 40
days Fast; and generally by all was observed Continentia quadraginta dierum,
as Leo the Great speaks, Sermon, 3. de Quadrages. Ut ad Paschale Festum
quadraginta dierum continentia se praepararet populus Christianus, That the
Christian people might by some sort of abstinence through the forty days
prepare themselves for the Paschal Feast. Which same Author yet in his very
next Sermon of Lent, contents himself for his Auditors with three days fast
only in the week, through the weeks of Lent. Our Church also prays to him who
for our sakes did fast 40 days and 40 nights, that he would give us grace to
use such abstinence, that our flesh being subdued to the Spirit, we may ever
obey his godly motions, etc. (not such miraculous Fasting as His.) In those
days shall they Fast. Our holy and tender Mother, the Church considers her
childrens strength, as Christ the children of his Bride-chamber: she has her
exceptions, relaxations for the sick, or weak, for children and aged, prisoners
and laborers, women with child and travelers, and in her compassion, seems
even to bear about another passion, with that of her own fastings of Lent.
There are wont to be reckoned four reasons, which excuse from fasting: 1.
Impotentia corporis. 2. Ex paupertate, indigentia ordinaria ciborum. 3.
Necessitas laboris majoris. 4. Pietas boni melioris, (to which some add,
Intempestas caloris, in some regions, for some hotter months of the year.)
Three of them the 8th Council of Toledo, Can. 9. recounts, Illi vero quos aut
aetas incurvat, aut languor extenuat, aut necessitas arctat, non ante prohibita
violare praesumant, quam a sacerdote permissum percipiant. The 4 Excusations
are either bodily infirmity, or ordinary penury of diet from their poverty, or
necessity of greater toil and bodily labor, or zeal of some greater good,
offering it self upon the dispensing with their Fast. And yet even in such
cases take S. Chrysostom's advertisement with you: (...). For although thou
can not fast, yet can thou forbear pampering thy body with delicacies, and
fullness. Nor is this of little moment, but often avails to the weakening of the
Devils temptations, to whom nothing is so pleasing, as Epicurean diet, and
drunkenness -- If thou have a weak body, so that thou can not continue such
fastings, yet happily it is not weak to prayer, nor unable certainly to despise
the pleasures of the full belly.

Yea, perhaps thy bodies health requires rather this Fasting, or Abstinence, as
well as the Churches Law, and thy souls consideration. Theodoret on Dan. 1.
has well advertised us from the example of the three children, who eating
pulse and drinking water (instead of their appointed meat and wine) their
countenances appeared fairer and faster in flesh then all the children which
did eat the portion of the Kings meal, c. 1. 12. -- x4. Theodoret thereupon
observes, I say, (...). We are lesson'd that bodily strength and comeliness may
gain by the use of fasting. And so Chrysolog. de Iejunio Sermon. 8. says, Est
jejunium pax corporis, membrorum decus, robur mentium, vigor animarum,
castitatis murus, pudicitiae propugnaculum, civitas sanctitatis, magisterii
magisterium, disciplinarum disciplina, Ecclesiasticae viae viaticum saelutare.
Fasting is peace to the body, the comeliness of limbs, the strength of minds,
the vigor of souls, a wall of chastity, a sconce of purity, a city of
sanctity, the instruction of instructions, the discipline of disciplines, the
salutary provision for the Churches way. Likewise S. Chrysostom (...) tom. 6.
(...). Will one say, But it does inflict upon us weakness of body. Resp. Yea
rather if thou would exactly search the matter, thou will find it the mother
of health, or a good habit of body. And if thou believe not my words, ask the
sons of the Physicians about it, and they will tell thee these things more
clearly.

Lastly, to Fast is wont to be called in Scripture to afflict the Soul ( Lev.
23. 29. Isa. 58. 5.) This being the end of fasting, that such chastening by
affliction of the body may afflict the lower sensitive powers of the Soul, that
the inferior powers of the Soul being afflicted, a troubled spirit, and a
humbled heart thence arising in us may be a sacrifice and burntoffering unto
God. Afflict certainly thy Soul thou may, which is the end, if thou art not
able to afflict thy body which is the means; since, therefore only, thou may
not perhaps safely afflict thy body, for that it is already afflicted. Nay this
it self, that we are not happily able in body to be susceptible of so salutary
a medicine, as fasting, ought and is apt to be one consideration, wherethrough
to afflict our selves. Therefore said God of the day of Expiation to that
people, among whom yet, no doubt, there were many sick and infirm in body, as
thou art: Levit. 23. 29. Whatsoever Soul it be, that shall not be afflicted in
that same day, he shall be cut off from among his people. Certe qui jejunare
non potest, non praesumat inducere novitatem: sed ^ateatur esse fragilitatis
propriae, quod relaxat, and redimat eleemosynis, quod non potest supplere
jejuniis, says Chrysologus Sermon. 166. de Quadrages. At least he which cannot
fast, let him not presume to introduce novelty: but confess it to be from his
own weakness, that he does relaxe his fasting, and let him redeem by
almsdeeds that which he cannot supply by fastings.

If any yet look on this duty of fasting in Lent, as disagreeing to their
pleasures of Spring, and therefore with sour aversion do receive this meek and
gentle law of this Fast, I shall anon evidence the Laws of it to be an easy
yoke, and mean while say, that God seems to complain of such refractory
stupidity by his Prophet Jeremy c. 8. v. 7. Yea, the Stork in the heaven
knows her appointed times, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow
observe the time of their coming; but my people know not the judgment of the
Lord. (...) [(...)] (...), says Chrysostom ( tom. 5. (...).) The season of
Fasting [Lent] is the spiritual Spring of our souls. And the same in his 2d
Homil. (...). And again, (...). In the days of the Fast pleasures do dye, and
virtues bud forth, and are in their flower, and the most pure beauty of
sobriety puts forth it self. Behold the Fast of Lent is at hand, pointing out
to thee the spiritual Pool which cures not one sick soul only in each years
returning, but a whole people. When God bad his Prophet Ezechiel to bear on his
right side the iniquity of the house of Judah 40 days: I have appointed thee
(says God) each day for a year, ( Ezekiel. 4. 6.) or as the Hebrew, and your
Margin has it, A day for a year, a day for a year. And behold I will lay bonds
upon thee, and thou shall not turn from that side. It may be to us, for our own
sins, possibly each day for a million of years, and we may well be patient of
the bonds then. Add to this that these 40 days on this side Easter of mourning
for the Bridegrooms taking from us, are answered by other 40, yea 50 following
Easter, of joy for the Bridegroom's presence returned. S. Augustine. tractat.
17. in Joan. Cum labor celebramus Quadragesimam ante Pascha: cum laetitia vero
tanquam accepta mercede quinquagesimam post Pascha: With labor let us observe
the Quadragesimal or 40 days fast before Easter: But with joy the 50 days
Celebrity after Easter when we receive as it were a reward. Ambros. l. 8. in
Luc. Majores tradidere nobis Pentecostes omnes 50. dies ut Pascha celebrandos.
Per hos 50. dies jejunium nescit Ecclesia, ficut Dominica qua Dominus
resurrexit, and sunt omnes dies tanquam dominic^. Our Ancestors have delivered
unto us all the 50 days ending in Whitsunday to be celebrated as [a continued]
Easter. Through these 50. days the Church knows no fasting, as neither on the
Lord's Day, whereon the Lord rose from the dead; and these (50) are as it were
all Lords-days. And in S. Ambros. Ser^. 60. Sic enim^disposuit Dominus, u^
sicut ejus passione in Quadragesimae jejuniis contrist aremur, ita ejus
resurrectione in Quinqua^esimae ferii^ l^taremur. Non igitur jejunamus in ha*
Quinquag^ma* quia in his di^bus nobis^um Dominus commoratur, non inquam
jejunamus praesente Domino, quia ipse ait: Nunquid possunt filii sponsi
jejunare, quamdiu cum illis est sponsus? For, so has the Lord disposed, that
as we are to sorrow in his Passion by the Fasts of Lent, so should we from his
Resurrection rejoice in the 50 days following Celebrity. In these therefore we
fast not, because in these days the Lord abides with us. We fast not, I say,
the Lord being present, because himself said, Can the children of the
Bride-chamber fast, so long as the Bridegroomi^ (...)?
Forty days Fast, (at least abstinence from pleasures, from full and
pleasurable diet) is a number consecrated by God in the Old and New Testament,
in the Law by Moses, in the Prophets by Elias, in the Gospel by Christ: Moses
the Type of Christ's Mediation, Elias of his Ascension, both the figures of his
40 days Fast, and both they, and only they appear with him in glory at his
Transfiguration. Moses by whose mediatory hand the Law was given, yet fasted 40
days, Elias who did not trouble Israel but was jealous for the Lord of hosts,
yet fasted 40 days, and troubled his own flesh: The Lord Christ, who knew no
sin, yet fasted 40 days, and thou who art a sinner, yet cum Domino penitus
jejunante non observas Quadragesimae moderata jejunia? With the Lord fasting
wholly, do thou not observe the moderate Fasts of Lent? says S. Ambrose
Sermon. 34. de Quadragesima. We have sinned, and 40 days was the number of days
of Gods judgment on the old world by waters for sin. Forty days fast the
second time Moses undertook, to ask pardon for the peoples sin. Forty years the
people of Israel bare their iniquities in the wilderness ( Number. 14.) Forty
days fast like the 40 stripes appointed by God for the offender, ( Deuteronomy. 25.)
Forty days the space which God gave Nineveh to repent in from their sins, and
to avert their denounced destruction. The Spies sent by God returned from
search of the land of Canaan after 40 days, ( Number. 13. 25.) and brought of the
fruit of the Land. Now walk we therefore circumspectly, wisely in the land of
our pilgrimage. With what fear? with what care? (2 Cor. 7.) Then shall we
return with the cluster of grapes, the wine of Angels, the blood of Christ, a
happy taste of the fruits of our future Canaan. Chrysologus Sermon. 116. thus
speaks, 40 diebus ac noctibus expiaturus terram coelestis Imber effunditur --
Attendite, fratres, quantus sit quadragenarius numerus iste, qui and tunc
coelum terris aperuit abluendis, and nunc fontem Baptismatis orbi toti pandit:
Speaking of the solemn public celebration of Baptism (whereof the Deluge of
waters cleansing the earth was a type) at the end of the 40 days of Lent. At
the end of 40 days Noah according to Gods word opened the window of the Ark,
which he had made. At the end of 40 days God opens to us the window of heaven,
and sends down the Manna of the holy Eucharist: when we with Moses and Elias
have (according to our poor measure) fasted or abstained in some sense 40
days, that at the end we may appear before God (as they) in a meet preparation
to the Holy Eucharist; we yet shall need to wrap, with Elias, our faces in our
mantles, and to fear before his presence in our approach to his Holy Table.

Conclude we therefore this of the Quadragesimal Fast with that of S. Bernard
Sermon. 3. Nunquid non valde indignum est, ut nobis onerosum sit [ Quadragesimale
jejunium] quod Ecclesia portat universa nobiscum? Is it not a very unworthy
thing, that that should seem burdensome to us, which the whole Church bears
with us? And how universal this practice was, that of S. Basil in his 2d Homily
of the praise of fasting will tell you: In this time of Lent, there is no
Island nor Continent of the earth, no City, nor Nation, no extreme corner of
the world, where the Edict of this Fast of Lent was not heard. Yea whatsoever
Armies, Merchants, Travelers, or Mariners are abroad, this Fast comes unto
them all, and with joy they all receive it. -- This composes every house, every
city, and every people, in sobriety, and quiet, and concord; this st^ls the
la^e clamours, contentions, and noyses of the town: Let no one therefore exempt
himself from the number of Fasters, in which every degree, nation and age
almost of men, and all of all dignities whatsoever are engaged.

And now lest any of the forty days Spies of this Montanous land should bring
up an evil report upon it, and affright you with the men of Anak, with the
difficulty of this Forty days Fast; and by reason of some bottles, that do
fly, the good liquor should be in some part spilt, and perhaps some bottles
perish, and the Religious exercise of Fasting evil spoken of, (...), and the
Schism be made worse; I shall sincerely let you know, how and in what manner
the Generality of the Christian Church did in ancient days observe this Fast
of Lent; which I doubt not but will be judged by you a light and easy yoke.
And as S. Ambrose sermon. 34. de Quadrages. calls it, Quotidiana and moderata
Quadragesimae jejunia, the daily and moderate Fasts of Lent. This S. Hierom
also in his Epistle ad Laetam, does caution: In perpetuo jejunio hoc praeceptum
sit, ut longo itineri vires perpe^es suppeterent, ne in prima* mansione
currentes, in mediis corruamus. In a continued Fast take this precept, that you
take care how your strength may last, and supply you for so long a journey. The
same S. Hierom Epist. 15. Displicent mihi in teneris maxim aetatibus longa and
cimmoderata jejunia, Fasts not only long continued, but also immoderate
displease me, especially in young and tender ages. Therefore S. Chrysostom
also provided, ((...)) that in Lent relaxing their Fast on two days together
every week, Saturday and the Lord's Day, they might take breath as it were,
(...). The Lord has indulged these two weekly days (Saturday and the
Lord's Day) like certain stages, inns, or havens, that the body being for a
little while relaxed from its labors of the Fasting, and the mind comforted,
they may again, when these two days are passed over, afresh set upon the
remaining part of the Fast to be traveled through. Basilius Magnus, (...)
(...). For this I think we ought to take care of, that by no immoderate excess
of abstinence we dissolve the strength of the body, and render it unactive, and
languishing as to any honest employment and business. For God when he made
man, would not, that he should be idle and not stirring, but active, as to
things agreeable to his nature, commanding Adam himself in Paradise, to labor
and to keep the garden. It is meet therefore, that nothing be innovated
contrary to nature and the bounds set us by the gracious Author of our nature;
but abiding within them, to maintain our bodies fit for action. In no wise
dissolving its strength by immoderate fullness, or fasting. For this I suppose
to be the best economy to follow the laws of nature set us, and by no means to
consume or enfeeble the body by immoderate spendings of it. This also we must
provide for, that neither upon pretense of the bodies need we thrust our selves
forth into the service of pleasure. We ought to use both moderate fastings, and
yet supply the body with necessary sustentation. Not following the
prescriptions of pleasure, but of reason, accurately judging what is needful
for us, concerning our viands; consulting right reason, as a knowing Physician,
which may take care of the infirmity of our body, by things meet for it,
disinteressed from our appetites and passions. It is much better and more
behooveful, that our body should be preserved, in its consistent strength, and
vigor for good actions, then by our own counsel to render it as it were
dissolved and unactive. Thus far S. Basil, one of the most strict Asceticks of
the Ancients, to whom agrees also Procopius Gazaeus upon Isa. 1. (...). He
would a Fast, which without ostentation, should bring into subjection our
carnal mindedness -- But declares it our duty not to extend abstinence from
meats, so far, as to weaken or dissolve the vigor of the body, or draw the
mind to an inadvertent incogitancy.

You see how unanimously and tenderly the ancient Doctors of the Church agree
on this caution of Observanda, but Moderata Quadr age simae jejunia; The fasts
of Lent to be observed, but with just and equitable moderation. How by the
Ancients it was moderated we will now say in a few words.

First, Then a Quadragesima all called it, as in which though they could not
hope to imitate the miraculons 40. days fast, of Moses, Elias, and Christ our
Lord: yet in all those 40. days they could abstain, and they abstained from
pleasures, and bread of delight, from public joyances, and private unnecessary
indulgences. And as many as whose health could bear it (without experience, or
just fear of sickness, or weakness) from flesh and wine also: but as to the
abstaining from all food till the evening, the generality of the pious
Christians both of the East and Western Church sought out within that 40 days
space, for their pattern some example of mere man, as themselves were, and that
one unassisted with miraculous power (as Moses and Elias were) viz. Daniel his
3 weeks fast, Dan. 10. 2, 3. Whereupon I assure my self, that both the Western
Church, even Rome it self singled out to themselves among their 40 days of
abstinence (as Leo fitly calls it) 21 days, or 3 weeks for full fasts until the
evening: the Eastern Church likewise 3 weeks, in which they reckoned but 15
days, (as appears from Socrates) as reckoning the weeks without the Sunday,
and Saturday, on which the Eastern Church fasted not, except only one Saturday
in the year, the Vigil of Easter day. As to the Western Church, where was the
fast of Lent more strictly observed, then in Ancient Rome? Yet hear Leo the
great, and first Bishop of that name in that See, thus instructing the
Christian people of Rome, in his 4th Sermon of Lent. Ut omni immunditi a a
penetralibus cordis exclusa, sanctificetur jejunium nostrum [Quadrage simale]
-- Secunda igitur and quarta, and sexta Feria jejunemus, Sabbato autem apud B.
Petrum Apostolum vigilias celebremus. That all uncleanesse being shut out from
the inmost of our heart, our [Lent] fast may be sanctified. -- Let us therefore
fast on the 2d, 4th and 6th day of the week, and on saturday keep a watch apud
B. Petrum. Apostolum. These 3 days of each week in their 6 weeks fast of Lent
from Quadragesima-Sunday made up 18 days, which with Ash Wednesday, and the
friday following Ash Wednesday, and Easters-eve made up just their 21 days
Fast: which Epiphanius and the Tripartite History ( l. 9. c. 38.) relate that
the Romans fasted ( i. e. with this full fasting unto the evening) the space of
3 weeks before Easter. The same says Socrates twice of the Eastern Churches 15
days fast, which they also measured for 3 weeks (exempting the Lord's Day, and
the Sabbath Day, as has been said.) Thus great an agreement there was to
observe both the Lords 40 days Fast by their abstinence from pleasures, flesh,
and wine, and if able, by stricter fasting, Daniel's 3 weeks. Which they had
great reason thus to emulate; 1. For that his only was done, as mere man
contenting himself with the measure of a man, after he had seen Moses, and
Elias's more glorious, but miraculous, example. 2dly Because Daniel himself did
undertake that 3 weeks Fast upon his foreseeing in Spirit, the taking away of
this our Bridegroom, the cutting off of Messiah the Prince, but not for
himself. Compare the end of Daniel c. 9. v. 24, 26. with the beginning of c.
10. 2, 3. 3dly This Fast was kept by him (says the Text v. 4.) in the first
month of the year, answering to our March; the time wherein the Messiah was to
be cut off, wherein the Christian Church would afterward celebrate their
Paschal Fast for his Passion. 4thly For the great acceptance with God, that
this three-weeks Fast of Daniel found. Compare c. 10. v. 2, 3. with v. 12. In
those days I Daniel was mourning three full weeks: I ate no pleasant bread,
neither came flesh nor wiae in my mouth, neither did I anoint my self at all,
till three whole weeks were fulfilled. V. 12. Then said he unto me: Fear not
Daniel: For from the first day, that thou did set thine heart to understand,
and to chasten thy self before thy God, thy words were heard, and I am come for
thy words. Thus we read when 40 days were indicted by God for Nineveh's
destruction, a three-daies Fast of Jonah in the Whales belly was accepted for
him, And the Whale vomited up Jonah upon the dry land. And a three-daies Fast
of the city Nineveh, a city of three days journey to pass through, was
accepted of God for their deliverance. (See Jonah 3. according to the Lxx.) And
God repented of the evil he had pronounced against them, and he did it not. On
which says S. Chrysostom tom. 6. (...) [(...)] (...) (...). Drunkenness and
gluttony shook the city of Nineveh, when it stood fair and flourishing, but the
Fast [of three daies] when it shook, and was about to fall, established its
standing. For forthwith you might see them all run unto fasting, both men and
women, servants, and masters, Rulers, and people, children, and old men; nor
was even the irrational nature of beasts priviledg'd from this service. Every
where was seen sackcloth, every where ashes, every where lamentation and
mourning. And a strange sight it was to see, what the Purple and Diadem could
not do, that Sackcloth and Ashes prevailed to do -- And delivered the city
from their dangers. Fear not therefore -- when ye hear of the Fast; for that is
not terrible to us [which delivers us from fearful judgments.] But it is
terrible to the Devils -- Since it is therefore so terrible to the enemies of
our life, we ought to love, and embrace, and not to fear it. S. Chrysostom had
learned this from that of our Lord (to whom every knee of things beneath the
earth also do bow) Mat. 17. 20, 21. This kind goes not out, but by Prayer and
Fasting. You have seen the gracious Acceptance which the Ninevites Fast sound
with God Almighty. But lest any of us should undergo like labor, and miss of
like acceptance, how far in the next place directions for the truly Religious
manner of performance of this duty of fasting will be necessary, S. Chrysostom
will tell you upon the occasion of this Ninevites Fast, in his 3d Homily ad
pop. Antiochen. (...). For the nature of fasting, says he, suffices not to
free those which are exercised therewith; except it be performed according to a
meet rule, or law. For he that striveth for masteries, is not crowned, except
he strive lawfully. Lest therefore we undergoing the pain of fasting, fall
short of the crown and reward thereof, let us learn how, and after what manner
we ought to perform the thing. For otherwise we know, the Pharisee also fasted,
but after his fast, he went away empty and void of the fruits of fasting. Yea
the Publican, who fasted not, was preferred before him that fasted, that you
may learn, how there is no benefit of the fast, except all other requisits also
do accompany it. The Ninevites fasted, and drew down upon themselves the favor
of God. The Jews also fasted, and were never the nearer, but went away accused.
Since therefore there is so great danger of the fast, to those, who know not
how they ought to fast, LETUS LEARN THE LAWS OF FASTING, that we run not
uncertainly, nor beat the air, nor be as such cuffers who fight as it were with
their shadow. Fasting is a medicine; but physic, although it be never so good,
that is prescribed, oftimes becomes unprofitable, by reason of the imprudence
of him that uses it. For that he ought well to know, both the season of taking
it, and the quantity, and the constitution of the body, that receives it, and
the air or region, and the season of the year, and what diet is to be taken
with it, and many other rules; of which he that shall oversee any marres the
whole course of physic; which he had entered upon. Let us then now come to
these (...), which St. Chrysostom says we are to learn, the rules and laws of
this fast, especially of Lent; that it may be such a fast, as God has chosen.
I will name eight. 1. That our fasting be as the Church at first designed it, a
great instrument of our great work of repentance from our sins, of judging our
selves, that we be not judged of the Lord; of more instant mortifying all
sinful lusts and affections, (as it is a special season of memory of Christ's
death and passion) forasmuch as Christ has suffered for us, and we, if with
him we suffer in the flesh, must cease from sin, as we learn from St. Peter.
2dly. That our ^ Pet. 4. 1.
fast be truly fasting, not a commutation only of our usual di^t for other
delightful fullness, refections, and pleasures. 3dly. That fasting be not
severed from its ancient company of watchings, hard-lyings, sorrowings,
sequestration of ornaments, and public joyances. 4thly. That in our fasting
our bowels relent from all hard oppression of others to all works of justice,
the fast which God has chosen to undo heavy burdens, and to break every yoke.
5thly. That it abound in works of Isa. 58.
mercy; the fast commanded us by God, to deal our bread, from which we fast, to
those who not of choice, but by necessity do hunger. 6thly. To make our
fastings subservient to our more instant prayers, as our bodies to our Souls;
for a time, as St. Paul speaks, (...), giving ourselves to attend on fasting
and prayer, (1 Cor. 7.) as also to more frequent hearing of Gods word; as the
Church at this season provides more frequent sermons, that while the outward
man fasts, the inward man may be filled daily. 7thly. More particularly take we
care in this time of the abstinence of Lent to prepare ourselves for the Lords
Holy Table at Easter, to which it is instituted as a preparation. Lastly. That
all this your good be not leavened with the leaven of vainglory and hypocrisy,
when ye fast be not as the hypocrites are. These the Ancient Doctors did join
together in their injunctions; as may be seen, especially throughout St.
Chrysostoms Homilies on Lent. Thus Caesarius Bishop of Arles. A. D. 508. in his
2d Homily of Lent. Rogo vos, (...) charissimi, ut in isto legitimo ac
sacratissimo Quadragesimae tempore -- etiam quod vos facere credo, charitatis
contemplatione commo^eo; ut p^r totam Quadragesimam, and usque ad finem paschae
castitatem, Deo auxiliante, servantes in illa sacrosancta solemnitate paschae,
castitatis luce ves^iti, eleemosynis dealbati, orationibus, vigiliis, and
jejuniis velut quibusdam coeleslibus and spiritualibus margaritis ornati, non
solum cum amicis, sed etiam cum i^imicis pacisici, libera and secura
conscientia ad altaria Domini accedentes, corpus and sanguinem ejus non ^d
judicium, sed ad Remedium possitis accipere. I beseech you, most dear Brethren,
that in this ordained and most sacred time of Lent etc -- And of love I
admonish you (that which I trust you also do) that through the whole Lent unto
Easter, keeping yourselves through Gods help in purity; in that holy Solemnity
of Easter, you being clothed with the light of purity, and made clean and white
by Alms, and adorned with Prayers, Watchings, and Fastings, as with certain
heavenly and Spiritual Pearls; and being at peace not only with your friends,
but also with your enemies, approaching with a free and quiet conscience to the
Altars of the Lord, may receive his Body and Blood, not to judgment, but for
your Spiritual Remedy and healing. Has not our Lord Christ prepared and
mingled as it were all these together in one part of his Sermon on the mount,
Prayer, Alms, and Fasting, and charitable forgiving, and putting far from us
hypocrisy (in those) and Repentance? Man. 6. and 7. c. to v. 5. And these are
indeed all linked together in their own nature; when our fasting helping
forward, and witnessing our Humiliation and Repentance, enabling us also the
better to watching, and both giving us opportunity to Prayer, and enabling us
at least out of what by Fasting we spare from our own bodies, to feed and
relieve the poor; and therefore much more doing justice to others, in all
things performing sincere obedience to God and his Church without hypocrisy,
in love of our brethren and neighbors, and purity of our bodies, and meet
preparation of our souls, we approach at the end of the fast, to the Holy
Table, and heavenly feast of Christ's most holy, purifying, and sanctifying Body
and Blood. S. Austin somewhere compares the Faith of Christians to the lamp,
Alms to the oil in the lamp, Fasting and Watching to the golden snuffers of the
Sanctuary, Prayer to the Incense, Justice and Obedience to the Sacrifice. But
of those eight, let us proceed distinctly to speak somewhat to each. 1. That
Fasting be joined with Repentance; Ut corpus and anima simul jejunent; corpus a
cibis, Anima ab omni re mala, says S. Hierom ad Rusticum. That the soul and
body be joined in the Fast, the Body commanded to fast from food, and the soul
from every evil thing. Quale est enim (says S. Austin) propter pecca^um
jejunare, and in peccatis volutare? For what do we mean to fast for sin, and
yet to wallow in sin? Before them both, Origin had so advised, Hom. 10. in
Levit. 16. Iejunans debes adire Ponti^icem tuum Christum -- Et per ipsum
offerre hostiam Deo. Vis tibi ostendam, quale te oportet jejunare jejunium?
Iejuna ab omni peccato; nullum c^bum sumas malitiae, nullas capias epulas
voluptatis, nullo vino luxuriae concalescas, etc. Nec hoc tamen ideo dicimus,
ut abstinentiae Christianae fraena laxemus; Habemus enim Quadragesimae dies
jejuniis consecratos, etc. Will you, that I show you what manner of Fast you
ought to fast? Fast from all sin, feed not any way your malice, feast not your
self with any pleasures, nor warm your self with any luxury, etc. Yet this we
speak not to let loose the reins of Christian abstinence; For we have the days
of Lent consecrated to Fastings, etc. S. Chrysostom speaking also of Lent,
makes the same judgment of Fasting, ((...)) (...). A man may undergo the
labor of fasting, and not receive the reward thereof, [of which reward our
Lord spoke, Mat. 6.] How? When we abstain from meats, but not from sins: when
we eat no flesh, but devour the houses of the poor: when we drink not our fill
of wine, but are drunk with evil concupiscence: when thou deniest thy body its
ordinary repasts, and feedest thy soul with unlawful food: when thou fastest
with thy body, and have eyes full of adultery. The same Father in his 3. Homil.
ad pop. Aatioch. (...) (...). * The fast I speak of is not that of the vulgar,
but the accurate fasting; not the abstinence from meats only, but from sins.
See we what it is, that dissolved that indeclinable wrath [gone out against the
Ninevites] was it fasting ONLY and sackcloth? That cannot be said. But the
change of their whole life -- And God saw their works. What works? that they
fasted? that they were clothed with sackcloth? neither of these does he
mention; but says, that every one returned from his evil ways, and God
repented of the evil, that he had said he would do unto them. See thou, that
not fasting delivered them from their danger, but the change of their life
rendered God propitious to those Barbarians? This I have said, not that we might
dishonor fasting, but that we might honor it. For the honor of fasting is
not the abstinence from meats, but the separating ourselves from our sins, so
that he who defines fasting, by abstinence from meats ONLY, he it is who
especially dishonours Fasting. Do thou fast? show it me by thy works. What
works will thou say? If thou see the poor, show him mercy. If thou see
thine enemy, be reconciled to him. If thou see thy friend in honor, envy him
not -- Let not thy mouth ONLY fast, but also thine eye, thine ear, thy feet,
thy hands, and all the members of thy body. Let thy hands fast from rapin and
injury, let thy feet fast from running to unlawful spectacles, let thine eyes
fast from busy beholding beauties belonging to others; for beholding with the
eyes is as it were the food of the eyes; which if it be forbidden food, marres
our fast -- Let the fast of the hearing be, not willingly to take up
accusations and slanders. With this Patriarch of Constantinople agrees S. Cyril
Patriarch of Alexandria in his first Hom. de Fest. Paschal. (...) [(...) supra
nominatas] (...) (...). For in no wise may we find the truer grace of fasting
in ONLY abstinence from food, but let us send away, and free ourselves from
fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, and evil concupiscence; for
the remedy whereof this medicine of fasting was found out -- Feed not therefore
your mind with the pleasures of intemperance, mortify the fury of fornication,
free your mind from inordinate affection, ^ee the fellowship of unclean
persons. It is good therefore in season to abstain from needless meats, and to
withdraw from an exquisite table, least filling ourselves with superfluous
food, we awaken the sin, that dwells and sleeps in us: for the flesh waxing fat,
and living in pleasure becomes difficult and hard to be mastered by the motions
and desires of the Spirit -- Let therefore evil be evacuated in us, and all
delicacy of food pass beside us -- Let sober fasting enter in unto us, which is
the enemy of all sin. But it is troublesome. Resp. If refusing to endure a
little we shall fall into greater and sorer sufferings -- I would gladly ask
those that are so affected, whether they will say it is troublesome to fast, or
to be punished for ever. Viz. Which might be prevented by fasting after a right
manner, (1 Cor. 9. ult.) I Keep under my body, and bring it into subjection,
lest that by any means when I have preached to others, I my self should be a
castaway.
-- Let us love therefore the fast, as being the mother of all good and of all
cheerfulness -- Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and
spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. For so, ^o, I say, shall we
perform a pure fast unto the Lord, beginning the H. Lent from the 15 day of the
month of February [so it fell that year.] And that you may understand S.
Chrysostomes negative above, (...), to be spoken, as not excluding Fasting from
repentance in the deliverance of the Ninevites, but as pronouncing Fasting
ineffectual with exclusion of repentance; and where they were both, Repentance
to have been the principal, and the other for its sake, but for its sake to be
assumed; both his own words there following teach us, and more clearly S. Cyril
here in this Homily, (...) [(...)] (...). What was it that saved the Ninevites
from that great commination? For the Prophet proclaimed; Yet three [others read
40] days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown. They betaking themselves to
Fasting, as to an impregnable hold, by importunity pacified the divine anger,
and were deliverd from the impendent evils. Where Cyrils Fasting must be
understood likewise according to his words above, as including also the more
principal work, Repentance. You have heard how these two renowned Patriarchs
have defined the true Fasting; the rest are long.

Hear we now therefore our own Churches definition of it, in her Homily of
Fasting, that as Fasting (in the outward part of it) is a withholding of meat
and drink, and all natural food from the body, for the determined time of
fasting; so also (says the 2d part of the Homily) The inward Fast of the mind
is a sorrowfulness of heart, detesting and bewailing our sinful doings. A
larger description if you require, you may take it thus: Fasting is a denying
our selves lawful refreshments, for having not denied our selves in unlawful
desires; a real judging our selves worthy to be punished, that we be not
judged, and afflicting or punishing our selves, ( Ezra 8. 21.) judging our
selves also worthy (and executing on ourselves, for sometime, that judgment) of
the wonted blessings created of God for man to enjoy, for our former inordinate
enjoyments of them, and our other offenses against God. Illicitorum veniam
postulantem oportet etiam illicitis abstinere, says Halidgarius lib. d. Ordin.
Poenitent. c. 5. [ sed multo magis ab illiciis] Tertullian Anciently in his
book of Repentance c. 9. Plerunque vero jejuniis preces alere, ingemiscere etc.
[ oportet.] In quantum non peperceris tibi, in tantum tibi Deus (creed) parcet.
We ought frequently to feed our prayers with fastings, and with groans to utter
them etc. By how much thou sparest not thy self, God will spare thee. Which
Caesarius of Arles in Hom. 1. de Quadrages. thus dilates upon: Iejunia ac
vigiliae and sanctae afflictiones humilitate corpora macerant, maculata corda
purificant -- ac sic mortificatione praesenti futura mortis sententia
praevenitur, and dum culpae author humiliatur, culpa consumitur, dumque exterior
afflictio voluntariae districtionis infertur, tremendi judicii offensa sedatur,
and ingentia debita labor solvit exiguus, quae vix consumpturus erat ardor
aeternus. Fastings and watchings, and holy afflictions macerate the body in
humiliation, and purify the heart from its stains -- And so by present
mortification the future sentence of death is prevented. And while the author
of the sin is humbled, the sin is consumed; and while the outward affliction of
voluntary severity is inflicted, the offense of the dreadful judgment is
appeased, and a little labor dissolveth great debts, which eternal burning
scarce would eat out.

Thus Fasting avails, much joined with repentance; repentance also is best
performed in conjunction with Fasting. S. Basil the great in his 1. Sermon of
Fasting, (...). Repentance without Fasting, is scarce set on work -- Fasting is
the initiatory discipline of repentance -- the restraint of anger, the
separating from concupiscences. So see we in the example of whole communities,
that Gentile city of the Ninevites ( Jonah 3.) and the Jews the people of God (
Joel 2.) How it serves to the perfecting of the imperfect Proselytes, in the
instance of Cornelius ( Act. 10. 9.) How in conversion of single sinners, in
the instance of Saul, anon S. Paul ( Act. 9. 9.) The reason is rendered by
Chrysologus in his 7th Sermon on Mat. 6. Agricola si non impresserit cultrum,
si sulcum non defoderit, si non exciderit sentes, si gramina non evuiserit, si
in tuto semina non locarit, sibi mentitur, non terrae; nec terrae facit damnum,
sed sibi non facit frudum; and ita se vacuat, ita decipit, impugnat ita, qui
terrae manu fallaci mentitur. Expounding himself further within a few lines
thus. Premens jejunii aratrum, and abscindens gulae gramina, atque eradicans
luxuriae sentes. The husbandman, if he break not up the ground with the plow of
fasting, if he cut not, dig not the surrow, if he cut not up the thorns of
luxury, if he pluck not up the rank grass of superfluous plenty, if he place
not the feed in safety, he is false to himself, not to the earth, brings no
damage to the ground, but reaps* no fruit to himself; and so deceives himself,
who deals so with a deceitful hand about his ground. According to that of the
Prophet, Ier. 4. 3. Break up your fallow-ground, and sow not among thorns. And
Ier. 10. 12, 13. Sow to your selves in righteousness, reap in mercy, break up
your fallow-ground: for it is time to seek the Lord, till he come and rain
righteousness upon you. Now for as much as Fasting is so useful an instrument
of contrition S. Chrysostom, (...). ad Stelechium de Compunctione, (...), Even
as it is hard, yea rather impossible, to mingle fire with water; so I deem,
that fullness of delicacy, and compunction cannot be found together -- for this
is the mother of tears and watching, the other of laughter and extravagancy.
and Repentance, most wisely in the Church is there appointed a yearly public
season of joint Fasting and penance; wherein not only public offenders, but
secret also, even the whole Congregation join in humiliation for their sins:
according to that of Leo the Great Sermon. 4 de Quadrages. Dum per varias
actiones vitae hujus sollicitudo distenditur, necesse est de mundano pulvere
etiam Religiosa corda sordescere: Ideo magna divinae institutionis salubritate
provisum est, ut ad reparandam mentium puritatem 40 nobis dierum exercitatio
mederetur, in quibus aliorum temporum culpas, and pia opera redimerent, and
jejunia casta decoquerent. Which I have englished above. But to the same sense
I may allege that of S. Austin. l. 1. c. 169. Quaest. super Genes. Which is to
be added to the 7 Testimonies for Lent, which I have out of him already
produced. Non enim frustra 40. dies jejuniorum sunt constituti, quibus Moses,
and Elias, and ipse Dominus jejunavit, and Ecclesia praecipua observatione
jejuniorum, Quadragesimam vocat. Unde and in Hebraeo de Ninevitis apud Ionam
Prophetam scriptum pe^hibent, Quadraginta dies, and Nineveh subvertetur; ut per
tot dies poenitentium humiliationi accommodatos, intelligatur in jejuniis sua
deflevisse peccata etc. For it was not in vain, that 40. days were
constituted, in which Moses, and Elias, and the Lord himself fasted, and the
Church with special observance of fastings, calls Lent. Whence also
concerning the Ninevites in the Prophet Jonah, it is said to be written in the
Hebrew: Yet 40 days, and Nineveh shall be destroyed; that through so many
days accommodated to the humiliation of penitents, they may be understood to
have bewailed their sins in fastings.

For this cause S. Hierom also thinks, that not only John the Baptist, a
preacher of repentance, was so remarkable for fasting, but that our Lord also,
who began to preach and to say, Repent ( Mat. 4. 17.) entered upon his office of
preaching with the preparation of the fast of 40 days: Ipse quoque Dominus,
verus Jonas, missus ad praedicationem mundi, jejunavit 40 dies, and
haereditatem nobis jejunii relinquens. The Lord himself the true Jonas sent to
preach (Repentance) to the world, fasted 40 days, leaving to us also the
inheritance of fasting. S. Cyril of Jerusalem in his 1 Catech. Thou have given
unto thee the penance of 40 days (speaking of Lent) which 40 days Leo also
calls in his 4 sermon of Lent, Dies mysticos, and purificandis animis atque
corporibus sacratius institutos. Days of mystical meaning, instituted and
dedicated to the purifying of our souls and bodies. Theodulphus Bishop of
Orleans Anno Christi. 843. in his Epistle number. 36, 37, Quadragesima cum summa
observatione custodiri debet -- Ipsos dies cum omni religione and sanctitate
transigere debemus -- Hebdomada una ante initium Quadragesimae, confessiones
sacerdotibus dandae sunt, poenitentia accipienda, discordantes reconciliandi,
and omnia jurgia sedanda, and dimittere debent debita invicem de cordibus suis
etc. As S. Chrysostom before had said, (...) ex M. S. Regio. (...). The day of
fasting, the day of composed gravity, the day of brotherly love.
Et sic ingredientes in Beatae Quadragesimae tempus, mundis and purificatis
mentibus, ad Sanctum Pascha accedant, etc. Lent itself ought to be kept with
all observance, and those days to be passed with all religion and sanctity,
and one week before the beginning of Lent, confessions are to be made to the
Priests [ viz. by such as need advice and relief to their conscience] penance
is to be received, persons fallen into difference to be reconciled, and all
strifes taken up, and men ought to forgive each other from their hearts etc.
And so entering into the blessed time of Lent with clean and purified minds,
they may arrive to the Holy Pasche (or Easter.)

The 2d rule was, that our Fast be truly fasting; (where the body is well and
truly able) not an exchange only of our usual diet for other delightful fullness
and refections: For if Fasting be any thing, to which God has promised any
reward (as he has Mat. 6. 16.) Be Fasting how little a thing soever, yet it is
no small danger to mock God, who sees both in secret, and otherwise, and
observes, that to which he has promised to render a reward openly. It is a
fearful thing, even in bodily things, yea and happily such as were in our own
power, before they were pretended to, to lie to the holy Ghost. The 2d Council
of Chalon. ^. 35. complains of some men's fasting. Et si carnium and vini usus
eis interdictus est, mutata non voluntate, sed ejusdem cibi aut po^us
perceptione in tantum deliciis suis indulgent, ut deliciosius, his int^rdictis,
aliorum ciborum vel potionum appetitu vi^e cognoscantur. Spiritalis autem
abstinentia, quae in poe^itentibus vigere potissimum debet, and quorundam
ciborum ac potionum perceptiones, and desiderium sugere debet -- sibi non solum
quarundam rerum perceptione, sed delectatione corporis penitus interdicit.
Although the use of flesh and wine be precluded them, yet changing not their
will, but only the kind of meat and drink, they so far indulge their pleasures,
that those being interdicted them, they are known to live more deliciously,
after their appetite of other meats and drinks. But the spiritual abstinence,
which ought to be eminent in penitents, should both fly the enjoyment of
certain meats and drinks, and also wholly interdict to them corporal delights.
S. Austin also, or whoever else was the Author of 157th Sermon, which is of the
time of Lent, tells us, that which is too true whosoever said it) Sunt quidam
observatores Quadragesimae deliciosi potius quam religiosi, exquirentes novas
suavitates, magis quam veteres concupiscentias castigantes; qui pretiosis
copios^sque apparatibus fructuum diversorum quorumlibet varietat^s and sapores
superare contendunt. Vasa in quibus coctae sunt ^arnes t^quam immunda
f^rmidant, and in carne su^ ventris and gutturis luxuriam non reformidant;
Iejunant, non ut solitam temperando minuant edacitatem, sed ut immoderatam
differendo augeant aviditatem. Nam ubi tempus resiciendi advenerit, optimis
mensis tanquam pecora praesepibus irruunt, ventresque distendunt, artisiciosis
and peregrinis condimentorum diversitatibus, tantum capiunt manducando, quantum
digerere non sussiciunt jejunando. -- tanquam non sit Quadragesima piae
humiliationis observatio, sed novae voluptatis occasio, etc. There are certain
observers of Lent, followers of delicacy more then of Religion, that hunt out
new delights of the belly, rather then correct the concupiscences of the old
man; Who by costly and rich provisions, and manner of cooking, strive to outdoe
the variety of natural tastes, of whatsoever several fruits of the earth. They
are afraid of any vessels in which any flesh has been boiled, as unclean; and
yet in their own flesh fear not to admit the luxury of the throat and belly.
These fast, not that they may by moderating themselves diminish their wonted
full-feeding, but that by deferring a meal, they may increase their intemperate
greediness of the belly; for when the time of Refection comes, they rush to
their tables, as beasts to their full mangers, and distending their bellies
through diversities of artificial and strange sawces, take in so much by
devouring, as they are not able again to digest by fasting. -- as if Lent were
not the observation of a pious humiliation, but an occasion of seeking out new
pleasures. A like complaint makes Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria, of some
in the Churches under his care. Epistola Paschali 3. Qui autem legum praecepta
custodiunt, ignorant vinum in jejuniis, carnium ^sum repudiant, and
insatiabilem avaritiam Dei timore compescunt. -- Non possunt suscipere
Correctionem, qui luxuriae oblectatione capiuntur, neque ventris ingluviem
ratione and consiliis refraenare, amore jejunii, qui desideria and peritura
cito voluptate studium virtutis infamant, non erubescentes vinum clam bibere,
and avidis faucibus arbitros declinantes, in cubiculis mulsa potare, ut inediam
and jejunia quae ultro adpetere debebant, jejuniorum tempore, luxuria and
ebrietate commutent: nescientes quod, etiamsi hominum conscientiam fugiant, and
clausis parietibus vescantur carnibus, atque aves altiles diebus Quadragesimae,
and propinquante Pascha immundis manibus lacerent, tristi vultu foris jejunia
promittentes; corripiat hujusmodi -- Dominus, etc. Such as observe the rules of
Laws, know no wine in their Fasts, refuse eating of flesh, and correct
insatiable greediness with the fear of God. -- They refuse to receive
correction, who are taken with the delights of luxury, nor know they to bridle
with the love of fasting, the greediness of the belly, by reason and counsel,
who defame the profession and study of virtue through perishing pleasures:
being not ashamed secretly to drink wine, and in their chambers declining
witnesses who may observe them, greedily fill themselves with sweet wine, that
they may commute their fasts and abstinence, (in the time of Fastings) with
luxury and drunkenness; not considering, although they fly the conscience of
men, and (their doors shut about them) in the days of Lent feed themselves
with flesh; and even Easter drawing near, with hands not clean tear their
fatted fowls, and yet outwardly with a sad countenance professing fastings;
that such God reproves, etc. This yet they would have thought Religious
Fasting. Some make such satisfaction afterward to their belly, their God, for
some few hours preceding emptiness (of which Tertullian said, Spernitur
jejunium, quod vespere deliciis compensatur. Not God only, but the man himself
despises his own fast of the day, which in the evening he recompenses with
delicacies:) as others by laying in store before, provide against the siege of
the Fast: both which sorts of fasting S. Chrysostom warned his hearers of, tom.
6. (...). Let not drunken riot usher in so grave a Matron as Fasting, nor let
us kick down the meal which we have given, by more then recompensing the meal
which we have forgone. The very same Admonition is S. Basil's (in his 1. Homily
of Fasting) (...); Let not Drunkenness initiate thee into the Fast -- He who is
to combat, exercises himself before; He that enters upon the Fast, must
practice temperance before, not avenging the fasting days, not dealing
deceitfully with the Lawgiver -- Why invitest thou the enemy to possess
beforehand thy strong holds? In the day of Fasting, the Ancients simplicity
required a deferring of the hour, a diminution of the quantity, a lessening of
the number (if more then one) and an abatement of the quality of our usual
daily refections; upon the fore-alledged example of Daniel c. 10. v. 2, 3. In
those days I Daniel was mourning three full weaks; I ate no pleasant bread,
(or bread of desires, as it is in the Text, from which abstaining, he is himself
by the Angel called a man of desires, c. 9. 23.) neither came flesh, nor nine
in my mouth; nor did I anoint my self at all, till three whole weeks were
fulfilled: S. Hierom thus Comments: Hoc docemur exemplo, tempore jejunii a
cibis delicatioribus abstinere (quod ego puto nunc dici panem desiderabilem)
nec carnem comedere, nec vinum bibere. We are taught by this example, in the
time of our Fast to abstain from more delicate food (which here I suppose to be
meant, by pleasant bread) nor to eat flesh [he means, where the consideration
of health can agree thereto] nor drink wine, [He might have added: Nor use
other delicacies, as Daniel abstained from anointing himself at all, a delicacy
of those Countries.] From each of which Eusebius relates in his Ecclesiastical
History, that S. James the Brother of our Lord, did all his time perfectly
abstain. Eusebius l. 2. c. 23. (...) [(...)] (...) etc. -- (...).
But Daniel in the three weeks of his Fast, and the generality of the Christian
Church in her seven weeks Fast, They judged it not agreeable to the time of
their humbling and afflicting their souls, and chastning themselves (as
offenders) and bringing into subjection their bodies (as servants,) by Fasting,
to indulge them such meats and drinks as either were delicate and pleasurable
in themselves, or were full of high nourishment to the flesh, or provoked to
any carnal appetites or desires, or enkindled the blood, and spirits. And
because I see few, either of the Roman or the opposite Persuasion, that in
practice or rule admit this of abstinence from wine, as any part of the Fast; I
shall only say, besides that it was, and was noted by the Spirit of God, in
Daniel. c. 10. 3. and in John Baptist, Luke 1. 15. beside the many Canons of
the Church prescribing it, it may more move some to hear from S. Chrysostom
the general practice of the Christian people in his age, Hom. 6. ad Pop.
Antioch. (...) [ sc. (...)] (...). When the Fast of Lent is come, although any
one would entreat a man ten thousand times, although he would by vexation
enforce one to take his part of drinking wine, or any other thing forbid to be
tasted on the Fasts, he would choose to suffer all, rather then to meddle with
such forbidden nourishment. And although we liked well enough, of the pleasure
of such Refection, yet for the accustoming of our conscience, we bear all
generously, and persist in mourning. And as to Daniel's not anointing himself,
which is by Synecdoche put for other external delicacies also, our Churches
Homily has told us, That Fasting is an abstinence from all meat and drink, and
all natural food, yea and from all delicious pleasures, and delectations
worldly. I comprise in this 2d Rule the instructions both of Epiphanius and of
Dorotheus the Archimandrite: of Epiphanius in Heresy 75. (...). In the days
before Easter, when with us are practiced lyings on the ground, purities,
self-affiictings, dry-diets, prayers, watchings, and fastings etc. [those he
instructs us were the Churches practises] then they [the Aerians] from the
morning fill themselves with flesh and wine, loading their veins, laugh, deride
and mock at such as perform this holy service of the Paschal-week. Of Dorotheus
Archimandrita, about the year 692, in his 15th Doctrine. (...) -- 2 (...). 3
(...), 4. (...). The Holy Apostles have by their suffrage sanctified to us
these 7 weeks of fasting -- Each one therefore who is willing to be cleansed of
his sins of the whole year, is willing through these days, 1 to keep himself
from indifference of meats, 2 next he is willing also not to dissolve his fast
[before the set hour] without great necessity. 3 not to seek out pleasurable
food. 4 not at any time to burden, or load himself with fullness of meats or
drinks. Antiochus (...).
Now for that this difference of meats, meets with most eager opposition, it
shall be useful to recall to your mind, that in Canonical authority Daniel's
clear example above, makes the objection of superstition to be itself impious
boldness. And S. Austins defense among the Writers of the Church, against the
Manichees objecting it, shames the objectors for ever. His words at large I
cited above p. 120. Where he says, Such abstinence from flesh and wine was in
the time of Lent observed by almost all Catholics and Christians, for the
souls humbling, and the bodies chastening. And this he says was doctrine (he
says not praeceptum) Prophetarum and Apostolorum. I conclude this with that of
Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria in his 3d Paschal Epist. Nequaquam diebus
Quadragesimae (sicut luxuriosi divites solent) vini poculum suspiremus, neque
in praelio, ubi labor and sudor est necessarius, carnium edulio delectemur. Let
us by no means in the days of Lent, as is the manner of luxurious rich men,
pant after drinking of wine; nor yet in this our spiritual combat, where our
labor and sweat is necessary, be delighted with feeding on flesh.

The 3d rule was, that fasting be not divorced from its primitive society of
watchings, humicubations, sorrowings, putting away ornaments, and public
jollities. Thus these children of the Bride chamber, of whom the Lord said, the
days would come when they should fast, did in those days with their fastings
join watchings, and sorrowings. 2 Cor. 6. 5, 10. (...), in watchings, in
fastings, as sorrowing, yet always rejoicing. And c. 11. 27. (...). In
watchings often, in fastings often, in weariness and painfulness. All, is a
sort of fasting, or containing our selves either from meat and drink, or from
sleep, (which also is given to nourish and refresh the body) from mirth, from
ease, and from ornaments. The use which Watchings have joined with Fasting for
Mortification, we hear from Palladius iu historia Lausiaca c. 145. concerning
Candida. (...). I knew this Generous [ Candida] wont to labor and toil
throughout the whole night -- for the taking down the force of her body;
declaring her self, that whereas Fasting did not suffice, I add [saith she]
thereto, this laborious auxiliary watching. In Vigiliis saepe, nam Vigiliae
honestatis macerant carnes, says Primasius in 2 Cor. 6. In watchings often,
For honest and sober watchings do macerate and abate the flesh. And S. Hierom
Epist. 19. ad Fur. de viduitate servanda. Ardentes Diaboli sagittae jejuniorum
and vigiliarum rigore restinguendae. The fiery darts of Satan are to be
quenched and deaded by the rigor of watchings and Fastings. Our Lords example
I have reserved unto the last, which take in the words of Gregory Nazianzen in
his 16th Oration: (...). Good is it to keep under the body, Let Paul persuade
thee that; who still chasten'd himself, and striking terror through those of
Israel 1 Cor. 9. 20, 23, 27.
into all such as confide in themselves, and indulge their body: And Jesus
himself, who fasted and was tempted, and overcame the tempter! Good is prayer
and watching, even let [the Lord our] God himself persuade thee, watching and
praying before his Passion. Next also, Tertullian conjoyns, Castigationem
victus, atque cultus l. de Poenitent, c. 11. Denying to our selves superfluity
of ornaments, as well as of food. Thus God ( Exodus 33. 5, 6.) commanded the
children of Israel, when they had sinned, to put off their ornaments from them,
and they stripped themselves of there ornaments by the mount Horeb. For
Humi-cubation, we have David's example, 2 Samuel 12. 16. And David fasted a fast,
and went in, and lay all night upon the earth. And the Jews generally, Esth.
4. 3. adding to their fasting, weeping and wailing, and lying in sackcloth and
ashes. I conclude this 3d Rule with that of the 4th Council of Toledo c. 5. In
omnibus praedictis Quadragesimae diebus -- opus est 1. fletibus, ac 2. jejuniis
insistere, corpus 3. cilicio and cinere induere, 4. animum moeroribus dejicere,
gaudium in tristitiam vertere; Quousque veniat tempus resurrectionis Christi,
quando oporteat jam Allelujah in laetitia canere, and moerorem in gaudium
commutare. Hoc enim Ecelesiae universalis consensio in cunctis terrarum
partibus roboravit. In all the foresaid days of Lent we ought to insist on 1.
fasting, and 2. mourning, to cover the body with 3. sackcloth and ashes, 4. to
humble our mind with mournings, to change our joy into heaviness, until the
time of the Resurrection of Christ, when we are with joy to sing Allelujah, and
turn our heaviness into gladness. For this the consent of the universal Church
in all the parts of the earth has confirmed.

The 4th Rule, the Prophet Isaiah gives us, concerning joining justice with our
Fasting, (which is the acknowledgement of our unrighteousness) in these words (
c. 58. 6.) Is not this the Fast that I have chosen? To loose the bands of
wickedness, to und^e the havey burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and
that ye break every yoke? Not with the Pharisees fasting twice a week
outwardly, and within [all the week] full of extortion and excess, Mat. 23. 25.
Not with Iezabels fast, (in the Old Testament) robbing and murdering innocent
Naboth; not bearing witness by their holy fasting to their wicked false
accusing. Not fasting for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of
wickedness: the fast of the bloody Covenanting conspirators against the life of
S. Paul in the New Testament, Act. 23. 21. Many such Fasts and
Humiliation-daies from Iezabel the late Schism and Seditious conspiracy, her
demure and bloody zeal, this poor Nation has seen lately acted upon the stage.
Nunquid membra tua recte domas, qui Christi membra dilanias? says S. Austin l.
de Utilitate jejunii; Do thou rightly mortify thine own members, who
butcherest the members of Christ? who r^ntest the bowels of thy mother, the
Church and Country that bare thee? Such fasters I cannot better resemble, then
to the ancient blood-thirsty Tyrants, who commanded their Lions to be kept some
days fasting and hungry, that they might with uglier greediness devour the
meek condemned Christians.

The 5 Rule was, That (as our feasts, so) our fasts be inseparably conjoined
with alms and mercy to the poor. Is not this the fast that I have chosen (says
God) is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor
that are cast out, to thy house? when thou see the naked, that thou cover
him, and that thou hide not thy self from thine own flesh? Then shall thy light
break forth as the morning, and thine health shall spring forth speedily, and
thy righteousness shall go before thee, etc. Then shall thou call, and the Lord
shall answer, Isa. 58. 79. This is properly to forget to eat our bread (with
David) and not forget or hide ourselves from our own flesh. One fasting joined
with many works of mercy, feeding with our bread, covering with our garments,
and bringing into our house. This is righteousness going before thee, making
thee friends of unrighteous Mammon, that may receive thee. This makes thy
fasting assuredly health; and these two together fail not to obtain, that the
3d, thy prayers miss not to be heard and answered of the Lord. Thus much the
Prophet. I was fasting, says Cornelius of himself unto this hour; (the 9th.)
But the Angel of God said unto him; Thy prayers and thy alms are come up for a
memorial before God. And S. Luke says of him, He gave much alms to the people,
and prayed to God always, Act. 10. 2. 4. 30. After whose example Leo (in his
3d sermon. de jejunio Pentecostes) directs our fast: ( ^m sanctas continentiae
delicias appetentes aliquantulum nobis de terrenorum ciborum abundantia
subtrahamus, ita proficiat eleemosynis, quod non impendit r mensis. Tum enim
demum ad animae curationem proficit medicina jejunii, cum abstinentia
jejunantis esuriem resicit indigentis. When we desirous of the holy delights of
abstinence substract from ourselves something of the abundance of our earthly
viands, that what is not expended upon our tables, may bring us in great gain,
by being laid out on our alms. For then does the medicine of fasting work to
the curing of the Soul, when the abstinence of him that fasts, refreshes the
indigence of him that hungers. That Ancient writer Origin speaking of
Lent-fast, and the weekly stations, tells us of a certain saying of the
Apostles, which had come down to him, Hom. 10. in Levit. 16. Habemus enim
Quadragesimae dies jejuniis consecratos; habemus quartam and sextam septimanae
dies, quibus solenniter jejunamus -- est and alia adhuc religiosa [jejunandi
ratio] cujus laus quorundam Apostolorum literis praedicatur. Invenimus enim in
quodam libello ab Apostolis dictum, Beatus est qui etiam jejunat, pro eo ut
alat pauperes. Hujus jejunium valde acceptum est apud Deum. We have the days
of Lent consecrated to fastings, we have the 4th and 6th days of the week,
whereon we solemnly fast -- there is also yet another Religious way of fasting,
whose praise is set forth in writing from certain of the Apostles; for we find
in a certain book, that it was said by the Apostles; Blessed is he, who fasts
also for that end, that he may relieve the poor. This man's fast is much
accepted with God. Misericordia and pietas [eleemosynae and orationes] jejuniis
sunt alae, per quas tollitur and portatur ad coelum, sine quibus jacet and
volutatur in terra, says Chrysolog. sermon. 8. de jejun. Alms and prayers are
the wings of fasting, by which it is carried up to Heaven, [as was Cornelius's]
without which it lies dead and spiritless upon the earth. Idem ibid. Iejunantes
ergo, fratres, prandium nostrum reponamus in manu pauperis, ut servet nobis
manus pauperis, quod venture nobis fuerat perditurus -- Manus pauperis est
gazophylacium Christi -- Pauperi qui non jejunat, Deo singit. -- Iejunium sine
misericordia simulachrum famis est -- sine pietate jejunium, occasio est
avaritiae. Quia parcitas ista, quantum siccatur in corpore, tantum tumescit in
sacculo. Let us therefore, O my brethren, when we fast deposit our dinner in
the hand of the poor, that that hand may preserve for us, what our belly would
lose to us -- The hand of the poor is the treasury of Christ -- He that fasts
not to the poor, does but feign a fast to God -- fasting without works of
mercy, is but an empty image of hunger. -- Without pity to others it is but an
occasion taken of covetousness* Because by such sparing, what is taken (...)
in the flesh, swells in the bag. And in his 7th sermon on Mat. 6. Sciat ille
sustinere (...) incassum, se nihil habiturum, qui premens jeju^* aratrum, and
abscindens gulae gramina, atque ^adicans luxuriae sentes, misericordiae semina
nulla jactaverit. Let him know that he suffers pain i^ vain, and shall receive
nothing, who ^ing up his fallow with the plow of fasting, and roo^ng up
gluttony, and the thorns of luxury, yet casts into the furrow no seed-corn of
the works of mercy. As thine own use of meat and drink, and other blessings, so
also thy fast itself (wherewith thou would purify and cleanse thy heart) has
need, being not without mixture of sinful infirmities, of that method wherewith
to be purified, prescribed by our Lord. Give alms of such things, as you have;
and behold all things are clean unto you, Luke 11. 41. Imple commiserationis
officia, and jejunia sanctificasti, says S. Austin.

The 6th Rule: by these premised duties there is now room made for thy fervent
prayers, which together with more frequent hearing of Gods word, and other
works of Devotion are the 6t necessary company of the fast. As in the examples
of Moses, Daniel, and Cornelius, and infinite more, might be shown; for Moses,
Deuteronomy. 9. 18, 25. I fell down before the Lord, as at the first 40 days, and 40
nights; I did neither eat bread, nor drink water because of all your sins etc.
But the Lord hearkened unto me at that time also -- Thus I fell down before the
Lord 40 days, and 40 nights, as I fell down at the first. I prayed therefore
unto the Lord and said. And in the New Testament not only the Apostles have
coupled them together, 1 Cor. 7. 5. For a season, (...), A season of vacant
attendance on fasting and prayer, of which none so common, so fixed, so holy,
as this of Lent; But also our Lord himself concerning what was most difficult
even to the Disciples themselves, gives this singular prescription, This kind
goes not out but by prayer and fasting. Upon which words S. Chrysostom thus
comments: (...) [(...)] (...) [(...)] (...). He that prays with fasting, has
two wings, and those lighter then the winds themselves; for such a one does not
stretch himself, or yawn, or is drowsy in his prayer -- He that fasteth is
light and winged, and prays with vigilance, and extinguishes his own evil
lusts, and renders God propitious to himself, and humbles his own soul, that
was lift up. For this cause also the Apostles were almost always in fasting,
-- Fasting with faith, brings into the soul a great force, and much Philosophy,
and makes of a man an Angel, and helps him to fight with incorporeal powers --
Howbeit Fasting by it self alone does not thus avail; but it has need of
prayer also; and first of prayer. [As in nature the soul is before the body;
and in the Gospel our Savior said, By Prayer and Fasting; where he places
prayer first; but shows them their prayers then proved ineffectual, because
they had not annexed jointly Fasting; For as the same Father S. Chrysostom
elsewhere says ( viz (...) (...). ex M. S. R*) (...). Fasting is the source of
Sobriety, the guardian of piety or Devotion, nursed up with S^ts, and having
its habitation among Angels. By reason of it both pleasures and Devils fly from
us, concupiscence is mortified, and passions are quieted: The force of prayer
and fasting together, we read experienced against one of the first enemies of
God's Church and people. In Exodo adversus Amelech oratione Moysis, and totius
populi usque ad vesperam jejunio depugnatum est. In Exodus the fight was
managed against Amelech by the prayer of Moses, and the Fast of all the people
unto the evening. These three holy sisters, Prayer, Alms, and Fasting, are
happiest when all three meet together, (as Mat. 6. Act. 10.) But of these
three, the 1. Prayer, the eldest daughter of Faith, ( Romans 10.) must always be
present; And therefore never is out of our power, (oral, or virtual, or mental
Prayer, at least.) They which cannot give alms, may fast the more; they which
cannot fast, should give the more alms; and if any can neither fast, nor give
alms, yet all can pray. Fasting disarms the flesh, Alms win friends and
auxiliaries, Prayer fights, as Moses's hands lift up against Amalek, through
the might of the Spirit. Alms lades the ship with precious substance, sent
before into another country; Fasting in any swelling of the seas or storm,
lightens the vessel, and casts out the unprofitable burden of the ship;
Faithful Prayer tugs hard in rowing to bring to the shore: Fasting takes from
ones own flesh, that he may in alms give to the poor to supply his wants: and
prayer from the riches of God derives grace and strength upon our selves, to
supply our own wants. Fasting treads under foot and leaves the earth; Charity
and Alms take our Brother by the hand, and raises him up; Prayer pierces the
clouds and enters into heaven. S. Ambrose Sermon. 23. de Quadragesima: Ego
testificor vobis -- hoc esse tempus coelestis quodammodo medicinae -- nunc
languidus aegritudinis suae invenit medicinam, si cum solicitudine medici
mandata servaverit -- Istud autem praeceptum ejus est primum, ut his 40 diebus,
jejuniis, orationibus, vigiliis operam commodemus. Iejuniis enim lascivia
corporis castigatur, orationibus devota saginatur anima: Vigiliis diaboli
insidiae depelluntur. I testify unto you -- that this is the time as it were
of the heavenly course of Physic, when the sick person finds medicine for
his malady, if he with all carefulness shall observe the prescriptions of his
Physician -- Now this is a chief prescription of his, that in these 40 days we
give diligence to fastings, prayers, and watchings. For by fastings the
lasciviousness of the flesh is chastis'd, by prayers the devout soul is
replenished, by watchings the ambushes of Satan are [discovered and] beaten
off. In Lent, with the Devotion of prayers and fastings, the Church has ever
annexed other works of Devotion also, as more frequent hearing and preaching
Gods word, attending on Sermons, repairing to Church, and the like. S.
Chrysostom Hom. 11. in Genesis 2. (...) (...). For it is not this only that is
required of us, that we be present here every day [of the Lent] and continually
hear concerning the same things [of ghostly concernment] and be in fastings all
the Lent; For except we shall gain something by our continual coming hither,
and by the [daily] exhortation here; except we bring home something profitable
to our own soul, from this season of this Fast, these things shall not only
profit us nothing, but shall be an occasion of our greater condemnation: when
so great care having been taken of us, we continue still the same. Thus S.
Chrysostom, who in his 1. Sermon. also of Anna, mentioning how the fast of Lent
had then abidden 40 days among them, mentions as argument of great pleasure to
himself and his Auditors, (...), the days of the fast, and their assemblies,
and common meetings, and their good things which they had enjoyed by the fast
-- Now although, says he, we have passed over its labor, (...). Let us not
lay aside the pleasant memory and desire of it. And indeed very many of his
golden Homilies, (as likewise of others of the Fathers) were Sermons preached
day by day in Lent to the people. Of Philip the Roman Emperor about 136 years
after S. John's death, Georgius Syncellus (Contemporary to the 2d Council of
Nice) thus writes, ad An. 237. (...). Philip so far was joined to the Faith of
Christ: that he gladly consessed his sins, and joined with the people in the
Churches prayers, in the night, or vigil of the feast of Easter, when and where
the word of God was with* greater and opener freedom preached forth.

7thly And yet more particularly this Fast of Lent, was in the Institution
purposely designed as a preparation to partaking either of holy Baptism, by the
Catechumens, on the Vigil of Easter Day, or of Absolution, by the penitents on
Maundy-Thursday: or of the Holy Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ by
the Believers on Easter Day, or lastly of two of these by the same persons, as
of Baptism and the Eucharist (with the intervention of Confirmation) on the
night and morning of Easter Day: or of Absolution and the Holy Eucharist on the
Thursday before, and on Easter Day. No fitter season to be baptized into the
death of Christ, and buried with him in Baptism, and therein also quickened
together with him and raised up; no fitter season to be absolved and quitted
from our sins, by his Death and Resurrection; no meeter time to be made
partakers of his Holy Body, which was broken, and Blood, which was shed for us
for the Remission of our sins, then at this holy time of sacred memory of
Christ's Death and Passion, Burial, and Resurrection. And for these holy
memories, and holy partakings of Absolution, Baptism, Confirmation, and the
holy Eucharist, what 40 days, what repentances and fastings can be thought
more then needful? S. Paul has taught us, that purging out from our selves the
old leaven, that we may be a new lump, as we are unleavened, is necessary to
our keeping the Feast of Christ our Passover sacrificed for us (1 Cor. 5. 7,
8.) that judging of our selves [(...)] discerning of our selves aright, upon
our examining our selves, is necessary to our [(...)] to our discerning the
Lords body, to our worthy receiving; that we be not condemned, or if not that
(upon our after-Repentance;) yet chastened of the Lord. Thus that Primitive
Patriarch Dionysius of Alexandria, in his Epistle to the Bishop Basilides:
(...) [(...)] (...). Humbling our souls with Faftings until the season of the
Resurrection of our Lord -- But unto the Holy, and unto the Holy of Holies, [so
I suppose he calls the Baptism and the Holy Eucharist of that season] he which
is not altogether clean in soul and body, should be forbid to approach. Both
Lent, and other Preparatories next before Lent, were both designed to fit us
for those holy things of ^r: so the sacred first ecumenical Council of Nice
cap. 5. (...) (...). Let there be held Synods, one before Lent, that all
peevishness being taken away, a pure gift [or oblation] may be offered unto
God; and a 2d about the time of gathering the fruits. S. Hierom in his comment
upon Jonas is most express: Ipse quoque Dominus, verus Jonas, missus ad
praedicationem mundi, jejunavit 40 dies, and haereditatem nobis jejunii
derelinquens, ad esum corporis sui, sub hoc numero, nostras animas praeparat.
The Lord himself being sent, as the true Jonas, to preach unto the world,
fasted 40 days, and leaving to us the inheritance of the fast, under this same
number prepares our souls to the eating of his body. So Leo also the great in
his 5th sermon of Lent: Ut dignius celebremus [ sacramenta Redemptionis
nostrae] saluberrime nos 40 dierum jejunio praeparemus. The words I englished
above p. 70. And the same Leo in his 10th sermon of Lent. Cognoscimus ad
celebrandum Paschae diem merito nos 40 dierum jejunio praeparari, ut digne
possimus divinis interesse mysteriis. We know that with great reason, by the
fast of 40 days we are prepared to celebrate the day of Easter, that we may
worthily participate of the Divine mysteries [or sacrament.] And so Caesarius
of Arles above p. 72, and Dorotheus p. 79. Where he says that the Holy
Apostles sanctified or set apart for our repentance the 7 weeks fast of Lent,
that we may partake of the Holy mysteries, not to condemnation, [but to life.]
The import and advantage you see answers your labor, as S. Cyril also of
Jerusalem tells us. Cateches. 1* (...) (...) [(...) supra Nominata] (...). Do
you not give yourself to prayer? -- purify your vessel [by exercise of fasting
also] that you may receive the more grace -- if thou labor little, thou
receivest little: I add, thou understandest little. When first in the Law and
the Prophets, Moses and Elias took up this 40 days Fast, it was the better to
prepare them for their appearance then before the presence of God. To this
effect S. Chrysostom instructs us, tom. 6. (...). Both Moses and Elias
themselves, the towers among the Prophets of the old Testament, although
otherwise so illustrious and great, and having great boldness toward God, yet
when they would approach and draw near to speak unto God, as far as unto man it
was possible to do, they betook themselves unto this work of fasting, and by
her hands offered themselves unto God. At the end of this 40 days fast of
Lent, at the feast of Easter (as always one of the 3 times) he who approached
not to Gods Holy table to receive the Holy Eucharist, was not deemed worthy of
the name of a Catholic, says the Council of Eliberis (elder then that of
Nice) thrice in the year at least, say they, (whereof this time always one)
and punctually so, says our Church. Once in the year only, says the Church of
Rome (which would be the only Catholics) Not once necessarily, in the year,
say some among us. At the end of Lent, besides Easter morn it self, the more
religious did generally receive also on that day, which is called Coena Domini;
(on which that mystery was instituted:) and very many, of the Clergy
especially, communicated every day of that great week. And what preparation is
sufficient for these Holy things?

The eighth and last rule of fasting is: When ye fast be not ye as the
Hypocrites are, ( Mat. 6. 16.) Si vult, quare tristis? si non vult, jejunus
quare? says Chrysologus upon that place. And upon the same words S. Chrysostom
((...).) (...). If willing to fast, why sad? if not willing, why fasting?
Rejoice in fasting, and be not of a sad countenance as the Hypocrites are
(...), as that Father speaks, (...) tom. 6.
. Non voluptuosos ( Dominus) indulget aspectus, sed vultus qui simulantur
excludit. The Lord does not indulge us in wanton aspects, but excludes the
simulation of affected looks. Disfigure not the fast, nor disfigure thy face.
Fast not to appear unto men, appear unto God to fast; and appear not to God, or
men to break the fast; (except where God and man have indulged to humanity)
Dionys. Alexandr. Epistola ad Basilidem. (...).
Pestilentia hypocriseos (says Chrysologus in his 7th Sermon on Mat. 6.)
Fugienda, quae de remediis creat morbos, conficit de medicina languorem,
sanctitatem vertit in crimen* placationem facit re^um, generat de propitiatione
disc^men -- Hypocrisis crudeli art virtutes truncat mucrone virtutum, jejunium
jejunio perimit, oratione orationem evacuat, misericordiam miseratione
prosternit -- Hypocrisis dum cupit captivare oculos, oculis fit ipsa captiva.
Fly the pestilence of hypocrisy, which of remedies themselves, creates
diseases, of medicine sickness, which turns holiness into a crime,
propitiation into guilt -- Hypocrisy by a cruel art cuts asunder virtues by the
edge of virtues, slaies fasting by fasting, evacuates prayer by prayer, beats
down almsgiving by alms-deeds -- Hypocrisy while it seeks to captivate the
eyes of men, is itselfled captive by the eyes. That odds there does arise from
being like, or unlike Hypocrites when we fast: That to the great honor of the
Church S. Austin shows thence, how the Church Christian fasting twice a week
does it Religiously, albeit the Pharisees did the same thing wickedly, August*
epistola ad Casulan. Sic and bis in sabbato jejunare in homine, qualis fuerat
Pharisaeus, infructuosum est; in homine autem humili^er fideli, vel fideliter
humili, religiosum est. Fasting twice in the week in a man like the Pharisee,
is unprofitable; but in a man humbly faithful, and faithfully humble, it is
Religious. Conclude we this: neither fast thou so as the Hypocrites, nor fast
not as the Hypocrites; who pretend such set and Ancient fasts of the Church to
be superstitious, and themselves too holy to join with their Brethren in them.

All these eight requisites of right performing of this Fast, we find together
in the Churches practice, and by her care prescribed at this time of Lent to
her children. In S. Chrysostom's time, according to his irrefragable witness (
Homil. (...) (...)* viz. tom. 6. (...).) (...) [(...), supra nominatis:] and
ibidem recenset etiam 40 dierum illorum (...). For what cause, therefore, some
may say, do we keep the fast of these 40 days? -- that in these days all of
us being (8) perfectly purified, together by (6) prayers, and by (5) alms, and
by (2) fasting, and by (3) whole nights watchings, and (1) by tears, and by
confession, and by all other things, we may so according to our power with a
(4) pure conscience (7) come unto the holy Mysteries [the Sacrament:] and in
the same place he recounts also as part of the exercise of those 40 days, (6)
hearing Gods word, attending on Sermons and Synods. Theophilus Bishop of
Alexandria in his 1. Paschal Epistle sets all these guests at one table
likewise: Si Adhaerentes studio virtutum animarum vitia purgare, [ volumus] and
quicquid in nobis sordium est jugi scripturarum meditatione diluere, quasi sub
sudo apertam doctrinarum scientiam contemplantes, festinemus supernae laetitiae
festa celebrare, and jungere nos Angelorum choris -- Eoque ^mnis
impraesentiarum adsumatur labor, ut and eos qui paululum negligentes sunt, and
nosmetipsos, aeternae gloriae praep^remus -- and homines provocantur ( terrarum
humilia dese, entes) cum Ecclesia primitivorum Dominicae Passionis festa
celebrare -- Priusquam slemus ante tribunal Christi, praeterita peccata
poenitentia corrigamus, praesenti fletu redimamus futura gaudia -- Curemus
diversa vitiorum vulnera, and rapinas divitum, quibus vel maxim hoc hominum
capitur genus, crebris commonitionibus reprimamus. Et sic poterimus imminentium
jejuniorum iter carpere, incipientes Quadragesimam, a tricesima die mensis
Mechir, -- ut juxta Evangelicas traditiones siniamus jejunia intempesla nocte,
die 18. supradicti mensis Pharmuthi. -- praebentes nos dignos communione
corporis and sanguinis Christi. If adhering to the study of virtues, we desire
to purge away the vices of our souls, and wash away, whatever of filth is in
us, by (6) continual meditation of the Scriptures, contemplating, as it were,
in the open and serene heaven the knowledge of doctrine, let us make have to
celebrate the solemnities of the Heavenly joy, and join our selves to the
Quires of Angels. -- Let us take upon us (3) labor at present, that we may
prepare both (5) those which are somewhat negligent, and our selves, unto
eternal glory -- Hereby men are provoked, forsaking the low things of the
earth, (8) to celebrate with the Church of the firstborn, the holy days of
the Lords Passion -- ere we come to stand before Christ's Tribunal, let us
correct our sins past by (1) repentance, let us by present mournings redeem to
our selves future joys -- Let us cure the sundry wounds of our vices; and the
(4) rapines, wherewith rich men are delighted, let us repress (6) with frequent
admonitions; so may we enter the (2) journey of the Impendent Fasts, beginning
our Lent from the 30th day of the month Mechir -- But so (Epistle 2d) that we
end the Fast according to Evangelical Traditions, late at night on the 18th day
of the month Pharmuth. -- presenting our selves worthy Communicants of the
Body and Blood of Christ. Having thus guarded and secured the duty of Fasting
by its necessary qualifications and conditions, it cannot be unsafe or
unseasonable to admit now unto audience, some strictures of the Elogies, which
the Ancient Fathers give of this duty of Fasting: As that God prescribed some
sort of Fasting to man, so soon almost as he was created; (...). S. Bafil. Ser.
1. de Iejunio. (ut supra.)
as a guard to innocence it self, and the first trial of man's obedience. (...),
says S. Chrysostom; Of these thou may eat, of this thou shall not eat, was
a sort of Fast prescribed. Which being not observed, because thou have
hearkened, says God, unto the voice of thy wife, and have eaten of the tree, of
which I commanded thee, saying, thou shall not eat of it, cursed is the ground
for thy sake: In sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days of thy life. Thorns
also and thistles shall it bring sorth to thee. -- In the sweat of thy face
shall thou eat bread, till thou return to the ground. ( Genesis 3. 17, 19.) The
earth of his flesh also bringing forth troublesome thorns and thistles, not to
be keept down, but by laborious sorrowful fasting, nor consumed but by the
spirit of judgment and burning. (...) (...), says S. Chrysostom tom. 6. (...).
If Fasting was necessary in Paradise, much more out of Paradise. If this
Physic was useful before our wound, much more after it. If whilst yet there
was no war of lusts raised within us, this armor was yet of use, much more
after so great a fight, from lusts within, from Devils without, this auxiliary
force of Fasting is necessary.

Come we to the Law; S. Basil tells us in his 1 Sermon of Fasting: (...);
Fasting above [in the Mount] prepared Moses to receive the Law; but fullness
amongst the people below, caused them to run mad after idolatry; for the people
sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play. -- The tables then, which
fasting had received written by the finger of God, the drunkenness [of the
people] caused to be broken; The Prophet judging it not meet that a people
drinking drunk with wine, [with the wine of spiritual fornication, which is
Idolatry, also Ier. 51. 7.] should receive the Law from God. -- Also Moses for
his 2d receiving of the Law, needed a 2d Fast. After him (...) (says the same
fatherthere) (...); He thinks that as S. Paul is usually said to be the fruit
of S. Stephen's Martyrdom and prayer, so the holy Prophet Samuel was more the
fruit of his mother Hannah's fasting and prayer, then of her womb. He then
proceeds to Samson, of whom he says, (...) [(...)] (...). With Fasting he was
conceived in his mothers womb: Fasting brought him forth, and fasting nursed
him; Fasting brought him up to manhood, that fast which the Angel commanded his
mother; Whatsoever comes of the vine thou shall not eat; nor drink wine, nor
strong drink. Fasting begets Prophets, strengthens mighty men, makes wise
Lawgivers: God prescribed both Samson an order of fasting, before he was born,
and to his mother a fast for his sake, while he should be in her womb. (...),
etc. (...) ( id. ibid.) But neither wise Daniel had seen the visions (of God)
had not fasting rendered his soul bright and pure. -- That man of desires, who
fasting full three weeks, etc. taught even the Lions to fast. With Daniel let
us join the three Children as companions, of whom S. Cyril thus writes, Hom. 1.
de Festis Paschal. (...) [(...)] (...). By Fasting, the three Children also
were found dreadful, and inexpugnable by the Babylonians, who when they might
have partaken of King Nebuchadnezzars table, and of his famous feasts, besought
that they might be nourished with pulse [and water] letting the Babylonians
enjoy the fullness and lusts of the flesh, and embracing a slender and
nothing-superfluous dyer. But see the fruit hereof: They were vouchsafed divine
visions, they appeared stronger then the fire it self, etc. In the New
Testament, (...), says the same S. Basil (ubi supra.) John's whole life was
one fast, of whom much has been said before. Lastly, (...) (says the same
Father in the same place of our Lord Jesus) (...). Our Lord having by fasting
sortifi'd the flesh, which he took for our sakes, so received the assaults of
the Devil in it, instructing us by fastings to anoint and exercise our selves
unto the combats of temptations S. Chrysostom agrees hereunto upon Psalm. 110.
verse. 8. speaking of Christ our Lord, he describes, (...). And Theodoret. in
Ps. 109. v. 24. (...) [(...)] (...).
Of his Apostles S. Chrysostom also is witness on Man. 17. (...). The Apostles
were continual as it were fasting. And Bid in the western Church, ad Psalm. 66.
Genua mea jejunio infirmata sunt, h. e. Apostoli infirmati sunt a jejunio, i.
e. propter absentiam meam in quo prius resiciebantur qui per mortem eis ablatus
sum. My knees are weak through fasting: that is, My Apostles are weak through
fasting, to wit, by reason of my Absence, in whom, before they were refreshed;
who by death was taken from them. Thus have you had a bri^f of what some few
only of the Fathers had observed throughout the Old and N. Testament. Now for
the ^orce of it: Vitia extinguunt ista [Iejunium oration and eleemosyna] -- Haec
reddunt casta corpora, corda pura; haec pacem membris, mentibus quietem. Per
haec in templum Dei pectora humana consurgunt. Haec hominem praestant Angelum;
per haec Elias nescit mortem, relinquit terras, commoratur Angelis, convivit
Deo; and terrenus hospes supernas possidet mansiones -- Iejunium illum levavit
ad coelum; and purificato sic corpori ignei currus addixit obsequium --
Iejunium, fratres, scimus esse Dei arcem, Christi castra, murum spiritus,
vexillum sidei, castitatis signum, sanctitatis trophaeum, says Chrysologus, (
Ser. 12, 43, and 166.) These things [Fasting, Alms, and Prayer] extinguish
vices, render bodies chaste, and hearts pure; peace to the members, and quiet
to minds. By these humane breasts are raised into a temple of God. These render
the man an Angel;, by these Elias knows not death, leaves the earth abides with
Angels, lives with God; and a stranger come from earth possesses the mansions
above -- Fasting lifted him up to heaven, and to his body so purified offered
the service of a fiery chariot -- Fasting, my brethren, we know to be the
Watchtower of God, the Camp of Christ, the Bulwark of the Spirit, the Ensign
of Faith, the Colors of Chastity, the Trophee of Sanctity Tertullian. lib. de
Patientia c. 10. Imprimis afflictatio carnis, hostia Domino placatoria per
humiliationis sacrificium -- Haec patientia corporis precationes commendat,
deprecationes affirmat, haec aures Christi aperit, severitatem dispergit,
clementiam elicit. -- Quod de virtute animi venit in carne perficitur. Et S.
Ambrose l. de jejunio and Elia c. 3. Iejunium Refectio Animae, cibus mentis,
vita Angelorum, culpae mors. It is (says S. Ephrem de jejunio c. 9) Vehiculum
ad coelum sut Eliae elim] bonae animae custodia [malae medicina] prophetas
suscitat, tentationes retundit [ad certamen inungit.]
Like sayings has S. Ambrose in his 25th Sermon. Castra enim nobis sunt nostra
jejunia, quae nos a diabolica oppugnatione defendunt. Denique stationes
vocantur, quod stantes and commorantes in eis inimicos insidiantes repellamus.
Castra plane sunt jejunia, a quibus si quis aberraverit, a spirituali Pharaone
invaditur, aut peccatorum solitudine devoratur -- Luxuriosum oppugnat inimicus;
ubi autem jejunum viderit, fugit, metuit, pertimescit, terretur pallore ejus,
debilitatur inedia, infirmitate prosternitur -- Tunc est fortis infirmitas,
quando caro tabescit jejuniis, anim^ puritate pinguescit. -- Tunc enim magis de
Deo cogitat, tunc judicium metuit, tunc vincit inimicum: Ait enim Salvator de
Diabolo: Hoc genus non ejicitur nisi in jejunio and orationibus. -- Videte ergo
quae jejunii virtus sit, quantam homini suo praestat gratiam, quod tantam
praestet alteri medicinam: quemadmodum proprium sanctifieet hominem, quod ita
purificet alienum. Fasting is our Camp and works, out of which if any man
wander abroad, he is set upon by the spiritual Pharaoh, and devoured by the
beasts of the wilderness. [Satan] the enemy fights the luxurious man, but when
he discerns him fasting, he flies, and fears, and trembles; he is terrified by
his paleness, his hands are weakened by His feeble knees, he is beat down by His
infirmity. -- Then is weakness strong, when the flesh is lessened by fastings,
and the soul fatned with purity -- Then does he more think of God, then fears
he his judgments, then overcomes his enemy; for our Savior has said
concerning the Devil: This kind is not cast out but by fasting, and prayer. --
Behold what virtue fasting has, what salutary grace it obtains to the man
himself, which affords such remedy and medicine to another. How does it
sanctify its proper subject, which so purifyeth another [by its pity made its
object]. But here we are to be remembered, that when such force is ascribed to
fasting, against the Devil, it is then only verified, when it is joined (as
here you may discern) with fighting, and striving against sin, with ceasing
from sins, the works of the Devil; for otherwise it renders us but more like
the Devil; For he watches perpetually, has his stations, and whole
night-vigils, he riots not, he eats not, he drinks not, but he cease not to
sin from the beginning; and that is his meat and drink for him and his. After
S. Ambrose I subjoyn Leo, another Holy Bishop in his (sermons of fasting.)
Praesidia militiae Christianae (sc. jejunia) etc. dilectissimi, sanctificandis
mentibus nostris atque corporibus divini* tus instituta, ideo cum dierum
temporumque curriculis, sine cessatione reparantur: ut infirmitatum nostrarum
ipsa nos medicina commoneat. -- His autem conversionibus (...) and omnes bonae
voluntatis affectus ad maturitatem totius virtutis enutriunt. The garrisons of
Christian warfare (fastings etc) my Beloved, were instituted of God, for the
sanctifying of our minds and bodies, which therefore are to be repaired with
the course and returns of days and seasons, that our remedy itself may put us
in mind of our infirmities. -- To these conversions (wherethrough they which
had been defiled by unchastity have shined in purity) through the providence of
Gods grace holy fasts have been added, which on certain days should require of
the universal Church the devotion of general observance; for although it be
lovely and laudable, that the single several members of Christ's body adorn
themselves by their own [private] offices, yet it is a matter of more excellent
performance, and of more sacred force, when the hearts of the community of the
Godly people concur in one proposed duty, that the Devil, to whom our
sanctification is a torment, be overcome not only by a part, but also by the
entire body together. -- For it behooveth not only the chief Prelates, or the
Priests of the 2d order, nor only the ministers of the sacraments [or Deacons]
but also the whole body of the Church be purged and cleansed. -- It appears
most manifestly, that among other the gifts of God the grace also of fastings
was given [to the Church] among all the institutions of Apostolical teaching,
which have flowed forth from the fountain of divine institution, there is no
doubt but that through the Holy Ghost influencing the Princes of the Church,
this observance was by them at first conceived, that the rules of all virtues,
should be, begun from the observance of Holy fasting. -- Whilst through
temperance, the pleasure of the outward man is diminished, the wisdom of the
inward man is strengthened; for neither is there the same vigor of heart under
a load of meat, which is under the lightness of fasting; nor can fullness
generate the same sense, which abstinence does. For when the flesh lusting
against the spirit, is overcome by the spirits lusting against the flesh, the
freedom of ghostly, health, and the soundness of freedom is obtained; that both
the flesh may be governed by the judgment of the mind, and the mind by the help
[and grace] of God. -- For fasting has ever been the diet of virtue; from
abstinence do proceed chaste thoughts, reasonable wills, salutary counsels; and
by voluntary afflictions the flesh dies unto lusts, and the spirit is renewed
unto virtue. -- Fastings give victory against concupiscence, repel temptations,
take down pride, mitigate anger, and nourish the affections of every good will
unto the maturity of entire virtue. Thus much from a few of the Latins. Nor
are the Greek Fathers short of the other. We will begin with S. Basil the
Great, in his 1st and 2d Sermon of Fasting; who thus writes: (...) (...).
Fasting is the symmetry of reason, the purity of the heart, the mother of
health, the Schoolmaster of youth, the ornament of the elder. -- An excellent
preservative of the soul, the bodies armourbearer, the weapon of gallant men,
the exercise of spiritual wrestlers, the decency of the city, the quiet of the
courts, the peace of the house -- There are Angels which in every Church write
all those that fast, neither dares the Insolence of Devils ought against such
as fast: -- and the Angels, the guardians of our life, do with more studious
labor abide with such, which have purified their souls with fasting. --
Fasting makes the young man sober-minded, the old man grave and reverend, the
most fit dress of women, a bridle for those who are in the flower of their age,
the custody of marriage, the nurse of virginity. -- Fasting is our assimulation
unto Angels. It transforms on a sudden all the city, and all the people into a
well ordered appearance -- It quiets the noise, it pacifieth the brawl; it
coerceth the trouble and tumult of the city. In the time of the Fast, what
lascivious company can have allowance? Filthy songs, and outrageous dances,
suddenly depart the city; being chased thence by fasting, as by an austere
judge Idem S. Basilius ibid. (...).
. In like manner S. Cyril of Alexandria in his 20. Hom. de Fest Paschal. says,
(...). And in his 1. Sermon. (...). (as S. Chrysostom has called it, (...).) Let
us receive that truly chaste and holy Fasting, the nurse of all good order, the
mother of sanctity, and the harbinger of a good will from above. -- Does not
fasting bring forth to us the Idea of all virtue? Fasting the Imitation of
Angelical conversation, the fountain of temperance, the beginning of
continence, the paring off of lasciviousness, the calm and serenity of our
souls: which was S. Chrysostom's word.

To conclude this: Fasting seems the flower of Temperance, the chastisement of
intemperance, the exercise of corrective justice on our selves, the cutting off
of occasion of injustice toward others, the understandings clearness, the
wills emendation, it is the body of piety, which serves the soul and spirit of
inward godliness; Beati qui lugent, Mat. 5. Blessed are they that mourn. After
all this it shall happily be demanded, what reasons can be assigned of these so
great Encomiastick praises of the work of Fasting, even rightly performed: I
answer 1st. negatively, such afflicting of ourselves by fastings, watchings,
lying on the ground, or in sackcloth, or the like, are not to be thought to be
given to God, for satisfaction to his Justice, in lieu of eternal punishment;
That Christ only could and did satisfy for; that is a debt which the Bridegroom
alone could and did discharge for his spouse, and for the children of his
Bride-chamber, and all who are called to the marriage-supper of the Lamb; he
has done it alone and of the people there was none with him. When there was
none to help, none besides to save, his own arm brought salvation, and He has
trodden the wine press alone ( Isai. 63.) 2dly Not for satisfaction to the
divine Justice, as if such selfafflictions were adequate to the temporal
punishments, either which God might, or happily would otherwise have laid on
us, if impenitent, or laid on us, even in some true degree penitent: for that
he well may, and has sometimes inflicted even death itself, even on his
children themselves truly penitent. For this cause many are sick and infirm
among you, and many are fallen asleep, (1 Cor. 11. 30.) But when we are judged,
we are chasten'd of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world V.
32. 3d ly Such will ever differ from temporal afflictions, which are part of
the curse of God upon the wicked, Christ having redeemed and freed us from the
whole curse, both eternal and temporal, and ^arn turned whatsoever remains
(...) affliction ^r ^hastisement unto blessing, (...) (...) (...) (...). ^. 4.
(...) qu^ ^am (...), Luk ^ 2^ Thus (...) me, I will not bring the evil in his
dates, 1 King. 21. 27-29. (that I mention not now Gods command in his Law: c.
16* 29-31. Ye shall afflict your souls -- Ye shall afflict your souls ^y a
statute for ever. And c. 23. 27-29, 32. Ye shall afflict your souls on the
ninth day of the mon^h at even, from even unto even shall ye celebrate your
rest -- Whatsoever soul it be that shall not ^e afflicted in that same day, he
shall ^e cut off from among his people.) Come we to the New Testament, I shall
need to allege but S. Paul, and S. James: S. Paul to the Corinthians 1 Epist.
9. v. ul. so fight I, not as one that beats the air; but I keep under my
body, and bring it into subjection, lest that by any means when I have preached
to others, I my self should become a castaway. And c. 11. 31. For if we would
judge our selves, we should not be judged. 2 Epist. 7. 11. This self-same
thing, that ye forrowed according unto God, what carefulness it wrought in you;
yea what clearing of your selves, yea what indignation, ((...)) yea what fear,
yea what vehement desire, yea what zeal, yea what revenge! ((...)) In all
things ye have approved your selves pure in this matter. S. James also c. 4. 8,
9, 10. Draw nigh to God -- Purify your hearts -- Be afflicted, and mourn, and
weep; Let your laughter be turned into mourning, and your joy into heaviness:
Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you up. Of the
Ancient Doctors Interpretation of such Texts* I shall allege one clear one for
many: S. Basil Hom. in Psalm. 114. brings in David, saying, (...) (...). What
then did I do to be healed? For as much as I found out affliction and sorrow,
that which is wrought by repentance; for I devised (against my self) such
afflicting of my self from true repentance, as might bear some proportion to
the greatness of my sin: so waxed I bold to call on the Name of the Lord. But I
am to remember that our enquiry was of the reasons and cause (and not only of
the proof and truth) of Gods acceptance of this poor service. Such I humbly
conceive to be these following: 1st For the honor of the divine holiness of
God our Father, who is a God of most pure eyes, who without respect of persons
will judge every man that judges not himself. We therefore necessarily so
judge our selves by such self-afflictions and real acknowledgments, that his
not judging us may not possibly be by any thought, his accepting our persons to
the favoring of our sin; It is a stopping of the mouth of Blasphemy in the
enemies of God, when they shall see the sins of Gods children so condemned,
punished, and persecuted by the offenders themselves, and that in order to
regain the favor of God, and his sparing of them. And therefore surely those
sins much more condemned by God (for if our own hearts judge us so worthy to be
punished, God is greater and holier then our hearts.) But because also he is
most faithful in his promises of mercy (and his ways higher then man's ways)
we judging our selves, he will not judge us: we abhorring our selves in dust
and ashes, he will not abhor us.

2dly Though not for satisfying of Gods justice, yet for the satisfying of his
gracious will, who will accept much less, of corrective chastisements, when so
voluntarily by our selves adjudg'd, and inflicted on our selves, then
otherwise, 1 Cor. 7. 11. 30-32. For this cause many are sick, and infirm among
you, and many sleep; for if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged.
But when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be
condemned by the world.

3dly Therefore for the preventing of the hand of God executing his anger
against our sins in temporal judgments; So (beside the example which* S. Paul
told his Corinthians that they might have experienced; and the experience which
Ahab had, both above remembered,) David who knew as much of this matter as any
now, knew it to be possible, knew nothing, but it might to him then be, that
Gods hand might be prevented by his self-affliction, 2 Samuel 12. 22. While the
child was yet alive, I fasted and wept; For I said, who can tell whether God
will be gracious to me, that the child may live? Or yet for preventing the hand
of God chastising; in part, when the whole cannot be prevented by us, 2 Chronicles.
12. 7-9. The princes of Israel and the King humbled themselves; and they said,
the Lord is righteous; and when the Lord saw, that they humbled themselves, the
word of the Lord came to Shemaiah saying: They have humbled themselves;
therefore I will not destroy them, but I will grant them some deliverance, and
my wrath shall not be powered out upon Jerusalem by the hand of Shishak;
nevertheless they shall be his servants, that they may know my service, and the
service of the Kingdoms of the Countries. So Shishak King of Egypt came up
against Jerusalem, and took away the treasures of the house of the Lord, and
the treasures of the Kings house: He took all, he carried away also, etc. Yea
even when that cannot be prevented, neither in whole, nor in part, yet even so
shall this return into our bosom, for greater reward hereafter; ( Thy Father
shall reward thee openly, Mat. 6. 18.) or happily in this world also, upon such
our humiliation and through-submission to the recommended medicines of our
purgation, both by our own voluntary afflicting our selves, and by his hand
also punishing, to which we cheerfully submit, so Moses said, Deuteronomy. 8. 16. Who
fed thee in the wilderness with Manna, which thy Fathers knew not, that he
might humble thee, and that he might prove thee, to do thee good at thy latter
end.

4thly It is a great help and degree, and external part of our Contrition,
(proceeding from the inward) which consists of four holy passions in one
compound, viz. a holy sorrow for what is past, a holy anger and indignation at
our selves, a holy fear of Gods judgments, a holy hatred or detestation of our
sins: now all these four are exercised, as well as witnessed in these
self-afflictions, it is that (...), that (...), that wise indignation, and only
lawful revenge of a private Christian, mentioned by S. Paul, 2 Cor. 7. (and
(...) contains in it (...)) it is a work of justice corrective upon our selves.

5thly As it is a wholesome degree of our contrition, so is it also of our
Confession; It is not a verbal, but a real practical Confession in deeds, an
humble acknowledgement more then by words only, that we are by our sins
unworthy of Gods good creatures, and of his blessings (by denying unto our
selves even food, and pleasures, and rest, and ornaments; in fastings,
watchings, lyings on the ground in sackcloth, etc. and worthy of his
judgments, 1 Samuel 7. 6. It is also a due Confession, that we suffer justly,
what we do otherwise also perhaps suffer from Gods own hand. 2 Chronicles. 12. 5-7.
They humbled themselves, and said, the Lord is righteous.

6thly It is for our future emendation, and securing us from return to the same
sin again, which has caused us so to smart; the pleasure whereof we have been
enforced to avenge on our selves by so severe sharpness of pain, or affliction
for mortification of the flesh.

7thly Beside the fear of a repeated smart, otherwise also available it is, for
the better taking off our hearts from the love of the world, while we stand so
long by our own counsel sequestered from the contents, enjoyments, and
blandishments of the world, and flesh. And so the mind has better leisure, and
temper, and serenity to make a truer judgment, and estimate of the excellency
of heavenly things, and of the true bread from heaven, which endures unto
everlasting life: That the things which are seen, are eaten* and drunken, that
please the eye, or touch, or taste, are temporal; but the things which are not
seen, nor touched, nor tasted by the palate are eternal, its true what S. Austin
says, Major voluptas cordis, quam carnis, and what Leo the Great, Agnoscat
rationalis animus majores delitias menti datas esse, quam carni (Sermon. 4. de
jejun. pentecost.) Greater is the pleasure of the heart then of the flesh. Let
the reasonable soul (of man) acknowledge, that greater delights are by God
given to the mind of man, then to his body [to his understanding and will, then
to his senses and appetites] that a little time of being withheld, sequestered,
as it were, and intercepted from the continued drunkeness and hurry, and
bewitching of the deceitful pleasure of sin (by a retired day, or days of
fasting, meditation, and considering with ourselves where we are, what will be
our end, whither we are hasting) will help us easily to understand, that far
greater and sweeter, and more satisfying and delighting are the pleasures of
the Fathers kiss, the robe, the ring, the fatted calf, the mirth (of Saints and
Angels) in our Fathers house; not only then the husks, which drove the prodigal
to consider; but also then the riotous living, and the vomit, and mire
(filthier then the swines which he afterward fed) then the noise, and the
harlots with whom he devoured himself, his flesh, and his substance.

8thly With God who has promised to give grace to the humble, these
humiliations, for the very humility thereof, and there from, are a powerful
means to obtain his inward grace, and guidance, Ezra 8. 21. 23.

9thly By them we may procure deliverances and blessings to others also, some
way concerned with us (or more then us perhaps) in the dread of some judgment
of God upon sin, (as 2 Samuel* 12. 16. Dan. 9. 3. Mat. 17. 21. Psalm. 35. 13, 14,
Esther. 4. 16. Nehem. 1. 4, 6.)

Thus have you heard the (...), what is true religious Fasting: the (...) of
due moderation in Fasting: the (...), that being rightly performed, it is a
work which the Scripture has directed us to, the Church of the Saints ever
practiced, and God has chosen, and will reward openly, the (...), in those
days: lastly the (...), the reasons, why it is so accepted of God, and
profitable unto our selves: Ye have tasted, I trust, in some measure, that this
new wine which Christ would have preserved, (that you may be preserved
thereby,) is excellent and meet for our Masters house, and for your use; and
will drink pleasant, when kept, and you by habit acquainted with it. I know
that there will be still, who say, as the Pharisees and objectors did in this
place before my Text, (...), the business of Fasting is no part of
Christianity; that reduce the profit of it first to little (mistaking the place
1 Timothy 4. 8.
of S. Paul, which speaks not of fasting, but of another matter,) (as shall
hereafter be shown) and then to nothing.) First to be of no pleasing, unto God,
nor pleasing, or profitable to our selves; and then to be hurtful, because
Superstitious; if it return too constant upon us, and be prescribed by others
then by our selves, or such guides, as we have heaped up to our selves. To all
which I oppose in short the word and example of our Lord and Master; his word
of promise to this mean and least duty of Fasting, thy Father shall reward
thee, Mat. 6. 18. even openly, when thou do it secretly. His direction, this
kind comes not out but by prayer and fasting. His command and prediction in my
Text, (...), this wine must be put up: and (...), they shall, they will fast.
And this Text thus interpreted of the Churches Set Fasts, (and principally of
this Set Fast of Lent) by the Church it self in Tertullian ( supra page 28.) by
Petrus Archbishop of Alexandria and Martyr, by S. Austin, by S. Chrysostom, by
Innocentius primus, by Epiphanius, by Isidore Hispalensis, by Venerable Bede,
by Theophylact, and others. With what meekness, gentleness, and loving care our
Lord does here provide for the preservation of the vessels, old, and new, and
of the wine both old, and new, you may perceive.

For first it is to be observed, that our gracious Lord who first fasted
himself his Quadragesimal fast, and that for his people, the Church, which had
sins past to be fasted for, and need of arms and strength against temptations
to come, yet he would not command his Church any other times of fasting, then
such only as her own regard and affection toward her dear spouse in his
absence, and the memory of his dear love in his fasting, Agony, death, and
passion should command her. An express command, if S. Austin, and Socrates say,
they read not; it needed not; she will do it; In those days they will fast.

2dly The duty of fasting our Lord compares it but to (...), a piece to mend
up. If our own garment were not worn and rent, there would have been no need of
peicing, or (...); If men had continued in innocence and original
Righteousness, the work of painful fasting had been nothing useful at all; but
we are waxen old in our sins, and not forthwith capable perhaps, even of our
remedies, least our rent be made worse. Yea our Lord comparing it to new wine,
gives sentence that the old is better, that commandment which is both new, and
old, which you had from the beginning, and which is new in him, That ye love
one another. But both are to be preserved: our pieced garments also are to be
worn in our bride-grooms absence, although not in his presence.

3dly Observe that as all the Churches set, solemn, unchangeable fasts, her
weekly Stations, and her yearly Paschal fast of Lent (and if any will add the
Rogation-fasts also before his departure from her at the Ascension) are from
the taking away the Bridegroom from her: so from the presence of the
Bridegroom with her, or to her, are all the Churches Feasts (as those of
Christ's Incarnation, Nativity, Resurrection, or his entering into Heaven to
appear in the presence of God for her, and to prepare a place for her living in
his presence, at his Ascension,) or from the friends of the Bridegroom, their
being brought into his presence in the days of their several martyrdoms.

Yea and 4thly all the times prohibited by her, as to any set, or public
fasts, are only therefore prohibited as times of something of her Bridegrooms
presence; as the Lord's Day no fasting-day, for the return of his presence at
his Resurrection; yea and wheresoever in the Christian world saturday was a
time also exempted from being a fasting day, (except one only in the year) as
it was exempted generally in all the Oriental Churches, and in many places, and
the first ages of the Western likewise: it was not as some have thought from
condescension to the Ieus, but from the joy of that day after our Lords descent
into, and return from hell, at the long expected presence of Christ the
Bridegroom, theirs and ours, to the souls of all those that had departed out
of this world (through so many ages) in true repentance and faith; with whom
the Church on earth has and holds a communion of Saints, and a part in their
joy from that joyful time. And S. Austin thinks for another reason also by him
assigned, for the joyous signification of our eternal rest by that day of rest,
and of the rest of our flesh in hope after death, as Christ's did that day rest.

5thly I have my self above noted to you, that Fasting is not the principle,
but an Annex, (yet annexed by the advice of God's Spirit) in the words of my
Text, (...), an additament, a piece of a new garment to make up, and help the
defect of our infirmity, in due place, time and measure. Quod Deo non pro
justitia, sed cum justitia offerimus. I. Power.


6thly I have in this Discourse shown the necessary conjunction of Prayers with
our Fastings, as in the context of my Text they are by the objectors themselves
connected, Why do John's Disciples fast often and make Supplications? I have
showed you this new wine of Fasting, now by long continuance in the Christian
Church to be waxen old; so that now the bottles, that are broken, and fly
rather then they will contain this good wine, do but pretend either more
weakness or tenderness of Conscience, then they have, or for the time ought to
have; or more perfection and strength then they have in them (or thus are
likely to have;) as if they needed it not; their impotent refusal is not now
from the newness of the wine, nor always from the oldness of the bottles, but
from the cunning simulation of some Impostors, who take with them for pretense,
according to the crasty wile of the Gibeonites, wine-bottles old, and rent, and
bound up, old garments upon them, and clouted shoes upon their feet; crying
out, [weak and tender consciences;] and so desire to make a cunning League with
the Church. (...). This comes not from the nature of the wine, says
Theophylact upon my Text. And I may say [(...)] nor from the oldness of the
bottles, (...), as then in our Saviors instance at that time, and now (...),
from the Schism, which is resolved by any arts to make it self worse; it is not
from the weakness or tenderness, but the stiffness and hardness of the neck;
that shakes the yoke to cast it off. They cannot submit to the two words of our
Lords command of this duty in my Text. 1st (...), this new wine must be put up,
where it must be preserved: 2dly (...), in those days they shall Fast. They
are angry at the Stewards, or governors of the house of God, who are by their
office especially to take care, and do take care of our Saviors good will and
pleasure in his (...), that both be preserved; the duty of Fasting, and the
Vessels of Honor, that should contain this precious liquor, of which our Lord
takes this care. These are not the men, it seems, of whom our Lord in my Text
foretells, (...), they will Fast. I have declared at large, even of the 7 first
ages of the Church; when the wine was newer then now it is, (and of the
following ages, the opposers of this Fast of Lent, not only confess their
observance of it, but complain of their diligence therein:) I have declared, I
say, that the custom of the Bride her self, i. e. the Catholic Church of
Christ, in this time of her preparation of her self to be brought to the
Consummate Nuptials of the Lamb, has ever observed this Paschal Fast of Lent.

(...), In those daies] which what they are, I have not given you mine own
sense, but have, as we are bid, enquired of the former days, and prepared my
self, and you to the search of our Fathers, (as we are directed Job 8. 8.) For
that both we and our opponents are but of yesterday. The days will come, said
Christ; Are they already come? or are they not come, which Christ said should
come? And if not yet come; who can show us with any color, that ever they
shall come? But if they are come, they are to be found in the Churches practice
surely through 15 Ages. The taking away of the Bridegroom once for the sins of
the whole world, is certainly not now to come. And do not almost all the
Testimonies by me produced, found and settle the Paschal Fast on that Basis, of
the annual, solemn memory of Christ's Death and Passion; the Bridegrooms taking
away so precious to his Bride, the Church? S. Austin l. 4. de Baptismo. Co.
Denatist. c. 23. Cum. Whatsoever observance was not first instituted by any
plenary Council, as this was not, (let any one go about to show it, if they
think it was o^ can be shown) yet observed (...) by the whole Catholic Church,
came at (...) from the (...) ^n St Aust^ judgment. (...) (says he) (...) (...)
P^ssio* and (...), and (...) ^ (...), and (...) (...) (...) Spiritus Sanc^
ANNIVERSARIA SOLENN^TATE celebra^: Et siquid aliud (...) ^ccurrit, quod
servatur ab universa, quacunque se (...) Ecclesia. As that THE PASSION OF THE
LORD, his Resu^rection and Ascension, and the coming of the Holy Ghost from
Heaven, are celebrated by an anniversary so^mnity; And if there occur any other
^ch thing, (says he) which is observed ^y the Universal Church, (...) ever it
is d^ffused S^quid (...) ^ta per orbem (...) (...). N^m ^c qu^n ^ta ^ciendum
sit (...), (...) ^ insantae est, If any of (...) (...) the Church, the whole
Church through the world (...) (...) the (...) of ( viz through the many ages
of it) to d^spure against the doing of that, is the part ^ (...) insolent
madness.
But perhaps we should not thus expostulate with the frowardness appearing in
many, (I speak of the many late sects of this lately most unhappy Nation.) For
Theophilus the renowned Patriark of Alexandria, in his 1. Paschal Epistle has
foretold as much; when speaking of this Paschal Fast (as above) Provocantur
homines cum Ecclesia Primitivorum Dominicae Passionis Festa celebrare, Men are
invited to keep the celebrity of the Lords Passion with the Church of the
Primitive Saints, He adds; Non est, non est Haereticorum ulla solennitas: It
is not (says he) it is not the guise of Heretics to keep any of the Churches
solemnities. There is therefore one part of the context of my Text ( Luke 5.
30.) which I do not pretend ever to be able to satisfy. (...) ((...)) (...).
And the Pharisees murmured against the Disciples of Christ. It were enough for
the Jews this to oppose; But though there was no such Paschal Fast, before the
Pasch of the Jews, yet for all that we know there was authority sufficient, in
and under the New Testament to add this observance: Our Lord calls it (...), An
additament of a new garment. I have showed you the substance and circumstance
of the duty here prescribed; I have given you an account of the Fasting of
John, and his Disciples, of Christ our Lord, and his Disciples; of the Scribes
and Pharisees also (with their Disciples;) which are all the persons that
en^red the Drame of this Text: I have cautioned you (...), That we fast not in
hypocrisy liker unto the Pharisees; but I know none excused from the Duty it
self, but such only whom those words of Christ may in some sense reach, (...)
They cannot fast. Of all other good Christians he has said, In those days
they shall fast, they will fast. He said it, I say, who both could command them
what should be their duty to do, and could foresee what faithfully and
certainly they would do. Those days what they were, they could know; what they
took themselves to be commanded to do, and by whom, and on what days; and what
they have done, ye have heard. That this precious new-wine (even for the more
precious old wines sake) may not be poured out, spilt, or lost: for that cause
I have made this profusion of sand and labor; that no vessels old, or new may
perish, is my hearts desire and prayer.

FINIS.
Deo Gloria.
(...) The Appendix.
CHAP. I. Of the Churches Fasts in General.
AS Almighty God in the beginning created Man to glorify and serve him, both
in his body, with the bodily appetites and senses thereof, and in his spirit,
with its intellectual knowledge and will, both which are Gods, (1 Cor. 6. ult.
and c. 7. 34. and James 2. ult.) and Man soon departed from God in his first
Fall by a Rebellion in both those, br^king his first express Command, both to
gratify his own bodily appetite and sense, and his inordinate desire of being
made wise to know good and evil; (as it is written Genesis 3. 6. And when the
woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the
eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit thereof,
and did eat, and gave also unto her husband with her, and he did eat.) And as
in men's personal acquired corruptions men farther depart from God, by pleasing,
obeying, and fulfilling both the lusts of their flesh, (lusting against the
Spirit of God) and the vanity of their own blinded, fleshly and corrupt minds,
there through both bearing enmity with God, by their carnality, or law in their
members, leading them captive to the law of sin, (so as that they obey it in
the lusts thereof) and also alienated, and enemies in their mind by wicked
works: ( Col. 1. 21.) So in our Recurning unto our heavenly Father, we cannot
hope for reconciliation or peace with him, but by being renewed both in the
spirit of our minds, by a new and contrite heart and spirit, and also by the
mortification and subduing of our flesh, crucifying it with the sensuality,
affections and lusts thereof. Agreeable hereto the holy Church of Christ in her
begetting and bearing Children unto God, has according to the wisdom taught
her from God, conjoined together, both the earnest Preachings of Repentance,
(which is (...), a change of the mind, or renewing of the spirit or inward
man) and bodily fastings, or mortifications. And because the mind or spirit of
man cannot always be in its exaltation, nor continually in its troubled state
of contrite sorrowfulness; nor yet the flesh, or body bear either continual
feasts of fullness, nor (if we speak of the greater sort of Christian people)
perpetual fastings and severities: Therefore the Church, the common Mother of
us all, has (as she has been taught by the Holy Ghost) in all Ages prescribed
to her Children set times of feasts and fastings. Of her fasts we are now
farther to entreat: Fasting or (...), as it is commonly contra-distinguished to
(...), hunger, (2 Cor. 11. 27. (...), In hunger and thirst, in fastings often;
and chap ^. verse. 4. 5. (...), In necessities and distresses, -- in labors, in
watchings, in fastings.) In this acception of the word Fasting is a voluntary
denying our selves our wonted lawful refections and pleasures of the body. But
yet neither are all Fasts religious Fasts, nor all religious Fasts
Ecclesiastical or the Churches Fasts. Religious Fasting is a voluntary denying
our selves as to some measure of time, quantity, or quality, (or rather all
these together) our wonted, lawful, bodily refections and pleasures, and other
worldly delights, for better humiliation of the soul, and mortification, and
subduing of the flesh to the spirit, toward the obtaining mercy and favor from
God in some evil deprecated, or some spiritual, or temporal good thing sought.
But these religious Fasts are either private, of private Christians devotion,
or the joint public Fasts of the Church. Again, those religious private Fasts
are either such as particular Christians indict to themselves for the ends
above mentioned, or such as to particular persons are either enjoined from
their Bishop, or advised and directed them by the Priest upon their private
Confession. Those Fasts which they indict and choose unto themselves, are
either such as by the Bond of a Vow or Promise to God they have bound upon
their soul: or otherwise such as they purpose and perform in all freedom. Every
Vow and every binding Oath to afflict the soul, (if they were in their own
power, and the thing in their power, and they have not vowed to God a Sacrifice
of Robbery, ( de rapina holocaustum) depriving of strength and health their
bodies, which are not their own, but made for Gods service:) shall bind over
the soul and body to danger of Gods judgment, if not performed, Numb. 30. 2,
13. Eccles. 5. 4, 6. An Ecclesiastical Fast, or Fast of the Church is such
religious fasting, as above described, wherein the public Congregation (as
many as conveniently can) does join. Which, as all other agreeing or gathering
together of more Christians, in the name of Christ, touching any matter, has a
more special promise of prevailing with Almighty God ( Matthew. 18. 19, 20.) Leo
Sermon. 7. de Iejunio decimi mensis. Excellentioris tamen est actionis,
sacratiorisque virtutis, [ Iejunium, etc.] cum in unum propositum piae plebis
corda concurrunt. Ut ille (Diabolus) cui sanctificatio nostra supplicium est,
non solum a part, sed etiam a soliditate superetur. It is yet a work of more
excellent performance and of more sacred force, [ viz. Fasting, etc.] when the
hearts of godly people concur and meet in one for that holy purpose. That the
Devil to whom our sanctification is a punishment, may be vanquished not only
by a particular, but by the whole body of the people: who prevail more, when
both more spiritual duties meet together in each person, as Repentance and
Faith, Prayer, Fasting, and Alms, and the whole number of Christian people meet
in one, each armed with all those pieces of Armor.

CHAP. II. The distribution of the Fasts of the Church into their several
kinds in respect of their Institution.
THese Fasts of the Church (if we consider their institution and original) are
either such, as were at first derived to her from the Authority of the Apostles
of the Lord, (the first Teachers of the Church under Christ:) or in after time
from her Bishops the Successors of those Apostles, who did, (while the Church
had yet no Christian Kings or Queens, her nursing Fathers or nursing Mothers,)
indict such Fasts, either fixed or occasional: or, (when God had given to the
Church Kings to be her nursing Fathers) proclaimed from the Authority, piety
and devotion of Christian Kings and Magistrates, as by the Kings of Israel in
the Old Testament. But before such were as yet given to the Church, in the
Primitive Ages of the Church, that the Bishop wanted not power to enjoin such
Fasts, is evident from the testimony of Tertullian, of the usage and manner of
the Church in his time; who then being angry with the Church, that she denied
unto Montanus the new Prophet or Paraclete, (by him newly acknowledged) what
yet they granted to their Bishops, he thus bears witness to the truth of the
Churches so ancient practice lib de Iejuniis cap. 13. Quale est autem, ut tuo
arbitrio permi^tas, quod imperio Dei [ sc. per Montanum Prophetam ^jus] non
das? -- Been aut^m quod and Episcopi universae pl^bi mandare jejunia assol^nt,
n^n dico de industri^ stipium conferendarum, ut vestrae capturae est, s^d
interdum and ^x aliqua solicitudinis Ecclesiasticae cau^a. Itaque si and ex
hominis edicto and in unum omnes (...) agitatis, quomodo in nobis, etc.? But
how is it that you permit that to your own pleasure, which you yield not to the
command of God, [ viz. by his Prophet Montanus]? -- But it is well, that even
your Bishops are wont to enjoin Fasts to all the people, that I say not now,
how that is done on the purpose for making Collections of a^ntage to
themselves, as it is a common craft with you, [so did he standerously
calumniate the charitable Collections ^r the Poor on (...) days] but sometimes
also from so^e cause of care and so^tude of the Churches occasions moving them
thereto* If therefore even from a man's edict you all meet together in a joint
humiliation* how is it in us, etc.? As these were occasional, so other fixed,
set, and annual Fasts there were by the agreement of Bishops introduced, at
least, into some parts of the Church. As the Fasts of the Rogation-days Of
these Rogation-day^ you may see Sid (...) l ^. Epist (...) ^. (...) (...) ^.
Council. Aurelion. c. 29. as it is in Gratian. c. Rogation^s d^ Consecrat,
Distinct. 3* (...) (...) (...) of the 1^3 Sermon d^ tempore in St Austin.
began at first from Mamertus Bishop of Vienna about the year of 490. and
accepted soon after by most Bishops and Churches of the West; but as is
probable at first, some while before Easter, (and not after) (...) a stricter
time of Fasting within some of the forty days of Abstinence. Other such set and
annual Fasts introduced by such agreement of Bishops, as was allowed by the
good will and pleasure of their Princes, were those anteferiales vigiliae, the
Eves before certain Feasts or Holy Days, which upon inconvenience found in the
more ancient Night-service, and Watches, (by reason of the wickedness of later
times) were by the Churches wisdom, converted (first in the Council of
Eliberis) from proper Vigils into (...) jejunia, or lesser Fasts. Of these Eves
^ept Fasts the first mention that ^ meet with is in St. Gregory Nazianzen in
his Ora^ upon the Festival day of St. Cyprian, where he wills the people to
bring to Church with them on the morning of that Holy Day (...), emptiness of
the body [ viz. from the Eves Fast] the elevation of their souls, and virgins
the contempt of their flesh. Next Inn^ntius ad Epis^pum Braccarensem. Omnium
Apostolorum vigiliae sunt in observatione jejunii celebrandae, praeter vigilias
Philippi and Iac^bi, and I^nnis Evang^listae, Sanctorum quoqu^ vigiliae, etc.
The Vigils of a^l the Apostles are to be celebrated with the observance of
Fasting, except the Vigils of Philip and James [because it always falls within
the fifty days of the Churches solemn rejoycing] and of St. John the
Evangelist, because always with Christmas, and St. Stephen's day next before
it. The Eves of Saints days also Fasts, etc. These were brought in i^ imitation
of the one more ancient and most solemn Vigil of the Eve before Easter, (...);
in imitation whereof also the Churches of Spain first of all (for where is it
to be read of before the Council of Eliberis in Spain, Can. 21.?) And afterward
the Roman and others converted the every-weeks Vigil of the Lords day, viz.
Saturday, (as Leo often witnesses in his Sermon, that Saturday was observed in
his time as a Vigil only, and not a Fast) into a weekly Fasting-day, in the
place of the Wednesday, or fourth day of the Week, which from the beginning had
been that. But our main purpose is to enquire of such of the Churches Fasts, as
were in their Original Apostolical, and from the beginning, of universal
practice. They are of two sorts, either such as were delivered to the Church by
Tradition of Precept, as from the Apostles; or by Tradition of counsel and
recommendation only from the Apostles to the free devotion of Christians.
Those of Tradition of Precept first, whether for some determined time of the
year, as the Paschal Fast of Lent, the Spring-fast next before the Feast of
Easter, which Easter was celebrated annuo circulo in mense primo, says
Tertullian, lib. de Iejun. cap. 14. (...), as others witness, annually in the
first month close upon the Vernal Aequinox, and so much only [the
Spring-fast] by Lent-fast is signified, or other often recurring Fasts for the
substance, from the Apostles to be observed constantly, though without a time
determined by them. As the Fasts of the Church before her public solemn
Ordinations, though for the times of the year, wherein both those Fasts and
Ordinations should be kept, the Church was left to determine her self; which
she has wisely distributed into four Seasons of the Year, so sanctifying to
her self both her hopes and partakings of the fruits of the earth, and more
principally her Spiritual laborers sent forth into Christ's harvest. Of such
solemn calling on God preparatory to Ordination, we have the example, first of
Christ our Lord himself in the Gospel, Luke 6. 12, 13. where we read, that in
the Eve or Vigil before the day, which he designed for choosing out of his
Disciples twelve, which he would name Apostles, (...), And it came to pass in
those days, that he went out into a mountain to pray, and continued all night
in prayer to God. And when it was day he called unto him his Disciples: and of
them he chose twelve, whom also he named Apostles. This grand example of the
Lord, the Apostles of the Lord also are recorded in holy Scripture to have
followed, Act. 14. 23. And when they, the Apostles Barnabas and Paul v. 14. had
ordained them ^lders in every Church having prayed with fastings, they
commended them unto God, viz. (...), with fastings plurally, not (...) only,
and having so prayed and Fasted before the Ordination, as the words may well be
understood; The same was also practiced by the Prophets and Teachers of the
Church at Antioch, before that, Act. 13. 1 -- 3. Then having Fasted and Prayed,
and having laid on their hands, they sent them away. If now the Church shall
witness, that she has also received this order of Fasting before her
Ordinations, from the Apostles, and their times, the very examples but now
alleged above may render it not difficult for us to believe it. Leo the first
and Great Sermon. 2. de Iujunio Pent. Dubitandum non est, Dilectissimi, omnem
observantiam Christianam eruditionis esse Divinae, and quicquid ab Ecclesia in
Consuetudinem est Devotionis receptum, de Traditione Apostolica, and de Sancti
Spiritus prodire dictrina -- Manifestissime patet inter caetera Dei munera
Iejuniorum quoque gratiam, quae hodiernam Festivitatem indivisa subsequitur,
tunc fuisse donatam -- Ideo, dilectissimi, secundum eruditionem Spiritus Sancti
per quem Ecclesiae Dei omnium virtutum collata sunt dona, suscipiamus alacri
fide solenne jejunium. It is not to be doubted, most beloved, but that all the
Churches observance is of Gods teaching, and whatever has been received by the
Church, [viz. Universal] in the custom, [ viz. constant and perpetual] of her
Devotion comes from Tradition Apostolical, and from the teaching of the holy
Ghost. -- It most evidently appears, that amongst the rest of the gifts of God
the Grace also of fastings, which immediately follows this present Festivity,
[ viz. of Pentecost] as does the second Ember-week in the year] was then, [
viz. at the sending down of the holy Ghost upon the Apostles] given to the
Church. -- Therefore, my dearly Beloved, according to the teaching of the holy
Ghost, by whom the gifts of all virtues are conferred upon the Church of God,
let us undertake with cheerful Faith the solemn Fast. And again Sermon. 4. upon
the fast of the same Ember-week: Inter omnia dilectissimi, Apostolicae
instituta doctrinae quae ex divinae institutionis font manarunt, dubium non
est, inst^uente in Ecclesiae principes Spiritu Sancto hanc primum ab eis
observantiam fuisse conceptam, ut Sancti observatione Iejunii omnium virtutum
regulas inchoarent. Amongst all the Institutes of Apostolical teaching, which
have flowed forth from the fountain of Divine Institution, there is no doubt, o
most beloved, but that this observance was first conceived by those Princes of
the Church, the holy Ghost influencing them, that they should begin the
regulations of all virtues which the observation of holy Fasting. And in his
seventh Sermon. on the Fast of the tenth Month (another of the Ember-weeks) he
thus speaks: Praesidia militiae Christianae (sc. jejunia, etc.) delectissimi,
sanctificandis mentibus nostris atque corporibus divinitus instituta, ideo cum
dierum temporumque curriculis sine cessatione reparantur; ut infirmitatum
nostrarum ipsa nos medicina commoneat. These guards of our Christian warfare, (
viz. Fastings, etc.) [as he spoke of the Fast of the Ember-week.] were
Instituted of God, for the sanctifying our minds and bodies; therefore are
they renewed incessantly with the course of days and times, that the medicine
it self [ recurring] may admonish us of our infirmities. So in the eighth Sermon.
Hujus observantiae utilitas, dilectissimi, in Ecclesiasticis praecipue est
constituta jejuniis, quae ex doctrina Spiritus Sancti, ita per totius anni
circulum distributa sunt, ut lex abstinentiae omnibus sit ascripta temporibus:
siquidem jejunium vernum in Quadrage sima, aestivum in Pentecoste, Autumnale in
mense septimo, hyemale autem in hoc, qui est decimus, celebramus; The utility
of this observance, my Beloved, is especially seated in Ecclesiastical Fasts;
which by the teaching of the holy Ghost are so distributed through the circle
of the whole year, that there is a law of abstinence affix*d to all the four
seasons: For So Much as the Spring-fast we keep in Lent, the Summer-fast in
Whitsunweek, the Autumn-fast in the month of September, the Winter-fast in
this month of December. So that punctually the same four Ember-weeks, or
fasts, and also the following solemn Ordinations are in those four self-same
seasons, and appointed times, in this Church of England, which were in the
Church more then 1200 years since. In the same place he adds of those Fa^s
before the Ordinations. Intelligentes divinis nihil vacuum esse praecept^s,
understanding that nothing, [ viz. of such things] is left devoid of the Divine
precepts. But as I above yielded, though the Church be guided always by the
Spirit of God in some sense, yet the a^ing of those Fasts and Ordinations to
those determinate times, (...) be thought, was not of Apostolical Tradition,
(as the Fasts to be ^fore the Ordinations were,) ^or after all this said by
Leo, we she ^inde him also confess as much in his fifth Sermon. de Iejun. d^mi
^ensis: Huic autem operi, dilectissimi, cum ja^ opp^rtuna sint tempora, h^c
nunc praecipue aptum est atque conveniens, in quo S. Patres, n^tri divinitus
inspira^i d^cimi ^nsis sauxere ^unium, ut omniu^ ^ructuum collectione conclus^
(...) Deo abstinenti^ (...). For this work, my Beloved, as all times are
opportune, (...) is this most agreeable and fit; in which our holy Fathers
inspired from God have ^ecreed the Fast of the tenth month to be, that the
g^ing of all the fruits being concluded, a reasonable abstinence [by us] should
be dedicated to God.

Before Leo the Great's time, Athanasius the Great in his Apology for his
flight mentions, how the people in the Week after the holy Pentecost, having
finished their Fasts went to pray, etc.

We proceed now to such Fasts of Tradition Apostolical, as are by Tradition of
Counsel only, and recommendation, not of Precept: such as are, first, those
which were ever in the Christian Church from the Apostles times, the Stations
of the fourth and sixth day of the Week, ( Wednesdays and Fridayes) wont to be
Fasted unto the ninth hour, our three a Clock in the Afternoon; after the
example of Cornelius's Fast, called Stationum semi-plena jejunia. And secondly
such is some degree of the extent of the Fast of Lent, as the Abstinence to be
continued throughout forty days: the proper Fast of somewhat like the measure
of three weeks, in Imitation of Daniel's Fast: the stricter and more rigorous
Fast of all the six days in the last Great Week; all which seems to have been
ever in the Church from the Apostles times, as Tradition Apostolical, but ex
arbitrio, non ex praecepto Apostolorum praestanda* as shall be shown in the
seventh Chapter. Here we will speak of the former, the stations of the fourth
and sixth days of the Week; For which (omitting that of Ignatius ad
Philippenses.) I first allege the Churches practice in Tertullian's time,
which he contending with her witnesses, and takes as a thing confessed by her
to argue from* lib. de Iejuniis c. 13. Ecce enim convenio vos, and praeter
Pascha jejunantes citra illos dies, quibus ablatus est sponsus, and Stationum
semi-jejunia interponentes, and vero interdu^ pane and aqua victitantes, ut
cuique visum est. Denique respondetis haec ex Arbitrio agenda, non ex Imperio,
And c. 10. Aeque stationes nostras, ut indictas [h. e. praecepto omnibus
praestitutas] quasdam vero and in serum constitutas novitatis nomine accusant.
Hoc quoque munus and ex Arbitrio obeundum esse dicentes, and non ultra nonam
detinendum, [ viz. public in Ecclesia] de suo sc. more. Non quasi respuamus
nonam, cui and quarta sabbati, and sexta, plurimu^ fungimur -- Venit enim horae
nonae observatio de exitu Domini. Itaque in eam usque horam celebranda pressura
est, in qua a sexta co^tenebratus orbis de^uncto Domino lugubre fecit officium,
ut tunc and nos revertamur ad jucunditatem, cum and mundus recepit claritatem.
And c. 2. Quae and ipsae [ stationes] suos quidem dies habeant, quartae feriae,
and sextae, passive tamen current, neque sub lege praecepti. From which witness
we observe these confessed truths; 1. That both the Church, and the Montanists
did then, and had before observed these stations of the fourth and sixth day;
2. That the Church answered so to his Accusation of her; that those stations
she did indeed, and would still recommend to her Children, but ex Arbitrio, non
ex Imperio agenda, ut passive currentia, non ut sub lege^ praecepti, as matter
of Counsel, not of Precept, which they that do not observe, sin not, but they
do better, that observe: And therefore she accused Tertullian and the
Montanists of Novelty, for enjoining them by Precept; as well as for producing
them to the evening beyond the three a clock in the Afternoon, as by Tradition
they both had received.

3ly. That her days of public Fasts were constituted and prescribed unto her
already by God in the Gospel, viz. these in which the Bridegroom was taken
away, and hos esse jam solos legitimos jejuniorum Christianorum [ dies] that
Tertullian objected, to the Church, that she, who stood upon it, that she had
received those, and no other days or ^asts from the Apostles, but those only,
1. On which the Bridegroom was taken away, (for the Church had replied, c. 2.
Apostolos nullum aliud imponentes jugum certorum, and in commune omnibus
obeundorum jejuniorum.) And that she yet observed those stations, which
Tertullian thought in no sense were the days, on which the Bridegroom was
taken away. When yet both the days themselves did, and the hour of breaking up
the Fast did, in Tertullian's own acknowledgment, derive it is observation from
the Bridegrooms taking away; ^or so are his words, c. 10. Not as if we refuse
the ninth hour; for the observation of that hour comes from the Lords departure
out of the world, or giving up of the Ghost. Therefore they were in sadness
till that hour, and then did partake of the Refection; as the world was in
darkness from the sixth hour to the ninth, and then light returned. Not many
years after Tertullian, Clemens of Alexandria in his seventh book of Str^mata
thus speaks: (...) He knows the mysteries also of the Fasts of these days,
of the fourth day of the week, and of the day before the Sabbath [which are
called Wednesday and Friday.] Now the riddle or mysteries of those days which
he mentions is but the reference to the Bridegroom's taking away; as S.
Augustine and Epiphanius will anon tell us. And so (...), is in the same sense
spoken, as S. Ambrose above calls the days of Lent, dies Mysticos, days of
mystical meaning; soon after that Clement Origin, hom. 10, in Lev. 16. Nec hoc
tamen dicimus, ut abstinentiae Christianae fraena laxemus; Habemus enim
Quadragesimae dies jejuniis consecratos, habemus quartam, and sextam septimanae
dies, quibus solenniter, jejunamus. We have, says he, after the forty days
Fast of Lent, the fourth and sixth days of the week, on which we solemnly
Fast, and those he recounts not as prescribed by this, or that Church, or of
this, or that Age, but as part of the Christian Abstinence. Then Peter also the
Archbishop of Alexandria in his 15 Can. ratified by the sixth General Council,
thus declares the Churches Fast: (...). Nor can any accuse us for observing
the fourth and sixth day of the week, in which we had been with great reason
commanded to Fast, according to Tradition; on the fourth day, by reason of the
Council held by the Jews for the betraying of the Lord, etc. What Tradition,
what command he means, you shall now hear; The Tradition, Epiphanius will tell
us, was from the Apostles, and the Command from the Successors of the
Apostles, the 69. Can. Apostolic* made by Primitive Bishops, the early
Successors of the Apostles, does witness, (...). If any Bishop, Priest, or
Deacon, any Reader, or Singer Fast not the Holy Lent, or Fast not the fourth or
sixth day of the week, let him be deprived, except he were hindered by weakness
of body. And if a laick, let him be separated; a Canon, which might concern
their times only. Now whence the Tradition of those days came, we shall hear
from Epiphanius, in his book de Expositione Fidei, c. 22. (...). On the
Wednesday and Eve of Saturday, we are in fasting unto the ninth hour. -- And
the Apostles have delivered that on these days Fasts be performed, and that
which is written be fulfilled, that when the Bridegroom shall be taken from
them, then shall they Fast in those days, And in his Haeres. 75. (...)
Sequitur ibid. (...). and in expos. fidei the same Epiphanius says, (...) and
ibid. (...) [(...)] (...).
Who is there, that does not confess and agree in all the climates of the
world, that the fourth day and the Eve of Saturday is a defined Fast in the
Church? Only, says he, elsewhere in the end of his third book of Haeres.
(...). In the day of the manifestation of Christ in the flesh, when the Lord
was born, it is not lawful to Fast, though it fall out on the fourth or sixth
day of the week. S. Hierom shall be our next witness in his preface upon the
rule of S. Pachomius: Bis in hebdomada quarta and sexta sabbati ab omnibus
jejunatur, excepta Pentecoste. The Fast is observed by all twice in the week,
on the fourth and sixth day thereof, except within the solemn fifty days. Their
Exceptions both are to be put together. The same ground of the Fast with
Epiphanius, S. Austin gives us Epist. 86. ad Casulanum. Cur autem quarta and
sexta feria maxim jejunet Ecclesia, illa ratio reddi videtur, quod considerato
Evangelio, ipsa quarta Sabbati, quam vulgo quartam feriam vocant, concilium
reperiuntur ad occidendum Dominum fecisse Iudaei -- Deinde traditus est ^a
nocte, quae jam ad sextam Sabbati, qui dies Passionis ejus manifestus est,
p^rtinebat. Now why the Church especially Fasts on the fourth, and sixth days
of the week, that reason seems to be rendered, that the Gospel being
considered, on the fourth day of the week the Jews are found to have held a
council for the slaying of the Lord Who was afterward delivered up, on that
night which belongs to the sixth day of the week, which manifestly was the day
of his Passion. (...), says Epiphanius, Ratio reddi videtur considerato,
Evangelio, says S, Austin. Apolloniu^ ap^d Gra^ianum Distinct. 4. cap. 32.
Iejunia vero legitima. i. e. quarta and sexta feria non sunt selvenda, nisi
g^andis al^ que necessi^s fuer^. qu^d quarta feria Iadas de Traditione Domini
cogitave^it, and feria sexta (...) est Salvator. The two weekly days of the
Jews were the second, and fifth: of the Maniches, were the first, and second*
of the Christians, were the fourth, and sixth days of the week.
These are the several Fasts of the Church according to their several Originals
and Institutions.

CHAP. III. Of the several Fasts of the Church, (or also other Religious Fasts)
as to their measure of Time.
THe extension of the Fast, as to the persons performing it, was either a Fast
of the whole Catholic Church, as it were at one time performed by all
Christian people, or particular Fasts of particular Churches; or individual
Fasts of single persons: But the extension of Fasts as to the time, (for so much
as the flesh which needs that medicine, is not able to bear it continued
perpetually, or for a very long time; if we speak of the ordinary strength of
Christians) has been in diverse proportions bounded out. There is first the
semi-jejunium stationum, as Tertullian calls it, Cornelius's Fast till three a
clock in the afternoon; such is called in Typico S. Sabae (...). Venit enim
horae nonae observatio de exitu Domini, as we heard Tertullian grant to the
Church but now. There is secondly a proper, entire Fast of one day unto the
Evening, 2 Samuel 1. 12. 1 Samuel 7. 6. and Judges 20. 26. And all the Children of
Israel, and all the People went up, and came into the house of God, and wept,
and abode there before the Lord, and fasted that day until the Evening, and
offered Burnt-offerings and Peace Offerings before the Lord. According to which
Pattern the Christian Church, in the Fasts of Lent, in those days when they
fasted until the Evening, celebrated their commemorative Sacrifice, viz. of the
holy Eucharist, in the Evening, next before their Officium vespertinum,
'betwixt three a clock and six at night; (as on the other Fasts of their
stations, which they brake up at three a clock, they offered up their
commemorative Sacrifice next also before their Evening Service, but betwixt the
hours of twelve and three) Such was also Daniel's Fast conjoined with
supplications, sackcloth and ashes, and continued until the time of the
Evening Oblation, Dan. 9. 3. 21. The Angel of God putting this period of the
Evening to his Fast, as an Angel of God did at the ninth hour unto Cornelius's
Fast, Acts 10. Amongst the set Fasts of the Church, certain, especially in
Lent, and those also before the Ordinations, (which as appears by the Sermons
of Leo, were wont then to be kept but two days, the fourth and sixth of the
week) were then extended unto the Evening. A third sort of fasts, as to the
extent of time, is that which the Greeks called (...), or Superpositio, when
they added to the day the night following also, or at least the time unto the
Cock-crowing: So holy David, 2 Samuel 12. 16. He fasted a Fast, and went in, and
lay all night upon the earth; and as the words of the Text may import,
pernoctavit in jejunio. As the Sir. and Arab. did read the Hebrew in their
Copy. Iejunevit jejunium in quo and pernoctavit (...) not as now (...)
Fourthly, there is a fast of two days continued, such as it seems was in the
Church by some used at their Paschal fast, says Irenaeus, and Dionysius, The
two days of the Disciples sorrow, when their Master was taken from them. Of
which, as the Prophet Hosea seems to have given before some intimation, chap.
6. 2. After two days he will revive us, and the third day he will raise us up,
and we shall live in his sight. Then shall we know, etc. His going forth is
prepared as the morning; So Tertullian also describes the Churches more
instant exercise of fasting on those two days of our Saviors remaining in
death, lib. de Iejun. cap. 14. Cur jejuniis Parasceuen? Quanquam vos etiam
sabbatum, si quando continuatis, nunquam nisi in Pascha jejunandum, secundum
rationem alibi redditam. But more expressly Dionysius, (...) [(...)] (...)
[(...)] (...) [(...)] (...). Nor do all keep the six days of the fasts [ viz.
those of the great Week] equally or alike; but some indeed pass them all over
continuing without food [either wholly, or on each day to the next
Cock-crowing] But others, two, [ viz. Good Friday, and Easter-Eve] again others
three [the Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday] and others four [adding Thursday]
The two or three days fast we meet with in St. Hierom in his fifteenth Epistle
( ad Marcellum) of Asella a very holy Virgin, Cum per omnem aetatem jugi
jejunio pasceretur, biduo, triduo que sic permanens, tum vero in quadrage sima
navigii sui vela tendebat. As in all her life, she almost continually fasted,
abiding so sometimes two, sometimes three days fasting: so especially in Lent,
etc.

Fifthly, a three days fast in Old and New Testament is renowned, Esther 4. 16,
17. Go, gather together all the Jews, which are found in Shushan, and fast ye
for me, and neither eat nor drink three days, night nor day. I also and my
Maidens will fast likewise, etc. So Mordecai went his way, and did according to
all that Esther had commanded him. Such (as is supposed) was also the Ninevites
fast; and such was St. Paul's fast at his Conversion, Acts 9. 9. And he was
three days without sight, and did neither eat nor drink. The same fast of three
days we have in the History of godly Judas Maccabaeus, 2 Mac. 13. 10-12. That
two days, and this three days fast is by some religiously also emulated, who
not able to continue so long fasting join together so many several days of
fasts; though taking some food each Evening.

Sixthly, we often meet with the mention of a five days fast, and such each
weeks fast in Lent, as St. Chrysostom for Constantinople, and St. Basil for
Caesarea does witness, (besides that which Socrates mentions of the (...),
three five days fasts with interval of many days betwixt.) St. Basil in his
first Sermon of fasting days, (...), a fifth fast proclaimed, (...). Lay not in
before hand five days riot, as if you would avenge before hand the days of the
fast.

Seventhly, the next honorable fast is that of seven days, as that of the men
of Iabesh Gilead, for Saul and his sons, they fasted seven days, 1 Samuel ult.
ult. Like Ioseph's mourning for his father seven days, Genesis 5. 10. Like as
Ezechiel also sat with them of the Captivity, and remained astonished amongst
them seven days; And it came to pass at the end of the seven days, that the
Word of the Lord came unto him, Chap. 3. 15, 16. So as also Job's three friends
having rent every one his Mantle, and sprinkled dust upon their heads, sat
down with him upon the ground seven days and seven nights, and none spoke a
word unto him, Job 2. ult. Yea the Lord said unto Moses of Miriam, Number. 12. 14.
If her father had but spit in her face, should she not be ashamed seven days?
let her be shut out from the Camp seven days. This seven days fast is answered
by the Christians whole weeks fast, in their great week, except in that the
festival day of Easter (yea even every weekly Lord's Day) has a greater
privilege of exemption from fasting, then the Jewish-sabbath then had. Our
(...), six days of the Fasts, mentioned by Dionysius of Alexandria, above in
Epistola ad Basilidem, are to the Christians instead of a seven days Fast. So
measured they their (...) by (...).

Eighthly, Daniel's three weeks fast was, as I said, diverse ways emulated by
the Christians in Lent; some after that example, amongst the forty days of
Abstinence more strictly fasting the three weeks next before Easter, (excepting
the Lords days, or also two of the Saturdays) some selecting to themselves one
and twenty days dispersedly throughout the Lent, (as Leo Sermon de jejun.
Quadrages.
mentions the second, the fourth, the sixth of each week) some fifteen days
interpreting the three weeks with their abatement of two in each, (Saturday and
Sunday) of this we have Sozomen's testimony lib. 7. cap. 19. (...) [(...)]
(...). Some others fast three weeks of days here and there selected within the
compass of the six or seven weeks fast of Lent; but others join for their fast
three weeks of days together next before the feast of Easter; others fasting
two weeks, as the followers of Montanus, [besides some others.] For so much we
may take Socrates's witness also, (because in this agreeing with others) lib.
5. cap. 22. (...). Some in Rome fast three weeks before Easter conjoined
together, excepting the Sabbath and Lords day in each week, (though Leo gives
us in his time their three weeks (...), viz. every other day, or three days in
each of almost seven weeks) Others beginning their fast seven weeks before the
Feast, fast only three several five-days spaces with a weeks interval betwixt
each: And this they meant also a three weeks fast. St. Chrysostom also is a
witness beyond exception in his sixteenth Homily ad populum Antiochen. (...).
It is the manner of all to ask touching Lent, how many weeks any one kept the
(...), and you may hear some say two, [ viz. beginning their fasts from
Passion-Sunday] but some three weeks, and some answering that they have fasted
all the weeks. All the 15, or 18, or ^1 days in emulation of holy Daniel's fast
in some sort or other.

Ninthly, the most renowned number was the forty days fast, of which we have
entreated at large; which most did aim at, either in strict fasting, as those
in Illyricum, and all Greece and Alexandria, as the last cited Author in the
same Chapter witnesses, or at least in continual abstinence, though not so
long fasting; as Leo supposes in the Romans in his time, and St. Ambrose in the
Christian people at Millan.

Tenthly, all days, but few festival days only excepted; such was Iudith's
fast, who fasted all the days of her widowhood, except the Sabbaths, New Mons,
Feasts, and solemn days, with their Eves that then were observed by the House
of Israel, chap. 8. 6. and some such we may suppose was that other religious
Widow Anna's fast in the Gospel, Luc. 2. 37.

Eleventhly, a continual uninterrupted fast, though not from all Meats, but
from all Bread of delight, and to a very small proportion; such was John
Baptist's Fast, and many Christian Anachorites.

CHAP. IV. How the Paschal or Lent-fast is, as has been shown, Apostolical.
THere are that bear the world in hand, that the Observation of any set, and
oft-recurring day, beside the Lords day, is superstitious, and contrary to the
Gospel's freedom, and at best but of humane Tradition. Who requiring of us an
express written precept for any such day or days, and having been lately by
many of the Sectaries convicted, as unable to produce any such express written
precept of God's in the New Testament for changing the seventh day of the old,
into the first day of the week, which we now observe, they have given them
occasion to cast off the observance of the first day of the week also. The
Churches interpretation of some Texts, (which are not evident and express
Precepts) and her witness of the Apostolical Tradition concerning the same, and
the Churches universal and perpetual practice, all this together they have
taught the Sectaries to be an unsufficient Warrant for the determination of any
day, or days. But we are not afraid to say, that upon those grounds above said,
we hold all obliged, as to the determination of the weekly first day, for the
Churches more public Assemblies; so also for an annual (beside the weekly)
memorial-day of Christ's Resurrection, called Pascha, or Easter day. (And so
our Paschal or Lent-fast preceding is not the only observance, that need's the
Churches interpretation and Tradition Apostolical) And touching this ^east of
Easter, we desire them to tell us their minds. We shall content our selves at
present, till that feast particularly be denied, to remind them of one only
Record, even out of their own Author Socrates, so often vouched by them
against the set feasts and fasts of the Church; whose witness here, where he
agrees in express terms with Eusebius, l. 3. de vit. Constantin. cap. 7, 18.
and Theodoret lib. 1. cap. 10. two sufficient witnesses of themselves, may
better be believed, than in what he reports contrary to them, as it happens
when the Opposers of our ^ast do vouch him. The Record is in Socrates, lib. 1.
c. 6. where he tells us, and truly, that in the Imperial public Letters of
Constantine, which were sent by him to the Churches in all the Provinces
throughout the whole Empire, the Emperor to the Churches thus wrote upon the
Result of all, or at least the greater part of the Bishops (invited from all
parts, and then assembled in that first and most sacred Ecumenical Council at
Nice; and that touching the most holy day of the Feast of Easter, ((...)) We
have received, says he, from our Savior another way of observing Easter, than
that of the Jews.) (...). ^or the course of observing Easter, which is
propounded to our most holy Religion, is the legitimate and becoming course,
which he calls afterward, (...)* and above (...). The truer order which we ( i.
e. the Christian Church) have kept from the first day, wherein Christ our Lord
who is our Passover suffered [ viz. ever since Christ's very suffering] until
this present year; the same observance also to be extended unto the Ages to
come, [the Passion and Resurrection of our Lord being close together, as it
were one Season and Solemnity, and coming under the one name of Pascha;
therefore also of the principal day of our Paschal-fast, nearly preceding the
feast of Easter] He proceeds in the same Imperial Letter to say, (...). For our
Savior has delivered one Solemnity, viz. the day [or time] of his most holy
passion, the day of our freedom, [ viz. together with the day of his
Resurrection] and would that his Catholic Church should be one. And this there
he calls (...). So great a matter, and such a feast of our Religion. And (...).
The most holy day of Easter, the feast from which we have received the hope of
immortality. And that before this feast there did precede not only the fast of
Good Friday, but more fasts, more set and appointed fasting days, (which make
up our Paschal, or Lent fast) you may see in the following part of that
Imperial Epistle, where twice he adds of something preceding that feast, (...),
and within few lines, (...). Vacant attendance upon fasts, and determinate
fasts. Thus far Constantine (Socrates himself recording it) from the Bishops
assembled in the first general Council, as the Representative of the Pastors
of the whole Christian world. In this Question therefore now, betwixt us and
our Brethren, Whether our Lord himself did, or did not, deliver to the Church
the Annual Memorial of his Passion and Resurrection, in the set fast and feast
appointed therefore? Whether this order and way the Church had, or had not,
received from our Savior that she should observe the Paschal Solemnity in a
different manner from the Jews? Whether that order they had, or had not, kept
from the very year it self of our Saviors Passion, and Resurrection, u^o the
time of that Council to be transmitted to all posterity? Whom shall we believe?
a few men of this or yesterdays Age (laying hold upon some saying of Socrates,
against the agreement of him with all other Historians) or those three hundred
and eighteen most renowned Fathers of the first and most sacred Ecumenical
Council, that ever was held? If now their own Socrates (though in conjunction
with Eusebius and Theodoret) displease them, they should yet consider, that the
matter of fact and Tradition from the Apostles times above related concerning
the annual set feast of Easter was not denied but freely consented to, by the
very Novatians; the adversaries of the Church, that then lived; Acesius the
great Novatian Bishop freely acknowledging to Constantine, (as the same
Socrates also acknowledges) that what the Council had defined concerning the
time of the Feast of Easter, was not any new thing, but what himself had
received from the elder time, and even from the beginning, from the times of
the Apostles: (...), Socrat. l. 1. c. 10. If neither the holy Fathers of that
first Council, from whom Constantine learnt and received what was to be given
in order to all the Churches, nor the Sects differing from the Church be to be
believed, before the Negative of some few in our age (upon pretense too of
Socrates;) what will they say to one of the seven Churches in Asia, to whom our
Savior wrote, Apoc. 2. and that with the greatest honor and commendation of
them, above all the rest, the Church of Smyrna, in an Epistle of hers in
Eusebius. l. 4. c. 15. (written about 69 years after the Epistle of our Lord
sent to her?) which Epistle thus begins: The Church of God which inhabiteth in,
and about Smyrna to the Church in Philomilium, and to all the Diocesses of the
holy Catholic Church in every place Mercy, peace, and the love of God the
Father, and of our Lord Jesus Christ be multiplied. In this Epistle she tells
the Churches of all the world, first, that the day of the carrying of Saint
Polycarp, [who had been ordained Bishop of Smyrna by S. John the Apostles own
hands] to the place of his Trial, and Martyrdom, was (...), on the day of the
great Saturday, [or Saturday of the great week.] So that the Churches of every
place of the world were by them here supposed to understand the name of one set
day in the year called (...), which day it meant; viz. the Saturday of the week
before Easter, called (...), by the Oriental Churches throughout all ages unto
this day; as a high ^asting-day and vigil, and the close of the Paschal Fast.
And yet our Brethren must be believed, that the first pure and primitive ages
knew nothing of annual set days for Fast* or Feast, excepting only the
Lord's Day. Secondly, That Epistle of the Church of Smyrna tells the Churches of
all the earth, (...) (...) That they hoped that the Lord would grant unto them,
that they should be able to observe or keep the Birthday of his Martyrdom,
assembling there together, with exultation and joy; and that both for the
memory of them that had contended (unto death) and for the excitation and
preparation of those that should come after. And yet our Brethren must be
believed, that the first pure and primitive ages knew nothing of our holy days
for particular Saints and Martyrs. Thus much for annual, set, recurring days;
there lying no exception against the Paschal Fast, or Feast, but what is made
(still out of the same Socrates, or the like) against all annual set Fasts, or
Feasts: For no Author ever pretended any annual Fast, or Feast in the Christian
Church was to be preferred before this Feast of Easter, and the Fast preceding.
But to return to the Fast particularly: It was an age of the Church well near
as ancient, as that age of the Church of Smyrna, and Polycarp, which told
Tertullian, and the Montanists: Quod ad jejunia pertineat, certos dies a Deo
constitutos; (as I have above cited, from Tertullian. l. 2. de Iejun. l. 1, 2,
13, 14.) certe in Evangelio illos dies jejuniis determinatos, in quibus ablatus
est sponsus -- sic and Apostolos observasse, nullum aliud imponentes jugum
certorum, and in commune omnibus obeundorum jejuniorum. And c. 10. Stationum
munus ex arbitrio obeundum esse, and non ultra nonam detinendum. That there are
certain days constituted of God, that those days for Fastings were determined
in the Gospel, the days in which the Bridegroom was taken away* that so the
Apostles had observed or kept [those dayes] imposing no other yoke of set Fasts
to be performed by all in Common: that the office of Stations [ viz. of the
fourth, and sixth day of the week] was to be at choice performed, and not to be
extended beyond the ninth hour, [ viz. three a clock afternoon.] That here are
set Fasts, and this set Fast about the time of our Saviors Passion before
Easter, and for this reason, The taking away of the Bridegroom; and that to
concern the whole number of Christian people, and that observed first by the
Apostles themselves, and by them imposed on the Church, and constituted by God,
and in some sort determined in the Gospel, and that in those words [In those
days, when the Bridegroom shall be taken from them:] and all this observed or
kept by the Bride her self, and by her witnessed; is here so evident, that I
cannot foresee what exception can be made, unless some should pretend that
those Psychici (as Tertullian by contempt calls the Church there) who there
speak, should not indeed be the Church, or true Catholics. But he must be
ignorant of all Tertullian's writings, who should make this desperate attempt
of escape. To put it therefore past all doubt, that not only Tertullian, but
the rest of the pretended pure and Spiritual heretics of that age were wont so
by contempt to miscal the true Catholics, by the name of Psychici, or sensual
persons; S. Irenaeus the holy Father, and Martyr gives us certainly to know in
l. 1. against Heresies c. 1. (...) (...) These spiritual men -- Suppose such
like men to be instructed in mysteries. For as for the Psychici, or sensual
men, they are instructed in sensual things, who by works and mere faith have
their establishment, and have not the perfect knowledge. Now these [ Psychici]
they say, we of the Church are; and therefore that it is indeed necessary for
us to do good works; for that otherwise it is impossible we should be saved.
But themselves they hold shall be saved wholly and altogether not by deeds, but
for that they are by nature Spiritual ones. -- They will have it that it is not
possible, for that which is spiritual [ viz. themselves] to receive corruption,
whatsoever deeds they are conversant in. Tor as Gold laid up in mire does not
lose its beauty, but keeps its own nature, the mire being in nothing able to
hurt the gold; so say they of themselves, that in whatsoever gross works of the
body they shall be conversant, that they are in nothing hurt thereby, nor lose
their spiritual being or subsistence. -- And doing many other filthy and
Atheistical things, they show themselves fierce against us, who keep our selves
through fear of God from sinning even in word, or thought, as idiots, and such
as know nothing. But they highly exalt themselves, calling themselves the
perfect ones, and the seeds or children of Election. They say that we have
grace only lent us for use; and therefore that it shall be taken from us; but
that themselves hold it as their proper possession from above, by an
unspeakable, and not to be named conjunction. Therefore they call us the good
sensual people, or Psychici, and say that we are of the world, and that
continence and well-doing is necessary for us, that thereby we may come unto the
place of mediocrity; but in no wise necessary unto them as being spiritual, and
called perfect ones. -- And anon: They teach that that which is spiritual is
the first fruits; but that we, i. e. the Church of the Psychici, are the lump.
Who they were therefore, who opposing Tertullian and the Montanists, were by
him called Psychici, and what, they said, they had received from God, and from
the Apostles, ye have heard. Now what Tertullian says of them there follows:
viz. c. 4, 13. That they, the Psychici, (which were the Church) did Pascha
jejunare, illos dies, quibus ablatus est sponsus; and stationum semi-jejunia
interponere: that they did fast the Paschal Fast, those days wherein the
Bridegroom was taken away, and also the half-fasts of the Stations: and
sometimes did as each man saw good, live on bread and water. And c. 14. that
they did, as well as Tertullian and the Montanists, Pascha celebrare annuo
circulo in mense primo; and thence, 50 diebus in omni exultatione decurr^re;
that they did Stationibus quartam and sextam Sabbati dicare, and jejuniis
Parasceuen. And c. 2. that they did bid Anathema to the Montanists introducing
Novelty, in the matter of fasting; that they did keep Easter in a yearly
circle, in the first month, and thence observe 50. days in all exultation;
that they did appropriate the 4th and 6th days of the week to stations, and
the Friday before Easter to Fastings, [ viz. solemn:] as on which, says he, l.
de Orat. c. 14. Communis and quasi publica jejunii religio est: A joint, and,
as it were, public Religion of a fast is observed. What can be required more
then the witness both of the Church and of her enemies, in the contest, and
otherwise; that a Paschal Fast was and ought to be observed, as being the days
on which the Bridegroom was taken away? Whether other days also of fasting
beside those [the Stations, and the Pascal Fast] were also by God appointed to
be kept, was the controversy betwixt them then; the Church insisting, that
nothing of Novelty ought by them, under pain of the Churches Anathema, to be
introduced, and laid as a yoke upon Christians, but what they had received from
God, and from the Apostles, what the Apostles themselves had observed, and had
enjoined the Church, as the only fasts of necessary observation by all
Christians, [ viz. that were able] but the other the followers of Montanus,
were, as Eusebius in his description of them notes, wont (...), ( Eusebius. l. 5.
c. 15.) to be in sudden rapture of fury, and to begin to prate and utter new
and strange things contrary to what the custom of the Church according to
Tradition, and according to succession thereof derived from the beginning, had
received. And as Apollonius a Catholic Writer of the Church, who lived in
Tertullians time witnesses, ( ap. Eusebius. l. 5. c. 18.) (...) [(...)] (...).
This Montanus a new Master, this is he who taught dissolving of marriages, and
made new Laws of fasting. There also he declares how his two chief
Prophetesses Priscilla and Maximilla, pretending Inspiration, left their
husbands, painted their faces, and died their hair, (...). Played at dice, and
put out their money to use; and these were the contemners of the Apostolical
Tradition. Now among the Apostles, to whom the Church referred the Tradition of
a Paschal Fast, that Polycarp and Polycrates vouched S. John and other
Apostles, S. Philip by name, that Anicetus and Victor alleged S. Peter, and S.
Paul, and that both agreed, for the ending of certain Fasts before Easter, I
have shown above. ( p. 35, 36, 37. of the Sermon,) That following Heretics for
a long time denied not such Tradition Apostolical, but only understood and kept
it amiss, may be seen in Theodoret l. 3. haereticarum fabularum c. 4. (...).
Understanding amiss the APOSTOLICAL TRADITION, they celebrate in their
Assemblies the memory of the Passion [blindly] as it happens. Having thus
farther shown the strength of the Churches Testimony in Tertullian, referring
the Paschal Fast to an Institution from God, and from the Apostles: I shall
remind the Reader only, that answerably to the Churches Testimony there in
Tertullian: Sic and Apostolos observasse, nullum aliud imponentes jugum, etc.
Et in Evangelio Determinatos dies. We have also produced Theophilus Bishop of
Alexandria, and S. Cyril of the same See, so frequently; S. Hierom, and S.
Austin, and Theodoret, Leo so often, and Isidore Bishop of Sevil, Dorotheus
Archimandrita, and Rabanus Maurus (beside others) all these expressly avowing
some Paschal or Lent-Fast to be of Apostolical Institution or Tradition: and
answerably to the Churches, certos Dies a Deo constitutos, and in Evangelio
Dies illos jejuniis determinatos, (in Tertullian) I have produced S. Austin, S.
Cyril of Alexandria, S. Gregory Nazianzen, S. Ambrose, S. Hierom, Maximus
Taurinensis, Leo, and Chrysologus, Isidore, Dorotheus, and Bid (beside others
referring this Pascal Fast to the Authority of Gods Institution, and the
Gospels. If yet you may surmise, that these say it but seldom times (though
they be not a few Authors:) How often does Leo repeat and press the same truth?
and the two great Patriarchs of Alexandria (successively,) Theophilus and S.
Cyril, two great Lights of the Christian Church in their times, no less then 24
times in 24* Paschal Epistles or Sermons read of most Churches, avowed the
ending of certain Antepaschal or Paschal Fasts, to be the night before the
Feast of Easter, according to Traditions, Constitutions or Instructions,
Evangelical or Apostolical (which comes to the same in effect, the Gospel being
sounded forth, and explained by the Apostles first to all nations.) All this
being already made good, I shall here add and enlarge on but two or three chief
Authorities more. The first shall be the late Edition (in that renowned work of
the Biblia Polyglotta) of the simple and Ancient Version of the Syriack New
Testament. Which simple Syriack Translation, how ancient it is confessed to be
by most learned men, you may read in the Prolegomena before that Oriental
Bible; there may you see it, the judgment not only of that late Reverend,
Prudent, and most Laborious Prelate, Bishop Walton, but also of Tremellius,
Widmanstadius, Trostius, Gesner, and also the constant and uninterrupted
Tradition of the Eastern Churches of the Maronites and Syrians themselves, that
that simple Syriack Version was done by Thaddaeus (whom S. Thomas the Apostle
sent to King Abgar) and by other Apostolical persons; but also the Editor
avowing, that beside all this, Ex Insitis Argumentis probari in ipsa Versione
quae magnam ejus Antiquitatem testantur: And for the copy of that simple
Version which they followed, they professed, Omnia ^n Editione nostra supplere
conati sumus, secundum exemplaria MSS. quorum quaedam Antiquissima, Reliqua ex
Authenicis apud Syrios Codd* descripta sunt. Now if that Syriack simple Version
be a Version made by the Apostles own Disciples (some going higher) in the
days of that King Abgarus, who lived in the days of Christ's flesh upon earth,
and the edition thereof in our Bible be from Copies so most Ancient and
Authentical: what I find there (especially agreeing with so many other most
ancient Records, as have been produced) I shall not doubt to be of the first
primitive Authority, and in fair probability, in use of the times, nearest the
Apostles.

Now in the Edition of that simple Ancient Syriack Version, you have the
apportioning such and such portions of the New Testament to several times and
days of the year, and that I trouble you not to travel through the whole book;
cast but your eye upon S. Matthew's Gospel, and in the Syriack thus you read,
at Mat. 4. v. 1. Dominica Introitus jejunii, and ad oblationem Quadragesimae:
For the Sunday that enters before the Fast, and at the oblation in Lent. At the
6 c. v. 1. Matutinis quartae feriiae septimanae primae Quadragesimae: for
morning service on the Wednesday of the first week in Lent: and at v. 25. Feria
tertia septimanae primae Quadragesimae: for Tuesday of the first week in Lent.
At c. 7. v 13. Matutinis dici veneris hebdomadae primae Quadragesimae: for
morning service on the Friday of the first week in Lent. At c. 8. 14. Lectio ad
oblationem sabbati primi Quadragesimae: the Gospel for the first Sabbath or
Saturday in Lent. At cap 20. 29. The Gospel for the fifth Saturday of the fast
(or Lent.) At cap. 21. 28. Nocturno secundo, secundae noctis passionis: for the
second Nocturn of the second night of Passion-week. At cap. 22. 15. Ad vesperam
feriae tertiae septimanae passionis: for evening service on the third day of
Passion-week. At cap. 23. 29. Officio secundo noctis tertiae passionis: for the
second office of the third night in passion-week. At cap. 26. 31. Ad noctem
Parasceues Crucifixionis: for the night of Good Friday or the parasceue on
which Christ was crucified. At cap. 28. 1. Ad Vesperam Dominicae
Resurrectionis* for the evening service of the Sunday of Christ's Resurrection.
All this in one Gospel; see the other Gospels every where so distinguished, as
it were. And at Ast. 7. 30. Matutinis Dominicae Osanarum: for morning service
on the Sunday of Hosanna's (or Palm sunday as it is called also at 1 Ioh. 2. 7.)
At Act. 24. 1. Media parasceue Crucifixionis: for Good Friday noon. At Hebr. 4.
14. Secunda statione noctis parasceues crucifixionis: in the second station of
Good Friday night. At Heb. 9. 11. Statione tertia noctis parasceues
crucifixionis: for the third station of Good Friday night. At Hebr. 13. 9. Hora
nona parasceues crucifixionis: at the ninth hour (or three a clock after noon)
of Good Friday, or the day of Christ's crucifixion.

Beside the practice of the Christian Religion in Egypt in Philo's days (who
had seen S. Peter) above made most probable; and Eusebius, and S. Hierome's
judgment thereon above shown; I shall here not omit (which above was omitted)
Eusebius Caesareensis his own judgment upon the whole matter of the Paschal
(...) of Lent, in his Ecclesiastical History l. 2. c. (...). where among that
recapitulation of (...), or as sometimes he names others there (...)) Customs
delivered in the beginning from the Apostles (or as others he there names,
Apostolical men) (...) Customs and rules of the Church, kept even until now,
unto, and in our times: he recounts these: (...). Those Ascetical performances
observed even until now among us: which more eminently we are wont to perform
about the solemnity of our Saviors Passion, in fastings and
whole-night-watches, in attentions to the Word of God, which accurately, etc.
-- and especially the whole-nightwatches of the great Solemnity, and the
Ascetical usages therein they taste no wine at all, nor ought that has blood,
[or sensitive life] (as Bede upon Fxod. 1. 41. (a testimony not yet recited) Ut
aviditatem nostram tanquam jejunio temperantiae refraenemus -- Quadragenario
enim numero and Moses, and Elias, and ipse Dominus jejunaverunt. Praecipitur
enim nobis ex lege and ex prophetis and ipso Evangelio, etc.

CHAP. V. Of that much agitated T. of Irenaeus's Epistle to Victor, its true
Import, and an Answer to the Presbyterians pretense of advantage from this
place.
NOw from that ancient Writer Irenaeus (seeing we have already out of him
helped our selves to understand the Church in Tertullian) whom Eusebius
declares ( lib. 5. cap. 19, 20.) to have testified of himself in his Book de
Ogdoade, (...), that he lived in the first succession from the Apostles, and
that he had seen Polycarp (whom St. John had ordained) let it be judged whither
it appear not, that there was some Paschal fast in the Christian Church from
the beginning. When there was, says Eusebius lib. 5. cap. (...). no small
question arisen, (...) concerning the Salutary-feast of Easter; and whither or
no they ought on the very fourteenth day of the Moon, on whatsoever day of the
week it should happen, (...) Put an end to the Fastings, [which next preceded
Easter] they on the one side alleging (...), even from S. John (according to
the Gospel) chap. 23. (...). and the other (...): A custom that had held from
Apostolic Tradition until that time: But still the controversy equally
proceeding of the time of ending the Fasts (thrice mentioned in that one short
Chapter) as of the Feast of Easter it self; not whither such a Feast of Easter,
or whither such Fasts before Easter were always observed by both parts, and
ought to be observed, according to Tradition from the Apostles; for that was
not once doubted by any one of either contenders; but the controversy of the
time of the Feast, and so (say they) of the ending of the Fasts, exercising
much then the Church, and several Councils then held about it; and Victor
Bishop of Rome proceeding to that extremity, so as to go about to excommunicate
the Asian Bishops, and their Churches, who differed not with him at all about
an Easter to be kept, and the Fasts to be ended at Easter, but only about the
time of the Feast, and of the ending of those Fasts: This Irenaeus* peaceable
in his nature, according to his name, who began to live soon after St. John's
death, and wrote about the fourscore and seventeenth year after his death,
seeing both sides careful to retain what they had received from the Apostles
themselves by a near Tradition, in succession, that could not be doubted of, on
either side (the Apostles directing several distant Countries, to different
times and circumstances of the same Feast and Fast, as there were or were not,
in the respective Countries, new convert- Jews to be condescended to in the
very Quartadecima Lunae) seeing also that the Apostolical Tradition of the
Feast it self of Easter and of the Fasts to be ended at Easter, to be safe,
unshaken and agreed upon by both sides, yea and contended for (for else what
needed all that ado about a circumstance of it?) Himself ( Irenaeus) first
writes, that the Mystery of Christ's Resurrection ought to be celebrated [ viz.
in the Feast of Easter] not on the fourteenth day of the Moon, whatsoever day
of the week it fell upon; but only on the weekly memory of Christ's
Resurrection, viz. on the Lord's day: And also earnestly exhorts Victor that he
would not cut off whole Churches of God for following their Tradition (in their
Countries) of ancient time. For that there had been in fore time difference not
only about the time or day of Easter, (and so of ending of the Fasts) but even
concerning the manner or form of the Fast it self (the Apostles themselves
having left both an allowance of condescension to the Jews, in some Countries
touching the day of the Feast; and also to some infirm or weaker then others,
in the form or manner of the Fast to be extended to more or fewer days: and
this condescension having been abused also by some, to take up with very little
time for the fast) (...), but not (...) had been the difference* for some think
they ought to fast one day, some two, some also more, and some measure their
day ( viz. such as would have one day suffice) yet by 40 hours, reckoning in
the hours of night and day, viz. as may be most reasonably thought, from the
beginning of Christ's sufferings, His Agony on Thursday night, onward 40 hours,
which should enclose all the Parasceue or Good Friday, and keep some
resemblance of our Saviors 40 days fast, accounting to themselves (because the
other they could not reach) an hour for a day: and some resemblance also of the
Churches wonted 40 days abstinence, from which they made this discession and
innovation of 40 hours in the stead of the ancients simple and plain custom of
40 days: and lastly, some memory of the 40 hours in which Christ did abide
given up to death; these their forty hours probably they begun, I say with the
beginning of his bloody Sweat and Agony, from about eight a clock of the night
before he was crucified, until about noon on Saturday, which is the just
number of forty hours. Now this I am the rather induced to believe to be the
meaning of Irenaeus's words, and of their practice of forty hours fast
(comprising within the account the hours of day and of night) because I find
in ancient Authors a frequent custom of Christians (...), or whole
nights-watch on the night preceding Good Friday, as on which Christ our Lord
rested not at all, but passed from his Agony to his Apprehension, and thence to
Annas first, ( John 18. 13. and 24.) and thence to Cajaphas (the High Priest
that year) where the Scribes and the Elders were assembled, ( Matthew. 26. 57.)
where false Witnesses were sought for against the Lord, and examined, where he
was accused, spit upon, blind-folded, buffeted, and smitten with the palms of
their hands, denied by his own Disciple Peter, about the time of the
Cock-crowing; held on still by those who most impiously did, and blasphemously
spoke many things against him; and by the first Light appearing (which he had
created)* led by the Elders of the people, and the chief Priests and Scribes
into their Council to a fresh Examination, ( Luc. 22. 66.) and thence early in
the morning to Pilat's Judgement-Hall, etc. ( John 18. 28.) Upon the
consideration of this whole nights most indign suffering of our Lord from his
own People the Jews, and their malicious Rulers, many Religions had in use that
which* they called (...), the whole nights-watch of Christ's sufferings, as the
Greeks have it. This Epiphanius in Exposit. Fidei in express words thus
records, (...). And in some places at the end of the fifth day (or Thursday)
they watch unto the daylight of Good Friday, as also the night before Easter
morning, these two [whole nights] only. The same I take to be the meaning of
John of Jerusalem (Catech. 18.) (...) (...), by reason of the labor which you
have lately born, both from the extended fast of Good Friday, and from the
Vigil or watching thereof, [ viz. of the night that leads unto it] Wherefore
St. Hierom also in his Book against Vigilantius, by way of Sarcasme thus
collects what Vigilantius would have. Non vigilemus itaque diebus Pascha. Let
us leave off then to watch on the days of the Pasch, viz. especially the two
Eves of the (...), and of the (...) (though (...) mentioned in Eusebius lib. 6.
cap. 9. I acknowledge to be the latter. But that there were more than one of
these (...) or whole-night-watches near the day of our Lord's Passion, Eusebius
himself has left recorded, lib. 2. cap. 15, 16. (...) and rursus, (...) Those
Ascetical performances which are even still until now with us accustomably
exercised, which more eminently we are wont to perform at the Solemnity of the
Passion of our Savior in Fastings and whole nightswatches and attentions unto
the Word of God, and again the whole night-watches of the great Solemnity, and
the Ascetical performancestherein. Well therefore might the hours of that first
whole-nights-watch begin the first part of their forty hours, which they
extended, it seems, to Saturday noon (for that they which kept but one day in
fasting (as Irenaeus and Dionysius say some did, though neither approve that
pittance in persons of ordinary strength)* did not fast Saturday, as Tertullian
also says, Quanquam vos etiam sabbatum siquando continuatis, etc. Of those
therefore whom here Irenaeus mentions and tolerates, but approves not, some
kept one day imitating as to the time, the one only fast day (the day of
Atonement) at first by God in the Law appointed to the Jews, (a ground
unsufficient to warrant in any now no more.) Others two days, Good Friday, and
the great Sabbath; because on those two days the Apostles were in special
sadness, and our Lord was given up to death for us: Quanquam vos etiam sabbatum
siquando continuatis, nunquam nisi in Pascha jejunandum. Others also more,
whether three, adding the Wednesday wherein the Council was held, and Money was
given, and taken, for the taking away our Lord; Or four, the (...) As Dionysius
Bishop of Alexandria in his Epistle to Basilides records, some fasted with
superposition or continuance to the Cock-crowing, two days, some three, some
four, and others all the six of that great week:) others fasting forty hours of
day and night so measure their one day, (for the reasons above given,
especially relating to forty days, an hour for a day, whether of Christ's fast,
the remembrance whereof they would with the Church honor; or of the Churches
abstinence, with which they would, according to the allowance they gave
themselves, so far comply: and remembering also those our Lord's forty days of
Fast, equalled now by his forty hours being given up to death:) but still an
hour for a day. Does all this now give any color, that there was no Paschal or
Lent (that is Spring) fast, derived from the Apostles? or that forty days were
not then at all in the Churches observance? or that (...) was first so called
from forty hours? Nothing so. To the clearing whereof, I lay down first the
words of Irenaeus, and then the gloss of an ancient Record thereon; for the
former part of them first Irenaeus says, (...). This I acknowledge probable to
be the true reading, and punctation, (as our Brethren also contend) and to be
rendered thus: For some indeed think they ought to fast one day, and some two,
and some also more, and some by forty hours of daytime and of night
commensurate their day. These words which have given puzzle to so many
Antiquaries, and have been several ways pointed and interpreted, Beatus
Rhenanus in his Preface to Ruffinus (as my very learned and worthy Friend Mr.
Thorndick has already advertised us) thus helps us to understand, Incidi
nuperrime (says Beatus Rhenanus) in (...) quandam (...), quam cum evolverem,
occurrerunt forte fortuna Irenaei verba quae Eusebius cap. 23. lib. 5. citat
Graece sic habentia, (...). I light upon a Synopsis of Evangelical History,
where by chance I met with the words of Irenaeus cited by Eusebius thus, For
some fast one day only, and some two, and some more, and some fast forty hours
only of daytime and of night, fasting an hour for a day. This ancient Author
(living nearer unto, and so more knowing of, the Primitive Churches practice
(by which often the obscurer sayings of Authors are best interpreted) is much
in this inquiry to be regarded; and yet I may easily grant the words of his
Synopsis to be only a Gloss, or Metaphrase, wherein he explains (...) by (...)
And these words [and some by forty hours of daytime and of night commensurate
their day] he thus explains [and some fast forty hours only, of daytime and
of night, fasting an hour for a day] so that, as to Ezekiel, forty days were
appointed, each day for a year: so these had set themselves a fast of forty
hours, an hour for a day. Now sure this ancient Gloss (except any one would
rather it should be the ancient true reading of Irenaeus] finds Irenaeus
presupposing in the Church, the simple and plain manner of forty days Fast
(before Easter) before such change had been made into forty hours; which change
had been made by some men's unaccurate walking, long before Irenaeus and
Victor's days. So that in some (sew perhaps) 40 hours were elder then
Irenaeus's days, but 40 days elder then these devised hours: and this change in
some was helped on perhaps by the bodily infirmity of a fewer number (amongst
those few) who could not perform more in honor to our Saviors forty days
fast for us, then a fast of forty hours, handsomely accommodated Therefore
Irenaeus's word is (...), not (...).
also to the 40 hours of our Lords being given up unto death (which was from
about nine or ten on Good Friday, to the hours of one or two on Sunday morning:
which yet I think could not be the bounds of their fast; for then should not
the morning of Good Friday have been any part of their Paschal fast, which
never was heard of, nor would any admit.) On this accommodation others who had
no such bodily infirmity, yet gladly (as is likely) laid hold, till it became
at length a noted different way of fasting the Paschal fast: and is now again
in our age advanced to give check to the elder, simple and plain manner of
forty days abstinence of fasting. But that Irenaeus should recite those
pittances of one, or two days, or forty hours, as approved by him, or as
indifferent and equally good and regular with the former simple and plain
custom, no man can imagine, that either considers what Ancient Books have
wrote of the (...) the form of that fast, or so much as what Irenaeus writes*
as his censure in the very next following words, (...) (...). Through those who
not accurately holding the [former] form of the fast, have changed the custom
which [was] after simplicity and plainness, into that which [followed] after.
Of which words more hereafter. But first, for (...), some one day, which if it
were regular, would yet join with the rest in condemning those among us, who
are for (...), for never an one, as Dionysius of Alexandria noted some in their
practice to be. ( Epistola ad Basilidem.) It is manifest indeed, that one day
there was in the year of the more solemn united public Fast of the whole
congregation meeting both young and old in the Church after Nocturns at the
morning hour, when our Lord was carried from the Council of the Elders, chief
Priests, and Scribes to Pilates judgement-hall. Again, at the third hour, when
the Lord was lifted up upon his cross; at the sixth hour when the Sun was
darkened; and at the ninth hour, when our Lord gave up the Ghost, as may be seen
in the distribution of portions of Scriptures (in that ancient Syriack-Bible)
to be read in the Church at all these hours of the Parasceue crucifixionis, or
Good Friday. There was one day says Tertullian, while yet no Montanist, l. de
oratione c. 14 Dies Paschae [(...)] quo communis and quasi publica jejunii
religio est -- nihil curantes de occultando quod cum omnibus faciamns. The
Pasch (of Good Friday) in which the religion of the fast is common to all, and
in a sort public -- we not caring then to hide that, which we do in common
withal: but that the (...) or Paschal fast of the single private Christians of
ordinary strength should be regularly but one day, is far from the meaning of
Irenaeus, or any other ancient Ecclesiastical writer, which may appear, as from
Irenaeus's censure of these variations, so also from the 23d. chapter (the
third before this) where the plea and pretense of both contending parts being
recited, and tradition Apostolical alleged upon the part (that Irenaeus was
of:) and (...) (a tradition as ancient as from S. John Sozomen tells us) was
alleged upon the other part (which Irenaeus would have to be forborne) the plea
of both their traditions met in this, that on Easter Day (...) or (...), seu
(...) and so the decrees of their several Synods also concluded for (...) on
the day of the Lords resurrection. So that the Paschal fast according to them
and their pleaded traditions Apostolical on al hands was (...), or (...) not
(...) only, or (...), the fasts or fasting days that were to end in Easter and
not the fasting day. The Church in like manner in Tertullian opposed to the
Montanists; quod ad jejunia pertineat, certos dies a Deo constitutos -- certe
in Evangelio illos dies jejuniis determinatos, in quibus ablatus est sponsus.
That there were certain days appointed by God for fastings -- that in the
Gospel those days were determined for fastings, on which the bridegroom was
taken away. Certain days, not day [those dayes] not only [that day] so
Dionysius of Alexandria (Epistola ad Basilidem) (...). By all it will be
confessed, that we must humble our souls with FASTINGS until the feast of
Easter. To this add that the 24 Paschal Epistles or Sermons of Theophilus and
Cyril, Patriarchs of Alexandria, each of them do conclude, that according to
Evangelical or Apostolical traditions, constitutions, or teachings, they should
end or dissolve (...) ('it is still plurally) the Fasts on Easter Eve. The 45
Canon of the Laodicaean Council confirmed in general Council, tell us of (...),
the holy fasts, not fasting day of Lent. St. Ambrose thought more commanded by
God to Christians of an ordinary strength, then the fast of a day, in Lent,
when he said ( l. de jejunio and Ecclesia) propitia divinitate ecce jam pene
transegimus Quadragesimae indicta jejunia, and praecepta Domini abstinentiae
devotione complevimus. Where he calls the many fasts indicted in one Lent the
precepts of God. 2. Irenaeus by his recital, that some thought they ought to
fast two days (and no more) and others more, cannot be understood as if
Irenaeus approved that number, which Dionysius his words (the Patriarch of
Alexandria within a few years after) disparaged greatly, even when performed
with greatest severity of superposition or fasting to cock-crowing, as if they
thought they did some great matter: says he, the question which Christians
were wont to propound one to another in St. Chrysostomes time ( homil. 16 ad
popul. Antiochen.) was not how many hours, nor how many days they had fasted of
that Lent, but how many weeks, (...); and ye might hear them answer (none of
them one, but,) some two, some three, and some all (...). Therefore there was a
Known [all] (which all know to have been so many as contain 40 days) and that
two or three weeks were not all, much less two or three days all the days. But
the question may be put against that ancient gloss, [that they who fasted 40
hours did it an hour for a day.] How that can be when no mention is of 40 days,
no nor of (...) before Irenaeus's time? To this (though it be an argument drawn
only negatively from testimony, as silent, which speaks nothing to any proof;
especially so far off (when they might speak out, and we not hear of it: and in
an age, whereof so few monuments are left remaining) yet it may be said, that
if (...) be found; then 40 days* for what (...) distinctly signifies (it being
purely an Ecclesiastical word) surely the Churches use and interpretation of
that word, where ever any thing distinct can certainly be known (as it may in a
thousand places) must needs be a better Lexicon to us, then our own interessed
conjectures from the origination common to both. Now let one Ecclesiastical
record be shown where (...) must signify a fast of forty hours; for though
here is such a fast in Irenaeus, yet no such name here; and we will produce
numberless ancient monuments of the Church, where it is impossible to be forty
hours, but must be many weeks, such as the 45, 50 and 51 Canons of Laodicea;
yea where it must needs signify the fast of forty days precisely, as where
they are precisely reckoned up, as in most of the 24 Epistles Paschal of
Theophilus and St. Cyril, and what the use of the word (...), quadragesima,
soon after Irenaeus, signified in the Church, is most considerable as to this
enquiry. Now when it is in Origin hom. 10. in Levit. c. 16. Nos habemus
quadragesimae dies jejuniis consecratos, we have the days of quadragesima
consecrated to Fasts, it cannot be meant of one fast, or of forty hours only,
but of days it is: and that is the nearest to Irenaeus's time which can be
shown. Now hear we the whole entire passage of Irenaeus, which is this, (...)
(...). About the reading whereof or punctation, and about rendering of the
former part of it, we shall easily agree. Neither is the controversy only
about the day [of Easter] but also concerning the form it self of the fast; for
some think that they ought to fast one day, some two, others also more, and
some by forty hours of daytime, and of night, commensurate their day. And
such variety of those that keep (the fast) etc. Hitherto we have little
difference with our brethren; but as to that which follows just cause of great
complaint of the abuse of the Author, and of the Reader, and of the fast. For
those following words we say our brethren in the 66 Page of their grand debate,
have translated amiss to their own advantage, for the disparagement of the
Paschal fast in these words [With our Ancestors, who, as is most like,
propagated to posterity a custom which they retained, as brought in by a
certain simplicity and private will] instead of those words from the Greek
[with our Ancestors, who less accurately, as is most like, retaining (the form
of the fast, above mentioned) have changed the simple and plain custom, or the
custom which was after a simple and plain manner of speaking, into that which
followed after. For 4. words our brethren put in which are not in the Greek
either formally or virtually, viz. [brought in] say they, that their English
reader might think that Irenaeus had said; that even that which Irenaeus's
Ancestors retained (and not then devised) the custom of the fast, was brought
in by a certain simplicity and private will. Tell us now I pray what one word
is there in your Author, which ye pretend to translate, that signifies [brought
in, or brought in by a certain simplicity and private will?] but if there be no
word of bringing in by a certain simplicity, etc. but only of changing that
simple vulgar manner which was before, then you have not dealt truly in a
matter of main concern to the question. As if those long before Irenaeus's time
had retained what was before their time, and propagated to posterity a custom
at first brought in by a certain simplicity and private will. Whereas there is
not one word of all that in the Text, neither of [propagating to posterity] nor
of [brought in] nor of [private will] nor of [a certain.] For secondly, tell us
you, what word is there for propagating to posterity? It is not (you see) (...)
in any copy, you pretend not that, nor can you; and then how can (...) signify
propagating to posterity, since there is nothing in the Greek that signifies
either propagating, or posterity? no more like then changing is to propagating,
and the thing changed or made another thing, or another manner, is to
posterity. Thirdly, how can any sincerely render (...), propagating to
posterity the custom which they retain as brought in by a certain simplicity
and private will? For beside nothing of [propagating] nothing of [posterity]
nothing of [brought in] why is (...) there to be rendered a private will? 4.
what Irenaeus spoke in praise, (...), in simplicity, that you, that you might
pretend it was brought in, and amiss too, render by [a certain simplicity] so
changing by your additament of [a certain] Simplicity, that which was the
praise of that custom which should have been still retained, into dispraise by
a certain Artifice. Howbeit Hesychius says (...). Irenaeus's word (in the
concrete) the Prince of Grammarians renders, [not-oblique] which you here would
have the ground of an obliquity brought in. Phavorinus and Suidas out of
Polybius tells us that (...) signifies also (...), and so the custom according
to simplicity will be the custom that was from the first: he adds there,
(...), Phavorinus gives the same rendering: and (...) and (...) that is said to
be simple, or according to simplicity, which is not a thing that one fashions
or forms after his own device; not of various and busy humor. Thus much you
have put in, now see what you have left out, a main thing which was against
you, viz. these words, (...), for which there is no English at all in your
Version; for it had wholly marred your cause: the Author thus saying, if he be
truly rendered: [ And such variety of those that keep (this Fast) has not been
made or begun now in our age, but very long before with our Ancestors, who, as
is meet to believe, NOT ACCURATELY RETAINING, (the manner of the Fast above
mentioned) have changed the custom which was simple, and plain, into that
which was afterwards] thereby plainly intimating, that all those Instances of
definite numbers above mentioned by him, were so many deviations for want OF
NOT ACCURATE OBSERVING the former plain and simple manner. If you have at all
rendered (...), tell us. Yet nevertheless Irenaeus and the Church charitably
tolerating what he said was beside that which was at first (beside what in
accurateness ought to have been,) the plain and simple manner: all these, both
those which he expressly named, and those which are here implied, such as did
keep the Fast accurately, lived peaceably together, and we are in peace, says
he; [but what he thought of such as should refuse to keep the Feast, or the
fast at all, he does not there tell us, none in that age giving occasion of
that.] If you think there is no such cause now, why we should thus complain of
your Translation: is it not, in Earnest, hard, that to the advantage of your
cause, and the hurt of the honor of the Churches anniversary public Fast, you
should change, put in, and leave out of the words of the Author, whom your
selves produce? and not that only, but contrary to true Translation even of our
own former learned Writers; whose error, if any, might have been corrected by
you, but not their faithful Translation blotted out. Thus before our time
Musculus rendered the place [ Qui ante nos praeter accuratam diligentiam, ut
verosimile est, rerum habenis potiti, simplicem ac vulgatam consuetudinem
posthabuerunt ac mutarunt] that which he renders [have postponed and changed
the simple and vulgar custom,] you read [have propagated to posterity the
custom which they retain, as brought in by a certain simplicity and private
will.] But Russinus also, and He one of the Ancients, reads with Musculus and
Us, in the main, against you thus: [ Qui non simpliciter quod ab initio
traditum est tenentes in alium morem vel per negligentiam, vel per imperitiam
postmodum decidere.]

What (...) signifies, we all know; and no unconcerned Interpreter that had not
somewhat of your cause to maintain, ever so palpably omitted those words,
before you; and being not omitted, they charge the Authors of those varieties,
with want of careful keeping to the former rule. All which is indeed against
the service of your Hypothesis to take notice of.

Now what (...) here means, is to be discerned partly from the import of the
word it self, and partly by the company with which it is joined.

(...) sirmonis forma e vulgo sumpta apud Dionysium Longinum. (...), says
Hesychius, and Suidas out of Thucydides vulgar and genuine Citizens.
Aristophanes (...), says Suidas, toward strangers, and toward the native and
proper Citizens. (...) vulgata consuctudo, says Musculus, etc. here in this
place especially, being joined with (...), is surely to be rendered, the Custom
which was simple and plain, or which was after simplicity and plainness. Not
with the mystery of 40 hours for 40 days: nor because 'twas pascha, therefore
to be shrunk up into one day or two. That (...), signifies, not to propagate to
those that come after, but to change into what came after, is evident by the
words in themselves, and by the like manner of speech in that Language,
Incertum amicorum statum, (...), in Thucydides, to make it of uncertain before,
now certain.

Now the Reader has Irenaeus's words, and their true Rendering: His sense I
shall lay down briefly. First, That Irenaeus as he wrote against the Asian
custom of keeping Easter, in his own name, and the name of the rest of the
Bishops of France, and maintained that Victor's judgment was the right
concerning the day of Easter, yet exhorted Victor to mutual tolerance, peace
and love: so here his applauding peaceableness with these various observers of
the Fast, is no approving of the variations and differences which he recites.
Yea secondly he recites them, because not approved by him: for his scope was at
that time to set down only no other definite numbers but such as were so many
sundry deviations from the right rule, which yet ought not to break the
communion, (at least whilst it was evident that all retained, and honored the
Feast it self, and the Fast it self.) For that he might persuade Victor, that
the Asians error now in continuing a peculiar custom indulged to the former
Infancy of the weak new converted Jews amongst them of Asia, against the
general custom of the rest of the Christian world, which stood free from those
particular encumbrances, yet was to be born with: He uses this argument, That
the difference which was not now first, but of old, found, about the keeping of
the Paschal Fast also, and had been introduced by a less accurate observance,
and want of keeping to the first plain and simple Tradition, yet had not
heretofore, nor ought now to break the peace 'twixt such less accurate
observers of the manner of the Fast, and the others more careful and faithful
preservers of the Churches Rule (amongst which he seems to account Victor and
himself deservedly in these words, (...). All they were nevertheless at peace
with the rell, and we with them. So ought it therefore to be about the day of
the Feast of Easter. Thirdly, therefore also neither one day of Fasting, nor
two days, or somewhat more; nor forty hours are the Accurate insisting on the
first simple and plain Tradition of observing that Paschal Fast, according to
Irenaeus. Fourthly, from Irenaeus's his words, any one may well collect, that
there was even on all hands confessed a Fast kept, and to be kept before the
Feast of Easter; and that before Irenaeus's time, (...), very long before his
days (for which you may allow fairly at least about sixty years) such
differences had been, and variety, about the degree and rigor of keeping that
Paschal Fast, less, or longer time. And yet that before such differences and
variety there had proceeded an Agreement, a plain and simple custom (which
should have been still, but was not by some accurately observed; but changed
into that which in some men's practice after followed.) To which preceding
custom, if you shall allow but about thirty or forty years, the least that can
entitle it to so known and famous a custom, you have brought it up to the
Apostles own days (S. John living within 98 years of Irenaeus's writing this)
and yet still all those alleged following varieties and differences agreed
accurately in this, that they had observed, and would and ought all to observe
a Paschal Fast, and Feast: that there were certain fasts (...) or (...) to be
ended yearly at Easter. That the celebration of the Pasch was a thing worthy of
their great care and faithfulness: and the very less circumstances of it worthy
of peaceable enquiry at the least, and persuading one the other, if they could.
Which the sacred first General Council of Nice thought worthy the second place
in their care: and which they then established by joint decree; and here whiles
yet they could not agree, all sides acknowledged Apostolical Tradition in both
Churches of East and West; and an Agreeing Tradition ever in the Church
touching certain Fasts to be ended at Easter, whenever that was to be. Thus
the Text of Irenaeus by you produced, is not against us, but for us. Though I
allow (as I do) their reading and punctation to be (as it is) very probable:
yet here before we part with that Text, I must tell you, that there is another
reading with other punctation, which is very probable also, and has seemed the
true reading to many learned men (it being certain that in the old Greek MSS.
of the age of Irenaeus, there were no accents or points usually and distinctly
added.) The reading is that which Ruffinus of ancient time, and our late
Learned Sir Henry Savil, with the Reverend and Learned Bishop Mountague, (and
Christophorson also in part) do follow; and it is thus: (...). for some think
they ought to fast one day, and some two, and some also more, and some forty:
and [withal] measure their day by the hours of the day, and also of the night.
That is, deeming that they ought to measure out each of their number of forty
days, by all the hours of the day, and most also of the night following, at
least unto the Cockcrowing; so that they relaxed their fast, and began to
refresh themselves also with sleep, not but then, which was an excess of rigor
on the one hand; as those pittances of one or two days, were in extreme on the
other hand of defect, and contracting or shrinking up the Fast. All which
variety came from those who long before Irenaeus's days, retaining not
accurately (as is probable) the manner of the fast [at first delivered] had
changed the simple and plain manner, into that which followed. Ruffinus's
reading of the former part of the words is thus: [ alii uno tantum die putant
observari debere jejunium, alii duobus, alii vero tribus, nonnulli etiam 40;
etiam ut horas diurnas nocturnasque computantes diem statuant: only here we are
to remember, that Irenaeus says not (...). Or (...).
Or 40 times 24 hours, for then must they have eat nothing in 40 days: but 40
days; computing in to their day, not only all the hours of the day, but the
night hours also, sc. unto Cock-crowing, h. e. 40 (...), or superpositions,
such as Dionysius of Alexandria in his Epistle to Basilides describes some:
and this reading is made the more probable, both in regard that there does not
occur (that ever I could learn of) any other record (beside this controverted
one) of any 40 hours fast, either in Irenaeus time, or before, or after: and
for that on the other hand, Dionysius of Alexandria living not long after
Irenaeus, mentions (and that with praise, and no note of excess) in the
forecited Epistle, some that passed the whole great week, (...), so as fasting
every day, taking in the hours of day and of night also, until the
Cock-crowing at the least, (...) Epiphanius also in Compendio fidei Catholicae
and Apostolicae Ecclesiae. (...). The whole Church is wont to keep the Lent
continuing in Fastings -- but the six days of the Pasch [or Paschal-week] all
the people continue in dry or hard diet: and even all the week unto the
Cock-crowing of the Lord's Day dawning, they continue in Watches. Eusebius also
l. 2. c. (...). does testify of the Christian manner, (...) that they were
wont to spend more eminently the days near the solemnity of our Savior's
passion in fastings, in whole-night-watches, and attention to the word of God.
This it seems some too forwardly pressed even throughout all the forty days,
and as a duty (for so the words must (...) be understood, (...).) Now whether
we follow this reading, or the other, all the definite numbers (as there
managed) are recited by Irenaeus as deviations from the plain and simple
manner* and both readings suppose the use of forty days Abs^inence, as being
before in the Church. To the rest of your Allegations, answer shall as fully be
made in the 8. chapter: only here because you bid us (in your 66th. pagE) read
the rest of the Chapter, we have so done, but find nothing that favors your
cause; but still against you more then enough: for in the following part of the
Chapter Irenaeus tells Victor, that Anie^tus his predecessor could not
persuade Polycarp (whom above he calls the blessed Polycarp) not to keep
Easter, according to the tradition in Asia, (...). As which he had ever kept or
observed with St. John the Disciple of our Lord, and the rest of the Apostles
with whom he had conversed. Here if the blessed and holy martyr Polycarp be to
be believed (as he is by all sober Christians in the world) it is undeniably
certain that St. John the Apostle, and other Apostles, and Polycarp with St.
John the Apostle, and with those other Apostles (with whom he had conversed)
did constantly keep an Annual set feast of Easter. And now I leave it to you,
to tell us who they are that have taught the Sectaries to condemn the
observation of such Anniversary set feasts, and particularly that Anniversary
day of Easter, as superstitious, and not agreeable to the purity of the best
Christians. Against whom I enter this charge, even against all that so at any
time teach Christian people, that they are undeniably found condemners of St.
John the Apostle, and of other Apostles of the Lord, I add even in that
wherein Saint John and those other Apostles of the Lord agreed with St. Peter
and St. Paul, in that wherein Polycarp and Anicetus agreed, Polycrates and
Victor agreed, and were all of one accord; had one custom, both those Apostles
which toward their later end abode in Europe, and those which so abode in
Asia, and the Bishops their successors in the West, and in the East, the first,
and second age, before, and after St. John's death until Polycarp, yea until
Victors time; and it is known even until our time also. For their time so much
was pleaded (as may be seen by comparing this of Eusebius. l. 5. (...). with cap.
(...). and with Sozomen l. 7. 19.) Now how sure a witness this Holy Polycarp
was in what he said of the Apostles, and said he knew by conversing with them;
Irenaeus, whom you have produced shall tell you. l. 3 c. 3. his own Greek words
we have in Eusebius. l. 4. (...) (...). Polycarp was not only the Disciple of the
Apostles, and had conversed with many that had seen Christ, but was by the
Apostles constituted Bishop in Asia, of the Church of Smyrna: whom also we have
seen -- He gloriously and most remarkably suffering martyrdom departed out of
this life: having always taught those things which he had learned of the
Apostles, which also the Church does deliver, and which only are true. And all
the Churches in Asia do bear him this record. And yet either this Polycarp must
now be found a false witness of what he had seen done by the Apostles when he
conversed with them; and of what he had done, and done constantly with them; or
else the Apostles did observe some Anniversary set holy day, and this
particularly, and those that have clamoured on this and the like as
superstitious, are found condemners of the Apostles themselves. This is the
charge, let it not be forgot to be wiped off. And since you bid us to read on,
we read on still but to the very next words after your direction, and behold
the Bishops, Narcissus, Theophilus, Cassius and Clarus of the same time with
Irenaeus, and others with them assembled in Palestina, (...), [in their writing
or decree] discoursing much concerning the tradition of the Apostles touching
Easter, which had come down to them by succession: (and the fast confessedly on
all hands was to preceed the feast of Easter) and so in cap. 23. we read of an
Apostolical tradition received and practiced also in more then three parts of
the world. (...). That the Fasts should be ended on no other day of the week,
then [the Sunday] the day of the Lords resurrection. And therefore fasts were
to have their place and being as well as their ending before the day of that
Feast, according to Apostolical tradition. (...). A custom (begun) from
Apostolical tradition, and obtaining even until now. And those fewer Churches
which did not so end their fasts as making Easter Day only Sunday, yet pleaded
tradition also (no less ancient) ((...). That the dissolutions of the Fasts
ought to be at Easter) for ending the Fasts at Easter Day nevertheless, on
whatsoever day of the week that were. So that the tradition of all the world
was for ending certain fasting-days at Easter. And for more then three parts of
the world it was pleaded in that very place, that it was from Apostolical
tradition, that they observed such custom of so ending their Fasts.

CHAP. VI. In what regard the Forty days of the Quadragesima were of
Apostolical recommendation, and in what regard of Ecclesiastical Constitution.
THat some Paschal, or Lent, ( i. e. Spring-fast) before Easter was ever from
the Apostles time, and of Apostolical tradition and constitution, has been
sufficiently evidenced, both in the whole body of the discourse above, and also
in the whole fourth Chapter of this Appendage. We proceed now to the
consideration of the forty days; and to the declaration, how the observance
thereof was ever in the Christian Church, as a special time of spiritual
exercise, and abstinence for the generality of Christian people, from
recommendation Apostolical. Ab Apostolis Traditum and Commendatum.
Howbeit, the precept of such forty days abstinence, and much more the precept
of forty days fast, as also of other Ecclesiastical discipline, and
Ecclesiastical Administrations respecting Penitents, or Catechumens, respecting
public Penances, Absolutions, Catechizings, solelmn Baptism, Synods of
Bishops, and other the like, specially affixed and determined to that time, may
well be allowed to be of Ecclesiastical constitution. But it is meet to begin
with that, which is (even in this of forty days also) of Apostolical
Recommendation. For the proof whereof I might permit it to the judgment of any
Reader, whether a great and sufficient number of the Authorities by me above
produced (though brought only to prove some Paschal, or Lenten^ast before
Easter, to have been of Tradition and Institution Apostolical) have not
evidenced, that forty-daies-abstinence, within which also we might best choose
to us days for proper fasting, according to the measure of our bodily
strength, and Devotion of our minds, comes unto us fairly recommended from
Tradition Apostolical. In a word this is proved from every Author, that has
given in Testimony of the Original Apostolical of (...), or Quadragesima; which
I have showed, never was understood in the Church, of forty hours; and yet was
for certain an aiming at least at some number of forty; within which Christian
Abstinence should especially be exercised. But if not forty hours, there is
nothing next that can be imagined less, nor indeed was it more, than forty
days. Amongst such Testimonies already produced there need be nothing asked
for, elder then the practice of the Religious in St. Mark's time, witnessed by
Philo, who saw them, and lived among them; by Eusebius, who saw, and cites many
ancient records; and monuments Ecclesiastical, which now are no where extant;
and by S. Hierom, who made most curious search into the Ascetical observances
of the primitive religious Christians in Egypt, and wrote exactly the lives of
many of the chief of them. All these three, ( Philo in his Book (...), Eusebius
in l. 2. Histor. Ecclesiast. c. 16, 17. S. Hierom. in l. 2. advers. Iovinian.
c. 39. Add to these Sozomen l. 1. c. 12. (...).
) do together make up this complete Testimony, that far within the times of the
Apostles, whiles yet S John, yea S. Peter, and S. Paul were alive, in the
Church, where S. Mark was set Bishop by S. Peter, the Religious Christians did
(...), by the space of about seven weeks, (speaking popularly) exercise special
abstinence, and devotions; not of precept indeed to all Christians; (for we
speak not now of that) but of recommendation certainly from their spiritual
guides, which were Apostolical persons, sent to them from the Apostles. And
particularly, S. Mark a Teacher inspired of God. For the time, Philo's words
are, (...) etc. (...). These assemble themselves especially by the space of
seven weeks. -- Wine in those days is not brought in unto their tables. -- And
their table has not any thing of that, which had [sensitive life, or] blood,
but bread for their food, and salt for that which they eat with their bread. --
Some for the space of three days receive no food: and scarce [sometimes] by
the space of six days, did they refresh themselves with their natural food. --
A week they observed by a pure, and holy virginal observance; which was
preparatory to the greatest feast, (which with Philo and Eusebius, in the Jews
and Christians language was known to be the feast of Easter.) Which was
followed with the 50 days solemnity. (...) The whole space with them from
morning unto evening is [a spiritual] exercise, for being intent on the Holy
Scriptures, etc. -- Making one Quire they sing Eucharistical Hymns to God their
Savior. -- Ever they have God in perpetual remembrance. This Philo wrote, who
in the days of Claudius came to speech with S. Peter in Rome; and he wrote of
those (...), not only whom he had seen, (...), but also setting forth, admiring
and reverencing the Apostolical men of the Hebrew nation [which lived there
where S. Mark did] says Eusebius, who writes farther on this wise: (...) etc.
(...) These words of Philo we deem to be manifestly, and undeniably meant
concerning those which are of us [Christians]; which if any shall be so hardy
to deny, let him yield to these clear demonstrations (and cease to be hard of
belief) viz. of such things, as are not to be found with any but in the
Religion of Christians only, according to the Gospel. -- Even such Ascetical
abstinences, which are of custom performed amongst us even until now, which
more eminently are observed about the solemnity of our Saviors Passion in
fastings, and whole-night-watches, etc. -- Which accurately after the same
manner are performed even until now, and with us Christians only. The vigils
and abstinences belonging to that great solemnity. -- And even such customs
has Philo (there) written, which were delivered in the beginning from the
Apostles. The time Philo tells us, was about the space of seven weeks before
that Feast, (which was Easter.) That space of time, exempting one day in every
seven, which Philo there says they did (...) hold as very sacred, and
festival; gives us the forty days with two only, (as with us) preparatory to
the forty. And this being before the number of forty mentioned by Irenaeus,
Eusebius. l. 5. c. (...).
in the matter of the Fa^, adds reason to the authority of that ancient Record,
which B. Rhenanus light on, that interpreted the forty hours, which Irenaeus
noted as a change from the former, plain, and simple custom, to have been a
substitution of forty hours for forty days. Or else to that reading of some's
fasting forty days, and those so many superpositions, such observance of seven
weeks, that is (with such exemption as above) forty days, being, as Eusebius
there pronounces, inter (...)* which was the Proposition here undertaken; that
forty-daies observance was (though not of precept; wherefore variations
therefrom were born withal by the Church, says Irenaeus, yet) from Apostolical
Recommendation. Here I shall esteem it no bar to what has been said, if any
shall observe with me in those new-converted zealous Christians, being Philo's
contrymen, of the Nation of the Jews, (which dwelt in and about Alexandria,
in the greatest numbers, with Philo the Jew himself) some part of zeal left in
them toward something of their ancient Judaical rites, which in new-converted
Jews the Apostles themselves did bear with: This is no more then Eusebius and
Sozomen themselves (who magnify their Christianity) did observe in the (...).
It is sufficient that these their observances of fastings, and watchings, and
devotions by the space of seven weeks before Easter, were no part of their
Judaical rites. Let any show us any such observance of any Sect of the Jews,
or of any other Religion in the world, before Christianity brought in this: so
far therefore was this from any thing of Judaical rite, that from this it self
Eusebius collects (as from one of his (...)) their indubitable Christianity.
Next I may here be allowed to suppose, that I have already shown in the
foregoing chapter, a fair intimation of forty days abstinence, or fasting, in
Irenaeus his Epistle to Victor ( Eusebius. l. 5. c. (...).) as the plain and
simple manner of keeping the Paschal Fast; as long before his time, as the
Apostles were. They which are so confident, that no mention of forty days,
that no such number of days was at first observed, or can be shown so early,
as in Irenaeus's days, should consider, whether what S. Austin wrote in his 2d
Book de Doctrina Christiana c. 16. Quadraginta diebus jejunare monemur. Hoc
lex, cujus persona est in Mose; hoc prophetia, cujus personam gerit Elias: Hoc
ipse Dominus monet, qui tanquam testimonium habens ex lege and prophetis,
medius inter illos in monte, 3 Discipulis videntibus atque stupentibus claruit:
We are admonished to fast forty days, this the Law whose person Moses bare;
this the Prophets, whose person Elias sustained; this the Lord himself
admonishes us, who as receiving witness from the Law and the Prophets, shone
forth in the midst 'twixt those two in the mount, the three Disciples beholding
with astonishment. And what St. Hierome writes in l. 2 advers. Iovinian. Est
Dominus, qui Quadraginta diebus Christianorum jejunium sanctificavit. And on
Iona 3. Ipse quoque Dominus -- jejunavit 40 dies, and haereditatem nobis
jejunii derelinquens ad esum corporis sui sub hoc numero animas nostras
praeparat. And on Isa. 58 Dominus quadraginta diebus in solitudine jejunavit,
ut nobis solennes jejuniorum dies relinqueret. The Lord fasted forty days in
the wilderness, and has thereby sanctified the Christians fast, and left to us
the solemn days of fastings, leaving to us that inheritance of the fast, and
preparing our souls to the eating of his body under this number of forty. They
should consider, whether, I say, Irenaeus himself can no where be found (beside
if in that Epistle) to have given some such fair intimation. I shall produce a
passage from him at large, because I have not seen it by any observed to this
purpose: it is in his fifth book against heresies, c. 18. Primo quidem diebus
40 jejunus [ Dominus] similiter ut Moses and Helias postea esuriit, ut hominem
eum verum and firmum intelligamus; proprium enim est hominis jejunantis
esurire. Deinde autem ut baberet Adversarius ubi congrederetur. Quoniam enim in
principio per escam non esurientem hominem seduxit transgredi praeceptum Dei,
in fine esurientem non potuit dissuadere eam, quae a Deo esset, sustinere
escam. -- Quae ergo suit in Paradiso repletio hominis per duplicem gustationem,
dissoluta est per eam, quae fuit in hoc mundo indigentiam [ seu inediam] --
Quoniam enim initio homini suasit transgredi praeceptum factoris, and ideo eum
habuit in sua potestate; potestas autem est transgressio and Apostasia, and his
colligavit hominem [ lapsum.] Per hominem ipsum [ Christum] iterum oportebat
victum eum contrario colligari iisdem vinculis, quibus alligavit hominem; ut
homo [ qui lapsus fuerat and colligatus] solutus revertatur ad suum Dominuns,
illa vincula relinquens [ gulae inter caetera] per quae ipse fuerat alligatus,
i. e. transgressionis -- NOS AUTEM SOLUTOS PER IPSUM PRAECEPTUM DOCUIT
ESURIENTES QUIDEM SUSTINERE EAM, QUAE A DEO DATUR, ESCAM. First of all (the
Lord) fasting forty days, like as Moses and Elias had done, was afterward an
hungered, that we might know him to be true and undoubted man; for that it
properly belongs to man when he fasts to be an hungered. Next also that Satan
might have a field to fight in and encounter him: for because in the beginning
the Devil seduced man by food to transgress the precepts of God, while he
consented not to abstain; therefore in the end the Devil was not able to
dissuade [the man Christ Jesus] from waiting for that food, which is given of
God -- The repletion therefore of man which was in Paradise by the double
tasting [ viz. of Adam and Eve] was dissolved through that abstinence, which
[Christ] exercised in the world: for in as much as in the beginnning [Satan]
persuaded man to transgress the precept of his Maker; and therefore had man
delivered into his own power. (which his power over man lay in man's
transgression and apostasy, wherewith he held man fast bound) therefore it was
needful, that he should by man himself [the Man Christ Jesus] be himself again
overcome, and be in contrary manner himself bound fast in the same bonds,
wherewith he had bound man: [ viz. in the trial of eating and abstinence] that
man who had been bound being now loosed [by Christ] might return to his own
Lord, leaving those bonds [ viz. of being led by the belly to obey Satan]
wherewith he had been held fast bound, the bonds of his transgression. -- FOR
HE HAS TAUGHT US (NOW LOOSED BY HIS COMMAND IT SELF) THAT HUNGRING, OR
FASTING, WE SHOULD SO WAIT FOR THAT FOOD, WHICH IS GIVEN OF GOD. [ viz. I
understand the holy food of his body and blood then wont most solemnly to be
received by all Christian people at Easter, after their fastings; as appears by
the Allegations in Irenaeus his time of such fasts ending in the feast of
Easter, according to traditions and customs much elder then Irenaeus, and
delivered from the Apostles. And he must be much ignorant of Christianity, who
can doubt, whether the most solemn Christian festival in the year were, or not,
a solemn time of receiving the Holy Sacrament. If forty-days abstinence were
not in public use in Irenaeus's time, it must be more then strange, how Origin
living so near his time, should in the name of Christians say: Habemus enim
Quadragesimae dies jejuniis consecratos. And those there by him remembered, as
his first instance of abstinentia Christiana; Not that we may, says he, let
loose the reins of Christian abstinence; hom. 10 in Levit. These Homilies are
Origens's own, says Gerard, and these fasts of the Quadragesima are the
Christians own, says Origin. Who it cannot be wondered should mention the
Quadragesima in his Homilies, who in his eighth book against Celsus,
acknowledges and defends egainst Celsus the common manner of all Christians in
observance of the (...). (Of which Tertullian before had said, speaking of a
custom common to the Catholics with his Montanists: Cur Pascha celebramus
annuo circulo? -- Cur dicamus and jejuniis Parasceuen?) For we have the days of
Quadragesima [or the forty days] consecrated to fastings. [ viz. a consecrated
chief part of the Christian abstinence] About this time might that Canon be
made, the 68th. among the Apostolical Canons (confirmed in the second Canon of
the sixth general Council in Trullo) under severe penalty censuring either
Bishop, or Priest, or other Clergy, or Lay. (...). If any should not fast the
holy Quadragesima, or space of forty, which preceeds the Pasch, or Easter.
Which as to the sanction of penalty and strictness of precept we yield not to
be from the Apostles, but from the successors of the Apostles, in their
respective times to the Churches governed by them. A precept Ecclesiastical
only as to the commanded number of forty, which yet was, if not then, in the
ages of the Church since, GENERALLY commanded, as may appear by the 50, 51, 52.
Canons of the Council of Laodicaea, and those Canons ratified in the fourth and
sixth general Councels. Which Canons of Laodicaea provide, not only for the
keeping (...), and again (...) but also that men should beware, (...), to
dishonor the fast of forty days. Yet though such abstinence of forty days were
not commanded by the Apostles, but by the Church, we have shown
notwithstanding, that it was of Apostolical recommendation. And who is there
not almost since the writings of Christian Bishops came to be more frequent,
and to be better preserved unto our hands ( viz. since the days of Constantine)
which does not witness so much at least? We have but even now recited St.
Austin and St. Hierom. Briefly, there is not one of the twenty four indubitable
Paschal Epistles, or Homilies of Theophilus, and St. Cyril of Alexandria, which
does not witness the abstinence of forty days before Easter, to have descended
from the Apostles, or from instruction Evangelical from the Lord, (which also
was not taught the world, but by the Apostles.) For the several testimonies of
St. Ambrose in Millan, Leo in Rome, of Basil, and Gregory Nazianzen in the
East, of Chrysologus, Caesarius and others, I rather refer you to the preceding
discourse from p. 46. and forward, then here repeat them. It remains now to
show in what sense the observance of the forty days was of constitution only
Ecclesiastical. And such it was first, if we respect the precept of fasting
forty days: secondly, if we respect the several sanctions of Ecclesiastical
penalties, which the Governors of the Church did, and might justly, as they
saw cause, decree: thirdly, in respect of some particular kinds of meats
prohibited with the allowance of others (because such distinction generally may
be profitable to the ends of fasting) within the compass yet of which law, and
of the letter of it, men may (for so may any humane law be abused) choose to
themselves such of the meats allowed, as may be but an exchange of pleasures,
and in no wise less contrary to the ends of fasting, then the meats forbidden.
Which argues, as the shifting wickedness of sensuality, so also the
imperfection of any law, that can by men be set about matters in themselves so
various and infinite, unless it meet with such, as obey the laws of their
superiors for conscience sake, and in their conscience bearing honest and
faithful regard to the end of the law; this will be found true, whether we
consider the rules of the Ancients, concerning their (...), or the more modern
prohibitions of all flesh, but the flesh of Fish, or in other places also of
lacticinia, milkmeats, or elsewhere also of some fruits. St. Aust. l. 30. con.
Faust. Manich. cap. 3. - 5.
And yet may there be chosen such dry meats, or such fish, or such unforbidden
fruits, or even such panis deliciarum, bread of delight; as no man can pretend
that any Apostle ever thought better of, for the mortifying the flesh, or
humbling the soul, then of some sort of food by the Church forbidden. And yet
the law may to the generality be profitable; and when it is a law (undispensed
with) must be obeyed, and when it is abused by the devices of fleshly minds,
the fault is theirs.

Fourthly, The observation of forty days is a constitution Ecclesiastical also,
as to some purposes of the Church, such as are those above mentioned; which
will best appear by the words of such ancient authors, as sometimes have called
the observance of forty days a constitution of the Church. We will begin with
that most remarkable one in St. Chrysostomes hom. (...) (...) (...), have
prescribed, delineated, set a stamp up on, figured ou^, or copied unto us 40
days of Fast, etc.
(...) etc. Many of old have been wont to come to the mysteries, or Sacrament
indifferently* and at adventure [as if simply to come only, and eat were
sufficient] especially at this season [of Easter, or the great week] on which
Christ delivered it. The Fathers therefore knowing well, and aware of the harm
which proceeds from such careless coming to the Sacrament, meeting together
have prescribed forty days of Fasting, of prayers, of hearing of the word, of
Synods [for correction of evil manners and abuses] that all of us together
being in these days, purified with all diligent care, both by prayers, and by
alms, and by fasting, and by whole-nights-watches, and by tears, and by
confession [or the whole (...) of penances, and satisfaction to the Church] and
by all other means, might so come to the Sacrament with a pure conscience; so
far as is possible to us. And that they have wrought great reformation and
good, working us to a habit and custom of fasting, is manifest. Where first we
are to observe, that even laws also Apostolical in some sort, may by the
Churches Governors be reinforced, pressed, and envigorated in new Canons,
Sanctions, and Decrees, where they shall see it needful. Secondly, Much more
things which descend from Recommendation Apostolical may upon some appearing
emergent need be by them made laws Ecclesiastical, for some times, and places.
Thirdly, That the Appropriation of such season of forty days to some such
purposes, as by this our Author here are named, viz. for (...) of offenders any
way made known; their Confessions, and satisfactions to the Church, for public
hearing of Sermons, for public night-watches and constant fastings, for Synods
of Bishops (designed to the correction of evil manners, and abuses) may be
properly by an order, rule, and application Ecclesiastical; a (...) of the
Fathers of the Church; and yet the Recommendation of those forty days to
especial abstinence and Devotion, (especially unto the generality of
Christians, who do not, This exception Cassianus makes above.
as some (...), or Religious, exercise themselves in fastings, as it were all
the year long) be Apostolical. For even S. Chrysostom who wrote this: [(...)]
yet in Hom. 11. on Genesis, speaking of the forty days observed by that Church
in about eight weeks, with exemption of each Saturday and Sunday, tells his
Auditors that (...). In the holy time of Lent, to such as undertake this course
of fasting THE LORD HAS INDULGED these two [weekly] days, like certain
stages, or inns, shores, or havens, that both the body may be a little relaxed
from its labors of the fasting, etc. Where by saying the Lord has indulged
those days, he at least implies, that the Lord has directed, and recommended
the other. And he uses the same word in that place of (...).

A second Authority, is that of S. Hierom upon Galat. 4. where having recorded
together the observation quartae Sabbati, parasceues, dici Dominicae, jejunii
Quadragesimae, and Festivitatis Paschae, ac Pentecostes, Of the fourth day of
the week, and of Friday, of the Lord's Day, and of the Fast of the Quadragesima,
or forty days of Lent, and of the Festivities of Easter and Pentecost, which
some might object against, as the observation of days, and months, and times:
He answers, Ad quod qui simpliciter respondebit, dicet, non eosdem iudaicae
observationis dies esse, quos nostros -- Et ne inordinata congregatio populi
fidem minueret in Christo, propterea dies aliqui constituti sunt, ut in unum
omnes pariter veniremus: Non quo celebrior sit dies illa* qua convenimus* sed
quo quacunque die conveniendum sit, ex conspectu mutuo laetitia major oriatur.
Qui vero oppositae quaestioni acutius respondere conatur, illud affirmat, Omnes
dies aequales esse; n^c per Parasceuen tantum Christum Cruci^igi, and die
Dominica resurgere; sed semper sanctum Resurrectionis esse diem, A like answer
Origin makes to Celsus l. 8. Quod (...) qu^ nobis ex advers^ regerat nostras
Domin^ces, parasceuasque, aut Pascha, aut Pentecosten recurrentes solenniter.
Respondendum est and ad hoc: quod qui persectus est Ratione, operihus,
cogitationibus* perpetuo haerens D^ and verbo naturali nostro Domino, semper
^git Dies Domini, (seu Dominico^) and nunquam non habet Diem Dominicum.
and semper eum carne vesci Dominica: ^junia autem and congregationes inter
dies, propter ^os, and A VIRIS PRUDENTIBUS CONSTITUTOS, qui magis seculo vacant
quam Deo: n^c possunt, imo nolunt, toto in Ecclesia vitae suae tempore
congregari, and ante humanos actus Deo orationum suarum offerre sacrificium. --
Itaque sicut nobis licet vel jejunare semper, vel semper orar^, and diem
Dominicam accepto Domini corpore indesinenter celebrare gaudentibus: Non ita
and Iudaeis ^as est omni tempore immolare agnum, etc. To which, he which will
answer simply, shall say, that the days of Judaical observance are not the
same, which are ours. -- And le^t the inordinate congregation of the people
should lessen their faith in Christ; therefore certain days are appointed,
that we might all meet together in one. Not that such day wherein we meet is
more excellent, but that on whatsoever day we meet, a greater joy may arise
unto us from seeing each other. Howbeit, he who endeavors more acutely to
satisfy the Objection opposed, affirms that all days are equal, that neither
Christ is only crucified on Goodfriday, nor rises again only on the Lord's Day,
but that the Holy Day of his Resurrection is always, and that he always feeds
on the flesh of the Lord. But that Fasts and Congregations on certain days
were appointed by wise men, for their sakes, who are more employed in the
world, then toward God; who neither can, yea nor will assemble themselves in
the Church, the whole time of their life, and offer up the sacrifice of their
prayers unto God before humane actions -- -- Therefore not as it is lawful unto
us, either to fast always, or to pray always, and receiving the Lords body
with joy incessantly to celebrate a Lords day; not so I say, was it lawful to
the Jews, on every day to offer up the [Paschal] Lamb, etc. Here first we are
to observe, that both the Objection and the Answer of S. Hierom in express
terms proceed equally of the Lord's Day, as of the Fast of Lent, or of the
Stations, or of the Feast of Easter: So as that the Opposers of this Paschal
Fast, if they will with us own the Lord's Day to have been delivered to us from
the Lord, and from the Apostles, are with us concerned, to give a fair and just
interpretation unto S. Hierom's words. Secondly, that all days are in
themselves equal. Thirdly, that the Difference betwixt the Jews observation of
days, and times, and months from the Christians, is, that many of their chief
services of God, as their offering the Paschal Lamb, or the Sacrifice of
Atonement, and the like, might not by them be performed, but on such days
only, to which by God they were restrained. But there is no such high service
of Christianity, (as the Holy Eucharist, Public Confessions of sins, and
Praises, the service of public Prayers, and of Preaching, and Hearing Gods
Word) which may not upon just occasion be performed unto Almighty God
acceptably on any day. Fourthly, That the great benefits and mercies given us
by God, such as are His Son's Birth, and Dying for us, and Resurrection, His
Ascension, and sending down the Holy Ghost, are of us always to be remembered.
Fifthly, that notwithstanding it is needful to the Ghostly health of the
Generality of Christian people, and profitable to all, that a weekly Lord's Day
should be, as there is, prescribed unto all from God, and Christ, and taught us
by his Apostles, on the day of his Resurrection, the first day of the week, and
not any other, weekly day to be the Lord's Day; and also annual days, for the
memory of Christ's Passion, Resurrection, etc. which we have been taught also
from the same Apostles, as the same Catholic Church practices, and witnesses
in all ages. Sixthly, That to look on the perfection of some few, who are
daily, and as it were, continual in Fastings, in Prayers, in receiving the Holy
Eucharist, in Hearing God's Word, etc. and not to look on or regard the
imperfection and weakness of the generality of Christian people; which neither
can, as S. Hierom says, and much more will not; (such is the imperfect
disposition of their minds) assemble themselves daily, is a great want of the
perfection of charity and wisdom, which shines in the Church of God. Seventhly,
That therefore certain days for Fasts, and for Congregations for the sake of
Gods people have been appointed by wisdom given from God. Eighthly, That
whereas S. Hierom says, such days have been appointed by wise men, we trust
that since it was a wisdom needful in all ages, and as well in the Apostles
times, (especially in some distance of time after the great measures of the
Spirit had been given in the Descent of the Holy Ghost at Jerusalem) in some
degree, as in aftertimes, which appears by the Apostles complaint of his
Corinthians, and Galatians, and of the Hebrews forsaking the assembling of
themselves together, cap. 10 We trust, I say, they will allow the Apostles to
have been filled with the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Wisdom for that purpose,
that they should be for the Churches present and perpetual good, men wise in
their constitutions principally; that as S. Paul said of himself, in some of
his written Constitutions, 1 Cor. 7. 12. To the rest speak I, not the Lord, (
viz. not by express word, when he was upon earth, as he had that of verse. 10.
11.) and verse. 40. She is happier after my judgment; and yet in both those he
thought, and we think also, that he had the Spirit of God: so some things are
said to be constituted by men, and not the Lord, (which yet is more then S.
Hierom said in this case) when not expressly commanded by the Lords own mouth on
earth, though they be constituted by such men, as were constituted by God, to
guide his Church infallibly: By those, we mean the Apostles of the Lord. And so
constituted was the Lord's Day, and the Paschal-Fast of Lent, and the Feast of
Easter, etc. certainly according to S. Hierom's meaning; as appears by his own
express words: Nos unam Quadragesimam toto anno tempore nobis congruo secundum
Traditionem Apostolorum jejunamus: We fast one Lent within the compass of the
whole year, [not three, as the Montainsts] in a fit season, according to the
Tradition of the Apostles. And yet thrice he says, that the Fast of the forty
days was sanctified by the Lord, was left as an inheritance from the Lord, l.
2. Con. Iovin. and on Ion. 3. and Isa. 58.

But it may well be from the Lord, and from the Apostles, (as above declared
and proved) and yet from the Church [from wise men and Governors in the
Church] as to the inviting, occasioning thereby and compelling such, as S.
Hierom there describes, qui nolunt, which otherwise would not assemble
themselves in the Church, as to the Congregationes inter dies, which he
mentions.

A third Author, which is produced, is Victor. Antiochenus, (living in the
same Age with St. Hierom,) on Mark 2. where he thus writes; Enimvero inter eos
qui in Moyse, and eos rursum, qui in lege gratiae Iejuniis dant operam, hoc
praeter caetera interest; quod illi quidem jejunia a Deo praefinita habebant,
quae proinde modis omnibus explere obligabantur, etiamsi alias noluissent. Hi
vero virtutis amore, liberaque voluntatis electione jejunant verius, quam ulla
omnino legis coactione. Quod si vero Quadragesimale, vel aliud quodc unque
jejunium definitum habemus, propter ignavos and negligentes, quo nimirum ii
quoque officium faciant, praefinitum habemus. Studio^i namque pietat^que dediti
certo animi consilio, propensaque voluntate jejunium illud persolvunt, magis
quam ulla omnino legis aut praecepti vi compulsi. Betwixt those truly, which
fast under the Law of Moses, and those again which fall under the Law of
Christ, there is this difference beside others, that they indeed had their
Fasts predefined by God, [ viz. by his express written Law for the number,
manner, and rigor thereof] which they were by all means obliged to fulfill,
although otherwise they would not. But these fast more truly from the love of
virtue, and free choice of will, than by any coaction at all of Law. And if we
have a Quadragesimal Fast, or any other defined, it is for the slothful and
negligent, that they to wit may do their duty, that we have it so predefined.
For they which are studious, and virtuous, and devoted to piety do pay that
Fast by a certain purpose of of their mind, and ready will, rather than
compelled by any force at all of Law or Precept. Here you are first to
remember, that I have above laid down this concession, that the Precept or Law
of Fasting forty days is of Constitution Ecclesiastical only. Albeit even
forty days abstinence we have showed to be of Apostolical recommendation. To
this Victor's words here agree, concerning the Fast Quadragesimal, or of forty
days; which (if we abstract from Law Ecclesiastical) Christians perform verius
virtutis amore, quam ulla omnino legis coactione. Or as also he said a little
before, Non quod aliqua legis necessitate ad hoc adigentur; -- sed quod hoc
medium veluti salutare, and opportunum ad virtutis, perfection^sque studium suo
postea tempore, adhibituri sint. Which agrees with what we have observed from
our Lord's words Luke 5. (...); that they are partly a Prediction, In those
days they will fast, by a certain Law of gratitude, which the Apostles would
practice and teach the Church, more truly, than by any coaction of Law, as
Victor here says. Such coaction of Law Victor declares himself here to mean, as
was the coaction of fear, compelling them to fulfill those Fasts, Quae modis
omnibus explore obligabantur, etiamsi alias noluissent. Though otherwise they
would not. Not as the Christians from the force of love, and by the Law of
gratitude, and of a ready mind: Quod hoc medium veluti salutare and opportunum
suo posted tempore adhibituri sint. Secondly, we are to observe, that Victor
here does not deny, but rather grant some sort of Law, and constitution for,
some time and season of fasting given to Christians; while he says, Quod si
vero Quadragesimale, vel aliud quodc unque jejunium definitum habemus; and
forthwith adds [ habemus praefinitum] We have such Fast prescribed. And a
little after, Iejunium illud persolvunt, they pay that Fast; therefore that
Fast was their duty; though that duty they performed magis propensa voluntate,
quam ulla legis vi compulsi; verius amore virtutis, liberaque voluntatis
electione, (choosing the things that please God) quam ulla omnino coactione
legis. This being from the law of the spirit of bondage, the other from no less
a true law of the Spirit of Love. (...), they will, and shall fast. Where
though (...) be not expressed, yet it is as well included in the word, as when
he says, John 19. 16. (...), And they shall, they will hear my voice. And
Matthew. 21. 41. They shall, they will render unto him the fruits of the
vineyard. Thirdly, when Victor says, Propter ignavos and negligentes jejunium
praefinitum habemus, that we have a law (if any says he) of the Quadragesimal
Fast prefined or prescribed by reason of the slothful and negligent. Of which
sort there are and ever will be many in the Church amongst the generality of
Christians, whose consideration must not be contemned, but ever was ground
sufficient for the prefinition of some law* of fasting to be given in general:
which being given, all must obey, as well those which yet equally would do it
without a law, as others who need such a law. The strong this way also bearing
the infirmities of the weak. Of this see more in our Interpretation last given
to St. Hierom's words. Fourthly, the entire occasion and ground of Victor's
words was his scope to show, that the Iudaical Fasts did not now oblige the
Apostles or Christian people, as appears by his preceding words: Cum enim
Apostoli novi T. praecones and doctores sint instituti, non debent nunc veterem
caeremoniarum, and observationum legibus obstringi. Vos itaque [ O Pharisaei]
qui priscis illis ritibus and consuetudinibus etiamnum addicti, obstrictique
haereticis, Mosaica jejunia merito observatis. Isti vero qui ut nova anteque
inaudita praecepta and leges hominibus tradant designati sunt, ad vestras
jejunationes hoc tempore compelli non debent, nec jure quoque valent. At suis
nihilominus locis una cum caeteris virtutibus, jejunii quoque observam iam and
Religionem ostensuri sunt. Non quod aliqua legis necessitate [ h. e. legis
terrore] ad haec adigentur, aut quod vestro more, aut sensu, veteribus ritibus
adhuc insistendum arbitrabuntur. For since the Apostles are appointed Preachers
and Teachers of the New Testament, they ought not now to be bound by the laws
of the old Ceremonies and observances. You therefore [O Pharisees, viz. those
that came to the Lord, Mar. 2.] who as yet addict your selves to those old
rites and customs, and are bound up by Heretics, full well do ye observe the
Mosaical Fasts; But they who were designed to deliver unto men new Precepts and
Laws, not before heard of, ought not, and in right cannot be compelled to your
Fastings in this time, [ viz. of the Gospel.] But nevertheless they shall also
together with other virtues show forth their OBSERVANCE AND RELIGION OF FASTING
IN ITS PROPER PLACES OR SEASONS. [ viz. In those days when the Bridegroom shall
be taken from them, to which Victor was here speaking, on Mark 2.] Not that
they shall be driven, or compelled thereunto by some legal necessity, [ viz. as
of old by terror of Law, nor by any express written Precept of God] or that
they shall deem, that they ought after your manner and sense insist still on
the old Rites, or Rites of the old Law. The sum is: The Christian Law of
Liberty (which is not less obliging, because such) is principally a Law of
Gratitude, which is not wont to have all its measures, and manner and degrees
minutely, and expressly defined. Yet such obligation it has to some great
Evangelical mercies, and benefits from God, (as are these of which we speak, of
Christ's Agony, Death, and Passion for our sins, and his being raised from the
dead for our Justification) that never did any Apostle, or other ancient
Christians think the Christian Church less obliged to the solemn memory of the
former at the set season, or time thereof, in the public Religion of Fasting
(by them that were well able and knowing thereof) or of the latter on the
solemn joy or Festivity of Easter, than the Jews were, (though not bound by any
express written precept as they) to their observation of their Paschal feast,
or their Humiliation on the day of Atonement. For no Christian heart may deny,
that the Evangelical benefits and mercies which we have received of God beyond
what they had, does as much increase our obligation in that regard beyond
theirs, as their precept was, and needed to be more, expressly written than
ours. Yet (...), they shall fast, so shall their obligation, and their needs
require. (...), they will fast, so will their gratitude and love compel them,
according to that of Psalm. 110 Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy
power. Therefore we said also, that the abstinence for such measures of time as
their forty days, (if ye abstract from law Ecclesiastical) was of Tradition,
but that of recommendation, Apostolical. For there were as I have shown you
from the ancients, some observances (...), by precept, and some (...), some
left to the willing choice of devotion, ab Apostolis tradita and commendata (as
St. Austin speaks l. 2. de Baptismo. con. Donatistas) Hence it is, that Saint
Hierom writes in his Epistle 22. ad Eustochium: Iejunium totius anni aequale
est [perhaps he means in each week ordinarily, and at the four seasons of the
year equally distributed] excepta Quadragesima, in qua CONCEDITUR districtius
vivere: Except the fast of forty days, in which we have fair leave to live
more severely. So also in his seventh Epistle to Laeta, about the bringing up
of her daughter. Prohibens in tenella aetate onera abstinentiae; in
Quadragesima tamen (inquit) continentiae vela pandenda sunt; and tota aurigae
retinacula equis laxanda properantibus. Severe burdens of abstinence are not to
be laid on tender years; yet in Lent says he, you may hoise up sails to her
abstinence, and lay loose upon the neck all the reins, when ye see her of her
own forwardness speeding. The Quadragesimal fast has a goodly space, and
lovely recommendation for our exercise therein. (...).
(...), says St. Cyril Patriarch of Jerusalem Catech. 1. You have the space of
penance or repentance, the forty days, you have a large opportunity both for
putting off [the old garments] and washing your self clean, and of putting on
[the wedding garments] and of entering in [into the marriage feast.] And indeed
as the property of the grace of the Gospel would, that much should be left to
the willing choice of our Christian thankfulness; so the nature it self of
humane bodies and minds makes it not reasonable, so much as generally to
prescribe the same measures. Which St. Basil the great, observed to himself l.
(...) ad (...). Neither is it possible to prescribe any the same law for the
time of men's refection, nor for the manner, nor for the measure. Yea of this
very Paschal fast Gregory Nazianzen in his fortieth Oration thus wisely
teaches us, comparing Christ's forty days fast, and our Paschal abstinence he
says: (...). Christ fasted a little before his temptation; we before Easter;
the matter of fastings is one -- Christ indeed fasted forty days; for he was
God; but we proportionate this to our power: though zeal carry some beyond
their strength. Though this be so plain, yet at last I expect to have it
objected, that so many of the Fathers, even by me produced, do call the fast of
forty days, not only a tradition, but also a precept of the Apostles, or of the
Lord. As when St. Ambrose says l. de Iejun. and Elia, Behold through the
mercies of God we have passed through the indicted fasts of Quadragesima, or
forty days; and have fulfilled with the devotion of abstinence the commands of
the Lord. But this he might say, though all the forty days were not, if
something within it, were commanded of God. But when the abstinence of forty
days is expressly mentioned, it is more frequently then said, that it is
according to tradition, or institution, or instruction Apostolical, or
Evangelical, than by precept of the Gospel, or of the Apostles. And if in some
instance it be called their precept, when the extent of forty days is
mentioned; since such speeches occur much more seldom, we are to interpret
them by the more usual. The love of Christ in some sort constrains, where no
precept of his, or his Apostles enjoyneth. It is easy to show, that some
seldom times we are to allow authors to use those words (...), mandatum,
praescriptum, and jussio, or the like, not in their whole rigor. It is St.
Austin who is wont to be objected, against not only the forty days, but any
time of Paschal fast; for those his words: Praecepto Domini, vel Apostolorum
non invenio definitum, in his Epistle 86. ad Casulanum* Yet the same St. Austin
elsewhere on Psalm. 110. seems to press on the other hand as far: Quadragenario
numero, quo and Moses, and Elias, and ipse Dominus jejunaverunt: Praecipitur
enim nobis and ex lege, and ex Prophetis, and ex ipso Evangelio, etc. Candor
must reconcile these his sayings to one another: But if men will not be candid,
he himself interposes: Non invenimus in Evangelicis and Apostolieis literis
evidenter praeceptum. This temper is needful to his words, as to the Paschal
fast it self, and as to the extent, and degree of it, betwixt his praecipitur
nobis [above] numero quadragenario; and that other sentence of his, l. 3.
contr. Faustum c. 5. vel certis diebus atque temporibus, (sicut per
Quadragesimam fere omnes) quanto magis quisque vel minus, seu voluerit, seu
potuerit. It is evident, that something he thought of precept, and something of
counsel left unto free devotion therein.

CHAP. VII. An Answer to the Objections of the Presbyterians from pretense of
some ancient Ecclesiastical Writers, in the 65, 66, and 67. pages of their
Grand Debate in 40.
HEre first is published by our brethren the sum of their desires: It is
desired that nothing should be in the Liturgy, which so much as seems to
countenance the observation of Lent, as a Religious fast, i. e. It is desired,
that what has been part of the Religious observance of this renowned Church of
Christ, the Church of Brittany, as is most probable, ever since it was a
Christian Church, from the days of the Apostles unto this present time (except
if at any time Christianity it self has for some years here been overrun with
Paganism) both before the corruption of Popery, and under it, and ever since
the Reformation, should now at their instance, as men that have brought unto us
new light, be wholly expunged. That whereas there stands now in this Churches
public service of God, no less then twenty five leaves relating to the
Religious observance of Lent; care now be taken, that nothing should be left,
which may continue, yea or countenance, (they add also) or so much as seem to
countenance that part of our Churches service of God. As for the testimonies
cited by us, they pronounce them to be to little purpose; for that they deny
not, that the custom of observing Lent, either fewer days, or more, to have
been as ancient as those Authors, viz. St. Chrysostom, St. Cyril, St. Austin,
and St. Hierome. Nor do they deny it so anciently by St. Hierome there cited to
that purpose, to have been witnessed a tradition Apostolical; and by how many
more, they may if they please, see in this Treatise. What exceptions now
against Lent, are made in their own conceptions and words we (esteeming such of
less weight, therefore) shall speak to, but in the second place. We begin first
to examine, what they lay pretense to in Antiquity; where first they begin with
Tertullian de Iejun. c. 14. Si omnem in totum devotionem temporum and dierum,
and mensium, and annorum, erasit Apostolus, cur Pascha celebramus annuo circulo
in mense primo? Cur quadraginta inde diebus in omni exultatione decurrimus? Cur
stationibus quartam and sextam Sabbati dicamus? Et jejuniis Parasceuen?
Quanquam vosetiam Sabbatum siquando continuatis; nunquam nisi in Pascha
jejunandum, etc. And c. 15. [Excusing that rigor of their fasts] Quantula est
apud nos interdictio ciborum duas in anno hebdomadas Xerophagiarum, nec totas,
exceptis soil. Sabbatis, and dominicis offerimus Deo. Which words of your
Author, for so much as you english not to your Reader, (as neither any that
follow) we shall not trouble our selves to do it, by syllables. Out of the same
Author c. 2. you subjoyn: Neque de caetero differenter jejunandum, ex arbitrio,
non ex imperio novae disciplinae, pro temporibus, and causis uniuscujusque; sic
and Apostolos observasse, nullum aliud imponentes jugum certorum, and in
commune omnibus obeundorum jejuniorum. This is your strength from Tertullian.
Now beside much, which you omit in those Chapters, which is for the Paschal
fast against you; what one word is there in what you cite for you against the
Paschal fast of Lent? By Lent we understand that which is mentioned in the
Common Prayer Book; for that only your request mentions, and desires to be
removed. Now Lent, as there you may discern by our prayer to God, and services,
is indeed a Religious fast, properly so called, an Anniversary fast,
forerunning in our Common Prayer Book, and in our observance, the feast of
Easter. Now what word can any man discern in all this of Tertullian, that can
make ought against such anniversary, religious fast before Easter? If any thing
could have been made, either you or your Printer, we cannot tell which, would
have done it, by changing as we see a very material word: [ itaque jejunandum]
into [ neque jejunandum.] But let that be the Printers mistake, yours are
greater, to think any of that, which you do produce from Tertullian, helps your
cause. For you here granting us what cannot be denied, that the Psychici here
with Tertullian are the Catholics; then Tertullian here mentions first as a
practice common to the Catholics, and the Montanists, that they did both
celebrate annually Easter: and that forty days after, ( Tertullian says fifty)
the Church spent in a holy joy, or exultation, ( viz from Easter to
Whitsuntide.) Secondly, That the Church did observe two weekly stations,
Wednesday, and Friday (on which the Church of England has her public Litanies
enjoined in all Churches.) Thirdly, that the Catholics did especially exercise
on Good Friday fasting; and sometimes at least, continued on Saturday.
Fourthly, that other fasts were not to be prescribed by new Schismatical
teachers, (whereof Montanus was then head.) And fifthly, as for the [ nullum
aliud, etc.] ye have wholly left out that, to which it refers: certos dies a
Deo constitutos. Which you would not let your Reader know, that the Catholics
(as you confess they were, that spoke) did plead that they had certain days of
fastings appointed by God; that no other yoke ( viz. by teachers only such as
Montanus was) was to be imposed of fasts in common to be observed; (for as to
their Governors Tertullian does acknowledge in the Chapt. before what you
cite, that it was received in custom with the Catholics, that they which had
the rule over them, did beside those fasts constituted by God, indict
occasional fasts. Sixthly, that the Montanists, and Tertull. society, as to
their fasting, took to a singular way themselves different from the Church and
Catholics, for which they were here contested with; and that new way was of
two weeks chosen at their own pleasure, and kept in their Montanist
congregations, observed in dry or hard diet. Seventhly, that this new way being
taught by Montanus, as a doctrine from God, different from the certain days
appointed the Church by God (as the Catholics there contend) was justly
chargeable with that which St. Paul blames in the Galatians: Observing days
and times; viz. besides what was appointed by God, as the Lord's Day and those
they mentioned, Certos dies a Deo constitutos. These are all the Propositions,
which are contained in all you cite from Tertullian. Now what one word is here
against the Religious Fast of Lent before Easter, as observed in our Common
prayer book? One would think the whole allegation had been gathered by some one
of your Adversaries, for the Church of England against you. For tell us we pray
you, that we may run through all the seven; First, Is it your society, or the
Church of England, that observes annually the Feast of Easter? and 50 days
after from that Feast unto Whitsunday in exultation and joy, [ viz. spiritual]
for Christ's Resurrection and Ascension? Secondly, Are the weekly Wednesda^es
and Fridaies by you, or by the Church of England rather regarded? Let her
Litanies on both days, and her customary Fasts on Fridaies witness. Thirdly,
Fasting specially exercised on Good-fridaies; is this the thing which you
allege for your selves against the Common Prayer Book of the Church of
England, and against the Religious* Fast of Lent before Easter? Fourthly, Is
the Church of England's public observance of the Fast of Lent, the
prescription of fasts by private Schismatical Teachers, such as* Montanus was?
whose authority in requiring fasts, is more like Montanus's, the Church of
Englands, or any private men's within her? Fifthly, As to the Nullum aliud; viz.
praeter certos dies a Deo constitutos, and in Evangelio determinatos, illos in
quibus ablatus est sponsus) whose prescribed fasting-daies, the Church of
England's religious Fast of Lent, or other men's indicted fasts, are more likely
to be meant by the Catholics in Tertullian, saying that they had certain days
constituted by God, and determined in the Gospel, those, viz. in which the
Bridegroom was taken away? Sixthly, Whether does the Church of England in her
observing the Religious Fast of Lent, or others in separating from the
observance of that Fast, more resemble the Montanists different singular ways?
Seventhly, the certain days appointed by God, in which the Bridegroom was
taken away; beside which, for teachers to press a fixed annual Fast, any other,
without the authority of lawful Governors, was charged by the Church as
observing of days, and times, and months, and years; are, I say, those days
more likely to be the public religious fasts before Easter, which the Church
of England observes, or some other you can show us? This is all you have, but
much more you might have brought from Tertullian to the same sense; as that the
Catholics objected to those new teachers, Novitatem, de cujus illicito
praescribunt, c. 1. They object to them Novelty against the unlawfulness
whereof they prescribe. They the Catholics, prescribe also against the
Montanists, Constituta esse solennia huic fidei Scripturis, vel Traditione
majorum; nihilque observationis amplius adjiciendum ob illicitum innovationis.
The next Author you allege, is a fragment of Irenaeus's Epistle in Eusebius. l.
5. c. 6. which how much it makes against you, and for the religious
Paschal-Fast of Lent, I have shown you through the whole 5. chapter of this
Appendix; where I have considered, that passage of Irenaeus, both in it self,
and in relation to you; whither I refer you, and the reader. To Socrates (with
Sozomen, and Nicephorus,) we shall speak in the last place, because there is
much laid on him. And now consider the rest of your helps to expound S. Hierom,
who calls the Fast of Lent a Tradition Apostolical. To this you say, citing
Regaltius a modern Critic, that S. Hierom, and others calling it an
Apostolical Tradition, did it with respect to Christ's forty days; and what
then we pray you? Is that against the religious observation of the Fast of Lent
in our Common Prayer Book? where our Church thus prays: O Lord, which for our
sakes did fast forty days, and forty nights, give us grace to use such
abstinence, that our flesh being subdued unto the spirit, etc. So that what S.
Hierom and the other Fathers you say did respect, the same does our Church and
our Common Prayer Book respect, viz. Christ's forty days fast. And how is your
objection against the Common Prayer Book helped by that? To what you say, that
they did not intend themselves any such thing, as any fast of forty days, how
apparently false that is found to be, you may read, for S. Hierom in the 54,
and 55. pages of this Discourse; and for the rest in the rest of the discourse.
Next you teach us how to expound S. Hierom, by that in his Epistle ad Lucin.
Unaquaeque provincia abundet in suo sensu, and praecepta majorum leges
Apostolicas arbitretur. If this were as you mean, whether do the observers of
the Religious Fast of Lent, or you who dissent, defer more to Praecepta
majorum, the Precepts of our Ancestors? Secondly, S. Hierom does not here say,
that such precepts in several provinces were to be held pro Traditionibus
Apostolicis. To the obedience of wholesome customs Ecclesiastical, whiles they
are not retracted by those, who rule over us, (and of such only S. Hierom
speaks) we are by Laws Apostolical obliged* and yet such customs or Laws are
not, nor yet are called by S. Hierom, Traditions Apostolical. It is a Catholic
rule given by Ferrandus Diaconus in Paraenetico ad Reginam, regula quinta. Et
omnis, qui se ad Ecclesiam pertinere gloriatur, legibus vivat Ecclesiae; maxim
his, quas Antiquitas roboravit. Next to what you object out of S. Austin,
Epistle 86. if you had not withheld from us his own Explication, which he adds
in the same place, professed by him as an Explication, [saying, Ut supra
commemoravi] it had been in the whole thus: In Evangelicis and Apostolicis
literis, totoque Instrumento quod appellatur Testamentum Novum, animo id
revolvens, video praeceptum esse jejunium. Quibus autem diebus non oportet
jejunare, and quibus oporteat, praecepto Domini vel Apostolorum non invenio
definitum. Hoc est, non invenimus evidenter praeceptum. Now though there be no
express, evident written precept in the New Testament, yet for all that, it may
be Traditio Apostolica; as, lest we should so mistake him, so as here you have
done, himself has told you of some l. 2. de Baptism. contr. Donatist. c. 7.
Quam consuetudinem credo ab Apostolica Traditione venientem; (Sicut multa quae
non inveniuntur in literis eorum, neque in Conciliis posteriorum, and tamen
quia per universam custodiuntur Ecclesiam, non nisi ab ipsis tradita and
commendata creduntur.) Yea and of the particular Paschal Fast it self, kept as
it is also, in memory of Christ's Passion, he tells us, Illa autem quae non
scripta, sed tradita custodimus, quae quidem toto terrarum orb observantur,
dantur intelligi, vel ab ipsis Apostolis, vel plenariis Conciliis, quorum est
in Ecclesia saluberrima autoritas, commendata atque statuta retineri; sicuti
quod Domini Passio and Resurrectio, and Ascensio in exlum, and Adventus de
coelo Spiritus Sancti anniversaria solennitate celebrantur. Now then this
Paschal Fast of Lent being observed in all the world (then when he wrote that
at least; and indeed ever since, till the present age of this controversy, or
thereabouts) and yet not pretended by the observers thereof to have been
appointed, or instituted by any General Council: (the very first of those
Ecumenical Councels mentioning it only in the 5th Canon as a thing famously
known long before in all the world.) It remains therefore, that according to S.
Austin's rule, It was delivered from the Apostles. If all this convince you
not, that you have produced St. Austin to a purpose evidently against his own
meaning, it is yet more manifest, how the same St. Austin, who says, In
Evangelicis literis non invenio evidenter praeceptum; yet says also in his
hundred and nineteenth Epistle which is to Ianuarius, Quadragesima sane
jejuniorum habet autoritatem and in veteribus libris, and ex Evangelio, etc.
The Lent truly of Fastings has authority both in the old Books, and out of
the Gospel. And Psalm. 110th. Quadragenario numero, quo and Moses, and Elias,
and ipse Dominus jejunaverunt: Praecipitur enim nobis and ex Lege, and ex
Prophetis, and ex ipso Evangelio, quod testimonium habet a Lege and Prophetis.
In the number o^ forty days both Moses and Elias, and the Lord himself did
fast; for it is commanded unto us both from the Law, and from the Prophets; and
from the Gospel it self, which receives witness from the Law and the Prophets
Now proceed we to your next Testimony, and that from St. Austin also; and make
trial, whether you have any better success therein. The place is lib. 30.
contra Faustum Manichaeum cap. 5. Quanto magis quisque vel minus voluerit, vel
potuerit. Thence you would conclude, that Christian abstinence in Lent was
voluntary; when as St. Austin speaks only of the degrees of the rigor of that
abstinence. For he does not say, Si forte aliquis voluerit, and potuerit, but
Quanto magis quisque vel minus seu voluerit, seu potuerit. But because you give
us his words so imperfect, we will set them down here a little more at large:
The Manichean Heretic objecting thus against St. Austin and the Catholics;
Quidergo and vos, cum haec a vobis Passionis Christi celebrantur mysteria? --
Si quadragesima sine vino and carnibus, non superstitiose ^ vobis, sed divina
lege servatur, videte quaeso, videte, etc. St. Austin answers, Christiani non
haeretici, sed catholici, edomandi corporis causa, propter animam, ab
irrationalibus motibus amplius humiliandam, non quod illa esse immunda credant,
non solum a carnibus, verum a quibusdam etiam terrae fructibus abstinent: vel
semper, sicut pauci: vel certis diebus atque temporibus, sicut per
Quadragesimam fere omnes, quanto magis quisque vel minus, seu voluerit, seu
potuerit. Vos autem ipsam creaturam negatis bonam, etc. -- Videtis ergo multum
interesse inter abstinentes a cibis propter sacratam significationem, vel
propter corporis castigationem, and abstinentes a cibis, quos Deus cr^avit,
dicendo, quod ^os Deus non creavit; Proinde illa doctrina est Prophetarum and
Apostolorum: haec Daemoniorum mendaciloquorum. You see that what you cite, was
spoken, not of the substance of the Paschal Fast, but of a certain manner, or
rather one part of the manner of their keeping it; and that not permitted to
their will, save as to the degree of the rigor of it. And concerning that very
manner he speaks greater words than the Common Prayer Book which ye would
have corrected, or the Church of England any where has expressed her self in.
Your next Testimony ( Socrates being reserved) is from Prosper, you say lib. de
vit. contemplat. 2. cap. 24. But you should have been advised by learned
Protestant Writers, who would tell you that that Book was not St. Prosper's,
but put upon him. The next therefore is that of Cassian lib. 2 col. 21. cap.
30. In primitiva Ecclesia aequale fuisse jejunium per totum annum: Ac
frigescente devotione, cum negligerentur jejunia, inductam Quadragesimam a
sacerdotibus. To omit many exceptions that lay against Cassian in this point;
give us any such Age, wherein, with the generality of Christians, (for whose
sake Constitutions are framed for the Church, whether by the Apostles, or
others) an equal Fast was kept through the whole year, as it was perhaps by
some Anchorets or Religious, whom Cassian especially had in his eye; and we
will easily grant the command of forty days fast to be superfluous then. But
that Cassian does not say ever came to pass, even in the most primitive times:
per totum annum, he says, but not per totum orbem Christianum. Secondly, no
man can ever show an Age of the Church, wherein she was without the Paschal
fast, or any following Age, wherein it was brought in by Bishops or Priests,
though it might be often re-enforced and urged into more diligent practice, and
whetted upon Christian people as in the Council of Laodicaea in many of its
Canons, and in the general Council of Trullo Can. 9^. and this some may call a
being brought in. And yet if Cassian mean, as he may, (speaking not of
abstinence only, but of stricter proper sal^ing) that the precept and
necessity of so fasting forty days, was only of Constitution Ecclesiastical,
he speaks nothing for you against the Common Prayer Book. As for the difference
about the manner, or number of days; of stricter fasting, mentioned by
Dionysius of Alexandria, Sozomen and Nicephorus, it matters nothing. Since
there were always forty days of abstinence notwithstanding recommended (as I
have proved) to all that were able: tradita and commendata ab Apostolis, or
commanded them also, by their Rulers and Governors (as in most Churches and
Ages of the World, after the waxing cold of Devotion needed such commands,
which may further also interpret Cassian.) Within such time moreover, either
the devout Christians themselves did choose out for themselves, or those that
had the rule and government over them did choose out for them (as we read that
Leo did Sermon. 4. de Quadragesima) some number of days either continued, or with
intervall, more, or fewer, to be fasted until Even, but especially on the six
days of the great week, as Dionysius Alexandr. in the place by you alleged
expressly witnesses, and more especially yet on the day of our Lord's
crucifixion, as your selves also alleged from Tertullian, Dicatam jejuniis
Parasceuen. and cap. 14. of his Book of Prayer, Sic and die Paschae [(...)] quo
communis and quasi publica jejunii Religio est.

Come we therefore in the last place to Socrates, out of whom you have brought
two Testimonies, and might have (I freely acknowledge) brought more, and he is
by us the more to be considered, because all that of late have written against
the obligation of the Religious Fast of Lent at home or abroad, have fetched
their chief armor from Socrates; yet sometimes wronging him by most unjust and
purposely false translation of their Author, (as in an English Pamphlet of
last year) who may seem himself enough to have wronged or loosened the Churches
Fasts and Festivals, for causes which shall presently be shown. But here we
shall first show, that none of our Exceptions against Socrates are needful to
our Refutation of our Brethren (the Presbyterians,) their Exceptions out of
Socrates against the Religious ^ast of Lent, as it is appointed to be observed
in our Common Prayer Book. For first as to the variety in several Countries
about the number of the days ( viz. of their stricter fasting, as Dionysius
Alexand. whom you here join with Socrates, has shown you) I have answered
above, showing that it hurts us nothing; but no Country had a custom of
keeping none, or pretended conscience against the substance of the Paschal or
Lent fast, that they might therein be allowed to differ from all the body of
the Catholic Church, (that then lived or had lived) throughout the world; as
our brethren now would obtrude upon their own Country and the Church that bare
them If Socrates admire that so many Countries differing about the number of
the days, yet that all agreed to call it (...), Quadragesima, or the Fast of
forty days (and so your selves allege Sozomen and Nicephorus also witnessing)
this is an evident testimony that all the Countries every where had received a
Tradition of a (...), Quadragesima, or Fast of forty days, elder than their
differences about the number of days, (as has been showed above at large in my
fifth Chapter) that whatever variety of Indulgences several Countries (upon
whatsoever pretense of their fainter Regions, or hotter stomachs, or less
plentiful provisions throughout all the year, or the perpetual toil of their
manner of living, or the like) had allowed themselves therein; yet so universal
and consenting was their acknowledgment of something in common received by them
all, which they called (...), or Quadragesima, that it makes manifest evidence
that they all had received ab antiquissimis temporibus traditum and
comme^datum, A Tradition and Recommendation universal of forty days
abstinence, with an allowance of variation in their number of their stricter
fasting days, and in their rigor of their abstinence: and that variety which
Socrates notes, Socrates himself acknowledges there, had various causes [as it
were reasonable grounds] of some such varieties, (...). And there are beside
(in other diverse Countries ten thousand causes or reasons.) (...), [ viz. three
weeks of stricter fastings after the example of Daniel; for otherwise that Rome
had from the first of all the custom of forty days abstinence, or fasting
more largely taken, St. Hierome himself a Priest of Rome, who could know better
than Socrates, (though Socrates also does not here deny it) witnesses, who
tells us what he means by his [ Nos unam Quadragesimam secundum Traditionem
Apostolorum jejunamus] We fast one Lent accord^ing to Tradition Apostolical,
Epist. ad Marcellam, by what he writes on Jonah 3. Ipse Dominus jejunavit
quadraginta dies, and haereditatem nobis jejunii derelinquens, ad esum corporis
sui sub hoc numero nostras animas praeparat. The Lord himself fasted forty
days and leaving to us the Inheritance of the Fast, prepares our souls under
this number of (forty days) ^o the eating of his Body, and on Isai 58.
Dominus quadraginta diebus in solitudine jejunavit, ut nobis solennes
jejuniorum dies relinqueret. The Lord fasted forty days, that he might leave
us the solemn days of the fastings. And farther for Rome also Leo the great
himself Bishop of Rome, Sermon. 12. Appropinquante, dilectissimi, solennitate
Paschali, sic est praecurrenda consuetudo jejunii, ut nos quadraginta dierum
numerus, ad sanctificationem corporis and mentis exerceat -- unde in
coelestibus Ecclesiae disciplinis multum utilitatis afferunt Divinitus
instituta jejunia. The solemnity of Easter now approaching (my beloved) the
custom of the Fast is so to be premitted, that the number of forty days may
exercise us for the sanctification of our body and mind -- so as that in the
heavenly disciplines of the Church the Fasts instituted by God bring [unto us]
much advantage. The same in his fourth Sermon, Magna Divinae Institutionis
salubritate provisum est, ut ad reparandam mentium puritatem, quadraginta nobis
dierum exercitatio mederetur. And yet the same Leo in the same his fourth
Sermon of the Fast of Quadragesima chooses out for the people of Rome the
number of days amounting to (and a little exceeding) the number of the days
of Socrates's three weeks which he assigns to Rome, to wit, three days in each
of six weeks ( secundam, quartam, and sextam) which are one and twenty days.
So that forty days, and yet the number of one and twenty days for stricter
sasting may well consist together, and still the Lent be called of all
Quadragesima, (as Socrates and Sozomen note) therefore Leo when he mentions
forty days as from God, he does more often call the Quadragesima, quadraginta
dierum continentiam (as Sermon third) THE ABSTINENCE of forty days, and
quadraginta dierum EXERCITATIONEM, ( S^rm. 4th.) the exercise of forty days,
than quadraginta dierum jejunia. If Leo could for the practice of Rome in one
and the same Sermon of Lent direct his Auditors to forty days exercise, and
one and twenty days Fast, (as are six times three) then Socrates sinding at
Rome, as he says, three weeks fast (though all together) yet needed not to
wonder how they called it there and in all Countries Quadragesima. That some
observation of forty days was kept at Rome, Gregory the Great another godly
Bishop of Rome does witness, Homil. 16. In Evangelia; Quadragesimae tempus
inchoamus, etc. Cur ergo in Abstinentia Quadragenarius numerus custoditur, nisi
quia, etc.? Now begin we the time of Lent, etc. why then is the Number of
Forty observed in (our) Abstinence, but because, etc.? -- a praesenti etenim
die usque ad Paschalis solennitatis gaudia sex hebdomadae veniunt -- ut nos per
abstinentiam mortificemus Forty days of ABSTINCE he requires, though as for
the degrees of that Abstinence, and as to stricter Fastings, he adds,
Unusquisque in quantum virtus suppetit, carnem maceret, ejusque desideria
affligat, etc. Thus much be said to what your Socrates writes of Rome. But when
he tells you there how those in Illyricum, and all Greece, and Alexandria fast
their Paschal-fast, ((...)) six weeks before Easter, and call it (...): how
others begin their Lent 7 weeks before the Feast and call it (...), how well
does this variety that you allege out of Socrates yet agree upon the matter
with the Religious Fast of Lent in the Church of England, which she begins
betwixt the sixth and seventh weeks before her Feast of Easter. And to your
second citation out of Socrates; if he say that there is no express written
Precept for Lent, as he says indeed more than once of such Rites, (...). And
again, (...). St. Basil l. de Spiritu* Sancto, c. 10 (...). They clamor and
call for demonstrations from written testimonies, and send away, (with
disgrace) as nothing worth, the unwritten witness of the Fathers. And cap. 27.
(...), etc. But they cease not, up and down clamouring, that this is not
witnessed in any written Word of God.
No written DEMONSTRATIVE Institution, or Precept. St. Austin (we grant) has
said; and we have ever yielded as much: Non evidenter praeceptum in literis
Evangelicis, etc. (...). And yet St. Augustine could (whatsoever Socrates saw,
or not) derive its authority ex Evangelio, as he says. Nor is any variety
about the number of days alleged from Socrates or others, any bar to that
which St. Austin and others say of the Apostolical Original of the Paschal-fast
before the Feast of Easter. Nothing more than when the same Socrates in the
same Chapter by you cited recounts the varieties and differences of several
Churches about the days and number of days of the Churches public Synaxes,
or Celebrations of the holy Eucharist, is any bar to the divine Original of
the Synaxis, or holy Eucharists administration, and that also on the Lord's
days* For what though some added Saturdaies, as Socrates says most Churches
then did, yet they at Rome, and Alexandria from a certain Tradition did not.
And what though others added the days of the stations, and some every day of
the week for the holy Eucharist also, and others not; yet the Lords day was
always held proper for that service. Socrates words are: (...).

Secondly, Whereas you cite Socrates, as saying, Perspicuum esse Apostolos
liberam potestatem in eadem cujusque menti ac arbitrio permisisse: That it is
perspicuous, that the Apostles left a free power in the same to every man's mind
and arbitrament. These words either you would have your reader believe that
Socrates spoke of the religious fast of Lent, which is set forth in our
Common Prayer Book, or of some other matter, or circumstance: If this latter,
to what purpose is it here by you alleged? But if the former be by you
pretended, (as evidently it is,) as if Socrates had said that to be the
Apostles mind concerning the religious fast of Lent, (which only our
Common Prayer Book sets forth) as if it were to be left to every ones mind and
will. This is a great untruth, and a great abuse of your Reader; Socrates
speaking these words of the Apostles permission and judgment ((...)) not of
the religious fast of Lent it self, NOR OF THE NUMBER OF DAYS, MORE, OR FEWER:
But having last mentioned the matter of abstinence from some meats, and shown
it not to be alike in all Countries; for that some abstained from all creatures
that have sensitive life, others but from some, allowing themselves to partake
of fish ((...)) and others together with fish, allowing themselves the flesh of
birds, how others also abstained from some fruits and eggs; and some lived only
on dry bread, and others not that, and others fast till three a clock in the
afternoon [perhaps on the days of their abstinence, and not of their stricter
fasts] and then used a freer refection; of which variety he shows there have
been various causes: he immediately subjoyns the words by you cited, which in
his own Greek we will let the Reader see. (...), he says, de hac re; of this
thing, not of whatsoever you please to extend it to; therefore not at all
necessarily of the number of days, more or less; much less of the Paschal fast
it self. But here you produce this saying of Socrates, against the Religious
fast of Lent (as set forth in our Common Prayer Book) which was spoken of
variety of abstinence, from flesh, also in some places from fish, from some
fruits, from eggs, and of others even at three a clock entertaining themselves
more plentifully. Of this Socrates says; and of this who doubts to affirm, that
we have no written precept? Of this who doubts to say, that as for any thing
left from the Apostles (if ye abstract from Laws Ecclesiastical) a free power
thereof is permitted to every man's choice and will. But here you begin your
citation out of Socrates with a Relative without an Antecedent, either
expressed, or intimated by you; on which Antecedent yet lay all the
controversy, of what it was that Socrates spoke. Thus you begin: Ac quoniam
nemo de ea re praeceptum literarum monumentis, etc. And again, Apostolos
liberam potestatem in eadem re, etc. But quae ea res, there, sirs, lay all the
strength of your argument, and all the concern of the cause. And in that the
Reader is left probably to think, that Socrates and the Apostles (according to
Socrates) in those words had made that judgment of the Religious fast of Lent,
whereas the speech there is, (...), of some choices of some meats, and the more
or less plentiful refection, at three a clock or otherwise. And it is
observable, that Socrates there calls even some forbearing of some meats by
choice, for the exercise of fasting (as we read in Daniel so also chastening
himself, as that he does record: I ate no pleasant bread, neither came flesh
nor wine into my mouth three full weeks; and that for the chastening of himself
before his God, Dan. 10. 2, 3, 12.) that Socrates I say, in the very words by
you produced does call even that, (...), working that which is good. Nothing
now surely needs to be added, but to advertise you, that in many things, (as to
any law from the Apostles) permitted by them to every man's will and choice, we
yet may be, and are, lawfully and profitably bound up by godly Ecclesiastical
constitutions; and that in the matter of fasting. I have before alleged the
evident and received Canons of the Council of Laodicaea. Kings and States
Christian, and where such are not, Churches and Bishops may make such binding
Laws or Canons. You may perceive by what has been said, that as to ought
produced by you from Socrates, we need not acquaint the Reader, how in some
things Socrates* long ere now has been censured: of which now we will say a
little, that others may not please themselves in something which have been
alleged out of Socrates. I think not worth regarding such English nameless
Pamphlets from some of the Faction, having Socrates's name prefixed, cast
abroad by false translatours, and true maligners of the Religious fast of Lent.
Whose honest dealing that I may once for all warn the English Reader how ever
to trust again, I shall set down some part of their abuse of Socrates, and of
the fasts and feasts of the Church, and of the Reader. Socrates having said in
that Chapter by them published; (I speak not now of our Brethren) (...),
[(...), supra nominat.] which in English is this. But [the Apostle and the
Gospels] left the feast of Easter, and other feasts to the ingenuitie or good
will of gratitude (...) says Phavorinus, (...) Hesychius, (...) says Suidas,
and (...) is rend^ed by Hesychius (...).
of those who had received the benefits, to HONOR. This they give the English
Reader thus: but left the remembrance of the feast of Easter, and observation
of other holy days to their free choice and discretion, which have been
benefited by such days. Omitting all mentioning of Socrates's word (...) or
HONOR; which it seems they envied, and perverted the benefits, which Socrates
meant of the fundamental benefits of Christ's Resurrection, and the like, to the
benefits which any may have received by such days: And rendering (...), which is
the good will or ingenuitie of gratitude, by [their free choice and discretion]
who if the matter come once to their free choice and election, have already
showed their will, and ingratitude. A second instance we will give: whereas
Socrates had said, (...). Which in English is this: The things already laid
down are sufficient for to prove, that the feast of Easter has had from
custom different HONOR in several Countries. This they render thus: Thus much
already laid down may seem a sufficient treatise for to prove, that the
celebration of the feast of Easter began every where more of custom, then by
Commandment, either of Christ or any Apostle. Whereas in this their rendering,
here is again no mention of HONOR, which was according to Socrates, in the
several Countries. And in the words of Socrates there was no mention of the
beginning of Easter, much less of its being begun every where more of custom,
then of any Commandment of Christ, or any Apostle; there being nothing in the
Greek of [beginning, of custome] nothing of these words [more then by
Commandment] nothing of these words [either of Christ or any Apostle.] And this
was last year a sufficient confutation of the Paschal fast.

A third instance shall be here in Socrates's recital of Constantines letter;
wherein the Pamphleter deeming that Constantine spoke too great things of that
comely Order (which says he) all the Churches of the West, and South, and
North parts of the world observe, and some of the East likewise: [and the rest
dissenting only about the time:] the Translatour of his own head introduces
Constantine thus prefacing of himself. In my simple judgment a notable
custom, etc. which for Constantine to have said of himself had been but
humility; but when neither Constantine there said so, (for he spoke of that he
was more sure of, then of his own judgment) nor yet Socrates, for men to cry
Socrates, and put into the good Emperors mouth, that what he spoke was but so
[in his simple judgement] and forthwith rendering (...), a comely order by other
words [a notable custome] which it might be, though it were neither order, nor
comely, but wicked. And what the Emperor Constantine concluded: (...). But
even, as this is most holy for all in common to wish, etc. the Pamphleter tells
you, he Translates Socrates and Constantine, and yet leaves out every where
such words as he envies, as here he leaves out wholly, (...), MOST HOLY [ viz.
for all in common to will.] Surely this is injuring all that come in our way;
Socrates, Constantine, and the Churches Order; that our Puritanical novelties
may borrow some pretense, though false, from some one man of some Antiquity.
For perfect noveltie in Religion is odious in its own eyes.

A fourth instance, where Socrates had said, that the feast of Easter, (...),
was observed of custom rather by all persons of old, then by law, and that
(...); in the other words he leaves out, (...), with all persons; and the
(...), etc. where the Author says, that the feast of Easter of a certain
custom had a peculiar observation [ viz. in several Countreys] he renders it
thus [of a certain private custom and observation.] Thus much time I have
spent in vindicating Socrates from the Pamphleter, and from our English
Sectaries that abused him. The holy Rites of the Catholic Church concerning
the feast of Easter, and the fast before, and other solemn feasts of the
Church, which is called the city of our solemnities ( Isa. 33. 20.) declared
so (as throughout this whole book I have made appear) from Antiquity,
Universality of reception, and consent of testimonies of the generality (the
three golden rules of Vincentius Lirinensis.) If these shall now suffer any
contradiction from Socrates any where, or any other single Author, or twain, we
are first to say, that (...)* That no single writers authority, when it stands
alone, no nor any two, or three in contradiction to the testimony of the
generality, can warrant our following any new doctrine, or practice, nor be
any material exception to any Catholic doctrine or practice. Secondly, that an
Historian, though a diligent writer, in what dogmatical censures, or judgments
he shall mingle with history of fact, is therein less to be regarded, then in
what he relates as an Historian. Thirdly, that none ought to think it much, if
Socrates be contradicted in that wherein he is found to contradict others more,
and more ancient, and more renowned Writers of Ecclesiastical History, or
other such Fathers (to whom himself often appeals, as l. 5. c. 22.) For that both
parts of a contradiction cannot be true, and there is scarce any thing so
strange of this nature, which some one Author (perhaps as great as Socrates)
has not been found to say. And therefore to this consent which I have shown,
whosoever shall reply, by alleging one or two Authors, wherein some men think
they do some great matter, I shall not think it at all considerable. When any
one speaks, whosoever he be, yea two or three, the rest are to judge. The
spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets; if that be true of
Prophets, much more of Ecclesiastical Doctors o^ Historians. God is the God of
order and peace, as in all Churches, and not of confusion. Which must needs
follow, if the witness of one or two be to be accepted against the Community.
An excellent way it is for every man to believe what he list, and that from
countenance too of authority, because almost what ever he list he may find
said by some one Author. But we are assured that God has otherwise promised
his assistance to the succession of Pastors, then he has to any one writer or
preacher, Ephesians. 4. 11-14. Mat. 28. 19. 20. Fourthly, who can imagine Socrates
may not be contradicted, who in one and the same Chapter, even that which our
brethren cite as for them, so apparently contradicts himself. I here set down
the very words, l. 5. c. (...). p. 697. A. ( Edit. Colon. 1612.) (...). For
they indeed in Rome fast three weeks together before Easter, excepting the
Saturday and Lords day. In the same Chapter. (...), In Rome they fast every
Saturday, p. 698. E. In both (...), the same then present time. Fifthly,
Albeit, for some even great errors in judgment men may not heartily refuse all
faith to a diligent Historian, yet when such Historians shall be found to
differ from the Community of Catholic Writers in that which any way favors
such error, which he is known to patronize, if especially in that his history
he declare such his error, he then may justly be held suspected in such
narration, as is singular and looks toward the favoring of that error: for
example, if Philostorgius an Arrian historian shall declare ought singular, and
contrary to the consent of other Authors in the favor of his fellow* Arrians,
it may well be judged, that Partiality has caused him to turn aside from the
Truth. This whither it tends I shall now declare, albeit in matters of less
moment, then the Prime Article of our Faith. That the followers of Novatus his
Errors, such of them as did inhabit Phrygia, did (contrary to Novatus's own
practice) change the Churches received time of celebrating Easter, even after
it had been established by the Holy Council at Nice, and acknowledged
Apostolical by their own Acesius; and turned themselves in the Synod of Pazus
to observe the Feast of Easter at the same time with the Jews and
Quartadecimani, (others of them yet more famous Bishops at the same time
resisting them.) By means whereof, the Church of the Novatians was at that time
divided. Socrates himself relates l. 4. c. 27. (...) (...). The Quartadecimani,
and the Novatians in great part being now joined together, the Renowned
Patriarch S. Chrysostom proceeded to deprive them both together of their
Churches, as Socrates himself also witnesses l. 6. c. (...). etc. (...). And
the Novatians part of them thinking that they ought to agree with the Church
about the keeping of Easter, and the last before Easter; and part judging that
they ought to follow the Judaical time of the 14. day of the Moon, for their
Easter, and for the ending of their fast: at length both part of these
Novatians assembled in Council together at Angar in Bithynia, made a decree
Conciliariter (agreeing to their occasions) which Socrates himself relates l.
5. c. (...). that (notwithstanding the peaceable end of the Controversy of
Easter in the Council of Nice, and the universal Churches receiving of one way
therein) (...) They set forth a Canon concerning the Feast of Easter, and
called it, The Adiaphoron, or Canon of Indifferency: saying, that the
difference of the Feast was not a sufficient cause to divide [their] Church --
they having devised such things at large, they decree their Canon of
Indifferency concerning Easter: so as that every one might keep Easter
according to the custom which he had taken up before, if it pleased him --
this decree being confirmed by them, Sabbatius -- so often as it happened that
their times of keeping Easter differed, would by himself before hand FAST, and
keep THE WATCH, and then keep Easter on [his] wonted Sabbath Day. Here we see
the Novatian Church, or Sect, owning openly an Indifference of the time of the
Eeast of Easter, and so of the precurring Fast. For so here Sabbatius keeping
by himself before hand the Feast of Easter, kept also by himself aforehand the
Fast and the Watch, which was to precede. It was now serviceable to the
Novatians, that their friends and favorers, according to the tenor of this
Council and Canon, should plead the small import and indifferency of such
matters; such, suppose a while, was Socrates, who liked rather of the Catholic
Order, yet pleaded for mutual tolerance, even after the establishment of that
matter throughout the Christian Church, by the sacred Council of Nice, as well
as had been (with good cause) before. To this purpose plea was made for them,
as we read in this Chapter of Socrates: (...) -- And some other such sayings,
with a keen anger at the Bishops, are found in him. Now whether Socrates, if he
were indeed a favourer of the Novatians, in their main error, may not be
thought to have written these things to gratify the Novatians, for the
reconciling of them one to another in this lesser matter, and reconciling them
both to the Church herein, let the Prudent judge. I shall proceed to examine,
whether Socrates were so indeed, a favourer of their main error: Wherein I
shall not content my self to receive others Accusations of him; such as the
learned Greek Patriarch, Photius; who makes this judgment of Socrates, (...).
But shall rather hear himself, what he says, whom you may read much displeased
with the holy and famous Patriarch of Constantinople, S. John Chrysostom lib.
6. cap. 11. Where he relating of Chrysostom, (...) That he took away many of
the Churches from the Novatians, and the Tessarescaidecatitae, he says of that
holy man in the same Chapter, (...); he imputes unto him, (...), a subdolous,
and secretly exulcerate mind; he says that for his favor to an insolent
person one Serapion, (...). And c. (...) and c. 21. relating S. Chrysostom's
death, he leaves this mark upon him: (...). John (as he calls him) died the
14th day of November, a man, as I said before, by reason of his zeal of
temperance, giving way more to wrath then to modesty. Consider we next as
touching the main error it self of the Novatians, wherein as he does pronounce
of Novatus himself, that he died a Martyr ( l. 4. c. (...)) Novatus is
Socrates's Martyr (and the miracles wrought by his followers, as he says, he
is diligent in.) But S. Chrysostom even after his death, he thus proceeds to
censure, because he defended that Repentance was not to be denied to those that
fell after Baptism more then once, alleging against him an ancient more severe
discipline of a Synod of Bishops. (As if the following Bishops had not power in
their times seeing cause to relax such severity of discipline.) His words of
Chrysostom are l. 6. c. (...). It is matter of admiration to me, how he [
Iohn] (as above he calls him) showing so great a zeal of temperance, should in
his discourses teach men to despise temperance. ^or repentance being granted by
a Synod of Bishops to such as had fallen once after Baptism, he was bold to
say, If thou have repented a thousand times enter hither. Surely not far off
from his Lords merciful sense, Luke 17, 3, 4, 5. Take heed to your selves: If
thy Brother trespass against thee, rebuke him; and if he repent, forgive him.
And if he trespass against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a day
turn again to thee, saying, I repent; thou shall forgive him. And the Apostles
said unto the Lord, Increase our faith: (they say not our charity only, but our
faith:) Compare this also with Mat. 18. 15 - 18.* Surely this was no argument
of (...), or bitterness of Chrysostom, whereof Socrates has accused him. But
is Socrates more favorable to the more ancient Bishops, who opposed Novatus?
that you may read in his 4th Book c. (...). Where having related Novatus's his
Letters, he then speaks of Cornelius his contrary Letters, (who was a holy
Bishop and Martyr of Rome) (...). Both, says he, confirming their opininion
from the holy Scriptures: (...) He adds, (...) For as many, as were lovers of
^in, laid hold of that concession, which was granted, [ viz. by Cornelius the
holy and true Bishop of Rome] and so for time to come, used that Concession for
all manner of sin. But the manners of the Phrygians appear to be more sober,
then other nations; for they indeed seldom swear -- With them there is no
running after Horse-races, nor Theaters. WHEREFORE it is, as it seems to me,
that these* and those which were so affected, inclined rather to the things
then written by Novatus. FOR fornication is counted with them as a detestable
abomination. For why? you may find the Phrygians and Paphlagonians living more
soberly, then any other Sect whatsoever. AND THERE IS THE SAME REASON, I
suppose of them also, who live about the Western parts, and hearken unto, or
obey Novatus. Whoever has read in Story the sound and Catholic Faith, and
holy life, and Martyrdom of Cornelius, S. Cyprians dear friend; and has read
in S. Cyprian the lewd and wicked life of Novatus, and his factious Schism, and
Heretical teaching, let him judge of these words of Socrates, which he would
leave behind him in his History to the World. Lastly, when S. Chrysostom was
driven in Banishment, he says thus; Others have said, that John suffered in
his deposition justly, because he had taken away many Churches from the
Novatians, and the Quartadecimani, and certain others. But whether that
Abdication of John was just, according to the saying of those that had been
grieved by him, God, who knows the secrets and the truth it self in that
matter is a just Judge. These things have I let you hear Socrates speak from
himself, not to withdraw any due regard to his labors and history, except only
where, in things regarding some part or other of the Novatians singularity, and
his thence detracting from the holy Catholic Bishops, such as Cornelius the
Martyr, and S. Chrysostom, and from the honor of the Churches holy Fasts, and
Feasts: wherein I deem that he ought not to be heard against the consent of the
Catholic Doctors, and Fathers of all Ages, without great Injustice to the
Church. I conclude this Chapter, with this double Item. 1. That allowing all
that which our brethren the Presbyterians brought out of Socrates for
themselves, it has been shown above, that it profits not their cause at all,
nor hurts ours. 2. That all other loose sayings of Socrates removing from the
Apostles all care of any such thing as the Feast of Easter, or the Fast
preceding, or other holy days, are but the effects of his Novatian Infection,
a pursuance of that Canon of Indifferency ( Socrat. l 5. c. (...),) which his
Friends the Novatians assembled in Council, had decreed at Angar in Bithynia.

CHAP. 8. An Answer to the other Objections of the Presbyterians, and to their
pretense from an Act of Parliament.
THe 5th. Proposal of our Brethren the! Presbyterians, as they have published
it now themselves in their Grand Debate page 44. was this, [That nothing should
be in the Liturgy, which so much as seems to countenance the observation of
Lent as a Religious Fast.] This by them propunded and desired of the King and
Bishops and the Church of England is, that nothing may be left even of that
which is extant in our public Liturgy; wherein is no one word of the choice of
meats, but only 1. of Prayers and Services to Almighty God at that time before
Easter. and 2. of such abstinence, that our flesh being subdued to the Spirit,
we may ever obey the Godly motions of the Lord in righteousness, and true
holiness, to his honor and glory; and 3. a grateful remembrance and mention
that the Lord for our sakes did fast 40. days, and 40. nights, with a Prayer
4. particularly on the first day of Lent, that God would make in us new and
contrite hearts, that we worthily lamenting our sins, and acknowledging our
wretchedness, may obtain of him the God of all mercy, perfect remission and
forgiveness through Jesus Christ. And 5. on Passion week, and on Good Friday, a
holy and humble memory of our Lords being betrayed, and given up into the hands
of wicked men, and to suffer death upon the Cross for his Family [the Church]
with a prayer for the whole body of that Church, and for all the enemies
thereof, all Jews, Turks, Infidells, and Heretics (on that day on which
Christ prayed for his enemies on the Cross.) And 6. a narrative that in the
Primtive Church there was a godly discipline; (the restoring whereof the Church
desires) that at the beginning of Lent, such persons as were notorious sinners,
were put to open penance, and punished in this world, that their souls might be
saved in the day of the Lord; and that others admonished by their example,
might be the more afraid to offend; with the reading 7. of the general
sentences of Gods cursing against impenitent sinners (the people being required
to give after the several sentences, an acknowledgment with their own mouths,
that the curse of God is so due to impenitent sinners; and 8. a following godly
earnest exhortation to repentance, and David's 51 Psalm of Repentance, with some
h^ly penitential Prayers following Beside these eight things, let them show us
if they can, any thing that is of Lent in our Common Prayer Book: In all and
every of these 8. things, it is manifest, that the Church of England does
exercise some part of her Religion in the Fast of Lent, wherein she prays also
unto God that she may exercise religious abstinence. Not were their propounded
desires (they well know) to meddle with ought else than what is in the
Common Prayer Book, as themselves give all the world to understand by their own
now printing his Majesty's Commission (given to them with others) in the
beginning of their Book. Not they, nor others then by that Commission, were to
propound, advise, answer, or reply, any thing touching Lent, but what was in
the said Common Prayer book, and your proposal being framed accordingly [that
nothing be in the Liturgy, which so much as seems to countenance the
observation of Lent as a Religious Fast] I having summed up all that is in the
said Liturgy touching the Religious Fast of Lent; It now abides upon your part,
because you have brought it in to public view, to say now before all the world
if you can, 1. Whether there be ought in the Liturgy that so much as seems to
countenance the observation of Lent as a Religious Fast: beside either all
these 8. rehearsals which I have summed up, or something of, or in, some one or
more of these branches. And if there be nothing else, as it is sure there is
not, then it now remains your part which you are challenged to do, to give one
instance, if you can, in any thing of all those eight contents of the matters
concerning Lent, in our Liturgy, with which any Christian can find just fault;
i. e. to name any one thing blameable, or not godly among all those things
whereof you propound, and desire that no one thing may be left in the Liturgy.
Nothing, say you; that may countenance, or so much as seem to countenance the
observation of Lent in the Liturgy, as a religious Fast. Surely where things of
Religion are desired to be left out, there your Religion will oblige you, if
you can, to show us something of those things, which is evil, at least which is
not Religious.

In the account you have given of your own Proposal first and last, page 4* 70,
71, 72, 73, 74, 75. wherein is every word you speak of this matter, you have
not touched so much as any one thing contained in all the Common Prayer Book;
(except perhaps one, and that mistaken, as shall be shown.) But in stead of
doing of that which was most reasonable for you to have done, you give us,
where you make your Proposal, only two Reasons of your own, in three names;
where you pass from Christ to Moses, and from Moses forthwith to the Act of
Parliament 5 Elizabethae; and that is all. First, you say, That nothing be in
the Liturgy, which may seem to countenance the observation of Lent as a
Religious Fast; the Example of Christ's Fasting forty days and nights being no
more imitable, nor intended for the imitations of Christians, than any other of
his miraculous works were, or then Moses forty days fast was for the Jews. Here
you would seem to remove the ground which we have for this Religious Fast: But,
Sirs, tell us, we pray you, may there not be some other sufficient Grounds, if
this were none? If you know not, then we shall tell you another, and a more
principal Reason, viz. The Holy Memory of our Blessed Saviors Death and
Passion about that time of the year, as all acknowledge; and the memory of, and
compunction for our own sins, which cost the Son of God his own precious Blood:
The looking upon Him whom we have pierced. Nor shall it suffice you to say,
That we ought always to remember that; for so we ought always to remember his
Resurrection for our Justification: Yet God has taught us, That what ought
always to be remembered, yet may with great spiritual profit be by certain
stationary and recurring days more especially and certainly be brought to the
remembrance of all of us generally and jointly. And if Christ's Resurrection
have a weekly Feast of remembrance, how is the Catholic Church of all Ages to
be taxed as superstitious for one recurring Religious Fast in the year, the
memorial of his Passion? This has been done in all Ages, even the purest; and
this Fast for this reason, and for this reason principally, the memory of our
Lords Death and Passion, the taking away of the Bridegroom: In those days they
have fasted. And this reason they have given; and this the Church her self has
given in her contest with Heretics, and that in that very Chap of Tertullian,
which afterward you cite; where the Psychici, i. e. the Catholics, as you
acknowledge, give this account of their Fast before Easter: Quod ad jejunia
pertineat, certos dies a Deo constitutos opponunt. -- Certe in Evangelio illos
dies je^uniis determinatos, in quibus ablatus est sponsus. -- Et hos esse jam
solos legitimos jejuniorum Christianorum, abolitis le alibus and propheticis
vetustatibus. -- Sic and Apostolos observasse, uullum aliud imponentes ^ugum*
And when the Bishops of the Christian world met together in the First and most
sacred General Council, and did therein unite the differences that had been
about the proper time of that Feast of Easter, and the Fast preceding;
Constantine having had perfect knowledge from those Bishops, in his Imperial
Letters to the Christian Churches acquaints them with what the Bishops had
decreed, and writes thus: (...) Here Sirs you see another reason alleged by
the Catholics, and taught by the Bishops of the Catholic Church, as that
which had been the reason of observing it, ever from the day of our Saviors
Passion unto that present year. And that the Lord had delivered to them the
Pasche to be remembered, of which also Constantine again in the same Epistle
adds: (...). Thus has the Church fulfilled the Prophecy of God by his Prophet
Zachary, wherein he promised to pour upon her the Spirit of Grace and
Supplications. And they shall look upon me, says he, whom they have pierced,
and they shall mourn, etc. Zech. 12. 10. Thus you see, you have done nothing to
overthrow the Religious Fast of Lent, though you had removed that which you
mentioned, and any other ground, whilst you forgot the principal. But now
return we to examine, whether ye have, as ye endeavor, overthrown all
imitation of Christ in this Fast; and so something in the Common Prayer Book.
Where there is no more then once, but that a just and pious mention of it, viz.
in the Collect of the first Sunday: O Lord which for our sake did fast forty
days and forty nights: give us Grace to use such abstinence, that our flesh
being subdued to the Spirit, etc. Where we doubt not but all Churches in the
world will both consent to this Prayer, and praise the modest humility of
Christ's handmaid this Church of England, except only some of her own Children.
For 1. She does not so much as pray, that the Lord would give her grace to use
such Fasts, as he had done; but thankfully acknowledging what he had done for
her, ( viz. fasted forty days and forty nights) she prays, That she may use
such abstinence, (calling her own rather abstinence, than Fasts) that our flesh
being subdued to the Spirit, we may ever obey his godly motions: Not that she
may be glorious in a miracle of fasting, but humbled in an exercise of
mortifying* That she may obey his godly motions, not emulate the Divine power
of his Miracle. Tell us out, we pray you, whether our Church praying thus, and
thus far only, for Imitation of Christ in some abstinence (according to our
poor measures) does offend you? And if not this; where in the
Common Prayer Book is there ought of that which you accuse? But again, why we
pray you, because it is not possible for us to imitate Christ's miraculous
eating nothing at all through all the time of forty days; therefore Christians
may not, what you cannot deny to be possible, use some special abstinence
through forty days, for the mortifying of those sins, for which Christ suffered
hunger and thirst, and afterward Crucfixion and death, lest that by any means,
when we have known all this done for us, our selves should become Cast-aways?
May not some pious charitable Physician go about, according to his skill which
God has given him, and without taking any thing, use the means of healing the
poor sick, and lame, in imitation of Christ's great pity, who went about healing
all manner of diseases, because he cannot cure miraculously, infallibly, and
universally as Christ did? May not some man that has but ability, after the
example of our Saviors compassion, pity a multitude that abide three days,
having nothing to eat, and feed them, because he cannot miraculously multiply
loaves? May we not be bid to be holy and perfect as our Lord is holy and
perfect, though no miracle can lift us up to equal or come near his holiness or
perfection? What a lame Exception therefore have you given against the Churches
excellent Prayer? But if the Church moreover in this Prayer, and in this Fast,
and in some lowly degree of petitioned imitation of her Savior, has but
imitated the piety, and followed the Doctrine of the Ancient Fathers of the
Church, and been a follower of them as they were followers of Christ; then
bless we God, who has given us such a Mother, and God send her more dutiful
Children. And if ye ask us, who those Ancient Fathers were, First, S. Austin,
l. 2. de Doctrina Christiana, c. 16. Quadraginta diebus jejunare monemur; hoc
lex cujus persona est in Mose, hoc prophetia cujus personam gerit Elias, hoc
IPSE DOMINUS monet, qui tanquam testimonium habens ex lege and prophetis,
medius inter illos in monte, 3. discipulis videntibus atque stupentibus
claruit. We are admonished to fast forty days; this the Law, whose person Moses
bare; this the Prophets, whose person Elias sustained; this the Lord himself
admonishes us, who as receiving witness from the Law and the Prophets, shone
forth in the midst 'twixt those two in the Mount, etc. The same S. Austin, l.
^. c. 169. Qu^st. super Genes. Non enim frustra quadriginta dies jejuniorum
sunt constituti, quibus Moses, and Elias, and ipse Dominus jejunavit, and
Ecclesia precipua observatione jejumorum* Quadrage simam vocat. S. A^stin again
in Psalm. 110. Dies i^i Paschales praeteritis diebus Quadragesimae, etc. --
Quadragenario numero, quo and Moses, and Elias, and ipse Dominus jejunaverunt.
Precipitur enim nobis and ex lege, and ex prophetis, and ex ipso Evangelio,
etc. S. Hierome on Jon. 3. Ipse quoque Dominus verus Jonas missus ad
praedicationem mundi jejunavit quadragint a dies, and haereditatem nobis
jejunii derelinquens ad esum corporis sui, sub hoc numero nostras animas
preparat. S. Ambrose, Sermon. 25. Dominus enim Diabolum posteaquam 40 dies
jejunavit; evicit; non quod non and a^te jejunia cum vincere potuisset, sed ut
ostenderet ^obis tunc nos Diaboli posse esse victores, cum quadraginta dies
victores jejunando desideriorum carnalium fuissemus. -- Ille qui peccatum non
habebat, Quadragesimam jejunavit: ^u nonvis Quadragesimam jejunare, qui peccas?
ille inquam peccatum non habebat, sed pro nostris jejunavit peccatis. 'Twere
easy to add of the Latins many more; Theodulphus Aurelianensis, Bid, and
others. Now hear we the holy Oriental Bishops. S. Basil the Great, Hom. 1. de
Jejunio, (...). S. Gregory Nazianz. in Orat. 4. (...)* Where the Father answers
your Objection punctually, that though we cannot fast forty days as he; for he
was God: yet we can proportionate our abstinence to our power. Magnus Canon
Andreae Cretensis: (...). By this time we think, the Churches Reasons, and her
Authority, and Authorities, which she follows, to come (...) to the Reason of
your Papers, and the Authority of your Persons. Your Act of Parliament shall be
considered in the end of your reply, where you are larger in it. In which
Reply, to begin first with matters of our own Function, because you declare
your selves ready in a modest challenge, to prove the truth in an equal
Conference, that you may no^ wan^ome Propositions to prove, we will set down
some manifest untruths of your own in the two leaves of that reply, (besides
the Fathers, of which every one how ye have mistaken, I have showed you above,
Chap. 5. and 7.) Your (...) untruth, or false Proposition is this: (which
contains three in it) viz. That adoring God not kneeling on the Lords days, and
using the white garment, and milk and honey after Baptism, had more pretense of
Apostolical Tradition, and were generally used more anciently then Lent. This
you being never able to prove, in your insinuation that the Church may as well
be called contentious for her not using those things, as you for not using
Lent, we do indeed (according to your own words) think ye have wronged the
Church, and that greatly. 2. That the Church has shown you any such example of
changing so the Fast of Lent, as that you may be allowed by that example not to
continue it a Religious Fast, is another untruth. Upon which let Tertullian ask
you the Question, l. de Coron^ Militis, c. 2. Quale est autem, ut tunc quis in
quaestionem provocet observationem, cum ab ea desiit? A third untruth, That
Lent was not known or kept in the second or third Ages. And we have seen, as
you bid, what follows, and find the direct contrary from those very Fathers
which there follow. Upon so many untruths, any one may build as many others, as
are there collected in your Reply. Other things there are, which you know not,
and should know. You know not, you say, of any such things as General Councils,
except ye retract afterward your words by a correction that none but your
selves gave you occasion of. For we believe the tradition and practice of the
Paschal or Lent-Fast to be elder then all General Councils: And do find it in
the first General Council, not institued, or commanded, where it needed not;
but in plain words there supposed as a thing long before known throughout the
Christian world. And so all your following discourse of the Commands of General
Councils, or of a Council of the Bishops of one Empire, is wholly impertinent.
To show you now the odds betwixt the Apostolical Tradition of the Paschal Fast
of Lent, and those you mention, that the three mentioned by you had not as you
say more pretense, no^ equal, shall appear, if you can now be entreated to go
about to prove any one, or all of those three from the like antiquity,
universality of practice, and consent of Testimony; with which I yet pretend to
have proved this of the Paschal or Lenten Fast. 2. Since our Controversy is
about a binding Apostolical* Tradition, and no other, one certain mark of such
binding Apostolical Tradition is*, when the Universal Church which always
shall continue Apostolical (because always built upon the rock and foundation
which the Apostles have laid) has never generally by di^use in any age laid it
aside, This we defend of the Paschal or Lent-Fast; tell us now, whether you are
ready to maintain the like of all those three? But whether you will do that or
no; if that be but at all true, what you now say that the Churches changing is
an argument of a thing not binding, and therefore not Apostolical and
perpetual: Those of the three which you do not prove never to have been by the
Church changed, may not by you be pretended to be a binding Apostolical
Tradition. Of the very first of them your selves when you needed for an
argument below, do prove that it was laid by, without any repeal by following
Councels. Now show us if you can when the Paschal Fast of Lent was laid by at
any time, or when it began (if not from the Apostles) or when 'twas not (though
you cannot tell us the beginning.) but if you can neither, and yet cannot be
silent, consider the Rule of St. Augustine so often by him pressed against the
Donatists, that such things which ever have been continued in the Church
Universal, nor were at first brought in with any plenary Council, are to be
believed to have come from the Apostles: and tell us whether St. Austin did
therein insufficiently, blindly and superstitiously oppose the Donatists; to
what you say of St. Hierom's Ep. ad Lucin. Unaquaeque provincia abundet in suo
sensu and praecepta majorum leges Apostolicas arbitretur. I answer, he says
not Traditiones Apostolorum arbitretur. The Apostles Law binds us to observe
the Customs of the Churches of God (whiles the Governors of the Church
continue them to be such) and so by authority Apostolical they are to be
obeyed. 2. There may have been truly different Traditions also Apostolical in
diverse Countries, as in the very first Ages: Primitive Bishops and Martyrs have
witnessed, such as Policarp. Anicetus, etc. You are charged by your Opponents,
that according to the Apostles rule, if you shall oppose your selves against
the custom of the Churches of God, your are among the number of contentious
persons according to St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11. 16. And far be from you the portion
which abides contentious persons, which yet you may read Romans 2. 8, 9. You
reply, that you are not contentious, for not following both the purer times of
the Church; and the latter times, in that wherein they are to one another
contrary; But it is the greatest height of the spirit of Contention, not only
to follow (neither, the former and purer times, nor the latter) bu^ also to set
at contention or contrariety the former and latter times of the Church, in that
wherein they agree; viz. in the substance of some Paschal, or Lent-Fast. So
that they were so many superfluous questions which you asked, What Churches, or
what ages you must conform to? till you find us some age in the Church, wherein
the Church (in its generality) may not be said to have observed this Religious
Fast of Lent. 2. Why ye are not tied (when no body says ye are not tied)
rather to imitate the purer ages, then the more corrupt? Our answer is, that
such open opposition of the Catholic Churches Custom in that point, is a
corrupt degeneration of this Age. Next when you ask where God has commanded
you to follow the greater number; surely nowhere, if you speak of the greater
number of the world; But if you speak of the Church Universal, and of her
prescribed Canons, and ^niversal rule of her Pastors; how come the
Presbyterians to give that privilege to a Classis of the Presbytery, which they
deny to the Church Universal? For either in such Classis you give your
presiding Presbyter a power to himself, with the minor part to determine
against the Major; which is to be more then a Bishop in your account; or else
the Major part may determine against the Minor, or ye can never determine any
thing, if but one or two do dissent. If God has made the Church Universal a
body, as sure he has, 1 Cor. 12. tell us whether there is not a power in every
body over its ordinary members, and what power can that be, if upon difference
the greater part does not stand for the Community? But we speak of such
obligation as binds to acquiescence, or silence at least. When God ba^e that
two or three should speak, and the rest should judge (1 Cor. 14.) Whether did
the fewer judge the more, or the more judge the fewer? And if that be true even
in Prophets, that the r^st shall judge the two or three, it will be surely as
true, where none has infallibility, but being gathered together in the name of
Christ, they have such power, as a Church, that Christ says, they ought to be
heard. If you say they are fallible, so say I; and if you infer, What obedience
then can you owe them? if you please, this implies that you need not obey any
Governors at all, but such as are infallible; and so none now upon earth,
because all such may err; and if you judge they err, there is no sin in
disobeying them, least you should err with them. And as to the writings of the
Apostles (...) (...): you acknowledging none over you in the interpretation of
t^ose Scriptures also; we ^ee what has followed, we know (...) ^ll follow;
even the following of your own will for a law, to you^ sel^es, and to others
(that please to depend upon your Interpretati^*) It has ^een sufficiently
tried in the late confusion of our Church and State; that give men ^ut leave to
be uncontrouled ^nterpreters of the Law, and they need not care what written
laws be called their rule to judge by. Next whereas you say, that after Christ
(who speak^ infallibly by his inspired Apostle (a^ you kn^ no true head of the
Church Universal so) also you know no (...) Church of Christ, but either such
as are the Kings Subjects, or a (...) Church: It m^st needs be (...) in your
judgment, that since the Catholic Church (...) is not in the whole body of it,
the Kings Subjects, that it is (...) and (...) (...) to you, and so you to it,
or else you know no Catholic church a^ all. But that there is a Catholic
Church, which in the whole body of it, is not the Kings Subjects, nor yet any
forr^ign Church, we thus demonstrate; Because our most (...) Sovereign blessed
be God for him) is a part, and a Highly Honorable part (...) he ^atholick
Church; and yet no part of any foreign Church, nor ^ject to himself; therefore
there is some Catholic Church, ( viz. that whereof His Excellent Majesty is a
part) which is (...) (...) (...) Church, ^or yet only the Kings Subjects. We
who are so, are twice happy; for that ^is most Excellent M^eeps himself firmly
to the usag^s of ^he H. Catholic and Apostolic Church of Christ, whiles you
either doubt, whither there be any such thing as the Catholic Church, (for you
speak here very suspiciousl^) or certainly would (...) aside our m^st Gracious
Sovereign, and (...) Church, and Nation *if you were hearkened to) from due
regard to the Catholic Church, which is the mother o^ u^ all. To (...) (...),
y^ say, That the Article of the Church of England, (...) all human^ Laws about
Rites and Ceremonies of the Church unchangeable; (sure you mean changeable) by
each particular National Church (...), That A (...) (...) Binding Traditions
are not mere humane ^ws, th^gh humane L^ws are ^iously by Christians Kings and
Magistrates made to enforce them also. But if you ask, Which are they? I will
give you inst^ces, (...) make you your best of them. Such is, F^rst, The
Anniversary Feast of Easter (that I may omit in this place, to make instance
(...) (...) ought the in Point controverted) Secondly, The Power of Priests,
and not Deacons from the beginning to consecrate the H. Eucharist. Thirdly,
Such is the Precept or Law from the beginning of changing the seventh day into
the first day of the week for the Churches solemn public Assemblies. Such is,
Fourthly, The Testimony, whereby any one comes certainly to know concerning any
controverted Chapter or Verse, or larger piece of a Chapter, (to say nothing
now of a Book) whither it be Canonical Scripture, or not.

Thus liberally you see we deal with you: But at last you earnestly beseech us,
that we would be cautious how we obtrude upon you a foreign Power under the
name of Christ's Church. I answer, First, We assure you, that we your Brethren
having by our Oath (according to what was our Judgment and Duty otherwise)
renounced utterly all foreign Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities and
Authorities) have kept inviolably our Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy not
turning aside after Absalon, nor Adoni^ah within, nor Rome or Geneva without,
and therefore may hope to be believed for the time to come. Secondly, We fear
lest you be in much more danger of that, then we; for you professing a
Catholic Church in the Creed you were baptized into, and in your Writings, and
yet professing now to know none, but either a foreign Church, or the Kings
Subjects, which Subjects of our gracious Sovereign you know to be only a part
of the Catholic Church: upon the whole matter you acknowledge a Catholic
Church, and yet acknowledge no other, but some foreign Church. Again you
reply, If it be said, That the Church has Authority to command, We desire to
know what Church that is, and where to be found and heard, etc? And a little
after you tell us, (rightly supposing indeed that we do not mean any pretended
head of the Church Universal) You can find no Church of Christ, but either the
National Church of England, which are the Kings Subjects, or some foreign
Church, and you not know therefore what we mean; then hear you St. Austine
speak our meaning, when he neither spoke of the National Church whereof he was
a part, nor of any foraign Church, yet pronounces, that to dispute against that
which the Universal Church practices, Insolentissimae est insaniae, (Epist.
119.) Again the same St. Austine, l. 2 de Baptism. Co. Donatist. c. 7. Quam
consuetudinem credo ab Apostolica Traditione venientem; (sicut multa que non
inveniuntur in literi^ eorum, neque in conciliis posteriorum, and tamen quia
per universam custodiuntur Ecclesiam, non nisi ab ipsis tradita and commendata
creduntur) Which custom I believe to have come from Tradition of the Apostles;
(as many things which are not found in their Writings, nor in the Councels of
following times; and yet because they are observed through the Church
Universal, are believed to have been by them delivered and commended. If you
understand St. Austines meaning, you understand ours: If you know the Church he
spoke of, you know the Church we speak of. But whatsoever we mean, you say, we
seem to contradict the forecited Article of the Church of England. But why?
Does i^ follow at all, that because it is not necessary, that Ceremonies or
Traditions be in all places one, or utterly alike, that therefore there is no
one Tradition, (no not as to the substance of it, though not utterly as to the
manner or circumstances) common to all the Church? for example, that of the
Feast of Easter?

As to your exception against what was said of St. Peter's Fast till noon, you
should before your declamation have well considered that Fast of St. Peter
mentioned Acts 10. 9, 10 Four things are in the Text observable, as at least
sufficiently employed. 1. That it was about the sixth hour, ( i. e. it may be
something after) when others usually, according to our custom are ending their
meal; that was the time, I say, that St. Peter went up upon the house top to
pray, Verse 9. Then it follows, Verse 10. And he became exceeding hungry, viz.
after his Prayer: Therefore this, yet more after the point of noon; thence
continued he fasting while they made ready for him: But yet before he eat, he
falls into a trance, in which a vision was presented to him, wherein to him,
being hungry, several Creatures were offered, Arise, Peter, s^ay, and eat. The
mystical signification of this Vision we all know. but evidently the Providence
of God disposed him to that Vision by something a longer delayed and increased
hunger. In all this some time is spent beyond Noon, and a hunger raised beyond
ordinary. However popularly speaking, since it was (...), it might be called
St. Peter's Fast till Noon. Here you mentioning your selves, and your
temperance, and something of Princes, and Students, and some Tradesmen, (not
all surely) seem to forget that the Fast of Lent, as St. Bernard may have
taught us, was intended ordinarily for the generality of all Christians, in
ordinary strength of years and body (when not in the accident of extraordinary
labor) so that the ordinary laborers are herein included, (...) (...). S.
(...). Bishop Mo^ (...) Appea^, p. 310 l. 2. c. 24 The Romanists free all ^der
twenty years of age, etc. and whosoever are employed in bodily (...). The
Protestants charge all Christians to fast some time, so far as the ^ndifferent
^bility of Nature permits.
who are known necessarily to require their mornings repast, (as our Savior in
his morning-Travel, Mat. 21. 18, 19.) Now forasmuch as Fasting is properly a
voluntary substraction of food in such a degree, as may afflict the body, let
any judge whither if the ordinary laborers are to bear some part in the
Churches common Fast, (though not in that degree that sedentary men and the
like are) and if they shall extend their Fast but to St. Peter's time of eating
in that Text, Acts 10. whither it shall not be to them a Fast, A greater
voluntary Affliction of their body, then other men's abstaining till night? And
so St. Peter's Fast in respect of some in the Church concerned in her Fast (for
ought you have said) needed not to be an occasion of your magnifying your
temperance* or fear of bringing the Clergy under suspicion of intemperance, by
calling your ordinary wholesome temperance by the name of Peter's Fast. B^sh.
Andrews Se^m. 5 of (...)* (...) and Fasting, page 225. Pet^rs Fast they find,
and that is the lowest: he was fasting till past the sixth hour: till then.
Thus in^ [^he ^he Church] is, for these are not without example in Scripture,
we see, not unknown to (...).
When Daniels Fast is described, Chap. 10. for ought we can perceive, the
abstinence in quality of his Diet, that neither flesh nor wine came into his
m^uth, and that he ate no pleasant bread, etc. till three full weeks were
fulfilled, (with diminution of his food, no doubt) without any mention of his
food delaid till evening, is there called the chastening of his body.

Lastly, We come to the Act of Parliament, concerning which you thus begin your
Reply, If when the expres words of a Statute, etc. are cited,) Who would not
herein think, that our Brethren had brought some part of a Statute, wherein the
religious Fast of Lent, as contained in our Common Prayer Book, were expressed?
But there is no such matter. Whereas your Answerers had produced an express Act
of 1. Eliz. made on purpose to confirm their Common Prayer Book, and every part
of it, and so to be sure the twenty five leaves thereof, that contain all
things whatsoever the Common Prayer Book has of the Religious Fast of Lent.
That Act adding severe Penalties against any person, or persons whatsoever,
that shall by any open words declare, or speak any thing in derogation of the
same Book, or any thing therein contained, or any part thereof: Such as the
twenty five leaves, concerning the Religious Fast of Lent undeniably is, and
your very proposal supposes. On the other side, the Act by you mentioned,
speaks not any word of any thing mentioned in any part of the
Common Prayer Book. Except you think, that when the Church prays [that we may
use such god^y abstinence, that the flesh may be ^ubdued to the Spirit, etc.*
that such godly abstinence cannot be but b^ the difference of fish and flesh,
[the only thing (...) there which were a superstition grosser then the Papists
are gu^ of; so that we have a whole Act standing in force on purpose mad^ (...)
defend, amongst other parts of our Liturgy, the religious Fast of (...), as it
is in the Common Prayer Book contained: and the (...) (...), 5. Eliz. relating
only to the difference of fish and flesh, of wh^ there is no word in the
Common Prayer, you must now confe^s to be wholly nothing to our question,
unless you meddled beyond your commi^ion touching Lent, besides what it is set
forth as a religious Fast in the Common Prayer Book.

But now because by this your discourse you have wronged the piety of our Laws
and Acts of Parliament, I proceed to make good against you, that according to
the Statutes of this Realm, the comm^nd in Lent made (not by the
Common Prayer Book, b^t) by the Statutes to fo^bear Flesh, is declared by Acts
of Parliament now in force, to be partly for the subduing of the flesh to the
Spirit, and as a means to virtue, and that in the Statute by you produced there
is nothing to the contrary: which that it may appear, look over your Law again,
consult the Statute, 5 Eliz. 5 and you shall find, That there is nothing as to
fasting in that Statute, but these two things: 1. The superaddition of
Wednesday to the former Fish-dayes, which part of the Statute stands repealed,
3. Car. ( c. 4.) 2. The increase of the penalty only upon any transgressors of
the former Acts concerning Fish-dayes. Both these that Statute declares to be
only for political ends, as other Politic Laws are, and be, viz. both the
superaddition of Wednesday, (wherein they gave leave to have flesh also at
Table, so that the wonted fish were there served up also) and also the
augmented penalty to be only in favor to the political concernment; and who,
think you, believes, that any forbearing of flesh, or eating of fish mentioned
in that Statute, is of any necessity for the saving of the soul of man? and yet
that mentioned in the preamble of the 2. and 3. Edwardi 6. c. 19. may be, and
is a mean to virtue, and to subdue the flesh unto the Spirit, which is not at
all mentioned in this of 5. Eliz. 5. as to the constituting and enacting part,
but only as to another penalty upon the other, the politic end: Ask the
learned in the Law, whither that of the 2. and 3. Edward. 6. c. 19. were
repealed by this; but of that you were wise to take no notice at all. 3. No Act
did not repeal in any word any part of that 2. and 3. Edvardi 6. c. 19. But in
all Acts touching days of Abstinence, as 5 and 6. Edward. 6. c. 3. great
regard is had by a special clause that none should mistake, as if the present
Act did extend to abrogate, or take away the Abstinence in L^nt commanded in
the Act of 2. and 3. Edward. 6. c. 19.

Now therefore hear you the words of the Statute, 2. and 3. Edwar. 6. c. 19.
Albeit the Kings Subjects now having a more perfect and clear light of the
Gospel, and true word of God through the infinite mercy and clemency of
Almighty God, by the hands of the Kings Majesty, and his most noble Father of
famous memory, promulgate, shewe^, declared, and opened, and thereby perceiving
that one day, or one meat of it self is not more holy, more pure, or more clean
then another, for that all days, and all meats be of their nature of one equal
purity, cleanness and holiness; and that all men should by them live to the
glory of God, and at all times, and for all meats, give thanks unto him; of
which meats none can defile (...) men, or make them unclean at any time, to
whom all mea^s be l^wfull and pure, so that they be not used in disobedience or
vice; yet for ^smuch a dive^ of the Kings Subjects, turning their knowledge
therein to satisfy their sensuality, when they should thereby ere case in
virtue, have of late time, more then in times past, broken and contemned such
Abstinence which has been used in the Re^lm upon the Friday and Saturday, the
Embring days, and other days, commonly c^lled V^gils, and in the time commonly
call^ (...), and ^her accustomed times; the Kings Majesty considering. The due
and godly (...) is a mean to virtue, and to subdue men's bodies to their soul
and spirit; and considering also that Fishers, and men using the Tra^ of living
by Fishing in the Sea, may thereby the rather be set on work, and that by
eating of Fish, much flesh shall be saved, and encre^ed, and also for diverse
other considerations and commodities of this Realm, does Ordain and Enact, with
the assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Common (...) this
present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, -- -- That no
person, or persons of what (...), degree (...) condition he or they be, shall
at any time after the fist day of May, in the year of our Lord God 1549.
willingly and wittingly eat any manner of flesh, after what manner of kind or
sort soever it shall be ordered, dressed or used, upon any Fridy or Saturday,
or the Embring days, or in any day in the time commonly called Lent, etc. The
scope* and reason, and motive of which Law, if it be considered according to
the principal end of it, subduing the flesh to the Soul and Spirit, (for there
is added another end also which was political) may well admonish us (though it
was hard to contain the particulars in a Law) to abstain also at such times of
Mortification from whatsoever food else is, more delicate, costly, of hotter
nature, and of higher nourishment. The formers of that Law (which is now the
Law of out Land) had no doubt before their eyes the approbation of God, and his
gracious answer to Daniel so chastening himself, as in the holy Scripture is
described: I ate no pleasant bread, neither came flesh nor wine in my mouth,
Dan, 10. 2, 3, 12. which that Ministers of Gods Word should not as well have
before their eyes, as our civil Magistrate, is a great shame. But if you look
back to the Common Prayer Book, (which was the matter of your Commission, and
of your grand debate (as you call it) and of your Proposal; there if you think
the Act of Parliament ratifying and establishing the Common Prayer Book, and
therein the religious Fast of Lent designed the end to be the service of God no
otherwise then as other Political Laws are, and be, you should evidently
contradict that Act of Parliament which professes there and then an
establishment of the order of the public and divine service, and should imagine
the prayer for the first Sunday of Lent to have the suspicion of such a sense
as this, O Lord, who for our sakes did fast forty days and forty nights,
give us grace to use such abstinence, that our seafaring men and Mariners, and
young Cattle, and the like may be maintained, how worthy a conceit were this?
To conclude this Chapter: for the substance of the Paschal or Lent-Fast we have
heard. (To name no more now then S. Austine) Habet Authoritatem, and in
veteribus libris, and ex Evangelio, (Epist 119.) praecipitur enim nobis, and ex
lege, and ex Prophetis, and ex ipso Evangelio, ( idem ad Psalm. 110.) and the
same also. l. 30. con. Faustum, (c. 3 -- 5.) avowing Abstinence from some sort
of meats, (of Delicacy and higher nourishment, Flesh, etc.) Edomandi corporis
^usa, propter corporis castigationem, sicut, says he, per Quadragesimam fere
omnes) to be commanded from the Apostles and the Prophets, you have tried it
now as to the kind of flesh, or fish by our Law, and let the Reader judge of
the Issue.

CHAP. 9. The judgment which the Ancient Fathers made of such as opposed the
Churches set Fasts or Feasts, and particularly this Paschal, or Lent-Fast.
SAint Augustine in his Book of Heresies, n. 53. writing of the Aerians thus
says; Aeriani ab Aerio quodam sunt nominati, qui -- in Arrianorum haeresim
lapsus, propria quoque dogmata addi^isse nonnulla [ fertur] dicens -- nec
statuta solenniter celebranda esse jejunia* sed cum quisque voluerit
jejunandum, ne videatur esse sub lege, dicebat etiam Presbyterum ab Episcopo
nulla differentia debere discerni. That is, the Aerians are named from one
Aerius, who having fallen into the Heresy of the Arrians, did add thereto some
opinions of his own, affirming that the solemn set Fasts were not to be
observed; but that every man was to fast when he pleased, least he should seem
to be under the law. He also said, that there was no difference to be put
between a Priest and a Bishop.

And n. 82. of the same Book, he thus says of the Iovinianists; A Ioviniano
quodam monach^ illa haeresis orta est aetate nostra cum adhuc juvenes essemus
-- dicebat non aliquid prodesse jejunia, vel a cibis aliquibus abstinentiam. --
cito tamen illa haeresis oppressa and extincta est, nec usque ad d^eptionem
aliquorum sacerdotum potuit pervenire. That is, the Heresy of the Jovinianists
in my time, when I was young, sprang from one Iovinian A MONK -- who said, that
fasting and abstinence from certain meats was not at all profitable* -- But
this herefie was soon extinct, and proceeded not so far as to deceive any
Priests.

Johannes Damascenus in his 6. Book of Heresies, writes thus of the Aerians or
Eustachians; Aeriani ab Aerio Pontico: fuit autem sacerdos Eustachii Episcopi [
Arriani] filius ejus [ Eustachij.] qui jejunium feria quarta, and sexta, and
quadraginta diebus servari, and pascha celebrari prohibet. Stata haec damnat
omnia -- quod si quis jejunium servare velit, id ab eo certis statisque diebus
servari negat oportere, sed quando volet, negat enim se lege teneri: negat
etiam quicquam inter Presbyterum and Episcopum interesse. That is, the Aerians
were named of Aerius of Pontus, who was a Priest to Eustachius, [an Arrian]
Bishop, and son of that same Eustachius, who did fordid fasting on Wednesdayes,
and Fridayes, and in LENT, and the observation of the Pasch. He condemns these
set solemnities -- saying, that if any one would keep a Fast, he ought not to
observe ^t upon certain set days, but when he pleases; for he denies that he
is bound to it by a Law: He also denies that there is any difference between a
Priest and a Bishop.

Epiphanius in his 75. Heresy, which is the Aerians: (...) Afterward ^e
says, what is the Pasch which is performed with you? Do you adhere again to
Jewish fables? For says he, ye ought not to perform the Pasch; for Christ our
Passover is slain -- for there is to be no set Fast: For these things are
Judaical, and under the yoke of bondage. -- But it I fast at all, I fast what
day I please for my own liberty; whence they commonly affect to fast upon the
Lord's Day, but on Wednesday and Friday, etc. And Theophilus of Alexandria in
his first Paschal Epistle says, Homines provocantur ( terturum humilia
deserentes) cum Ecclesia primitivorum Dominicae Paessionis sesta celebrare --
Non est ergo, non est haereticorum ulla solennitas, nec qui in errore decepti
sunt, illius possunt communione laetari Men are provoked (forsaking the low
things of the earth) to celebrate the solemnities of the Lord's Passion with
the Church of the Primitive ones. -- There is not therefore, there is not any
solemnity that Heretics will keep, nor can those which are deceived with
error, be delighted with the communion thereof.

Synodus Gangrensis can 19. (...) If any of the Religious without any bodily
necessity shall proudly contemn and break the Fasts delivered in common, and
observed of the Church, a perfect deliberation in him rejecting them, let him
be an Anathema. Epistola Synodica Patrum Synodi Gangrensis a Haereticis
quibusdam Eustathianis; (...) (...). Concillium Moguntinum sub Carolo ^agn.
Can. 35. Siquis indictum jejunium Superbiendo contempserit, and observare cum
caeteris Christianis noluerit, etc. Anathema sit, nisi se emendare statuerit.
Evagrius l. 2. c. 8. notes certain Heretic; of Alexandria; (...) Not
reverencing the time of the Celebration of the salutary Pasch.

CHAP. 10. The judgment of the Right R. Fathers in God, Lancelot Andrews Bishop
of Winchester, and John Cousin the present Lord Bishop of Durham; also (in some
measure) of the most Reverend Father in God Archbishop Whitgift, and Bishop
Montague.
BIshop Andrews in his fifth Sermon of Repentance, p. 216. says, He [Christ]
that in this place [St. Mat. 6. 16.] says, Cum jejunatis, when ye fast; says
in another, Tum jejunabunt, then they shall fast; and that amounts to a Precept
(I trow) And p. 217. They that were under Grace, went far beyond them under the
Law in their Cum, and in their jejunatis both. And in the 223. and 224. p. of
the same Sermon, speaking of the yearly recurrent fast of Lent, he says, It is
a custom of the Church, while it was a Christo recens, yet fresh and warm from
Christ, the Church which was the mother of the Apostles themselves, at all
times kept; everywhere observed then, and ever since. Some to resist it, frame
to themselves a fear of (I wot not what) Superstition* where no fear is. Before
any Superstition was stirring, any Popery hatched, it was, this Fast was. Lex
abstinendi in quadragesim semper fuit in Ecclesia (says the Oracle of
Antiquity, Theophilus Alexandrinus) Lent was ever in the Church; Nos unam
quadragesimam secundum traditionem Apostolorum: We have but one Lent, (the
Montanists had three) but that one was delivered us by the Apostles (says St.
Jerome) why should I weary you with reckoning them up? what one more ancient
Writer then other is there, but you shall find it in him expressly, even up to
Ignatius, who lived with the Apostles themselves? Apostolic then it is; and
for such St. Hierome avowss it; and when that is said, enough is said for it I
think, yet it is good (you know it) the Fast so delivered, and by the Church
ever, and everywhere so kept; the Council of Gangra has laid an Anathema on
them that keep it not, avoid it how they can that keep it not. -- every man (so
we would have it) to be left to himself, for Prayer, Fasting, Sacrament; nay
for Religion too (now) and all? for Gods sake let it not be so -- let us have
our days appointed, and our h^ures set for it. If all were left to us, God
knows, I durst not promise, what should become of Prayer it self: the like I
say for the Sacrament -- and so for Fasting. Fast privately in Gods Name; but
hear you; let not the Church trust to that; nor she has not held it wisdom so
to do: but, as in both them (Prayer and the Sacrament) so in this, hold us to
our order of days and times established. Them if we keep, so it is; otherwise,
were it not for the Churches times, I doubt there would be taken scarce any
time at all. Now yet somewhat is done; but leave it once at liberty, liberty
has lost us some already, and will loose us the rest, if it be not looked to
in time. Page 2* 5. this Fast is called Iejunium. paschalo; for Easter and ^ent
stand up on one base; both stand, and fall together. Last of all, page 224.
REMEMBER IT CAME FROM THE APOSTLES: that is it that binds us; that is it that
sets us fast: Thus far Bishop Andrews.

And the R. Reverend Father in God the Lord Bishop of Durham, in his Collection
of Private Devotions in the Practice of the Ancient Church, after many
Citations out of the Holy Fathers, of the Greek and Latin Church concerning
Lent, thus says, All which being put together, will abundantly prove, That the
Lent which we now keep, IS, AND EVER HAS BEEN AN APOSTOLICAL CONSTITUTION, as
S. Hierome said in his Epistle to Marcella, Nos unam Quadragesimam secundum
Traditionem. Apostolorum tempore nobis congruo ^ejunamus: That is, We observe a
Lent Fast of forty days, as we have been taught to do by the Apoin a fit and
seasonable time of the year. To which he adds the Testimony of S. Augustine,
and Chrysologus.

The most Reverend Father in God Archbishop Whitgift, in his Defense of the
Answer, etc. p. 104. I know no reason why the Apostles many not be said to be
the Authors of celebrating the day of the Passion, etc* neither yet do I
understand any cause why the Church may not still observe the same: sure I am,
that they were not the Authors of the Superstitions and Errors used in them
by the Papist; neither does S. Austin say so: For thi^ is no good Argument, to
say, The Apostles appointed these days to be celebrated: Ergo, They appointed
the manner of celebrating used by the Papists. The days may be with more
Godliness, and profit to the Church, observed, (being cleansed from
Superstition and erroneous Doctine) then abrogated. The place of S. Austin is
in his Epistle ad Ianuar: 118. Illa a quae non scripta, sed tradita custodimus,
etc.

And for Recommendation Divine of the forty days Fast, the Reverend Father in
God Richard Mountague Bishop of Norwich, Origin. Eccles* pars 2. n. 81. Numerum
hunc mysticum [dierum 40.] and sacrum, (...) Scripturis multa sunt quae decent
testimonia -- Certe erat aliquid in* eo, cur dicb^os continuis 40, apertis
coeli catarectis and abyssi (...) bus resolutis* invalescerent aquae super
terram. Quod annos 40 ex Aegypto redu^ Israel eremi erroribus destinebantur --
erat certe dispensatorius, and pluries quam una vice Christi Domini actionibus
consecra^us. -- Certe fortuito non fiebat, quod toties in Scripturis numerus
ille per Deum consecrabatur -- Mihi recte opinatus videtur Augustinus, qui
numerum quadragenarium totum praesentis vitae cursum significare diceba^,
tempus, nimirum jejuniis, orationibus, poenitentiae, peccatorumque expiationi
destinatum. Et, si per Novatores liceret illud adderem, Ut ECCLESIAE
QUADRAGESIMAM COMMENDARET.

And even such Learned Protestants, who write its Original not Apostolical, or
from Christ, yet prove it themselves from Antiquity to have been in the Church
observed, both by Clergy and Laity, before his time, who was a Bishop in the
Church about 38 years after S. John's death, (who himself it is probable was
born much about S. John's death, or a little after) so Zanchius l. 1. in 4.
Praeceptum, p. 695. certe Telesphorus, qui fuit septimus Romanae Ecclesia
Episcopus and martyr, circa Annum Domini 139. hujus [temporis Quadragesimalis
supranominati^] mentionem facit, tanquam ante se in Ecclesia observati. Ad^ecit
enim aliquot dies, quos volebat a Clericis ac Sacerdotibus, amplius quam a
^aicis observabantur, observari. -- Statuimus, inquit, ut septem hebdomadas
plenas ante sanctum Pascha omnes Clerici, i. e. in sortem Domini vocati a carne
jejunent: quia sicut discreta debet esse vita Clericorum a Laicorum
conversatione, ita and in jejunio debet esse discretio.

These Learned Authors (especially the four Revered Bishops of our own Church
above) I have produced, not that I think there may not perhaps more then double
the number be alleged of modern Authors, differing in judgment from what I
have asserted; But by whomsoever they shall be alleged, if they shall stand by
themselves alone, and my Replyer shall not first produce, as I have done,
according to Vincentius Lirinensis's Golden Rule, 1. Antiquity, 2. Universality
of practice, (generally speaking,) 3. The Consent of the generality of Learned
Ecclesiastical Writers, at least through the first 600. or 700. years, (the
time wherein lawful General Councels were, who with Authority noted Heretical
Writers,) (and then, if he please, and not but then, give us the Judgment of
any Holy and Learned men:) Otherwise, I here prescribe against any number of
Moderns of one smaller part of the Christian world, and of one or two Ages
farthest removed from Antiquity, (except where Authority of our own Church, to
which we have subscribed, does interpose;) such testimonies, I say, standing
alone by themselves, Antiquity that app^oaches nearer the Fountain not being
first heard, both to interpret Scripture, and testify of Tradition (where that
is part of the Controversy;) All such weak and trifling process of Arguments
from Testimony, I take to be but tyranny over men's Judgments, who are bound to
none but to Gods Word, who is Truth, and the Churches Witness, whom he has set
to be the Pillar of Truth; whose witness is best learned from Antiquity, and
Universality of practice, and consent of her Pastors of the Ages required; and
to submission of acquiescence to their own Church in such matters.

But why then have I brought those Five worthy Witnesses? I answer, 1. Because
I had first in legitimate order premised such Antiquity, Universality, and
Consent; (and so my Adversaries Testimonies ever shall be welcome.) 2. To show,
that any the most faithful Sons of the Church of England may be allowed to
defend what I in this maintain. 3. To prevent such Replyers, who are wont to
supply with railing, what they want in weight of Argument or Testimony:
forasmuch as the World sees, that so Reverend, Zealous, and Learned
Protestants, and such as have done as much service against the Papists a^ all
the Presbyterians put together in their Writings and Sermons have done, have
thus written. Howbeit I deny not, that many Reverend and Learned men, and far
from Presbyterians, are herein of a different Judgment, and have done very good
service against the Papists in their gross Errors.

FINIS.
A TABLE of the Names of the Sundays and other Chief Days of LENT, and of
some following, in the Eastern and Western Churches.
Septuagesima, The ninth Sunday before Easter Day. (...). Dominica Filii
Prodigi. Memoria 70 Annorum qui in significationem fuerunt exilii nostri a
Domino ( Augustine. l. 3. d. Doctr. Christ.) And Memory of the 70 weeks Dan. 9.
26. in the end of which Messiah the Prince was to be cut off, but not for
himself. Sexagesima, The eighth Sunday before Easter day. (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...)
. Quinquagesima, The seventh Sunday before Easter Day. (...), vel (...),
Dominica Ingress^s seu Introitus Jejunii. Hi^c (...) (...) (...) ^sse Cl^is
(...) sui (...).
. Quadragesima, The sixth Sunday before Easter Day. Memoria Jejunii Domini.
Ord. Romans (...) Hac (...) (...) Graeci (...) (...)
(...). (propter gulam.) Dominica Invocavit. The whole week the Greeks called,
(...). Shrovetuesday. Fastness Tuesday. Ash Wednesday. Caput Jejunii. Dies
^inerum. Second Sunday in Lent. (...). Dominica Reminiscere. Third* Sunday in
Lent. (...). Dominica Oculi. Fourth Sunday in Lent. (...). Dominica
Refectionis. Dominica de Panibus. Dominica Laetare. (...). Fifth Sunday. (...).
Dominica Passionis, (propterquod Dominus praedixit c^ di^ de instanti Passione
sua.) ^ive Judica Friday in this week. Praeparatorium Lazari. Saturday. (...),
Sabbatum Lazari. Sixth Sunday. (...). Dominica Osannarum. Dominica Palmarum,
Palm Sunday. The whole week was called, (...). Sancta hebdomada. Septimana
Passionis. Hebdomas Xerophagia^um. Hebdomada poenosa. The great week. Hac
hebdomada (...) (sicut and (...)) (...).
Monday in this week. (...)* Feria Secunda Passionis. Tuesday. (...)* Feria
(...). Feria tertia Passionis. Wednesday. (...). Feria quarta in Proditione
Judae. Feria quarta Passionis. Tenable Wednesday. And these four days before
Easter called, (...). Thursday. (...). Feria quinta Passionis. Coena Domini.
Feria quinta in Coena Domini. Feria mysterio^um. ^avipedium. Dies mandati,
Maundy Thursday, Sheer Thursday. Good Friday. (...). Dies Paschae Parascheue
Crucifixionis. Dies sanctus Passionis Domini. Pascha quo passus est Dominus. (
Augustine. ep. 119.) ^cclesia Smy^ensis Ep. de (...) Polycarp.
Saturday, or Easter-Eve. (...): Sabbatum Sanctum. Vigilia Paschalis. (...). (
Greg. Nazianz*) Easter Day. (...) S. Greg. Nazianz. ( Orat. in Pasch.) (...)
Eusebius. (...). ( Con^. Ancyr. c. 5.) Dominica Magna Resurrectionis. The day
which the Lord has made. Psalm. 118. 24. Monday in Easterweek. (...). ( Greg.
Nazianz.) Feria 2da. Resurrectionis Domini. Secundus Dies Festi. Tuesday. Feria
3ia. Resurrectionis Domini. Tertius dies Festi. ( S. Aug. d. Civ. D. l. 22. c.
8.) Wednesday. Feria 4a. (...), Candidatorum. Thursday. Feria 5a. (...), seu
Candidatorum. Sunday after Easter. (...). Greg. Naz. (...). ( Gregor. Nazianz.)
Dominica quasi-modo-geniti. Dominica in Albis. Octava Paschalis, Low-Sunday,
Low-Easter-day, or the Octaves of Easter. The 2. Sunday after Easter. Wednesday
after. (...). The 3. Sunday from Easter. (...). The 25 day of the fifty.
Dies Disputationis Christi cum Doctoribus. (...). Sunday before Ascension.
Dominica Rogationum. (...) Ascension-day. (...) Holy Thursday. Sunday after
Ascension. (...) Dominica Expectationis. Dominica hebdomadae Expectationis.
Whitsunday. (...) ( Evagr. l. 1. c. 3.) (...). Festum Pentecostes. Wied-Sunday.
Wh. Monday. (...) quae dicitur ^tiam Graecis, (...). Wh. Tuesday. (...).
Wednesday, Friday, etc. Iejunium Pentecostes.
The four Ember weeks of Fasting are called Iejunia quatuor temporum, quae and
imbrem vocat Council. Aenhamens^ can. 16 Iejunium primi mensis. Iejunium
Pentecostes. Iejunium septimi mensis. Iejunium decimi mensis.


Anciently the Wednesday and Friday, (says L^) but since, the Wednesday,
Friday and Saturday next A Cruce, post Cineres, post Pentecos, atque Luciae.

The weekly lesser Fasting-days of Wednesday and Friday are called Stationes,
Stationum semijejunia, (...) seu (...).

The Fasting-Eves before certain Holy Days, (...) Anteferiales Vigiliae.

FINIS.
Some Errata of the Press to be thus amended.
Page 33. lin. 12. pro Eusebius, lege Philo. p. 48. l. 11. pro (...), lege
(...). p. 165. l. ult. pro (...), lege (...). p. 219. pro (...), lege (...). p.
226. pro (...), lege (...)* p. 453. l. 20. dele 2. and pro l. 1. lege c. 1. p.
463. lege Relig^ous (...) religions. p. 475. l. 26. lege quidam, pro alii.
ibid. l. 28. lege plurib^s, pro ^ibus. ita, pro etiam. ibid. in marg. (...),
pro (...). In the Table, pro Fastness Tuesday, lege Fastens eve.


