Moses and Aaron Brethren OR, The Excellency, Necessity, Consistencie, and
Usefulness OF MAGISTRACY and MINISTRY under the GOSPEL: Opened in a SERMON
Preached at the Assizes held at Darby, the Eighth of March, M DC LIII.

By Samuel Gardener, M.A. late Fellow of Corpus Christi College in Cambridge,
and now Minister of the Gospel at Eckington in Darbyshire.

Published not for Contention, but Satisfaction.

LONDON, Printed for John Rothwell, at the Fountain and Bear in Cheap Side,
1653.

To his honored Friend and Patron, GEORGE SITWEL Esquire, High Sheriff of the
County of Darbie.
SIR,
MY special respects and obligements to your self, was that which drew me forth
upon this service: What was preached at your desire, is now published under your
Name. If I have spoken somewhat freely in matters of so great concernment; it
will be (I hope) in these times of freedom, if not commendable, yet
pardonable: Et veniam pro laud peto. I am not ignorant, that the World is even
surfeted on Sermons, many having been hearers so long, that now like them that
live by the falls of the River Nilus, they are grown spiritually deaf, hear no
more. But the occasion of this Sermon is not ordinary, may be less hereafter;
and such as will not patiently hear, may possibly better see their own error,
who while they pluck one stake after another out of the hedge of Government,
endanger the laying all flat and level.

Magistracy and Ministry are the great stays of the World, preservatives of
Order, Distinction and Reverence. The Ministry is the Magistrates guard, bank
and bulwark; of singular use, even to civil peace and obedience, unless we can
believe that a people will honor Magistrates, and obey their Laws, that
through barbarous irreligiousness fears neither God nor men. But some men are
so unjust as to desire a Ministry, and yet to grudg them their maintenance,
unless what is next to none, an arbitary, poor and uncertain one, as hard to
come by, as to live on.

SIR, be you pleased still to continue a cordial friend to Magistracy and
Ministry, Religion and Learning, Piety and Sobriety; which will engrave you on
the Annals of Time, a true Common-wealths-man: Praying the blessings of Heaven
on you and yours, I rest

Your obliged Friend and Servant in our Lord, Sam. Gardener.

Moses and Aaron Brethren: OR, The excellency, necessity, consistencie and
usefulness of Magistracy and Ministry under the Gospel.
PSALM. 71.20. Thou leddest thy people like a flock, by the hand of Moses and
Aaron.
THe Psalm is a Psalm of Asaphs. It may be entitled Asaphs rehearsal Sermon,
or a Psalm to bring to remembrance Gods ancient mercies. The title of the 38,
and the 70 Psalm.
I will remember thy wonders of old, verse 11. old wonders of mercy. The
Prophet (for so he was, as appears, 2 Chronicles. 29.30.) at the penning of the
Psalm, seems to have been in a sad condition: his spirit overwhelmed, verse 3.
so as that he could neither sleep nor speak, verse 4. yet he endeavors to
raise up his hope and heart in God, by calling to mind his ancient loving
kindness to his people Israel, whom when they came out of Aegype, a rude, mixed
and ungoverned multitude, he was yet pleased graciously to take the guidance
and government of, to carry them through the red Sea, Mare algosum, whose weeds
hindered their passage.

Specialiter facta ant dicta generaliter sap^unt. Tertul. Heb 13.5.


through all difficulties and perplexities in the Wilderness, to the promised
land, by the service of Moses and Aaron; this the holy man of God recounts
here, to his own particular comfort and encouragement as a singular mercy, not
to be forgotten, with which he closes his Song, and concludes the Psalm, Thou
leddest, etc.

In the words we have,

1 A singular and special mercy celebrated, The government of Israel in the
Wilderness, expressed in this word, Leddest.

2 The principal Author of this mercy, God himself; Thou leddest.

3 The Instruments employed by God, in and for the bestowing this mercy, Moses
and Aaron: By the hand of Moses and Aaron.

4 The subjects of this Government, or persons partaking of this mercy, Gods
own people: Thy people.

5 The manner or temper of this Government: like a flock. Thou leddest, etc.

To begin with the first particular, the mercy here celebrated; The Government
of Israel in the Wilderness, expressed in this word, leddest.

A mercy indeed most fit to be thankfully celebrated and remembered. For
Government is the mercy of all outward mercies. Exodus 39 29. Ordo est anima
mundi.
The bond that binds, as the High Priests girdle, his other garments, all
other blessings to us. The very life and soul of the World, without which it
would presently return to its old Chaos of confusion, and become a carcass of
corruption, rotting into its first simple elements. In a word, the very breath
of our nostrils, without which we can no more live then without the common air
we breath in; an expression borrowed from no Court-flatterer, but from the
Prophet Jeremy, and applied by him to none of the best Governors, King
Zedekiah, Lam. 4.20. The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the Lord, was
taken in their pits, of whom we said, Under his shadow we shall live amongst
the heathen.

But I need not sail to Ophir for Gold, to guild this subject, (...), placide
deducere, ut pastor gregem. Pagninus.
there is enough, a mine in the Text, in this one word ledaest. For it is a
Pastoral leading, or the leading of a Shepherd his sheep, so much the word here
used implies, and the latter words clear it; for thou leddest like a flock, and
so consequently, as a Shepherd.

Now in the Shepherds leading of his flock, there are three things that will
sufficiently set forth, and commend unto us the excellency of the blessing of
Government.

1 Direction. 2 Provision. 3 Protection.
1 In the Shepherds leading there is direction, to which purpose, as our
Savior (the chief Shepherd of our souls) observes according to the custom of
those Eastern Countries, he goes before them, he leads them forth, John 10.4.
and he brings them in, he has his whistle or voice to call, and if that will
not do, his Dog to fetch in wanderers and straglers.

Government a singular mercy in respect of direction, in regard it guides and
directs men what to do, how to carry themselves in the several windings and
turnings of their lives. And this it does by wholesome and good Laws, which are
communis ratio, common reason, or reason of State, National wisdom and
understanding, civil directories pointing the unexperienced Traveller, like the
Mercurial Statues of old, into the right path, or path of right: Deuteronomy. 4.6.
Sheep are animalia erratica, apt to err and go astray. It Is no way good or
safe for them to be left to the self-destructive liberty of their own
straglings. Praemio and paena.
They must be infolded betwixt rewards and punishments of wise laws, and
sometimes upon trespass impounded. Psalm. 119. last.
And men have their errors too; I have gone astray like a sheep that is lost,
says the Kingly Prophet. The far greater part of men are born, not to rule, but
to obey; to be led and directed by others, seeing they have not a sufficiency
of reason and understanding, much less of grace and honesty, to carry
themselves inoffensively toward God and man. The people of Israel, Gods own
people, never strayed farther from all Piety and Justice, then when every man
was left to his own government and self-direction; doing what was good in his
own eyes. As we may see in the story of the Levite and his Concubine (and such
times usually make bold with the Levite) recorded in the last Chapter of
Judges, and the last Verse.

Government a singular mercy in respect of direction, that is the first.

2 In the Shepherds leading his sheep, as there is direction, so provision;
Praeit ut prosit.
he goes before them, but it is to feed them; he leads them, but its to green
pastures, and clear still waters, Psalm. 23.2.

Government a singular mercy in respect of provision, in regard it provides for
all, takes care of all, even of the poor, of infants and outcasts, that else
would perish: it regulates trade, it forbids Monopolies, ingrossures,
depopulating enclosures, (...), as Aristotle wrote to Alexander. Psalm. 50 1.
Divum Pater.
that so all may live in employment.

Governors and Magistrates, the powers mentioned, Romans 13.1. as they are
ordained of God: so it is in bonum, for good, to be not flagella ira Dei, the
plagues and scourges, but rather provisores, to provide for the people
committed to their care. To be like God whom they represent, optimi as well as
maximi, best as well as greatest; and first best, and then greatest. The
hunger-starved Egyptians run to Pharach, and he sends them to Joseph, and what
would they have done, if they had not had a Joseph to provide for them? 2 Kings
6 26.
The woman in the siege of Samaria, cried out to the King, Help, my Lord, o
King. Hence the Heathen placed the Images of their Magistrates by their
spring-heads, which refresh all comers, Caussinus. H^ero. Genesis 20. Haurite ex
me tanquam ex Nilo vestro, Vespasian to the Egyptians in Sueton. Patres
Conscripti. 1 Timothy 5.8.
the poorest and meanest. The King of Gerar is styled Abimelech, that is, My
father the King, and the Roman Senators were usually styled Fathers. Now it
belongs to Fathers, as to guide and govern, so to provide for their family.
Government, as it is a direction of all, so it is intended by God as a provision
for all; and therefore in it is own nature, a singular blessing to all.

3 In the Shepherds leading, as there is direction and provision, so protection:
as he guides and feeds, so he defends his flock. To this purpose he has his
staff, and chiefly his Dog, not to worry weak sheep, but abigere lupos, to
drive away the Wolves and beasts of prey from the fold. Otherwise he is a
hireling, one that cares not for the sheep, but the wool. Tondere, non tueri.


Government a singular mercy: for as it directs men where they are apt to err,
provides for such as are most exposed to want; so it protects all in what they
enjoy. Pluck up the hedge of Government, and all things are common.

No man has any thing which another may not say is his, if so be he have the
longer sword: Magistrates are therefore styled the shields of the earth, Psalm.
47.9. The shield is a weapon of defense, not offense: it keeps off blows, it
interposes it self twixt harm and the body. Codrus in Just. The Fabii and Decii
in Florus. 2 Timothy 3.1, 2.
All stories divine and humane are full of the names of such as have sacrificed
themselves to certain death for the safety of the Commonwealth. But, alas! we
are fallen into the very dregs of time, men are lovers of themselves, and
that is a sign of perilous times, yea, a cause.

The King of Tire is called an anointed covering Cherub, from the tender
protection he gave his people, quasisub alis, Ezck. 28.18.
as it were under his wing: Magistrates, when worthy of their place and
calling, are Angeli Custodes, Guardian Angels of the places they presule over,
like the Cherubims that covered the Arc, the Law, and the Testimony from
profane irreverence, Exodus 37.9.
or like those Cherubims in Paradise, that with the flaming sword of Justice
defend the lives and possessions of their people in peace and security. And is
not this, my beloved, a singular mercy? have ye so soon forgot lawless and
plundering times? Fear, lest a worse thing happen unto you. Doubtless, to be
deprived of the benefit of good Laws, and the protection of Government, is
nothing else then with Nebuchadnezar to be driven to live amongst beasts, of if
amongst men, under the curse and trembling of Cain, that, omnis homo lictor,
every one that meets us will slay us; Government then a singular mercy in
respect of protection.

Let there be none amongst us then that may deserve the brand of Saint Peter, 2
Pet. 2.10. Jude 8.
and Saint Jude, set on some in their days, (so ancient is the mistake of true
Christian liberty) They despise dominion, and speak evil of dignity:
presumptuous and self-willed persons. Legibus servire libertas. Cicero.
Aquinas. Yenophon. Cyrus.
We should be most ungrateful to God and men for so excellent a blessing, if we
should look upon all Government as tyranny and slavery, on just Laws as bolts
and shackles. It Is true liberty to obey good Laws. For good Laws are nothing
but recta ratio, right reason, and he is a beast or a bedlam, that will not be
ruled by reason. The Persians taught their children the knowledge of Laws
as soon as of Letters.

And the Cretians and Agathyrsi were so in love with their Laws, Concentu
quodam Musico. Aelian. Var. hist. Deuteronomy. 32.
that they taught them their children in Songs with Music. An imitation
possibly of Gods own prescription, who taught his people the sum of his Laws in
a Song. Saint Paul gives order that Prayers, and not only Prayers, but
Thanksgivings also should be offered up to God for all in authority, 1 Timothy 2.1.
that under them we may live a peaceable life; if that we may, surely much
rather when we do, or may if we please.

And great reason thanks should be offered up to God in this behalf, in regard
Deus nobis haec otia fecit; God is the principal author of this mercy,
whosoever be the instruments, Thou leddest, though by the hand of Moses and
Aaron. God was the Shepherd of Israel, Psalm. 80.1.
that led Joseph like a flock, even he that sits between the Cherubims. Thou
leddest, says Isaiah, thy people with thy glorious arm by the right hand of
Moses The hand was Moses, Esaias 63.11.
o but the glorious arm wrapped in the cloud was Gods: Thou leddest.

God is indeed the great State-holder, the upholder of Government in the World.
Psalm. 47.9.
The Cap of Maintenance fits only his head, Cujus nutu geruntur omnia. The
shields of the earth are the Lords, they bear his arms, image, and
inscription; he holds them up, and over the world. Dan. 4.3 Omne regnum sub
gravtori. In ipsos reges Imperium est Jovis.


The Kingdom is the Lords, and he is the chief Governor among the Nations,
Psalm. 22.28. and this Kingdom rules over all, Psalm. 103.19. even in and over
the Kingdoms of me^, disposing of Crowns, and Scepters, as he pleases, leading
his people by them that are their Leaders, though not by miraculous or
immediate, yet by special and overruling providence.

This is old doctrine, and therefore I like it the better, Christianus nullius
hostis, ne dum Imperatoris quem scit a Deo suo constitui.

Colimus ergo Imperatorem ut hominem a Deo secundum, and quicquid est, a Deo
consecutum. Tertul. ad Scap.

Inde Imperator unde and homo, inde potestas illa unde and spiritus. Apolog.

Cujus jussu animae nascuntur, and reges conflituuntur, etc. Iren. lib 5. ad
finem.


as old as Tertullian. A Christian, say^ he, is no man's enemy, much less the
Emperors, whom ^e knows to be appointed by his God. Go therefore, reverence
the Emperor, as a man next to God, and as one that has obtained whatever he
has gotten from God. And elsewhere, Thence comes the Emperor, whence comes his
power, whence comes his spirit; which he learned from Irenaeus, before him, He
whose powerful Word creates souls, the same creates Princes and Potentates, his
Word, whose saying is making, who has said of these men, Ye are gods. Psalm.
82.6.

That popular saying then, that all power is from the people, must be wisely
and warily understood, else it will be found both dangerous and irreligious.
For though it is true, government of men over men is usually committed for
execution to men, by the free consent and choice of men; yet we must still
firmly hold, unless we deny providence, that it is primarily, principally, and
originally from God, from whom, though in part by the good wills of men,
descends every good and perfect gift, Jam. 1.17.

And seeing the power or dominion of men over beasts and creeping things is on
all hands acknowledged so divine, as that it is made a special part of Gods
image, or likeness in man, certainly the power and dominion of men over their
fellow creatures men, must need be much more divine, (...), Jupiter quasi
juvans pater.
the very image that fell from Jupiter, mentioned, Acts 19.35. Yea, the image
of the living God, the true helping Father of the World, fallen on men, causing
them to shine like Moses with the glorious beams of his own power communicated
to them. In a word, to close this particular, Government of men is nothing for
the substance, but a power over m^ns estates and lives. But this power must
necessarily come primarily and originally from God; for who shall exempt the
Magistrate, taking away any man's life and estate, from those general, and by
men uncontrolable Laws, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not steal, but a divine
dispensation, and a law equal in authority to the former?

A willing agreement and submission of men is not alone sufficient. For though
I be willing to be killed, desire, yea command another man to kill me, yet he
may not take away my life. Neither does the heinousness or notoriousness of
men's crimes authorize men to punish; for if one were going to suffer for
killing his own father, a private man cannot without murder put him to death.
But there is a divine Law impowring some men to these great actions, recorded,
Genesis 9.6. He that sheds man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. God has
resolved and enacted that in case of murder one man shall have power by virtue
of this grant and grand Charter to take away, Gen 9.6. Magna Charta Magistratus.
even the life of his fellow creature, and that lawfully. Neither are we to
conceive that God will himself punish every murderer, as Socinus would evade;
for it is clearly expressed, By man shall his blood be shed. God has authorized
and deputed men to be his Ministers and Administrators o^ judgment on men. The
Magistrate or power is Gods Minister empowered, and ordained by him to execute
wrath, i e. severe punishment, even to death, on evil doers.

For he bears not the sword in vain; and the sword we know is the instrument of
death. Jehoshaphat in his charg to his Judges, 2 Chronicles. 19.6.
tells them they judged not for men, i.e. primarily or only, but for and in the
room of the Lord, as his Deputies and Vicegerents, ministers and instruments;
so that what they do according to his powers and instructions, he does by them:
Thou leddest, though by the hand of Moses and Aaron.

Let the fear of God then fall upon all your hearts this day. Every thing
that is divine, springs from God, bears his Name and appointment, is sacred and
reverend. Power of some men over others naturally their equals, is from God his
order and institution. They could have no power over us, our lives, and
estates, were it not given and granted them, not only from beneath, by the
will of men, but chiefly from above, by the will of God, as our Savior
acknowledges concerning even Pilates jurisdiction over him, which was usurped,
or at least imposed without the free consent of the people, as all Histories
manifest. The powers that be, are ordained of God, John 19.11. (...).
and no power but is so, Romans 13.1. The God of gods has said, They are gods,
and we must reverence him and his power in them.

What then? our Savior said concerning John Baptist, What went ye out to see?
a man clothed in soft raiment? etc. Matthew, 11.9.
We may apply to the present occasion: What come ye out for to see? men clothed
in Scarlet, mere men? yea, I say unto you, These are more then men; for God
has said of these men, that they are Gods, and all children of the most High.
So that, I hope, I may use in a better sense the words of those of Lystra: The
gods, Acts 14 11.
or rather God is come down to us in the likeness of men.

Truly, my Lords, the solemn sound of the Trumpet (a good Memoranaum of the
grand Assize, whereat Judges themselves must be judged) your scarlet dip't in
the blood of Malefactors, Vox capitis in ore membri.
your erected seat of Justice and solemn attendance, are apt to breed awe in
the hearts of men. But, alas! this is but the outside, the ceremony, and
trappings of honor, ad populum phaleras. The sacred majesty of God, whose
person ye represent, whose Judgment ye pronounce, on evil doers, (for the
Judgment is not yours, but the Lords, Deuteronomy. 1.17.) This is that which makes ye
truly honorable to all religious and judicious minds. Divinity is the
mainteiner of your civil Honor, and Religion bears up the Tribunal in
reverence, whilst men are taught to discern God, as having the chief hand and
stroke in Government, by whom Kings reign, Princes decree Justice, yea, all
the Nobles and Judges of the earth. Prove. 5.16.
Whilst men see and acknowledge God ruling by Rulers, and leading by them that
are Leaders. Thou leddest by the hand of Moses and Aaron.

3 But lest any should be so wrapped up into the consideration of Gods
Sovereignty and providential rule of the World, as to despise Moses and Aaron,
the Instruments he employs; we must give them a just and due consideration, and
so the third particular, the Instruments employed by God in and for the handing
down this heaven-borne blessing, By the hand, or Ministerial service, of Moses
and Aaron.

It was the declaration of Corah, and his Accomplices (and I am sorry to hear
some men use even the very same words; the dumb earth opened her mouth
against, and I thought had sufficiently confuted and buried, unless we could
expect stones should speak) Are not all Gods people holy? his Clergy, lot, and
inheritance? what need of Aaron the Priest? And is not the Lord amongst us?
does not he guide and govern the World? does he need any Vicars or Vicegerents?
what need of Moses the Magistrate?

But sober Christians, and such as will, may easily understand, that God, as at
first he made all things of nothing alone by himself: so he could, if he so
pleased, preserve and continue in being al things he has made alone by himself,
without the subsidiary and assistance of one creature to another. And he could,
as preserve all creatures alone by himself, so instruct and teach, rule and
govern all men by his own power and Spirit, without the Ministry or service
either of Moses or Aaron, Magistrate or Minister; yet we know notwithstanding
Gods almightinesse, he has appointed secondary causes, means, and instruments
in order to preservation; and it is no trusting, but tempting of God to expect
preservation from him, unless we use the means appointed by him under his
blessing thereunto. Now as for preservation, so for instruction and correction
of evil doers God has appointed secondary means and instruments; to wit,
Magistrates and Ministers. And it is no less presumptuous tempting of God to
expect immediate revelations in order to instruction, or miraculous executions
of judgment from heaven on evil doers in order to correction: no, we must
humbly use the means God has settled and ordained thereunto.

Not as if he could not do these things alone by himself, but in regard his
wisdom has so determined, partly to put the honor of employment on his
creatures he has fitted thereunto; partly to try our obedience to him by
obeying them. For it is a truth appears every day more and more, that such
persons as contemn the Ministers of God (and Magistrates are Ministers too, Rom
13.4. He is the Minister of God to execute wrath) will thereby be imboldened to
contemn God himself; and that they that despise the Ordinances and appointments
of God, as to the Church, will hardly obey men's, as to the State, for Gods
sake. Power and Authority is, as has been cleared, primarily and originally in
God, but he keeps it not in his own hands, but delegates and deputes men over
men in his room and stead; to whose care and guidance he commits his people,
making use of their service and Ministry; Thou leddest thy people by the hand
of Moses, etc.

And here we have two things considerable. 1 The order. Then the union.

1 The order. First Moses: then Aaron. Moses, who is he? the supreme
Magistrate; the priority and precedencie is his. Papists are for the Supremacy
of Aaron; Protestants are for the supremacy of Moses. And surely herein we
observe Gods own order. In the prophecy of Haggai, Zerubbabel the Governor or
Prince of the Captivity is five several times constantly set before Joshua the
son of Josedec the High Priest. 2 Kings 2 25.
Solomon put Abiathar from his place. S. Peter exhorts all Christians without
exemption to submit to the King, (...), as to him that has apicem
authoritatis, 2 Pet. 2.13. Tanquam praecellenti.
the supereminency over all persons whatsoever. Surely Saint Peter better knew
Christ's order then his pretended successor. Tertullian acknowledges the Pagan
persecuting Emperor the next man to God, greater then all, whilst less then
God only. Neither is any ignorant that have looked into Ecclesiastical
History, how this supremacy of power, even in matters of Religion was enlarged
and exercised by the succeeding Emperors, when they became Christians. Non
eripit terrestria, Colimus Imperatorem ut hominem a Deo secundum. Tertul. ad
Scap. Omnibus major dum solo Deo minor. Apologet. Eusebius. vita Constant.
Socrates, etc.
qui regna dat coelestia. And what was the right of Emperors then, holds
proportionably true of all supreme Powers now under their several kinds and
forms of Administration.

Protestant-Ministers were the revivers and chief maintainers of this ancient
truth against Popish claims, with their ink and blood, for which the
Magistrate owes them a kindness, who notwithstanding they differ among
themselves, as to the particular form of Church Discipline, (do not Lawyers
and Physicians differ in opinion?) yet they all agree in an acknowledgement of
subjection to the supreme Magistrate. For Episcopal men, their Judgment is
known. Presbyterians acknowledge themselves accountable to the Magistrate in
theri Ministerial Functions. Papers in the Isle of Wight, the last Considerat.
and caur. of the Londoners, upon Apologet. Narrat.
And Congregationall men say they give more to the Magistrates power in matters
of Religion then the former; so that though there be an avowed distinction, as
to the right of Administration, (for we read not that Moses meddled with the
administration of holy things after the consecration of Aaron, and we know how
dear it cost Saul his sacrificing, and Vzziah his incense burning) yet seeing
there is a professed subjection to the Magistrates superinspection, regulation,
and censure, there may well come in the second particular, the Union, By the
hand of Moses and Aaron.

Not by the hand of Moses alone, nor by the hand of Aaron alone, but by the
hand of Moses and Aaron; both are instrumental in order to this mercy both are
employed by God, both useful and necessary; for without Moses they would not
have been a people, a flock, but as sheep scattered on the mountains of prey,
having no Shepherd; and without Aaron they would not have been Gods people. As
men, we need Moses; as Christian men, we need Aaron. And better to be no men,
(...). Diod. Sic. apud Just. Martyr. in Paraen. Exodus 4.14, 15.
then not to be religious men; and to be no people, then not to be Gods. When
Israel Gods people here were to be led out of Egypt, Moses (whom the very
Heathen commend, as a prudent and gallant man) would not undertake this service
alone, wherefore for the facilitating the work, God tells him, Aaron the Levite
his brother was coming to meet him, and would be glad in his heart to see him.
They meet, and kiss each other, and both are commissioned by God to bring
Israel out of Egypt; Thou leddest thy people by the hand of Moses and Aaron.

And it is here by the hand: (...) in manu, in, or by the hand; in the singular,
not hands, to intimate the unity and consistencie of these two persons and
their functions (distinct, though not opposite) together. Moses and Aaron may
be several fingers, and his may be the longest, and yet they may well make up
still one hand of Government: Matthew. 17.3.
by the hand of Moses and Aaron. There is no inconsistency 'twixt Moses and
Aaron, Magistracy and Ministry. There Is no jarring in the Mount 'twixt Moses
the supreme Lawgiver, and Elijah the King-reproving Prophet. Exodus 7.12.
Revel. 11.8.
Moses his rod though it may devour the rods of the Egyptian Sorcerers of
Rome, (which is spiritually Egypt) that draw people to the obedience of another
supreme Head, yet not Aarons rod. Numb. 17. 1 Cor. 4.21.
And Aaron had a rod laid by the pot of Manna: So had S. Paul; Shall I come
unto you with the rod? The rod of information and correction are not
inconsistent, but subservient each to other: Lightning should go before
Thunder: inform, convince, then think of punishing men.

Moses and Aaron we know were brethren, and brethren naturally love one
another, and are helpful each to other. When Israel was entangled in the war
with Amaleck in the Wilderness, Exodus 17.12.
Moses's hands grew weary and heavy, Aaron then held them up. Had not Aaron
helped Moses, Moses had not held out, nor Israel prevailed against their
enemies.

They were led, but still by the hand of Moses and Aaron:

Whether is it any hinderance to this so desirable and useful harmony, that
Aaron pleads a divine right for his office, as Moses for his: is it any wonder
that brethren lay claim to the same Father? Moses and Aaron are Brethren. But
to show the weakness of this exception. Are not all Magistrates by divine right
as well as the Supreme? Does not the Apostle say, There Is no power but of God;
Romans 13.1. Beza in locum.
and, Let every soul be subject to the higher powers? The Apostle says not, as
Beza observes, Let every soul be subject to the highest power, but to the
higher powers. And inferior Magistrates are higher powers, in respect of the
people, as well as the Supreme. Will they therefore undermine the Supreme? or
must the Supreme Magistrate, to show his Supremacy over all, perform all
Offices in his own person? Have not Masters a clear divine right to rule their
servants? Parents to rule their children? are they therefore inconsistent with
the Supremacy of the civil Magistrate? May they not with subordination and
declared subjection, mould up into one civil Polity, Society and Government?

I have stuck a little in this, in regard there are evil, envious men who go up
and down sowing the tares of division in the Nation betwixt Brethren, even
these two, Moses and Aaron. As if they were Cadmei fratres, brethren that
cannot stand together, but must destroy one another; surely there is no such
antipathy, as these men (fearing their own shadow) imagine 'twixt Magistracy
and Ministry. If so, surely it would have appeared long ago in the government
of Gods people, but there is no such complaint; yea, contrarily we have in this
very text a thankful acknowledgement of Gods singular mercy in and by the
government of both, subscribed in the behalf of himself and all God's people,
by the undoubted Prophet Asaph: Thou leddest (amongst other special mercies)
thy people by the hand of Moses and Aaron.

And this leads me to the fourth particular, the subjects of this divine
Government, Gods own people, Thy people.

The people whom he chose out of all the Nations of the earth to be his
peculiar people, a people to whom he was not only a God, but a King; for their
Government was a Theocracy, as Philo calls it.

The Lord was their Lawgiver, the Lord was their King; as they acknowledge,
Esaias 33.22. A people to whom he not only gave most excellent Laws without them,
to guide them, (for their Laws were all divine, of Gods own framing) but also
his holy Spirit within, to rule and govern them, yea, who enjoyed extraordinary
manifestations of the Spirit, in Dreams, Visions, and Revelations, Vrim and
Thummim; Gods miraculous presence, going before them, and leading them by the
Cloud by day, and the Pillar of fire by night; and yet notwithstanding all
this, God would not leave, even this people, to their own private spirit, and
self-government, but committed them to the guidance and public direction of
Moses and Aaron, men subject to the same passions, weaknesses and miscartiages
with themselves. Thou leddest thy people by the hand of Moses and Aaron.

By what has been said (honored and beloved) ye may easily discern the
self-conceit, or at least deceit of those, who because they are, as they say,
Gods people, have his grace and Spirit within to teach and govern them, despise
all outward instruction or government as below them, bitterly scorn and revile
the Ministry both of Moses and Aaron. For Moses the Lawgiver, they have the
Law written in their hearts. They need none of your outward dead, killing
letter. They have the Spirit: and no question, the Spirit of God is as able to
make a man on a sudden without study or meditation an accomplished Lawyer,
Physician, Husbandman, etc. (as a Minister) and makes in that manner in these
days as many of one sort as another. But for Aaron, they are all Priests, and
why not Kings too, as well as John of Leiden? all Prophets taught of God, and
shall they be put to charges to be taught of men?

But such Anabaptistical fancies as these are sufficiently discovered by the
light of this Text, to honest minds, that seek nothing but truth, and the
saving their souls, not their tithes. For we see here plainly that God settled
this way of governing by Moses and Aaron, ruling and teaching Elders, over his
own people; it is clearly divine: and dare any man think God settled a Government
over his people, tyrannical, oppressive, or prejudicial to their temporal or
spiritual concernments? yea, though in those days, the Canon or Rule of divine
Writ not being fully completed?

The true spirit of prophecy, not that boorish, apish sprite, that scares
Ranters and Quakers out of all sense and reason, was more generally bestowed
then now it is, or need to be; yet God would still have a public, outward,
standing Magistracy and Ministry, to rule and direct his people; and he that
presumptuously and contemptuously opposed their directions, Deuteronomy. 17.12.
was to die the death: so far was God from leaving every one to his own humor,
and self-government, even of his own people, who were a Kingdom of Priests,
holy, and dear unto God, as well as any now under the Gospel.

But says the Socinianiz'd Anabaptist, There Is great difference 'twixt the Jews
and us: Gradu, non substantia. Iten. Eusebius. was the Jews, (...). Lib. 1. 5.
we are Christians. You must not urge legal adminstrations and institutions in
Gospeltimes. I answer, The Jews were Christians as well as we, were they not
believers, saved by faith? Heb. 11. Was not Abraham one, who was the father of
the faithful? The Jewish and Christian Church differ not in substance, but in
degree of perfection only; in time and growth, not in nature.

Can they prove Magistracy, Ministry, or Tithes either Ceremonials, things
that have in them any thing peculiar typical, proper to the Jews as such, no
way allowable under the Gospel? if not, their exception is vain and frivolous.

But who were they to whom Saint Paul writes, Romans 13.1.
to be subject to the higher powers? Were they not Christians? Does he not
enjoin Titus to put Christians in mind, Tit^s 3.1.
to be subject to principalities and powers, to obey Magistrates? This is New
Testament-doctrine, and is not that a Christians? 1 Thessalonians. 5.12.
We beseech you, Brethren, to know them that labor amongst you, and are over
you in the Lord, (surely without self-exaltation, and love of pre-eminency) and
to esteem them very highly for their work sake. What work? for admonishing you.
Isaiah 29.21.
But men of this spirit most scornfully mis-esteem them, hating them whose
special ofice it is to reprove in the gate. And no question, they that hate
Ministers for admonishing them of their sins and errors, do, however they
hide it, hate Magistrates much more in their hearts, for punishing their
persons. But if such principles of levelling Anabaptisme prevail, it is no great
matter whether men be Magistrates or Ministers; they will make a perfect parity:
which if it be the Gospel-Reformation, it is just it should be a through one. But
I shall close up this with the serious and seasonable admonition of Saint
Peter: Wherefore, Beloved, seeing ye know these things before, 2 Pe^. 3.17.
(what they tend to) take heed, lest ye be carried away, (as with a land-flood)
with the error (...), of the lawless ones, or, as we read it, wicked ones. And
they may well stand together, for lawless persons are wicked persons, either
they must be so or the laws. Such they have formerly proved; witness the
Circumcelliones, or rigid Donatists of old, and the Anabaptists in Germany of
late.

But lest any should surmise, as the world is full of jealousy and mistake,
that I have spoken all this while covertly for ryranny, oppression, or
persecution of quiet and harmless persons; for insolent domination over Gods
people, either by Moses or Aaron, Magistrate or Minister; let me request your
patience to the last particular. The temper or manner of this Government, which
I have hitherto vindicated and commended, expressed in this Metaphor, like a
flock. There Is two things it, Lenity, Unity. I am for both.

1 Lenity, like a flock; not like an herd of Swine, or drove of Oxen, that are
driven by violence and rigor; but like a flock of sheep, that must be gently
and tenderly led. The Romans sometimes took their Generals from the Plough,
Duci volunt, n^n cogi.
which rips up the bowels of our common mother, the earth; but God, when he
chose a man after his own heart to govern his people, Flotu lib. 1.
David, from following the Ewes great with young, (a condition requiring all
tenderness) he took him that he might feed Jacob his people, Psalm. 78.72.
and Israel his Inheritance, He brought him up a tender Shepherd over sheep,
that so he might make him ((...), as Homer calls his Prince) a fit Shepherd of
men Moses was a man of the same occupation, a Shepherd, and of the same temper
and disposition too; Numb. 12.3.
the meekest man upon the face of the earth, as soft as the wool on his Sheeps
backs; his gentle hand it is by which God led Israel; no Phaeton's or Furius's:
Thou leddest thy people by the hand of Moses.

2 It notes as a leading with lenity, so in unity, (...), sicut pecudem, like
one sheep in respect of unity; like a flock, in respect of society and
communion. Our Savior often compares his Desciples to sheep; it is his usual
Hieroglyphick, Joh. 10. Matthew. 25. Sometimes to a flock, Luke 12.32. Fear not,
little flook. Heb. 10.25.
Sheep are animalia aggregativa. Love the flock, (...) to synagoguize, to
assemble together. Beasts of prey, as lions and bears are solivaga, love to
wander alone. It Is true, sheep are apt to go astray; and therefore Shepherds
are necessary, but it is never more then when they leave the Shepherd and the
sheepfold. I have gone astray like a sheep that is lost, Psalm. 119. ult. We
read in the Gospel of a sheep lost, seldom or never of a flock lost. There Is
great security, as well as comfort, in the communion of found and honest
Christians. The communion of Saints is indeed an article of our faith, but we
have disputed it almost to nothing. I care not to graspe shadows. But
certainly, God delights not in subtle, nice, and unnecessary separations and
divisions. It pleases him little to see his people scattered up and down in
holes and hedge-bottoms. He loves to see them tanquam gregem, like a flock.
Thou leddest thy people like a flock.

And o that Gods people would be like Gods people here, like a flock. And to
that end that they would without peevishness or prejudice be led, Ezekiel. 13.7.
Matthew. 26.31.
as God in all ages has led his people by Moses and Aaron, Magistrates and
Ministers; for seeing there is no infallible spirit to direct us in our days,
unless in the Popes chair, or the Anabaptists stool, it is the surest and best
way of government. God has now left us to follow, at least to submit to the
judgments of such men as God in the way of providence, has (according to the
judgment of men able to discern) endowed with gifts suitable to places of
public instruction or direction. For self-conceited fancy and pretended
revelation, or authorization by the Spirit only, is the mother of all
confusion and delusion.

And o that Magistrates whom God has designed to rule, would lead his people
like a flock, in unity with lenity. So as to be neither Jehu's, driving too
furiously, lest they over-drive the sheep; nor yet Gallio's, ruling too
negligently, betraying their own authority, together with the peoples security.

That Ministers would study Unity, the end of their Office, Ephesians. 4.16.
Ephesians. 4.16. that the whole body of the Church being compacted, not distracted
into factions and fractions, (which we know hinder thriving by dislocation) may
grow to the increase of it self in love.

And that people would know them that are over them as Pastors and Shepherds in
the Lord, hearken to them, Heb. 13.7, 17. 1 Pet. 5.4.
following their faith, and sound Doctrine, seeing they must render an account
of their souls to the chief Shepherdat the last day, that they may do it with
joy, not grief of heart, which will not be profitable for them.

My Lords, ye are this day to drive the chariot of the Sun of righteousness,
betwixt these two Tropicall points, Lenity, Unity; ye are to sing David's song
in the me^n, of mercy and judgment will I sing. Psalm. 101.1.
Let mercy have the precedence, go before; but let judgment pursue, and
overtake evil doers. To take out the Prophet Micah's lesson, Micah 6.8.
To love mercy, and to do justice: so to love mercy, as to do justice; so to do
justice, as still to love mercy. To which purpose, forget not Aaron, he is your
brother. The benefit of the Clergy, as it is commonly called, is, as I conceive,
under your Lordships favor, a prudent mitigation of the severity of our Laws,
wisely intwisted into the administration of justice, by our foreseeing
forefathers, Net totam se^ vitutem far possumus, nec totam libertatem.
who knew our temper, that we could endure neither all lenity, nor all
severity. Too much liberty will make us wild; too much severity will make us
mad. Medio tutissimus ibis: the mean is safest, best.

Lead us then, in a word, like a flock; with lenity, lest we be worried by our
keepers; with unity, lest we worry one another. So aim at unity as to use
lenity; so exercise lenity, as still to preserve unity. So shall ye be as gods,
knowing good and evil, fit Instruments and Representatives of him, that led
his people like a flock by the hand, etc.

FINIS.
June 25, 1653.
Imprimatur,

Edmund Calamy.


