The Frontispiece explained.
THE greatest light is not excused,
But often with Clouds and Mist abused,
Darkness on our side does appear,
But Light is in his Hemisphere;
The mischief to our Selves is done,
Though Clouded, yet it is still a Sun;
Whose rays more glorious are, and bright,
After the darkness of a Night,
And finds his Luster gains by this
Combined Antiperistasis.
The Palm Tree pressed, yet still will rise,
And all the weight on it despise:
Spices, when beaten, are most sweet,
With more delight their object meet;
As does the Walk of Camomel,
When Trodden, best affect the smell.
Then maugre Clouds obscuring force,
This Giant still will run his course.
engraved panel of sun behind clouds with a banner OBNVBILATVS SOL TAMEN

engraved panel of a man grinding spices TVNDO. FVNDO

engraved panel of a a man walking in a field in front of a castle A Brief
Discourse Of Bathe.

CRESCIT SVB PON DEAR

ALCATVM VIRET

engraved panel of a palm tree engraved panel of a sun emerging from behind
clouds with a banner E TENEBRIS CLARIOR



London Printed for Henrii Brom 16^^

A DISCOURSE OF BATHE, AND THE HOT WATERS There.

ALSO, Some Enquiries into the nature of the Water of St. Vincent's Rock, near
Bristol; and that of Castle-Cary.

To which is added, A Century of Observations, more fully declaring the Nature,
Property, and distinction of the BATHS.

WITH An Account of the Lives, and Character, of the Physicians of Bathe.

By THO. GVIDOTT, M. B. Physician There.

Virtute vincam Invidiam. LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun in St.
Paul's Churchyard, the West end, 1676.

Librum hunc dignum judicamus qui Imprimatur

Geo. Ent, Praeses. D. Whistler Censor.

CLARISSIMORUM MEDICORUM LONDINENSIVM. COLLEGIO CELEBERRIMO SPECIATIM VERO
EXCELLENTISSIMO VIRO D. D. GEORGIO ENT EQUITI AURATO PRAESIDI DIGNISSIMO NEC
NON SPECTATISSIMO IV. VIRATUI D. D. THOMAE COX D. D. DANIELI WHISTLER D. D.
HUMPHREDO BROOKS D. D. THOMAE FRANCKLAND, CENSORIBUS DOCTISSIMIS RELIQUISQUE
SOCIIS ERUDITIONE INGENIO SAGACITATE INSTRUCTISSIMIS HOC QUICQUID EST NOVI DE
THERMARUM BATHONIENSIUM NATURA ET VIRIBUS SUBMISSE OFFERT T. G.

To the RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, And my Much Honored Friend, Sr. Edward Greaves
Baronet, Fellow of the College OF PHYSICIANS in London, AND Physician in
Ordinary TO HIS MAJESTY.
Honored Sir,
THE kind reception you were pleased to afford a small Paper of mine, that had
lately the honor to have your Name prefixed, has given this encouragement to
present to your view, a further Collection of Experiments touching the same
Subject, relating to the Waters of Bathe, a place you were pleased once to
grace with your Practice, and still with your Favors, for which a more than
ordinary respect is, in gratitude, your due.

Besides, Considering you have so far favored my late Enquiries, as to assist
me by your presence, and be an Eyewitness of some of the Experiments, and are
a sufficient Judge of them all, I could not fix on any fitter than your self,
and the Learned Body you have Relation to, to make this Address unto, or give
the Trouble of this present Dedication.

It has caused me sometimes not a little to admire, That the Metropolitan
Waters of all England, (as I may term Them) to say no more, should lie 2000
years, and it may be much longer, in so narrow a Diocese; for the discovery I
have made of many Things relating to Them, (of which in part here is some
Account) that were never taken notice of by former Persons, and those few
Writers that have Treated of Them, will Justify the Expression.

The Principles formerly were accounted Sulphur, Copper, Iron, and a little
Marcasite; of late, Bitumen, Nitre, and some Sulphur, which last I endeavor to
Confirm, with the Addition of many more, which will partly Constitute, and
partly evidence the Nature of these Waters: Besides the beneficial discovery of
the Rational use of the Bath-waters in Potion, which hitherto having been but
as a good Back-Sword, are now become a Single-Rapier, ready to save, and not
destroy, unless ill managed by a distempered hand.

I confess I did not think to have appeared in this Dress, having designed, and
in part completed, as you know very well, something else, that would have
better suited with my Condition, the Dignity of the Subject, and Reputation of
These Waters. But finding some hasty Surgeon that has already launced what
I intended should have had a longer Time to digest, and expecting, as none but
in reason must, the Pretenses of many others, I found my self obliged to
appear, though in a careless habit, and in a manner undrest, rather than too
much to exercise the Patience, if not justly incur the Censure of those
friends, whose kindness shall induce them to give me a Visit.

And although my Nature inclines me rather to a diffidence, than presumption on
any thing that is my own, yet I must be so far confident as to believe, that
the Existence of Nitre in the Waters of Bathe, so much questioned by some, and
my particular Concern, is so fully established by the following Experiments,
made with my own hands, as to keep those words upright in my late Letter to
your self, wherein I assert it to be undeniable. And whoever shall take the
pains to satisfy himself in that Particular, as I have done, and shall let me
know wherein he is dissatisfied, and can convince me to the Contrary, whom I
will assure he shall not find obstinate, he shall have the Honor, if that be
any thing, of making me his Convert, (for I think my single Reputation a small
Sacrifice on the Altar of Truth;) but if not, it will appear, which is no great
matter on either hand, that some Body has been mistaken.

However the Satisfaction is not little, nor the Omen bad, that I have already
gained the Approbation of a Person so Judicious as your self, who have formerly
taken pains on the same Account, and on which side soever the Scales shall
turn, I have had this opportunity of doing something to oblige my Country, as
well as acknowledge my self

Sir, Your most humble and faithful Servant, Tho. Guidott.

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
THat the Reader may be acquainted with the occasion, time, and manner of my
making these Enquiries (which are not hasty conclusions, but the product of
more mature consideration) I shall here premise something concerning that, and
also discourse of, as more pertinent in this place, some other matters tending
to the enlargement of the Reputation, and usefulness of the Waters.

Taking therefore into consideration the performances of some before me, and
the attempts of others, in my time, which were not satisfactory, and having the
advantages of a more retired nature, and constant residence on the place, with
those Conveniences which some others have not had, I thought it worth my while
to employ my leisure hours in some Experiments on the Waters, which none had
done before to any great purpose, the Waters having hitherto been rather
admired than understood, if so I might give my own Curiosity satisfaction in
that affair. And indeed, no vain glorious humor of desiring to be Popular,
which I never affected, nor itch to have my Name in print, which has been
already sufficiently done by the kindness of my friends, and therefore needs
not any labor of my own again, was the occasion of my entering on this
undertaking; but observing the Bath-water was drank by some, and probably like
to advance, I could not satisfy my self in advising my Patients to it, unless
I had first made a particular search into what it did contain, it seeming as
absurd to me to tell my friends tbat depended on my judgment for their health
and preservation, they should drink the Bath-water, which I knew nothing of, as
to advise them to the use of such Spirits, Pills, or any other Medicine, I was
ignorant of the composition of, or had procured from others.

Had I found this done to my hand, I could well have dispensed witb the
confinement and risque this design has occasioned, and spent these hours I
have done in my Study, as cheerfully elsewhere, but finding little satisfaction
in what had been before performed, I first made collection out of the best
Mineral Authors, such as Fallopius, Agricola, Baccius, and others, what was the
best way to obtain a Sediment out of any Water, and then how to know of what
that sediment did consist, making application of this Theory to the Waters of
this place.

Observing then the ways of gaining a Sediment to be chiefly sour,
Evaporation, Distillation, Precipitation, and Insolation, the last, as too
laborious, I thought fit to wave, and resolved on the other three, Evaporating
precipitating, and distil^ing first small quantities of all the Baths, which
gave me encouragement to proceed to greater.

Having obtained a Sediment, which I call the Contents of the Water, the very
Notion of which was but lately a stranger here, I trusted not to my single
judgment, but made it known to the best Physicians of my acquaintance, with
whom I had Converse, particularly my ever honored friend Sr. Edward Greaves,
whose encouragement to this design has not been little, and also addressed my
self in writing to the very Ingenious and Eminent Doctor Willis (whose loss all
Ingenious Philosophers and Physicians must lament, his many thoughts now dying
with him) whose assistance I desired by Letter dated 1. Sept. -- 73, in these
words: Sir,
THe Acquaintance I had the happiness to have with you formerly in Oxon, and
the Civilities you have been pleased to confer on me since, with the readiness
you have ever expressed of encouraging all ingenious Inquiries, have emboldened
me to give you this Interruption. The desire also I understand you have
expressed to Mr. Robert Chapman an Apothecary of this City, of a better account
of the Contents of these Waters, which has hitherto I know not how, been too
much neglected, and concerning which I have of late made some Experiments, has
further encouraged me only at present to acquaint you, that about Michaelmas
next, God willing, I shall have a convenience by a friend of mine, your
Neighbor, to send you the true Contents of all the Baths apart, which if you
please to examine, and honor me so far as to return me your thoughts of the
Ingredients, being doubtless a Compounded body, I shall with all alacrity and
obsequiousness imaginable give you a larger account of my Observations, which
I forbear to do till you please to favor me with an Answer, that so I may not
preoccupy your more exact enquiry. The thing it self being of so grand import,
and so well suiting with your own genius, I may promise my self the greater
happiness in your Correspondence, etc. which is all the trouble shall at this
time be given by

Your most humble Servant, T. G.




According to this Letter, I sent the Doctor what I promised, on the 15. of
October next ensuing, by my facetious, learned, good friend, Mr. Alexander
Dyer, with this Letter, which because it contains the rude draught of what I
afterward took more pains about, and not much different from what I now
publish, I shall here insert.

Honored Sir,
HEaring nothing of Colonel Morgan, the Person I designed for conveyance of
what I formerly promised, I have now met with a convenient opportunity by my
worthy friend Mr. Alex. Dyer to present you with as true an Anatomy of the
Baths, as my present inspection will permit: viz. The Contents of all the
Baths, Kings, Cross and Hot, in Iron and Glass Vessels; the former i. of each,
the latter ii. or thereabouts; that in Glass being all that one Gallon of the
Water of each Bath did afford; the other in Iron, not the whole quantity, but
sufficient, I hope, for your satisfaction, that came from four Gallons, the
Kings Bath yielding in Iron, on my first Experiment xiiii; the Cross xii ss;
the Hot ix. ii: but on my second Trial performed in the late wet weather, much
less out of the same vessel, and quantity of water, which may suggest something
to Enquiry if I find it hold. But usually out of 4 Gallons in a Vessel of mixed
Metal, I commonly evaporate it in, I have i. out of a gallon of all the Baths
alike, so that I judge about ii. to be the common proportion out of a gallon
the Water will afford.

Now of these ii, as I suppose, you will easily discover all is not Salt, but
according to my best observation I find a third part only Saline, or ii. in ii:
the residue, which I have sent under the name of Residuum Sedimenti non
Salinum, will not relent but continues of a gritty nature, and I suppose,
consists of two different substances.

The Ochre arises in a large quantity, where the stream of the Bath meets with
any resistance; but what I am not so fully satisfied in for the present is,
that though so much continually is breathed out of the water, nothing yellow is
discovered in the Contents.

The Oleum Salis Thermarum per deliquium, is only that Salt I have sent you by
the name of Sal Thermarum relented in the air, and cleansed from impurities
that will subside, but tincted greenish by a touch of Copper it met with in
extracting, when otherwise the true color is more inclining to Amber.

One thing more also I think fit to advertise you of, that in Glass Vessels
there is a thin crust in the outside covering that part that is most Saline, as
thin as the thinnest Wafer, but not Salt at all, which I have caused to be
separated in the Contents of the Hot Bath, and put in a distinct glass
containing i. gr. 10; this more flakey and much less, if at all Saline, being
only ii. gr. 14. The Kings and Cross Bath are alike, mixed here in one glass,
only the Hoth Bath separated for your further satisfaction.

You have also the Sand, Mud, and Scum, in Boxes by themselves, all which I
submit to your more exact scrutiny what names to call these by, which is the
grand thing in question, and on which will be built, as I conceive, the truest
Hypothesis of the Nature and Virtues of these Waters that has yet been given,
and much different from what has hitherto been supposed and presumed on.

I hope to have the honor of a few lines from you, what your thoughts are of
the nature of these particulars, which will be very acceptable to

Sir, Your obliged humble Servant, THO. GUIDOTT.


Postscript.
IN an ordinary infusion of any of the Contents in Common Water, you will
observe a white gritty substance, which will harden into a stone in the bottom
of the glass, one of which I have sent in the Box containing Sedimentum non
Salinum; above that a bluish light, and more dirty substance; then the Salt in
the Water to which it gives a yellow tincture.

The Doctors business being much on other accounts, I cannot understand he did
any thing in this, only in a Latin Letter he had occasion to write me not long
after, on the account of an Honorable Patient, for whom we then were both
concerned he takes a very kind notice of my Letters, and Experiments, and gives
me thanks in this expression, Clarissime Domine, Multum Tibi debeo pro Litteris
and Experimentis Tuis circa Aquas Thermales mihi jam pridem missis, quae
officia Tua ut gratissima habeo, ita compensare studebo; but sent me no other
satisfaction.

A little after, having an opportunity of obtaining the Contents of many
Hogsheads of the Water, I wrought them all of, and came to an exact separation
and distinction of Particulars, as expressed in the Observations hereunto
annexed, and as occasion served, communicated my Experiments to my Honored
friends, the Learned and accomplished Sr. Charles Scarborough, Doctor Thomas
Witherley, Dr. Nathaniel Highmore, and Dr. Thomas Harbech. This I think is
sufficient to take off the surmise of Singularity, if any such thing by chance
should be thought upon.

And here I cannot but admire how a Judicious man should be so far imposed on
by any person whatsoever, as to imagine, that a satisfactory enquiry into the
nature of these Waters was so nice a speculation, as to be inconvenient or
useless [according to these words; I have been desirous heretofore to have
attempted some discovery of our Baths, Jord. Not. Bath, c. 17. in fin. p. 147.
according to those Principles: but being thought (by some) either not
convenient, or not useful, I was willing to save my labor, which perhaps might
have seemed not to be worth thanks.] For, what can be more necessary, and
therefore useful and convenient too, than to know the Principles of any Water
we recommend our Patients to? and what did all the Mineral Writers that treated
of such Waters before him whose authority he uses, but either make such
enquiries, or speak by guess? and which of these two is the more useful or
convenient, is easily determined.

Besides, by this means we act as rational Physicians, and free the Baths and
Mineral Waters from that aspersion they labor under, of being accounted
Empirical Medicines, whereas they are the exact composition of the best
Physician, and perform their operations by virtue of the Ingredients they
consist of, and the blessing of God Almighty, as all other good Medicines and
Prescriptions do.

Moreover, this way we can better judge of the reason of the effects, which
without this, perplex the understanding with an ignorant admiration, and we
prove no better than the ordinary Spectators at a Puppet-play, who admire the
motions, but know nothing of the hand within that occasions them.

I confess indeed, his thinking his pains might not have deserved thanks, might
somewhat discourage him; but a man of Resolution would have considered that
things of this kind, subjected to public view, would fall either into the
hands of understanding, generous and unbiast persons; or else ignorant,
self-interested, and narrow Souls: the former ever have been, and will be ever
ready to give what encouragement ingenuity shall deserve; and for the other,
they are not much to be regarded, being best brought to a knowledge of
themselves by an understanding of their errors; and as their mouths are no
slanders, so their thanks are but slender, if any, commendations. And thanks be
to God for it, there have been and now are many worthy, brave, and generous
Spirits in this our Nation, who can discern and make distinction 'twixt things
that differ, else had would be the condition of those that have broken through
that opposition at which others have boggled, and think it no disparagement to
undergo rude Censures from the ruder multitude, in prosecution of a design for
public advantage.

Although the Credit of the Waters has been preserved by Bathing, and advanced
by Drinking, especially these two Summers last past, yet a far greater degree
of Reputation may be acquired, by a more particular account of the more
remarkable Cures that are annually wrought, principally thereby; which being
digested into the nature of a Register, would mightily conduce to the
satisfaction of those that seek remedy here in the like distempers. And
although I have endeavored what in me lay to promote so necessary a good work,
yet such is the stupidity of some to things of their own advantage, that
nothing of this nature has yet been performed, although recommended by the
learned Doctor Jorden, N. B. Chapter 18. in fin. p. 163.
then practicing on the place, and often inculcated, though with like success,
by my self: So that to the wonderful honor of those on whom it must reflect,
the Waters have been more beholding to the gratitude of Foreigners in
registring their own Cases, than to the care and duty of those that are at
home. I shall instance in the Case of Sr. Humphrey Lloyd, who having received a
hurt in his Hip, hy the kick of a horse in Milain, was grievously afflicted
with a Sciatica for a twelve months time, and after having made use of much
Physic, from several Physicians, to little purpose, in only six days using
these Waters was perfectly recovered. His words are these; Alia Belgarum urbs,
Ptolomaeo, Fragm. Descr. Brit. p, 16.
Aquae Calidae; Antonino, Aquae Solis; Britannis, Caer Badon; and Anglis, Bathe
dicitur, Balneis Aquarum Calidarum saluberrimis clara; Cujus rei ego
certissimus testis esse possum. Nam cum ex ictu equi Mediolano, in Italia,
excepto, dolor Schiatico duodecim continuis mensibus laborarem, diversisque
Doctissimorum Medicorum auxiliis, non convalescerem, his Balneis, cum tantum
sex diebus usus essem, sanitati pristinae restitutus sum.

And that I may mention one fresh in the memory of all, whose gratitude in this
kind deserves a remembrance, Mr. John Revet, an aged man, has very lately
publicly testified his cure of an Hemiplegia, in a months bathing, by an
Inscription round a very fair Brass ring, on the right hand of the Entrance
into the Queens Bath out of the Kings, after this manner; Thanks to God. I John
Revet his Majesty's Brazier, at 56 years of age, in this present month of July
1674, in this place recovered a cure of health and limbs, of the Dead Palsy,
on one side, from head to foot.

That this way of Registring of Cures was also thought necessary, and
recommended before the time of Dr. Jorden, may appear from the words of Mr.
Jones, an honest Cambrobritan (whose authority I am constrained to make often
use of in the following discourse, in regard he is the only man that has
treated any thing largely of these Waters,) which I recite as they are, being
the plain words of an honest meaning man. Bathes And, lib. 4. fol. 33.
I wish* says he that you leave a Note of the Commodity received, and a
knowledge of your condition and calling in the Records of the Mayor of the
City, where it shall be registered, until a Physician be appointed, who then
shall be joined with the Mayor, paying to the Poor-man's Box, and 4 pence for
Registring your benefit received there. [And in another place; Buxtons Benefit,
fol. 22.
] Always provided the day of your coming thither be noted before you enter into
the Baths, and the day of your departure, with the Country of your habitation,
condition, or calling, with the Infirmities or cause you came for, in the
Register book kept of the Warden of the Bath, or the Physician that there shall
be appointed, and the benefit you received, paying four pence for the
Recording. This Register may be so contrived as that the Patients name, or only
letters thereof, as shall be thought expedient, with their place of residence,
distemper, and time of using the Waters, may be expressed in short; a model
whereof, in many instances, we have in Jo. Bauhinus de Aquis Bollensibus, lib.
1. cap. 17.

And whereas mention is here made of the Poor-man's Box, it gives me a good
occasion to remind this Age, of what prudent and charitable disposition the
former Age was, in which for the necessary support of the many Poor that came
hither for relief, (now sufficiently numerous, and burthensom too) Reparations
and Conveniences of the Bath, and other good uses, a Tax, or Pole-bill was
made, and willingly consented to by the users of such Waters, by which a
certain reasonable rate, or sum, was required of every man or woman of all
conditions, from a Duke to a Yeoman, by which all Clamours, now too frequent,
were prevented, and all occasions of Exactions taken away, no person paying, or
requiring more than what was commonly known to be their due, reserving their
Gratuities to dispose of as they please. The money collected to be put into the
Treasury of the Bath, and entrusted in the hands of one or two honest and
sufficient persons, who should every Michaelmas give up their Accounts, and
dispose of good part of the money chiefly to the use of the poor abroad that
come with good Certificates, or accounts of their condition, to be approved of
by competent Judges in this case, and other necessary, good, and charitable
uses, as shall be thought requisite; provided the Baths, Pumps, or any of their
appurtenances be supplied, and kept in good order and repair. And this was
never intended in any violent or compulsory way, but only as a fair proposal to
the better disposed persons, who by their good example, and readiness to comply
in this particular, may have an efficacious influence on the more captious and
excepting, to beget in them a better understanding of this charitable, and
orderly design.

Neither can this Tax in reason be imagined to be prejudicial to the Waters, as
some others are reported to have been; on the imposition of which the Waters
are said to have lost their virtue: for however the truth of such stories may
be admitted, which are delivered by credible Authors, and I cannot contradict,
yet certain it is, that if any such thing ever happened, it was either on the
restraint of a public resort, by denying Poor people the use of the Waters, or
else by an Impost collected by the Officers of the Prince to his private
advantage; whereas this is only to prevent exactions, and moral abuses, between
man and man, and the Poor rather hence to be relieved than exacted of, with a
probability of a much greater resort that will be procured by a reasonable
demand, and good order withal.

The overplus of this Collection, if rightly managed, and the years prove
lucky, may in a short time, make a purse for the covering one or two of the
Baths also, whereby the Waters would be rendered useful all the year, which hy
reason of the coldness of the ambient Air, and fear of injury thereby, and no
other, are thought not so fit to be used in the Winter season, the Waters then
being as effectual as in Summer.

And this would be agreeable to the use and custom of most of the Baths in
Europe which are covered, and thought by the best Physicians to be a means of
keeping the Waters to an even Temper, being an equal defense against the wind
and cold of the Winter, and the troublesome heat of the Sun in Summer; so that
nothing external causing alteration supervening, the benefit of the Waters may
be safely received from the first of January, to the last of December, which
would be much for the relief of those infirm persons that require a longer stay
than ordinary here, and by their so long absence from the Bath, do but weave
Penelope's web, undoing in the Winter, what is done in Summer; whereas if they
did in this manner, as we say, follow their blows, they probably would not only
prevent a relapse, but set themselves in a way of perfect recovery with one
resolution, without many comings at several seasons, being many times not so
well at their second coming, as they went away on their first season of bathing.

For this use I think the Queens Bath most convenient, both in regard it is but
small, and also more especially for the conveniences of the Slips, and Houses
about it, where it is almost no more than out of Bath, into Bed; and if well
covered, and care taken in rising, may be as well as if a man made use of a
Bath in his own house or Chamber where he lies. After which the Cross Bath may
follow, if it be thought fit, the Kings, and Hot, being kept open still.

But against this I foresee two Objections will be made. First, That it will be
inconvenient in the Summer time to sit so close, if no offense does arise from
the steam. And, Secondly, That it will be injurious to the Lights about the
Bath.

To the first, I answer generally; That those persons that desire good, will
think nothing an inconvenience that is in order to it, and those that come for
pleasure may be somewhere else; yet that it may appear to be made out some
other way, I suppose the increase of Heat, which sometimes that Bath wants,
procured by keeping the Air out, and the steam in great measure in, (which yet
will not be more than will well be endured) will make a sufficient recompense
for this supposed molestation. And as for the Steam, a vent hole, or Tunnel at
the top, will so discharge, that it may not be offensive or troublesome at all.

As to the Lights, the Cross Bath will certainly inconvenience none, and the
Queens may be so contrived, if made flat, as to do the same but if built more
erect for gaining room below, there will be but a very little blind, or perhaps
none at all, to the lower Windows on the Heart lodging side, which house, by
reason of the accommodation of the Slip thereunto belonging, being, in all
probability, likely to partake most of the profit, may contribute a little in
this kind. But to avoid all exception, the Cover may be so made with shutters
on a Timber frame, that it may be easily taken off if there be occasion, and as
soon closed up again, if necessity shall require.

One thing more I shall only add, which as a means to establish greater order
and content, with submission to more political judgments, I here propose, That
I conceive that the persons having dependence more immediately on the Bath, may
be better paid by Salaries, than the Nunquam-satis-arbitrary way now on foot;
That their number may be lessened, being by that reason, and (the consequent
thereof) their necessity, only such as repine at now, and prey one upon
another; and that two Sergeants, four able men to manage the Pumps, and cleanse
the Baths, four Women to introduce and place the Females; with twelve
Chair-men, may be sufficient. The Salaries to be paid them by the Officer in
chief, collected by the Sergeant, and raised by a moderate demand by the Pole
from the Users of the Waters, according to their conditions, quality, and time
of stay at the Bath, expressed in a Table for that purpose mentioned before;
and if any other clamorous demands, uncivil deportment, neglect, or want of
duty, should at any time happen in those Servants, upon complaint made, to be
animadverted on, suspended, or discharged by the Authority under which they
are. These things some may make light of, but the Prudent will consider.

T. G.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THe Introduction, page 1 Chap. II. The Opinion of a late Author
concerning the Nature of the Baths of Bathe, page 6 Chap. III. An Examination
of some particulars in the former Chapter, p. 12 Chap. IV. Of Nitre in the
Bath-water, p. 20 Chap. V. Of Sulphur in the Bath-water, p. 26 Chap. VI. Of
Vitriol in the Bath-water, p. 33 Chap. VII. A further proof and illustration of
former particulars, p. 37 Chap. VIII. A Letter formerly written to Sr. E. G. p.
42 Chap. IX. Of the Antiquity of the Baths and City, p. 55 Chap. X. Of the
Roman Antiquities in Bathe, p. 66 Chap. XI. Of the Abbey Church in Bathe, p. 76
Chap. XII. Of the Baths of Bathe, p. 94 Chap. XIII. Of the use of the
Bath-water in Potion, p. 106 Chap. XIV. Of the virtues of the Bath-water taken
inwardly, p. 115 Chap. XV. Of the Water of St. Vincents Rock near Bristol, p.
122 Chap. XVI. Of Castle-Cary Water. p. 125 A Century of Observations, p. 131
The Lives and Character of the Physicians of Bathe, p. 163
illustrated map of Bath BATHE
Places within the City observed by letters A St. Maryes B High Street C
Market House D St. Peter's E The Abbey F Abbey Gate G St. James H Sta^^les
Street I Abbey lane K Kings ^ath L Tennis Court M Sta^^les Church N Cheap
Street O Co^kes lane P Vicaridge lane Q Spuriers lane R The Timber green S St.
Michaels T Westgate Street V St. John's Hospital W Cross Bathe X Hot Bathe Y
Lazours Bathe Z St. Katherines hospital

inset on the map of Bath depicting the Kings Bath and the New Bath The form
of Kings Bath

The form of the New Bath

inset on the map of Bath depicting the Cross Bath, the Hot Bath, and Lazours
Bath The form of the Cross Bath

The form of the Hot Bathe

Lazours Bath



A Discourse of BATHE, AND THE HOT WATERS There.
CHAP. I. The Introduction.
HAving formerly, in the year 1668, annexed a brief discourse of Bathe to one
of Doctor Jorden's of Natural Bathes and Mineral Waters, under the name of an
Appendix concerning Bathe, by which and some other pains I had taken about the
Treatise it self, I thought I had obliged (as was the opinion of most) not only
the Relations of the deceased Author, but all his Friends and Well-wishers; but
meeting, contrary to all expectation, with ^ude and unhandsom returns from an
Impudent person, to whose Temper the modest Doctor was a great stranger, and
of whose behavior he would be much ashamed, were he now alive; who on his
pretended relation has repaid me with ill language, and foolishly threatened me
with Trouble for my good will. Now to put an end to all disputes of this kind,
I have thought fit to appeal to any understanding person, that has his senses
exercised, and his wits about him, (for all have not, and some have none at
all) whether my Additions have been any impair to the Doctor's Reputation, whom
I have treated with all the Civility imaginable; and for the Sale of the Book
(a good argument of its acceptance) I believe there were not more sold in the
Doctor's life time, of what he printed himself, than went off the first year of
my Impression. But to silence all Cavils and silly Objections of this nature, I
have discharged that Author, and published in this discourse my own thoughts
and Observations, and how much different they are from his, or agreeable to
Truth, may best be determined by the ingenious Reader.

I did intend indeed, according to my Promise in the end of my Preface to the
Edition of Dr. Jorden, to have amplified that small discourse into an History
of Bathe; but finding no encouragement since to that design, and many things
that have made me alter my resolution, my intentions are to wave that, and
apply my self, in some convenient time, to the Roman Court, where I shall have
a fairer Trial, and more Justice done me. In the mean time, I hope this may in
some measure stop the gap, and release me of my obligation to the Candid world;
especially considering that the Antiquities of the Baths and City can hardly, I
think, be improved higher, and the Mystery of the Sacred Waters of Minerva, is
not to be profaned, which it wants little of if idly prostituted to vulgar
Capacities; which, besides that they are incompetent Judges in other matters,
are apt to put a sinister interpretation on those very things, that really are,
and were so intended for their own advantage; neither had I published the
Observations I now do in this language, had it not been on a more particular
account.

The ill Usages and great Indignities I have already met withal, from an
ungrateful people, in the prosecution of my design of making further Enquiries
into the Nature of those Waters, are not here to be mentioned; they are
sufficiently known to be products of Envy and Malice, and as I have hitherto
contemned what pitiful opposition could be made against me by the united
strength of Envy, Pride, Beggary and Revenge; so I shall not surcease my
Thoughts in due time of performing that which will be better esteemed by more
Judicious persons, and render me and my design most acceptable when best
understood. It was a fit return of a grave Divine to a vainglorious opposer of
his good Inclinations, Nec propter Te coepi, nec propter Te desinam. Thou,
Satan, said he, have nothing to do with my Concerns, for thou art at neither
end of my design; and as I did not begin to do thee a kindness, so I will
continue notwithstanding thy rage. Such unclean Spirits have no more to do with
public affairs, than to interrupt the quiet of better than themselves; and are
like a troublesome Curr on the Road, that does little else, with a besom tail
and a whiffling bark, than make a man well mounted look back, his horse kick,
and so returns.

It has ever been the fate of New Discoveries to meet with Course
entertainment at their first appearance; and whereas men are usually courteous
and civilly demeaned to strange Persons, they treat strange Opinions and new
Inventions at another rate. It Is the only Policy accounted to keep a balance
among men, and if any one by a more than ordinary industry and God's blessing
on it, has made at any time a conquest in the Intellectual world, whereby it is
thought he may get the start of his Neighbors, a rotten Cabal shall make head
against him, and perhaps, use him with as much severity as a forceable Intruder
on another's right; whereas the Secrets of Nature are free to all, and the
Victor here enters not by Blood, and Rapine, and Tyrannical oppression, but in
a way both innocent in it self, and advantageous to others.

When I reflect on the hard measure the Renowned Dr. Harvey met withal from the
pride and peevishness of some conceited Brethren (who esteem nothing Current
but what bears their image and superscription, if not minted in their own
brain) on his first demonstration of the Circulation to the World, I cannot but
conclude, if I had no other instance for it, That neither Ingenuity, Learning,
Modesty, nor any thing that is good and truly valuable can give protection
from, though a sufficient antidote against, the poison of Envy; Envy, that
spreading Ring-worm, that Vbiquitarian infection, that Canker of what is sound,
and Rust of what is bright! to be found almost in all places, in Town and in
Country, in the Shop and in the Street, in the Tavern and in the Alehouse; it
hovers over all, and pitches where it can, till at last, if it hurt not others,
it preys upon it self: Thou wicked Fiend! that never did good,
But have perversely it withstood,
And ever will, till Time shall be
No more, or We
Be rid of Thee.


But to pass by things of this nature with that of the unconcerned Grecian to
as abusive persons, (...); or that of Tacitus, Convitia spreta exolescunt, the
best answer being nothing at all; I shall rather choose to acquaint the Read^r,
That whereas I conceive, when I writ my Letter of Observations, that Bitumen
and Sulphur were not primarily concerned in the Body of the Waters, and
therefore no way observable in the Contents; by fresher Experiments and
Observations of a later date, I am inclined to believe, that Sulphur is one
ingredient in the Contents of the Waters, though not proportionable in quantity
to the Salts, and lost in the bringing them to a better color. For if two or
three ounces of the Contents, which at first much resemble the courser sort of
Sugar, be put into a Crucible in order to fusion, when the Crucible is red, and
before the Salt does run, there is the perfect color and smell of Brimstone,
insomuch that it may be sensibly discerned in any part of the room, and as the
Salt draws nearer the state of Fusion, the Sulphur wastes and is diminished; so
that as dross or Recrement it burns off in Calcination, and is no way concerned
in the refined Salt, though one Ingredient in the Waters, and contained in
their body.

I shall further add, that I made a Lixivium of the Salt calcined before
fusion, when probably the Sulphurous parts, or so reputed, were not all
consumed, and observed so great a foetor in the Lixivium representing Sulphur
so effectually to my smell, that it presently obtained the Testimony (if that
be any thing) of that sense.

CHAP. II. The Opinion of a late Author concerning the Nature of the Baths of
Bathe.
Joh. Mayow LL. D. and Med.
AND here I cannot but take notice of a Novel Writer, who Magisterially thus
determines: Quod ad Nitrum and Sulphur attinet, quibus Thermas Bathonienses
imbutas esse hactenus creditum est, eorum neutrum Aquis Thermarum istarum
solutum esse arbitror: As to what concerns Nitre and Sulphur, with which the
Bathes of Bathe have hitherto been thought to be impregnated, I suppose there
is nothing of either of them dissolved in the Waters.

A bold assertion! which had it been vented and believed but 50 years ago,
would have prevented much trouble in evincing the contrary; but, since it is in
fashion to be peremptory, I do assert, That both Nitre and Sulphur are to be
found in all the Bathes of Bathe, and that dissolved in, and mixed with, the
Body of the Waters. In order to the Proof of which, I shall take some account
of the forementioned Author's 15th. Chapter of his Tract of Sal-Nitre, the
arguments he has against it, and his opinion to the contrary.

His words therefore, as well as I can translate them, are these:

Among the most celebrated Bathes, we may justly reckon those of Bathe, in
which admirable Waters, a continual Vestal and sacred Fire is maintained, as if
things of a most different nature were interleagu'd. Before I come to the
manner how these Bathes receive their Heat, it will not be improper if I make
some enquiry into the Contents of these Waters.

It is therefore manifest, that the Bathes of Bathe are impregnated with a
certain Salt of an acid nature, for if any Sal alkali, or volatile Salt purely
salin'd, be mixed with these Waters, a precipitation will ensue, and the Waters
will become turbid, and of a milky nature.

Moreover, The Bathe-water powered on boiling Milk, will coagulate it, as any
other acid does.

Neither does this acid Salt seem to be the only Salt of the Bathe, but is
complicated with an Alkali; for if the Water be evaporated quite away, a
certain Salt of a more fixed nature will be found in the bottom of the vessel,
which, on the pouring of any acid on it, will ferment.

Of the same nature also are the Mud and Sand of the Bathe, which are wrought
up with the Springs; for any acid liquor being powered on them, an Ebullition
will follow.

There may be also observed in these Waters a Salt, or rather a Lime-Chalk kind
of Earth, sticking to the bottom of the Gouts, or passages, almost in all
places where the Water passes.

From what has been said may be collected; That the Bathes of Bathe are
impregnated with a certain acid saline Salt, and the Salt of the Bathe seems
not much unlike Tartar vitriolated, or Aluminous Salt.

The Reason why these Salts destroy not one another, but each of them ferments
with its contrary Salt; may be understood from what has been delivered in the
former Chapter: To wit; These Salts are so imperfect, that in Conjunction they
cannot destroy one another. But more of these Salts, hereafter.

As to Nitre and Sulphur, with which the Bathes have hitherto been thought to
participate, I suppose, That neither of them is dissolved in those Waters.

That there is no Nitre in the Waters appears by this, That the Salts that
remain after the Evaporation of the Bathe-water, put on a Coal, burn not, as
Nitre does. Although I shall not deny, that those immature Salts of an Alkali
nature, (which are also contained in the Sand, and If that be meant by Fimus in
the Author, to express which, Limus or Lutum had been more proper.
Mud of the Bathe) being exposed sometime to the air, may, perhaps, by its
influence be converted into Nitre.

As to Sulphur, which has been so much reported to be in all Bathes, it is not,
I believe, dissolved in these Waters. Because,

If a Solution of Alom, Vitriol, or any other Salt, whether acid, or fixed, be
mixed with the Water of the Bathe, Sulphur discovers not it self to be
precipitated, either by a fetid smell, or any other sign; which notwithstanding
in the Solution of Sulphur in the water of unslak't Lime, or made into a
Lixivium, does appear, where the Sulphur by the affusion of any acid Liquor is
precipitated.

I am not ignorant that the Water of these Bathes, if Salt of Tartar, or a
purely volatile Salt, be cast into it, will presently turn white, as is declared
before; which color proceeds not from Sulphur, but a stony, or Aluminous
matter precipitated, not much unlike to what is observed in the Water of
unslak't Lime, when any fixed Salt is mixed therewith; in which notwithstanding
it is not to be supposed the Sulphur is dissolved; for if Sulphur be boiled in
Water of unslak't Lime, the Water becomes white, not by the affusion of a fixed
Salt, as before, but of an acid; so that fixed Salts may dissolve Sulphur, but
not precipitate it. Wherefore if Sulphur be contained in the Waters of the
Bathe, they would be precipitated, not by a purely saline, as formerly, but an
acid Salt, and the Sulphur so precipitated would discover it self by a fetid
smell, which it does not do.

To which I add, That an acid Salt, or something Aluminous, does seem to
predominate in the Bathes aforesaid, so that they become altogether unfit to
dissolve the Sulphur.

Moreover, If Common Sulphur be boiled in those Waters, they are never tinged
with a yellow or Sulphurous color, neither can Sulphur, by any means, be
precipitated from the decoction, as I have often experimented.

And therefore I much admire the famous Willis, in his Treatise of the heat of
the Blood, should affirm, That Sulphur boiled in Bathe-water may be dissolved
after the same manner, as if boiled in Water of unslak't Lime.

Now if Sulphur seems to be dissolved in the Waters aforesaid, the occasion of
the mistake, I suppose to be, That the decoction was made in a vessel, in which
some fixed Salt had been decocted, so that the Solution of the Sulphur may be
made by some particle of a fixed Salt, with which the vessel might be seasoned.

Concerning the Baths of Bathe, It Is the common Opinion that Silver dipped into
them is colored yellow, in the same manner as if it were cast into a Solution
of Sulphur, and hence it is supposed that the Baths have Sulphur in them; but
experience evinceth the contrary; for Silver put into the Bath-water becomes
not reddish, or yellow, but rather black.

The mistake may seem to arise from this, That it is customary with the
Bathe-Guids to tinge, and as it were guild over pieces of Silver with a
Salino-Sulphurous Mud, or Dung, such as is often found in houses of Office, and
put them off to Strangers, for a little profit, as if they were colored with
the Bathe-water.

And here this is to be noted, That a kind of Bituminous Mud, with a small
pittance of Common Sulphur, is brought up with the Springs, which only swims on
the top, or else continues at the bottom, but never is dissolved in the Waters
themselves.

Neither is Sal Armoniack, as some imagine, to be found in these Waters; for if
on the Solution of Sal Armoniack, Salt of Tartar be injected, the purely saline
volatile Salt (of which Sal Armoniack in part does consist) being at liberty
from the acid Salt, to which it was formerly united, will presently fly off
into the air, and will quickly be discovered by a pungent affecting the
nostrils, which is never observed in the Bathe-waters.

Lastly; As to Vitriol, the Cross and Hot Bathe seem to have none at all; for
if Galls are beaten, and infused in these Waters, they neither turn purple nor
black; which would certainly be, if these Waters had Vitriol in them.

The King's Bathe seems to have a little Vitriol in it; for if some beaten
Galls are cast into that Water, it will have a light tincture of a black purple
color.

It Is also to be noted, That a certain Minera, for Minerale, is corruptly,
though Chymically, used here
Mineral of a Metallic nature, arises out of the Earth, with the Springs of
the Bathe, which is easily turned into Vitriol. For if any acid liquor be
affused on the Sand (which breaking out with the Springs, is found in the
bottom of the Bathe) it being corroded with an acid Menstruum, not without a
remarkable effervescence, will in part be converted into Vitriol, just as it
happens to the filings of Iron corroded with an acid liquor.

For if that Sand of the Bathe corroded with an acid liquor, be put into the
Infusion of Galls, the liquor acquires an atropurpureous color. Whereas if the
Infusion of Galls be put on the Sand newly taken out of the Bathe, and not
corroded with an acid liquor, it will, by no means, be of a purple color; an
apparent sign, that the Metallic Sand of the Bathe, unless corroded with an
acid Menstruum, does not turn to Vitriol.

It is further observable; That the Sand of the Bathe kept some time, and
exposed to the open air, will of its own accord, be converted into Vitriol; for
if that Sand be mixed with the Infusion of Galls, the Water will contract an
atropurpureous appearance.

Moreover, If it be laid on the Tongue, it has a perfect Vitriolick taste; and
no wonder, for the Nitro-aereous Spirit, after some time, closes with the
Metallic Mineral, and Salino-Sulphureous Marchasite, of which Vitriol uses to
be made, mixed in the Sand, and causes it to ferment, and at last, as was
showed before, converts it into Vitriol, etc.

CHAP. III. An Examination of some Particulars in the former Chapter.
HOW far this Author has ploughed with my Heifer, I leave to the consideration
of those that have been any way acquainted with my design; and shall only here
take notice, what Observations are agreeable with, or different from those I
have often made with the greatest exactness, and repeated Trials, submitting
all to the unbiast judgment of Indifferent persons.

And first of all, I concur with him, that the Baths of Bathe are in part
impregnated with a certain Salt of an Acid nature; but why this acid Salt
should be called Aluminous, I am not yet so fully resolved, as much on other
accounts, so somewhat on this, That although an acid Spirit be in Alom, yet the
most perceptible taste is either acerbe or austere; which being not observed in
these Waters, I have so much reason to judge Alom not predominant, as asserted
here.

The Experiment he mentions of precipitation or alteration of the Waters to a
milky color, or almond Milk, we owe to the Ingenuity of the Industrious Mr.
Stubbe, who, though he had not the good hap to discover what was precipitated,
yet gives it the general name of an insipid Magistery, Pl. ult. red. To a
Nonpl. p. 135.
and is nothing else but Freestone finely wrought, and intimately mixed with the
body of the Waters.

If any blame me for calling it by so homely a name, I desire they would
consider, that I had rather call it so than a Metallic Mineral, or a
Salino-sulphureous Marchasite, supposing it more agreeable to all their
apprehensions that will be concerned in things of this nature, and whom I would
not have abused with hard names and uncouth expressions; the effect of
Ostentation, or sanctuary of Ignorance.

That this is Freestone appears by this, that it is insipid, gritty, scowrs,
leaves a white color like Chalk on the fingers after it, and is inclinable to
an union into a stony consistence.

That this is not Calx vive, or any lapis Calcarius that holds affinity with
it, I am much induced to believe from this, See Obs. 83
That neither the Insipid magistery, nor the more gritty powder, being nothing
different but in fineness and color, will, either alone or together, open the
body of Sulphur, which is usual with Calx vive, as I have fully experimented by
decocting two parts of the powders with one of Sulphur in a proportionable
quantity of Water, which gave the water very little alteration, and as little
was precipitated. To make it further evident, I calcined a large Crucible of it
with as strong a fire as could well be given, yet nothing quick or limy did
appear, but dead and gritty ashes, which, mixed with water, neither made it
white, nor created any disturbance. But more of this in what will follow.

That the Bath-water will coagulate milk, I confess, but not as any other acid
liquor does; for this does it sooner upon affusion, and makes a hard curd; that
with the Bath-water, must boil again and that pretty smartly, else a soft white
Curd, as commonly it is, will not appear.

I also agree with the forementioned Author in this, That there is a
considerable quantity of an Under this Notion, I take the liberty to understand
Common Salt, or Sal Marine, consonant to the proper notation of the word: for
the Salt of Kali or Glassewort is Marine, though used indifferently by the
Chemists for the fixed Salt of any Vegetables, by Calcination.
Alkalizate Salt, mixed with some other Salt in the body of the waters, and
apparently distinguishable by the taste, as well in a Lixivium made of the
Contents of the waters, as in both the Courser part, the result of the
Evaporation, and also the purer part, when made white and refined; and that
this Alkali does constitute good part of the Saline matter, with which the
Baths are impregnated.

For I am apt to believe, that great part of the acidity is breathed off in
evaporation, either in the Bath or over the fire, or both ways together, in
regard very little of that taste is perceptible in the Salt extracted, but the
Saline is easily discovered. To the confirmation of which the acting also of
acids on it may somewhat conduce, and the experience of many this Summer, who
according to my directions have dissolved the Salt in the Bath-water to improve
it, and have sensibly found an increase in the other taste, but little or
nothing at all in acidity.

Neither does the Lixivium, though made very strong, nor the Oleum per
deliquium dropped 20, 30, or 40 drops into a small proportion of water, tinge
with Galls either purple or black.

I may also urge as an Argument for the evaporation of Vitriol, the abundance
of a yellow Ochre which ascends with the steam of the Bath, and is there
chiefly to be found where the steam of the Water meets with any resistance, as
I have noted elsewhere, which probably may be the Terra Vitrioli: And although
it is not very easy to give the reason, why the Vitriol should not be as
visible as the Ochre, or else make it more acid than we find it to be; yet if
we conceive it to be in succo primitivo, aut Solutis principiis, and there per
halitum, and so per transitum too, it may better be conceived to go off, and
not imbody as the other Salts do. Yet that all the Acidity is not breathed of,
will appear from this, That the Bath-water cold will coagulate Milk. And what
is more, the same water distilled from a gallon to a pint, a fourth part of
that pint will make a curd, when the distilled water in the Receiver will do
nothing at all: Which may probably proceed either from something Vitrioline, or
rather from the acidity of Sulphur, in regard the Salt made white, in which is
nothing wanting but the Sulphur, will not coagulate, as the water does; whereas
the browner Salt before calcination, dissolved in Spring Water, will. So then,
this Alkali is but one part of the fixed Salt, found in the bottom of the Vessel
after evaporation ad siccitatem.

For a further confirmation that an Alkali is contained in the waters, which,
considering the Quantity that may continually be made evident both to light and
taste, will scarcely be judged to need other demonstration. Yet it is
observable, that the Cross-Bath having lately been kept drawn four or five
days, the Saline matter not meeting with water sufficient for its dissolution,
was driven up in substance from the Springs, and again reverberated by the
ambient air, and incrustated on the tops of the stones that were above the
water in the bottom of the Bath, which gave me some divertisement to behold,
and, on examination, appeared much alkalizate both by taste and ignition; some
pungency also I observed in it, which I rather judged to proceed from the
acrimony of Nitre than Tartar, but the predominant taste was clearly
alkalisate, which after the Nitrous parts were wasted, was less exceptionable
in the remaining calx on the Iron after burning, in which the Alkalisate taste
was most remarkable; not to mention its crepitation, and that some pungency
also is observed in an Alkali it self.

To make it further evident that this accretion did probably arise from the
Minera, I believe, not far distant, and was not engendered or contracted from
some floating particles in the air derived elsewhere, and there settling by way
of Magnetism, as some may imagine; it is further remarkable, That neither the
stones under water, nor, what is more material, any stone either of the Seats,
or in the sides of the bottom of the Bath, remote from the water, had any Salt
affixed to them, but only those, as I may so term it, that peeped out of the
water, the tops of which only, as I said before, were incrustated. So that had
a Magnetism any place here, the Salino-Nitrous particles must, I conceive, have
lighted as well on the stones of the same nature hard by, as where they were,
the reason of the thing being much the same. For a fuller Testimony of this,
See Obs. 88.

I acknowledge also this, That a great Fermentation is produced by the affusion
of Acids on the Sand and Mud of the Bath, (but do not tell you who first
observed it) and a much less on the Scum; yet I must be excused in this, if I
say, That I cannot conceive how this should arise from the action of Acids on a
Saline matter, in regard it transcends my understanding to apprehend, how any
Salt can possibly lie at the bottom of the Bath, either in the Sand or Mud,
undissolved, and the waters no higher impregnated than we find they are.

It Is a trivial Observation, that what is dissolvable in any liquor, the pores
of it will receive till it can hold no more; neither can I be yet persuaded,
that there are just so many porosities in the Bath-water assigned for Vitriol,
and the rest taken up with other Bodies, seeing the dissolution of Vitriol in
the Bath-water afterward, and the alteration in taste that happens thereupon,
is sufficient to give me satisfaction to the contrary.

But to speak a little more to this, because the Author insists so much upon
it; If any Vitriol be contained in the Sand, it is no absurdity to conceive that
warm water may dissolve it and fetch it out; now, if half a pint of warm water
be poured on an ounce of Sand, with what agitation you shall think convenient,
and thus let stand infused ten or twelve hours, the water then decanted, and
the sand dried and weighed again, there will be little wanting in the weight,
abating for the Ochre, which arises first to the top, through the body of the
water, much like white Vitriol, afterward precipitates and settles at the
bottom on the Sand, and is hardly preserved in the decantation.

The Ebullition therefore, on the affusion of acid liquors on the Sand, I
conceive does arise from somewhat not Saline (if Taste be the judge) of which I
shall treat more at large by and by: So that the Sand and Salt are no further
of the same nature, than as fermentation may arise upon different Commixtures.
How this may be reconciled to the Experiment I sometime made, of making Ink
with Bath-water and Galls, and the Sand of the Bath, with other things which
might have been no small encouragement to this opinion, I shall have occasion
in part to declare hereafter, but more when I find my Answer is required.

As to the Salt, or rather, to use the new-made word, Calcineous kind of Earth,
sticking to the bottom of the Gouts and passages, almost in all places where
the water passes, I was never yet so happy, though I have searched
particularly to find any such thing. I confess I have heard it spoken, that
five years ago, or thereabouts, there was a Gout out of order at the
Cross-Bath, in the rectifying of which there was observed some such matter
adhering to the Passage; but this, I suppose, was as much above the Civilian's
knowledge, as the Physicians, and whether a bare Tradition with some other
uncertainties, to say no worse, be a sufficient foundation for this Hypothesis;
That the Salt of the Bath does much resemble a Vitriolated Tartar, or Aluminous
Salt, I shall leave those to determine that know the meaning of this approved
Sentence, Nullum simile est idem. And seeing that the Author chooses to call
this adherent matter by the name of a Chalky kind of substance rather than a
Salt, I think I may not be much mistaken if I imagine it to be Freestone;
concerning which I can say no more, till I shall happily meet with the like
accretion.

That the Fermentation on the affusion of Acids on the Sand, arises chiefly
from the acting of that liquor on Freestone in conjunction with some Testaceous
particles, and not from any other Saline matter, seems evident from this; That
whereas these parts with a blew Clay or Marle, Rubrica, Ochre, and
Chrystal-pebbles, are clearly distinguishable by a Magnifying-glass in the
Sand, when the a^i^ liquor has done its worst, and the difference between the
Sand and it, is amicably composed, the remaining particles of Sand that will
not ferment, are only some part of the Marle and Chrystals; And this I call
Arena castrata, because, by this means, the Sand loses its fermenting vigor,
though the stones do remain.

And whereas the Mud of the Bath, which seems chiefly to consist of this blew
Clay or Marle, with something Sulphurous, will do the like; the Fermentation I
conceive does arise not so much, though something I confess, from the Earth it
self, as the Testaceous particles with which it abounds, in which Earth nothing
Saline can be discovered to which the ebullition may make any pretense.

To this may be added; That the color of the Acid liquor, after Saturation by
the Sand, is altogether the same with what arises from the Freestone, both
equally resembling the infusion of the filings of Steel; so that in this also
there is an agreement.

CHAP. IV. Of Nitre in the Bath-Water.
THat Nitre is contained in the Body of the Waters is evident from this, that
it may, by art, be extracted thence; and I may as well suspect, and, if I
please, believe, that I had not money in my pocket, when I took out some silver
for a necessary use; as when I see Nitre taken out of the Bath, say it was
never there.

But the difficulty will be to prove the thing; now, I say, a Sceptick may
doubt whether a Man be a Man, a Brute a Brute, or whether he makes use of his
voice that asks the Question; but whether he be not the wiser man that takes
these for granted, and not pragmatically contradicts the unanimous consent of
Judicious Writers, is easy to determine.

I confess it burns not as Common Saltpeter does, because it leaves a Calx
behind it; but in that more resembles the Nitre of the Ancients, a pound of
which being burnt will leave four ounces of Ashes: Jord. Not. Bath. and Min.
Wat. chap. 7. p. 53.
Saltpeter will leave none.

Neither does it huff, nor melt altogether in a small quantity as Saltpeter
does, on the account of an allay it receives from the mixture of another Salt
of an Alkalisate taste with some bitterness withal, which remains on the
Iron-plate after accension, and is little more than a fourth part of the Body;
wherefore to deny the being of Nitre in the Salt, because it is not all so, is
as absurd, to make a Linsey-woolsey Comparison, as to affirm, there is no
Woollen in that sort of Vesture where Linen is; or to say, That a man that is
both Lawyer and Physician, has nothing of Physic, because he has something
of Law.

But that Nitre is there, though not predominant, seems clear by the shooting
in stiria's, which is concluded to be the proper form of that Salt; and
although Tartar, and perhaps some other Salts, may somewhat resemble it; yet
the difference is easily perceptible by the sight, but more by the taste.

And now I am discoursing of this matter, I conceive the Author did not hit the
mark, because he did not make the Bath-water shoot, in that he only mentions,
the Salts that remain after evaporation, which, he says, put on a Coal, burn
not as Nitre does. But the shootings so called, in a figure somewhat pyramidal,
with many Columellae, or small pillars closely united, put on a red-hot
Iron-plate, and so burnt, may alter the case, which I affirm to do, as I
mentioned before.

And, what is not a little considerable, on the burning of six ounces of the
Chrystals, in order to the Examination of the remaining Calx, the Nitrous parts
of the shoots, being many in number, in a short time melted, and ran down both
sides of the Iron-plate in a stream, consonant to Pliny's observation of Nitre,
(Q)
which he affirms ingentibus rivulis profluxisse.

To which I may add the bitter Taste apparently discoverable in the Salt,
insomuch as to bring it within the verge of a suspicious appearance of a Sal
amarum (if any such Salt there be distinct from Nitre) which bitterness has
been accounted proper to Nitre, and the waters impregnated therewith, De
Therein. l. 5. c. 5.
of which the Laborious Ballius gives this Testimony; Differunt etiam Nitrosae
Aquae a Salsiae, quod amarorem Nitrosae sapiunt potius quam Salsuginem, and quo
magis syncerum habent Nitrum eo sunt amariores. So that the bitter Calx
mentioned before, seems, if any, to be the true Calx of Nitre, and no small
argument of its sincerity, although this taste be not perceptible in the water,
in regard the Nitre is much diluted, and though sufficient for the purpose, not
in so great a proportion there.

Also for a further satisfaction, if any Aluminous parts were contained in the
Crystal shoots, I observed, That the six ounces mentioned before, after they
had hufft, melted and ran upon the Iron-plate, were in little more than one
minute reduced to somewhat less than two ounces of a dead white Calx; which
being again dissolved, filtred and evaporated, gave me a plain Alkali with some
remaining bitterness, which on the affusion of any acid would ferment, and
being put to undergo the fire-ordeal Trial, would neither melt nor boil, but
crackle and leap.

To make a further Trial, whether what was bitter and suspiciously Nitrous
might be separated from the Alkali; I dissolved and filtred the same Salt
again, and evaporating it ad Cuticulam, it shot pa^tly into a white hoary down,
penetrating cooling, and bitter, distinct from the Alkali with which before it
was mixed, and partly into an inspissated juice, which I judge to be the succus
primitivus of Nitre, with the same qualities; both which put on the Plate did
huff and melt as the former, leaving a small bitter Calx behind it, which, I
believe, by frequent dissolutions, evaporations, and coagulations, would huff
and melt all off, to the utter consumption of its whole body that way, I mean
as far as Nitrous, the Alkali showing it self proportionable in the Calx, after
every trial.

And here I would not be mistaken, as if I pretended to that grand Arcanum, the
discovery of the Nitre of the Ancients, for I am well assured, that the
description of that is very much different from what I am now discoursing of,
being acknowledged by Pliny, Dioscorides, and others, to be of a rosy color,
and almost purple, which they used sometimes to dye that color with (though
some white there was also) and came nearer to the nature of ordinary Salt,
whereupon Dioscorides in his 85th. Chapter has these words, Nitre, and the
froth of Nitre (or Aphronitrum) have the same virtues as Salt, and are burned
like that; yet because some measures may be taken from that, for the better
understanding of what is now under the test, I thought fit in that regard at
present, only to make this bare mention of it.

Neither can the contrary, I think, be evinced from the effects; for cooling,
penetrating, and purging, are attributed to Nitre, and confessedly in the
waters, the two former evident in allaying thirst, abating inflammations, and
quickness of passage: the latter, as plain in its operation, for Nitre as well
as Salt, is said both alvum laxare, and urinas ciere, and Baccius treating of
nitrous waters, affirms, that they do vacuare, virtute Nitri, per alvum, and
per urinas. The like may be said of the external effects by Bathing, which can
no way prejudice the being of Nitre there.

Besides, This way of arguing from the effects is but a posteriori, and less
significant where there is matter of fact, which may be useful in the dark; but
if it thwart with a plain experiment, must yield; for, Quid verba audiam, cum
videam facta? And whoever shall undertake a business of this nature may
consider, that the best judgment to be made of the effects, is from a constant
observation of particulars on the place, which cannot be conceived to be so
well done at a distance, but must require, besides some time, a good
attendance, as well as practice here. But to return.

These Stiriae, or Needles, I observed in the water of all the Baths, yet in a
different shape and consistence; for the King's Bath-water after a full
imbibition of the Salt dissolved, and a strong Lixivium thence procured,
evaporated ad Cuticulam, and set in a cool place, shot from the inside of the
evaporating Glass into its Cavity, into strong, and compacted Needles, with
that strength, that it took some of the Common Salt with it, which appeared in
the Nitrous shoots, something like the stars in a clear sky, but white, and in
a Cubical form, in perfect squares, or Tessera's distinct from the body of the
Nitrous shoots, with which the Nitre was studded, being impacted into it.

The Cross Bath shot in smaller Needles, but longer and very thin, in great
number, directly from the bottom of the glass, very close together, but
distinct each from other, much like the Finnow, or hairy excrescence, that
oftentimes arises from corrupted matter, which on the least violence offered
would break, and not endure any kind of resistance.

The Hot Bath gave me more trouble to bring it to shoot, insomuch as being
frustrated in two or three Experiments, I had almost concluded there was
nothing Nitrous there, but the thing afterward succeeding, I had on a small
quantity of the Salt dissolved, and the Lixivium evaporated according to Art,
five, or six single Stiria's, bigger, engraved figure Fig I
engraved figure Fig II
engraved figure Fig III
engraved figure Fig IV
engraved figure Fig V
engraved figure Fig IV
engraved figure Fig VI
engraved figure Fig VII
engraved figure Fig VI


and stronger, though not so long, as those I observed in the water of the
Cross Bath, which gave me satisfaction as to that Bath also, in the particular
thing of Nitre now under debate. Since which time on another Experiment, I had
as firm and compacted Needles from the Hot Bath, as I had formerly from the
King's, both which Baths shoot much alike, and different from the Cross.

I shall not lay any great stress on these observations, in relation to the
difference between the three Baths mentioned before, in regard it must be a
business of greater experience, and more exact observation of many
Circumstances, to state that affair as it ought to be, and is, in good part
done in the Miscellaneous Observations hereunto annexed; only this use I may
safely make of them, to confirm what I had before asserted, That there is Nitre
dissolved in the Water of all the Baths of Bathe. And if this be not the thing
that has hitherto been described under that name, by the most approved
Writers, I presume we may afterward take it for a Chimerical notion, that has
no foundation in any work of Nature, but owes its subsistence to a fantastical
brain.

To this may be further added; That the Liquamen, or oleum per deliquium, being
closely stopped, and but heated by the fire, presently, as soon as cold,
concretes into a Nitrous form; so that we need not call in the secret, and
invisible assistance of the external air, to make a Metamorphosis almost as
strange as those mentioned by the Poet, when we have clear, and unalterable
principles of Nature, and innate propensities, and disposition in matter it
self, with a divine impression, that will serve the turn.

In the rear of these Philosophical Arguments, I shall offer one
(supernumerary) Grammatical, which is this; That the Salt I call Nitrous,
either in the Sun, or by Candlelight, shines and sparkles very much, consonant
to the Notation of the word Nitrum, which probably, may not be so much a
Grecian, as the great Etymologist would have it, and derived (...) from its
scouring, and absterging nature; as a Latinist, and so called a Nitendo;
because it gives a greater luster than any other Salt does.

CHAP. V. Of Sulphur in the Bath water.
AS to Sulphur, the next thing to be insisted on, as contained in the Waters, I
conceive that many that have endeavored to avoid Charybdis, have fallen into
Scylla, and because the ancient Authors have asserted that Sulphur was
undoubtedly concerned in all Baths, they will affirm there is none in any; but
whoever builds a fabric on this foundation, and certainly concludes, that
Sulphur is not in the Bath-waters, because it cannot be discovered by
precipitation, I would have forbear a positive determination on a negative
experiment, till I see Vitriol precipitated in substance from the King's
Bath-water, which is acknowledged to be there. And if I cannot light on an apt
precipitater, which every way opposes the particles to be so discovered, and
have some other reasons to incline me to the contrary, I should not be so fond
of my own conceit, as to be prevailed upon by a comparative instance of
unslak't Lime, to wipe my own Nose, and put out my Eyes, which as far as they
can, assure me to the contrary.

I shall refer the Reader to what is mentioned before concerning the Color and
Smell, in calcining the Contents of the Bath-water in general, and till I shall
meet with something that will both burn blew, and give a fetid smell, that is
not Sulphur, I shall so esteem that, till ascertained of the contrary.

I may further add, That the Sulphur is probably incorporated with the Salt, as
appears by its passing with it into the Lixivium, and through papers in
filtration, and not discoverable but by a strong fire, by which the body of the
Salt is opened, and a solution of the Continuum made, in order to fusion; so
that if you do not precipitate both, you can precipitate neither, unless a
separation of the Sulphur from the Salt be made, which, I presume, is not easy
to be done, without the help of fire, by which the Sulphur is consumed: so that
the comparative instance of unslak't Lime is little to the purpose; where the
Sulphur is separated, decocted, and precipitated; here not so, being not apart,
but residing in a Saline-Sulphureous Salt, a piece of whose Body, as we now
have it, it seems to be.

Moreover, Whereas he collects from the Bath-waters not ringing Silver yellow,
but rather black, that there is no Sulphur contained in the same; I may retort,
and that very justly, this as an argument to assert it. For the proper color
that Sulphur dissolved gives to Silver is not so much yellow as black, as may
be e^sily discerned by putting any piece of Silver, but a very little while,
into the decoction of Sulphur made in the water of unslak't Lime, which gives
as near the color of the Silver I have caused to lie some time near the
Springs of the Bath, as may be, so that the difference is not discernable; not
to mention that some yellowness is observed on the Silver tinged by the Bath.

Neither am I fully satisfied that the only, or indeed the best, precipitator
of Sulphur is an acid; for on the decoction of that Mineral in the water of
quick Lime (the Lixivium, though with much Sulphur, not succeeding) and very
sudden change, on the affusion of Spirit of Vitriol, into a milky, and much
whiter Consistence, the Liquor afterward settled, and precipitated not as
Sulphur, but Limestone; so that the Sulphur, although it gave a greater fetid
smell, yet was not so apparently precipitated, as by Oil of Tartar in another
glass, which gave the Sulphur in proper color precipitated, without a
permanent lacteous opacity. Whereupon I made this observation, as to the
present experiment, That although acids do not precipitate of this lapideous
matter alone, yet if in the embraces a strong sulphurous commixture, they will,
and the Limestone is most properly precipitated by an acid, if Sulphur be
decocted with it; whereas the Body of Sulphur, decocted as before, is best
precipitated by a fixed Salt, the Sulphur appearing without whiteness, in its
own garb, though not so fetid as on the affusion of an acid.

It may be also noted that S. Closseus, in his preparation of Lac Sulphuris, in
which the body of Sulphur is opened with Calx Vive, directs the Sulphur to be
precipitated with Urine.

The occasion of this mistake (seeing he pretends to give the reason of
another, concerning an experiment of a like nature) I conceive to be, That the
white matter precipitated on the affusion of any acid, was, without much
examination, reputed wholly sulphurous, as appears from these words; For if
Sulphur be boiled in the water of unslak't Lime, the water becomes white, not
by the affusion of a fixed Salt, as before, but of an acid: so that fixed Salts
may dissolve Sulphur but not precipitate it. Whereas the whiteness arises much
from the mixture of the Limestone, as appears by the open confession of what
is precipitated, if standing some time, filtered, and brought to the test by
fire, where the Limestone is discovered, the Sulphur being rather disturbed
than precipitated by the acid liquor, which makes it give a greater fetor, but
never kindly precipitates; the other precipitation with oil of Tartar, which
here, contrary to its wonted course, joins with the Limestone, which it
usually precipitates, and opposes the Sulphur, is very apparent, and
sulphurous beyond contradiction.

I am not ignorant, that in the preparation of Lac Sulphuris mentioned before,
Sulphur also is precipitated by an acid, but that fixed Salts should dissolve
Sulphur, but not precipitate it, is what I said I was not so fully satisfied
in. Not to mention that the matter precipitated by a fixed Salt is white on the
first affusion, though the whiteness be not so permanent, the Sulphur in a
short time precipitating in proper color.

Besides, If Sulphur be boiled in the Bath-water, and does not tinge it with a
yellow color, I presume, it cannot thence be argued that there is no Brimstone
there, for the color of the water in which Sulphur is dissolved, is not so
much yellow as Lixiviate, or reddish; and therefore Schroder gives this
direction for the making that preparation of Sulphur mentioned before, that
after the Sulphur and Tartar are mixed, they ought to boil, donec fere omne
Sulphur solutum sit, liquorque rubeus appareat; though some addition I confess
it may have from the Tartar. Yet Closseus, in his way of making that
preparation where there is no Salt of Tartar, but, instead of that Quicklime,
which gives no such tincture of it self, has this Note; Coque, donec parts
tres aquae sint consumptae, ruboremque contraxerit instar sanguinis, ex
Sulphur dissoluto.

I therefore think it no ill advice here, that they that are so much concerned
to give the reason of the mistakes of others, would a little mind to rectify
their own, and not be an Argus abroad, but a Mole at home.

I do also acknowledge, that I believe that the white Magistery or in-palpable
Powder, precipitated from the Bath-water on the affusion of Salt of Tartar, or
any other analogous, or agreeable Salt, is not Sulphurous, much less Aluminous;
but rather Stony, of a lapideous substance, the result of an intimate
Commixture, with the body of the Waters, which may have no small influence on
their fermentation, as may hereafter be more fully considered.

And as to what reflects on that famous Practitioner, the Ingenious and Learned
Dr. Willis, I shall, at present, say no more than this, That observing one so
pedantickly dressed up in his own clothes, he ought not to be affrighted with his
own shape; only this may be further noted, That whereas Dr. Willis had desired
of me the exacter trial of that Experiment of decocting Sulphur and Antimony in
the Bath-water, I well remember I returned him something of both that was
precipitated after a double filtration, and the decoction performed in a Vessel
altogether free from the season of any fixed Salt.

Yet I must acknowledge, that what was precipitated was very inconsiderable to
what was decocted, and not so much as to make much alteration in the color of
the water; which may deserve their consideration wh^ affirm, a Lime-Chalk
Stone, or Lapis calcarius, to be contained in the Waters, and yet deny them to
dissolve Sulphur, and again affirm, that Sulphur is dissolved in the water of
Lime.

The same alteration of the water into a turbid milky appearance, and the
precipitation by oil of Tartar, of an insipid powder, mentioned before, was
also observed in the Spaw at Scarborough, and Sulphur-Well at Knaresbrough, by
William Simpson Doctor in Physic, as appears from several places in his
Hydrologia Chymica, and Hydrological Essays, which he there asserts to be
Aluminous, and page 118. of the latter Treatise says; By the addition of Oil
of Tartar this Sulphur-water turns white, and that because it is impregnated
with a small quantity of a Simple natural Alom Salt. How far Alom is concerned
in that water, I shall not here dispute, but leave it to the Learned Dr.
Witty, whose concern it is: only thus much I can say, that the like
Phenomenon appearing in these waters, what is thus precipitated here is not
Aluminous, as has been acknowledged by many eminent Physicians, who have seen
some quantity of the precipitated powder; and was particularly noted by the
ever Honored Sir Charles Scarbrough, this Summer, here.

But to prevent any misunderstanding, I must acknowledge that this assertion
stands on this foundation, That the white powder precipitated by oil of Tartar
from the Waters, is the same with the finer sort of what I had, in greater
quantities precipitated spontaneously per decubitum, on the evaporation of many
Hogsheads of the Water, and is now to be seen, though not altogether so white
nor fine, having undergone many alterations, which being decocted in
Spring Water, the water filtered will precipitate with oil of Tartar, as the
Bath-water does; yet if any one shall think fit to deem this Saline, and
perhaps, Aluminous; he ought to consider, how any Salt can so soon be divested
of the essential property of what is saline, as to be rendered perfectly
insipid, when saline at first: though I do not absolutely deny, but that we may
attribute, though somewhat Catachrestically, the name of Salt, to something not
saline, communicating with it in some other of its properties.

I know very well that Alom dissolved in Spring Water, the Water filtered and
the Salt precipitated with oil of Tartar, will be impaired much in its saline
taste; yet so much of the sowrness, and stipticity will remain, as will be
sufficient to discover its nature.

CHAP. VI. Of Vitriol in the Bath-water.
TO pass by the Reason of the Common Artifice of tinging Silver at the Bath,
what concerns the Scum, and Sal Armoniack, as of no great moment; Vitriol is,
by Him, denied to be in the Cross and Hot Bath, because Galls beaten and
infused in these Waters, will never turn them purple nor black, which is
confessed would certainly be, if these Waters had Vitriol in them.

How true this is, a slight Experiment will soon evince, and if the Author had
ever made trial, his Galls or Sight, must be worse than mine, if a purple
color did not appear.

To which may be added the Experience and Testimony of my Honored and Learned
Friends Sir Edward Greaves, and Dr. Not. Highmore, who have both made trial,
and found the Waters turn. With the former of whom I lately further observed,
that when we had been sufficiently satisfied in the turning color of the Hot
Bath Pump-water, with less than half a pint of Water and but two grains of
Galls, and had thrown away the Water and Galls, in order to the trial of
something else, more of the same Water, though much cooler than when brought at
first, being powered into the same glass, turned color also, receiving a brisk
light purple, from the remaining particles of the former infusion about the
glass, though nothing of the Galls did appear at all.

It Is also confirmed by this, That whereas the Leaves of Oak make little or no
alteration in the Water of the King's Bath, the Chips, or inner Bark of the
same make rather a better purple in the Water of all the Baths, than the Galls;
only the King's Bath tingeth deeper than the other two, as in all Experiments
of this nature, it appears to do. The like also will happen on the Seeds of
Sumach contus'd and infused, but with Pomegranate Flowers most apparently, so
that the Water of any of the Baths affused hot on that, will presently turn
purple; though the color does not keep so long in strength, as that which
arises from the Oaken Chips.

These things considered, I conceive it no injury to the King's Bath to allow
it a little Vitriol, though manifestly derogatory to the other two to deny it,
since they make their claim by the same evidence, and that Judge will hardly
free himself from the censure of injustice and partiality, that will not hear a
poor man's Tale, but suffers an honest Cause that has weak lungs and a weaker
purse to be lost, on the louder clamours of more importunate addresses.

The truth of this Experiment being thus far called in question, I am the more
afraid of the certainty of some others; for I remember an old Story of Mr.
Thief in the University, that was wont to be very busy in some Booksellers
Shops, and entered in the Shop-Book under that name, whoever therefore was taken
in the fact but one time, was obliged to quit the whole score, on this account,
That he that was really convicted once, might commit the same thing five, ten,
or twenty times before, and therefore he the man from whom all was required.

The Metallic Mineral, so called, has nothing Metallic contained in it; and
if this be so easily, by the air, converted into Vitriol, it is very strange we
have not yet had any Houses of Vitriol, which surely have endured the air long
enough to experience a Transmutation.

As for the Sand breaking out with the Springs in which Vitriol is supposed to
lie undissolv'd, as was mentioned before, if there were no better arguments for
Vitriol than this, I shall not stick to say, that he that depends on this,
builds at best but on a sandy foundation.

That the purple color appearing from the mixture of the Sand of the Bath,
with the infusion of Galls, may not arise from the tincture of Vitriol, seems
more than probable by this Experiment. I have formerly declared, that the Sand
of the Bath may be so far corroded with an acid Menstruum, as not to ferment
any longer, but lie quiet in the bottom of the glass without any motion at all;
now, this Sand on the affusion of Common Water gave an excellent purple, when
it is not likely that any thing saline should remain, after so many washings and
reaffusions, as are requisite to reduce the Sand to that condition. Moreover
it is considerable, the infusion was not acid, nor any way altered from its
common taste. But this Experiment I made but once, and had not an opportunity of
repeating it again.

It Is likewise more observable, That after some hours standing, a purple
floccous matter did spontaneously precipitate, upon which there being a clear
separation, the Water returned to its pristine color, and the floccous matter
subsided in the bottom of the glass, which being filtered per Chartam, and
examined, was perfectly insipid, and not at all Vitrioline.

Besides, On the Calcination of half a pound of the Sand, when the Crucible was
as red and the Sand as hot as usually it is when the Salts do run, the Sand
powered out glowing hot, nothing saline was observed to concrete among it, which
it would certainly do, if any fusible Salt were there, as in other Calcinations
it appears to do.

I therefore rather judge it to proceed from an insipid but astringent Ochre,
such as is mentioned by Fallopius, De Met. and Fosse. c. 35. de Ochra.
which lying some time in the open air, becomes more sour than when taken out
of the Bath, which may occasion the difference between the Sand newly taken,
and that which is kept some time; the Ochre it self infused making the liquor
much blacker after some standing, as is more fully declared in the following
Chapter.

CHAP. VII. Containing a farther Proof and Illustration of the former
particulars.
TO make this a little clearer; It Is an easy Experiment to power warm water on
the Sand, in what proportion you please, which if kept some time will alter the
water in which it is infused, into a yellowish or amber color: when the water
is impregnated very well, mix some of this with the infusion of Galls, and
presently an atropurpureous color will appear, in which if you infuse white
paper but a very little while, you will quickly be satisfied what color it
will tinge. Now, if this infusion be permitted to cool, the Ochre will
precipitate, leaving the water somewhat yellower than in it self it is, to
which it also communicates a harsh taste, and at last settles on the top of the
Sand, from which it may be separated by decantation. The contrary happens to
the Sand newly taken, in which the Ochre clogged with too much moisture cannot
show it self, as when older, and more dry. So that I see no reason or
necessity, from this Phenomenon, to assert the existence of Vitriol in the
Sand of the Bath, otherwise than as it has relation to this astringent Ochre,
which I do believe receives this tinging property by the impression of Vitriol,
this being in all probability, as is noted elsewhere, the Terra Vitrioli, or
Earth, in which the Vitriol is contained before exhalation; as I conceive, the
Marl or Mud is the bed of Sulphur, or the Terra, to which that Mineral does
more nearly adhere.

And that it is this yellow matter that occasions the alteration, may be further
evident from this; That after the first decanting, if the Ochre be powered all
off, and warm water affused on the Sand again, and that infusion mixed with the
infusion of Galls, no change of color will ensue. To which may be added, that
the Ochre it self kept some time, and infused in the decoction of Galls, will,
after lying a pretty while, turn that Liquor into a much blacker appearance.

I shall end this dispute with the observation of one, D. Simpson
who affirms, That Artificial Alom will not with Galls strike a purple color,
but the Natural Alom with its inbred Ochre, will; ascribing more to the Ochre
than the Alom. So that this may be the end of that Controversy about Alom and
Galls tinging Water purple, That Alom, as Alom, does not tinge, but as in
conjunction with this inbred Ochre, or as Vitrioline; for between Vitriol and
Alom there are many resemblances, and a worthy Author has observed, Jord. Not.
Bath. chap. 7. p. 52.
that the Basis of Vitriol is Alom, both these being much alike, but that
Vitriol has a garb from Copper or Iron, which in the Ochre gives the tinging
quality, the Alom, as distinct from Vitriol, contributing nothing at all.

If any shall affirm this Ochre to be Vitrioline, I have not denied it, having
formerly supposed it might be Terra Vitrioli; but what I here question is,
whether any Vitrioline saline body, different from the Ochre, be contained in
the Sand, or can lie undissolved there.

It Is very remarkable what is said, That if the Sand of the Bath, impregnated
with an acid Liquor, be put into the infusion of Galls, the Liquor acquires an
atropurpureous color; and no wonder, since the acid Liquor may do much alone,
as may be seen in the mixture of Vinegar, with the decoction or infusion of
Galls, which supplying in some measure the place of Vitriol, by a kind of
analogy inclines the infusion to an inky complexion.

And as for the Metallic Mineral contained in the Sand, which on the affusion
and corrosion of an acid Menstruum, will in part be converted into Vitriol, I
have said before that it is nothing else but a Common Freestone, a Mineral, I
confess, but how far Metallic, I leave to the judgment of the men of that Art.

For a partial satisfaction in this thing; if the sharpest Vinegar be powered on
the Sand in one glass, and on Freestone in another, the same fermentation will
appear for the present, and the same bluish color of the infusion afterward
upon Corrosion; so that it much resembles the color and smell of the saturated
Liquor, on the affusion of Vinegar on the filings of Iron. But whether this be
a sufficient argument to dub it Metallic, I shall be better satisfied, when I
am convinced of this, That Truth has never suffered by mere Resemblances.

But that it may appear that I desire to proceed in this Affair with all
ingenuity and freedom from animosity, unless what will seem necessary to
discover truth; I shall here recite a Passage out of Dr. Wittie's Answer to
Hydrologia Chymica, leaving how far it may be applicable to the saline Stiria's
mentioned before, to the judicious Reader and further observation.

The Candid Doctor, page 63. among other Preparations out of the Minerals of
the Spaw at Scarbrough, made by Mr. Sam. Johnston, a Physician at Beverly, and
by him communicated to the Doctor, m^kes mention of an Essential Salt, which
Mr. Johnston calls Anomalous, or sui generis, as differing much from the
factitious or natural kinds of Alom, Vitriol, or Nitre, though in some
properties it agree with each of them.

The Reason of this Scruple, he adds, is this, which Paracelsus has clearly
made out, That here they are not corporally, but I suppose, the Doctor does not
mean, that what is percolated has no body or substance, but only that it is
more refined.
percolated, not perfect in their several kinds, but in suo primitivo, not
single, but all mixed together, which as yet I could never attain to separate.
And therefore this Salt is nothing so acid as Vitriol, nor stiptick as Alom,
nor inflammable as Nitre, notwithstanding it does shoot in Stiria's. I Will only
add this, That they are all here, though in fractis, imminutis, and debilitatis
viribus, and the virtues of the Waters to be judged from them all.

To which I shall only subjoyn this Remarque, That the Nitre, undoubtedly here,
being allayed with the mixture of some other Salts, could not be expected to do
altogether as sincere Nitre does, and the best way, I conceive, to discover the
distinct natures in this Compositum, had been to have attempted a separation by
frequent Calcinations, Dissolutions, and Coagulations, which, if done, I much
admire the several Salts did not appear in proper form, as they did in the
anomalous Salt of these Waters, subjected to the same way of trial: and then I
somewhat question, whether Alom would have deserved so much favor, as the
Doctor's good nature has allowed it here.

I shall forbear, at present, to trace this Author or follow his track any
further, as also to examine his Opinion, concerning the Cause of the Heat of
the Bath-waters, till my Treatise, in the same language he has written in, be
presented to the World; only thus much I shall say now, That I conceive an
Hypothesis founded, though not on a subterranean ^ire, yet on things under
ground, may probably give more satisfaction than some airy notions, considering
especially, that nothing external to the Body of the Earth, can in reason be
supposed capable of reaching these Waters, but rather somewhat included in its
own Bowels, which may be near at hand, of an active, even, and durable nature;
when, to say no more, nothing is more variable than the air, nor unconstant
than rain.

I shall also distinguish the whole bulk of what relates to the Body of the
Waters, into things Saline, and non-Saline: the former I shall endeavor to
evince to be Nitre, Common Salt, and Vitriol; the latter, to be partly
unctuous, as Bitumen and Sulphur; partly gritty, as Freestone; and partly
earthy, as Marl and Ochre. I shall likewise examine what pretenses Alom can
make, and further discourse of the difference between that and Vitriol: and
lastly, enquire into the competition of Lapis Calcarius with Freestone; so that
the Bath-water will have relation to, or comprehend in its largest extent,
eight distinct Substances, at least according to my Observations, which will be
the business, God willing, of the first Book of my Treatise De Thermis
Bathoniensibus, viz. de Aquarum Principiis, una cum earundem appendiculis,
nimirum, Arena, sive Sabulo, Luto, and supernatante uligine, sive Spuma. The
second Book shall treat De Aquarum Calore. The third De usu Thermarum; ubi de
modo Balneandi; de Aquarum potatione; de Antliatione jam in usu loco dulciae,
aut Stillicidii Veterum; de usu Luti, etc. The fourth and last Book, I intend,
shall be De Aquarum Virtutibus, and Nocumentis, observationibus quibusdam
rarioribus, quantum res ipsa patitur confirmatis: Which Emoluments and
Inconveniences shall be both evidently deduced from the precedent Principles,
the one recommended, the other provided against. But this will require some
time; for I am willing to prevent that fault in my self, which I find in
another, and would not have it justly said of me, Canis festinans coecos parit
Catulos.

CHAP. VIII. Being a Letter formerly written to Sir Edward Greaves.
I Know you (as well as other Ingenious and Inquisitive Persons) are somewhat
concerned, and desirous to understand, what Success my late Enquiries have had
into one of the Grand Mysteries of Nature, I mean, the BATHS of this City:
considering especially that you were pleased the last Summer to afford me the
Honor of your Company and particular Acquaintance, and to express a more than
ordinary desire of my proceeding in this Thing.

Concerning which I must tell you, That as I have not been wanting, either to
Pains or Pay, in my Proceedings hitherto; so I have had the good Hap (which
has been my Encouragement) to meet with many considerable Discoveries. And
though the main Body of the Matter collected touching this Affair, be not yet
ripe for the Launcet, but will require a longer time to digest; yet some
Observations I shall now communicate, which will give a little satisfaction to
an earnest desire, and make, in some measure, appear that we have been lame and
defective hitherto in a rational Account and true Understanding of the Nature
of these Waters.

It has been indeed the ill fortune of these Baths, (which I may truly say are
as good if not better than any Baths in the world) to lie a long time in
obscurity, and not so much as to be mentioned among the Baths of Europe by any
foreign Writer, till about the Year 1570. when that Excellent Person Sir
Edward Carne, sent Ambassador by Queen Elizabeth to Pope Julius the Third, and
Paul the Fourth, made some Relation of them to that famous Writer Andreas
Baccius, then at Rome, and writing his elaborate Book de Thermis, into which he
has inserted them, upon his Relation, Lib. 4. Cap. 13. (though somewhat
improperly) among Sulphurous Baths.

About the same time also one John Jones, an honest Cambro-Britan, frequenting
the Baths for Practice, composed a little Treatise of them, which he calls
Baths Aid, in which are some things not contemptible, though in a plain
Country dress, and which might satisfy and gratify the Appetite of those
times, which fed more heartily and healthily too, on good Beef and Bag-Pudding,
than we do now upon Kickshaws and Haut-gusts; yet nothing of the true Nature is
there discovered, only, as almost in all former Writers of Baths, chiefly
Catholic, a strong Stench of Sulphur, and a great ado about a Subterranean
Fire, a fit resemblance of Hell, at least of Purgatory.

Our Countryman Dr. William Turner, I confess, was more particularly
concerned to give a better account, than I find is done in his Discourse of
English, German, and Italian Baths: And whether want of opportunity, or any
other impediment was in cause, I know not; but I find that at this stay they
stood till the Famous Dr. Jorden took Pen in Hand, about the Year 1630. To whom
I thought fit to make some Additions, at my first entrance on this Place, some
five Years since. And although that Learned and Candid Physician had chiefly
and more especially an intent to enlarge the Knowledge of our Baths in
Somersetshire, (as he declares to my Lord Cottington, in his Dedicatory
Epistle) and has performed more than any Man before him, yet what was first in
Intention, was last in Execution; and how small a part of that Treatise is
spent upon this Subject, how short he is in some Material Points, and what
Objections may be framed against his Opinion, I may sometime or other, with due
Respect, more largely treat of; and for the present shall here, with good Sem
and Japhet, cast a Garment over the Nakedness of this my Father.

What has been done since (except in some particular pieces of other Tracts,
to the Authors of which the Baths are also indebted for their kindness and good
will) is not worth the mentioning. The old saying's true, Little Dogs must
piss, and what is writ upon an Ale-bench claims the greater affinity to the
Pipe and the Candle; especially if the best Wine at the Feast (which is usually
kept till last) be but a silly Story of Tom Coriat, and an old Taunton Ballad
new vampt, abusing the dead Ghosts of Lud, Hudibras and Bladud, with a
Nonsensico-Pragmatical, Anticruzado-Orientado-Rhodomontado-Untruth-Le Grand,
which we Westerly Moderns, call a GROTELYE, into the Bargain. A pretty Artifice
in Rhetoric, to cry a thing up, and besmear, and shed plentifully on the
Founder Ordure, both Humane and Belluine.

Rode Caper, vitem, N. B.
tamen hic cum stabis ad aras
In tua quod fundi cornua possit, erit.
Goat, Bark the Vine; yet juice enough will rise
To drench thy Head, when made a Sacrifice.
I have Industriously omitted Dr. Johnson, Dr. Venner, and some others, in
regard it would be improper here to Write more Historically. I shall therefore
now let you know not so much what has been done by others, as what further
discoveries have been made by my endeavors, assisted by the careful Pains of
Mr. Henry Moor an expert Apothecary and Chemist of this City.

And here at first I cannot but take notice how that opinion has so much
prevailed as to be accounted Orthodox, and not only received by Tradition as
certain, but Printed as such, that the Body of the Waters is so jejune and
empty, as to afford little or nothing at all whereby to make a discovery of its
Nature, and that what impregnates the Baths is not Substantially, Materially or
Corporally there, but potentially, virtually and formally, or to use the
Author's own words, (...), Carolus Claromont de Aer. Aq. and Loc. T. A. page 32.
with much more canting after this manner, in a small discourse in Latin
written by an Itinerant Exotic; when as a slight operation will soon evince
it, though white and transparent of it self, being taken immediately from the
Pump, to contain a considerable quantity of a Dusky, Gritty, and Saline Matter,
with many transparent Particles intermixed with it, to the proportion, (as near
as I can calculate) of two drams to a gallon of the Water. And this I can
ascertain, having had several ounces of it done in Earth, Iron, Bell-metal, and
Glass, and have at this time three or four ounces by me, untoucht, beside what
I have made use of in other Experiments.

But the thing I shall more Peculiarly insist on, at this present, is, That by
God's blessing on my Industrious Search, I suppose I have lighted on the main
Constituent of the Virtues of the Bath, in which chiefly resides what benefit
can be expected from the use of these Waters, and lodges in a Saline
substance, in a very small proportion to the Body of the Waters; so that as
they are now, not much more than forty grains is contained in a Gallon,
insomuch that this little Soul, as I may so term it, is almost lost in so
Gigantick a Body, and cannot animate it with that vigor and activity as may be
rationally expected, were a greater quantity of the Salt contained in a less
proportion of the Water. The Remainder, which is not Saline, being, as I judge,
two Parts of Three of the Bulk of the contents, is partly Whitish, Gritty, and
of a Lapideous Nature, concreting of it self, into a stony consistence not
easily dissolvable; partly more Light, and Dirty, resembling Clay, or Marle,
and discovers it self by an apparent separation from the Saline and Gritty part
mentioned before.

Now the chief Virtue of the Bath, as I conceive, consisting in the Salts,
which appear by undeniable Experiments, to be Nitrous, and I believe Vitrioline
(Bitumen and Sulphur being not Primarily, as these Salts, but Secondarily
concerned) and no small proportion of other things blended with it, the best
way to make it most serviceable I conceived to be, to free it from those
encumbrances and allays it has from the other Ingredients, and prepare it as
exactly as may be performed by Art, for the benefit of those especially who are
willing to Drink the Waters with greater success in a lesser quantity; which
they may now do, and have more of the virtue of the Waters in a quart, three
pints, or a pottle, than they formerly had in two or three Gallons, did they
drink so much; which will be, besides other Conveniences, a great relief to
the Stomach, which certainly must be relaxed, and the Tone of it injured by
that vast quantity of Water which is usually taken, diluting its ferment
overmuch, and distending its Membranes beyond all the bounds of a reasonable
Capacity.

Besides, What is separated only by an artificial Extraction will better unite
again, and mix with the Waters, as much more familiar, than the extraneous
Salts of Sal Prunella, Cream of Tartar, etc. which are usually dissolved and
drunk with the Waters; so that a great part of the Operation may be ascribed to
that; and the Waters being, as we say, between two Stools, that of it self, and
the dissolvent in it, has not attained to that degree of Reputation as they
have deserved, and may be procured with much more advantage, if nothing but the
same be spent upon the same, a way of Improvement altogether equally beneficial
to Fluids and Solids, to the wet as to the dry.

Again, Whereas it is a custom here as in all other places of the like Nature,
when Persons are not willing, or have not conveniences to come to the Fountain
Head, to send for the Waters to the places of their Residence, not thinking it
much material whether Mahomet go to the Mountain, or the Mountain come to him,
whereby the Virtue of the Waters is much impaired, if not stopped and sealed up
with very great care; this defect may in good part be supplied by the addition
of a Quantity of the same Ingredients, which may repair the loss that has been
sustained by Evaporation in the Carriage, or other way of damage, and restore
it again, as near as may be, to its pristine Virtue, and genuine advantage. Not
to mention, that if need require, and the poorer sort cannot procure or pay the
Freight for the Waters, they may take a shorter course, by mixing the Salt,
which they may have at reasonable Rates, with Spring Water, brought to a
proportionable degree of heat at home, and expect more advantage, for ought I
know, than those that drink the Waters themselves at so great a distance.

And because I am now fallen on this Subject, I shall crave leave to remind you
of what you well enough understand already, that not only Dulcius but Vtilius
ex ipso Font, etc. and Waters especially impregnated with volatile Spirits,
such as most acid are, and peculiarly Vitrioline, to avoid the inconvenience
and expense, not so much of Money as Virtue, in the Carriage, must be drank on
the place where they are, which, in some kind resembling Children, that must
live by sucking, if once removed from their Mother, or Nurse, by degrees
dwindle away, and at last die.

It is observable in these Waters, that with four Grains of Galls injected into
a Pint Glass of Water, or the Water poured on it, it immediately turns of a
purple Color, which in short time after, as the Water cools, abates much of
its vividity, and becomes more faint: if the Waters be suffered to cool, and be
quite cold before the Galls are injected, but little alteration happens upon a
much greater proportion of Galls superadded, and (what is more remarkable) if
the Water, which is permitted to cool, be recruited by the Fire, and the same
Trial reiterated, it offers no greater satisfaction in change of Color, than
the second Experiment. Consonant to what Andreas Baccius has formerly
observed, who in his second Book de Thermis, Cap. 10. Page 69. has these
words, Nulla Balnei Aqua, eodem cum successu ac laud bibitur long exportata,
quo ad fontem proprium; maxima enim part ex ipso font haustae ac delatae,
amittunt omnem virtutem; multae non servantur per hyemem, dilutae pluviis; and
quae utcunque servantur delatae a propriis fonticulis, fieri non potest, quin
amittant, cum calore suo Minerali, vivificos illos Spiritus in quibus omnis
Juvamenti vis consistit, quae semel amissa, nullo postea extrinseco calore
restituitur. Quod est valde notandum.

I have been the more particular in this, in regard it is a very useful and
practical Discovery, and may procure more real advantage to Mankind, than the
vain and unattainable attempts of the Philosophers Stone, making Glass
malleable, and the Quadrature of a Circle.

Some other Observations I shall also mention, of a less magnitude, and more
contracted circumference, as the dying of the Bath-guides skins, the Bathers
Linen, and the Stones in the bottom of the Bath, of a yellow color, and the
eating out of the Iron Rings of the Bath, the Iron Bars of the Windows about
the Bath, and any Iron infused in it; insomuch as I have now by me a Gad of
Iron by accident taken up among the Stones of the Kings-Bath, so much eaten
out, and digested by the Ostrich stomach of these Waters, that, the sweetness
extracted, what remains resembles very much a Honeycomb, a deep perforation in
many places being attempted, and the whole Gad it self reduced to a thing very
much like a Sponge.

The first, viz. the Tincture I have discovered to arise from an Ochre, with
which the Bath abounds, and has afforded me a considerable quantity, so that
now I have near a pound by me, and with an infusion of that in warm water,
tinge Stones as exactly of the Bath color, that they are not discernable one
from another. It is further observable, that the nearer the place of
ebullition, where the Springs arise, the deeper and finer is the Yellow color,
so that in some places, about the Cross in the Kings Bath, and at the head of
the great Spring, at the Southwest corner thereof, it is almost made a natural
paint, being labored together by the working of the Springs, and a continual
succession of new Matter coming on, free from those impurities it contracts in
other places, which make it distinguishable into two or three sorts, according
to its mixtures with, or freedom from, more adulterating Matter. The Clouts
also and Woollen Rags, which the Guides use to stop the Gouts withal, besides
the Walls, Slip-doors and Posts, when the Bath is kept in a considerable time,
as in the Winter season it uses to be, are all very much tinged with this
yellow substance, and if at any time they chance to lie unwash'd or not thrown
away, they send out so ungrateful a scent, that a man had rather smell to a
Carnation, Rose, Violet, or a Pomander, than be within the wind of so unwelcom
a smell, it being the greatest policy to get the Weather-gage in this
encounter. The same thing I have experienced in Vessels at home, where after it
had stood some time in a common infusion of warm water, I have the same
reverence for that as Pictures, and do aver it to be true, E Longinquo
reverentia major.

One thing more is to be noted before I leave this particular, that although so
much of this yellow Matter is continually bred, with which the neighboring
Ground is sufficiently replenisht, as I have found by digging in some places
not far distant, yet nothing of that color is discovered in the Contents, a
probable argument it either evaporates, to which I am more inclined, in regard
I find it much more copious where the Steam of the Bath meets with any
resistance, or else it may be, which is less probable, turns color by the fire
in evaporation that way; less probable, I say, because for further
satisfaction, I have decocted the Ochre more than once, and find rather that it
gets than loses in its color.

The Reason of this I conceive to be, That this Ochre being probably, as I have
elsewhere discourst, the vehicle of Vitriol, on its separation from it in the
open air, precipitates to the bottom, and tinges the stones with a yellow
color, leaving the body of the waters through which it passes much
unconcerned; which may be one reason, why the Water of the open Bath tingeth
not with Galls, as I have observed, like that from the Pumps, though the
avolation of Spirits may not perhaps be altogether ridiculous, considering
especially, that the water from the Pump when cold, will lose its tinging
property, though nothing be observed to be precipitated. And that some of this
yellow matter is contained in the water, though with some difficulty observed,
does appear from the fifty second Observation.

The greenish color arises from another cause, which I conceive may be the
effect either of the Salt or Vitriol, or both, the former making that color in
meats long in salt, and the latter, if from green Copperas, may easily be
understood.

The eating out of the Iron I conceive must proceed from something Corrosive,
and till any one can assure me it is something else, I shall judge it to be
Vitriol, though the Salt also may contribute not a little. And that it may
appear not to be caused by the bare steam, as Rust is bred upon Pothooks and
Cotterels, besides the difficulty to conceive how the steam should operate
under water, as in the case of the Gad before mentioned, I made a Lixivium of
the contents of the Water, and in it infused Iron but a very small time, and
found it to do the same as in the Bath it self, considering the time of
infusion; and the very Knives and Spatules I put in to stir some residence in
the bottom, were almost as soon as dry, crusted over and defended with a rusty
coat.

I have other Arguments I suppose will contribute something more to the
confirmation of this opinion; as that with the help of the Sand of the Bath,
with Water and Galls, I made good writing Ink, which in a short time comes to
be very legible; but the infusion of the Contents in Common water, or the
Lixivium thereof, with an addition of an inconsiderable proportion of the
decoction of Galls makes it tolerably legible on the first commixture, only the
first, viz. that made with Sand, casting an eye of decayed red from a mixture
of Ochre contained in the same. Neither is it altogether to be slighted, that
the Water it self has been heretofore used by the best writing Masters for the
making of Ink, who observing by their experience, that Ink made with
Bath-water, and the other usual Ingredients, had a better color, and was more
lasting than any other, preferred this Water before any other for this use, as
I have been informed by some credible persons. Also having not long since
occasion to pour warm water on the Contents of the Bath, in order to the making
a Lixivium, some of the water happened by an accident to fall on a Bazil skin I
sometimes use, and immediately turned the Red into a Black more than the
breadth of an ordinary hand, with as much facility as any Curriers Liquor. Alum
I know will do the like, but I find no necessity to assert that, which had it
any thing to do here, must make the Water much rougher, whiter and sowrer, than
I find it to be. To which I may add, that many judicious persons, my Patients,
and some intelligent and eminent Physicians also have assured me, that they
have perfectly discerned by the taste a mixture of Vitriol, and that I need not
doubt, but that was one principal Ingredient. It Is also not very
inconsiderable, that the Bath-water alone will coagulate Milk, though not after
the usual way of making a Posset; for after the Milk and Water are put
together, it must boil pretty smartly, else the Curd will not rise. I may
likewise subjoyn as a further probability, that on the relenting of the Salt
extracted into an Oil per deliquium, there is a very sharp Stiptick and
Vitrioline taste perceived in the gross deliquium, as also in the clear Oil,
and the Salt it self; not to mention its shooting into glebes, of which I have
some small assurances by trials I have made, not yet sufficiently satisfactory,
and therefore I dismiss this part for the present, with the greatest
probability, till a further inquiry shall make me positive.

But as to Nitre, there can be no question made about that I suppose; for
besides the quick, acrimonious, cooling, and nauseous taste, most apparently
discoverable both in the infused contents, the Salt and Oil (the latter of
which, viz. the nauseous Taste, I take more particular notice o^, in regard it
is most predominant, and assigned by Fallopius to Nitre, and the Waters
impregnated with it, which, he says, sometimes do subvertere stomachum, and
facere nauseam, de Therm. Aq. and Met. cap. 9. besides, I say, these probable
conjectures) what will set it beyond all contradiction, is, that it has the
true Characteristick of Nitre, and shoots in Needles, of which I have now
lately shot above twenty Stiriae.

I the rather mention this, in regard it has been my good hap to bring this
thing to perfection and autoptical Demonstration, which has been in vain
attempted by some industrious persons; not that I am, in the least, willing to
arrogate to my self, or derogate from them, more than what is fitting, but to
confirm this truth, that there are some Mollia tempora fandi; some
opportunities, when Nature will give willing audience, without much ceremony or
ado, confessing more by fair persuasions, than racks and torments, and greater
importunity. And that we ought to be very cautious how we affirm a thing not to
be, upon the failure of a single, or some repeated Experiments.

In fine, Lest I should too much exceed the bounds of a Letter, what concerns
the cause of the Heat of the Waters, I say little of here, only tell you, that
when I shall come to discourse of that Subject, of which I intend, God willing,
a large Disquisition in another Language, I believe I shall find my self
obliged not so much to depend on a subterranean Fire, as to expect greater
satisfaction from another Hypothesis.

Many more Experiments I have made upon the Sand, Scum and Mud of the Bath,
with some Observations drawn from the Natura Loci, or Ground hereabouts; but, I
fear, I have been too tedious already, and therefore, without further ceremony,
shall release you out of this Purgatory, with the Subscription of,

Honored Sir, Your most Faithful, etc.


CHAP. IX. Of the Antiquity of the Baths and City.
AND now it may be expected I should say something concerning the Antiquity of
the Baths and City, which I the rather do here, in regard since my writing any
thing of this kind heretofore, in many Particulars I have met with better
information.

Not to mention any thing of Bladud, and the British Histories, as at best,
uncertain, Gul. Malm.
I shall first take notice of the Opinion of those that ascribe their discovery
to Julius Caesar, fifty years, or thereabouts, before Christ, which the Learned
Antiquary Mr. Cambden thinks not so probable, Br. p 234.
because Selinus, who lived in the time of Titus Vespasian, 130 years after,
and 83 (rather 81) years after Christ, was the first of the Romans that made
mention of them. But if it be uncertain when So inus lived, and most likely
after the year three hundred, as my Judicious friend, Dr. Will: Lloyd.
the Reverend and Learned Dean of Bangor has observed, then the Antiquity
reaches not so high.

To which may be added most assuredly, That Julius Caesar came not so far up
into the Land: For whatever some Poets and Poetical Historians that lived a
thousand years after him, may deliver, certain it is that J. Caesar made not so
great a Conquest here as they made for him; whence Tacitus writes, That he
discovered only, not delivered unto the Romans, Britain. His words in the life
of Julius Agricola are these; Primus omnium D. Julius cum exercitu Britanniam
ingressus, quanquam prospera pugna terruerit incolas, ac littore potitus sit,
potest videri ostendisse posteris, non tradidisse. Horace also calls the
Britain, before Augustus, Untoucht; Lib. Epod. Od. 7.
Intactus aut Britannus ut descenderet
Sacra Catenatus via.
Nor yet, Th'unconquered Britain to convey
Captived, in Chains, down Sacred way.
And Cambden says, That it is so far from being true what Paterculus reports,
Bis penetrata Britannia a Caesare, That Caesar passed twice through Britain, or
twice a great way into Britain, which is all can well be understood by those
words of that Historian, that he scarce made entry into it. For many years
after this Entrance of Caesar, the Inhabitants of this Island were left to the
free government of their own Kings, and used their own Laws.

Twin. Comm. p. 146, 147.
Another Learned Antiquary treating of Caesar's Conquest here, is of opinion
that it extended no farther than Kent, some part of Sussex, Surrey, Middlesex
and Essex, and perhaps, as the Learned Dr. Lloyd has further noted, De Bell.
Gall. lib. 5.
into the edge of Berks, Oxford and Bucks; for he mentions the Bibroci and
Anealites, which Cambden with good probability places there. The words of Twine
are these; Mihi quidem videtur universum Cantium, Sussexiae vicina loca, and
Suthreiam, quae Regni nomine, itemque Middlesexiam and Essexiam, qui hodie a
Doctorum vulgo, Trinobantum appellatione intelliguntur, legionibus suis
invasisse; nec, si ad plures penetrasset, aut in gratiam recepisset, puto
praeterire silentio valuisse. Reliqui vero populi manus quidem dederunt, quorum
tamen regiones nunquam a Caesare conspectae sunt. To me, indeed, it seems
probable, that Julius Caesar, with the Soldiers under his Command, conquered
all Kent, the neighboring parts of Sussex and Surrey, called by the name of
Regnum, also Middlesex and Essex, which the Learned call Trinobants; neither do
I believe but that if he had conquered or made peace with more, he would have
mentioned them: Some other Inhabitants nearest to danger yielded, whose Country
Ca sar never saw.

The Saxon names of Bathancester, Hat Bathan, and Akmanchester, are of later
date, the Saxons not arriving here till the time of Theodosius the younger,
about the year of Christ, according to the most probable account of Venerable Bede, 449. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 15.
Nay the later name of Akmanchester was not given till some few years after the
year of Christ 577; when from a mean condition, to which this City was then
reduced by War, it again recovered strength and great dignity, and from the
great concourse of Diseased people that came for Cure, was called Akmanchester,
or, The City of Sickly folks.

Anno 575, says the Saxon Chronicle, the City of Bathe, as also Gloucester and
Ciceter, were taken by Cuthwin and Ceaulin the Saxons from the Britains, after
the slaughter of three British Kings, Commail, Condidan, and Farinmail, that
year in a battle at Deorham.

Neither can their Antiquity be much more advanced by the (...), or Hot waters
in Ptolomy, who flourisht about Anno Christi 161, being also the first year of
the Reign of the Emperor Antoninus; Aquae Solis, or Waters of the Sun of
Antonine, or Badiza of Stephanus, who lived Anno Dom. 540. But what may seem to
some of greater consequence are the British Names of Yr Ennaint Twymin, as
Cambden has it, or rather Caer Ennaint, the City of Ointment, from the
Diseased people that came hither for relief, Ennaint in Welsh signifying
Vnguentum: H. Lloyd. F^agm. descr. B^it p. 16.
or else, Caer in nant Twymin, the City in the warm Vale; whence Bristol was
anciently called, Caer Dorr in nant Badon, the City Oder in the Vale of Bathe.
Caer Baddon, or Bathon; and Caer Paladdur, the City of Pallas, or Minerva's
Water; especially since Solinus affirms Minerva to have been the Patroness of
these Baths, if of them he writes, as most probable, in these words, Chap. 25,
where speaking of Britain, he says, In quo spatio magna and multa flumina
sunt, fontesque calidi opiparo exculpti apparatu ad usus mortalium: quibus
fontibus praesul est Minervae numen in cujus aede perpetui ignes nunquam
canescunt in favillas, sed ubi ignis tabuit, vertitur in globos saxeos; i. e.
In which space are many great Rivers, and Hot springs, very curiously adorned
and kept for men's use, the Patroness of which is the Goddess Minerva, in whose
Temple perpetual fires never turn to ashes, but when the heat is over, become
round lumps of stone. There being also a Tradition here, that there was
formerly a Temple dedicated to Minerva, where the Church of St. Peter and Paul,
commonly called the Abbey-Church, now stands. I say, if Solinus writes of them,
because the Baths of Buckstones in Darbyshire are likewise in Britain, and were
formerly much frequented.

I know very well that Mons Palader was a name amongst the Britans for
Shaftsbury, Mr. Tho. Wilkins, Prebend of Llandaffe.
Paladr in that Language signifying a Shaft; but Ponticus Virunnius, who lived
1500 years since Christ, corruptly calls it Paladur; Rudhudibras condidit
oppidum Montis Paladur quod nunc Sefronia dicitur; and therefore gave occasion
to some inconsiderate persons to confound it with Bathe: Now although any one
that knows a Mountain from a Plain may see the difference, yet I must be so
impertinent here as to say, That I see no reason to the contrary but that
Palladdur may be two words, and rendered Minerva's Water; Dwr being the word for
Water in Welsh, and Mons Palader, Paladr, or Baladr, as it should be written,
and Caer Palladdur, to be two distinct places; the former Shaftsbury, the
latter Bathe: However if Cambden be mistaken, and my self also following his
Authority, we are both under the correction of those that have better converse
with the British Writers.

I shall only add, That Ptolomy reckons Therma and Ischalis as Cities of the
Belgae, whereof Ischalis, now Ilchester, he places in 16 degrees 40 minutes of
Longitude; 53 degrees 30 minutes of Latitude; and the other City Therma, or
Bathe, in 17 degrees 20 minutes of Longitude, and 53 degrees 40 minutes of
Latitude.

Antoninus his Itinerary has Aquae Solis in the way between Venta Silurum, now
Caer Guent, and Verlucio, now Warminster: from Venta to the ferry over Severn,
called Trajectum, he makes six miles; from that Ferry to Aquae Solis eighteen
miles; and from Aquae Solis to Verlucio sixteen miles. This may serve to prove,
that Therma in Ptolomy, and Aquae Solis in Antonine, were meant of Bathe.

Let this then suffice for the Antiquity of the Waters, That we have a
Tradition, and the Authority too of some suspected Writers, that the Baths were
discovered eight hundred and odd years before Christ: That not long after
Christ, we have undoubted mention made of them in credible Authors, and that
doubtless they were known, and made use of too, long before any Author writ of
them: So that to trace their Original, is to unravel the Creation, and to make
enquiry for their commencement, little different than to seek after the Head of
Nile.

To give but a taste of the Philosophy of the Times, but little more than two
hundred years ago, in reference to these Waters, I shall mention a part of the
Riming History of Unfortunate Princes, composed by John Boccace, who lived
about A. D. 1450, and translated by Dan. Lidgate, where fol. 31, Bladud speaks
thus: I.
Some say I made the Holesom Baths at Bath,
And made therefore two burning Tuns of Brass,
And other twain seven kinds of Salts, that have
In them enclosed; but these be made of Glass;
With Sulphur filled, Wildfire emixt there was.
And in four Wells those Tuns so placed heat, for aye
The Water springs up before it pass away.
II.
Which Waters heat, and cleansing perfect power,
With vapors of the Sulphur salts and fire,
Has virtue great to heal, and cleanse, and scower
The bathed Sores therein that health desire.
If of the Virtues more thou do require
To know, I will recite what old Experience tells
In Causes cold, the noble Virtues of those Wells.
III.
The Baths to soften Sinews Virtue have,
And also for to cleanse and scowr the skin;
From Morphews white and black to heal and save;
The bodies freckled, faint, are bathed therein,
Scabs, Lepry, sores are old, and fester'd in
The Scurf, Botch, Itch, Gout, Pox, swelled Joints and humors fell,
The Milt and Liver hard it heals, and Palsy well.
IV.
I must confess, by learned skill I found
These Native Wells whence springs that help for men.
But well thou know, there runs from under ground
Springs, sweet, salt, cold and hot, even now as then,
From Rock, Salt Peter, Alom, Gravel, Fen,
From Sulphur, Iron, Lead, Gold, Silver, Brass and Tin,
Each fountain takes the force of vein it coucheth in.
V.
Then whosoever knows by Natures work in these
Of Metals or of Mines the force to heal,
May sooner give his Judgment in disease
For curing by the Bath; and surer deal
With sickly people of the Public weal:
And also find of Fountains salt, or hot, or cold,
And for to heal by them the sick with honor be bold.
VI.
The City eke of Bathe I founded there,
Renowned far by reason of the Wells:
And many Monuments that ancient were,
I placed there, Thou know the story tells, etc.


What probability the Philosophical part of this Poetry may carry concerning
the seven kinds of Salts enclosed in four Tuns, and things relating thereunto,
may be concluded much from what is Historical, and mentioned in the last place,
concerning the Monuments, which cannot possibly pretend to that Antiquity,
being not in the least British, but purely Roman, as is made appear in the
following Chapter; This therefore is to be taken as a fancy, and so let it go.

Alexander Necham, somewhat above 400 years ago, wrote these Verses on the
Baths.

Bathoniae Thermis vix praefero Virgilianas
Confecto prosunt Balnea nostra Seni;
Prosunt attritis, collisis, invalidisque
Et quorum morbis frigida Causa subest.
Praevenit humanum stabilis natura laborem,
Servit Naturae legibus Artis opus.
Igne suo succensa quibus data Balnea fervent
Aenea subter aquas Vasa latere putant.
Errorem figmenta solent inducere passim,
Sed quid? Sulphureum novimus esse locum.
Which I thus made English: Baths Baines with Virgil's I compare,
Useful for ancient folk they are,
Bruised, weak, consumed, as well as old,
And in all griefs whose source is cold.
Nature man's Labor does prevent,
And Art again serves her Intent.
There Is fire under ground some say
That thus makes Baths great Pots to play.
Fancy does often Error breed,
But what? from Brimstone these proceed.


As to the City, it is not, I think, to be doubted, but that the Baths were
before that, and gave name to it, sick people making small Cottages first for
their Conveniences, which were afterward improved into fairer Buildings.
Constat Latinum nomen huic Civitati ab Antiquis inditum, Aquae Calidae ex his
Balneis, says Andr. Baccius, if the Testimony of a Stranger may be admitted;
It is certain the City was called Aquae Calidae, from the Baths. The Statues
also of Coil a Britti h King, and Edgar a Saxon, who are said, how truly I know
not, to have given Charters to this City, placed at the end of the Town Hall,
or Council-House, are arguments of its Antiquity, although perhaps they might
be Patrons that were chosen by the Monks.

That Edgar was Crowned at Bathe above 700 years ago, Bathe being then called
an Old Borough, with great Solemnity, on Whitsunday, appears from these words
of the Saxon Chronicle, written by one that then lived, and writ his History
but three years after his Coronation. Anno 973. May 11. being Whitsunday, Edgar
was Consecrated King with great glory, in that Old Borough Akemannesceastre,
which by another name they call Bathon, there was great joy to all men on that
Blessed Day, which they call Pentecost; there was a great Assembly of Priests
and Monks, and the Wise met there in Council.

Edgar had lived 29 years full of trouble and misery, when this came to pass,
and in his 30th. year was Consecrated.

Anno 520. or 71 years after their arrival here out of Germany, the English
Saxons besieged this City, with whom K. Arthur fought a great Battle on Mons
Badonicus, now called Bannesdown, and slew so many of them, that they had
little heart to make any further attempt for a considerable time, but left it
to the quiet possession of the Britains. Yet Ninnius writes, that the 12th. of
K. Arthur's Battles against the Saxons, was at the Hill or Town of Bathe, where
many a one was slain by his force and might. The Saxons then had besieged
Bathe, K. Arthur raised their Siege, and after besieged them on Mons Badonicus,
Dr. Lloyd.
where he took their Camp, made a great slaughter of them, and then kept his
Christmas in Bathe. This was the year that Gildas was born, and thereupon was
called Badonicus ever after.

Anno 676. Osbrich founded here a Nunnery, and not long after Offa K. of Mercia
built a Church, both which in the time of the Danish Wars were demolisht. Out
of the Ruins of these two arose the Church of St. Peter, in which Edgar was
Crowned. But more of the Church in its place.

Anno 775. the year in which Offa is said to have began this Church, he fought
with Kinewulf K. of the West Saxons at Bensington near Oxford, overcame him,
and took Bensington. This Offa is said to have spent much of his time at Bathe;
Iste Offa (says the Author of Brutus abbreviatus) multum morabatur Bathoniae.
MS.
He began his Reign Anno 755. reigned 39 years, and died Anno 794.

In the Time of Edward the Confessor Bathe flourished exceedingly, Doomsday
Book.
the King having there 64 Burghers, and 30 Burghers of others, the City paying
T^ibute according to 20 Hides, which amounts to about 30 yard Land.

Cambden. Br. p. 234.
In the Reign of William Rufus, Robert Mowbray Nephew to the Bishop of Constance
sacked and burnt it.

The Industrious Mr. Pryn in his P. 298.
Brevia Parliamentaria rediviva, and P. 299.
4th. part of a brief Register of Parliamentary Writs, has given an account of
Citizens returned to serve in Parliament for this City, ever since the 26th.
year of K. Ed. 1. about A. D. 1298. or 377 years since.

In Bathe are three Hospitals, it self, indeed, being but one great one, St.
John's, Bellots, and the Bimburies, otherwise called St. Katherines, besides a
Free School erected in the Time of Ed. 6.

The Hospital of St. John's was founded A. D. 1174. by Reginald Fitz-Joceline, a
Lombard, Godwin Cat. p. 364
Bishop of Bathe and Wells, and afterward translated to Canterbury, but, before
he was possessed of his new honor, died, and was buried at Bathe. It was
valued at the yearly Rent of 22 l. 19 s. 6 d. since which time its revenues are
much increased, to the great advantage of him that has it, and no less profit
and reputation to the City, with the perpetual entailment of God's everlasting
curse and blast, on the treacherous head and posterity of him, that is
notoriously known to have been the Author of this mischief. He gave it this
name from St. John's in the Savoy, where he was Consecrated Bishop, after his
return from beyond Sea, by Richard Archbishop of Canterbury.

Bellots Hospital was built by Thomas Bellot Esquire; one of the Executors of the
Lord Cecil, in the Time of K. James, of whom we shall treat more largely in the
Chapter of the Church, to which he was an especial Benefactor.

As for the Bimburies, I can learn no more concerning it than this, That it was
bu lt by seven Sisters, who left this Hospital behind them as a monument to
Posterity, both of their Charity and Name.

CHAP. X. Of the Roman Antiquities in Bathe.
BUT the greatest Argument of Antiquity the Place affords, I suppose to be the
Roman Coins found in or near it, with the Inscriptions and Images in the Town
or Borough Walls, the latter of which, to wit, the Inscriptions and Images, Mr.
Cambden took notice of, and inserted into his Britannia.

To begin with the Roman Coins: The first I shall mention is that of Vespasian,
made 1600 years since, this Emperor's Reign beginning A. D. 71. with this
Circumscription on the Face-side: IMP. CAES. VESPASIAN. P. F. AUG. Imperator
Caesar Vespasianus, Pius, Felix, Augustus. The Reverse; PIETAS AUGUSTI, with an
Image between S. C. signifying Senatus Consultum. This is of Brass, and
Communicated by Mr. John Parker of Bathe, where it was also found.

The second is of Trajan, made A. D. 101. the year this Emperor was 5th. time
Consul; read thus: IMP. TRAIANO. AUG. GER. DAC. P. M. T R. P. Imperatori
Trajano Augusto, Germanico, Dacico, Pontifici Maximo, Tribunitiae potestate.
Reverse; COS. V. P. P. S. P. Q. R. OPTIMO PRINC. Consuli quinto, Patri patriae
Senatus Populusque Romanus optimo Principi. This is Silver, and was found at
Wrigleton five miles off of Bathe, and given by Mr. Hugh Ivy, Rector there.

A third is of Carausius, who usurpt Empire in Britain Anno Christi 285.
reigned seven years, was slain by Alectus who usurpt after him, and was himself
killed by Asclepiodotus praefectus Praetorio Anno 295. The Circumscription
thus: IMP. C. CARAUSIUS P. F. AUG. Imperator, Caesar Carausius, Pius, Foelix,
Augustus. On the other side PAX. AUG. Pax Augusti. And underneath an Image M. L
X X. denoting Miles, or Milites Legionis vicesimae. A Soldier, or the
Soldiers of the 20th. Legion, with B. E. on both sides of the Image signifying
Britannicus Exercitus. If M^. X X. as it rather seems, it may denote Miles, or
Militia vicesima,


The fourth is of Constantine the younger, made Caesar together with Licinius
and Crispus in March, Anno Christi 316. with these Letters round the Head:
CONSTANTINUS IUN. NOB. C. Constantinus Junior Nobilissimus Caesar. The Reverse
a Palace, and PROVIDENTIAE CAESS. Providentiae Caesarum. It is the Palace in
which he lived at Triers, expressed in the Letters underneath P. T R E. that
is, Pecunia Treviris.

The fifth of Alex. Sever. A. D. 224. with this Inscription: IMP. C. M. AUR.
SEV. ALEXAND. AUG. Imperator Caesar Marcus Aurelius Severus Alexander Augustus.
The Reverse; P. M. T. R. P. II. COS. P. P. Pontifex Maximus, Tribunitia
potestate Secundo Consul, pater patriae. These three are Brass, and were found
in Bathe, and given by Mr. Parker.

The sixth is a Coin of Constantius made Anno Christi 357. in May, when he kept
his Vicenalia, as appears by Votis XXX. Votis triginta, Multis XXXX. Multis
quadraginta, within a Wreath. On the Reverse; The Coin stamped at
Constantinople, as is evident from the Letters P. CON. signifying Pecunia
Constantinopoli. On the Face-side DN. CONSTANTIUS P. F. AUG. Dominus
Constantius Pius, Felix, Augustus. This is Silver, and was found in
Glocestershire, not far hence, and given by Mr. Edward Barnard, a skilful
Bone-setter at Tedbury in that County.

The seventh is a Brass piece of Valentinian the Second, who Reigned A. D. 375,
with this Inscription on the face-side DN. VALENTINIANUS P. F. AUG, Dominus
Valentinianus Pius Foelix Augustus. The Reverse, Victory holding a Palm-branch
in the left hand, and offering a Garland with the right; the Motto, SECURITAS
REIPUBLICAE, and P. CON. Pecunia Constantinopoli, underneath.

The eighth is a Brass Coin of Constantine the Great, about the year of Christ
307, with this Inscription CONSTANTINO CAES. Constantino Caesari. Reverse,
Victory with a Spear and Shield, only these letters under P. TREE. Pecunia
Treviris. These two were the gift of that Worthy Gentleman John Harington
Esquire, Grandson to the Ingenious and Noble Sr. John Harington (of whom more
in the Chapter of the Church) and were found in his own grounds at Kelston,
three miles distant West of Bathe.

These are all the Coins I have met with yet of any value, among many others of
none at all.

The Inscriptions and Images next succeed; and the first I take notice of is
the nearest to the North-gate, being a Memorial of a Roman Senator, of the
Colony of Gloucester, Cambd. Br. p. 3^0.
a City built by the Romans, who also placed there a Colony called Colonia
Glevum. The Inscription thus:

DEC. COLONAE GLEV. VIX AN. LXXXVIII.

i. e. Decurioni Coloniae Glevi. Vixit annos Octoginta octo.

Leafes folded in are at the East end of this Inscription, Fig. 13. A little
lower more leasage not expressed.

And whereas I render Decurio a Senator, I pitch on this signification of the
word as most proper here, of which Rosinus gives this account: Ant. Romans l. 10.
c. 24.
Senatores in Coloniis, ut etiam in Municipiis, Decuriones vocabantur, eam ob
causam, quod, Pomponio I. C. Authore, decima pars eorum qui deducerentur, sit
solita Conscribi. I know Festus mentions another and more usual signification
of the word, to wit, an Officer over 10 Horsemen; Decuriones, inquit,
appellantur qui denis Equitibus praesunt. Of which if any please to understand
it, he shall have my leave.

The next is a little Image about a foot and half in length, supposed by Mr.
Cambden to be Hercules, bearing his left hand aloft, with a Club in his right.
See Fig. 11.

Next to that lower, toward the West-gate, is the Monument of one of the
Children of two Romans, Primulus, Romulus, Vipomulus, or rather Veteromulus
(for that word in the stone is somewhat difficult to be read) and Victisarina,
with a longer and exactly Roman Inscription, in a sepulcher Table, between two
little Images, whereof the one holds the Horn of Amalthaea, or Cornucopia; the
other brings a flying Roll, or winding List or Banner over the left shoulder.

The Inscription thus: depiction of a sepulchral tablet bordered by the bas
relief of a person on each side D M



Diis Manibus Successae Petroniae, Vixit annos tres, menses quatuor, This
Inscription Cambden sent to Gruterus; and may be seen in Grut. Inscript. page
DCC. fig. 6.
Dies Novem. Veteromulus and Victisarina filiae Carissimae fecerunt: i. e. To
the Ghost of Successa Petronia, who lived three years, four months, and nine
days. Veteromulus and Victisarina, in memory of their dear Child, made this.

A little after follow these Letters, in a Cut stone, very imperfect:

V R N. In the outside of the Wall, pretty high, is a Head, which seems of no
great moment. Fig. 9. And as for Hercules straining two Snakes, I cannot yet be
so fortunate as to light upon it. Fig. 14.

Between the West and South-gates stand these Letters cross, which, by reason
the stone is cut on both sides, are unaccountable: III. US. SA.

Then two fierce heads, one within the cope of the Wall, and another in the
outside thereof hard by. Fig. 7, 8.

After that, these Letters standing overthwart, of which no sense can be made:
I L L A.

Near this place formerly was a Hare running (now lost) which might be the
Rebus of a Leporius that set up this Monument. There were of that name in
Britain, and it is now the name of the Honorable Family of my Lord of
Colerain. Fig. 15.

An angry man laying hold of a poor Peasant, which may be a bold insulting
Roman, on a poor distressed captivated Britan. See Fig. 6.

Leafage, with leafs folded in, Fig. 5.

Two kissing and clipping each other, which by the Crook in the right hand of
one, and the Dog upon the other, seem to be a Shepherd and his Mistress; the
Dog reaching up toward the head of the Woman. See Fig. 4.

A Foot Soldier brandishing his Sword, and bearing out his Shield. Fig. 3.

A Footman with a Truncheon in his right hand. Fig. 2.

A great Face, or a Giants Head, with hair. Fig. 1.

As for Medusa's head all Snakes, I cannot, on the best enquiry I can make,
find it out. See Fig. 10.

Neither does Ophiuchus occur to me. It Is therefore, I believe, lost in the
alteration of the Wall, as the Hare, and Medusa's head mentioned before. See
Fig. 12.

At Walcot, a Parish adjoining to the City, was found a stone with this
Inscription: VIBIA IVCVNDA H. S. E.

i. e. Here lies Vibia Jucunda.



Jucunda was an Agnomen of the Family Carvilia, and it seems of Vibia, as
Loetus of the Claudiae and Pomponiae.

1
illustration described as a great face, or a giant's head, with hair.
Resembles a sun with a face 2
depiction of a man with a club or truncheon in his right hand 3
depiction of a soldier with a sword in his right hand and a shield in his left
page. 72 4
depiction of a triangular tympanum depicting a man and woman reclining with a
dog 5
depiction of a flower spiralling out into stem and leaves 6
depiction of two men, one with his hand on the other man's head 7
depiction of a right-facing bust 8
depiction of a left-facing bust 9
depiction of a man in a window 10
depiction of a left-facing bust of Medusa 11
illustration a man standing on his right foot with a club in his right hand 12
depiction of a boy holding a snake in his right hand 13
depiction of a flower spiralling out into stem and leaves with leaves along
the bottom 14
depiction of a woman carrying two snakes 15
depiction of a right-facing hare

In Bathe also might be seen this Inscription, On Henry Coriat.

MORTUUS. HIC. ET. SEPULTUS. JACET. BIPEDUM. NEQUISSIMUS. H. C. IMPIETATE.
ARROGANTIA. LOQUACITATE. IMPUDENTIA. FASTU. ET. FRAUD. NULLI. SECUNDUS. MALUS.
PARENS. GUBERNATOR. PEJOR. CIVIS. PESSIMUS. QUI. POSTQUAM. LX. ANNORUM.
CURRICULUM. RAPINIS. ET. LITIBUS. ARMATUS. ET. IN ERMIS. LONGANIMITATE. DEI.
MAXIMA. TRANSEGISSET. PAUPERUM. PTOCHOTROPHII. S. JOANNIS. BATHONENSIS.
ALIMONIAM. IN. ALTERIUS. MANUS. PERFIDE. DEDISSET. ET. FISCUM.
CIVITATIS-PUBLICUM. IN. PRIVATOS. USUS. CON. VERTISSET. INTER. ALIORUM. ODIUM.
CONSANGUINEORUM. MISERICORDIAM. SINE. PLANCTU. ET. LACHRYMIS. A. NEMINE.
DESIDERATUS. EX. HAC. VITA. MIGRAVIT. IN. VENTURAM. UT. POENAS. AEQUALI.
IMPUDENTIA. SUSTINEAT. AETERNAS. NISI. EI THEM. SUCCURRAT. QUOD. MINIME.
SPERANDUM. SALUS. ALTISSIMI. QUAE. ILLUM. QUIDEM. IPSA. NON. POTUIT. SALVARE.
Lastly, There are two fair Inscriptions, in two Grave-stones, erected in the
North wall of a Garden by the Cross Bath, belonging to Mrs. Crofts, preserved
by Mr. Robert Chambers, Father to Dr. Humphry Chambers, born in this City,
between which, Robert Chambers has this Inscription, which preserves him as
he has done the other two.

HEC. MONUMEN. VIO LATA. SVLCIS. IN. CA MP. DE. WALCOT. R. C. CVLTOR. ANTIQ.
HVC. TRANSTVLIT. A No. VER. INCAR. 1592. The Inscription on the East of this,
is an Epitaph of Caius Murrius, of the Tribe called Arniensis, the 25th. Tribe
among the Romans (so called from Arnus a River in Tuscany, as Carolus Sigonius,
and Onuphrius Panvinius relate,) born at Friuli, or Forum Julium, a modest
Soldier of the Second Legion called, Adjutrix pia foelix, under the Command of
Julius Secundus, 25 years of age; how long in pay is broken out of the Stone,
but, I suppose, eight. The Inscription as follows: C. MVRRIVS. C. F. ARNIENSIS
FORO. IVLI. MO DESTVS. MIL. LEG. II. AD. P. F. IVLI. SECVNDI. AN. XXV. STIP. H.
S.

Caius Murrius, Caii filius, Arniensis, Foro-Juliensis, Modestus Miles Legionis
Secundae, adjutricis piae, foelicis Julii Secundi, Anni Viginti quinque,
Stipendio octo, Hic situs est.

The other on the West is an Epitaph of Marcus Valerius a Latin (as I read, Mr.
Cambden Eatinus, it seems to be an Agnomen) a Soldier of Augustus his Legion
(or the 20th.) 35 years of age, and 20 years in pay.

The true Copy thus: DIS MANIBUS M. VALERIUS. M. FILL. LATINUS. C. EQ. MILES.
LEG. AV. AN. XXXV. STIPEN. XX. H. S. E.

i. e. Dis Manibus. Marcus Valerius Marci filius Latinus Coh. Equitum Miles
legionis Augustae (aut vicesimae) annis triginta quinque, Stipendio viginti,
Hic situs est.

Where it may be noted, that this man was admitted at 15 years of age, Al. ab.
Al. Genesis Dier, l. 1. c. 20.
when the usual time of listing Soldiers was not till 17.

Ophiuchus, Hercules straining two Snakes, Medusa's head, and the Hare, are
lost. Vid. Fig. 10. 12. 14, 15.

CHAP. XI. Of the Church of St. Peter and Paul in Bathe.
COncerning that neat and curious fabric, the Church of St. Peter and Paul,
commonly called the Abbey Church in Bathe, I need not give any other account,
than what Sr. John Harington, a neighboring Knight, whose good will to this
Church and City did rival the acuteness of his Wit and Learning, being both
very great, has done sometime since, in a Latin Poem writ and spoken to Bishop
Mountague, at his first Visitation and sight of the Church, then uncovered. The
Manuscript Copy found in Sr. John's Study, and Communicated by his Grandson,
John Harington of Kelston, Esquire, has this Title; Conditiones variae
Ecclesiae Sancti Petri and Pauli Bathoniensis, a primis fundamentis jactis Anno
775, ad annum decurrentem 1609, Historico-poetica (...); deque foelicissima
ejusdem Ecclesiae restauratione, Vaticinium. Ad Reverendissimum in Christo
Patrem, Jacobum, providentia divina, dignissimum Ecclesiae Bathoniensis, and
Wellensis, Episcopum, Bathoniam primo foeliciter invisentem and Visitantem.

The Poem.
MActe: bonis avibus, recidivi limina Templi,
In Christo Reverende Pater, gratissimus intras.
Macte: sed haud pigeat prius, aequa mente, parumper
Pristina Delubri perpendere fata miselli.
Temporis Elapsi studio monumenta revolvens
Attento, invenies, Historia.
hujus fundamina templi
Prima Offam, priscum regem, jecisse: An. 775.
Secunda
Elphegum, regni Primatem, 1010.
tertia tandem
(Cum duo Danorum rabies, ignisque, priora
Vastasset) Sumptu posuit majore Johannes
De villa, natu Gallus, 1088.
non infimus artis
Professor medicae; Wellensi ingratior aedi;
Qui quum illic variis viguisset Episcopus annis
Sedem, Thermopolim, Cathedralem transtulit illine,
Vrbe hac quingentis Marcis, a Rege coempta.
Pulchrius antiquis fanum construxit; at ipsum
Aevo, Combussit pariter Jovis ira, sequenti.
Structorem Celebris misit Normannia, quartum
Officio Monachum, Rodbertum nomine, molem
Subversam toties qui restanravit, 1137.
and inter
Presbyteros, litem, de Sedis honor, diremit,
Exornans titulis utramque aequalibus urbem.
Tandem, post seriem numerosam, munificamque,
Insignis praesul pietate, vicesimus atque
Tertius, hunc sequitur, qui faustum nominis omen
Expressit factis, Oliver King dictus; 1495.
Olivam
Et Regem vere referebat: adinstar Olivae
Pacis erat populo, simul ubertatis and author;
At magis hoc retulit, regali munere, regem,
Quippe opus incultum Rodberti sustulit: atqui
Illius, extemplo, vice fundamenta locavit
Ista; dedit Solidis speciosa pteromata muris.
Tecta superstruxit sublimibus alta columnis.
Areolas Soleis longas substravit and amplas.
Omnia, ad hanc pulchram, structurus caetera, formam,
Et spoliis, dubio procul, instructurus, opimis,
Morte immortales, subito est arreptus, ad arces.
(Tantae molis erat tam clarum condere Templum!)
Ne tamen his tantis perfectio debita coeptis
Deforet, huic operi colophonem attexuit almus
Abbatiae Rector Gulielmus Birdus. At eheu
Sanctis stare diu, fatis (proh fata) negatum est!
Horrida de innocuis fertur sententia fanis;
Abbatiae pereunt, spoliantur Templa, rapinis
Tecta patent, reditus, fundi, sacraria: quid non?
(Vnde nefas tantum Zeli fautoribus?) una.
Ipse, vel in cunis, insons discerpitur infans.
Impete diripitur violento haec fabrica; prostant
Saxa, vitrum, plumbi, Campanae, ac omnia praeter
Hoc miserum (...). Tantae at quae causa ruinae?
Number pietatis amor? vel amor sceleratus habendi?
Hic amor exitio est Templis, Templique ministris.
Hic amor extinxit clarissima lumina regni;
Nec finit hic amor haec extincta resumere lucem.
Nemo bonum Templi, Templi bona quisque requirit.
Hinc haec, Cimmeriis, per tot, tam turpiter, annos,
Maxima lux Vrbis, latuit suppressa, tenebris.
Sed pater omni-bonus, cui provida cura suorum est,
Hanc piceam, nuper, coelesti lampade, noctem
Dispulit e multis Sanctorum cordibus, unde
Accendere suo nostrum de Lumine lumen.
Sic tamen ut quivis magis hinc sibi luceat ipsi
Vt tacito ad praesens reliquo veneremur honor,
Vivida quos totum celebrabit fama per orbem;
Nobile Bellotti Sidus sic emicat, omnes
Inter nutritios Templorum jure colendos,
Plena velut Stellis praefulget luna minutis.
Singula quae cernis pulchrae ornamenta Capellae,
Area, porta, solum, subsellia, rostra, fenestrae,
Bellottum unanimi compellant voce parentem.
Bellottum Sonitu reboat Campana Sonoro,
(...) sonant Bellottum, Balnea, Vici,
Compita, Bellotti jactant ad sidera nomen.
Quod Christi est cultor, simul excultorque sacrorum.
VATICINIUM.
Desine plura: sat est veterum: peragenda peractis
Succedant, meliora bonis, majora minutis.
Auspiciis huc miss sacris (Sanctissime Praesul)
Sensibus haec imis superum consulta repone,
Quae Tibi fatidico dispandit carmine Vates,
Laeta ruinoso proclamans omnia Templo.
Quo decet hanc specta, vultu, sine nube, sereno
Faecundam laudum segetem sine fine Tuarum.
Molliter ossa cubent Offae, ac Elphegi, Oliveri,
Rodberti, ac Birdi: merito celebrentur honor.
Debita Bellotto reddatur palma benigno.
Perpius extento Bellottus floreat aevo.
Non equidem invideo, laetor mage: gratulor illi.
Quod si tam celebrem mereatur guttula laudem,
Praemia quae referet, largos qui funditat imbres?
Tantum at honorifico cedes, Bellotte, Jacobo,
Effuso tenuis quantum imbri guttula cedit.
Bellotti guttis rorata Capella virescit;
Imbribus assiduis divi madefacta Jacobi,
Integra quam laetos diffundent Templa racemos?
Nec tamen haec aqueo, vitis cupit, imbre rigari:
Aureolo hanc Dana^m Saturabis, Jupiter, imbre.
Hinc quae spreta diu languenti Ecclesia morbo
Intabuit; vitam, Te, Te medicante, resumit,
Vt redit infuso flaccescens Vena Lyaeo.
Hujus sint alii fautores, sidera, fani:
Cinthia Bellottus; solus Tu (...) Apollo.
Haec Tu vivifico reparabis membra calore:
Haec Tu magnifico decorabis Tecta nitore.
Aspice surgenti laetentur ut omnia Templo?
Grandaevum videor mihi prospectare Jacobum,
Aspectus Virtute Tui, torpore solutum,
Atque reornato scandentem climace Coelos.
Vt renovat vires? ut concipit aethera mente?
Insuper alatos, ultro citroque meantes
Coelicolas video, bona climacteribus istis
Nuncia portantes Superis: ac gaudia divum
Inde renarrantes terris de Praesule tanto,
Teque cohortantes, (propria sat sponte citatum)
Euge: opus hoc mirae pietatis perfice Praesul!
Te nempe ad decus hoc peperit Natura; replevit
Dotibus eximiis Deus: Ars perfecta polivit:
In gremio refovet ter magni gratia regis:
Ditavitque Plumbi fodinae in agro Mendipensi.
bonis, tanta ad molimina, natis.
Huc opulenta Tibi sua fundit viscera Tellus,
Huc Tua Te Virtus, sort ancillante, propellit.
Euge; opus hoc mirae pietatis perfice Praesul!
Aggredere aeternos (servit Tibi tempus) honores.
His petitur Coelum scalis, hac itur ad astra.
Nec mora fervet opus. Structor, Lapicida, peritus
Gypsator, Sculptor, Fusor, Vitrarius: omnes
Artifices instant ardentes. Maenia surgunt,
Dissita quae fuerant loca concamerantur Erismis;
Extima plumboso velantur tegmine, pulchris
Intima caelantur laquearibus: omnia miris
Sunt decorata modis: respondent omnia votis.
Nec deerunt Mystae, celebrent qui sacra, frequentes:
Sed numerosa brevi totam quae complete aedem
Pompa Sacerdotum, Psalmodorumque decano
Praeducente chorum, cantabis grata Jehovae
Cantica, tantorum fonti, authorique bonorum.
Haec mihi praesagit men's non ignara futuri.
Corpore (quis neget hoc?) specioso haec Templa Jacobus
Donavit Praesul, (pia na mdecreta proborum
Aequivalent factis) animum Rex ipse Jacobus
(Hoc quoque quis dubitat?) tribuet. Deus alme Jacobi
Decretis benedic factisque utriusque Jacobi.
O fortunatam nimium bona si Tua noris
Thermopolim, tali frueris quae Praesule, Rege!
Funde Deo summas ex imo pectore grates,
Et cole perpetuo pietatis honor Jacobos.
Quo pede caepisti, Praesul Sanctissime, pergas.
Episcopi Responsio.
Cupivi diu, has ruinas, and haec rudera videre and contemplari; has vero
ruinas and haec rudera videre, and contemplari, jam dolet: Ingrediar tamen, sed
hoc animo, ut nunquam, hoc more, sim reingressurus, priusquam isthaec melius
tecta videro.

The Translation. AN HISTORICO-POETICAL ACCOUNT Of the various state of the
Church of St. Peter and Paul in Bathe, from its first foundation, in the Year
775, to this present Year 1609. ALSO, A PROPHECY of the happy Restoration of
the same Church.
WElcome, Right Reverend, to this place,
Invited both by Heart and Face;
Enter; but first let me relate
This ruined Churches former fate.
If ancient Monuments you turn over,
An. 775.
King Offa first you will discover
To found a Temple in this Place,
1010.
Archbishop Elphege next his Grace;
The third (when Danish rage and fire
To ruin both these did conspire)
1088.
With greater cost John clep'd de Villa,
A French man born, but, silly fellow,
Vsu, non Literis, Medicus probatu^. G. Malm.
Professed the Art, if stories true.
The Grounds of which he never knew.
This man at Wells did take a pett,
And many years did Bishop sit;
But once in rage removed his See,
And caused it here in Bathe to be.
Five hundred Mark the City cost
The Bishop from the King, at most.
Where he a neater Pile did raise,
Which did not long proclaim his praise;
For God not pleased with him that quackt,
Made Sacrifice his Pious act.
Brave Normandy a Fourth sent,
Monk Robert, who with good Intent
This ruined Fabric did repair,
Composed the strife about the Chair;
Caused his Successors, story tells,
To bear the Name of Bathe and Wells.
At length, when Benefactors store
Had graced this Church where we adore,
The Three and twentieth Bishop came,
Who minded by his Lucky name,
Oliver King, An. 1137.
could do no less
Than King and Olive both express.
Like Olive, peace and plenty great,
Were products of this Bishops Seat;
But, to say Truth, in this grand thing,
He did resemble more a King:
Roberts attempt away he took,
And raised this Chuch on which you look;
Strong Walls, fine Buttresses, the Roof,
With stately Pillars bearing proof:
Made Walks and Isles both long and fair:
In short, this handsome Pile did rear;
And doubtless it was his Intent,
(But sudden death did him prevent)
To have endowed this Church with Lands,
(He must obey, when God Commands.)
So great a task it was, I wis,
To build so fine a Church as this!
Now lest the Work at stay should stand,
Good Prior William Bird, the last Prior of Bathe. In the South side of the
Chapel, outward, is a Memorial of his Name, a W. and a Bird in Stone, with his
Coat of Arms in the Chapel built by himself, and called, after him, Bird's
Chapel. He was not buried here, but died very poor, having been blind for some
time, and given much to Chemistry, while Prior here. See Mr. Ashm. Theatr.
Chym. Brit. p. 475, in Annot.
Bird put his last hand,
He finished, with his cost, the Thing,
And found some work after a King.
But, Oh the fate of what is holy!
And, Oh the mad Religious folly!
Nothing that Sacred is must hold,
And men with Temples must make bold;
Abbeys are ruined, Churches sacked,
Roofs sold, and Rents are more than rackt;
Deluge of Sacrilege! what not?
Have Zealots thus their God forgot?
This innocent Chrysom's boxt about,
And torn in its Swadling-clout:
The Fabrick's spoiled, they sell the Stones,
Glass, Lead, Bells, all except these Bones;
Of this great Spoil, what was the cause?
Was It love of Money, or God's Laws?
It Is that has ruined Church and Priest,
And laid our greatest Heads to rest.
It Is that extinguished, and keeps out
The Lights, that erst shone all about.
None seek the Churches good, but all
What they steal from it, their own call;
Hence in the darkest blackest night,
Has lodged the Cities greatest light.
But our good God, who loves his own,
This pitchy storm away has blown,
And with his heavenly Lamp dispelled,
The Chains of darkness which us held,
So that we now beholding are
To them for light they to us spare;
Yet so as each has light enough
To give due praise without a snuff,
To whom deserts shall gain a Name,
And spread over all the World a fame.
So far has Bellot's Star outshin'd
Whoever has to Church been kind, Thomas Bellot Esquire; one of the Executors of
W. Lord Burghly, sometime Lord Treasurer of England.

As does full-Moon, in Starry night,
Exceed the lesser Torches light.
The Chapel ornaments, the Floor,
The Benches, Windows, Seats and Door,
Call Bellot Father; and the Bell
Rings Bellot, though it ring a Knell.
Hospitals, Baths, Streets and Highways,
Sound out the Noble Bellot's praise,
'Cause he was Pious, and has given
Much, whose Reward shall be in heaven.
THE PROPHECY.
Forbear my Muse; change now thy Text,
Come to things greater, better next.
Enough of old things: now succeeds
A good supply to former Deeds.
Thou, Reverend Prelate, sent to us
By God Almighty's Mittimus,
Consider deeply what he says
To thee, through my Prophetic bays,
Wishing this Church no other ill,
Than to be built, and flourish still.
View with clear aspect from the top,
Your endless Praises fruitful crop.
Let Offa, Elphege, Oliver, rest
Robert and Bird in Honors nest.
Let bounteous Bellot take the Palm,
And after Age his Name embalm,
I envy not, but more rejoice,
And give him too my thankful Voice.
If to a drop this Laud be due,
What Is to a greater stock, think you?
He well deserves a grateful sense
That showrs down Benevolence.
Bellot alone to James gives way,
Differing as drop and shower may.
Bellot's drops make the Chapel thrive,
When James divine long showrs shall give,
How'll all the Fabric sprouting live?
This Vine loves not a Watery shower;
Gold into Dande Jove will pour,
So that this Church that long has been
Consumptive, by thy skill again
Gets strength, as the flagg'd vein plumps up
And swells, with Bacchus cheerful cup.
Others this Church may somewhat steed,
Bellot's the Moon, You Sun indeed:
With lively rays these limbs restore,
Thy Roof you will nobly cover over.
Behold! how all things now are glad,
Old Jacob wakes, and as a Lad
Enlivened by Your presence here,
Ascends the Ladder quick and clear;
Look how he mounts, striving to rise.
And makes with vigor to the skies?
Methinks, I see the Winged host
Of their new Message seem to boast,
Telling the news above, and then
Returning with Gods Joy to men:
And quickening you, though quick before,
Complete this work we You implore.
Nature has bred you for this end;
To this God's great endowments tend.
Art you has wrought, the King embraces,
Who seldom does misplace his Graces.
And you has aptly given a The Lead Mines of Mendip.
Mine,
Prepared for this great design:
The Earth her bowels op's to you,
And your good Nature prompts you too.
Finish the work, Time serves, My Lord,
Which will eternal praise afford.
This way you will to Heaven climb,
And to the Stars your self sublime.
Praesto, The work advances, all
The Laboring men are come at call;
Builder, Stone-cutter, Plaisterer,
Graver, Bell-founder, Glazier,
All busy. Walls are up; The space
That common was, Arches embrace.
The outside's leaded, Roof adorned,
And all things to my wish performed.
Nor will there wanting be a Quire,
Which to this place may all retire,
And with resort, and their own Train
Fill this whole Temple once again.
Priests in their habits, Singers, and
A Dean the Quire to command:
Will Anthems sing to God above,
And praise the Fountain head, his love.
My mind persuades me this will be,
And I can at some distance see.
The Prelate James (none can deny)
Has given a Body large and high,
(For those things that good men decree
Are equal with their deeds to me)
A Soul King James (who can this doubt?)
Will add, to make this compound out.
Now Jacob's God bless James's twain,
Their Actions and Intents maintain!
O happy Bathe, if thou did know
From whence thy happiness does flow!
A King and Bishop now thou have,
Never yet outdone in Ages past;
Give Thanks to God with all thy heart,
And Honor to both James impart.
Proceed, Most Worthy Prelate, in
The Thing you did so well begin.
The Bishop's Answer.
I have long desired to see and contemplate these Ruins and Rubbish; and now
it grieves me to behold Them: However, I will enter, but with this intent,
never to re-enter till I see them better covered.

For a fuller confirmation of the precedent particulars, I think fit to insert
in this place an extract out of an ancient Record, now in the house of my
Honored friend Edward Cousin Esquire, whose genius inclining him to the study
of Antiquity, has collected, and communicated it to me.

Johannes de Villula, the 16th. Bishop of Wells, having bought the Town of
Bathe of King Henry the First for five hundred Marks, transferred his Seat unto
that City, 1088. Hence grew a jar between the Monks of Bathe and Canons of
Wells, about the Election of the Bishop. At last the difference was composed by
that Bishop Robert whom before I spoke of: That from thence forward the Bishop
should be nominated from both places, and that precedence in the style should
be given to Bathe. That in the Vacancy of the Sea, a great number of Delegates
from both Churches should elect their Prelate, who being elected should be
installed in them both: both of them to be reckoned as the Bishops Chapter, and
the Grants and Patents confirmed in both. And so it stood until the reign of
King Henry the Eighth; what time the Monastery of Bathe being dissolved, there
passed an Act of Parliament for the Dean and Chapter of Wells, to make one sole
Chapter for the Bishop, A. 35. H. 8. c. 15. Thus far Mr. Cousin.

The Church that now is, was first begun A. D. 1137. by Oliver King Doctor of
Laws, of Kings College in Cambridge, Principal Secretary to three Monarchs of
this Land, Edward the fourth, Edward the fifth, and Henry the seventh; Register
of the Knights of the Garter, Bishop of Exeter, and thence translated hither
November. 6. 1495. died 24th. of Jan. 1503, and is thought to lie buried at
Windsor, where he was sometime Canon. It was four hundred seventy five years
before it was completed and brought to perfection (having made many halts by
the way) and was finished about the middle of King James's Reign, near. A. D.
1612, as by the Munificence of Noblemen, Knights, Gentlemen and others, so
especially by the liberal hand of the Learned Dr. James Mountague Bishop of
this Diocese, to whom the former Poem was directed, who at one time gave a
thousand pounds toward its Reparation, and lies buried, by his own appointment
under a fair Marble Monument, in the body of the Church, deceased July 20.
1618, with this elegant Epitaph on the South Side: MEMORIAE SACRUM PIETATE
VIRTUTE ET DOCTRINA INSIGNIS JACOBUS MONTACUTUS EDVARDI MONTACUTI DE BOUGHTON
IN COMITATU NORTHAMTONIAE EQUITIS AURATI A SAR. COMITIBUS DEDUCTA PROPAGINE
FILIUS QUINTOGENITUS A SAPIENTISSIMO JACOBO REGE SACELLO REGIO DECANUS
PRAEPOSITUS AD EPISCOPATUM BATHONIENSEM PROMOTUS ET DEINDE AD WINTONIENSEM OB
SPECTATAM IN MAXIMIS NEGOTIIS FIDEM DEXTERITATEM ET PRUDENTIAM IN SANCTIUS
CONCILIUM ADSCITUS REGIQUE CUI CHARISSIMUS ERAT IN AULA ASSIDUUS IN MEDIO
ACTUOSAE VITAE CURSU QUAM DEO ECCLESIAE ET PATRIAE DEVOVERAT AD AETERNAM VITAM
EVOCATUS 20. JULII ANNO DOMINI 1618. AETATIS 50.

Sacred to Memory.

For Piety, Virtue and Learning, very eminent, James Montague, fifth Son of Sr.
Edward Montague, of Boughton, in the County of Northampton, Knight, lineally
descended from the Earls of Salisbury, by the most wise King James made Dean of
the Chapel, then Bishop of Bathe, afterward Bishop of Winchester, and for his
faithfulness, dexterity and prudence in weighty affairs, chosen one of the
Privy Council, and very much at Court, being in great favor with the King: In
the midst of a busy life, which he had devoted to God, the Church, and
Country, was summoned to life everlasting, 20 July 1618, in the 50th. year of
his age.

On the North side, this Inscription.

REVERENDISSIMUS HIC EPISCOPUS IN HOC TEMPLO ANTIQUISSIMO QUOD INTER ALIA MULTA
EGREGIA PIETATIS MONUMENTA MAXIMIS IMPENSIS INSTAURAVIT CORPUS DEPONI JUSSIT
DONEC CHRISTO REDEMPTORI VIDEBITUR EUM CUM JUSTIS AD INTERMINATAM VITAM QUAM IN
TERRIS SEMPER ANHELAVIT EXCITARE EDVARDUS MONTACUTUS DE BOUGHTON HENRICUS
MONTACUTUS CAPITALIS IN BANCO REGIO JUSTITIARIUS CAROLUS MONTACUTUS TESTAMENTI
CURATOR ET SIDNEIUS MONTACUTUS A SUPPLICUM LIBELLIS EQUITES AURATI FRATRI
OPTIME MERITO CUM LACHRIMIS POSUERUNT. In this most Ancient Church, which,
among many other Monuments of Piety, with great charge, he repaired; This most
Reverend Bishop commanded his Body to be laid, until Christ the Redeemer shall
please to raise him, with the Just, to life eternal, which, when on Earth, he
earnestly desired.

Sir Edward Mountague of Boughton, Sir Henry Mountague Lord Chief Justice of
the Kings Bench, Sir Charles Mountague his Executor, and Sir Sidney Mountague
Master of the Requests, Knights, to their most deserving Brother, in much
sorrow, erected this Monument.

Br. View, etc. p. 101, 102, 103.
Concerning Oliver King, the founder of this Church, Sr. John Harington tells
this pretty story: That lying at Bathe, and musing or meditating one night
late, after his Devotions and Prayers for the prosperity of Henry the Seventh
and his Children (who were then all or most part living) to which King he was
Principal Secretary, and by him preferred to this Bishopric; he saw, or
supposed he saw a Vision of the holy Trinity, with Angels ascending and
descending by a Ladder, near to which there was a fair Olive Tree supporting a
Crown, and a voice said, Let an Olive establish the Crown, and let a King
restore the Church. Of this Dream or Vision he took exceeding great comfort,
and told it diverse of his friends, applying it to the King his Master in part,
and some part to himself. To his Master, because the Olive being the Emblem or
Hieroglyphick of Peace and Plenty seemed to him to allude to King Henry the
Seventh, who was worthily counted the wisest and most peaceable King in all
Europe of that age. To himself (for the wisest will flatter themselves
sometimes) because he was not only a chief Counselor to this King, and had
been his Ambassador to conclude a most Honorable Peace with Charles the
Eighth, who paid, as Holinshead writes, 745 Ducats, besides a yearly Tribute
of 25000 Crowns, but also he carried both the Olive and King in his Name; and
therefore thought he was specially designed for this Church-work, to the
advancement of which, he had an extraordinary inclination. Thus though (as St.
Thomas of Aquin well notes) all Dreams, be they never so sensible, will be
found to halt in some part of their coherence: yet most certain it is, for the
time, he was so transported with his Dream, that he presently set in hand with
this Church, and at the West end thereof he caused a Representation to be
graved of this Vision of the Trinity, the Angels and the Ladder; and on the
North side the Olive and Crown, with certain French words (which I could not
read) but in English is this verse taken out of the book of Judges, chap. 9.
Trees going to chese their King,
Said, be to us the Olive King.
All which is so curiously cut and carved, as in the West part of England is no
better work, than in the West end of this poor Church. And to make the credit
of all this more authentic, he added this word to it, De sursum est, It is
from on high. Thus much the Stones and Walls (though dumb witnesses, yet
credible) do plainly testify.

Thus far that Learned Knight, and Great Well-wisher to this Church; where it
may be noted, that the Olive and Crown are on both sides of the Church, North
and South, with an Elephant on each side of the Olive crowned; and the words
Sr. John says he could not read, are not French, but Latin, being the old
Translation of the English writ on both Pillars, of either side, in good Text
hand, though now not so legible, above the English in this manner: Ierunt ligna
ut ungerent super se Regem,
Dixeruntque Olivae Impera nobis.
Trees going to chese their King,
Said, Be to us the Oliver King.
Which gave occasion to some in the late Times to take it for a Prophecy, but
was intended nothing more than to preserve the Memory of the Bishop that was
Founder.

CHAP. XII. Of the Baths of Bathe.
COncerning the Nature, Use and Virtues of the Baths, I purpose, if God permit,
to write a large and particular Account, in a Just Treatise on that Subject,
consonant to my own Principles, which for the greater Credit of this Nation and
Place (nothing having ever been before attempted in this kind) shall be in the
general Language; the design of which I have expressed Chap. 7. For I well
remember what I writ in my Appendix, seven years ago, in these words: I come
now to speak something of the Nature, Use and Virtues of the Baths. And here it
cannot be expected I should say much, because my Experience of them as yet has
been but little, and the Observations I have made seem fitter, as they are
intended, for a foundation to a greater Work, which Time and Variety of
Experiments must complete, than at present to be Communicated to the Public.
And to make some compensation for my Brevity in this Thing, which is justly
deemed the most material of all other, I shall take the boldness to engage, as
soon as Time and Opportunity shall permit, to make a through search into the
Cause of the Heat, Nature, and Efficacious Operations of the Baths, and perhaps
give a more satisfactory Account of the former, than has yet been given by
any; and for the latter, I shall not build on the Hay and Stubble of the Talk
and Relations of persons byast and concerned, but on the solid basis of Reason,
Observation, and Experience. And again, the last words: But I hope I may be
excused on the score of my former Engagement, if I am not more particular at
this time in things of this nature, till a just amassment of Observations and
Experiments, and a rational deduction of Conclusions from them, which I hope in
some time to accomplish, shall either confirm me in the opinion I now have of
the Nature and Virtues of the Baths of Bathe, or supply me with a better.

Having, I say, intended a Piece of this nature, and also published many
Particulars relating to this Affair, in the ensuing Century of Observations,
which I now make public, as a Specimen of my way of procedure, and groundwork
or foundation of my next Superstructure, I shall content my self at present
with some few Remarks.

The Baths then in some Things do agree; in others are different.

They agree in this, That though chiefly three in number, the King's, Cross,
and Hot (the Queen's being but an Appendent to the King's, as the Leper's to
the Hot) yet they all participate of the same Minerals, only the Hot Bath, if
some of my Observations hold, has something more than the King's, or Cross,
both which as to the particulars, and particular proportions, in a Hogshead,
Gallon, and Pint, are much the same, and what is defective in one Ingredient in
one Bath, is made up by another, in the other. So that herein the wonderful
Contrivance of the Almighty has appeared, in making so fine a Composition of
such various Ingredients, and acted (with Reverence be it spoken) not only the
Physician, but the Apothecary too, a good example and precedent for his
Creatures to follow, who have lived to see that unhappy day, wherein a
blear-eyed Leah has been advanced, though with shame and destruction too,
above a legitimate Rachel.

They differ chiefly in Dimension, and degree of Heat.

In Dimension; The King's Bath being 57 foot, or 19 yards, 10 inches, long; 40
foot, 8 inches, or 13 yards and 2 inches in breadth.

The Queen's, 8 yards, or 24 foot, 2 inches, in breadth; in length 25 foot, 4
inches; or 8 yards, 16 inches.

The Cross Bath, 24 foot; or 8 yards, 6 inches long; 19 foot 11 inches, or 6
yards and 5 inches over Northward; 12 foot, or 4 yards, 7 inches over on the
South.

The Hot Bath, 10 yards 8 inches long; 4 yards 13 inches broad South; 4 yards
and 5 inches over North.

From this undeniably is deduced that they differ in the Water they contain;
for being of different dimensions, the greater must hold more, and the lesser
less. To pursue this Curiosity a little further, I find by Gage, The King's
Bath being 1 yard 18 inches in Water, to contain three hundred and fourteen
Tun, thirty six Gallons.

The Queen's, eighty one Tun, three Hogsheads, and eleven Gallons.

The Cross, fifty three Tun, and forty seven Gallons.

The Hot, fifty four Tun, and twenty seven Gallons.

As to the difference arising from the degree of Heat, though I must acknowledge
my defect of Observations in that kind, which I will hereafter supply, yet I
may say thus much now, That the King's and Hot Baths are not more different in
that particular than the Queen's, and Cross, and that this latter is the most
temperate of all.

And here it may be noted, That what is written concerning the difference in
degree of Heat in the Baths, is so to be understood as esteemed now; for the
Hot Bath was formerly accounted the Hottest of all, whence it had its name,
(...), the rest being ever, and so reputed Hot, though in some degrees inferior
to that. Hence Jones says, From what he there delivered, the reason may be
gathered why some of the Waters of Baths break out most Hot, as the Hot Bath at
Bathe; others meanly Hot, as the Cross Bath; others between both, as the King's
Bath. And in another place; The King's Bath is Hot between both the other. But
of this I intend, God willing, to make further Trials.

The Cause of this Variation I conceive to be not an Intention, and Remission
of a Subterranean Fire, (which meeting with an Enemy that has had so many
recruits and reinforcements as the Water has, and will have till the end of
all Things, it is much should yet keep its ground, and not be extinct, to
mention no other Absurdities at present, that undeniably follow on that
Hypothesis, this Variation, I conceive, does not arise on that score) but
rather is caused by a greater or lesser fermentation, arising from the Acting
of an Acid on an Alcalizate Salt, both which are contained in the Bath, and
much assisted by the vast Quantity of an impalpable Powder, the greatest
Ingredient in the Waters, and seems to serve for no other end, except, what
shall be hereafter mentioned, to administer a perpetual supply to the
Fermentation.

It Is likewise observable, That where the greatest Heat is, as in the King's,
and Hot Bath, there is the greatest Quantity of this fermentative matter,
insomuch as I have Calculated that near 50 pound weight goes off in little more
than 24 hours in the King's; but in the Cross Bath, where less need is, there
is less of this gritty matter, and much less goes off in a longer time. So that
having sometime resembled this Fermentation to Generation, the father of it
being an acid saline Spirit, and the mother this gritty matter and Alcalizate
Salt, the Conjunction made, and the Thing produced, the father slips away
invisibly in a Mist of Steam, and the mother passes out at a backdoor as soon
as may be, resigning the Work to be successively promoted in the same manner,
to future generations. And indeed should the matter still continue that has
done its work, the Springs and Channels would be quickly obstructed, so that
what is acid being of light burden, and more active, quickly exhales, and the
more Corpulent passes off by convenient Sluices and Draughts, as an Excrement,
upon which the Wheel of Fermentation is kept continually going, by an immediate
succession of new matter of the same kind. That not only the acid part, but the
more fixed Salts also do in part exhale, may be found confirmed by the 88th.
Observation, which cannot but part with something of their Substance in the
Lucta of Fermentation.

Again, In some places where the fermentation is less, as in the Water of St.
Vincents Rock near Bristol, which has not half the heat that the Cross-Bath
has, the Water abates near the proportion in the quantity of Ingredients; and
although for the most part the same, yet in so small a proportion, cannot act
as a greater quantity would do, and the acidity being so little as scarce to
coagulate Milk, or turn with Galls, may not be expected to do wonders in a
fermentation.

To conceive a continuation of the Hot waters of Bathe to that of Bristol, by
way of Drein, as some Ingenious persons have imagined, is unphilosophical. For
if very Salt water becomes insipid by running but the tenth part of that course
under ground, how can it rationally be expected that any Salt should be left of
that little in the Bath here, after such a tedious journey, in which it may
happily meet with many fresh Subterranean passengers in cross roads, that may
intrude upon it, and, by mixing with it rob it long before both of its Saltness
and Heat.

I must therefore say here, what I shall further discourse of more at large in
another place, That since my first consideration of this matter, I was ever
inclined to believe, that the cause of the Heat and impregnation of the Baths
was not far off from the Baths themselves, (Coram adest quod quaerimus) for to
me it seems not a little strange, that on digging so many Wells,
Stone-quarries, Cole-pits, and other penetrations of the Earth to a
considerable depth, that have been made about the City, no Hot water should
appear, but only in one Stone-quarry near Dunkerton about an hundred years ago,
Bathes Aid, lib. 2. fol. 20.
mentioned by Jones to have been so hot, that they were fain to forbear
working: The truth of which Relation I somewhat question, and rather believe
the honest Cambrobritan, being a Stranger here, might the easier be imposed on
by some fabulous Relator.

Another Argument for a different Fermentation I take to be the different forms
of shooting of the Nitrous stiria's; otherwise, why should the Kings and
Hot-Bath, that have the strongest heat, shoot into more compact needles, and
much thicker than the Cross? but that the stronger fermentation ripens, and
invigorates better the Crude matter of the shoots, when the other not so strong
leaves the matter crude and weak.

Before I give a rough Draught of my own Hypothesis, which I only here propose,
and shall further, God willing, illustrate and polish in my next undertaking, I
must premise these few particulars, which in part contain a Survey of this
Country.

First, That the ground on which the City of Bathe in good part stands,
especially near the Baths, is raised ground, and that probably, under some
yards of Gravel is a Bog, made by the confluence of Waters hither. This seems
in good measure evident from this, That on the digging some foundations not
long since, the Workmen came at last to a soft Mud, which yielding much, and a
Soldiers Pike of a good length thrust into it, no bottom was discovered, but a
warm, Marly, Sulphurous mud adhering to the Pike. This was observed in the
North and South-west parts of the Town.

Secondly, That the Springs of Cold water about this place are very numerous,
insomuch that sometime since, having been desired by that Ingenious and Learned
Knight Sr. Anthony Morgan, since dead in France, to search what Springs I could
find hereabouts, in order to the making several mixtures, if that way we might
give any light to a Fermentation; I remember I brought Water from twenty two
several Springs, and might have done from as many more, within two miles
compass, on one side.

Thirdly, That the two Water-houses supplying the City, are placed on two
Hills, one on the North, and another on the South, for the more convenient
supply of the whole with Water.

Fourthly, That the Bowels of the Earth on the South of the Town, with the
South-east and South-west parts, for four or five miles compass, are
sufficiently replenisht with great plenty of Freestone, which supplies the
Country round about with good Materials for building, and would do many
Counties more were there a way agreed upon for its better conveyance.

Fifthly, That on the North part of the Town little or none of this Freestone
is dug, but Water arises in abundance, and on the Hills about Marshfield
some Marcasites have been found, of which Vitriol is made, and probably more of
that kind are contained in that ground. I mean not the white Marcasite found on
Lansdown: what that was is notoriously known.

Sixthly, That another sort of Earth that abounds about Bathe, is blew Marle
and Ochre. This is discovered almost in all sides of deep hollow ways, the
River sides, and particularly at Lambridge, a mile off, is a blew Marly slate
with Ochre sticking to it, and under that clear Ochre alone. And

Seventhly, That almost all things about the Bath, as Marle, Ochre, Freestone,
Sand, Mud, Scum, Shells and Salts, will ferment on the affusion of any acid.

These things premised, I proceed to my Conjecture concerning the Rise,
Continuation and Heat of the Baths; and man can do no more; for (...), the best
Prophecy is but a good Guess.

I conceive then, that the Salts and Marle with the conflux of Waters into this
compass of lower ground, being created in the beginning, and then placed under
or near where the Baths now stand, by the virtue of those words, (...),
increase and multiply, have increased ever since from their own seeds, in their
proper Seminaries, as the greatest part of the Creation does and ever will,
till the consummation of all things. Neither do I see much more reason to
admire the breeding and increase of those Minerals under ground, than the
perpetual springing and inexhaustible growth of the little spires of Grass we
tread on above it: But it ever was and will be the humor of the generality of
Mankind to overlook what is before them, and pay their admiration to what they
do not see, it faring with many other things as with Virtue in the Poet: --
Praesentem odimus
Sublatam ex oculis quaerimus invidi.
Virtue removed we dote on; present slight:
And darkness thus prefer before the light.
The Salts being here sufficiently fixed, two large Currents of Water may come
down upon them, and meet very near or under the Baths themselves; the one from
the South, bringing with it its Cargo of Freestone, the commodity, as was said
of that part of the Country; the other from the North, acuated by some
Vitrioline Marcasites, over which it may pass, and meeting near the place with
all this matter that is fermentative, a fermentation may arise sufficiently
productive of what heat we find; considering especially the closeness of the
Caverns of the Earth in which it is bred, where little air can abate it, but
rather by that advantage, reduplicate the heat.

Much to this purpose are the words of that Ingenious and Learned Physician Dr.
Sherley, whose Philosophical Essay came late to my hands, and some considerable
time after I had framed, and in these words written, my own Hypothesis; yet in
regard some coincidencies, though at this distance, and without any converse,
have happened, which may confirm and illustrate what is before discoursed, I
shall, by his permission, crave leave to say, That if the words I now recite be
understood of the Bath-waters, as he intended them of Water in general, the
duration and equality of these Waters will be better understood, and found to
be according as I have before asserted. He therefore says in the beginning of
the eighth Section of this Philosophical Essay, p. 112. In the beginning God
infused into the bosom of the Waters the Seeds of all those things that were
afterward to be made out of the Waters, setting them their constant rules and
laws of acting, and by the power of the words, Increase and Multiply, they had
a faculty given them to continue themselves in the same order till the World
shall be destroyed by fire; at which time all Seminal beings shall desert their
gross bodies, and return to their first fountain and grand Exemplar, GOD, on
whom they have at this time a constant dependence.

This I am apt to believe might be made demonstrative, if digging about the
Baths might be admitted and practiced without prejudice to the Springs, which,
it is feared, will ensue, and therefore I must be content with that kind of
Demonstration, which Art will afford in imitation of Nature, some of which I
could now propose; but I will not prevent my self in things of this nature, and
therefore shall end this Subject for the present with these two Remarks:

First, That the Baths having the same Minerals, and but little differing in
proportion neither, must be equally advantageous in the same distempers, but
with this difference, that the different degrees of Heat altering somewhat the
case, judgment must advise what Bath the Patient shall be committed to; how
long it may be convenient to stay, and what government is to be used more in
one Bath than another, besides the determination of the Distemper it is proper
to relieve.

And, Secondly, Whereas great discourse has arisen here concerning the
conveyance of some Nuts that were observed in the Cistern over the main Spring
of the Kings Bath, upon the alteration of a firm stone cross in the middle, to
that pretty Wooden device that now stands there; some whereof were black and
rotten, others fresh with their kernels in them, and some with shales very
green about them: the way of passage may be conceived to have been by the
currents of Cold water from an open Spring, if not the River, near a Coppice or
Wood-side, with which the water of the Bath may in part be supplied, the Bath
being, as I suppose, the great Exchequer, into which the lesser Rivulets do
return their tribute, and to which they pay their homage, as to their Liege
Lord and Sovereign, constituted such by Him, by whom Kings reign, and from whom
alone they receive their Scepters. That these Nuts could not come, by a nearer
cut, from the Bath-side, is most evident from this, That the Cistern was so
well plastered about with Plaster of equal hardness with a stone, that it
cost very many blows to get it up; presently from the rise of which the Nuts
did appear, immediately shot up from the Springs themselves.

As to the Internal use of the Waters, so much of late applauded, and not
without cause; Dr. Venner Tr. of Bathe, p. 12.
as a grave Physician, sometime of this Place, has in his Writings condemned
that, the Reason of which he never understood; so would not I on the contrary,
give my Vote for that which I had not thoroughly examined, and on good grounds
judged and found advantageous.

It being therefore clear, that Vitrioline, Nitrous, and Saline springs, are
recommended by the most Intelligent Writers to be used as a drink; and the
forementioned Salts, the two latter fixed and visible to the eye, the former
more invisible, transient and halituous, being contained in the Waters, I may
conclude them by good consequence to be potable and most proper to be drank.
Neither is the heat offensive, but amicable to the stomach, and does not of it
self, unless ingurgitation procure it, incline to Vomit. But because the
drinking of the Waters has so much obtained, I have the more particularly
discoursed of that in the two following Chapt^rs.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Use of the Bath-Water in Potion.
HAving in the close of the former Chapter debated and determined in short the
Question, Whether the Bath-water may be safely used inwardly, and on good
grounds carried it in the Affirmative: The next Thing I am to proceed to, is,
The manner how, and what course is to be taken by those that would use it so as
to find benefit thereby. But before I treat of this, I shall enervate one grand
Objection, and then give some preparatory directions for the better
information, and greater benefit of the Patient.

An OBJECTION.
It may then be said; That the Bath-Water, according to present discoveries,
containing those Ingredients that may be prejudicial to the Body, the use of
them in potion may not seem to be safe, and the best way to decry the internal
use, is to Anatomize their body, and declare their Contents; some of which
being gritty, and of a Lapideous nature, may obstruct the mesentery, milky
veins, and other passages, and conduce much to the heaping up a fabulous matter
in the Body, and thereby give occasion to the intolerable excruciations of the
Stone and Gout, besides the foundation it may lay for other distempers; others
being of a relaxing and effeminating nature, may have no good effect and
influence upon the Nervous parts, especially the Stomach and intestines,
through which they pass; and therefore this use of the Waters seems rather to
be avoided, and the inconveniences arising in probability from some parts
non-saline, may be thought much to overbear the advantages expected from the
Salts.

The ANSWER.
To this, I think the Substance of all that can be objected, I return this
Answer;

That the supposed Culpable parts in and about the Contents of the Bath-water,
being only three, Grit, Bitumen and Sulphur, the former, though in the greatest
proportion, is so finely wrought and intimately mixed with the Body of the
Waters, that in truth it cannot deserve that name, and therefore I call it so
in relation to the more brown and gritty, appearing on Evaporation, Obs. 83.
as I have elsewhere observed; this then in the Waters that are drank being
soft and impalpabable, and no magistery more finely pulverized, must pass in
Conjunction with the Water through all its Meanders; neither is the stay
usually so long in the Body, as to occasion any fear of a Separation, which
probably may be if they pass not well, and therein chiefly, I suppose, to lie
the danger, the natural heat being not so violent, but of a more moderate and
even tenor, and too weak to make an analysis of the Water in so short a time,
or dissolve its body, as the fire does, but having discharged its office, is
discharged also by the usual ways of Evacuation, if the Water stay not in the
Body too long.

Besides, The benefit of this Insipid magistery may not be a little; for if the
acrimony of the blood be abated, and sharp humors allayed, mitigated and
dulcifi'd, as the Experience of many persons, the two Summers last past
especially seem to testify; I know nothing else in the Waters I can attribute
this effect with greater justice to, than this impalpable powder, which like
Coral and Pearls, being in themselves gritty and insipid, are known to produce
the same effects without prejudice to the body, by imbibing the Acrimony, or
altering the property of those humors they are found to allay. I confess
indeed, some expectation might in reason be of a fermentation within, as by the
means of this powder, in good part* there probably has been without in the
Waters themselves, according to my Hypothesis mentioned in the former Chapter,
if the Powder were separated and immediately mixed with acids in the Bowels,
Stomach, Spleen, or elsewhere, upon which, Eructations, Inflations, and other
inconveniences might ensue; but the Water passing quickly off, and there being
not that constant supply as underground, nor proportionable acids neither, as
may be there, no such ill effects can reasonably be feared, nor yet have been
observed.

As to Bitumen, either Liquid or Solid, the first of which is chiefly condemned
by Mineral Writers, no inconvenience can arise from that, in regard I do not
conceive it mixed, or indeed capable of mixing with the body of the Waters, but
is at some certain times eructed from the Springs, chiefly in the Months of
June, July and August, it ascends, being driven through the Waters, without
mixture, to the surface, and there remains as a Scum, which taken off and dried
burns like Stone-pitch, and is noted elsewhere: See Obs. 100.
So that the quantity being inconsiderable to any other of the Minerals, and
the times of breeding and appearing not constant, with an incapacity of mixing
with the body of the Waters, otherwise certainly it would not ascend and float
on the surface as we find it does: these things, I say, considered, I cannot
but think it strange, the Learned Dr. Jorden should assert these Baths to be
Bituminous a praedominio, or consist principally of Bitumen, which I shall
hereafter make appear to be but a less principal Principle, and rather an
appurtenance to, than an Ingredient in the waters. So much also I must further
say, That the swimming of a Bituminous substance on the surface of the waters;
the shrivelling of the tops of the fingers in the Bath; and the bare smell of
Sulphur by the Baths-side; are no masculine foundations for asserting those
Principles, and making that the greatest ingredient in the waters, that is not
capable of mixing with them.

Whereas Sulphur (the third Ingredient of Dr. Jorden, and least proportionable,
N. B. Chapter 16. p. 150.
affirming the Baths to consist principally of Bitumen, with Nitre and some
Sulphur) is in much greater proportion than the Bitumen mentioned but now, and
contains, I judge, near a fourth part of the courser Contents, the result of
evaporation, for so much or therebouts is lost in Calcination, this, I say,
though much in quantity, cannot relax or effeminate, either by fattiness or
otherwise, as some Authors pretend; for, whatever it may have of that, it is
certainly so much altered by the other Ingredients into whose bosom it is
taken, and to which it is so nearly united, that nothing of that nature does
appear at any time, and is in nothing discovered more than its inflammability.
We ought therefore here to expect the known virtues and benefits of Sulphur, to
befriend the Lungs, to comfort and cherish weak parts, and do all those good
offices we experience in a Composition though made of many things besides,
rather than to imagine the Water of the Fountain Salmacis, Salmacis, fons
Cariae limpidissimus, juxta Halicarnassium; eo nomine olim male audiens, quod
lavantium in eo, aut ex eo bibentium corpora effoeminaret. Stephanus.
to be continued hither, or be frighted with any Sardanapalian nature in
Sulphur, which may create inconveniences we know not what. But if any person,
notwithstanding what has been said to the contrary, may be in some suspicion
of any nocument from the Sulphur, he may have a Salt made out of the Waters to
be dissolved in it, in which Sulphur is not concerned, and so the Waters may be
drank in lesser proportion.

Having therefore combated these three supposed Enemies to the Waters inward
use, and found them weak and insufficient to maintain the opposition they
pretend to, the greater confirmation will accrue from the consideration of the
threefold encouragement, arising from the mixture of the triple Salt, Nitre,
Salt and Vitriol, the further enlargement on which I shall at present forbear,
and now give some few directions for the Patient's benefit I mentioned before.

The first of which is, That it is very necessary the Body be well prepared
before the Waters be taken, and consequently that good advice be had whether it
be proper or no, for the inconsiderate use of any thing must be very
prejudicial; and the best reason why many Effects are not produced, is because
in reason they could not be expected. This preparation must be made, not
slightly with a little Bath-water and Salt, Syrup of Roses, and Manna, and such
like alimentary Medicines, but with proper, effectual, and frequent Purgations,
as the knowing Physician will think requisite sometimes. For what Impurities
are in primis viis, the Stomach, Intestines, etc. will certainly with the
Current be carried further into the Body, defile the blood, and thereby create
an Iliad of evils; whereas if the Body be well prepared, the Water has besides
a cleaner passage, a more free one too, unto the parts it must relieve.

It Is also less beneficial for the Patient to drink the Water in the Bath, and
contrary to the rules and directions of intelligent Physicians; but if thirst
be troublesome, somewhat may be taken to allay that, and half an hour before
rising a quantity may be drank, and the rest in bed, if occasion shall require;
otherwise to set aside some time for drinking alone, and never, during that
time, to use the Bath at all, is what may give both Uses due liberty to exert
their operations, and not cramp or supplant one another, as they often do when
made use of together.

It is likewise requisite that a good course of Diet be observed in the use of
the Waters, both as to Meat and Drink; that dinner be of meats of light and
easy digestion, at twelve or one a clock, when the Waters have made a
considerable pass; and that supper be in good time, that the Body may be clear
against the next morning again.

The best time for drinking is in the morning early, from the Pump, at the
place it self, if it may be, otherwise, if near, at home, very warm, with a
quarter of an hours walking after every Pint or Quart, at utmost; arising from
three to six pints, four to eight, or five to ten, as the Body will bear, for
no set gage can be given; and the best Rule is, that it ought to be taken pro
Tolerantia, every one as they are able to bear, without ingurgitation, or
relucting again. The number of days, 7, 14, 21, or a month, after which time I
have observed the like effects not to be produced, as in the intermediate
space, and therefore none ought to use it longer at one season.

But these Things, and many more of this nature, shall be further discussed,
and the whole Circuit of the way of drinking gone, and comprehended, in the
Solution of the following Questions, which I shall only here propound.

Question I. Whether the Bath-water ought to be drank Hot, or Cold? Quest. II.
Whether in a great or little Quantity? Quest. III. Whether it may be drank at
Meals? Quest. IV. Whether Bathing and Drinking may be done on the same day?
Quest. V. Whether Drinking may be in the morning, and Bathing in the evening of
the same day? Quest. VI. Whether the Bath-water ought to be taken many days
together, or else some days to Bathe, and others to Drink? Quest. VII. Whether
large Draughts may be taken, or more moderate; and what time is required should
be between the Draughts? Quest. VIII. How many days it is convenient the
Bath-water should be drank? Quest. IX. Whether any Medicines may be usefully
taken with the Waters, to further their operation? Quest. X. What times of the
year are most proper to Drink it in? Quest. XI. Whether the Bath-water may be
taken in Winter? Quest. XII. Whether the Leap-year has any malign Influence on
drinking the Waters? Quest. XIII. Whether the Waters may be safely used in the
Dog Days? Quest. XIV. Which is first to be done, either Bathing, or Drinking?
To give a greater security and Credit to the drinking these Waters, with which
I shall conclude this Chapter, it may be noted, That, besides the common
Discourse of things within the memory of man, the Bath-water has been ordered
to be drank above an hundred years ago; Jon. Bath. Aid. lib. 4. fol. 28.
for I find in a Physician that writ concerning them, A.D. 1572. among other
things, these directions:

About an hour after Sunrising in the morning, drink the Water out of the
Spring; the Body before purged, the digestion fulfilled, and the Bath first
cleansed, remaining clean six hours before.

So much of the Water as shall not be grievous to the Stomach may be drank.

The Water being drank, the Patient must walk gently a few paces in a temperate
air.

By which it appears, how careful they were then of preparing the Body, and
having the Water pure, which ought not to be less regarded now, otherwise the
danger will be more, and the benefit less, according to the right or wrong use
of the Waters. That this was discontinu'd, no better reason, I think, can be
given, than the Humor of the Times, to which also, a want of a due method in
drinking, and a true understanding of the nature of the Waters, may much
conduce.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Virtues of the Bath-water taken inwardly.
THat the Water, and consequently the Salt extracted from it, and dissolved in
it, may not be defrauded of their just Commendation internally used by way of
Potion, as well as by Bathing, or Lotion, outwardly, and that it may be rightly
made use of in a due way and manner, without expecting more from it than in
reason is to be done; I shall give a short Account of the Distempers in which
it may be profitable, and used with advantage.

And first, in General, I conceive it very proper in all Diseases or Symptoms,
that require cooling, cleansing, opening, or gentle Evacuation; under which
Heads are comprehended many Maladies, which I shall but briefly touch on, and
leave the fuller discovery of its Virtues to experience, and a longer use.

I shall begin with the Stomach, both in regard it is the part it first
descends into, and also, because in righting that, it is a general Benefactor
to the whole Body, the use of the Stomach being of absolute necessity to every
part, without which there can be no supply.

It must therefore infallibly cleanse this useful Receptacle from any
impurities lodging in the Bottom or Plicatures thereof, (which may render what
is taken in more foul) and prepare it the better for digestion of the food, on
which depends the maintenance of the lesser Universe, conducing much this way
to the making better Chyle, purer blood, and more clear and active spirits, the
wheels and machines of all sense and motion.

The next Advantage is, That it procures an Appetite, and makes those that
drink it receive and enjoy their food with more delight and satisfaction. This
is generally known to all that use it, and is effected partly by removing what
lines the inner Coat of the Stomach with too much Viscosity, with which the
fibers, and nervous filaments, the Organs of Sensation, are obstructed; partly
by an Esurine quality residing in the Salt, provoking the desire of Sustenance,
which we call Hunger, by its immediate application to the parts mentioned
before. And in this Esurine Quality it does exceed Common Water, of which
Hippocrates has written, That it makes men hungry; viz. by its washing and
cleansing the Stomach, as is declared before; but this by the mixture of the
Salt, is made more effectual.

A third Convenience is, That it allays Thirst, which is often very troublesome,
and sometimes dangerous to take in Liquors to suppress it, that may create
farther disturbances in the Body, and prove more offensive; whereas this, by
its cooling and moistening nature, is the best Remedy that can be provided, and
that in no great proportion neither, as has been often experimented.

It is also of good use in the Heart-burning, or Cardialgia, occasioned by the
sharpness and acrimony of a bilious humor, vellicating the nerves and
membranes of the upper orifice of the Stomach, called by the Ancients, by
reason of its great communication therewith, the Heart; which sharp and
acrimonious humor it alters, washes off, and at last evacuates, upon which the
Passion cease, and ease does ensue.

Also it clears by its immediate passage out of the Stomach, for some water, I
suppose, does pass that way, whatever obstructions are found in the Vessels
about the Stomach, relating either to that or the Caul, arising from the Vena
Porta, and known commonly among Anatomists by the hard names of Venae
Gastricae, Epiplociae, and Gastro-Epiplociae, conveying what is transmitted
from the Celiack Artery, to the Liver, and so by the Vena Cava, to the Heart,
according to the undoubted and established doctrine of the Circulation.

Moreover, It is of singular use in all Fluxes, whether with blood, or without;
Diarrhea's, Dysenteries, or bloody Urine; not that it has any strong
astringent quality, which oftentimes is prejudicial, but by its absterging and
cleansing virtue, and gently evacuative withal, it allays Acrimony, sweeps away
pungent particles, and discharges them by the draught. However, if astringent
Medicines shall at any time be judged necessary, the Cure will be facilitated,
and more speedily performed, if the Water be drank, or used by Clyster, or both
ways made use of, before they are advised, which will be a good preparatory to
other Remedies.

It is also good in the Colic, on the account before specified, and with the
addition of its Heat; insomuch that those that drink the Bath-water, are
observed to break more wind than other people, and find great relief in that
case.

It is proper also in the Distemper that is commonly, though improperly, called
the Heat of the Liver, when the Face is red, pimpled, and the Body afflicted
with choleric and pustulous Eruptions, having its foundation in the blood,
which the Water attemperates, and brings down to a just degree, proportionable
to the Natural and Balsamic Temper of its prime Composure.

It opens likewise the obstructions of the Liver, Spleen and Gall, and
therefore proper in the Spleen, so far as it arises from that Cause, and not
improper, but very advantageous, in the Scurvy, Jaundise, and obstructions of
the Mesentery, which, if the Waters pass, must be much advantage to the Body;
in regard there most commonly lies the Sentina Corporis, or Sink of the whole,
which is cleansed this way, as the Sewers in Bristow, by St. David's Flood.

It is also very beneficial, if moderately taken, in the Gravel of the Kidneys,
or any Gravel or Phlegm obstructing them, or the Ureters, which it undeniably
cleanses, and prevents Concretions, which may afterward terminate in Tophes
and Stones; so that it is a good preservative against the Stone, and will
dissolve what is not too firmly impacted, which may be discovered, if the water
pass not freely that way.

It is also of incomparable use in the Diabetes, or pissing Disease, which is
usually attended with a great drought, which it allays above any thing; and,
the quantity moderated for fear of pissing too much, produces great effects, as
has been experienced of late by a Person of Honor.

I doubt not also to commend it in the Dropsy, but care must be taken that it
pass well away, otherwise it may prove more prejudicial than advantageous. The
like also may be said of the Gout.

It Is beneficial likewise in the Whites in Women, and what is somewhat
consequential, prepares them for Conception; so that in some kinds of
Barrenness, no more effectual Medicine can be used. Plinius dicit, Aquarum
aliquas sterilitatem foeminarum abolere, and conceptus ipsis representare,
sicut Sinuessanas in Campania; Thespiarum fontis in Boeotia; Elati fluminis in
Arcadia; qui effectus significant hujusmodi Aquas esse Nitrosas: Etenim hae
vulvam, quoniam eam abstergunt, Conceptioni faciunt habilem, says Georg.
Agricola; and again, a little after, De Nit. Eor. quae effl ex Terra, lib. 2.
Nitrosae vulvam ad Concipiendum aptam faciunt. Nitrous Waters dispose the
Matrix to Conception. So that I question not but that outwardly and inwardly
used, but chiefly the latter, these Waters are very advantageous in that
condition.

The inward use is also very profitable in all foulness of the Blood, the Itch,
Scabs, Leprosy, and the Worms.

For the Distempers of the Head it may be less useful, being somewhat remote,
yet in many not prejudicial; for the fore-quoted Author says, speaking of
Nitrous Waters; Capita, succis frigid s qui mentem obtundunt, repleta
exiccantes and roborantes, tandem mentem denuo acuere, and sanitati restituere
possunt. Those Heads that are filled with cold humors, which dull the mind,
Nitrous Waters, by their drying and corroborating faculty, do relieve; and
sharpening the understanding, restore to perfect health. Yet in regard this may
be referred to the general Head of Obstructions, as before, I shall say no more
at this time of the Virtues of the Water in particular: only add what Kircher
says of Nitrous Waters in his Chapter of that Subject: When Nitre is These
Virtues are proportionably in all Nitrous Waters, according as they more or
less participate of that Mineral.
predominant, it makes the Water that has imbibed it powerful in operation;
enables it to correct an ill habit of Body, which such as are phlegmatic are
prone to; it looses the Belly; is good in the diseases of the Nerves, and for
such as are subject to defluxions upon the Lungs; heals the Itch, and other
diseases of the Skin; cures the ringing of the Ears, dropped into them; and, in a
word, makes it to be of an eminent absterging property. Where it may be noted,
That whereas this Author affirms Nitrous Waters to be good for such as are
subject to defluxions upon the Lungs, and consequently for those that are
weakened by a consumptive disposition, in extenuated persons; it is easy to
determine to which of the Minerals chiefly we may attribute that great
advantage an Eminent Surgeon of this Nation has lately found by drinking
the Waters, who from a thin body, and hoarse voice, has now recovered a plump
Corpulency, clear speech, and good habit of Body and Lungs, to the great credit
and reputation of the Water.

For the satisfaction of those that desire to know which way the Water comes to
the Kidneys and Bladder, whereby they may somewhat judge of the usefulness of
the Water, and true extent of its operation; I shall briefly, for a close,
discourse of that.

The Drink, or Water, which descends into the Stomach by the Gullet, passes
thence, either immediately by the Veins, that have a more immediate relation to
the Stomach, Caul, etc. or mediately, by the lower orifice of the Stomach,
called Pylorus, into the Guts, whence the most part passes by the milky Veins
to the Lumbar glandules, or Kernels of the Kidneys, ascribed to the Learned D.
Th. Bartholine, Professor at Copenhagen, as the first inventer, and answering
to the Receptacle of Chyle in Brutes; and partly, perhaps, by the Mesaraicks,
passes to the Liver. From those Glandules, or the Receptacle, some affirm that
the Potulent matter passes directly to the Emulgents and Kidneys; but since
this opinion seems not to be beyond dispute, as I have noted elsewhere, I shall
add no more as to that here, only admit, that the greatest share of it passes
from the Receptacle or Glandules, by the milky veins of the Breast, into the
right Ventricle of the Heart, thence, through the Lungs, into the left, then
into the great Artery, and so, by the Circular motion of the Blood, is carried
to the emulgent Arteries, and discharged into the Kidneys, where, by reason of
their fabric, aptly accommodated to the work of Straining, the Serum is
separated from the Blood, and drops down by the Ureters, into the Bladder,
whence through the Vrethra, or passage of the Yard, it again visits the open
air, where I shall now leave it, as of no further use, till it come into the
Urinal, and meet with some juggling and quacking Physician.

CHAP. XV. Of the Water of St. Vincent's Rock, near Bristol.
HAving in the 12th. Chapter of this Discourse made some mention of this Water,
as a neighboring Water to Bathe, and supposed only a Continuation thither,
which I did not think probable on the Reasons there alleged; it will not be
altogether improper in this place, to treat a little more largely of that,
which has a name among the useful Mineral Waters of this Land.

As to the Principles of this Hot-Well Water, as it is usually called, without
which the Reason of the Virtues can never be understood, they have been
variously reported; what I have found on my own observation, I here declare.

On the Evaporation of two Gallons of the Water, I had v. of the Contents; of
which iv. were a reddish ferrugineous Earth, somewhat resembling in color, an
Iron Ore, but in substance, very light and friable, with a mixture of a
Limestone: The other. which the Lixivium gave me, evaporated in Glass, seemed
to be Alom, yet in regard the Limestone may counterfeit Alom, especially when
precipitated, I could not absolutely conclude it to be Aluminous.

To be a little better satisfied, I caused Mr. Richard Millechape, an
industrious and skilful Apothecary in Bristol, to evaporate one Hogshead of the
Water of the Hot-Well, which he did in a furnace, first, to three or four
Gallons, afterward finished it in an evaporating Glass, and sent me the
Contents, which were little wanting of v ss. four Ounces of which were, on
examination, that red, rusty colored Earth, mentioned before, and somewhat,
though much less in quantity, more white.

Upon this non-Saline part, as I call it, to distinguish it from the Saline
part that constitutes the Lixivium, being put into a Crucible and calcined, I
observed: That the red Earth was not harder, but more friable, and lost its
rusty color, becoming more blew; but the white being cold, and mixed with fair
water, did, upon the first injection, hiss, and afterward dissolve, leaving
the water white, and a Limy residence in the bottom of the Vessel I infused it
in; and both white and blew, after infusion, being dried again, became very
white and limy.

The other part being Saline imbibed into a Lixivium, I evaporated away to half
a Pint, and setting it in a cool pla^^, found the next morning, it had shot
into long ^^nall Stiria's, much resembling those of the Cross Bath here, to the
quantity of iii. the remaining part of the Liquor that did not shoot, I
breathed away, and had i. of another kind of Salt, now under examination; so
that the Saline part is here much exceeded by the non-Saline, to which it seems
to bear proportionably not much more than a 5th. part, and to be contained
according to this Estimate, scarce twelve Grains in a Gallon, whereas that of
Bathe has about forty impure.

To give then a short Account of the Principles of this Water, I judge it to
consist of Iron, a Nitro-Sulphureous Salt, and some Limestone, according to
the proportions before delivered, and the Contents tents Saline, and
non-Saline, to be, in all, near half as much as in the Waters of Bathe, where
the Salts are a third, and here a fifth, or thereabout, as was mentioned before.

That very little of an acid is contained in these Waters, may appear from
this, That neither the cold Water, nor a strong Lixivium made of the Salt, will
either turn with Galls, or coagulate Milk; neither does any thing glebous show
it self among the Shoots I have had yet.

What the other Salt is, which I have not yet fully examined, and tastes much
Alcalizate, I do here promise to declare on another occasion: only for the
present, which is all I shall say of the Principles of this Water now, To make
it further evident, that this is Limestone, after the non-Saline part was well
calcined, with a strong fire, in the water of that I decocted Sulphur, which it
did dissolve, and was precipitated with a fetid smell, both by distilled
Vinegar, Spirit of Vitriol, and Oil of Tartar, in a considerable quantity.

This Water then though participating of the same Salts with the Water of
Bathe, but not in that proportion, cannot be expected to be as advantageous in
the same Distempers, as it is less hot; but containing so much of Iron, has
that advantage above it, and may be as effectual as Tunbridg Waters, in any
Diseases that Water is proper for, and, for ought I know, do every way as well.

CHAP. XVI. Of Castle-Cary Water.
THE Mineral Water in Somersetshire, commonly known by the name of Castle-Cary,
or Alford-water, being of a quick working nature, and by some persons made use
of at Bathe, deserves also an Examination; which I the rather do here, in
regard it may confirm and illustrate what I formerly discourst of, concerning
the Nature and Virtues of the Baths of Bathe, to which it may be also very
subservient.

By Trials therefore, according as I had done on the Waters of Bathe and
Bristol, I find it to consist of some parts Saline, some non-Saline. The Saline
part is chiefly Nitrous, Nitre being almost double to the other Salts; and
therefore I judge this Water, Nitrosa a praedominio; Nitre appearing in a
nauseous taste, apparent bitterness, cooling, penetrating, and shooting into as
long and firm Stiria's, as I have ever seen in the King's, or Hot Baths.

The other Salt, is common brown Salt, arising, I conceive, from a small Rock
or Mine, of that sort of Salt in the ground about the Spring. This, I said, is
little more than half the proportion of the former, and shows it self in proper
Squares or Cubes, peculiar to that Salt, the Nitre shooting first, and this
Salt last of all.

The parts non-Saline are likewise double:

First, A red Gritt, arising also from a Rock of that color, and is the proper
Gritt of the ground; next the Earth under the Sward, of which I am now to treat
a little. The Earth under the surface of the ground is first, a stiff blew
Marl: under that a white Clay: and last of all the Red Rock.

The Earth, the second part non-Saline contained in the Water, is chiefly the
latter, I mean the white Clay, which with the Rocky Sediment, makes up near the
proportion of the brown Salt, or rather somewhat more, the Rock bearing not a
fourth part to the Clay.

Out of 12 Gallons of this Water wanting 3 Pints, I had 18. vi ss. of the
Contents, besides dross and scum in the depuration of the Water, of which iii.
Nitre; i. vi. brown Salt; and ii. Earth and Rock. iii. gr. 30. lost in working.
So that ss. of Salt is contained in every Gallon of the Water, or
proportionably ss. in every Pint, or between 20 and 30 Grains, of which two
parts are Nitre, and one brown Salt.

Note, That out of the quantity of Water mentioned before, I had of the pure
refined Salt only iv. 2 Drams, and 40 Grains, in a Gallon; 20 Grains in a Pint.

This Water then must be of good use to cool, cleanse, penetrate and attenuate
gross humors; allay acrimony; attemperate and suppress undue fermentation.
Good in the Spleen, Scurvy, Jaundise, and all obstructions of the Mesentery and
Bowels, having all those properties Kircher gives of Nitrous Waters, mentioned
Chap. 14.

It cleanses the Kidneys and Ureters, and is very beneficial in the Stone,
moving by Siege, Urine and Sweat, and that very effectually, in regard the
Minerals are so strongly imbibed, which makes it better to be mixed with the
Water from the Springs at Bathe, which, having the same Salts are less,
operative, because less impregnated.

And thus having discoursed of Three Mineral Waters, by the Salts, the main of
their Composition, somewhat related, St. Vincent's Hot Well, less impregnated;
Bathe, more; and Castle-Cary Water, in the highest degree; I hope the best use
will be made of them all. And so I take leave of this Subject for the present,
referring the Curious to more Particulars, concerning the principal part of my
Design, to the ensuing Century of Observations.

A CENTURY OF Observations: Containing further DISCOVERIES Of the Nature of the
HOT WATERS at BATHE; With the Contents, Property, and Distinction of each Bath,
in particular.

By T.G. M.B.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom. MDCLXXVI.

OBSERVATIONES HYDROSTATICAE; OR, OBSERVATIONS Relating to the Waters Weight.
OBSERVE. I.
THAT the Weight of the Water of all the Baths is much alike, only the Hot Bath
Water is somewhat lighter than the King's and Cross, as is further evidenced in
the following Observations.

Observe. II.
That the Bath-water if exactly weighed, is lighter than Common Water by 2
ounces in a ^^llon; for 12 Gallons of the Bath-water weigh^^ (...) 95 pound 14
ounces, whereas Common (...) as much weighed 97 pound, 6 ounces; 24 (...)s, or
lbiss. difference. The like will hold in ^^ller proportions, as ii. in a Pint,
and i. in a ^^nt, and i. in a Pottle. Note,

That this Observation was made in Frost, and must be understood of Bath-water
cold. See Obs. IV.

Observe. III.
That a Gallon of the Bath-water hot, weighed 8 pound, 8 ounces; 2 pound, 2
ounces, the Quart: Cold, 8 pound, 2 ounces and half; 2 pound v. the Quart. 5
ounces and half in a Gallon wanting; xi. in a Quart; vss. in every Pint.

Observe. IV.
That the usual proportion in open dry weather is Common Water lbi. vi. the
Pint; Bath-water hot lbi. v. Bath-water cold lbi. iv. Bath-water 1 ounce in a
Gallon less cold than hot; i. lighter than Common Water hot; ii. cold. Note,

That this Observation is chiefly to be understood of the King's and Cross
Bath; and of the Measure, Weights and Scales used at that time.

Observe. V.
That Bath-water hot being weighed a second time, in like proportion, against
Common Water, in open Scale, both Waters did very near, in open weather,
balance each other, but standing in the Scale, till the Bath-water was cold,
the Bath-water required ii. in a Pint, to make up the Balance.

Observe. VI.
That on another Trial made Nov. 18. 75. in open weather, Bath-water hot, and
Common Water did weigh much alike; but cold, wanted ii. in a Pint of its own
weight hot, and (consequently) was ii. in a Pint, or ii. in a Gallon, lighter
than Common Water.

Observe. VII.
That at any time, Bath-water hot, nor cold, was not heavier than Common
Spring Water.

Observe. VIII.
That the same Pint of Bath-water weighed at the first 12 hours end, after
taking from the Springs, standing 12 hours longer, did weigh lighter by i.

Observe. IX.
That by a Pint, Wine-measure, the Cross Bath Water exactly weighed, 17. Nov.
75. did weigh lbi. i. v. and 8 grains.

Observe. X.
That the King's Bath Water weighed much the same, by the same Measure, Weights
and Scales, at the same time, and, if any difference, the King's was somewhat
heavier, being immediately weighed in the dry-Pump Room.

Observe. XI.
That the Hot Bath Water 1 Pint, weighed then at the King's Bath, did weigh
lbi. i. iii. ss. and 4 grains; but at the Hot Bath, with the same Measure,
Weights and Scales, weighed lbi. i. iv. and 12 grains; 38 grains more than at
the King's Bath.

Observe. XII.
That the Hot Bath Water, one Pint, weighed ii. 8 grains lighter than the Cros^.

Observe. XIII.
That the Water of the Hot Bath, one Pint, weighed 42 grains lighter than the
Kings.

Observe. XIV.
That the two former Observations immediately foregoing, were made with the Hot
Bath Water, against the just weight of the King's and Cross, and the Measure
twice filled with the greatest exactness, may cause this little Variation of 6
grains between King's and Cross; but if the estimate be made from the weight of
the King's, Cross, and Hot Bath Water, at, or near their respective Pumps (as
in Obs. 9, 10, 11.) then the Hot Bath Water, one Pint, is 56 grains lighter
than either King's, or Cross.

Observe. XV.
That the Hot Bath Water is the lightest of all, but the King's and Cross are
in weight much alike, provided the Water of both be weighed, at or near the
Pump of either Bath.

Observe. XVI.
That the Menstruum, or Water imbibing the Minerals of the Hot Bath, is lighter
than that of the King's or Cross: for in one Pint of the former are contained
11 grains ^/4 (as in Obs. 69.) and the two latter but 9 grains (as in Obs. 67,
68.) one grain 1/3 more in a Pint of the Hot Bath Water, than the Cross or
King's, and yet the Hot Bath is so much lighter than either King's or Cross,
according to the former Observations.

Observe. XVII.
That as the King's Bath Water has as much less Marle, as it has more Gritt
than the Cross; so the Cross Bath on the contrary, has more Marle, and less
Gritt than the King's: which makes the contents even, and the weight of the
Water equal, the Menstruum of both weighing both alike.

Observe. XVIII.
That the drinking Pump in the King's Bath, and dry Pump out of it, convey out
Water of an equal weight: neither is that received at the dry Pump, lighter
than that which is taken immediately from the Springs.

Observe. XIX.
That the Water of none of the Baths, did at any time weigh heavier than Common
Water, by the same Measure, Weights and Scales.

Observe. XX.
That Hydrostatical Observations may vary, according to the difference of
Weather, Water, Measure, Weights and Scales; but that what is mentioned before
in relation to that Affair, is done (I judge) with as much exactness as may be.

OBSERVATIONES CHROMATICAE: OR, OBSERVATIONS Concerning the Waters Tincturing.
Observation XXI.
THat the Water of all the Baths warm will tinge with Galls.

Observe. XXII.
That the same quantity of Bathwater warm, with the same proportion of Galls,
gives a deeper Tincture in frosty weather, than in open.

Observe. XXIII.
That the New Pump, and dry Pump, at the Kings Bath, Tincture both alike, but
the Water of the Bath it self, not at all.

Note,
That this Observation is to be understood of the Bath when full; for if trial
be made when the Bath is filling, and the water low, the water of the open Bath
will Tinge, as coming more immediately from the Springs.

Observe. XXIV.
That a Glass-bottle filled with water hot from the Kings Bath, well cork't and
sealed, gave a deep tincture with Galls, in open weather, 48 hours after.

Observe. XXV.
The like Tincture, but somewhat more faint, I have observed at three days end.

Observe. XXVI.
That the Water of the Kings, Cross, and Hot Baths, being kept close stopped and
sealed for the space of seven days, the King's Bath did turn with Galls, but
the Cross and Hot were not altered at all.

Note,
That here might be some fault in stopping, for on another Trial, the Cross
Bath, on the seventh day, did give a tincture. See Obs. 45.

Observe. XXVII.
That the water of the Kings Bath well stopped and sealed, did, at eight weeks
end, give a purple tincture with Galls, little different from what it did, when
taken hot from the Pump.

Note,
That this I had from the Relation of another, and is not consonant to my other
Observations: if so, there must be then a long Frost, which I have not met with
since.

Observe. XXVIII.
That the Water of the Cross Bath corkt, and waxt, gave a pretty brisk
tincture, on the sixth day after taking from the Pump, in open weather,
although the bottle had been opened and wax't up again two days before. The
Kings Bath Water also taken at the same time did turn, but not so soon, and
more faint. Another bottle also of the Kings Bath did the like, filled Nov. 6.
and opened Nov. 12. the same days as before.

Observe. XXIX.
That the Water of the Hot Bath corkt and waxt, and opened at 24. hours end,
did not strike a purple tincture with Galls, though carefully made up, as soon
as taken from the Pump.

Observe. XXX.
That another Vial of the Hot Bath-water opened at three hours end, in open
weather, did not tincture, though corkt and waxt as the former.

Observe. XXXI.
That two bottles of the Water of the Cross and Hot Bath, opened twelve hours
after sealing at the Pump, in Frost, and in a short time carefully sealed up
again, did the next morning, twelve hours after, give a tincture both with
Galls and Oaken chips, but sooner and higher the Cross.

Observe. XXXII.
That two bottles of the Water of the Cross and Hot Bath filled from the Pump,
and standing twenty four hours in Frosty weather, unstopt, the water of both
the Baths did turn with Galls, but sooner and deeper the Cross.

Observe. XXXIII.
That the Water in the same bottles standing twenty four hours longer unstopt,
the water still continuing Frosty, the Cross Bath water did tinge as formerly,
but that of the Hot was not altered at all.

Observe. XXXIV.
That three hours after the former Experiment, the weather then breaking that
had been frosty before, neither Hot nor Cross Bath water was considerably
altered, though the water of the Hot Bath was but three hours before taken hot
from the Pump. The Cross Bath water, that but that morning had Tinged very well
after forty eight hours standing, did then very little; and the Hot taken
immediately from the Pump but three hours before, not at all.

Observe. XXXV.
That two glass Vials of the Cross and Hot Bath-water well corkt and sealed up
hot, and opened at three days end, the Cross Bath water did tincture with
Galls, but the Hot was very little altered. Another half pint bottle corkt and
waxt, opened at four days end, the water of the Hot Bath, gave no tincture at
all.

Observe. XXXVI.
That trial having been made with Galls, on the Water of all the Baths unstopt,
at ten hours end, in open weather; The Hot Bath lost its Tincturing first; the
Kings decayed much next; but the Cross Bath gave a tincture much brighter than
the Kings.

Observe. XXXVII.
That the next morning, thirteen hours after, the weather still continuing
without frost, the Cross Bath did tinge very well; but the Kings Bath very
little,

Observe. XXXVIII.
That after six hours more, the Cross Bath did tinge as formerly, but the water
of the Kings did not tincture at all.

Observe. XXXIX.
That eighteen hours after that, the Cross Bath in the same open weather
unstopt, gave a very faint tincture with Galls, after some standing, and
shortly after became as the Kings the day before.

Observe. XL.
That the Water of the Kings Bath in open weather, unstopt, gave no tincture
with Galls at 18 hours end, when the Cross Bath did at 28.

Observe. XLI.
That the same Water of the Cross Bath kept unstopt, in open weather, 18 hours
longer, or at 46 hours end, did not tincture with Galls, but in a short time
became thick and white.

Observe. XLII.
That the Kings Bath-water that Tinctured faintly in the morning, at six days
end, in open weather, stopped again with Cork, but not waxt, four hours after did
not tincture at all.

Observe. XLIII.
That the Kings Bath-water unstopt in open weather at 10 hours end, gives a
faint tincture with Galls; at 18 hours very little (if any;) and at 24 hours
none at all, unless in frost, or weather frost-like.

Observe. XLIV.
That the Cross Bath-water unstopt loses its tinging in little more than 48
hours, in any weather.

Observe. XLV.
That the Water of the same Bath stopped and sealed, will tincture after six or
seven days, with a faint tincture; but after nine days, in open weather, will
not tincture at all.

Observe. XLVI.
That the Water of the Hot Bath unstopt, in open Weather, will give no tincture
with Galls after three or four hours, although the Water then retain somewhat
of its heat.

Observe. XLVII.
That the Water of the same Bath opened or stopped, will not turn with Galls
after three or four days, in any weather.

Observe. XLVIII.
That the Kings Bath-water unstopt, did give a purple tincture with Galls at
four days end, in frost, and the fifth day, the weather breaking, with fresh
Galls added to more of the water became turbid and white, much resembling
Almond-milk.

Observe. XLIX.
That the Cross Bath-water cold and unstopt, in open weather, tinctures longer
than the Kings.

Observe. L.
That the Hot Bath-water unstopt loses its tincturing before it is cold, or in
four hours time at most; The Kings Bath seldom exceeds 24 hours, and the Cross
48, in open weather.

Observe. LI.
That the Water of all the Baths may appear somewhat purplish after the times
before mentioned, but that faint color seldom holds more than three or four
minutes before the water grows thick, and for the most part white; in long
standing palish yellow; with fewer Galls, more green, and sometimes black.

Observe. LII.
That the Water of the Cross and Hot Baths kept in two Vials stopped with cork,
but not sealed, for the space of two years, did then with oil of Tartar become
white, although both had deposited a sediment, as well white as yellow. The
Water of neither did tinge with Galls.

Observe. LIII.
That the Halitous part is not made more visible, nor can be saved by
distillation, although the joints be luted never so close; neither is the first
distilled Water acid, nor will turn with Galls. The like has Dr. French
observed, in the waters of the Vitrioline Well at Knaresborough, Yorkshire
Spaw, p. 67.

Observe. LIVE.
That the Water of all the Baths effete, and divested of their Tincturing
purple with Galls, in a short time become opake, and something like a thin
Whey, or as if some few drops of oil of Tartar had been mixed with it.

Observe. LV.
That the Bath-water loses its Tincturing with Galls, although nothing be
observed to be precipitated.

Observe. LVI.
That the Bath-water sealed up in a glass bottle cold, and laid near the
Springs of the Bath twenty four hours, does not then recover its Tinging
property with Galls, but becomes white as precipitated with oil of Tartar,
which Spirit of Vitriol makes clear again.

Observe. LVII.
That the cold Water of none of the Baths, except the Cross, standing 24 hours
before Trial unstopt, will Tinge with Galls or otherwise, in open weather,
unless well stopped and sealed up hot.

Note,
That in Frost-like vveather, in the Winter season, the Cross Bath chiefly, and
sometimes the Kings, may color after this time; but not after 48 hours unless
in constant frost.

Observe. LVIII.
That the Water of the Drinking-pump lately erected in the Kings Bath, tinges
with Galls no longer than that of the Dry-pump; but both within ten, and twenty
hours space, unstopt, in open weather, lose their Tincturing and become effoete.

Observe. LIX.
That the Kings Bath-water at eight days end, and the Cross at nine, in open
vveather, did not give any tincture with Galls, although Trial was made on
seven glass Vials (4 of the Kings, and 3 of the Cross) corkt and waxt, at the
same time, and successively opened and experimented, with good fresh Galls
injected into every Glass.

Observe. LX.
That how long the Waters of all the Baths will Tincture in Frost, this Winter
proving very mild, has not yet given me an opportunity to experiment.

OBSERVATIONES MISCELLANEAE; OR, OBSERVATIONS Touching diverse Subjects; more
especially, The Contents of the Waters, and Things appertaining thereunto.
Observe. LXI.
THAT the Water of all the Baths, though clear and transparent in a Glass, do
contain in their Body, a considerable quantity of a fine, white, insipid
Powder, which afterward, by decoction, becomes more brown and gritty, with a
blew Sulphurous Earth or Marle, and a Saline matter.

Observe. LXII.
That the Contents of the Bath are less in the same proportion of Water, in wet
weather, than in dry.

Observe. LXIII.
That the Saline matter producible in Substance from the Bath-water, subjected
to the Sight, and other senses concerned, are only Common Salt and Nitre.

Observe. LXIV.
That out of one Hogshead of the Water of the Kings Bath taken from the Pump,
in wet weather, I had x. vss. whereof v. iii. were Gritt; ii. viiss. Salt; ii.
iss. Marle.

Note,
That after this proportion, Gritt has five parts; Salt about three parts; and
Marle two; Common Salt more than two; Nitre one.

Observe. LXV.
That out of one Hogshead of the Cross Bath in the same weather, came xviii. v.
whereof iv. Gritt; iii. i. Marle; ii. Common Salt; and ss. of Niter.

Observe. LXVI.
That one Hogshead of the Hot Bath, in the same weather, yielded xi. iii.
whereof iv. iv. Gritt; iii. ii. Marle; ii. vi. Common Salt; and vi. of Nitre.

Observe. LXVII.
That the King's Bath one Gallon ordinarily contains near 43 grains of Gritt;
23 grains of Salt; 17 grains of Marle; in all iv. 7 grains. 5 grains Gritt; 2
grains Salt ( viz. 2 grains Sal Commune, and grain Nitre) and 2 grains Marle,
the Pint. In all 9 grains.

Observe. LXVIII.
That the Cross Bath one Gallon contains near 32 grains Gritt; 25 grains Marle;
16 grains Sal Commune; 4 grains Nitre; in all i. gr. 14. 4 gr. Gritt; 3 gr.
Marle; 2 gr. Sal Commune, and 1/ gr. Nitre, the Pint. Total 9 gr..

Observe. LXIX.
That one Gallon of the Hot Bath Water contains near 36 gr. of Gritt; 26 gr.
Marle; 22 gr. Sal Commune; and 6 gr. of Nitre. 4 gr. Gritt; 3 gr. Marle; 2 gr.
1/3 Sal Commune; 1/3 gr. of Nitre. Total 11 gr. in a Pint.

Observe. LXX.
That the Gritt in proportion is almost double to all the Salts; in the King's
Bath, more.

Observe. LXXI.
That the Common Salt is near three parts, and the Nitre but one.

Observe. LXXII.
That the Hot Bath Water contains by more than a fourth part more Nitre than
the Cross. The like will hold as to Common Salt.

Observe. LXXIII.
That the Proportion the Saline part bears in the King's and Cross Bath, is
near iiss. in a Hogshead, or 60 Gallons; but in the Hot Bath iii. or somewhat
better. So that in a Gallon of the two former are no more than 20 gr. Salt, 2
gr. in a Pint; in the latter 24 gr. in a Gallon, or 3 gr. in a Pint.

Note,
That what is asserted in the two Observations immediately preceding,
concerning the Hot Bath Water containing more than the King's or Cross, was
done on a single Experiment, which I have not since repeated.

Observe. LXXIV.
That one Hogshead from the Pump of the King's Bath, in frosty weather,
afforded xii. ii. of the Contents; whereof vi. Gritt; iiiss. Salt; and ii. vi.
Marle; ii. ii. Sal Communis; and x. Nitre.

Note,
That the same quantity of the Cross and Hot Bath Water I have not experimented
in frost, but judge them proportionable to the King's, upon which is grounded
the 62. Observation.

Observe. LXXV.
That the Nitrous parts of the King's and Hot Baths shoot much alike, into
strong, firm, and compacted Needles; but the Cross Bath more faint, into small
hoary Threads, slender, short, and brittle.

Observe. LXXVI.
That what I call Marle, is chiefly that insipid blew Earth which remains on
the filtring paper after Calcination, and in part burns away to less in the
Crucible, being the Terra adhering more nearly to the Salt, and in which
(probably) the Sulphur does reside.

Observe. LXXVII.
That the Cross Bath Water has less Gritt than the King's.

Observe. LXXVIII.
That the King's Bath has as much Nitre as the Cross, although the form of
shooting be different.

Observe. LXXIX.
That the Water both of the King's and Cross Baths, have an operation in Potion
much alike, only the Cross Bath drinks more pleasant, the reason of which may
be gathered from Obs. 77.

Observe. LXXX.
That the Bath-water cold will coagulate Milk.

Observe. LXXXI.
That ii. of the impalpable Powder precipitated from the Bath-water with oil of
Tartar, and mixed with Spring Water, did not coagulate Milk, when 20 grains of
Alom did it effectually.

Note,
That half a Pint of Water will turn the Milk; and that this quantity of the
Powder is near as much as is contained in a Gallon.

Observe. LXXXII.
That i. of the white Salt dissolved in half a Pint of Spring Water, and mixed
with as much boiling Milk, made no alteration; whereas i. of Alom dissolved in
like manner, made a clear Posset, with a hard Curd.

Observe. LXXXIII.
That the precipitated Powder, though fine, white, and impalpable, if
precipitated, in Evaporation becomes more gross, browner, and gritty, and upon
settlement leaves the bottom of the Water thick and white.

Observe. LXXXIV.
That the same Powder when precipitated, put on a red hot Iron Plate, neither
boyls, crackles, nor melts, but lies heavy, dead, and burns not at all.

Note,
That this impalpable Powder bears an equal proportion with, at least, if not
exceeds all the Salts contained in the same.

Observe. LXXXV.
That the Infusion of the yellow Crocus, or Ochre, poured on a Solution of Sal
Chalybis, with the addition of Galls, makes a deep purple first, and afterward
black.

Observe. LXXXVI.
That the Bath-water receives no alteration by being close stopped with wax; nor
will, unless by long standing, deposite any Sediment that way.

Observe. LXXXVII.
That the Salts do exhale; as is evident from this Observation. On the 20th. of
February, 1674/5. the Cross Bath having been kept drawn 5 or 6 days, and the
Water so low, that the tops of many of the Stones did appear above it, a Salt
of the same nature with that which is extracted, was observed to adhere to the
Stones above the Water, reverberated by the ambient air, the season then very
frosty, and fixed on the Stones in the nature of a Candyed drop, or small white
tip, or speck, resembled by some that saw it to the excrements of Birds; some
of the Stones I brought away, which a month after abated nothing of their
Saltness, neither would have done, if kept till this time. Mr. Henry Dyer,
Sergeant of the Cross Bath, gave me notice of it as an unusual accident, and
Robert Baulch, at the White Horse against the Hot Bath, collected a good
quantity from the tops of the Stones, which he afterward gave me for
examination. It did melt on an Iron Plate, and left a Calx much like the
Chrystals, the taste chiefly alcalisate. The like Concretion I observed a
second time, 24 October. 1675.

Note,
That the King's Bath has not yet afforded the like Observation, in regard the
Water of that Bath cannot well be drawn so low.

Observe. LXXXVIII.
That an exact Pint of the Bath-water put into a Pint glass Bottle, and the
height of the Water presently marked, the Bath-water cold subsided lower than
the mark on the neck of the Bottle unstopt, the breadth of half an inch.

Observe. LXXXIX.
That the subsiding or seeming Vacuity, mentioned in the former Observation,
did appear within the space of two hours, although the Bottle well filled was
immediately stopped and sealed.

Note,
That Common Water waxt up warm, will subside in the neck of the Bottle, after
the same manner as Bath-water does: The Bottle top full, a void space of half
an inch afterward appearing, Q. annon hic detur Vacuum?

Observe. XC.
That the Sand of the Bath does consist of Free-stone-Gritt, Marle, Ochre,
Shells, Rubrica, Crystal Pebbles, and Sulphur; and that nothing Saline is
contained in the same.

Observe. XCI.
That the Sand of the Bath dried and weighed after the affusion of warm water
on it, and has so continued for some time, is not sensibly diminisht in its
weight, of what it was of before the affusion of the water, neither is the
water any thing salter, but a little more rough.

Observe. XCIII.
That a large quantity of the Sand calcined in a Flemish Crucible, with as
great a heat as could well be given, no Concretion was observed, but dead
gritty ashes, neither did the water in which it was afterward infused, become
more salt.

Observe. XCIV.
That the Sand of the Bath put on a red hot Iron Plate, and held in a dark
place, burns very blew, and smells much of Sulphur, if only lying some time
before a strong heat.

Observe. XCV.
That the Sand of the Bath on the affusion of Vinegar, or any acid Liquor, will
ferment.

Note,
That Common Freestone, and Shells, will do the like.

Observe. XCVI.
That the Mud of the Bath dried will ferment as the Sand.

Observe. XCVII.
That the Mud of the Bath does consist of a blew Marle, some Shelly, or
Testaceous particles, and more Sulphur than the Sand.

Observe. XCVIII.
That the foul Contents of the Bath put into a Crucible for Calcination, in
order to the making the Salt more pure, before the Marly or Muddy parts are
consumed, the Crucible then opened, and the Contents touched with a Spatule,
give a very strong stench of Brimstone, and burn as blew, as ever I saw any
Sulphur do.

Observe. XCIX.
That the Mud it self hot has a Sulphurous smell, and is very useful if
applied in these external Distempers, which Sulphur does relieve.

Observe. C.
That the Scum of the Bath arising usually most in June, July, and August,
floating on the Surface of the Waters, dried into Cakes, burns like
Stone-Pitch; and being once kindled, goes not out till all be consumed.

These Observations are made according to present Experiments; Anomalous
Observations may be noted afterward.

THE LIVES AND CHARACTER OF THE PHYSICIANS OF BATHE, From the Year, MDXCVIII,
To this present Year, MDCLXXVI.

In which, Within the compass of Fourscore Years, is comprehended great part of
the Lives of XVII. Physicians, which confirms the words of Hippocrates, in his
first Aphorism; Ars Longa, Vita Brevis.

By T. G. M. B.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, MDCLXXVII.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
ALthough he that writes the Life of another man, does almost the same thing as
he that takes upon him the care of a friend in Trust, which, however faithfully
discharged, is oftentimes accounted but a Thankless office; yet I have
adventured to give in the following Papers, a brief account of some particulars
relating to the Physicians of Bathe, with all the Truth and Candor that I can;
and if my Expressions, which I have smoothed what I may, in a few places seem
to grate and bear hard upon some, I would have those consider that shall take
exception at it, that it is not my fault I had not better matter; and if I have
proceeded as near as I could, according to the Subject, as I Am sure is done, it
will appear that I have not industriously abused the dead, or distasted the
living, but used distributive Justice, in giving every one his due.

This may also encourage others that have the like opportunity, to do the same,
that so those modest Meal-mouths, that think it too great an honor to publish
any thing in their own time, (whereby I am persuaded Learning has been more
injured than by any one thing whatsoever, good Copies by this means falling
afterward into the hands of corrupt and illiterate persons) may not want their
just commendation; and those that keep their own breath, as we say, to cool
their Pottage in a Chimney-corner, may have this good use of another man's.
Whether well or ill, Quod scripsi, scripsi, and so Farewell.

THE Lives and Character OF THE PHYSICIANS OF BATHE.
HAVING hitherto discoursed of the Waters and City, I think it not improper
here to give some account of the PHYSICIANS of Bathe, both in regard they have
been as eminent as any, I think, in any part of England, and also for the most
part have been continued in a Series of Judicious, able men, well qualified and
graduated in Universities, which deserve the greatest and most particular
mention here. And although I would have wished, that they had signalized
themselves on the place, by some other way besides their practice, by which
more remarkable Memorials would have remained to posterity, and been a good
occasion of my Commendation; yet since they were pleased, for reasons best
known to themselves, to pass by the thing that best deserved their
consideration, I mean the nature of the Waters, (only one or two having written
of them) I shall not make them the like requital, but give what account I
either know or can procure, and gather up the fragments of their Memories that
remain. And first of Doctor Reuben Sherwood.

1. Doctor Reuben Sherwood.
OF Dr. Reuben Sherwood, the first Physician I meet with any remembrance of, I
can give no other account than that he died here Anno Dom. 1598.

2. Dr. Thomas Elton.
DOctor Thomas Elton it is likely was contemporary with Dr. Sherwood, or not
long after, whom he survived twenty years, and was buried at Bathe, Aug. 11.
1618; A well bred Gentleman, obliging and affable.

3. Dr. John Sherwood.
AT the same time also flourished Dr. John Sherwood, graduated in the
University of Cambridge, who died two years after Dr. Elton, and was buried in
the Church of St. Peter and Paul, in the South-Isle, as appears by this
indifferent poetry on a piece of Brass against the Wall; in which he is
recommended to posterity with this bare Title: Joannes Sherwood Doctor Med.
Sepultus 16 Febr. 1620.

The Verses these; Conditur hic Sherwood, medica praeclarus in art
Doctor, adhuc cujus fama corusca volat:
Ossa licet lateant hujus sub mole sepulchri,
Spiritus aetherea vivit in arce poli.


Which may thus be answerably translated: Here famous Doctor Sherwood lies,
Whose skill in Physic Lore
Was great, and his bright Fame yet flies,
Both now and evermore.
Although within this Tomb his bones
Are hidden out of sight,
His Soul, not pent within these stones,
To Heaven has ta'n her flight.


Of him I can learn nothing more observable, than that he was of the Romish
Religion, and a good Housekeeper.

4. Doctor Edward Jorden.
COncerning Dr. Jorden, whose Name is yet fresh, and memory very acceptable to
all that knew him, having left the deserved Reputation of a Learned, Candid,
and Sober Physician: I have written something heretofore, and shall only here
again mention some particulars more nearly relating to his person and condition.

Doctor Jorden, I understand, was a Gentleman of a good Family, and, being a
younger Brother, designed for a Profession, for which when he had accomplished
himself, by a convenient course of studies in his own Country, he traveled
abroad to see the Manners and Customs of the Universities beyond Sea, and
having spent some time there, especially at Padua, where he took the degree of
Doctor in Physic, returned home, practiced at London, became an eminently
solid and rational Philosopher and Physician, and one of that famous and
learned Society, The Kings College of the Physicians there.

He had a natural inclination to Mineral works, and was at great charges about
the ordering of Alom, which succeeding not according to expectation, he was
thereby much prejudiced in his estate, as appears from these words in the
seventh Chapter of his Treatise of Not. Bathes and Mineral Waters; Now I come
to Alum (Indignum vex ipsa jubet renovare dolorem,) the greatest debtor I
have, and I the greatest benefactor to it, as shall appear when I think fit to
publish the artifice thereof. For the Patent or Grant for the profit of the
Alom works, which he reasonably did expect, fell afterward, I know not how, to
Sr. Arthur Ingrams lot, although the Doctor also had a good share in the
affection of King James.

After he had practiced sometime in London, he settled at Bathe, where living
many years, and having Children not a few, his conversation was so sweet, his
carriage so obliging, and his life so answerable to the port and dignity of the
faculty he professed, that he had the applause of the Learned, the respect of the
Rich, the prayers of the Poor, and the love of all. But living a studious and
sedentary life, which might encourage his two grand distempers he labors
under, the Stone and Gout, departed this life in the great Climacterical year
of his age 63, and of our Saviors Nativity 1632, lying buried in the South
Isle of the Abbey Church, but without a Monument, or any Inscription. And thus
much for Dr. Jorden who was the first Physician that writ any thing of the
Waters, that resided on the place.

5. Doctor Edward Lapworth.
DOctor Lapworth was bred up in the famous University of Oxford, and a member
of that flourishing Society, Magdalen College there, where he proceeded Doctor
in a solemn Act in the year 1611, with two eminent Physicians his
contemporaries, Dr. Simon Baskervill, and Dr. Thomas Clayton.

His correspondence was good with Jorden, being both at one time practicioners
on the place, as appears from the verses he has prefixed to Dr. Jorden in
Laudem operis. He had only one Daughter, who being married out of this place,
caused his Name to be extinct here, lying buried in the North Isle of the Abbey
Church in Bathe, and deserved a better Epitaph than this English Inscription
cut round the Stone that lies over him: Here lies the Body of Edward Lapworth,
Doctor in Physic, who deceased 24 of May, An. Dom. 1636. His age I guess was
near 60. As to his gifts of Mind they are doubtless beyond exception, having
been so well educated, and a professor, if I mistake not, in Oxford, which
gave some interruption to his practice here; being in body not tall, fat and
corpulent, which inclined him the more to take his ease.

6. Doctor Tobias Venner.
DOctor Tobias Venner was born at Petherton near Bridgwater in the County of
Somerset, of honest Parents, who sent him to Oxford, where he was made Doctor
in Physic to the great repute of his own family, and Alban Hall, in the year
1613. He lived many years at Bathe, and had the Name of a plain, charitable
Physician, but no ready man at stating a Case, which occasioned one, a little
tartly, to say, That whereas some other men had, (according to the common
Phrase) Guts in their Brains; Dr. Venners Brains were in his Guts. However he
found the right way to write a book called Via recta ad vitam longam, wherein
is this memorable Observation, V.R. ad V.L p. 59, l. 8.
That a Gammon of Bacon is of the same nature with the rest of the Hog. He
wrote also a little discourse of Bathe, thereby expressing his good will to the
Waters, which had it been bigger he should have had more thanks, but being very
small, must be contented with the like commendation.

He lived to see both his Wives, and all his Children die before him, and left
his Estate to the Relations by his second wife now in Bathe: The Ashes of this
grave,
No Phoenix, but Chimaera gave, A Riddle.

The Head, the Feet, about the Thigh,
A Duck, a Mouse, a Butterfly.


I can give no better account of him than a Friend of his has done in this
Epitaph, to be seen engraven in a Marble Table, in the middle of a massy
Monument of Freestone against the East Wall of the South Isle, in the greatest
Church of Bathe, under his Effigies in this manner.

SISTE VIATOR NEC SORDIDE OBTULIT QUI The Author of this Epitaph, for who made
it is uncertain, seems rather to me to have been a Divine than a Physician, for
which conjecture I have these Reasons:

1. That the form thereof is borrowed from one made on Doctor Daniel Featley,
now in Lambeth, as I could clearly make appear by comparing the Expressions, as
I have sometime done, and for the satisfaction of any that desire it, may
without a journey thither, be read, mutatis mutandis, in Doctor Featley's Book
against the Anabaptists, where it is copied, and whence it was probably taken.
Now a Physician, I conceive, would never have taken pattern from a Divine, to
make an Epitaph on his own faculty, which is proper for a Divine, being more
his concern.

2. Venerandus is a word suiting better with a Divine, and a more proper
Epithete than for a Physician, as Reverendus and Venerabilis; and is most
likely to have come from one whose tongue was tipp'd with such language, who
would rather choose to run the risque of an impropriety in speech, than lose
the honor of a jingling quibble.

3. It Is probable this Epitaph was made near a Church, and that either when the
Bells were going, or else in imitation of that sound, as may appear from the
Chime of Hoc and Illo, Horum and Illorum, His and Illis, with the great pains
taken to observe the Cadences so exactly as is done.

4. In the fourth place, the word plus is somewhat suspicious, by which we
must understand Minus, otherwise, Nec plus defuit sanis quam aegris paupe^ibus,
may bear this sense, and not well any other, that the Doctor was wanting both
to the one and the other, when the Author, I suppose, meant he was wanting to
neither. Now Plus is a fit word for a divine, and might the sooner have been
made choice of for this, that it is the origin or sourse of the word Plurality.

Fifthly and lastly; No Physician would have used that Expression, Theoriam
unius anni confirmans Praxi 85, by which Doctor Venner is made a Practicioner
from his Mothers womb, and longer a Physician than St. John Baptist was a
Prophet, which in it self being somewhat harsh, though taken in relation to his
course of life, where the life of that expression lay, can proceed from none
but a Divine, who oftentimes will be nibbling at Physic.

Again, for I reserved something for a second part, That expression is justly
liable to exception, Quod Charitatem solus hic tamdiu exercuisset, wherein Dr.
Venner is made the only Charitable person in Bathe, whereas there were then
living, besides some Charitable Inhabitants of another stamp, three or four
more Physicians there, whose Charity, though perhaps not so rampant as Dr.
Venners, was enough both in food and Physic to call the truth of that
expression into question.

And although this necessary requisite to every good Christian that is in a
condition so to do, be not with that ostentation put into the Epitaph of Dr.
Baue. Yet I have heard a good Character of him also in this kind, and do know
many poor persons now alive in Bathe, that will affirm they have received good
Alms and Physic too from his Charity. I confess Tamdiu may do some service
here, to this effect, that Dr. Venner was the only man that was charitable
here so long, which, though it may abate somewhat, does not take off the
arrogance of Solus, which, like the Sun, never appears without reflection. I
write not this to derogate from Dr. Venner, or disparage the Epitaph, having
that esteem for both they do deserve; but as the Devil, we say, should have his
due, so I think, it is not fitting a Saint should have more. And thus much for
the Charitable Dr. Venner.

7. Dr. Ralph Bailey.
DOctor Ralph Bailey, of whom I am next to treat, was well known to all his
Colleagues of New-Colledge in Oxon, where he had his Education, to be as stout a
man as that Society has yielded, having in his Temper an equal mixture of Mars
and Mercury, or rather, born under the praedominium of Mars, as he has often
evidenced when he longed for Venison, though sometimes bought at a dear rate.

Doctor Bailey was born in Berkshire, descended of a good Family in that County,
whose Coat Armor is, In a field Gules, three Martlets; or, A Chief Vairy
Argent of Azure. Having spent some time in Winchester School, that fruitful
Seminary of Learning, he was in due time transplanted to New-Colledge in
Oxford, where he gradually proceeded with good applause, till he arrived at the
perfection of Doctor of Physic, which happened in the year 1618. By two Wives,
the one a Quintin, the other a Hungerford, both comely Women; he had issue both
Male and Female.

His eldest Son Walter, my intimate friend and acquaintance, he educated in the
University, in Magdalen Hall in Oxford; but finding his genius not so much
inclining him to Learning, though he was ^ great admirer of it, and had much
respect for any Scholar that was truly so, and had Learning enough himself to
render him facetious, and as good company as any man could wish; finding, I
say, his genius not so much bent to study, he rather chose a gentile Education,
and being very acceptable to all persons of Quality, especially the Gentry of
Hampshire, in particular Sr. Richard Gifford of Sumburne, Henry Ludlow of
Tadley Esquire, and many others, where he used to hunt and recreate with all
the kindness imaginable; at last, on the death of his Father took to the
Estate, and settled at Bathe in the same house the Doctor enjoyed, where he
lived plentifully many years, and saw an end of all his Generation, till at
length, for Death is the end as well of the good Companion as the Sot, of a
lingering distemper, being much obstructed in the Mesentery and Urinary
passages; he ended this life about the sixtieth year of his age, on the 15 day
of November, An. Dom. 1672, and is buried in the Abbey Church in Bathe.

Doctor Bailey is further remarkable in this, that he is the only man save one,
of any Physician that lived here; that had a Son of his own Profession, which
was Mr. Thomas Bailey, by his second Wife Mrs. Hungerford, an Ingenious man, and
good Physician, of whom his Brother would often speak with much affection and
respect, who in the beginning of the Wars, when no Acts were kept, was with
many others, created Doctor An. Dom. 1642, and practicing at Newbury in
Berkshire, with good success and reputation, died of a high infection in the
prime of his years, not long after. He was much encouraged to the Delivery of
Women, being fitted for that service both by art and nature.

It is also further observable in Doctor Ralph Bailey, that although he had good
practice, and prescribed to many Patients, yet such was his good Temper of
Nature, and Temperance withal, that he never took any Physic himself, or made
use of the Bath, being never sick in all his life; which fell the heavier on
him, according to the vulgar observation; for going from his house at Bathe to
another he had at Widcombe, a mile distant, he was suddenly taken with a great
faintness, insomuch as he was constrained to call at a Neighbors house before
he came to his own, to desire something to refresh him, using these words, as
God shall mend me, which was his usual saying, I am ill, and presently
departed, and was buried at Widcombe, Nov. 16. 1645.

He was a proper, Comely person, charitable, and well read in the Ancient
learning, witness a good Collection of old Authors, well marked with his own
Hand, now in my possession. And so much for Dr. Ralph Bailey, being the only
man, I think, that ever lived and died without pain.

8. Sr. Edward Greaves.
DOctor Edward Greaves ought also to have a mention here, having sometime lived
and practiced in this place (to which he has relation yet) till his deserts
preferred him to what he now enjoys, concerning whom, to avoid the imputation
of flattery, which I ever hated, I shall say no more, than that he is full of
Honor, Wealth and years, being a Baronet, one of the College of Physicians in
London, Physician in ordinary to his Majesty, and 35 years Doctor in Physic,
which he took being Fellow of All Souls College in Oxford, An. Dom. 1641.

9. Doctor Samuel Baue.
WIth Doctor Baue I had the happiness to have a particular acquaintance, being
the eldest Physician on the place at my coming hither, in the year 1667, and
although many things are observable in his life and practice, having lived to
see completed fourscore years, yet I shall contract my self as much as may be,
in regard I would not be tedious in a thing that ought to be brief.

Doctor Baue was born in the remarkable year 1588, at Colen in Germany, of a
good Family, as appears by a good Coat of Arms brought thence, whence he came
young for England, on occasion, as he told me, of his being Tutor to Sr. Thomas
Edmond's Son, which Sr. Thomas was Ambassador from King James at Paris,
where Mr. Baue was then a Student, in which Family, and about the Court, he
continued some time with an honorable allowance from the Knight, but chiefly
bent his studies to the faculty of Physic, in order to which he afterward
became a Member of that great Body and famous Society of Christ-Church College
in Oxford; where he proceeded Doctor in Physic in the year 1628, with three
other Physicians that went out with him, viz. Dr. Tailor, and Dr. Speed of
St. John's, and Dr. Saunders of Oriel, at a very splendid Act.

The first beginning of his public Practice was at Gloucester, being invited
thither by one Whittington an Apothecary, where though his condition could not
be expected to be extraordinary, having no Natural, but acquired Friends in
England, yet in time he made his own fortunes, and so well improved his small
Talent at first, as to leave behind him, besides what he parted with in his
life time which was not inconsiderable) the best estate of any Physician that
died in Bathe. And I have often heard him bless God for that good success he
had given his undertakings, and the prosperous condition he had brought him to,
not without a modest humble reflection on what no man had any reason to be
ashamed of, in the words of good Old Jacob, in the like condition, With my
staff have I passed over this Jordan, and now the Lord has made me many bands.
Which is more than many men have said, that have been raised to greater Estates
by less skill or pains, it being no disparagement to any man to have a
beginning since none but God but had so; and a gatherer, though the first rise
of a Family, is much better than him that scatters through many Generations.

After he had been some time in Gloucester, his Parts and Learning procured the
good opinion of Alderman Robinson, a wealthy Citizen, and Counselor at Law,
whose Daughter he married, with whom he lived many years, and had Sons and
Daughters. From Gloucester he removed to Bathe, about the year 1640, where
practicing with admirable success, for near thirty years, and maintaining a
mighty riding practice, died in a good old age, in his eightieth year, as may
further appear by this Epitaph I caused to be engraven in Marble on a handsome
Monument, erected by his Wife Mrs. Hester Baue in the South Isle of the Abbey
Church, as follows: P. S. COLONIAE AGRIPPINAE NATUM M DC LXVIII. OBDORMIUNT
ETIAM NON PROCUL ABHINC

He was besides an able Physician, well verst in the High Dutch, Low Dutch, and
French Tongues, but above all eminent in the Latin, which he wrote and spoke
very fluent and proper.

He met with no kind usage toward the latter end of his days from one whom he
had formerly sufficiently obliged, who, because I hope he has or may live long
enough to repent his unhandsom carriage to him, and some others of the faculty,
shall only here be marked with the Letter, I. F.

He had an excellent memory, and ready invention, insomuch as having much
business, and using two Amanuenses, he would write himself, and dictate to the
other two, at the same time, in several Languages.

He was also very happy in, the glory of a Physician, the Cure of Chronical
distempers, which he effected chiefly by Chalybeat Medicines, which, he was
wont to say, were as true as Steel; but a little too much addicted to the
vanity of Nostrums, which he being many times unwilling to discover, caused
some dislike on consultation with others.

He was by Nature not so affable, but somewhat morose, and hated an Emperick,
though made use of his Medicines. In short, He was an industrious man, an able
Physician, and much in the favor of that great Physician of his Time Sir
Theodore Mayern, between whom many Letters passed, on Commendation of Patients,
chiefly French. And so I pass on to Dr. Maplet.

10. Dr. John Maplet.
DOctor John Maplet was born in London, bred at Westminster-School, and
afterward removed to Christ-Church in Oxford, where he was first Proctor of
the University, then Doctor of Physic, in the year When he had his Grace, but
kept no Act till 1654.
1647. and after that Principal of Glocester-Hall; a man well accomplished as a
Gentleman and a Scholar, meek, sober, and temperate, beloved and respected by
all that knew him.

While he was in the University, he had an opportunity by accompanying the Lord
Viscount Falkland, to whom he was Tutor, to Travel, and accordingly went in the
year 1650. into France, where he continued near two years, chiefly at Orleans,
Bloys and Saumur, and made many Observations on those Countries, which he
committed to Writing in a neat and curious Hand, in some Epistles now with me,
with a particular Tract of his Travels, in an elegant Latin Style, which I may
sometime or other make public, and do further right to the memory of this
Worthy Person.

A second time he Traveled into Holland and the Low Countries, with my Lord
Falkland, then Viscount, on the death of his elder Brother, whom before he had
accompanied into France, the young Lord Scudamore, and Sir Henry Jones, who
lost his life by an unfortunate Shot at the late Siege of Maestricht, and at
his return, or shortly after, married Mrs. Anne Hull of Bristol, where he
usually practiced in the Winter time, and at Bathe in the Summer.

And although he left a good Estate, considering the small time he had for
practice, dying not old, and spending much of his time at first abroad, yet I
must say, he had no right done him, by one that pretended much kindness to him,
D. Wall of Chr. Chapter Oxon.
on whom, to my knowledge, he had reason to depend, and whom he not only courted
and honored as a Patron, but had almost the same Reverence for as for a
Father, as does appear by that Volume of familiar Latin Epistles, I have by me
directed to him for the whole space of 16 years, viz. from the year 1650. in
which he traveled, to the year 1666. But seeing that Cunning Fox is now
eathed, I shall not dig after him; but proceed to some other Particulars, of
no Vulpone alike under ground.

He was of a tender, brittle Constitution, inclining to feminine, clear skinned,
and of a very fresh Complexion, and though very temperate, as I said before,
yet inclinable to Rheumatick Distempers, chiefly Gouts and Catarrhs, which
would oftentimes confine his Body, but not his Mind, which was then more at
liberty to expatiate, and give some invitation to his Poetic Genius, which was
very good, to descant on the Tormenter, and transmute his Sorrow into a Scene
of Mirth. I shall mention one or two out of the Manus^ripts I have, because
Ingenious and short.

The first is, De Catarrhi in oculorum alterum defluxu ad Amicum singularem D.
D. Wall.
SPongia praemadidi collis mihi clausa cerebri est,
Expressoque oculum degravat imbre meum;
Omnis ab infuso turgescit Venula succo,
Nec siccum hoc aqueo cernis in orb locum,
Ingratum Phaebi lumen: transire fenestras
Auroram roseo nil juvat ore meas.
Nil juvat in faculo lignorum lucida Strages,
Pyramidesve altae quas sibi flamma facit.
Nil florum splendour: species nil pulchra colorum,
Hos si vel proprio fundis ab ore, Venus.
Delicias oculo facitis qui forte serenat,
Cui gratum est quicquid, dum micat ipse, micat:
Sed pluvias, and acre serum immingente Catarrho,
Solamen Tenebrae lumine majus habent,
Defluvium pacant quae sunt expertia lucis,
Ni tamen e vultu lux ruat illa Tuo.
Nam de Te radius mulcet fulgore Catarrhum,
Opticus and mihi quem frons Tua vibrat, erit.
Sufficit in reliquis obscurae noctis imago,
De Te sed veniet quaeque serena dies.


Another is, De Catarrhi Fuga.
FAre, ubi diluvium est? mihi tandem exaruit orbis,
Absumptasque suas continet amnis aquas.
Ordo Naturae, rerum and Simulachra recurrunt,
Et minimas atomos sicca pupilla capit.
Non fontem, sed pumiceum jam cernis ocellum,
Et Victor lachrymis fraena dat ille suis.
Splendore ingenito lucet Chrystallina seeds,
Cui fuscam ecclipsin guttula nulla parit.
Jam licet immittas, oculorum Phaebe, fenestris
Te totum, Sphaera est illa, vel illa, capax.
Pulchra veni, si quando lubet, Tu Flora, colores,
Seu facies istos, seu Tuus hortus alit.
Nil jam divinum lumen, jam palpebra nullum
Excludit, mihi Nox atque Catarrhus abest.
Plus tamen hoc gratum est quod non circumfluit humor,
Vultum qui possit dimidiare Tuum.
Nam mihi quem lippo reserebant vivida vela,
Integer haud fuerat, pars erat illa Tui.
Te fruor, atque oculi speculo, sed dulcius illud
Quam speculi, quod pars perdita nulla Tui est.


The good Doctor was very sensible of his approaching end, and well knew, that
all the props of Art were too weak to support his crazy Temper, and therefore
was not of the number of those that are blamed for having gray hairs creeping
on them, but not regarding it; for he made these Excellent Verses In Primam
Canitiem, which shall be the last of his I shall mention here.

Humida jam Nivibus sparguntur Tempora primis,
Et fuscam intingunt albida fila comam.
Sentio quam tacit non intellecta Senectus
Obrepit; nos Ver credimus, instat Hyems.
Haec si tardescat, mox infert Cura senectam,
Mensque dies cito quod non facit, ipsa facit.
En quoties morimur? succos sive exedit hora,
Sive hos degeneres turbida Cura parat.
Grata mihi veniunt tamen haec praeludia fati,
Morsque his primitiis, quam ferit, ante monet.
Respicias animum, Tibi det Prudentia canos,
Atque annos Virtus praeeat alma tuos.
Hoc decet, hoc pulchrum est, atque hoc canescere divum est;
Foedus eris canus Vertice, mente Puer.
I have not adventured to Translate the two former Copies on the Catarrh, in
regard I think they cannot be so aptly expressed in any other language, those
Verses, as many others, sounding best in their own words; yet as a foyl to the
Doctor's Jewel, to render it more radiant, I have attempted a Translation of
the last, thus: On the First gray Hairs.
On Temples moist first Snow is shed,
Twist, brown and white, is on my Head;
Old age creeps on, that Silent Thing,
Winter's at hand, We call it Spring.
If this delay, Care brings on age,
And thoughtfulness prevents Time's rage.
How often we die? whe'r Time devour
Or Toilsome Care our Juyces sour.
Welcome these Monitors of Death;
Death stops not now, but warns, my breath.
In prudent mind see Thou be sage,
Let Virtue older be than Age.
Thus to be gray is meet and good,
For God grows gray thus understood;
And it is indecent to behold
A Boyish Soul, a Body old.


His Body being macerated by a weakness of the Tone of all the Parts, by
degrees languished to that measure, that confined him for some few days to his
Chamber and Bed, and a flux of blood supervening from the Hemorroides, which,
though stopped in time, gave him little hopes of recovery, and therefore after
the use of many means in vain attempted, he resigned himself to death, which in
a short time ensued.

One thing I must remind, as an argument of his Contentedness to leave this
World, That after my self, and Mr. Rob. Chapman his Apothecary, who attended
him in his sickness, had left him, and taken our leaves of this dying Friend,
Sr. R. N.
an Eminent Physician of his former acquaintance coming accidentally to Town,
and hearing the Doctor was so dangerously ill, made what have he could to pay
him his respects, and enquiring of Mrs. Maplet how the Doctor did, and she
replying, without any hope of Life, he, in kindness, said, If he were not dead,
he would do his utmost endeavor to recover him; and desired her to acquaint
him with as much, which she did; but the Doctor replied in his modest manner,
Pray remember my Service to Sr. Richard, and let him know that I thank him for
his visit, but am past his cure and any body's else, and shall take it as a
kindness, if in the condition I am now in I am not troubled; and the same night
parted with this Life for a better, according to the Motto of the Rings at his
Funeral, Morier ut vivam.

He wrote several Latin Epistles, in which he had a singular faculty, (which,
with some Poems, and a few Observations, were the greatest part of his Writings
he left behind) as well to the most Eminent Sir Alexander Fraiser Knight, and
Principal Physician to his Majesty, his Learned and good Friend Sir John Baber,
with whom he had an intimate acquaintance, Sir Francis Prujean, Dr. Bate, Dr.
Meara, Dr. Nedham, and others at home, as also to some abroad, particularly Dr.
Neal of Leedes, and Dr. Bennet of Saumur, where he was very sick, and recovered
from an imminent danger of death, by the help and assistance of this Physician,
as he most pertinently expressed in one Epistle, in which are these words; Sed
and Silente illa Comitatis Tuae voce, resuscitata Mihi Tua open Sanitas, ad hoc
scribendi officium, nullo etiamsi alio devinctum nomine, adegisset, ut qui
fuerit conservatum Corpus, Corporis saltem pars manus recognosceret. Per Tuam
scilicet Apollineam manum, in suo refloruit domicilio, robustus ille vigor, quo
itinerum aut suscipere labores, aut perferre debueram.

I shall end the Life of Dr. Maplet, with one expression of his kindness to me,
and another of mine in return to himself.

The first is, That on the setting up of Dr. Bave's Monument, there having been
some envious spirits that raised a discourse to the disparagement of that
Epitaph, I was constrained to appeal to this Worthy Judge of Learning for a
Censure, which I did in these words. Censuram Tuam, Vir Doctissime, de hoc
Epitaphio liberam and vere criticam peto obnixe; Vtrum Prisciani, ut dicitur,
Capiti vulnus aliquod sit inflictum, quemadmodum Tenebrio quidam anonymus, cui
sinciput uti suspicor, parum sanum est, deblaterat, fac ut sciat Tui
Observantissimus. To which the Candid Doctor returned this answer; Cur dicam
Tibi Epitaphii hujus causa scribat ullam, aut ferulae plagam cur jubeat
retribui, ob vulnus aliquod in Capite suo inde acceptum, omnino non habet
Prisci^nus. A Tuo, ut ab Eruditorum calamis solet, illaesus permanet, debitoque
fruitur honor; si vero Beatitudines in plurali, apud authors politos
infrequentius legamus, haud ideo in Grammaticen peccatur; sed and isti numero
Hebraeorum idioma de Coelesti loquentium felicitate, quod Te callere scio,
forte favet. Ecce quam libere Tecum and sincere, prout ipse jubes, ago; quod
ipfum amoris studiique erga Te mei certissimum quoddam pignus esto. Tibi
deditissimus.

The other I call a kindness to Him, is an Epitaph much short of his desert,
now standing in the North-Isle of the Abbey Church in Bathe, which out of the
great respect I had to the memory of my Worthy and Learned Friend, I presented
to Mrs. Maplet, and is now cut in a black Marble Table well adorned, and set in
the midst of a neat Monument of Alabaster, in these words: CONDITUR HIC OBIIT
PRIDIE NONAS SEXTILES

His Wife also enjoying little health afterward, being Paralytick and
Convulsive, died Apoplectick, the 14th. of February following, only 6 months
and 12 days surviving the Doctor, of whom, as also of two Children John and
Mary, lying on both sides of the Parents, this remembrance may be seen in a
little Marble Table under the former.

SEPELITUR ETIAM JUXTA His style in Latin was terse, his words choice, but his
Periods a little too elaborate. And thus much for the Learned, Candid, and
Ingenious Dr. Maplet, a good Physician, a better Christian, and an excellent
Poet.

On Themison.
WHen many Autumns Themison had past,
He Master of a great house was at last;
Another passing by, and viewing it,
Said, Here Is a great head, but, pray, where is the wit.
The House was great, the Furniture but small,
The Head had skull, but had no brain at all.
Vltimus hic ego sum, sed quam been, quam male, D. Johnson de Seipso.
nolo
Dicere, de me qui judicet alter erit.
I am the last, but whether Be, or Drone,
Another pen shall write, and not my own.
Others also there were good Practitioners on the place, though not of that
degree. The first of which is;

Mr. Thomas Leyson.
THis Physician was a Welchman, but of what County in Wales I know not; a man
of a good repute, and especially taken notice of for his Charity to the Poor.
He is as remarkably commendable for his kindness to his Wife, who lies buried
in the Parish Church of St. James in Bathe, with this Epitaph made by himself
in Brass against the Wall, under the East Window, which, because a rare
instance of Affection, I shall mention here, and for the further ^ropagation of
the kindness of this Welsh Love, shall translate into our own language.

The Latin Verses are these: TRistia quae Vxori moestus Tibi carmina pono
Quam vellem nimium Te potuisse mihi?
Septem annos (sic velle Dei est, sed nolle Parentum)
Et sine Connubio mutuus arsit amor.
Bis septem sine lite ulla simul egimus annos,
Disjungi and mortis Lis mihi prima Tuae est.
Sola meos Tu, habuique Tuos ego solus amores,
Quos habet atque habeat dehinc Libitina Tua.
Tecum semper eram viva, defuncta ero Tecum,
Nunc animo, and dum mors junxerit atra duos.
Namque ista (cum fata vocant) dormire sub urna
Destino, propitius det mihi vota Deus.
Tho. Leyson Vir moestiss. Mariae uxori posuit 1599, Apr. 15.


The Translation thus: THese Verses thus in grief made on Thee, Wife,
Would Thou had made on me to save thy li.
Seven years (so long did friends cross heavens will)
We loved and liked, but at a distance still.
Twice seven years more we lived in love together,
Serene and calm, Thy death first brought foul weather.
Thou had my Loves alone, I only Thine,
Which now unto Thy Ghost I do consign,
Alive was with Thee still, dead will be so,
In mind at present, till in Body too:
For when God please, I Will rest too in Thy grave,
From whom this boon in mercy now I crave.
Tho. Leyson in much grief made this on Mary his wife, 1599. Apr. 15.


This Mr. Leyson writ a Latin Poem, in which was contained the description of
the Ancient Seat of the as ancient Family of the Stradlings, called St. Denets
in Glamorganshire, which, the laborious and learned John David Rhaesus, that
took so much pains to so little purpose, in the Epistle Dedicatory to his Latin
Welsh Grammar, written to Sr. Edward Stradling, affirms he saw, and turned into
Welsh, giving it the commendation of Venustum Poema, and He the title of, Vir
^um rei medicae, tum Poetices peritissimus. He died in Bathe, and, as far as I
understand, had his desire, expressed in the two last verses on his Wife. The
time of his death is uncertain, being not entered in the Register.

John Vincentius Ostendorph.
OF this Physician I can give no other account than that he was a German, and
like Field-fares and Wind-thrushes did change his climate for better food,
which he liked so well that he married here one Mrs. Cavell, Sister to an
Ingenious Limner of that name, and after some years practice, died, and was
buried in the Abbey Church in Bathe, the 12th. day of April, An. Dom. 1648. I
have mentioned him in this place, because if a Doctor of Physic it was beyond
Sea, of which I have not assurance.

Mr. John Dauntsey.
MR. John Dauntsey was a Gentleman of a good extraction, and younger Son, as I
have heard, to a Knight, who having been bred a Scholar, was encouraged to the
practice of Physic by Dr. Jorden, for whom Mr. Dauntsey had a great esteem,
as appears by his Verses on Dr. Jorden's Treatise. He was a man of great
integrity, but made no considerable advance in the World. He died ancient near
80, in the year 1650, and was buried in the Abbey Church, Febr. 12. He married
a Gentlewoman of a good family, one Mrs. Winter, by whom he had besides other
Children, Mr. John Dauntsey his eldest Son, who practiced Physic with good
success in Bristol, and died lately; and another now living a Surgeon.

There was an Epitaph made on him by one known by the name of Dr. Somerschall,
a Chemist, who if no better Chemist than Poet, was never like to attain the
liquor Alkahest, or the Philosophers Arcanum, which, because I am informed, it
was put on Mr. Dauntsey's Tombstone by this Philosopher (of which I have seen
some marks) I have through his means made so great a progress as to know where
the Philosophers Stone is, though but little legible on it now, vvhereupon, as
greater Chemists have been in this search, I was frustrated of my expectation;
however the Verses were in part these, or to this purpose: Here lies Doctor
John Dauntsey by name,
Whose harmless life, whose Saint-like death, whose lasting fame
With judgment good in Physic lore,
Approved to posterity shall this engraving over last evermore*


Mr. Thomas Brewer.
MR. Thomas Brewer was born in the County of Somerset, where there are now of
that name related to him, of good Estates; an industrious man, a good Scholar,
and expert Physician, as I have understood by his prescriptions. He was well
acquainted with the Greek and Latin Tongues, and excellent in the former,
which is so rare among many pretenders to the faculty now, that Graecum est,
non potest legi, may be made use of again, and therefore this instance of
Commendation ought not to be omitted. He lived many years in good esteem, and
is buried in the Abbey Church with this Inscription on a piece of brass on his
Tombstone: Here lies the Body of Thomas Brewer, late of the City of Bathe
Physician, who departed this life the third of November, An. Dom. 1665.

Mr. Somerschall.
AS a Conclusion, or Epilogue, I shall add the life of one Somerschall, a
Chemist, mentioned before, who died in Bathe, after many projects, in a poor
condition, which, in a merry riming humor, I thus suddenly vvrote.

There dwelt a Chemist here of note,
That wore in Summer a furred Coat;
Who promising to make all rich,
Left not enough to cure the Itch.
Full glad was Bathe of such a guest,
And gave him room among the rest
That came to practice here, or try
What gain it was to multiply.
His tackling he together got,
To work he went, would do what not?
And sooner others to fetch over,
He vvheedled in the Earl of Dover.
Both night and day the fire brent,
To bring to pass this grand intent,
Which was the thing aimed at, I Am told,
To pave the streets of Bathe with gold.
But yet to compass this design,
There must beforehand be some Coin,
Which freely lent, on Reputation,
To pay, the German pawned his Nation.
A house was built fit for the work,
Where he in privacy might lurk,
As close as if made underground,
The money went but nothing found,
For something still fell out to cross
The main, and multiply the loss.
At length, when nothing did appear,
And he had wrought this and that year,
Death seizes on this Artist great
To try if he were not a cheat.
Unwilling he was sore to go,
And leave his work imperfect so,
But go he must; on which they mind
to see what pelf he left behind,
And find no Gold or Silver oar,
But Soot and Horsedung there good store.
His pockets searched too were unwilling
To part with all they had, a shilling,
Which was too little judged by all
To pay the charge of's Funeral:
The boards of a poor Hut he built
Were sold to multiply the gilt,
To set the Caput mort in ground
Of this Philosopher profound.
Th'Apothecaries too, they say,
Were willing something to defray,
As part of what they got to boot
By sale of's famed Spirit of Soot.
Hermes his Bird went thus to rest,
Leaving a Feather in his nest.
On whom as on a broken staff,
I write this homely Epitaph:
Here lies the man, whom Bathe did call
By th'name of Doctor Somerschall;
Or, if you like this better, know it,
Here lies John Dauntsey 's famous Poet.
THE END.

