THE Lord Keeper's SPEECH TO Mr. Sergeant SAVNDERS, At the time He was Sworn
LORD CHIEF JUSTICE Of His MAJESTY'S Court OF King's Bench, Tuesday the 23 d.
January, 1682.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Pawlet, at the Sign of the Bible in Chancery Lane,
1682.

THE LORD KEEPER'S SPEECH TO Mr. Sergeant SAVNDERS, At the time He was Sworn
LORD CHIEF JUSTICE Of His Majesty's Court of King's Bench.
YOU are sent for hither by the Kings Command, to supply the Place of Chief
Justice of this Court, now vacant by the removal of the Lord Chief Justice
Pemberton, to be Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas.

It was a very unpolitick course that was taken heretofore, to punish a Chief
Justice that served Ill in the Common Pleas, by advancing him to this Place, to
make him discontented, and at the same time to entrust him with greater Power.

The King has inverted that course; He will not have this a Seat of discontent:
they that serve Him well here, shall have this encouragement, that though they
are in the Highest Place of the Law, they are not above his Reward; for if they
desire it, He will prefer them to Ease and Plenty in a Lower Station.

There could never be a better occasion to make this demonstration; for no Man's
Services were more Eminent, nor better Accepted, than my Lord Chief Justice
Pemberton's, and yet there was a further Reason for the taking him from Hence,
The King had need of his Service in His Privy Council, which would require more
time than could be spared from this busy Province, without great prejudice to
His People.

And that His People may not suffer in the want of so good a Magistrate, His
Majesty has taken care in the Choice of Your Self, to Succeed him in this
Great and Important Office.

You are so qualified for it by your natural and acquired Parts, by your solid
Judgment to determine right, and your clear expression of reason for the
satisfaction of others, by your Knowledge of the Law, and long experience in
the practice of this Court: And these abilities not mastered by any unruly
passions, nor accompanied with any suspicion of Pride or Covetousness, but
having the advantage of meeting a Person of manifest Integrity and Affection to
the King's Service; I say, you are thus so eminently qualified for this Office,
that the King immediately, and without any Hesitation designed the Office for
You; and though others had been longer in His Service, and very useful to it,
yet His Majesty was pleased with an Occasion, to show the World, that he will
consider neither Age nor Order, in disposing of Places of Great Trust in the
Law, but they which are most fit and deserve best of him, shall be preferred.

Mr. Sergeant, The Greatness of your Merit does not lessen the Obligation you
have to the King; for notwithstanding this Great Character you have obtained in
the World, there is much more to be expected from you, which the King takes
upon trust. You are now to show your Self a Good Magistrate, which requires
another sort of Spirit; Every good Lawyer cannot make a good Judge, nor every
good Man a good Magistrate, though every good Judge must be a good Lawyer and a
good Man.

Sometimes a private man is commended for Qualities, which in a Magistrate
would be Faults.

A private man is praised for showing Humility and Deference to others in his
Conversation, and passing by Indignities.

But a Judge must take Greatness upon him; He must consider he represents the
King's Person in his Seat of Justice; He must therefore be very careful to
preserve the Dignity that belongs to it.

He must have Passions, but not of a private man, that may disturb his
Judgment, but he must assume Passion to set off his Severity, when the
Greatness of the Crime requires it; but it must be done so, as it may appear
that his Judgment governs his Passion, and directs it against the Offense, and
not against the Person.

A Judge must be covetous, but not as a private man, for his own profit, but he
must be very solicitous for the King's Profit, knowing that the King's Revenue
is like the Animal Spirits, without which the Government would not be able to
perform its ordinary Motions.

Mr. Sergeant, you that have already shown your self a good man and a good
Lawyer, will now approve your self (I doubt not) a good Magistrate, and a good
Judge; I may say without Flattery, that you come into this Seat with as few
Passions and personal Frailties, as any that have been before you.

But in another respect your Burden is far greater than theirs, in respect of
the Times; The Age is degenerate and full of Faults; Faults of Irreligion,
Immorality, Debauchery, Quarrelling, Falseness and Faction, so full of Faults
that it requires more than a man to censure them.

You will therefore consider that inferior Magistrates and inferior
Jurisdictions are to take a great part of this Labor off your hands, in that
regard you will upon all Occasions encourage and direct them to make them
useful to you, and not overthrow their Proceedings upon every slight Exception,
to drive People to begin their Process here at greater Charge.

And when Justices of the Peace act heartily, though not with so much Skill in
the Law, you will show Tenderness to them, as Gentlemen that serve the King and
the Public for nothing, and have not those Assistances of Council and Officers
that are here.

You have the Assistance of very skilful Officers in this Court, and you will
give them all due Encouragement; but you must have a strict Eye over them, that
they neither oppress the Innocent, by sending out Process, upon every malicious
and frivolous Information, nor take part with Offenders, by making Errors,
whereby, after Conviction they shall escape out of the Hands of Justice.

They are paid Fees for Discharges, but not for Convictions; and therefore it
may be feared they will not be careful to prevent Errors: But they should know,
the greatest Use of Officers, is, that Business should be in the Hands of
skilful Men; and that when a Criminal escapes by their Negligence or Ignorance,
the Fault of the Offender lies upon them, and they show themselves to be unfit
for their places.

Mr. Sergeant, When you have the due Assistance of Inferior Magistrates, and
of the Officers of this Court, your Province will not be so burdensome as it
is esteemed.

And you may yet reduce it into less Compass, by seasonable Severities,
whereby, when you have once mastered the Heads of Disorder, others will easily
be kept in Obedience to the King's Laws.

The Temper of the present Age requires your Severity in Cases of Sedition. It
was lately grown to that Height and Insolence, and managed with that Malice,
that it was thought very near breaking out into open Force, to the Danger of
the Kingdom: But by the wise Conduct of His Majesty, with the Blessing of God,
it was suffered to baffle it self by its own Extravagance, you may expect it
should now be crafty; therefore you must be the more careful to stop the
Beginnings of so dangerous and quick-spreading a Poison, and to suppress all
false News, Libels, and other Materials of Sedition.

A great means toward it, will be to cut off all hopes it may have of
Countenance in the Courts of Justice. You must not suffer Councils to abett the
Guilt of their Clients, instead of endeavoring to make them appear innocent,
nor urge their own Opinions instead of Arguments of Law; and with that pretense
of Authority, that when the Court differs from them, they affect to show a
Discontent, as if they appealed to the Bystanders. These Indecencies were not
tolerated heretofore, and if you meet with them, you should animadvert severely
upon those that offend.

You must be sure to maintain the respect that is due from the Bar to the Court.

The Greatness and Dignity of this Court, is necessary to the use of it, that
no Offenders may think either by their Number or Magnitude to be too hard for
Justice.

Mr. Sergeant, I touch these things but lightly, your own Judgment will show
you better Methods, to make the Jurisdiction of this Court answer the ends of
its Institution.

That the World may see the truth of the Act of Parliament, that took away the
Court of Star Chamber, which recites, that whatsoever was regularly punishable
there, might be punished in the ordinary Course of Justice.

That the King may see the use and sufficiency of the Law for the Support of
his Government, and may be more and more satisfied in his Resolutions to govern
according to Law; and all his People may live happily under his Government.

Mr. Sergeant, When you have these Great things under your Care, I know you
will do your utmost for the accomplishing them.

FINIS.

