A SERMON Preached at the Visitation held at High Wickham in the County of
Bucks. May 16. 1671. WHEREIN The Ministers Duty is Remembered. Their Dignity
Asserted. Man's Reconciliation with God, urged.


By Samuel Gardner M. A. and Chaplain to His Majesty.

^ch the Word, be instant in Season, out of Season, Reprove, (...) Rebuke,
Exhort with all long-suffering and Doctrine.

2 Timothy 4.2. ^ed is that Servant, whom his Lord when he comes, shall find
(...)so doing.

Matthew. 24.46. (...) ^d who is sufficient for these things?

2 Cor. 2.16. LONDON. ^ted by T. Ratcliff, and N. Thompson, for Nath. Ranew at
the Kings Arms in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1672.

To The Right Reverend Father in God, WILLIAM, By Divine Providence Lord Bishop
of LINCOLN, All Felicity and Celestial Happiness.
My Lord,
YOU may most justly Wonder at this attempt why I (the meanest of so many)
should expose my self unto Public view, and the manifold Censures which will
inevitably follow hereupon.

Secondly, In this my bold address unto Your Lordship in the Dedication, with
so poor and barren a Sermon, upon so rich and fruitful a Text, wherein so many
glorious things should be insisted on. But my fear is most the Censure of God;
and that I may be afraid to Censure others.

I confess it is better to be haled in by force of others unto great Duties,
then over hastily to rush upon them.

Your Lordship knows right well, That Forwardness argues Insufficiency.

They are modest beginnings, which give hopeful Proceedings, and happy Endings.
Yet when I considered that Servant was Condemned of Evil, that gave God no more
then his own, which he had received, Matthew. 25.27. Though but one Talent, yet
ought to have improved it.

Then with neglect of Censure, contented to learn to be Contemned; I adventured
to send forth this Plain Sermon into the World, seconded with many desires that
the Blessing of Heaven may go along with it, under Your Lordships Patronage.

I Design nothing of Controversy; I inveigh not against any one; I would give
no offense, neither to the Jevv nor to the Gentile, but especially to the
Church of God. 1 Cor. 10.32. Nor yet to gratify such as are accustomed to
humane flourishes, oftentimes contracting Itching Ears do begin to loath the
simplicity of the Gospel, and will not endure sound Doctrine. 2 Timothy 4.3.

The efficacy of the Holy Spirit does more appear in a naked simplicity of
words, then in too much Elegancy and Neatness.

Hence Saint Paul says that he was (...), Rude in Speech, yet not in
Knowledge. 2 Cor. 11.6.

Your Lordship is not ignorant that the two great Pillars, upon which the
Kingdom of Satan is erected, and by which it is upheld, are Ignorance and
Error; The first of these is so far from being the Mother of all Devotion,
that Saint Bernard says, it is Matter omnium Vitiorum. Bern. de ordine vitae.

Through the Power of the Gospel, and our careful Government, holy Discipline,
we shall be much delivered from these Mischiefs.

Your Lordship has now a large Opportunity for Gods glory, and the Churches
good, to further, and honor, the truth of the Gospel in the Power and Purity
of it while the Church of God shall be favored with Your life, and happy
continuance amongst us.

The Lord stretch out his holy Arm together with you in that great Charge
committed to you, and make your Lordship as great a blessing, as faithful a
favorite unto Piety, as great a supporter and encourager of the faithful
Ministers of the Gospel, and the most sincere, and Godly of your Lordships
Diocese, as ever did Preceed you, or ever shall Succeed you. And then give you
a full and an ample reward; that your last translation may be to a never fading
Crown, and such choice delights as never entered into the heart of man to
conceive.

The Lord of Heaven and Earth bless your Lordship with many and happy days, and
grant you true Felicity. Thus craving your Lordships pardon for my presumption,
I subscribe my self

Your Lordships, Humble Servant in all duty and faithful Service, Samuel
Gardner.

Reverend and dear Sir,
HAving lately had a happiness to hear a Sermon read by a Reverend Friend,
which not long since you Preached at a Visitation, concerning the Dignity and
Duty of Gospel Ministers. I could do no less, then signify to you how much I
was affected therewith; and how much I desire You would make it Public, being
persuaded that through the Blessing of God much good would accrue both to
Ministers and private Christians, into whose hands it may come, who cannot but
be both delighted and edified by reading it; and learn thereby, the one to be
more painful in Preaching, and the other more careful in Hearing, and both more
Conscientious in living regularly.

Howsoever your Work and Labor of love, in so Learned and Powerful
dispensation, shall be rewarded. Nor do I fear, as he who read your Sermon
seemed to do, That any of the dissenting Brethren that are truly pious and
peacable, will take the least offense at any passage therein. Which is all at
present from your unworthy Brother, Friend and Servant,

John Bryan.
Toddington. Sept. 6. 1671.
Ministers Dignity and Duty. A Sermon Preached at the Visitation held at High
Wickham in the County of Bucks. May 16. 1671.
2 Cor. 5.20. Now then We are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech
you by us; We Pray you in Christ's stead, be ye Reconciled to God.


THE great Ambassadors of Kings and Princes in this inferior World Command
Respect and Reverence from all beholders.

And what innumerable multitudes are there, whose highest Ambition it is, to
feed their Eyes in viewing and beholding their goodly and comely Order, both in
their access for Audience, and also in their retedure?

Here the Solemnity is more honored, a greater Presence promised unto the end
of the World. Matthew. 28.20. The very Attendance more glorious in nature then
our selves. Heb. 1.14.

The Place more beautiful and amiable, the things more rich and excellent,
sublime and spiritual.

An inestimable treasure is now presented which excels all the Riches of the
Earth, the unsearchable Riches of Christ. (...). Riches that has no footsteps,
which cannot be traced out; that is the propriety of the Word.

Though we are men of like Passion with your selves, that Preach unto you, that
ye should turn from Vanities unto the living God, which made Heaven and Earth,
etc. Acts 14.15. for that you are no more able of your selves to hear God
speaking to you immediately in his own Wisdom, then Israel, in whose eyes the
glory of God was like devouring Fire, and they as stubble before him. Exodus
20.19.

Therefore let it content you, that you have this Heavenly Treasure, though in
Earthen Vessels; that the Excellency of the Power may be of God, and not of us.
2 Cor 4.7.

And seeing it is the pleasure of the Almighty God to have it so for his own
Glory, and your eternal Happiness, is it fit and rational for Dust and Ashes to
Dispute, and to be angry with the Judge of all the Earth? Genesis 18.25.

And for poor Worms to rebel against their Maker, at whose Presence both
Heaven and Earth does tremble.

Here Is Gods great Condescension: because of the weakness of our apprehension.
And if there be humility of greatest Poverty, yet here is an attestation of
preatest glory. That no man might be offended, but rather stand astonished with
an holy admiration at the infinite grace, wisdom, mercy, and goodness of God.

First, That his own Son, God blessed for ever, should assume humane nature to
save us, to unite a Clod of Earth unto his Divine Person! That Christ should
give this World so glorious, so magnificently great, and so happy a Visitation!
Greater Condescension then if some great Prince should go into an Hospital to
look on a loathsome diseased Creature.

Here Is superabundant love of God in Jesus Christ, which transcends all the
degrees of Comparison!

And then, that God should entreat, woo, and beseech us by the Ministry of his
Ambassadors, that we would save our selves from everlasting ruin. That God
should look upon all the Children of men in their fallen lost sinful and
miserable Condition, with such pity and compassion; who have made themselves
liable to eternal Wrath, which they understand not, which they are not able to
bear; That God out of his infinite grace and wisdom should find out, and
provide a way and means of Salvation: For the Children of men his professed
Enemies.

In the words we have these particulars to be considered.

First, The Apostles illation, drawn from the Premises, by which the Text has
his Coherence, with the precedent verses. And presents us with this
instruction, That we are not bound to accept matters of Religion, meely without
all reason, and probable inducements.

Secondly, the assertion of the Subjects by plain Enunciation, We are
Ambassadors.

Thirdly, the honorable Dignity of these Ambassadors, they are for Christ;
Ambassadors of Christ.

Fourthly, the Authority of God the Father confirming this excellent Dignity,
as though God did beseech you by us, and as if Christ himself stood by and
prayed men, We pray you in Christ's stead.

Fifthly, here is res considerata, and modus considerandi; The Gospel Embassy
it self.

Secondly, the way and manner of Gospel Ministers delivering of Gods Message
and Errand unto the People; and that not in a way of severity and rigor, but
beseeching and entreating to be reconciled to God

Now the Doctrinal truths which are to be Collected and deduced hence are these.

First that the Foundation of our eternal Salvation is laid by God in Christ.
God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself.

Secondly, Gods Ministers have their Commission from Heaven, they come in the
Name of the great King of Heaven and Earth, and are his Commission-Officers.

Thirdly, that God who might come in flaming Fire to consume us in a moment,
comes to us in the greatest Mercy, Tenderness, and Condescension, Praying and
Beseeching us to be reconciled unto him.

Fourthly, that God and Man are at a great distance.

Fifthly, Reconciliation unto God was the most glorious work that ever was
wrought, and the most blessed word that ever was heard; But I must not think to
grasp all these. But the truth that I intend to insist upon, is this: That it
is the great Honor and Dignity of the Ministers of the Gospel to be the
Ambassadors of Jesus Christ. But I will first speak something of their Duty:
and then Secondly, of their Dignity. Thirdly, of man's reconciliation to God, in
the Application.

The words of my Text, as you have heard, are an illative Conclusion drawn from
the Premises, verse. 19 there is set forth the Reconciliatiation on Gods part:
He though Pars laesa; the Party greatly and grievously injured and offended
(the greatness of an offense growing from the dignity and excellency of the
person offended; and this makes it Crimen laesa majestatis, so heinous and
Capital, high Treason indeed against the Crown and Dignity of Heaven) yet
contrives and designs this great work of Reconciliation.

God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself; namely, by his Merit and
Intercession; for as the greatness of the injury grows from the dignity of the
person offended, because there the worth of the offended person is hurt, so the
worth of him that makes satisfaction does grow from him that makes
satisfaction; because here the yielding of honor is looked into, which depends
upon the Dignity of him that yields the honor.

And has committed unto us the word of atonement or reconciliation. (...)
showing that a Minister of the Gospel should have the Doctrine of
Reconciliation first fixed and placed in his own heart, and so speak from his
own heart to the hearts of others, and comfort others with those comforts
wherewith he himself has been comforted of God.

When a man is no stranger unto those things he delivers unto others; how
many are there who only have a humane knowledge of divine things?

There is nothing more easy (says Bishop Hall, Cent. 2. Med. 91.) then to say
Divinity by rote, and to discourse of Spiritual matters from the Tongue or Pen
of others; but to hear God speak it to the Soul, and to Feel the Power of
Religion in our selves, and to express it out of the truth of experience
within, is both rare and hard. All that we feel not in the matters of God is
but hypocrisy, and therefore the more we profess, the more we sin. Luther felt
what he spoke, and had experience of what he wrote; and being to, speak of our
Justification by Faith in Christ, says he, In my heart this one Article
reigns, even the Faith of Christ, from whom and unto whom all my divine
studies have recourse to, and through continually.

Says S. Paul (...); and who is sufficient for these things? Who is sufficient
for the ministry of Life? Who has fit and particular qualifications for such
places? for matters of such weighty and great importance, for so great a charge
as is committed to them? If a man were to paint the Sun, or to limn out the
nature of a Soul, who could instruct him what Colors he must use? It is not
enough that men have public vote for public places, but they must have
suitable Endowments. He that thinks to act for God, must have qualifications
from God.

There must proceed a mission and Commission; or else whosoever runs abroad,
had better have staid at home. 1 Timothy 3. The Apostle lays down their particular
qualifications, who shall be fit for such places, and he would have us look to
whom he has qualified. That our most Reverend Bishops, most instructed in the
Government of the Church, and most highly dignified in it, should take great
heed whom they bless: Such as may know how to behave themselves in the Church.
This calling by man is not to be despised. For it is not enough, as Luther
observes, for a man to have the Word and pure Doctrine, but he must also be
assured of his Calling, and he that enters without this certainty, enters to
no other end, but to kill and destroy. For God never prospers the labor of
them that are not called. And although they may teach some good and profitable
matter, yet they edify not. A Minister must be (...). 1 Timothy 3.3. given to
Hospitality, a lover or user of Hospitality, according to the Apostles
exhortaion, as we have therefore opportunity let us do good unto all men,
especially unto them who are of the Household of Faith. And also after the
Example of our heavenly Father, who makes his sun to shine on the evil and on
the good, Matthew. 5.45. And for that the common sort approve of friendship by
profit. Non ex benedictis, sed ex benefactis.

But especially a Minister must be (...) apt to teach, ready to teach, ever
ready pressed to do any thing which the Lord has given him in charge; to feed
the Peoples Souls with divine meat, to approve himself a Pastor after Gods own
heart, ever laboring to imitate our Blessed Lord and Savior, Matt. 5.2. who
so opened his mouth that he taught the People the way of life and Salvation,
and that with most admirable Wisdom, excellent Grace, singular Meekness, ardent
Zeal, and Authority unusual, not respecting any man's person, so that never man
spoke like this man. Joh. 7.46.

And as God said to Moses Exodus 23.13. In all things that I have said unto you
be circumspect, (...) Ye shall be wary, or take heed to your selves, that ye
transgress not. So our Savior gave the charge unto his Disciples to be as wise
as Serpents, and harmless and innocent as Doves. Matt. 10.16.

Christ would have them Wise and Innocent. The Serpent has too much subtilty,
but wants simplicity, and innocence; therefore the simplicity of the Dove, and
the wisdom of the Serpent make a good mixture; yet of the two, it seems more
safe to want wisdom then innocence; better to err for want of wit, then to
deceive with too much.

Nocentissimi autem qui non simplices, sicut stultissimi qui non sapientes,
prastat minus sapere quam peius, errare quam fallere.

Tertull. adversus Valent. Cap. 2. This must be our rejoicing according to that
golden saying of the Apostle, That in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with
fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the
world. 2 Cor. 1.12.

Again, a Minister must be a Labourer not a loyterer in Gods harvest Whereunto
I also labor, striving, says the Apostle, (...), Sweating and taking great
pains, bearing the burden and heat of the day. Col 1.29. Which may be most
truly verified of him, who labored more abundantly then all; as his works in
the New Testament do sufficiently witness. Christ never bad us pray for
loyterers and lookers on; such as will rather let their bodies rust away, then
spend and wear them away in the service of God.

The Ministry is a matter of Service; as an Honor, so a Burden. None are
called into Gods Harvest but Laborers: And therefore what Work we have to do
for God, we are to put forth our strength about it; our great Errand and
business in this world being to save Souls, we are to apply our selves unto it
with all our might; which is the Argument of the Holy Ghost, Whatsoever thy
hand finds to do, do it with thy might, for there is no work, nor device, nor
knowledge, nor wisdom in the Grave whither thou go. Eccles. 9.10.

Jeremiah says, Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord negligently, or
deceitfully. Jer. 48.10. Maledictus qui facit fraudulenter. Arias Mont.

If this curse do not touch them, which do the chiefest business of the Lord
negligently, truly I know not whom the Prophet means.

Says Paul to Timothy, Give attendance to Reading, to Exhortation, to
Doctrine, meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them; (...) be in
them; 1 Timothy 4.13. and after the example of Christ (...); says he, I must be
about my Fathers business. Luke 2.49. The Apostles professed unto the multitude
of People that came about them, that they would give themselves continually to
Prayer, and to the Ministry of the Word. Acts 6.4. Many thrive not in their
Studies, as not calling upon God for his assistance therein, and blessing
thereupon, by frequent, servent and constant prayer; which is an excellent way
to make a man's ministry shine. And also joining Fasting thereunto, as often as
is convenient. Christ excused his Disciples in not fasting while he was with
them: But took it for granted that they would fast, so soon as he was gone from
them to Heaven. Matt. 9.15.

This is that which seeds the Soul with the dainties of the Scripture, does
refresh and comfort with Contemplation establishes with grace, and nourish
with heavenly food. This is also the way to true Honor, and to do something in
the World for the glory of God.

Jejunium scripturarum deliciis Pascitur, contemplatione reficitur, gratia
stabilitur, coelesti pane nutritur. Quotquot vires virtutum vidimus, sine
jejunio non legemus ascendisse: nec aliquod magnum moliti sunt, nisi prius
abstinentia praecessisset.

Cypr. de je junio and tentationibus Christi. That our profiting may appear to
all, many delivered out of ignorance, many purged from their filthiness, when
we declare unto our People all the Counsel of God. Propound the will of God out
of the Word unto the Edification of our People, when the end of Preaching is
love, out of a pure heart, and a good Conscience, and faith unfeigned, labor
to save our selves and them that hear us. 1 Timothy 1.5.

This is the only way to be great Blessings unto them amongst whom we live;
when thousands are enriched by you. Many bless God that ever you came amongst
them; and to have many Prayers of the Saints ascending to Heaven for a Blessing
upon you in your Ministry; this is no small mercy. To be instrumental for much
good unto the Church of God, this is one of the greatest happinesses in this
world, To have large Opportunities for God and his Church. And when a Minister
is a Voice, he is heard; Ignorance does not silence him, nor laziness, nor
abundance of preferment, nor indiscreet and distempered zeal; he is a Voice in
his Habit, in his Gesture, and in his Life and Conversation, as well as in his
Doctrine.

Now the Peoples eyes will be taught as well as their ears; who otherwise, will
be most unmerciful and severely Critical. Noah was a Preacher of Righteousness;
because his Life was an actual Sermon. An innocent and unrebukable life is a
silent testimony of a good Minister. But especially when we manifest our love
to Christ by feeding his sheep. Joh. 21.15. By doing all that belongs to the
office of a good Shepherd to his sheep; either young and tender, or strong and
well grown. This is also a sure argument of the Ministers love to Christ, when
he does Conscionably labor to Edify those, whom Christ loves, and for whom
he dyed. When we labor to approve our selves abundantly to the Church of God,
and to the Consciences of men: But not unto their humors.

To answer the end of our Education, the Cost and expense of God, Parents, and
Schoolmasters, the expectation of Friends, and any who have showed us kindness.

And now what infinite pity is it, that any one way of sin should ever stand up
to hinder us from serving of God, in the Gospel of his Son? or rob us of our
Excellency, and Beauty, and Strength, and Glory. So much sin and lusts, so much
loss of excellency. Genesis 49.4.

When there is either lewdness or negligence of them that are able to do well
in their Ministry, and yet do contrary, although your words be never so loud,
yet if your works be lewd, though you were sons of Thunder, yet a crack in the
Instrument will spoil the sound. Sin even in Ignorance is a talent of Lead; but
sin in Knowledge is a Millstone to sink a man to the lowest. Bona noscere, and
mala facere, to know good, and do ill, makes a man's own mittimus to Hell.

The pleasures of sin are dear bought in any, but especially in a Minister.
Heb. 6.6. This does a world of mischief and hurt both in heaven and earth. The
Minister that spends himself like a Taper to give light unto others, must not
himself go out with an ill savor. When such a one as David sinned, he gave
great occasion to the enemies of God to blaspheme; others may swear and
swagger, and they matter not, nor wonder not. 2 Samuel 12.4.

This was the reason why the Indians refused the Gospel brought by the
Spaniards: because their lives were more savage then those Savages. It is said
of Hophni and Phinehas, that although they were the Lords Priests, yet they
were sons of Belial; they knew not the Lord, and by their sinful and corrupt
Sacrificing, they made the People abhor the Sacrifice. 1 Samuel 2.12. So many by
their raw indigested slubbering of the Word, for want of study and meditation,
do make men think that there is no more Wisdom, Purity Perfection, Majesty and
Glory, then they show out of it; And therefore they stay at home, and say. They
know as much as the Minister could tell them. When in a whole Sermon the hearer
could not pick out one Note more, then he could gather himself.

Good Matter slubbered up in rude and careless words is made loathsome to the
hearer; as a body misshapen with unhandsome Clothes. [B. Hall.] A good
Minister as he makes Conscience of Preparing his heart to serve the Lord, so
he will not serve God with that which cost him nothing; He converses much with
God that he may be holy; as the Object of his Preaching is Christ and the
Gospel, and the Kingdom of Heaven, so he labors to be heavenly also. O how
graciously should we deliver Gods Errand to the People, and they hear it with
fear and trembling!

Holy Duties call for holy Preparation: David washed his hands in innocence
before he compassed Gods Altar. Psalm. 26.6. And Job intending to sacrifice to
God in the behalf of himself and his Children, sends to them solemnly to
Prepare themselves. And if this be not done, if they sin not against more
light, yet certainly against greater obligations.

Nay, the very Heathens themselves would not admit any to come to their
Religious Services, unless they were prepared; as that of Aeneas to his Father
Anchises, upon his return from the Wars. Tu genitor cape sacra manu, Patriosque
penates.
Me bello e tanto digressum and caede recenti.
Virg. lib. 2. Aenead. p. 176. Therefore they had one that cried out to the
people, Procul hinc este prophani; All you that are unclean and profane depart
hence, and come not near us. And shall Christians who have learnt better
things, touch holy things with unholy hands, or unholy hearts? no, they must
not, they ought not; Holy Duties call for holy Preparation, and in a most
special manner of a Minister, that comes so near unto the Lord. Men must be
sanctified within and without, before they come to the performances of any holy
duty: It is true that the Duty sanctifies, but men must be sanctified for the
duty.

Again a Minister must be active and vigorous in the reproof of sin, Preach the
Word be instant in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long
suffering and doctrine. 2 Timothy 4.2. Young Timothy must Reprove and Rebuke;
Preaching the same Truths with aged Paul. It is Gods Charge unto Isaiah, to Cry
aloud, to spare not, to lift up his Voice like a Trumpet, showing the People
their Transgressions and sins. Isa. 58.1.

A Minister must sometimes change his note, differ from himself, sharpening his
speech, dipping his words in gall as our Savior himself did. Ye Serpents, ye
generation of Vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of Hell? Whom yet we may
find in another place, Matt. 5. as it were Piping and Dancing, and all
melodious sweetness. When Elymas the Sorcerer, would have obstructed Saint
Paul's Preaching, and have turned the Deputy from the Faith. Paul set his eyes
on him, and cries out, O full of all subtilty, and all mischief; thou child of
the Devil, thou enemy of all righteousness.

It Is true the Gospel has not one hard and unkind word against a Child of God;
but always Grace and Peace from God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ. This
is the Voice of the Ministers of the Gospel, Peace be to you, and Fear not: for
behold I bring you good tidings of great joy. Luke 2.10.

Says the holy Apostle, Ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to
fear; But ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father.
Romans 8.15. It is never a Spirit of Bondage again in that sense and meaning, as
it was before.

But now on the contrary, there is nothing but woe unto sinful and profane
ungodly wretches; There is a time to reprove sinners and workers of iniquity,
most sharply, as well as to comfort Saints.

God is content sometimes that we should derive from his Throne Thunderings,
and Lightnings, and louder sounds. Rev. 4.5. When Israel in Moses his absence
corrupted themselves in making a molten Calf, Moses did not dance after their
pipe, and laugh at their Idolatrous Image, and superstitious merriment: but
with great zeal reproved their folly, and with indignation confounded their
Idol.

So if the whole Nation be grown Sermon-proof, sits still and is at rest,
settled on the lees, profane, Athiestical; should we not be false Prophets to
cry nothing but Peace? Certainly we must now Cry with Isaia. Woe to a sinful
Nation. When men's lives proclaim Wars against God, must we not denounce Gods
Judgments against them? We would be glad at every Sermon to say nothing but
Peace to this Audience; but our God says, There is no Peace to the wicked. We
would sing with the Angels, Peace on Earth, and good will toward men: but how
shall we sing the Lords Song in a strange Land? Ps. 137.4. We have Preached
Glory, Honor, and Peace, and Salvation, and an incorruptible Crown, and the
choycest delights that heart could wish; and were not regarded: What remains
then? but to Preach Indignation, and Wrath, tribulation, and angnish upon every
Soul of man that does evil. Romans 2.8,9. Fire from Heaven, Plague, Sword, and
Famine, Captivity, Emptied from vessel to vessel, hurried from place to place.

Mists, and Clouds, and Darkness, and Torments for days and nights, and eternal
generations of Years.

We have Piped unto you, and ye have not Danced. Matt. 11.7. we have sung, With
thee, O Lord, is mercy, that thou may be feared. Psalm. 130.4. But now we
must change our note, With thee is Vengeance that thou may be feared.

If the Spirit of Gentleness can do no good, a Rod must come; if the Songs of
Sion cannot Mollify, the Thunders of mount Sinai must Terrify.

Eli though a good man, yet his Reproof wanted life, and indignation against
sin; Nay my Sons, for it is no good report that I hear. 1 Samuel 2.24.

In the matter of Preaching, O what weighty things does the Word contain?
Truths that should make the very bowels of the Minister to yern, and pour out
his affections in the Pulpit, to rouse up the Peoples thoughts, and awaken
them, from the sleep of sin, and security, wherein they have lain so long a
time; Otherwise, when they hear of matters of Life and Death; Salvation and
Damnation, they sit like blocks in their Seats as though it were no great
matter. Thus the golden Bells of Aaron must be rung in several tunes. A
Minister must labor to be like John Baptist, to be a burning and a shining
Light, more then a Voice; there must be life and heat in his Ministry. Job.
5.35.

A Minister had need of many rare and excellent gifts, to open the Scriptures,
to deduce from them, to convince of sin, to lay a good foundation, to move the
affections (which the holy Scripture is so full of) And most certain it is that
they which are of the most prodigious, wonderful and incomparable parts, are
most sensible of their own inabilities. When God told Moses he would send him
to deliver Israel, says Moses to God, Who am I that I should go unto Pharaoh?
Exodus 3.10. When none in all Israel or Midian was comparably fit for this
Embassage.

Which of the Israelites had been brought up a Courtier, 1 Scholar, an
Israelite by Blood, by Education an Egyptian, Learned in all the Wisdom of the
Egyptians, and was mighty in words and is deeds. Acts 7.22. So that he was
Learned, Wise, Valiant, Experienced; Yet he says, Who am I? It Is to be feared
there is few amongst us look Moses his way; first upon himself, his own
insufficiencies.

How few amongst us, that are named to any place, begins at Moses, What am I?
where have I Studied, and Practiced sufficiently before, that I should fill
such or such a place of Judicature? where have I served, and labored, and
Preached in inferior places of the Church, that I should fill such or such a
place of Dignity or Prelacy there? How few like Abram left to say in all
humility, I am but Dust and Ashes; or Jacob, Non sum dignus. I am not worthy of
the least of these Preferments: But every man is vapour'd up into Air, and (as
the Air can) he thinks he can fill any place. Many run into the Magistracy;
many into the Ministry; but who is sufficient for any one? Who is sufficient
for these things? says that (...)* Master of Speech. 2 Cor. 2.16. This is
spoken in the high Commendation of Apollos, that he was an Eloquent man, and
(...); powerful, and mighty in the Scriptures. Acts 18.24. fervent in the
Spirit, teaching diligently the things of the Lord. Therefore a Minister must
have his senses exercised in the holy Scripture, even beyond the common sort of
believers; so that he may be said with Apollos, Mighty in the Scriptures:

And though he may and ought to make use of Councils, Schoolmen, and Fathers
with reverence; yet Apostolical Writings are only to be appealed to, as the
last Rule of Faith.

Thus having spoken something of the Ministers Duty, though in this Grave,
Worthy and Learned Audience; not to be Your Instructor, but so as to bring
things to your remembrance.

Now it remains that I should speak something of the Ministers Dignity; and for
that you see it falls in my Text.

There is no Duty but the Lord crowns it with some Privilege, Blessing and
Dignity, and that duty and service of the Ministry is not excluded, but
expressed more eminently and emphatically.

Now then, We are Ambassadors for Christ.

This is the great Honor, and Dignity of the Ministers of the Gospel, to be
the Ambassadors of Jesus Christ.

Therefore we magnify our Office: and this heightens our Calling from the
preciousness of the Truth, which is to be manifested by us. The greatest
Mystery in Heaven and Earth; that upon which depends the great weight of
Salvation, a glorious and great dispensation is committed unto us.

First, Ministers are called Watchmen. Son of man, I have made thee a Watchman
unto the house of Israel. Ezekiel. 3.17. a Minister has relation, and is debtor
unto the whole Church of God. This shows the Churches danger, and the Ministers
duty, carefully to watch, and to warn, to foresee, and foretell danger; this is
the Watchmans duty, as not to be blind watchmen given to sleep and slumber.
Isa. 16.10.

And upon this very ground the Apostle exhorts the Hebrews, that they should
give Honor and Obedience unto the Guides, Leaders, Governors, and public
Officers of the Church, because they watch for your souls, as they that must
give account. Heb. 13.17. therefore Honor, Reverence, Obedience and high
Estimation is due unto them, as the Servants of the most High God, which show
unto men the way of Salvation. Acts 16.17.

(...). Nomen quaesivit ab omni ambitione prorsus remotum, and tamen authoritat
is maximae, si quis suo munere sancte fungatur. Beza in loc. Non dubito quin de
Pastoribus loquatur, and reliquis Ecclesiae gubernatoribus. Nam neque tunc
Christiani Magistratus erant, and quod vigilare cos dicit pro animabus, ad
spirituale regimen proprie pertinet. Primo obedientiam, deinde honorem illis
defer jubet. Haec duo necessario requiruntur, ut plebs fidem ao simul
reverentiam Pastoribus habeat. Nam quo quisque plus laboris suscipit nostra
causa, and quo majori difficultate, vel periculo se nobis impendit, eo sumus
illi magis obstricti.

Call. in Loc. Secondly, Because this obedience will make them do their duty
with joy and not with grief; With grief and sorrow for your disobedience, when
you oppose your selves, and are obstinate, and rebellious, and ignorant, and
set not your hearts to Consider of what is taught.

Thirdly, Because their Rulers discouragement occasioned by their disobedience,
will be unprofitable to the disobedient; For that is unprofitable, says Paul,
you shall be infinitely loosers at last, mourn and be in bitterness at the last.

The Ministers watch for your Souls to win and gain them if it might be. The
Charge of Church Rulers is the heaviest of all Charges, because of Souls; the
most assiduous and painsul setting not of the body only, but the Spirit on
work; because it is a Charge of watching, the most dangerous of all Charges;
because the account of lost Souls within the Church, shall be required at their
hands, Acts 20.26,27. whether they have done all that which became them to do,
to save them or not?

All the People ought to watch. Mark 13.37. and to be sober and vigilant. 1
Pet. 5.8. But the Minister is to watch over all the Flock with a most vigilant
eye. The two famous Academies of Oxford and Cambridge, are called the two Eyes
of this Land, in comparison of other places: And they are ( in Potentia many of
them) to be watchmen; excelling in more clear seeing reason, men of Piercing
understandings, Pure phansies, Quick inventions, Conversing with God in the
immediate dialects of the Holy Ghost. Others see not but by their Eyes; they
see with their own what is written in the holy Scriptures. They hear (as it
were with their own ears) the very same word which God once spoke unto his
People.

They can perceive the peculiar and native Elegancy, the sweet allusions, and
Cadences of Words, with the rich and lofty expressions in the Original, whereas
others can but drink of the waters which run through the Chancls of
Translation; they have recourse to the Fountains themselves, drink at the
Springs Head, where the waters must needs be both sweeter and clearer: For
dulcius ex ipso font bibuntur aquae. Inspectio fontium, says St. Austin (de
doctrina Christiana) is a special help for the understanding of the Scripture;
what need he wait upon a Chanel, that may dwell by a whole Fountain?

That I may digress a little further.

Our Nobility themselves, have delightfully devoted themselves, in the morning
of their time, to gather their choicest flowers out of these Gardens. Those
that study not the holy Languages, that dig not in these mines; they cannot
find such precious Metal, such goodly pearls, such choice Jewels.

And such of our Nobility as come to be fervent lovers of sound Literature,
purity of heavenly Doctrine, and godliness in sincerity of heart, wherein true
Nobility does chiefly consist (for indeed there is none truly Noble but the
Virtuous) This is the way to add to the Renown of all their famous Progenitors,
and propagate an everlasting augmentation, and increase of all virtue, and
honor to all that shall succeed them: Like Romanus who was Noble of Birth, but
more Noble in his Martyrdom. Not the Blood of my Progenitors, says he, but
Christian Profession makes me Noble.

I suppose it is granted by all wise men, that there is some knowledge of the
Tongues necessary to the understanding of the Scripture: for the Scriptures are
understood by the same means that other humane Writings are; by the use of
Logic, Rhetoric, Grammar, and those Tongues in which they are expressed:
though it is most true, that there is a singular light of the Spirit always to
be sought for by the faithful in the Scriptures, to an acquired habit, though
not in that peculiar and special manner, when they were insused by the Spirit
of God into the minds of men.

Though the Penmen of holy Scripture wrote not according to Art, (as some tell
us) but according to grace, which is above all Art: (for unto them the Spirit
of God did indite and dictate) Yet they that have written of Art, have found an
Art in their Writings. Non enim secundum artem scripserunt, sed secundum
gratiam, quae super omnem artem est; scripserunt enim quae Spiritus iis loqui
dabat; sed tamen ii qui de art scripserunt, de eorum scriptis artem
invenerunt. Ambr.

Periculose docent, qui prius non didicerunt. They are dangerous Teachers, and
unfit for Watchmen, that never were learners.

While they will not become Scholars of Truth, they become Masters of Error.
Says Christ, I will make you fishers of men; yet they went not presently out
of the Boat into the Pulpit, he was three year instructing them: Christ
commanded them to stay at Jerusalem, till the Holy Ghost descended on them:
Acts 2. they must not simul recipere and effundere, Receive in and Pour out at
once. Heri catecumenus, hodie Episcopus. But first be well principled, and full
fraught with sound knowledge, and good learning.

As all the Israelites went down to the Philistines, to sharpen every man his
Share, and his Coulter, and his Ax, and his Mattock. 1 Samuel 13.20. so in the
Schools of the Prophets, studious young men, do exceedingly sharpen their
understandings, grow, and improve themselves insensibly.

The Levites under the Law were first Probationers, before they were allowed to
be Practitioners. This is the way to be men of gravity and experience; to
Thunder in Doctrine, and Lighten in Conversation, having an inward Principle of
the light of holiness in them from Christ, that they may shine out holily unto
others, not only in the Pulpit and Prayer, but in the whole Course of their
lives also. That they may be able to say, as the Christians did of old, Nos non
eloquimur magna, sed vivimus; We do not speak great things, but we live them;
they cannot look to be satisfied by the fruit of their mouths, qui operibus
destruunt, quod recte docent, who say one thing and do another.

Secondly, Ministers are called Prophets, such as by the inspiration of the
Holy Ghost did foretell the ruin of sin, and the reward of virtue, and were
interpreters between God and Man.

Prophets and Seers, such as were immediately stirred up by God, and
extraordinarily assisted by his Spirit, in such weighty matters, as could not
otherwise be effected.

Now Prophets are of such account with God, that it is said God will do
nothing, but he would reveal it unto his Servants the Prophets Amos 3.7. Kings,
Priests and Prophets, were figures of Christ; all these were anointed with Oil,
to show that they had greater grace, then the rest. But especially the Prophets
are called Men of God; to show that all that are of God will make much of
Prophets for Gods sake.

And Job speaks of such as one of a thousand, an Interpreter, that shows unto
man his righteousness, and Gods righteousness. Job 33.23.

Thirdly, All the people of God must work in Gods Vineyard. 1 Cor. 3.9. but the
Ministers are co-workers with God. When we Reprove and Rebuke, and threaten for
sin, God he threatens; when we Exhort for Duties to be performed, Graces to be
improved: God he Exhorts; when we Invite and persuade, and Comfort by the Word,
God he Comforts: and therefore those things, which Gods Ministers befeech, or
Command in the Name of Christ; people ought no otherwise to receive them, then
if Christ Jesus himself stood by, and commanded them: Therefore as Christ was
content to be Baptized of John Matt. 3.13. so be you content to be instructed
of us: And they that think themselves too wise, to be taught by us, let all
such remember that God has chosen the foolish things of the world, to confound
the wise. 1 Cor. 1.27. Let them think us those Fools whom God has chosen to
confound them.

And all such as account our Preaching foolishness, we grant it unto them that
perish; For the Preaching of the Cross is to them that perish foolishness: but
unto us that are saved it is the Power of God, and the wisdom of God. 1 Cor.
1.18,24.

We are Laborers together with God, says the Apostle; and of believers in
general, says he, Ye are Gods Husbandry, Tillage, Field, or Building. 1 Cor.
3.9. which ought to be closely united to one another in the service of God.

Therefore they ought not to be rent into parties one from another. But the
Ministers are the Builders, to build men up in Faith and Holiness and in the
Comforts of the Holy Ghost. Not for that we have dominion over your Faith, but
are helpers of your Joy. 2. Cor. 1.24. And that the fear of God might be in
every Heart, and the worship of God in every Family, as so many Temples or
Sanctuaries.

Fourthly, Though all Believers in general be the Servants of God, yet the
Ministers are the Stewards, and Dispencers of the blessed mysteries of
Salvation. Let a man so account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and
Stewards of the Mysteries of God. 1 Cor. 4.1.

The Magistrate is (as it were) a Fingers of Gods Hand, the Minister a Steward
in his House, though in a large sense all are the Lords Ministers. Says
Luther, A Master of a Family has something to do, a Magistrate more, and a
Minister most of all.

Fifthly, Ministers are called Stars, for that they must shine in the Firmament
of the Church here, shine others, and outshine all others, as Stars of the
first magnitude, yea as the Sun it self: When God set the Sun in the Firmament,
he bad him shine there; so when God sets a Minister in a place, he expects he
should shine in his Ministry. The Heavens declare the glory of God; Psalm. 19.1.
now how do they do it, but to the Eyes of men, and by the Tongues of men, for
whom they were made: For as a man's Tongue is his glory, so it should especially
be for the glory of his God. But for a Minister God has promised most divine
assistance, that he will be with his mouth, Exodus 4.12. and says Christ to his
Disciples, It is not ye that speak, but the Holy Ghost Mark 13.11. Yet that
extraordinary Promise was most proper to the times of the Primitive
Persecution. A Ministers work is in a most special manner to Trumpet forth the
praises of his God; to shine in the firmament of the Church here, and to
outshine the Sun in the Kingdom of his Father hereafter.

They that be wise shall shine, and they that turn many to righteousness as the
Stars for ever and ever. Dan. 12.3. First wise for the salvation of their own
souls, that when they have Preached unto others they themselves may not become
cast-aways. 1 Cor 9.27. Like those Carpenters, that built the Ark to save
others, and were drowned themselves: Or like Porters of Great men's Gates, that
let in others, but lodge without themselves.

Secondly, Gaining of others, saving himself, and them that hear him. 1 Timothy
4.16 Timothy must save himself and them that hear him; and then this is a
pledge of our glory; the Promise is clear, they that turn many to Righteousness
shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever.

Ministers are like Lamps which consume themselves to give light unto others.
And from hence some do strongly imagine, that the blessed Apostle had a
peculiar regard and respect unto Ministers in that 2 Cor. 5.1. For we know,
that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building
of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. q. d. dye when
you will, heavenly mansions are ready for you. Joh. 14.2. your eternal
happiness and blessedness is secured, which being so; those Ministers which are
ready to say with Peter, they will dye for Christ. O what pains then should
they take for him?

Ministers are the Light of the world, in the places where they live, Matt.
5.14. and where they are wanting, their People sit in Darkness, and in the
shadow of Death. Luke 1.79. that is, they are Blind, and Ignorant, Dead in
trespasses and sins. Ephesians. 2.1. rophane, without all the Life of grace in
them; they are abominable in the Eyes of God, and all their actions are odious
unto him, they are under the power of Satan, and under the wrath of God.

Though it is true, that Christ is the true Light of the World, as well as the
true Salt of the Earth; yet it is as true, that Gods faithful Ministers are the
Salt of the Earth. Matt. 5.13. to make people savoury both in heart and life;
so that a constant, painful, faithful, powerful Minister Preaching to the
Consciences of men, there will be such an efficacious effect of this, that even
wicked men cannot so easily sin against God.

Sixthly, Ministers are called Angels; Rev: 2.1. now Angels are Spirits,
spiritual substances, as the Psalmist speaks, he makes his Angels Spirits,
they are spiritual creatures; their Communion, their Food, their Affections,
their minds are Spiritual; so a Minister, though he is a body, yet he is a
spiritual man. If you say, so is every Believer, I answer; But a Minister is a
spiritual man in a more special manner, as one that comes nigh unto God; his
Office and Employment is Spiritual. Divinity being of all Arts the supreme,
most noble, and masterpiece, proceeding in a special manner from God himself,
treating of God, and Divine matters, and tending, and leading men to God.

1. Use.

For Exhortation to Ministers, that they would be careful to teach the People:
If people perish for want of knowledge, shall Ministers escape who are
negligent in teaching? be sure of it both smart together, they for their
Ignorance, these for their Negligence; such Ministers have their doom in that
Scripture, Hosea 4.6. Because thou have rejected knowledge, I will reject thee,
whose office it was to instruct, admonish, reprove, entreat, and by all means
to turn the people from their evil ways. O that such men would be pleased to
consider, that the best service they can do, the greatest honor they can
attain unto, is to be faithful Laborers in Gods Vineyard. What an honor and
happiness is it to a man, to be made a Common Blessing unto all men round about
him? to be Eyes to the Blind, Legs to the Lame, a Mouth to the Dumb, a Staff to
the Feeble, a Physician to the Sick, a Counselor in hard Cases, a Watchman in
Danger, a Captain in Conflicts; so much, and much more is a Minister unto his
People; if he do his duty as he ought.

And unworthy are they of that office, who scorn to take the pains that belongs
to it, or think it an easy, or small matter to save a soul from death.

2. Use Hence we may see by what has been said, that the Office of the
Ministry is no base office; nay, the whole world has not a greater Office in
it. The Apostle tells us, That Jesus Christ the Prince of the Kings of the
Earth, was a Minister to confirm the Promise made unto the Fathers. The office
of a Minister is an Angels Office; the Angels of Heaven, the highest of them in
their places, never go on greater Errands. When they came to the Shepherds,
what did they do, but tell of the Birth of Christ? Peace on earth, and good
will toward men. Luke 2.14. And is not this our business also? to treat
between God and man, about eternal life? We are the Friends of the Bridegroom,
We are Ambassadors for Christ, and God does beseech you by us. We are suitors
not for our selves, but for him; desiring to Espouse you unto one Husband, and
to present you chaste Virgins to Christ. 2 Cor. 11.2. Our work is to Cater for
Heaven, to seed the slock of God, 1 Pet. 5.2. to win souls, to gather together
with Christ, Matt. 12.30. to bring in Custom for the Kingdom of God. So that a
Minister does not darken knowledge, but his Lips keep and disperse Knowledge.
Prove. 15.7. and the people therefore should seek the Law at his mouth, for he
is the messenger of the Lord of hosts. Mal. 2 7. opens the window to let in
the light; breaks the shell, that we may eat the kernel; puts aside the
curtain, that we may look into the most holy place; removes the cover of the
well, that we may come by the water.

Is he then a Contemptible person which brings the Message of God? which has
the name of an Angel, the ministry of Life; or else what is the meaning of the
Text, Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ?

Certainly the least man in the Ministry ought not to be contemned. As in a
Building, some bring Stones, some Timber, others Mortar, and some perhaps bring
only Nails; yet these are all useful in their places; the very Nails serve to
sasten the work in the Building.

Thus the Church of God is a spiritual Building; some Ministers bring stones,
like James, Cephas, and John, Pillars in the House of God. Gal. 2.9. are more
eminent and useful: Others useful pleces of Timber, though not Pillars, others
less; they may have but a Nail in the Work, yet all serve for the good of the
Building. The least Star gives light, and the least drop moistens; Grandis
dignitas Sacerdotum, etc. Hieron. in Ezekiel. The least Minister is no less then
an Angel; the least Nail in the Ministry serves for the fastening of Souls unto
Christ; there is some use to be made even of the lowest parts of men, the
weakest Minister may help to strengthen ones Faith, though all are not
Apostles, all are not Evangelists, all have not the same dextrous abilities in
the Ministry, yet all edify: And sometimes it comes to pass, that God crowns
his labors, and sends, most fish into his net, who though he be less skilful,
is more faithful, and though he have less of the Brain, like Jacob in respect
of Esau, Gen 25.27. yet he may have more of the Heart, go away with the
Blessing; and therefore not to be Contemned.

Let a man so account of us, says the Apostle, as of the Ministers of Christ,
and Stewards of the Mysteries of God. 1 Cor. 4.1. q. d. Take heed how you
slight our Ministry; you cannot despise, slight, and contemn our Persons and
Office, and have Life and Salvation. You cannot have the the mysteries of
grace, saving knowledge, regeneration, and faith, without us, effectual
calling, Justification, and glorification. What the Lord may do in an
extraordinary manner, that I will not dispute; but this is Gods ordinary way,
which he has established, and we may not expect another; not a new Revelation
from heaven. Romans 10.14. How shall they believe in him of whom they have not
heard, and how shall they hear without a Preacher. Acts 26.17,18. Says God to
Paul, I send thee to the Gentiles, to open their eyes, and to turn them from
darkness to light. There is Effectual calling; under which is comprehended
union with Christ, Regeneration, inabling us unto Repentance toward God, and
Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, [That they may receive remission of sins.]
there is justification; under which is contained Gods remission of our sins,
and his acceptance of our persons, unto Life and Salvation. [And an
inheritance among them that are sanctified.] There is glorification, under
which is couched as well Gods glorifying of us in this life:

First, By conferring upon us glorious privileges, as Adoption, Kingship,
crowning every good soul with that style, Regale sacerdo^um, Royal Priesthood 1
Pet. 2.9. to be Royal without Priesthood, seemed not to him Dignity enough, and
indeed of all the Offices of Christ his Priesthood is the main.

Secondly, Imparting to us here in this world glorious graces, and thereby
inabling us to glorious performances.

Thirdly, His Crowning us with glorious Joys, and sweet peace of Conscience.

So then, that which I clearly collect from the words, is this; That the
Preaching of the Gospel, is the means appointed by God, whereby we shall be
Called, Justified, and Sanctified. Therefore our Office is no mean Office.

When the Prophet Elisha sent fot Naaman the Leper, to come unto him, these
were his words, He shall know that there is a Prophet in Israel. 2 Kings 5.8.
^s though all the glory of Israel were chiefly in this, that they had Prophets,
and others had none.

So when Elisha was dying, Joash the King wept over his face, and cried, O my
Father, my Father; the Chariot of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof. 2 Kings
13.14. Showing that the Chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof, do not so
safe guard a City as the Prophets which teach it, and pray for it.

How joyful and glad was Lydia when she could draw, and constrain Paul, and
Silas to her house? If ye have judged me faithful to the Lord, says she, come
into my House, and abide there. Acts 16.15. showing that never any Guests were
so Welcome to her House before.

The Shunamite perceiving that Elisha was an holy man of God, spoke unto her
husband to build a new Room to welcome him, and to keep him with her, she
thought all the places in her house too bad for him. 2 Kings 4.9,10.

How much did the Galatians make of St. Paul? that he says, They would have
plucked out their own eyes, if it had been possible, to have done him good.
Gal. 4.15.

How beautiful are the feet of them, that Preach the Gospel of peace, and bring
glad tidings of good things. Romans 10.15. So it is evident, and manifest that
once a Minister was esteemed like a Minister. And has God bidden you despise
them now, which bad you honor them before? 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders that
Rule well, be accounted worthy of double honor, especially they who Labor in
Word and Doctrine.

Such as apply their spirits most to the glory of God, and the Public good;
especially such as are Timothies in their houses, Chrysostoms in their Pulpits.
S. Chrysostom was such a golden mouthed Preacher, Mellitissimus Christi
Concionator; he was so admired for his sweet winning Eloquence, as that all the
people cried out when he was like to be silenced, Satius est ut sol non luceat,
quam ut non doceat Chrysostomus; We had better want the Sun, then the Preaching
of St. Chrysostom.

And S. Austin studied to make his language sweet and harmonious, and
acceptable to Gods people. Some degree of Eloquence seems to be meet for a
Minister; for Moses says to God, I am not Eloquent. Exodus 2.10.

3. Use. Thirdly, Hence we may see who are the best Ministers; not they that
can plot most for Preferment, or can Preach most for Applause, ambitious of a
little popular breath, but he that sets himself with all his might to do
good. He that wins souls is wise. Prove. 11.30. because of the great
difficulty of this work, he is wise to himself, he lays up a good foundation
against the time to come. They are the best Ministers that carry people to
heaven; though I know a Converting work is not for us, but for the Holy Ghost;
rostra habet in Coelis, qui corda docet. Yet sometimes the Lord is wonderful
powerful and efficacious, by that word which we preach, piercing through the
very hearts and souls of men, and leaving impressions of an immortal nature
upon their spirits.

How fain would Christ have saved the people of Jerusalem, the name is doubled
to express the truth, and certainty of his great affection. How often would I
have gathered, etc. Matt. 23.37.] God offered them mercy, while they had the
dispensation of the means of grace:

And good Ministers like a Hen which clocketh her Chickens, together from the
Kite, so they clock you together from the Serpent. They would fain do so.
Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men. 2 Cor. 5.11. the
wrath of God is an unsupportable burden; Who is able to dwell with devouring
fires and everlasting burnings? therefore would we persuade men, all men. When
Agrippa was almost persuaded to be a Christian, says Paul, I would to God that
not only thou, but also all that hear me were both almost, and altogether.
Acts 26.28.29. A good Minister would carry all his people to heaven with him.

How deeply is Moses affected that the sin of Israel might be forgiven, Exodus
32.32. what extraordinary zeal and love for the salvation of men? and as if his
joy would have been utterly drowned in the destruction of the Church, or had no
part in the Election of Grace. Tertullian understands it typically and
figuratively of Christ the good Shepherd, who was to be exhibited, and to Dye
for the Sheep. Certe quidem bonus Pastor animam pro pecoribus ponit, ut Moses
non homini adhuc Christo revelato, etiam in se figurato ait, si perdis hunc
populum, inquit and me pariter cum eo disperde.

Tertull. de fuga in Persecutione. Cap. 11.

And it is true that Moses was a typical Mediator, and did atone for them.
Exodus 32.30. With what a bleeding heart does St. Paul speak for the salvation
of the Jews? Romans 9.1,2,3. servent appearing in the degree of it, with this
unexpressable adjunct, great heaviness.

Secondly, Continuance of it, Continual sorrow in my heart: for I could wish
that I my self were accursed from Christ.

And truly we that are the Ministers of the Church of England, might speak
this even with tears of blood, if we were able, when we consider how many
people in England seem to loose the hope of a good beginning, who have sucked
their first sincere milk of the word, that they might grow thereby. 1 Pet. 2.2.
in waiting upon God in his public ordinances, and blessed God that they might
wait, seemed to be in a good forwardness, in the of way of Life and Salvation,
confessed that they have received comfort, and will still to this day
acknowledge it; yet by reason of some who never (we have cause to fear) were
converted unto Christ, but unto an opinion, Fantastical spirits which in
Corners pour out their Poison, and come not at the Congregations, as Luther
speaks, and so they fall off and turn either unto Athiesm, or Quakerism, etc.
And there is no doubt, but that this has been no little grief and trouble unto
our godly and dissenting brethren themselves, when they see such sad effects of
that doctrine which they have preached. It is one good argnment of piety to
love the place where God speaks, the house of his presence. Psalm. 26.8. Lord, I
have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine honor
dwells. As the Sun shines gloriously though no eye behold it, and pure waters
flow from the fountain though none drink of them; so Ministers are the light of
the world, though few be enlightened by them, and the salt of the earth, though
few be seasoned by them.

4. Use. Let me then Exhort you all unto this happy Reconciliation with God.
Reconciliation presupposes a breach; and indeed this was the greatest that
ever was made by reason of the sins of man.

There was a heavy war denounced in the inimicitias ponam, when God raised a
war between the Devil and us Genesis 3.15. Gods wrath provoked, man thrown out of
Paradise, Cursed in his name, nature, body, soul, senses, friends, and
whatsoever he takes in hand. Adams Posterity as well as himself became bondmen
to Hell; the Earth made barren for his sake, and all the days of his life he
was to eat his bread in the sweat of his face, Man an enemy to God, God and man
at a very great distance (I mean a distance of state and condition) and so
unhappy man desires to continue, never to have to do with God for ever.

And how sad and dreadful is it to consider, how averse men are unto all means
that can be used to reduce them, and bring them back again to God. They think
not of him, they speak not of him, desire not the knowledge of him, nor any of
his ways. Job. 21.14.

And some they can never be far enough from God, and therefore the Prodigal
went into a far Country. Men having lost their Communion, fellowship,
friendship, and acquaintance with God, desire so to continue, like some of the
Israelites, who began to be in love with their bondage and slavery in Egypt.

And how many thousands and millions have we cause to fear there be, who are
dead while they live, or at the best but lukewarm, such as Christ threatens to
spue them out of his mouth. Rev. 3.16. serving of God in such a slight,
perfunctory negligent and careless manner, only for fashions sake, and by fits,
sometimes perhaps pray when the night comes, hear when the Sabbath comes, fast
when Lent comes, and think to repent when death comes.

And alas all this while, they are under the wrath and Curse of God, liable to
all the miseries of this life, to Death it self, and those pains that are
endless, easeless, and remediless.

And yet men are in a golden Dream, and bless themselves in their evil ways
until the very flames of Hell take hold on them. The Lord threatens, he will
not spare them, but his jealousy and anger shall smoke against them, blot out
their name from under heaven. Deuteronomy. 22 20. separate them unto evil; what can be
more miserable and dreadful then and desolation?

Let me then in the name of God Exhort you all to seek the Lord in good earnest
while he may be found. Know in this your day the things of your eternal peace,
without which you had better never to have come upon the Stage of the World. O
what will become of men at that great Day? that have all their time here been
found fighters against God, treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath. Acts
5.39. Romans 2 5. every day carrying a Faggot to that Pile, which shall burn them
for ever, a Brand to that Hell, which Sin, and the Wrath of God has made so
hot already. O for men to be in the very gall of bitterness, and in the bond of
iniquity! Acts 8.23. possessed with most wicked malice, slaves to the Devil to
do all manner of wickedness; to be given up to blindness of mind, utterly
destitute of the true knowledge of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ; under
strong delusions, to take pleasure in believing lies. 2 These. 2.11,12. This is
the greatest judgment that can befall you, unless the earth should open and
swallow you up, like Korah, Dathan, and Abiram. Numb. 16.32,33. when Husbands
and Wives, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, went all quick to hell
together.

Yet for ought we know while God in justice killed their bodies, he might in
mercy save some of their souls. He that repents not to day, will have one day
more to account for, and one day less to repent in: And who knows what may
depend upon one day?

Yet Prayers and Tears may do you good. But stay a while; and though streams of
blood should flow from you, and you should cry and howl to God to all Eternity,
it would never do it; therefore know your time. It is a happy thing for a man
to do a business in such a time wherein he may have the comfort of it, the
benefit of it.

God proclaims and says to every one of you, this day; Friend, poor soul, as
ever you expect to receive mercy, look to it now: for now the golden Scepter is
stretched forth, now is the acceptable time and the day of grace and salvation;
come in and accept of the offers and tenders of grace and mercy now, or else
you may be lost and gone for ever, qui jam non credit imposterum sentiet, he
that will not now believe shall hereafter feel, sooner or later, The sinner an
hundred years old shall be accursed. Isa. 65.20. Tua res agitur non Dei; thou
art the person concerned, this business concerns thy life, thy Eternal estate.
(...). Chrysostom. in Loc. It is not said, Reconcile God to your selves, for God
does not make the breach, but reconcile your selves to God.

Certainly it concerns men, that have not made their peace with God, to spend
their days in bewailing their sinful and miserable condition, to exchange all
their carnal joy for some godly sorrow, that God may give them that in tears
which they could never find in sensual pleasures, that God may give them
salvation; (...), Naz. Orat. 17. God has joined salvation, with sorrow and
sighing, godly sorrow, and sighing is the souls food, and the minds refection.
Therefore do not ruffle it out in the world, taking your fill of Pleasure, as
if this world were made on purpose for you to sport in; Remember what the
Prophet Isaiah says, And what will ye do in the day of visitation? in the
great Day, whom will ye fly for help to? Isa. 10.3. when the Earth shall burn,
and the Heavens shall flame, and the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, and
all the Tribes of the Earth shall mourn before the Lord. Although the Lord keep
many terrible privy Sessions, and sharp and severe Visitations, for to keep
this world in order, yet he has reserved the great Assise, the great
Visitation until the last Day.

And therefore is this a time to be carnal, and secure? and sleeping, when you
should be running for the Crown of glory? to be an Athiest in the world?

The wicked through the pride of his countenance, will not seek after God, God
is not in all his thoughts. Psalm. 10.4. or all his thoughts are, there is no
God. non esse Deum sunt omnes cogitationes ejus. Junius. This is that fool that
has said in heart, there is no God. Psalm. 14.1. it is rather an Option then an
Opinion, faith S. Austin, He could be content there was none. Ita tacitus
loquntus est impius, non est Deus, vel utinam non esset Deus.

God is not the object of his joy, his thoughts, and meditationsu, either is he
careful and solicitous aboutheavenly and divine things being intentive about
profane. The best things are shut out of his heart, Intus existens prohibet
alienum; he lives as if there were no God, with no due sense, awe, or reverence
of the most Holy, and glorious God. These men are most truly (...) Without God
in the World. Ephesians. 2 12. hic labor, hoc opus. And therefore to get men to be
reconciled to God; this is a work indeed, a very difficult work: Well might
Paul say, Who is sufficient for these things?

Herein consists the great work of Reconciliation, when Parties between whom
has been friendship, and afterward breaches made, then they are brought into
favor again; as S. Bernard tells us in his 32. Sermon super Cantica. Quidest
reconciliatio, nisi iterata animorum dissidentium conciliatio? And the same
Father tells us, that there are three to whom we ought to be reconciled, To
God, Angels, and Men. Unto Men by manifest deeds, clear and shining, which are
to be wrought before men Joh. 3.21. Let your light so shine on earth to the
glory of your Father in heaven. Matt 5.16. There Is a demonsiration. Feed the
hungry, relieve the Poor; There Is another demonstration.

When this is done in Faith; and in Obedience to the Commandments of God? it is
one excellent way for rich men to lay up some of their treasures in heaven: and
then let their hearts follow their treasure thither.

This is a brave noble way of giving Earth a translation, and to improve every
Alms and Penny to the best, laying up in store for themselves, a good
Foundation against the time to come. That they may lay hold on eternal life. 1 Timothy 6.17,18,19.

Secondly, Unto Angels by hidden and secret signs, which are sighs and groans;
Angelorum delitiae Poenitententium lacrymae. and other signs of repentance
which please and delight the Angels, who are sent about Gods Messages to this
Earth.

There is joy in the presence of the Angels of God, over one sinner that
repents. Luke 15.10. And good Ministers are glad too, when they can perceive
it. How glad was the holy Apostle when he perceived it in the Romans, and asked
them, What fruit had ye then in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? Romans
6 21.

Certainly, sin is not a gainful way; without doubt, more men are impoverished
and beggered by sinful courses, then enriched; sin cannot be the way to Glory
and Honor: for we dare not avow our sins, but are ashamed of them, when they
are done; fruitless, unprofitable before, shame and dishonor after.

Men's Souls are desperately sick of sin, and at Deaths door; must we tell them
of Heaven, and an immortal Crown, and Kingdom, before repenting of their
wickednesses, till they be first recovered in some measure from the gall of
bitterness, and bond of iniquity. Acts 8.22. from the jaws of Hell, and snare
of the Devil? Revive them with the Gospel, before they be humbled with the Law?
Without any humiliation, repentance, sighs, and groans; certainly we cannot
give you comfort. We dare not apply the oil of Consolation, till we have
scoured your festred wounds with the sharp wine of Reprehension.

Be not deceived, God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man sows, that shall he
also reap. Gal. 6.7.

If ye live after the flesh ye shall dye. Romans 8.13. When Iniquity has played
her part, then shall Vengeance leap upon the Stage. The wicked shall be turned
into hell, and all the nations that forget God. Psalm. 9.17. And that with a Go
ye Cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his angels. Mat.
25.41.

Could we behold your Cheeks blubbered with Tears, your Hands beating your
Breasts, like the poor penitent Publican. Luke 18.13. your Cries resounding at
Heaven Gates for mercy: or any way but perceive your Repentance and Indignation
against Sin;

Then should we think it high time, and seasonable, to sing as sweetly as we
can, of the tender mercies of God, and the Riches of his grace, unto afflicted
and broken spirits.

Thirdly, We must be reconciled to God by Purity, singleness, and sincerity of
heart, wherein the perfection of the Gospel does consist. Mat. 5.8.

And now Men, Brethren, and Fathers, with what words shall I bespeak you all,
to live to that God from whom you shine? That when the Grave shall be open for
you, Heaven may not be shut against you. O you that are yet asleep in sin, is
it not high time for you to awake? Romans 13.11. And that knowing the time, that
now it is high time to awake out of sleep. The time of the light of the Gospel
which is as it were the Dawning of that great everlasting Day; the words are an
Alarm, or Summons unto spiritual vigilance; an appeal to Conscience for the
necessity of the Duty: And now knowing the time, the Propinquity and nearness
of salvation, The night is far spent.

Shall the Heavens be all in flaming fire, 2 These. 1.8. and the Elements melt
with servent heat, before you will begin to fear God? The Sun shined upon Sodom
in the morning, and yet the horrible wrath of God fell upon them before
evening, and thy Soul may be in Hell before the next morning; as that rich
Churls, who reckoned upon many years, and had not a day to live. Luke 12.20.

Shall the great Luminaries of Heaven, the Sun and the Moon be darkened? Mat.
24 29. before that soul of thine be enlightened? And the Stars fall down from
Heaven, before thou will fall down in all humility before thy Maker, confessing
and forsaking thy sins? Shall the Sea give up her Dead, before thou art alive?
and the Harvest of the world to come, before the Seeds of grace, and eternal
life be sown in thy heart? art thou so dead, and buried in sin, that no Sermon
shall stir nor awaken thee? but the last Trumpet shall sound before thou will
hear? O woe to thee when thy days are ended. Then the great Judgment, and
Visitation will fall most dreadfully upon thee.

And yet I declare unto you this truth in the name of God, that there is not
the worst, the vilest in the Congregation, that is come through the Providence
of God, before God this day; but for ought we know it is possible, for thy sins
to be pardoned, for God to be reconciled unto thee, and thy soul to be saved;
though even now, an enemy, a rebel against God, a slave of sin, and Satan.

O therefore prize this Doctrine of Reconciliation, prefer it above your
appointed food, as Job did the holy Scripture; yea, before thousands of gold
and silver. Job 23.12.

For upon your forsaking a Course of sin, God will not only pardon you, let
all Suits fall, cancel all Bonds, quit all scores, but also receive you into
favor.

Now herein the Lord infinitely excels all the Princes of the Earth. If a
Subject offend his Prince, and his offense be heinous, and capital; be
accounts it a singular and great favor from his Prince, if he can be
pardoned, but he shall never be honored more, never be trusted more; But now
the Lord does not only pardon great sinners, upon true repentance, but he
highly honors them, and Crowns them with very glorious Rewards, and the
choicest Joys, and Delights that heart can wish.

And this may be said with all grateful commemoration, and great truth, that
when by Divine Providence, Almighty God the Father of all Mercies, returned our
most dread Sovereign unto us the People of England, to the execution of his
Kingly Office; he did not only pardon many Offenders, but has also honored
them with titles of quality, and places of trust.

I will Answer but one Objection, and so I will draw to a Conclusion.

What infinite Pity is it to consider, how some forsake all Religion, because
the Preachers do not Agree; or because the Lives of Professors give some
offense?

But certainly there is no Cause why they should mislike the Word for the
Preacher, or why they should despise Religion for the Professor.

Because the Word and Religion, are not theirs which Preach it, and Profess it,
but Gods.

The Seed sown in good Ground, may grow, although the Sower had a dirty Hand;
Gold Crowns and Scepters are excellent things, although they may be (sometimes)
in the hands of thieves.

There is nothing more frequent, then for the Laity to Patronize their sins
upon the example of others, and to fortify their profaneness from the
infirmities of their Teachers. Wicked men love that in the Saints, which the
Saints never loved themselves: And is this wisdom for a man to make their Foyl
his Jewel? their Shame his Glory?

A Ministers life is bad, therefore his Doctrine is false. O this is an harsh
Non sequitur.

Personal offenses suspend not the Power of the Holy Ghost; but the blessing of
Heaven goes along with the Office, and Function. I speak not this for any one
to take liberty to sin, but for the satisfaction of some, and for the verifying
of the truth.

The Ordinances of God, become effectual means of Salvation, not by any virtue
merely in themselves, or in him that does Administer them, but only by the
blessing of Christ, and the working of his Spirit.

Now the Lord is not necessarily tied to afford his Presence, and to manifest
his Power always in them; for God is a free Agent, and instrumenta in divinis
operantur acsi non operantur. And if God withdraw himself, there is no more
Power nor Majesty in them, but a bare empty outside, and no more.

Preaching is the Power of God unto Salvation, if the Lord discover himself,
without which it is no more Powerful then the breath of a man, yet God has
tied us to the word, and Ordinances; Because it is the food of the soul,
therefore as if you take away food from the body, it will pine; so without
Preaching, the People will famish, for where no vision is the people perish.

And O what a miserable thing it is, when a Land is darkened, and and the glory
is departed? O the dreadful effects that will follow the Contempt of Gods
Ordinances, and his Ministers. When the Prophets went from Jerusalem, then
Sword, and Famine, and Pestilence, and all the Plagues of God rained upon them,
even as Fire came down upon Sodom so soon as Lot was gone out: And yet our
Tribe is a hated Tribe. Of all Offices, the Office of a Reprover is most
unwelcome, for that men love their sin, and their lusts as their lives.

Gods faithful Ministers, as they are set up by God in a special manner to
oppose, and beat down the Kingdom of sin, and Satan; so usually they are
singled out by the Devil and his Instruments, as the principal Butts against
which the invenomed Arrows of Malicious hearts are most directed. And therefore
not only Serpentine Wisdom, and Dove-like Innocence is necessary for them,
above others: also Courage and Magnanimity, not to fear the faces of Men:
Sanctity and Holiness: but also Diligence and indefatigableness in that great
Work which God imployes them about. St. Paul who was the most famous Preacher,
and instrument of Gods glory, next to Christ, that ever was in the world, yet
counted an Enemy unto the Galatians, for that he told them the Truth. Gal.
4.16. and (...) a Babbler with the Philosophers of Athens; The deadliest that
Demosthenes bestowed upon Aesehines, and the best the Athenians could afford
St. Paul.

Micaiah was hated, because he dealt truly with Ahab. The bravest Deacon that
ever the world bred, was half a Martyr in the Pulpit. Acts 7.54.

But although every base fellow stop his ear and harden his heart, against the
God of Heaven, and will not obey our Message, which we have from God: yet in a
faithful discharge of our duty, we shall be glorious in the eyes of God; and if
we cannot get them to the Banquet, yet we shall be welcome without them. We are
unto God (says the Apostle) a sweet savor of Christ in them that are saved,
and in them that perish. 2 Cor. 2.15. The faithful Ministers labor whether it
hit or miss, is accepted of God; for as he who persuades to evil, be it
Heresy, or Treason, is punished, although he do not prevail, because he
intended it, for that he did labor it.

So he that does his best to win men to heaven, though he effects not what he
desired, though he has labored in vain, and spent his strength in vain
(amongst men) yet he shall be accepted, and his reward shall be with God.

Thus though our Calling is despised of men, yet it is honorable with God:

Even as the Ambassador of a King glories in this, that he comes not as a
private person, but as the Kings Ambassador; and because of this Dignity, that
he is the Kings Ambassador, he is honored, and set in the highest place,
which honor should not be given him, if he came as a private person.

So a Minister of the Gospel, like the Kidgs Ambassador, must magnify his
Office and Calling, for that he glories not in himself; but in the King which
has sent him; whose Authority he desires to be honored, and magnified.

Now let us all stand and admire at the infinite grace and favor of God, the
Father of all Mercies, in bestowing upon us, the People of England, such great,
and manifold Blessings; as our Ancient Government, public Peace, much Plenty,
Prosperity within our Palaces. Psalm. 122.7. But amonst all our joys, none
should more fill our hearts, and cause them to run over with thankfulness, then
the blessed continuance of the Preaching of Gods sacred Word amongst us.

The Dew lies not only upon Gideons Fleece, upon some particular persons, but
it is dispersed generally, all the Kingdom over: Every man may take S. Austins
counsel, Toll lege, Toll lege; every man amongst us may be a Rabbi, Learned
in the Laws, Conversant in the holy Scriptures, and speaking the Language of
Canaan; seeing that through the infinite goodness of God, out Princes are
Christians, there is not that Persecution, Religion is not disturbed, we are
not compelled to manifest the proof of our Faith by harder trials, to resist
even unto blood striving against sin. Heb. 12.4. Sealing to the truth with our
blood, as that holy Martyr Ignatius, and many others did. (...). And when he
came to the wild Beasts to be devoured of them, and his bones crushed between
their Teeth, says he (...), Now I begin to be a Chris^ian. Ignat. Epist. ad
Romans

In the History of the Waldenses, they petitioning, That seeing it was
permitted to the Saracens, and Turks, and Jews, who are mortal Enemies to
Christ, and the basest People in the World, to dwell peaceably in the fairest
Cities of Christendom; that Pity, and Compassion might be showed unto them, who
have their whole Religion founded upon the Gospel, and worshipping the Lord
Jesus; and that they might be suffered to live quietly in desolate Mountains,
and Deserts, and Valleys, professing that they would live in all fear, and
reverence of God, with all due subjection to their Lord and Prince, and to his
Lieutenants, and Officers; and yet this Petition could not be granted.

The Church of God was so obscured, as it was not to be sought for in any
external pomp in Public places; but in Prisons, and Dens; Non in tactis, and
exteriori Pompa, sed potius in Speluncis, and Carceribus.

Why then are a generation so angry and displeased? like Jonah, that did even
Chide with God. By now much the less we are in our Passive obedience, by so
much the more let us be in our Active. Let that strength be laid out for Gods
glory, which might have been spent in suffering the Wrath of God, or the rage
and sury of wicked men.

And let us all be earnest with God for his Church, That the Gates of Hell may
not prevail against it; That the Lord would make his People ten thousand times
more then they are; and increase their Graces, as well as add to their number.
That all the Nations of the World may see the Salvation of God, that the Lord
Jesus may abundantly see of the Travel of his Soul, and be satisfied.

That the Word of God may be as glorious, and as much prized by us the people
of England, as ever it was by any Nation since the world stood

That the Ordinances of God may be in so much Power, and Purity, Beauty,
Splendour and Glory, that Godliness, and the powerful Profession of it, may be
more Honorable, then ever it has been Contemptible.

That through the Power of the Gospel, and our careful Government, the Mouth of
Wickedness and Profaneness may be stopped, and subdued, and whatsoever is
contrary unto sound Doctrine, and unto holy Practice.

That the Lord would be pleased to bless our most dread Sovereign Lord the
King, with many and happy Days; Enrich his Royal heart with many singular and
extraordinary Graces, make him as an Angel of God; a man after his own heart,
and an Excellent Spirit of Government, that he may still know how to go in and
out before so great a People; and may be the Wonder of the World in this Latter
Age, for Happiness, and true felicity, to the honor of the great God, and the
good of his Church.

That our Nobility may be Loyal, and Faithful; men of holiness and Religion,
sparkling with ten thousand Glories, Virtues, and Graces; while they oblige
their Servants, Tenants, and the Country round about them, by their holy
Example to the practice of Piety, and the fear of God.

That our Judges may be as at the first, and our Counselors as at the
beginning. Isa. 1.26. like Moses, Joshua, etc. Impartially Execute Gods
Judgments upon the Enemies of the Church, and faithfully administer Justice
among the People; no unrighteousness in Judgment: but run down as Waters, and
Righteousness as a mighty Stream. Amos 5.24. That there may be no complaining
in our streets.

That our inferior Magistrates may be Able men, such as fear God; Men of Truth
hating Covetousness. Exodus 18.21.

Our Gentry Sober, Vigilant, Temperate in all things; That they may Run in that
heavenly Race set before them in the Holy Scriptures, and so obtain an
Incorruptible Crown. 1 Cor. 9.24,25.

Our Ministers all as so many burning Lights, Pastors after Gods own heart.

Our Right Reverend Bishops, and Governors of the Church, imitating Christ,
the Bishop of their Souls.

All the People receiving Gods Truth, in the Love thereof, and in the power
thereof, men of Integrity, Innocence, and Sincerity:

The gloss of Profession without Sincerity, will off in a Storm; when a man
has not the Root, and principle of grace in him. Mat 13.21.

But where this is, it obliges a man close to his Duty, both to God and Man.
If I am Regenerate, and truly sanctified; I do good Works how, and whenever
occasion is offered: As,

If I be a Minister of the Word; I obey the inward Calling of the Spirit, I
accept the outward Calling of the Church; I Preach Absolution of sins to every
Penitent Soul; I offer the Seals of Reconciliation to every Contrite spirit; I
Comfort the Brokenhearted.

If I be a Householder; I govern my Family, I bring up my Children in the
knowledge and fear of God.

If I be a Magistrate; the Charge that is given me from above, I diligently
execute.

If I be a Servant; I do my Masters business faithfully.

If I be a Subject; I live in obedience unto my Prince: For the same
Commandment that binds and obliges unto the Fear of God, binds also to
Honor the King. 1 Pet. 2.17. to give honor and obedience in a special manner
unto the highest Magistrate, so that he which has not performed the latter of
these Duties, is not to be thought to have performed the other sincerely.

Duty binds us to give obedience to Evil Princes, in Conscience of Gods
Ordinance: And as an Evil Subject serves God for his Princes sake, so a good
Subject serves his Prince for Gods sake.

Thus Obedience is given, if not Principi, yet Principatui; if not to the
Person, yet to the Office.

Therefore in the fear of God, let us give all due obedience unto Authority; be
men of meek and quiet spirits, in imitation of Christ, and according to his
Command. Mat. 11.29. who has also intailed such a blessing upon such persons
as imports all good things. Mat. 5.5.

Is it not infinitely better to be a peace Maker, then a peace Breaker? They
that live in obedience unto Government, have the Blessing, Benefit, and
Protection of Government.

Whereas it is the property of wicked men to be unquiet, restless, such as are
without true Peace in themselves, and seek to disturb or molest others; as the
word (...) in the first Psalm signifies. And therefore the Laws of the Kingdom
do oftentimes most deservedly take hold of them. O how may such persons, be
ashamed to live; and afraid to dye? when the whole Creation may groan, and
travail in pain by reason of their sins?

Set your hearts now unto these things, for what is our Hope, or Joy, or Crown
of Rejoicing? are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, at his
Coming? Ye are our Glory and Joy. 1 These. 2.19,20. Weep in secret for all
Abominations you see committed. Let our Reverend Visitors now set their faces
against all iniquity, that no sin may be Countenanced, to Eclipse the glory of
this Solemnity; so that with the glorious Company of the Apostles: The goodly
Fellowship of the Prophets: The noble Army of Martyrs: And the Holy Church
throughout all the world: We may arrive to that General, Honorable, and
Glorious Assembly, Heb. 12.23. to Celebrate the Praises of God; and give him
due thanks world without end, Amen.

FINIS.

