THE ART OF CONVEYANCING.

ARS CLERICALIS: THE ART OF Conveyancing EXPLAINED.

Being a Collection gathered with great Care and Industry, out of the many
Books of the Law.

Wherein the Nature and Effect of such Deeds and Instruments, by which Lands
are conveyed from one Man to another, are clearly demonstrated.

Also the Forms and orderly Parts which ought to be observed in Deeds and
Conveyances are laid open and explained.

By R. G. Gent.

LONDON, Printed by the Assigns of Richard and Edward Atkins Esquires: For
Thomas Basset at the George near St. Dustans Church in Fleet Street. 1690.

TO THE READER.
THE Law of England consists of several curious Parts or Branches, some whereof
have relation to the Theory, others more immediately to the Practice. Of the
later, not one has given greater Reputation, or contributed more to the
enriching its Professors than the Art of Conveyancing; which proceeds chiefly
from the Necessity attending it, in regard no Estate or Property can possibly
be settled or secured without it. There are several Books (indeed) in all
Volumes already extant, of Conveyanceing; but many of them being desicient
either in Matter or Form, heap't together without Judgment, and backed with no
manner of Authority, do, instead of instructing the Tyro's of the Law, lead
them into manifest Errors; neither is any of them express upon this Subject,
though most of them treat something thereof. Therefore to demonstrate to the
World by a small Essay what may be further performed in this Nature by more
time and thought, this little Tract has ventured abroad; ^eing a brief
Collection out ^f those many Books; where ^ou have a Prospect altogether, and
in Order, not ^rowded with Precedents, nor mixed with improper Matter, but full
and clear to the understanding of the whole Art, and scarce a Paragraph in the
whole but what is warranted by two or three Authorities. It was chiefly
intended for a help to Young Clerks, though perhaps none of the old Ones will
have occasion to repent the perusing it. It Is true, there is no new Invention
in it as to Matter, neither indeed can it be expected in Books of this Nature,
which are or ought to be governed by Authorities and Precedents; and as to the
Form or Method it is wholly new, and perhaps more compact and orderly than any
Book of this kind.

Vale and fruere.
THE CONTENTS.
THIS Treatise is divided into six Chapters: CHAP. I. Shows how Property in
Lands is ^en and transferred from one to ^ther. CHAP. II. Shows the Nature and
Effect of such ^^eds, by which Lands usually pass, and are conveyed from one to
ano^h^r. CHAP. III. Shows the Forms and orderly Parts which ought to be
observed in Deeds and Instruments. CHAP. IV. Shows what Things are required t^
the perfecting a good Deed or Instrument. CHAP. V. Shows the Form and Effect o^
Livery of Seisin and Attornment, etc. And what is a Reversion, Remainder and
particular Estate, etc. CHAP. VI. Shows the several Ways whereby Men get
Property in Goods and Chattels.


Advertisement.
LEgis Series: Or the Process of the Law in order, with some Entries both in
Kings Bench and Common Pleas; useful for Young Clerks to direct them in their
first ^teps to Clerkship, per R. G. Gent. price 6 d.

CHAP. I. Showing how property in Lands is gotten and transferred from one to
another. Of Property in Lands.

THE intent of this Treatise being to lay down and explain the Art of
Conveyancing, whereby the property in Lands is transferred from one to another;
I shall first show the several ways by which property in Lands is or may be
gotten:

And note; That property in Lands is gotten and transferred from one to another
four ways.

Viz. 1. Entry. 2. Descent. 3. Escheat. 4. Conveyance.


I. Property in Lands by Entry, Property by Entry.
formally and strictly taken, was, where a Man found a piece of Land that no
other possessed, or had Title to, and entered thereon; This Entry gained him the
property of it, and this seems to be grounded upon the Text: Terram dedit
Filiis hominum, etc.

In the Case of Occupancy Occupancy.
(which arises by Conveyance) as,

Where Lands are conveyed to A. for the Life of B. and A. dies without making
any Estate or Assignment thereof, here whosoever first enters after the death
of A. gets property in that Land during the Life of B. for the Land cannot
revert to him that leased to A. till B. die; and to the Heir of A. it cannot
go, for it is not any Estate of Inheritance, nor descendable to the Heir
(without special words) And as for the Executors of A. they cannot have it, for
that it is not an Estate Testamentary, to go to them as the Goods and Chattels
do, so as in truth no Man can entitle himself to the Land, and therefore the
Law prefers him that first enters, and he is called Occupans, and shall
hold it during the Life of B. but yet such a one must pay the Rent, perform the
Conditions, and do no wast or harm, N. B. fol. 83. Co. Lit. 41.

But this Estate of the Occupant may be prevented at the making of the Grant,
1. Occupancy how prevented.
by adding these words To have and to hold to A. and his Heirs during the Life
of B. for then it is descendable to the Heir.

It may also be prevented after B. etc. ^o. Lit. fol. 41. Shepards Touchstone,
^ag. 108.

And note that the Statute 29 Car. (...). 29 Car. 2.
has provided, That the Lessee ^r Grantee may devise such Estate or another
Life, by his Will in ^resence of three or more Wit^esses.

If he devise it not, Ibid.
and his Heir ^ecome Occupant, it shall be chargeble in his hands, as Assets by
De^ent, as in case of Lands by Fee-^mple. Stat. eod'.

And in case there be no special Occupant, Ibid.
then it shall go to the ^xecutors or Administrators of the party that had the
Grant, and shall be Assets, Stat. eod. See the Statute.

Property by Descent.
2. Inheritance is Fee-simple to a Man and his Heirs for ever.
Property in Lands gotten by Descent, is where a Man having Lands of Inheritance
dies, not making any disposition thereof, but leaves it to go as the Law
appoints, and the Law appoints, that it be cast upon the Heir, that is
called a Descent in Law; and upon whom this Descent is to light, is the
question.

Now Descent is either Lineal Lineal Descent
or Collateral; Lineal Descent is conveyed downward in a right-line from the
Grandfather to the Father, and from the Father to the Son, and from the Son to
the Nephew, etc.

Collateral Descent, Collateral Descent.
is springing out of the side of the whole Blood, as Grandfathers Brother,
Fathers Brother, etc. as you may plainly discern by the Degree of Parentage in
the Lord Coke upon Lit. fol. 15.

Yet it may be here to the purpose in hand, and expected, that something more
be said concerning the Descent of Lands; Therefore take these Rules following,
borrowed from Mr. Noy, that Learned Expositor of the Law.

Nota, That Lands, or an Estate of Inheritance (which is to a Man, and his
Heirs for ever) does always descend, for it may not lineally ascend from the
Son (which is seized in Fee and dies) to his Father, but descends to his
Uncle or Brother, and to his Heirs, which is the next of the whole Blood; for
the half Blood shall not Inherit, but the most worthy of Blood; as of the Blood
of the Father, before the Mother; and of the elder Brother, before the other,
if Born within Espousals, See Noys Max. p. 22.

But note, That if Lands be once settled, or entailed in the Blood of the
Father, the Heir of the Mother shall never have them, because they are not of
the Blood of him that was last seized, Idem page 23. For a Descent shall be
intended to the Heir of him that was last actually seized, Idem p. 22.

And if a Man disseiseth another, and dies seized, and his Heir enters, or
makes a Feoffment to another in Fee, or in Tail, and he dies, and his Heir
enters; these Descents put the disseised, etc. from an Entry, Noys Max. p. 34.

But a dying seized of a Term for Life, or of a Remainder or Reversion, does
not take away an Entry, for he must die seized in Fee, Idem pa. 34, 35.

The Sister of the whole Blood, (where her elder Brother did enter after the
death of his Father) shall inherit, before his Brother of the half Blood, or
any other Collateral Cousin, Ibid.

Yet notwithstanding such a one may be Heir to a Common Ancestor; as if the
Land, Rent, Advowson, or such like do descend to the elder Son, and he die
before any Entry, or Receipt of the Rent, or Presentment to the Church, (etc.)
then the Heir of him that was last actually seized, shall Inherit (as the
younger Son, etc.) and the reason is, because that in all Inheritances in
Possession, he which claims Title thereunto as Heir, ought to make himself
Heir to him that was last actually seized, Idem p. 22, 23.

Note, The Possession of a Lessee for Years, or of a Guardian, shall invest the
actual Possession and Frank-tenement in the elder Brother, Idem p. 23.

But if he die seized of a Reversion, or Remainder, or an Estate for Life, or
in Tail; there he which claims the Reversion or Remainder as Heir, ought to
make himself Heir to him that had the Gift, Ibid.

And so in case of a Purchase, it shall descend to the Heir of the Blood of the
first Purchasor; As if the Father purchase Land, and it descends to his Son,
who enters and dies without Heirs of the Fathers part, then the Land shall
descend to the Heirs of the Mother of the Father, or of the Father of the
Father, (as the Heirs may be,) and not to the Heirs of the Mother of the Son;
although they are more near of Blood to him that was last seized; yet they are
not of the Blood of the first Purchasor, Ibid.

If the Heirs be Females in equal degree; as Daughters, Sisters, Aunts, etc.
they shall Inherit together, and are but one Heir, and are called Parceners,
Idem p. 24.

But note, If a Man be seized of Lands or Tenements to hold to him and his
Heirs for ever; It is the best Inheritance a Man may have, and he may Sell, or
Grant, or make his Will of those Lands; but if otherwise he die, they do
descend to his Heir of the whole Blood; ut supra, with respect to the several
Cases, etc. See Idem, pa. 20.

Property by Escheat
It where the Owner of Land

And it is to be understood, That all Lands are said to be holden of the Crown
either immediately or mediately, and the Escheat pertains to the immediate
Lord, not to the mediate Lord, See Camb. Brit. page 93. Cowels Interp. Tit.
eod'.

The lack of Heir happens principally in two Cases, Magna Charta. 31. Fitz.
N. B. fol, 143. T. etc.
the one where the Owner of the Land is a Bastard, the other where the Owner is
attainted of Treason or Felony; for neither can a Bastard have an Heir (unless
he be his Child) nor a Man attainted of Treason or Felony, have any Heir though
he be his own Child.

Property by Conveyance
4. Diverse Estates by Conveyance.
Is distributed into diverse Estates.

Viz. for 1. Years. 2. Life.
Viz. in 3. Tail. 4. Fee simple.

And these Estates are created either by Word, Writing or Record.

1. By Word or Parol, By Parol.
as Leases for Years.

2. By Writing, By Writing.
as by Indenture, Grant, etc.

3. By Record, By Record.
as by Fine, Bargain and Sale, etc.

But note, Nota.
That Leases parol are void if they exceed three Years from the making, and if
they do not exceed, yet two third parts of the improved value of the thing
demised must be reserved to the Landlord, See Stat. 29 Car. 2.

Leases for Years, 1. Of Leases for Years.
are mostly made by Indenture, by words of Demise, Grant and to Farm let, with
such Conditions and Covenants as the parties agree upon, Co. Lit. fol. 45. Bro.
Leases 60. 67. h.

And such Leases be called Chattels Real, They are called Chattels Real, etc.
and are not inheritable by Heirs, but go to the Executors or Administrators;
they be saleable for Debt in the Life of the Owner, or in the Executors or
Administrators hands by Writ of Execution: They be forfeited to the Crown by
Outlary, Are saleable, etc.
or by Attainder for Felony, Treason or Praemunire, etc. 32 L. Ass. pl. 6.
See Wentworths Executor pa. 76.

If a Lease be for 500 Years it is but a Chattel, Extents for Debts are of the
same Nature as Leases for Years.
and cannot be entailed, Registr. Practical p. 192.

Of like nature are, Interests gotten in other Men's Lands by Extents for Debt
upon Judgment, in- any Court of Record, upon Statute-Merchant, or of the
Staple, or Recognizances, and the Tenants thereby are called Tenants by Elegit.
All these also be called Chattels Real, and do go to the Executors or
Administrators, and not to the Heir, and are saleable and forfeitable as Leases
for Years are, Idem pa. ead.

See more hereafter, Chapter 2.

Leases for Lives
Are called Freeholds, 2. Leases for Lives are Freeholds. Bract. lib. 2. c. 9.
which are also made by Writing or Record; And when by Writing, there must be
Livery and Seisin given at the making of the Lease, the manner of which Livery
and Seisin is set down, Chapter 4.

This Lease for life is not saleable by the Sheriff for Debt; but the Land is
to be extended Not saleable but extendable.
at a yearly value, Not forfeited except, etc.
to satisfy the Debt, neither is it forfeited by Outlary, (except in Felony)
nor by any of those means before mentioned, to which Leases for years are
liable and subject (saving only Attainders for Treason, Felony or Praemunire)
and then only to the Crown, not to the Lord of the Escheat, Vide 25 Ed. 3.
Stat. 5. cap. 2.

This Estate will go to the Heirs Will go to the Heir.
(if the word (Heirs) be contained in the Grant) if not contained, Then to the
Executor, Or Executor.
in case of no special Occupancy, as before Page 2, 3.

A Lease for life, or for years, How Leases for Life may be made.
may also be made by Fine of Record, Bargain and Sale, or by Covenants to stand
seized to uses, upon good consideration of Marriage or of Blood, See Bro. Fines
106.

Note, If a Man have a Lease for never so many years determinable upon life or
lives, (which some Persons call a Lease for lives) it is but a Chattel,
Wentworths Executor, page 28.

Of Entails
Entail signifies Fee entailed, 3. Entail defined
That is, Fee scanted or limited and tied to certain Conditions. See Cowels
Int. Tit. eod.

These Entails may be created by a Gift with Livery and Seisin to a Man and the
Heirs of his Body; How created.
This word (Body) making the Tail, may be restrained to Males or Females, to
the Heirs of the Bodies of the Husband and Wife, to the Body of his Father or
Grandfather in Tail special or general.

When they began
Entails began by a Statute in Edward the Firsts time ( Westminster. ca. 2. de Donis
Conditionalibus) (for before that Statute Feoffees after they had Issue, had
power to alien and disinherit the Issue contrary to the mind of the Donees: By
Statute West. ca. 2.
) And by this Statute they were made so strong, as that the Tenants in Tail
could not put away the Land from the Heir by any Act of Conveyance, or
Attainder; nor let it, or any way charge or incumber it, longer than for his
own life; (see the Statute.)

The inconveniences by that Stature.
But the inconveniency thereof was very great; for by this means the Lands were
so surely tied upon the Heir, as the Father could not put it from him; It made
the Son disobedient, negligent and wastful, Marrying often without the Fathers
consent, and to grow insolent in Vice, knowing there could be no check of
disinheritance to restrain him: It made also the Owners of entailed Lands less
fearful themselves to commit Felonies, Murders, Manslaughters and Treasons,
Committing Felonies, Murders, Manslaughters and Treasons.
for that they knew that none of their Acts could hurt their Heir in his
Inheritance. It hindered Men that had entailed Lands, that they could not make
the least Profit of their Lands, by taking Fines or other Improvements: Hindered
Improvement of Lands.
For that none upon so uncertain an Estate of the Owners life, would give him a
Fine of any value, nor lay any great Stock upon the Land that it might yield an
improved Rent.

And lastly, These entailed Lands defrauded the Crown and many Subjects of
their Debts, Defrauded the Crown and Subjects of their Debts.
for that the Land was not liable thereto longer than for his own life, which
made that the King could not safely commit any Office of account to such whose
Lands were entailed, Hindered the Owners to borrow Money.
nor other Men to dare to lend them Money.

These Inconveniences were all remedied by later Statutes, The Inconveniences
remedied by Fine, etc.
as namely by the Statutes of 4 Hen. 7. and 32 Hen. 8.36. A Tenant in Tail may
disinherit his Son by Fine and Proclamations; And by that means also may make
it subject to his Debts and Sales; Grant by several Statutes
And by a Statute made in 26 Hen. 8. cap. 13. Tenant in Tail does forfeit hi^
Land for Treason; Which make Tenants in Tail forfeit for Treason, and they may
make Leases.
And by another Statute made in the 32 of H. 8 cap. 28. He may make Leases goo^
against his Issue for twenty on^ years, or three lives, (so it be no^ his chief
Lands or Demeans, no^ a Lease in Reversion, nor a lesse^ Rent reserved, than
the Tenants for the most part of twenty years before have paid; And so as such
Lease have not any matter of discharge for doing Wastes or Spoils) and by a
Statute made the 33 H. 8. Tenants in tailed Lands are liable by Extent for the
Kings Debt: They are liable to the Kings Debt, and are saleable, but
And by a Statute 13 Eliz. 4. they are saleable for his Arrearages upon his
account for his Office.

not forfeited for Felony
So that now it rests that entailed Lands have these two Privileges only,
viz. Not to be forfeited for Felonies, nor extended Not extended
for Debt after the Parties Death, except the Tail be cut off Except the Tail
be cut off
by Fine or Recovery.

Note, These entails are now usually created by settlements upon Marriage for
the benefit of the Posterity, and may be cut off as before is shown; And these
settlements entailing such Land unto the Issue or Posterity, describes the
Uses, Behoofs, Intents, Purposes, Provisos, Conditions, Powers and Limitations
of the Parties thereto and thereby meant, and the Lands are usually made over
to Trustees by Fine and Recovery to stand seized to such Uses, etc.

The last and greatest Estate of Land is Fee-simple, Fee-simple what.
which is an Estate absolute to one and his Heirs for ever; To one and his
Heirs for ever.
Therefore he that makes a Lease for life to one, or a Gift in Tail, may
appoint a Remainder after that Estate to another for life, or in Tail, and a
third in Fee-simple; but after a Fee-simple he can limit no further Estate: And
if a Man does not dispose of a Fee-simple by way of Remainder when he makes
the Gift in Tail, or for life, or for lives, then the Fee-simple rests in
himself as a Reversion, Co. on Lit. fol. 112, 113. Brook Tit. Don. and
Remainder, fol. 245 Glanv. li. 7. cap. 1.

And the difference between Remainder and Reversion Difference between
Remainder and Reversion.
is this; The Remainder is always a succeeding Estate at the time when the
precedent is appointed; But the Reversion is the Estate left in the Giver after
a particular Estate Note, A particular Estate is such as is derived from a
General Estate
made by him for years, life, or in tail See hereafter Chapter 5. Bract. lib. 2.
cap. 25.

Where the Remainder is made with the particular Estate, then it must be done
by Deed in Writing with Livery and Seisin; and if the Giver will after dispose
of the Reversion that remains in himself, he is also to do it by Writing, and
the Tenant is to have notice of it, and to attorn to it, which is to give his
assent (as to say) I do agree to the Grant made to you, or I am well contented
with it, or I do attorn unto you, or I do become your Tenant, or deliver to the
Grantee a penny by way of Seisin of Rent in the name of the whole, Note, It must
be done in the lifetime of the Grantor. See Attornment.
it is good for all, Noy Max. Pa. 63. The manner of Indorsement thereof is
hereafter set down Chapter 2.

And except the Tenant will thus ^ttorn, the party to whom the Reversion is
granted cannot have the Reversion, Reversion passes not without Attornment
neither can he compel him by any Law to attorn, unless ^he Grant of the
Reversion be by Fine, Unless the Grant be by Fine
and then he may by Writ (called Quid Juris clamat, directed ^o the Tenant to
show his Estate.) This Writ issues out of the Record of the Fine which
remains with ^he Custos Brevium of the Common Pleas before the Fine be
engrossed, Then there is a Writ to compel.
If the Writ be not sued
for afterward it cannot be had, West Symb. Part 2. Tit. Fines. 159. And if he
do not purchase that Writ, yet by the Fine the Reversion shall pass: But the
Tenant shall pay no Rent, nor be punished for any Wast in the Houses or Woods
before Attornment, or unless the Reversion be granted by Bargain and Sale by
Indenture, and that ^nrolled within six Months. The Reversion may pass, but
Tenant not punishable for Wast, unless granted by Indenture enrolled within six
Months, 39 H. 6. 24.
The end of Attornment is to perfect Grants, and therefore may be made upon a
Condition, or for a time, neither can the Tenant attorn for part of a thing
granted, but it shall ^enure for the whole absolutely, Noy Max. page 64. If the
Tenant have true notice of all the Grant, then such Attornment is void,
Voidance.
Ibid. pa. 65. See Chap. 5.

What perils Fee-simple Estates are liable to.
These Fee-simple Estates lie open to all perils of Forfeiture, Extents and many
the like Inconveniences.

CHAP. II. Showing the nature and effect of such Deeds by which Lands usually
pass, and are conveyed from one to another.
LAnds are conveyed several ways, and by several Deeds or Instruments.

Ordinary Deeds by which Lands usually pass, are Feoffment Fine Recovery
Indentures to lead the uses of Fines and Recoveries Bargain and Sale Covenants
to stand seized to Uses Gift or Grant Lease Lease and Release Assignment
Exchange Surrender Confirmation Revocation and new Declaration Wills in
Writing.


Of which in their Order.

And first of Feoffment.
A Feoffment Feoffment what.
is where by Deed Lands are given, and Livery and Seisin made: It is not called
a Feoffment unless the Fee-simple It makes Fee-simple.
be conveyed; but otherwise it is called a Lease for Life or Gift in Tail, as
is abovementioned.

M. West, part 1. Symb. Lib. 2. 235. says, It signifies in our Common Law any
Gift or Grant of any Honors, Castles, Manors, Messuages, Lands or other
corporal and immovable Things of like nature, unto another in Fee-simple, that
is, to him and his Heirs for ever, by delivery of Seisin and Possession of the
thing given, whether the Gift be made Nota, as before, must be in Writing.
by Word or Writing; and when it is in Writing it is called a Deed of
Feoffment; and in every Feoffment the Giver is called the Feoffor, and he that
receives by virtue thereof, the Feoffee. And Lit. Lib. 1. cap. 6. says, That
the proper difference between a Feoffor and a Donor Difference betwixt Feoffor
and Donor.
is, That the Feoffor gives in Fee-simple, the Donor in Fee-tail.

And note, That a Joynt-Tenant cannot enfeoff his Companion, Noy Max. p. 57.

A Man cannot enfeoff his Wife, Ibid.

A Disseisor cannot enfeoff the Disseisee, for his Entry is lawful upon the
Disseisor, Ibid. 56.

But note, That a Copartner may make a Feoffment of his part, or ^e may
Release, Ibid. 57.

A Fine Fine what.
is a Ceremonious Con^eyance of Lands or Tenements, ^r of any thing
inheritable, having (...) Being at the time of such Fine, ^o the end to cut off
all Controver^es, West part 2. Symb.. 1. says, They are Covenants made before
^ustices and entered of Record, it ^egins thus: Haec est Finalis Concor^ia, etc.
(This is the Final Agreement, etc.) And this must be done before the Kings
Judges in the Court of Common Pleas concern^ng Land, Where to be made.
that one Man shall have ^om another to him and his Heirs, ^r to him and to the
Heirs of his ^ody, or to him for life, or for ^ears; whereupon also a Rent Rent
may be reserved.
may ^e reserved, but no Conditions or Covenants. This Fine is a Record ^f
great Credit, and upon this ^ine four Proclamations Four Proclamations.
are made ^n the Common Pleas every Term ^or the four next Terms together. 3
El. 2.
And if any Man having right to those Lands make not his claim within five
years If the Heir claim not within five years.
next after these Proclamations are ended, he loses his Right for ever, unless
he be an Infant, a Woman Covert, one beyond the Seas, or one Mad, He loses his
his Right unless it be an Infant, Woman Convert, beyond Seas, or Mad.
and then his Right is saved, so that he claim within five Years after hi^
first coming to full Age, after the death of her Husband, after their return
from beyond the Seas, an^ after the Recovery of his Wits; a^ the Case falls
out, Example^ follow.

This Fine is called a Feoffmen^ of Record, Fine is called Feoffment on Record.
because it includes al^ that a Feoffment does, and works farther of his own
nature, an^ barreth Entails peremptorily whether the Heir claim within fiv^
years or not, Barreth Entails claim or not claim.
if he claim by him that levied the Fine.

A Fine begins Fine how begins.
by Praecipe and Concord

The Praecipe Praecipe what.
is a Commandmen^ or Charge supposed to be given to the Cognizees to hold
Covenan^ with the Cognizors of such an^ such Lands, etc.

The Concord Concord what
is the very Covenant or Agreement betwixt the Parties Cognizors and Cognizees.

In the form whereof many things are to be regarded, Things to be observed in
the form thereof.
as if it be single, whether it be sur Cogni^ance de Droit come ceo que il ad
de ^on Done, or sur Grant, Done, Release ^r Confirmation, such and the like be
^alled single Fines, Single Fine.
nothing being ^endred back by any of the Cog^izees to any of the Cognizors,
^ee West, Tit. Fines.

A double Fine Double Fine what.
is with a Render, what Estates are to be created there^y, and of the
Reservation of Rents, ^omine poenae, and Clause of Distress and Services, with
the Clause of Warranty: For which it is to be ^oted, That when a Fine is levied
to ^ivers Cognizees the Right shall be ^^mited How the Right shall be limited.
3 H. 6. 42. 24 E. 3. 64.
to one of them only, and ^he Estate limited to his Heirs on^y, whose Right it
is knowledged to ^e, Ibid.

(As this.)

Et est Concordia talis, Example.
scilicet quod ^red' A. Cogn' Tenementa pred' cum per^in' esse jus ipsius B. ut
illa quae iidem B. and C. habent de dono pred' A. Et ^ll' remisit and quiet'
claim' de se and Haeredibus suis prefat' B. and C. and Haeredibus ipsius B. etc.

And likewise the Release Release how to be. 21 Ed. 3. 33.
and Warranty must be from the Heirs of one of the Cognizors; for in a Fine
from diverse the Fee must be supposed to be in one of them only, West, Pres.
Tit. Fines. 30.

Of what things it may be.
And a Concord cannot be of any other thing than is contained in the Writ of
Covenant, and not of a Foreign thing if it be not consequent, Ibid.

And if diverse join in a Fine the Warranty The Warranty how to be made.
must be by them and the Heirs of one of them which is the Owner of the Land,
44 E. 3. 1.

And note, That Warranties Diverse sorts of Warranties.
be sometimes General, That is, against all Men; some against all, except
certain Persons; some against certain Persons only; some against every Cognizor
and his Heirs severally; some against one of the Cognizors and his Heirs only;
some of all the Lands in the Fine; some of all except part, and some of part
only certainly expressed, West, Tit. Fines,. 147.

He who acknowledges the Fine is called Cognizor, and he to whom the Fine is
levied is called the Cognizee; and it is requisite that either the Cognizor or
Cognizee be seized of the Lands in the Suit at the time of the levying The
Partles must be seized at the time of levying.
thereof, otherwise the Fine is void, 41 Ed. 3. 14. 22 H. 6. 13. 3 H. 6. 27 H.
8. 4. and 20. 37 H. 6. 34. 22 H. 6. 57. See West, Exception.
Tit. eod. unless it be by a Vouchee after he has entered into the Warranty to
the Demandant, for he being Tenant in Law may confess the Action; but a Fine by
Vouchee levied to a Stranger is void, 8 H. 4. 5 H. 7. 40. See West; Ibid.

All Persons Male and Female may be Cognizors, Who may be Cognizors.
except Idiots, Madmen, Lunatiques, Men having the Lethargy, Blind, Deaf or
Dumb, and these be hindered by nature; Friars, Nuns, Monks, (who are dead in Law
Exceptions of Persons dead in Law, etc.
) and Persons having Joynt-power, as a Bishop without the Dean and Chapter, a
Dean without his Chapter; a Parson, Vicar, Prebendary without their Ordinary; a
Mayor without his Commonalty, Masters of Colleges without their Fellows, and
the single Members of every Corporation or Society, and these be hindered by the
Law, West, ibid.

Cautions.
Of Husband without his Wife.
A Husband without his Wife ought not levy a Fine of her Lands, for she and her
Heirs may avoid it after his death, 32 H. 8. cap. 28 12 E. 4. 12. 42 E. 3. 20.

Care to be taken by Infants
Infants, i. e. all Persons under one and twenty Years ought to have a special
care how they levy Fines, for they must be reversed again during their Infancy,
otherwise they are good, and the Court must see them at such reversal thereby
to judge of their Age, 50 E. 3. 5. 17 E. 3. 52. 78.

Drunken and old Doters not capable.
It ought to be regarded, that Drunken-men and old doting Persons be not
Cognizors, for their Fines are not reversable, 17 E. 3. 5. and 8. 17 Ass. 17.

Care to be taken by a Married Woman under Age.
A Married Woman under Age ought to take heed that she levy not a Fine of her
own Lands, for she cannot reverse it during her Husbands Life, neither after
his Death if she be then at full Age, 50 E. 3. 5. Ass. pla. 53.

A married Woman of age Of Age.
ought not to levy a Fine but with her right Husband, 7 H. 4. 23. 42 E. 3. 20.

And she must beware how she with her Husband With her Husband.
levy a Fine of her Jointure, lest she thereby lose her Thirds if the Jointure
were well settled before Marriage, Dyer fol. 359. pla. 49.

If she without her Husband Without her Husband.
levy a Fine of her own Lands wherein she has Fee-simple, it will be a Bar
against her and her Heirs, unless her Husband avoid it by Entry, or otherwise
during her Life.

If he be Tenant by Courtesy, Tenant by Courtesy.
he may reverse it after her Death, 17 E. 3. 52. and 78. 17 Ass. 17. 7 H. 4. 23.

If a Woman during her first Husbands Life marry a second, Fine by Woman having
two Husbands.
and with him, and by his Name knowledge a Fine, it shall not bind her, 7 H. 4.
22, 23. because she is misnamed.

With her right Husband.
And if she levy a Fine with her right Husband by a wrong Christian Name, she is
bound by Estoppel during her Life; and the Tenant may plead that she (by such a
Name) levied the Fine, 1 Ass. pla. 11. Brook Fines 117.

(Of Cognizors.)
Of the Estates of Cognizors who may levy.
Persons outlawed or waved in personal Actions may alien by Fine, 9 H. 6. 20. 21
H. 7. 7.

Persons attainted of Felony or Treason may levy by Fine; but their Fines are
void against the King, and the Lord of whom the Lands be holden, 9 H. 6. 20. 21
H. 7. 7.

Tenants for Life may.
Tenant for Life may levy a Fine, sur Grant and Release of the Lands which he
holds for Life, to hold to the Cognizee for Life, of the Tenant for Life, 44
E. 3. 36. But if the Estate be larger, it is a forfeiture of his Estate, 4 H.
7. Noy 30.

Forfeiture of Estates.
And so the Law is the same of such Fines by Tenant in Tail, after possibility,
Tenant in Dower, or by the Courtesy, 39 E. 3. 16.

But it seems to be no forfeiture of a Rent, Rent no Forfeiture.
2 H. 5. 7.

Yet a particular Tenant, Particular Tenant.
as in Dower, by Courtesy, or for Life, cannot grant and surrender their
Estate to the Owner of the Reversion or Remainder, 17 E. 3. 62.

Tenant in Common, Tenant in Common.
or Joynt-Tenant may levy a Fine of his part, 26 H. 8. 9. so a Copartner of his
part, Dyer 334.

So may Tenant in Tail, Tenant in Tail
General or Special.

Also Tenant in Fee-simple, Tenant in Fee-simple.
in Remainder or Reversion.

Cognizors must be certainly named by their right Names of Baptism and
Sirnames, Cognizors how must be named.
and their Additions, as Knight, Esquire, Gent. etc. are commonly used in
Fines, West, Tit. Fines,. 14.

(Of Cognizees.)
All such Persons as may be Grantees, or take Contracts may be Cognizees; Who
may be Cognizees.
as Persons of full Age, Infants, Femes-Covert, Madmen, Lunaticks, Idiots, Men
imprisoned, Men without the Realm, and all Corporations and Civil Bodies, Men
attainted of Felony or Treason, Men outlawed in personal Actions, Bastards,
Clerks convict, etc.

Exceptions of Persons dead in Law.
But Persons civilly dead, as Monks, Friars, etc. cannot be Cognizees, because
they want Civil Capacity, West, Pres. Tit. Fines,. 15.

Cognizees how to be named.
Cognizees in Fines must be named by their proper Names and Sirnames; For a Fine
levied to A. and Sibel his Wife (where her Christian Name was Isabel) was
holden void, West Tit. Fines Sect. 15.
1 Ass. pla. 11. the rest in order; as for the Cognizors, mutat' mutand'.

All, or two of the Justices of the Common Place may in open Court take
knowledge of Fines, Who may take knowledge of Fines in Court
and Record them by virtue of their Offices; And the Justices of the Common
Place be the only Judges for the recording of Fines; and all Cognizances
thereof must be certified thither, 15 E. 2. 36 H. 6. 34. 44 Ed. 3. 38.

The Chief Justice of the Common Place by his Prerogative of his Office, may
take Cognizance of Fines in any place out of the Court, Fines taken out of
Court.
and certify the same without a Dedimus Potestatem, Dyer 224. pla. 31.

By the Statute 2 E. 6. cap. 28. Fines may be levied Where Fines may be levied
in the County Palatine of Chester; and by 37 H. 8. cap. 19. of Lands in the
County Palatine of Lancaster.

And by 5 El. cap. 27. within the County Palatine of Duresme alias Durham.

Fines may be levied of all things being in esse tempore Finis, Of what things
a Fine may be levied.
and certainly expressed in the Writs, 18 E. 4. 22.

Fines may be levied of all things, whereof a Praecipe quod reddat lies, West,
Tit. Fines,. 25.

Lands bought of diverse Persons by several Purchasors may pass in one Fine,
Several Lands pass in one Fine.
and then the Writ of Covenant must be brought by all the Vendees against all
the Vendors; and every Vendor must Warrant against him and his Heirs only. And
these Joint Fines are seasonable when the Purchases are of small Value, The
Convenience.
and the Charges would exceed the Value.

Fines may not be levied of things uncertain, as de Tenemento, 3 Ed. 4. 19. Of
what things Fines may not be levied.


Lands restrained.
Nor of Lands restrained from sale by Act of Parliament, 32 H. 8. cap. 36.

Lands assured for Jointure.
Nor of Lands of the Husband or his Ancestors assured for Jointure, Dower, or in
Tail to any Woman by means of her Husband, or his Ancestors: For if she grant a
greater Estate than for her Life; her Estate is presently forfeited, Plow. fol.
459.

Lands in ancient Demesne.
Nor of Lands in ancient Demesne, for it may be reversed by a Writ of Disceit
brought by the Lord of Ancient Demesne, 7 H. 4. 44. 8 H. 4. 23. Reg. fol. 13. b.

Mixed Lands.
But if it be both of Ancient Demesne, and of Lands at the Common Law, it shall
be good for the Lands at the Common Law, 7 H 4. 44.

What Persons be barred by Fines.
Privies in Blood; as Heirs of the Cognizors claiming by the same Title that
their Ancestors had that levied the Fine, be barred presently thereby, whether
they be void of Impediments or no, 1 R. 3. c. 7. 4 H. 7. c. 24. Br. Fines 109.

Strangers excepted.
But Strangers to Fines, (that is, such as be not Parties or Privies) have years
after Proclamation to enter and claim their Right, Ibid.

The like time have Infants, Infants.
after they accomplish their full Age, Plow. 367. a. 359. b. 4 H. 7. cap. 24.

The like liberty have Madmen Madmen, etc.
and Lunaticks after they be cured of their Maladies, Plow. fol. 375. and 366.

Also Feme-Coverts, Feme-Coverts.
or married Women being Strangers to the Fine, after the Death of her Husband.

Nota, If a single Woman having present Right, take a Husband who suffers the
five years to incur, Five years suffered to incur.
she is for ever barred.

Prisoners Prisoners.
Strangers to the Fine shall have five years after their enlargement, Plow.
360. a. 375. 366. a.

But Civil Bodies Civil Bodies.
and Corporations, having an absolute Estate, so as to maintain a Writ of
Right; as Mayor and Commonalty, Dean and Chapter, etc. are barred by five
years, Plow. fol. 538. T. 20 Eliz.

But Deans, Bishops, Exception.
Masters of Hospitals, Parsons, Vicars, Prebendaries, etc. Which may not have a
Writ of Right, are not barred by five years, Plow. 538. a.

But note also, That such Persons who have such Impediments, as aforesaid; if
after Proclamation the said Impediments be wholly removed, Impediments removed
after Proclamation.
and afterwads they fall into the like again, and die, their Heirs shall not
have five years claim anew; but the first years begun immediately after the
first removal of the said Impediments shall run on to five years, and shall
bind the Heirs, Plow. fol. 375. a.

Note, There must be four Proclamations Four Proclamations.
in four Terms, one in each Term.

Thus much of Strangers to Fines, having present Right at the Proclamation.

Yet such Strangers to Fines, and void of such Impediments, whose Right or
Title comes or descends to them after the Proclamation, Title descending
after Proclamation.
have five years after the coming of such Right, 1 R. 3. cap. 7. 4 H. 7. cap.
24. Plow. fol. 378. a. b.

So he in Remainder or Reversion, Limitation after a Reversion accrueth.
depending upon an Estate of Freehold, after the Remainder or Reversion
accrueth, has five years to enter, and if he die before Entry, his Heir has
only five years to enter after the Death of the particular Tenant, Plow. fol.
374. a. b.

And also such Strangers to Fines as are not void of such Impediments, having
future Right, Fines after Impediments removed where there is future Right.
have five years after such Impediments removed, 1 R. 3. c. 7. 4 H. 7. c. 24.
Plow. fol. 364. a.

Such Strangers to Fines, as have neither present nor future Right Neither
present nor future Right.
at the levying thereof, by reason of any matter had before the Fine, whose
Right grows either entirely after the Proclamation, or partly before, and
partly after, may enter or claim when they please, within the time of the
prescription; As if the Father die seized, Example.
his eldest Son being possessed, and the youngest Son enters, and is
disseized, and a Fine with Proclamation levied; and after the eldest Son is
deraign'd, i. e. discharged of his Profession or Religion: It seems he is
bound to no time.

So if the Husband levy a Fine of his own Lands, Dower.
whereof his Wife is Dowable, and die, and five years pass, she is not barred
of her Dower; for before his Death she had only a Possibility, and not any
Title to Dower, Plow. fol. 373. a.

And if Strangers have several future Rights, by diverse Titles growing at
several times, Several future Rights growing at several times.
they shall have several five years from the time that their several Titles
first accru'd unto them, Ibid.

Strangers having neither present nor future Right.
And Strangers to Fines having neither present nor future Right to the Tenements
in the Fine, but unto some thing in, or issuing out of the same; as Rent,
Common, Way, Estovers, or any such charge out of the Land, seem not barrable at
all: For it seems that these Fines extend only to bind the Estate, Title,
Right, Claim, Entry and Interest, in and to the Land, and no Profits to be
taken out of the Lands, nor to take power given to Executors, or others to sell
the Land, Brook Tit. Fines 123.

It is a good plea to a Fine, Plea to a Fine that a Stranger was seized.
to say, That J. S. was seized at the time of levying it, and before, without
that, That the Parties to the Fine had any thing therein at the time of the
Fine levied, 9 H. 4. 27. 3 H. 6.27.

Or that the Parties to the Fine had nothing, Plea that the Parties had nothing.
etc. But that A. B. had, whose Estate he has, 33 H. 6. 18. 26 H. 6. 9. 42 E.
3.20. 4. H. 4.8. 4 H. 7. cap. 24.

If there be two of one name, Two of one Name.
and the one levy a Fine of the Lands of the other, the other may avoid it by
pleading; likewise the Owner of the Land may aviod the Fine levied (by a
Stranger) in his name, Fine how to be avoided.
because it is a matter of Record, and there is no other remedy, except an
Action of Deceit, 34 H. 6. 19.

But neither Parties to Fines, Pleas not allowable.
nor their Heirs may plead, that before, at, and since the levying the Fine,
the Plaintiff or their Heirs were always seized of the Lands in the Fine, or of
parcel thereof, 27 E. 1. cap. 1.

Tenant in Remainder in Fee, Averment of him Remainder in Fee.
may aver the continuance of Possession against a Fine, sur Cognizance de Droit
come ceo, etc. levied by Tenant in Tail, 12 E. 4. 12. because he is neither the
Party nor his Heir; The Reason.
and so may a Feme-Covert where her Husband sole levyeth the Fine, Ibid.

Issue in Tail may aver continuance of Possession Continuance of Possession.
against a Fine, sur Cognizance de Droit tantum, but not against a Fine sur
Cognizance de Droit come ceo, que il ad de son done, because that Fine is
executed, and the other only Executory, 12 E. 4. 15. and 19. 11 H. 4. 85.

And lastly, Note that if the use of a Fine be not declared before, nor after
the Fine levied, it shall be intended to the use of the Cognizor Use of a Fine
not declared, remains to the Cognizor.
and his Heirs, See West, Symb. Tit. Fines.

Of Recoveries.
Recoveries are either feigned, That is, Common or True, that is, actual by
Judgment.

The end and effect of a Common Recovery, is to discontinue and destroy
Estates, Remainders and Reversions, and to bar the former Owners thereof, West,
part 2. Symb.. 1.

And it is used for assurances of Land where the Parties do agree, that one
shall bring an Action Real against the other that has the Freehold of those
Lands, as though he had good Right to the Lands, and the other shall not make
defense against it, The form of it.
but shall allege that he bought these Lands of A. B. who has warranted them
to him, and prays that A. B. may be called to defend the Title, and A. B. shall
vouch to warranty H. H. who is called the common Vouchee, Common Voucher.
(unless it be in special Cases where some others are to be, and must be
vouched thereby to cut off Remainders) which Vouchee shall appear as though he
defended, and pray that day for defense; and after a day being given him by the
Court, makes default, and thereupon the Court is to give Judgment Judgment.
against him; which Judgment cannot be for him to lose the Land, because he
has it not, but the Party to whom he sold it, who called him to warrant it.

Therefore first the Demandant against whom there is no defense, must have
Judgment to have the Land against him that he sued, who is called the Tenant;
and the Tenant is to have Judgment against the first Vouchee, etc. And by this
Devise grounded upon the strict Principles of Law, the first Tenant loses the
Land, Tenant loses his Land by Agreement.
and has nothing for it, but it is by his own Agreement, and for the Assurance
of him that buys the Land.

The Effects of Recovery.
The Recovery bars Intails, and all Remainders and Reversions that should take
place after Intails, saving where the King is the Giver of the Estate Tail, and
keeps the Reversion in himself; It prevails not where the King has the
Reversion.
and then the Heir in Tail, nor the Remainder, or Reversion is barred by such
Recovery, 23 H. 8. b.

The Reason why the Heir, etc. is barred by such Recoveries.
The Reason why the Heirs of the Remainders and Reversions be thus barred, is,
because in strict Law the Recompense adjudged against the Vouchee, is to go in
succession of Estate, as the Land lost should have done; and then it were not
reason to allow the Heir liberty to keep the Land, and also to have a
Recompense in value, therefore he loses the Land, 23 H. 8.
and is to trust to the Recompense.

This slight was first invented Recoveries when first invented.
when Intails fell out to be inconvenient, as is before declared, so that Men
made no Conscience to cut them off if they could find Law for it; and now by
use these Recoveries are become common Assurances against Intails, and against
Remainders, and Reversions, and are the greatest Assurances that the Purchasors
have for their Money; Are the greatest Assurances for Purchasors
for a Fine will bar the Heirs in Tail, but not the Remainders, or Reversions;
but a common Recovery bars them all.

And this common Recovery is used The use.
when a Man is desirous to cut off an Estate Tail in Lands or Tenements; to the
end, to sell, give or bequeath it, as himself sees good.

There is also a true Recovery True Recovery what.
which is an actual or real Recovery of any Thing, or the value thereof by
Judgment; for example, If a Man buy Land of another with a Warranty, which Land
a third Person afterward recovereth against him; the Buyer has remedy against
the Seller to recove^ it in value, That is, to recover so much in Money as the
Land is worth, Fitz. N. B. fol. 134.

Note, That these common Recoveries are sued out with single, double and treble
Vouchers. Vouchers.


What a Recovery with single Voucher is.
And yet in that called a single Recovery, you will find two Recoveries
included; the first by the Demandant against the Tenant, and the second by the
Tenant against the common Vouchee.

The intent of a common Recovery, with single Voucher, What is intended by a
Recovery with single Voucher.
is to bar the Tenant and his Heirs of such only Estate Tail which then is in
him, to destroy the Estates which others have of any Reversion Expectant, or
Remainder Dependant upon the same; and of all Leases and Encumbrances derived
out of such Reversions or Remainders.

In a double Voucher there are ^lso three Recoveries mentioned; What a Recovery
with double Voucher is.
^ne for the Demandant against ^he Tenant, another for the Te^ant against the
Voucher, the last ^or the first Voucher against the ^ommon Vouchee

And by this Recovery with ^ouble Voucher, What is intended by double Voucher.
it is intended to ^ar the first Voucher and his Heirs ^f every such Estate, as
at any ^ime was in the same Voucher, or any of his Ancestor whose Heir he ^s of
such Estate, and all other Persons of such Right to a Rever^on or Remainder;
And of all Leases, Charges and Encumbrances derived out of any such Reversion
or Remainder.
and will be al^o a perpetual Bar of such Estate, whereof the Tenant was then
^eized in Reversion, or Remainder Expectant or Dependant upon the ^ame.

In a Recovery with treble Voucher, What a Recovery with treble Voucher is.
are included four Reco^eries; the first by the Demandant against the Tenant;
the second ^y the Tenant against the first Vouchee; the third by the first
against the second; and the fourth ^y the second against the common Vouchee.

The intent thereof.
The scope and intent of this treble Voucher, is to make a perpetual Bar of the
Estates of the Tenant, and of every such Estate of Inheritance, as at any time
had been in the first or second Vouchee, or any of them, or either of their
Ancestors, whose Heirs he or they are of such Estate, and as well of every
Reversion thereupon dependant; as also of all Leases, Estates Charges and
Encumbrances derived out of any such Reversion o^ Remainder.

And the uses both of Fines and Recoveries are mostly expressed and led by
Indentures between the Parties designed, before or afte^ for that purpose,
which be called Indentures, to lead the uses of Fine^ and Recoveries.
Indentures to lead the uses of Fines and Recoveries.


And as these Fines and Recoveries are a Bar, and dock the Estates
aforementioned, so by these Indentures to lead the uses thereof new Estates
and Intails are limited and created, subject to further Fines and Recoveries,
Et sic ad infinitum.

Upon Feoffment, Fines and Recoveries, the Estate of the Lands does settle, as
the use and intents of the Parties is declared by Writing before or after the
Act was done; (as for example,) If they make Writing that one of them shall
levy a Fine, or make a Feoffment, or suffer a Recovery to the other; yet the
use and intent may be, is that one shall hold it for his Life, and after his
death a Stranger to have it in Tail, and then a third in Fee-simple: The Use
guides the Estate.
In this case the Land setleth in Estate according to the use and intent
declared; and that by reason of the Statute of 27 H. 8. cap. 10. 27 H. 8. cap.
10.
Which conveyeth the Land ^n possession to every one that has interest in Use,
or the intent of the Fine, Feoffment or Recovery, according to the use or
intent of the Parties; But before that Statute the Feoffees were Owners of the
Land, The convenience and force of that Statute
but now the Cestuy que Use (he to whose use they were enfeoffed) is the Owner
of the same; before the Possession ruled the Use, but since the Use governs
the Possession, Noy Max. 60.

Upon this Statute of 27 H. 8. is also grounded the fourth and fifth of these
Conveyances, (viz.) Bargains and Sales, and Covenants to stand seized to Uses.

For this Statute wheresoever it finds, conveyeth the Possession to the Use.

Use what.
The Use is but the Equity and Honesty to hold the Land (in Conscience of a good
Man,) as for example, If I and You by Deed agree, and Covenant that I shall
give you Money for your Land, and that you shall make me Assurance of it: I pay
you your Money, and you have made me no Assurance of the Land. Here although the
Estate of the Land be still in you, yet the Equity and Honesty to have the Land
is still with me; Use quid.
and this Equity is called the Use, upon which I had no remedy but in Chancery,
until the Statute of 27 H. 8. Advantage by the Statute 27 H. 8.
And now this Statute conjoyning and conveying the Land to him that has the
Use, I for my Money paid, have the Land it self, without any other Conveyances
from you; and this is called a Bargain and Sale.

It Is true, Uses first began, When Uses first began.
and were invented upon the Statute called West. 3. or Quia emptores terrarum,
before the which Statute no Uses were known, Perkins Devices 528. And because
Men's Wills had in time devised many Deceits, by the settling of the Possession
in one Man, and the Use in another, the aforementioned Statute of H. 8. was
made, whereby it was enacted, That the Use and Possession, Uses and Possessions
united
of Lands and Possessions should always stand united.

But the same Parliament that made that Statute, did foresee, Bargains and
Sales.
that it would be mischievous, that Men's Lands should be so suddenly conveyed
(upon the payment of some ^ittle Sum of Money) from them; and that peradventure
in an Alehouse or Tavern upon strained Advantages, and so gravely provided
another Act, 27 H. 8. 16.
at the same Parliament, That the Land upon this Payment of Money should not
pass away, Bargain and Sale must be in Writing, indented, sealed and enrolled
within six Months.
except there were a Writing indented made between the Parties, and the same
Writing also within six Months after to be enrolled in some of the Courts at
Westminster, or in the Sessions Rolls of the Shire where the Land lies, unless
it be within Cities, and Towns Coporate where they did use to inrol Deeds, and
there the Statute extends not; by Bargain and Sale Fee-simple passes, though
Heirs be omitted in the Deed; The effect thereof.
and though there be no Livery and Seisin made by the Seller.

Note.
No Manor, Lands, Tenements or other Hereditaments can pass, alter, or change
from one Man to another, whereby an Estate of Inheritance or Freehold is made,
or takes effect in any Person or Persons, or any use thereof is made, by
reason only of any Bargain and Sale How Estates pass by Bargain and Sale.
therefore; except the same be made by Writing indented, sealed and enrolled in
one of the Courts of Record at Westminster, or within the same Court or County
where the Tenements so bargained do lie, Inrolment to be made, how and when.
before the Custos Rotulorum, and two Justices of Peace, and the Clerk of the
Peace, or two of them, whereof the Clerk of the Peace to be one, and that
within six Months after the date of such Writing indented, See Stat. 27 H. 8.
Noys Max. page 56, 57.

The Inrolment shall be intended the first day of the Term. When it shall be
intended.


And shall have relation to the delivery of the Deed against all Strangers,
Noys Max. page 57. Has relation to the delivery.


A Man by Deed Bargains and Sells his Land to one, Two Bargains and Sales made
of the same Lands to two several Persons, who shall have it.
and before the Inrolment of the Deed, sells it another, and the last Deed is
the first enrolled; and afterward the first Deed is also enrolled within the
six Months, the first Buyer shall have the Land, 2 And. 161. Moor 40, 41. 2
Inst. 675. Hob. 165. Die. 218. 4. Co. 71.

If the Bargainee after the Bargain, and before the Inrolment sell the Land to
another, and afterward the Deed is duly enrolled; the Sale by the Bargainee is
good, 2 Inst. 675. 2 Cr. 52. 1 Cro. 218.110. Roll. 424. 1 Inst. 186.

Nota, The Buyer of a Reversion on Life, or Lease for Years, shall have the
Rent upon the first Lease without Attornment or Inrolment, 8 Co. 93. V. Plow.
421. Jon. 206. 2 Inst. 672. 6 Co. 68. 3 Cro. 166.

Covenants to stand seized to Uses.
A Covenant to stand seized to uses, Covenants to stand seized to uses how.
is in this sort. A Man that has a Wife and Children, Brothers and Kinsfolks,
may by Writing under his Hand and Seal agree, That for their, or any of their
Preferment, he will stand seized of Land to their use, either for Life, in Tail
or Fee-simple, as he shall think fit or see cause.

Upon which Agreement in Writing there arises an Equity or Honesty, that the
Land shall go according to his Agreement. Nature and Reason requiring and
allowing these Provisions, of which Equity and Honesty is the Use. The Use how
arises.


And the Use being created in this sort, the Statute of 27 Hon. 8.
beforementioned, conveyeth the Estate How the Estate setleth.
of the Land as the Use is appointed; and so this Covenant to stand seized,
since the said Statute is a Conveyance of the Land.

But this differs from a Bargain and Sale, How Covenants to stand seized,
differ from Bargains and Sales.
in that this needs no Inrolment, as that does, neither is tied to be in
Writing, indented as the Bargain and Sale must.

And if the Party to whose use he agrees to stand seized of the Land, be not
Wife, Child, Uncle or Cousin, or one that he intends to marry, then will no
Use arise, and so no Conveyance; for although the Law allow these weighty
Considerations of Marriage and Blood to raise Uses, Considerations to raise
Uses.
yet does it not so of trifling Must not be trifling.
Considerations; as of Old Acquaintance, Schooling, Service and the like, 1 Co.
176. 2 Co. 15, 76. Moor 504. con. 3 Cro. 394. Moor 102.

But where a Man makes an Estate of his Land to others, by Fine, Feoffment or
Recovery, Upon a Fine, Feoffment or Recovery, a Man may limit the Use.
he may then appoint the Use to whom he lists, without respect of Kindred,
Marriage, Money or other Thing; for in that case his own Will and Declaration
guides the Equity of the Estate, Ibid.

It is not so when he makes no Estate, but agrees to stand seized; nor in
Bargain and Sale when he has taken any thing.

Note, The Statute 29 Car. 2. to prevent Frauds, etc. Enacts, That all
Declarations, or Creations of Trusts of Lands or Hereditaments, must be
declared in Writing, or by Will in Writing, or else void; except Trusts arising
by Implication of Law, which shall be of the same effect, as if the Statute had
not been.

Also all Grants and Assignments of Trusts, must be in Writing, signed by the
Party, granting or assigning by his last Will or Devise, or else to be void.

If a Man Covenant Covenant to raise an Use.
with his Brother, and two Strangers in consideration of the Love to his Wife
and Children, their Preferment and Living, and to settle his Lands in his Name
and Blood, to stand seized of the Lands, to the use of himself for Life; and
after his decease, to the use of his Wife; and after her decease, to the use of
the Covenantees, and their Heirs upon Trust, etc. No Use arises to these other
Covenantees, but only to the Brother, because they are Strangers to the
Consideration, No Use arises to them that are Strangers to the Consideration.
1 Cro. 529. Jon. 418. Plow. 307. Yelv. 51.

In consideration that the Land shall remain in his Name, etc. And the Use is
limited to the King No not to the King.
to preserve the Tail: it will not raise an Use to the King, 2 Co. 15.

What this Use is, and when first began, and how united to the Possession, you
have read immediately before.

Gift or Grant.
The six Conveyances before treated are the Chief, and of greatest moment, and
most largely to be treated; the next Conveyance in order proposed, is a Gift or
Grant, which differs from a Feoffment; as is before explained.

A Grant A Grant what
Concessio, as Mr. West says in his Symb. part 1. Lib. 2.. 290. signifies
permission, sufferance, leave, license, yielding or giving over of a Thing; but
especially taken it signifies a Gift in Writing of such Things as cannot aptly
pass by Word only without Writing; as Rents, Reversions, Services, Advowsons in
Gross, Common in Gross, Tithes, etc. or made by such Persons as cannot give but
by Deed; as the King, and all Bodies Politic; The general signification.
as Mayors and Commonalities, Deans, Chapters, etc. which Differences be
oftentimes neglected, and then it is taken generally to signify every Gift
whatsoever, made of any Thing, by any Person whatsoever; and he that grants
or gives, is termed the Grantor or Donor; and he to whom the Grant or Gift is
made, the Grantee or Donee.

An Instrument of Grant, is a Deed containing the Description of such a Gift or
Grant.

Attornment necessary in Grants.
And note, That Lands and Tenements, and such things as naturally lie in Grant,
cannot be transferred from one to another by bare Grants of the Parties,
without the Attornment and Agreement of others; the Nature and Effect whereof
is after laid down.

Note, A Grant must be certain, Certainty.
Noys Max. p. 61.

A Man cannot charge or grant that which he never had, Ibid. p. 62.

A Thing that cannot begin without a Deed, may not be granted without a Deed;
Things beginning by Deed, how they must be granted.
and every Thing that is not given by delivery of Hands, must be passed by
Deed, Ibid.

All Things that are incident Incident.
to others, pass by the Grant of them that they are incident unto, Ibid.

A Man by his Grant cannot prejudice him that has an elder Title, No prejudice
to an elder Title.
Ibid. 63.

If no Estate be expressed in the Grant, How the Estate shall be limited*
and though Livery and Seisin be made, yet the Grantee has but an Estate for
Life, Ibid.

But if the words manifest the lawful Will of the Grantor, the Estate shall be
taken according to his intent, Ibid.

All Grants shall have a reasonable Construction, The Construction of Grants.
and taken strongest against him that made them, and most beneficial to him to
whom they are made, Ibid.

There must be Attornment Attornment.
to Grants of Reversion or Rents, otherwise nothing passes, except it be by
matter of Record, Ibid.

Lease for Years.
The next of these Conveyances is a Lease for Years; Lease for Years.
and he that lets is called the Lessor, and he that takes by the Lease is
termed Lessee.

Certainty thereof.
A Lease for Years must be for time certain, and ought to express the Term, and
when it should begin, and when it should end certainly; And therefore a Lease
for a Year, and so from Year to Year during the Life of J. S. is for two Years,
Noys Max. p. 65.

It may be made by Word or Writing as before.

Lease at will.
A Lease from Year to Year, so long as both the Parties please, after entry in
any Year, it is a Lease for that Year, etc. till warning be given to depart, 14
H. 8. 16. Noy, Ibid.

A Lease beginning from henceforth, How they shall commence.
shall be accounted from the day of the delivery, Ibid.

From the making From the making.
shall be taken inclusive from the day of the making, or of the date exclusive,
Ibid.

If the Habendum of a Lease be for Term of one and twenty Years, without
mentioning when it shall begin; it shall then begin from the delivery, From the
delivery.
Co. Lit. fol. 46. Herns Law of Conveyances, p. 15. and 131.

If Lands descend to the Heir before his Entry, Lease made by Heir before Entry.
he may make a Lease thereof, Noys Max. p. 65.

Tenant for Term of Years may enter When the Tenant may enter.
when he will, the death of the Lessor is no let, and he may grant away his
Term before it begin, Noys Max. p. 30.

But before he enter he cannot surrender, When surrender.
nor have any Action of Trespass, nor take a Release, Ibid.

He is bound to repair Repairs.
the Tenements.

And if Tenant for Life or Years, Term forfeited.
grants a greater Estate than he has himself, he does forfeit his Term, Ibid.

View of Reparations and Distress.
Nota, The Lessor may enter to see what Reparations or Wast there is, and he may
distrain for his Rent, or have an Action of Debt, Ibid.

The nature of Leasts.
And note also, That Leases for Life or Years are of three Natures; some be good
in Law; some voidable by Entry; and some void without; some in futuro, and some
in praesenti, of all which, and o^ the Dates, Commencements, Habendums,
continuance and determination of Leases; you may find many Examples in a
Treatise for that purposed collected, called Landlords Law, p. 137. etc.

See more of the before, Chapter 1.

Of a Release.
Release defined.
A Release is an Instrument whereby Estates, Rights, Titles, Entries, Actions
and other Things, be sometimes extinguished; sometimes transferred; sometimes
abridged, and sometimes enlarged, West, Symb. part 1. Lib. 2.. 466.

A Release made after a Lease for Life or Years, amounts to a Feoffment; It
amounts a Feoffment.
as if I let Land to a Man for Years or Life, and after release to him all my
Right in the Land, Example.
to have and to hold to him and his Heirs, hereby he has a Fee-simple, Co.
Lit. f. 207. a. Finch L. 1. c. 5. page 67. Dyer 263.

But if I Release to him all my Right which I have in the Land, Words to be
observed.
without using any Words in the Release, then here he has only an Estate for
Life, Ibid.

And note, That a Release is the giving or discharging a Right or Action which
a Man has, or claims against another, or out of, or in his Lands, Noys Max.
pa. 74.

And a Man may not release upon a Condition, nor for time, How a Release shall
enure.
nor for part; but either the Condition is void, and the time is void, and the
Release shall enure to the Party to whom it is made for ever for the whole, by
way of Extinguishment, Ibid. p. 57. But such Release by Deed indented is good,
Ibid.

Words to be observed.
A Release to charge an Estate ought to have these words, (Heirs) or words to
show what Estate he shall have, Ibid.

Void Release.
A Release made by him, that at the time of the making thereof had no Right, is
void, Ibid. page 74.

Void Release.
And a Release made to him, that at the time of the Release had nothing in the
Lands, is also void; it behooves him to have a Freehold, or a Possession or
Privity, Ibid. p. 75.

The common Course of passing Land by Lease and Release.
For which purpose it is now the course in passing Land by Lease and Release;
first to execute a Lease for a Year, or the like Term, to the intent and
purpose that the L^ssee may be in the actual possession of the Lands intended
to be released, and thereby, and by force and virtue of the Statute 27 Hen. 8.
for transferring Uses into Possession, be enabled to take a Grant or Release of
the Reversion, and Inheritance of the said Land, to the use of him and his
Heirs.

A Release made to him that has a Reversion, Where it helps the Freehold.
or a Remainder in Deed, shall serve and help him that has the Franktenement;
so shall a Release made to a Tenant for Life, or a Tenant in Tail, How it shall
inure.
inure to him in the Reversion or Remainder, if they show it; and so to
Trespassors and Feoffors, but not to the Disseisors, Noys Max. p. 76. quod been
nota.

Nota, Mr. Noy here by Franktenement means him that has Fee-simple; yet a Man
is said to have Freehold if he holds either in Fee, Fee-Tail, or for Term of
Life, Bract. Lib. 2. cap. 9. The new Law Terms, Tit. eod. Brit. cap. 32. says,
Franktenement is a Possession of the Soil, or Services issuing out of the Soil,
which a Freeman holds in Fee, to him and his Heirs, or at the least, for the
Term of his Life, See Cow. Interp. Tit. Freehold.

Assignment.
Defined.
Assignment is the appointing or setting over a Right unto another.

And there is an Assignee in Deed, and an Assignee in Law, Assignee in Deed and
Law
he in Deed In Deed.
is such a one as to whom a Lease, Estate or Interest is assigned.

He in Law, In Law.
is he whom the Law so makes without any appointment; as an Executor is an
Assignee in Law, Vide Dyer fol. 6. nu. 5.

The difference betwixt an Assignee and Deputee Assignee and Deputee the
difference.
is said to be, for that the Assignee occupies in his own Right, the Deputee
in the Right of another, Vide Perkins in Grants.

If the Lessee for Years assign over his Term, and die, his Executors shall not
be charged Executors not charged.
for Rent due after his death, Noy^ Max. 71.

And if the Executors or Administrators of a Lessee for Years assign over their
Interest, an Action of Debt does not lie against them for Rent; yet it seems
that the Lessor must have notice of the Assignment, Notice of Assignment.
and consent to it, Noy 71. See Moor Rep. Marrow and Turpins Case, and 3 Co.
Walkers Case.

If a Lessee for Years assign over his Term, the Lessor may charge which of
them he will; but if he accept the Rent Acceptance of Rent.
from the Assignee (knowing of the Assignment) he has determined his Election,
Barreth.
and cannot afterward bring an Action of Debt against the Lessee for Rent due
after the Assignment, Co. 3. Rep. ^ol. 24. Bulstr. 2 part 151. Herns Law ^f
Convey. p. 110.

If the Lessor grant away the Reversion after the Assignment of ^he Lessee; in
this case the Grantee cannot have an Action against the ^essee for the Rent,
because there (...) no privity between them; Privity between the Parties.
but ^e is left to his remedy against the Assignee, Poph. Rep. 55. Brownlows
(...) part p. 56.

An Assignee of Lands, Assignee may pay Money to save the Land.
if he be ^ot named in the Condition, yet ^e may pay the Money to save his ^and,
Noys Max. p. 72.

But he shall receive He shall not receive.
none if he be not named, and the Tender shall be to the Executor of the
Feoffees, Ibid.

Assignee shall always be intended, Who shall be intended an Assignee.
he that has the whole Estate of the Assignor, that is assignable; and if
there be an Assignee in Deed, an Assignee in Law will not be allowed, Noy, Ibid.

In Assignments it is necessary to have Covenants of the Assignors part, to
save harmless of former Rents, Grants and Charges, and for the delivery of
former Deeds, that he is Owner in Possession, and has power to grant and
assign, etc. That the Assignee may quietly enjoy, etc. and to make further
assurance, etc.

And on the Assignees part, to pay the Rents, and perform the Covenants, etc.
West, part 1. Lib. 3. 453. But this may be done by Bond.

Exchange.
Exchange Exchange what.
permutatio, Mr. West in his Symb. part 1. Lib. 1. sect. 33. says, Permutation
or Exchange, is a nameless Contract, consisting in the thing and consent, by
which one certain thing is given, and exchanged for another; and albeit, it
counterfeits Buying and Selling very near, yet because it cannot be discerned
thereby, whether is the Buyer, and whether the Seller, it cannot usurp that
Title.

In Exchange both the Estates must be equal; Estates must be equal.
there must be two Grants, and in every Grant mention must be made of this word
(Exchange,) Noys Max. p. 60.

It may be done without Livery of Seisin, Without Livery of Seisin.
if it be in one Shire, or else it must be done by Indenture, and by this word
(Exchange,) or else nothing passes without Livery, Ibid. p. 61.

Exchange imports in the Law Condition of Re-entry, Imports Re-entry.
and a Warranty, Voucher and Recompense of the other Land that was given in
Exchange: An Exchange^ may re-enter upon an Assignee, Ibid.

Surrender.
Defined.
Surrender is an Instrument testifying with apt words, that the particular
Tenant, i. e. Tenant for Life or Years, of Lands or Tenements, does
sufficiently consent, That he which has the next mediate Remainder or
Reversion thereof, shall also have the particular Estate of the same in
Possession and that he yields or gives the same to him: For every Surrende^
ought forthwith to give a present possession of the thing surrendered unto him
which has such an Estate, where it may be drowned, West, Symb. part 1. Lib. 2.
sect. 460. Noys Max. p. 73.

Two sorts.
And there are two manners of Surrenders, viz. A Surrender in Deed, and a
Surrender in Law: Now a Surrender in Deed, In Deed.
is that which is really performed, as by Writing; and also when the words of
the Lessee to the Lessor prove a sufficient assent, that he shall have again
the thing which he holds of his Lessor (if the Les^or do agree to it,) it
amounts to (...) Surrender in Deed, Perkins sect. 606, 607, 608. 6 E. 3. 7.

A Surrender in Law, In Law.
is in in^endment of Law, by way of consequent, and not actual; as if (...) Man
have a Lease of a Farm, and during the Term, he accept ^f a new Lease; this Act
is a Sur^ender in Law of the former Lease, Perk. ibid. 6 Co. fol. 11. b.

And note, Agreement, or disagreement.
The Lessee cannot ^urrender to his Lessor against his will; but if he to whom
the Sur^ender is made, once agree to it, he cannot afterward disagree
thereunto, Perk. ibid.

As if the Lessee for Life or Years of Land say, that his will is, Example.
that his Lessor shall enter into the Land which he holds of him, and shall
have the same again, if the Lessor agrees thereunto, and by force thereof
enters; this is a good Surrender, Ibid.

A good Surrender.
And if the Lessee comes and says unto his Lessor, That he will occupy the
Lands no longer, Note, a Surrender in Deed must have sufficient words to prove
assent and agreement.
and the Lessor by force thereof does enter; this is a good Surrender, for the
Agreement and Entry has confirmed it, and so of the like, Perk. 109 Herns Law
of Con. p. 76.

Husband surrendreth Wives Dower.
If a Woman being Tenant in Dower, takes a Husband who surrendreth the Land
which he holds for her life, and in her Right* after his death she may enter,
though she had joined in the Surrender, and notwithstanding that, She is not
bound.
he to whom the Surrender was made died seized of the Land in Fee and his Heir
be in by descent Perkins sect. 112.

She shall be bound.
But if a Feme-sole who is Less^ for Years of House or Land, takes a Husband
who surrendreth, an^ dies before the Years are out here she shall be bound by
this Surrender, Ibid. sect. 113.

Good Surrender.
And if Tenant in Dower i^ Land grants her Estate unto him in the Reversion,
this is a Surrender* Ibid. 623.

If one hold Lands for Life, How surrender takes effect.
the Remainder to a Stranger for Years; and if the Lessee for Life surrendreth
unto him in Remainder, it shall not take effect, because that an Estate for
Life cannot drown in an Estate for Years, Perkins sect. 589.

If a Copyholder for Life surrender to the use of another, Estate detertermined.
who is ^dmitted, by this the Copyholders Estate is clearly determined.

But if a Copyholder in Fee sur^ender to the use of another for Life, Revived.
after his Death he shall have ^t again, 1 Cro. 148.

A Joynt-Tenant Joynt-Tenant.
cannot surren^er to his Fellow, Noys Max. 73.

Lessee for Years Lessee for Years.
cannot surrender before his Term begin, (though he ^ay grant,) also he cannot
surren^er part of his Lease, Ibid.

The Husband may surrender the Wifes Dower for his Life, Husbands surrender of
his Wifes Estate.
(as before) and her Lease he may surren^er for ever, Noy 74.

Note, How it effects.
That those things which cannot take effect without Deed, cannot be surrendered
without Deed, ^xcept in some special Cases.

By Deed.
And therefore if a Man seized of Rents, Tithe, Common, etc. grants the same
for Life or Years, the Grantee cannot surrender them without Deed, Perk. sect.
581, 582, 584.

But that those things that may not be granted without Deed, may be determined
by the surrender of the Deed Surrender of Deed.
to the Tenant of the Land, Noys Max. p. 73.

Confirmation.
Defined.
Confirmation is a strengthening and making good of an Estate formerly had, and
yet voidable or defeasible, though not presently void by him which has a
better or longer Estate in the thing granted, than the Tenant thereof has,
Lit. sect. 522. West page 1. Lib. 2. sect. 457.

And it is made by the words (have ratified, approved and confirmed, and
similia.)

Defined.
Noy in his Max. says, Confirmation is when one ratifieth the Possession, as
by Deed, to make his Possession perfect, or to discharge his Estate that may be
defeated by another Entry, Noys Max. p. 76.

Landlord and Tenant p. 106. says, A Confirmation is the Conveyance of an
Estate or Right that one has unto Lands or Tenements to another that has the
Possession thereof, or some Estate therein, Defined.
whereby a voidable Estate is made sure and unavoidable; or whereby a
particular Estate is increased and ^nlarged; and though sometimes it may pass
by the words dedi and con^essi, yet the most proper words ^re, confirmavi,
ratificavi and appro^avi, which do signify ratum and fir^um facere and
supplere omne defectum; and he that makes the Confirma^ion is called the
Confirmer, and ^e to whom it is made the Con^rmee, Co. Lit. 295. Bract. 1. Lib.
2. ^8.

And there are two kinds of Con^^rmation, Two sorts of Confirmations
Confirmation in Deed, ^he other implied by Law. Con^irmation by Deed, is when
the Act done, or Deed made, is in^ended for a Confirmation. Con^irmation
implied, Implied.
is when the Law ^y construction makes a Confirmation of a Deed made to another
purpose, and both these are always in Writing, Co. Rep. 9. fol. 142. Co. Lit.
fol. 295. Shephards Touchstone C. 18. p. 311.

Where it effects.
If a Tenant for Life will gran^ a Rentcharge in Fee, then h^ in the Reversion
may confirm the same Grant; where a Man by his Entry may defeat an Estate there
by his Deed of Confirmation he may make the Estate good, Noy^ Max. 77.

The words.
A Confirmation to charge a^ Estate, must have words to show what Estate he
shall have, Ibid.

A Confirmation cannot charg^ Cannot effect.
an Estate that is determined by express Condition or Limitation Ibid.

Confirmation to Tenant for Life of his Estate only for an hour shall be good
for Life; For an hour good for Life.
and so (...) made to a Tenant in Fee, it shall be good for ever, Ibid.

A Lease for Years may be confirmed for a Time, or upon Condition, Upon
Condition.
or for a piece of the Land Ibid.

But if a Franktenement be as before, it shall enure to the whole absolutely,
Noy, Ibid.

To confirm the Estate of Tenant for Life to his Heirs, Word Heirs to be
observed
cannot be but by Habendum the Land to him and his Heirs; and therefore it is
good to have such an Habendum in all Confirmations, Ibid.

In a Confirmation new Service may not be reserved, and old may be abridged,
Ibid.

Confirmation has relation to release, and where he that (as before) has a
better Title in the Land than the Tenant, releaseth to the Tenant; this is a
Confirmation, West, pa. 1. Lib. 2. sect. 457.

A Confirmation made by him, that at the time of the making thereof had no
Right, is void, Noys Max. p. 74.

And so if a Right come to him afterward, (unless it be with Warranty) and
then it shall bar him of all Right that shall come to him after the Warranty
made, Ibid.

Where voidable.
But note, A Confirmation made to one Disseisor, shall be voidable to the other,
so shall not a Release, Ibid. p. 77.

Note, That if the King for him and his Heirs grants Catalla felon' and
fugitivorum, or the like, which is in grant, and dies, the Grantee needs no
Confirmation of the new King, Where necessary.
but if it be a Fair or Market, or the like, and it is abused or misused, as it
may be; or if it be a judicial or ministerial Office or Power, as to be a
Justice o^ Peace, Escheator, or the like, there he ought to have a Confirmation
of the new King, See Brooks Tit. Confirmation 19 and 29. 1 R. 3.4.

In a Confirmation it is not amiss in the Premises of the Deed specially to
recite the Estate Estate to be recited.
of the Tenant which must be confirmed, and also the Estate of him that shall
confirm, and to expres^ the Consideration thereof, if any such be, West, Symb.
part 1. Lib. 2 sect. 457.

Revocation and New Declaration.
This seems to be dependant upon some former Deed or Conveyance, being a
Reservation by Covenant to revoke a Precedent, and by Declaration to create a
new Estate of the Lands; after which the Lands settle accordingly.

Will.
The last of these Conveyances ^s a Will in Writing, Wills in Writing.
which course of Conveyance was first ordained, by a Statute made the 23 of H.
8.1. When first of force.
before which Statute no Man might give Land by Will, except it lay ^n some
Burrough-Town, where ^here was a special Custom, That Men might give their
Lands by Will; as it is in London and many other Places.

The not giving of Lands by Will, The Reason.
was thought to be a defect by the Common Law, that Men in the Wars, or
suddenly falling Sick had not power to dispose of their Land, except they would
make a Feoffment, levy a Fine, or suffer a Recovery, which lack of time would
not permit; And for Men to do it by those means, so as they could not undo it
again, was thought hard; besides even to the last hour of Life, Men's Minds
might alter, upon further proof of their Children or Kindred; or by increase of
Children; or for Debt; or for defect of Servants or Friends.

For lack of Wills, Men used the following Device
For which cause it was thought reason that the Law should permit him to reserve
to the last instant, the disposition of his Land, and yet then also to give him
a means to dispose of it how he pleased, which seeing it did not, Men used this
Device following:

The Device.
They conveyed the full Estate in their Lands in their good Health, to Friends
in Trust, A Feoffment in trust to Friends.
(called properly Feoffees in Trust,) and then they declared by their Wills,
how these Friends should dispose of their Lands, and if those Friends would not
perform it, Who were compelled to Perform it.
the Court of Chancery was to compel them by reason of the Trust; and this
Trust was called the use of the Land, so as the Feoffees had the Land, and the
Party himself had the Use, which Use was an Equity to take the Profits himself,
and that the Feoffees should make such Estates as he should appoint them; and
if he appointed none, then the Use was to go to the Heir, as the Estate it self
of the Land should have done; for the Use was to the Estate, like to the Shadow
following the Body; But observe that by this course of putting Lands in Use,
there were many inconveniences; for this Use that first grew of a reasonable
Cause, Many Inconveniences grew thereby, as a Man, knew not against whom to
bring his Action. The Wife defrauded, Husband defrauded, Lord defrauded,
Creditor defrauded, Tenant defrauded.
to give Men liberty to dispose their own, was turned to defraud many other
just and reasonable Rights, as namely, A Man that had cause to sue for his
Land, knew not against whom to bring his Action, nor who was Owner of it; the
Wife was defrauded of her Dower; the Husband of being Tenant by the Courtesy;
the Lord of his Wardship, Heriot and Escheat; the Creditor of his extent for
his Debt; the poor Tenant of his Lease, for the Rights and Duties were given
from him that was Owner of the Land, and another (who was not the old Owner,
And Cestuy que use took the Profits, whose Estate was not liable to Dower,
Debts or Forfeiture for Treason.
whom we call the Feoffor) but Cestuy que Use, he to whose use the Feoffment
was made, should take the Profits, and have power to dispose the Land by his
direction to the Feoffees; and yet he was not such a Tenant, nor so seized of
the Land, as that his Wife could have Dower, or the Land be extended for his
Debts, or that he could forfeit it for Treason, or that his Heir could be in
Ward for it, Cestuy que Use could not be in Ward, or make Leases.
or any Tenure of Duty fall to the Lord by his Death, or that he could make any
Lease of it.

The Frauds partly remedied by 1 R. 3. 4 H. 7. 16 H. 8. Action against him that
took the Profits.
Which Frauds, as by Degrees of times they increased, were remedied by many
Statutes, as namely by the Statute of 1 H. 7. 1. it was appointed that the
Action might be brought against him that took the Profits, Frauds yet increased.
which was the Cestuy que Use, he to whose use the Feoffment was made; which
Frauds nevertheless daily multiplying, in the end, the Parliament of 27 H. 8.
purposing to take away all the Uses, Another remedy.
and to reduce the Laws to the ancient form of conveying Lands by public
Livery and Seisin, Fine or Recovery, To carry the Estate from the Friends in
Trust presently to Cestuy que Use, and so this device ended.
did ordain that when Lands were put in Trust or Use, there the Possession and
Estate should be presently carried out of the Friend in Trust, and settled and
vested in him that had the Use, for such term and time as he had the Use, See
the Statute.

And by this Statute of 27 H. 8. The Remedy worse than the disease, and
therefore
the power of disposing Lands by Will was clean taken away amongst these
Friends, and so this Statute did as it were dispendere justum cum impio, take
away what might seem reasonable, by a means less reasonable.

Whereupon in the 32 of H. 8. 1. Wills in Writing began.
Another Statute was made to give Men power to give Land by Will, which took
away many Inconveniences.

But this Statute was limited Were limited.
by many particulars, as to be seized in Fee-simple, to be wholly seized and
not jointly, with restraint to Lands held in Capite by Knight Service of the
King, that a third of the whole should descend to the Heir, to answer Wardship,
Livery and Primer Seisin to the Crown: Were remedied.
But by Statute 12. Car. 2. Cap^ 4. All Wardships, Tenures in Capite, Livery
and Primer Seisins, and other Dependences were taken away, and the Act 32 H. 8.
cap. 6. and 33 H. 8. cap. 22. repealed.

How the Will must be signed and subscribed
And by the Statute 29 Car. 2. For prevention of Frauds, declares that all
devises of Lands or Tenements deviseable either by the Statute of Wills, or by
force of the Custom of Kent, or of the Custom of any Borough, or any other
particular Custom, shall be in Writing, signed by the Devisor, or some in his
presence by express directions, and subscribed in his presence by three or four
credible Witnesses, or else to be utterly void, See the Statute.

Devise in Writing revocable by Writing only. This Clause does not say the
Witnesses shall subscribe
And further, That no Devise in Writing shall be revocable, but by some other
Will or Writing declaring the same, or by burning, cancelling, tearing or
obliterating the same by the Testator himself, or by his directions, and
consent in his presence, the Writing to be signed in the presence of three or
four Witnesses, declaring the same, See the Statute.

That if any Cestuy que Trust The Heir of Cestuy que Trust chargeable for
Assets.
die leaving a Trust in Fee-simple to descend to his Heir, such Trust shall be
Assets by descent, and the Heir chargeable as fully as if the Estate in Law had
descended in Possession, in like manner as the Trust, See the Statute.

Provided that the Heir by reason of any Plea, But only of that Estate.
or confession of the Action, or suffering Judgment, be not chargeable to pay
the Condemnation out of his own Estate, but out of the Estate so made Assets,
in whose hands soever it shall come after the Writ purchased, Sea the Statute.

That no Will in Writing, Will in Writing of a personal Estate not alterable by
word of Mouth, except put in Writing in the Testators Life, etc.
concerning any Goods or Chattels, or personal Estate shall be repealed; nor
any Clause, Devise or Bequest therein altered or changed, by any other Will
made by word of Mouth only, except the same be committed to writing in the
Testators Life, and read to him, and allowed by him, and proved to be so done
by three Witnesses at the least, See the Statute.

Note.
There are also two sorts of Wills, Written, and Nuncupative.
Written Wills be such as I have before treated, by which kind Lands and
Tenements pass, for Lands pass not but by Writing.

A Nuncupative Testament, is when the Testator does by Word without Writing
declare his Will before a sufficient number of Witnesses of his Chattels only,
it may for the better continuance after the making, be put in Writing and
Proved; but it is still a Testament Nuncupative, Wests Symb. part 1. Lib. 2.
sect. 640.

Note, That by the Statute 29 Car. 2. Where the Estate given by Nuncupative
Will exceeds 30 l. it is not to be good, except made in the presence of three
Witnesses, bid to bear witness by the Testator in his last Sickness in his own
House, or where he had resided ten days, unless surprised by Sickness from
home. And it must be proved within six months, unless committed to writing in
six days.

In a Will of Goods there must be an Executor named, otherwise of Lands; for by
the Doctors of the Civil Law, and Sergeants of the Common Law, if a Man makes
his Testament, 5 M. 1. Com. 185
and names no Executors, this is no Testament, but yet it is a good Will of the
Land No Executor no Testament, yet a good Will of Land.
in it, for those are not Testamentary; but in the first where Executors want,
yet the Legacies shall be paid; but if it appears that he made part of the
Testament, and not the whole, there the Legacies shall not be paid. And where a
Man makes a Testament and Executors, and they refuse, yet the Legacies shall be
paid, Legacies shall be paid.
for there is no default in the Testator; and the Testament shall be annexed to
Letters of Administration, 37 H. 8. B. Test. 20.

A Boy after the Age of fourteen, and a Maid after her Age of twelve may make a
Will Who may make Wills.
of their Goods and Chattels by the Civil Law.

Who may be Witnesses to Wills.
Persons having power to make Testaments, and void of all natural and civil
Imperfections which may impeach their Testimony, may be Witnesses to Wills and
Testaments, and there must be three or four at the least present at the
sealing, signing, publishing and declaring, and the Testator in presence at
their testifying, etc. See Wentworths Office of Executor, and Meriton of Wills,
where you may read many more things at large.

CHAP. III. Showing the Forms and orderly Parts which ought to be observed in
Deeds or written Instruments.
AND thus I have led you through the Nature and Effect of such Deeds by which
Lands usually pass.

Next I shall treat of the Forms and orderly Parts which ought to be observed
in such Deeds or written Instruments.

And as to the Forms.
Deeds or written Instruments are either Indented or Poll.

Indented Deeds are such as are cut at the top, one into the other, Indentures.
beginning thus, viz. This Indenture, etc. And they do consist of two parts,
three parts, four parts, five parts, Their Parts.
or of as many parts as shall be needful, and be termed Indentures Bipartite,
Tripartite, Quadripartite, Quinquepartite, etc. In which it is expressed that
the parties to the same Deed, have to every part thereof interchangeably set
their several Hands and Seals, and are most usually made in the third Person,
yet may be made in the first Person; as,

Indentures in the first Person.
To all Christian People to whom this present Writing (Charter or Letters)
indented shall come: I A. B. of C. etc. send greeting: Know ye, That I the said
A. B. have given, granted and by this my present Writing (Charter or Letters)
indented, confirmed unto C. D. etc. twenty Acres of Land, etc. To have and to
hold, etc. In witness whereof as well I the said A. B. as the said C. D. to
these Indentures our Seals interchangeably have set, Dated, etc.

Or thus:

In witness whereof to one part of this present Indenture I have set my Hand
and Seal, and to the other part of the said Indenture, the said C. D. has set
his Hand and Seal, Dated, etc.

And note, Nota.
That this Indenture of the first Person may be Bipartite, Tripartite,
Quadrupartite, Quinquepartite, etc. as in a Gift in general Tail, with
Remainders over, viz. In witness whereof to two parts (or more, as the
Remainders are limited) of this my present Charter tripartite indented
remaining with the said C. D. and E. F. etc. I have set my Hand and Seal, and
to the third part of the said Charter remaining with me, the said C. D. and E.
F. their Hands and Seals have put, etc.

Nota, such Remainders are to lives in esse.

This Indenture Indenture bipartite in the third Person.
made the first day of May, etc. between A. B. of the Parish of, etc. of the
one part; and C. D. of the Parish of, etc. of the other part, Witnesses, etc.

This Indenture tripartite, Tripartite.
made the second day of May, etc. between A. B. of, etc. of the first part; C.
D. of, etc. of the second part; and E. F. and G. H. of, etc. of the third part;
Witnesses, etc.

This Indenture quadripartite, Quadripartite.
made, etc. between A. B. of, etc. and C. D. his Wife of the first part; D. E.
of, etc. of the second part; F. G. of, etc. of the third part; and H.I. of,
etc. of the fourth part; Witnesses, etc.

And so of the rest.

And note, That each part of such Indentures is of as much force and effect
alone, and as beneficial to either of the said Parties, as both parts thereof
together, Wests Symb. Lib. 1. sect. 46, 47.

Deeds Poll Poll Deeds.
are Deeds only of one part, and cut even or plain at the top, beginning thus,
viz.

Know all Men by these Presents.

Or thus:

To all Christian People, etc. and may be made in the first Person or third.

Know all Men by these Presents, First Person.
That I A. B. of, etc. Gent.

To all Christian People to whom these Presents shall come, A.B. of, Third
Person.
etc. sends greeting; Whereas, etc.

Be it known to all People, etc.

This present Writing witnesses, etc. cum multis aliis, any of which Forms may
be in the first or third Person.

And each of these Deeds may consist of Grants or Discharges.

Grants which are constitutive Grants constitutive.
and creating what was not before, as the first Grant of a Way, of a Rent, or
of an Estate in Tail, for Life, or for Years, with Warranty or without; and are
either absolute or conditional; or conveying, whereby Estates already or
formerly made, are conveyed to others.

Of Discharges Discharges.
which are remissory or liberatory, releasing or discharging something in
being; as Releases, Defeazances, Acquittances, etc.

And most of such Deeds and Instruments by which Lands pass, as before
described, have formal and orderly Parts, viz.

The parts of Deeds.
The Premises 1. The Habendum 2. The Reddendum 3. The Warranty 4. The Covenants
5. The Conditions 6. The Conclusion 7.
First, the Premises The Premises what.
unto the Habendum, wherein is included 1. Grantor. 2. Grantee. 3. Thing
granted.


By apt and proper Names and Descriptions, which are certain in themselves, or
which by Reference may be reduced to a certainty.

4. Exceptions, Words of Exceptions.
by these, or the like words, Excepted, Excepting, Besides, Saving, Save only,
etc. which must be first of some particular, out of a general; secondly part of
what is granted, and not all; thirdly that which may be severed from the thing
granted, and not an inseparable incident thereunto.

5. A Recital of something antecedent.

Nota, In many Deeds in the Premises, there may be no occasion of Exception or
Recital; some may require either, and some both; as in the making of a new
Lease, reciting the surrender of a former Lease, and excepting the Bodies of
Oak Trees, or a Room out of a House, or of Woods, etc. as the Case requires.

Nota, Exceptions of part, ought always to be of such things which the Grantor
had in Possession at the time of the Grant, Noy, page 69.

Wests Symb. Lib. 1. sect. 48. To which may be properly added the date and
consideration; as Moneys, Goods Natural Affection, and similia.
The Premises, says he, is commonly all that precedeth the Habendum, or
Limitation of the Estate, wherein are to be considered, first the Person
contracting; next the Thing, Matter or Fact, whereof the Contract is to be
made; and then the Words, with which the said Contract is to be described; for
the Persons are the very efficient, as the Considerations are the motive
Causes; for which, and by whose consent the Instruments are agreed upon and
made.

Noys Max. page 133. In the Premises are first the direct nomination, as well
of the Feoffor as of the Feoffee, together with their Places of Residence,
Habitation or Dwelling, and their Qualities, Estates, Additions or Conditions.
Secondly, the certain expressment and setting down of the Lands conveyed.

Secondly the Habendum or consequence of Deeds; whose Office is to set down, 1.
Grantee. 2. Certainty of the Thing Estate and Life granted, and to what use.


Wests Symb. Lib. 1. sect. 52. The later part of Instruments and Consequence
thereof, is all that necessarily follows the Premises, and that is the
Habendum.

In which is limited and expressed what Estate and Property the Party passive
shall have; The Habendum what.
as Fee, Tail, etc. and that is twofold, namely the Limitation of the Estate,
and of the Use reciting withal the Thing granted, by some sufficient general
Name, as Habendum and Tenendum the said (Manor,) Message or Tenement
aforesaid, with the Appurtenances (as the case requires, and as it is granted
in the Premises) unto the said J. S. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, to the
use and behoof of the said J. S. his Heirs and Assigns for ever.

Noy, 150. The Office of the Habendum, is to name again the Feoffee, and to
limit the certainty of the Estate: and it may and does sometime qualify the
general Implication of the Estate, which by construction and intendment of Law
passes in the Premises; and the Premises may be enlarged by the Habendum,
but not abridged; it is also required of the Habendum to include the Premises,
Noy, page 54. The Habendum Habendum void.
must not be repugnant to the Premises; if it be, it is void, and the Deed
will take effect by the Premises, Ibid. That is, the precedent Estate given by
the Premises shall stand, and the Estate by the Habendum shall be void; As
where a Feoffment is made to one and his Heirs by the Premises of the Deed,
Habendum to him and his Heirs during the Life of I. S. or if a Feoffment be
made to one and his Heirs by the Premises of the Deed, Habendum to the Lessee
for the Term of his Life: Now these words of Limitation, during the Life of I.
S. or during the Lessees Life, as aforesaid, are void words, because the
Habendum is repugnant to the Premises, Landlord and Tenant, page 139.

2 Co. Buckleys Case.
The Habendum sometimes does qualify and control the general Implication, etc.
as for example; A Lease to two, Habendum to one for Life, the Remainder to the
other for Life; this Limitation does alter the general Implication of the
Joynt-tenancy, which would have been without the Habendum, and the Habendum is
not contrary to the Premises; for in the Premises no certain Estate is
passed, See Buckleys Case in the second Book of Sir Edward Cooks Reports.

But Landlord and Tenant Landlord and Tenant fol. 140.
citing this very Case to show that the Habendum does control and qualify the
general Implication, says, [And therefore the Habendum is void, in that the
Premises do make them Joynt-tenants; and the Habendum would sever the
Jointure, and make the one to have all during his Life, and the other the whole
after him, and directs to Plow. fol. 133. and Herns Law of Convey. p. 2.]

But Quere Quaere.
of this.

And what has been aforesaid, may be sufficient to show the Office of the
Habendum.

To which also let us join the Tenendum, Tenendum. what.
which before the Statute of Quia emptores terrarum, 18 Ed. 1. was usually in
Feoffments expressed from the Feoffors and their Heirs, and not of the Chief
Lords of the Fee, etc. whereby there happened diverse Inconveniences to the
Lords, as the losing of their Escheats and Forfeitures; etc. Whereupon it was
granted, provided and enacted, That every Freeman for the future, might sell
his Lands or Tenements, or part thereof at his Will, so that the Feoffee should
hold such Lands or Tenements of the Chief Lord of the Fee, by the same Services
and Customs, by which his Feoffor before held the same; which Statute was made
for the advantage of Lords; And at this day where the Fee-simple passes, the
Tenendum, must be of the Chief Lords of the Fee, etc. for no Man since the said
Statute could ever convey Lands in Fee, to hold of himself, (except the King.)
And note, That where Lands, etc. are conveyed in Fee, though there be no
Tenendum at all mentioned, yet the Feoffee shall hold the same in such manner
as the Feoffor held before, Quia fortis est Legis Operatio, the Statute so
determines, Noy 151, 152.

Thirdly, The Reddendum which reserves some new Thing to the Grantor, etc. and
is usually made by the Words, Yielding. Paying. Doing. Reserving. Finding, etc.


And reserves what was not before, Tenendum what
or abridges the Tenure of what was before; and it is termed an adjunct proper
to the Consequence of Instruments, and is the Reserservation of a Rent, Suit or
Service, if any be reserved, Wests Symb. Lib. 1. sect. 55.

If a Rent be reserved, it must be out of a Message, and where a Distress may
be taken, and not out of a Rent, Noy 69.

And the Heir shall not have that which is reserved, if it be not reserved to
him by special words, Noy 70.

If a Man makes a Feoffment of Lands, and reserves any part of the Profits
thereof, as the Grass, or the Wood, that Reservation is void, Void Reservation.
because it is repugnant to the Feoffment, Ibid.

A Man by a Feoffment, Release, Confirmation or Fine, may grant all his Right
in the Land, saving unto him his Rentcharge, Ibid.

Nota.
Things that are given only by taking and using, as Pasture for four Bullocks,
or two Loads of Wood, cannot be reserved but by way of Indenture, and then they
shall take effect by way of Grant of the Grantor, during his Life, and no
longer without special words, Ibid.

Fourthly, Warranty, Warranty what.
Warrantize it is a Verb used in the Law, and as Littleton says, makes the
Warranty, and is the cause of Warranty, and no other Word in the Law: But it
may be understood only of an express Warranty in Deed, and of a Warranty
annexed to Lands; for there are other Words which will extend and inure
sufficiently to warrant Chattels, etc. and which will imply a Warranty Words
implying Warranty.
in Law, as Dedi, etc. Excambium, etc. Glanvil Lib. 3. c. 1. vel in Excambium,
or Escambium datione, Lit. in his Chapter of Parceners, teaches that Partition
implies a Warranty in Law. The Feoffor by the Words of Dedi and concessi shall
be bound to Warranty during his own Life, Noy 84. There are three manners of
Warranties, Viz. Warranty Lineal, Warranty Collateral, and Warranty which
commences by Disseisin, Vide Littleton Chap. Warranty.

The first is when one by Deed binds both himself and his Heirs to Warranty,
Lineal Warranty.
after his Death this Warranty descends to, and upon his Heir.

The second is in a Transverse or overthwart Line, so that the Party upon whom
the Warranty descends, Collateral Warranty.
cannot convey the Title which he has in the Land, from him that was the maker
of the Warranty.

Warranty by Disseisin.
The third and last is where a Man unlawfully enters upon the Freehold of
another, thereof disseising him, and conveyeth it with a Warranty, Noy, 3.83.

Lineal Warranty barreth him that claims Fee, and also Fee-tail, with Assets
in Fee, Ibid.

How it barreth
Collateral Warranty is a Bar to both, except in some Cases that be remedied by
Statute, as Warranty by the Tenant by the Courtesy, except he has enough by
descent by the same Tenant, Ibid.

Warranty by Disseisin barreth not at all.

Warranty descends How Warranty descends
always to the Heir at the Common Law, viz. the eldest Son, and follows the
Estate, and if the Estate may be defeated, the Warranty may also, Noy 84.

It barreth not the second Son in Gavelkind; although all the Sons shall be
vouched, and not the eldest alone, yet he alone shall be barred, Ibid.

Every Warranty which descends, does descend to him that is Heir, to him which
made the Warranty by the Common Law, Noy 154.

Cowels Interp. Title Warranty, says, Nota.
That under the word Haeredes are comprised all such, as the first Warranters
Lands come unto afterward, either by descent, or otherwise ex causa lucrativa,
so that if a Man have twenty Children, yet if he give his Land to a Stranger,
leaving his Children no Land, that Stranger in this case is his Assignee, and
is contained under this word Heir, so that if he commit Felony after such
Warranty covenanted and forfeit his Lands to his Lord by Escheat, the Lord is
quasi haeres in this case, and liable to the Warranty formerly passed. To this
may be joined the word Defend. Defendemus.
being used in Feoffments, etc. whereby as Bracton says, The Feoffor binds
himself and his Heirs to defend, etc. Si quis velit servitutem ponere Rei datae
contra formam donationis, etc.

Fifthly, The Covenants Covenants what.
containing the Terms of Granting and Holding, being either real or personal,
and inherent or collateral, must contain Things lawful and possible to be done.

A Covenant is the consent of two or more in one self thing, to give or do
somewhat, West, part 1. Lib. 1. sect. 4.

And there is a Covenant in Law, and a Covenant in Deed, or Covenant express,
and Covenant in Law; Covenant in Law.
a Covenant in Law is covert or hid, and to be implied; as if the Lessor do
demise, etc. to the Lessee for a certain Term, the Law intends on the Lessees
part, that the Lessee shall during his whole Term quietly enjoy his Lease
against all lawful Encumbrances, Cowels Interp. Title Covenant.

Covenant in Deed.
Covenant in Deed, or Covenant express is manifest, and that which is expressly
agreed between the Parties; and this is the Covenant we now intended, which as
aforesaid, may be either real or personal, Fitz. N.B. f. 145.

A Covenant Real Covenant Real.
is whereby a Man tieth himself to, pass a Thing real; as Lands or Tenements;
as a Covenant to levy a Fine, etc. A Covenant merely personal, Covenant
Personal.
is where a Man covenanteth by Deed with another to build him a House, or any
other thing, or to serve him, or to enfeoff him, etc. Cowels Interp. Tit. eod.

Covenant collateral Covenant Collateral.
is that which comes in, or is adhering of the side; as Collateral Assurance
is that which is made over, and beside the Deed it self.

Note also, Nota.
A Bond for performance, is termed a Collateral Assurance, because it is
external, and without the essence of the Covenant, Cowels Int. Tit. Covenant.

The words of Covenants are, Words of Covenant.
Covenant, Grant, Promise and Agree, expressing the thing agreed upon by apt
words; and there be Deeds made altogether of Covenants, whereof you may see
good store in West Lib. 2. sect. 57, 58, 59, 60, etc.

Nota, All Covenants are to be made on either side, according to every several
Contract, as to be saved harmless or discharged, to be seized in Fee, etc. To
have power to sell, to be Owner of the Tenements or Chattels sold, to make
further assurance, for quiet enjoyment, etc.

Sixthly, The Conditions which are procedent, or subsequent to the Estate.

Conditions what.
A Condition is generally a Rule, Manner or Law annexed unto Men's Acts, staying
and suspending the same, and making it uncertain, whether they shall be or no:
For a Condition is properly said to be, when any thing is referred to any
uncertain Chance, West, Symb Lib. 2. ^^ct. 110.
which may happen or not happen.

The Words of a Condition.
The words of a Condition are, Sub Condition, Ita quod, Si Contingat, Proviso
semper, i. e. Under Condition, So that, If it shall happen, Provided always,
and the like; But the words, To the effect, with that intent, to pay, etc. do
not make a Condition in Feoffments and Grants, if it be not in the Case of the
King, or in the Case of a Will, Landlord and Tenant, page 34.

Note, Nota.
There are two manners of Conditions, one expressed by Words, and called a
Condition in Deed; the other implied by Law, and called a Condition in Law.

A Condition in Deed, Condition in Deed.
or express Condition, is knit, and annexed by express words to the Lease or
Grant; for example, If I make a Lease for Years, reserving Rent to be paid at
such a Feast, upon Condition, That if the Lessee fail of payment at the day,
that then it shall be lawful for me to re-enter.

A Condition implied, or Condition in Law, Condition in Law.
is when a Man grants to one the Office to be Keeper of a Park, Steward,
Bailiff, or such like, for Term of Life; here the Law implies a Condition,
That if he does not truly and faithfully execute his Office, then it shall be
lawful for the Grantor to discharge him thereof.

Nota.
Note also, All Conditions are as aforesaid, either precedent and going before
the Estate, and are executed; or else they are subsequent and following after
the Estate, and to be executed.

Condition precedent Condition precedent.
does gain and get the Thing or Estate made upon such Condition, by the
performance of the same; as when an Estate is made to a Man for Life, upon
Condition, That if the Lessee for Life will pay to the Lessor 20 l. at such a
day, then he shall have Fee-simple; here the Condition precedes, and goes
before the Estate in Fee-simple, and upon the performance of the Condition, the
Lessee does gain and get the Fee-simple, if Livery and Seisin were given.

Error was brought in Ejectment out of C. B. in a special Verdict, The Case was
John Hamond having two Sons, John and Thomas, being seized of a Copyhold,
Estate in Fee, in nature of Borough English, surrenders to the use of himself
for Life, and after his Decease to the use of his Son John, and his Heirs and
Assigns for ever, if he attain the Age of twenty one Years; Provided, That if
my said Son John do die within Age, then it shall go to my right Heirs.

Holt pro Quer' in Error', said, The Question was, If it was a Condition
precedent or subsequent, and held it was a Condition precedent, and cited
Plowden 35. and said, A subsequent Condition is to be taken strictly, and must
have proper words; but a precedent Condition may not, Lit. 330. 1 Inst. 103.
Lit. sect. 301. Jones, Spring and Caesar, fol. 389.

Pollexfen pro Def. said, There may be a Remainder upon a Condition precedent
and Judgment was affirmed, Mich. 26 Car. 2. Bockeril versus Hamond, To. 120.

A Condition subsequent, Condition subsequent.
does keep and continue the Thing or Estate made upon Condition, by the
performance thereof; as when one grants to A. B. his Manor of G. in
Fee-simple, upon Condition that the Grantee shall pay to him at such a day 20
l. or else that his Estate shall cease: here the Condition is subsequent, and
following the Estate in Fee-simple, and upon the performance thereof, does keep
and continue the Estate.

Terms del Ley verb. Condition.

Void Conditions.
Nota, If an Estate he made, and the Condition against the Law, the Estate's
good, the Condition void, Noy, p. 78.

If the Estate begins by the Condition, then both are void, Ibid.

Conditions repugnant, the Estate good, the Condition's void, Ibid.

Conditions impossible are void, and the Estate good, Ibid.

It shall not enlarge any Estate, Ibid.

No Man shall take advantage of a Condition, except he be privy or party to it.

When the word Proviso Of the Word Proviso.
makes a Condition, it must have these three Qualities; First it must not
depend upon another Sentence, or have Reference to any other part of the Deed,
(for if it do, then it is but a Qualification or Limitation of the Sentence, or
of that part of the Deed, When and how it makes a Condition.
as Provided that the Person of the Grantee shall not be charged.) Secondly it
must be the word of the Bargainor, Feoffor, Donor, Lessor, etc. Thirdly, it
must be compulsory to enforce the Bargainee, Feoffee, Donee, Lessee, etc. to do
an Act; and where these Things concur in a Proviso, it does make a Condition,
in what place soever it be placed; For cujus est dare, ejus est disponere,
Landlord and Tenant, p. 61.

But note, the Case put afterward.

Nota, Sometimes the word Proviso or Provided does make a Covenant; sometimes
an Exception; sometimes it is taken for a Reservation; sometimes for an
Explanation, Ibid.

When a Lessor lets Lands, Provided that the Lessee shall not alien without
the assent of the Lessor under pain of forfeiture, Proviso makes a Condition.
here it is a Condition. Ibid.

If a man have two Manors both of them named Dale, and he leaseth his Manor
of Dale to one, Provided that he shall have the Manor of Dale in the
occupation of A. B. This Proviso is an Explanation. An Explanation.
Ibid.

If a man lease a House, and the Lessee covenants that he will repair it,
provided always the Lessor is contented to find the great Timber; This Proviso
is a Covenant, A Covenant.
Ibid.

If a man lease his House to D. provided he will have a Chamber thereto
belonging to himself, This Proviso is an Exception An Exception
of the Chamber, Ibid.

If I make a Lease of Lands rendering Rent at such Feasts as J. S. shall name,
provided that the Feast of St. John Baptist shall be one; here the Proviso is
taken for a Reservation, A Reservation
Vid. Landlord and Tenant, p. 61, 62.

The Case was, A. lets to B. for twenty one Years, and after the Reddendum is a
Covenant, Provided always, etc. That the Lessee shall not let or assign over
his Term without the consent of the Lessor first had in Writing.

B. cannot assign over to D. lest A. enter upon him, and oust him, because it is
a Condition: And although the words are, That he shall not let, etc. Yet if
there be any other Covenants between the Reddendum and this Proviso, then it is
but a Covenant: And if B. do let to D. A. cannot turn him out, but have an
Action of Covenant against B. but if otherwise A. may turn him out.

Therefore observe whether it does follow the Reddendum or no. Nota.


Edmund Saunders.

And note, These Conditions precedent or subsequent to the Estate, are or may
be, Affirmative, Negative, Collateral, Inherent, Restrictive, Compulsory,
Single, Copulative and Disjunctive, and make the Estate whereto they are
annexed void without, or voidable by Entry, or Claim, or tend to make and
enlarge, or destroy or clog Estates.

Seventhly, The Conclusion, Conclusion what.
In cujus rei Testimonium, In Witness whereof, etc.

This Clause is added as a Preparatory Direction to the sealing of the Deed;
for sealing is essentially required to the perfection thereof, because it does
plainly show the Feoffors or Parties consent to, and approbation of what is
therein contained, Noy, p. 155, 156.

Nota.
And note, That the date of the Deed, which is the Description of the Time in
which the Deed was made, either by the Year of the Lord, or the Year of the
Princes Reign, may be placed in the Conclusion, and is so most usually in all
Deeds Poll: but otherwise in Deeds indented most commonly and properly in the
beginning of the Premises, as before is touched in several Examples.

Words to be used in Instruments.
And here take notice that such words are to be used in the making of
Instruments, as the nature of the Contract does require; as in Feoffments, In
Feoffments
Feoffavi, Dedi or Concessi, have enfeoffed, given, granted, etc.

In Bargain and Sale, In Bargain and Sale.
have bargained and sold, etc.

In a Gift or Grant, In Gift or Grant.
have given, granted and confirmed.

In a Lease In a Lease.
for Years, have demised, granted and to farm let.

In a Release, In a Release.
have remised, released and for ever quit claimed.

In Assignments, In Assignments.
have given, granted, assigned and set over.

In Exchange, In Exchange.
have given, granted and confirmed, and by these Presents, etc. unto A. B. and
to his Heirs and Assigns for ever in Exchange, etc.

In a Surrender, In Surrender.
has surrendered, granted and confirmed.

In a Confirmation, In Confirmation.
have ratified, approved and confirmed, etc.

CHAP. IV. Showing what Things are required to the making of a good Deed or
Instrument.
AND thus I have laid you down the formal and orderly Parts which ought to be
observed in the making of Deeds and Instruments; Requisites.
but it is requisite to let you further know,

That to the making of a good Deed are required,

First, Legible and formal Writing Legible Writing.
in Paper or Parchment, before sealing and delivery.

Secondly, Capable Persons Capable Persons.
not disabled by Law, (but Donors and Donees that are Monks, Friars, etc. are
disabled.)

Also Persons attainted of Treason, Felony or Praemunire.

And Infants Madmen Idiots Femes Covert Aliens Deaf, Blind and Dumb from
Nativity.
Are disabled, Defects hindering.
except in several special Cases and Things

For all which, by Nature can consent, cannot also consent by Law: But Age
hinders some; and some the Defects of the Body; and some the Defects of the
Mind, so that they cannot consent, West, Symb. part 1. Lib. 1. sect. 4.

Age Age.
hinders those that be within the Age of twenty one Years. Defects of the
Mind, those that be of full Age, Ibid.

Infants which understand not what is done, Infancy.
can therefore neither make Obligation nor Covenant, which may take beginning
at their Persons; Exception.
except such as be at the Age of Discretion; That is, Males at the Age of
fourteen Years, and Females of twelve Years, which in some Cases may covenant
and be bound; as for necessary Food, Raiment, Schooling Instruction, etc. or as
Executor to another, etc. Ibid.

Lands properly named.
3. It must be a Thing to be granted and passed.

4. It must be by proper and sufficient Names and Descriptions, both of the
Grantor, Grantee, and Thing granted.

Which must be grantable Grantable.
in its own Nature, and by him that grants it, and is either corporeal and
immovable, or incorporeal, or Chattels: Corporeal and immovable; as Houses,
Lands, Woods, etc. which are grantable in Fee, Tail, for Life, for Years, etc.
and assignable from Man to Man.

Incorporeal; as Rents. Services. Advowsons. Presentations. Reversions.
Remainders. Offices. Licenses. Franchises. Commons, etc.


Whereof some are grantable at their first Creation, but not assignable after,
As Great Offices of Trust. Judicial Offices. Licenses. Authorities, etc.
Some are 1. Assignable always. 2. Entirely, but not in part. 3. Entirely or in
part. 4. To any Body. 5. But to special Persons. 6. Some Things incident to
others, and not grantable without the Things to which they are incident.


Or Chattels which are either real; as Leases for Years present, Chattels real.
or to come, Extent, etc.

Or personal; Personal.
as Horses, Oxen, Plate, etc.

Fifthly, Reading the Deed.
The true reading or dedeclaring to a blind or illiterate Person.

Sixthly, Sealing and Delivery. Sealing and delivery.


By the Maker or his Attorney absolutely and positively to, or to the use of the
Party.

Or conditionally, and as an Escrow to another.

Seventhly, To an Honest end, To honest Ends.
and not by unlawful Contract, or made by Force or Fraud.

Eighthly, Due Ceremony; as Attornment,

Livery of Seisin,

Inrolment, etc.

Deeds executed not alterable.
A Deed when made, read, sealed and delivered, may be altered or amended in
nothing, West, Symb. part 1. Lib. 1. sect. 56.

A Writing cannot be said to be a Deed if it be not sealed; although it be
written and delivered, it is but an Escrow, Escrow.
Noys Max p. 55.

Insufficient Deed.
And if it were sufficiently sealed, yet if the print of the Seal be utterly
defaced, the Deed is insufficient, it is not my Deed; and though it may not be
so pleaded, yet it may be given in Evidence, Ibid.

A Deed takes effect How it takes effect.
by the delivery, and if the first take any effect, the second is void, Ibid.

And a Jury shall be charged to enquire of the delivery, Delivery and Date.
but not of the date; yet every Deed shall be intended to be made when it does
bear date.

So if a Lease be made, How Deeds shall commence.
dated the third of May 1688. to have and to hold for three Years from
henceforth, or from the making; and it is delivered the 20 day of June after,
in this case the day of the delivery shall be the first day of the Term, and
must be taken inclusive, and the Lease shall end the 19 day of June in the
third Year, Co. Lit. fol. 46. Co. Rep. 5. fol. 1. and 93. Noys Max. p. 55.
Herns Law of Conveyances p. 14, 15.

The delivery ought to be done by the Party himself, Delivery how to be made.
or by his sufficient Attorney, and so it shall bind him whosoever wrote or
sealed the same, Noys Max. p. 55.

If one be bound to make Assurance, Reading the Deed.
he need not deliver it, unless there be one to read it to him before, Ibid. p.
56.

False reading.
And if any Writing be read in any other form to a Man unlearned, it shall not
be his Deed, Ibid.

Deeds how voidable.
And yet a Deed when well made, read, sealed and delivered, may be void or
voidable, when got By Force, Fraud, Corrupt Agreement.
Or may be marred by Rasure Interlining Addition Breaking the Seal Defacing
Judgment of Court, etc.


Voidable Deeds.
All Feoffments, Gifts, Grants and Leases made by duress of Imprisonment, are
voidable; and tha^ not only by the Parties themselves but by their Heirs, and
those who have their Estates, Perkins, sect. 16 Plow. 18. a. Co. Lit. fol. 253.

CHAP. V. Showing the Form and Effect of Livery of Seisin and Attornment, etc.
And what is a Reversion, Remainder and particular Estate.
Livery and Seisin.
LIvery and Seisin, Defined.
is a Ceremony used in the Conveyance of Lands, that the Common People might
know the passing or alteration of the Estate; that they might surely know in
whom the Right thereof remained for their own peace and quietness, Perk. 209,
210. Bract. Lib. 2. cap. 18. sect. 12. Noys Max. p. 58. West, Symb. p. 1. Lib.
2. Sect. 251.

The usual manner of Delivery of Seisin, of Houses, Lands, Tenements, etc. is
thus:

The Feoffor and Feoffee, How to be executed.
(if they be present) or in their absence their Attorneys (sufficiently
authorized in Writing,) do come to the House or Place whereof such Seisin is to
be delivered, and there in the presence of sundry good Witnesses, declare the
cause of their meeting there; and then openly read, or cause to be read the
Deed of Feoffment (and Letter of Attorney, if by Attorney) or to declare the very
effect thereof, before them in English; which being so done, the Feoffor or his
Attorney takes a Clot of Earth, or a Bough, or a Twig of a Tree thereupon
growing, the Ring, or the Hasp of the Door of an House, and delivers the same
with the said Deed unto the Feoffee or his Attorney, saying, I deliver these
unto you in the name of Possession and Seisin, of all the Lands, Tenements,
etc. contained in this Deed, To have and to hold, according to the form and
effect of the same Deed, Ibid.

The Effect.
By Livery of Seisin the Feoffor transferreth unto the Feoffee all that he has
in things whereof Livery is made, according to the State thereupon limited,
West, sect. 251. p. 1. Lib. 2.

And the date and manner of this Seisin must be endorsed (thus,) Memorandum,
Indorsement of Seisin.
That the (...) day of (...) peaceable and quiet Possession and Seisin of the
Lands and Hereditaments within mentioned to be granted, was had and taken by
the within named A. B. and by him was delivered to the within named C. D. in
their proper Persons, according to the Tenor, Form and Effect of the within
written Deed, in the presence of us,

A. B. C. D. E. F.




Note, If by an Attorney By an Attorney
to an Attorney, or by Attorney to the Lessee himself, or by the Lessor to an
Attorney, then you say, By (or to) A. B. Attorney of the within named C. D. and
so of the like, mutatis mutandis, West, Ibid.

Note, A Man cannot make Livery of Seisin before he has the Possession,
Possession necessary.
Noys Max. 57.

Livery of Seisin is requisite Where it is requisite.
in all Feoffments, Gifts in Tail, and Leases for Life, made by Deed or without
Deed, Ibid. 59.

No Freehold Freehold.
will pass without Livery of Seisin, except by way of Surrender, Partition or
Exchange, or by matter of Record, or by Testament, Ibid.

Time.
Livery of Seisin must be made in the Lifetime of him that made the Estate,
Ibid.

There needs no Livery of Seisin to be given on a Lease for Years, Lease for
Years.
but the Lessee may enter when he will, Co. Lit. 48. a. And if Livery be given,
he shall have but an Estate for Years.

There needs neither Livery of Seisin, nor Writing to an Assignment of Dower,
Assignment of Dower.
because it is due of Common Right, Idem fol. 35. Dyer 91.

Note, If there be a Lease for Years, They in Possession cannot take it.
and a Remainder granted over in Tail, or in Fee, or for Life, then there must
be Livery given to the Lessee for Years, or otherwise nothing passes to him in
the Remainder; And if the Lessee enter into the Land before Livery, and enjoy,
then the Lessor after his Entry cannot make Livery to him, for he is then in
Possession, and such Persons as have Possession in Lands for Years, or for
Life, etc. cannot take by Livery and Seisin of the same Lands, for Livery must
be given of, and ought to bring an immediate Possession, For it ought to bring
an immediate Possession.
Lit. Tenures fol. 13. a. Co. Lit. fol. 49. b. Herns Law of Convey, p. 25. Co.
Rep. 2. fol. 31.

The Lessor cannot make Livery and Seisin against the Will of the Lessee Cannot
be against the Lessees Will,
being on the Land, but he may grant the Reversion; and if the Lessee do
attorn, the Freehold will pass without Livery of Seisin, Noys Max. p. 58.

If two several Deeds How it passes where two Deeds of one thing.
be made to two several Persons, of one self thing, it passes unto him unto
whom Seisin is first delivered, West, Symb. sect. 251. part 1. Lib. 2.

By Livery of Seisin in one County, County.
the Lands in another County will not pass, Noys Max. p. 59.

And therefore if they lie in several Counties, Several Counties.
it is convenient that he enter into every parcel thereof, and so make Livery
in every several parcel, for he can give no Possession unto his Feoffee, if he
have it not in himself at that very instant, West, ubi supra.

Livery may not be made of an Estate to be given in futuro, Estate in futuro
for no Estate of Freehold or Franktenement may be given in futuro, but shall
take effect presently by Livery and Seisin, Noys Max. p. 59.

See the Case of a Lease for Years with Remainder, ut supra.

And note that Livery of Seisin is of two sorts, Livery of Seisin is twofold.
viz. in Law, and in Deed, Noys Max. p. 160.

Livery of Seisin in Law, is termed Livery of Seisin within the View, which is,
when a Man makes a Deed of Feoffment, and delivers Seisin within the View, the
Feoffee being afraid to enter, Ibid. 163.

And note, This Livery within View Livery within the View.
is good, if the Feoffee do enter in the Lifetime of the Feoffor, Idem p. 59.

And yet it is said, that a Livery in View or Law, may sometimes be perfected
by an Entry in Law, Perfected by Entry in Law.
which is, when the Feoffee being afraid to enter, as before, makes continual
Claim of the same, 38 Ass. pl. 23.

And it is said that no Man can constitute another to receive Livety for him
within the View, No Attorney in Livery in View.
nor yet to deliver; for none can take by force or virtue of a Livery in Law,
but he that takes the Freehold himself, Et sic e contra, Noys Max. p. 163.

Livery and Seisin in Deed Livery in Deed.
is actually done either personally or by Attorneys, as is before explained.

Attornment.
The end of Attornment is to perfect Grants, Defined.
and therefore may not be made upon Condition, or for a Time, Noys Max. p. 64.
but it shall enure to the whole absolutely.

Attornment is the Agreement of the Tenant to the Grant, by Writing or by Word;
as to say, I do agree to the Grant made to you; or I am well contented with it;
or I do Attorn unto you, or I do become your Tenant, etc. or delivering a Penny
unto the Grantee, by the Tenant by way of Seisin of a Rent, and to pay or do
but one Service only in the name of the whole, it is good for all, Ibid. p. 63,
64.

Where it effects.
Lands and Tenements, and such things as naturally lie in Grant, cannot be
transferred from one to another by bare Grants of the Parties, without the
Attornment and Agreement of others; as of the Tenant, to the Grant of the
Seigniory, (or of a Rent,) or the Agreement of the Donee in Tail, or of the
Tenant for Life or Years, to a Grant of a Reversion or Remainder made by the
Donor or Lessor to another; as,

Where necessary.
Where he that has an Estate in Reversion or Remainder, after an Estate for
Life or Years, does grant or give the same away; here the Tenant of the Land
must give his consent to such Grant or Gift, or else generally the same is not
good, and this yielding of consent is called Attornment: See Terms del Ley, Co.
Lit. fol. 309. pl. 25.

Attornment is either Actual or in Law. Twofold.


Actual Actual.
is an expressed consent to the Grant, as before, Lit. 551. Plow. 25. a. 344. a.

Attornment in Law, In Law.
is where the Person that ought to attorn, does not expressly declare his
consent, but does some other Act, as in Law sufficiently implies an Agreement;
as if a Lease be made for Life or Years, and after he that has the Reversion
or Remainder, grants the same to his Lessee, who accepts the Deeds; These
and such like be Attornments in Law, West, Symb. Lib. 2. sect. 383.

To the making good of an Attornment, Requisits to make a good Attornment.
where it is requisite diverse. Things are required,

1. It must be made by the Person that ought to make it.

2. It must be made to the Person that ought to take it.

3. It must be made in due time.

4. If it be an express Attornment, the Tenant must have notice of the Grant of
the Reversion, etc. to which he must Attorn; but of Attornment in Law, there
notice in all Cases is not necessary.

5. It must be done in such manner as the Law does prescribe.

And observe (as before) that it may be made either by Words or Deeds By Word
or Deed.
without Writing, or by Deed or Writing, and this is the safest way.

By Word.
And any Word written or spoken by the Tenant, (after he has knowledge of the
Grant of the Reversion) which do import an Assent or Agreement to it, will make
a good Attornment in Fact or in Deed; as to say, I do Attorn, or turn Tenant to
you according to the Grant, or if he do pay all or any of the Rent, or do any
part of the Service, (as before) this is a good express Attornment, and is best
of all when it is made by Words, and Deed Best by Word and Deed both.
or Sign both, for then the Witnesses will best remember it, Co. Lit. fol. 309,
310, 315. Plow. Com. 344. Landlords Law, p. 127. 128.

When to be made.
Where Attornment is necessary, it must be made in the Lifetime of the Parties
Grantor and Grantee, for if either of them die before Attornment be made, the
Grant is void; but if the Tenant die before he Attorn, he that has the Estate
may Attorn, and it is good; or if the Tenant grant over his Estate, his
Assignee may Attorn, Co. Lit. fol. 315. a. Perkins sect. 231, 263. Lit. Tenures
110. a. Co. Rep. f. 8. Noys Max. p. 64.

It seems that Attornment is not necessary, Where necessary.
but to have Avowry, or an Action of Wast, 2 E. 6. Brook 45.

Note, Where not.
That when no attendency nor payment is to be made by the Tenant, there the
thing passes without Attornment, 31 H. 8. Brook 59.

Where Attornment is necessary in Law or in Deed, Note.
See Landlords Law p. 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136.

This Attornment must be indorsed on the Deed, or else declared by a Deed, and
may be done in this manner: Indorsement for one Tenant.
Memorandum, That the within named A. B. being Tenant for Term of Life, etc.
(or being present Tenant, etc. as the Case requires) of the Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments, etc. understanding the effect of the within written Grant,
thereof made unto the within named C. D. did the (...) day of (...) Anno (...)
assent and agree unto the same Grant in every respect as the same is within
written, and did therefore Attorn, and for proof thereof did give unto him the
said C. D. in the name of Attornment the Sum of 6 d. in the presence of us
whose Names are subscribed,

A. B. C. D. E. F. etc.




Or thus, by diverse Tenants themselves.

For diverse Tenants.
We whose Names are hereunder subscribed, being the present Tenants, (etc.) of,
(etc.) understanding, (etc.) do assent, (etc.) and do therefore Attorn, and in
Testimony of such Attornment, each and every of us did give, (etc.) and also
have hereunto subscribed our Names the (...) day of (...) Anno Domini, 1688.

Witness A. B. C. D. E. F.


Or thus: Memorandum, That the Persons whose Names are under written did the
(...) day of (...) Anno Domini, 1688. Attorn and become Tenants unto the above
named A. B. according to the purport of the Lease within mentioned, Notice of
the Grant.
having notice of the said Grant, and for proof thereof every one of them did
give unto the said A. B. one Penny in the Name of Attornment.

Witness hereto G. H. I. K. L. M.

Here let the Tenants set their Names, A. B. C. D. E. F.




It may be indorsed together with the Livery of Seisin Indorsed with Livery of
Seisin.
to an Attorney thus.

Memorandum, That Possession and Seisin of the Lands and Tenements within
mentioned was taken by, (etc.) and afterward delivered to the within written
S. P. 10. die Junij, Anno Domini 1688. to the use within written. And also the
same day (the within named) J. V. Tenant of the Premises for the Term of his
Life, Quere if the Tenant that attorns be named in the Deed, otherwise that
Clause to be left out.
did attorn Tenant to the said S. P. according to the Tenor of this present
Deed; and the said J. V. did give unto the said S. P. one Penny in the name of
Attornment, in the presence of

It may be declared by Deed Poll thus:

Attornment declared by Deed Poll.
To all People, etc. I A. B. of, etc. send greeting; Whereas I the said A. B.
have and hold for the Term of my Life one Tenement with the Appurtenances,
lying and being in, (etc.) the Reversion of which said Tenement should belong
to one C. D. and being at present satisfied, that the said C. D. has by his
Deed bearing date, etc. granted, bargained, sold and confirmed unto E. F. of,
etc. the Reversion of the said Tenement, as by the said Deed may appear.

Know ye that I the said A. B. Tenant of the said Tenement, of my free will
have attorned unto the said E. F. by payment unto him of one Penny in the name
thereof, and do by these Presents as much as in me lies, ratify and confirm
unto the said E. F. the Reversion aforesaid, In witness, etc. See West, Symb.
part 1. Lib. 2. sect. 383, 384, 385, etc.

Note, A voluntary Attornment where it is needful may be made by an Infant,
Voluntary Attornment by an Infant.
or one that is Deaf and Dumb may do it by signs; but one that is not Compos
mentis cannot make an Attornment, Co. Lit. fol. 315. Co. Rep. fol. 84.

Note, It must be certain, Certainty.
Co. Lit. 310.

In all Cases for the most part where there is no means provided by Law, to
compel the Tenant to attorn; in such Cases Attornment Deed or in Law is not
necessary, Where it needs not.
as in the grant of a Seigniory, etc. by Letters Patents from the King; or
where such things are granted by matter of Record from a Subject to the King;
but a Seigniory, a Rentcharge, a Remainder or a Reversion will not pass
without Attornment, but by matter of Record, Co. Lit. 314, 321. Co. 6. Rep. 68.
Noys. Max. p. 64.

Attornment necessary upon a Devise, Devise.
Noys. Max. p. 65.

In all Cases where tho Grant is in the personalty there needs no Attornment,
Needless.
as in Annuities which do charge the Person only and not the Land: And in all
Cases where there is an Attornment in Law, there needs none in Deed, M. 3. Jac.
in C. B. agreed in Curnocks Case.

Noy says in his Maxims, p. 65. That if the Tenant have true notice of all the
Grant, then such Attornment is void: Void Attornment.
But quere.

Common of Pasture for a certain number, or Common of Estovers certain, will
pass by Gran^ without Attornment; Needless.
for where there is no Tenure, Attendance, Remainder, Rent or Service to be
paid or done, Attornment is not necessary, 31 H. 8. 59. Kitchen 103. a.

Note, Attornment is a solemn Act, and ought to be done, Time, when it must be
done.
so that notice may be taken of it, and therefore Attornment after Sunset is
not good, for it shall not be presumed that notice can be taken in the Night,
M. 23 Car. 1. in B. R. Registr. practicale, p. 30.

Concerning Possessions.
The difference between Possession and Seisin Difference of Possession and
Seisin.
is,

A, Lessee for Years is possessed, Possession what.
and yet the Lessor is still seized; and therefore the Terms of the Law are,
That of Chattels, Seisin what.
a Man is possessed, whereas in Feoffments, Gifts in Tail, and Leases for Life,
he is called seized, Noys Max. page 20.

Of Estates.
And note that all Estates that have their being, are in Possession, Reversion,
Remainder, or in Right; but of all these, Possession is the principal, Idem,
page 119.

There are two Degrees of Possession; in Law, and Deed.

In Deed, is the actual Possession; Possession in Deed.
In Law, In Law.
is that Possession which the Law it self casts upon a Man before any entry
or pernancy of the Profits; Example.
As where the Father dies seized of Lands in Fee, and the same is to descend
to the Son as his next Heir; in this Case before any Entry the Son has a
Possession in Law, Ibid. p. 120.

And so of a Reversion expectant, Reversion Expectant, etc.
or a Remainder dependent upon a particular Estate for Life;

Example.
As if Tenant for Life die, he in Reversion or Remainder before his Entry, has
only a Possession in Law.

And note, That all manner of Possessions that are not Possessions in Fait or
Deed, are only Possessions in Law, Noys Max. p. 120.

Of a Particular Estate.
A Particular Estate is such as is derived from a General Estate, Defined:
by separation of one from the other, Noys Max. p. 117.

As an Estate Tail, for Life, or for Years, created by Gift or Grant out of a
Fee-simple, is in the Donee or Lessee a particular Estate in Possession,
derived and separated from the Fee-simple, Ibid. and similia.

And of particular Estates, Twofold.
some are created by Agreement between the Parties, and some by Act of Law.

By Agreement, By Agreement
as those before specified.

By Law, By Law.
as Estates in Tail after possibility of Issue Extinct, Estates by the
Courtesy of England, Dower, etc. for in Dower the Party is compellable by Law
to complete the Estate, Ibid.

Of a Remainder.
Defined.
A Remainder is the Residue of an Estate, at the same time appointed over, and
must be grounded upon some particular Estate given before, granted for Years or
Life, and so forth, Noys Max. p. 31.

When it begins.
And ought to begin in Possession when the particular Estate ends there may be
no mean time between either, by Grant or Will Ibid.

Where cannot be.
No Remainder can be made o^ a Chattel Personal: A Remainde^ cannot depend on a
Matter ex pos^ facto, to be done in futuro, as upon Estate Tail, upon Condition
tha^ if the Tenant in Tail sell, the^ the Land to remain to another, is avoid
Remainder, Ibid.

In every Remainder five Thing are requisite, Five Things to be observed


1. That it depend upon some particular Estate, Ibid. page 123.

2. That it pass out of the Grantor, Donor or Lessor, at the time of the
creation of the particular Estate whereon it must depend, Ibid.

3. That it vest during the particular Estate, or at the instant time of the
determination thereof, Ibid.

4. That when a particular Estate is created, there be a Remnant of an Estate
left to the Donor to be given by way of Remainder, Ibid.

5. That the Person or Body to whom the Remainder be limited, be either capable
at the time of Limitation thereof, or else to be thereof capable during the
particular Estate, See Noys Max. page 124, 125, 126, 127. where a Remainder
takes effect, and it is void.

Of Reversion.
A Reversion, Defined.
is the residue of an Estate that is left after some particular Estate granted
out, in the Grantor; Example.
As if a Man grant Lands for Life, without further granting, the Reversion of
the Fee-simple is in the Lessor, Noys Max. p. 32.

Also it commenceth after a Remainder; May commence after Remainder. Example.


As when he in Fee-simple leaseth for Life to one, or in Tail, he may appoint a
Remainder after that Estate, and a third in Fee-simple; for if he does not
dispose of the Fee-simple by way of Remainder, when he makes the Gift for Life
or in Tail, then the Fee-simple rests in himself as a Reversion, See antea,
fol. 5.

Nota.
Note, That after a Fee-simple, he can limit no further Estate, Ibid.

Of Fee.
Defined.
The division of Fee in diverse respects are many, but for our present purpose it
is sufficient to divide it into two sorts,

First, Fee-simple or absolute.

Secondly, Fee-Tail or Fee-Conditional

Fee-simple Fee-simple.
is that whereof we are seized to us and our Heirs for ever.

Fee Tail Fee Tail.
is that whereof we are seized to us and our Heirs with Limitation, that is,
the Heirs of our Body, See Lit. ca. 2. Lib. 1.

And note, Twofold.
That a Fee tail is either General or Special.

General General.
is, where Land is given to a Man and the Heirs of his Body, not naming upon
what Woman to be begotten; Therefore if he marry one or more Wives, and have no
Issue by them, and again marryeth another by whom he has Issue, this Issue
shall Inherit the Land upon such Grant.

Special Special.
is, when it is certainly set down of whom the Issue shall come; as when Lands
are given to a Man, and the Heirs of their two Bodies; Lit. ut supra, and this
special Estate is either expressed or implied.

Expressed Expressed.
where it specially limited what Issue shall inherit.

Implied, Implied, as in Frank-marriage.
as where upon Special Tail, either of the Parties die, and have no Issue
between them, the surviving Party is improperly called a Tenant in Tail after
possibility of Issue extinct, See West, Symb. part 1. Lib. 1. sect. 40.

Thus I have made good to you, the Subject Matter promised in the Frontispiece,
which might have been much enlarged by proper Precedents, but would much have
shadowed that Light which hereby is intended.

Whereto for the Affinity of the Subject, is added a brief Dicourse, showing by
what ways Property in Goods and Chattels, is or may be gotten.

CHAP. VI. Showing the several ways whereby a Man may get Property in Goods or
Chattels.
Property in Goods and Chattels is gotten ten ways, viz. 1. By Gift, 2. By
Sale, 3. By Stealing, 4. By Waiving, 5. By Straying, 6. By Wreck of the Sea 7.
By Forfeiture, 8. By Executorship, 9. By Administration, 10. By Legacy.


Property by Gift.
The Property of Goods may pass by Gift, Property by Gift.
either by Word or Writing. If there be a general Gift made of all his Goods,
This is suspicious to be done of Fraud to deceive Creditors.

Fraudulent Deed of Gift.
And if a Man make a Deed of Gift, being in Debt, to prevent the taking of his
Goods in Execution for his Debts, this Deed of Gift is void, Void against the
Creditors.
as against those to whom he stood indebted; but as against himself, his
Executors or Administrators, or any other to whom he afterward shall sell or
convey them, this Gift is good by that Deed, Good against the Debtor.
50 E. 3.6. 13 El. 5. 27 El. 4.


Property by Sale. Bona fide good.
By Sale any Man may convey his own Goods to another; and although he fear
Executions for Debt, yet he may sell them for Money at any time before the
Execution served, so there be no reservation of Trust between the Parties, as
that of paying the Money he may have the Goods again; for that Trust in such a
Case does prove plainly a Fraud to prevent the Creditors from taking the Goods
into Execution.

Note, The Goods are liable to an Execution, so soon as it is delivered to the
Sheriff, by a late Act.

Property by Stealing, etc.
If a Man steal away Goods, or take them from me in jest, Goods stolen or
taken in jest.

Sold in a Market, etc. bars the Owner.


or borrow them of me, or take them as a Trespassor, and not as a Felon, and
carry them to a Fair or Market, and there sells them, this Sale does bar me
of the Property of my Goods, saving that if it be of a Horse, 2, 3 P. M. 7.
he must be ridden once over in the open Market or Fair, between the Hours of
Ten and Sun setting, and to be tolled in the Toll-Book, and the Seller must
bring one that will a vouch his Sale, who is known to the Toll-Book Keeper, 31
Eliz. 12.
or else this Sale binds me not.

And for any Goods where the Sale in Market or Fair shall bar the true Owners
(being not the Sellers) of their Property, Sale to bar the Owner must be a
Market where usually such Things were sold.
it must be a Sale in a Market or Fair, where usually Things of that nature are
sold, So that the Buyer know not of the former Property, and do pay Toll and
enter it. Plate must be sold at the Goldsmiths Stall, and not in his inner
Shop, Noy Max. p 90.

Examples of Sale.
If a Man steal a Horse, and sell him in Smith-field, as before, the true Owner
is barred by the Sale; But if he sell the Horse in Cheap Side, or Newgate
Market, or Westminster Market, the true Owner is not barred, because those
Markets are usually for Herbs, Fishes, and such like, and not for Horses: So
whereas by the Custom of London, every Shop is a Market all days of the Week,
except Sundays and Holydays; yet if a piece of Plate, or Chain of Gold, or
Pearl that is stolen or borrowed, be sold in a Drapers Shop, or in a
Scriveners, or in any but a Goldsmiths, as before, this Sale bars not the true
Owner, and the like.

Yet by stealing of the Goods only the Thief gets no such property, but that
the Owner may seize them Stealing gains no absolute Property, But the Owner
may seize, etc.
again wheresoever he finds them, except they have been sold in a Market or
Fair after they were stolen, Outlary in an Action personal, is a Forfeiture of
Goods and Chattels.

See the Author of the Terms of the Law.


and that bona fide without Fraud; But if the Thief be condemned of the Felony,
or outlawed therefore, or outlawed in any personal Action, or any way commit a
Forfeiture to the Crown of his Goods, then the true Owner is without remedy.

These Goods nevertheless (if presently after they were stolen, Fresh pursuit
of the Felon. Stanf. P l. Cor. Lib. 3. cap. 10 and 12.
the true Owner makes fresh pursuit after the Thief and Goods, and take the
Goods with the Thief) he may take them again; and if he make no fresh pursuit,
yet if he prosecute the Felon so far as Justice requires, that is, Idem in his
first Book cap. 27. says, that fresh Suit may continue for 7 years.
if he get him indicted and arraigned, and found Guilty, though he be not
hanged, or have Judgment of Death, in all those Cases he shall have his Goods
again, by Writ of Restitution to the Party in whose custody they be, 21 H. 8.11.


By waiving the property of Goods is thus gotten; Property of Goods waived is
in the King.
A Thief having stolen Goods, and being pursued flying away, and leaving the
Goods in the flying; this leaving is called Waiving, and the property is in the
King, except the Lord of the Manor by Custom or Charter have right to them;
but if that Felon be indicted or judged, or sound Guilty, or Outlawed at the
Suit of the Owner of the Goods, he shall have restitution of the Goods by Writ,
But if the Owner prosecute Restitution will be made.
as before.


Lord of the Manor has Estrays after a year and day
By straying the property of stray Cattle is thus gotten; when they come into
other Men's Grounds, straying away from the Owner, Then the Parties or Lord in
whose Grounds or Manor they come, causes them to be seized, and a With to be
put about their Neck, and to be cried in three Markets adjoining, showing the
marks of the Cattle, which done, if the true Owner claim not within a Year and
a Day, then the property is in the Lord of the Manor, if he have Estrays by
Custom or Charter, or else in the King, See Briton cap. 17. See Estrays in the
Forest, Anno 27 H. 8. cap. 7.

Yet if a Man take Beasts as an Estray, If the Lord keep the stray three
quarters and then lose it, he gains no Property, 12 H. 8.10. Though another
Stranger find them.
and keeps them three quarters of a Year, and after that again stray from him,
and another happens on them; the first Lord which kept them for three Quarters,
cannot take them again, because that he had no property in them till he had
kept them a Year and a Day, and Proclamation passed; for the possession of the
second Seisor is good against him who has no property, 33 H. 8. b. Estrays 11.


By Wreck of the Sea, the Property is thus gotten: When a Ship laden is cast
away on the Coast, so as neither Man, Dog or Cat escape alive out of the Ship
to land, Property by Wreck, when a Ship sinketh and no living Creature escapes.
then all those Goods be said to be wrecked, ( Westminster. prim. cap. 4. Anno 3 Ed.
1.) and they belong to the Crown if they can be found, except the Lord of the
Soil adjoining, And the Wreck goes to the Crown, unless the Lord of the Soil
can prescribe.
can entitle himself by Custom, which we call Prescription, or by the Kings
Charter.

But if any of these escape alive the Goods are the Owners still, so he come
within a Year and a Day to claim them. If any Creature escape, the Goods are
the Owners by claiming duly.


Note, Nota.
That Fitzherbert in his Natura Brevium, fol. 112. supposes that if any of the
Goods be cast upon the dry Land by any in the Ship, it is no Wreck, subject to
the Prerogative; for by this some of the Ship are presumed to come to land, and
still to have a Custody of the Goods, Vide Sir Edward Coke Vol. 6. fol. 107. a.

Property by Forfeiture.
By Forfeiture, Goods and Chattels are thus gotten; If the Owner be outlawed;
Goods forfeited to the Crown by Outlawry.
If he be indicted of Felony or Treason, and be found Guilty of it, or confess
it, or refuse to be tried by his Peers, or by Jury; or be attainted by
Judgment; or fly for Felony, 34 H. 8. 4 H. 7. 11. 35 H. 8. 8. 5 E. 6. St. 185.
20 E. 4. 5. 40 E. 3. 42. etc.
although he be found not Guilty; or suffer the Exigent to go forth against
him, although he be not outlawed; or if he go beyond the Seas without License,
in such Cases all the Goods that he had at the time of the Judgment, be
forfeited to the Crown, except some by Charter can claim them, Unless claimed
by Charter.
(as is before in some measure treated of,) for in these Cases Prescription
will not serve, unless it be so ancient as it had allowance before Justices of
Air in their Circuit, or in the Kings Bench in ancient time.


Property by Executorship where a Man makes a Will, etc.
By Executorship Goods are gotten thus: When a Man possessed of Goods, makes his
last Will and Testament in Writing, or by Word, and makes one or more
Executors thereof, Note, By a Devise of all Goods, a Rentcharge for Years will
pass.

Note, Movables, are Horses, Cattle, etc. and Personal Chattels.


those Executors have by such Will, and the Death of that Party, all his Goods,
Chattels and Leases for Years, Wardship of the Body and Lands of the Ward in
Knight Service, (but not in Soccage,) Leases for Years, and Rent-Charges for
Years, Statutes, Recognizances, Bonds, Lands in Execution, Immoveables are Corn
growing, and Fruit on Trees and Chattels real.
Corn upon the Ground, Gold, Silver, Plate, Jewels, Money, Debts, Cattle, and
all other Goods and Chattels of the Testator, (if they be not otherwise devised
before,) and the Executor may also give them away by Word or Deed, but not by
Will; Personal which belong immediately to the Person of a Man; as a Cow,
Horse, etc.

Real not immediately to the Person, or issuing out of some immovable thing to
a Person.


and if he do will omnia Bona and Catalla sua, (all his own Goods and
Chattels,) the Goods of the Testator pass not thereby, neither shall they be
forfeited by the Executor; and these Executors may meddle with those Goods, and
dispose of them before they prove the Will, Plow. Com. fol. 525. Bransbury and
Grantham, 24 E. 3. fol. 35. 32 H. 6. 34. 9 E. 4. fol. 33. 47. 7 H. 4. 18. Noys
Max. page 103.

But this Will must be proved, 21 H. 8. 5. The Will must be proved, or else
Administration.
and the Ordinary may convent Executors to prove the Testators Will, and to
bring in an Inventory; but if the Executor refuse to prove it, he may commit
the Administration of the Goods to the Widow, or next of Kin, or to both, which
he pleases, making request, and may revoke it again at his pleasure, Noys.
Max. 105. 3 H. 7. 14. Plowdens Commentaries 281.

An Executor may release before probate An Executor may Release before Probate
of the Will or Testament, but cannot have Debt before the Probate, 7 H. 4. 18.
Coke 5. part 28. a. Middletons Case.

And a Man may be Executor in his own wrong, Executor in his own wrong.
as if he meddle with the Goods, and after refuses Probate, 20 H. 7. 5. 21 E.
4. 6. 11 H. 4. 71.

Or where a Man dies Intestate, and a strange Person takes the Goods of the
Intestate, and uses them, or sells them, this makes him an Executor of his
own wrong: for when none assumeth to be Executor, nor takes Letters of
Administration, Where Executor in his own wrong, and where not.
there the using of the Goods is sufficient to charge one as Executor of his
own wrong; yet when there is an Executor who proves the Testament, if in this
Case a Stranger take any of the Goods and claim them for his own, this does not
make him an Executor of his own wrong, because there is one lawful, Co. Lit. 5.
Reads Case, fol. 33.

But an Executor of his own wrong, Executor of his own wrong cannot pay his own
Debts.
ought not to retain Goods in his own Hands to satisfy his own just Debt, (as
a real Executor may,) for it is not reasonable that one should take advantage
of his own wrong; yet it is clear that all lawful Acts Yet his actings to
others are lawful.
that such an Executor does, are good, Idem, fol. 30.

Note, An Executor cannot assign over his Executorship, Vaughan 182. Bedal and
Constable.

Note, If an Executor release before Probate of the Will, Executor releasing
before probate takes Administration, that Release shall not bar him.
and afterward take Administration, that Release shall not bar him of an Action
notwithstanding, for the right of the Action was not in him at the time of the
Release, Coke 5. p. 28.

If one Executor prove the Will in the name of both, he that does not
Administer, shall not be charged, Executor not meddling shall not be charged
Noy 102.

But if the Executor do once any Action, If he do, he is chargeable.
that is proper to ^an Executor, as to receive the Testators Debts, or to give
Acquittance for the same, etc. he may not refuse, Ibid.

Yet he may meddle with their Goods; Feed their Cattle and not be charged. 21
H. 6.28. 20 H. 7.5. 21 E. 4.6.
Yet he may dispose of the Testators Goods about the Funeral, or feed his Cattle
lest they perish, or keep his Goods lest they be stolen; These things may
every one do without danger, Ibid.

When Executors do bring an Action, it shall be in all their Names, as well of
them as do refuse as others; but an Action against Executors, must be brought
against them, All the Executors must be named in their Action, otherwise if the
Action be brought against them.
or him that does Administer only, and he which first comes shall first
answer, Ibid. pa. 103. 22 Ed. 3.19. 15 Ed. 3. Exec. 8. 41 Ed. 3. f. 22.

If the Executor do wast the Goods Executor shall not wast the Goods.
of the Testator, he shall pay them of his own, Noys Max. page 104.

If an Executor take the Goods of another Man amongst the Goods of the
Testator, he shall be excused of the taking in Trespass, Executor excusable in
Trespass.
Ibid.

Note, An Executor must prove his Will, The Will how proved.
as aforesaid, which is thus, They are to exhibit the Will into the Bishops
Court, and bring the Witnesses there to be Sworn, and the Bishops Officers who
do use to keep the Original Will, do certify the Copy thereof in Parchment
under the Bishops Seal of Office, See more of Ex^cutors following.
which Parchment so sealed, is called the Will proved.

Property by Administration.
Property of Goods by Administration is thus gotten: Where a Man is possessed
of Goods dies without Will, Property by Administration where a Man dies
without Will.
there such things as Executors should have had, if he had made a Will, 31 Ed.
1. ca. 11.
come to the Administrator, and this Administration is granted by the Bishop,
first to the Wife if she require it, or to the Children, To the Widow or
Children.
or to the next of Kindred, (as is before mentioned;) but if they refuse it (as
often they do) because the Debts are greater than the Estate will amount unto;
Or Creditor. See Noys Max. p. 105.
then some Creditor or other will take it as the Bishops Officers will think
fit. See after how Intestates Goods are to be distributed after Debts paid,
Ibid. Stat. 29 Car. 2.

Westminster. 2. Anno 13 Ed. 1. ca 19.
In ancient times the Goods of one dying without Will, were committed to the
Ordinaries disposition, who was bound to answer the Intestates Debts, so far
forth as the Goods would extend; but now otherwise, as before.

It grows often in question what Bishop should have the right in proving of
Wills, and granting the Administration What Bishop shall grant Administration.
of Goods: In which Controversy the Rule The Rule.
is this, That if the Party dead, had at his death Goods of some reasonable
value, called Bona Notabilia, Where Bona Notabilia. Goods in several Diocesses.
Then the Archbishop.
in diverse Diocesses, then the Archbishop of that Province where he died, is
to have the Probate of his Will, and to grant the Administration of his Goods,
as the Case falls out; otherwise the Bishop of the Diocese where he died
Otherwise the Bishop of the Diocese where he died.
is to do it, by a Canon made 1 Car. 2. Canon 92, 93. Bona Notabilia must
amount to five pounds.

And note, That a Testator making a Will, may make as many Executors as he
pleases, and upon Condition or Limitation.
That a Testator making a Will, may assign as many Executors as he pleases,
being capable thereof, ( Wests Symb. part 1. Lib. 21. sect. 637.) upon
Condition, or Time; Upon Condition as if a Testator appoints J. S. his
Executor if he find sufficient Sureties for the performance of his Will, before
the proving thereof: Upon Time, as if the Testator makes J. S. his Executor
when he comes to full Age, or when he comes from London, or while he dwells
at London, etc. West, Ibid.

And as these Executors may be so made, simply or upon condition, or with
reference to time; so may Legacies and Devices be made to one or more simply,
or conditionally, or with reference to or from time;

Example.
As if a Man devise that (...) Man shall have the Occupation of his Plate o^
other Chattels during hi^ Life, But note, That if a Chattel be given to one for
Life, the Remainder to another, the Remainder is void; for a Grant or Devise
for an hour of a Chattel is good for ever, and the Devisce may dispose of it;
but if he do not, the other shall have it.
or for Years, and i^ he die within the Years then that they shall remain to M.
A and it is good, Noys Max. page 99, 100.

Executor not to meddle during Life of another Executor.
A Man makes A. and B. his Executors, and Wills that B. shall not meddle during
the Life of A. and good, for he does not restrain his entire power; for he may
make one Executor of his Goods in D. and so he may divide the time, 19 H. 8. By
Fitz See Dyer. 19 H. 8.
32 H. 8. B. Exec. 155.

If there be but one Executor made, yet he may refuse the Executorship Executor
having not meddled may refuse the Executorship.
coming in the Court before the Bishop or his Official, so as he have not
before meddled with any of the Goods, or with receiving of Debts, or paying of
Legacies; and if there be many, and all refuse, then is the Party ^ead
Intestate; and if there be more Executors than one, 42 El. Co. 9. fol. 36, 37.
yet so many as list may refuse the Executorship, and if any one of them ^ake
it upon him, the rest that once did refuse, may notwithstand^ng take it upon
them when they will, Noys Max. page 103. Coke Lit. -- 5. fol. 28. cont. 18 E.
2. Bro. 8.37.

No Executor shall be far^her charged with Debts or Legacies, How Debts ought
to be paid by Executor. Stat. 29 Car. 2. says, No Action to be brought to
charge any Executor or Administrator upon any special Promise to answer Damages
out of his own Estate, unless the Agreement or some Memorandum thereof in
Writing, and signed by the Party to be charged, or some by him lawfully
authorized.
than the value of the Goods of the Testators which come to his Hands, ^o that
he foresee that he pay Debts of Record first; ^s namely, Debts to the King;
then upon Judgments, Statutes, Recognizances; and then Debts for Bonds or Bills
sealed, or for Rent unpaid, or Servants Wages, and then Debts due by
Shop-Books, and for Contracts by Words; and lastly Legacies, Co. Lit. 5. Reeds
Case.

If Executor or Administrator pay not the Debts in course, they shall be
charged. See Went worths Executor. p. 189
For if an Executor or Administrator pay Debts to others before the Debts to the
King, and pay Debts upon Bonds before Debts due by Records, or pay Debts upon
Shop-Books, or for Contracts before those due upon Bonds, or for Arrearages of
Rent, he shall pay the same to others in their Degrees out of his own Goods.

M. 33 and 34 Eliz. Lady Walsinghams Case, Noys Max. page 104.

Debts of equal degree, Executor or Administrator may pay first which he will.
But yet the Law gives them choice; That where diverse have Debts due in equal
degree of Record or Specialty, he may pay which of them he will before any Suit
be brought against him; but if any Suit be brought, Exception.
he must first pay him that first gets Judgment against him, 28 H. 8. Dyer
22. Doct. and Stud. cap. 10. p. 78. 41 E. 3. El. Dyer 232. Co. Intr. 148, 149,
286.

Any one Executor may convey the Goods, or release Debts without his Companion;
any one may do as much as all together, One Executor may do as much as all
together.
H. 48. E. 4.14, 15.

But one Man's releasing of Debts, or selling of the Goods, shall not charge But
one shall not charge the rest.
the other to pay so much of their Goods, as was released or sold by the other,
though there be not enough besides.

But it shall charge the Party himself that did so release, or sell, But only
himself.
or convey, See Wentworths Executor p. 321. but he must be above seventeen
Years old, Hill. 9. Jac. Rot. 87.

But it is said to be otherwise of Administrators, Administrators cannot act
alone.
because they have but one joint Authority given them by the Ordinary over the
Goods, which Authority being given to many, is to be executed by them all
joining together, Sed Quaere, for it is said,

That the power and charge of an Administrator, is equal in every point to the
power and charge of an Executor, Power of Administrator equal to Executor.
Noy 106.

If a Man make an Infant his Executor, the Ordinary may commit the Execution of
the Will to the Tutor of the Child, Infant Executor must have a Tutor, etc.
for the Child's behoof, until he be of the Age of seventeen Years and no
longer, Noy, Ibid.

An Administrator during the minority of an Infant, may do nothing to the
prejudice of the Infant; Administrator during minority, must do nothing to the
prejudice of the Infant.
not sell the Goods of the deceased, unless it be upon necessity to pay Debts,
or that they would Perish; nor let a Lease for a longer time, than whilst he is
Adminstrator, Noy, Ibid.

An Infant upon the true payment of a Debt due to the Testator, may make an
Acquittance, Infant may make Acquittance.
and it shall be good; for a Child may better his Estate, but not make it
worse, Noy, page 107.

Note, If an Executor die, making an Executor, the second Executor is to be
Executor Executor of an Executor.
to the first Testator, 25 Ed. 3. Noys Max. p. 103.

But if an Administrator die Intestate, or make an Executor, yet this Executor
or Administrator, Executor or Administrator of an Administrator.
shall not be Executor or Administrator to the Intestate.

But in this Case the Bishop, New Administration may be made.
called the Ordinary, is new to commit the Administration of the first
Intestates Goods.

If the Executors or Administrators do pay Debts, When Executors or
Administrators pay their own Money, they may retain in value.
or Funeral Charges, or Legacies of their own Money, he or they may retain so
much of the Goods in kind of the Testator or Intestates again, and shall have
property of that in kind, but not of Lands appointed to be sold, 20 H. 7. 5.

Note, Stat. 29 Car. 2. concerning Administrators.

Note, The Heir though he have been advanced, etc. is to have an equal part
with the other Children, notwithstanding, etc.


That by the Statute 22 and 23 Car. 2. The Ordinary is empowered to call
Administrators to an account for the Intestates Goods, and what remains clear
(after Debts, Funerals, and just Expenses allowed,) is to be distributed as
follows; One part to the Wife of the Intestate, and all the residue by equal
Portions to and among the Children of the Intestate, and such Persons as
legally represent such Children, other than such Child or Children, who shall
have been advanced by the Intestate equal to the share as shall come by such
Distribution to the other Children; After the Intestates Debts, etc. paid, the
Remainder to be distributed to the Wife and Children.
if the distribution amount to more apiece than the advanced Child or Children
had, then they must all be made equal; and if no Children, then one Moiety to
the Wife, and the other to the next of Kin in equal degree; but not to any
Collaterals after Brothers and Sisters Children; If no Wife, Exception. If no
Wife, all to the Children.

If no Children to the next of Kin, with some Cautions


then equally to the Children; If no Children, then to the next of Kin in equal
degree to the Intestate, and their legal Representatives, as aforesaid, and not
otherwise.

No distribution to be made till after a Year after the Intestates death; and
every Person who is to have a share, must give Bond with sufficient Sureties to
refund a ratable part of such Debts as shall afterward be sued for, and
recovered, or otherwise duly made to appear, to enable the Administrator to pay
them with the Costs, etc. This Act not to prejudice the Custom of London, or
other Customs peculiar to other Places, etc. See the Statute.

And by the Act 29 Car. 2. No Probate, or Letters Testamentary of a Nuncupative
Will, Probate of a Nuncupative Will.
shall pass the Seal till fourteen days after the Testators death, nor any
Nuncupative Will received to be proved till Process first is sued to the Widow,
or the next of Kin to call them in, to contest the same if they please; The Act
not to extend to married Women, but their Husbands may have Administration as
before.
And by this Act it is further explained, That the former Act for settling
Intestate Estates, shall not extend to Feme Coverts, (Women that are married,)
that shall die Intestate; but their Husbands may have Administration, and enjoy
their personal Estates, etc. as before.

And touching all these Matters concerning Executors and Administrators, you
may read more largely in the Book called The Office of Executors.


Is When a Man makes a Will and Executors, and by that Will gives a Legacy,
The Executor must assent to the Legacy.
he to whom such Legacy is so given must have the assent of the Executors, or
one of them, to have that his Legacy; yet the property of that Lease or Goods
bequeathed unto him, is said to be in him; but he cannot enter and take such
Legacy without the assent of the Executors, Or the Legatee shall not have it.
or one of them, because the Executors are charged to pay Debts before
Legacies; and if they assent to pay Legacies first, they shall pay the value of
them to the Creditors out of their own Goods, if there be not otherwise
sufficient to pay the Debts, Debts must be paid before Legacies.
32 H. 8. 21 E. 4.21. 94 E. 1.90. 37 H. 6.30. 2 H. 6.16.

What Debts before Legacies.
And this is to be understood of Debts due by Record, or to the King, or upon
Bond, or Bill sealed, or for Arrearages of Rents, or for Servants, or Workmens
Wages; and also of Debts by Shop-Book, Yel. 55, 56, 57. Owens Rep. 56. Cro.
1.59. Co. Lit. 53. Dyer 114. 3 Bulst. 235, 236
or by Bills unsealed, or Contracts by Word, for before them the Legacies are
not to be paid, for it is now out of question, Co. Lit. 9. fol. 88. b. Doctor
and Student Li. 2. cap. 10 and 11. though formerly much controverted.

It Is said, If the Executor doubt he shall not have enough to pay every Legacy,
he may pay which he will first; Executor may pay which Legacy he will first.
but he may not sell a special Legacy of a Lease, or of Goods in Kind to pay a
Money Legacy; Exception.
but he may sell any Legacy he will to pay Debts if he have not enough besides:
Que^e of this.

Note, If a Man make a Will, Will without Executor, how to be proved.
and make no Executor, the Ordinary is to commit the Administration, cum
Testamento annexato, (with the Will annexed,) and take Bond of the
Administrators to perfo^m the Will, See Wentworths Executor, f. 4, 5.
and he is to perform it in such sort as an Executor should have done, if he
had been named, Plow. Com. 185.

And what has been said concerning Executors, Administrators, etc. shall here
suffice, there being several Books now Extant, which treat of the Duty of
Executors and Administrators, etc.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for Thomas Basset at the George in
Fleetstreet.
1. THE Great French Dictionary in two Parts; the first French and English, the
second English and French, according to the Ancient and Modern Orthography.
Folio.

2. A New French Grammar or a New Method for learning of the French Tongue: To
which is added, for a help to young beginners, a large Vocabulary, and a store
of familiar Dialogues, in 8 vo.

3. Novel Method pour appendre l'Anglois avecune Nomenclatur and Francoise and
Angloise, 8 vo.

4. The Grounds of the French Tongue; or a New French Grammar according to the
present use and Modern Orthography, digested into a short Essay, and acurate
Method, with a Vocabulary and Dialogues, 8 vo.

5. A short and easy French Grammar, fitted for all sorts of ^^^^^rs,
according to the present Use and Modern Orthography of the French, with
Reflections upon the ancient use thereof, 8 vo.

6. The present State of Denmark, 8 vo.

7. A short Dictionary French and English; and another English and French, the
Third Edition. These seven written by Gay Meege, Gent.

The Theater of the Empire of Great Britain, presenting an exact Geography of
the Kingdom of England, Scotland, Ireland and the Isles adjoining: as also the
Shires, Hundreds Cities, and Shire-Towns within the Kingdom of England and
Principality of Wales: with a Chronology of the Civil Wars in England, Wales
and Ireland; together with a Prospect of the famous Ports in the World; (viz.)
Asia, Africa, Europe, America, with these Empires and Kingdoms therein
contained, (viz.) Grecia, Roman Empire, Germany, Bohemia, France, Belgia,
Spain, Italy, Hungary, Denmark, Poland, Persia, Turkish Empire, Kingdom of
China, Tartaria, Summer Islands, etc. by John Speed, Folio.

Le Beau Pledeur: A Book of Entries, containing Declarations, Informations and
other select and approved Pleadings, by Sir Humphry Winch Knight, sometime one
of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas, Folio.

The History of the Romish Treasons and Usurpations, the second Edition, by
Henry Foulis, B. D.

The History of the World in five Books, by Sir Walter Rawleigh Knt. whereunto
is added in this Edition, the Life and Trial of the Author, Folio.

Tracts written by John Seldom of the Inner Temple Esquire, the first
Entitled, Jani Anglorum Facies altera, rendered into English with large Notes
thereupon, by Redman Westcot Gent. The second, Englands Epinomis. The third, of
the Original of Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions of Testaments. The fourth, of the
Disposition or Administration of Intestates Goods, Folio.

A General Chronological History of France, beginning before the Reign of King
Pharamond, and ending with the Reign of King Henry the Fourth, by the Sieur de
Mez^ray, Historiographer of France, translated by Jonh Bulteel Gent. Folio.

Les Reports des tres Honorable Edward Seigneur Littleton Baron de Mounstow,
Custos de le Grand Seal, Folio.

Catalogue of Common and Statute Law Books

Grotius his three Books of War and Peace; Englished by William Euats B. D.
Folio.

Formulae been placitandi: A Book of Entries containing variety of choice
Precedents, by Will. Brown, Folio.

Lord Bridgman's Conveyances, the second Edition with large Additions. Folio.

The Ten Volums of Year Books with new References, Folio.

Officina Brevium: A Book containing Forms of Writs. Folio.

Thesaurus Brevium; the second Edition. Folio.

Chaucers Works. Folio.

History of the Seven Champions. 4 to.

Callis's Reading on Sewers, the second Edition enlarged, 4 to.

Sheppard's Grand Abridgement, in 4 to.

The Complete Planter and Cyderist, the Art of Pruning Trees, 8 vo.

Poems on several occasions, by Charles Cotton Esquire, 8 vo.

Doctor Salmon's new Dispensatory, 8 vo.

Doron Medicum, 8 vo.

Art to know Men, 8 vo.

Sandys Christ's Passion: A Tragedy, with Annotations and Sculptures, 8 vo.

-- Europae Speculum, 8 vo.

Ogleby's Aesops Fables, 8 vo.

Young Clerks Guide in Four Parts, 8 vo.

Complete Solicitor Entering Clerk and Attorney, 8 vo.

Pettus, of the Constitution of Parliaments, 8 vo.

A new Book of Instruments, 8 vo.

Brown, of Fines and Recoveries, 8 vo.

Epitome of Doctor Willis his Works in English, 8 vo.

The Young Clerks Tutor Enlarged. 8 vo.

The Anglers Vade Mecum: Or a Compendious Discourse of Angling, by James
Chetham Esquire; the second Edition illustrated with Sculptures and very much
enlarged, 8 vo.

Gesta Romanorum, 8 vo.

Davenport's Abridgment of Cook on Littleton, 12 ves.

Shiptons Pharmocopoeia, 12 ves.

Doctor Salmons English Herbal with Cutts, Folio.

Stanlys Lives of the Philosophers, or History of Philosophy. Folio.

Knoll's Turkish History with Sir Paul Rycaut's Continuation to 1677. and from
thence continued to the taking of Buda, Folio.

Register of Writs with Theloals Digest of Writs, with new Additi^ns, Folio.

Legis Series: Or the Process of Law in order, with some Entries both in Kings
Bench and Common Pleas; useful for young Clerks to direct them in their first
steps to Clerkship, per R.G. Gent. price 6 d.

An Essay concerning Humane Understanding in Four Books, by Mr. John Lock,
Folio.

Ben. Johnson's Works, Folio.


