A DISPLAY OF HERALDRY: MANIFESTING A more easy access to the Knowledge
thereof than has been hitherto published by any, through the benefit of Method;

Whereunto it is now reduced by the Study and Industry OF JOHN GUILLIM, Late
Pursuivant at ARMS.

The Fifth Edition much enlarged with great variety of BEARINGS.

To which is added a TREATISE of HONOR Military and Civil, According to the
Laws and Customs of ENGLAND, collected out of the most Authentic Authors, both
Ancient and Modern, by Capt. JOHN LOGAN.

ILLUSTRATEED With variety of SCVLPTVRES suitable to the several Subjects; to
which is added a Catalogue of the Achievements of the NOBILITY of England,
with diverse of the GENTRY, for Examples of BEARINGS.

LONDON, Printed by S. Roycroft for R. Blome; and are sold by Francis Tyton,
Henry Brom, Thomas Basset, Richard Chiswell, John Wright. and Thomas
Sawbridge, MDCLXXIX.

TO The most August CHARLES THE SECOND, King of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Dread Sovereign,
HERE is a Firmament of Stars, that shine not without your Benign Beam; you are
the Sun of our Hemisphere that sets a splendor on the Nobility: For as they
are Jewels and Ornaments to your Crown, so they derive their luster and value
from thence: From your Breast, as from a Fountain, the young Plants of Honor
are cherisht and nursed up. Your virtuous Achievements are their Warrant and
Example, and your Bounty the Guerdon of their Merit. And as all the Roman
Emperors after Julius Caesar, were desirous to be called Imperatores and
Caesares, from him; so shall all succeeding Princes, in this our Albion (in
emulation of your Virtues) be ambitious to bear your Name to Eternity.

Deign then (Great Sir) a gracious Reflex upon, and Acceptance of this Display
of Heraldry, which though in it self is excellent, yet thus illustrated by your
Name, will admit of no Comparison, but render to the Publisher a share of
Honor, in that he is permitted into your Presence: Being

In all humility, Your Majesty's most submissive and obedient Subject and
Servant, RICHARD BLOME.

TO THE RIGHT NOBLE Henry Duke of Norfolk, EARL-MARSHAL of ENGLAND, Earl of
Arundel, Surrey, Norfolk and Norwich; Lord Howard, Moubray, Segrave, Brews of
Gower, Fitz-Allen, Clun, Oswalstree, Maltravers, Graystock, and Howard of
Castle-Rising, etc. AND TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT Earl of ALISBVRY and
ELGIN, VISCOUNT Bruce of Ampthill, Baron Bruce of Whorlton, Skeleton, and
Kinloss, Hereditary High-Steward of the Honor of Ampthill, Lord Lieutenant of
the County of Bedford, and High-Steward of Leicester, and one of the Lords of
his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, his Graces Substitute for the
Officiating the said Office of Earl-Marshal.
Most Honored Lords,
THIS Treatise, next to his Sacred Majesty, Honors Grand General, must
necessarily be dependant on your Lordships, Honors Earl-Marshal, to whose
Protection and Patronage it is also most humbly Dedicated by,

My Lords, Your Graces and Honors most Submissive Servant, Richard Blome.

To the most Concerned the NOBILITY AND GENTRY.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THis inestimable Piece of Heraldry, that had past the Press four times with
much approbation, had the unhappy Fate in the last to have a Blot in its
Escocheon, viz. the Insertion of Oliver's Creatures; which as no Merit could
enter them in such a Regiment but Usurpation, so we have in this Impression
exploded them, and inserted the Persons, Titles, and Dignities of such as his
Majesty (since his blessed Restoration) conferred Honor upon, that so the
Corn may be entire, of one Sheaf, and the Grapes of one Vine. To this
Impression is added A Treatise of Honor Military and Civil, which I do own to
have received from Captain David Logan of Idbury in Oxfordshire, whose
Manuscript is not exactly observed by omitting the Quotations in his Papers, as
being unwilling to swell the Volume unto too large a bulk; and the rather,
being confident he asserts nothing without the Authority of good Authors,
putting my Confidence in his Care, who is tender enough of his Honor and
Loyalty, Virtues inherent in his Blood and Name, witness the Scotis^ Histories,
although unfortunate therein three or four Ages ago: Nor may this Treatise be
without some Errors, committed by the Press, and that occasioned by his great
distance in the Country, which (if any) shall be corrected in the next
Impression, begging the Readers pardon for the present.

R. B.

Mr. Guillim's PREFACE TO THE READER.
HOW difficult a thing it is to produce form out of things, shapeless and
deformed, and to prescribe limits to things confused, there is none but may
easily perceive, if he shall take but a slight view of the Chaos-like
contemperation of things not only diverse but repugnant in Nature, hitherto
concorporated in the generous Profession of Heraldry: as the forms of the pure
Caelestial Bodies, mixed with gross Terrestrials; Earthly Animals, with Watery;
Savage Beasts, with Tame; Whole-footed Beasts, with Divided; Reptiles, with
things Gressible; Fowls of Prey, with Homebred; these again, with River-Fowls;
Airy Insecta, with Earthly; also things Natural, with Artificial; Arts Liberal,
with Mechanical; Military, with Rustical; and Rustic with Civil. Which
confused mixture has not a little discouraged many persons (otherwise well
affected to the study of Armory) and impaired the estimation of the Profession.
For redress whereof my self (though unablest of many) have done my best, in
this my Display of Heraldry, to dissolve this deformed Lump, distributing, and
digesting each particular thereof into his peculiar Rank; wherein, albeit the
issue of my Enterprise be not answerable to the height of my desires, yet do I
assure my self my labor herein will not be altogether fruitless; forasmuch as
hereby I have broken the Ice, and made way to some after-comers of greater
Gifts and riper Judgment, that they may give a fairer body to this my
delineated rough draught, or shadow of a new-fram^d method. For if men of
greatest skill have failed to give absolute form to their works,
notwithstanding their best endeavors, with little reason may such perfection
be expected from me, whose Talent is so small, as that I am forced to build
wholly upon other men's Foundations; and therefore may be thought to have
undertaken an idle task, in writing of things formerly handled and published by
persons of more sufficiency and greater judgment. Notwithstanding, who knows
not, that as every man has his proper conceit and invention, so has he his
several drift and purpose, so as diverse men writing of one self Argument, do
handle the same diversty? which being so, what lets that every of us,
writing in a diverse kind, may not without offense to other, use our uttermost
endeavors to give unto this erst unshapely and disproportionable profession of
Heraldry, a true Symmetria and proportionable correspondence of each part to
other? Inasmuch (if I be not deceived) both they and my self do all aim at one
mark, which is, so to adorn and beautify this Science, as that it being purged
from her wonted deformities, may become more plausible to many, and be
favorably entertained of all^ which could not be otherwise better effected,
than by dissolving of this Chaos-like or confused Lump, and dissevering of each
particular thereof from other, and disposing them under their peculiar Heads,
which is the full scope of these my Travels. Now to the end I might the
bet-accomplish this Task, after I had carefully collected the chief Grounds,
Principles, Rules, and Observations that Ger. Leigh, Boswell, Fern, Bara,
Chassaneus, and other best approved Authors in their several Works have written
touching the Rudiments and first Principles of Armory; then did I seriously
bethink my self for the orderly distribution of those their dispersed Notes and
Observations so by me collected, and digesting of them into some form of
Method, or at the least into some Methodical resemblance, wherein I hope I have
in some sort accomplished my desire, and have for thy better understanding and
apprehension ( gentle Reader) first distributed this work into Sections, and
those into Chapters, briefly showing their several substances and orderly
connexions; and throughout the whole I have begun with the Genus of each kind,
and severed them into their Species, which also are subdivided into
Individua's, annexing particular Rules to each several sort. Moreover, I have
added Definitions, Divisions, and Etymologies of the Artificial terms
peculiarly pertaining to this Art, bestowed the chief Grounds, Principles,
Rules and Observations under their proper Heads, and manifested their use by
examples of special choice, whereby they receive not only warrant, but also
lively sense and vigor, in default whereof they would become destitute of all
force, according to that saying of Aretius, Praecepta, quantumvis bona and
concinna, mortua sunt, nisi ipse auditor variis exemplis ea repraesentat.
Finally, to the end that nothing should be wanting that might give thee full
contentment, I have prefixed before every Section an Analogical Table, briefly
comprehending the substance of each subsequent Section, and that with such
coherence that each of the said Tables answers in a Relative respect of the
one of them to the other; so as all of them do jump together in an universal
coherence, as by their particular references does manifestly appear, whereby I
have brought to pass (though with long and difficult labor) that in this my
Display of Heraldry, thou may easily find (bestowed according to Order)
whatsoever thou desire concerning the Principles of this Profession: So that
thou in short time, and with much ease, may reap not only a profitable
Gleaning, but a plentiful Harvest of this my long and painful Lucubrations.

Farewell.
A TABLE OF THE HEADS and METHOD Of such things for the Display of Heraldry As
are treated of in this WORK.
Section I.
PLain Shields 11, 35 Ermyns 15 Vaire 15, 36 Bordures 18 Files and Labels 22
Distinction of Houses 25 Abatements 29
Sect. II.
Chiefs 39 Pales 41 Bends and Bendlets 41, 66 Fess 47 Cheverons 49 Bars and
Barrulets 51, 67 Gyrons 51 Piles 52 Flanches 54 Orles 55 Crosses 56 Saltires 63
Pallets 65 Two or three Ordinaries in one shield 67
Sect. III.
Angels and Spirits 74 Spheres and Stars 77 Sun and Moon 82 Crescents 85
Flames, etc. 87 Mullets 90 Nebule 93 Escarbuncle 94 Stones 95 Trees and Leaves
97 Fruits 101 Roses 102 Wheat-ears and Sheaves 103 Flower de Lis 106 Trefoils,
Quaterfoils, and Cinquefoils 109 Flowers 111 Guttee 113 Deaths heads and bones
114 Elephants 118 Horses, Asses, Bulls, Goats, etc. in whole and in part, 119
Stags, Bucks and Deer 124 Bucks heads 128 Unicorns 130 Camels, Boars, Sheep,
etc. in whole and in part, 131 Lions 134 Lions heads and paws 145 Tigers,
Bears, and Wolves, 147 Greyhounds and Dogs 149 Foxes, Cats, Ermyns, 151
Squirrels, Rabbets, Moles, Hedghogs, Tortoises, ibid. Toads, Spiders, Emmets,
154 Grasshoppers 156 Snakes, Snails, 157 Swans, Ducks, Cranes, and Herns, 158
Spread Eagles 161 Wings, Feathers, and Legs, 163 Hawks, Owls, and Birds, 166
Martlets 170 Peacocks, Turkies, 172 Flies, Bees, etc. 173 Eeles, Dolphins,
Crabs, and other fish, 175 Escallop-shells and other shells 178 Effigies of
men, etc. 182 Parts of men. 184 Otters 189 Leopards 190 Leopards faces 191
Griffins, Wiverns, Cockatrices Mermaids, etc. 192 Lions and other Beasts not
freely born 195
Sect. IV.
Crowns, Scepters, Garters, etc. Cardinals Hats, Miter^, Crosiers, 202 Swords,
Maces, 207 Rings, Annulets, 208 Billets 210 Pens, Inkhorns, Letters 211 Fidles,
Pipes, and other Instruments 212 Celestial Signs 213 Plows, Harrows,
Checkerwheels, 214 Spindles, Cards, Barrels, 216 Maunches 217 Combs, Purses,
218 Pellets, Plates, Hurts, Bezants, 219 Pick-axes, Mallets, Squares, Axes, 222
Plumets, Compasses, Pinchers, etc. ibid. Castles, Towers, Tents, 225 Bells,
Cushions, 228 Tressels, Trevets, Pots, Bellows, etc. 229 Sails, Anchors, 230
Boats, Ships, 231 Hunters Horns 232 Bells, Lewres, 233 Mascles, Frets, 234
Fishhooks, Nets, and Weels, 235 Playing Tables, Dice, 236 Chess-rooks and
Ferdemolins 237 Banners, Spears, Beacons, Drums, 239 Trumpets, Fluits,
Clarions, 243 Guns and battering Rams, 244 Bows, Arrows, and Pheons, 246
Swords, Spears, Bills, Lances, and Ladders, 248 Helmets, Gauntlets, Legs, 254
Saddles, Horses, Shoes, 256 Chaplets 258 Shackbolts 259 Waterbowgets 260
Torteuxes 262 Lozenges, Fusils, ibid.
Sect. V.
Coats of several Ordinaries 269
Sect. VI.
Impaled Coats 285 Quartered Coats 288
Nihil est inventum and perfectum simul.
THis first Section shows the original beginning and universality, diverse
denominations, composition and voluntary assumption of Arms and Ensigns; the
original discipline of them, the Equivocation of the Latin word Arma, and in
what sense the same is to be understood and taken, the necessity and use of
Arms and Ensigns; when and by whom they were first given for remunerations;
their sympathy with their Bearers, and their conformities with Names; their
Definition, Distribution, Blazon, Accidents, and Parts; their Diminutions or
Abatements; together with many Precepts, Rules and Observations, as well
general as particular, pertaining to Blazon.

The Table of the First Section.
The skill of Armory consists in Blazoning, wherein must be considered
Accidents, which are both Tincture, which consists of Colors, which are
either General, As when things are born in their natural Colors: Special,
Single, As white and black. Mixed, Exactly compounded of white and black, as
Red. Declining more to the onethan to the other, with Red, as Yellow, Sanguine,
Purpure, etc.


Furrs, which consist either of One color, viz. white, which is the Levites
Skin or Furr. More than one, Two only, which are either With black, as Black
with white, Ermyn, which is black upon white. Ermyns, white upon black.
Black with yellow, Ermynois, black upon yellow. Pean, yellow upon black.

Without black, Verrey, which is composed of white and blue, or of blue and
white. Which is green with yellow, or yellow with green.

More than two, Ermynites, differing from Ermyn by a red hair added to each
side of the spots. Vayre, which is of all Colors, except blue and green.



Differences, which are both Ancient, as Bordures of all sorts. Modern, as
Files, Crescents, Mullets, Martlets, Annulets.

Parts, which are the Escocheon, wherein we must observe the Accidents. viz.
Points, of which some are Middle, as the Fess, Honor, and Nombril Points.
Remote Superior, Exact middle point of the Chief, and the two extremes
thereof, viz. the Dexter and Sinister Base Points. Inferior, Precise middle
Point of the Base of the Escocheon, and the two Extremes thereof, scil. the
Dexter and Sinister Base Points.

Rebate ments, which consist in Diminution, which are placed On the middle
Point, as the Delf and the Inescocheon reversed. Elsewhere, and do occupy Some
one of the other Points alone, as the Dexter Point parted. More Points than
one, viz. Four, as a Point in a Point. Fewer Points than four, Three, as Point
Champain, Point Plain, and Gore Sinister. Two, as a Gusset Dexter and Sinister.



Reversing, which is a transposing or turning upside down of the whole
Escocheon.

Kinds, whereof see the Table of the Second Section.
Ornaments without the Escocheon, whereof see in the Table of the Sixth Section.

Marshalling, whereof hereafter in the sixth Section.


A DISPLAY OF HERALDRY.
SECT. I. CHAP. I.
WHosoever shall address himself to write of matters of Instruction, or of any
other Argument of importance, it behooves, that before he enter thereinto, he
should resolutely determine with himself, in what order he will handle the
same: So shall he best accomplish that he has undertaken, and inform the
understanding, and help the memory of the Reader. For so does Chassaneus
admonish us; saying, Priusquam ad scientiam perveniatur, bonum est, modum
praescribere docendi, and ordinem; quia per ordinem res intellectae magis
delectant animos, mentes nutriunt, sensus magis illuminant, and memoriam
reddunt, clariorem. Such order and course of Writing does also procure in the
Reader a facility of apprehension, as Erasmus notes; saying, Facilius discimus
quae congruo dicuntur ordine, quam quae sparsim and confusim.

What Order is, St. Augustine does inform us; saying, Ordo est parium,
dispariumque rerum distributio. This Order is twofold; the one of Nature, the
other of Discipline: the order of Nature (as Doctor Casius notes) is a
progression from Simples to things Compound: contrariwise, the order of
Discipline is a proceeding from things Compound to Simples. As touching the
order that I have prefixed to my self in this Display of Heraldry, you shall
understand, that forasmuch as the handling of one of these alone, suffices not
to the effecting of my intended Method, I must of force make use of them both
in some sort according to their distinct kinds. Wherein albeit the order of
Nature in right should have the precedence, as the more worthy, quia Natura
regitur ab intelligentia non errante: nevertheless in regard my principal
purpose tends to the prescribing of a form of Discipline, whereunto these
tokens which we call Arms must be reduced, and therein to manifest rather their
Location than their Generation, their Use than their Essence, their Shadow than
their Substance; I am constrained to prefer the latter (which serves directly
for my purpose) before the former, which tends thereto but collaterally;
whose dignity notwithstanding I purpose regardfully to observe, when I shall
come to the distribution of things Natural in their proper places.

But before I enter my Method, I hold it expedient (though I do somewhat
digress) by way of introduction to the better conceiving and understanding of
that which shall be herein handled, briefly to offer to the consideration of
the Judicious Reader, some few things of necessary note, touching the Subject
of this Work: Such are those ensigns or marks which we call Arms in English,
and in Latin Arma; which being a word of equivocation or ambiguity, needs
some explication; Digredi enim quandoque licet ex caus^, non autem divagari:
for so it is very requisite, to the end it may be certainly known in what sense
this word is to be here taken, quia discenti ponenda sunt vera and certa.

It is therefore to be observed that this word Arma in Latin is sometimes
taken for very natural instruments, and in this sense does Doctor Casius use
the same, where he says, Arma belluis natura dedit, ut Leoni dentes, Serpenti
aculeum, etc. Sometimes it is taken for all manner of instruments pertaining to
Mechanical Trades, as Arma Rusticorum, Rastra, Ligones, and hujus^^odi. Also
Arma Coquinaria, lebes, patella, tripus, olla, etc. And Virg. Aeneid. 5.
speaking of the necessaries pertaining to Shipping, says, Colligere arma
jubet, validisque incumbere remis.

Sometimes it is taken for all sorts of warlike instruments; and in this sense
does Doctor Casius take it, saying, At hominibus arma industria finxit, eoque
finxit, ut pro imperio rationis eis uteretur. But this word Arma here meant is
not understood in any of these significations, but must be taken in a
metaphorical sense, for that they do assume a borrowed name (by way of figure
called Metonymia Subjecti) from the Shields, Targets, Banners, Military
Cassocks, and other Martial Instruments, whereupon they were engraven,
embossed, embroidered or depicted: which kinds of furniture and habiliments are
peculiar unto Martial men and professed Soldiers, to whom only it pertains
to bear Armor; which even at this day we do usually call by the name of Arms.
And of them in process of time did these ensigns or marks receive their
denomination, and were called Arma, in English Arms, as Abra. Fra. notes,
saying, Arma appellantur, quod olim solis militibus data fuerunt, qui arma
gerere solent. Nam cum ista sit gloria armis, ut instrumentis comparata,
placuit ipsam quoque mercedem arma appellare.

Claudius Fauchet says, that Arms have their Appellation or Denomination,
because Military men bare their Devices, or Inventions depicted upon their
Coat-Armours, and in and upon their shields: Claudius Fauchet.

Arms were called Symbola, which signifies Signs, Tokens, or Marks, given in
time of Hostility, or of Civil Tumults, by Captains to their Soldiers, or by
the Authors of Rebellion to their pernicious Associates and Confederates, for
distinguishing of particular persons, as well among themselves, as from their
Enemies; for the better avoiding such inconveniences (as I shall presently
show when I come to speak of them, and use of Arms.)

These Armorial Notes (so much in use with us at this day) are oftentimes
called Insignia, which name, as Aldrovandus supposes, proceeded of the
barrenness of the Latin tongue; his words are these, Insignium nomen ex
linguae Latinae videtur fluxisse inopia, and certe vix aliud vocabulum huic
magis quadrat, quod haec praecipue virtutis and gentilitatis sive nota sive
signum sit.

How far the extent of this word Insignia, or Ensigns, does dilate it self, we
may perceive by this, that it compriseth generally all Signs, Marks, and Tokens
of Honor, due to well deserving persons, either in respect of their
Government, Learning, Wisdom, Magnanimity, etc. These albeit they have no
government annexed to them, yet have they in them much honor, and estimation,
as were those Pontifical Ornaments, and Ensigns, wherewith Simeon the High
Priest was adorned and furnished at such time as he went to meet Alexander, by
means whereof his f^ry was appeased. In the like sort did Pope Leo attire
himself, when he went to meet Attila the Scythian Prince; who having subdued
the Country of Hungary, and destroyed Aquileia in Italy, came forwards to Rome
with like intent. So also did Pope Benedict mitigate the fury of Totila, as if
there lurked some secret force and majesty in the very Ornaments and Ensigns.

Of the number of these Ensigns, are those notes, marks, and shapes of Animals,
that Martial men used to adorn the Crests of their Helmets withal, to make
themselves more eminent in the Field: and to the end there might be better
notice taken of their valorous actions, when they encountered their Enemies in
Battle: or should draw on their Forces to fight. Whereof we shall have cause to
speak hereafter in place more convenient, when we shall come to Treat of them
particularly.

The use of these was yet extended farther than the adorning of Shields and
Helmets only: For Ships also and other Navigable Vessels, were also garnished
and beautified in their Fore-decks, yea, and that in very ancient time, for the
distinguishing of one Ship from another; as we may see, Acts 28. 11. Where Paul
says, he went in a Ship whose badge was Castor and Pollux. Also the Fore-deck
of the Ship that carried away Europa, had a form of a Bull painted thereon,
which gave occasion to the Fable, that a Bull had stolen away Europa. Neither
did the Ancients only use this, but it has been a received Custom in all Ages
sithence, and yet continued with us unto this day. Hereof it comes that we
give the Ships the names of the things that are depicted upon them, as the
Bull, Bear, Lion, Tiger, etc.

Arms then as they are here meant, according to their Original and first Use,
may be thus defined: Arms are tokens or resemblances, signifying some act or
quality of the Bearer. Or thus, These Signs called Arms are nothing else but
Demonstrations and Testimonies of Nobility and of Worthy prowesful exploits
performed in Martial services, especially if they be ancient, and bestowed by a
Noble and Renowned Prince; And this is according to their use in the time of
Alexander the Great, and since, until of later times; But according to their
modern (I mean since the time of Charles the Fourth) and present use, Arms may
be said to be Hieroglyphical or Enigmatical Symbols or Signs, testifying and
demonstrating the Nobility or Gentry, acquired by the virtue and good service
performed by their Bearer or some of his Ancestors, either in Martial Exploits
abroad, or by their Learning and Wisdom, which they attained to, by spending
their bodies and spirits in continual study, to make themselves fit for the
patronage and defense of the Weal-Publick at home.

How great the dignity and estimation of Arms ever has been, and yet is, we
may easily conceive by this, that they do delight the beholders, and greatly
grace and beautify the places wherein they are erected; so also they do
occasion their spectators to make serious inquisition, whose they are, who is
the owner of the house wherein they are set up, of what Family their Bearer is
descended, and who were his next, and who are his remote Parents or Ancestors.

It is very probable that these Signs, which we call Arms at this day,
howsoever in former Ages they have been named (whether Emblems or Pictures,
graven, painted, or embossed, or notes representing some secret or hidden
Mystery; as Hieroglyphics, or Enigmatical, or hidden conceits) they were
external notes of the inward disposition of the mind, manifesting in some sort
the natural qualities of their Bearers, yet so as they were hidden from the
vulgar sort, and known to the judicious only, experimented in the knowledge of
the natural virtues and dispositions of Bodies Celestial, of Animals, and of
Vegetables, etc.

These in their beginning and first institution, were not bestowed upon vulgar
persons, neither were their intendments fitted for common capacity, but such as
were extracted out of the bowels, and very entrails of Nature, and were neither
obscure to the Learned, nor over-familiar to the Common sort.

Between Arms and Names there is a certain conformity, so that as it is a thing
unlawful for a man (but upon great occasion) to change his name; Sic neque arma
(says Chassan.) mutare licet, nisi magna and honorifica causa accesserit; and
another says, A Nominibus ad Arma bonum deducitur Argumentum.

There are sometimes Arms born that may seem to have been devised (in their
first institution) according to the Surnames of the Bearers, as a Bear for
Vrsonne, three Castles for Castleton, three Conies for Conesby, etc. Whether
these be either better or more ancient than other Arms, it is a question of
more difficulty to be resolved, than commodious if it were known.

If there were two distinct Families of one Surname, yet bearing several
Coat-Armours, it is no consequence that they are originally issued from the
same Ancestors; for their agreement of their Surnames may be said to be a
probability, but yet it is no proof, that they are both extracted from the same
Ancestors, unless there be withal a resemblance of their Coat-Armours, which
are the express notes of distinction.

In case where there are two Families, diverse in Name, and issued from several
Parents; and both of them do bear one and the self same Coat Armor, and the
Name of one of them is agreeable to the Coat Armor, and the other dissonant
from the same; the same being in question to whether of them this Coat does
properly appertain: it may be probably conjectured, that he is interes^ed in
the Coat Armor whose appellation is agreeable therewith; rather than he, whose
name has no conformity with it. For Names were instituted for differencing of
each person from other severally, according to the saying, Sicut Nomina inventa
sunt ad cognoscendos homines: Ita Arma and Insignia ad recognoscendum homines
sunt inventa.

If two men of several Families shall bear one Coat Armor, and have their
abode in one Country or Territory; and one of them can produce no more proof
why he does arrogate the propriety thereof, than the other can; in such case
the cause shall be questioned before the Sovereign, or before such as do from
him derive their authority, for the hearing, examining, and determining cases
of this nature; Otherwise, if either of them can prove that his Ancestors
received the same of the Kings Gift, as a remuneration for service done, the
Arms shall be adjudged to be his.

Also there is between these Arms and their Bearers a kind of Sympathy or
natural participation of qualities, insomuch as who so dishonourably or
unreverently uses the Arms of any man; seems to have offered indignity to
the person of their Bearer, so as (according to some Authors) their owner shall
right himself against such an offender, or wrong-doer, Action Injuriarum.

As touching the Antiquity of these Signs which we call Arms, Diodorus Siculus
makes mention, that Osyris surnamed Jupiter the Just, Son to Cham the Cursed
Son of Noah, called of the Gentiles Ianus, being banished from the blessed
Tents of Shem and Iaphet; by reason of the Curse fallen upon his Father, was
constrained to seek some remote place wherein he might settle himself, his
children, and people: for which purpose he assembled a great Army, and
appointed Hercules his Eldest Son Captain. And in this so ancient an expedition
of Wars, as well Osyris himself as Hercules, Macedon and Anubis his Sons and
others, did Paint certain Signs upon their Shields, Bucklers, and other
Weapons; which Signs were after called Arms: As for example Osyris bare a
Scepter Royal, insigned on the top with an Eye; Hercules a Lion Rampant holding
a Battle-axe; Macedon a Wolf, and Anubis a Dog. And we find in Homer and in
Virgil, that the Hero's had their Signs or Marks, whereby their persons were
distinctly known, and discerned in Battle, as well as their Kings and Commons
had their Public Ensigns: For the Athenians bare the Owl, the Persians an
Anchor or Sagittary stamped on their Coins the Romans bare in Eagle, Minotaur,
and sundry other shapes, which (according to Pliuy) they bare in Battle unto
the time of Marius, who bare in his Ensign an Eagle, Argent, Figured and
Embossed, Sus une haute longue, as may be seen in ancient Medals, and chiefly
in which is found this world, Allocutio.

Paulus Aemilius says, that anciently the French Kings did bear, Argent, three
Diadems, Gules. Others say they bare three Toads, Sable, in a field, Vert,
alias Sinople, which cannot be good Armory, as the Masters of that Mystery do
hold, because of Color upon Color.

Whence they received those Arms is not certainly known, unless they had them
from the Romans.

But their opinion is more probable who by the Blazon of the Shield of France,
would show that the first Franks consisting of Sicambri (a people of Germany,
inhabiting the Marches of Frizeland toward Holland, Zealand, and Gelderland)
gave unto them Azure, which resembles the water (which being calm represents
the color of the Heavens) and therein three Flowers de Lis Or, which do grow
plentifully in those Marches, and do flourish in May and June.

Others affirm, that the same was sent by an Angel from Heaven to Clovis, the
first Christian King of France.

But Gregory of Tours in his History mentioned no such thing, neither does it
appear that they bare those Arms before the time of King Pepin, but after the
time of Lewis le Gross: at which time it seems that Armories began to become
hereditary, and were transferred from Father to Son in each Family.

In the first assumption of these Signs, every man did take to himself some
such Beast, Bird, Fish, Serpent, or other Creature as he thought best fitted
his Estate, or whose nature and quality did in some sort quadrate with his own,
or whereunto himself was in some respect in quality like, or wished to be
resembled unto. Ex iis quibus quisque maxim delectatur qualis etiam sit ipse
cognoscitur. The reason is, for that no man is delighted but with things that
are like himself. Therefore wherein any man is specially delighted, himself
also is found to be in quality much like unto them. Zanchius de immortalitate
Animarum 133.

Whereof it comes that our Souls albeit they are naturally delighted with
things that please, and delight the External Senses, yet shall we find that by
how much the mind is more generous and noble, by so much the more does it
apprehend a more solid delight in things pertaining to the inward faculties,
than in such as pertain to the exterior senses, as we may see in those Arts
wherein the Fantasy is chiefly exercised; whereby they receive a greater
contentment of things pertaining to the mind, that is to say, as well Moral, as
Natural, and Supernatural Philosophy. For like as our exterior senses are
delighted with corporal, and corruptible things; so in like manner are our
minds affected to things Spiritual and eternal, and are wonderfully delighted
in them by reason of the Sympathy of their natural qualities. Similitudo non
currit quatuor pedibus (ut aiunt in Scholis) many things may be like, yet
nothing like in all points or respects.

As their Institution is not new, but very ancient, derived almost from the
beginning of the world; so their use was not limited, or restrained to some few
particular Nations, Kingdoms and Countries, but most largely spread all the
World over, insomuch, as there is no Nation, Country or People, so savage or
barbarous, but that they have their particular Signs, whereby they may
particularly and distinctly be known and discerned from others. As in Example.

The Nations of the Israelites Bare for their Ensigns The Hebr. Letter Tau,
Scythians A Thunderbolt, Egyptians An Ox, Phrygians A Swine, Thracians Mars,
Romans An Eagle, Persians Bow and Arrows, Corali a Savage people of Pontus bare
2 Wheels.

And Plutarch in the life of Marius says, that the Cimbrians, a People
inhabiting the parts of Denmark, Norway, and the Almains, which in those days
were cruel, and barbarous, nevertheless had their Shields adorned with the
forms and shapes of savage and cruel beasts, as also their Targets, and other
Military Instruments suited accordingly, and that in such multitudes, and in
such glorious and glistering manner, that they dazzled the eyes of the beholders.

Neither were these Signs particularly restrained unto Nations, Countries, and
Provinces but they were so universal, as that there was no Tribe, particular
Person or Family, but had their Armorial Signs or Notes, whereby they were not
only distinctly known, and discerned from other foreign Tribes and Families;
but also apparently discerned (amongst themselves) one from another, by means
of interposition of some minute or small differences, which after-comers were
forced to devise for the preservation of Common peace and unity, when the
multitude of Bearers (through long tract of time) increased excessively.

Achilles had his Shield beautifully adorned with great variety of things
Celestial, as the motion of the Sun, Moon, Stars, Planets, and other the
Celestial Spheres, the Situation of the Earth, and the adjacent Islands, the
Seas with the ebbing and flowing thereof, etc. whereof I shall have better
occasion offered to speak more at large hereafter. Also Amphiaraus (as Pindarus
the Theban Poet affirms) in his expedition to Thebes, bare in his Shield a
painted Dragon. Capaneus one of the seven Captains that besieged Thebes, bare
the manifold headed Hydra that Hercules fought withal, as Statius the
Neapolitan Poet reported. Polynices a Sphynx. Agamemnon in the Trojan Wars bare
in his Shield a Lion, with this Epigram, Terror hic est hominum, and qui nunc
gerit est Agamemnon.

Ulysses bare a Dolphin, and a Typhon breathing out flames of fire; Perseus
Medusa's head; Autiochus a Lion with a white wand; Theseus an Ox; Seleucus a
Bull; Augustus a Sphinx, with infinite others which I purposely overpass.

These Signs or Tokens were in their first production rough-hewen (as I may
term them) and rude, as also those other notes of signs that we now call Badges
or Cognizances: so as they may be said to have been rather painted Emblems,
than exquisite tokens of honor, or absolute signs or badges: in the time of
their first institution they received diverse denominations, as Signs, Ensigns,
Tokens, Marks, Cognizances, etc. But when in After-ages they had been polished
and refined, then were these Tokens or Signs, that had been formerly (after a
rude fashion) handled together, more carefully distinguished, so as those which
we now call Crests or Cognizances, worn upon the helmets of Military persons in
the field, were distinctly known from those that were born in the Shields and
Targets, which we now call Arms in English, and in Latin Arma. Men of ancient
times devised and invented many things ingenuously and with great care and
consideration, but finished them not; but recommended them to posterity, to be
by them brought to perfection, according to that saying, Invenit antiquitas,
posteri perfecerunt, neither does this derogate ought from the studious, and
industry of the Ancient, neither is this any indignity unto them; Non erubescat
antiquitas (says Chassaneus) si quid melius horum quae ipsa tradidit, Novitas
adinvenit: for nothing is devised and perfected at an instant, but it is
continuance of time, and much labor and industry that brings it to perfection.

These Signs, Marks, Notes, Ensigns, or whatsoever else you please to name
them, are not all of one sort, for some of them may be applied to peace, and
others to military use; and of each of these there are diverse kinds or sorts:
For some of them are express notes of government and authority or jurisdiction,
others have no authority at all annexed to them.

Like as there is an absolute Authority or Jurisdiction Royal, free from all
limitation, and another said to be a mixed government; yea, and that as well in
Civil Policy, as in Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: so are also the Ensigns
several, as well those that pertain to the City, or Commonwealth, as also
those that belong to Ecclesiastical Government.

Those Ensigns that are remote or exempted from Government and Authority are
diverse, according to the diversity of conceits of the first institutors or
devisers of them. For some of them are in manner Vulgar and Common, and such as
may fall to the lot of a person of mean condition: others again of more subtle
and deep invention; exquisite, beautiful, and honorable, and are remunerations
or rewards of some noble exploits, of mere divine wits, or of some rare or
excellent virtue, as a recompense of memorable and worthy deserts.

I know some are of opinion that these tokens or signs, which we do call Arms,
were utterly unknown to the ancient Greeks and Romans; and their memory not to
be found with their Nations: They do confess that the Romans did make the same
use of their Images that we do at this day by our Arms, viz. to produce them
for testimonies of their generous race.

Some other are of opinion, that they were excogitated and brought in use by
Charles the Great and the Lombards, and some again do suppose, they began in
the time of Frederick Barbarossa, but the contrary appears by Authentical
proof, as I have even now showed: well may their opinion stand with reason,
that do hold, that the discipline of Arms in the Reign (or rather) during
Imperial Government of Theodosius, and in the time of Charles the Great, was
brought to some kind of perfection, and withal more generally propagated and
dispersed, according to that saying of Abra. Fra. Carolo Potentissimo Imperante
haec and distinctius explicata fuisse, and frequentius usurpata elucescit.

The principal end for which these signs were first taken up, and put in use
was, that they might serve for notes and marks to distinguish tribes, families,
and particular persons, each from other; but this was not their only use, for
that they served also to notify to the ingenuous beholder of them (after some
sort) the natural quality and disposition of their Bearers; and so behooveful
was this invention thought to be, and their use so reasonable, as that they
have been entertained of all succeeding posterities, among all Nations, and
continued (even to this day) without any immutation or alteration of their
primary institution. These Armorial Ensigns thus ingeniously devised had a
further use; for they served also for the more commodious distribution of
Nations, Tribes, and Families, into Regiments and Bands; as also for
assembling, conducting, and governing of them in martial expedition, and
distinguishing (as I have showed) of particular persons in wars, as well
amongst themselves as from their enemies; because it often falls out by
reason of the likeness of Armor and Weapons, of Discipline of War, and of
Language and Voice (in default of such signs) that much treachery is wrought,
and many men after battle or skirmish do make their retreat to the troops of
the Enemy, to the danger of their surprise, or loss of life: So then it is
clear that this is one use of these Notes, or Marks of distinction called Arms,
that if a man shall meet or encounter us, we do forthwith discover by the note
or mark that he bears whether he be friend or enemy; and for some of those
uses and ends which I have formerly showed, These Armorial Ensigns have
received approbation in the highest degree, even from the mouth of God himself
(who, when he prescribed unto Moses and Aaron a Form of ordering and conducting
the Israelites in their passage toward the Land of the Promise, did expressly
command the use of Armorial Signs, saying, Filii Israelis quisque juxta
vexillum suum cum signis secundum domum Majorum suorum castra habento: which
order he required to be observed not only in the conduction of them in their
journey, but also in the pitching and raising of their Camp.

In which precept we may observe, that God makes mention of two sorts of
Ensigns; the one general, the other particular; and that these latter were no
less needful than the former; for the orderly governing and conducting of so
huge and populous a multitude as the Israelites were, in a journey so long, and
withal subject to infinite dangers. The first sort of these Ensigns, God
calls Vexilla, that is to say Standards or Banners, which served for the
conduction of their several Regiments. For the Israelites consisted of twelve
Tribes which were divided into four Regiments; that is, to wit, three Tribes to
each Regiment, of which every one had a particular Standard, which as they
differed in color one from another, so did they doubtless comprehend in them
several and distinct Forms.

Here may arise a twofold question concerning these Standards before mentioned;
the one, what color each of them were; the other, what forms and shapes were
depicted on them. As to the color, Lyra upon the second of Numbers, says,
Qualia sunt ista Vexilla in Textu non habetur, sed dicunt aliqui Hebraei quod
Vexillum cujuslibet Tribus, erat simile colori lapidis positi in rationali, in
quo inscriptum erat nomen ipsius Reuben, and sic de aliis.

And as to their several Forms, Martinus Borhaus in his Commentary upon the
same place, has this saying, Tradunt Veteres in Reubenis vexillo Mandragoram
depictam fuisse, quam ille in agro collectam matri Liae attulerat; in Jehudae
Leonem, cui illum benedicendo pater Jacobus contulerat. In Ephraim vexillo,
Bovis species, In Danis vexillo, serpentis Imago, qui serpenti and colubro a
Jacobo comparatus erat, fiat Dan coluber in via. And in Conclusion he says,
Sit fides penes Authors.

This sort of Ensign according to Calepine, is called Vexillum quasi parvum
velum, and accipitur (says he) pro signo quo in exercitu vel class
Imperatores utuntur. The use of these Standards does consist herein, that they
being born aloft upon a long pole or staff apparent to every man's view, the
Soldiers may be thereby directed (upon all occasions of service) and by the
sight of them may be dissevered and united at all times, as the necessity of
the service shall require. Of this use, Lyra upon the second of Numbers says,
Vexilla in perticis elevantur, ut ad eorum aspectum bellatores dividantur and
uniantur: for like as a Ship is guided in the surging Seas by the Stern or
Ruther, even so are the Soldiers ordered in their Martial Exploits by their
Standard or Ensign.

The other sorts of Ensigns God calls Signa secundum domum Majorum suorum:
whereby is meant (if I be not deceived) the particular Ensigns or Tokens of
each particular Family, and of the particular persons of each Family. For so do
I understand that exposition of Lyra upon the same place, Signa propria sunt in
vestibus and scutis, quibus bellatores mutuo se cognoscunt, and suos ab
Adversariis distinguunt.

But here we must put a difference between these words Arma and Insignia, and
we must separate those things that are proper to Arms from such as pertain to
Ensigns.

Arms therefore being taken in the largest sense (as I have hitherto in this
Discourse used the word) may be said to be either Public or Private.

Such are said to be Public Arms, as have some Sovereign authority or
jurisdiction annexed to them.

Of the first sort are such Arms as are born by Emperors, Kings, and absolute
Princes, and free Estates, having Sovereign authority and power within their
several Empires, Kingdoms, and Territories. These in propriety of speech cannot
be aptly said to be the Arms of their Stock or Family, whereof they are
descended, but do rather represent the nature of Ensigns, than of Arms, in
regard of the public authority to them annexed; as also in respect that
whosoever shall succeed them in those supreme Governments shall bear the same
Arms, as the express Notes and Testimonies of such their several Jurisdictions,
though they be extracted from Aliens or foreign Families. For so neither is
the Eagle the peculiar Arms of the house of Austria, nor the Lions of the
Family of Plantagenet, nor the Flowers de Lis of the house of Valois. And these
Arms or Ensigns may no man else bear, or yet mark his Goods withal, unless it
be that in token of Loyalty he will set up the Kings Arms in his house, and
place his own Arms underneath. And there are certain Ensigns of Dignity and
Office which every man having the same Dignity or Office may lawfully bear, as
the Ensigns of a Proconsul, the Ensigns of a Bishop. And these are peculiar to
those only that have the exercising of such Dignity or Office; if any other
shall ufurp the bearing or use of them, he incurreth the crime of Forgery.
Private Arms are such as are proper to Private persons, whether they be numbered
in rank of the greater Nobility, as Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts and
Barons, having no sovereign or absolute power: or of the lesser Nobility or
Gentry, Knights, Esquires and Gentlemen; neither yet are they Ensigns of any
ordinary dignity, but peculiar to their Family, and may be infinitely
transferred to their Posterity.

For Arms or Armorial Tokens pertaining to some particular Family; do descend
to every peculiar person extracted from the same Agnation, whether they be
heirs to their Father or Grandfather, or not. Sometimes the bearers of these do
so greatly multiply, as that they are constrained for distinction sake, to
annex some apposition over and above their Paternal Coat to them descended, for
differencing the persons. Quod licitum est, sicut nomini addere praenomen,
which they may no less lawfully do, than to add a Christian name to a Surname,
to distinguish two Children issued from one Parent.

These Arms are sometimes composed of Natural things, as of some kinds of
Celestial Bodies, viz. of the Sun, Moon, Stars, etc. Sometimes of four footed
Beasts, or of Birds, or of Serpents, or of Fishes, or some other Reptiles, or
else of some kind of Vegetables, as Trees, Shrubs, Flowers, Fruits, Leaves,
etc. Or else of some solid things, as Castles, Towers, Mountains, etc. Or of
things pertaining to Arts Liberal, or Trades Mechanical, etc. Sometimes again
they are compact of none of these, but do consist only of the variations of
simple Colors, counterchanged by occasion of Transverse, Perpendicular, or
whatsoever other Line used in Coat Armor, whether the same be Straight,
Crooked, Bunched, etc. Whereby passing through the Escocheon, either Traverse,
Oblique, or Direct, the Colors become transmuted or counterchanged; of all
which I shall have occasion to speak hereafter in their particular place.

If question happen to arise touching the right of some desolate place, or
ruinated building, if in digging up the ruins, or taking up of the foundation
thereof, there be found any known Coat Armor; the questioned place shall be
adjudged to appertain to that Family, to whom that Coat Armor belongs.

If any man be attainted or convicted of Treason, for betraying his Country, or
of Heresy, to the end he should be branded with a greater note of infamy, his
Arms are rased, broken down and utterly defaced.

Sometimes it falls out that if a Noble Family be extinguished by the death
of the last of the same (deceasing without issue) whereby the bearing of the
Arms proper to that Lineage is from thenceforth abolished: The Arms are
interred in the grave, together with the Corpse of the Defunct.

After long tract of time, these Tokens which we call Arms, became
remunerations for service, and were bestowed by Emperors, Kings, and Princes,
and their Generals and chief Commanders in the field upon Martial men, whose
valorous merits even in justice, required due recompense of Honor answerable
unto their worthy acts, the remembrance whereof could not better be preserved
and derived unto posterity, than by these kinds of honorable Rewards. The
first we read of, that made this use of them was Alexander the Great, being
moved thereunto by the persuasion of Aristotle his Schoolmaster: who having
observed his magnificent mind in rewarding his Soldiers to the full of their
deserts, did at length prevail with him so much, as that he caused him to turn
the Current of his Bounty another way, and to recompense his Soldiers with
these Marks or Tokens of Honor; which he bestowed on them as Hereditary
testimonies of their glorious merits. In later Ages Charles the Fourth the
Emperor, gave Arms also unto Learned men, and such as had performed any
memorable service, or excellent work, therefore Bartholus, being a most expert
man in the Laws, and one of the Council of the said Charles the Fourth,
received in reward for his Arms from the said Emperor, this Coat Armor, viz.
Or, a Lion rampant his tail forked, Gules, which afterward descended
successively to his Children and Posterity. But Bartholus (though he were a
most singular and perfect Civilian) because he was unexperienced in Martial
Discipline, durst not at first assume the bearing of those Arms: But afterward
upon better advice he bare them, knowing how unfit it was to refuse a Reward
given by so Potent an Emperor. And this was a noble Institution of Charles the
Fourth, that not only the Skilful Professors of the Civil Laws, but the Learned
Proficients, and the Judicious Students in other Arts and Professions, might
receive remuneration for their Virtues, Honos enim alit Arts, omnesque
incenduntur ad studia glori^, Abra. Fra. page 76. And without all doubt there
is great reason that Arms should be distributed unto men renowned for their
Learning and Wisdom, who with expense, even of their Lives and Spirits in
continual Study, to enable themselves fit for to serve the Weal public at
home, by Magistracy, and Civil Government, wherein they may no less merit
reward of their Prince at home, by their politic managing of Civil Affairs,
than the Martial man abroad with his brandished slaughtering Sword; sithence
they oftentimes in their Civil Government, do prescribe limits to Martial
affairs also, how far they shall extend their power, according to that saying
of Cicero; Offic. 1. Parvi sunt foris Arma, nisi est consilium domi And this is
the cause that Arms are given for remuneration in later times, as well to
Learned and Religious men, as to Martial men; yet not so much for their valor,
as for their wisdom, and to honor them withal, according to the saying of a
certain Author, Arma dantur viris Religiosis, non propter strenuitatem, sed
propter honorem, quia honorabile est Arma portare; ut Doctor in legibus viginti
annis per legem Armorum fiet Miles, non tamen propter ejus strenuitatem, sed
propter ejus dignitatem.

The examples of these two Great Potentates before mentioned, in remunerating
their well meriting Soldiers, faithful Servants and virtuous and learned
Subjects, with these Signs or Symbols called Arms; the one, viz. Alexander the
Great, for service done in Wars; the other, namely Charles the Fourth, for
politic managing of Civil Affairs by learning and wisdom at home, have been
imitated by diverse Emperors, Kings and Princes of succeeding Ages, using
therein the ministry of the Office of Heralds; as subordinate Officers
thereunto appointed and authorized, reserving always to themselves the supreme
jurisdiction of Judging and Remunerating persons according to their Deserts;
but using the ministry of the Heralds, as for sundry other uses of great
importance in a State, so also for the inventing and devising of congruent
tokens of Honor, answerable to the merits of those that shall receive the
same: to do which although there is a power seeming absolute, committed to them
by the Sovereign; yet the same is restrained into a power ordinary, which is to
devise with discretion Arms, correspondent to the desert of the person, that
shall be thought worthy to have these honorable badges or tokens of honor
bestowed upon him.

Now sithence we have had cause here in this Chapter to make mention of a
Herald, it shall not be amiss to show what this word is, and its natural
signification.

Here-heaulte. by abbreviation (as Verstegan notes) Herault, as also Herald,
does rightly signify the Champion of the Army; and growing to be a Name of
Office, he that in the Army has the special charge to denounce Wars, or to
challenge to Battle or Combat: in which sense our name of Heraulte approaches
the nearest to Fecialis in Latin.

CHAP. II.
SO much of such Notes as are necessary to be observed for the better
understanding of these things that shall be hereafter delivered, touching the
Subject of this Work. Now we proceed to the practick exercise of these Armorial
tokens, which pertain to the function of Heralds, and is termed Armory, and may
be thus defined: Armory is an Art rightly prescribing the true knowledge and use
of Arms.

Now like as in things natural the effects do evermore immediately ensue their
causes, even so division which is a demonstration of the extent and power of
things, must by immediate consequence follow definition, which does express the
nature of the thing defined. Division is a distribution of things common, into
things particular or less common. The use thereof consists herein, that by
the assistance of this division, words of large intendment and signification,
are reduced to their definite and determinate sense and meaning, that so the
mind of the learner be not misled through the ambiguity of words, either of
manifold or uncertain interpretations. Moreover it serves to illuminate the
understanding of the learner, and to make him more capable of such things as
are delivered, Ea enim quae divisim traduntur facilius intelliguntur.

The practice hereof shall be manifested in the distribution of the skill of
Armory, with all the parts and complements thereof throughout this whole Work.

This Skill of Armory consists of Blazoning, and Marshalling.

Albeit I do here make mention of the Marshalling, or conjoyning of diverse Arms
in one Shield, or Escocheon; nevertheless, sithence it is far besides my
purpose, for the present to have further to do with them (in this place) than
only to nominate them; for distributions sake, I will reserve this kind of
Marshalling or conjoining of the Arms of distinct Families in one Escocheon,
unto a more convenient time and place, peculiarly destinated to that purpose,
and I will proceed to the explication of those things which do concern the
first member of this distribution, viz. Blazoning.

Blazon is taken, either strictly for an explication of Arms in apt and
significant terms, or else, it is taken largely for a display of the virtues of
the Bearers of Arms: in which sense Chassaneus defines the same in this
manner, Blazonia est quasi alicujus vera laudatio sub quibusdam signis,
secundum prudentiam, justitiam, fortitudinem and temperantiam. A certain French
Armorist says, that to Blazon is to express what the shapes, kinds, and color
of things born in Arms are, together with their apt significations.

Like as definitions are forerunners of divisions, even so divisions also have
precedence of rules. To speak properly of a rule, it may be said to be any
straight or level thing, whereby lines are drawn in a direct and even form. In
resemblance whereof, we here understand it, to be a brief precept or
instruction for knowing or doing of things aright, as witnesses Calepine,
saying, Regula per translationem dicitur, brevis rerum praeceptio, that is to
say, a compendious or ready instruction of matters.

Rules are taken for brief documents prescribed for the delivery, or
apprehension of some Art or Science; by these the wits and inventions of men
are much comforted and quickened, according to the saying of Seneca, Ingenii vis
praeceptis alitur and crescit, non aliter quam scintilla flatu levi adjuta,
novasque persuasiones adjicit innatis, and depravatas corrigit. The force of
wit is nourished and augmented by Rules or Precepts; like as a spark is kindled
with a soft and gentle fire, and do add new inducements and persuasions to
those that are already apprehended, and corrects such as are depraved and
vicious.

It follows therefore, by due order of consequence, that I should annex such
Rules as are peculiar to blazon in genere. For other particular Rules must be
reserved to more proper places.

The aptest Rules for this place, are these immediately following: In Blazoning
you must use an advised deliberation before you enter thereunto; for having
once begun, to recall the same, does argue an inconsiderate forwardness meriting
just reprehension.

The more compendious your Blazon is, by so much is it holden the more
commendable; Quia quod brevius est semper delectabilius habetur. Therefore you
must shun multiplicity of impertinent words in your Blazon, Frustra enim fit
per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora. But herein you must observe this
Caution, that whilst you labor to be compendious, you omit nothing material or
necessary to be expressed: For as the one does eclipse the understanding, so
the other is offensive to memory, as Aristotle notes, saying, Omnis sermo, si
sit brevior quam oportet, obscurat intellectum, si autem longior, difficile
erit retentioni.

You must take special heed to words in Blazon, for a different form in
Blazoning makes the Arms cease to be the same; Diversitas enim nominis inducet
diversitatem rei, in tantum quod nomina sunt significativa rerum.

You must not be too full of conceits in Blazon, nor overforward in speech.

You must use no iteration or repetition of words in Blazoning of one Coat:

Especially of any of these four words, viz. Of, Or, And, With.
For the doubling of any of these, is counted a great fault, insomuch as the
offender herein is deemed unworthy to Blazon a Coat Armor.

In Blazoning you must have regard of the things that are born in Arms: as also
whereunto they may be resembled, whether they be natural or artificial, and so
to commend them accordingly.

In the Blazoning of any Coat, you must evermore observe this special Rule.
First to begin with the Field, and then proceed to the Blazon of the Charge, if
any be. Moreover, if the Field be occupied with sundry things, whether the same
be of one or diverse kinds, you must first nominate that which lies next and
immediately upon the Field, and then Blazon that which is more remote from the
same. What Field and Charge are shall be showed in their proper places; Interim
oportet discentem credere.

Chassaneus holds, that where the Chief of an Escocheon is of one color or
metal, or more, you shall blazon the Chief first; but I hold it more consonant
to reason, to begin with the Field (because of the priority thereof in nature,
as also in respect that it is the Continent) rather than with the Charge, which
is the thing contained, and so consequently last in nature. Nevertheless the
French Armorists for the most part do blazon the Charge first, and the Field
after, which is a course merely repugnant to nature; by whose prescript order,
the place must have precedence of the thing placed, and the continent of the
thing contained: wherefore our Heralds manner of blazon is more agreeable to
reason than theirs. There be diverse forms of blazon: A certain Dutchman, who
lived in the time of King Henry the Fifth, used to blaze Arms by the principal
parts of man's body, as Ab. Fra. writes, page 63. Malorques, a Frenchman, made
use of flowers for this purpose. Faucon, an Englishman, who lived in the time
of King Edward the Third, performed it by the days of the week. But in former
times their Predecessors used only these three kinds following: first, by
Metals and Colors; secondly, by precious Stones; and thirdly, by the Celestial
Planets. Out of which sundry forms, I have made choice of these three last
which are most ancient and necessary, in respect that these, above all other,
do best fit my purpose; which is, to apply to each particular state of Gentry,
a blazon Correspondent. As for example, to Gentlemen having no title of
dignity, blazon by Metals and Colors: to persons ennobled by the Sovereign, by
precious Stones: and to Emperors, Monarchs, Kings and Princes, blazon by
Planets.

The two last of these three selected forms are not to be used in the blazoning
of the Coat-Armours of Gentlemen that are not advanced to some degree of
Nobility, unless they be rarely qualified, or of special desert.

These selected forms of blazon, do seem to imply a necessity of their
invention; to the end that as well by blazon, as by degree, Noblemen might be
distinguished from Gentlemen, and persons of Majesty, from those of Noble
Lineage, that so a due Decorum may be observed in each Degree, according to the
Dignity of their Persons; for that it is a thing unfitting, either to handle a
mean Argument in a lofty style, or a stately Argument in a mean.

CHAP. III.
SO much of the Definition and general Rules of Blazon. Now will I proceed to
the distribution thereof.

The principal means of teaching, and the chief part of Method consists in
distinction, therefore in the explanation or unfolding of this Fabric of Arms
or Armorial Signs, I will use some manifest kind of distribution.

The blazon of Arms consists in their Accidents, and Parts.

I call those notes or marks Accidents of Arms, that have no inherent quality
or participation of the Substance or Essence of them, but may be annexed unto
them, or taken from them, their Substance still remaining; for so does
Porphyrius define the same, saying, Accidens potest adesse and abesse sine
subjecti interitu. Accidents may be said to be Cosin-germans to Nothing: For
so, after a sort, does Aristotle reckon of them, saying, Accidens videtur esse
propinquum non enti, Metaph. 6. For they have no being of themselves, but as
they are in things of being, or annexed to them. As the same Author further
notes, Metaph. 7. Accidentia non sunt entia, nisi quia sunt entis.

Accidents and Forms do agree in this point, that both the one and the other of
them being separated from the Substance, yet is not the Substance thereby
altered from that it was, but remains still the same; which occasioned many
men to think that Forms were Accidents. These cannot alter the matter or
substance, because they are not of the main, but come upon the by, as it were.
Nihil enim transmutat materiam, nisi sit in materia.

Accidents are in the subject,, as passio in patiente, according to that
saying, Accidens ut est in subjecto, non idem est in subjecto, sed ut est
passio ejus, est sibi idem.

Such Accidents as are here meant are these, viz. Tincture, and Differences.

Tincture is a variable hue of Arms, and is common, as well to Differences of
Arms, as to the Arms themselves.

And the same is distributed into Colors, and Furrs.

Color may be said to be an external die, wherewith any thing is colored or
stained, or else it may be said to be the gloss of a Body beautified with light.

And the Color here mentioned is both General, and Special.

By general Color, I understand the proper and natural color of each
particular thing, whether the same be Natural or Artificial, of what kind
soever that are depicted and set forth in their external and proper beauty. In
this respect all colors whatsoever (without exception) may seem to pertain to
this Art, for so much as there is nothing in this world subjected to the sight
of man, but either is, or aptly may be born in Arms; so spacious and general is
the scope of Armory. In blazoning of things born in their natural or proper
color, you shall only term them to be born proper, which is a blazon
sufficient for things of that kind, and well fitting their property or nature,
for there are no terms of blazon allowed to things born after that sort.

By special Colors, I mean such colors, as by a certain peculiar propriety
(as it were) do belong to this Art of Armory.

These are both Simple, and Mixed.

Simple Colors are those, whose existence is of such absolute perfection (in
their kind) as that they need not the participation of any other color to make
them absolute, but do communicate their natural qualities to all other colors,
to make them perfect, in which respect they are called elementa coloris, as
shall be showed hereafter.

And those are White, and Black.

To these in right belongs the first place amongst colors, because in the
order of nature they were before all other colors: Priora enim sunt compositis
incomposita: and are of Aristotle called Elementa colorum, saying, Albus and
niger sunt elementa colorum mediorum. Only White and Black are accounted simple
Colors, because all other colors whatsoever are raised either of an equal or
unequal mixture or composition of these two, which are (as I may term them)
their common parents. These are said to be the common parents of all other
colors, in respect they have their original being from these, either in an
equal or disproportionable mixture. Therefore I will begin with them, and so
proceed to the rest that we call colores medii, in respect of their
participation of both. Now for as much as practice is the scope of Doctrines
(to the end those things that are, or shall be delivered, may be the better
conceived or born in memory) I have thought good to manifest them by particular
examples of ocular demonstration, in the plainest manner that I can devise,
Quia qualis est rerum demonstratio, talis futura est hominum scientia.

Examples and Demonstrations are of great power and efficacy to illustrate and
bring things to light, wherein brevity, the prop and aid of memory and sweet
companion of facility, is highly commended, as Farnesius notes, saying, Nihil
est ad res illuminandas illustrius exemplis, in quibus brevitas adjutrix
memoriae, facilitatis socia, semper est commendata.

White is a color that consists of very much light, as it is of Scribonius
defined, Albedo est color simplex in corpore tenuiore multa luminositate
constans: to which Black is contrary. Note, as colors may be resembled to
things of greatest Nobility or Reputation, so is their worthiness accounted of
accordingly.

The color White is resembled to the light, and the dignity thereof reckoned
more worthy than the Black, by how much the light and the day is of more esteem
than darkness and the night, whereunto black is likened. Furthermore, white is
accounted more worthy than black, in respect of the more worthy use thereof.
For men in ancient time were accustomed to note things well and laudably
performed (and esteemed worthy to be kept in memory) with white, and
contrariwise, whatsoever was holden reproachful or dishonorable, was noted
with black, as the Poet notes, saying, Quae laudanda forent, and quae culpanda
vicissim,
Illa prius creta, mox haec carbone notasti.


Moreover, white challenges the precedence of black (according to Vpton) in
respect of the priority of time, for that it was in nature before black, which
is a deprivation thereof: Like as darkness, whereunto black is resembled, is an
exemption of light, Omnis enim privatio praesupponit habitum. Finally, Vpton
prefers white before black, in regard that white is more easily discerned,
and further seen in the Field.

This color is most commonly taken in Blazon for the metal Silver, and is
termed Argent, wheresoever the same is found, either in Field or Charge. This
metal represents Water, which (next to the Air) is the noblest of all the
Elements, and in Armory it is termed Argent, for that it approaches near to
the Luminary Bodies. To this metal is given the second place next to Gold, in
regard that the Armory cannot be good, that has not in it either Gold or
Silver: It also, for another cause, bare the resemblance of Water, which
scoureth, cleanses, and puts away all filth and uncleanness: For in Blazon
it betokens innocence, cleanness of life and chastity; amongst Complexions it
is likened to phlegm. As for the esteem of this metal Silver, we may observe in
all Ages, that Emperors, Kings, and Princes had, and yet have, their Vessels
of chief use of Silver. As for the abundance of this metal, you may read 2 Chronicles. 9. how every man brought unto Solomon presents, being Vessels of Silver
and Vessels of Gold, and Raiment and Armor, and sweet Odors, Horses and Mules
from year to year. And the King gave Silver in Jerusalem as Stones, etc. Such
was the plentiful abundance of this metal in the days of Solomon. In
composition of Arms, it is accounted a fault worthy blame to Blazon this
otherwise than Argent; but in doubling of Mantles it is not so taken: for
therein it is not understood to be a metal, but the skin or furr of a little
Beast called a Lituite, so named (as I conceive) of Lithuania, now called
Luten, a part of Sarmatia, confining upon Polonia. This Furr has been
heretofore much used by the ancient Matrons of the honorable City of London,
even by those that were of the chiefest account, who ware the same in a kind of
Bonnet, called corruptly a Lettice Cap.

Black is a color contrary to White, having little participation of light, and
is of Scribonius thus defined, Nigredo est color in corpore crassiori exiguae
luminositatis particeps. Whereby it is apparent that black is of less
perfection than white. For what thing soever there is that has in it either
light or heat, or else a life, either Animal or Vegetable, the same being once
extinct, the thing it self becomes forthwith black, which is said to be the
color of horror and destruction; for which respect mourning Garments are made
of that color, that does most significantly represent the horror of death and
corruption, Farnes. 3. 104. This color is called in blazon Sable, of the Latin
word Sabulum, which signifies gross sand or gravel, in respect of the heavy
and earthy substance, wherein it abounds above all others. And this color is
reputed far inferior in dignity to white, and is likened to darkness, called
in Latin Tenebrae, eo quod teneant, id est, impediant oculos, and visum
prohibeant. Note that the rest of those special colors before mentioned,
besides white and black, are called Colores medii, for that they have their
primary Essence from these, either by an equal or uneven concorporation or
mixture of these two together: and in regard of these two extremes, from which
they have their being, cannot properly be called Colores, nisi per
participationem. This color is in Heraldry blazoned Sable, and is expressed in
Graving by lines hatched cross each other.

Now as touching Colores medii, or mixed Colors, it is to be understood that
they are raised by the contemperation or mixture of the two Simples formerly
handled, as may appear by the Definition of Scribonius, who says, Mixtus color
est, qui ex Simplicium contemperatione producitur.

All mixed or midling Colors, that we call Colores medii, are reckoned more
Noble, or Ignoble, by participation; that is to say, as they do partake more or
less of the nobility of white, which is resembled to light; or of black, which
has a resemblance of darkness, or deprivation of light.

Of these according to Scribonius, some are Exactly compounded of both Simples.
Declining more to the one than to the other, in an unequal proportion.


That Color which is said to be exactly compounded, does participate of the
two Simples indifferently in a just proportion, as Red; which Scribonius thus
defines, Rubedo est color aequali simul Albediuis and Nigrediuis combinatione
constans. Amongst Colors (next after Metals) this Color, Vermilion, or Red,
has the prime place, forasmuch as it represents the Fire, which of all other
Elements, is the most lightsome, and approaches nearest to the quality and
virtue of the Sun: In regard whereof it was ordained, That none should bear
this Color (which betokens nobleness of Courage, and valorous magnanimity)
but persons of honorable birth and rank, and men of special desert. This
color inciteth courage and magnanimity in persons that do grapple together in
single or public fight. We read, that those that strengthened their Battles
with Elephants, when they would provoke them to fight, they produced before
them resemblances of this martial Color, as the blood of Grapes and of
Mulberies. This Color is likened to the precious Rubie. Amongst Virtues it is
compared to magnanimity or boldness of Courage. And amongst the Complexions it
is resembled to Choler. In Armory it is called Gules. And it is expressed in
Graving by Lines drawn straight down the Escocheon.

This Color is bright Yellow, which is compounded of much White, and a little
Red, as if you should take two parts of White, and but one of Red. This color
in Arms is blazed by the name of Or, which is as much to say as Aurum, which is
Gold: And it is commonly called Gold Yellow, because it does lively represent
that most excellent Metal, the possession whereof inchanteth the hearts of
Fools, and the color whereof blinds the eyes of the Wise. Of the excellency
of this Metal, Hesiodus has this saying: Aurum est Corporibus sicut Sol inter
Stellas. And therefore such is the worthiness of this Color, which does
resemble it, that (as Christine de Pice holds) none ought to bear the same in
Arms, but Emperors and Kings, and such as be of the Blood Royal, though indeed
it be in use more common. And as this Metal exceeds all other in value,
purity, and fineness, so ought the Bearer (as much as in him lies) endeavor
to ^urpass all other in Prowess and Virtue. It is expressed in Graving by
Pricks or Points.

This Color is Green, which consists of more Black, and of less Red, as
appears by the Definition; Viridis est color Nigredine copiosiore, and
Rubedine minore contemperatus. This Color is blazoned Vert, and is called in
Latin Viridis, a vigore, in regard of the strength, freshness, and liveliness
thereof; and therefore best resembles youth, in that most Vegetables, so long
as they flourish, are beautified with this verdure: and is a Color most
wholesome and pleasant to the eye, except it be in a young Gentlewomans Face.
This Color is expressed in Graving by Lines drawn toward the right hand.

Blew is a Color which consists of much Red, and of little White, and does
represent the Color of the Sky in a clear Sunshining day. This in Blazon is
termed Azure. Coeruleus color, a Coelo dictus est, quod tanquam solers and
diligens nescit otiari. Farnes. 2. 18. In Graving, this Color is expressed by
Lines drawn cross the Shield.

Purpure is a Color that consists of much Red, and of a small quantity of
Black, and is thus defined; Purpureus color est, qui a multa Rubedine, and
pauciore Nigredine commiscetur. Chassaneus having formerly handled those former
six Colors, viz. White, Black, Red, Yellow, Green, and Blew, says, that of
them all (being compounded and mixed together according to proportion) this
Purpure Color is raised. This Color usually has no other name in Blazon.

Purpure Color has some resemblance of a withered red Rose, which after long
gathering, the glorious luster thereof fading, becomes somewhat blackish, as
if it were a proportionable commixture of Red and Black together. This Color
has its Denomination of a certain Fish called in Latin Purpura, a kind of
Shellfish, whereof in times past, great store have been found near to that
famous City of Tyrus, situated next to the Seacoast in the Country of
Phoeuicia: this kind of Fish has in the mouth of it an excellent and precious
liquor, or juice, of singular use in dying of ^loaths, the invention and use
whereof was first found out by the Tyrians, for which cause this Color is
called Tyrius Color. They must be taken alive, and that chiefly in the Spring
Season, at which time the juice is most plentiful in them at other Seasons it
is more scarce: They are gathered alive, and cast together on a heap, that so
by their continual motion they may vent out this rich liquor together with
their spirit, which done in some near place or other provided for the clean
keeping thereof, it is taken up and spared for necessary purposes. This Color,
in ancient time, was of that precious esteem, as that none but Kings and
Princes, and their Favorites, might wear the same, as we may see, Dan. 5. 16.
Now if thou can read the writing, and show me the interpretation thereof,
thou shall be clothed with Purple, and shall have a chain of Gold about thy
neck. Also, 1 Macchab. 10. 20. And Alexander sent Jonathan a Purple Robe, and a
Crown of Gold. And again; When his Accusers saw his Honor as it was
proclaimed, and that he was clothed in Purple, they fled all away. Hereof
(perhaps) it comes that this Color is found of so rare use in Armorial Signs.
Moreover it is said; And the King commanded that they should take off the
Garment of Jonathan, and cloth him in Purple, and so they did, 1 Macchab. 10.
62.

Tawny (says Leigh) is a Color of Worship, and of some Heralds it is called
Brusk, and is most commonly born of French Gentlemen, but very few do bear it
in England. In Blazon it is known by the name of Ten. It is (says he) the
surest Color that is (of so bright a hue, being compounded) for it is made of
two bright Colors, which are Red and Yellow: neither shall you have any Color
so made among all that may be devised; and not to be stainand.

The last of the seven mixed Colors, we do commonly call Murrey, but in
Blazon, Sanguine, and is (as most truly says Leigh) a Princely Color, being
indeed one of the Colors appertaining of ancient time to the Prince of Wales.
It is a Color of great estimation, and very stately, and is in use in certain
Robes of the Knights of the Bath. Some Heralds, of approved Judgment, do hardly
admit these two last mentioned for Colors of Fields, in regard they are
reckoned Stainand Colors. Yet some Coats of Arms there are, and those of
reverend Antiquity, whose Fields are of those Colors, for which respect they
have been allowed for Colors of Fields, as Sir John Fern, in his Glory of
Generosity, notes. This kind of bearing, Leigh does instance in two English
Gentlemen of ancient Houses, that have of long time born Tawny in their Arms;
the one of them he names Hounzaker, and the other Finers.

I have purposely, for the avoiding of prolixity, omitted here to speak of the
Elements, Virtues and Complexions which every one of these Metals and Colors
are respectively resembled unto, because Fern, in his Blazon of Gentry, has a
large Discourse of the same subject, to which I referr the Reader.

CHAP. IV.
HItherto of Colors and Metals: Now of Furrs, according to the Series and
Course of our Distribution before delivered, page 10.

Furrs (used in Arms) are taken for the Skins of certain Beasts, stripped from
the Bodies, and artificially trimmed, for the furring, doubling, or lining of
Robes and Garments, serving as well for State and Magnificence, as for wholesome
and necessary use. And these thus trimmed and employed, are called in Latin
pellicei, a pellendo, of driving away, (quite contrary in sense, though like in
sound, to pellices, a pellicendo, for drawing all to them) because they do
repel and resist the extremities of cold, and preserve the Bodies that are
covered with them in good temperature.

These are used as well in doublings of the Mantles pertaining to Coat-Armours,
as in the Court-Armours themselves.

Furrs do consist either of One color alone, or, More colors than one.

That Furr that consists of one Color alone, is White, which in doubling is
taken for the Lituits Skin, before spoken of, p. 11. An example whereof we have
in this Escocheon. Some perhaps will expect, that in the handling of these
Furrs, I should pursue the order of Gerard Leigh, who gives the pre-eminence
of place unto Ermyn, for the dignity and riches thereof: but that form suiteth
neither with the Method that I have prefixed to my self; nor yet with the Order
of Nature, which ever prefers Simples before Compounds, because of their
priority in time: For as Aristotle says, Priora sunt compositis incomposita:
which order, as it is of all other the most reasonable, certain, and
infallible, so do I endeavor by all means to conform my self, in these my poor
Labors, thereunto: Natura enim regitur ab intelligentia non errante. Note that
this, and all other the Examples following throughout this Chapter (as they are
here placed) must be understood to be doublings or linings of Robes, or Mantles
of State, or other Garments, wherein (according to Leigh) they all have one
general Name, and are called Doublings; but in Escocheons they are called by
Nine proper and several Names. What those Mantles are, shall be showed
hereafter, when I come to the handling of the second Member of Division before
made. In the blazoning of Arms, this Color is evermore termed Argent, unless
it be in the description of the Arms of one that is Reus Laesae Majestatis: but
being a doubling, it is no offense (says Christine de Pice) to call it White,
because therein it is to be understood only as a Furr or Skin.

Furrs consisting of more than one Color, are either of Two Colors, or, More
than two.

Such Furrs as are compounded of two Colors only, are sorted either. with
Black, and are either Black mixed with white, as Ermyn, and Ermyns. or, Black
mixed with Yellow, as Ermynois and Pean.
or without Black; such are, according to Leigh, Verrey, sez. A. and B. and
Verrey, Or, and Vert.



Knowledge is no way better or more readily attained than by Demonstration:
Scire enim est per demonstrationem intelligere, says Aristotle. I will
therefore give you particular example of their several Bearings.

Ermyn is a Furr consisting of White, distinguished with black spots. Albane
Earl of Britain, unto whom William the Conqueror gave the Earldom of Richmond,
and Honor of Middlesham, bore this Coat. You must Blazon this by the name of
Ermyn, and not Argent powdered with Sable. This is the Skin of a little Beast,
less than a Squirrel (says Leigh) that has his being in the Woods of the Land
of Armenia, whereof he takes his name. The tail thereof is of a Thumbs length,
which is of color brown. The Egyptians did propose this little Beast for an
Hieroglyphick of Chastity, Farnes. lib. 2. fol. 15. So greatly is this little
Beast affected unto cleanness, as that she had rather expose her self to the
hazard of being killed, or taken by the Hunters, than she would pollute her
Coat with the filth of the Bird-lime laid before the entrance of the Cave to
take her at her going in. Leigh, in the former part of his Accidence, fol. 132.
seems therein to contradict himself, in that he affirms Ermyn to be no
Color, but a Compound with a Metal, and serves as Metal only. For mine own
part, I do not see how in doubling of Mantles it should be reckoned a Metal,
for that all doublings or linings of Robes and Garments, though perhaps not
altogether, yet chiefly are ordained for the repelling of cold and weathers
drift: to which use Metals are most unfit, as King Dionysius declared, when
coming into a Church where the Images were attired in most rich golden Robes,
he took them away, saying, Such Garments were too cold for Winter, and to heavy
for Summer. A fair pretense to cloak his Sacrilegious Avarice. The same Author
in his said Accidence, fol. 75. making mention of this Furr, takes occasion to
commend a late prescribed order for the distribution of this rich and rare
Furr, according to the dignity of the persons to whom the wearing thereof is
allowed, which is this; That an Emperor, a King, or a Prince, may have the
powdering in their Apparel as thick set together as they please: a Duke may
have in his Mantles cape, only four Raungs or Ranks of them: a Marquis three
Raungs and a half: an Earl a cape of three Raungs only. In some Coats these are
numbered, but then they extend not to the number of ten. These rows or ranks
before named are of some Authors called Timbers of Ermyn: for no man under the
degree of a Baron, or a Knight of the most honorable Order of the Garter, may
have his Mantle doubled with Ermyn.

This is that other Furr, before mentioned, to consist of a mixture of White
and Black, and has some resemblance of the former: but differs in this; that
where that is composed of White powdered with black; contrariwise this is Black
powdered with White. But neither in that, nor in this, shall you make any
mention in Blazon of any such Mixtures, but only use the name appropriated to
either of them, which does sufficiently express the manner of their composition
to the understanding of those that are but meanly skilled in Blazon; the name
peculiarly allotted to this Furr, is Ermyns.

Mr. Boswell is of this Opinion, That Ermyn and Ermyns ought never to be sorted
in Arms with the Metal of their color, because (says he) they are but Furrs,
and have no proper Blazon with any Metal. Yet does he particularly Blazon the
Coat of Walcot, fol. 106. in the Achievement of the Right Honorable Lord, Sir
William Cecil Knight, late Lord Treasurer of England, where he might fitly have
taken exception against such bearing, if he could have produced any good ground
for warranting such his Opinion; in default whereof he there passes the same
over with silence, knowing that Antiquity and Custom (which has the vigor of
a Law, where there is no Law written) are powerful in things of this nature: he
secretly relinquisheth his Opinion, forasmuch as it is manifest, that not only
Walcot, but Kingsmell, and many others, both ancient and modern, have used such
bearing without contradiction.

Of those Furrs before mentioned, that are compounded of Yellow and Black, this
is the first, and is termed in blazon, Ermynois, whose Ground or Field is
Yellow, and the Powdrings Black. Though this be rich in Arms (says Leigh) yet
in doubling it is not so rich. Of the use of this Furr, Bara makes mention in
his Book, entitled, Le Blazon des Armoiries, p. 14. and Edel. Hiryssen, in his
Book, entitled, Le Iardyn d' Armoiries, in the Arms of Leefwelt.

This is that other Furr composed of the same Colors, but disposed in a
contrary manner to the former; for whereas that consists of Yellow powdered
with Black, this is Black powdered with Yellow; and in Blazon is termed Pean.

These are other sorts of Furrs or Doublings, consisting also of two only
Colors, which as they are much different in form, so do they also receive a
diverse Blazon from these before specified, which are these that follow, and
their like.

He bears Verrey, Or and Gules, by the name of Ferrers, and is the Coat of
Io. Ferrers of Walton upon Trent in Derbyshire, Esquire. In Coats of this sort
of bearing, in case where it may be holden doubtful whether should have the
precedence, the Color or the Metal; the Metal must have the preeminence as the
most worthy. The French men, from whom we do borrow our terms of Blazon, do
call all sorts of Doublings or Furrs of this form, by the name of Vaire^
perhaps, Quia ex diversis coloribus alternatim variantur. To this sort of
bearing, there are no other terms of Blazon allowed. If your Vaire does consist
of Argent and Azure, you must in Blazon thereof, say only, He bears Vaire;
and it suffices: but if it be composed of any other Colors, then you must
say, He bears Vaire of these or those Colors. The Latin Blazoners, making
mention of this sort of bearing, do thus describe them, Portat arma variata ex
pellibus albis and caeruleis, accounting them for Skins of little Beasts. For
that in ancient times they were used for linings of Robes, and Mantles of
Senators, Consuls, Emperors and Kings, and thereupon are skilfully termed
Doublings. Of this use of them, Alex. ab Alex. Genial. dierum, lib. 5. fol.
285. says, Legimus Caligulam depictas penulas induisse.

Sometimes it was permitted to men grown to years, to use a kind of short
Cloak, called Penula, in time of wars, though it were in substance but slight
and thin: For Alexander Severus the Emperor, in favor of aged men, did grant
them a Privilege for wearing of this kind of Garments: Wolf. Lazius, lib. 8.
The Garments of the Tribune of the People, and of the Plebeian Sect, were most
commonly this Penula before mentioned; like as also was Sagum, which was a
Soldiers Cloak or Cassock, and Endromis, which was an hairy Garment much like
an Irish Mantle and Hood. These were apt Garments for repelling of Cold. These
were not Habits beseeming an Emperor, or chief Commander to wear; nevertheless
we read that Caligula ware oftentimes Depictas Penulas, Alex. lib. 5. Amongst
the rest this is to be observed, That Consuls were habited sometimes in
Coat-Armors, called Paludamenta, and sometimes in Kirtles called Trabeae, which
was a kind of Garment worn by Kings under their Mantles of State. So that they
were sometimes said to be Trabeati, and sometimes to be Paludati, according to
these several Habits. Also the Lictores were Officers that usually attended
these Consuls, and were like unto Sergeants, or Ministers appointed to inflict
corporal punishment upon Offenders, and were most commonly in number Twelve.
These also attended the Consul to the wars, invested also with Coat Armor.

Concerning those Depictae Penulae formerly mentioned, they are said to have
been in use with Emperors of later Ages, that were addicted to wantonness and
delicacy, whereof Tranquillus in Caligula, writes in this manner, Vestitu,
calceatuque and caetero habitu, neque patrio, neque anili, ac ne virili quidem,
ac denique non humano semper usus est: saepe depictas gemmatasque Penulas
indutus. Wolf. Lazius in Comment. Reip. lib. 8. 857. If you observe the
proportion of this Vaire, you shall easily discern the very shape of the Case
or Skin of little Beasts in them; for so did ancient Governors and Princes of
the World (says Sir John. Fern in Lac. Nob. page 68.) line their pompous
Robes with Furr of diverse Colors, sewing one Skin to another, after the
plainest fashion. There is yet another kind of Furrs much differing from all
other the Furrs before expressed, not only in shape, but in name also, as in
Example.

This sort of Furr or Doubling was (as Leigh notes) of some old Heralds called
Varry Cuppy, and Varry Tassa, which (says he) is as much to say, as a Furr of
Cups; but himself calls it Meire, for so he reckons it well Blazoned, very
ancient, and a Spanish Coat. But I hold it better Blazoned, Potent
counterpotent, for the resemblance it has of the Heads of Crowches, which
Chaucer calls Potents, Quia potentiam tribuunt infirmis, as appears in his
Description of Old Age, in the Romant of the Rose.

So eld she was that she ne went
A foot, but it were by potent.
So much of Furrs consisting of two Colors only: now of such as are composed
of more than two Colors, according to the Division before delivered.

Such are these, and their like, viz. Ermynites. Vaire of many Colors.


This, at the first sight, may seem to be all one with the second Furr, before
in this Chapter expressed, but differs in this, that herein is added one hair
of Red on each side of every of these Powderings. And as this differs little
in shape and show from the second Furr, named Ermyn; so does it not much differ
from the same in name, that being called Ermyn, and this Ermynites.

The other Furr that is composed of more than two Colors, is formed of four
several Colors at the least, as in Example.

This differs much from all the other Furrs, and (according to Leigh) must be
blazoned Vaire; this is composed of four distinct colors, viz. Argent, Gules,
Or, and Sable. Here I will note unto you a general Rule that you must carefully
observe, not only in the blazoning of these Furrs, but generally of all
Coat-Armours, viz. that you describe them so particularly and plainly, as who
so hears your Blazon, may be able to trick or express the form and true
portraiture thereof, together with the manner of bearing, no less perfectly,
than if he had done it by some pattern thereof laid before him.

Although I have here in the Blazon of this kind of Furr, as also in the Table
of this first Section put a difference between these three words, Vaire,
Verrey, and Varrey, in ascribing to every one of these a particular property in
the Blazon of Furrs differing in Metals and Colors; in which I must confess, I
have followed Leigh; yet I do for my own part rather agree with Sir John Fern,
who in the 86. page of his Book entitled Lacy's Nobility, writes, That there
is no other blazon allowed to a Doubling or Furr of this nature, than only
Vaire, or variated; for which word variated I have observed, that our English
Blazoners use Verrey, from the French Masculine participle, vaire; and Sir John
Fern there further says, That these differences of terms, Verrey, Varrey, and
Vaire, are mere fantasies of Leigh his Blazon, and newly by him devised,
without any authority of Writers to infer the same: And that before Leigh his
time, all Authors had called this sort of Furr or Doubling, Vaire: And if it be
varied, or composed of Argent and Azure, then it is so caled, and no Colors
named: but if it consist of any other Color, then it is blazoned Vaire, of
such and such Colors. And I shall hereafter in this my present Edition, always
blazon a Furr of this nature, of what Metal and Colors soever composed, yea,
although it consist of two Metals and two Colors, Vaire or Verrey, always
naming the Metal and Color, except it consists of Argent and Azure: And thus
concluding the Chapter of Tinctures, being the first kind of Accidents of Arms,
I will now go on to the second sort.

CHAP. V.
HAving hitherto handled the first part of the distribution before delivered
touching the Accidents, viz. Tincture: I will now go forward to handle that
other member of the same, namely, Differences; showing first what Differences
are; and so proceed in order to the Division of them.

But before I proceed to the definition and division of them, it is not
unnecessary to observe, That Arms may be resembled to Arithmetical numbers, for
like as in numbers, the addition, or subtraction of an unity, makes the said
number to receive a diverse form from that it has before; in like manner by
the apposition to, or exemption of any one thing from the Coat Armor, be it
either difference, or whatsoever else, the Coat Armor is not the same, but
varieth from that it was before. This variation (occasioned by the addition or
exemption of some adventitious thing) nevertheless alters not the substance
of the Coat Armor, but makes the same to differ in form only from that it was
before; for these adventitious Appositions are of the nature of Accidents,
whose property is Adesse and abesse sine subjecti corruptione; as I have
formerly shown out of Porphyrius, p. 16.

Differences have no existence of themselves, but are of the quality of
Adjectives, which need the aid and support of some substantive, to be annexed
to them, and were devised, for the distinguishing of Coat Armor, of particular
persons, of one and the same family each from other among themselves, according
to that saying of Chass. Differentia sunt quaedam aceidentia per se non
existentia, quae inducunt diversitatem separativam, per quam dignoscuntur talia
Arma, in quibus sunt inserta, ab armis alterius. But I will proceed to the
definition and division of Differences.

Differences are extraordinary additaments, whereby Bearers of the same
Coat Armor are distinguished each from other, and their nearness to the
principal Bearer is Demonstrated.

Of Differences some are Ancient, Modern.


Those I call ancient Differences, that were used in ancient time for the
distinguishing, not only of one Nation or Tribe from another, but also to note
a diversity between particular persons, descended out of one Family, and from
the same Parents. Such are Bordures and Imborduring of all sorts. The Bordures
that were annexed unto Coat-Armours, in the beginning were plain, and (in all
likelihood) were of some one of the Colors or Meals before spoken of: But
afterward in process of time (by reason of the multiplication of Persons and
of Families) men were constrained to devise other sorts of Bordures, to induce
a variety, whereby each particular person might be distinctly known, and
differenced ab omnibus and singulis ejusdem domus and familiae. Of these there
are diverse forms, as by these examples following may appear.

The first devised Bordures were born plain, after the manner of this, which is
thus blazoned. He bears Argent, a bordure Gules. Here you shall not need to
mention the plainness of the bordure; for when you say a bordure of this or
that color or metal, and no more, then it is always understood to be plain,
albeit the same be not so expressed. But if it have any other form than plain,
in such case you must not omit to make express mention of the fashion thereof.

The plain Bordure, used for differing of Coat Armor, is resembled to those
Fimbria's, or Bordures, that Almighty God, by the mouth of his Servant Moses,
commanded the Israelites to wear about the skirts of their Garments, to put
them in mind of their duties touching their observation of his Precepts; In
respect that the people were yet rude, and unexercised in obedience, therefore
was this Ordinance prescribed unto them; as St. Hierom notes in these words:
Rudi adhuc populo, and hominibus ad obedientiam insuetis, per Moysen imperatur
a Domino: ut in signum memoriae quod praecepta Domini recordentur, per singulas
vestimentorum fimbrias habeant cum cocco Hyacinthini coloris Insignia, ut etiam
casu huc illucque respicientibus oculis, mandatorum Coelestium memoria
nascatur. Of these Bordures were the Pharisees reproved by Christ, because they
perverted the use thereof, by wearing them, not for the putting of them in mind
of the observation of Gods Precepts, but for a bravery, and their own vain
ostentation, and to the end they would seem more strict and severe observers of
Gods Precepts, than others were.

The Content of the Bordures (says Leigh) is the fifth part of the Field. Also
it is to be observed, that when the Field and the Circumference or Tract about
the same, drawn (as in this example) be both of one Metal, Color or Furr, then
shall you not term it a Bordure, but you shall say, that he bears such Metal,
Color or Furr imbordured. Leigh reckons this sort of imborduring here spoken
of, to be of the number of Differences of Brethren; but Bartol (says he) has
committed the distribution thereof to the Heralds.

Before I proceed to the Compound Bordures above specified, I will give some
few Examples of other several forms of simple Bordures; ( Quia simplicia priora
fuerunt compositis) as follows.

He bears Sable, a Bordure ingrailed, Argent. This word ingrailed, is derived
from the Latin word Ingredior, which signifies to enter, or go in: Quia ista
linea ex qua conficitur Bordura, Campum plus aequo ingrediatur. Or else it is
derived of Gradus, which signifies a step or degree, and thereof it is called
a Bordure ingrailed; Quia (as Vpton notes) ejus color gradatim infertur in
Campum Armorum.

The next sort of Bordure that I will note unto you, is a Bordure invecked; and
the same is formed as appears in this next Escocheon.

This Bordure is formed merely contrary to the last precedent, and is blazoned
in this manner. He bears Or, a Bordure invecked, Gules. As the former does
dilate it self by way of incroaching into the Field, contrariwise this does
contract it self by inversion of the points into it self; in regard whereof (it
seems) it receives his denomination, and is called Invecked, of the Latin
word Inveho, which signifies, To carry in: Qv^a ipsa linea gibbosa, in
borduram plus aequo invehatur.

This Bordure differs in form from both the other, and is thus blazoned; he
bears Gules, a Bordure indented, Argent. Mr. Wyrly, in his Book entitled,
The true use of Arms, treating of the honorable life, and languishing death of
Sir John de Gralhye, Capitol de Buz, and one of the Knights elected at the
first foundation of the Garter, by that victorious King Edward the Third, does
therein make mention of one Sir Perducas Dalbreth, to whom this Coat Armor did
properly appertain, and describes the same in this manner.

Sir Perducas Dalbreth to the French returned,
Who Guly Shield about his neck did fling,
Wrapped with dent Bordure silver shining.
This Bordure is said to be indented, because it seems to be composed (as it
were) of Teeth, whereof the same has a resemblance as well in property as in
form: For Teeth (especially those of Beasts of ravenous kind, or of prey) have
that part of their Teeth next to their Gums, broad and strong, and their points
sharp, after the manner above specified; and they are called in Latin, Dentes a
demendo (as Isidorus notes) which signifies to take away or diminish, Quia
aliquid de cibis semper demunt. In the same manner also do every of these
Indentings, entering into the Field, lessen and take away some part of them as
they go.

Note that all sorts of Bordures are subject to charging with things, as well
Artificial, as Natural; as by examples following, in part shall appear; wherein
I purpose not to be curious, either in their number, or yet in their order; but
as they shall come to hand, so will I set them down in their proper places.

Hitherto of Bordures simple. Now of such as are compounded, as follows:

He bears Azure, a Bordure counter-componed, Or, and Gules; which is as much
to say, as compounded of these two Colors counterly placed. Note that
Counter-compony consists evermore of two Tracts only, and no more. Note
further, that the manner of differencing of Coat-Armours by Bordures is very
ancient; but if you respect their particular forms and charge, they are not so.

He bears Gules, a Bordure purslew, Verrey. Note here, that this term
Purflew, is common to all the Furrs before handled, so often as they are used
in Bordures. Therefore whenever you shall find a Bordure of any of these
several kinds, you must (for the more certainty of the Blazon) express by name
of what sort of Furrs the same is, if the^ be a peculiar name appropriate
thereunto. Otherwise, if it be one of those kinds that have no certain name,
whereby it may be distinctly known from the rest; or if it be so, that the
Bordure be composed of some such of the Furrs, as do comprehend under one name,
diverse and distinct Colors, then must you of necessity particularly name the
Colors whereof every such Bordure is so composed, except it consists of
Argent and Azure, as this does, and then it suffices to call it only Verrey,
as in this Example I have done.

He bears Gules, a Bordure checkie, Or, and Azure. Albeit this has a near
resemblance of Counter-compony before handled, yet it is not the same, for that
never exceeded two Tracts or Panes, and this is never less than of three:
Therefore you must take special heed to the number of the Tracts in Blazon,
else may you easily err in mistaking the one for the other. And this Rule
holds not alone in Bordures, but also in Bends, Fesses, Bars, etc. born
after those manners.

He bears Vaire, a Bordure Gules, charged with eight cross Croslets, Argent,
by the name of Molesworth; and is born of Hender Molesworth of Spring-Garden in
the Parish of St. Katherines in the Island of Iamaica, Esquire one of his Majesty's
Council in the said Isle; second Son of He^der Molesworth of Pencarrow in
Cornwall, Esquire. who was lineally descended from Sir Walter de Molesworth of
Northamptonshire, who flourished in Martial Prowess in the days of King Edward
the First, and went with him to the Holy War.

Sometimes you shall find the Bordures charged with things living, as in these
Examples.

The Field is Argent, a Bordure Azure, charged with Enaluron of Martlets, to
the number of eight, Or. In your blazoning of Bordures of this kind of bearing,
you must mention what sort of Fowl or Bird your Bordure is charged withal; for
that this term serves generally for all kinds of Bordures charged with things
of this kind.

A like Bordure does Jasper Earl of Pembroke bear, that was half-brother to
King Henry the Sixth, and was created Duke of Bedford, by that most prudent
Prince, King Henry the Seventh.

He bears Azure, a Bordure Gules, charged with eight Lioncels passant, Or.
Such a Bordure is set forth for Hamlyne Plantagenet, that was Base-brother to
King Henry the Second. This term Enurny is proper to all Bordures charged with
any Beasts, whose kinds must be specially observed, and expressed in Blazon,
for the more certainty thereof.

Sometimes you shall find two of these sorts of Bordures before handled,
commixt in one, as in these next Examples following.

He bears Argent, a Bordure quarterly, as follows: The first Gules, Enurny
of three Lioncels passant gardant, Or. The second, Azure, Verdoy, of as many
Flowers de Lis, Or. The third as the second: The fourth as the first. Such a
Bordure did Henry Courtney, Earl of Devon, and Marquess of Exeter, bear, (who
lived in the time of King Henry the Eighth) environing the Royal Arms of
England, which he received as an augmentation of Honor. And this Coat Armor
may also be thus shortly blazoned, Argent, a Bordure quarterly England and
France.

He bears Gules, a Bordure, quarterly composed of Purflew, Ermyn, and
Countercompony, Or and Azure. Such a Bordure did Henry Fitz-Roy bear, who was
Duke of Richmond and Somerset, as also Earl of Nottingham. He was base Son unto
King Henry the Eighth. Sometimes you shall find Bordures charged with Leaves or
Flowers, and other Vegetables, as in Example:

He bears Sable, a Bordure, Or, charged with Verdoy of Trefoils, slipped to
the number of eight proper. Note that this term Verdoy is appropriated to all
Bordures charged with Leaves, Flowers, Fruits, and other the like Vegetables^
Wherefore to make your blazon more certain, it behooves that you should
expressly mention what kind of Vegetable the Bordure is charged withal.

Otherwhiles you shall have Bordures charged with other sorts of things
inanimate, or without life, as in this next example.

He bears Or, a Bordure Sable, charged with Entoyre of eight Besants. Such a
Bordure did Richard Plantagenet, King of the Romans, and Earl of Cornwall bear,
that was Son unto King John, and Brother to King Henry the Third. Note, that
this term Entoyre is proper to all Bordures charged with dead things. Therefore
you must name what kind of Entoyre the Bordure is charged with, whether with
Roundles, Crescents, Mullets, Annulets, or whatsoever other dead thing. A
Besaunt, or (as some call them) a Talent, is taken for a Massive Plate or
Bullion of Gold, containing (according to Leigh) of Troy weight, 104 l. and 2
Ounces, and is in value 3750 l. sterling, and had for the most part no
similitude or representation upon it (as some hold) but only fashioned round
and smooth, as if it were fitted and prepared to receive some kind of stamp.
But others are of Opinion that they were stamped, and that they were called
Bezants (or rather Bizants) of Byzantium, the place where they were anciently
coined. Note, that whenever you shall find any Bezants or Talents born in
Arms, you shall not need to make mention of their color in blazoning of them,
because they be evermore understood to be Gold.

Sometimes you shall find Bordures gobonated of two Colors, as in this next
Example.

He bears Ermyn, a Bordure gobonated, Or and Sable: And such a bearing is so
termed, because it is divided in such forts, as if it were cut into small
Gobbets.

As this Bordure is gobonated, so shall you find Bordures, either Bendy, or
Bendwaies, or charged with Bends, as in this next Escocheon in part may appear.

He bears Gules, a Bordure Sable, charged with three Bends, Argent. I give it
this blazon in respect that the Sable does surmount the Argent, and stands
(as it were) in stead of a Field: but if they both were of even pieces, then
should I have termed it a Bordure Bendee, or Bend-ways, of so many pieces
Argent and Sable, or Sable and Argent, as it should happen.

There rests yet one Example more of Bordurings, which I have here placed, to
the end the same may serve in stead of many particular demonstrations,
otherwise requisite for the full understanding of the manifold several sorts of
Diapering that may be used in Bordures, as in Example;

He bears Argent, a Bordure Gules, diapered, Entoyre, Enurny, Enaluron,
Verdoy, etc. Note, that you may have Diaper of any two, three, or more of
these, or any other their like, in one Bordure, and that not only Bordures, but
also Fields of Coat-Armours, are found diapered. That Field or Bordure is
properly said to be diapered, which being fretted all over, has something
quick or dead, appearing within the Frets. And albeit things having life and
sense, or their parts, may be born diapered: Yet Plants, Fruits, Leaves,
Flowers, and other Vegetables, are (in the Opinion of some Armorists) judged to
be more fit for such kind of bearing.

This kind of bearing Diaper in Coat Armor is sometimes seen in Coats of
France and Belgia, but very rare or never in England, as Sir John Fern notes.
Diaper (says he) is known of every man to be a fantastical work of knots,
within which are wrought the signs or forms of things, either quick or dead,
according to the invention of the Work-master, as is well known in Ipres,
Bruges, and some Cities of Heynault. In the blazon of such Coats you must first
name the Color or Metal of the Field.

As touching their first several Charges imposed upon these Bordures
aforehandled, I should not (I acknowledge) have made mention of them at all in
this place (the order of my Method respected) sed propter necessitatem
nonnunquam recedendum est a regulis. But the occasion offered to treat of the
differences of Bordures in this place, enforced me to make untimely mention of
those Charges, to the intent I might yield some satisfaction to the Reader
touching these variable forms, which I could no way better perform than by
demonstrative Examples: Exempla enim ponimus, ut sentiant addiscentes.

Notwithstanding, that I take here only mentioned a Bordure and Imborduring,
for ancient Differences, yet I do not thereupon conclude, that Antiquity was
not acquainted with any other than these: but the Reason, that I do not
particularly here discourse at large of those other ancient Differences, is,
because the use of diverse of them now, as Differences, is antiquated; and some
of them are now used, as Ordinaries, or some other Charge of the Field, which I
shall afterward handle, but not here, because it suits not with my intended
Method; others of those ancient ones are still in use, as Differences, but to
demonstrate some other younger Brother than anciently they did, and therefore
now termed modern, by changing of their first use. Let it therefore suffice
only to name some of those first sort here mentioned, as Orles, Cotizes, Bends,
etc. Which how they then were disposed of, in the Terminal, Collateral, and
Fixal Coat-Armours, I refer you to Sir John Fern and others, who have writ
plentifully of them. In those elder times also, the variation of Metal or
Color, Transposition of Charge, yea, sometime change of the Charge, or of part
of the Charge, were used for distinctions of Families, as you may observe in
diverse Authors, and in the Coat-Armours of younger branches of many ancient
Families.

CHAP. VI.
HItherto of the ancient manner of differencing Coat-Armours: Next, such as we
call modern Differences, come in order to be handled. I call those modern
Differences that are of a latter institution, and put in use sithence the
invention of Bordures. Such are these that follow, and their like, viz. the
File, Crescent, Mullet, Martlet, Annulet, Flower de lis, etc.

What these Files are, I cannot certainly avouch, because I find that diverse
Authors, and those very Judicial in matters of this kind, do diversely judge of
them, according to their several conceits. Vpton, a man much commended for his
skill in blazon, and of some Armorists supposed to have been the first that
made observation of their use (but they are therein much deceived, for that
such use was made of them many Ages before Vptons time) calls them Points,
such as men usually fasten their Garments withal, and says, they may be born
either even or odd, to the number of Nine. Budaeus, an ancient Writer,
affirms them to be Tongs, and that they may be born but odd. Alciatus in his
Parergon names them Plaitez or Plaits of Garments. Bartolus calls them
Candles. Some other Authors call them Files, and others Lambeaux or Labels. In
this so great uncertainty, I forbear to determine any thing, seeing those so
Learned cannot certainly resolve among themselves what they are. Only
concerning their diverse manner of bearing, these Examples following will give
light: wherein I will begin with their single bearing, and so I will proceed to
their Compound use.

The Field is Argent, a File, with one Label, Gules. This form of bearing is
found in the Chapel of the Castle of Camphire, alias Trevoir, in Zealand. Such
is the dignity of the File, as that the Heralds in their sound discretion,
have caused many poor decayed Gentlemen, and Persons newly risen, to lay aside
the bearing thereof, because of the dignity of the same, being such, as the Son
of an Emperor cannot bear a difference of higher esteem, during the Life of his
Father.

Vpton says, that Files are not born for Arms, but for differences of Arms:
Tales lingulae sive labellae (says he) non dicuntur proprie signa, sed
differentiae signorum. Nevertheless in practice it falls out otherwise, as in
this Coat here expressed, and others following may be seen. For we find that
Labels are born both single and manifold, without any other manner of Charge;
so that it is clear that they are born sometimes for Arms, and not always for
differences of Arms, as by the second Escocheon following more plainly
appears.

He bears Azure, a File of three Lambeaux, Argent. This (says Leigh) is the
first of the nine Differences of Brethren, and serves for the Heir or eldest
Son, the Father living. Honorius says, That one of the Labels betokens his
Father, the other his Mother, and the middlemost signifies himself.

He bears Argent, a File of five points, or Lambeaux, Azure. This seems to
me a perfect Coat of it self, for I find the same anciently set up in a
Glasswindow in the Church of Estington in the County of Gloucester, and is born
by the name of Henlington. Whence may appear that this File is born as a Charge
sometimes, and not for a difference of Coat Armor always. The File of five
Lambeaux, says Leigh, is the Difference of the Heir whilst the Grandfather
lives; but his Grandfather being deceased, then he leaves this, and takes
that of three, which was his Fathers difference. But herein his Rule fails;
for that they have been anciently born with five points for the difference of
the eldest Son, in the time of King Edward the First, as appears by diverse
Seals, and other good authentic proofs of Antiquity.

Note, That as the Bordures before mentioned, so also these Files are
oftentimes charged with things, as well quick as dead, whereof I will give you
some few Examples in these next Escocheons.

He bears Argent, a File of three Lambeaux, Azure, each charged with as many
Flowers de lis, Or. Such a File did Henry the Fourth, Duke of Lancaster bear,
(over the Arms of England) who was Son to Henry Earl of Lancaster, whose Father
was Edmund, surnamed Crookback, that was first Earl of Lancaster, and Son to
King Henry the Third.

He bears Azure, a File of three Lambeaux, Argent, each charged on the dexter
side of the foot thereof with a Canton, Gules. A like File did Lionel
Plantagenet bear (who was third Son unto King Edward the Third) over the Arms
of France and England; saving that those Cantons were placed in the highest
part of his Labels aforesaid.

The Label of the Heir apparent (says Wyrly) is seldom transferred unto the
second Brother, but when the Inheritance goes to the Daughters of the eldest
Brother. In which case, it was permitted unto him, to bear the File as
Heir-male of his Family, and as one that remained in expectancy of the
Inheritance, if the Issue of his Neeces should fail. Note, that the second
Brother might not intrude himself into the absolute Signs of his Family, the
Inheritance being in his Neeces or Kinswomen. Hugh de Hastings being a second
Brother, and his Posterity did bear a Label for their difference upon the like
occasion, and for the reasons here mentioned.

The Field is Vert, a File of three points parted perpale, Gules and Argent, on
the first six Towers, Or; and the second as many Lionceaux rampant, Purpure.
Such a File was born by Edward Plantagenet, Son and Heir to Edmund of Langly,
Duke of York, which Edward lived in the time of King Richard the Second, by
whom he was created Duke of Aubemerle, and was slain in the Battle of Agincourt
in the time of King Henry the Fifth.

He bears Argent, a File of three Lambeaux, Gules, each charged with as many
Towers, Or. Such a File did Robert d' Artois bear, who guided K. Edward the
Third in all his wars against the French. This Robert was a Frenchman, and was
thought to have been the first that moved King Edward the Third to make his
challenge to the Crown of France. Many more Examples might be given of the
diverse manners of bearing and charging of Files, but these here expressed may
suffice to inform the Reader that they are no less subject to Charges than the
Bordures before expressed: as also to move him to take a more strict
observation of them, as they shall come to hand.

Forasmuch as it has been anciently questioned (and for ought that I could
ever see, rests as yet undecided) by Bartholus, Budaeus, and other Judicious
persons of their times, Whether Files or Labels should be born with even
points, or odd? some holding that they could not be born but odd, others
maintaining they might be used indifferently as well even as odd. In my former
Impression I followed the stronger Opinion, and in all the precedent Examples
have produced patterns of unequal points. Nevertheless, not so resting
satisfied, I have sithence endeavored to examine their use (the faithfullest
Interpreter of things doubtful) to which end I took occasion to peruse certain
Miscellanean notes of Seals, which I had gathered long ago: by which Seals it
appeared they had been anciently used to be born as well even as odd; whereupon
(out of my desire to clear all doubts, and to make every thing as perspicuous
and manifold as I could) I resolved to cut such Seals as came to my hands, for
the better approbation of this my assertion, and content of the Reader; and
withal to set them down according to order of even bearing, viz. two, four,
six, etc. before I would conclude this Chapter of Files. As in Example:

Sigillum hoc appendet Chartae cujusdam Ioh. ap Howell de Monnemoth fact.
Christianae Ball. continenti quoddam escambium unius Curtilagii, in vico vocato
Mowkentstreet, etc. Dat. Anno Regni Regis Edward. III. 32.

This piece of Evidence rests amongst the Writings or Deeds of George Thorpe
of Wanneswell, Esquire, and one of his Majesty's Gentlemen Pensioners, whose
residence is in the Parish of Barkley in the County of Gloucester.

An Example of a File with four points follows in this next Escocheon.

He bears Argent, two Cheverous, Gules, on a quarter of the second, a File of
four points of the first. This Coat was, amongst others, taken out of an old
Mass Book at Gosworth in the County of Chester, wherein they were found, fair
limmed, many years ago; as appears by a Book of Visitation of that Shire,
remaining in my own hands extant to be seen: which Visitation was made by
William Flower, alias Norroy, King of Arms of the North part beyond the River
of Trent, who was associated and accompanied therein with Robert Glover,
Somerset Herald, his Marshal, Anno Dom. 1580.

This Coat might have been more aptly placed hereafter in the second Section,
amongst Ordinaries of diverse kinds, born one upon another; but that I desire to
place all my Labels of even points together without interruption, though I
digressed somewhat therein by giving way to necessity, albeit with breach of
Rule and Order; Nonnunquam enim propter excellentiam seu necessitatem receditur
a Regulis. This form of bearing of Files with four points, is also warranted by
Rolls of great Antiquity; as appears by the Coat of Sir Thomas Leybourne,
that bare Azure, six Lionceaux Rampant, Or, a File of four points, Gules, which
I do here pass over, as well for brevity, as for impertinency thereof to this
place, in respect of the Lions, the principal charge thereof. Note here a
strange bearing of a File.

This Seal was affixed unto a certain Deed of one William de Curli, as
appears by a Transcript thereof in my Book of Seals, the effect whereof is
brief, as follows in these words.

Will. de C. fill. Will. de Curli, etc. pro Salute Antecess. etc. terr. in
Territorio de Langle, 20 Henr. 3. Test Hug. le Poer. Vicecom. Warwick. He^r.
de Napford, Roberto de Clopton milit.

This Example serves to confirm my former assertion, That Files are not only
born for differences, but sometimes for the only charge of the Coat Armor, as
appears by the Coat of Henlington, whereof I have given Example elsewhere:
And herein we may observe a rare form of position thereof in bend Sinister.

I have also seen a like File of three points born dexterways in Bend for the
only Charge of the Field, as in this Escocheon, which may receive this blazon,
He bears Argent, a File of three points in bend, Sable. This Coat Armor
belonged to one Morien an Alien born, buried in St. Mary's Church in Oxford.

For the shunning of multiplicity of Examples, I will give an instance of a
Coat Armor, comprehending both sorts of Files, viz. even and odd points, which
for that it is simple, and unmixt with any ordinary or common Charge, may serve
in stead of all: As in Example.

The Field is Or, three Files born bar-wayes, Gules; the first having five
points, the second four, the last triple pointed: Here I am constrained to say
Triple pointed, lest by the iteration of the word Three, I should break the
Rule given, page 9. This is, as I take it, a Dutch Coat, born by the name of
Laskirke, quasi lis Ecclesiae.

Now if any man will demand of me, why I do spend my oil and travel in things
of so small moment? To such I answer, that so long as I travel to find out the
truth, I reckon my travel well bestowed, though the matter be of never so small
importance, Suave enim est in minimis etiam vera scire.

There is yet another form of bearing of Files, diverse from these before
mentioned, which albeit the same be not in use with us, but seems to be a
National Custom peculiar to the Kingdom of France: Nevertheless, sithence I
have undertaken to treat amongst things of the use of blazoning of Coat Armor,
I would not willingly omit any form of bearing, or other remarkable thing, that
might make either my self or the Reader more expert in the use of Blazon. This
form of bearing Files, which I will now show you, is not distant some little
space from the upper part of the Chief (after the most usual fashion) but
grows immediately out of the Chief it self.

The Field is Azure, a File issuing out of the Chief, without any intermission
at all, and is thus blazoned in French, Il port d' Azure, un file de Gules,
movant du Chief. These Armorial differences are in France observed upon the
Robes of Honorable persons issued out of Princely Families amongst themselves;
such Robes (I mean) as are given them, either at the Marriages or Funerals of
Kings and Queens. As for Example; It has been noted that the Lambeaux, Gules,
upon the Mantles of Orleance, have been adorned with Flowers de lis. The
Lambeaux of Artois with Castles, Or. Those of Anjou moving out of the Chief,
only Gules.

In like sort diverse other Noble Houses of France, viz. of Valois, of Berry,
and of Alencon, have Bordures either plain or engrailed, or charged with
Besants, those of Evereux Bastons, Or, and Argent, and they of Bourbon Bastons,
Gules.

Here may rise a Question not unworthy our observation, viz. Whether like as
the eldest Brother is preferred before the second, so the Son of the Eldest
Brother shall in like sort be preferred, or take place before his Uncle? And
this has been holden a great and difficult Question a long season; until at
length, Otho the Emperor of Germany, being at Trevere with his Barons, this
matter was there questioned, he ordained that the cause should be decided by
Combat, wherein the Nephew hardly obtained the Victory; because it was deemed
to have proceeded by the secret Judgment of God, it was decreed that from
thenceforth the Nephew should be preferred before the Uncle. Of this mind are
Nich. Boerius, Lucas de Penna, and John de Montolero, that the Nephew should
take place.

The like Question has risen in France between the Second Daughter, and the
Son of the Eldest Sister, as well in Avignon, a City of Narbone in France, as
in other parts thereof, which remained long undetermined. At length it was
finally adjudged in the Court of Parliament (holden at Paris) for the Nephews,
for whom also it was likewise decreed in the City of Avignon.

If any man shall demand of me, How it comes to pass that the Diminutions or
Differences of Arms beforementioned, are so diversely born, not only in foreign
Countries, but also in one self Nation? Or why there is not one set form
observed in the use of them with all Nations? I answer, That it is not
possible, because of the infinite actions of men, which are no less infinitely
subject to mutability, and therefore can by no means be reduced to a Set-form
of bearing universally, according to that saying of an uncertain Author, Res
sunt infinitae, infiniteque mutabiles, idcirco praecepto generali comprehendi
non possunt.

Besides these Di^^^rences beforementioned, other sorts of Modern Differences
were devised for the distinguishing of Brethren and Persons issued out of one
Family, which for the reach they extend unto, do more manifestly express, (and
as it were) point out with the finger, how far their several bearers are
distant in degree from their Original Ancestors; as also, how each of them
stands in Degree one to another among themselves, as by the Examples ensuing
may appear. The First House.
The Second House.
The Third House.
The Fourth House.
The Fifth House.
The Sixth House.


To these single Differences, expressed in the first of these Ranks, does
Gerard Leigh add three other, to make up the number of Nine; which number he
labored much to make complete throughout all his Book. The form of which three
are these: viz. the Rose, the Cross Molin, and the Double Caterfoil.

It has been evermore one Observation with Nations in bearing of Arms, that as
every particular Family (says Sir John Fern) did bear Arms, different in
substance from those of other Families, so those that are descended of the self
same Blood, should likewise bear the Arms of that House and Family whereof they
are descended, in a different manner each from other (not in Substance but in
Accidents) for the distinguishing of their Line of Agnation. And the apposition
of these Differences, albeit they seem to make some alteration in the
Coat-Armours whereunto they are annexed, yet is the same but merely Accidental,
the Substance still remaining as it was before; the Nature of these Appositions
being such as is of all other Accidents, Vt possint abesse, and adesse sine
subjecti interitu.

And these Differences annexed to Coat-Armours are of some Authors termed (and
that not improperly) Diminutiones Armorum, in respect they do derogate from the
Dignity of the Arms whereto they are added, as expressly manifesting them to be
of less esteem than those from which they are derived: Multiplicitas enim
individuorum, in eadem specie diminutionem arguit. But doubtless, the conceit
of Apposition of these Differences to Coat-Armours was grounded upon the
necessity (the common Parent of all Inventions) as well that thereby all
confused bearing of Arms might be avoided; as also that the Prerogative of the
Eldest Son should be preserved inviolable. And for this cause has the Eldest
of every Noble and Generous Family, his peculiar manner of sole and plain
bearing, which he will in no case permit any other man to use, though he be of
the same Family and Surname, but with addition of some kind of Difference,
because the sole bearing of Arms pertains only to the first begotten: In
primogenito enim (says Lyra) tanquam in capite stat, and remanet splendour
geniturae.

As touching the Dignity of the Firstbegotten, Tremellius in his Annotations
upon the 49th of Genesis, makes mention of two chief Prerogatives due unto
Re^ben, had he not defiled his Fathers Bed; the one of Honor, whereby he had
his Brethren in Subjection unto him; the other of Strength, by reason of his
double portion of Inheritance.

And Chassanaeus says, Ea quae acquiruntur Primogenito, acquiruntur titulo
universali, item acquiruntur ut constituto in dignitate. For these respects the
Arms of the Family ought to remain entire to the Eldest, because the second,
third, and fourth begotten Sons cannot arrogate to themselves any such
Prerogative, and therefore may not bear their Coat but with Difference.

Furthermore, these Differences here spoken of, are of some Authors called
Doctrinae Armorum; and that very aptly, in regard that by the apposition of
them to Coat-Armours, our understanding (upon sight of them) is informed from
what Line of Consanguinity the Bearer of such Difference does abstract himself,
whether from the Line Ascending, Descending, or Collateral; as also in what
Degree he stands; as, whether he be the second, third, or fourth begotten
Child of such a Parent. And such apposition in no less lawful, than is the
addition of Names of Baptism unto the Surname of the Family: Sicut enim nomina
inventa sunt ad cognoscendos homines, ita arma vel insignia ad familias and
personas distinguendas singulatim.

There is yet a further use of these Differences, in that they serve to prevent
and avoid Dissentions, Debates, Challenges, Combats, and Slaughters. For as to
all Brethren there is but one Surname allowed; yet for Difference, that one of
them may be discerned from another, there is added unto each Brother a
Praenomen, or Name of Baptism; so is it necessary, that since the Coat Armor
of the Ancestor is competible to all the Children (as the Mark of the Family
whereof they are descended, that a Difference should be added to the
Coat Armor of every Brother, to mark and limit out to all men's sight the
diversity of their Birth and Line whereupon they depend, that so all occasion
of Challenge may be prevented, when each man knows not only his place of
precedence, but also his nearness and place of title to the Inheritance.

Whereas I have formerly, among the Examples of Bordures, used demonstrations
of Differences in the Blood Royal, of some of the younger Sons of Kings, I hold
it fit, before I conclude this Tract of Differences, to give a little touch of
the necessity why these should be more eminent than those of ordinary use, with
Persons of inferior Estate. First, in regard that if the Coat Armor of others
should have too near a conformity and resemblance with the Sovereign Ensigns,
the Vulgar sort perhaps might (in some cases or pretenses) be seduced to follow
such a one as were not their King, to the great disturbance of the State, and
no less peril to the Person of their lawful Sovereign. And not only is it so in
Coats pertaining to the Blood Royal, but also in other inferior Callings: For
in ancient time (says Wyrly) when men could not sufficiently distinguish their
Coat-Armours by changing their Devices into other Colors, for the Number of
Leaders, that many times were of one House or Family; then were they forced to
very their Marks by the said Additions. And very seldom should you see in those
times, Crescents, Mollets, of such small things born for a Difference: or if
any such were, they were made so large; that they might easily be discerned by
the distance of forty foot. Furthermore, the Sovereign Estate and Dignity being
compared with the quality of any Subject, the Difference will be found so great
between them, and the one so far surmounting the other of them, as that Reason
it self wills that so great a Difference should be put between the Royal
Ensigns and the Arms of a Subject, as there is between their Estates and
Degrees, since those Ensigns are the Marks of their worthiness and esteem.

For these and other respects, it has been, and yet still is in use, that in
Addition of Differences to the Arms of Kings younger Children, the skilful
Heralds have given some of the Honorable Ordinaries, for more apparent
Distinctions, as a Fess, Chief, Bend, Pile, Bordure, and such like, as we may
manifestly see in diverse ancient Coats born by such Noble Personages as have
descended from the Collateral Lines of the Kings of England, France, Scotland,
etc.

Concerning those Modern Differences before expressed in the form of Six Ranks,
p. 25. viz. Crescents, Mollets, Martlets, etc. notwithstanding their
institution was ingenious, yet has tract of time discovered their use to be
dangerous, especially in Martial Affairs, by reason of their darkness and
unapparent forms, occasioned by imposition of one Difference upon another; the
peril whereof has not a little extenuated their estimation. Nevertheless,
their invention is not therefore to be condemned, inasmuch as the Events have
not fallen out answerable to the intention of their first Deviser: Neither can
it be therefore justly said to be done without ground of Reason, as a certain
Author notes: Si fi^^ in intellect^ operantis sit rationabilis, etiamsi non
sequatur quod intenditur, non idcirco dicitur irrationabiliter operari.

Here it is to be observed, that Differences do in no ways appertain unto
Sisters, for that they are reputed to be separated and divided from the Family
whereof they are descended, inasmuch as when they are once married, they do
lose their own Surname, and do receive their denomination from the Family
whereof their Husbands are descended. And so much does the word Soror notify
unto us, as Sosinus says: Soror est quasi seorsim nata, and a familia separata.

To Daughters it is permitted to bear the Arms of their Father, even as the
Elder Brother does after his Fathers decease, without any scandal or challenge
of their Elder Brother; for that to Daughters never were any Differences
allowed, and that for three causes: First, Because their Coats are never, or
very seldom advanced in the Field, forasmuch as to that Sex War is reputed
odious. Secondly, For that the Coat Armor is no longer born by them than
during their life, for the same extends not to their Issue. Lastly, Because
so long as Issue continues of any of the Brethrens Lines, they are debarred
from the Inheritance. Yet in some ^ases they shall bear the Coat Armor to them
and their Heirs; as in Example, If all the Issue of the Brethren happen to
become extinct, then the Daughters shall Inherit the Land of their Ancestor? In
which case, they may therewithal assume his Coat Armor, and bear the same by
themselves and their Heirs for ever. But betwixt (...) Sisters be allowed no
Differences of Ba^^es of Pedegrees: the Reason whereof is, for that since by
them the Name of the House cannot be preserved; therefore they are admitted to
the Inheritance equally: and are adjudged but one Heir to all intents and
purposes, in Laws as well Martial as Civil, without any eminent Prerogative
either of Honor or Possession, betwixt Elder and Younger.

CHAP. VII.
SO much of the Accidents of Arms, viz. Tincture and Differences, comprehended
in the first part of our premised distribution.

Now of the second Member thereof, viz. Parts of Arms.

The parts of Arms are,

The Escocheon. Ornaments without the Escocheon.


An Escocheon is the form or representation of a Shield of what kind soever,
and is so called of the Latin word Scutum; which has the same signification:
whence also an Esquire, or Page, takes his name of Scutiger, signifying
primarily a Target-bearer. And the Target is not unaptly deduced from the Latin
word Tergus, a Beasts hide, whereof at first Shields were made: whereupon Pliny
says, Tergus ad scuta galeasque impeuetrabile, An impenetrable hide fit to
make a Shield. And the Poet Statius, -- caesis clypeos vestire juvencis.
With Bullocks hides they clad their Shields.


Whence Virgil calls Ajax his Buckler, Septemplex, for the sevenfold doublings
of Leather: As elsewhere he describes a Target, -- duo taurea terga: -- made of
two Ox hides. But the clearest Star of our Profession, Mr. Clarenceaux takes it
from the British word Tarjan, and that from the French Thireos, which Pausanias
says, is the Buckler in use amongst the old Gauls. If any here should ask me,
Why then Escocheons-should be used in Heraldry, since other men are invested
with Ensigns of Honor, besides Martial men? I answer them, that as to Military
men that token is proper for reward of that kind of Service; so if others by
their Virtues, Arts, or Actions, advance either the honor or the welfare of
their Country, their service is as be^oveful as the other and themselves as
Defenders of Preservers of their Countries Peace and Happiness (as I have
formerly showed) deserve likewise the reward of the Escocheon, being the
Hieroglyphick or Emblem of Defense and Preserving. In which respect that good
Prophet Elijah was called The Chariots and Horsemen of Israel. And by the Civil
Law ( Imp. in L. Advoc. C. de Advoc.) an Advocate is said to be Miles, a
Martial man, and to have the same Prerogatives, in that they do civium vitam
and patrimonium defendere, defend the Life and Livelihood of the Subjects.
Touching the diverse forms of Shields, I will not here speak; every Country
almost having their diverse makings: amongst which, the smallest were in use
amongst our old Britains, as being most manageable; and the greatest amongst
the Romans and Grecians, as may appear by Alexander, who being to pass a River,
used his Shield for his Boat, and his Spear for his Ruther to guide himself
over. And it was ever held more dishonorable for a man to lose his Buckler
than his Sword in Field, because it is more praiseworthy to defend a Friend
than to hurt a Foe, as a Noble General once said: Mallem unum Civem, etc. I had
rather save one good Subject, than kill an hundred Enemies.

The Accidents in this Escocheon are Points. Abatements.


Points are certain places in an Escocheon diversely named, according to their
several Positions.

Whereof some are Middle. Remote.


The Middle Points are those that have their location in, or near to the Center
of the Escocheon.

Such are these, viz. the Honor Fess Nombril
Points.

The Fess Point is the exact Center of the Escocheon. The Honor Point is the
next above the same in a direct Line. The Nombril is next underneath the Fess
Point, answering in a like distance from the Fess Point, as Gerard Leigh has
set them down.

Remote Points are those that have their situation naturally in places further
distant from the Center of the Escocheon.

Of these there are Superior. Inferior.


The Superior Remote Points are those that have their being in the upper part
of the Escocheon.

Of these there are Middle. Extremes.


The Superior Middle Point does occupy the precise midst of the Chief, between
the two Extremes. The two Superior extreme Points do possess the corners of the
chief part of the Escocheon.

And are termed Dexter. Sinister.


The Superior Dexter Point has his beginning near unto the right corner of the
Escocheon, in the Chief thereof. The Superior Sinister Point is placed near the
left Angle of the Chief, in opposition to the Dexter Chief; whereunto, as also
to the Middle Chief Point, it answers in a direct Line.

The Inferior Points do occupy the Base of the Escocheon, and thereof have
their denomination, and are called Inferior, because they are seated in the
lower parts thereof.

Of these also there are both Middle. Remote.


Note, that each of these do answer in opposition unto the several Superior
Chief Points above mentioned, in a direct Line, insomuch as by them the
Location of these might be easily conceived without any further Description of
them, Quia posito uno contrariorum, ponitur and alterum. Nevertheless, because
those things that are delivered dividedly, are best conceived and understood, I
will particularize these as I have done the former, beginning with the Middle
Point.

The Middle Base Point does occupy the exact midst of the Base of the
Escocheon, and answers perpendicularly to the Middle Superior and Inferior
Points. And in like sort do both the Inferior Base Extremes answer in an
Equi-distant proportion to the Extremes of the Superior Points placed in the
corner of the Escocheon. That Extreme Base Point on the right hand is named the
Dexter Base Point; and that on the left hand is the Sinister Base. And for the
better explanation of that which has been here delivered touching the Points
of an Escocheon, I have here (because Examples add light) expressed the same by
manifest Demonstrations, placing several Letters upon every of the said Points,
according to the Description beforementioned. As there is a pre-eminence in
the priority of nomination of things, so is there also in their local
distribution: wherefore you must have respect unto the Points of an Escocheon,
for therein also consists a Dignity, inasmuch as one Point or Place of the
Escocheon, is more worthy than another, whereunto you must have regard in
Blazoning, Quia a dignioribus semper est incipiendum. What those Points of an
Escocheon are, appears in the last precedent Escocheon, and here made more
manifest, as in Example. A Signifies Dexter Chief Point. B Precise Middle
Chief C Sinister Chief D Honor E Fess F Nombril G Dexter Base H Exact Middle
Base I Sinister Base

The knowledge of these Points is very requisite, in respect, that when diverse
of these Points are occupied with sundry things of different kinds (as
oftentimes it falls out in some Escocheons) you may be able thereby to assign
unto each Point his apt and peculiar Name, according to the Dignity of his
place. For no man can perfectly Blazon any such Coat, unless he does rightly
understand the particular Points of the Escocheon.

CHAP. VIII.
WE come now from Points, the first part in our partition of Accidents of an
Escocheon, to the second part, which is Abatements.

An Abatement is an accidental Mark annexed to Coat Armor, denoting some
ungentleman-like, dishonorable, or disloyal demeanor, quality, or stain in
the Bearer, whereby the Dignity of the Coat Armor is greatly abased.

Abatements do consist in Diminution. Reversing.


Diminution is a blemishing or defacing of some particular Point or Points of
the Escocheon, by reason of the imposition of some stain and Color thereupon.
Note, that all these Marks of Diminution, in the Escocheons next following,
must be evermore of some one of the stainand Colors, viz. Tawny or Murrey, and
must in no wise be of Metal, neither must they be charged in any case, for so
should they be Additions of Worship.

These are placed on The Middle. Some other part of the Escocheon.


Such as are placed in the Middle are expressed in these next two Escocheons
following, whereof the first is a Delf, as in this Example.

He bears Argent, a Delf, Ten, to him that revoketh his own Challenge (as we
call it) eating his word (says Leigh) is this Abatement given in token
thereof. Note, that whenever you shall find two or more of them in one
Escocheon, you shall not reckon of them as Signs of an Abatement, but of
Honor; and in like manner, if either they be of Metal, or Charged upon; and so
is it also in some other Abatements, which either by their Number or Colors,
do Change their quality, and become Charges of perfect Bearing.

He bears Or, an Escocheon reversed, Sanguine. This is that other Abatement
that occupies the middle point of the Escocheon, and is given unto him that
discourteously entreats either Maid or Widow against their will; or to such
an one as flies from his Sovereigns Banner: he shall bear his Arms after this
sort, until such time as he have done some valiant exploit, worthy to be noted
by the Heralds; upon whose true report, it may please the Sovereign to restore
him to his former Bearing; which admission must be done in no less private
Assembly than in the Mustering of a Camp.

Such Diminutions as are placed upon some other part of the Escocheon.

Do occupy One point alone. More than one.


That which occupies one alone, is called a Dexter point parted, an Example
whereof you may see in this next Escocheon.

He bears Argent, a Point dexter parted, Tenn: This Diminution is due unto
him that overmuch boasts himself of his Martial Acts. If a man do perform any
praiseworthy Action, the self Deed will sufficiently commend him, though he
hold his peace. And therefore Seneca lib. 2. de Benefic^s, does reprehend this
kind of vain boasting; ^es loquatur (says he) nobis tacentibus, Let our Deeds
speak, let our Tongues be silent: or if we will needs have verbal praise, let
us seek it by the direction of that wise King, Laudet te alius, and non os
tuum, al^ena labia non lingua tua. Let another man be thy Trumpeter, and not
thine own mouth. For indeed, that mark wherewith Judicious Virgil brandeth
Drances, does seldom deceive, Lingua melior, sed frigida bello Dextera, Whose
Tongue is quickest to speak his Arm in fight is weak. And albeit a man be truly
valiant in Deeds of Arms, yet Laus in ore proprio sordescit, It is
ungentleman-like to boast of it. Plutarch writes of young Marius, that his talk
and gesture was so stout that he got the name of Martis filius, the Son of
Mars; but when it came to the proof, he was so far from what he seemed, that he
gained a new name of Veneris filius, the Son of Venus.

Such Diminutions as do occupy more than one point of the Escocheon.

Do comprehend Four points. Less than four.


That Diminution of the former sort, is this which you see in this Escocheon,
and is due to him that is sloathful in the Wars.

He bears Or, a Point in Point, Sanguine. Herein you may see in part how
necessary it is to know the Points of the Escocheon before expressed. Inasmuch
as this one Abatement compriseth these four Points, viz. the Honor, together
with the Dexter and Sinister, and the exact base Points. For it is very
manifest, that the one of these Archlines has his beginning from the Dexter,
and the other from the sinister base Points, and do meet in an acute Angle in
the Honor point, answering perpendicularly to the precise base point. In
former Ages this Vice was chastised by another kind of punishment, says
Chassanaus, Quando Miles se male gesserit in bello potest Iudex scutum suum
perforari facere, ut hoc exemplo alii Milites in praelio sint fortiores: If a
Soldier demean himself not well in fight, the Judge Martial may cause his
Escocheon to be pierced, to teach other by this Chastisement, to be more
valorous. But contrariwise, it is honouraable for a man of Arms to have blows
appear in his Buckler, given by his Foes; as is memorable in our ancient
Countryman Scaeva (the principal man who taught Julius Caesar the way to
conquer Britain) whose Valor Caesar has eternized with this acknowledgment,
that it was he alone who saved the Fortification against Pompey at Dyrrachium,
where Caesar perused his Buckler, and found Two hundred and thirty holes
pierced in it. And therefore because the Dastard dares not come so near the
Enemy to bear his strokes on his Shield, he must be content to take this
piercing of some of his own side in Arms.

Those Diminutions that do comprehend fewer than four.

Are either of Three. Two.


Such are said to comprehend three Points, whose Lines do bound so many within
their Limits, as in Example.

He bears Or, Point Champain, Tenn. This is the first of those Diminutions,
that do comprehend three Points, and is formed of one Arch-line, which takes
his beginning from the Dexter Base (and including the middlemost) and ends in
the Sinister Base Point. This is due unto him that kills his Prisoner (humbly
submitting himself) with his own hands, though in extreme need it is allowed by
the Law of Arms, rather to kill, than to hazard himself to be slain. Always
(says Sir John Froysard) by right of Arms a man ought to grieve his Enemy, and
good company of Arms is mercy to Knights and Soldiers.

He bears Or, a plain Point, Sanguine. This Abatement comprehends the same
Points that the last precedent does, but differs from the same herein, that
the former is framed of an Arch-Line, and this of a Right-line. This Abatement
is due to him that tells Lies, or other false Tales, to his Sovereign. For if
light ears incline to light lips, harm ensues; and War is then easily begun,
but hardly allayd again, when misreport and light credence meet together.

He bears Argent, a Goar Sinister, Tenn. This Abatement consists of two
Arch-lines drawn from the Sinister Chief, and bottom of the Escocheon, and
meeting in a sharp Angle in the Fess Point. This is the third and last of the
Abatements, that occupies three Points of the Escocheon, and is due to him
that is a Coward to his Enemy. For we must conceive that Goars, and likewise
Gussets, are things in use among Women, especially Semsters, and therefore are
fit notes of Cowards and Womanish Dispositions. But as for the Dexter Goar, we
must otherwise esteem of it; for (says Leigh) though it be of Stainand Color,
yet it is exempted out of the number of Abatements, and it is a good Coat for a
Gentlewoman; many of which Sex are so far from the stain of Cowardice, as they
will not turn their Backs to men of greatest Valor; but like the Valiant
Penthesilea, -- Audetque viris concurrere virgo,
The Damosel fair dares meet the stoutest man;
says Virgil 1. Aencid. But if there be both Dexter and Sinister (says he) it
is too bad to be born, for although it be charged, yet does it dishonor the
thing that is thereupon.

That Abatement that comprehends only two Points of the Escocheon, is called
a Gusset, and is formed of a Traverse Line, drawn either from the Dexter or
Sinister Chief Point of the Escocheon tending to the Honor Point, and
descending from thence perpendicularly to the extreme base parts of the
Escocheon; as in this next Example appears, wherein are expressed both the
Dexter and Sinister Goars.

He bears Argent, two Gussets, Sanguine. In Abating (says Leigh) there is
but one Gusset: and he that is too much devoted to the Smock, shall wear the
Gusset on the right side; but he that commits Idolatry to Bacchus, the
Gusset on the left side, shall be his Reward. If he be faulty in both, then he
shall bear both, as in the Escocheon present. Such a Coat as this I find born
by the Name of Coningham, saving that the Field is Sable, and the Gussets
Argent, and therefore not to be taken to be of this kind, according to the Rule
touching the Delf.

Hitherto of such Abatements as do abase the estimation of the Coat Armor
whereunto they are annexed, in some parts or points of them only, being the
first sort of Abatements whereof we promised to speak.

Now follows the last and worst of all the rest, which is a Coat Armor
reversed. Reversing is a preposterous manner of location of a Coat Armor, by
turning of the whole Escocheon upside down, contrary to the usual form of
bearing, after this manner.

He bears light Blew, four Mollets, yellow, two in the Fess, and as many in
the Chief. This Form of bearing is peculiar to a Traitor, such a one (says
Leigh) was he that owned these Arms, whose name was Sir Armery of Pavy, a
Lombard born, an unworthy Captain of Calais, and Traitor to King Edward the
Third, in selling the same to Sir Geffrey Charney for 20000 Crowns. To this
kind of bearing is this form of Blazon (beginning at the Base first) peculiar,
and to no other, in respect that as this Escocheon stands, the Base Point is
the highest part thereof. By this inglorious subversion of the Escocheon the
Dignity thereof is not blemished only in some points, as the former, but is
essentially annihilated in the whole. In all other Crimes, though Capital, the
Punishment transcendeth not the person of the Offender, Quia nullum delictum
patris innocenti filio poena est (says Chassanaeus) the Innocent Son shall not
bear the punishment of the Fathers Offense. But in this which we call Crimen
Laesae Majestatis, or High Treason (being an Offense so horrible and detestable
before God and Man) it is far otherwise; for herein, as well the Children of
the Offenders, as the Traitors themselves, shall participate of the heavy.
Vengeance due to so great an Impiety, although not in that deep measure that
the Father does; and that by the imitation of the Divine Justice; that so men
might be deterred, not only from the actual committing, but also from the
Confederation and Concealment of an offense so highly displeasing God, and
abhorring Nature. For when a Fact is committed or intended against the Person
of him that swayeth the Sovereign State (wherein he represents the Image of
the Divine Government) it is not so much offensive against the person of the
Prince, as it is against the Majesty of the Eternal God, whose Image he
bears. And the welfare of the Subjects depending on the safety of the
Sovereign, the danger intended to the one, has in it a guilt of endamaging the
lives of Millions.

As touching persons convicted of High Treason in the Justice of the Law of
Arms, for the further coercion of so heinous a Fact as Treason is, and for a
further punishment both of the Traitor and of his whole Progeny; it is to be
observed, that if a Gentleman of Coat Armor has Issue diverse Sons, and
commits Treason, he has forfeited his Coat Armor for ever, neither may his
Issue bear the same, Quia eorum memoria destrui debet: For that the memory of
them may utterly be extinguished. For since it is held they may be lawfully
killed, seeing they are said to be Enemies to the King and People, much more is
it lawful to prohibit to their Heirs, together with the Inheritance. their Arms
also, and style of Gentry: Insomuch, as some are of Opinion, that the Son
loses Iura Sepulchrorum, the Rights and Ceremonies of Burial accustomed to
Gentry. And of Marcus Manlius (who was condemned of Treason against the Roman
State) we find a Law that none should ever bear that name. A notable Example
whereof we saw of late on the Instrument of that Devilish Parricide on the
late puissant King of France, for the obliterating of the Name and Memory of
such a Villain out of that Kingdom. And in Ireland, such Traitors as are
convicted by the Acts and Ordinances of the High Court of Parliament, are by
force thereof adjudged to suffer damage in their Name, State, Pre-eminence,
Dignities and Honor to them due in fore-passed times. As in all their Offices,
Lordships, Castles, Manors, and in all their Hereditaments whatsoever:
Moreover, that they shall sustain corruption of their Blood and Family, and
both himself and his Posterity are (by force of such Conviction and Judgment)
disabled to demand, receive or recover of any man by descent from any of their
Ancestors, either Lineal, or Collateral; neither are the Children of persons so
convicted, permitted to make their Pedigree, or to derive themselves from such
Parents.

Finally, if such an one were invested with any honorable Dignity, the Laws
adjudge not only his Coat Armor to be razed, and his Shield reversed, but also
his Spear truncked, his Spurrs hewn from his Heels, his Horse docked, his
Sword to be broken upon his Helmet, his Crest divided, his Statues pulled down,
his Blood corrupted, and his Body to death ( nisi speciali Regis rescripto
intervenerit gratia, without the Kings special pardon) his Family at an end,
his Possessions taken away and (for a greater terror) given to some other
Family, whose profitable Service to the King and State may better deserve it.
So loathsome is this Offense to Nobility, that she cannot suffer the Marks of
him that has offended in so high a degree, to possess any place with her
Ensigns; but that the same shall be without all reverence defaced, and spurned
into some base place: So that by such his Degradation, he receives far greater
shame and ignominy, than ever he received Honor by his Advancement, according
to the old Proverb, Turpius ejicitur, quam non admittitur hospes:
The shame is less never to attain,
Than having won to lose again.


The end of the first Section.
Tum Dignum operae pretium venit, cum inter se congruunt Praecepta and
Experimenta.
THE Second Section makes mention of the several Kinds of Escocheons: Also,
what Field and Charge are: The several Kinds of Charges, and their Common
Accidents: Of Lines, with their diverse Forms and Properties: The Making, and
diverse Manner of Bearing of Ordinaries; and their Subdivisions: Together with
diverse Notes, Rules, and Observations to them particularly belonging.

The TABLE of the Second Section.
Kinds of which are Some one Tincture, as when a Coat Armor consists of any
one of the Metals, Colors, or Furs only. More Tinctures than one, wherein must
be considered the Field, which has Tincture Predominating: of which form of
bearing there be manifold Examples in and throughout the second, third, and
fourth Sections. Not Predominating: whereof there are diverse Examples in the
fifth Section.
Charge, which is Proper, which are called Ordinaries, wherein note their
Making, which consists of Lines, wherein observe their Accidents which are
their Rightness, as when they are evenly carried throughout the Field.
Crookedness, whereof some are Bunched in form, as in Lines Engrailed, Invecked,
Waved, etc. Cornered, Rect-Anguled, as in Coats Embattelled, Crenelle, etc.
Acute-Anguled, as in Indenting and Dancette.


Kinds, Single, which of it self makes a Chief. Manifold, viz. Twofold,
whereof are formed these Ordinaries following, viz^ a Pale, Bend, Fess, Gyron,
Canton, Quarter-Pile, etc. More then twofold, which do (...) a Cross, Saltire,
Inescocheon, and Or^e.


Manner of bearing, which is Simple, comprehending One sort, whereof some are
Single, as when a Cross, Bend, Pale, Pile, Fess, or other Ordinary is born
alone, without any other Apposition or Imposition. Manifold, as when more of
the same kind are born One upon another, as a Cross upon a Cross, a Saltire
upon a Saltire, etc. One besides another, as a Pallet, Bend, Pale,
besides a Pallet. 2 Cotizes. 2 Endorses.


Diverse sorts born in like manner One upon another, Bars Cheuron Escocheon
upon a Cheuron. Pile. Saltire.
One besides another Saltire Escocheon Cheuron
besides a Chief. Cross. Chief.


Compound, as having in them some kind of Mixture, by reason of the Apposition
or Imposition of common Charges unto or upon these Ordinaries.

Common, whereof see the Table of the Third Section, at this mark, 69.




SECTION II. CHAP. I.
HAving formerly handled, in the first Section, the Common Accidents of an
Escocheon, viz. Points and Abatements: Now will I proceed to show their several
kinds.

Escocheons are either of One Tincture. More than one.


Those Escocheons are said to be of one Tincture, that have only some one
Metal, Color, or Furr, appearing in the Shield of any Nobleman or Gentleman.
Concerning this form of bearing, it has been holden of some Writers a matter
doubtful, whether one Metal, Color, or Furr born alone in a Shield be ancient
or honorable: Sir John Fern affirms such bearing to be false Arms, and not
worth the receiving, except in some special cases; being perhaps thereunto
induced, because it was reckoned among the Romans a thing reproachful to bear a
naked Shield without any Portraiture, in regard it was an usual thing with men
of Valor and Courage to have their Shields painted.

White Shields were accustomed to be bestowed upon such as were Novices in
Martial Affairs, or (as we commonly call them) Freshwater Soldiers, to the end
they might in future time merit to have them garnished with the Titles and
Testimonies of their Valorous Deserts, until which time such Shields were
reckoned inglorious; as Virgil notes in his Aeneid. lib. 11. Ense levis nudo,
parmaque inglorius alba:
Quick he was with naked Sword,
But white Shield did no praise afford.


Contrariwise, Leigh reckons such unportraited bearing to be good, and withal
very ancient, grounding his Assertion (if I be not deceived) upon 1 Kings 10.
16. where it is said that King Solomon made Two hundred Targets of beaten Gold,
and that Six hundred Sheckles of Gold went to a Target; as also that he made
Three hundred Shields of beaten Gold, and that Three pound of Gold went to one
Shield.

Also we read, that Simon, the High Priest of the Jews, sent Numenius with a
Shield of great value to the Roman State, to confirm the League of Friendship
between them, as appears in 1 Macchab. 14. 24. in these words, After this,
Simon sent Numenius to Rome, with a great Shield of Gold of a thousand pound
weight, to confirm the friendship with them. And in the Letter of Lucius the
Consul, mention is again made of the Thousand pound weight of this Golden
Shield, 1 Macchab. 15. 16, 17, 18.

That these Shields were void of Portraitures, it may be probably conjectured,
in that there is no mention of any; for otherwise, such might have been the
curiousness and excellency of their Workmanship, as that it might have been
prised above the worth of the Gold it self: An Example whereof Ovid, in Metam.
lib. 2. gives, where, describing the glorious beauty of the Palace of the Sun,
he says, Argenti bifores radiabant lumine valvae,
Materiam superabat opus; nam Mulciber illic etc.
The two leaved silver gates bright rays did cast
Rich stuff, but Vulcans Art therein surpast.


Furthermore, we read that Alexander Severus the Emperor, had certain Golden
Shields, whose Bearers were named Chrysoaspides, the Golden Shield-Bearers. And
as touching the Bearers of Shields made of clean Silver, we read that Alexander
Macedo had such, whose Bearers were named Argyraspides, Silver Shield-bearers,
which manner of bearing (says Alex. ab Alex. they borrowed of the Samnites.
Neither is there any mention that these were garnished with any Embossments,
Graving, or Portraitures.

Now to prove, that not only Metals, but Colors also, have been anciently born
alone in Shields, I will note unto you the words of the Prophet Nahum, Chap. 2.
where it is said, Clypeus potentum ejus rubricatus, bellatores coccinati, etc.
The Shields of the Mighty ones were red, etc. alluding to their bloody Fights.

We also find that the Grecians used Russet Shields. The People of Lucania in
Italy, situated between Calabria and Apulia, had their Shields wrought of
Osiers, or Twigs, and covered over with Leather. It was the manner of the
Scythians, Medes, and Persians, to have their Shields of Red Color, to the end
that the effusion of their blood should not easily be discovered (when they
received any wound) either to the discouragement of themselves, or animating of
their Enemies. Moreover, these Nations used Scarlet and Red Colors in their
Military Garments and Shields, to the end they might thereby strike the greater
terror and astonishment into the hearts of their Enemies.

Of this sort of Bearing, I find in a Note worthy of credit, amongst the
Coat-Armours of many Noble Personages, and Valorous Gentlemen, that did attend
the Person of King Edward the First (in his Expedition that he made into the
parts of Scotland to the Siege of Kalauerock) that one Eumenius de la Brect,
did bear in his Shield only Gules. Finally, that Furrs also have been alone in
Shields (without any Charge) as well as Metals and Colors (besides the
Coat Armor of the Duke of Britain) I could produce many Examples even to this
day, were not the use hereof so vulgar, as that it is altogether impertinent to
give instance therein.

You have received a Rule before, page 15. and 17. how you ought to Blazon a
Furr of this sort. This kind of bearing of a Furr without any other Charge in
the Field, is both ancient and good, says Leigh. And this kind of Furr is much
in use with Persons Nobly descended, and Gentlemen of good Reputation have long
born the same; as Ferrars of Chartley, Beauchamp, Somerset, Marmion, Staunton,
and others.

Yet will I note unto you one Coat Armor consisting of Furrs, for the beauty
and rarity thereof, and the same of no Vulgar bearing, as you may see in this
next Escocheon.

He bears Verrey, Ermyn and Gules, by the Name of Gresly; and is the
Coat Armor of Sir Thomas Gresly of Drakelow in the County of Darby. Sometimes
you may observe in this kind of Bearing, the Metal part charged with some other
thing than Ermyn, viz. with Drops or such like.

CHAP. II.
FRom Shields or Escocheons consisting of one Tincture only, we come to such as
have more Tinctures than one. Such Escocheon is that, wherein diverse Colors
are represented to our sight.

Of this some have Tincture Predominating. Not Predominating.


Tincture is said to predominate, when some one Metal, Color, or Furr is
spread, or (at least) understood to be spread all over the Superficies or
Surface of the Escocheon, which we usually call the Field thereof. In such
Escocheons as have in them more Tinctures than one (as is usual with the
greatest number of them)

We must observe the Field. Charge,


The Field is the whole Surface (if I may so call it) of the Shield overspread
with some Metal, Color, or Furr, and comprehends in it the Charge, if it
has any. Look how ^ many Metals, Colors and Furrs there are beforenamed, so
many several Fields of Arms there be. In Blazoning of any Arms, you must
(according to the Rule given, page 9.) first express the Metal, Color, or Furr
of the Field, saying, He bears Or, Argent, Gules, etc. or thus, The Field is
Or, Argent, Gules, etc. but you must not name this word Field, when you use
these words, He bears; saying, He bears a Field, Or, Argent, Gules, etc.
but you shall only name the Metal, Color, or Furr; thus, The Field is Or,
Argent, Gules, etc. or, He bears Or, Argent, Gules, etc. and then proceed to
the Blazon of the Charge, if there be any. The first Metal, Color, or Furr
that you begin to Blazon withal, is always understood among our English
Blazoners to be the Field. Also in Blazoning of Arms composed of Field and
Charge, if there be several Charges, whereof the one lies nearer to the Field
than the other, after you have nominated the Metal, Color, or Furr of the
Field, then must you proceed to the immediate Charge that lies next to the
Field, and after to that which is more remote.

Whereas I have formerly made mention of Tinctures or Colors; when I speak of
the Tinctures or Colors of Fields, I understand thereby, those special Colors
beforenamed, which as by a certain peculiar Right belong to the Art Armorial;
utterly excluding all those that are named general or proper Colors, as
altogether unfit for Fields of Coat-Armours.

CHAP. III.
THese Fields are the parts of Arms, containing: Charges, which are the parts
contained, are next to be considered. A Charge, is that thing whatsoever that
does occupy the Field, and is in the same as Contentum in Continente, whether
it be Sensitive or Vegetable, Natural or Artificial, and is placed, either
throughout all the Superficies of the Escocheon, or else in some special part
of the same.

The Common Accidents of Charges Are Adumbration, or Transparency.
Transmutation, or Counter-changing.


Adumbration or Transparency is a clear exemption of the Substance of the
Charge or thing born, in such sort, as that there remains nothing thereof to
be discerned, but the naked and bare proportion of the outward lineaments
thereof, or the outward Tract, Purfle, or Shadow of a thing; and such kind of
Bearing is, by better Heralds than Grammarians, termed Transparent, quasi
transparens, because the Field, being (as it were) on the further side of the
Charge, or underneath the same, yet the Tincture and Color thereof shows
clean through the Charge, and that no less clearly than as if it were through a
Glass.

In Blazoning of Coat Armor of this kind, you shall say that the Owner thereof
bears this Beast, Bird, Tree, etc. umbrated; for that by reason of the
exemption of the Substance thereof, which was intended to be the Charge, it
affords no other representation than the simple Shadow thereof, which in
Latin is called Vmbra, and thereof is it termed umbrated. And the portraying
out of any thing umbrated, is nothing else but a slight and single draught or
Purfle, traced out with a Pencil, expressing to the view a vacant form of a
thing deprived of all Substance, which must be done with some imperfect or
obscure Color, as Black or Tawny, unless the Field be of the same Color.

Such Bearing has undergone the sharp Censure of those that judged it to have
been occasioned by reason of some ungentleman-like, or unthrifty quality, in
regard that the same represents a Shadow void of Substance. Others are of
Opinion, that their Owners were such, whose Progenitors in fore-passed times
have born the same essentially and completely according to the true use of
Bearing: But forasmuch as their Patrimony and Possessions were much impaired,
or utterly wasted; their Nephews and Kinsmen seeing themselves deprived of
their Inheritance, and yet living in hope, that in future time the same may (by
some unexpected Accident) revert unto themselves, or to their Posterities
(laying aside all ordinary differences) choose rather to bear their Arms
umbrated, that whenever either that Inheritance, or any other high Fortunes
should light on their Family, they might aagain resume the wonted Substance to
such their umbrated form, and so reduce their Arms to their ancient Bearing.
And it is deemed a far better course (upon such occasion) to bear the Arms of
their Progenitors, umbrated, than utterly to reject the same, whereby it might
(within a few Descents) be doubted much, if not denied, that they were
descended from such a Family.

Whatsoever is born with Arms umbrated, must not be charged in any case. In
Blazoning you must never nominate the Color of such Tract of the thing that is
umbrated, because they do only bear a show of that they are not, that is to
say, of a Charge; and therefore is the Color of such Adumbration esteemed
unworthy to be named in Blazon. As touching the distribution of Charges, it is
to be observed, that

All Charges of Arms are either Proper, or, Common.

Those Charges are said to be proper, which by a certain property do
particularly belong to this Art, and are of ordinary use therein, in regard
whereof they are called Ordinaries: And they have also the Title of Honorable
Ordinaries, in that the Coat Armor is much honored thereby, forasmuch as they
are oftentimes given by Emperors, Kings, and Princes, as Additions of Honor
unto the Coat-Armours of Persons of Desert, for some special Service already
past, or upon hope of some future worthy Merit. Moreover (as Leigh shows)
they are also called, Most worthy Partitions, in respect that albeit the Field
be charged in diverse parts thereof, whether with things of one or of diverse
kinds, yet is every of them as effectual as if it were only one by the
Sovereignty of these Partitions being interposed between them.

In these we must consider their Making. Manner of Bearing.


The making of Ordinaries consists of Lines diversely composed. Lines
therefore are These Honorable Ordinaries before mentioned (according to Leigh)
are in number Nine, viz. Cross, whose Content is 5. Part of the Escocheon
uncharged, and charged the 3. Chief, 3. Part. Pale, 3. Part. Bend, 5. Part
uncharged, and charged the 3. Fess, 3. Part. Escocheon, 5. Part. Cheuron, 5.
Part according to Leigh: the 3. according to Chassa. Saltire, 5. Part
uncharged, and charged the third part thereof. Bar, 5. Part.

As touching the Properties of a crooked Line, it is to be observed, that

A crooked Line is Bunched. Cornered.
Of these some are Invecked, As in Example, Engrailed, Waved, Nebula, the
matter whereof these Ordinaries are formed, and according to the diverse Tracts
and Forms of Lines, they do receive a diverse shape and variation of Names. For
this cause Lines must be duly considered, and especially their Properties; in
speaking whereof, I must crave pardon of Euclid's Artists, if I trace not in
their Steps and Definitions, but use such Description as shall be fittest for
our practice.

The Properties of those Lines are their Rightness. Crookedness.


Duae sunt lineae ex quibus figurae omnes componuntur, linea recta, and linea
curva, Zanch. lib. 3. cap. 422.

Rightness is a property of a Line whereby it is carried levelly or equally
throughout the Escocheon, without either rising or falling.

Crookedness is a property of a Line merely contrary to Rightness, in that it
is carried unevenly throughout the Escocheon, with rising and falling.

In Blazoning of Ordinaries formed of straight Lines, you must only name the
Ordinary, without making mention of the streightness of the Line, whereof the
same is composed: But if the same be made of any of the manifold sorts of
crooked Lines, the form of such crookedness must be especially mentioned, as by
Examples shall be made plain hereafter in their proper places.

A Bunched Line is that which is carried with round reflections or bowing up
and down, making diverse hollow Crooks or Furrows, by reason of the sundry
Bendings to and fro, as by these Examples next following may appear.

A Corner Line is framed of sundry Lines meeting together cornerwise.

Of cornered Lines, some are Rect-Anguled: so called of their right Corners or
Angles, and are formed after this manner, Acute-Anguled: so named because their
Corners or Angles are Acute or Sharp; and these we call Indented, after this
manner, Daunsett, which are formed after this sort,



Note, That these two last mentioned sorts of Lines, viz. Indented and
Daunsett, are both one, secundum quale, but not secundum quantum: For their
form is all one, but in quantity they differ much, in that the one is much
wider and deeper than the other. Of all these several sorts of Lines, Examples
shall be given hereafter, as occasion shall arise.

CHAP. IV.
HAving spoken of the Properties of Lines, so much as serves for our intended
purpose; let us next take a view of the several kinds of those Lines, as far
forth as they have use in Heraldry.

For they are used Single. Manifold.


Of both which kinds and forms are all the Honorable Ordinaries composed, as
we shall show hereafter. And first for the single Lines and their use, it is to
be understood, that one single Line does make that sort of Ordinary which we
name a Chief. A Chief is an Ordinary determined by some one of the several
forms of Lines aforesaid, added to the Chief part of the Escocheon: As in
Example.

He bears Gules, a Chief, Argent, by the Name of Worsley, and is the Coat of
Thomas Worsley of Havingham in the North Riding of Yorkshire, Esquire. Or, a
Chief, Gules, is born by Sir Martin Lumley Knight and Baronet. When I say that
a Chief is determined by one Line, I mean not, that one single Line is of it
self a complete Chief, but that the bounds and proportion of such an Ordinary
is designed out, and limited by such a single Line: for otherwise, to speak
more properly, a Chief contains in depth the third part of the Field; and the
same may be diminished, but in no case divided into halves. The Chief
betokens a Senator or Honorable Personage borrowed from the Greeks, and is a
word signifying a Head, in which sense we call Capitaneus (so named of Caput,
the Head) a Chieftain: though he spoke wittily, who derived the name of a
Captain, a capiendo and tenendo, of taking and then holding: For, Non minor est
virtus, quam quaerere, parta tueri:
No smaller praise is in it,
To hold a Fort, than win it.


And as the Head is the chief part in a man, so the chief in the Escocheon
should be a reward of such only, whose high merits have procured them chief
place, esteem, or love amongst men. This Ordinary in our Example you see is
formed of a straight Line: you must therefore in the Blazon thereof, only name
the kind of Ordinary (as before we admonished) making no mention at all of the
streightness of the Line: but if the same, or any other Ordinary be framed of
any other form than straight, then must you expressly mention the form of the
Line whereof such Ordinary is composed, be it Bend, Cheuron, Fess, Saltire,
etc. showing the same to be either Invecked, Engrailed, Wavy, Indented, etc.

He bears Gules, a Chief Crenel, Argent; by the Name of Ryncester. This term
is derived of the French word Crene, which signifies the Dent or Notch in the
Horn of a Bow, or such other thing. There is a kind of Bearing much like unto
this in show, but yet far different from it in kind: Therefore good
deliberation must be used, lest being carried away with a deceivable
appearance, we do utterly mistake the truth of things in Blazoning.

Chiefs are made of all those several forms of Lines beforementioned, as well
as other Charges, as by the Examples of Bordures beforehandled, may in part
appear, and shall be more fully showed hereafter in other kinds.

The Field is Tenn, a Chief, Or, charged with a Shapournet, Ermyn. This term
Shapournet (if I mistake not) is derived from the French word Chaperon, which
signifies a Hood, whereof this is a Diminutive, and bears a resemblance.
Leigh seems to take this form of Bearing to be a kind of Partition, and for
that cause does extend the dividing Line (as in this Escocheon) to the
extremities of the Chief; for which cause I have inserted the same (although
untimely) in this place, which otherwise I would have reserved to some other.
For my own part, I take the same to be rather a Charge to the Chief, than a
Portion thereof, distinguished from the same only by a conceited Line of
Partition, never heretofore heard of: which moved me to shorten the Head of the
rising Line, whereby the middle part has the more resemblance of a Chaperon or
Hood, in respect that it is made large below, and so ascending with a comely
narrowness to the top of the Chief: and if the Chief be the Head, as before we
said, what place can be fitter for the Hood to be on, than the Head?

A Chief (says Sir John Fern) may be honored of another, as an Addition to
the former, as in Examples:

He bears Gules, a Chief, Argent, surmounted of another, Or. This is
accounted good Armory, and signifies a double Reward given by the Sovereign.
So well may a Gentleman deserve in giving Counsel to his Sovereign, that he may
be twice rewarded for the same, as was the Bearer hereof, a French Counselor,
which when it happens, must be placed in this manner: Those Additions of Honor
that are given in reward for Counsel or wise Actions, are thought to be placed
most fitly on the chief part or head of the Escocheon, Quia a Capite edenda est
omnis ratio, Because all Reason proceeds from the Brain. That contrariwise a
Chief may be also diminished, this next Example may teach us.

He bears Or, a Chief, Azure, a Fillet in the neither part thereof, Argent.
Some perhaps strictly observing the Form of my undertaken Method, will conceive
that this Coat might have been more fitly placed hereafter among such
Ordinaries as are made of a twofold Line. Nevertheless, though it may seem to
be of the number of those, yet in very deed, one Line being added to the lower
part of the Chief, does constitute a Fillet, whose Content must be the fourth
part of the Chief, and must be placed properly and naturally in the precise
lowest part thereof. For a twofold respect was the name of Fillet given it; the
one in regard of the thing whereunto it is resembled, by reason of the length
and narrowness thereof; and the other because of the place wherein it is
bestowed. For as the Fillet is shaped long and narrow, for the more commodious
use of women, in trussing up of their hair, as also for the fastening of their
Head-tires, and restraining of their hair from scattering about their brows; so
is this very aptly placed on the Chief, which is the Head of the Escocheon, and
does confine and encompass the uttermost Borders of the same. This Head-tire
being taken from Women, may well fit an uxorious or luxurious person, or such
an one, as in matters of importance is overswayed by a woman: which does not a
little extenuate and impair their Dignity or Estimation amongst those of graver
sort; for that they are deemed to have their head fixed upon the shoulders of
others, and those of the weaker Sex.

CHAP. V.
HItherto has our Pencil drawn out to your view, a single Line, which does
create an Ordinary, or some other of the Charges last mentioned, it rests
that I show what a manifold Line is, and the use thereof, according to the
project of our prefixed Method. I call that a Manifold Line, when as more than
one Line are required to the perfecting of an Ordinary.

Manifold Lines are Twofold. More than twofold.


Twofold Lines I understand to be there, where is constituted an Ordinary of
two Lines. Of which kind of Ordinaries are these only, viz. The Pale, Bend,
Fess, Bar, Quarter, Canton, and their like, as shall appear by Example in
their several places: First of a Pale.

A Pale is an Ordinary consisting of two Lines drawn perpendicularly from the
Top to the Base of the Escocheon, comprehending the third part of the
Escocheon. The content of the Pale must not be enlarged, whether it be charged
or not.

He bears Gules, a Pale, Or; which Coat was born very anciently by Hugh de
Grandmesuil, Lord of Hinkley in Leicestershire, and Lord High Steward of
England, in the time of King Henry the First, whose Daughter and Heir, called
Parnel, was married to Robert Beaumont third Earl of Leicester, who in her
right was Lord High Steward of England.

This Ordinary is subdivided into Pallet. Endorse.


A Pallet is the moiety, or one half of the Pale, and thereof receives his
name of Diminution, as being a Demi or little Pale. And an Endorse is the
Fourth part of a Pallet. Example of each ensues.

He bears Azure, a Pallet, Argent. The Pallet is never charged with any
thing, either quick or dead, neither may it be parted in any case into two, as
some Armorists do hold; but that it may be parted into four, Leigh makes (...)
question: For he gives an Example of the bearing of the fourth part thereof,
which he terms an Endorse, as in this next Escocheon appears: But Sir John
Fern says, it contains the eighth part of the Pale, which in effect is all
one with the fourth part of the Pallet.

He bears or, an Endorse, Gules. This Endorse (says Leigh) is not used but
when a Pale is between two of them. But Sir John Fern says, he was very
confident and bold to set down such Rules of Blazon. And that an Endorse may
very well be born in any Coat Armor between Birds, Fishes, Fowls, Beasts, etc.
But then (says he) it shows that the same Coat has been sometimes two Coats
of Arms, and after conjoined within one Escocheon, for some mystery or secret
of Arms. And for the approbation of such Bearing, he gives an instance of an
Escocheon of pretense, or Engislet (so he terms it) born over these four
Coats, viz. of Austria, Burgundy, Sicily, and Flanders, which is, Or, an
Endorse between a Lion saliant, and an Eagle displayed, Gules.

Now from the Pale, and the several Subdivisions thereof, let us come to the
Bend, and the distinct parts of the same. A Bend is an Ordinary consisting also
of twofold Lines drawn overthwart the Escocheon, from the Dexter Chief to the
Sinister base point of the same, so that the exact point of the Dexter and
Sinister corners thereof, may answer to the precise midst of those Equidistant
Lines whereof the Bend is made: As in Example.

He bears Or, a Bend, Sable. Which Arms were anciently born by Peter de Malo
lacu, or Mawley, a Noble Baron of this Kingdom, in the time of King Edward the
Third. The Bend contains in breadth the fifth part of the Field, as it is
uncharged; but if it be charged, then shall it contain the third part thereof.
Of all the Ordinaries there is none divided like this, as by Example shall
hereafter appear.

The Bend seems to have its Denomination from the French word Bender, which
signifies to stretch forth, because it is extended betwixt those opposite
points of the Escocheon, viz. the Dexter Chief, and the Sinister Base. Yet in
ancient Rules I find the Bend drawn somewhat Arch-wise, or after the
resemblance of the bent of a Bow. Notwithstanding, according to some Armorists,
it does represent a Ladder set aslope on this manner, to scale the Walls of any
Castle or City, as shall be showed hereafter, and betokens the Bearer to have
been one of the first that mounted upon the Enemies Walls. This Bend drawn from
the right side to the left, is called a Bend Dexter; but you shall also find a
Bend exactly drawn like to this on the contrary side, having his Leginning from
the left corner of the Chief, and his termination in the Dexter base point of
the Escocheon, for which cause it is named a Bend Sinister, as in Example
hereafter shall illustrate. In Blazoning of Bends, if the same be Dexter, you
shall only say, He bears a Bend, not using the word Dexter; but if it be drawn
from the Sinister Chief to the Dexter Base, then you must in Blazon by no means
omit the word Sinister.

Note, That the Bend, and diverse other Ordinaries following, are subject to
exemption or voiding. Voiding (as erst we showed) is the exemption of some
part of the inward substance of things voidable, by occasion whereof the Field
is transparent through the Charge, leaving only the outward Edges, bearing the
color and quantity of the Charge, as appears in this next Escocheon.

He bears Ermyn, a Bend voided, Gules, by the name of Ireton. Note, that if
the void part of the Bend were of a different Metal, Color, or Furr, from the
Field, then should you term the same, a Bend bordured, Gules, (according to the
opinion of some Armorists:) But I am of opinion that it were better Blazoned, a
Bend of such and such a Metal, Color, or Furr edged. For this Difference do I
put between them, that when it is blazoned edged, it must be understood to be
an edge or hem, running along the sides only; but if it were termed in blazon
Bordured, then must it be conceived that the Bend is environed round, as well
the ends as the edges.

He bears Argent, a Bend engrailed, Sable, by the Name of Radclyff. This with
the Arms of Vlster, is the Paternal Coat Armor of the Honorable Sir Francis
Radclyff of Dilston in Northumberland, Baronet, of which Family there have been
Six Earls of Sussex; viz. Robert Radclyff Viscount Fitz-water, created Earl of
Sussex by King Henry the Eighth, Anno 1529. and one of the Knights of the
Honorable Order of the Garter. 2. Henry Earl of Sussex, Knight of the Garter,
who was indulged by Patent from Queen Mary, for some eminent Services performed
by him, that he might at any time stand Covered in her presence; an Honor
never granted to any Subject of England, neither before nor since that time,
no, not to the Prince or Heir apparent to the Crown, as Dr. Chamberlain, in his
Present State of England, page 160. takes notice of, 3. Thomas Earl of Sussex,
Knight of the Garter, and Lord Chamberlain to Queen Elizabeth, who went General
into the North. 4. Henry Earl of Sussex, Knight of the Garter. 5. Robert Earl
of Sussex, also Knight of the Garter: And 6. Edward Earl of Sussex. Of this
Family were also two more Knights of the Garter, viz. Sir John Radclyff in the
time of King Henry the Sixth, who was also Knight Banneret, Lord High Steward
of Aquitain, Constable of Bordeaux, and Earl of Longueville in France, as
appears by the Records in the Tower: And Sir Richard Radclyff in the time of
King Richard the Third.

Argent, a Bend engrailed, Gules, is the Paternal Coat Armor of that ancient
Family of the Colepeppers of Kent; the chief of which is the Right Honorable
Thomas Lord Colepepper, Baron of Thornsway, now residing at Leeds-Castle in the
said County. This Coat also appertains to Sir Thomas Colepepper of
Preston-hall in Aylesford in the said County, Baronet.

This Ordinary is composed of diverse other of the Forms of Lines
beforementioned, as sundry other of the Ordinaries are, as by these next, and
other subsequent Examples in their due places shall appear.

He bears Argent, a Bend wavy, Sable. This Coat Armor pertains to Henry
Wallop of Farleigh-wallop in the County of Southampton, Esquire This is termed
wavy, or waved, in respect it bears a Representation of the swelling Waves or
Billows of the Sea, which being tossed by contrary flaws of Wind, do rise and
fall after this manner: And this also by some is called Unde, of the Latin word
Undo.

This form of Bearing may put us in mind of the manifold (and those inevitable,
yet profitable) afflictions which do attend this Mortal state of ours; for so
has God ordained that they should be means to win and bring us to himself,
therefore must we receive them patiently, as the evident tokens of Gods great
Love and Mercy. As the Preacher admonishes us, saying, Whatsoever comes unto
thee, receive it patiently, and be patient in the change of thine afflictions;
for as Gold and Silver is tried in the fire, even so are men acceptable in the
furnace of Adversity. Believe in God and he will help thee, order thy way
aright, and trust in him, hold fast his fear, and grow old therein.

He bears Azure, a Bend Crenelle, Argent, by the name of Walleyes. What
Crenelle is, I have before showed. After this manner, Soldiers, in default of
Scaling Ladders, used to nick or score a piece of Timber with their Swords (for
want of better Tools) and so found means to ascend the Walls, and surprise the
Enemies.

He bears Sable, a Bend flory, Argent, by the Name of Highlord of Micham in
Surrey, Gent.

He bears Gules, two Bends, Verrey, by the Name of Fagge. This, with the Arms
of Vlster, is the Paternal Coat Armor of Sir John Fagge of Wiston in Sussex,
Baronet.

He bears Gules, two Bends, Vaire, on a Canton, Or, an Anchor, Sable. This is
the Coat Armor of Sir Richard Ford of the City of London, Knight, and Lord
Mayor thereof, Anno 1671.

He bears Pearl; three Bendlets in the Sinister Chief, Ruby; and is the
Paternal Coat Armor of the Right Honorable Richard Lord Byron, Baron of
Rochdale in Lancashire.

The parts of a Bend are Such as are deduced from it. Bendelet.


Such as are derived from a Bend do contain Half. Less than half.


That which contains half the Bend is called a Gartier, whereof you have here
an Example in this Escocheon.

He bears Or, a Gartier, Gules. This is derived either from the French word
Iartier, or else from the Norman word Gartier, both which are the same that we
call in English a Garter, the form whereof this Charge does represent. It is a
Name of Honorable esteem in English Heraldry, and it gave beginning to the
most Renowned Order of Knighthood, of which College and Society have been more
Kings and Princes, and princely Peers, than of all the Knightly Orders besides
in Christendom. This contains half the Bend in bigness.

Such as do contain less than half the Bend, are Cost. Riband.


Both which be exemplified in these next Escocheons.

The Field is Gules, a Cost, Or. The Content of this is the fourth part of the
Bend, and half the Garter, and is sometimes called a Cotise, and also a Battoon
(as Leigh notes): But Bara makes a Cotise and the Battoon two distinct
things. The word Cost or Cotise is derived from the Latin word Costa, which
signifies a Rib, either of Man or Beast. And Farnesius says, Costae a
custodiendo sunt dictae, Farn. 1. 45. When one of these is born alone, as in
this Escocheon, then shall you term it in Blazon a Cost; but if they be born by
couples in any Coat (which is never, says Leigh, but when a Bend is placed
between two of them) then you may name them Cotizes, as in Example:

He bears Or, a Bend, Verrey, between 2 Cotises or Costs, Gules. This Coat
pertains to Sir Edmund Bowyer of Camberwel in the County of Surrey, Knight.
Not unfitly are these so termed Costs or Cotises, in respect they are placed
upon each side of the Bend, and do enclose the same, as the Ribs of Man, or of
Beast, do bound and defend their Intrails. And concerning such Charges or
Fields composed of Verrey, I refer you (for the avoiding of needless
repetition) to the Rules before delivered. Note, That as well the Subdivisions
of Ordinaries, as the Ordinaries themselves, are formed of the several sorts of
Lines before expressed, as may be gathered out of Vpton, whose Opinion you
shall hear when we come to speak of Battoons.

He bears Or, a Riband, Gules. This is that other Subdivision that is derived
from a Bend, and does contain the eighth part thereof. The Name accords well
with the Form and Quantity of the same, in that it is long and narrow, which is
the right shape of a Riband.

Thus much may suffice touching the Bend Dexter, and the Subdivision thereof:
Let us now consider the Bend Sinister, and how the same is subdivided. A Bend
Sinister is an Ordinary consisting of a twofold Line, drawn traverse the
Escocheon, from the Sinister chief corner to the Dexter base point; and
differs (as we said) from the Dexter Bend only in this, that it is placed on
the opposite part of the Escocheon, as in Example.

He bears Argent, a Bend Sinister, Vert. You may perhaps sometimes find this
Bend born jointly with the Bend Dexter in one Escocheon, which to look upon are
much like unto a Saltire. In Coats of such Bearing, you must carefully observe
which of them lies next to the Field, and that must be first named. And this
Rule holds not alone herein, but also in all other Coat-Armours formed of
diverse Charges, whereof the one lies nearer to the Field than the other,
according to the sixth Rule of Blazon formerly given.

The Bend Sinister is subdivided into a Scarp. Battoon.


A Scarp (as Leigh notes) is that kind of Ornament (much in use with
Commanders in the Field) which we do usually call a Scarf, as may be gathered
by the derivation thereof from the French word Escharpe, signifying that
Ornament which usually is worn by Martial men after the same manner from the
left Shoulder overthwart the Body, and so under the Arm on the right side, as
in Example.

He bears Argent, a Scarp, Azure. You need not in Blazon thereof make any
mention of this word Sinister, because it is never born otherwise than thus.
Notwithstanding this Charge has some resemblance of the common Note of
Illegitimation: yet is it not the same, neither has it any such signification,
for that it agrees not with the Content thereof, nor with the manner of
bearing the same, as is plain by this next Escocheon.

He bears Or, a Battoon, Gules. This word Battoon is derived from the French
word Baston, which signifies a Wand or Cudgel. The Frenchmen do usually bear
their Battoon (as it were) couped after this manner; whereof I do better allow,
than of that form which is commonly used among us in England, because the same
being so born, does better resemble the shape or form of a Cudgel or Battoon.
And though this has the form and quantity of a Cost, yet it differs from the
same, in that the Cost^ is extended to the extremities of the Escocheon,
whereas the Battoon shall be couped, and touch no part of the same, as by this
Escocheon appears. This is the proper and most^usual Note of Illegitimation
(perhaps for the affinity betwixt Baston and Bastards; or else for that
Bastards lost the privilege of Freemen, and so were subject to the servile
stroke) and it contains the fourth part of the Bend Sinister; and being thus
born, differs from all the Subdivisions of the Ordinaries before manifested
sufficiently, what conformity soever any of them may seem to have therewith.
This Mark was devised both to restrain men truly generous, from the filthy
stain of this base (but common) sin, when they consider, that such accusation
to themselves, and shame to their Issue, shall never be severed from their
Coat Armor, which should be the Blazon of their Honor. For let the spurious
Birth have never so Noble a Father, yet he is Base-born; and Base will be ever
the first syllable in a Bastards name, till by his own Virtues he has washed
off the stains of his Fathers Vice, as many high Spirits have done; who though
so born, have attained to the highest pitch of Glory. Every Bastard may have
his Battoon of what color he will, but not of Metal, which is for the Bastards
of Princes. At the first, Bastards were prohibited to bear the Arms of their
reputed Fathers. Then (says Sir John Fern in his Glory of Generosity) they
did by suit obtain a toleration from Sovereigns and Kings, to be made
Legitimate, and to be matriculated by the Kings Grant, as Children lawfully
born: which Grant did enable them to be capable of many Immunities and
Prerogatives which others lawfully begotten do enjoy: and so by such
Legitimation they are discharged of all those dishonours which in former time
they were subject unto; and were acquitted from the stain of their Bastardy,
Excepto quod ex tali legitimatione non admittebantur ad Iura Sanguinis cum
aliis Filiis: Except only, that they had not the right of Blood and Inheritance
thereby; to participate with the lawful Inheritance of their Father, as
appears Judges 11. And when the woman's Children were come to age; they thrust
out Jepthah, saying, Thou shall not inherit in our Fathers House, for thou art
the Son of a strange Woman. By pretense of these Legitimations, they bear the
Coat Armor of their reputed Ancestors, with a sign of Bastardy, now commonly
known to every man, by reason of frequent use: which mark (as some do hold)
neither they nor their Children shall ever remove or lay aside, Ne sordes per
errorem inter praecipuos reputentur; Left the Fruits of Lust should by error
gain the estimation of Generosity.

It is not lawful for those that are base born to usurp the Arms of their
reputed Fathers, unless it be branded with certain Notes or Marks proper to men
Illegitimate, devised of set purpose to separate and distinguish them from such
as proceed from lawful Matrimony. Moreover, it is often questioned, Whether
such as be illegitimated (by Act of Parliament, or whatsoever other means) may
bear, or assume the bearing of the Arms of their reputed Fathers? Some are of
Opinion they may: Others do hold the contrary, unless they do ^ear them with
the apposition of some of the beforementioned Notes appropriated to the quality
of their Illegitimate Generation and Procreation. By Legitimate Issue, is not
to be understood Legitimate only, that is to say, such as be adopted Children:
For there is in such but a bare imitation of Nature, of such we have no use in
this Land of Adoption or Arrogation. But of such as are both Natural and
Legitimate; Natural so termed, Quia nature aliter generati; Legitimate, Ex
Legitima parentum conjunctione approbata per Leges. Such as are otherwise
begotten are Bastards, and the Issue of an unlawful Bed.

Consanguinity is a Bond or Link of Persons descended of the same Stock,
derived from Carnal Propagation: So called, Consanguinitas, quasi sanguinis
unitas, viz. the unity or community of Blood.

To discern priority or nearness in Blood, two things must be regarded
principally; viz. Linea and Gradus: The Line is that, that gathers together
the Persons containing their Degrees, and distinguishing them in their Numbers.
This is called Collectio Personarum. The other, viz. Gradus, shows the state
or condition of the distant Persons, how near they be, or how far distant
asunder (in themselves) from their common Stock, or either from other. This is
called Habitudo distantium personarum. Et dicitur Gradus, ad similitudinem
soalarum graduum, sive locorum proclivium; quia ita gradimur, de proximo ad
proximum.

This beforementioned Line is threefold, viz. Ascending. Descending. Collateral.


The Ascending Line is, from me to my Father, Grandfather, and so upwards.

The Descending Line, is from me to my Son, Nephew, his Son, downwards.

The Collateral Line is placed on either side.

This Line also is twofold, viz. Equal. Unequal.


The Equal Collateral is that, where equally the Persons differ from their
Common Stock: as Brothers and Sisters be equally distant from their Father: As
also Brothers and Sisters Children from their Grandfather.

The Unequal Collateral is, where one precedeth another: Such are Brothers, and
their Brothers and Sisters Children.

Affinity is (after the Laws) Personarum proximitas proveniens ex justis
nuptiis; A nearness of Persons proceeding from lawful Marriage. So called
Affinitas, quasi duorum ad unum finem unitas; A union or consolidation of two
that be of diverse Kindreds by Marriage or other Copulation conjoined.

By this, Affinity is contracted two manner of ways, viz.

By Lawful Marriage. Unlawful Knowledge.


The first is thus contracted; My Brother and I are Consanguine in the first
degree, He takes a Wife, her they call, personam additam personae per carnis
copulam. This is the first kind of Affinity (contracted by means of my Brother)
viz. between his Wife and me, and the first degree: for thus they be the
Kindred and Degrees) discerned in Affinity, viz. by the persons that be in
Consanguinity or Blood, either nearer or farther off. As for Example:

My Brother is in the first degree to me in Consanguinity; his Wife in
Affinity: My Brothers Son in the second, his Nephew in the third, his Nephews
Son in the fourth. They in Consanguinity: Their Wives in the same degrees,
second, third, or fourth unto me, but they in Affinity.

Note that they attain not (in me) by their addition that, I have attained (by
Blood) in the persons to whom they be added. For herein, that is to say, in
Attinency we be distinguished in Consanguinity and Affinity. To make it plain:
My Brother is my Consanguine, his Wife my Affine, only they retain and
participate with me the degree, whether it be first, second, third, or fourth;
that I have with the persons that they be carnally known by, the which they
alter not.

Consequently they shall be every person in Consanguinity to my Wife, in
Affinity to me, in what degree in the one, in that degree in the other. But
always in the first kind, be they Brother, Sister, Nephew, Niece, etc. But to
return to our Battoon. Vpton calls this Baston or Battoon, a Fissure, and
making mention of the variable forms thereof, says, Istae Fissurae tot modis
variantur, quot modis fiunt bendae: These Fissures have as many varieties of
forms as the Bends have.

For there are of them (says he) Planae, Plain. Ingrediatae, Ingrailed.
Invectae, Invecked. Fusilatae, Fusile. Gobonatae. Gobonated.

And (he says) it is commonly called a Fissure (which is a Cut or Rent) pro eo
quod findit Arma paterna in duas parts; quia ipse bastardus finditur and
dividitur a patrimonio patris sui: in that it cuts or rents the Coat Armor in
twain, because the Bastard is cut off from his Fathers Inheritance. In some
Countries they used to distinguish these from the lawful begotten, by setting
of two Letters upon their Garments, S and P, quasi, Sine Patre, without Father.
Cui pater est populus, pater est huic nullus and omnis.
Brats are priviledg'd above any:
We have but one Sire, they have many.


And perhaps S P did signify Satus Populo, the Son of the People. Chassanaeus
says, that Bastards are not capable of their Fathers Patrimony, either by Law
or Custom, Quia filius Ancillae non erat haeres cum filio Liberae: The
Servants Child must not part stakes with her Mistresses. Leigh is of Opinion,
That the lawful Son of a Bastard shall change his Fathers Mark to the right
side, observing still the quantity thereof; for so I do understand him, in
respect that he adds immediately, that the same may, at the pleasure of the
Prince, be enlarged, or broken after this manner.

He bears, Azure, a Bend, double Dancett, Argent, by the Name of Lorks. This
(says Leigh) shall never be called other than a Bend, after it is thus parted:
but Bastards (says he) have sundry other Marks, every one according to their
unlawful begettings; which with hundreds of others, are the Secrets of Heralds.

Besides those bearings bendwise above demonstrated, we mentioned another by
the name of a Bendlet, which has greater resemblance with a Bend than any of
the rest; and by the Name it may seem to be some subdivision of the Bend. It
has yet no certain quantity, but contains evermore a sixth part of the Field
(according to the observation of Leigh) whereof you have an Example in this
next Escocheon.

The Field is Argent, a Bendlet, Gules. Two manner of ways does this Charge
differ from the Bend: The one, that the bend contains the fifth part of the
Field uncharged, and the third part thereof charged. And this is limited to the
sixth part of the Field, which it may not exceed. Secondly, It is distinguished
from the bend, secundum locationem in place, inasmuch as the bend is so placed,
as that the corner of the Escocheon does answer to the just middle of the same,
between the upper and neither Lines thereof: but the bendlet begins in the
exact corner of the point of the Escocheon; so as the lower Line is distant
from the corner thereof the full breadth of the bendlet.

CHAP. VI.
OUR prefixed Order does now call upon me to bend my course from bends, with
the parts and subdivisions thereof, and to proceed to the Fess, which
challenges the next place.

The Fess is an Ordinary, formed of a twofold Line, drawn overthwart the
breadth of the Escocheon; in the midst whereof is the very Center of the
Shield. And it contains the third part of the Field, and may not be
diminished, albeit the French Heralds do blazon three bars gemels, for a Fess
of six pieces.

He bears Vaire, Or, and Vert, a Fess, Gules, by the Name of Duffield. This
word Fess is a French word, and does signify the Loins of a man. This Ordinary
has been anciently taken for the same that we call Baltheum militare, or
Cingulum Honoris, a Belt of Honor; because it divides the Field into two
equal parts, it self occupying the middle between both, even as the Girdle
environeth the middle part of a man, and rests upon his Loins.

This Girdle of Honor may seem to have been in ancient time given by Emperors
and Kings, and their Generals of the Field unto Soldiers, for reward of some
special Service performed by them: and it is not improbable, that such a reward
it was, that the General of David's Army, Ioab, would have given the Messenger
that brought him news that Absalom was hanged by the hair of the Head in an
Oak, if he had slain him; where Ioab says, Why have thou not killed him, that
so I might have rewarded thy Service with ten Sheckles of Silver, and a Girdle
(or an arming Belt)? For some translate it Cingulum, some Baltheum. Amongst the
Macedonians, it was ordained by a Military Law (says Alex. ab Alex.) that the
Soldier that had not killed an Enemy, non militari Cingulo, sed capistro
cingeretur: should not be girt with an arming Girdle, but with a Halter. And
not without reason is a man adorned with a Military Girdle, signifying he must
be always in a readiness to undergo the business of the Weal Public; for the
more speedy performance of which Charge, he should have his Garments close girt
unto his body, that the looseness of them should give no impediment to the
execution of his assumed Charge and enjoined Services. And these Tokens of
Chivalry were so highly esteemed in ancient times, that St. Ambrose says, in
his Age, Duces, and Principes, omnes etiam militantes, operosis Cingulis auro
fulgente pretiosis, ambiunt, etc. Great Captains, Princes, and Martial Men,
delight to wear their Belts curiously wrought, and glittering with Gold, etc.

As the bestowing of this Military Girdle, was reputed very honorable, because
none were to receive it but Men of Merit, so also was it ever accounted most
dishonorable for any just cause to be again deprived of the Dignity thereof;
neither should such an one be restored thereunto, but upon very singular and
especial Desert, as Ferettus notes, where he says, Augustus laudabiliter
militarem disciplinam gessit severissime: and privatos militari Cingulo nunquam
restituit, nisi illos prae caeteris virtutum merita insignirent: Augustus the
Emperor got much honor by the severity of his Military Discipline: for if a
man were once deprived of his arming Girdle, he never would restore it, unless
he performed some excellent Service above all others. Notwithstanding, there is
also one kind of putting off the Belt, of no less honor, than the putting on
of it; yea, much more glorious it is, in that it is the end and perfection of
the other; and that is, when the Victory is achieved, Victory being the end of
Arming, as Peace is of Battle. To which purpose is that saying 1. Reg. 20. 11.
Ne jactet se qui se accingit, ut qui discingit: Let not him boast who girds
himself, as he that does ungird: meaning, we must not triumph (as the saying
is) before Victory; but it being once attained, it is the Honor of a Generous
Mind, to put off his Belt, and not to Sanguine his Blade with cold blood. For
those Gallants, who in times and places of Peace, are still drawing their
Swords like Warriors, in times and places of War, prove (for the most part)
peaceabler and calmer than they should be.

But if a Knight be disarmed of his Military Girdle by his Demerits and
Offense, he is therewithal deprived of all Military Privileges, like as it
fares with a Captain, who (if he happen to lose his Ensigns) is disabled to
advance any other in the Field, until he has either regained the same, or by
his Valor extorted some other from the Enemy. Which kind of deprivation of
Knights and Martial Men for any notable transgression, was of frequent use in
times past, and in some places is continued unto this day with greater severity
and much more infamy than in former times. Depositio Cingulorum and Baltheorum
(says Wolfgangus Lazius) quod genus poenae proprio seorsim vocabulo
discinctura and recinctura vocabatur, manet hodie adhu^ in ordine Equestri,
majori quam olim ignominia. Quo ritu (ut nos dicimus) Equites aur ati
digradantur. The depriving of the Belt (which was wont to be termed the
discincture or ungirding) is at this day still in use amongst Knights, and with
more ignominy than was in ancient times: which is nothing else but that which
we call degrading of a Knight. If any ask me, How this comes about that such
Degradation of a Knight is more infamous than of old? I answer, it is because
it is more rare, and therefore more remarkable. If again you ask, Why it is
more rare than of old? I answer, because it is more infamous, and therefore
Princes more unwilling to inflict it. Howsoever, the truth is, that base and
unknightly actions and qualities, deserve a base and unknightly chastisement.

He bears Or, a Fess Dancett, Sable. These Arms pertain to the worthy
Gentleman Sir Thomas Vavasour, who, in the Reign of King James, was Knight
Marshal of his Majesty's Household, and of the Verge thereto appertaining; whose
Family anciently had the addition Le to their Name, as being the Kings
Valvasores, being in times past a Degree not much inferior to a Baron, and
given to their Family ex Regio munere, as Mr. Camden notes in Yorkshire,
speaking of Haselwood, being the ancient Inheritance of the said Family.

So much of a Fess: now of a Chevron. A Chevron is an Ordinary, formed of a
twofold Line Spirewise or Pyramidal; the Foundation being in the Dexter and
Sinister base points of the Escocheon, and the acute Angle of the Spire near to
the top of the Escocheon: As in Example.

The Field is Topaz, a Chevron, Ruby. This Coat pertains to the Honorable
and Ancient Family of Stafford, now Barons, and sometimes Earls of Stafford,
and Dukes of Buckingham. This Ordinary is resembled to a pair of Barge-couples
or Rafters, such as Carpenters do set on the highest part of the House, for
bearing of the Roof thereof; and betokens the atchieving of some business of
moment, or the finishing of some chargeable and memorable work. This was
anciently the usual form of bearing of the Chevron, as appears by many Seals
and Monuments yet extant, and is most agreeable to Reason, that as it
represents the Roof of a House (though I am not ignorant that Leigh says, it
was in old times the Attire for the Heads of Women Priests) so accordingly it
should be extended to the highest part of the Escocheon, though far different
is the bearing thereof in these days. In which respect it were fit that common
Painters, the common Disorderers of these Tokens of Honor, were better looked
unto; who both in former Ages, and much more in these days, have greatly
corrupted these honorable signs, by adding their new fantastical inventions;
that so they might make the things born in Coat Armor more perspicuous to the
view, or because they would be thought to be well overseen in Heraldry. For
indeed they want the eye of Judgment, to see and discern that such is the
excellency of these honorable Tokens, that the least alteration either by
augmentation, diminution, transposition, or whatsoever other means, does
occasion a change in them so great, as that they thereby differ from
themselves, not only in their accidental, but also in their substantial parts,
and cease to be any longer the same they were before, and their owners are
debarred to challenge any propriety or interest in them, in respect of such
alteration. Modica alteratio in membro principali magnam alterationem facit
(says the Philosopher) A little alteration makes a great alteration in a
principal part. As the least spot in the eye, which is the worthiest part of
the face, does more disfigure the same, than ten times so much in any other
Member of the whole body.

The Content of the Chevron is the fifth part of the Field (according to
Leigh): but Chassanaeus reckons the same amongst those Ordinaries that do
occupy the third part of the Field. You may have two Chevrons in one Field
(says Leigh) but not above; and if they exceed that number, then shall you
call them Chevron ways. But I suppose they might be termed much better
Chevronels; that is to say, minute or small Chevrons; for so is their blazon
more certain. This Charge following, and the Subdivisions thereof, are diversely
born, as well in respect of the diverse location, as of the variable form
thereof; for sometimes it is born on chief, otherwhiles on base, sometimes
enarched, sometimes reversed, sometimes fretted, etc. as after by Examples
appears.

He bears Or, a Chevron in Chief, Azure. Note that the lower part of this
Chevron is far above the ordinary place of a single Chevron; for it is pitched
as high as the Nombril of the Escocheon, whereas others have their rising from
or near above the Dexter and Sinister base points. The Ancestors of this bearer
(says Leigh) have born the same otherways, which was for some good purpose
removed, although it were better after the common manner of bearing. There are
diverse Accidents incident unto this Ordinary, viz. Transposition, as in this
last Escocheon; Couping, Voiding and Reversing. Of all which I purpose to give
several Examples in their proper places.

He bears Ermyn, a Chevron, couped, Sable, by the Name of Jones. What couping
is, I have before showed, whereunto (for shunning needless repetition) I refer
you.

He bears Azure, a Chevron Ingrailed, voided, Or, by the Name of Dudley. What
voiding is, I have showed before. In the blazoning of Coat-Armours of this
kind, I mean of Charges voided, you shall not need to make any mention of the
Color of the exempted part thereof, saying, that it is voided of the Field:
For if you say voided only, it is ever understood that the Field shows
through the middle part of the Charge voided. If the middle part of this
Chevron were of a different Metal, Color, or Furr, from the Field, then should
you blazon it thus; A chevron engrailed, Or, surmounted of another, of such or
such Color.

He bears Or, two Cheverons, Gules, by the Name of Mounson; and with the Arms
of Vlster is the bearing of Sir John Mounson of Carleton in Lincolushire,
Baronet.

Argent, two Cheverons, Sable, is the Coat Armor of Sir Joseph Ash of
Twittenham in Middlesex, Baronet: and of William Ash of Hatchbury in Wiltshire,
Esquire.

He bears Topaz, two Cheverons, Ruby, Or, a Canton of the Second, a Mullet of
the First. This was the Coat Armor of Sir William Pope, who was created Earl
of Down, and Baron Pope of Beltirbet in Ireland, whose Son William dying in the
life time of his Father, his Grandson Thomas succeeded him in the said Honor,
but left Elizabeth his Daughter and sole Heir (the Honor returning to Thomas
his Uncle) who was first married to Sir Francis Henry Lee of Quarendon in
Buckinghamshire, Baronet; by whom she had Issue Sir Edward Henry Lee, who was
created Earl of Lichfield, Viscount Quarendon, and Baron of Spelsberry; and
Francis Lee; and is now married to the Right Honorable Robert Bertue, Earl of
Lindsey, Baron Willoughby of Eresby, Lord Great Chamberlain of England, by whom
she has Issue the Lady Elizabeth.

He bears Argent, three Cheverons, Gules, a Label of three Points, Azure, by
the Name of Barrington, and is the bearing of Thomas Barrington Esquire Son and
Heir to Sir John Barrington of Barrington-hall in Essex, Baronet.

He bears Azure, three Cheverons, Argent, by the Name of Lewkenor, and is the
Paternal Coat Armor of John Lewkenor of West-Dean in Sussex, Esquire Son and Heir
of Sir John Lewkenor Knight of the Bath, deceased, who was descended from the
ancient Family of the Lewkenors.

Gules, three Cheverons, Or, by the Name of Mathews; and is born by Lemuel
Mathews A. M. Archdeacon of Down in the Kingdom of Ireland; and by his brother
Man Mathews, Vicar of Swansey in Glamorganshire.

Or, three Chevrons, Gules, was the Coat of Robert base Son of Henry the First,
who was created Earl of Gloucester by his Father, and had Issue William Earl of
Gloucester; which William had three Daughters and Coheirs, viz. Isabel, who was
married to King John; Mabel, who married to the Earl of Eureux; and Amicia,
married to Richard Earl of Clare and Gloucester. This Robert built the Castles
of Bristol and Cardiff, and the Priory of St. James in Bristol, where he lies
interred.

He bears Sable, three Chevrons, Ermyn, by the Name of Wise, and is the
Coat Armor of Sir Edward Wise of Sydenham in Devonshire, Knight of the Bath.

This Coat, with a due difference, is born by Mr. John Wise of the City of
London, Master Plummer to the Office of his Majesty's Ordnance.

He bears Argent, three Chevrons, Sable, each charged with five Annulets, Or,
by the Name of Colwal, and is born by John Colwal of the Inner Temple, London,
Esquire.

The Subdivisions of this Ordinary are Chevronel. Couple-close.


A Chevronel is a diminutive of a Chevron, and signifies a minute or small
Chevron, and contains half the quantity of the Chevron; as for Example.

He bears Argent, a Chevronel, Vert. Of these (says Leigh) you may have no
more than three in a Field, except Partition. The other Subdivision of the
Chevron is called a Couple-close. A Couple-close is a subordinate Charge
derived from a Chevron, and formed of two Lines erected Chevron-ways.

He bears Vert, a Couple-close, Argent. This contains the fourth of the
Chevron, and is not born but by Pairs, except there be a Chevron between them.
Well does the Name of this Charge, agree with the use thereof, which is not
only to be born by Couples for the most part, but also to have a Chevron
between them, which they enclose on each side.

The next in order to the Chevron is the Bar. A Bar is composed of two
Equi-distant Lines drawn overthwart the Escocheon, after the manner of the Fess
beforementioned, as in this next Escocheon appears.

This Ordinary differs from the Fess, not only in that it contains the
fifth part of the Field, whereas the Fess occupies the third part thereof; but
also that the Fess is limited to one certain place of the Escocheon, to wit,
the exact Center or Fess point thereof, whereas the Bar is not tied to any
prescript place, but may be transferred unto sundry parts of the Escocheon. But
if there be but one only Bar in the Escocheon, then must the same occupy the
place of the Fess, as appears in this Escocheon. This Charge is of more
estimation than is well considered of many that bear the same. If you have two
Bars in the Field, they must be so placed, as that thereby the Field of the
Escocheon may be divided into five equal parts; so shall each of them receive
their just quantity.

A Bar is subdivided into a Closet. Barulet.


A Closet is a Charge abstracted from a Bar, and consists also of two
Equi-distant Lines drawn overthwart the Escocheon: As in Example.

He bears Or, a Closet, Sanguine. This contains half the Bar, and of these
there may be five in one Field, and are very good Armory. The other Subdivision
of a Bar is called a Barulet, which (after the Opinion of Leigh) cannot be
born dividedly, but must be born by Couples, unless they be parted with a Bar,
whereof you have an Example in this next Escocheon.

He bears Sable, a Barulet, Argent. The Content of the Barulet is the fourth
part of the Bar, whereof it is a derivative, as by the name of Diminution
imposed thereupon does manifestly appear. Barulets (says Vpton) are diversely
born in Arms, viz. Plain, Engrailed, etc. whereunto good heed must be taken in
Blazon.

He bears Argent, two Bars, Gules, by the Name of South; and is born by John
South of Kelsturn in Lincolnshire Esquire one of the Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber
in Ordinary to his Majesty King Charles the Second, Son of Sir John South of
the said place, Knight.

Azure, two Bars, Or, is the Coat Armor of the ancient Family of the Burdets
of Warwickshire.

Argent, two Bars, Sable, is born by Edward Brereton of Burras in
Deubighshire, Esquire.

Hitherto of a Bar: Now of a Gyron.

A Gyron is an Ordinary consisting of two straight Lines drawn from diverse
parts of the Escocheon, and meeting in an acute Angle in the Fess point of the
same. A Gyron (as one says) is the same that we call in Latin Gremium, which
signifies a Lap, and is the space between the Thighs; and thence perchance do
we call the Groyn; which name, whether it be given to this Charge, because it
determines in gremio, in the very lap or midst of the Escocheon, or because it
has a bending like the Thigh and Leg together, I cannot define. Gyrons are
born diversely, viz. single, by couples, of six, of eight, of ten, and of
twelve, as shall appear hereafter, where I shall speak of Arms having no
tincture predominating. For the making this Ordinary, behold this next
Escocheon, where you shall find one single Gyron alone, which does best express
the manner thereof: as in Example.

He bears Sanguine, one Gyron issuing from the Chief Dexter point, Or. If
these two Lines whereof this Ordinary is framed, were drawn throughout to the
Extremities of the Escocheon, then would they constitute two Gyrons, as in this
next Escocheon appears. But if this Gyron had stood in Fess in the Dexter
part, and the Gyron Argent, then were it the second Coat of the Lord de Wolfo
of Suesia, whose Daughter was married to the Marquess of Northampton, and after
to Gorge.

He bears Argent, two Gyrons, Gules. You need not say, Meeting in point, the
one from the Dexter Chief, the other in the Sinister base, because they do
evermore meet in the Fess point, be they never so many. Here you see, that as
two Lines drawn, the one Bendways from the Dexter corner of the Chief part of
the Escocheon, and resting on the Fess point, and the other drawn Fessways
overthwart the Escocheon, and meeting with the same in the said Fess point, do
make one Gyron: so do the same drawn throughout, produce two Gyrons.

So much of a Gyron: Now of a Canton and Quarter.

A Canton is an Ordinary framed of two straight Lines, the one drawn
perpendicularly from the Chief, and the other transverse from the side of the
Escocheon, and meeting therewith in an acute Angle, near to the corner of the
Escocheon, as in this next appears.

He bears Ermyn, a Canton, Argent, charged with a Chevron, Gules, by the Name
of Middleton. This Ordinary is termed a Canton, because it occupies but a
Corner or Cantel of the Escocheon. Some Armorists do hold, That the Canton is a
Reward given to Gentlemen, Esquires, and Knights, for Service done by them, and
not to a Baron. Some others notwithstanding are of a different Opinion, That a
Canton may well beseem an Earl or a Baron receiving the same at his Sovereigns
hand; yet is the Quarter to be preferred in Dignity before the same: and before
them both, Sir John Fern prefers the Escocheon of Pretense, which he
calls an Engislet or Fessy Target. Note that a Canton parted traverse ways,
whether it be from the Dexter corner, or from the Sinister, does make two base
Squires. And if the Canton be placed in the Dexter corner of the Escocheon, you
must in Blazon only name it a Canton, not making any mention of the local
situation thereof: but if it be placed on the contrary side, then must you in
Blazon add this word Sinister, as he bears a Canton Sinister. The Sinister
Canton is all one with the Dexter in form, in quantity, and in estimation, but
differs from the same, both in regard of the local position thereof (by
reason that it is placed in the Sinister corner of the Escocheon) as also in
that it is not of so frequent use.

Hitherto of a Canton, now of a Quarter.

The Quarter is an Ordinary of like composition with the Canton, and holds
the same places, and has great resemblance thereof; insomuch as the same Rules
and Observations that do serve for the one, may be attributed to the other,
Quia similium similis est ratio; of like things the reason is alike. The only
difference between them is, that the Canton keeps only a cantle or small
portion of the corner of the Escocheon, and the Quarter comprehends the full
fourth part of the Escocheon; as in Example.

He bears Verrey, Argent and Sable, a Quarter, Gules, by the name of
Estanton. Albeit that (according to Leigh) the Quarter is for the most part
given by Emperors and Kings to a Baron (at the least) for some special or
acceptable Service done by him; yet do we find the same bestowed upon persons
of meaner dignity for like occasion. Contrariwise, the Canton (being received
at the Sovereigns hand) may beseem the dignity of a Baron or Earl, as aforesaid.

Having spoken of the Canton and Quarter, as much as for this present is
requisite, I will reserve some other their adjuncts to a more convenient place.
And will now speak of a Pile, showing some variable Examples of the diverse
bearing thereof.

A Pile is an Ordinary consisting of a twofold Line, formed after the manner of
a Wedge; that is to say, broad at the upper end, and so lessening by degrees
throughout with a comely narrowness and Taper growth, meeting together at the
lower end in an acute Angle, as in this next Escocheon appears.

The Pile I take to be derived from Pilum, an ancient Weapon peculiar to the
Romans, shaped somewhat like a Dart without Feathers, but thicker at the great
end, and waxing smaller Taper-wise, being about five foot in length, and
sharpened at the point with Steel: And such were the offensive Arms of the
Hastati and Principes, as Polybius of the Roman Militia affirms: And Generals
themselves have born them in their Marches, perhaps to encourage the Soldiers
by their Examples; all which is proved by the excellent Lucan, lib. 1. who
lamenting the misery of a Civil War, thus complains: -- Totis concussi viribus
orbis
In commune nefas, infestisque obvia signis
Signa, pares aquilas, and Pila minantia Pilis,
-- where armed to impious war
The force of all the quaking world from far
Is met; dire Standards against Standards dash,
Eagles against Eagles, against Piles, Piles do clash.


And Lib. 7.

-- sceleris sed crimine nullo
Externum maculent Chalybem, stetit omne coactum
Circa Pila nef as --
But no dire crime could stain the Strangers Steel,
Naught could do mischief but the Roman Pile.
Lastly, describing Cato's magnanimity in his rough March through Lybia, he
thus sings, Lib. 9.

Ipse manu sua Pila gerens, etc. Thus Englished: Himself afoot before his
wearied Bands
Marches with Pile in hand, and not commands.


He bears Argent, a Pile, Gules. This Coat pertained to the right worthy and
valiant Knight Sir John Chandos, Baron of St. Saviors, le Viscount in France,
great Seneschal of Poictou High Constable of Aquitain. All given him by King
Edward the Third, who also made him one of the Founders of the most Noble Order
of the Garter. In all Fortifications and Buildings, in case the ground be
distrusted to be unsure and deceivable, men are accustomed to build upon Piles,
and by them to force an infallible and permanent Foundation.

He bears Or, a Pile engrailed, Sable, by the Name of Waterhouse; and is the
Paternal Coat Armor of Dr. Edward Waterhouse, a great Lover of Antiquities and
Heraldry.

He bears two Piles in point Diamond. This is the Coat Armor of the Right
Honorable Gilbert Holles, Earl of Clare, Baron Haughton of Haughton, etc.

This Coat is also born by his Uncle, the Right Honorable Denzel Holles, Baron
Holles of Ifield, and one of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council, etc. whose only Son and Heir apparent is Sir Francis Holles of
Winterborn St. Martyn in Dorsetshire, Baronet, who has Issue now living Denzel
Holles, etc.

The Field is Or, three Piles, meeting near in the Base of the Escocheon,
Azure. This Coat was born by Sir Guy Bryan Knight, one of the Noble Knights of
the most Honorable Order of the Garter, in the time of King Edward the Third:
And he was also a chief mean unto the said King for obtaining the Charter of
Privilege and Freedom of his Majesty's Forest of Dean, in the County of
Gloucester, for the benefit of the Inhabitants of the same Forest.

Sometimes you shall find this Ordinary born transposed or reversed, contrary
to the usual form of their bearing, viz. with their points upward, which
naturally ought to be downwards, being supposed to be a piece of Timber, whose
neither part is sharpened, to the end it may be more commodiously driven into
the ground; as in Example.

He bears Argent, three Piles, one issuing out of the Chief between the two
others transposed or reversed, Sable, by the Name of Hulse: And is the
Coat Armor of John Howes alias Hulse, of Newbury in Berkshire, Esquire one of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace and Quorum in the said County; whose eldest
Daughter Bridget is now wi^e to James Georges of Land. Gent. Nephew to John
Georges of Bawnton in Glocestershire, Esquire. This Coat is also born by
Richard Hulse of Betherden in Kent, Esquire.

The Pile is an ancient Addition to Armory, and is a thing that makes all
Foundations to be firm and perfect, especially in Waterworks.

When there is but one Pile in the Field, it must contain the third part of the
same at the Chief. This Ordinary is diversely formed and born, as in these next
Escocheons appears.

He bears Argent, a Triple Pile, Flory on the tops, issuing out of the
Sinister Base, in Bend, toward the Dexter corner, Sable. This sort of bearing
of the Pile, has a resemblance of so many Piles driven into some Water-work,
and by long tract of time, incorporated at their heads, by reason of an
extraordinary weight imposed upon them, which gave impediment of their growth
in height.

He bears Argent, a Pile in Bend, issuing out of the Dexter corner of the
Escocheon, Sable Cotised, Engrailed, Gules. I have made special choice of this
Coat Armor (out of the Glory of Generosity) as well for the rareness thereof,
as for that I find the same there commended for fair Armory, and good in regard
of the variety thereof, for Blazoners to look upon.

He bears Azure, a Pile waved, issuing out of the Dexter corner of the
Escocheon, Bendways, Or, by the name of Aldam. As this Pile waved issues out
of the Dexter, so also may the same be born from the Sinister chief point.
Moreover you shall find them born in Pale, and sometimes issuing out of the
Base with the point thereof transposed, which I leave to observation.

Now the bearing of Waves, or of things waved, may well fit those that are
tried in the furnace of Afflictions, which are the Badges and Testimonies of
our election in Christ, who suffered for us; the Just for the Unjust, to bring
us unto God. Therefore we should bear our Afflictions gladly, forasmuch as if
we suffer with Christ, we shall also be glorified with him. For so does the
Apostle admonish us, saying, That no man should be moved with these
afflictions, for ye your selves know that we are appointed thereunto, 1 Thessalonians.
3. 3. And again, Thou therefore suffer affliction as a good Soldier of Christ,
2 Timothy 2. 3.

So much of Piles, and their variety, as well of Form as of Location. There
rest yet some other sorts of Ordinaries, that are composed of a twofold Line,
not hitherto spoken of.

Such are these, viz. Flasque. Flanch. Voider.


In some men's conceit perhaps these Ordinaries last mentioned might have been
more fitly placed amongst such as are before handled, and are composed of a
single Line (of which number these may be well reckoned, if we consider them
each one apart by themselves:) but forasmuch as none of them are born single,
but always by couples; for convenience I have chosen rather to sort them with
these that are formed of a twofold Line: and first of a Flasque.

A Flasque is an Ordinary consisting of one Arch-line, drawn somewhat distant
from the corners of the Chief, and meanly swelling by degrees until you come
toward the midst of the Escocheon, and from thence again decreasing with a
like comely descent unto the Sinister base points; as in Example.

The Field is Or, two Flasques, Azure. This Reward (says Leigh) is to be given
by a King for Virtue and Learning, and especially for Service in Embassage: for
therein may a Gentleman deserve as well of his Sovereign, as the Knight that
serves him in the Field. This is called an Arch-line, of the Latin word Arcus,
that signifies a Bow, which being bent, has a moderate bowing, void of excess
of tuberosity. This word Flasque is derived either from the French word
Fleschier, or from the Latin word Flecto, which signifies to bend or bow.

The next in Order is the Flanch, which is an Ordinary formed of an Arch-line,
taking its beginning from the corner of the Chief, and from thence compassing
orderly with a swelling embossment, until it come near to the Nombril of the
Escocheon, and thence proportionably declining to the Sinister base point, as
in this next Escocheon.

He bears Ermyn, two Flanches, Vert. This (says Leigh) is one degree under
the foresaid Flasque, yet it is commendable Armory. This word Flanch (as some
do hold) is derived from the French word Flans, which signifies the flank of a
man or beast, that includes the small Guts, because that part strutteth out,
cum tumore quodam, as it were a blown Bladder. Sometimes you may find this
Ordinary made of some other forms of Lines than plain, which when it shall
happen, you must in the Blazon thereof make special mention of the form of Line
whereof it is composed.

Last of all in our Ordinaries, comes the Voider, consisting of one Arch-line
moderately bowing from the corner of the Chief by degrees toward the Nombril
of the Escocheon, and from thence in like sort declining, until it come unto
the Sinister base, and has a more near resemblance of the bent of a Bow than
the Flanch has, in that it rises not with so deep a compass; as in Example.

He bears Tenn, two Voiders, Or. This is the Reward of a Gentlewoman for
Service by her done to the Prince; but then the Voider should be of one of the
nine Furs or Doublings. Such Reward (says Leigh) might the Duchess of
Montfort have given to her Gentlewoman, who served her most diligently, not
only while she kept the Town of Hanybot, but also when she rode armed into the
Field, and scared the Frenchmen from the siege thereof. These are called
Voiders, either because of the shallowness wherein they do resemble the
accustomed voiding Plates with narrow brims used at Tables; or else of the
French word Voire, which signifies a Looking-glass or Mirror, (which in
ancient times were commonly made in that bulging form) especially considering
they are given to Gentlewomen in recompense of Service, unto whom such Gifts
are acceptable; and withal implying, that Gentlewomen so well deserving, should
be mirrors and patterns to others of their Sex, wherein to behold both their
duties, and the due reward of Virtues. His counsel was so very behoveful, who
advised all Gentlewomen often to look on Glasses, that so, if they saw
themselves beautiful, they might be stirred up to make their Minds as fair by
Virtue as their Faces were by Nature: but if deformed, they might make amends
for their outward deformity, with their intern pulchritude and gracious
qualities. And those that are proud of their Beauty, should consider, that
their own hue is as brittle as the Glass wherein they see it; and that they
carry on their shoulders nothing but a Skull wrapped in skin, which one day will
be loathsome to be looked on.

CHAP. VII.
HAving showed the manner and making of such Ordinaries as are composed of a
twofold Line; we will now proceed to that other Member of the Distribution
before delivered, which makes mention of Ordinaries consisting of Lines more
than twofold; and will show how they also are made.

Such Ordinaries do consist of Lines Threefold. Fourfold.


Those that are formed of a threefold Line, are the Inescocheon and the Orle.

The Inescocheon is an Ordinary formed of a threefold Line, representing the
shape of the Escocheon; as in Example.

He bears Ermyn, an Inescocheon, Gules, by the Name of Hulgreve: This name of
Inescocheon is proper only to those that are born in this place; for if the
same were born in any other place, than upon the Fess point of the Shield, you
should term the same then an Escocheon, and not an Inescocheon; so must you
also, if there be more than one in the Field. This Escocheon is sometimes
termed an Escocheon of Pretense, as shall appear hereafter. This Ordinary
contains the fifth part of the Field (says Leigh, but his demonstration
denotes the third part) and may not be diminished; and albeit it be subject to
some alteration, by reason of the different forms of Lines before specified,
yet it keeps still one setform of an Escocheon, as we shall see by and by.

The next in rank of this kind is the Orle, which is an Ordinary composed of a
threefold line duplicated, admitting a transparency of the Field, throughout
the innermost Area or space therein enclosed. This has the form of an
Inescocheon, but has not the solid substance thereof, being evermore voided,
as in these following Examples appears.

He bears Or, an Orle, Azure, by the Name of Bertram, Lord of Bothal. This
word Orle seems to be derived from the French word Oreiller, which signifies
a Pillow, and is attributed to this Ordinary, because the same being of a
different tincture from the Field, and formed only of a double tract, in regard
of the transparency of the Field within, and the surrounding thereof without,
it receives the resemblance of an embossed Substance, as if it were raised
like a Pillow above the Field. Vpton terms it in Latin Tractus, which
signifies a Trace or Trail, because the Field is seen both within and without
it; and the Trail it self is drawn thereupon in a different Color. If this
were flored (says Leigh) then must it be called a Tressure, which must contain
the fifth part of the Field. And if two of these be in an Escocheon, you must
term them a double Tressure, Chassanaeus says, that the Orle is sometimes
formed of many pieces, and that they are born to the number of Six.

He bears Argent, an Orle within a Bordure, Gules, by the Name of Rutland,
and is born by the Rutlands of Saffron-walden in Essex, and of Micham in
Surrey; of which Family is Mr. William Rutland of London.

As touching the doubling of this plain Orle, I will not here give Example, for
that I purpose to present to your view a threefold Orle or Tract, which does
include the twofold, as in this next Escocheon appears.

He bears Or, an Orle of three pieces, Sable. That this Ordinary is born of
many Tracts, it appears by this Example, taken out of Vpton, for the Readers
satisfaction; where it is said, Sunt insuper alii qui habent istum Tractum
triplicatum and quadruplicatum, ut nuper in armis Episcopi Coenomanensis, qui
portavit pro Armis unum Tractum triplicatum de nigro, in campo aureo: Some bear
the Orle tripled and quadrupled, as the late Bishop of Maine, who bare a
tripled Orle, Sable, in a Field, Or. This Ordinary is born diversely, according
to the several forms of Lines before handled, as may appear in the Examples
ensuing.

He bears Argent, an Orle Engrailed on the inner side, Gules. I found this
form of bearing observed by an uncertain Author, whom at first I supposed to
have either unskilfully taken, or negligently mistaken the trick thereof; but
after I had found in Vpton, that in Blazoning of an Orle Engrailed, he Blazoned
the same, An Orle engrailed on both sides, I took more special notice of this
kind of bearing, for that such a form of Blazon (proceeding from a man so
judicious in this kind) seemed covertly to imply a distinction of that from
this form of bearing. And because diversa juxta se apposita magis elucescunt,
things differing give light each to other, I will here produce the Coat it
self, and the Blazon thereof, as I find it set down by Vpton.

Il port (says he) de Gules un trace engrailee, de chascun cost d'Or. And in
Latin thus: Qui habet ista Arma, portat unum tractum ex utraque part
ingradatum, de Auro in campo rubro. He bears an Orle engrailed on both sides,
Or, in a Field, Gules. And no doubt by heedful observation you may find these
Orles in like sort born Invecked, Similium enim similis est ratio; for like
things have the like reason and respect. Note, that diverse Charges, as well
Artificial as Natural, are born Orl-ways, or in Orle; as likewise in form of
Cross, Bend, Chevron, Saltire, etc. the Examples whereof I must pass over,
until a fit place be offered to handle Charges of those kinds. Concerning the
bearing of Orles, composed of the sundry sorts of Furs, I hold it needless to
use Examples to express them to the view, for that by consideration of the
manifold sorts of several Ordinaries before expressed, their diverse manner of
bearing may be easily conceived: and therefore I will leave them to observation.

Hitherto have we considered the making of such Ordinaries as are composed of a
threefold Line: Our Order calls me now to speak of such Ordinaries as do
require a fourfold Line for the effecting of them.

Of this sort is the Cross. Saltire.


The Cross is an Ordinary composed of a fourfold Line, whereof two are
Perpendicular, and the other two are transverse, for so we must conceive of
them, though they are not drawn throughout, but meet by couples in four acute
Angles near about the Fess point of the Escocheon; to look upon (if they were
couped, as they are sometimes found) like to four Carpenters squares; as the
Example following will demonstrate. This Ordinary is called Crux, a cruciando,
or a cruciatu, because of the unspeakable torture and torment which they do
suffer, who undergo this kind of death. The Content of the Cross is not the
same always: for when it is not charged, then it has only the fifth part of
the Field; but if it be charged, then must it contain the third part thereof.
To give you particular Examples of all the different forms of bearing of the
Cross, were as needless as endless, considering the variety set down by other
Authors: I will therefore content my self with these ensuing.

He bears Argent, a Cross, Sable, by the Name of Raynsford, and is the
Paternal Coat Armor of Sir Richard Raynsford of Dallington in
Northamptonshire, Knight. Lord Chief Justice of his Majesty's Court of Kings Bench.

This Coat was also born by Henry Raynsford of Stanmore magna in Middlesex, B.
D. deceased.

Argent, a Cross, Vert, by the Name of Hussy; and with the Arms of Vlster, is
the Coat Armor of Sir Thomas Hussy of Hemington in Lincolnshire, Baronet.

Azure, a Cross, Or: This Coat Armor pertained to the right worshipful Family
of Shelton, in the County of Norfolk, whence descended that honorable virtuous
Lady, Mary Shelton, who was many years of the most honorable Bedchamber of
that glorious Queen Elizabeth; and was also wife to the right worshipful Sir
John Scudamore of Home Lacy in the County of Hereford, Knight, Standardbearer
to her Majesty's Honorable Band of Gentlemen Pensioners. This Ordinary is
oftentimes diversely named, according to the diversity of Lines whereof it is
composed: For as it is the form of Lines whereof it is made, so is the
Denomination thereof. In the ancientest Institution of the bearing of the Cross
(without all controversy) it had this form; which is taken to be the true
shape of the Cross whereupon our blessed Savior Christ Jesus suffered: whose
godly observation and use was in great esteem in the Primitive Church; though
in latter times it has been dishonourably entertained by two opposed kinds of
Fantasticks: the one, who so superstitiously dote on it, that they adore it
like their God: the other, who so unchristianly detest it, that they slander
the most godly and ancient use thereof, in our first initiating unto Christ, as
if it were some devilish Idol. But the true Soldiers of such a Captain need
not to be ashamed to bear their Generals Ensign. And this bearing was first
bestowed on such as had performed, or at least undertaken some Service for
Christ and Christian Profession: and therefore being duly conferred, I hold it
the most honorable Charge to be found in Heraldry. But the form and bearing
hereof (as well as the Chevrons formerly spoken of) has been also depraved
through the inconsiderate handling of common Painters. For which cause I have
caused this precedent Cross only to be cut after this fashion, in the rest I
have ensued the vulgar manner bearing of how used, choosing rather to sway with
the multitude in matters of small importance, than that I would seem to affect
I know not what singularity; Nemo enim errantem arguit, qui cum multis errat.
This manner bearing of the patible Cross is warranted by Rolls of greatest
Antiquity, and it is most consonant to Reason, that the stem thereof should be
much longer than the cross part, by how much it was requisite that the same was
to be deeply fixed in the Ground: So then if we shall compare this ancient
bearing with that of modern times, we shall find this to be natural, and that
adulterate.

Crosses do receive manifold varieties of Denomination, according to the
multiplicity of their different shapes, and variable properties of Lines
whereof they are formed.

The bearing of the Cross, is the express note or badge of a Christian that he
bear the same according to the prescript, rule, and will of his Lord and
Master. For as Barth. says, Insignia ad voluntatem Domini sunt portanda, and
non alias.

All Crosses may signify unto us Tribulations and Afflictions, which (how
burdensome soever they may seem to the flesh) yet is there much comfort to be
found in them, to those that make a right use of them, and do undergo the
burden of them cheerfully, and without recalcitration. For it is the property
of worldlings that have been dandled (as I may say) in Fortunes lap, and
pampered with worldly delights to forget both God and themselves, and in their
fullness to spurn and kick up the heel, according to that saying of Moses in his
Song that he made a little before his death; But he that should have been
upright, when he waxed fat, spurned with his heel: He was fat, he was gross, he
was laden with fatness, therefore he forsook God that made him, and regarded
not the strong God of his Salvation, Deuteronomy. 30. 15.

Since then our Lord and Master (for our sakes) did willingly take upon him
this grievous, and almost unsupportable Burden, why should we then, that would
be counted his professed Soldiers and Servants shrink thereat; especially
since by the Discipline of the Cross, we are brought to the true knowledge of
God, his Omnipotency, Wisdom, Justice, Mercy, and all other his Divine
Attributes, and of our own miserable and damnable Estate, through our adherent
and inherent corruption of sins, as well Actual, as Original.

A like form of bearing of this, is that Cross which we find born in the Shield
of St. George, but diversely from this, both in Metal and Color: which of some
Armorists of Vptons time (as himself notes in his Discourse of Arms) received
in those days a very strange and absurd kind of Blazon, which he there sets
down after this manner; the Shield, Gules, four Quarters, Argent: whose reason
herein (says he) I do not allow, for that by such manner of Blazon, the
bearing of a plain Cross shall never be known. Moreover, herein also may we
observe the Blazon hereof to be erroneous, in that they say, Four Quarters:
which are indeed but so many Cantons; else should they all four meet in the
Center of the Escocheon. This Ordinary is subject to voiding and couping, as
these Examples following show.

He bears Argent, a Cross voided, Azure. Panormitan writes of Alphonsus King
of Aragon (what time he besieged Puteoli, a City by the Sea side in Campania)
that resorting daily to the Seashoar for his Recreation, upon a time he chanced
to find the Corpse of a man of Genoua in Italy, that had been cast out of a
Galley; and thereupon alighting speedily from his Horse, caused all others that
were near him to light; and commanded some to dig a Grave, whilst others
covered the naked Corpse: and he himself with his own hands did make a Cross of
Wood, which he sticked fast at the head of the man so interred; to testify
that all Christian Offices may beseem the greatest Kings; and that whatever
death we die, it is not material, so we live to Christ. So great is the
resemblance oftentimes of things born in Coat Armor, which yet in their
Existence are much differing, that a man well seen in Heraldry, may easily
commit an error in the Blazoning of them, as by comparing of this Coat Armor
with the next will manifestly appear: wherefore you must use an advised
deliberation in Blazoning, especially of Arms of near resemblance.

He bears Or, a Cross Patee, Sable, Fimbriated, Gules. The reason wherefore
this Cross is called Patee, I will presently show you when I come to speak of
the Shield of Cadwallader. This approaches near to the former in respect of
the double tract thereof; yet does it much differ from the same in substance,
forasmuch as the Charge of that is a twofold Cross, viz. one surmounted of
another; and this a single Cross bordured or environed with a hem or edge.
Moreover, That this is not a Cross of Gules, surmounted of another, Sable, it
is clear, because the edge that goes about this Cross is much narrower than is
the space between those two Crosses. Besides, it cannot stand with the Rules of
good Armory, to bear color upon color, or metal upon metal. This is called a
Cross Fimbriated, of the Latin word Fimbria, which signifies an edge, welt, or
hem for a Garment, and is to be understood to be of the same thickness with it,
and not to lie either upon or derneath.

He bears Ermyn, a Cross engrailed, Gules, by the Name of Norwood, and is
born by Henry Norwood of Tulsey in Glocestershire, Esquire one of the Esquires of
his Majesty's Body, and Deputy Governor of Tangier: And by Francis Norwood of
Lackington in the said County, Esquire.

As this Cross is formed of bunched Lines, so are there others that are
composed of sundry other sorts of Lines before showed, as experience will
inform you, and as you may in part see by the Example following.

He bears Argent, a Cross wavy, voided, Sable, by the Name of Duckenfield in
Devonshire. In Coats of such bearing, you shall not need to say in the Blazon
of them, that the Charge (whatsoever the same be) is voided of the Field;
because when you say only Voided, and no more, it is always understood to be
voided of the Field.

Of all other sorts of Crosses, the Cross waved is a more special note of
Tribulation, in regard it represents the turbulent Waves or Surges of the
Seas, occasioned by some turbulent gust or flaw of boystrous winds or storms,
causing a success of surging Billows; notifying unto us consequent Afflictions
and Troubles following immediately one upon another neck, which the Children
of God must sustain with a constant resolution, following therein the
instruction of Ecclesiasticus 2. 1. My Son, if thou will come into the service
of God, stand fast in righteousness and fear, and prepare thy Soul unto
temptation. And again, Settle thy heart and be patient, bow down thine ear, and
receive the words of understanding, and shrink not away when thou art assailed,
but wait upon God patiently: Ioyn thy self unto him, and depart not away, that
thou may be increased at thy last end, Verse. 3.

He bears Argent, a Cross Patonce, voided, Gules, by the name of Pilkington,
a Knightly Family of great Antiquity, and very numerous, taking Name from
Pilkington in Lancashire. It Is reported, according to Fullers Worthies, p. 110
that the chief of the Family being sought for soon after the Conquest, was
forced to obscure himself under the Habit of a Thresher (others a Mower) which
occasioned the Motto, Now thus, now thus. Others think this to have happened in
the Wars between York and Lancaster, when Sir John Pilkington, together with
his Brothers Sir Robert of Rivington, and Sir Thomas of Stanley, with their
Father Sir Robert, had their Lands taken from them; and Sir John was bound by
Indenture not to take up Arms against the King. Geffery Pilkington, Grandson of
this Sir John, married the Daughter and Heir of Sallow of Stanton in
Derbyshire, whose Posterity continues there to this day.

He bears Sable, a Cross engrailed, Or, in the first quarter a Mullet,
Argent, by the Name of Peyton. This with the Arms of Vlster, is the bearing of
Sir Thomas Peyton of Knolton in Kent, Baronet: And without the said
Augmentation of the Hand, is born by Sir Robert Peyton of Lincolns-Inn-fields
in Middlesex, Knight.

Azure, a Cross Avelane, Or.

Gules, a Cross Lambeaux, Argent, is born by the Name of Rudetzker.

Per Pale, Or and Vert, a Cross Furche, Gules, is born by Sir John Hingham.

He bears Vert, a Cross Croslet, Or, by the Name of Berry, and is born by Mr.
Samuel Berry, Citizen of London.

He bears Argent, a Cross Botone, Sable, by the Name of Winwood, and is the
Paternal Coat Armor of Richard Winwood of Ditton Park and Quainton in
Buckinghamshire, Esquire Son and Heir of the Right Honorable Sir Ralph Winwood
Knight, Ambassador Leiger to the States of the United Provinces, and Principal
Secretary of State to King James.

He bears Argent, a Cross Potence, Sable, charged with five Mullets pierced,
Or, by the Name of Rigby, and is the Coat Armor of Edward Rigby of Preston in
Lancashire, Sergeant at Law.

He bears Or, a Cross flory, Sable, by the Name of Lamplugh, and is the
Paternal Coat Armor of John Lamplugh of Lamplugh in Cumberland, Esquire descended
from that ancient Family of the Lamplughs, he being the Three and twentieth in
descent, of which there have been Nine Knights; one of which was Sir Robert
Lamplugh, who lived in the Reigns of Henry the Second, and Richard the First.
The bearer hereof (who is now living) was Colonel of a Foot Regiment in the
Service of his late Majesty King Charles the First, in the Army commanded by
his Highness Prince Rupert, and was in actual Service under the same Command at
the Battle at Marston-moor in Yorkshire, Anno 1644. and was in several other
Services for his said Majesty.

Parted per Saltier, Or and Argent, a Cross formy, Azure. This Coat was born by
High Pudsay Bishop of Durham, who bought of King Richard the First the Earldom
of Northumberland, and was afterward by the said King created Earl thereof;
who told him, That of an Old Bishop he had made a Young Earl.

He bears Or, a Cross Patee fitched in the foot, Gules. This Coat was born by
Galfride de Scudamore that lived in the time of King Henry the Second. It is
termed Fitched of the Latin word Figo, which signifies to fasten or make sure,
because by the means of the sharpness added to the foot thereof, it becomes
more apt to be fastened any where. There is another sort of fitching of Crosses
that have the whole fourth part figetive, as in this next Escocheon.

The Field is Jupiter, a Cross Patee on three parts, and fitched on the fourth,
Sol. This (says Gerard Leigh) was the Shield of blessed Cadwallader, last King
of the Britains, who slew Lothaire King of Kent, and Ethelwold King of
South Saxons. I confess in terming this kind of Cross, a Cross Patee, I differ
from Leigh, who calls it Formy: But Chassanaeus Blazons it Patee, and gives
this reason thereof, Quia extremitates ejus sunt patulae, because its ends are
broad and opened, Chass. fol. 28. Bara is of the same Opinion, Bara le blazon
des Arm. 67. and with these agree many of our Blazoners.

He bears Sable, a Cross Potent, Or, by the Name of Allen, and is the
Coat Armor of Sir Thomas Allen of Finchley in Middlesex; and of Sir Thomas
Allen of the City of London, Alderman, Knight and Baronet.

The Field is Jupiter, a Cross Potent fitched, Sol. This kind of Cross was born
by Etheldred King of the West Saxons, who lived Anno Salutis, 946.

What a Potent is, I have formerly showed in the first Section, page 16. It may
also be Blazoned a Cross crowchee, for the resemblance that it has of a
Crutch, which Chaucer calls a Potent, which is properly figetive: For were it
that the overthwart or cross part hereof should be exempted, then would the
middle part show it self to be a perfect Crutch, used for the slay and
sustentation of feeble and aged persons. Like as old Age is a blessing of God,
so contrariwise it is a Token of his heavy displeasure, to be cut off before a
man shall attain thereto: As appears by that saying of God unto Eli the
Priest, Behold, the days come that I will cut off thine Arm, and the Arm of thy
Fathers House, that there shall not be an old man in thine house, 1 Samuel 2^ 31.
And again, And there shall not be an old man in thy house for ever, Verse 32.
And further, And all the multitude of thine house shall dye when they be men,
Verse 33. Moreover, it is said in the Prophet Zachary on the contrary part,
Thus says the Lord of Hosts, There shall yet old men and old women dwell in
the Streets of Jerusalem; and every man with his Staff in his hand for very
Age: Whereby is meant, that God would preserve them in life, so long as Nature
might sustain them.

The Field is Jupiter, a Cross Patonce, Sol. You may read in Leigh his
Accidence of Armory, page 59. that King Egbert did bear in Battle a Cross of
this form or fashion in his left hand, and in his Azure colored Banner
likewise. Here you may observe how this Cross Patonce differs from the Cross
Patee (demonstrated before in the Shield of Cadwallader) and also from the
Cross floury or fleurtee, which I shall presently show you in Penthars
Coat Armor.

Whereas I have formerly made mention of Voiding, in the Chapter of Bends, and
of one other Accident, namely Couping, in the Chapter of Fesses, I will now
express them both in one Example in this Escocheon following.

He bears Argent, a Cross voided and couped, Sable, by the Name of Woodnoth.

There is another Accident whereunto this Ordinary is subject, that is to say,
Piercing. Piercing is a penetration or perforation of things that are of solid
substance. And it is threefold: That is to say, Round. Losengways. Quadrate.


As touching Round piercing, you have an Example in this next following
Escocheon.

He bears Sable, a Cross couped, pierced, Or, by the Name of Grill. If this
Round in the midst were of any other color than of the Field, then should you
account the same to be a Charge to the Cross; wherefore good heed must be taken
in Blazoning of Coats of this kind, and chiefly of the Orbicular form in the
midst of the Charge; to the end that you may know when to take the same for a
pierceing, and when for a charge.

The Field is Azure, a Cross Moline pierced Losenge-ways, Or. This is the
second form of piercing beforementioned; and the Coat was born by Richard de
Molineux of Lancaster, that lived in the Reign of King Richard the Second.

Concerning this Cross Moline ( Leigh says) that if it stood Saltire-ways,
then should you call it Far de Molin, that is to say, a Mill-rind, or the Ink
of a Mill: which to me seems a very Paradox, that transposition (being a
thing merely accidental) should give a new denomination to the thing
transposed, and consequently alter the essence thereof: Quia novum nomen dat
novum esse rei; where are new names, new things are supposed to be. It were a
thing worthy of admiration, that Accidents should have such power in them: For
Aristotle, Physicorum 1. says, Accidentia possunt miraculose, and non alias
mutare subjectum; Accidents change not their Subject but by Miracle. Addition
doubtless and Subtraction, are of greater force than Transmutation or Location;
yet is there no such power in them as that they can alter the essence of any
thing: Quia augmentum vel diminutio (says Chassanaeus) circa accidentia
contractuum, non reponunt contractum in diverso esse, neque per ea intelligitur
ab eo in substantialibus recessus: the adding or diminishing of Accidents makes
not the thing lose the nature of his being.

He bears Azure, a Cross Moline, Quarter pierced, Or. This Coat was born by
Thomas Molineux of Haughton in the County of Nottingham, that lived in the time
of King Henry the Fourth.

This Coat, with the Arms of Vlster, is born by Sir John Molineux of Teversal
in Nottinghamshire, Baronet^ and with the Arms of Vlster, with a due
difference, is born by Darcy Molineux of Mansfield in the said County, Esquire
Nephew to the said Sir John.

Leigh in Blazoning of this form of Cross, makes no mention at all of the
piercing thereof, perhaps because it resembles the Ink of a Mill, which is
evermore pierced. This is termed Quarter pierced, quasi Quadrate pierced, for
that the piercing is square as a Trencher.

He bears Gules, a Fess between three cross Croslets fitchee, Or, by the Name
of Gore, of which Family are two Sir John Gores of Hertfordshire, Sir William
Gore of Ireland Baronet, William Gore of Moreden in Surrey Esquire and Gerard Gore,
sometime since chosen Alderman of the City of London.

He bears Azure, a Fess Dauncett Ermyn between 6 cross Croslets, Argent, by
the Name of Barnadiston. This, with the Arms of Vlster, is the Coat Armor of
Sir Thomas Barnadiston of Keddington or Kenton in Suffolk, Baronet: and of Sir
Samuel Barnadiston of Brightwell-hall in the said County also, Bar onet.

He bears Argent, a Fess between six cross Croslets fitchee, Gules, by the
name of Craven: and with the Arms of Vlster, is the Paternal Coat Armor of Sir
Anthony Craven of Sparsholt in Berkshire, Knight and Baronet, of the Name and
Family of the Right Honorable William Earl of Craven, etc.

Ruby, on a Bend between six cross Croslets fitchee, Pearl, an Escocheon Topaz,
thereon a demi Lion pierced through the mouth with an Arrow, within a double
Tressure, counter-floured of the first; and is the Parernal Coat of the Right
Noble and Ancient Family of the Howards, which now flourishes in the Persons
of his Grace Thomas Duke of Norfolk, Earl of Arundel, Surrey, and Norfolk,
Baron Howard, Fitz-Allen; Matravers, Mawbrey, Segrave, Bruce, Clun, and
Oswaldstre: The Right Honorable Charles Earl of Nottingham, Baron Howard of
Effingham: The Right Honorable Francis Earl of Suffolk, Baron Howard of
Walden, Lord Lieutenant of the Counties of Cambridge and Suffolk, and Gentleman
of his Majesty's Bedchamber: The Right Honorable Charles Earl of Berkshire,
Viscount Andover, and Baron Howard of Charlton: The Right Honorable Charles
Earl of Carlisle, Viscount Howard of Morpeth, Baron Dacres of Gisland, Lord
Lieutenant of the Counties of Cumberland and Westmoreland; Vice Admiral of the
Coasts of Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmoreland, Durham, and Maritim Parts
there adjacent, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council. The
Right Honorable Henry Earl of Norwich, and Earl Marshal of England, Baron
Howard of Castle-Rising, and Heir apparent to his Brother Thomas Duke of
Norfolk: The Right Honorable William Lord Viscount Stafford; and the Right
Honorable Edward Lord Howard of Escrick. And from these, and their Ancestors
Loins, have issued forth diverse worthy Gentlemen, as Stems to support the
Dignity of the said Family.

The Augmentation born on the Bend was granted unto the Right Noble Thomas Duke
of Norfolk, and to his Descendants, by King Henry the Eighth, for his signal
Service as General of the Army which gave that remarkable overthrow at Floding
to King James the Fourth of Scotland; which said Duke was by King Henry the
Seventh created Knight of the Garter, and made Lord High Treasurer of England.

He bears Azure, Crusuly a cross Moline voided throughout, Or, by the Name of
Knowles.

He bears Ruby, a Chevron between ten Crosses Formee, Pearl, by the Name of
Berkley, and is the Paternal Coat Armor of the Right Honorable George Lord
Berkley of Berkley in Glocestershire, descended in a direct Male Line from
Robert Fitz-Harding, a second Son of the Blood Royal of Denmark; a great
promoter and encourager of Traffic for the public good of the Nation, and is
at present Governor of the Turkey Company, and a principal Member of the
East India, Royal, and other Incorporated Companies of Merchants.

He bears Or, on a Chevron, Gules, three Crosses Formee of the Field, by the
Name of Peck, and is the Paternal Coat Armor of William Peck of Samford-hill
in the County of Essex, Esquire Son and Heir of that Eminent Lawyer Edward Peck of
the said place, Sergeant at Law to his Majesty King Charles the Second; by
Grace, Daughter and Coheir of William Green of East Barnet in Hartfordshire,
Esquire.

He bears Gules, on a Bend, Argent, 3 Crosses Patee, Sable, by the Name of
Reversby. This, with the Arms of Vlster, is the Coat Armor of Sir John
Reversby of Thribergh in Yorkshire Baronet, whose Ancestors have been seated
there, and there adjacent, before, and ever since the Reign of William the
Conqueror, as by Records may appear. This without the Arms of Vlster, is the
Coat of Sir Tamworth Reversby of in Hantshire, Knight.

He bears Or, a Chevron between 3 Crosses flory, Sable, by the Name of
Stern, and is the Paternal Coat Armor of Richard Stern of Kilvington in
Yorkshire, Esquire, Son and Heir to the most Reverend Father in God Richard
Stern, Lord Archbishop of York, Primate, and Metropolitan of England,
descended from a Family of that Name in Nottinghamshire.

He bears Gules, a Chevron between three Crosses Botonee, Or, by the Name of
Rich, and is born by Sir Edwin Rich of Mulberton in Norfolk, Knight: and by
Captain Peter Rich of Lambeth in Surrey, Esquire Son of Edw. Rich of Hornden in
Essex.

He bears Argent, a Cross, Sable, a Tressure of half Flower de Lis between
four Mullets pierced of the second, by the Name of Atkyns, and is the
Coat Armor of the Right Honorable Sir Robert Atkyns of Totteridge in
Hartfordshire, and of Sapperton in Glocestershire, Knight of the Bath, and one
of his Majesty's Justices of the Court of Common Pleas; whose
Great-grandfather, Thomas Atkyns of Tuffleigh in Glocestershire, Esquire was twice
Reader of Lincoln's Inn; first in the Two and thirtieth year of King Henry the
Eighth; and secondly in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth; and whose
Grandfather, Richard Atkyns Esquire was Reader of the said Society in the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, and chief Justice of North Wales, and one of the Council of
the Marches of Wales; and whose Father, Sir Edward Atkyns Knight, late
deceased, was likewise Reader of the same Society in the Reign of King Charles
the First, and afterward one of the Barons of the Exchequer to his Majesty
King Charles the Second: and the said Sir Robert about Eleven years since was
likewise Reader of the same Society; whose Son, Sir Robert Atkyns, was Knighted
about Twelve years since, whilst he was a Student in the University of Oxford,
and is now living; so that Grandfather, Father, and Son, were all living
together, and Knights at the same time.

So much of the Cross, with the Accidents thereof: Now of that other Ordinary
that is framed also of a fourfold Line, that is to say, a Saltire.

A Saltire is an Ordinary consisting of a fourfold Line, whereof two are drawn
from the Dexter chief toward the Sinister base corners, and the other from the
Sinister chief toward the Dexter base points, and do meet about the midst by
couples in acute Angles. I know the Learned Geometer will find many more Lines
here than I do mention: but (as I said of Lines in the Cross) this our
description greeth best with Heralds, and our purpose.

He bears Pearl, a Saltier, Ruby. This is the Coat Armor of the Right
Honorable Digby Lord Gerard, Baron of Gerards Bromley and Lord Dutton: And is
also born by the Right Honorable Charles Lord Gerard, Baron of Brandon, one of
the Gentlemen of his Majesty's Bedchamber, etc. This Coat, with the Arms of
Vlster, is born by Sir Francis Gerard of Harrow-hill in Middlesex, Knight and
Baronet.

Azure, a Saltier, Argent, is the Coat Armor of Sir William York of
Burton-Pedwardin in Lincolnshire, Knight.

Sable, a Saltier, Argent, is born by the name of Ducket of Steeple-Morden in
Cambridgeshire. In old time (says Leigh) this was made of the height of a man,
and was driven full of Pins, the use whereof was to scale the Walls therewith,
to which end, the Pins served commodiously. In those days (says he) the Walls
of a Town were but low, as appears by the Walls of Rome, which Rhemus easily
leaped over; and the Walls of Winchester, which were overlooked by Colebrand
the Chieftain of the Danes, who was slain by Guy Earl of Warwick, who was
Champion for King Athelstane.

He bears Gules, Or, a Saltier, Argent, a Rose of the first, by the name of
Nevil, and is the Coat Armor of Colonel Richard Nevil of Billingbeare in
Berkshire Esquire, descended from the ancient and honorable Family of the
Nevils Earls of Westmoreland, several of which were Knights of the Garter.

He bears Emerald, a Saltier engrailed, Pearl. This is the Paternal
Coat Armor of the Right Honorable Francis Lord Hawley of Buckland in
Somersetshire, one of the Gentlemen of the Bedchamber to his Royal Highness
James Duke of York.

Argent, a Saltier engrailed, Sable, by the Name of Middleton. This, with the
Arms of Vlster, is the Coat Armor of Sir George Middleton of Leighton near
Warton in Lancashire, Baronet.

He bears Ermyn, a Saltier engrailed, Sable, by the Name of Ingoldsby, and is
the Coat Armor of Sir Richard Ingoldsby of Walridge in Buckinghamshire, Knight. of
the Bath.

He bears Vert, a Saltier waved, Ermyn, by the Name of Wakeman, and is born
by Wakeman of Beckford in Glocestershire.

He bears Argent, a Saltier engrailed between 4 Cinque-foils, by the Name of
Napier; and, with the Arms of Vlster, is the bearing of Sir John Napier of
Luton-How in Bedfordshire, Baronet: by Sir Nathaniel Napier of Middle
Marsh-hall in Dorsetshire, Baronet: and by Robert Napier of Pucknal in
Dorsetshire, Esquire.

He bears Or, on a Saltier trunked, Gules, five Croslets fitchee of the
first, born by the Name of Rich of Sunning in Berkshire.

He bears per Pale, Argent and Vert, a Saltier counterchanged, a Canton
Ermyn, by the Name of H^nt, and is the Coat Armor of Richard Hunt of R^^ford
in Essex; Gent.

He bears Gyrony of Four, Argent and Gules, a Saltier, between as many
Croslets, all counterchanged, by the Name of Twisden, and is the Coat Armor of
Roger Twisden of Bradborne in the Parish of East-Malling in Kent, Esquire eldest
Son of Sir Thomas Twisden of the said place, Knight and Baronet, one of the
Justices of his Majesty's Court of King's Bench; a Person eminent and celebrated
for his knowledge in the Laws, Son of Sir William Twisden, Knight and Baronet,
by Anne Finch, Daughter of Elizabeth Countess of Winchelsey.

He bears Gules, a Saltire, Verrey, by the Name of Willington. This Ordinary
is limited to the fifth part of the Field, the same not being charged, but if
it be charged, then shall it contain the third part thereof. This charge also
varieth his name in Blazon, according to the diverse forms of Lines whereof the
same is composed; for that it is no less diversely made in respect of the
lineaments thereof, than the Cross before handled.

CHAP. VIII.
HAving hitherto showed at large the several forms of making of such Charges as
we call honorable Ordinaries: Order requires that I should now show their
diverse manner of Bearing, according to our prefixed Distribution.

These are born Simple. Compound.


Those are said to be born Simple, when only Ordinaries do appear in the Field.

These Ordinaries comprehend One sort. Diverse sorts.


Ordinaries are said to be of one sort, when only one kind of them is born in
the Field, without mixture of any other.

Whose bearing is Single. Manifold.


By single Bearing I understand some one Ordinary born alone in the Escocheon:
such are these precedent Examples before handled.

By manifold bearing of Ordinaries, I mean the bearing of diverse Ordinaries of
the same kind, whether the same be born of themselves alone, or else conjunctly
with some of their Subdivisions.

Which form of bearing is twofold, viz. One upon another. One besides another.


What is meant by the bearing of Ordinaries of one kind, one upon another, may
be easily conceived by these four Escocheons next following.

He bears Ermyn, a Cross, Gules, surmounted of another, Argent, by the Name
of Malton. Amongst the Crosses formerly exemplified, I have given an Example of
one much like to this in show, but yet much differing from the same, as you
will easily find by comparing them together: For in the former the Field
shows through the innermost parts thereof; but in this it is far otherwise:
forasmuch as herein are two Crosses, whereof that which lies next the Field is
Gules, and the other that is placed upon the same is Argent; so as in this it
can by no means be conceived to be of that kind before handled, for then should
the Ermyns appear in the inner part thereof, as well as in the rest of the
Field, then might you boldly call the same a Cross voided, as that formerly
handled.

He bears Vert, a Cross couped, Argent, charged with another, Gules. This
Example does more apparently express the double charge showed in the last
precedent Escocheon, for that the Cross that lies next the Field is made more
spacious than the former: and withal, it does inform our understanding, that
there is great difference between the bearing of this, and of the Cross
fimbriated, herein, that in the Cross fimbriated, the edges thereof do occupy
the least portion thereof; and in this the surmounting Cross has the least
part of the same. This therefore cannot by any means be understood to be a
Cross fimbriated, for so should the guard or edge thereof be larger than the
thing that is said to be guarded, which were a very absurd affirmation.

He bears Gules, a Saltire, Or, charged with another, Vert, by the Name of
Andrews. What has been formerly said in the last precedent Example touching
the Cross, does hold also in this and other like Bearings: for in things having
a conformity or resemblance one of another, the same reason holds in the one
as in the other; where contrariwise, of things having no resemblance or
likeness, the reason is diverse. This Engine (as Leigh notes) in old time was
of the height of a man, and was born of such as used to scale the Walls of
Cities or Towns (which then were but low) and it was driven full of pins fit
for that purpose. Vpton says it was an Engine to catch wild Beasts, and
therefore bestowed upon rich and covetous persons, that willingly will not part
from their Substance.

Proceed we now to Examples of Ordinaries of the same kind born one besides
another: such are these next following, and their like.

The Field is Argent, three Pallets Gules. This Coat appertains to the
ancient Family of Berchem, Lord of Berchem in Brabant, near Antwerp. And as
there are Ordinaries of this kind born in straight Line, so are they also born
in Lines Unde, as in Example. The bearing of Piles, Pales, Bends, Bars, and
their extracted parts, was called of old Heralds, Restrial, in respect of their
strength and solid substance, which is able to abide the stress and force of
any trial they shall be put unto.

He bears Argent, three Pallets Wave, Gules, by the Name of Downs of Debnam,
Suffolk. Note, that such Ordinaries, as either of themselves, or else by reason
of some charge imposed upon them, do challenge the third part of the Field, are
exempted from this kind of bearing one besides another, because of such the
Field can contain but one of them at once. But their Derivatives or
Subdivisions may well be sorted with them in the same Escocheon; as a Pale
between two Endorses, a Bend between two Cotisses, and such like of the same
kind; as in Example.

The Field is Azure, a Bend engrailed, Argent, cotissed, Or. This Coat Armor
pertains to the worthy Family of Fortescue of Devon, and is born by Sir Peter
Fortescue of Preston and Wood in the said County, Baronet. As these Cotisses
are born plain, so shall you find them varied after the diverse forms of Lines
before expressed, as in these Examples following may in part be seen: And
Vptons assertion (before delivered) touching their diversity of shape approved;
as by practice the diligent Observer shall easily perceive.

He bears Sable, a Bend, Argent, between two Cotisses Dancett, Or, by the
Name of Clopton, albeit these Cotisses may seem to be of a diverse kind from the
Bend wherewith they are sorted: yet is it otherwise, inasmuch as they are
Subdivisions abstracted from the Bend, as has been before showed. Now I will
show you Bends born one besides the other.

He bears Or, two Bends, Azure, by the Name of D'oyley, a Family of good
Antiquity: for Robert Lord Oyley or D'oyley, came into England with the
Conqueror, and founded the Castle of Oxford within five years of the Conquest,
whose Son Robert was Constable to King Henry the First, and founded the Abbey
of Osney. Of this Family is Sir John D'oyley of Chisleyhampton in Oxfordshire,
Knight.

The Field is Argent, two Bends, Gules. This Coat Armor I find in an ancient
Manuscript of Collection of Englishmens Arms in Metal and Colors, with the
Blazon in French, of the time of our Henry the Sixth, as it is apparent by the
Character of the Letter: over which Coat Armor is there written the Bearers
name, viz. Monsieur John Haget; from whom Mr. Bartholomew Haget, late Consul of
Aleppo, deriveth his descent. This Book at this present remains in the
custody of a worthy Friend of mine, a curious Collector and careful Preserver
of such ancient Monuments.

Gules, two Bends, the upper Or, and the lower Argent, was born by Milo
Fitz-water, who by King Henry the First was made Earl of Hereford, and
Constable of England, and Lord of the Forest of Dean, in right of his Wife,
Daughter and Heir of Bernard Newmarch, Lord of Brecknock. This Coat is now
quartered by Sir Ralph Verney of Middle Claydon in Buckinghamshire.

He bears Azure, three Croslets fitchee, between two Bendlets, Or, this with
the Arms of Vlster, is the Coat Armor of Sir Norton Knatchbull of Mersham
Hatch in Kent, Knight and Baronet.

He bears Argent, three Bends wavy, Azure. This is the ancient Paternal
Coat Armor belonging to Wilbraham of Cheshire, as appears by diverse Records in
the Office of Arms, and elsewhere. The chief of which Name is Sir Richard
Wilbraham of Woodhey, Knight and Baronet, lineally descended from Sir Richard
Wilbraham Knight, who lived in the Reign of King Henry the Third, and was high
Sheriff of the aforesaid County in the beginning of King Edward the First. From
which Family of Wilbraham of Woodhey, descended Sir Roger Wilbraham Knight,
lately one of the Masters of Requests in Ordinary to King James, and Surveyor
of his Majesty's Court of Wards and Liveries; who at Nantwich (the place of his
Birth) and elsewhere, has by his charitable Acts le^^ pious Monuments of his
Name and Memory. Of this Family are Sir Thomas Wilbraham of Woodhey in the said
County, Baronet; as also Roger Wilbraham of Dearfold, and Roger Wilbraham of
Nantwich, both of the said County, Esquires.

Mr. Boswell, in his Works of Armory observes, That the Bearer of such Bends
as these, or of the like Coat Armor, may be thought to have done some great
enterprise upon the Seas, worthy of perpetual commendation. As for Ordinaries
of other sorts born likewise one besides another of the same kind, behold these
next Examples.

He bears Or, three Bars Dancett, Gules, by the Name of Delamare. This
Example serves to inform our understanding of the use of that sort of acute
Anguled Ordinaries, that in Blazon we term by the name of Dancett; and is in
shape like to that other sort of acute Anguled Line, which is there named
Indented, but differs from the same only in quantity, wherein these do exceed
those, as being more spaciously drawn than they.

He bears Azure, three Bars waved, Argent, by the Name of Samford. To the end
I may make plain (by demonstration) the use of the several forms of Lines
before expressed; I made choice of this Coat Armor, to exemplify the third
sort of bunched Lines there mentioned. This kind of bearing may put us in mind,
that like as in a tempestuous storm, the Seas being troubled, do raise their
waves one immediately upon another: So likewise has God ordained that one
trouble should succeed another to keep his chosen in continual exercise, and
may have manifold experiments of his gracious Providence and Fatherly care, in
preserving of them in all their troubles, and giving them a comfortable event,
and happy end of all their Afflictions; as appears Job 5. 19. He shall
deliver thee in six troubles, and in the seventh the evil shall not touch thee.
It is a blessed thing to be under Gods correction, as witnesses Job 5. 17.
Behold, blessed is the man whom God corrects, therefore refuse not thou the
chastisement of the Almighty: for he makes the wound and binds it up; he
smites, and his hands make whole, Verse 18. Again, He delivers the poor in
affliction, and opens their Ear in trouble, Job 36. 15. By afflictions God
moves the hearts of his Children to feel their sins, that they may come to him
by Repentance, as he did Manasseth. And if they be bound in fetters, and tied
with cords of affliction (Job 36. 8.) Then will he show them their work, and
their transgressions that they have exceeded, Verse 9. Behold, God exalts by
his power; what teacher is like unto him? Verse 22. Affliction brings us to
knowledge and acknowledging of our sins, as we may see, Deuteronomy. 31. 17.

Now from Ordinaries of the same kind born one upon another, with their
extracted Subdivisions, proceed we to Ordinaries of diverse kinds, and their
Diminutives abstracted from them, eftsoons found likewise born both one upon
another, and one besides another: Such are these next following, and their like.

He bears Gules, on a Chevron, Argent, three Bars Gemelles, Sable, by the
Name of Throkmorton; and with the Arms of Vlster, is the Coat Armor of Sir
Baynham Throkmorton in the said County, Baronet. These are termed in Blazon
Bars Gemelles, of the Latin word Gemellus, which signifies a Twin, or Children
of one Birth, as Gemelli fratres, Brothers of one birth, for like as these are
Twins of a birth, so are those in like sort born by couples.

He bears Sable, a Pile, Argent, surmounted of a Chevron, Gules, by the Name
of Dyxton. This Coat is found in the Abbey Church of Cirencester, in the County
of Gloucester; and it serves fitly to exemplify a Rule formerly delivered
touching the usual blazoning of distinct things born in one Escocheon; viz.
that the Charge lying next and immediately upon the Field, shall be f^rst
nominated, and then things more remote.

He bears Sable, on a Saltire engrailed, Argent, an Inescocheon, Or, charged
with a Cross, Gules, by the Name of Morris. It may be of some conceived that
there is false Armory in this Coat, in respect of the Escocheon, Or, placed
upon the Saltire, Argent, which is Metal upon Metal, a kind of bearing (as also
Color upon Color) utterly condemned for false Armory: but such kind of
falsity is evermore meant of Metal upon Metal, or Color upon Color, placed in
one self-same Escocheon: but here are several Shields, and those pertaining to
distinct Families, and therefore not to be holden for false Armory.

He bears Argent, on a Pale, Sable, three Crosses Patee, Or, within a Bordure
engrailed, of the second, by the Name of Crowch of Alswike, in the County of
Hartford. Here you may observe, that when you are to Blazon an Escocheon
wherein are born a Pale and a Bordure, that you must mention the Pale before
the Bordure.

The Field is Argent, a Fess and Canton, Gules. This Coat Armor pertains to
the Honorable Family of Woodvile, created Earl Rivers in the time of King
Edward the Fourth, who was also Lord Treasurer of England; from whom many
worthy Persons of high calling are descended. As touching Ordinaries of diverse
kinds born one upon another, you must observe, that if they be both of one
Metal, Color, or Furr, their parts contingent are not severed by purfle, for
that by their forms it may be easily conceived what Ordinaries they are,
notwithstanding the defect of the purfle.

He bears Gules, two Bars and a Canton, Argent, by the Name of Deane. As to
the omission of purfle last before mentioned, the Rule there given holds not
alone in that, but also in these and all other Coats of like bearing, I mean
such as have in them a Canton or Quarter born jointly (as in these) with some
other Ordinary of the same Metal, Color, or Furr, now I will add one Example
of the joint bearing of a Canton with three Bars, as in the next Escocheon
appears.

He bears Argent, three Bars and a Canton, Gules, by the name of Fuller.
Many more Examples of Coat-Armours of like sort of bearing could I produce,
were it not that I hold these few sufficient to inform the understanding of
studious Armorists, that as well Ordinaries of diverse kinds, as those of the
same kind, are found born one upon another; and withal to occasion them to pry
more narrowly into these curious and nice manners of bearing, which numbers of
them do slightly pass over, as if they held them unworthy of more than
ordinary Observation. But here the ^ars are cut too little.

He bears Or, three Bars, Azure, on a Canton, Gules, a Lions head enrazed,
Argent, by the Name of Cox, and is the Paternal Coat Armor of Thomas Cox, M.
D. Physician in Ordinary to his Majesty K. Charles the Second.

He bears Sable, a Bend and Chief, Or. This is a Coat of rare bearing, which
I find cut in stone in the Abbey Church of Westminster, in the North part
thereof. The conjoyning of these two Ordinaries does constitute (on the left
side thereof) the form of a Gyron; and the Ordinaries themselves thus united,
do resemble the form of the Arithmetical figure of Seven turned backwards.

Now for Ordinaries of diverse kinds born one besides another, you shall have
these Examples ensuing.

He bears Or, a Fess between two Chevrons, Sable: This Coat Armor was born
by Sir John Lisle Knight, and one of the first Founders of the most Noble Order
of the Garter, as appears by his Plate whereon these Arms are enameled, and
yet remaining in his Stall in the Quire in the Chapel of Saint George at
Windsor. Which Sir John Lisle was Lord of the Manor of Wilbraham, in the
County of Cambridge, of which said Manor William Lisle Esquire, is at this day
seized: A Gentleman, to whom the Studious in our ancient Saxon Tongue are much
obliged, for the clear light he has given therein by his great travel and
pains.

Robert Lisle, who was a Baron in the times of King Edward the Second, and
Edward the Third, bore the same Coat Armor. And diverse ancient and eminent
Nobles of this Kingdom do rightfully quarter these Arms, being descended from
the Heirs generally of the Family of Lisle.

Or, a Fess between two Chevrons, Gules, was the Coat of Anselme Lord
Fitz-water, in the time of the Conquest; of whom did descend Walter Fitz-water,
who had a Daughter and Heir that married to Robert Radcliff, Father of Robert
Radcliff Lord Fitz-water, of whom descended Robert Radcliff Earl of Sussex, and
Viscount Fitz-water; of which Family of Sir Francis Radcliff of Dilston in
Northumberland, Baronet, now living, 1675.

He bears, Gules, a Cross, Argent, in the Dexter Quarter, an Escocheon, Or,
charged with three Chevronels of the first, by the Name of Saint Owen; which
Family, either for affection, or for some Lands which they anciently held of
the House of Clare, may seem to have assumed the Arms of the said Clare in the
Dexter point of the Field; which form of bearing is of very rare use.

He bears Argent, a Cross flory, Gules, in the Sinister Quarter, an
Escocheon, Sable, charged with a Cross of the first, by the Name of Penthar.
This Coat I have also inserted here, because of the variety and rarity of it,
being of no less rareness than the former, and seldom seen to be born by any:
In Blazon of which I break not the Rule formerly given, by twice repeating the
word Cross, because it is in the Escocheon by it self.

The Field is Topaz, a Saltire and Chief, Ruby; and is the Arms of Sir Edward
Bruise Knight, Lord of Kinloss in Scotland, sometime Master of the Rolls of his
Majesty's Court of Chancery. These Arms sometime belonged to the old Bruses of
Anandale, and also to the Earls of Carict; out of which House the R. Honorable
Robert Earl of Aylesbury and Elgin, Viscount Bruise of Ampthil, Lord Bruise of
Wharlton, Skeleton, and Kinloss, Hereditary High Steward of the Honor of
Ampthil, High Steward of Leicester, and Lord Lieutenant of Bedfordshire,
derives his descent; to which Coat, as an Addition, his Lordship now bears on
a Canton Pearl, a Lion Rampant, Saphir.

He bears Gules, two Bars and a Chief indented, Or, by the Name of Hare.
This, with the Arms of Vlster, is the Coat of Sir Ralph Hare of St^w-Bardolph
in Norfolk, Baronet; and as I take it, derived from the ancient Arms of
Harecourt, whose Coat Armor it is if the Chief were away. In this Escocheon
you may observe in some part, the variable shape of Chiefs, occasioned by
reason of diverse forms of Lines (before showed) whereof they are composed. The
rest, time and diligent observation will make plain.

The Field is Azure, three Chevronels, brased in the Base of the Escocheon, and
a Chief, Or. This Coat Armor pertains to the Honorable Family of Fitzhugh,
sometimes ancient Barons of the North parts of this Land; of whom the Right
Honorable the Earl of Pembrook is Heir, and writes himself, amongst his other
Titles, Lord Fitzhugh, and also quartereth the Coat. These are termed in
Blazon Chevronels, in respect they are abstracted from Chevrons, whereof they
have not alone the shape, but also a borrowed name of Diminution, as if you
should call them minute, or small Chevrons.

He bears Argent, three Chevronels brased in the Base point of the Escocheon,
Sable, on a Chief of the second, three Mullets of the first, by the Name of
Danby, and is now born by Christopher Danby of Masham, Thorp-Parrow, and
Scruton, in the North Riding of Yorkshire; of Driffield in the East Riding; and
of Thornby in the Parish of Leeds in the West Riding of Yorkshire, Esquire.

The End of the Second Section.
Naturalia sunt specula eorum quae non videntur.
THis Third Section begins to treat of such Charges of Coat-Armours as are
called Common Charges, whereof some be Natural and merely formal; such are
Angels and Spirits: and others are both Formal and Material; as the Sun, Moon,
Stars; as also such Natures as are Sublunary, whether they be living after a
sort, as all kinds of Minerals; or that they live perfectly, as all manner of
Vegetables and Sensitive Creatures, with their General and Particular Notes,
Rules, Precepts, and Observations.

The TABLE of the Third Section.
Common Charges, whereof some are Natural Formal, As all kinds of Spirits,
which albeit they are Incorporeal Essences; yet in respect that some of them
have had assumpted Bodies, as those that appeared to Abraham, Lot, etc. they
have been born in Arms according to such their assumpted shapes. Material,
Simple, Constant, Heavens. Stars Fixed. Wandering: as the Sun, Moon, Comets,
etc.

Inconstant, as the Elements, Islands, Mountains, Fountains, etc.
Mixed, Brute, as Meteors Fiery, as the Mullet, or Falling Star, Lightning, etc.
Watery, as Clouds, Rainbows, and their like.
Living, After some sort, as Metals of Minerals, Liquefiable, as Gold, Silver,
etc. Not liquefiable, as Stones: Precious, as the Diamond, Sapphire, Carbuncle,
Ruby, etc. Base, as all sorts of Stones of vulgar use and employment.

Perfectly, Plants and other Vegetatives that grow upon a Stump Simple, that do
grow upon one body or stem, as all kind of Trees with their Limbs, Leaves, and
other parts. Manifold, as Shrubs of all sorts, whose Leaves, Flowers, and
Fruits, are of more frequent use of bearing in Arms, than is their whole
bearing.
Stalk: Such are all kinds of Herbs, and their parts, viz. their Leaves and
Flowers.
Sensible Creatures Common parts Contained, whereof only blood is of use in
Arms. Containing Adjuncts scil. their Support, as the Bones. Covering, which is
their Skin.
Their Animal parts destinated to Sense and Motion together, as the Brain,
whose excrement, viz. tears, are only of use in Armory. Motion alone, the use
whereof in Arms is the heart.


Kinds which are Unreasonable, such are Animals Terrestrial, that live Upon the
Earth, and are Four footed, and do produce Living Creatures Whole footed, as
the Elephant, Horse, M^le, Ass, etc. Diversely cloven, viz. In two, as Hearts,
Goats, etc. Into many parts, as Lions, Bears, Wolves, etc.

Eggs, of which some have Four feet, as the Tortoise, Frog, Lizard, Crocodile,
etc. More than four feet, as the Scorpion, Ant, Grasshopper, etc.

Creeping, or rather gliding, as Snakes, Snails, Blind-worms, etc.
Above the earth, having their feet Whole and plain, and are called Palmipedes,
as the Swan, Goose, Duck, and other like River Fowls. Divided, as Eagles,
Hawks, and all Birds of prey, and domestical Fouls.
Watery, whose covering is Soft, of which some are Skinned, as Lampries, Eeles,
Congers, and such like. Scaled, as the Dolphin, Barbel, Carp, Bream, Roch, etc.
Hard, which are Crusted, as Lobsters, Crabs, Crevices, Prawns, Shrimps, etc.
Shelled, as Scalops, Oysters, Periwinkles, Muscles, etc.


Reasonable, which is Man.






Artificial, whereof see the Table of the fourth Section, at this Character ^.


SECTION III. CHAP. I.
HAving performed the Task which our proposed Order imposed on us, touching
proper Charges, together with their making, and diverse manner of bearing: the
same orderly Progression now calls us to the handling of common Charges,
mentioned in the second Member of the same Distribution. By common Charges I
mean all such other Charges hereafter following, as are not hitherto handled.

Whether they be Natural. Artificial.


Things Natural (according to Philosophers) are Essences by themselves
subsisting: Res naturalis est essentia per se subsistens. Manifold, and in
manner infinite are these things Natural, as Zanchius notes, saying, Multae
sunt, and prope infinitae, non tam res, quam rerum species, in Coelis, in Aere,
in Terris, in Aquis: therefore it is not to be expected, that I should in
exemplifying of them, pass through all the particulars of them; but only touch
superficially some of their chiefest, selected out of that innumerable variety,
whereby I may manifest in what ranks, and under what heads, each peculiar thing
must be bestowed, according to their several kinds, and so redeem them from all
former confused mixture.

Of things Natural, some are Formal. Material.


The formal Nature is most simple and pure, and consists of the propriety of
its own form, without any body at all; of which sort are Spirits, which
(according to Scribonius are Essentiae formatae rationales and immortales;
Essences perfectly formed, reasonable and immortal: I say, perfectly formed, to
distinguish them from the Souls of men, whose forming is not perfect in it
self, but is for the informing and perfecting of the Body and the whole Man.

Amongst such Forms are numbered Angels. Cherubims.


Angels, in the Opinion of most men) are incorporeal Essences of a spiritual
Nature, void of all material Substance. Angelus in Latin, is the same that
Nuntius is, that is to say a Messenger; and the same is a name of Office, and
not of Nature, as St. Augustine notes upon Psalm 104. saying, Quaeris nomen
hujus naturae? Spiritus est. Quaeris officium? Angelus est. Will you know the
nature of it? It is a Spirit. Will you know the Office of it? It is an Angel or
Messenger. The like may we find (says he) in man: Nomen naturae Homo, officii
Miles: nomen naturae Vir, officii Praetor: To be a man, is a name of nature: To
be a Soldier or Praetor, is a name of Office. Angels are Messengers, by whom
God has manifested his will and power to his Elect in Christ Jesus: In which
respect also the Ministers of God are called in Scriptures Gods Angels, and
therefore to be honored as his Ambassadors and Messengers; and their Doctrine
is Evangelium, the good Angelical Message of life eternal with the Angels in
Heaven.

All Angels are of like spiritual Substance, of like intelligent faculty, of
like will and choice; In fine, all of them created alike good, and in nature
perfect. Nevertheless, as all men by nature and natural dignity are alike, but
by accident some of them are of more esteem and worthiness than others: So it
is also with Angels, inasmuch as some of them (if we give credit to
Philosophers) are appointed to attend the motion of the Heavens, others to
repress the rage of Devils, as appears Job 8. Others have charge of
preservation of Kingdoms, and to keep under the rage of Tyrants, as is manifest
Daniel 20. Some have charge of some particular Church, others of Apostles and
Pastors, and others of private Persons, Psalm 91. And all of them are by
Scripture said to be Ministering Spirits.

Of this diversity of Functions, and several Administrations, it is thought
(because some of these Off^ces are of higher employment than others are) that
some of them are simply called Angels, some Archangels, some Virtues, some
Dominations, as St. Hierom expressly shows.

And albeit these heavenly Spirits be in their own Nature void of all corporeal
or material Substance, yet is it certain, when it pleased God so to employ
them, they had assumpted Bodies for the time, to the end they might then more
effectually accomplish the service that God had enjoined them. Such Bodies had
the three Angels that appeared to Abraham, Genesis 18. Such Bodies also had the
two Angels that came unto Lot, Genesis 19. And as God gave them Bodies for that
time, so did he give them also the Faculties answerable to such Bodies; viz. to
walk, talk, eat, drink, and such like. These Bodies and bodily Faculties were
given them, to the end they might more familiarly converse and discourse with
the godly, to whom they were sent, and the better perform the charge enjoined
them, insomuch as they did unfeignedly eat and drink, as Zanchius notes;
whereby they did the better conceal their proper Nature, until such time as
they should make known unto men what they were indeed. Hereupon it seems the
Ancients of fore-past Ages have used the bearing of Angels in Coat-Armours,
according to those bodily shapes and habits wherein they appeared unto men, as
in Example.

The Field is Jupiter, an Angel volant in bend, pointing to the Heavens with
his right hand, and with his left to the Earth, habited in a Robe close girt,
Sol: having a Scroll issuing from his mouth, containing these four Letters, G.
I. E. D. The Letters do signify the words uttered by the multitude of heavenly
Soldiers that did accompany the Angel which brought unto the Shepherds the
most joyful tidings of the birth of our blessed Savior Jesus Christ, praising
God, and saying, Gloria in excelsis Deo, and in terra pax: Glory to God on
high, and on Earth peace. This Coat may well beseem any Ambassador or bringer
of happy news, especially such as first plant Religion in any Country; in which
respect this our Nation has been more glorious, both in preserving and
propagating the purity of Religion, than any other of the World.

The Field is Mars, an Angel standing direct, with his hands conjoined, and
elevated upon his breast; habited in a long Robe close girt, Luna; his Wings
displayed, as prepared to ^^ie, Sol. Amongst the Coat-Armours of such as were
assembled at the Council of Constance, Anno Domini 1413. I find this Coat born
by the Name of Brangor de Ceruisia. Furthermore, amongst the persons there
assembled, I find that the King of Arabia bare for his Coat an Archangel,
couped at the breast, the wings displayed, and signed in the forehead with a
Cross. And that Gideon, Episcopus Pellicastrensis, did bear an Angel issuing
out of the base of the Escocheon, with his hands conjoined, and elevated on his
breast, the wings displayed for readiness of flight.

He bears Luna, upon a Chevron, Saturn, three Angels kneeling, habited in
long Robes close girt, with their hands conjoined and elevated as aforesaid,
and their wings displayed, Sol. This Coat is said to be born by Maellock Krwm
of Wales. And indeed this form of kneeling well fitteth the Angels, to show
their continual adoring of their Almighty King, in whose Chamber of Presence
they daily wait: but that we should kneel to them, that themselves condemn in
the Apocalypse: and St. Paul expressly forbids Angel-worship. And indeed a
madness it is, when Christ commands us to pray, O our Father, that any should
teach us to pray, O my Angel.

After Angels, Cherubims (whose use in Armory is less frequent) are to be
handled. Of these I find two Examples of several bearing; the one out of
Hieron. Bara, expressing the sole bearing of a Cherub: another out of Leigh, of
a Cherub born upon an Ordinary: to which I have thought fit to add a Coat of
Name, for a more manifest proof of their use in Arms, as also to show that they
are born as well with Ordinaries between them, as upon Ordinaries.

He bears Jupiter, a Cherub having three pair of wings, whereof the uppermost
and nethermost are counterly crossed, and the middlemost displayed, Luna. As to
the forms of those Cherubims that covered the Ark, it is of some holden, that
they had the similitude of certain Birds, such as never any man has seen; but
that Moses saw in his most blessed Vision such shapes upon the Throne of God.
But Joseph. Lib. Antiq. Iudaic. 8. says, Hae Cherubicae effigies quanam specie
fuerint nemo vel conjicere potest vel eloqui: Of what shape these Cherubims
were, no mortal man can conjecture or utter.

He bears Luna, on a Chief, Jupiter, a, Cherub displayed, Sol. The Cherubims
were pourtraited with wings before the place where the Israelites prayed, to
show how speedily they went about the Lords business, Cherubim (according to
Zanchius, lib. 2. de Nominibus Angelorum) is not the name of any Order of
Angels, or Celestial Hierarchy (as others would have it) but such as may well
agree with all Angels: Nither does that Name always signify their Nature, or
ordinary Office, but for a certain reason, even so long as they do appear to be
such, as by those Names they are signified to be. And it is to be observed,
that Cherub betokens the singular Number, and Cherubim the plural Number.

The Field is Sable, a Chevron between 3 Cherubims, Or. This Coat pertained to
the right worthy Gentleman, Sir Thomas Chaloner Knight, sometime Governor to
the most High and Mighty Prince Henry, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall and
Rothsay, and Earl of Chester; and is now born by Sir Edward Chaloner of
Gisborough in the North Riding of Yorkshire, Knight.

In our Division we distinguished these from Angels, because by most they are
taken for a distinct Order above ordinary Angels, taking that Name from the
fullness or abundance of Divine and Mystical Science. Thus have you Examples of
Cherubims born, not only Sole, but also upon and with Ordinaries.

CHAP. II.
FRom things Natural that are merely formal, we come to such as are Natural and
Material. Those are said to be Essences Material, that do consist of a Body
subject to motion and alteration; Natura materiata est essentia in corpore
motui obnoxio subsistens; A material Nature is an Essence subsisting in a Body
subject to motion.

These are Simple. Mixed.


Simple, are certain Orbicular or Round Bodies, or bodily Essences, originally
consisting of an unmixed matter.

Of these some are Constant. Inconstant.


Those are said to be constant Natures which in respect of their perfection are
of most lasting continuance; such are the Celestial Globes and the Stars.

The heavenly Spheres or Globes, are Ummoveable. Moveable.


The Unmovable is holden to be that uttermost Sphere that glistereth so
gloriously, as that it dazeleth the sharpest sight of man, and is called Caelum
Empyreum, the fiery Heaven; whereof we shall be better able to judge and speak,
when God shall bring us thither, and yet our Star-gazers will take upon them to
talk so confidently and particularly of those incomprehensible Bodies, as if
they had been there, and surveyed every corner thereof. This Celestial Globe
(according to Scribonius) is the Mansion Place and Place of all the heavenly
Natures, wherein the Angels, and other the blessed of God, do with endless joy
behold the presence of Almighty God face to face. To this place (according to
the same Author) were Enoch, Elias, and Paul rapt up before their deaths.

But now for more orderly progression herein, forasmuch as we have occasion
here offered to speak of a Sphere, we will first show what a Sphere is, and so
proceed to the rest.

A Sphere is a figure or body exactly round of all parts, and void of all
Angles and Corners. The spherical or round form is of all other the most
perfect, as also the most beautiful, capable, and fit for motion, in as much as
it is void of all corners, which might give impediment to moving, therefore is
this form most agreeable to the Heavens and Celestial Bodies, which are
evermore in continual and restless motion. It was requisite then, that the
perfectest Body (such as the Heavens are) should receive the perfectest form,
which is the orbicular or round figure. Figura Sphaerica (says Aristotle, lib,
de Coelo and Mundo) est omnium figurarum nobilior.

The motion of the Heavens is the most sincere and unlaboured of all motions,
Movetur enim sine labor, and fatigatione, Arist. de Coelo 2. As also it is
said in Ecclesiast. 16. 26. The Lord has set his works in good order from the
beginning, and part of them be sundred from the other, when the first made
them. He has garnished his works for ever, and their beginning so long as they
shall endure: they are not hungry, nor wearied in their labors, nor cease from
their offices, Verse 27. Again, None of them hinders another, neither was any
of them disobedient to his words, Verse 28. He builds his Spheres in the
Heaven, and has laid the foundations of the Globe of Elements in the Earth: he
calls the waters of the Sea, and pours them out upon the open Earth; the
LORD is his Name, Amos 9. 6.

The matter whereof the Heavens are composed, has in it this natural property,
not to be moved violently, neither yet naturally to rest. As the same Author
testifies in these words, Natura materiae Coeli est innatu non movere
violenter, and non quiescere naturaliter, Lib. de Coelo: without intermission
is the motion of the Heavens. Therefore are high and noble Spirits resembled to
the Celestial Bodies according to Lipsius, Alti aethereique animi, ut ipse
ether, semper gaudent motu: Men of etherial or heavenly Spir its cannot be
idle, but are evermore in action, and exercise of things commendable and
virtuous, being thereto moved and quickened by an honest and free disposition
and affection of the will and desire of the mind: Omnia enim honesta opera
(says Seneca) voluntas inchoat, occasio perficit.

But virtue hardly receives her due merit at all seasons. Nevertheless, Saepe
honorata est virtus, etiam ubi eam fefellit exitus.

The circular Motion receives beginning in it self, and has the smoothest
passage: for in all other forms you shall find Angels, either more or less,
which do give impediments to motion, whereby they give occasion of some stay or
rest (as I have said before). Therefore it behooved, that the sincerest Body
should be fitted with the simplest form and motion. In this kind of motion of
the Heavens, is signified the very eternity of God, wherein there is neither
beginning nor ending to be found; and therefore it is rightly said by the
Apostle, The invisible things of God are conceived and understood by his
creatures: as also his Everlasting Power and Divine Essence, whereof his
visible works are the express Characters.

Mercurius Trismegistus in his description of God, resembles him to a Sphere,
saying, Deus est Sphaera, qui ratione sapientiaque comprehenditur, cujus
centrum est ubique, circumferentia vero nusquam, etc. God is a Sphere that is
apprehended by reason, whose center is every where, and his circumference no
where. For God has neither beginning nor ending: he wants beginning, because
he was not made by any, but was himself the Creator of all things: And he is
void of ending, by reason that he had no beginning: Nam quicquid finitur, in
sua principiaresolvitur; Whatsoever has an end, the same is resolved into that
it was at the first.

As touching the Substance of the Heavens, Scribonius says, that it is Corpus
constans ex aqua, in firmissimam essentiam instar pellis extensae concameratum.
It is a Body (says he) consisting of Water, in the most solid Substance
thereof spread out Vault-ways like a Skin.

Though it may seem to thee (courteous Reader) that I undertake a needless
labor in manifesting that the glorious Heavens and Earth, were formed and
framed by the most powerful God, a thing so frequent in the Sacred Scriptures,
and also so clear, as that no man can doubt thereof: yet give me leave for my
own particular, who do labor to apprehend every occasion to publish the glory
of the Eternal and Omnipotent God (which is the main and principal end of our
Creation) especially since the Order of my Method requires the same; and that
bonum aliquod saepius repetitum delectat; Give me leave, I say, in this my
latter impression, to reprove my self for my too much neglected duty in my
former; that so, though very late, yet at the last, I may prefer the Glory of
God before the Order of Method.

The Moveable Sphere of the Heaven is the Firmament. The Firmament is that
continual moving Heaven, which with his swift Revolution swayeth all the
Inferior Orbs, and is called in Latin Firmamentum (according to Scribonius) a
firmitate, that is, of the stability thereof; meaning (as I conceive) either
the durable subsisting of it, or else the unmoveableness of the two Poles,
Artick and Antartick: otherwise, one self same thing cannot be said to be
moveable and constant, but in a diverse respect; even as an Ironwheel in a
Clock, though still in motion, yet both in respect of the metalline solidity,
and of the sure fastening to the Axle, it may be said to be Firm and Unmovable.
If any man bear a representation of the Heavens, in his Coat Armor, whether
the same have the likeness of a Solid or Armil Sphere, they must be reduced to
this head: of this kind did the famous Archimede choose for his Device, who
before his death, commanded that a Sphere should be engraven on his Sepulcher.
And such a bearing is honorable for any great Professor of Astronomy, not such
witless Wizards and Fortune Tellers as usually deceive the World with their
idle Predictions; but those Noble Spirits, whose Eagle-eyes search out the true
Natures, Revolutions, and Properties of those Supernal Essences.

The regardful consideration of the Heavens and the Ornaments thereof, together
with their certain and orderly motions, should mightily move and provoke us to
raise up our thoughts, from the love and contemplation of base and earthly
Objects (whereon we usually dote) to the admiration of his unspeakable power
and love of his incomprehensible goodness, who made such a wonderful
Architecture; first, to serve for our use in this life; and afterward, to be
our blessed Palace and Mansion in a better life. For though all creatures
demonstrate the wisdom of their wonderful Workmaster, yet the Heavens
especially declare his glory, and the Firmament his handiwork: which made the
godly King David to rise out of his Bed in the night, to behold the Heavens,
and thereby to call to mind the perversity of Man, which never keeps the course
that God prescribes, whereas those Bodies, though void of sense, yet from
their first Creation never faltered in their endless journeys.

Now since I have demonstrated and laid open unto you what a Sphere is, the
form, perfection, dignity, property, motion, substance thereof, and the like, I
will now show unto you an Example of a Shield, illustrated with manifold
variety of Celestial Bodies, etc. which will be very necessary and commodious
to be inserted in this place.

The Field is Or, a Sphere, Azure, beautified and replenished with manifold
variety of Celestial Bodies, environing the Terrestrial Globe, all proper.

These were the Ornaments wherewith the Shield of that famous and valiant
Grecian Captain Achilles was illustrated and garnished: Which he caused to be
engraven therein, to the end that the mind of the beholders of them might be
raised thereby to a considerate contemplation and meditation of the admirable
power and wisdom of the Omnipotent Creator of them: Which duty whosoever
performs, he accomplisheth the sum and effect of all true Nobility.

This Shield did Vulcan garnish with variety of Stars of manifold kinds, and
added thereto the skilful feats and practices, as well of Peace as of Wars, and
all their rights and offices; omitting (in a manner) nothing pertaining to the
well-governing of the Assemblies and Societies of Men.

By this invention did he labor to manifest unto us, than there is no Shield
more powerful to resist the vehement and violent assaults of adverse Fortune;
that for a man to be furnished throughout with the complete Armor of Cardinal
Virtues, so shall he be fitted and prepared to sustain whatsoever brunt or
forcible encounter shall assail them.

If we shall compare this Shield of Achilles, thus garnished and furnished,
with manifold varieties of things, both Celestial and Terrestrial, with those
Coat-Armours that consist of Lions, Griffins, Eagles, and such other Animals,
or ravenous Creatures, we shall find that to be more available to chase away
and foil all passionate perturbations of the mind, occasioned by the
concurrence of some sudden and unexpected danger, than any, or all of these
together can be; by how much that compriseth a mixture of calamities and
comforts together. For as the Globe of the Earth does represent unto us the
dreadful and dismal dangers that attend our mortal state, by reason of the
manifold mutability of things Sublunary, to the daunting (oftimes) of the most
valiant: so contrariwise, the Celestial forms do represent unto us an Antidote
or Preservative against all dangerous events and accidents, when we call to
mind that those Celestial powers, or rather Gods power in them, is able to
divert or mitigate in a moment all harmful events and dangers whatsoever, be
they never so deadly. For these Celestial Bodies are Gods mighty and strong
Army, wherewith he oftentimes discomfiteth and subdueth his Enemies, and such
as seek the spoil and destruction of his chosen people: as we may see Judges 5.
20. They fought from heaven, even the Stars in their courses fought against
Sisera. The Sun stayed his course at the prayer of Joshua, 10. 12. And the Sun
abode, and the Moon stood still, until the people avenged themselves upon their
enemies, Verse 13. And there was no day like that before it, nor after it, that
the Lord hearkened to the voice of man, for the Lord fought for Israel. And
again, Ecclesiast. 46. 4. Stood not the Sun still by his means, and one day was
as long as two, Verse 14.

By these visible forms we should be incited and provoked (upon their view) to
invocate the most powerful God for his aid and deliverance, when we find our
selves any way distressed or beset with perils by the Example of Joshua: He
called unto the most High Governor, when the Enemies pressed upon him on every
side, and the mighty Lord heard him, and fought for him with Hailstones, and
with mighty power. So should we receive like comfort in all distresses, as
Joshua did. Thus should their view put us evermore in mind, to raise our
thoughts to Godward, and take every occasion to glorify him, by invocating him
for his aid; and say with the Kingly Prophet David, I lift my eyes to the hills
from whence comes my help, etc. So should we evermore in all distresses find
the comfort of his ever ready, and never failing promise and providence: For in
all things, O Lord, thou have magnified and glorified thy people, and have not
despised to assist them in every time and place, Wisdom 29. 21.

These kinds of Coat-Armours are so much more noble and excellent, than these
that we receive by descent from our Progenitors (as remunerations of their
virtuous demerits) by how much they have in them store of Art, witty Invention,
and of efficacy to admonish and put us in mind to persist in the performance of
our Duties.

This manner of adorning of Shields does Aldrovandus commend above all other
garnishings, saying, Nihil aeque atque Philosophia, ab omnibus adversis tuetur,
nihil ejus explicatu aptius est ad scutum exornandum and honestius. There is
nothing that does so safely protect a man against the damage of adverse
Fortune, as Philosophy does, neither is there any thing more fit and seemly to
beautify a Shield withal, than the explanation thereof.

Emblems, Hieroglyphics, and Ensigns of Noble Families, inasmuch as they do
instruct our eyes unto virtue, they cannot be defaced or blemished without
great wickedness: The reason thereof does Farnesius give in these words, Cum
virtutum imaginibus tantum debemus, quantum mutis praeceptoribus: Si illae
tamen mutae dici possunt, quae in silentio omni Doctrina sunt verbosiora. Of
all the things that are (says Cicero) there is nothing in the world that is
better, nothing more excellent, nothing more beautiful and glorious to behold,
and not only that there is, but that nothing can be thought or imagined to be
of more surpassing beauty than the world; whereunto Lipsius annexeth this
addition, examine the universality thereof, consider the great and small parts
thereof, and you shall find them composed and compacted in such orderly sort,
as that they cannot possibly be bettered for use, or more glorious to behold.
The consideration whereof moved King David to break forth in admiration.

The Spherical Figure is of all other forms the fairest, the most capable, and
the simplest, and comprehends all other forms. In a Spherical Line the end is
all one with the beginning, therefore it does aptly agree with the noblest and
perfectest Body, such as the Heavens are.

There is nothing that more apparently expresses the Spherical or round form
of the Heavens, than does the Sun by his Circular motion: The Sun, says
Solomon, Eccles. 1. 5. rises and goes down, and draws to his place where he
rises.

To the most simple body, the simplest motion is due, as also the simplest form
and shape.

Those things are said to be moved without labor, which are moved without any
intermission or rest, or any appetite or desire of rest; such is the motion of
the Heavens, because they are Circular or Round: in the Circular motion there
is no rest at all.

That the World is Orbicular or Round, it is manifest by the infallible
testimony of the Prophet David, Psalm 89. The heavens are thine, the earth also
is thine, thou have laid the foundation of the round world, and all they that
dwell therein, Psalm 24. 1. The Orbicular form that we observe to be in
Celestial Bodies is to them natural, but accidental to the Elements: according
to that saying, Figura Sphaerica in Coelestibus essentialiter, in Elementis
vero accidentaliter. Arist. 1. de Coelo.

A Star (which is next to be considered after the Heaven) is a permanent and
constant Essence, and the more condensat or compacted part of the Sphere,
wherein it is fixed, for the illuminating of Inferior Bodies: for albeit it be
an usual distinction, that of Stars some are fixed, and some are planetary or
wandering, yet they are indeed all fixed alike, and settled in one certain part
of the Sphere, but in respect of our eye, and in reference of their motions one
of another, they have a diverse aspect, and so have gotten a diverse name. It
is holden that the fixed Stars are discerned by their sparkling or twinkling,
by reason that our sight being bound as it were by the forcibleness of their
resplendent rays, our eyes do become wavering and trembling in beholding them;
and for this cause ought all Stars to be made with their rays or points waved,
as in Example.

He bears Sable, a Star, Argent, by the Name of Ingleby. If this Star were
born Or, which is his proper Color, it would add much more grace unto it,
especially in regard of the Azury Field, the proper Color of the Heavens,
wherein Stars have their natural Mansion. For a Star, says Farnesius, is a
Mystical Character, or Figure of God, to whom all Worship and Religion does
properly appertain; for like as Stars are called in Latin Stellae, a Stando,
because they be evermore fixed in the Firmament: so there is nothing more
constant or of more perpetuity than God, whose sacred Will is the regular
direction of all things whatsoever; and therefore may it be said not unfitly,
that they signify God and Religion, or otherwise some eminent quality shining
above the ruder sort of men, as a Star in the obscurity of the night.

Now the chiefest, but not the sole end, of the Creation of Stars, was not
alone to give light, and with their influence to be assisting to the Sun and
Moon, in their procreation, production, and fructification of the Seeds, Sets,
Plants, and Herbs committed to the Earth; but also to the designation and
foreshewing of times and seasons, like as the Sun and Moon were, as shall be
showed in place convenient hereafter. As for Example; The rising of the Star
Arcturus, placed near to the Bear, called Vrsa Major, or the greater Bear,
denotes unto us the presence of the Spring.

This Star shows it self after the expiration of January and February, as a
manifest note of the beginning of the Spring, when the Sun enters the sign of
Aries.

The rising of the Pleiades or seven Stars does demonstrate unto us that the
Harvest Season is at hand; and so forth of others. We may read hereof Job 38.
where he speaks of the influence of these and of other Stars.

The most part of all the Stars are, as it were, publishers and proclaimers to
admonish us what we ought to do in each season concerning the things serving
for the use of this present life.

Stars are Gods Instruments whereby he works the effects of his Providence in
these Inferior Bodies; Instrumento autem utitur Artifex pro suo Arbitrio; An
Artificer uses his Tool at his pleasure, and to serve his will. In vain
therefore are the predictions of them that take upon them to foretell of things
contingent, and that shall come to pass in future time; and will confidently
affirm what good or evil fortune shall befall a man: A thing that is only known
to the secret will of God, and rests in his Divine Providence to dispose
thereof at his good pleasure; as appears Prove. 20. 24.

As to the number of points whereof a Star consists, we must observe, they
must never be fewer than six; but when the same is formed of more, then must
you in blazoning of them express their certain number: for sometimes you shall
find a Star formed of Sixteen points, as in this next Example shall appear.

He bears Azure, a Star of sixteen points, by the Name of Huitson, and is the
Coat Armor of John Huitson of Cleasby in the County of York, Esquire one of the
Captains of the Cauldstrem Regiment of Foot Guards to his Majesty K. Charles
the Second.

He bears Argent, a Star of sixteen points, Gules, by the Name of Delahay.
The Field of a Coat Armor (as some men do hold) being Argent or White, does
signify Literature, and the Charge surmounting the same being Gules or Red,
which is an Imperial Color, and is sometimes per Synecdochen, taken (as the
thing signified) for the sign it self that is thereby represented: And white,
being a token of Justice (is in such a Case) surmounted of Red, which is proper
to Fortitude, betokens, as they do conceit it, Learning, which gives place
to Arms; and not Arms to Learning. This did the Poets secretly express, when
they preferred Pallas to be the Governess of Learning; and Mars, being a man,
to the managing of Martial affairs; whom they would have to receive the
denomination of Mars, A magnitudine Artis.

The excellency of the Stars is highly commended, Eccles. 43. 9. where speaking
of the glorious beauty of their Order and Constellations, it is said, That it
is a Camp pitched on high, shining in the Firmament of Heaven. The beauty of
the Heavens are the glorious Stars, and the Ornament that shines in the high
places of the Lord. By the commandment of the holy One they continue in their
order, and fail not in their watch. And the particular Stars (says David) God
calls by their names; as likewise does patient Job remember the titles of
several Constellations.

Stars are sometimes found pierced, and other whiles charged; for the
difference of which two forms of bearing, you have had a Rule formerly
delivered. Moreover, it is a Rule infallible, That the piercing of Stars must
be evermore round; for the piercing square, and Losenge-ways, are repugnant to
the nature of Stars. Here I will give you a general Observation touching
bearing of Ordinaries and common Charges together. That in the mixed bearing of
Ordinaries and Common Charges together, all Common Charges may be, and are born
In, upon, or with Chief, or one Common Charge, in, upon, or with another. Pale,
Bend, Fess, Chevron, Bar, Gyron, Cross, Saltire, Orle,

This General Rule I have thought good to set down in this place, here being my
first entrance into the handling of common Charges, and where their mixed
bearing with Ordinaries is first mentioned, to the end that the same may serve
as the stern of a Ship to direct your understanding, touching such interposed
bearing of any of the common Charges with Ordinaries; because I labor to shun
all idle iterations and multiplicity of unprofitable Examples, tending to one
and the same end. This form of bearing shall you find dispersedly, yet not
confusedly, exemplified in this Work, that will give approbation to the
generality of this note, which does not warrant this form of bearing alone in
these, but also generally in all other Coat-Armours of like kind. Of these
several forms of bearing, I have chosen some particular Examples, as in these
next Escocheons, and others, shall follow in their proper places.

He bears Sable, a Star of eight points, between two Flanches, Ermyn, on a
Canton, Argent, a Sinister hand, couped at the Wrist, Gules. This is the
Coat Armor of Sir John Hobart of Blickinge in the County of Norfolk, Knight
and Baronet, Heir-male to Sir Henry Hobart Knight and Baronet, Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas, who was descended from the second Son of Sir James Hobart of
Hales-hall in the said County, Attorney General to King Henry the Seventh.
Stars are numbered amongst the Host of Heaven, for that it pleases God
sometimes to execute his Vengeance upon the wicked, with no less dreadful
destruction by them than by numerous and militant Armies, as appears by the
place of Scripture by me formerly cited, Judges 5. As touching the color of
Stars, I hold it sufficient to name them only when they be born properly, and
in their natural color, which is Or; but if they be of any other color, then
the same must be named. As for the Canton thus charged, it being an
augmentation or remuneration given by our late Dread Sovereign King James, to
such as his Majesty advanced to the Dignity of Baronet (it being an Order and
Degree by him erected,) One of which number was Sir Henry Hobart, Knight and
Baronet, and late Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, Father to
this Sir John Hobart. I shall have better occasion to speak thereof in the
sixth Section, and second Chapter. When I come to treat of such Armorial Signs,
as by the Sovereigns favor are sometimes assigned for Augmentations.

He bears Ermyn, on a Chief indented, Gules, three Stars, by the Name of
Escourte. When you find any Ordinary charged upon the Field (having no other
Charge, as in this Example) you must reckon their Charging to be a Dignity unto
them, forasmuch as they are deemed to be thereby greatly honored. In regard
whereof they are called Honorable Ordinaries. Like as this Chief is charged,
so shall you find the Bend, Chevron, Fess, Saltire, Bar, and all other the
beforementioned Ordinaries, charged upon, as before we observed, and hereafter
shall appear.

He bears Gules, three Stars, a Canton, Ermyn, by the Name of Leverton. Here
I do name three Stars, as if the Canton were away, as well to the end that the
manner of their position may be perfectly understood by such Blazon; as also to
show that the Canton does not rebate the Star in the Dexter point, but only
does surmount the same.

He bears Gules, an Escocheon, Argent, between eight Stars in Orle. This Coat
was born by Sir John Chamberlain of Priesthury, in the County of Glocester^
Knight; and is now born by John Chamberlain of Maugersbury; and by Thomas
Chamberlain of Oddington, both of the said County, Esquires. These Stars are
said to be born in Orle, or Orleways; but they cannot be properly said to be an
Orle of Stars, because they have no connection to fasten them together, but are
born severally and apart one from another.

He bears Azure, ten Stars, four, three, two, and one, Or, by the name of
Alstone. This, with the Arms of Vlster, is the bearing of Sir Thomas Alstone of
Odell in Bedfordshire, Knight and Baronet, and of Sir John his Brother, Knight:
As also of that Eminent Physician Dr. Edward Alstone.

The Field is Diamond, a Fess wavy between the two Pole Stars, Artick and
Antartick, Pearl. Such was the worth of this most generous and renowned Knight,
Sir Francis Drake, sometime of Plymouth, as that his merits do require that his
Coat Armor should be expressed in that selected manner of Blazoning, that is
fitting to Noble Personages, in respect of his noble Courage and high Attempts
achieved, whereby he merited to be reckoned the Honor of our Nation and of
Naval Profession; inasmuch as he cutting through the Magellanick Straits, Anno
Domini 1577. within the compass of three years he encompassed the whole World;
whereof his Ship, laid up in a Dock near Deptford, will long time remain, as a
most worthy Monument. Of these his Travels a Poet has thus sung: Drake,
pererrati novit quem terminus orbis,
Quemque semel Mundi vidit uterque Polus.
Si taceant homines, facient te Sydera notum,
Sol nescit comitis non memor esse sui.
The worlds surveyed bounds, brave Drake, on thee did gaze,
Both North and Southern Poles have seen thy manly face;
If thankless men conceal, thy praise the Stars will blaze,
The Sun his Fellow-travellers worth will duly grace.
This Coat, with the Arms of Vlster, is now born by his descendant, Sir Francis
Drake of Buckland Monachorum in Devonshire, Baronet.

He bears Argent; a Fess between three Stars, Gules, by the Name of Everard.
The three Stars expressed in this Escocheon^ may put us in mind of that
threefold path of Religious passage unto the heavenly Canaan, viz. Moderation
and Sobriety toward our selves, Piety toward God, and Justice toward men.

The Stars may signify unto us a hopeful success and happy event, in the
turbulent time of tempestuous flaws and turmoils of this present life.

Like as in the Winter season the Stars shine more clear and resplendent than
in the Summer time; even so is the glory and virtue of a generous and
magnanimous spirit more evidently discerned in a shattered and broken estate,
than in prosperity.

Whenever there is a separation of common Charges born in Coat-Armours, by
reason of the Interposition of some of the before mentioned Ordinaries, then
are they not termed Ordinaries, but most worthy Partitions; and they are such
(says Leigh) as though the common Charge annexed do occupy more than one point
of the Escocheon, yet every of them is in as great effect as though it were one
only thing, by the reason of Sovereignty of the same Partition interposed.

Thus I have given you a taste of the particular and variable manner of bearing
of Ordinaries commixt with common Charges, according to the General Rule
formerly given. As for Example, that common Charges are born with Ordinaries,
you may see in the first and third of these six Escocheons: That they be born
upon Ordinaries, it is manifest by the second Escocheon: That they are parted
by Ordinaries interposed between them, it appears by these last Escocheons:
That they are born in form of Ordinaries, or Ordinaryways, it is clear by the
fourth Escocheon. Note, that albeit I have here set down but one Example of
each of these particular forms of bearing, yet must you hold that in every of
these several sorts there are diverse other particular kinds of composition of
Coat-Armours, as shall appear hereafter at large unto the diligent Observer.
Furthermore, whereas I have given only two Examples of common Charges born with
Ordinaries, one Example of Ordinaries charged upon, one of Ordinaries
interposed, and one of common Charges born Ordinary-ways, or in form of
Ordinaries; you must understand by the first sort, all common Charges
whatsoever, born with a Pale, Bend, Fess, Chevron, or any other of the
Ordinaries before-named in any sort by the second: all sorts of Ordinaries
charged upon, with any kind of common Charge: by the third, an interposition of
whatsoever sort of Ordinary between common Charges. Lastly, by the fourth, you
must understand all sorts of common Charges born in form, or after the manner
of a Cross, Saltire, Pale, Bend, Fess, or of any other of the said Ordinaries.
These have I here handled briefly, because I must of necessity deal more
copiously in each particular of them in places better fitting thereunto.

CHAP. III.
THus far of such Stars which we called fixed: Now of those Planets whose
shapes are of most use in Heraldry; I mean those two glorious Lights, the one
for the Day, the other for the Night: for, as for the other five Planets,
because their aspect is less to the view, therefore they cannot easily admit a
different form from the fixed Stars. The Sun is the very fountain of Light, and
(as some Philosophers think) of Heat also; and all the splendour which the Moon
has, it borrows from the Sun, and therefore as the Sun goes farther off, or
nearer to her, so her light does increase or diminish. And between both these
and the Stars there is a great conformity, in respect of their sparkling and
resplendent beams, which are in appearance more evident, and in operation more
effectual, or at least more palpably discerned in these, by reason of their
nearness unto us, than of those that are from us so far remote. But herein they
are unlike, that the beautiful and blazing brightness of these is oftentimes
subject to the passion of darkning or eclipsing. Of whose glistering,
eclipsing, and variety of forms, we have bearing, these and other like Examples
following.

He bears Azure, a Sun in his glory, by the Name of S. Clear. To express the
Color of the Sun, being thus born, I hold it needless; for who knows not
that the chiefest glory and highest commendation that may be given to the Sun
does consist in this, that he is beautified with the brightness of his proper
beams: which cannot be better expressed than by the Color Gold, or
Gold-yellow. But if it be born of any other than this, which is his natural
color, then must the same be expressly mentioned, as in due place shall appear.
The Sun is called in Latin Sol, according to some Authors, Vel quia solus ex
omnibus sideribus est tantus, vel quia cum est exortus, obscuratis aliis solus
apparet: for that only he is so great, or for that when he is risen, he so
darkneth all the rest with his splendour, as that he alone appears in Heaven,
as a Monarch in his Kingdom. Of the glory and excellency of the Sun, it is
said, Ecclus. 42. 16. The Sun that shines, looks on all things, and all the
works thereof are full of the glory of the Lord. And again, Ecclus. 43. 2. The
Sun also, a marvelous instrument, when he appears declares at his going out
the work of the most High. At Noon it burns the Country, and who may abide
the heat thereof? Verse 3. The Sun burns the Mountains three times more than
he that keeps a Furnace with continu^l heat. It casts out the fiery
vapors, and with the shining beams blinds the eyes. Great is the Lord that
made it, and by his commandment he causes it to run hastily. And if we
consider how many foggy mists it dispelleth, how many noisome vapors ^t
consumes, and how all Creatures are overcome with the heat thereof, we shall
find that King David did very aptly compare it to a Giant (for strength)
refreshed with wine, (for the heat) to run his course, for his swift motion.

He bears Gules, a Chief, Argent, on the lower part thereof a Cloud, the Suns
resplendent Rays thereout issuing, Proper, by the Name of Lesone in
Northamptonshire. The former Example wherein the Sun is born, does represent a
visible form of a corporeal shape of a Body, from which these Rays or Beams
here demonstrated may be apparently seen to issue; And these are as it were
strained through a Cloud. Sometime one Ray or Beam of this glorious Planet is
born in Coat Armor, without any other Charge, as in this next Example.

He bears Azure, one Ray of the Sun, issuing out of the Dexter corner of the
Escocheon Bend-ways, proper, by the Name of Aldam. Here I do not in the Blazon
make any mention of the three points or lines which are on either side of the
Ray, for in Nature they have no Essence, but proceed from the weakness of the
Eye, which is not able to behold so glorious an object as the Sun.

He bears Or, a Sun eclipsed, Sable. If this Color were not accidental in
respect of the eclipse of the Sun, the same should not have been named. The
Suns eclipse is occasioned by the Interposition of the Moon, which though it be
far less in quantity, yet coming betwixt us and the Body of the Sun, it does
divert the Beams thereof, and debarreth us of the sight of them, even as the
interposition of our hand, or any other small body, before our eyes, does debar
us from the sight of some greater Mountain. For to think that the Sun does lose
his light by the Eclipse, as does a Candle being extinct, proceeds out of
mere rustic ignorance: as the like error is in those who think the Sun loses
his light, or goes to Bed every night, whereas it does only remove it self
from our Horizon, to enlighten other Countries situated in other parts of the
world. As was well expressed by Secundus the Philosopher, who being demanded by
Adrian the Emperor what the Sun was, taking his Table in hand, wrote in this
manner; Sol est Coeli oculus, caloris circuitus, splendour sine occasu, diei
ornatus, horarum distributor: It is the eye of Heaven, the circuit of heat, a
shining without decay, the days ornament, the hours distributor. The most
miraculous Eclipse of the Sun that ever was, happened then when the Sun of
Righteousness, the Son of God, was on the Cross, when all the Earth was so
benighted at Noonday, that Dio^isius Aeropagita a Heathen Athenian, cried out,
Either the World was at an end, or the Maker of it was suffering some great
Agony. The Stars and Planets hitherto spoken of do shine alike, or after one
manner. Now others there are which shine after a diverse sort: such are the Moon
and Comets, which we call Blazing Stars. Neither are we ignorant, that in
proper speech, and truth of Philosophy, Comets are not Stars, but Meteors: yet
the Vulgar Opinion, and the received name and shape used in Heraldry, may
warrant me for thus ranking them amongst the Stars. But as touching the Moon,
her Light is merely reflective, as the brightness of a Looking-glass against
the Sun; and in respect that her substance is very unequal, as in some parts of
thicker substance, and in some parts thinner, therefore she is unequally
enlightened by the Sunbeams, which makes the weak eye, and weaker judgment, to
fancy a face of a man in the Moon: whence-we have gotten the fashion of
representing the Moon with a face. But why the Sun should have the like, I wot
not; unless it be that he should not be out-faced by the Moon, being his
inferior. The most wise and provident God, before the Creation of his other
works, did first create the Light, to teach man to lay the first foundation of
all his actions in the light of true knowledge, thereby to direct his ways
aright, and that his doings be not reproved as works of darkness: especially
since God would not suffer the Night it self to be so wrapped in darkness, but
that the Moon and Stars should somewhat illuminate it. And according to the
diverse apparitions of the Moon, has she her diverse denominations in Heraldry;
as her Increment, in her increase; her Complement, when she is at full; her
Decrement, in her waning; and her Detriment, in her Change and Eclipse. And
according to these varieties, is she also diversely born in Coat Armor, as the
Examples following will show.

He bears Gules, an Incressant, Or, by the Name of Descus. This is the state
of the Moon from her entrance into her first Quarter, which is most usually the
seventh day after the Change, unto her full. In which time she is more and more
illuminated, until she has filled her Circle. This word Incressant signifies
the Moons Increment, or increasing estate; and it may fitly represent the
rising Fortunes of some hopeful Spark, illightned and honored by the gracious
aspect and beams of his Sovereign, who is the bright Sun and Fountain of all
the Light of glorious Nobility, and may confer the Rays of his Grace on whom it
best pleases him.

He bears Ermyn, three Incressants, Gules. This Coat pertained to the Family
of the Symmes of Daventree, in the County of Northampton.

He bears Azure, a Moon in her Complement (which is as much as to say, the
Moon illustrated with her full light) Proper. Here you need not to name the
Color of the Moon for the Reason before delivered in the first Example of the
Sun. The proper Color of the Moon we in Heraldry take to be Argent, both for
the weakness of the light, and also for distinction betwixt the Blazoning of it
and the Sun: and therefore when we Blazon by Planets, we name Gold Sol, and
Silver Luna. Concerning the use of the Moon, it is said, Eccles. 43. 6. The
Moon also has he made to appear according to her season, that it should be a
declaration of the Time, and a sign for the World, Verse 7. The Feasts are
appointed by the Moon, the light thereof diminishes unto the end, Verse 8. The
Moon is called after the name thereof, and grows wonderful in her changing.
The Moon is the Mistress by which all moist, mutable, and unconstant things are
ruled; as Mulier, Mare, Flumina, Fontes; a Woman, and the Sea, Rivers and
Fountains; the ebbing and flowing of the Sea following the motions of the Moon.

He bears Azure, a Moon decressant, Proper, by the Name of Delaluna. This is
the state of the Waning Moon, when she declineth from her Full, and draws to
her last Quarter, which is accomplished most commonly the seventh day after she
has attained the Full, and receives a diminution of her light, to the wasting
of the one half thereof; and from the said seventh day after her Full, she
diminishes continually more and more, until she become again (as many honest
men are) corniculata, sharp-horned, and suffers continually diminution unto
the instant of her Change; and differs from her prime state after the Change,
only in this, that the first (represented by the first of these Examples) is
turned to the right hand of the Escocheon, and this other to the left. And
hitherto I have proposed Examples of her natural aspects, you shall now see her
accidental form; as in Example.

He bears Argent, a Moon in her detriment, or Eclipse, Sable. The Moon is
Eclipsed only at such time as she is at her full state, and diametrically
opposite unto the Sun; when by interposition of the Earth between them, she
seems to our sight, for the time, to be deprived of her light, through the
shadow of the gross body of the earth. This is a passive form of the Moon; and
such her Passions are called in Latin, Labores Lunae, the throws or pangs of
the Moon. In former time the old Germans thought the Moon was in a Trance, and
used to shout and make a noise with Basins, to wake her: Or else they supposed
she was angry with them, and therefore they howled till she looked cheerfully
on them again. Of this mutable state of the Moon, thus writes the Poet: Nec
par aut eadem nocturnae forma Dianae,
Esse potest usquam, semper hodierna sequente:
Dame Cynthia imitates the Dames of our Nation;
Every day she attires her self in a new fashion.


Which occasioned a witty Moral related by Plutarch (as I think) how on a time
the Moon sent for a Tailor to make her a Gown, but he could never fit her, for
it was either too little, or too big for her; which was not the Tailors fault,
but her own inconstancy: so impossible a thing it is to fit the humors of one
that is fickle and unstable.

Sometimes you shall find all these several kinds of Lights before expressed,
born together in one Escocheon; as in Example.

He bears Azure, the Sun, the Full Moon, and the Seven Stars, Or, the two
first in Chief, and the last of Orbicular form in base. It is said that this
Coat Armor pertained to Johannes de Fontibus, sixth Bishop of Ely; who had
that (after a sort) in his Escocheon, which Joseph had in his Dream, Genesis 37.
9. where the Sun, Moon, and eleven Stars did do him reverence; signifying his
Father, Mother, and eleven Brethren. For as in Scripture, so in Heathenish
Devotions also, the Sun and Moon were accounted the Male and Female, and
sometimes Man and Wife; and as the Moon has all her light from the Sun, so
has the Wife from the Husband; and as the Moon is ever lighter on that side
which looks toward the Sun, so should the Wife study to be fairest in her
Husbands eye. And many Wives in their Husbands absence do truly imitate the
Moon in this, that they are lightest when their Sun is farthest from them.
Howsoever this marriage betwixt Sun and Moon was made up, it is certain that
once the Banes were forbidden; as appears by one, who speaking of Queen
Mary's days, and of her Marriage, relates, how when the Sun went first a woing
to the Lady Moon, all Nations (especially those of hot Countries) preferred a
Petition to Jupiter, to hinder the Nuptials, alleging, that there then being
but one Sun, yet he scorched and burned all, but if he should marry, and get
other Suns, the heat would so increase, as all must needs perish: whereupon
Jupiter stayed the match for that time, or at least, was so propitious, that no
issue came of the conjunction of those fiery flames. The several states of the
Moon increasing and decreasing before handled, are now very rare in bearings,
and in manner antiquated: inasmuch as in these days, not only their shapes, but
their very names also are extinct, and instead of them we have another new
coined form, having neither the name, shape, nor yet so much as the shadow of
the former remaining, as may be seen in the next Escocheon.

He bears Azure, a Cressant, Argent, by the Name of Lucy, and is born by
Lucas Lucy of the City of London, Merchant.

He bears Azure, three Cressants, Or, by the Name of Rider, and is the
Coat Armor of Thomas Rider of Bednal-Green in Middlesex, Esquire Son and Heir of
Sir William Rider of the said place, Knight. deceased.

Gules, three Cressants, Or, by the Name of Munnings, and is born by William
Munnings of Waldarshire in Kent, Esquire.

Argent, three Cressants, Gules, by the Name of Butuillain of Northamptonshire.
At this day we take no notice of any other form, either of the increasing or
decreasing Moon, but only of this depraved shape, which corrupt Custom has
rashly hatched, as a form much differing from those before exemplified, if not
merely repugnant to nature. The Patricians of Rome used to wear the Badge of
the Moon on their shoes: as these Cressants are, sometimes the sole Charge of
the Field, as in this Escocheon, so they are born upon, and between the
honorable Ordinaries, as in these Examples following.

He bears Sable, a Fess, Ermyn, between three Cressants, Or, by the Name of
Coventry, and is the Paternal Coat Armor of the Right Honorable Henry
Coventry Esquire, his Majesty's Principal Secretary of State, son to the Right
Honorable Thomas Lord Coventry, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England,
Tempore Caroli Primi.

He bears Azure, a Fess Nebule, between three Cressants, Ermyn, by the Name
of Weld and is the Paternal Coat Armor of Humphrey Weld of Lulworth-Castle in
Dorsetshire, Esquire, Governor of his Majesty's Isle and Castles of Portland
and Sandsfoot; lineally descended from Edrick Sylvaticus, alias Wild (a Saxon
of great Renown in the Reigns of King Harold and William the Conqueror) whose
Father Alfrick was Brother to Edrick of Stratton, Duke of Mercia.

He bears Sable, a Chevron between 3 Cressants, Or, by the Name of Palmer,
and with the Arms of Vlster, is the Coat Armor of Sir Lewis Palmer of Carleton
in Northamptonshire, Baronet, son and heir of Sir Geffrey Palmer of the said
Place, Knight and Baronet, deceased, late Attorney General to his Majesty King
Charles the Second.

Sable, a Chevron Ermyn between three Cressants, Argent, by the Name of Glover,
and is born by Mr. Thomas Glover of the City of London, Merchant.

He bears Sable, a Chevron between two Cressants in Chief, and a Trefoil
slipped in base, Or, by the Name of Western, and is born by Thomas Western of
the City of London, Gent.

He bears Or, on a Chief indented, Sable, three Cressants, Argent, by the
Name of Harvey, a Family of good eminency, and is now born by Harvey of
Comb-Nevil in Surrey, Esquire Son and Heir of Sir Daniel Harvey of the said place
Knight, deceased, late Ambassador for his Majesty King Charles the Second, to
the Grand Seigniour.

He bears Argent, on a Chief, Vert, three Cressants of the Field, by the Name
of Sympson, and is the Paternal Coat Armor of John Sympson of the
Inner Temple, London, Esquire Judge of the Sheriffs Court for the Poultrey Compter
in Guild Hall, London, descended from the ancient Family of the Sympsons of the
North.

He bears Argent, a Chevron between three Cressants, Argent, on a Canton,
Sable, a Dove with an Olive Branch in her Bill, all Proper, by the Name of
Walker, and is born by Thomas Walker of the Inner Temple, London, Esquire,
(sometime Comptroller of the said Society) Son of Thomas Walker of
Warwickshire, Esquire who was descended from an ancient Family in the County of
Leicester by his Mother from Sir Thomas Chamberlain of Prestbury in
Glocestershire, Knight. who was Ambassador to King Henry the Seventh, and Eighth,
Edward the Sixth, and Queen Mary; and he was the first that brought Coaches
into England: which Family is descended from Count Tankerville in Normandy. The
said Thomas Walker, the Bearer hereof, is now married to Elizabeth Games,
Daughter and Coheir of Hoo Games of Newton in Brecknockshire, Esquire who is
descended from Sir David Gam, who was employed by King Henry the Fifth to view
the French Army before the Battle of Agincourt, who brought word to the King,
That there were enough to kill, enough to run away, and enough to be taken
Prisoners: which succeeded accordingly. Sir Walter Raleigh, in his History of
the World, makes mention of this Story, and compares him to Mago, Hannibals
Brother. In the said Expedition, the said Sir David took the Duke of Nevers
Prisoner; for which good Service he had his Arms given him, and was made a
Knight Banneret in the Field: This Story Dreyden, in his History of the Battle
of Agincourt, treats of at large. From Gladdice de Gam, Daughter of Sir David
Gam, are descended the present Marquis of Worcester, and the Earl of Pembroke,
with several other of the Nobility. The Family of the Gams is descended from
Tewdor the great King of South Wales, where the said Family is of that repute,
that those that marry into them do frequently assume for their Christian Name
their Surname, viz. Gam, or Games.

He bears Or, three Stars issuant out of as many Cressants, ^ules, by the
Name of Bateman, and is born by Mr. Matthew Bateman of the City of London, one
of the Members of the East India Company.

He bears Or, on a Fess indented, Azure, three Stars, Argent, a Canton of the
second, charged with a Sun in his Glory, by the Name of Thompson, and is the
Coat Armor of Sir William Thompson of the City of London, Knight: and by John
Thompson of Haversham in Buckinghamshire, Esquire.

He bears Azure, a Cressant, Argent, within an Orle of Mullets pierced, Or, a
Bordure of the last, by the Name of Burton, and with a due difference is born
by Thomas Burton of the City of London, Esquire.

He bears Ermyn, on a Chief, Sable, three Cressants, Or, by the Name of
Preston of Suffolk; as appears in diverse ancient Books remaining in the
Office of Arms. Concerning the Chief and Furs demonstrated in this Coat Armor,
I have elsewhere at large spoken of them in their proper places.

The other sort of Stars, that do shine after a diverse sort, are those that we
call Comets or Blazing Stars, whose Form is commonly as in this next Escocheon
is represented.

He bears Azure, a Blazing Star, or Comet, streaming in Bend, proper. The
Comet is not of an Orbicular shape, as other the Celestial Natures are; but
does protract his light in length like to a Beard, or rather dilate it in the
midst like a hairy bush, and growing thence Taper-wise, after the manner of a
Fox-tayl; and it does contract his substance or matter from a slimy Exhalation,
and has not his being from the Creation: neither is it numbered amongst the
things Natural mentioned in the History of Genesis, but is Aliquid praeter
naturam; and yet placed with the heavenly Bodies, because they seem to us to be
of that kind. They are supposed to prognosticate dreadful and horrible events
of things to come: Whereupon Lucan says, Ignota obscurae viderunt Sidera
noctes,
Ardentemque polum flammis, coeloque volantes
Obliquas per inane faces, crinemque timendi
Sideris, and terris minitantem Regna Com^tam.
In sable nights new Stars of uncouth sight,
And fearful flames all over the Heavens appear,
With fiery Drakes, and Blazing-beardedlight,
Which fright the World, and Kingdoms threat with fear.


CHAP. IV.
SO much of the first Member of the Distribution before delivered, viz. of
Constant Essences, which are only those Celestial Creatures, which being void
of this corrupt mixture that is found in all Creatures Sublunary, have a
privilege by Divine appointment from the mutability whereto all things under
the Moon are subject. Now come we to that other Member thereof, namely, such as
are Inconstant Natures, so far forth as there is use of them in Arms.
Inconstant Natures are bodily Essences of small continuance by reason of their
ignoble or base substance; such are the four Elements, viz. Fire, Air, Water,
and Earth.

Fire, Winters treasure: Water, Summers pleasure.
But the Earth and Air, none can ever spare.
Elements are simple Essences of small stability, and the womb of all mixed
things (as Scribo^^us notes) and according to some Authors called Elementa ab
alendo, of nourishing: but Saint Hierom calls Elementa, quasi Elevamenta, for
their proportionable mixture in the composition of the Bodies Sublunar, whereby
they are made fit for Motion: Of these Elements these Examples next following
having a representation.

He bears Argent, seven Firebrands ^lammant and Scintillant, proper. Some
Writers do a^^irm that none of the Mechanical Trades were found out by men
before they had fire, which being at the last obtained, and the use thereof
known, from thenceforth were produced all manner of Arts behoveful for man's
use, and through assistance of Fire, they did daily put in practice some new
invention and experimental proof, whereby they attained their perfection of
skill. Yet if we weigh the manifold mischiefs that sometimes come by Fire, we
might doubt, whether the good or the hurt thereby ensuing be greater. For both
Fire and Water are good Servants, but unruly Masters.

Fire in the Scriptures is often taken for a special token of Gods favor, and
that he is pleased with the Sacrifices that are done un^o him; as when he
answers (as it were by Fire) like as we read Judges 6. 21. Then the Angel of
the Lord put out the end of his staff that he held in his hand, and touched the
flesh and unlevened bread, and there arose up Fire out of the stones, and
consumed the flesh and unlevened bread, etc. And as when Eliah contended with
the Prophets of Baal, touching the manifestation of the true God: Then the fire
of the Lord fell, and consumed the Burnt-offerings, and the wood, and the
stones, and the dust, and licked up the water that was in the trench, 1 Kings
18. 38. And again, When Solomon had made an end of praying, Fire came down from
Heaven and consumed the Burnt-offerings, and the Sacrifices, and the glory of
the Lord filled the House, 2 Chronicles. 7. 1.

He bears Argent, a Chevron, Sable, between three flames of Fire, proper.
This Coat stands in the Church of Barkley in the County of Gloucester, in a
Window on the South side of the same.

The Chevron being (as we before have said) a memorial and token of Building,
it may seem the Heralds were not well advised to put flames of Fire so near it:
but it is no enforced conjecture, to suppose that this Coat Armor was first
given to him who had restored some public Edifice, which Fire had consumed.
This next ensuing has also a resemblance with it.

He bears Argent, a Chevron voided, Azure, between three flames of Fire,
proper, by the name of Wells. Many Coat-Armours seem to allude to the Bearers
Name, but surely this is not so; this hot Eliment having little affinity with
that watery Mansion. Fire betokens Zeal, and every Sacrifice was offered with
Fire, to show with what Zeal we should burn, that come to offer Prayer or
Praise, and thanks to the Lord. The Holy Ghost also descended upon the Apostles
in fire, to show the fervency of them upon whom it rested. But as here this
painted fire yields little heat, so does an Hypocrites colored zeal; and many
now adays might bear such painted Fire upon an Escocheon of Pretense for their
Device.

He bears Argent, two Billets Raguled and Truncked, placed Saltire-ways, the
Sinister surmounted of the Dexter, Azure, inflamed on their Tops, proper. This
is a Dutch Coat, and is born by the Name of Shurstab. Not unfitly is the force
of Counsel shadowed under the fire of Prometheus, because that as Fire, so
Counsel does give light to the darkest obscurity of things.

He bears Diamond, a Bend, Topaz, between ^ix Fountains, proper, born by the
Lord Sturton. This Coat, with a due difference, is born by John Sturton or
Stourton, of the City of London, Gent. descended from the Sturtons of Sturton
in Nottinghamshire. These six Fountains are born in signification of six
Springs, whereof the River of Sture in Wiltshire has his beginning, and
passes along to Sturton, the Seat of that Barony. And to this Head are
referred Spaciosa Maria, Vada Speciosa, Fluvii Lati, Fontes Grati: the spacious
Seas, the beauteous Shallows, Rivers spreading, Fountains pleasing. The Sea is
the Riches of a Kingdom, and a fair River is the Riches of a City: and
therefore their Waves are held good bearing for one that has done service upon
either.

Fresh and sweet Waters are reckoned amongst Gods peculiar Blessings, promised
to the observers of his Laws, and those of chiefest rank: For the Lord thy God
brings thee into a good Land, a Land in the which are Rivers of Waters,
Fountains and Depths that spring out of the Valleys and Mountains, Lev. 26. 7.

He bears Or, a Rock, Sable, by the Name of Securades. A Rock signifies
Safety, Refuge, or Protection: as Psalm 31. Thou art my Rock and my Fortress,
etc. For he that res^eth under the defense of the Almighty, is like a Castle of
strength, situated upon an inaccessible Rock, whereto none can approach to do
hurt. I have set this as a pattern of the Earth, as being one principal parcel
thereof; and withal to represent the stability of the Earth, which God has so
fixed that it cannot be removed.

The Field is Or, a Mountain, Azure, inflamed, proper. This Coat pertains to
the Family of Mackloide, Lord of the Isles of Skey and Jews in Scotland. Here
you see are two Elements born together, the earthy and fiery. Aetna is like
this, or else this like Aetna, it being a Hill in Sicily, which uncessantly
casts forth flames of Fire, whereto the envious man may be fitly compared,
who still disgorgeth his furious malice against others, but it inwardly eats
out Brimstone like his own Bowels. One writes of this Hill Aetna, That on the
one part it keeps Snow all the year long, and on the other it ever burns,
like those who can breath hot and cold out of one mouth.

The Field is Argent, fifteen Islands, diversely colored This Coat Armor
pertains to the King of Spain, in respect of certain Islands of that number
within his Dominions. And amongst these Examples of earthy bearing, I have
produced the bearing of a Mountain (a heavy bearing, but much in use among the
Germans:) Hillocks and Turfs might I add, which may sooner be conceived by the
understanding, than delineated by my Pencil. Touching the Element of the Air, I
have represented no shape; for to do that, were as wise an attempt as to weigh
the Wind in a Balance: yet some have expressed the boisterous motions thereof
by a man's face, with swollen and puffed Cheeks, whence issues as much Wind as
out of the Witches Bottles of Norway, who will sell any Wind that a Merchant
will ask for: If they sold Wines out of Bottles, I should sooner believe them,
and I think the Buyers should be less cozened.

CHAP. V.
HAving showed by particular Examples the bearing of simple Essences, or (at
the least) of such things as have a mutual participation of qualities with
them; I will now proceed to the handling of the next Member of the
Distribution, which comprehends Essences, or Natures of mixed Kinds.

Such are Brute, or without life. Living.


By Brute Natures I understand all Essences whatsoever of mixed kind that are
merely void of life. Such are Meteors, which are unperfect kinds of mixture,
which by their strange Apparitions do move their Beholders to an Admiration,
and these are called Corpora sublimia, because they are engendered aloft in the
Airy Region. The matter whereof these Meteors are engendered, is a certain
attracted fume drawn up on high by the Operation of the Sun and Stars.

This fume or smoke is Vapor. Exhalation.


Vapor is a moist kind of fume extracted chiefly out of the Water, and
therefore is easily dissolved again thereinto, and hence are watery Meteors.

Exhalation is a drier kind of fume, attracted up from the Earth, and apt to be
inflamed, and they are fiery Meteors. There are also other Meteors formed of a
mixture of both these fumes.

Fiery Meteors are forms consisting of hot Exhalations attracted into the Airy
Region, having a hot quality, which at length breaks into a fire.

And of these are Simple. Mixed.


Simple fiery Meteors are of diverse sorts and different forms, whereof there is
little use in Coat Armor, except of the falling Star, which of Blazoners is
termed a Mullet; which is an Exhalation inflamed above in the Air, and stricken
back with a Cloud, whereby it is forced to run downwards in such sort, that to
the Ignorant a Star seems to fall. There is oftentimes found upon the Earth a
certain gelly fallen from above, and dispersed into diverse points, which of
many is taken to be the substance of the Falling Star or Mullet. Note that such
Mullets born in Coat Armor, are now most usual of five points, but anciently
you shall find them born of six points.

And so I have seen them in diverse very old Rolls, in the Custody of that
worthy Knight, Sir Richard Saint George, now Clarencieux King of Arms, whose
industrious travel in the careful Collection of such Antiquities, and his free
communicating of the same to the studious in that way, merits much.

And I find in a very ancient Roll, now in the custody of the beforementioned
worthy Knight, Sir Richard Saint George, Clarencieux, in the Blazon of Gilbert
Hausarts Coat Armor, those which we now in Heraldry blaze by the Name of
Mullets, there to be termed Esteiles, I think it is meant Estoiles; yet are not
their points, which are five, there waved. But in this variety of Opinions I
leave every man to follow what in his judgment he shall approve to be best and
most probable.

He bears Ermyn, a Mullet of six points, pierced, Gules, by the Name
Hassenhull. These kinds of Meteors have an appearance of Stars, but in existence
they are nothing less; for they are (says Beken^ab) certain Impressions of the
Air, appearing for a time, and in time do vanish away, because they be of
nature flexible, and nothing permanent.

He bears Argent, two Bars between three Mullets of six points, Sable,
pierced, Or, by the Name of Doughty. This with a Cressant for a difference, is
the Coat Armor of Philip Doughty of Easher in the County of Surrey, Esquire
descended from an English-saxon Family of Dohtig before the Conquest.

He bears Argent, two Bars, Sable, each charged with three Mullets of six
points, Or, by the Name of Hopton. As are born upon Ordinaries, so shall you
find them commixt with other common charges; as also oftentimes sorted with
Ordinaries interposed between them: one Example whereof I will now presently
show you, which for the rarity of the form of the Ordinary, is worth your
Observation.

From Mullets of six points, we will proceed to those of five.

He bears Azure, six Mullets, three, two, and one, Or, by the Name of Welsh.
In blazoning of Mullets of this form, you shall not need to make mention of
their points, because it is the usual form of bearing; but if they do consist
of more than five points, then must you specially observe their Number, as in
the former Escocheon.

He bears Ruby, on a Chief, Pearl, two Mullets, Diamond. I give this selected
form of blazoning to this present Coat Armor, because it appertained to that
honored and right worthy Knight, Sir Nicholas Bacon, L. Keeper of the Great
Seal of England in the Reign of our late Queen Elizabeth, of blessed memory, to
whom he was a Privy Councellor; and for his Wisdom, Learning, and Integrity, by
her advanced to that high place of Lord Keeper. His eldest Son, Sir Nicholas
Bacon, was the first Baronet that King James made by Letters Patents under the
Great Seal; from whom is descended Sir Edmond Bacon of Redgrave in Suffolk, now
premier Baronet of England: and Sir Francis Bacon, one of his younger Sons, was
Lord Keeper, and afterward Lord Chancellor of England in the Reign of the
King, who created him, in Anno 1617. Baron of Verulam; and in the year
following Viscount St. Albans.

This Coat, with due differences is now born by diverse Gentlemen in Norfolk,
Suffolk, and elsewhere. In Norfolk, by Sir Edmond Bacon of Gillingham, Baronet;
Bacon of Egner, Esquire and by Francis Bacon of Norwich, Esquire. And in Suffolk, by
Sir Edmond Bacon of Redgrave aforesaid; Sir Henry Bacon of Lounde in
Lovingland, Baronet; Sir Nicholas Bacon of Shrubland-hall in Codenham, Knight
of the Bath; Thomas Bacon of Friston-hall, Esquire Philip Bacon of Wolverton, Esquire
and Philip Bacon of Ipswich, Esquire.

Though the falling Star it self is but the Emblem of the inconstancy of high
Fortunes, and unsure footing of ambitious Aspirers, which may shine for a time,
but in a moment fall headlong from the Heaven of their high hopes; yet the
Mullet in Heraldry has a more noble signification, it being supposed to
represent some Divine quality bestowed from above, whereby men do shine in
Virtue, Learning, and works of Piety, like bright Stars on the Earth; and these
are Stellae dimissae e Coelo, Stars let down from Heaven by God; not Stellae
dejectae, thrown down, as those which the Tail of the Dragon threw down, which
are Apostates from God and their Religion; nor yet Cadentes stellae, falling
Stars, such as the stroke of Justice and their own Demerits casts down from the
height of their Honors.

He bears Pearl, on a Chief, Ruby, two Mullets pierced, Topaz, by the Name of
St. John, and is the bearing of the Right Honorable Oliver Earl of
Bullingbrook, Lord St. John of Bletso. This Coat, with the Arms of Vlster, is
born by Sir Walter St. John of LydyardTregos in Wiltshire, and of Battersea in
Surrey, Baronet.

He bears Argent, on a Fess, Sable, three Mullets, Or, in the Dexter Chief an
Ermyn, by the Name of Grimston. This, with the Arms of Vlster, is the
Coat Armor of the Honorable Sir Harbottle Grimstone of Gorhambury in
Hartfordshire, Baronet, Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons for the
first Parliament under his Majesty King Charles the Second, and at present
Master of the Rolls.

He bears Gules, a Fess between six Mullets, Argent, by the Name of
Ashburnham, and is the Paternal Coat Armor of William Ashburnham of Ashburnham
in Sussex, Esquire Cofferer to their Majesty's King Charles the First and Second.

This Coat, with the Arms of Vlster, is born by Sir Denny Ashburnham of Bromham
in the said County, Baronet.

He bears Azure, a Chevron between three Mullets, Or, by the Name of
Chetwynd, and is the Paternal Coat Armor of Walter Chetwynd of Ingentre in
Staffordshire, Esquire. And with a due difference, is born by William Chetwynd
of Rugely in the said County, Esquire

He bears Or, a Chevron between 3 Mullets pierced, Sable, by the Name of
Davies, and is the Paternal Coat Armor of the Right Honorable Sir Thomas
Davies of the City of London Knight. and Lord Mayor thereof, Anno 1677.

Argent, a Chevron, Sable, between three Mullets pierced, Gules, is born by
John Davies of Vine-hall in Sussex, Gent.

He bears Sable, on a Bend, Argent, three Mullets pierced, Gules, by the Name
of Glisson. This with the difference of a Cressant within an Annulet is the
bearing of Francis Glisson, Dr. in Physic, and one of the Kings Professors of
Physic in the University of Cambridge.

He bears Ermyn, on a Chevron, Sable, a Lion rampant, Or, a Chief, Gules,
charged with three Mullets of the Third, by the Name of Trice, and is born by
John Trice of Godmanchester in Huntingtonshire, Esquire.

He bears Gules, on a Cross, Argent, five Mullets pierced, Sable, by the Name
of Randal or Randolph of Kent. Sometimes the round in the midst of the Mullet
is not of the Color of the Field, and then you must not take it for a
piercing, but for a Charge of other signification. Gerard Leigh seems to
prescribe this General Rule touching Mullets; that if the same do consist of
even points, they must be called Rowels; meaning (as I conceive) Rowels of
Spurs. But he might more aptly have applied the same in particular unto Mullets
pierced, in respect of their nearer resemblance of such Rowels than those that
are not pierced. Some are of Opinion, that all Mullets, whether they consist of
five or six points, pierced, or unpierced, are Rowels of Spurs, with this
difference, that those which are unpierced, are Rowels not fully finished or
made up by their Maker; and their Reason is, because that in old French or
Norman Language, this word Mollette signifi^th a Rowel of a Spur; as appears
in an ancient French Manuscript remaining in the Office of Arms, where the
Author there treating of the complete Armor of a Combatant a Cap a pee,
according to his degree, he there speaking of the Harness or Armor of the Leg,
uses these words concerning Spurs; -- Et ungz esperous d'ores qui sero^t
atachiez a une cordellette autour de la jambe affi^ que la Mollette ne turn
dessoubz le pie. The French is old, and according to the Orthography of those
times, which I, as precisely as I can; have showed you. Others think that the
Heralds have borrowed this word, used by them in blazon, from a kind of fish so
called; not that which is most usually known by the name of Mullet, but another
not much unlike in shape to that thing which is used in Armory; and as I am
informed, is often found upon the Sands, at the ebbing of the Sea: and is in
Kent now by the vulgar people, propter similitudinem, called a Tailors Bottom
or a Fivefinger, and in ancient time it was for the like cause known by the
name of a Mullet.

Azure, on a Cross, Argent, five Mullets, Gules, by the Name of Verney, and is
the Paternal Coat Armor of Sir Ralph Verney of Middle Cleydon in
Buckinghamshire, Knight. and Baronet, Son to Sir Edmond Verney Knight Marshal to K.
Charles the First, and Standard Bearer at the Battle of Edg-hill. And with a
due difference is born by John Verney, Son of the said Sir Ralph.

He bears Sable, a Chevron^ Rompee, between three Mullets, Or, by the Name of
Sault. This Chevron in blazon is called Rompe, or rather Rompu, from the French
Verb Rompre, derived from the Latin Rumpo, Rumpere, to break. Thus have you
Examples of the diverse bearing of these simple Meteors; to wit, the bearing of
them sole, unpierced, pierced, some of five points, and others of six.

So much of simple fiery Meteors, so far forth as there is use of them in
Coat Armor: Now of such Meteors as are of mixed kind, according to the
distribution before delivered in the next president. These are fiery Meteors
bred of an Exhalation somewhat more gross and impure, than those before
specified, by reason of a more thick and slimy vapor whereof they be engendered.

Meteors of this kind are Thunder. Lightning.


Thunder is an inflamed Exhalation, which by his powerful force breaks through
the Clouds violently, with great noise and terror. The forcible power thereof
is rather apprehended by the ear, than subjected to the sight: nevertheless,
the ancient times have devised a certain imaginary form whereby they would
express the forcible power thereof, as also of the Lightning.

Thunder is supposed to be engendered two manner of ways, viz. when either a hot
or dry vapor is enclosed in a cold and moist Cloud, and being unable to
contain it self therein, by reason of the contrariety, it labors by all
means to find a vent, and so striving by all means to get passage, it makes
way with great vehemence and horror of sound: such as a glowing Gad of Iron, or
any other fiery matter makes, when water is infused thereupon in abundance, or
that it is therein drenched, it makes a furious and murmuring sound. Such is
that weak and feeble sort of Thunder, that seems to be engendered in some
Region of the Air far remote from us, yielding only (for a small time) a kind
of turbulent noise or murmuring.

Or else it is engendered in a more violent manner, to wit, when this enclosed
dry and combustible matter, being in^lamed in the Clouds of contrary qualities,
does break out with vehemence, then does it yield a terrible and forcible
sound, not unlike a great piece of Ordnance when it is overcharged. And this
sound, thus engendered, is called Thunder.

This sort of sound is used oftentimes Metaphorically, as when God threatens
his Judgments against Sin, he is said to thunder them out. In this sense does
Petrarch use the same, saying, Deus ideo tonat in Coelis, ut tu in terras been
vivas, quodque amoxe debueras, saltem metu facias. For unless God loved man, he
would never threaten him, but rather punish him; forasmuch as man does evermore
minister many and those grievous occasions of execution of Gods Judgments.

Lightning is a vehement ^ruption of an inflamed Exhalation, proceeding from
Thunder; which though it is in time after the Thunder, yet is first represented
to our senses, by reason that our sight is far more subtle and apprehensive
than is our hearing. And in regard that Thunder and Lightning do both proceed
from one self cause, they have in such their imaginary fiction conjoined them
both under one form, after this manner.

The Field is Azure, Jupiters Thunderbolt in Pale, Or, inflamed at both ends,
proper, shasted Saltire-wise, and winged Fess-ways, Argent. Chassanaeus
describing the Ensigns of sundry Nations, notes this for the Ensign of the
Scythians: and in the Glory of Generosity, it is said, that Tomyris, Queen of
Scythia, did bear the same in this manner. The bearing of Lightning betokens
the effecting of some weighty business with much celerity and forceableness;
because in all Ages this has been reputed the most quick; forcible, and
terrible dart, wherewith the Almighty strikes where himself pleases: which
the Heathen religiously acknowledged, though he thereupon infers an irreligious
conclusion, saying, Si quoties peccent homines, sua fulmina mittat
Jupiter, exiguo tempore inermis erit:
If God should Thunder-strike still when he sin does see,
His Shafts would soon be spent, and Arm unarmed would be.


His Inference had been truer thus: If God should Thunder-strike still when he
sin does see,
All men would soon be spent, yet God still armed should be.


Hitherto of Fiery Meteors; now of such as be watery.

Watery Meteors are certain cold and moist Vapors, copiously attracted by the
powerful operation of the Heavenly Bodies into the Air, and there transmutated
into their several forms. Of these there are diverse sorts, whereof Clouds are
most usually born in Coat Armor.

A Cloud is a gross Vapor, attracted into the middle Region of the Air, and
there thickened, by reason of the coldness of the place, having in it store of
matter apt to engender water. A Cloud (according to Zanchius) is a moist thick
Vapor, attracted from the waters by the heat of the Sun, unto the middle
Region of the Air, and there thickened by the coldness thereof, and so
continues until it be again dissolved by the Suns heat, and so converted into
rain, and does distill down in drops. Zanch. de Meteoris aqueis, 483. The
Clouds are said to be Gods Chariots, as we may see Psalm^ 104. He lays the
beams of his Chambers in the waters, and makes the Clouds his Chariot, and
walks upon the wings of the winds. The Clouds are Gods Instruments, wherein
he contains and retains at his pleasure, the shours of Rain, as in Bottles:
as we may see Job 38. 37. Who can number the Clouds by wisdom? Or who can cease
the Bottles of Heaven?

The Clouds are resembled to a Sponge, replenished with water, and God with the
hand of his Providence wringeth the Sponge moderately, not pressing out all the
moisture thereof at once, but leasurely, and by little and little, after a
gentle and soaking manner. No Pencil can make a true representation of Clouds,
because every instant and moment of time, does add unto them some kind of
alteration, whereby it differs from that it was late before: nevertheless,
former times have coined (of these also) a conceited form, as in these next
Escocheons may be seen.

This Coat Armor is Bar Nebule, of eight pieces, Topaz and Diamond; and
pertains to the Honorable Family of Charles late Earl of Devon, and Lord
Mountjoy, Lieutenant Governor of Ireland, Great Master of the Artillery of
England, Captain of Portsmouth, Knight of the most Noble of the Garter, and of
his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council. The bearing of Clouds in Arms
(says Vpton) does import some Excellency in their Bearer.

This Coat is also born by Sir Henry Blount of Tittonhanger in Hartfordshire,
Knight.

In the Clouds has the Rainbow his temporary Residence; and therefore next
let us cast our eyes on it.

A Rainbow is a diverse colored Arch or Bow, formed in a hollow, thin, and
unequal Cloud, by the reflection of the Beams of the opposite Sun. The cause of
the rare use of the Rainbow in Coat Armor; perhaps may be for that the
Colors thereof cannot be aptly counterfeited, as witnesses Aristotle, Meteor.
lib. 3. saying, Soli colores Iridis non possunt fieri a Pictoribus: whereby it
seems of all other the hardest thing to imitate. The natural Colors of the
Rainbow (according to Scribonius) are Red, Green, Blew, and Yellow. The Field
hereof is Argent, issuant out of two petit Clouds in Fess, Azure, a Rainbow, in
the Nombril point a Star, proper. The Rainbow is a Token of Gods Covenant made
with Noah, and in him with all people; as appears Genesis 9. 13. I have set
my Bow in the Clouds, and it shall be for a sign of the Covenant between me and
the Earth, etc. As touching the Beauty of the Rainbow, it is said, Ecclus. 43.
11. Look upon the Rainbow, and praise him that made it: very beautiful is it
in the brightness thereof; it compasses the Heaven about with a Circle, and
the hand most High has bended it, Ibid. 12. And indeed, worthily is he to be
so praised, who when he could have made a Bow to destroy us, rather chose to
make this Bow to assure us he would not destroy us. A noble president, to teach
Nobles to use their strength and their weapons rather to preserve and help,
then to overthrow or hurt those who are under their power. Farnesius says,
that the Rainbow appearing in the South, betokens Rain; in the West, it
foresheweth Thunder; and in the East, prognosticates fair weather.

CHAP. VI.
HItherto have we prosecuted our intendment, touching things of mixed nature,
which are brute or liveless: Now proceed we to the consideration of things of
mixed Nature, having life. Mixed Natures that are living, are Corporeal Essences,
endued with a Vegetable Soul: for here we use this word Soul, as also the word
Life, in his largest signification. A Vegetable Soul is a faculty or power that
gives life unto Bodies.

Whereby they do live After a sort, or, Perfectly.

Such as do live after a sort, or less perfectly, are all sorts of Metals;
which because they are supposed to grow and increase in the Earth, we will (for
our present use) ascribe life unto them.

Metals are Bodies imperfectly living, and are decocted in the Veins of the
Earth.

Of these some are naturally Liquefiable. Not Liquefiable, or less Liquefiable.


The Liquefiable are Gold, Silver, Copper, Tin, Lead, and other of like kind.

The not or hardly Liquefiable are Precious. Brittle.


Those that are altogether hard, are Stones of all sorts. Stones are bred of a
waterish moisture, and of an oily kind of Earth firmly compacted together.

Of Stones, some are Precious. Base.


Stones precious are of that sort that we call in Latin Gemmae; which are of
estimation either for that they are rarely to be gotten, or for some virtue
phansied to be in them, or for that they are such as wherewith man's Eye is
wonderfully delighted by reason of their pureness and beautiful transparent
substance. Of which kind are the Diamond, Topaz, Escarbuncle, Emerald, Ruby,
and such like. Of which sorts, twelve of chiefest note were appointed by God
himself to be used in the principal Ornament of the High Priest, when he
appeared before the Lord, presenting therein the Names of the Twelve Tribes of
Israel, to show how precious in his sight is the People and Nation which
serves him, as himself prescribes. But of all these several kinds, the
Escarbuncle is of most use in Arms, and is born as in these next Escocheons
appears.

The Field is Ruby, a Chief, Pearl, over all an Escarbuncle, of eight Staves or
Rays, pommette and florette, Topaz. This Coat Armor Pertained anciently to the
Earls of Anjou, from whom came Geffery Plantagenet, Earl of Anjou, that married
Maud the Empress, daughter to Henry the First, King of England. This Stone is
called in Latin Carbunculus, which signifies a little Coal, because it
sparkleth like fire, and casts forth, as it were, fiery Rays. There is
another kind of, but fiery Carbuncle, which Chyrurgions can best handle; one of
those of the Lapidaries is more to be desired than ten of the other.

He bears Argent, two Bars, Azure, over all an Escarbuncle of 8 Rays, Gules,
pommette and florette, Or. This Coat is cut in Stone upon the Church Porch door
of Magnotsfield in the County of Gloucester, and is born by the Name of Blount.
As there is in all kinds of Minerals a Vegetable life, even so, and much more
(says Zanchius) is it judged that Stones have this life; yea, and that they
have a passive capacity of Sickness, of Age, and also of Death. Whether this be
so or not, sure it is a pretty device, to advance their estimation with those
who already too much dote on them; insomuch, as it was said of the Roman
Empresses, that some of them did ware whole Kingdoms at their Ears, so now many
a one hang whole Manors on their sleeves.

So much of precious Stones: now of those which are Base; such we esteem all
those to be, which both for their ordinary and base employments, and also for
that they are easily to be had of all men, are of small estimation; as are
these next following, with their like.

He bears Vert, three Flint Stones, Argent, by the Name of ^lint. This Coat
is quartered by the Right Honorable the Earl of Cumberland. The Flint-stone is
an ancient Emblem or Token used by great Persons. Johannes Digionius, Earl of
Flanders, gave for his Device, Ignitabulum Silicem feriens, a Steel and a
Flint-stone, which well agreed with his disposition. This Earl was taken
Prisoner by Bajazet the Turk, and when he should have been put to the Sword, a
Physiognomer, much esteemed by the Turk, persuaded him to let him go free,
saying, He foresaw in him, that when he came home, he would set a great part of
Christendom in a combustion; as indeed he did, by reason of the murder of
Lewis, Brother to the French King Charles the sixth; which his murder, the
Franciscan Friars did as impiously defend, by the Examples of Zimri killed by
Phinees, Holofer^es by Judith, Sisera by Iael, and the Egyptians by Moses. As
the like Examples are still produced by the Traiterous Patricides of Kings and
Princes, set on work by the Grandfather of such holy Treasons. The said Earls
Son, Philippus Bonus, was Founder of the Order of the Golden Fleece, which
hangs at a Collar made with the forms of the said Steels and Flint-stones;
which Order the Kings of Spain still upholdeth.

He bears, Azure, three Millstones, Argent, by the Name of Milveton. The
Millstone represents unto us the mutual converse of human Society; because
Milstones are never occupied single, but by couples; and each of them stands
in need of the others help, for the performance of the work whereunto they are
ordained. Hereupon our mutual Amities and Assistances are termed in Latin,
Necessitudines Amicitiae, because every man stands in need of some fast and
assured Friend, by whose counsel and advice he may be supported for the better
compassing of whatsoever affairs of importance he shall undertake. Of all the
rare Stones before mentioned, in my judgment men have cause to esteem the
Millstone (though here we have placed it amongst baser Stones) the most precious
Stone of all others; yet I would be loath to wish my Lady to wear it at her ear.

So much of Metals or Minerals (for I use the word in the largest sense) that
are hard and not liquefiable; there are other also which we reckoned to be
hardly liquefiable, in respect of their brittle nature; such are Alom, Salt,
Amber, Chalk, etc. but there is no use of them in Arms. Because in this Chapter
I have spoken of precious Stones, diverse of which are of use in Heraldry, for
blazoning of the Coat-Armours of Nobility (as my self have often occasion to do
in sundry parts of this Work:) before I proceed further, I will set down those
several Stones, as they answer to their several Metals and Colors; together
with the Planets also, which I use only in the Achievements of Kings and great
Princes. Selected Forms of Blazon before mentioned, Metal and Colors.
1. Or, 2. Argent, 3. Gules, 4. Azure, 5. Sable, 6. Vert, 7. Purpure, 8. Tenn,
9. Sanguine.
Precious Stones.
1. Topaz, 2. Pearl, 3. Ruby, 4. Sapphire, 5. Diamond, 6. Emerald, 7. Amethyst,
8. Jacynth, 9. Sardonyx,
Planets.
1. Sol. 2. Luna. 3. Mars. 4. Jupiter. 5. Saturn. 6. Venus. 7. Mercury. 8.
Dragons head. 9. Dragons tail.


CHAP. VII.
SO much touching Examples of such Natures as do live after a sort: In the next
place succeed those things, which do live perfectly or properly; such Natures
are those as have in them express and manifest tokens of a living Soul.

Of this kind, some are Vegetable. Sensitive.


Forasmuch as I am now to treat of Vegetable Animals, and of their particular
kinds; I must excuse my self in two things before I enter into the exemplifying
of them: The one, that there is no cause that any man should expect at my hands
an express demonstration of each particular Species of them; and that I should
run through and display their manifold and almost innumerable kinds, for that
would be a tedious travel, and (besides) an infinite and unnecessary charge and
cost, and withal far wide from the project of my prefixed purpose. The other
thing (and the same more pertinent to that I do intend) is, That in handling of
Vegetables and Sensitives, I purpose only to distribute their several ranks of
Distribution, according to their Order to them prescribed by Nature, which to
express is my chiefest drift, and the principal scope that I do aim at.

Of the perfect sort of Creatures there are many kinds, whereof some are of
more perfection and more worthy than others, according to their more excellent
kind of life, or worthiness of soul.

Of these the less perfect sort of Bodies were first created; and then such as
were of more perfection. Plants are more worthy than Metals, and Animals of
more reckoning than Plants: therefore were these first created, and those
afterward.

Of Animals wherewith God did adorn the Air, the Waters, and the Earth, there
are diverse kinds, whereof some were more worthy than others; in the Creation of
these did God observe the same order.

Between the Creation of Plants and Animals, it pleased God in his unsearchable
wisdom, to interpose the creation of the Stars wherewith he beautified the
Heavens, he did it to this end, to give us to understand, That albeit the Sun
with his light and motion, together with the Stars, do concur in the generation
of Plants and Animals, nevertheless their Generation is not to be attributed
simply to the influence and power of these Celestial Bodies; but only to the
Omnipotency of God, inasmuch as by his powerful Word he commanded the Earth to
produce all sorts of Plants and their Fruits, before the Stars were created.

From the most fertile and pleasant Garden of Eden, unto the most barren and
desolate Wilderness, may we see and behold the great and wonderful works of
God, and take occasion to extol his Omnipotency, Wisdom, and Mercy. As we may
observe Isai. 41. 9. I will set in the Wilderness the Cedar, the Shittah tree,
and the Myrhe tree, and the Pine tree; and I will set in the Wilderness the
Firr tree, the Elm, and the Box together. Therefore let them see, and know, and
let them consider and understand together, that the hand of the Lord has done
this, and that the holy One of Israel has created it, v. 20. Hence we may
gather that there is no object so mean that presents it self to our view, but
will minister some just occasion to glorify God.

Men are accustomed to attribute the propagation of these, either to the
influence of Nature, or to the travel and industry of man; but these were
produced before any other of like kind could be found upon the face of the
Earth, whereof it might be imagined they might receive being; for as yet there
had never fallen any rain to fructify the Earth, whereby it might produce
green herbs, nor as yet was Man created, that might manure and till the Ground
for that purpose: therefore neither were they produced naturally, or of their
own accord, nor yet by the Art, Skill, or Industry of Man, but by the immediate
Word and Commandment of God.

The reason that moved Moses to give an instance of Plants and Herbs, how that
they were produced by the virtue and power of Gods Word only, and not
naturally, or by the skill and industry of man; neither yet of Animals, nor of
any other of the infinite number of things created ( Genes. 1. 11.) was this,
because the Generation of Plants and Herbs might be much more doubted of, than
the original of other things.

Of the first springing of Trees in the Creation, Moses says, Et germinare
fecerat Iehova Elohim e terra omnem arborem concupiscibilem, id est, visu, and
bonam ad escam; which words do comprehend all the desirable qualities of Fruit
trees: for in them we expect that their fruits should be either delightful to
the Eye, or that they should be fit for food and wholesome, and that they be also
fragrant and sweet smelling: For the fruits of Trees, the better they be, the
more odoriferous they are.

That the Trees wherewith Paradise was planted, had all these qualities, it is
manifest by the words of Moses, in that he says, Concupiscibilem ad visum, and
bonam ad escam: whereby we gather that the sight is delighted with things
beautiful and glorious, the smell with sweet and pleasant savours, and the
palate with things of sweet and pleasant taste. And none of these are in
themselves evil; for such was the constitution of Adam before he transgressed,
that he might have delighted himself in them all without offense; and to that
end did God create them, that he should use them with thanksgiving.

Moses describes unto us two principal qualities of the Garden of Paradise,
whereby he lays before us the pleasantness of the situation thereof, and also
the beauty and fertility of the soil. The first of these qualities was, that it
was replenished with all sorts of Trees, not only most pleasant and delightful
to the eye, but also most pleasant to the taste; for that they produced the
best and sweetest fruits: The other quality was, that the whole circumference
of the Garden of Paradise was surrounded and environed with a River, being
distributed into four heads, which did highly beautify the same, and made it
most pleasant to the view.

In this description Moses makes mention of two Trees of special qualities,
that were planted in the midst of Paradise: The one named the Tree of Life, the
other the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil.

The first of these had a vivificant power in it self, the fruit whereof was
ordained to this end; That being eaten, it would enable a man never to feel
sickness, feebleness, old age, or death, but should evermore continue in the
same state of strength and agility of body: This was the efficacy and power
that was given to this Tree, whereof it was never yet deprived: Therefore was
this quality after a sort natural thereunto.

For this cause was there a Cherub set at the entrance of Paradise, to keep out
such as would enter the same, and eat of the fruit of the Tree of Life; that he
should not always live that kind of life.

How behooful the knowledge of the virtues and operations of Trees, Plants,
Herbs, and other Vegetables are, for the extolling and manifesting the
Omnipotency, Wisdom, Mercy, loving favor and fatherly providence of our most
gracious God toward sinful man is, in that he has created for the behoof and
use of man, as well touching his necessary food and raiment, as for recreation
and delight, we may evidently perceive by Solomon's industrious investigation
of the virtues and operations of all sorts of Vegetables: For (besides other
his admirable qualities wherewith he was richly endued) he had surpassing
knowledge in the virtues, operations and qualities of Herbs and other
Vegetables; insomuch that he was able to reason, discourse and dispute, not
only of Beasts, Fowls, creeping things and Fishes, but of Trees also and
Plants, from the Cedar in Lebanon to the Hyssop that springs out of the wall,
that is, from the highest and tallest Tree to the smallest Shrub and lowest
Herb. Thus we see the knowledge and skill in natural Philosophy to be holden in
great estimation in all Ages, insomuch as it has been reckoned a study well
befitting the dignity of a King, yea, of Solomon, who was the wisest King that
ever was, and a Type of our Savior Christ. But to return to the Vegetable.

Such are said to be Vegetable, as have in them a lively power of growing,
budding, leafing, blossoming and fructifying, as Trees, Plants, Herbs, Grass,
etc. And of these some grow on Trunks or solid Bodies, some upon flexible
Stalks: some again grow upon a single Stem, as commonly all Trees do; some upon
manifold Stems, as Shrubs, Roses, etc.

Trees are certain Plants springing from a root with a single Trunk or Stem
(for the most part) shooting up in height, and delineated with lims, sprigs or
branches. Of these Trees some are more proper to hot Countries; as the
Frankincense Tree to Arabia; the Balsamum, Myrrh, Mace and Nutmeg Trees, as
also the Pepper Trees, and such like, which chiefly grow in India; the Plane
Tree in Egypt and Arabia; the Pomegranate in Africa, etc. which I purposely
pass over, and will only give Examples of other sorts to us better known,
whether they be Trees fruitful or barren. In giving Examples whereof I purpose
not to observe any precise order, but to mingle them pel mel one with another,
because I hold such curious sorting them, better fitting a professor of
Physic, or some Herbalist, than an Armorist; to whom it suffices to show
superficially, that these, and their several parts, are born in Coat Armor, as
well simply of themselves, as also with things of different nature; as in the
Examples following may appear.

He bears Or, on a Mount in Base, an Oak acorned, proper, by the name of
Wood. Almighty God, at what time by his powerful word he did enable the Earth
to fructify, and produce Herbs and Trees with their variable fruits, said, Let
the earth bud forth according to his kind, the bud of herb that seedeth seed;
the fruitful tree which bears fruit according to his kind, which has seed in
it self upon the earth; and it was so. Whereby (says Zanchius) we are
admonished, that they should be preserved and nourished in the earth unto the
time of seed for our necessary use; for that they profit little, until they be
come unto their full ripeness. The Oak is of the strongest sort of Trees, and
therefore may best challenge the first place.

He bears Argent, on a Mount in a Base, a Pineapple Tree, fructed, proper,
by the name of Pine. There is a difference between the production of seed of
Trees and of Herbs, as well for the propagation, as for the preservation, of
their several kinds; for the herbs do produce their seed in their stalks
without fruit; and the trees do produce theirs in their fruit.

It is holden of some, that the Pine Tree is a representation of death;
forasmuch as the same being once felled, or cut down by the ground, the root
thereof is said never to sprout or spring any more.

He bears Or, on a Mount in Base, a Pear Tree fructed, proper, by the name of
Pyrton. As God for the necessary sustenance of man, ordained manifold varieties
of nourishment: so likewise many sorts were created, not only for man's
necessity, but also for his delight, both to eye and taste; as too well
appeared by the first woman, whose rash affection in this kind all her
Posterity has since rued. But withal, God teaches us by these dumb
instructers, that man should not be fruitless, lest he become thereby fuel only
fit for burning.

Those proposed Examples are of whole bearing of Trees: Now of their parts,
viz. their Leaves, Fruits, Slips, etc. promiscuously, as in Example.

He bears Gules, the stem or trunk of a Tree eradicated, or mooted up by the
roots, as also Couped in Pale, sprouting out two branches, Argent, and is the
Coat of William Borough, alias Stockden, of Borough in Leicestershire, Gent.
Branches must needs wither which have neither shelter from above, nor
nourishment from beneath: being therein like that Roman Embassage, where the
one Ambassador had a giddy head, and the other gouty feet; whereof one said,
That it had neither head nor foot.

He bears Azure, a Cheveron, Ermyn, between three Oaken slips acorned,
proper, by the name of Amades. By the words formerly noted to be extracted out
of Genesis 1. 24. Let the earth bud forth, etc. we do gather (says Zanchius) a
diverse manner of conserving of the several kinds of Herbs and Trees by
propagation (through the production of their Seeds, whereby their particular
sorts are preserved;) the one, that do bring forth their seed in their stalks
without fruit, and Trees do produce their seed in their fruit.

He bears Or, a Fess, Gules, between three Olive branches, proper, by the
name of Roundel, and is the Coat Armor of William Roundel of Hutton-Wansley in
Yorkshire, Esquire.

He bears Argent, three Mole-hills, proper, by the name of Tyldesly, and is
born by Edward Tyldesley of Morleys in Lancashire, Esquire.

He bears Argent, three starved branches, slipped, Sable, by the name of
Blackstock. This Example is of different nature from all the former, those
bearing the signs of their vegetation and life, but this being mortified and
unvested of the virdure which sometimes it had; which is the condition of all
mortal men, whose most flourishing estate must have a change, their beauty
turned to baldness and withered wrinkles, and they leave all their riches, or
their riches leave them: This is the end of the Tree, and fruits of our worldly
estate; but the fruits of holiness will never perish, and the righteous man
shall be as the tree planted by the waters of life. Other Escocheons of the
same kind ensue.

He bears Gules, a Bend of the limb of a tree, reguled and trunked, Argent,
by the name of Penruddock. That which I spoke of before touching the Bend
Crenelle, fitted by Art for the scaling of a Wall, the same seems to be here
naturally found. At the first approach of King William the Conqueror, the green
boughs of Trees, born by Soldiers, served for an excellent stratagem of
defense; and as helpful an instrument of offense to the Enemy may this trunked
Tree be, when other helps are wanting to the besiegers.

He bears Argent, three stocks or stumps of Trees, couped and eradicated,
Sable, by the name of Retowre. If the top or boughs be cut off, yet, the Root
standing, there is hope of a new growth: but when the Root is plucked up, there
remains no hope of reviving. And therefore that was a fearful warning, Now is
the Axe put to the Root; which should quicken us to the bearing of good fruits,
lest otherwise we mean to bear that dreadful stroke, and the issue of that
terrible commination.

He bears Azure, three Laurel leaves slipped, Or. This was the paternal
Coat Armor of Sir Richard Leveson of Lilleshall in the County of Salope, who
was made Knight of the Bath at the Coronation of our Sovereign Lord King
Charles. That the Laurel was in ancient times thought to be a remedy against
poison, lightning, etc. and in war used as a token of peace and quietness, you
may at your leisure read in Master Bossewell his Book of Coats and Crests.

The field is Topaz, five Figg-leaves in Saltire, Emerald. This Coat
appertains to the Count Feria of Spain. The Figg-leaves are the ancientest
wearing that is, being the first clothing of our first transgressing Parents.
And Irenaeus says, that they used not the Leaves of any other Tree, to show
the torture and anguish of Repentance, signified by the roughness and sharpness
wherewith this sort of Leaf is beset. Our Savior Christ liked not to see
Figg-leaves without fruit, and therefore cursed the Tree: And accursed will
their condition be, the growth of whose Faith and Religion is in show, and not
in substance of fruitful works.

The Field is Ermyn, two bars, Sable, each charged with five Elm-leaves, Or,
by the name of Elmes, and is the Coat of Thomas Elmes of Lilford in the County
of Northampton, Esquire It is supposed that there is great love, and a natural
sympathy betwixt the Elm Tree and the Vine, because the Vine never prospers
better than when it grows by the Elm; whereas the Elm it self is of all Trees
the most barren. So should those who have few good parts in themselves, yet at
least cherish and support such as Nature and Art have enabled to produce better
fruits of their Industry.

He bears Or, three Woodbine-leaves pendant, Azure. This Coat Armor
pertains to the Family of Gamboa in Spain. Sometimes you shall have these
Leaves born bend-ways as in this next Escocheon. The Woodbine is a loving and
amorous plant, which embraces all that it grows near unto; but without hurting
of that which it loves: and is therein contrary to the Ivy, (which is a type
of lust rather than of love) for it hurts that which it most embraces.
Sometimes you shall find Leaves of sundry sorts of Trees born ordinary ways, as
in Example.

He bears Argent, three Bay Leaves proper, by the Name of Foulis. This with
the Arms of Vlster is the Coat of Sir David Foulis of Ingleby Manor in
Cleaveland, in the North Riding of Yorkshire, Baronet.

He bears Argent, three Woodbine-leaves Bendways, proper, two and one, by the
Name of Theme. These Leaves are all one with those in the last precedent
Escocheon in shape, but different from them in the manner of their position, in
that those are born with their points downwards, and these naturally or
upwards. Otherwhiles they are born in form of other Ordinaries, as by Example
shall hereafter be made plain. Moreover, you shall find them sometimes born
with Ordinaries betwixt them, as in this next Escocheon.

He bears Argent, a Cheveron, Vert, between three Oaken leaves, proper, by
the Name of Tomlins, and is the Coat Armor of Thomas Tomlins of St. Leonards
Bromley in Middlesex, Esquire.

He bears Or, a Cheveron, Gules, between three Nettle-leaves, proper, by the
Name of Malherbe. The Nettle is of so tetchy and froward a nature, that no man
may meddle with it, as many testy-natured men are. One writes, that a little
Girl being stung by a Nettle in her Father's Garden, complained to him that
there was such a cursed Herb in his Garden, as that it was worse than a Dog, for
it would bite them of their own house. Her Father answered her, That it was the
nature of it to be unpartial, and friend or foe were all alike to it. Yet this
property it has, that the harder you press it the less it will sting.

He bears Argent, three Holly-leaves pendant, proper, by the Name of Inwine.
Note tha^ when Leaves are born after this manner, viz. pendant, you must tell
in what fashion they are born: but if their points only be upwards, then it
suffices to say Leaves; because it is their most ratural and proper way when
they are in full vigor.

Now I will show you an Example, where three Leaves are born Bar-ways.

He bears Argent, three Holly-leaves Bar-ways, two and one, their stalks
toward the Dexter part of the Escocheon, proper, by the name of Arnest. These
seem to have been, (as still they are) much used in adorning the Temples and
Sacred places, especially at the most solemn time of our Saviout's Nativity,
and thence to have taken that holy name. There is a kind of Holly, that is void
of these prickles, and of gentler nature, and therefore called Free-holly,
which in my opinion is the best Holly: and so it was in his, who says, That
Charity (the daughter of true holiness) is gentle and hurts not, but rather
suffers all things: far unlike to those Hedg-hogg holyones, whose sharp
censures, and bitter words, pierce through all those who converse with them.

He bears Sable, 3 Walnut-leaves, Or, between two Bendlets, Argent, by the
Name of Waller, and is the Coat Armor of Sir William Waller of Winchester in
Hantshire, Knight. lineally descended from Richard Waller of Groombridge in Kent,
Esquire who at the Battle at Agencourt, in the Reign of King Henry the Fifth, took
prisoner John Duke of Orleans, and brought him to Groombridge, where he
remained a prisoner four and twenty years; during which Confinement he built a
Chapel near the said House, on which his Arms does yet remain: And in memory
of that Action it has been ever since allowed to the Family, as an
Augmentation of Honor, to bear hanging on their Ancient Crest, viz. a Walnut
Tree, proper, the Arms of the said Duke. And as a further Honor to the Family,
the Sword which the Duke used in the said Battle, is now in the possession of
the said Sir William, who married the Daughter of Sir Edward Stradling of St.
Donets in Glamorganshire Baronet, deceased.

The Field is Argent, a Pomegranat in Pale, slipped, proper. These Arms do
pertain to the City and Country of Granata, within the Dominions of the King
of Spain, situated by the Mediterranean Sea. This fruit is holden to be of
profitable use in Physic, for the qualifying and allaying of the scorching
heat of burning Agues, for which end the juice thereof is reckoned to have a
very sovereign virtue.

He bears Azure, three Pears, Or, by the name of Stukeley. This fruit, as
other, was ordained for the comfort of man: But as the Devil made use of the
Apple to the destruction of man; so did the Devil's Imps use the Pear to a
wicked end, when the Monks of Swinsted, inviting King John to a Banquet,
poisoned him in a dish of Pears, though others write it was in a Cup of Ale.

Concerning the fruits of Trees, God in the beginning gave unto man a free
scope to use them without restraint, only the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of
good and evil excepted, whereof he was prohibited the eating upon pain to die
the Death whenever he should taste thereof. In this prohibition God would,
that we should not so much respect the fruit of the Tree, as the Sovereign
Authority of him that forbade the eating thereof; yea, this chiefly and
principally first; and secondly the fruit, because of the interdiction.

The end for which God did prohibit Adam the eating of the fruit of the Tree of
Knowledge of good and evil was, that notwithstanding God had given him a
Sovereign Jurisdiction on earth, yet was he not so absolute a Governor and
Commander, but that he had a Lord Paramount, to whose hests he was simply and
withal reverence to obey; and that he should know that God, his Creator, was
above him, whose will should be unto him the Rule of all Justice, and whereunto
he should conform all his actions, counsels, and cogitations; that he should
evermore have an awful eye unto him, and always hope in him, glorify, fear,
reverence, and love him. The end I say was this, That Adam should know both
God, and himself: God as his true Creator, himself to be his Creature; God to
be his Lord, himself his Servant; God a most bountiful and magnificent giver of
all good blessings, himself God's Foster-child, and such a one as must
acknowledge, that whatsoever he possesses, proceeds from God's free bounty
and mercy; and therefore should render unto him continual praise and thanks for
the same, from the ground and bottom of his heart.

He bears Gules, a Cheveron, Ermyn, between three Pine Apples erected, Or, by
the Name of Pine. The Pine Tree was in much request in ancient times, for
adorning of Walks about Mansion-Houses; according to that of the Poet, Fraxinus
in Sylvis pulcherrima, Pinus in Hortis,
Populus in Fluviis, Abiesin Montibus altis:
The Ash in Woods makes fairest show,
The Pine in Orchards nigh,
By Rivers best is Poplars hew,
The Firr on Mountains high.


He bears Or, three Mulberies, their stalks trunked, proper. The Mulbery Tree
is an Hieroglyphick of Wisdom, whose property is to speak and to do all things
in opportune season: And it is reputed (as I may say) the wisest of all Trees,
in regard it never sprouteth nor buddeth, until such time as all extremity of
cold Winter-season be clearly past and gone. This Fruit has a Purple-blushing
color; in the one resembling the Judges attire, who attempted Susanna; in the
other that hue of their face, which should have been in them, if they had been
so gracious to blush at their fault, as they were hasty to commit it. A greater
sin in them than in others, because they were to punish others for the like
offenses: But it is no rare thing to see the great Offenders hang the little.

He bears Or, on a a Bend, Sable, three Clusters of Grapes, Argent. This Coat
appertained to Sir Edmund de Maroley of the County of York, Knight. who lived in
the time of Edward the First. How profitable the moderate use of the juice of
the Grape may be to man, is as manifest, as the inconvenience that does attend
the too much bibing of the same is odious.

He bears Azure, a Bar, Argent, three Apples erected in Base, Or, by the
name of Harlewin. An Apple is called in Latin Pomum, which is a general word
for all sorts of eatable fruits; insomuch as Plin. lib. 15. cap. 22.
comprehends Nuts also under this name, albeit the same is most commonly taken
for this sort of fruit. If we desire to have Apples to continue longer upon the
Trees than their accustomed season of ripening, we may effect the same by
wreathing of the boughs and platting them together one in another, as Farnesius
notes, saying, Praeter naturae tempus ex arbore pendebunt Poma, si ramusculos
contorqueri jusserimus: whereof he yields this reason, That by means of such
wreathing and platting the humor is more slowly concocted or digested, so that
they cannot ripen with that maturity, as those which are not hindered of their
natural passage and action. Hereby we may learn, that Art works forcibly in
things merely vegetable; how much more effectual and powerful is Education
(which is reckoned a second nature) in forming and reforming the conditions and
inclinations of men?

CHAP. VIII.
HItherto of Plants growing upon a simple Body or Stem, with their common
parts. Now of such as grow upon a manifold stalk or tender sprigs, as Flowers,
Herbs, and such like, as in Example.

He bears Ermyn, a Rose, Gules, barbed and seeded, proper, by the Name of
Beverley. Amongst Flowers in ancient time the Rose was holden in chiefest
estimation, as appears in Scholiis Epist. St. Hieron. de vit. Hilar. where it
is said, Rosis apud Priscos prima gloria fuit inter flores. The Pourtraiture or
Resemblance of a Rose, may signify unto us some kind of good environed or
beset on all sides with evils, as that is with prickles: which may give us
notice, how our pleasures and delights are beset with bitterness and sharpness.
Here I do blazon this Rose Gules, because the word proper fitteth not this
flower: For if I should blazon it a Rose proper, it could not be understood of
what color the same were; forasmuch as White and Crimson are as proper to
Roses as Red: Therefore for the more certainty I have blazoned it Gules.

He bears Argent, on a Canton, Gules, a Rose, Or, barbed, proper, by the Name
of Bradston of Winterborne in the County of Gloucester. This beautiful and
fragrant flower does lively represent unto us the momentary and fickle state of
man's life; the frailty and inconstancy whereof is such, as that we are no
sooner born into the World, but presently we begin to leave it: and as the
delectable beauty and redolent smell of this pleasant flower does suddenly fade
and perish; even so man's life, his beauty, his strength, and worldly estate,
are so weak, so mutable, and so momentary, as that oftentimes in the same day
wherein he flourishes in his chiefest jollity, his beauty consumes, his body
decaieth, and his vital breath departs; and thus he leaves his life as if he
had never been. Of this sudden fading of the Rose, a certain Poet writes in
this manner; Mirabar celerem fugitiva aetate rapinam,
Et, dum nascuntur, consenuisse Rosas.
Quam longa una dies, aetas tam longa Rosarum,
Quas pubescentes juncta senecta premit.
As fades the blushing Rose, so speeds
Our flowery youth away:
It grows, it blows, it speeds, it sheds
Her beauty in one day.


He bears Sable, 3 Roses, Argent, by the Name of Maurice, and is the
Coat Armor of David Maurice Prebend of Myvod, and Vicar of Llanhassaph in
Flintshire.

Gules, three Roses Argent, on a Chief of the second, as many Roses of the
first, by the Name of Caesar (alias Adelmare). It is born by Sir Charles Caesar
of Benington-place in Hartfordshire, Knight. by John Caesar of Barkway in the said
County, Esquire and by Charles Caesar of Great Gransden in Huntingtonshire, and of
Much-hadham in Hartfordshire, Esquire second Son of Sir Charles Caesar Knight.
deceased, who was Master of the Rolls; which Sir Charles was Son and Heir of
Sir Julius Caesar Knight. also Master of the Rolls, Judge of the High Court of
Admiralty, Chancellor of the Exchequer, and Privy Counselor to King James, and
to King Charles the First; descended of the Learned and Noble Family of the
Dalmarii, of the City of Tarviso or Treviso in Italy. The said Charles married
Joan, second Daughter of Sir Thomas Leventhorp of Shingle-hall and Blakesware
in Hartfordshire, Baronet, by whom he has Issue Charles, Henry, and Dorothy.

He bears Gules, a Cross Lozenge between four Roses, Argent, by the Name of
Packer, and is the Coat Armor of Philip Packer of Groombridge in Kent, Esquire.

Argent, on a Bend, Sable, three Roses of the Field, by the Name of Carry, and
is the Paternal Coat Armor of John Carry of Wilcot in Oxfordshire, Esquire.

He bears parted Per Fess in Chief, Gules, a Cheveron between 3 Cinquefoiles,
Or, and in Base, Argent, a Rose, Gules, with the stalk, leaves and beards,
proper. This is a Dutch Coat, and is thus born by John Vanheck of the City of
London, Merchant.

Of such Plants that grow upon a manifold body or stalk, there are some other
sorts that do bear fruits, as in part may by this next Example appear.

He bears Argent, a Cheveron, Gules, between three Hurts, by the Name of
Baskervile, in the County of Hereford, and is born by Thomas Baskervile of
Eardisley, Humphrey Baskervile of Pontarilas, and by William Baskervile of
Comadock, all of Hartfordshire, Esquires. These (says Leigh) appear
light-blue, and come of some violent stroke. But if I mistake not, he is far
wide from the matter, in that he likeneth these Rundles unto Vibices or Hurts
in a man's Body, proceeding of a stripe; whereas they are indeed a kind of Fruit
or small round Berry, of color betwixt black and blue, growing upon a manifold
stalk about a foot high, and are found most commonly in Forests and Woodland
Grounds: in some places they are called Wind-berries, and in others Hurts, or
Hurtle-berries. They have their time when Strawberries are in season. The near
resemblance of their names caused Leigh to mistake the one for the other.

CHAP. IX.
THUS much of Vegetables, growing either on a single or manifold Stem or Body.
Now of such as grow upon a bending Stalk, such are Herbs of all sorts. And of
these some are Nutritive, others less Nutritive: The first sort are in ordinary
use of Diet; such are both those which produce Grain, and those which serve for
seasoning of the Pot, Salads, and the like. Such as do produce Grain are these,
and their like, Wheat, Rye, Beans, Pease, Barley, Spelt, Oats, etc. of these
such are most usual in Coat Armor, as are accustomed to be bound up in
Sheaves, as Wheat, Rye, Cumin, etc. as in part by these next Examples may
appear.

He bears Azure, issuant out of a Mount, in Base, three Wheat-stalks, bladed
and eared, all proper. This is a Venetian Coat Armor, and pertains to the
Family of Garzoni. And here we see a a Mount born, which we beforementioned, as
a bearing of the nature of one of the four Elements. As before we honored the
Millstone with the name of the chief of precious Stones, so may we justly give
precedence to this Plant above all other in the World, no one kind of food
being so necessary for preservation of man's life as this; which therefore the
Scripture calls the staff of bread, because it upholds the very being of
mankind. For which cause, as the Heathens accounted Ceres, and others, as gods,
for inventing means to increase Corn; so are those to be held enemies to
mankind, whosoever through covetousness overthrow Tillage, as by Enclosures,
and depopulations of Villages, etc. And how inestimable a blessing Corn is, may
by this be conceived, that no Country is said to have a Famine so long as it
has Corn, though all other things be scarce: But if all other things abound,
and Corn be wanting, that one want brings both the name and the heavy
punishment of a Famine.

Among the manifold blessings promised by God to the observers of his Laws,
plenty of Corn is reckoned one of the chiefest, Lev. 26. 3. If ye walk in my
statutes, and keep my commandments, and do them; then will I give you rain in
due season, and the Land shall yield her increase, and the Trees of the field
shall yield their fruit and your threshing shall reach unto the Vintage, and
the Vintage shall reach unto the sowing time; and you shall eat your bread to
the full, and dwell in your land safely. And again, Deuteronomy. 8. 7. For the Lord
thy God brings thee into a good Land; a Land of Brooks of Water, of Fountains
and Depths that spring out of Valleys and Hills; a Land of Wheat and Barley,
and Vines and Figg-trees, and Pomegranats; a Land of Oyl-olive and Honey; a
Land wherein thou shall eat bread without scarceness, thou shall not lack any
thing in it; a Land whose Stones are Iron, and out of whose Hills thou may
digg Brass.

He bears Azure, three Ears of Guiny Wheat, couped and bladed, Or, by the
Name of Grandgorge. This is a kind of Grain not much inferior to our Wheat for
use; but for multiplication, beauty, and largeness, much beyond it: And of this
most undoubtedly true is the saying of our Savior, that one Grain brings
forth fifty, yea an hundred fold: and such should be the increases of God's
graces in us, which are not put into us there to die utterly, but to increase
to our own good, and the givers glory. Saint Paul makes an excellent Argument
here to satisfy a very natural man, touching the Resurrection of the dead,
which is no more unpossible, than for dead Corn to sprout out of the Earth much
more flourishing, yea and more abundant than it was cast in.

He bears Gules, on a Bend, Argent, three Rye stalks, Sable, by the Name of
Rye, or Reye. Were it that these stalks had been born in their proper kind, it
would have beautified the Coat greatly, and made the same much more commendable
for bearing, by how much sweet and kindly ripened Corn is more valuable and to
be desired, than that which is blasted and mildew'd; that being a special
blessing of God, and this the express and manifest token of God's heavy wrath
inflicted upon us for our sins; as appears in the Prophet Amos 4. 9. I have
smitten you with blasting and mildew, etc. and likewise in Haggai the second
the same words are used.

The Field is Ermyn, two Flaunches, Azure, each charged with 3 Ears of Wheat,
couped, Or, by the Name of Greby of Northamptonshire. It makes not a little to
the comm^ndation of this Grain, that it is taken in the Scripture for the
faithful; where it is said, Which has his fann in his hand, and will make
clean his floor, and gather his Wheat into his Garner, etc.

These sorts of Grain are most usually born in Coat Armor bound up in sheaves,
and banded of the same Metal or Color; yet shall you find their Band sometimes
of a diverse Metal or Color from them.

The Field is Azure, a Garb, Or. This Coat Armor pertains to the ancient
Family of Gravenor of Cheshire, whose name was anciently written Grosvenour, or
Grosvenor, as it is at this day. They bear this Garb from their Ancestors, who
were of Consanguinity to the ancient Earls of Chester, as it is proved in the
Record of that famous Suit betwixt Sir Richard Scroope Plaintiff, and Sir
Robert Grosvenour Defendant, for their Arms, in Anno 12. Regis Richardi
Secundi. For with William the Conqueror came Hugh Lupus his Nephew, and with
the said Hugh Lupus came one Gilbert le Grosvenour, Nephew to the said Hugh,
who was Ancestor to the said Sir Robert Grosvenour; from whom is lineally
descended Sir Richard Grosvenour of Eaton in the County Palatine of Chester,
Knight and Baronet, Heir-male of that Family; and is now born by Sir Thomas
Grosvenor of Eaton in the said County, Baronet. This Coat, without the Arms of
Vlster, is born by Walter Grosvenor of Bishbury in Staffordshire, Esquire. A
like unto this is born by Holmeshed, saving that the band of that Garb is Vert.
There is a kind of wretched Cormorants, whose Garbs are so fast bound, that the
poor curses their merciless hearts. And such an one was Hatto Abbot of Fulda,
who suffered Rats rather to eat up his corn, then he would help the wants of
the poor; but his punishment was answerable thereunto; for the Rats devoured
him, though he guarded himself in a Castle purposely built in the midst of the
river Rhene, which is there this day to be seen.

He bears Gules, 3 Garbs, Or, by the name of Preston. This Coat was born by
Robert Common a Scot, who at the time of the Conquest was Earl of Cumberland,
and held all that Country beyond all the River Tyne; but after William Rufus's
time he was taken prisoner, with Roger Mowbrey Earl of Northumberland, and was
by King Henry the First disinherited. Here you may observe that I mention not
the bands of Garbs, because they differ not in Metal or Color from the Garbs.
Sometimes you shall find these Garbs born with an Ordidinary interposed between
them, as in this next Example.

The Field is Pearl, a Cheveron between 3 Garbs, Ruby. This Coat Armor
pertains to the Right Honorable Edmund Earl of Mulgrave, Baron Sheffield of
Butterwick, and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter. an Escocheon like
unto this (but of different Color and Metal, viz. the Field, Sapphire, a
Cheveron between 3 Garbs, Topaz) was born by Sir Christopher Hatton, late Lord
Chancellor of England, Counselor to that Peerless Queen Elizabeth, of immortal
memory: A coat well befitting his magnificence and bounteous Hospitality,
wherein he has scarce had any Rival ever since.

Azure, a Cheveron, between three Garbs, Or, is the Coat Armor of the Hattons,
the chief Ornament now existing in the person of the Right Honorable
Christopher Lord Hatton of Kirby, Governor of his Majesty's Island of Garnsey.

He bears Azure, seven Wheat-sheaves, four, two, and one, Or, by the Name of
Dolman, and is the paternal Coat Armor of Sir Thomas Dolman of Shaw in
Berkshire, Knight. and one of the Clerks attending his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council.

He bears Sable, a Cheveron engrailed between three Garbs or Wheat-sheaves,
Argent, by the Name of Field, and is born by Thomas Field of Stanstead Bury in
the County of Hertford, Esquire.

The Field is Or, on a Fess, Azure, three Garbs of the first, by the Name of
Vernon. This is an ancient Family of Cheshire, and descended of the worthy Stem
of Vernons that were Barons of Shipbrook, and do bear these Garbs for a
difference from the elder House that did bear Or, only a Fess, Azure. And the
reason of the bearing of their Garbs was, for that they would make known that
they were descended from the said Barons of Shipbrook, who anciently held of
the Earls of Chester.

He bears Azure, a Fess between 3 Garbs, Or, by the Name of Lewhite of
Bromham in Wiltshire. The Garb signifies in Heraldry plenty or abundance; and
that the first Bearer did deserve well for his Hospitality.

He bears Azure, a Fess Dauncette, between six Garbs, Or, by the Name of
Rayncourt. Leigh calls it a Sheaf of Wheat; but though it were of Rye,
Barley, or Cumin, or whatsoever it were (says he) it is sufficient to call it
a Garb (which is a French, or rather Teutonick word, signifying a Sheaf)
telling the Color or Metal whereof it is. As to their sole and diverse bearing
upon, and with Ordinaries between them, these few Examples may suffice for the
present. Others shall follow in there places.

He bears Ermyn, on a Bend, Azure, a Mullet pierced, Or, between two Garbs,
proper, by the Name of Modyford, and is the paternal Coat Armor of Thomas
Modyford of Eastuar in the County of Kent, Esquire Colonel of a Regiment of Foot at
Port Royal in the Island of Iamaica, Son and Heir of Sir Thomas Modyford
Baronet, late Governor of the said Island.

He bears Argent, three Bean-Gods Barr-ways, two and one, proper, by the Name
of Hardbeane. The Bean in ancient times amongst the Grecians, was of great
Authority; for by it they made all the Magistrates of their Commonweals, which
were chosen by casting in of Beans, instead of giving of Voices or Suffrages.
But Pythagoras taught his Scholars to hate the Bean above all other Vegetables,
meaning perchance, that they should shun the bearing of any Office; though
others give other reasons of that his Doctrine. Some writ^, that the flowers of
the Beans, though very pleasing to the smell, yet are very hurtful to weak
brains; and that therefore in the time of their ^^owring there are more foolish
than at other times; meaning belike those, who then distill these flowers to
make themselves fair therewith.

To this Head must be referred all other sorts of Nutritive Herbs born in
Coat Armor, whether they produce Grain in Ear, Cod or Husk; or that they be
Herbs for the Pot, or Salads; as Betony, Spinach, Coleworts, Lettice, Purslain,
Leeks, Scallions, etc. All which I leave to observation, because I labor by
all means to pass through this vast Sea of the infinite varieties of Nature,
with what convenient brevity I may, because Quod brevius est, semper
delectabilius habetur; in such things as these, The shorter the sweeter.

CHAP. X.
NEXT after Herbs Nutritive, let us take a taste of Herbs less Nutritive, which
are either Coronary or Physical. Coronary herbs are such, as in respect of
their odoriferous smell, have been of long time, and yet are used for decking
and triming of the body, or adorning of houses, or other pleasurable use for
eye or scent; as also in respect of their beautiful shape and color, were most
commonly bestowed in making of Crowns and Garlands; of which uses they received
their name of Coronary. Amongst which we may reckon the Rose before expressed,
to be one of the chie^est, as also Violets of all sorts, Clove-Gilliflowers,
Sweet Majoram, Rosemary, White Daffodil, Spikenard, Rose Campion, Daisies, etc.
But of all other, the Flower de lis is of most esteem, having been from the
first bearing, the Charge of a Regal Escocheon, originally born by the French
Kings, though tract of time has made the bearing of them more vulgar; even as
purple was in ancient times a wearing only for Princes, which now has lost
that prerogative through custom. Out of these several kinds I have selected
some few Examples, as in the Escocheons following appear.

He bears Saphir, a Flower de lis, Pearl. This is the paternal Coat Armor of
the Rt Honorable George Earl of Bristol, Lord Digby of Sherborne, and Knight
of the most Noble Order of the Garter.

Or, a Flower de lis, Azure, is born by the Name of Portman, and with the Arms
of Vlster, is the Coat Armor of Sir William Portman of Orchard in
Somersetshire, Knight of the Bath, and Baronet.

He bears Gules, a Fess wavy between 3 Flowers de lis, Or, by the Name of
Hicks, and with the Arms of Vlster, is the bearing of Sir William Hicks of
Rickols in the Parish of Low-Layton in Essex, Knight and Baronet.

He bears Or, a Cheveron between 3 Flowers de lis, Sable. This Coat Armor
pertained to the very worshipful Sir Thomas Fanshaw Knight of the Bath, his
Majesty's Remembrancer of his Highness's Court of Exchequer; and was also born
by the Right Honorable Thomas Lord Viscount Fanshaw of the Kingdom of Ireland,
his Majesty's Remembrancer of the Court of Exchequer. This Flower is in Latin
called Iris, for that it somewhat resembles the Color of the Rainbow. Some of
the French confound this with the Lily; as he did, who doubting the validity of
the Salique Law to debar the Females from the Crown of France, would make it
sure out of a stronger Law, because (forsooth) Lilia non laborant, neque nent;
the Lilies neither labor nor spin: which reason excludes as well a laborious
Hercules, as a spinning Omphale.

Sable, a Cheveron between three Flowers de lis, Argent, is the Coat Armor of
Sir Lionel Ienkins Knight. Judge of his Majesty's high Court of Admiralty, and of
the Prerogative Court.

Or, a Cheveron, Sable, between three Flowers de lis, Azure, and is the
Coat Armor of John Millecent of Barham-hall in the Parish of Linton in
Cambridgeshire, Esquire.

He bears Argent, on a Cheveron, Gules, beween three Flowers de lis, Sable,
an Inescocheon of the first, charged with a sinister hand couped at the wrist,
as the second. This is the Coat Armor of that Noble Knight and Baronet, Sir
Basil Dixwell of Barham in Kent, whose real expressions of true love and
affection to his native Country deserves commemoration. Here I name of the
first, and as the second, to avoid iteration of the same words, according to
the Rule formerly given.

He bears Argent, on a Fess, Gules, three Flowers de lis, Or, by the Name of
Disney, and is born by John Disney of Swinderby, Esquire by Molineux and Gervase
Disney of Norton-Disney of Lincolnshire, Esquire.

Sable, a Fess Dauncette, Or, in chief 3 Flowers de lis, Argent, by the Name of
Feak, and is born by William Feak of Stafford in Staffordshire, Gent, Son and
Heir of John Feak of London, Gent. deceased.

He bears Argent, a Fess Nebule, Gules, between six Flowers de lis, Sable, by
the Name of Dobson, and is the Coat Armor of Edw. Dobson of Leverpool in
Lancashire, Esquire.

Argent, on a Fess Ragule, Azure, three Flowers de lis, Or, and is the
Coat Armor of William Atwood of Bromfield in Essex, and of Gray's Inn in
Middlesex, Esquire Son and Heir of John Atwood Esquire deceased, by Elizabeth eldest
Daughter and Coheir of Patrick Young Esquire Son of Sir Peter Young Knight. Almoner and
Privy Counselor of Scotland to King James.

He bears Sable, on a Cheveron engrailed, between six crosses Patee-Fitchee,
Or, three Flowers de lis, Azure, each charged on the top with a Plate, by the
name of Smith of Nibley, in the County of Gloucester. The Plate is the
Representation of Silver Bullion fitted for the stamp, and therefore need not
have other blazon than its own name. Armorists hold that this bearing of Sable,
and Or, answers to Diamond joined with Gold, whereof each gives honor to the
other; and it may well beseem a Bearer, whose sober and well composed
conditions are accompanied with the luster of shining virtues.

He bears Sable, a Be^d, Argent, between six Flowers de lis, Or, by the Name
of Redmere. This Coat Armor have I added in regard of the variety of bearing
hereof from those before handled, inasmuch as in this one Escocheon is
comprehended the full number contained in both the former; as also to make
known in what manner, these or other charges of like bearing must be placed,
the same being born entire: But if they were strewed, or (as I may better term
it) seminated all over the Field, then were it not a Bend between, but upon, or
over them; forasmuch as in such bearing only the halves of many of them, or
some greater or lesser portion of them would appear as well under the Bend, as
in the limits or Edges of the Escocheon.

He bears Argent, on a Cross, Sable, five Flowers de lis of the first: This
Coat Armor in the time of K. Henry the Fourth, appertained unto Robert le Neve
of Tivetishall in the County of Norfolk (as appears by Seals of old Deeds and
ancient Rolls of Arms) from whom are descended those of that Surname now
remaining at Aslactun, Witchingham, and other places in the said County. If
this Cross were seminated all over with Flowers de lis, showing upon the sides
or edges thereof but the halves of some of them, then it should be blazoned
Semy de Flowers de lis; and the like is to be observed when they be so born on
any other Ordinary or Charge.

He bears Sable, on a Cross between four Flowers de lis, Argent, five Pheons,
Azure, by the Name of Banks, and with the Arms of Vlster, is the Coat Armor of
Sir John Banks of the Friars in the Parish of Aylesford in Kent, Baronet.

Sable, three Lozenges, Argent, on a Chies, Or, as many Flowers de lis, Gules,
by the Name of Pedley, and is the Coat Armor of Sir Nicholas Pedley of
Tetworth in Huntingtonshire, Knight.

He bears Argent, on a Saltire, Sable, five Flowers de lis, Or. This
Coat Armor pertained to Sir Thomas Hawkins of Nash in Kent, Knight. I have
inserted this Escocheon, not only to show you that this Flower is born upon
this kind of Ordinary, but also to give demonstration that the Saltire charged
contains the third part of the Field, according to the Rule formerly given.

The Field is Sable, three Lilies slipped, their stalks, seeds, blades and
leaves, Argent. These Arms pertain to the College of Winchester, founded by
the renowned Architect, William Wickham, Bishop of Winton, who contrived those
many and most curious Castles and other Buildings of King Edward the Third's.
And besides this goodly College of Winton, built another magnificent College
(called the New College) in the University of Oxford: two such absolute
Foundations, as never any King of this Land did the like. This Wickham having
finished the Castle of Windsor, caused to be inscribed on the Wall of the
round Tower, This made Wickham; which caused such as were envious of his high
favor, to suggest unto the King, that he arrogated all the honor of that
great Work to himself: but he pleasantly satisfied the King, saying, That he
wrote not, Wickham made this; but, This made Wickham; because by his service
in these Works he had gained his Sovereign's Princely favor.

He bears Argent, a Fess Nebule, between three Trefoils slipped, Gules. This
Coat pertained to George Thorpe of VVanswell in the County of Gloucester, Esquire
one of the Honorable Band of his Majesty's Gentlemen Pensioners. The Trefoil
is accounted the Husbandman's Almanac, because when it shuts in the leaves,
it foretells rain; and therefore the Fess Nebule representing the rainy
clouds, is not unaptly joined with it. This Leaf being grassy, some may marvel
I should reckon it amongst the Coronaries: but they must know, that in ancient
Roman times, amongst other sorts of Crowns, the Graminea Corona, or grassy
Crown, was of very high honor to the wearer.

He bears Or, a Cheveron, between three Trefoils slipped, Sable, by the Name
of Abdy, and with the Arms of Vlster, is the Coat Armor of Sir John Abdy of
Stapleford-Abbot in Essex, Baronet.

He bears Or, a Cheveron engrailed, between three Trefoils slipped, Sable, by
the Name of Williamson, and is the paternal Coat Armor of the Right
Honorable Sir Joseph Williamson of Milbeckhall in Cumberland Knight. one of his
Majesty's principal Secretaries of State.

He bears Gules, on a Bend, Argent, three Trefoils slipped, Vert, by the Name
of Hervey, and is the Coat Armor of the Honorable John Hervey of Ickworth in
Suffolk, Treasurer to her Majesty Queen Katharine.

Or, on a Cheveron, between three Trefoils slipped, Sable, as many Mullets of
the Field, by the Name of Holworthy, and is the paternal Coat Armor of Sir
Matthew Holworthy of Great Palsgrave in Norfolk, Knight.

Or, on a Bend cotized, Azure, between six Trefoils slipped, Vert, three
Escallop-shells of the first. This is the bearing of John Row of the City of
Bristol, Gent. descended from the ancient Family of the Rows of VVindley-hill
in the County of Derby

He bears Azure, three Quaterfoils, Argent, by the Name of Vincent, and with
the Arms of Vlster, is the paternal Coat Armor of Sir Francis Vincent of
Stoke-Dabernon in Surrey, Baronet.

He bears Argent, on a Cheveron, Sable, three Quaterfoils, Or, by the Name of
Air, and is born by the Family of the Eyres of Dorsetshire, and of New-Sarum
in Wilsthire, from whom is descended Mr. Nicholas Air of the City of London.

Or, a Cheveron, between three Cinquefoils, Gules, by the Name of Chicheley,
and is the Coat Armor of the Right Honorable Sir John Chicheley of VVimpley
in Cambridgeshire, Knight. Master of the Ordnance, and one of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, etc.

He bears Gules, a Bend, Or, in the sinister Chief a Cinquefoil, Ermyn. This
was the Coat Armor of Sir Erasmus de la Fontaine of London, Knight. deceased,
whose Lady was Sister to the Right Honorable Baptist Lord Viscount Camden.

He bears Sable, a Bend engrailed, between six Cinquefoils, Or, by the Name
of Povey, and is the paternal Coat Armor of Tho. Povey. Esquire one of the Masters
of the Requests to his Majesty King Charles the Sec^nd.

He bears Argent, a Cross quarter-pierced between five Cinquefoils, Vert.
This Coat, with a due difference, is born by Thomas Hodgskins of Hamersmith in
Middlesex, Gent. descended from the Hodgskins of Glocestershire.

He bears Gules, a Cheveron between ten Cinquefoils, four, two, one, two, and
one, Argent. This Coat Armor pertains to the worshipful Family of Barkley of
Wymundham, which descended out of the right Noble Progeny of the Lord Barkley.
This Coat is of an usual kind of blazon, and therefore I held it the fitter to
be here inserted, as a pattern for all such Coat-Armours, whose Charges are
marshalled in this order. The Cinquefoil is an herb wholesome for many good
uses, and is of ancient bearing in Escocheons. The number of the leaves answer
to the five senses in a man; and he that can conquer his affections, and master
his senses, (which sensual and vicious men are wholly addicted unto) he may
worthily, and with honor, bear the Cinquefoil, as the sign of his fivefold
victory over a stronger enemy than that three-headed Monster Cerberus.

He bears Saphir, a Cinquefoil, Ermyn, a Bordure engrailed, Topaz. This is
the Coat Armor of the Right Honorable Jacob Lord Astley, Baron of Reading,
etc. and with the addition of the Arms of Vlster, is the Coat Armor of Sir
Jacob Astley of Melton-Constable in Norfolk, Baronet. Of this Family there has
successively been Barons of Parliament from the time of King Edward the First,
to the Reign of King Henry the Fifth, and one Knight of the Garter in the Reign
of King Henry the Sixth.

Argent, a Fess engrailed, between three Cinquefoils within a Bordure, Sable.
This is the paternal Coat Armor of Thomas Foley of Witley-Court in
Worcestershire, Esquire, Father of Thomas Foley of the said place, Esquire of Paul
Foley of Stoak-Court in Herefordshire, Esquire and of Philip Foley of Prestwood in
Staffordshire, Esquire

Argent, three Cinquefoils, Gules, each charged with five Annulets, Or, by the
Name of Southwell, and is the paternal Coat Armor of Sir Robert Southwell Knight.
one of the Clerks attending his Majesty in his most Honorable Privy Council;
whose Family is now seated at Kingsale in the Kingdom of Ireland, but were
formerly of Woodrising in Norfolk, and were anciently of the Town of Southwell
in the County of Nottingham.

He bears Saphir, Crusuly three Cinquefoils, Pearl. This is the Coat Armor
of the Right Hono^rable Conyers D'arcy, Baron D'arcy, Meynnille, and Conyers,
descended from John Lord D'arcy and Meynnille, Chamberlain to King Edward the
Third; whose Son and Heir, the Honorable Conyers D'arcy Esquire is High Steward of
his Majesty's Honor of Richmond-Castle, and Richmondshire, chief Bailiff of
the Liberty thereof, Constable of Middleham-Castle, and Master of
Arhengarthdale Forest.

He bears Argent, a Cheveron, Sable, between three Columbines slipped,
proper, by the name of Hall, of Coventry. The Columbine is pleasing to the eye,
as well in respect of the seemly (and not vulgar) shape, as in regard of the
Azury color thereof; and is holden to be very medicinable for the dissolving
of impostumations or swellings in the throat.

He bears Argent, three Gilliflowers slipped, proper, by the Name of Journey.
These kinds of Flowers, for beauty, variety of color, and pleasant redolency,
may be compared with the choicest attires of the Garden: yet because such
daintiness and affected adornings better befit Ladies and Gentlewomen, than
Knights and men of valor, whose worth must be tried in the Field, not under a
Rose-bed, or in a Garden-plot; therefore the ancient Generous made choice
rather of such herbs as grew in the fields, as the Cinquefoil, Trefoil, etc.

He bears Argent, a Cheveron, Gules, between three Bluebottles slipped,
proper, by the Name of Chorley, an ancient Family in the County Palatine of
Lancaster. These few Examples may suffice to show that all others of like kind
(which I for brevity sake voluntarily pass over) are to be reduced unto this
Head of Coronary Herbs; from which we will now proceed to the Physical, whose
chief and more frequent use consists in asswaging or curing of Maladies and
Diseases. And of these some are Aromatical, which for the most part, in respect
of their familiar and pleasing nature, do serve for the corroborating and
comforting of the inward parts of man's body, and for that purpose are often used
in meats; of which sort are Saffron, Ginger, and such like: Others are merely
Medicinal, and such as a man (were it not for necessity) would wish rather to
wear in his Escocheon, than in his Belly. Examples of which kinds I will
willingly pass over, only as it were pointing out with the finger unto what
head they must be reduced, if any such be born in Arms. Of the Plants, Trees,
Fruits, and Herbs beforementioned, some are Foreign, and some Domestical; some
grow in Mountains, some in Marish and Fenny Grounds, some by the Rivers, some
by the Seacoast. Concerning their causes, natures, and effects, Philosophers,
Physicians and Herbalists do seriously dispute; and doubtless they are the
admirable work of the most Omnipotent God, who has sent as many kinds of
Medicines, as of Maladies; that as by the one we may see our own wretchedness,
so by the other we might magnify his goodness toward man, on whom he has
bestowed Fruit for meat, and Leaves for medicine.

CHAP. XI.
HAving hitherto handled that part of our distribution which comprehends
things Vegetable, proceed we now to the other concerning things sensitive,
which are all sorts of Animals or Creatures endued with senses. The senses, as
likewise the sensitive Soul, are things in themselves not visible, and
therefore estranged from the Herald's uses: But because they reside in bodies
of differing parts and qualities from any other beforementioned; therefore in
handling of these sensitive Creatures, I hold it requisite to begin with their
parts (for of them the whole is raised;) and these are either the parts
contained, or containing, or sustaining.

But since we are now to speak of things sensitive (and amongst them) first of
Terrestrial Animals and their parts, it shall not be impertinent to produce
some few causes amongst many, why these Terrestrial Animals and Man were
created in one day, viz. the sixth day.

First, because God had appointed the Earth to be the joint habitation of man
and beast together. Secondly, in respect of the near resemblance, both of
bodily parts and natural properties, that these Terrestrials have of Man, in
respect either of Fowls or of Fishes. Lastly, for that very many of them were
to serve for man's ease and necessary use: As Oxen to till the ground; Horses
for his ease in travel; Dogs to be watchful keepers of his house; and others
for other his necessary and Domestical uses.

There is no Animal but has at the least these parts, viz. Head, wherewithal
to receive food, and wherein their senses have their residence; a Belly, to
receive and concoct his meat; Intrails, whereby to eject the superfluities or
excrements of aliment; Members also, serving for the use and exercise of the
senses, and others ordained for motion from place to place; for without these
Members he cannot receive food or nutriment, neither feel nor move: Therefore
there is neither laboring beast, or beast of savage kind, domestical reptiles,
or other, that can be without these bodily parts.

By the name of Soul and Life, wherewith all sorts of Animals are endued from
God, Moses teaches us, that there is no living creature to be found that has
not either true and natural blood, or at the least some kind of hot humor that
is to it instead of blood; Anima enim cujusque Animalis in Sanguine est, as
Moses teaches Leviticus 17. and in sundry other places; and in the common
received opinion of all men, In humido and calido consistit vita.

That which is spoken of diverse kinds of Insecta, that there is no blood to be
found in them, it is to be understood to be meant of true, perfect, and natural
blood; but of necessity they must have instead thereof some kind of humor in
them that has the quality of blood, viz. that is both hot and moist as
afaresaid, else can they not live.

Concerning Animals in general, it is not to be doubted, but that all sorts of
them, as well those of savage and ravenous kind, as those of domestical and
laboring kind, as also venomous Serpents, of themselves, and of their own
nature, were themselves good, and might be good to others, and profitable for
man's use; for as much as it is said, Et vidit Elohim quod bonum: But in that
they are now become noisome and painful to man, that is per Accidens; for this
is occasioned by the sin and transgression of man, whereby all things became
accursed for his sake.

The utility or benefit that comes to man by these Terrestrial Animals is
twofold; the one pertaining to the Body, the other to the Soul. The corporal
benefit that comes to man by them, who knows not? For daily experience
shows us how beneficial the use of horses, oxen, kine, calves, sheep, and
other sorts of beast and cattle of all sorts, are for the service of man;
whereof some serve us for food, some for raiment, some for carriage, some for
tillage, and other for diverse other uses. Of this use of them Moses says, That
God has subjected all things to man, Omnia subjecisti sub pedibus ejus, etc.
and made him Ruler over the fishes of the Sea, the fowls of the Air, and the
beasts of the Land; whereby he gives us to understand, That all sorts of
Animals were created for the diverse uses of man, and each one of them ordained
to a several end. But their spiritual use is far more noble and excellent, by
how much the soul surpasses the body in dignity and worthiness.

And their use consists not alone in this, that by the consideration of them
we are led to the knowledge of God, and of his wisdom, power and goodness (for
this use have all things else that are created) as appears Romans 1. and
elsewhere: But also that in these Animals God has proposed to us such notable
examples of imitation, in respect of vices to be eschewed, that, the sacred
Scriptures excepted, there is no moral Precepts can better instruct us than
these Animals do, which are daily in our view, and of which we have daily use:
amongst these we may produce some examples of fishes and fowls, but many more
may we gather from Terrestrial Animals. And to the end we should shun the
ignorance of things, such especially as are Celestial, David, the Kingly
Prophet, proposes to us for examples, the Horse and Mule saying, Non eritis
sicut Equus and Mulus, in quibus non est intellectus.

Like as Natural Philosophy consists in other things, so does it chiefly in
the knowledge of Animals, viz. in the understanding of their wisdom, natures
and properties: which knowledge has been approved by God himself from the
beginning; and not only approved, but also ordained and given to Adam; for
Moses says, God brought these Animals unto Adam, to the end that he should
advisedly view and consider them; to the end that Adam should give them names
answerable to their shapes, natures, proportion, and qualities; and that the
imposition of these names should not be casually or at adventure (for God
abhors all disorder and confusion) but deliberately and according to reason,
so as every thing might be aptly distinguished from other, by their particular
names, and according to their several natures and dispositions; and that for
our benefit, that we hearing their names, and understanding their
significations may be led to the understanding of their natural properties, for
which Etymology, or true interpretation and derivation of words is very
behoofful and of great use.

The parts contained are Humors and Spirits, whereof only the first is used in
Coat-Armours, wherein are represented sometimes drops of blood, and sometimes
tears, which both are naturally humors contained, though in Armory they are
supposed no longer to be contained, but shed forth. The bearing of this humor,
blood, is understood to be evermore born Drop-meale (as I may so term it) or by
drops. Which manner of bearing is in blazon termed Gutte, of the Latin word
Gutta, which signifies a drop of any thing that is either by Nature liquid, or
liquefied by Art. These drops do receive a different manner of blazon,
according unto their different color, or diversity of the substance whereof
they do consist, as by Examples shall appear.

He bears, Argent, Gutte de Sang, by the Name of Lemming. These drops are
seldom born of themselves alone, but rather upon or with some other kind of
Charge, either ordinary or extraordinary, or else dividedly, by means of the
interposition of some of the lines of Partition hereafter to be handled. These
are termed Guttae de Sang. Quia ex guttis sangninis constant; because they
signify drops of blood, wherein the life consists. And if the blood of
those, who boast of their generous blood, should once drop forth of their
veins, no difference would appear betwixt it and the meanest man's blood;
unless perhaps it be in this, that usually it is more corrupt and vitiated;
whereas in the poorer sort it is more healthful and pure. Which should teach
such great ones not to prize their blood at too high a rate, but rather to
excel others in virtues, since they cannot surpass in that humor, which is
alike in all: And if they look in the first originals of both sorts, they shall
find, that Adam was the first Ancestor of the Poor, as well as of the Mighty;
and so the one of them as anciently descended as the other.

He bears Azure, a Pale, Or, Gutte de Sang, by the Name of Player, and is the
Coat Armor of Sir Thomas Player of Hackney in Middlesex, Knight. Chamberlain of
the Honorable City of London, succeeding his Father Sir Thomas in the said
Office.

He bears Argent, Gutte de Sang, a Cross, Gules, by the Name of Fitz of
Fitzford in the County of Devon. This is the most principal and predominant
humor, whereby the life of all Animals is nourished and continued, and whose
defect brings present death. For the life of all flesh is his blood, it is
joined with his life: Therefore I said unto the children of Israel, Ye shall
eat the blood of no flesh; for the life of all flesh is the blood thereof,
whosoever eats shall be cut off.

He bears Argent, Gutte de Larmes, or de Larmettes, a Cheveron voided, Sable,
by the Name of St. Maure. This is that other humor beforementioned; and this
bearing is called Gutte de Larmes, Quia ex Lacrymarum guttis constant, because
they represent drops of tears falling; these Gutte are always understood to be
of color blue.

In blazoning of Coat-Armours charged with drops, you must evermore consider
the substance whereof they are, and to give them a denomination accordingly, so
shall you not need to name their color at all; forasmuch as by their substance
their colors are easily conceived, whereof I will give you some few Examples
in these Escocheons next following; which albeit they may seem to be unduly
bestowed with these, yet in respect of their uniform manner of bearing, to wit,
by drops (as the former) I have chosen rather to sort them together with these,
than to bestow them confusedly under several Heads.

He bears Sable, a Turnip, Proper, a Chief, Or, Gutte de Larmes. This is a
wholesome Root, and yields great relief to the poor, and prospers best in a
hot sandy ground, and may signify a person of good disposition, whose virtuous
demeanor flourishes most prosperously even in that soil, where the scorching
heat of Envy most abounds. This differs much in nature from that whereof it
is said, And that there should not be among you any root that brings forth
gall and wormwood.

He bears Sable, Gutte deEau, a Canton, Ermyn, by the Name of Dannet. This
word Eau is a French word, and signifies the same that Aqua does in Latin,
which is as much as to say, He bears drops of water. If he should blazon it
in English, the proper color thereof is Argent. This had been a worthy
Escocheon for a Soldier of that Christian Legion, called Fulminatrix, at whose
prayers in a great drought God poured down rain in the sight of the Heathen, as
Eusebius testifies, and yet they were no Freshwater Soldiers; but were as
ready to have embrued their Escocheons with drops of blood, as to have thus
sprinkled them with drops of rain.

He bears Argent, Gutte de Poix, a Chief, Nebule, Gules, by the Name of
Roydenhall. This word Poix is a French word, and is the same that we call Pitch
in English. Yet among our English Blazoners these colors and drops are termed
Gutte de Sable. This Coat serves aptly to give warrantize of the bearing of
Chiefs, consisting of some of the bunched lines beforementioned in the first
Section. There are Ordinaries framed of sundry other former sorts of lines,
before expressed in the first Section, which I leave to the strict observation
of the curious searchers of those things.

He bears, Argent, a Cross engrailed, Sable, charged with Gutte de Or, by the
Name of Milketfield. These drops may be understood to be drops either fusible
or molten, as Gold either molten in fire, or otherwise liquefied, whereby it
may be distilled Dropmeal.

Note, that if such kind of drops be Or, then shall they be taken as
representations of fusible or liquid Gold: if they be Vert, then shall they be
taken to be drops of Oyl-olive, as hereafter shall appear, when I shall speak
of Coat-Armours, whose fields have no tincture predominating. But to return to
the humor of blood (from which we have upon occasion hitherto digressed) it is
infallible that there is no Animal or living Creature but has in it either
blood, or some other kind of hot humor in quality like thereunto, as I have
said before.

These humors beforementioned, in respect of their moist and fluent nature, do
stand in need of some other thing to contain them; and such containing parts
are either the outmost includer, which is the skin (of which we have already
spoken in the first Section, where we treated of Furrs) or the whole Body it
self, with the several members and parts thereof; all which, because they need
their supporters, those we will first speak of, and so descend unto the whole
bearings and parts.

But I will first show you an Example of the bearing of dead men's sculls, and
then proceed to the supporting parts.

He bears Argent, on a Cheveron, Gules, three dead men's sculls of the first,
by the Name of Bolter. This kind of bearing may serve to put both the proper
owner of this Coat Armor, and also the serious spectators of the same in mind
of the mortality of their bodies and last end.

Parts of support, whereof we have use in Arms, are those solid substances
which sustain the Body, viz. the Bones, whereby the Body is not only
underpropped, but also carried from place to place, by help of their ligatures
and sinews. Of the use of these in Coat Armor you shall have Examples in these
Escocheons next following.

He bears Sable, a Shinbone in Pale, surmounted of another in Cross, Argent,
by the Name of Baynes, and is the Coat of John Baynes of the Inner Temple
London, Esquire one of the Counsel of the City of London, eldest Son of John Baynes
of the Parish of St. Olive in the Old Jury, London, Esquire who holds in Knights
Service several Capital Messuages, Lands, and Tenements of the King's Majesty
in Essex. I do give this form of blazon hereunto, because the first lies
nearer to the field than the other does; for they cannot be properly said to be
a Cross of Bones, because they be not incorporated one with another, but are
dividedly severed by interposing the purflings.

He bears Sable, two Shinbones Saltireways, the sinister surmounted of the
dexter, by the Name of Newton, and is the Coat of Thomas Newton of Duffield,
and Robert Newton of Mickleover in Derbyshire, Gent. To this Coat Armor I give
the blazon in the former, for the reason before delivered. Concerning bones,
Jesus Syrach recording the fame and virtues of Joshua, Caleb, and Samuel, says,
Let their bones flourish out of their place, and their names by succession
remain in them that are most famous of their children, Eccles. 46. 12. And
though they seem like the withered bones in Ezekiel's vision, yet shall they
revive again by virtue and power of him who died on the Cross, and of whom it
was said, Not a bone of him shall be broken. Thus in brief you see the use of
these parts of support.

CHAP. XII.
IN following the tract which our method first chalked out unto us, we are at
length come to such blazons, as do present to the eyes those sensitive things
which we called the Containing, because they are the mansion, in which not only
the blood and spirits, but also the bones (which we named the parts sustaining)
are enclosed. These are Animals or living Creatures, with their parts and
members. An Animal is any substance consisting both of a body fitted for diverse
functions, and of a soul giving life, sense, and motion.

Animals (says Zanchius) especially such as do produce a living creature, have
a more near resemblance of man, both as touching the parts of their bodies, as
also concerning the faculties of their mind, and subtilty and quickness of wit;
for their bodies also do consist (like as ours do) of flesh, sinews, arteries,
bones, gri^tles and skin, etc. In like sort they have head, neck, breasts,
back, a chine or backbone, thighs, legs and feet: As also hearts, lights,
liver, spleen, guts, and other inward parts as we have: Furthermore, they do
participate with us in our actions, as to eat, drink, sleep, watch and move:
albeit in many other things they are much unlike us.

In the handling of Animals, it might be a scruple, whether the bearing of such
creatures whole should have precedence in their bearing before their parts, and
also in what rank and order the several kinds of creatures are to be marshalled
by us, that thereby the dignity of their bearing may be best conceived; because
the dignity of those things that are born in Coat Armor, being truly known,
and duly considered, does not a little illustrate the worthiness of the bearers
in the displaying of their Ensigns. For taking away these scruples, I hold it
requisite, before I proceed to give Examples, first to set down certain notes
by way of introduction to that which follows, showing how the dignity of
these Animals, hereafter to be handled, is to be accounted of, either in a
relative respect of things of distinct Natures compared one to another, or in a
comparative reference of Animals of the same kind each to other.

This dignity cannot be better understood, than by taking a considerate view of
that Order, which the Author of all Order, and the most wise and powerful
Disposer of all things, did observe, not only in the creation of the Celestial,
but also of the Elementary parts of the World, with their several Ornaments,
wherein be observed a continual progression from things of less perfection, to
things more perfect. For, was there not a Chaos without from and void, before
it came to that admirable beauty, whereof it is said, Lo, it was very good? In
the Celestial, the Sun (the glory thereof) was made after the Firmament, and
the Night was before the Day. In the inferior bodies, the Vegetables, as Trees,
were made before sensitive and living Creatures: And amongst these, the Fishes
(which have neither breath nor voice, and therefore imperfecter) were before
the Fowls, and both of them before terrestrial creatures; and all of all sorts
before man, made after God's Image, for whose service all other things were
made, as he was made for God's Service. Moreover, in the creation of man, the
body was before the soul, which yet is a thing incomparably of more perfection.

By this rude draught of God and Natures admirable method, you may conceive the
natural dignity of those creatures, as often as they shall occur in Armory. But
as Art has not always the same end which nature has (because the one
intends the being, the other the knowing of things:) so is not the method of
both always alike in attaining their ends; for Natures process is a simplicibus
ad composita, from the single parts to the whole, whereas Art descends from
the compounds to the simples: in imitation whereof, we shall in this our
progress follow this course, that first every whole bearing of any Animal shall
precede, and then such parts and members thereof as usually are born; for so
every one that first has seen the whole, will discern the parts the better;
whereas he that sees a part (having never seen the whole) knows not whereof
it is a part. And in Coat Armor the whole bearing of Animals is most worthy,
yet is not the bearing of parts to be misliked; but if we consider both the one
and the other respectively, then does the whole bearing far surmount the parts
in honor and dignity.

Neither must we here precisely esteem the worth of every bearing by this order
of Nature, because Art does sometimes stamp a peculiar note of dignity, for
some particular respect, as for some especial use, quality, or action in the
things. And this dignity or nobility may have a twofold relation; the one,
betwixt Animals of diverse kinds, as a Lion and a Spaniel, a Woolf and a Lamb;
the other, betwixt things of one kind, as whelps of one litter, whereof yet one
may be nobler than the other, as the one will run to the Chase, the other to
the Pottage Pot. And forasmuch as the living things beforementioned, as well
vegetable as sensitive, have their peculiar virtues worthy imitation, as also
their particular vices to be eschewed, and that it is a chief glory to
Gentlemen of Coat-Armonr, to have their virtues displaied under the types and
forms of such things as they bear, it is to be wished that each one of them
would considerately examine the commendable properties of such significant
tokens as they do bear, and do his best to manifestto the world, that he has
the like in himself: for it is rather a dishonor than a praise for a man to
bear a Lion on his shield, if he bear a Sheep in his heart, or a Goofe in his
brain; being therein like those Ships, which bear the names of Dreadnought,
Victory, and the like, though sometimes it speed with them contrary to their
Titles. A true generous mind will endeavor that for his self-vertues, he may
be esteemed, and not insist only upon the fame and merits of his Progenitors,
the praise whereof is due to them, and not to him.

Nam genus, and proavos, and quae non fecimus ipsi,
Vix ea nostra voco, --
Ovid. Met. lib. 13. Verse 140. Great birth, and blood, and Ancestors high
worth,
Call them not thine, but what thy self bringst forth.
And now we will proceed to some particular precepts, concerning things
sensitive born in Coat Armor. Wherein first observe, that all sorts of Animals
born in Arms or Ensigns, must in blazoning be interpreted in the best sense,
that is, according to their most generous and noble qualities, and so to the
greatest honor of their bearers. For example; the Fox is full of wit, and
withal given wholly to ^i^ching for his prey; if then this be the charge of an
Escocheon, we must conceive the quality represented, to be his wit and cunning,
but not his pilfering and stealing, and so of all other. All Beasts of savage
and fierce nature, must be figured and set forth in their most noble and fierce
action; as a Lion erected bolt upright, his mouth wide open, his claws extended
(as if he were prepared to rent and tear;) for with his teeth and claws he does
exercise his fierceness; in this form he is said to possess his vigor and
courage; and being thus formed, he is said to be rampant. Action does the
Prophet David approve to be proper to a Lion, Psalm. 22. where describing the
cruelty of the wicked toward him, he says, They raged upon me with their
mouths, as it were a ramping and roaring Lion. A Leopard or Wolf must be
pourtraied going (as it were) Pedetentim, step by step; which form of action
(says Chassanaeus) fitteth their natural disposition, and is termed Passant:
All sorts of placable or gentle nature, must be set forth according to the most
noble and kindly action of every of them, as a Horse running or vaulting, a
Greyhound coursing, a Deer tripping, a Lamb going with a smooth and easy pace,
etc.

And concerning the true placing of Animals of whatsoever kinds in Armory
according to Order, Art, and the Property of their nature; the use of the
thing, whereupon they are to be placed or depicted, must be first considered
of, and so must they be placed accordingly, whether they be born bolt upright,
passant, or tripping, or howsoever.

As if they be to be placed in Banners, they must be so placed, as that it be
agreeable to the natural quality of the thing that is born, Ars enim imitatur
naturam in quantum potest: therefore since it is proper for a Banner to be
carried upon a staff, according to the use thereof the staff does proceed, and
the Banner comes after; therefore ought the face to look toward the staff,
that is, directly forwards. So is it likewise in every other thing, whose parts
are distinguished per Ante and Post; in such the forepart of the thing born
shall be placed toward the staff, otherwise it would seem retrograde or going
backwards, which were monstrous to behold.

If a man do bear only the head of some Animal (then most commonly) the
forepart thereof cannot aptly regard the staff, but is born sideways chiefly
being full faced, whether it be the head of Ram, Bull, etc.

As touching the orderly placing of the feet of Animals, this is a general
Rule, That the right foot must be placed foremost, Quia dextra pars est
principium motus. And withal, it is the most noble part in regard it is the
stronger and more active, and therefore thus to describe them, is to set them
forth in their commendablest fashion; for Dispositio laudatissima animalis est,
ut in omnibus dispositionibus suis sit secundum cursum naturae; that is the
best disposition of every creature, which is most agreeable to nature.

But here you must observe, That in a Banner, that which is made for the one
side, will seem to be the left foot on the contrary side, but that chances by
accident: and therefore the side next to him that bears the Banner must be
chiefly respected, that the same be formed right in regard of him; like as it
is in writing, that side next to the writer is according to order; whereas if
we turn the paper, all falls out after a preposterous fashion: Therefore we
must chiefly respect the side next the bearer, let the rest fall out as it
shall.

Arms are sometimes depicted or embroidered upon the Garments of men, and
chiefly upon the uppermost vesture of Military persons, especially Emperors,
Kings, and their Generals, and other Commanders in Military Services, used to
cast over their Armours a kind of short habit, as a Jacket, Mandylian, or such
like, whereupon their Arms were richly beautified and curiously wrought; to the
end, that in time of service, their Soldiers, who could not be directed by the
ear (by reason of the far distance that was oftentimes upon occasion between
them and their Commander) they might by their eye (...) instructed according to
the necessity of the present service, and might by ocular observation of their
Commander (being so eminently clad) know and discern their fit times and
opportunities of marching, making a stand, assailing, retiring, and other their
like duties, whereupon this kind of short garment was called a Coat Armor,
because it was worn aloft upon their Armor. And it was called Paludamentum,
quia ex eo gestans t^le vestimentum palam fiebat omnibus. Such was the
Coat Armor of Alexander that he left in Elymais in the Country of Persia,
whereof mention is made, where it is said, Now when King Antio^hus traveled
through the high Countries, he heard that Elymais, in the Country of Persia,
was a City greatly renowned for riches, silver, and gold. And that there was in
it a very rich Temple, wherein were coverings of Gold, Coat-Armours and
Harness, which Alexander, King of Macedonia, the son of Philip that reigned
first in Grecia, had left there.

For proof that Emperors used to wear Coat-Armours, it shall be to good purpose
to produce the verbal testimony of Bayfius, speaking in these words, Fertur eo
die Crassum non purpureo, ut Romanorum Imperatorum mos erat, paludamento ad
Milites processisse, sed pallio nigro.

And further the same Author says, Paludamentum vero fuisse Imperatorum,
plantem fit ex Tranquillo in Caesare, qui Alexandriae cterca oppugnationem
pontis, eruptione hostium subita compulsus in scapham, pluribus eodem
praecipitantibus cum desiliisset in mare, n^ndo per ducentos passus evasit ad
proximant navem ^lata laeva, ne libelli, quos tenebat, madefierent,
paludamentum mordicus trahens, ne spolio potiretur hostis.

Of all creatures apt to generation and corruption, Animals are most worthy.
All Beasts have a natural and greedy desire for the supply of their wants,
insomuch as for the attaining thereof, they do roar, bellow, bray, and cry out
exceedingly.

All beasts of savage and harmful kind, are naturally armed with some thing
wherewith they may hurt a man, for which they are reckoned dangerous, and to be
shunned: As the Boar with tusks, the Lion with tallons, the Stagg with horns,
the Serpent with poison, etc.

Notwithstanding that the bearing of things properly (whether vegetable or
sensitive) is specially commended, yet must not such peculiar^ commendation be
extended to derogate from the dignity of other bearings, as if they were of no
esteem, in regard they be not born properly; for there are as good and
honorable intendments in these as in them, data paritate gestantium, if they
be as ancient as the former, and their bearers of equal estate and dignity;
which is not the least respect that must be holden in the esteem of
Coat Armor, Quia arma nobilitatem sumunt a persona gestantis, Arms are
honored by the bearers. And sometimes the variation from the property may be
of purpose to prevent some other quality, which may be no lesser honorable
than the proper. Besides, it is one thing to bear a living creature in color
or in action diverse from nature; and another, to bear him repugnant or
contrary to nature; for the former may be born commendably, but this latter
sort of bearing is holden disgraceful, or rather is condemned for false Arms,
and therefore not worthy of bearing. In the blazoning of things born in their
natural color, whether the same be Celestial, except the Sun, Moon, and Stars;
or Sublunar, it suffices to say, He bears this Comet, Meteor, Beast, Bird,
Fish, Fowl, Plant, Tree, Herb, Flower, etc. Proper, without naming of any
color; for by Proper is evermore understood his natural colors; and for the
Sun and Stars, when they be of the color of the metal Or, which is their
natural color, it suffices to say, a Sun, or Star, without adding the word
Proper, or Or. And so it is of the Moon, when she is Argent, which in Heraldry
is holden her proper color.

As touching the dignity of things born in Coat Armor, I have already showed
how the same is to be reckoned in the order of Nature; but if it be considered
according to vulgar estimation, then we must hold this for an observation that
seldom fails, That ^ith every particular Empire, Kingdom, and Nation have
their distinct Ensigns of their Sovereign Jurisdiction, look what Beast, Bird,
Fish, Fowl, Serpent, etc. he that swayeth the Sovereignty does bear for his
Royal Ensign in each particular Nation, the same is accounted there to be of
greatest dignity. So is the bearing of the Lion chiefly esteemed with us in
England, because he is born by his Majesty, for the Royal Ensign of his
Highness's Imperial Sovereignty over us: so is the bearing of the Eagle
esteemed among the Germans: and in like sort the Flowers de lis amongst the
Frenchmen. Four-footed Beasts, whether they be born Proper, or Discolored
(that is to say, varying from their natural color) are to be esteemed more
worthy of bearing in Coat Armor than either Fishes or Fowls are, in regard
they do contain in them more worthy and commendable significations of Nobility.
Amongst things Sensitive, the Males are of more worthy bearing than the
Females. Some men perhaps will tax me of inconsideration, in not treading the
usual steps of Armorists in the handling of these sensible Creatures, for that
I do not prefer the Lion (in respect of his Regal Sovereignty) before all other
Terrestrials. For clearing of my self in this point, I must plead, that the
project of my prescript method has tied me to another form, and does enforce
me to prefer other Beasts in place, before those which otherwise are preferred
in dignity. And albeit I cannot say there was any priority of time in the
creation of Beasts, because God spoke the word and it was done, he commanded
and they were created; nevertheless in regard of discipline, there is a
priority to be observed, wherein those things that do promise us a more easy
access to the distinct knowledge and understanding of the succeeding documents,
ought to have the precedence.

The Order that I prefix to my self in treating of these Beasts, shall concur
with the Table of this present Section; as first, to set down Animals of all
sorts living upon the Earth: Secondly, such as live above the Earth, as Fowls:
Thirdly, Watery Creatures: and lastly, Man. And because of the first sort some
are gressible, having feet, and some creeping or gliding, as Serpents, we will
begin with the gressible; and first with such Beasts as have their feet solid
or undivided, or (as I may term them) Inarticulate, that is to say, without
toes; then will I proceed to such as have their feet cleft in two; and lastly
to Beasts that have their feet divided into many.

CHAP. XIII.
HAving delivered diverse Rules and Observations concerning living things, and
their parts in genere, I will now annex such Examples as may demonstrate these
several sorts of bearing; forasmuch as demonstrations give life and light to
ambiguous and doubtful precepts, as Aristotle Ethic. 7. notes, saying,
Demonstrationes sunt perfectiores and nobiliores, quando inducuntur post
orationes dubitabiles; Demonstrations are ever best after doubtful passages. Of
these briefly, as in the next Escocheon. The Invention of Arms, wherein Beasts,
or their parts, are born, are borrowed (says Sir John Fern) from the Huns,
Hungarians, Scythians, and Saxons, cruel and most fierce Nations, who therefore
delighted in the bearing of Beasts of like nature in their Arms; as Lions,
Bears, Wolves, Hyenes, and such like; which fashion likewise came into these
our Countries when those barbarous people overran with Conquest the West part
of Europe. Now to the end that the Rules and Observations formerly set down may
receive both life and warrant by Presidents, I will now exemplify them in
their Order: And first of whole-footed Beasts with their Members.

He bears Gules, an Elephant passant, Argent, tusked, Or, by the Name of
Elphinston. Concerning these Arms that are formed of Beasts, it is to be
observed, That generally those are reputed more Noble which do consist of whole
Beasts, than are those that are formed of their parts; yet sometimes the parts
may be given for some such special services, as may be no less honorable than
the whole bearing. The Elephant is a Beast of great strength, but greater wit,
and greatest ambition; insomuch that some have written of them, that if you
praise them, they will kill themselves with labor; and if you commend another
above them, they will break their hearts with emulation. The Beast is so proud
of his strength, that he never bows himself to any (neither indeed can he;) and
when he is once down (as it usually is with proud great ones) he cannot rise up
again. It was the manner of such as used the force of Elephants (in set
Battles) to provoke them to fight by laying before them things of Scarlet or
Crimson color, to make them more furious; as we may see 1 Mac. 6. 34. And to
provoke the Elephants for to fight, they showed them the blood of Grapes and
Mulberries. Furthermore, they were placed in the strength and heart of the
battle, as in the same Chapter appears; where it is said, And they set the
Beasts according to their ranges, so that by every Elephant there stood a
thousand men armed with Coats of Mail, and Helmets of Brass upon their Heads;
and unto every Beast were ordained five hundred Horsemen of the best, Verse 35.
Which were ready at all times wheresoever the Beast was; and whithersoever the
Beast went, they went also, and departed not from him, Verse 36. The highness
and incomparable strength of this Beast may be conceived by this, That be bare
thirty two fighting men in strong Towers of Wood fastened upon his back; as we
may see expressly set down in the same Chapter in these words; And upon them
were strong Towers of Wood that covered every Beast, which were fastened thereon
with Instruments: and upon every one were thirty two men that fought in them,
and the Indian that ruled him, Verse 37.

He bears parted per Cheveron, Sable and Argent, three Elephants heads
erased, counterchanged, by the Name of Saunders, a Family of good account in
Northamptonshire; amongst whom is William Saunders of Briaeworth, Esquire William
Saunders of Welford, Esquire and Ambrose Saunders of Sibertoft, Esquire And is also
born by Thomas Saunders of Hadnam in Buckinghamshire, Esquire.

He bears Or, a Fess, Gules, between three Elephants heads erased, Sable, by
the Name of Fountain, and was the Coat Armor of that eminent Lawyer John
Fountain, Esquire Sergeant at Law, who left Issue John Fountain of Melton super
Montem in the West Riding of Yorkshire, Esquire

He bears Sable, on a Fess between three Elephants heads erased, Argent, as
many Mullets of the first, by the Name of Pratte. When any part is thus born
with liggs, like pieces of the flesh or skin, depending, it is termed Erasing,
of the Latin word erado, to scrape or rent off; or of the French, Arrasher, of
the same signification. This being the first place of such bearing, I thought
good here to observe that this Erasing and Couping are the two common accidents
of parts born. Couping is when a part is cut off smooth, as in this next
Example.

The Field is Purpure, the Proboscide, Trunk or Snout of an Elephant in Pale,
couped, flexed, and reflexed, after the form of a Roman S, Or. Bara, page 147.
sets down this for the Coat of Cyneus King of Scythia, where also he notes,
That Idomenes King of Thessaly, the Son of Deucalion, did bear Gules, a
Proboscide of an Elephant after this manner, Argent. The Elephant has great
strength in this part, and uses it for his hand, and all other uses of
agility, wherein Nature has recompensed the unaptness of his legs, which other
Beasts do use to such services. The Roman Histories do relate of an Elephant of
an huge greatness, carried in a show about Rome, which (as it passed by) a
little boy pried in his Proboscis; therewith being enraged, he cast up the
child a great height, but received him again on his Snout, and laid him down
gently, without any hurt, as if the Beast had considered, that for a childish
fault; a childish fright were revenge enough.

He bears Argent, a Fess, between 3 Colts in full speed, Sable, by the Name
of Colt, and is the bearing of William Dutton Colt, Esquire Son of George Colt of
Colt-hall in Suffolk, Esquire by Elizabeth, Daughter and Coheir of John Dutton of
Sherborn in Glocestershire, Esquire.

He bears Sable, a Fess, between three Horses passant, Argent, by the name of
Stamp. A Horse erected bolt upright, may be termed enraged, but his noblest
action is expressed in a Saliant form. This of all Beasts for man's uses, is
most noble and behoofful, either in Peace or War. And since his service and
courage in the field is so eminent, it may be marvelled, why the Lion should be
esteemed a more honorable bearing: But the reason is, because the Horses
service and strength is principally by help of his Rider; whereas the Lions is
his own: And if the Horse be not mounted, he fights averse, turning his heels
to his Adversary; but the Lion encounters affront, which is more manly. It is
observed of the Horse (as also of other whole-footed Beasts) that their Legs
are at the first as long as ever they will be: and therefore young Foals
scratch their ears with their hinder foot, which after they cannot do, because
their Legs do grow only in bigness, but not in length, Plin. lib. 11. cap. 48.

The Horse is a Beast naturally stubborn, fierce, haughty, proud and insolent;
and of all Beasts there is none that vaunteth more after victory obtained, or
dejected if he be vanquished; none more prone in battle, or desirous of revenge.

Azure, a Pegasus with the wings expanded, Argent. This is the Coat belonging
to the Honorable Society of the Inner Temple, being one of the four Inns of
Court.

He bears Gules, a Horse-head couped, Argent, by the Name of Marshe. The
neighing of the Horse is a token of his great courage, as appears Job 29.
Have thou given the Horse strength, or covered his neck with neighing? whose
fierceness also he singularly describes thus; He swalloweth the ground for
fierceness and rage, and he believes not that it is the noise of the Trumpet.
He says among the Trumpets, Ha, ha; he smells the battle afar off, and the
noise of the Captains and shoutings.

He bears Ermyn, on a Canton, Sable, a Horse-head couped, Argent, with a Bitt
and Rains, Gules, by the Name of Brixton. The undauntable courage of the Horse
Job in the forecited Chapter does pourtay most lively, saying, Have thou made
him afraid as the Grasshopper? his strong neighing is fearful. He diggeth the
valley, and rejoices in his strength, and goes forth to meet the harnessed
man. He mocketh at fear, and is not afraid, and turns not back from the
sword. Though the quiver rattle against him, the glittering Spear and the
Shield. To govern him, no less needful is the Bitt and Reins sometimes to hold
him in, than is the Spur to put him forward: And therefore David likens an
unruly man to a horse, which thou must keep in with bitt and bridle, lest he
fall upon thee.

He bears Azure, a Fess between three Horses heads couped, Argent, by the
Name of Skeleton, and is the Paternal Coat Armor of Bevil Skeleton Esquire eldest
son of Sir Io. Skeleton, late Lieutenant Governor of Plymouth, who was Page of
Honor to his Majesty in his Exile, and now one of the Grooms of his
Bedchamber, and Captain of a Company in his Foot Guards.

He bears Gules, a Horses head couped, between three Crosses Botony fitchee,
Argent, by the Name of Marshe, and is the Coat Armor of Sir Thomas Marshe of
Darks in the Parish of South-Mims in Middlesex, Knight.

He bears Argent, a Fess, between three Asses Passant, Sable, by the Name of
Askewe. The Ass is the lively Emblem of Patience, whom therefore our blessed
Savior (being Patience and Humility it self) honored with his own riding;
which has made some to fancy ever since that time, that the black line on the
ridge of all Asses backs, thwarted with the like over both the shoulders, is
stamped on them as the mark of his Cross, whereon he was to show his Patience by
suffering for us.

He bears Argent, an Asses head erased, Sable, by the Name of Hokenhull; and
is born by Richard Hokenhull of Penton in Cheshire, Esquire; as also by Henry
Hokenhull of Tranmore, and John Hokenhull of Hokenhull, both of the said
County, Gentlemen. In the second of the Kings we read that Benhadad, King of
Aram, did beset the City of Samaria with his Host, and laid so strait siege
thereunto, as that an Asses head (which as it seems was reckoned amongst
things of least esteem) was valued at fourscore pieces of Silver; which perhaps
gave occasion to the old Proverb, Asini caput ne laves Nitro, Wash not an
Asses-head with Niter; which is a matter white, like Salt, and full of holes as
a Sponge; whereby we are admonished not to be bestow our time, charge, and
travel in matters of small moment; and not (as we say in our English Proverb)
make more ado about the broth than the meat is worth.

He bears Gules, a Mule passant, Argent, by the Name of Moile. The generation
of Mules seems to be the invention of Anah the son of Zibeon: For it is said,
Genesis 36. This was Anah that found Mules in the wilderness, as he fed his Father
Zibeon 's Asses: who not contented with those kinds of beasts which God had
created, found out the monstrous generation of Mules, between an Ass and a
Mare. A Mule depicted passant has his chiefest grace.

CHAP. XIV.
AFter beasts whole-footed, succeed those who are cloven-footed, whether into
two parts or more. And first for those which have their feet divided into two
parts only, they are for the most part armed with horns, as the following
Examples shall illustrate. And by the way this must be noted, That these horned
beasts, besides that their Members^ are born couped and erased (like other
beasts) have also their heads born trunked; which of some Armorists are
blazoned Cabosed, of the word Caho, which in the Spanish Language does signify
a head; which form of blazon gives us to understand, that it is the head of
some such beast, born sole, and of it self, having no part of the neck thereto
adherent; an accident that seldom befalls beasts of other kinds, which most
usually are born with the neck conjoined; which form or bearing you shall
hereafter see in due place.

He bears Argent, on a bend, Sable, 3 Calves, Or, by the Name of Veal. If
these Calves live to wear horns, which differ either in metal or in color from
the rest of the body, then must there be special mention of such difference in
blazoning, as you shall see in the next Example. Pliny says, That Nature
seemed to sport her self in making such variety of horns of beasts, as so many
several kinds of weapons, wherewith they come armed into the field: for in some
she has made knagged and branched, as in the Red and Fallow Deer; in other
plain and uniform without Tines, as in Spitters, a kind of Stags which
thereupon are called in Latin Subulones, and that their horns are like to the
blade of a Shoemakers Awl; but of all other, the horns of the Bull may most
properly be called his Arms, they being of so piercing and violent a stroke, as
hardly can be resisted.

He bears Ermyn, a Bull passant, Gules, armed and unguled, Or, by the Name of
Bevill. The Bull is the ringleader amongst other beasts, and through hope of
his increase of breed, he is privileged to range in ^ll pastures with free
ingress and egress. The Bull being gelt changes both his nature and name, and
is called an Ox.

The bearing of a Bull, or the head thereof, is a note of valor or
magnanimity; where contrariwise the bearing of an Ox, or the head thereof,
denotes faintness of courage, as Vpton notes, That their first bearers were
either gelt persons, or such as had some notable defect in the generative
parts, as that thereby they became altogether unfit for procreation.

He bears Argent, a Bull's head erased, Sable, by the Name of Carselack. The
Bull's head may signify a man enraged with desire of Revenge, whom nothing can
satisfy but the utter spoil and ruin of his Adversary.

The field is Luna, a Cheveron, Mars, between three Bull's heads couped,
Saturn, armed, Sol. This Coat Armor pertained to the Right Noble Family of
Thomas Bulleine Lord Hoo and Hastings, Viscount Rochford, who was created Earl
of Wiltshire, and of Ormond, by the renowned King of famous memory, Henry the
Eighth, who married the virtuous and beauteous Lady Anne, daughter of the same
Earl, and Mother to the most glorious Queen Elizabeth; the memory of whose
long, most prosperous and flourishing Government, be blessed and eternized to
all future Posterities.

He bears Gules, a Cheveron between 3 Bulls heads trunked or cabosed, Argent,
armed Or, by the Name of Baynham. Bara, a good French Armorist, uses neither
of these words at all, but blazoneth it a Bull's head only; because any head
thus born is understood to be so cut off, as no part of the neck be appendant
to the same.

He bears Sable, a Cheveron, Ermyn, between 3 Bulls heads cabosed, Argent, by
the Name of Sanders of Charltwood and Ewell in Surrey, of Ireton in Derbyshire,
of Barton in Staffordshire, and of the City of London; which Family dwelt at
Sandersted from or before the Conquest, till Richard de Sandersted, son of Sir
Leonard de Sandersted, sold it to Robert de Pirle, the eighteenth of Henry the
Third, whose son Ralph Sanders married Daughter and Coheir of Sir Roger Solomon
of Horley, Knight. who dwelt at Charltwood, where his Posterity have continued ever
since, till Edmond Sanders, Esquire dying without Issue, about the year 1660.
Charltwood was sold by his Sisters. In Henry the Eighth's Reign Tho. Sanders,
son of Richard, was the first of this Family that settled in Derbyshire, of
which Family Sir Tho. Sanders, Remembrancer of the Exchequer in Edward the
Sixth's time, and Dr. Nich. Sanders, who wrote De Schismate Anglicano, etc. and
perished in Ireland, Anno 1580. his Life is in Pit's De Scriptor. Angliae.

He bears Azure, a Bull's head couped, Argent, winged and armed, Or, by the
Name of Host, and is the Coat Armor of Mr. Derick Host of the City of
London, Merchant.

He bears Gules, a Goat passant, Argent, by the Name of Baker. The Goat is
not so hardy as politic; therefore that martial man which uses more policy
than valor in atchieving a Victory, may very aptly bear for his Coat Armor
this beast. And now I will show unto you one Example of the bearing of the head
of this beast erased.

He bears Ermyn, a Goat's head erased, Gules, attired, Or, by the Name of
Gotley. By this blazon you may observe how you ought to term the horns of a
Goat in Armory, when you find they differ in metal or color from the beast, or
that particular part of the beast which is born. The Philosophers write that
the blood of a Goat will mollify the Diamond.

He bears Azure, on a Fess counter-battilee, between 3 Goats passant, Argent,
as many Pellets, by the Name of Man, and is born by Will. Man Esquire Swordbearer
to the Lord Mayor of the City of London.

He bears Gules, a Cheveron, Ermyn, between 3 Goats heads erased, Argent, by
the Name of Marwood, and is the Coat Armor of Henry Marwood of Little Busby in
Yorkshire, Esquire son and heir apparent of Sir George^ Marwood of the said place,
Bar. Which said Henry was high Sheriff of the said County, 1675. is now one of
the Deputy Lieutenants of the North Riding, and one of his Majesty's Justices
of the Peace of the West and North-Ridings of the said County.

He bears Azure, a Fess wavy, between 3 Goats heads erased, Argent, by the
Name of Sedley, and with the Arms of Vlster, is the bearing of Sir Char. Sedley
of Southfleet, and of Sir John Sedley of St. Cleeres in Ightam in the County of
Kent, Baronets.

Snce we are no wcome to treat of beasts of the Forest, I hold it fit to speak
somewhat in my first entry of their Numbers, Names, Qualities, Royalties,
Armings, Footings, Degrees of Age, etc. according as they are termed of skilful
Foresters and Woodmen. And first of their kinds.

Of Beasts of the Forest, some are Beasts of Venery. Chase.


Of Beasts of Venery there are five kinds, viz. the Heart Hind Hare Boar Wolf.
As old Woodmen have anciently termed them.

These have been accounted properly Wild-beasts of the Forest, of Beasts of
Venery. These Beasts are also called Sylvestres, scil. Beasts of the Wood or
Forest, because they do haunt the Woods more than the Plains.

Proper Names, Seasons, Degrees, and Ages of Beasts of the Forest and of Chase.
Wherefore you shall understand that the First year you shall call them Hind or
Calf. Second Brocket. Third Spayade. Fourth Staggard. Fifth Stag. Sixth Heart.

But here by the way we must observe that some ancient Writers do report, That
in times past Foresters were wont to call him a Stag at the fourth year, and
not a Staggard, as we do now; and at the fifth year they called him a Great
Stag: And so they were wont to distinguish his several Ages by these words,
Stag and great Stag.

The knowledge of the Ordure or Excrements of every Beast of Venery and Chase
is necessary to be observed; because their Ordures are a principal note,
whereby good Foresters and Woodmen do know and observe the place of their haunt
and feeding, and also their estate: And therefore it is a thing highly to be
observed, for that a Forester or Woodman, in making his reports, shall be
constrained to rehearse the same. The Ordure of a Heart Hare Boar Fox and all
Vermin
is termed Fumets or fimashing of all Deer. Crottelles or crotising Lesses
Fiantes.

Terms of footing or treading of all Beasts of Venery and Chase. That of a
Heart Buck and all Fallow Deer Boar
is termed SLot. View. Tract or Treading.


That of an Hare is termed according to her several Courses: for when she
keeps in plain fields, and chaseth about to deceive the Hounds, it is said
she Double^h; but when she beats the plain highway, where you may yet
perceive her footing, it is said she Pricketh. Terms of the Tail.
That of a Heart Buck, Roe, or any other Deer Boar Fox Wolf Hare and Coney.
is termed his Tail. Single. Wreath. Bush, or holy water sprinkle. Stern. Scut.


The fat of all sorts of Deer is called Suet. Also it may be very well said,
This Deer was a high Deer's Grease.

The fat of a Roe Boar and Hare
is termed Bevy Grease Grease.


You shall say that a Heart Harbors Buck Lodges. Roe Beddeth. Hare Seateh or
Forms. Coney Sits. Fox Kenneleth.


You shall say a Deer Hare Fox
is Broken. Cased.Uncased.


You shall say Dislodge Start Unkennel Rowse Bowlt
the Buck. Hare. Fox. Heart. Coney.


You shall say a Heart or Buck Roe Boar Hare or Coney Fox Wolf
goes to his the
Rut. Tourn. Brym. Buck. Clicketting. Match, or to his Make.


Terms excogitated and used by Foresters.

Tou shall say a Heart Belloweth. Buck Groaneth. Roe Belleth. Hare and Coney
Beats or Tappeth. Fox Barketh. Wolf Howleth.


You shall say a Litter of Cubs. Nest of Rabbets.


Skilful Foresters and good Woodmen Do use to say, a Herd Of Hearts Herd All
manner of Deer. Bevy Roes. Sounder Swine. Rowt Wolyes. Riches Marternes. Brace
or Lease Bucks. Brace or Lease Foxes. Brace or Lease Hares. Couple Rabbets or
Conies.

These are apt terms of Hunting, pertaining both to Beasts of Venery and of
Chase.

Whereas some men are of opinion, that a Stag, of what age soever he be, shall
not be called a Heart until the King or Queen have hunted him; that is not so:
For after the fifth year of his age, you shall no more call him a Stag, but a
Heart. So then at six years old he is called a Heart. Now if the King or Queen do
hunt or chase him, and he escape away alive, then after such hunting or
chasing, he is called a Heart Royal.

Note, That if this Heart be by the King or Queen so hunted or chased, that he
be forced out of the Forest so far, that it is unlike that he will of himself
return thitherto again, and then the King or Queen gives him over, either for
that he is weary, or because he cannot recover him; for that such a Heart has
showed the King pastime for his delight, and is also (as Budeus notes) Eximius
Cervus, a goodly Heart; and for that the King would have him return to the
Forest again, he causes open Proclamation to be made in all Towns and Villages
near to the place where the same Heart so remains, That no manner of person or
persons shall kill, hurt, hunt or chase him, but that he may safely return to
the Forest again from whence he came. And then ever after such a Heart is called
a Heart Royal proclaimed.

So that there are three sorts of Hearts, viz. Heart. Heart Royal. and Heart Royal
proclaimed.


A Hind has these Degrees.

First Second Third
Year is called a Calf. Brockets sister. Hind.


Good Foresters have observed, that when a Heart has past his sixth year, he is
generally to be called a Heart of Ten; and afterward according to the
increase of this Head:

Whether he be Crochod, Palmed, or Crowned.


When he breaks Herd, and draws to the Thickets or Coverts, the Foresters
or Woodmen do say, He takes his hold.

Forasmuch as it may oftentimes fall out, as well in Coat-Armours as in Badges,
that the Attires of Deer, both Red and Fallow, may be born bendy, barry, or
otherwise counter-coloured; I have thought it fit, for the more apt blazon of
them, to annex such propriety of terms, as the skilfullest Foresters or
Woodmen do attribute unto their several kinds, so there may be a fit
correspondence of Artificial terms, as well Woodman-like as Armorial; adding
withal their forms and shapes of their several Attires, for the better and
readier conceiving of their particular parts, and fit application of each
particular term to his proper part, by the help of the Alphabetical Letters
that I have for that purpose annexed to each part.

Skillful Woodmen, describing the Head of a Heart, do call the a Round Roll next
the Head The Burr. b Main Horn Beam. c Lowest Antlier Browantliers. d Next
above thereunto Bezantliers. e Next above that Royal. f Upper part of all
Surroyal top.

And in a Buck's head they say, c Burr. b Beam. d Branch. e Advancers. a
Palm. Spellers.


And though every Gentleman is not an Armorist, or a skillful Woodman, yet it
is well-beseeming men of a generous race to have a superficial skill in either
of these professions, forasmuch as they both (especially the former) do well
beseem the dignity of a Gentleman; the one tending to the delight and
recreation of the mind, and the other to the health, solace, and exercise of
the body: that so in their mutual converse they may be able to deliver their
minds in fit terms in either kind, and not in speeches either vulgar or
obsol^te. For which cause I here set down the terms appropriated (by skillful
Foresters and Woodmen) to Beasts of Chase, according to their several Names,
Seasons, Degrees, and Ages, like as I have formerly done of Beasts of Venery,
as in Example.

Of Beasts of Chase the Buck is the first, And is termed the First year a
Fawn. Second Pricket. Third Sorel. Fourth Sore. Fifth Buck of the first head.
Sixth Buck, or great Buck.

Next to the Buck is the Do, being accounted the second Beast of Chase, And is
termed the First year a Fawn. Second Prickets sister. Third Do.

The third Beast of Chase is a Fox, which albeit he be said to be politic, and
of much subtilty, yet is the variety of terms of a Fox very scarce: For in the
First year, he is called a Cub. Second Fox. Afterwarwards an old Fox, or the
like.

The Martern, or Marton (as some old Foresters or Woodmen do term them) being
the fourth Beast of Chase, has these terms. He is called the First year a
Martern Cub. Second Martern.

The fifth and last Beast of Chase is the Roe, whose proper terms, pertaining
to Chase, are these: He is said to be the First year a Kid. Second Girl. Third
Hein use. Fourth Roe-buck of the first head. Fifth Far Roe-buck.

These Beasts of Chase do make their abode all the day time in the Fields, and
upon the Hills and high Mountains, where they may see round about them afar
off, for preventing their danger: For these are more timorous of their own
safety, than dangerous and harmful to men. And in the night time, when men be
at rest, and all things quiet, then do they make their repair to the
Cornfieldsd and Medows for food and relief; for which respect they are called
Campesties, because they do haunt the Field and Champion grounds more than the
Woods, and thick Coverts or Thickets, as we do most usually observe them.

He bears Argent, on a Mount, Proper, a Stag lodged, Gules, by the Name of
Harthill. The Stag is a goodly beast, full of state in his gate and view, and
(amongst Beasts of Chase) reputed the chief for principal game and exercise. It
is observed of him, that finding himself fat, he ever lodges and sculketh in
secret places to avoid chasing, as knowing himself worth following and worth
killing (as was said of the great Stag at Killingworth) but most unfit for
flying.

He bears Sable, a Stag standing at Gaze, Argent, attired and unguled, Or, by
the Name of Jones of Monmouthshire. The Stag which erst you saw lodged, you now
see standing, as listening to the approach of any danger. And Nature having
denied this beast other securities, yet has endued him with two excellent
favors above others; the one, exceeding quickness of hearing, to foreknow his
hazards, and so the sooner to prevent them (for which cause the Stag is amongst
the Emblemes of the five Senses, representing the Hearing;) the other exceeding
speed of foot, to fly from the danger when it approaches.

He bears Argent, a Stag tripping, Proper, attired^ and unguled, Or, by the
Name of Holm. The Heart born in Arms (says Vpton) betokens sometimes one
skilful in Music, or such an one as takes a felicity and delight in harmony:
Also, a man that is wise and politic, and well foreseeth his times and
opportunities; a man unwilling to assail the Enemy rashly, but rather desirous
to stand on his own guard honestly, than to annoy another wrongfully.

Sable, a Buck trippant, and Chief Indented, Or^ This with the Arms of Vlster,
is the Paternal Coat Armor of Sir William Humble of the City of London, and of
Stratford in the Parish of Westham in Essex, Baronet.

He bears Azure, a Stag, Argent, with an Arrow stuck in the back, and
attired, Or, by the Name of Bowen. This is the Coat Armor of George Bowen of
Kittlehill in Glamorganshire, Esquire lineally descended from, and present Heir
unto the ancient Family of the Bowens of Courthouse in the Seignioury of Gower
in the said County.

This Coat, with the difference of a second Brother, is born by John Bowen of
Swansey in the said County, Esquire

He bears Vert, a Stag springing forwards, Or, by the Name of Gilsland. Pliny
says, That horns are so mollified with wax, whilst they are yet growing upon
the heads of the beasts, that they may be made capable of sundry impressions,
and are made divisible into many parts: but Nature needs not this device,
neither can Art form a fashion of more stately decency, than she has done on
the Stag. All horns in a manner be hollow, save that toward the pointed tip
they be solid and massy. Only Deer, both Red and Fallow, have them solid
throughout.

Argent, Fretty Vert, a Stag springing forwards, Sable, attired, Or, by the
Name of Warnet of Sussex.

He bears Azure, a Stag in his full course, Or, pursued hotly by a brace of
Dogs, Argent, all bend-ways and at random, by the Name of Yardeley. Though
horns be assigned to the Stag, Buck, and other like beasts, for weapons both
offensive and defensive; yet do they seldom use them to those ends, being
therein like many Gallants well attired and armed, but it is more for show than
for use, when it comes to proof. So David speaks of of some, who carrying bows
turned their backs; as having arms, but wanting hearts. And it may be, the Heart
has his name (as Mons a movendo) for being heartless: But sure it is, that all
the Armor in the Tower is not enough to arm a Dastard's heart.

He bears Vert, a Fess between three Bucks in full course, Or, by the Name of
Robertson. This kind of Deer is called Cervus Palmatus, for the resemblance
that his horns have with the hand and fingers. This beast reposeth his safety
chiefly in flight, wherein he is very swift in case of pursuit: his color most
commonly sandy, with a black struck along his back; their sides and belly
spotted with white, which spots they lose through age: their Females are more
variable in color, as being sometimes all white.

He bears Vert, on a Cheveron between three Bucks tripping, Or, as many
Cinquesoils, Gules, by the Name of Robinson, and is the Paternal Coat Armor of
Thomas Robinson of the Inner Temple, London, Esquire chief Prothonotary of his
Majesty's Court of Common Pleas; descended from Nicholas Robinson of Boston in
Lincolnshire, Gent. who lived in the time of King Henry the Seventh. Although
this beast, as a Coward, flies with his weapons; yet two times there are when
he dares turn head on his foe: the one is when it is for his life, as when he
is chased out of breath, and his strength so spent that he cannot by flight
escape, Desperatio facit audacem. He is more than a Coward that will not fight
when he sees his case desperate; and therefore it is a general rule in good
policy, never to put them to the utmost exigent and extremity, with whom we
desire to prevail, according to the old English Proverb, Compel a Coward to
fight, and he will kill the Devil: which was the cause that the Romans, landing
in this Kingdom, burnt their own Navy, thereby to enforce the Army to be
resolute, by despairing of any escape of return by Sea again. The other time of
the Stag's courage is for his love, at which time he will fight to the death
with his Rival or Hinderer of his hot desire,

He bears Azure, 3 Bucks tripping, Or, by the Name of Green. The Buck is a
worthy beast, and has a degree and measure of all the properties of the Stag,
but comes far short of his stateliness and boldness (for there are degrees of
courage even amongst Cowards.) And Nature has made his horn rather broad, for
a defensive buckler, than sharp, as the Stags, for the thrust. Their best
quality is, that they are sociable, and love to keep together in Herds, which
is the property of all harmless and peaceable Creatures, which are of comfort
and courage only in company; whereas all beasts and birds of prey are given to
wander solitary, neglecting societies: And that made the Philosopher say, That
a solitary and unsociable man was either a Saint or a Devil.

He bears Or, a Cheveron Nebule, Argent and Azure, between three Bucks in
full course, Vert, by the Name of Swift, and is born by Godwin Swift of
Goodridge in the County of Hereford, Esquire one of the Society of Gray's Inn,
descended from the Swifts of Yorkshire.

He bears Argent, a Fess, Azure, between three Stagstanding at gaze or
guardant, Gules, by the Name of Robertson. Sometimes the Females, both of Red
and Fallow Deer, to wit, Hinds and Does, as well as Stags and Bucks, are born
in Coat Armor; but such bearing is holden less commendable than that of Males,
because Masculinum dignius est Faeminino, as Aristotle witnesses, Topic. 1.
The Male is ever nobler than the Female. To prove that Females are born also, I
have (out of many Examples) selected one of rare bearing, here next following.

He bears Sable, two Hinds countertripping in Fess, Argent, by the Name of
Cottingham. Pliny in his Natural History, Lib 9. writes, That among all sorts
of beasts, the Males are more stomachful, and of greater courage than the
Females, excepting in Panthers and Bears: and that those parts that Nature has
bestowed upon beasts, to serve them (as it were) instead of weapons, as teeth,
horns, stings, and other such like, she has given them especially unto the
Males, as to those that are both better and stronger, and has left the Females
altogether disarmed; whereof Martial writes in this manner, De^te timetur
Aper; defendunt cornua Cervum:
Imbelles Damae, quid nisi praeda sumus?
The Boars Tusks him protect; the Heart trusts to his Horn:
We harmless armless Hinds for prey are left forlorn.


He bears Or, a Fess between three Hinds tripping, Sable, by the Name of
Iekell or Iekyll, being the Coat of Thomas Iekyll of Bocking in Essex, Esquire but
residing at Deptford in Kent. This Coat is also an instance of the alteration
of Escocheons heretofore sometimes made upon Marriages or the like occasions by
License, as appears amongst the Evidences of this Family, and by the Records
thereunto relating in the Office of Arms.

He bears Argent, 3 Stags heads couped, Sable, by the Name of Rigmaiden. Some
Authors are of opinion, That the Attires of Gentlewomens heads were first found
out and devised by occasion of the sight of the horns of this beast, because
they are seemly to behold, and do become the beast right-well; and that Nature
bestowed horns on them, more for Ornament than Assault, appears by this, that
they repose their safety rather in their speedy footmanship, than in the
strength of their heads. The Tines of the Stag's head do increase yearly, until
he has accomplished the full number of seven years, and then decrease again.

The Field is Diamond 3 Stags heads trunked, Or, cabosed, Pearl, attired,
Topaz. This is the Coat Armor of the Right Noble Henry Duke, Marquess, and
Earl of Newcastle, Earl of Ogle, Viscount Mansfield, Baron Ogle, Bertram and
Bolesm^re, one of the Gentlemen of his Majesty's Bedchamber, and Lords of his
most Honorable Privy Council, and Lord Lieutenant of Northumberland, and Town
and County of Newcastle upon Tyne.

This Coat is also born by the Right Honorable William Earl of Devonshire,
Baron Cavendish of Hardwick, and Lord Lieutenant of the County of Derby.

Gules, three Bucks heads cabosed, Argent, is born by the Name of D'oyley, and
is the Coat Armor of Sir William D'oyley of St. Margarets Westminster in
Middlesex, Knight. Son and Heir of Sir William D'oyley of Shotisham in Norfolk,
Knight and Baronet.

Gules, three Stags heads cabosed, Or, attired, Argent, is born by the Name of
Faldo of Bedfordshire. For two respects I have inserted this Coat; the one in
regard that the Attires are of a different metal from the heads, which is not
usual; the other to show that Sir John Fern, in his Book entitled, The Blazon
of Gentry, page 240. sets down for the Armorial Ensigns of this Family, a
Coat of Device, which he supposes to have been invented by some of the
Ancestors thereof: which (as he says) was very ancient, yet no Coat of Arms,
as indeed it is not, but a mere fantastic device; which being so, he had done
much better to have expressed the true Paternal Coat of that Family, as it is
here expressed, rather than the adulterate or counterfiet Coat, which neither
relisheth of true Armory, nor yet of any sharpness of ingenious Device or
Invention.

He bears Gules, 3 Bucks head couped, Or, by the Name of Deering. The bearing
of the head of any living thing, betokens Jurisdiction and Authority to
administer Justice, and to execute Laws: For the greatest esteem of the head in
Coat Armor is in respect of the more noble use thereof; for by it is the whole
body governed and directed, and is called in Latin Caput, Quia capiat omnes
sensus; and he that is a Head should be sure to have all his Senses about him,
as the Head has.

He bears Diamond, a Cheveron between three Bucks heads cabosed, Pearl. This
is the bearing of the Right Honorable Robert Viscount Bulkeley of Cashaw in
Ireland, and residing at Barrow-hill near Bea^maris in the Isle of Anglesey.

He bears Pearl, a Bend engrailed, Sapphire, between 2 Bucks heads cabosed,
Diamond, and is the Paternal Coat Armor of the Right Honorable Thomas Lord
Needham, Viscount Kilmurrey in the Kingdom of Ireland.

He bears Argent, on a Fess Sable, three Stags heads erased, Or, by the the
name of Bradford. Sir John Fern, in Lacie's Nobility, says, That the head of
any Beast born erased, as this is, is one of the best manner of bearings. The
heads of such horned Beasts were wont to be held sacred to Apollo and Diana;
perchance because Diana signified the Moon, which is her self a horned
Creature; and Apollo, for being a good Bowman, deserved the horns for his
reward.

He bears Argent, a Cheveron, between 3 Bucks heads erased, Gules, by the
Name of Collingwood, and is the Coat Armor of Daniel Collingwood of Branton,
Northumberland, Esquire, Major to the Queens Troop of his Majesty's Guard,
Governor of his Majesty's Castle in Holy Island in the Bishopric of Durham,
Deputy Lieutenant of the said County of Northumberland, and a Member of
Parliament for the Town of Barwick upon Tweed.

Azure, a Bucks head cabosed, Argent, is the Paternal Coat Armor of George
Leg Esquire, Governor of Portsmouth, Master of the Horse to his Royal
Highness James Duke of York, Lieutenant of his Majesty's Forest of Alceholt and
Woolmer in Hantshire, and one of the Deputy Lieutenants of the said County,
Commander of his Majesty's Ship the Royal Katherine, and one of the principal
Officers of his Majesty's Ordnance.

Of all the parts or members of Beasts, Birds, or other living things, the
bearing of the head (next to the whole bearing) is reckoned most honorable,
for that it signifies that the owner of such Coat Armor ^eared not to stand
to the face of his Enemy.

Argent, a Bucks head cabosed, Gules, is born by the name of Try.

He bears Sable, a Bucks head cabosed, between two flanches, Or, by the name
of Parker, and is the Coat of Henry Parker of Honington in Warwickshire,
Esquire, as also of Edward Parker of Plimpton St. Mary's in Devonshire,
Esquire. This Coat Armor seems to have some congruity with the name of the
Bearer, it being a name borrowed from the Office, which it is probable the
first Ancestor of this family held, viz. a Park-keeper, which in old English
was called Parker, who by Office has the charge of the Beast whose head is
born in this Escocheon.

He bears Argent, three Rain-Deers heads, trunked or cabosed, Sable, by the
Name of Bowet. If you should have occasion to make mention of the horns of any
sort of Deer, by reason that they be of a different Metal or Color from their
Bodies, you must term them Attired. If upon like occasion you shall speak of
their Claws, you must say they be Unguled, of the Latin word Vngula, which
signifies the Hoof or Claws of a Beast.

He bears Sable, a Cheveron between three Attires of a Stag, fixed to the
Scalp, Argent, by the Name of Cocks. This Coat, with the Arms of Vlster, is
born by Sir Richard Cocks of Dunbleton in Glocestershire, Baronet: And without
the Arms of Vlster, by Sir John Cocks of Northey in Glocestershire, Knight. And by
Thomas Cocks of Castle-ditch in Herefordshire, Esquire. The Stag does mew his
head every year, unless he be castrated or gelt whilst his head is in his
prime: For in such case he never meweth his head, neither does his Beam burr,
or Tynes augment, or diminish any more, but continue still in the same state
wherein they were at the time of his Castration.

Foresters and Hunters do call this yearly mewing of their heads the Beauty of
their Wildness, and not the Mewing of their Horns as the Latinists do term it.

These having mewed their heads, do betake themselves to the thick Brakes and
Coverts to hide them, as well knowing they are disarmed of their natural
weapons; and therefore do never willingly show themselves abroad in the day
time, until the Spring that they begin to bud and burgeon toward their
renovation of force.

Horns do betoken Strength and Fortitude, inasmuch as God has bestowed them
upon Beasts to be unto them Instruments or Weapons, as well offensive as
defensive; as we may probably gather by that which is spoken by the Prophet
David, Psalm. 75. 12. All the horns of the ungodly will I break, but the horns
of the righteous shall be exalted.

This Field is Sol, three Attires of a Stag, ^orn Paly, Barry, Saturn. This
Coat Armor pertains to the Renowned Family of the most High, Puissant, and
Noble Prince Frederick, late Duke of Wirtemberge, and of Tec, Count of
Mountbeliard, Lord of Heydenheib, etc. and Knight of the most Noble Order of
the Garter. The Stags, having cast their horns, do skulk in secret and desolate
places, because they find themselves disarmed and destitute of their former
strength, which makes them more careful of their safety, as Aelia^^s notes.

He bears Argent, an Unicorn Seiant, Sable, Armed and Unguled, Or, by the
Name of Harling. The Unicorn has his name of his one horn on his forehead.
There is another Beast of a huge strength and greatness, which has but one
horn, but that is growing on his Snout, whence he is called Rinoceros, and both
are named Monoceros, or One-horned. It has been much questioned amongst
Naturalists, which it is that is properly called the Unicorn: and some have
made doubt whether there be any such Beast as this, or no. But the great esteem
of his horn (in many places to be seen) may take away that needless scruple.

He bears Gules, an Unicorn tripping, Argent, Armed and Unguled, Or, by the
Name of Musterton. Touching the invincible Nature of this Beast, Job says,
Will thou trust him because his strength is great, and cast thy labor unto
him? Will thou believe him, that he will bring home thy seed, and gather it
into thy Barn? And his Virtue is no less famoused than his Strength, in that
his horn is supposed to be the most powerful Antidote against Poison: Insomuch
as the general conceit is, That the wild Beasts of the Wilderness use not to
drink of the Pools, for fear of venomous Serpents there breeding, before the
Unicorn has s^irred it with his horn. Howsoever it be, this Charge may very
well be a representation both of strength or courage, and also of virtuous
dispositions and ability to do good; for to have strength of body without the
gifts and good qualities of the mind, is but the property of an Ox, but where
both concur, that may truly be called manliness. And that these two should
consort together, the Ancients did signify, when they made this one word,
Virtus, to imply both the strength of body, and virtue of the mind.

He bears Sable, three Unicorns in Pale, current, Argent, Armed, Or, by the
Name of Farrington. It seems by a question moved by Farnesius, That the
Unicorn is never taken alive; and the reason being demanded, it is answered,
That the greatness of his mind is such, that he chooses rather to die than to
be taken alive: wherein (says he) the Unicorn and the valiant minded Soldier
are alike, which both contemn death, and rather than they will be compelled to
undergo any base servitude or bondage, they will lose their lives.

He bears Gules, 3 Unicors heads, couped, Argent, by the Name of Shelly. The
Unicorn is an untamable Beast by nature, as may be gathered by the words of
Job, chap. 39. Will the Unicorn serve thee, or will he tarry by thy crib? Can
thou bind the Unicorn with his band to labor in the furrow, or will he plough
the valleys after thee?

He bears Argent, a Cheveron, Ermyns, between three Unicorns heads couped,
Sable, by the Name of Head, and is the Coat Armor of Sir Richard Head of the
City of Rochester in Kent, Baronet.

He bears Sable, a Camel passant, Argent, by the Name of Camel. This
Coat Armor stands in Bury-Pomeroy Church in the County of Devon. This Beast
far surpasses the Horse in swiftness in travel, to whom he is a hateful Enemy.
After all these cloven footed Beasts, I will add one more, no way inferior in
stomach and absolute resolution to any of the former.

He bears Argent, a Boar passant, Gules, Armed, Or, by the Name of
Trewarthen. The Boar, though he wants horns, is no way defective in his
Armor; nay he is beyond those formerly exemplified, and is counted the most
absolute Champion amongst Beasts, for that he has both weapons to wound his
foe, which are his strong and sharp Tusks, and also his Target to defend
himself; for which he uses often to rub his shoulders and sides against Trees,
thereby to harden them against the stroke of his Adversary: And the shield of a
Boar well managed, is a good buckler against that cruel Enemy called Hunger.

He bears Argent, 3 Boars heads couped, Sable, Armed, Or, by the Name of
Cradock. The Boar is so cruel and stomackful in his fight, that he foameth all
the while for rage; and against the time of any encounter he often whetteth his
Tusks to make them the more piercing. The Boar has been much honored by being
the Crest of an Earl, which seems to be given to the House of Vere, because
Verres is the Name of a Boar in Latin.

He bears Gules, a Cheveron between three Boars heads couped, Argent, Armed,
Or, by the Name of White, and is thus born by Sir Stephen White Knight. formerly of
the City of London, and now of the Parish of Hackney in Middlesex, descended
from a Family of good Antiquity in Norfolk.

The bearing of the Boar in Arms betokens a man of a bold spirit, skilful,
politic in Warlike feats, and one of that high resolution, that he will rather
die valorously in the field, than he will secure himself by ignominious flight.
He is called in Latin Aper (according to Farnesius) ab asperitate, because he
is so sharp and fierce in conflict with his foe. And this is a special property
in a Soldier, that he be fierce in the encountering his Enemy, and he bear the
shock or brunt of the conflict with a noble and magnanimous Courage; Miles ^nim
dura and aspera perfringit animi and virium robore.

He bears Topaz, 3 Boars heads erected and erased, Diamond, Armed, Topaz.
This is the bearing of the Right Honorable George Booth, Baron Delamer, of
Dunham-Massey in Cheshire: from whose Family is descended Sir Rob. Booth of
Salford in Lancashire Knight. now Lord Chief Justice of his Majesty's Court of
Common Pleas in Ireland, and one of his most Honorable Privy Council for the
said Kingdom, Grandchild of Humphrey Booth of Salford aforesaid, Esquire who in his
life time erected a Chapel there, and endowed it with a liberal Maintenance;
as also left to the poor of the said Parish 20 l. per Annum for their relief.

This Coat with a due difference appertains to Richard Booth of the City of
London, Esquire who descended from the Booths of Witton in Warwickshire, where the
said Family have been seated four Generations. Here those which are young
Students in Armory may learn to be careful in observing the manner of the
position of the Charge of the Field, by comparing these two last Coat-Armours
together, admitting that they neither of them differ in Metal nor Color, and
that the Boars heads in both Escocheons were couped or erased; yet the very
manner of the position of them were sufficient difference to vary one
Coat Armor from the other.

Gules, on a Bend, Erminois, between two Cottizes, Or, 3 Boars heads couped,
Argent, by the Name of Edgcombe, and is the Paternal Coat Armor of Sir Richard
Edgcombe of Mount-Edgcombe in Devonshire, Knight of the Bath.

He bears Azure, 3 Cups, Or, out of each a Boars head erected, Argent, by the
Name of Bowls. This with the Arms of Vlster is the Coat Armor of Sir John
Bowls of Scrampton in Lincolnshire, Baronet.

This Coat is also born by Sir William Bowls of St. James Clarkenwell in
Middlesex, Knight. one of the Gentlemen of his Majesty's Privy Chamber in Ordinary.

He bears Azure, a Cheveron between six Rams accosted counter-tripping, two,
two, and two, by the Name of Harman of Rendlesham in the County of Suffolk. The
chiefest strength of the Ram consists in his head.

He bears Azure, a Toison d'Or within a bordure of Scotland. This with the
Arms of Vlster is the Paternal Coat Armor of Sir Robert Jason of Broad
Somerford in the County of Wilts, Baronet.

He bears Gules, three holy Lambs, staff, cross and banner, Argent, by the
Name of Row of Lamerton in the County of Devon. The holy Lamb is a typical
representation of our blessed Savior, who is understood by diverse to be that
Lamb mentioned in the Apocalypse of Saint John: And all the Christian Churches
acknowledge him for the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world.
This kind of bearing may well befit a brave resolute Spirit, who undertakes a
war for Christ's cause.

He bears Sable, a Cheveron between three Rams heads couped, Argent, by the
Name of Ramsey of Hitcham in the County of Buckingham, of which Family was Adam
Ramsey, Esquire for the body to King Richard the Second. The Ram is the Captain
of the whole flock. I shall not need to mention the great profit that is
brought to this Kingdom by the Winter-Garment of this beast.

CHAP. XV.
HItherto of such beasts as we call Animalia bisulca, which have their feet
parted only into two Claws: The next part of our Distribution contains those
which are called Multifida, which have many Claws; of which sort are not only
Lions, Bears, Wolves, and others of fierce and ravenous kind, that live by prey
and spoil; but such also as are of timorous nature, whose chiefest safety
consists rather in swiftness of foot, than in any other means, as Foxes,
Hares, Conies, and others of less harmful kind, whereof I will give particular
Examples: But first I will offer unto your heedful Observation certain Notes,
as well of general as of particular use, concerning beasts of this kind; not
forgetting (by the way) such Rules and Observations as have been already
commended to your regard, that especially touching mixed bearing of Ordinaries
and common Charges, which must serve for a Regular Direction throughout our
whole Work. And in delivery of these Observations and Examples, I hold it fit
to begin with beasts of fierce nature, and first with the Lion, reckoned the
King of beasts; Dignioribus enim digniora loca sunt danda, Highest person
highest place.

Some French Armorists are of opinion, That the Lion should never be made
Guardant, or full-faced, affirming that to be proper to the Leopard, wherein
they offer great indignity to that royal beast, in that they will not admit him
(says Vpton) to show his full face, the sight whereof does terrify and
astonish all the beasts of the field, and wherein consists his chiefest
Majesty, and therefore may not be denied that Prerogative, Quia omnia Animalia
debent depingi and designari in suo ferociori actu, ex illis enim actibus magis
vigorem suum ostend^nt.

All beasts should be set forth in their most generous action, for therein they
show their chiefest vigor. As concerning the true Note whereby the Leopard is
distinguished from the Lion, Vpton lib. de Armis writes thus, Cognoscitur
Leopardus a Leone, quia Leopardus ubique depingitur habens naturaliter maculas
nigras, cum grosso capite, and est Animal planum non hispidum: Leo vero habet
unum colorem continuum, cum pectore hispido, cum certis jubis in canda. The
Leopard is portrayed with black spots, and a great head, and no where shaggy;
whereas the Lion is one color, shaggy brea^^ed, with a certain tuft of hair in
his train. So that it is evident that the Leopard is notably distinguished both
in shape and color, and not by his full-faced Countenance, as they dream.
Moreover Vpton says, That he has often observed Leopards born by diverse
Noblemen, as well half-faced as guardant.

It is observed that the generous nature of the Lion is discerned by his
plentiful shaggy locks that do cover his neck and shoulders, which are
infallible tokens of his noble Courage, especially if those his locks be
crisped and curled, and short withal. Such Lions were those whereof Saint
Hierom makes mention, In vita Pauli Eeremitae, saying, Talia in anima
volvente, ecce duo Leones ex interioris Eremi part currentes, volantibus per
colla jubis ferebantur: Two Lions came running with their shaggy locks wavering
about their shoulders. Moreover the thickness of the Lion's mane is a testimony
of his generous birth, and by the same he is distinguished from the degenerate
and bastard race of Leopards begotten between the adulterous Lioness and the
Parde, which are naturally deprived of this noble mark; and not only so, but
they are also bereft of that bold and invincible Courage that the generous sort
of Lions have. For these respects the degenerate brood of Lions are called in
Latin, Imbelles Leones, that is, Heartless and Cowardly Lions; whereas the true
Lion is termed in Latin, Generosus Leo, quia generosum est quod a natura sua
non degeneravit; That is generous which degenerateth not from his kind: by
which reason a man of Noble Descent, and Ignoble Conditions, is not truly
generous, because he degenerateth from the Virtues of his Ancestors.

Lions, Bears, Wolves, and other beasts of ravening kind, when they are born in
Arms feeding, you must term them in blazon Raping, and tell whereon. To all
beasts of prey Nature has assigned teeth and talons of crooked shape, and
therewithal of great sharpness, to the end they may strongly seize upon and
detain their prey, and speedily rend and divide the same. And therefore in
blazoning of beasts of this kind, you must not omit to mention their teeth and
tallons, which are their only Armor; for by them they are distinguished from
those tame and harmless beasts, that have their teeth knocked out, and their
nails pared so near to the quick, as that they can neither bite nor scratch
with much harm. Those teeth and tallons are for the most part in Coat-Armours
made of a different color from the bodies of the beasts; and therefore in
blazoning of beasts of this kind, when you speak of their teeth or tallons, you
shall say they are thus or thus Armed. So likewise if you please to speak of
their tongues, you shall say they are thus or thus Langued.

To bear a Lion or whatsoever Animal in a diverse color from his kindly or
natural color, as to bear a blue, green, red, purple Lion, Bear, etc. or
whatsoever other color different from that which is natural unto him, is not a
bearing reproachful, though disagreeing to his Nature, if we consider of the
occasion of their primary constitution; for that the custom of such bearing
seems to have proceeded from eminent persons, who habiting themselves either
for their sports of Hunting, or for Military Services (as best fitted their
fantasies) would withal suit their Armours and Habiliments with colors
answerable to their habits, with the shapes and portraitures of forged and
counterfeit Animals.

Or else perhaps by occasion of some civil tumults, as that between the Guelphi
and the Gibelini in Italy, they perhaps of each faction bearing Lions, Bears,
and Wolves, or other Animals, to avoid confusion, and to the end the one of
them should not be entrapped by the other of the contrary faction, when they
were intermixed one with another, and that their valorous actions might be more
particularly discerned from the other, they distinguished themselves by
different and unlike colored Garments, that so each Governor and Leader might
know those that were of his own faction.

The like may we observe to have been of late years used among ourselves, when
private factions have sprung amongst us; one sort was known from others of the
contrary faction by a Carnation Ribond worn about, or in his Hat; or by a
Crimson Feather, or other thing: the contrary faction wearing like thing, but
in a different color or fashion.

The Lion ( says Vpton) passing through stony places, does contract his Tallons
within his flesh, and so walks on his feet as if he had no Tallons at all,
keeping them exceeding choicely, lest he should dull and blunt their sharpness,
and so become less able to attach and rend his prey. And this property seems
not to be peculiar to a Lion, but common to all beasts of rapine; as Pliny
ascribes the same property to Leopards, Panthers, and such other, as well as
to the Lion.

Not only Lions, but also all other beasts of ravenous kind (according to
Bekenhawb) do bring forth their young in some part defective; as Lions do
produce their Whelps dead, Dogs bring them forth blind, Bears deformed and
shapeless, etc. For Nature would not that they should attain perfection in the
womb, in regard of the safety of their Dam, lest in their production they
should spoil and rent her womb by their teeth and tallons.

Other more particular Rules there are concerning the diverse kinds and peculiar
actions of beasts of Rapine, which shall follow in their more convenient
places. In the mean time, let us proceed to Examples that may give life and
approbation to those premised Rules; Praecepta enim quantumvis bona and
concinna, mortua sunt, nisi ipse auditor variis exemplis ea percipiat; Good and
fit Precepts are but dead, unless Examples give them life: Of which Opinion was
Leo the Tenth, when he said, Plus valent exempla quam praecepta,
Et melius docemur vita quam verbo.
Examples are more forcible than Precepts,
And our lives teach more than our words.


He bears Jupiter, a Lion dormant, Sol. The Hebrew Rabbis (says Leigh)
writing upon the second of Numbers, do assign to the Tribe of Judah a Lion
after this manner, alluding belike unto that blessing that Jacob (a little
before his death) did pronounce upon Judah, saying, He shall lie down and couch
as a Lion; who dares stir him up? Wherein one notes, That Jacob seems to
allude to that diminution, which happened at such time as the more part of the
people of that Tribe did fall away unto Jeroboam; Tunc enim (says he) Rex
Iudae similis esse coepit Leoni dormienti; neque enim erectis jubis timorem
suum late effudit, sed quodammodo accubuit in spelunca. Latuit tamen quaedam
occulta virtus sub illo sopore, etc. The King of Judah was then like a sleeping
Lion, which did not show his rage with his erected Shag; but did as it were
lurk in his Den, yet so as he lost not his strength in his sleep, neither durst
any the most adventurous to rouse him. This may be true of the King of Judah,
but surely the Lion of the Tribe of Judah does neither slumber nor sleep,
though he seems to sleep; neither does their vengeance sleep who dare provoke
him. It is reported that the Lion sleeps with his eyes open; so should
Governors do, whose Vigilance should show it self when others are most at rest
and secure.

He bears Or, a Lion couchant, Sable. The Lion couching after this manner,
must not be deemed to have been compelled thereunto, but that he has so
settled himself of his own accord; for it is contrary to his magnanimous nature
to couch by any chastisement, or to be corrected in himself; but if a Whelp, or
some other beast be beaten or chastised in his sight, he thereupon humbles
himself after this manner: But as touching himself he must be overcome with
gentleness, and so is he easiest won. Generosus enim animus facilius ducitur
quam trahitur; The generous mind you may easier lead than draw. So when the
Children of Princes offend, their Pages are whipped before them: And the
Persians, if a Nobleman offend, brought forth his Garment and beat it with
wands.

He bears Gules, a Lion Seiant, Argent. Though this form and gesture has
affinity with the former, yet the difference is easy to be observed, by
comparing the manner of their reposing: And in these kinds of varieties of
gestures, you may observe, that by degrees and steps I proceed from the most
quiet to the most fierce gesture and action.

The Field is Mars, a Lion passant, Guardant, Sol. This was the Coat Armor of
William D. of Aquitaine, and of Gwyan, one of the Peers of France, whose
daughter and heir, named Eleanor, was married to Henry the second, King of
England; by reason of which Match the Field and Charge being of the same color
and metal that the then Royal Ensigns of this Land were, and this Lion of the
like action that those were of, this Lion was united with those two Lions in
one Shield: Since which time the Kings of England have born three Lions
passant, Guardant, as hereafter shall appear.

Sol, a Lion passant, Guardant, Mars, was born by Brutus, Son of Silvius
Posthumus, who coming out of Italy with the remnant of the Trojans found out
this Island of Great Britain, and reigned four and twenty years

He bears Pearl, a Lion passant guardant, Ruby, gorged with a Ducal-crown,
Topaz, and charged on the shoulder with a Mullet of the first, and is born by
the Name of Ogilby, an honorable and spreading Family in Scotland, the chief
of which are the Right Honorable James Earl of Airly, Elight, and Glentrahen,
a person ever loyal to the Crown, and was always concerned with the Earl of
Montross in his loyal Undertakings; once being taken prisoner, he was to have
been beheaded in Scotland, but by a fortunate escape the night before was
preserved to do his Majesty more service. He was long a prisoner in the Tower
of London, and after his releasement did again engage himself in his Majesty's
service at Worcester, and in the North. His brother, Sir David, at Worcester
fight was taken prisoner, and sent up to London; and Sir George his other
brother, was killed in the Actions of Montross. Of this Family are the Right
Honorable the Earl of Finlator, the Right Honorable the Lord Ogilby, Baron of
Bamfe, with several Knights and Gentlemen: Amongst which is Michael Ogilby, now
Rector of Bideford in Devonshire, and Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty King
Charles the Second, whose Grandfather, Sir Michael Ogilby, was a near Relation
to the Earl of Airly.

He bears Sapphire, a Lion passant, guardant, between three Flower de Lis,
Pearl. This is the Coat Armor of the Right Honorable Dudley North, Baron of
Carthley, etc. whose second Son, Sir Francis North Knight. is Lord Chief Justice of
his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas.

He bears Azure, a Lion passant, guardant, between three Pheons, Or, by the
Name of Wolstonholme, and is the Coat Armor of Sir Tho. Wolstonholme of
Winchenden in the Parish of Edmonton in Middlesex, Baronet.

He bears Gules, on a Fess Ermyn, between three Annulets, Or, a Lion passant,
Azure, by the Name of Underwood, and is born by Edward Underwood of the City of
London, Gent.

Ermyn, a Saltier engrailed, Gules, on a Chief of the Second a Lion passant
guardant, Or, by the Name of Armine, and is the Coat Armor of Evers Armine of
Osgodby in Lincolnshire, Esquire.

Sable, 3 Piles, Argent, on a Chief of the Second, a Lion passant, Gules, by
the Name of Hacket, and is born by Sir Andrew Hacket of Moxhull in
Warwickshire, Knight. one of the Masters of the high and honorable Court of
Chancery.

Or, a Lion passant, Sable, in Chief three Roman Piles of the Second. This was
the Paternal Coat Armor of John Loggan (alias Logon, an English Commander, by
whose Valor and Conduct the Scots (then Masters of the Northern part of
Ireland) were in Anno 1317. temps Edward the Second, beaten out of the Province
of Vlster. Sir Allen Stewart their General, took prisoner, and brought to
Dublin, who for his Ransom gave his daughter, with several Lands in Scotland,
to his Conquerors Son, from whom came Sir Robert Loggan, who was Admiral of
Scotland, Anno 1400. and from thence the Loggans of Restalrige in Scotland, not
of Idbury in Oxfordshire, and of Bassetsbury in Buckinghamshire are lineally
descended.

He bears Sable, ten Plates, four, three, two, and one, on a Chief, Argent, a
Lion passant of the field, by the Name of Bridgeman. This with the Arms of
Vlster is the Coat Armor of Sir John Bridgeman of Castle Bromwich in
Warwickshire, Baronet, eldest Son of the Right Honorable Sir Orlando Bridgeman
of Great Leaver in Lancashire, Knight and Baronet, deceased, late Lord Keeper
of the Great Seal of England.

He bears Or, two Bars Azure, in Chief a Lion passant of the Second, crowned
of the First, by the Name of Gregory, and is the Coat Armor of John Gregory of
St. Margarets Westminster in Middlesex, Gent. descended from the Gregory's of
Lastingham in Yorkshire; from whence the Predecessors of the said John (about
the year 1525.) removed to East-stockwith in Lincolnshire, where they continued
until thence expelled by the Calamities of the Wars, through the Loyalty of his
Father Lieutenant Colonel William Gregory, and his two elder Brethren William
and Gilbert.

He bears Or, on a Chief, Gules, a Lion of England, by the Name of Titus, and
is the Paternal Coat Armor of Colonel Silus Titus of Bushy in Hertfordshire,
one of the Grooms of his Majesty's Bedchamber, etc.

Argent, two Lions passant, guardant, Azure, by the Name of Hunmer. This with
the Arms of Vlster is the bearing of Sir Thomas Hanmer of Hanmer and
Bettisfield in Flintshire, Baronet, descended by many Knights from Sir John de
Hanmer, who lived in the Reign of Edward the First. Cambden in his Britannia
mentioning Hanmer Town, has these words, Vn^ clara sane and antiqua quae ibi
habitat familia cognomen assumpsit.

Or, two Lions passant, guardant, Gules, is the Coat of the Right Honorable
Sir William Ducy of Tortworth in Glocestershire, Knight of the Bath and
Baronet, now Viscount Down in Ireland.

Gules, two Lions passant, guardant, Argent, by the Name of L'Estrange, a
Family of good antiquity, of which is Sir Nicholas L'Estrange of Hunstanton in
Norfolk Baronet, and Roger L'Estrange of St. Giles's in the Fields in
Middlesex, Esquire.

Gules, two Lions passant, guardant, Or, was the Coat Armor of William Duke of
Normandy, base Son of Robert Duke of Normandy, who in Anno 1066. having slain
King Harold in Battle, seized the Kingdom, and reigned almost One and twenty
years, since which time his Heirs have happily enjoyed his Crown and Dignity.

He bears Gules, two Lions passant within a Bordure engrailed, Argent, by the
Name of Strange, and is born by Io. Strange of the City of London, Gent.

He bears Argent, three Lioncels passant, guardant in Pale barrways, langued
and armed, Gules. This Coat Armor pertained to that worthy Gentleman Sir John
Brograve, Knight. sometimes Attorney General of the Duchy of Lancaster. In the
blazoning of Arms consisting of more Lions in a Field than one, you must term
them Lioncels (according to Leigh) which is as much to say, as so many young or
petite Lions. The reason of this Rule I take to be this, That inasmuch as the
Lion has a Prerogative Royal over all Beasts, and cannot endure that any other
should participate of the Field with him, Quia Principes nolunt pares, Princes
will admit no fellows to the impeachment of their Sovereignty; therefore the
bearing of diverse Lions in one Field must be understood of Lions whelps, which
as yet have not so great feeling of their own strength, or inbred noble
courage, nor apprehension of their ingenerated Royal Sovereignty over all
Beasts, as Lions have. But Leones adulti participationem non admmittere solent,
when they are of years they will know their own worth. Note that this Rule must
be understood with a certain limitation in some particular cases, Quia non est
regula adeo generalis, quin admittit exceptionem in suo particulari: For this
Rule holds not in the Sovereign's Ensigns, where these beasts are said to be
Lions, propter dignitatem Regiae Majestatis: Next this Rule has no place in
Coat-Armours, wherein any of the honorable Ordinaries are interposed between
these beasts: For by such interpositions of these Ordinaries (says Leigh)
everyone of them is reckoned to be of as great dignity, as if he were born
dividedly in so many several Escocheons, and that in respect of the Sovereignty
of the Ordinary so interposed; for which cause they have the Title of most
worthy partitions. And so shall you reckon of all other Coat-Armours consisting
of things so divided.

King Henry the Second being Duke of Aquitain and Guion, in the right of his
Grandmother, and Duke of Normandy in right of his Mother, joined the Arms of
Guion, which was a Lion passant guardant, unto that of Normandy and England,
which was Gules, three Lions passant guardant, Or.

Ruby, three Lions, passant, guardant, parted per Pale, Or and Argent. This is
the Coat Armor of the Rt. Honorable William O Brien, Earl and Baron of
Insiquin, Baron of Burren, Captain General of his Majesty's Forces in Africa,
Governor of the Royal City of Tangier, Vice Admiral of the same, and of the
parts adjacent, and one of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council for the Kingdom of Ireland.

He bears Sable, two Lioncels counter-passant, Argent, the uppermost toward
the sinister side of the Escocheon, both collared, Gules, by the Name of Glegg,
and is the Coat of Edward Glegg of Gayton, and Edw. Glegg of Grange, both of
Cheshire, Esquires. Some Blazoners have given another blazon to this
Coat Armor thus; He bears Sable, two Lioncels, the one passant, the other
re-passant, Argent, both collared, Gules. But in mine Opinion, no man by this
last blazon is able to trick or express the true portraiture and manner of the
bearing of these Lioncels; for it appears not by this blazon toward which
part or side of the Escocheon their heads are placed, which is contrary to the
Rule given Chap. 4. Sect. 1. The Lion and the Lioness do never go one and the
same way, either when they seek their prey, or when they go to fight; the
skilful and expert men render this Reason for it, That these beasts stand so
much upon their strength of body, as that neither of them needs the others
help.

Now that Lions and Lioncels are born in Arms, the first with interposition of
some of the Ordinaries, the other charged upon Ordinaries, the following
Examples will make it manifest; and in blazoning of such Coat-Armours, care
must be taken to observe and remember what concerning this point of their
difference I have even now delivered.

Per Cheveron Or and Gules, three Lions passant counter-changed, and is born by
Francis Lund of Parson's Green in the Parish of Fulham in Middlesex, Gent.
descended from the Family of the Lunds in the County of York.

He bears Azure, a Fess wavy between 3 Lions passant, Or, armed and langued,
Gules. This is the Coat Armor of John Hawes or Hawys of London, who draws
his descent from William Hawys of Walsham of the Willows in Suffolk, which
William was seized of Lands there in the time of Edward the Third. The Lion
passing his ground leisurely, and as it were pedetentim, step by step, which
kind of gate we usually do call passant, expresses his most generous and noble
action of Majesty, Clemency, and Circumspection.

He bears Gules, on a Fess, Argent, three Lioncels, passant, guardant,
Purpure. These Arms appertained to Arnold Oldesworth, Esquire late Keeper of the
Hanaper of the high Court of Chancery. Such is the noble courage and
magnanimity of the Lion, as that in his greatest rage and fury, he never does
tyrannize over those that do prostrate themselves to his mercy; whereof a
certain Author thus writes, Parcere prostratis scit nobilis ira leonis:
Tu quoque fac simile, quisquis regnabis in orb.


He bears Gules, 2 Bars Ermyn in Chief, a Lion passant, parted per Pale, Or
and Argent, by the Name of Hill of Hales in the County of Norfolk. This Lion is
different from the former passants, in that he goes directly forward, showing
in the Escocheon but half his face, whereby he is distinguished from the
guardant, which shows the whole face. This Lion passant seems to go with
more confidence and resolution, but the guardant, with more vigilance and
circumspection, which both being joined, do make an absolute Commander.

He bears Or, a Lion salient, Gules, by the Name of Felbridge. The proper
form of a Lion salient is when his right forefoot answers to the dexter
corner of the Escocheon, and his hindmost foot the sinister base point thereof.
And he is termed salient, a saliendo; because when he does prosecute his prey,
he pursues the same leaping, which action he never uses when he is chased in
fight (as Pliny notes) but is only passant. And it is sometimes no dishonor
to go softly, or retire leisurely out of the Field, but to fly is a reproach;
and therefore of all gestures, I never find any Lion current.

Pearl, a Lion rampant, Ruby, was the Coat of Edrick a Saxon, who at the time
of the Conquest was Earl of York; and for that he took part with Earl Edgar
Etheling against William the Conqueror, and delivered to him the City of York,
he had by the Conqueror's command his eyes put out, and kept a prisoner at
Winchester during life, and died without issue.

Ruby, a Lion rampant, Pearl. This is the Paternal Coat Armor of the Right
Honorable Louis Duras, Baron Duras of Holmby, one of the Captains of his
Majesty's Horse Guards, and Privy Purse to his Royal Highness James Duke of
York; brother to the Duke and Marshal Duras, as also to the Marshal de Lorge in
France; and Nephew to the late Marshal de Turein in the said Kingdom; one of
whose Ancestors, viz. Galliard Lord Duras, was in the Reign of K. Edward the
Fourth, Knight of the Garter, being one of the last of Gascoign that held for
the Crown of England, where he came and continued in great Employments under
the said King Edward, until he was restored to his Estate in Gascoign by the
Peace made betwixt the two Crowns.

Ruby, a Lion rampant, Pearl, was the Coat Armor of Roger Mowbray a Norman,
who was made Earl of Northumberland by William the Conqueror. He flew in Battle
Malcombe King of Scots, and his eldest Son; but after rebelling against William
Rufus, was taken prisoner in Northumberland, and kept, in Winchester prison
till the reign of Henry the First, and then died without issue; after whose
decease King Henry the First gave all his Lands and Arms to the Lord Nigell de
Albaine, whose Son was called Mowbray, of whom descended the Mowbrays Dukes of
Norfolk: And this Coat is now quartered by the honorable and flourishing
Family of the Howards.

Ruby, a Lion rampant, Topaz, is the Coat Armor of the Right Honorable
Richard Earl of Carbery, Baron Vaughan of Emblin and Molingar, and one of the
Lords of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council.

Sapphire, a Lion rampant, Pearl, is the Coat of the Right Honorable John Lord
Crew, Baron of Stean, descended from Eustace Crew, who came into England with
William the Conqueror, and was made Baron of Monthalte.

Argent, a Lion rampant, Sable, is the Coat Armor of the Stapletons of
Yorkshire.

Sable, a Lion rampant, Argent, is born by Edmond Lewis Carn-Lloyd in
Glamorganshire, Esquire; and by Edward Lewis of the Van in the said County,
Esquire. As touching the bearing of the Lion after this manner, I hold that
then he may be truly said to be rampant, when he stands so directly upright,
as that the crown of his head does answer to the plant of his foot, whereupon
he stands in a perpendicular line, and not by placing of the left foot in the
dexter corner of the Escocheon, as Leigh would have it. As the former Example
shows the gesture of the Lion pursuing his prey; so this shows his gesture
in seizing on it when he has attained it.

He bears Argent, a Lion rampant, Sa, charged on the shoulder with a Martlet
of the Field, by the Name of Mompesson (anciently Montpintson) and is the Coat
of Sir Thomas Mompesson of Bathampton in Wiltshire, Knight. a person of eminent
loyalty and suffering in the late Troubles, whose Family have been of great
Antiquity in the said County.

He bears Ermyn, a Lion rampant, Azure, crowned, Or, by the Name of
Pickering, and with the Arms of Vlster is the Coat of Sir Henry Pickering of
Whaddon in Cambridgeshire; and of Paxson in Huntingtonshire, Baronet.

He bears Argent, a Lion rampant, the Tail elevated and turned over the head,
Sable. This was the Coat Armor of John Buxton of Tibenham in the County of
Norfolk, Esquire. Although this manner of bearing, in respect of the Tail, is
rarely used, yet it is very ancient, as appears by an old Table of the said
Arms taken out of the Monastery of Bungey in Suffolk, having been before the
dissolution of the Abbeys there hanged up, for one styled Le Seneschal Buxton;
which Table now remains in the custody of the said Mr. John Buxton. Here
Blazoners may please to observe, how requisite it is to take advised
consideration in what manner the Tail of this beast is born in signs Armorial;
but I shall presently in this Chapter have further occasion in the Coat Armor
of Cork to treat more largely of this point.

He bears Azure, a Lion rampant, Argent, a File of three Lambeaux, Gules,
each charged with as many Bezants, by the Name of Covell. Here I tell not the
color of the Bezants, because every Rundle in Armory (of which sort these
Bezants are) has his proper color and name in blazon, as shall hereafter be
more particularly declared, when I come to speak of Rundles in general.

The Field is Or, a Lion rampant, parted per Fess, Azure and Gules, armed and
langued, Argent. This was the Coat Armor of Ralph Sadler of Standon in the
County of Hartford, Esquire Grandchild and Heir-male to Sir Ralph Sadler the last
Knight Banneret that lived in England, a Grave Counselor of State to King
Henry the Eighth, King Edward the Sixth, and Queen Elizabeth; and is now born
by Sir Edwin Sadler of Temple Dinsley in Hartfordshire, Knight. This kind of
bearing of a Lion parted per Fess, appears in a very old Roll of Arms in
colors, now in the custody of the beforementioned Sir Richard Saint George,
Knight. Clarenceux King of Arms.

He bears per Pale, Argent and Gules, a Lion rampant, Sable, by the Name of
Roberts, and is the Coat Armor of Edward Roberts of the City of Dublin in the
Kingdom of Ireland, Esquire.

He bears Argent, a Lion rampant, Gules, in the dexter point a Pheon, Sable,
by the Name of Petyt. This is the Coat Armor of Petyt of Cornwall, as also of
Yorkshire; from whom is descended William Petyt of the Middle Temple, Esquire whose
Ancestor was Gilbert Petyt, Esquire Lord of the Manor of Sharlesteane, and diverse
other Lands in Oteley near Whearf in Yorkshire; who in the thirteenth year of
Henry the Sixth, with I. Cardinal and Archbishhp of York, Richard Duke of York
and others, was Iusticiarius Regis ad pacem in partibus de Westrithingo in Com.
York, etc. and younger Son of Sir John Petyt, Lord Ardover in Cornwall; which
Sir John married Margaret, Daughter and Coheir of Thomas Carmino, Grandson to
Sir Oliver Carmino, Knight. Chamberlain to King Edward the Second, who married
Elizabeth, sister to Thomas Holland Earl of Kent, and Duke of Surrey, who died
the tenth year of Henry the Sixth, descended from an ancient Family of Petyts,
Lords of Ardover, in the time of Henry the First, of which Family there has
been six Knights; all which appears by the Descent and Pedigree of that
Family, and by several Inquisitions post mortem.

He bears Azure, a Lion rampant, and Chief, Or, by the Name of Dixie. This
with the Arms of Vlster, is the Paternal Coat Armor of Sir Wolstan Dixie of
Bosworth in Leicestershire, whose Son and Heir apparent is Beaumont Dixie of
the said place, Esquire

He bears Sable, a Lion rampant between three Crosses Formee, Or, by the Name
of Ayloffe, and is the Coat Armor of Sir William Ayloffe of Braxted Magna in
Essex, Baronet; as also of Henry Ayloffe of the said place, Esquire and of William
Ayloffe of Chissele also in the said County, Esquire

Argent, a Lion rampant, Azure, between three Escallop shells, Gules, by the
Name of Ianes, and is born by William Ianes of Kirtling in the County of
Cambridge, Gent. descended from the Family of the Ianes of Cornwall.

He bears Gules, a Lion rampant, Argent, crowned Or, between three Crescents
of the third, by the Name of Salisbury, and is born by Richard Salisbury of
Barnstable in Devonshire, Gent.

He bears Diamond, a Lion rampant crowned between three Croslets, Topaz. This
Coat was born by the Right Reverend Father (...) God, Henry Lord Bishop of
Chichester, Son of John King Lord Bishop of London.

Or, a Lion rampant, Sable, between three Flowers de Lis, Azure, is born by
James Fairclough of London, Dr. in Physic, who is descended from the ancicient
Family of the Faircloughs of Lancashire; one of whose Ancestors was by the Lord
Stanley of Bosworth-field (to whom Henry the Seventh owed so great a share of
his Victory) made his Standard Bearer. The Faircloughs of the Counties of
Bedford and Hertford are branches of this Family.

Ruby, a Lion rampant within a Bordure engrailed, a Topaz, is born by the Right
Honorable Charles Earl of Shrewsbury, Baron Talbot, Strange of Blackmere,
Gifford of Brimsfield, Furnivall, Verdon and Loveloft.

Ruby, a Lion rampant within a Bordure engrailed, Pearl, is born by the Right
Honorable Ralph Lord Gray, Baron of Warke; of whose Family was Sir John Gray,
who for his good Service in France was by King Henry the Fifth created Earl of
Tanquerville in the said Kingdom.

He bears Ermyn, a Lion rampant, Sable, within a Bordure, Azure, by the Name
of Prichard, and is born by Sir William Prichard of the City of London, Knight
and Alderman.

He bears, Azure, a Lion rampant, Argent, crowned Or, bordured as the Second,
Pellottee, by the Name of Henley, and is born by Sir Robert Henley of
Northington in Hantshire, Knight. Master of the King's Bench Office.

He bears barrey often, Argent and Azure, over all a Lion rampant, Gules, by
the Name of Stratford, and is the Coat Armor of Richard Stratford of Hawling
and Nether Getting in Glocestershire, Gent. descended from that ancient Family
of the Stratfords of Farmcoat in the said County.

He bears per Bend sinister, Ermyn and Ermyns, a Lion rampant, Or, by the
Name of Trevor, and is born by Sir Thomas Trevor of Lemington Hastings in
Warwickshire, Knight and Baronet, only Son of Sir Thomas Trevor, one of the
Barons of the Exchequer to King Charles the First: And by Sir John Trevor of
Brynkynalt in Denbighshire, Knight. descended from Tudor Trevor, Earl of Hereford.

This Coat is also born by Sir Roger Mostyn of Mostyn in Flintshire, Knight and
Baronet; and by William Mostyn of Rhyd in the said County, Esquire.

He bears Gyrony of eight Ermyns and Ermynois, a Lion rampant, Or, by the
Name of Williams, and with the Arms of Vlster is the Coat Armor of Sir Trevor
Williams of Langiby Castle in Monmouthshire, Baronet.

Gules, a Lion rampant, guardant, Or, is the Coat Armor belonging to the
Family of the Morices; the chief of which is the Right Honorable Sir William
Morice of Werington in Devonshire, Baronet, late one of his Majesty's Principal
Secretaries of State, and at present one of his most honorable Privy Council.

He bears Gules, on a Pale, Or, a Lion rampant, Azure, by the Name of
D'arnall, and is the Coat Armor of John D'arnall of the Middle Temple, London,
Esquire.

He bears Azure, upon a Pale radiant raionee, Or, a Lion rampant, Gules, by
the Name of Colman of Brunt Ely in the County of Suffolk. Had not the shining
rays of this glistering Pale extraordinarily invited me to gaze upon the rarity
of this bearing, I should without respect of the Lion rampant (of which kind
you have had already great variety) being this rare Pale's only charge, omitted
to have here demonstrated this Coat Armor; but I doubt not, if the skilful
Artist in this way observe it well, he cannot but commend the invention of its
first deviser.

He bears Argent, a Lion rampant between three Cressants, Sable, a Chief,
Verrey. This is the Coat Armor of Thomas Wilcocks of Tottenham High-cross in
the County of Middlesex.

He bears Or, a Pale between two Lions rampant, Sable, by the Name of
Naylour, and is born by Richard Naylour of Offord D'arcy in Huntingtonshire,
Esquire, whose great Grandfather, William Naylour Esquire was one of the six Clerks
of Chancery in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

He bears Argent, a Bend between two Lions rampant, Sable by the Name of
Osborn, and with the Arms of Vlster, is the Coat Armor of Sir John Osborn of
Chi^klands in Bedfordshire, Baronet.

He bears Gules, three Lions rampant, Or, by the Name of Herbert, and is born
by Basil Fitz-Herbert of Norbury in Derbyshire, Esquire.

Argent, three Lions rampant, and a Chief, Azure, is the Paternal Coat Armor
of Samuel Grant of Crundall in Hantshire, and of the Society of the Inner
Temple, London, Esquire.

Argent, three Lions rampant, and a Chief, Gules, is the Coat Armor of Sir
Henry Yelverton of Easton-Manduit in Northamptonshire, Baronet. The Lion (
says Farnesius) is a lively Image of a good Soldier, who must be valiant of
Courage, strong of Body, politic in Counsel, and a foe to fear: Such a one was
the most valiant Prince Richard the Second, surnamed Cour de Lion, whose
renowned Adventures, suited with all courage and politic care, gave him the
eternal Name of the Lion-heart.

He bears Gules, a Cheveron between 3 Lions rampant, Or, by the Name of Owen.
This with the Arms of Vlster, is the Coat Armor of Sir Hugh Owen of Or^elton
in Pembrokeshire, Baronet.

Per Pale, Saphi^e and Ruby, three Lions rampant, Pearl. This is the
Coat Armor of the Right Honorable William Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery,
Baron Herbert of Cardiff, Ross of Kendale, Parr, Marmion St. Quintain, and
Shurland.

This Coat is also born by the Right Honorable William Herbert, Earl and Baron
of Powis; and by the Right Honorable Edward Lord Herbert, Baron of Cherbury
and Castle-Island.

This Coat is also born by the Family of the Progers; amongst whom is Charles
Proger Herbert of Gwerndy in Monmouthshire, Esquire one of the Gentlemen of his
Majesty's Privy chamber: By Edward Proger Herbert, Esquire one of the Grooms of his
Majesty's Bedchamber: And by Henry Proger Herbert, Esquire one of his Majesty's
Ecqueties.

Per Pale, Argent and Gules, a Cheveron between three Lions rampant
counterchanged, by the Name of Limbery of Lime-house in Middlesex, Gent.
descended from the Limberies of Dorsetshire.

Per Pale, Gules and Argent, a Cheveron engrailed between 3 Lions rampant,
Argent, by the Name of Hoskins, and is born by Sir William Hoskins of Oxted in
Surrey, Knight.

He bears Ermyn, on a Chief, Sable, three Lions rampant, Argent, by the Name
of Gleane, and with the Arms of Vlster is the Paternal Coat Armor of Sir Peter
Gleane of Hardwick in the County of Norfolk, Baronet.

Ermyn, on a Chief, Azure, three Lions rampant, Or, by the Name of Aucher, and
is the Coat Armor of Sir Anthony Aucher of Bishops-bourn in the County of
Kent, Knight and Baronet.

He bears Argent, three Mascles, Sable, on a Chief of the Second, as many
Lions rampant of the First, by the Name of Hanson, and is the Coat Armor of
Sir Robert Hanson of the City of London, Knight. Lord Mayor thereof Anno 1675.

He bears Or, on a Fess indented between three Billets, Azure, each charged
with a Lion rampant as the Field, so many Bezants, by the Name of Rolls, and
is the Coat Armor of Sir John Roll of Steventon in Devonshire, Knight of the
Bath: And of Colonel Samuel Roll of Heanton in the said County, Esquire

He bears Azure, on a Cheveron engrailed, Argent, between three Trefoils
slipped, Ermyn, as many Lioncels rampant, Sables, armed and langued, Gules, by
the Name of Barliff Bariff or Beriff: For I find the Name variously written,
which I note here to give a Caveat to Gentlemen to be careful to keep the
ancient and true Othography of their Sirnames, lest in time the differing
variety thereof may call their Descents and Arms into question: For it is
utterly unlawful by the law of Arms, for one Gentleman to bear the Coat Armor
of another, they both being descended from several Families, although their
Sirnames be near agreeing, or the same.

He bears Argent, on a Cross, Gules, five Lioncels salient, Or, by the Name
of Audyn of Dorchester in the County of Dorset. The Prophet Isaiah describes
the valourous courage of these kind of beasts, though young, where he says,
That as a Lion, or a Lion's whelp roareth upon his prey, against whom if a
multitude of Shepherds be called, he will not be afraid at their voice, neither
will he humble himself at their noise; so shall the Lord of Hosts come down to
fight for Mount Sion, and for the Hill thereof, Isa. 31. 4. But here the Lions
are not well cut.

He bears Or, two Lions rampant, combatant, Gules, langued and armed, Azure,
by the Name of Wycombe.

Sable, two Lions rampant, combatant, Or, is born by Nicholas Carter of London,
Dr. in Physic. Leigh says, That these were two Lions of sundry Regions, which
of manhood must combat only for Government: For the Lion is as desirous of
mastery as a courageous Prince is ambitious of Honor; which if it be in a just
Title and Claim, is a virtue in a King, and no way to be disliked? For it was a
Royal Apothegm worthy that great King, Nemo me major, nisi qui justior; I
acknowledge no King greater than my self, but he that is juster.

He bears Azure, two Lioncels rampant, endorsed, Or. This Coat (says Leigh)
was born by Achilles the Grecian at the Siege of Troy. And Leigh takes it to be
a Combat intended between two valiant men, and they both keep appointment and
meet in the Field; but the Prince favoring both Parties, takes the matter
into his hands, and then turn they back to back, and so depart the Field: For
their stout Stomachs will not suffer them to go both one way, because it is
counted an injury to hardiness to go first out of the Field.

There are yet other forms of bearing the Lion than are hitherto expressed, as
in these next Escocheons may be seen.

The Field is Mars, a tricorporated Lion issuing out of the three corners of
the Escocheon, all meeting under one head in the Fess point, Sol, langued and
armed, Jupiter. A like Lion did Edmund, Surnamed Crouchback (Earl of Lancaster
and brother to King Edward the First) bear in Device, as appears by the Seal
of the same Edmund; the Circumference of which Seal contains this
Inscription; SIGILLUM EDMUNDI FILII REGIS ANGLIAE. Only herein it differs
from this, that where the middlemost of the bodies in this is born rampant, and
the other two descend from the corners of the Escocheon; contrariwise in the
Seal the two lowermost are born passant, and the third descended from above,
and are all conjoined in the Center of the said Circumference. The like was
born in Device by one of the Ancestors of the Right Noble and Honorable late
Lord Carew, Earl of Totness: But the Field of this was Topaz, and the Lion
Diamond; moreover the middlemost body of this was rampant, and the other two
after a sort passant.

Ruby, three demi Lions rampant, Pearl, between a Mound, Topaz, is the Paternal
Coat Armor of the Right Honorable Henry Bennet, Earl and Baron of Arlington,
Viscount Thetford, Knight. of the most Noble Order of the Garter, Lord Chamberlain
of his Majesty's Household, and one of the Lords of his most honorable Privy
Council, etc. whose elder brother is Sir John Bennet of Dawley in the Parish of
Harlington in Middlesex, Knight of the Bath, and Lieutenant to his Majesty's
Band of Gentlemen Pentioners.

He bears Azure, two Bars wavy, Ermyn, on a Chief, Or, a demi Lion rampant,
Sable, by the Name of Smyth, and with the Arms of Vlster is the Paternal
Coat Armor of Sir Robert Smyth of Vpton in the Parish of Westham in Essex,
Baronet; and without the Arms of Vlster, is the Coat of Sir James Smyth of the
City of London, Knight and Alderman, Sons of Sir Robert Smyth of Vpton
aforesaid, Knight and Baronet.

He bears Or, a demi Lion rampant, Gules, by the Name of Mallory. There are
certain forms of bearing much like unto this at the first sight; but are
diverse from it in bearing, and do receive a different form of blazon, whereof
good heed must be taken, Quia diversitas nominis denotat diversitatem rei, the
diversity of names does manifest the diversity of things; inasmuch as names are
significant demonstrations of things, and express notes of their differences.

He bears Azure, on a Chief, Or, a Lion rampant issuant, Gules, langued and
armed of the first, by the Name of Markham. This Lion is said to be issuant,
because he does issue from out of the bottom of the Chief; and so must other
things be blazoned which thus arise from the bottom thereof.

He bears Azure, a Chief, Gules, a Lion rampant jessant, his tail forked, Or,
by the Name of Hastang. A Lion jessant born in Coat Armor, is where the Coat
is first charged with a Chief or other Ordinary, and after by some occasion
some Animal is added thereunto, but is not subjected to the primary Charge, but
is born over both the Field and Charge; and is therefore called a Lion jessant,
a jacendo, because of such lying all over. Some blazon this Coat Azure, a
Chief, Gules, over all a Lion rampant, his tail forked, Or.

He bears Or, out of the midst of a Fess, Sable, a Lion rampant, naissant,
Gules, armed and langued, Azure. This Coat was born by Sir Henry Emme, Knight
of the most Noble Order of the Garter, and chosen companion thereof by Edward
the Third, when he did erect and establish the same. This Lion is said to be
naissant, because he seems to issue out of the womb of the Fess, Quasi nunc
esset in nascendo. This form of blazon is peculiar to all living things, that
shall be found issuing out of the midst of some ordinary or common charge.

He bears Argent, a Lions head erased, Gules, by the Name of Govis.
Concerning the dignity of this part of the body, and how the same is preferred
before all other the parts and Members thereof, I have formerly made mention,
as also of the commendable bearing of Members erased.

He bears Topaz, on a Chief, Diamond, three Lions heads erased of the first.
This was the Coat Armor of Sir Thomas Richardson, Knight. Lord Chief Justice of
his Majesty's Court of Kings Bench; and is the Achievement of the Right
Honorable Thomas Lord Richardson, Baron of Cramond in Scotland. I do here give
this Coat Armor this kind of blazon by precious stones, in respect of that
high place of Justice which its Bearer executes under his Majesty.

The Field is Azure, a Cheveron, Argent, between three Lions heads erased,
Ermyn, crowned Or. This was the Coat Armor of Sir Paul Pindar of the City of
London, Knight. whose bounteous Piety, manifest in many other charitable actions,
was in the year 1632. more conspicuous in the richly adorning and exquisite
beautifying the Quire of Saint Paul's Church. Erasing is a violent rending of a
member from the body, and may signify some worthy and memorable Act of the
Bearer, that has severed the head from the shoulders of some notorious
turbulent or seditious person.

Azure, a Cheveron between three Lions heads erased, Or, by the Name of
Wyndham, and is the Paternal Coat Armor of Sir Hugh Wyndham of Silton in
Dorsetshire, Knight. one of the Justices of his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at
Westminister, eighth Son of Sir John Wyndham of Orchard-Wyndham in
Somersetshire, Knight. who was lineally descended from the ancient Family of the
Wyndhams in Felbrigg in Norfolk, and owner thereof.

This Coat is also born by Thomas Wyndham of Tale in Devonshire, Esquire one of the
Grooms of his now Majesty's Bedchamber, third Son of Sir Edmond Wyndham of
Cathanger in Somersetshire, Knight Marshal of his Majesty's most Honorable
Household, and lineally descended of the ancient Family of the Wyndhams of
Crown-Thorp in Norfolk.

He bears Sable, on a Fess between three Lions heads erased, Or, as many
Ogresses, by the Name of Cambell. This with the Arms of Vlster, is the bearing
of Sir Henry Cambell of Clay-hall in the Parish of Barkin, Essex, Baronet.

He bears Argent, on a Bend, Sable, three Lions heads erased of the Field,
crowned, Or, by the Name of Wroth, and with the Arms of Vlster, is the
Coat Armor of Sir John Wroth of Blenden-hall in the County of Kent, Baronet.

Vert, three Quaterfoils, Argent, each charged with a Lions head erased, Sable,
by the Name of Plott, and is the Coat Armor of Thomas Plo^t, Esquire Secretary to
his Highness the great Duke of Tuscany; descended of the Family of the Plotts
of Sparsholt in Barkshire.

He bears Sable, two Lions paws issuing out of a Dexter and Sinister base
points, erected in form of a Cheveron, Argent, armed, Gules, by the Name of
Frampton. The forefeet of the Lion have five toes upon each foot, and the
hinder feet but four, whereby nature has enabled him, for the more sure
seizing and retaining his acquired prey. The Lions claws are crooked and
exceeding hard, with these he carveth and rendeth his prey; and for this
purpose he keeps them very choicely and tenderly, and is no less careful to
save them from blunting, than a good Soldier is to keep his Armor and Weapons
from rust and bluntness. By the greatness and sharpness of the Lions claw, we
may easily conjecture how dangerous a thing it is for a man to encounter him;
for wheresoever he seizes, if he break not the bones, yet he renteth away the
flesh. So also may we give a near ghess, if not make a certain demonstration of
his proportion and bigness; for so we read that Phydias, the famous Carver of
great Images in Gold and in Ivory, upon the sight of a Lions claw only, did
raise the whole proportion of his body, which gave occasion (as is supposed) of
the Proverb, Leonem ex ungue aestimare, whereby is meant, That of one probable
conjecture, a man may give a near ghess of the whole business.

He bears Gules, 3 Lions Gambes, or paws erased, Argent, by the Name of
Newdigate; and is the Coat Armor of Richard Newdigate of Harfield in
Middlesex, Sergeant at Law, Son of Sir John Newdigate of Arbury in
Warwickshire, Knight. who was Son and Heir of John Newdigate of Harfield aforesaid,
Esquire.

He bears Argent, two Lions paws, erased, in Saltire, the Dexter surmounted
of the Sinister, Gules. That Lions, Panthers, and Leopards do hide their claws
within their skin when they go or run, it may seem a little miracle; for they
do never extend them but when they offer to seize their prey, lest they should
be blunted, and so become less serviceable for the apprehension, retention, and
division of their prey.

He bears Sable, 3 Lions paws couped and erected, Argent, armed, Gules, by
the Name of Usher. Sometimes these paws are found born upon Ordinaries, as in
this next Escocheon, where there is a Lions paw born upon a Canton. And you
must observe, That albeit I do here use but one Example for an Instance, yet
shall you by observation find them born as well upon other Ordinaries as on
this.

He bears Argent, on a Canton, Sable; a Lions paw erased in bend, Or, by the
Name of Bowtheby. This one Coat does minister occasion of a twofold
observation: the one, that this member is born upon Ordinaries; the other, that
it is born after the manner or fashion of Ordinaries, as Cheveron-ways,
Cross-ways, Saltire-ways, etc. as by the precedent Examples may appear.

He bears Sable, 3 Lions tails erected and erased, Argent, by the Name of
Cork. The Lion has great strength in his tail, the much motion whereof is a
manifest token of anger. When he minds to assail his enemy, he stirs up
himself by often beating of his back and sides with his tail, and thereby
stirs up his courage, to the end he do nothing faintly or cowardly. The Lion
when he is hunted, carefully provideth for his safety, laboring to frustrate
the pursuit of the Hunters by sweeping out his foosteps with his tail as he
goes, that no appearance of his track may be discovered, whereby they may know
which way to make after him.

The Lion bears his tail after a diverse manner, insomuch as we may thereby
(if not certainly know, yet give a near ghess) what a mood he is in for the
present; viz. whether he be furiously bent, or peaceable, or majestically
affected. And these qualities are manifestly discerned by the Inversion,
Eversion, or Extension, etc. of his tail.

Here may rise a Question, Whether the bearing of the tail of the Lion in any
of these several manners be a sufficient difference to prevent all causes of
challenge?

For my own part (albeit I have not read or seen in Gerard Leigh, Boswell,
Fern, or any other Armorial Writers, the state of this Question handled) I
hold that they be differences sufficient to debarr all challenge: My Reasons
are these; first, Sufficit quod inter arma mea and tua talis sit differentia,
qua detur diversitas. And again, Nova forma dat novum esse rei: I hold them not
only to be differences secundum quid, but simpliciter; that is to say, absolute
and essential differences. Furthermore, Data una dissimilitudine etiam paria
judicabuntur diversa. Moreover, experience shows us, That the least addition
or subtraction in Armorial signs makes them cease to be the same that they
were; Omnia Arma Arithmeticis figuris sunt simillima, quibus si quid addas vel
subtrahas, non remanet eadem species, as I have formerly showed. Finally, for
approbation of these my Opinions, I will add this infallible Assertion, Ea
differunt quorum definitiones differunt.

These are my Reasons that induce me to be of this Opinion, that the diverse
manner of bearing of the tail of the Lion, as aforesaid, are or may be (without
exception) essential differences: which nevertheless I referr to the judicious
censure of the Learned in this Profession, who perhaps may convince me with
more forceable grounds.

But because Demonstration is the best of Arguments to convince the
incredulous, it is apparent that Buxton's Coat before mentioned, differs not
from that of Smeres, but only in the manner of the bearing of the tail, both of
them being Argent, a Lion rampant, Sable; only in Buxton's Coat the tail is
elevated and turned over the head of the Lion, as it more plainly appears
before in this present Chapter.

Now as touching particularizing of the beforementioned assertion, I say that
the Eversion of the tail of the Lion is an express token of his placability or
tractableness: as contrariwise the Inversion of his tail is a note of wrath and
fury, especially if he do beat the back therewith, and does roar withal. Of
this property of the Lion Catullus makes mention in these words, Age, caede
terga cauda tua, verbera pateant
Face, cuncta mugienti fremitu loca retonent.


The gate of a Lion, when he is passant, is an apparent note of his
jurisdiction and regal authority and sovereignty wherewith the extension of his
tail does fitly quadrate and agree: inasmuch as when he hunteth after his prey,
he roareth vehemently, whereat the Beasts being astonished, do make a stand,
whilst he with his tail makes a circle about them in the sand, which circle
they dare not transgress; which done, out of them he makeh choice of his prey
at his pleasure.

The Field is party per Pale, Gules and Azure, a Tigre passant, Argent. This
was the Paternal Coat Armor of John Mabb Chamberlain of London in the time of
Queen Elizabeth. The Tigre may well take place next to the Lion, it being a
Beast of great cruelty and incomparable swiftness, whence some think the River
Tigris had its Name.

He bears Argent, a Tigre passant, regardant gazing in a Mirror or
Looking-glass, all proper. This Coat Armor stands in the Chancel of the
Church of Them in Oxfordshire, in a Glass-window of the same Chancel, impaled
on the Sinister side with the Coat Armor properly pertaining to the Family of
de Bardis. Near to this Escocheon is placed this Inscription, Hadrianus de
Bardis Prebendarius istius Ecclesiae. Some report that those who rob the Tigre
of her young, use a policy to detain their Dam from following them, by easting
sundry Looking-glasses in the way, whereat she uses long to gaze, whether it
be to behold her own beauty, or because, when she sees her shape in the glass,
she thinks she sees one of her young ones, and so they escape the swiftness
of her pursuit. And thus are many deceived of the substance, whiles they are
much busied about the shadows.

He bears Azure, a Fess between three Tigres heads erased, Or, by the Name of
Hunlock, and with the Arms of Vlster, is the Paternal Coat Armor of Sir Henry
Hunlock of Wingerworth in the County of Derby, Baronet.

He bears Sable, a Bear passant, Argent. It is written of the she Bear, that
she brings forth her young ones unperfect and deformed, like a lump of raw
flesh, and licks it till it comes to shape and perfection. The she Bear is most
cruelly enraged against any that shall hurt her young, or despoil her of them:
as the Scripture ^aith in setting forth the fierce anger of the Lord, That he
will meet his adversaries, as a Bear robbed of her whelps. Which teaches us
how careful Nature would have us to be of the welfare of our Children, since so
cruel Beasts are so tender hearted in this kind.

He bears Argent, a Bear rampant, Sable, muzzled, Or, by the Name of Barnard.
The Countries that were reputed famous for the cruelty of Bears, were Lucania
and Vmbria in Italy, now called the Duchy of Spoletum. And so in ancient times
was our Island of Britain: For Bears were carried from hence to Rome for a
show, where they were holden in great admiration. The Bear by nature is a cruel
Beast; but this here demonstrated unto you, is (to prevent the mischief it
might otherwise do, as you may observe) as it were bound to the good behavior
with a muzzle. I must confess I have often seen a Sable Bear saliant, in a
Field Argent, born by the Name of Bernard.

Argent, three Bears heads erased, Sable, muzzled, Or, by the Name of Langham,
and is the Paternal Coat Armor of Sir James Langham of Cottesbrook in
Northamptonshire, Knight and Baronet; Sir William Langham of Walgrave in the
said County, Knight. and Sir Stephen Langham of the City of London, Knight. Son of John
Langham of London and Cottesbrook aforesaid, Esquire who was descended from Henry
de Langham of Langham in Rutlandshire; whose Son William de Langham,
Grandfather of Robert, who lived in the Reign of Edward the Third, held three
Caracuts of Land there.

He bears Argent, a Cheveron between 3 Bears heads erased, Sable, muzzled,
Or, by the Name of Pennarth. The Bear is reported to combat with the Bull; in
which fight he uses no less policy than strength, as evidently may appear out
of Aristotle de Animalibus, lib. 8. chap. 230.

He bears Azure, a Wolf saliant, Argent, langued, Or, armed, Gules, by the
Name of Down or Down. Some such Ensign did Macedon the Son of Osyris
(surnamed Jupiter the Just, whose Father was Cham the Son of Noah) bear in his
shield at such time, as he, together with diverse of his brethren and kinsfolk,
did warfare under the conduct of Osyris, as witnesses Diodorus Siculus;
Osyridem duo filij, virtute dispares, Anubis and Macedon, prosequuti sunt,
uterque Armis usus est insignibus, aliquo animali haud ab eorum natura
dissimili: nam Anubis Canem, Macedon Lupum, insigne Armorum tulit. Anubis
(says he) gave a Dog for his device on his Arms, and Macedon a Wolf. This
Coat Armor may serve to exemplify that which I have formerly delivered
touching the Antiquity of Arms. The ancient Romans also in their Military
Ensigns did bear the Wolf, as appears by Vegetius Valturius and others.

He bears Gules, a Wolf preyant, Argent, by the Name of Low, and is the
Coat Armor of Sir Edward Low of New Sarum in Wiltshire, Knight. one of the
Masters of the high and honorable Court of Chancery. Vpton leaves to the
considerati^ of Heralds, whether the bearing of the Wolf in Arms be not fit for
such persons as in Parliaments and places of great Assembly, are accustomed to
wrangle and show themselves contentious; and ( quasi Johannes in opposito) to
put on a resolute determination to be contrary to all others. For it is the
Wolves nature, when they assemble together, to fall a howling. Some write, that
those who suddenly look on a Wolf do lose their voice. It were fit such wolvish
and snarling persons would look on themselves in a Glass, and so become more
silent.

He bears Argent, three Wolves passant in pale, Sable, by the Name of Lovet;
and is born by Edward Lovet of Corfe in the Parish of Tanstock in the County of
Devon, Esquire

He bears Argent, on a Bend, Vert, three Wolves heads erased of the Field by
the Name of Myddleton; and with the Arms of Vlster, is the Paternal Coat Armor
of Sir Thomas Myddleton of Chirk Castle in Denbighshire, Baronet. This Coat,
without the Arms of Vlster, is born by Sir Thomas Myddleton of
Stansted-Mount-fitchet in the County of Essex, Knight.

Thus ending with the Wolf, I will perclose this Tract of Beasts of fierce
Nature, comprehending all others of this kind, as Ounces, Lynxes, Hyenaes,
Panthers, etc. under these before handled. Forasmuch as the greatest part of
the general Rules, as also of the sundry forms of bearing attributed unto Lions
and Wolves, may be aptly applied to all, or the greatest part of other Beasts
of like Nature.

CHAP. XVI.
HAVING given Examples of ravenous and fierce kind, that by main force do
prosecute and obtain their prey; I will now proceed to the handling of Beasts
less fell and harmful: of which number some are wild and savage; other are
domestical and sociable, as Dogs of all sorts, of which I will first entreat;
because the Dog, whether it be for pleasure and game in field, or for thrift
and guard at home, deserves a very high estimation; and of all Dogs, those of
chase are most in use in Armory; whereof some prosecute their prey speedily,
others more leisurably. Of the first sort is the Greyhound, as in Example.

He bears Argent, a Greyhound passant, Sable, by the Name of Holford. Such
Dogs as do pursue their Game with a more leisurely pace, are Hounds fitted for
all sorts of Game; as Harthounds, Buckhounds, Harriers, Otterhounds,
Bloodhounds, etc. which are of some Authors called Odorisequi canes, quia
odoratu investigant, for following by the smell: and Cicero calls them
Sagaces canes, because of their tender and quick sent; and both these and the
Greyhound are called Canes Venatici, Dogs for the chase.

Note, that it appears in an old Manuscript treating of Blazon, that a
Greyhound cannot properly be termed rampant; for it is contrary to his kind to
appear so fierce, as the Author there writes in his said Book, now remaining
in the custody of that worthy Knight Sir William Seger, Garter, principal King
of Arms, whose great study and travel in this Heraldical Art has, by his own
Works already published, been sufficiently manifest.

He bears Vert, a Greyhound current, Argent, collared, Gules, studded, Or, by
the Name of Blome; and is the Coat Armor of Richard Blome of Abergwlly in
Carnarvonshire, Esquire of John Blome of Sevenoak in the County of Kent, Gent. and
Richard Blome of London, Gent. the Undertaker of this Work.

He bears Argent, two Bars Sable, charged with three Trefoils slipped of the
Field, in Chief a Greyhound current of the Second, by the Name of Palmer; and
is the Coat Armor of William Palmer of Ladbrook in Warwickshire, Esquire Son and
Heir of Sir William Palmer of Warden-street in Bedfordshire, Knight.

He bears Gules, 3 Greyhounds current in pale, Argent, by the Name of
Mauleverer; and with the Arms of Vlster, is the Coat of Sir Thomas Mauleverer
of Allerton-Mauleverer in the west Riding of Yorkshire, Baronet.

Argent, three Greyhounds current pale-ways, Sable, collared, Or, by the Name
of More (or De la More) and with the Arms of Vlster, is the Coat Armor of Sir
Edward More of More-hall and Bank-hall in Lancashire, Baronet, lineally
descended from the ancient Family of the Mores of the said places; whose
Ancestors have there continued for above twenty Generations, as appears as well
by diverse ancient Deeds now in the custody of the said Sir Edward, as by the
Hatchments and Inscriptions engraven on the walls of the said Houses. This Coat
is also born by Sir John More of the City of London, Knight and Alderman,
lineally descended from the Family of the Mores aforesaid.

Sable, three Greyhounds current in pale, Argent, collared, Or, is the
Coat Armor of the ancient Family of the Machels of Crakenthorp in
Westmoreland; and is now born by Lancelot Machel, Esquire Lieutenant of Horse to
the Counties of Cumberland and Westmoreland, a great Loyalist, and an expert
Soldier. This Name was writ Mauchael, or Mauchel, from the Conquest to the
Reign of King Henry the Eighth, at which time those two valiant Warriers, Guy
Mauchel of Crakenthorp, Esquire and Hugh his Brother, engaged themselves in that
Expedition against the French, in which the English were victorious, and took
the almost impregnable City of Turnay, from whence they both returned, and were
successively Lords of Crakenthorp aforesaid. This Guy, though in many dangers,
yet died in his Bed about the 27th of Henry the Eighth, but showed an Heroic
and Marshal Spirit in bequeathing his Arms and Armor to his Sons in the very
first place, as that which was most dear unto him. And Hugh Machel, for his
Valor, was by King Henry the Eighth deputed with Sir Thomas Wharton, Warden of
the west Marshes of England, by a Warrant under the said King's Sign Manual,
Dated the 28th of June in the 29th year of his Reign.

He bears Azure, a Talbot passant, Argent, by the Name of Borgoigne. It is a
general observation, That there is scarce any virtue incident to a man, but
there are singular sparks and resemblances of the same in the sundry kinds of
Dogs: For some are so courageous, as if they be in the encounter, you may cut
off a leg or any limb before they will let go their holdfast: in which kind the
English Mastiff has highest praise; insomuch that Histories report, That the
Romans took Mastiffs hence to carry in their Armies instead of Soldiers. Some
others have been so trusty and loving to their Masters, as being by error
lost, they have refused meat, though it were to their death, till they saw
their Masters again. For their admirable property in finding any thing that is
lost, in fetching any thing they are enjoined, in pursuing any man by the scent
of his foot after he is fled: It requires a Naturalist's large Discourse,
rather than the touch of an Herald's Pencil.

He bears Gules, a Talbot passant, Or, a Chief, Ermyn, by the Name of
Chaffin; and is the Coat Armor of Thomas Chaffin of Chettle in Dorsetshire, Esquire

He bears Or, a Fess dauncette, between three Talbots passant, Sable, by the
Name of Carrick. These kind of Dogs are called in Latin Canes sagaces, for the
tenderness of their scent, and quickness of smelling, because thereby they do
readily discover and find out the tracts, forms, and lodgings of Beasts of
chase, and of Savage kind: which done, they do prosecute their undertaken chase
with open mouth and continual cry, that oftentimes, through hot pursuit, they
do so tire it, as that it is either taken up by the Huntsman, or does become a
prey to themselves.

Per Cheveron engrailed, Argent and Gules, three Talbots heads erased
counterchanged, by the Name of Duncombe; and is the Coat Armor of the Right
Honorable Sir John Duncombe of Batlesdenbury in Bedfordshire, Knight. Chancellor
and Under-Treasurer of the Exchequer, and one of his Majesty's most honorable
Privy Council, etc.

He bears Azure, a Fess between three Talbots heads erased, Or, by the Name
of Burton; and is the Coat of Casibulan Burton of Lindley in the County of
Leicester, Esquire To this head must be referred all other sorts of Dogs of
Prosecution; as Beagles, Terriers, and such like, so called, Quia feras sub
terra prosequuntur, (for that they prosecute their prey under the ground, as
the others do above ground) also Land and Water-Spaniels, and such others. Now
for the wild or savage sort of Beasts, some do atchieve their prey by subtle
means, as Foxes, Ferrets, Weasels, Cats, etc. some by prudent providence, as
the Hedghog, Squirel, and such like. Others also there are, whose care is, not
so much how to come by their prey, as that themselves become not a prey to
others; as Hares, Conies, etc. of these briefly I will give some few Examples,
to show to what head they are to be reduced, as follows.

He bears Argent, two Reynards countersaliant in Bend, the dexter surmounted
of the sinister Saltire-like, Gules, by the Name of Kadrod-Hard of Wales. These
are somewhat unlike Sampson's Foxes, that were tied together at the tails; and
yet these two agree in aliquo tertio: They came into the field like two
enemies, but they meant nothing less than to fight, and therefore they pass by
each other; like two crafty Lawyers, which came to the Bar, as if they meant
to fall out deadly about their Clients cause; but when they have done, and
their Clients purses well spunged, they are better Friends than ever they were,
and laugh at those Geese, that will not believe them to be Foxes, till they
(too late) find themselves Fox-bitten.

He bears Argent, three Cats-a-mountains in Pale passant, Sable, by the Name
of Keat; this with the Arms of Vlster, is the bearing of Sir Jonathan Keat of
Pauls-Walden in Hartfordshire, and of Grovehurst in the Parish of Milton in
Kent, Baronet.

He bears Argent, a Cheveron, Azure, between three Squirels seiant, Gules, by
the Name of Lovell. This Beast has his name Sciurus, or Scuirel, by reason of
the largeness of his tail, which shadoweth all his Body: And is therein like
one, who carefully keeping the love and affection of his followers and
retainers, is sure they will stick to him, protect and shadow him in time of
need. To whom those Villains (mentioned in the Roman History) were much unlike,
who betrayed their proscribed Lords, flying to them for shelter and secret
coverture. And such a one was the faithless Cartismandua, to whom our renowned
British King Caractacus flying to hide himself till he might gather his Forces
together against the Romans, she betrayed him unto his Foes, to the ruin of
this Kingom: That infamous Queen had not Caudam Sciuri, a Squirels shadowing
tail; but Caudam Draconis, fiery and venomous.

The field is parted per Fess, Gules and Azure, in the first six whole Ermyns,
Ermyn, couchant, three and three. This was the Coat Armor of a Bishop in the
Kingdom of Scotland, who lived Anno Dom. 1474. as I find it in Mr. Garter's
beforementioned Manuscript. The Surname of this Bishop is not there set down. I
have inserted this Coat Armor in regard of the rarity of the bearing of this
Beast whole in an Escocheon, which is seldom so used: but the skin of this
Beast is of very frequent use in Arms, it being that Furr in Blazon called
Ermyn, of which I have formerly treated in this Book, Sect. 1. Chap. 4. I was
as curious as I could in procuring this Escocheon to be cut like unto that
which is depicted in that Manuscript, because I was desirous to demonstrate
unto you the fashion of Escocheons of those times. I must confess that I find
the Blazon there to differ from this of mine; for there he begins to Blazon
the base part of the field first, which manner of Blazon at this day is not
approved of by English Blazoners.

To these must be added all fourfooted Beasts that are provident in acquiring
their food, as the Hedghog and such other. It rests that I should now give
Example of the last sort of Beasts, among them of savage kind before spoken of,
which are those of timorous and fearful Nature: Such are these that follow, and
their like.

He bears Argent, three Conies, Sable, by the Name of Stroode. Conies are
bred in most Countries, but in few are they so plentiful as in England. Amongst
the Baleares they were so abundant, as that the people made suit to Augustus to
grant them a military company of Pioneers to destroy them. Of this little Beast
it seems, that men first learned the Art of undermining and subverting of
Cities, Castles, and Towers by the industry of Pioneers.

He bears Sable, three Conies current, Or, by the Name of Cunliff, and with a
Crescent for a difference is the Coat Armor of Nicholas Cunliff of
Chis^^churst in Kent, Gent.

He bears Gules, three Conies seiant within a Bordure engrailed, Argent, by
the Name of Conisbie. Though Nature has not given these timorous kinds of
Beasts such craft of strength as to the former; yet are they not destitute of
their succors, in that they have their strong Castles and Habitations in the
Earth, and their Food ever growing so nigh them, that they need not put
themselves into danger except they list.

He bears Argent, on a Fess Nebule, Sable, three Hares heads couped, Or, by
the Name of Harewell. The Hare is a simple Creature, and reposeth all her
safety in swiftness, wherein she uses many shifts to help herself withal, both
to defend herself from the peril of the Hounds, and to frustrate the endeavors
of the Huntsmen. She naturally fears the Eagle, Hawk, Fox and Wolf, her
natural Enemies. It is strange which some have written of Hares, that their
Nature is, for the self same to be sometimes Male, and sometimes Female. Such
an one also (as Poets write) was Tiresias of Thebes, who being a man, became a
woman, and so continued seven years, and then returned again to his former
shape. Afterward a great Controversy rising betwixt Jupiter and Juno, whether
the man or the woman were more insatiate of Venery, or took most delight
therein, he was chosen Arbitrer in the matter, and gave the Garland to Juno and
the Female Sex, as being invincible in the incounters of Venus.

He bears Azure, three Hedghogs, Or, by the Name of Abrahall. The Hedghog
signifies a man expert in gathering of Substance, and one that providently
lays hold upon proferred opportunity, and so making Hay (as we say
Proverbially) whilst the Sun shines, preventeth future want.

He bears Azure, a Cheveron between 3 Hedghogs or Urchins, Argent, by the
Name of Mainstone; and is the Coat Armor of Mr. William Mainstone, alias
Mayneston, of London, Merchant, lineally descended from Thomas Mainstone of
Vrchinfield in Herefordshire, tempore Edw. 3. Anno Dom. 1372.

He bears Argent, three Moles, Sable, their Snout and Feet, by the Name of
Nangothan, or Mangotham, a Family, as I take it, of Scotland. I could not well
here term these Moles proper, because there be many white Moles; which color,
whether in them it is occasioned by age or not, I will not here dispute. The
Mole in Latin is called Talpa, from the Greek word (...) Caecus, Caecitas.

He bears Argent, a Cheveron between 3 Moles, Sable, by the Name of
Twisleton; and with the Arms of Vlster, is the Coat Armor of Sir John
Twisleton of Dartford in Kent, Baronet; as also of Richard Twisleton of Drax in
the West Riding of Yorkshire, Esquire

And hitherto we have handled such Terrestrial Animals only, as are called
Vivipara, because they do bring forth living Creatures; whereas the other
Terrestrials do bring forth eggs, and are therefore named Ovipara, of which
sort we will speak in the next place.

CHAP. XVII.
THIS other sort of four-footed Egg-bearing Animals (as I may so term them)
notwithstanding that in many things they have no small resemblance with man, as
well touching the faculties of the vegetable soul, as also the parts of the
body; yet are they far more unlike us, than those that bring forth a living
Creature. And albeit that these Egg-breeding four-footed Animals do consist of
the same bodily parts that the Vivipara, or Animal-producing do, and of the
four humors that are answerable in quality to the four Elements, and have all
parts, as well internal as external senses, and many other things wherein they
do communicate with the Vivipara; yet are there many other things wherein they
differ not only from these, but also even amongst themselves one from another
of them. For neither do we find in these that quickness of wit that we observe
in others, neither like parts of strength of body that the other have.

Like as man (especially in his soul) approaches near unto God in likeness: so
in like manner do other Animals resemble man, wherein they do participate with
man in likeness after some sort, but in diverse degrees; forasmuch as some of
them have more, and some less likeness with us than others have.

There is not ( says Beda) amongst the Universal Works of Nature, any one
thing so little, or of so base esteem, wherein a man cannot find some Divine
thing worthy of admiration. No less ( says Farnesius) may we admire the force
of a silly Flea, than the hugeness and strength of an Elephant.

Not without reason does the Husbandman prognosticate the approach of some
great shower of Rain by the croaking of Frogs more frequent than usually;
whereupon he says, that they do cry for rain. For this Observation is grounded
upon a Physical Reason, Omne enim simile gaudet suo simili, and suae naturae
utili ac convenienti; every like is delighted with his like, and with that
which is commodious and agreeable to his Nature. Since then that Frogs are
exceedingly delighted with water, as with that which best agrees with their
Nature; therefore when they do apprehend a foresense of Rain they do rejoice,
and do testify their joy by singing after their manner.

Animals of base esteem, and of no industry, have (for the most part) not only
four, but manifold feet: whereby we are admonished, that perverse and evil
disposed persons have multiplicities of affections, in respect that by the
motion of the feet our bodies are perduced from place to place; so do our
affections transferr us from one delight to another, according to that saying,
Pes meus, affectus meus; eo feror, quocunque feror.

Though some perhaps may esteem these Egg-bearing Animals unworthy the dignity
of Coat Armor; yet for my own part, I hold their bearing to be no less
honorable, than many of those that in common estimation are reputed far more
worthy; insomuch that they may well beseem the bearing of the greatest
Potentate. For if it pleased the Sovereign King of Kings to use them as his
special Instruments to chastise the stubborness of such as rebelled against his
Ordinance, and to arm those his minute and weak Creatures, with such an
incredible boldness, as that they feared not the face or forces of men, but
that the very Frogs entered the houses and chambers of the Egyptians, upon the
people, into their ovens, and into their kneading-throughs; yea, even into King
Pharaoh's Chamber, and upon his Bed. Moreover, if God has vouchsafed to give
to the Grasshopper, the Canker-worm, the Catterpiller, and the Palmer-worm, the
honorable Title of his huge great Army: Why should we prize them at so low a
rate, as that we should disdain to bear them in Coat Armor? Since God says by
the Prophet Joel, I will render you the years which the Grasshopper has eaten,
the Canker-worm, and the Catterpiller, and the Palmer-worm, my great Host which
I sent among you.

It is therefore to be observed, that they also have their actions not to be
omitted in Blazon, albeit not in that variable manner, nor yet so copious as
some others. And because they are far different from those formerly handled,
not only in shape, but also in the manner of their living, in their gate and
actions; therefore must they receive a diverse manner of Blazon. They are called
in Latin Reptilia, or creeping things; Quia reptant super terram. And here we
must distinguish between those things quae reptant, which creep, as Frogs,
Ants, etc. and those quae serpunt, which glide, as Snakes; which latter kind we
shall speak of afterward.

But here we mention those Reptiles which are gressible, such as by means of
their feet are able to go step by step from one place to another; so termed a
gradiendo, which is proceeding by degrees: And hitherto also are referred such
as by skipping, mounting, or leaping, raise their bodies above ground, and so
alter their station, place, or seat. Of which kinds some have four feet, some
have more. Such as have four feet only, are these that follow with their like.

I have omitted in this Edition that Escocheon Sol, charged with three Toads
erected, Saturn, which according to some Authors, was the Coat Armor of the
ancient Kings of France; because since my last Edition I find great variety of
opinions concerning this matter, of which I have given a touch in the first
Chapter of the first Section. And in lieu thereof I do present you with the
ancient Coat Armor of the same Charge, born by a Family in this Kingdom.

He bears Argent, three Toads erected, Sable, by the Name of Botereux of
Cornwall, which Family long since there flourished, as you may read in Learned
Camden. Toads and Frogs do communicate this natural property, that when they
sit, they hold their heads steady and without motion: which stately action
Spencer, in his Shepherds Calender, calls the Lording of Frogs. The bearing
of Toads (after the opinion of some Armorists) do signify a hasty choleric
man, that is easily stirred up to anger, whereunto he is naturally prone of
himself; having an imbred poison from his birth.

He bears Vert, a Tortois passant, Argent, by the Name of Gaudy; and is born
by Sir Charles Gaudy of Crows-hall in Debenham in Suffolk, Knight and Baronet;
as also (with due differences) by Charles Gaudy of Stapleton, and Anthony Gaudy
of Ipswich, both of the said County, Esquires. The shells of the Arcadian
Tortoises are very great, therefore out of them they do make Harps, whereof
Mercury is said to be the Inventor; who finding a Tortois left upon the Rocks
after the falling of the River Nilus, the flesh being consumed, and the sinues
that remained dried up, he struck them with his hand, and they made a kind of
Musical sound, whereupon he framed it into a Harp, which caused others to
imitate his practice, and to continue the same unto this day.

He bears Azure, a Tortois erected, Or, by the Name of Cooper. This Escocheon
I have caused to be inserted in this Edition, to manifest the various bearing
of this gressible Reptile in Armory.

Bara in his Book entitled, Les Blazones dez Armories, gives an Example of
two Lizards, erected one against another (as if they were combatant) and
terms them rampant, a term very unfitly applied to Reptiles, to whom the
terms of mounting, leaping, or skipping are much more proper. To this head must
be reduced Crocodiles, Salamanders, Chamelions, Ewets, Lizards, and whatsoever
other Egg-bearing Reptile, having only four feet, as to their natural and
proper place. There rests yet one other sort of this kind of Reptiles, which
are diversely shaped from all the former, and are called in Latin Insecta
animalia; because that being divided in their body between their head and
belly, their parts do seem so divided, as if they hanged only together by small
strings; having no flesh, blood, sinues, etc. And there are also Insecta which
sly; but here we speak only of Terrestrials, leaving the other to their due
place. And because such bearing is rare, I am enforced (rather than to pass
them over with silence) to use Coats of Device, for expressing their sundry
forms, as in Example.

He bears Or, a Cobweb, in the Center thereof a Spider, proper. The Spider is
born free of the Weavers Company; she studieth not the Weavers Art, neither
has she the stuff whereof she makes her thread from any where else, than out
of her own womb from whence she draws it; whereof, through the agility and
nimbleness of her feet, she weaveth Gins, and dilateth, contracteth, and
knitteth them in form of a Net. And with the threads that she draws out of
her body, she repaireth all rents and wracks of the same. Not unaptly is man's
life resembled to a Spiders Web, which is wrought with much care and diligence,
and is suddenly marred with the least occurrent that may befall it. For that it
is protracted with much care and diligence, and suddenly ended by swallowing of
a crum, or hair, or some other lesser accident (if less may be.) In like manner
Sophistical Arguments are likened to Spiders webs, for that they are framed
with much artificial cunning, and yet are fit for no use but to entangle flies
and weak capacities. And to like purpose does the Poet compare the execution of
Laws to Cobwebs, saying, Laws like Spiders webs are wrought,
Great flies escape and small are caught.
Vpton says, That he has seen Spiders born in Coat Armor by a certain
Lumbard. By the Spider we may understand a painful and industrious person,
occupied in some honest and necessary business; a man careful of his private
estate, and of good foresight in repairing of small decays, and preventing of
wracks. The Spider herself is poisonful and deadly, yet is her web reckoned an
Antidote against poison, notwithstanding the same is extracted out of her womb.
In like sort (says Aelianus) out of the poisonful contagion and infectious
venom of sin and transgression, the Sovereign powers do take occasion to
extract and establish wholesome and profitable Laws against such notorious
crimes. Of the Spider Solomon writes in this manner, The Spider takes hold
with her hands, and is in Kings Palaces.

A very remarkable Note does Farnesius propose unto us, taken from this poor
despised Creature the Spider, touching the Procreation of Children: It is a
matter of great consequence of what Parents a man is descended. If we desire (
says he) to have a good race of Horses, a litter of special good Hounds for
game, choice Plants and Stocks to plant our Orchards and Gardens with
delectable fruits, do we not use our uttermost endeavor to effect them? How
much greater should our care and providence be in the procreation of our
Children? The first instruction that the Children receive, is in the veins and
bowels of their Parents, whereof we may take an Example from Spiders, which are
no sooner hatched and excluded out of their Eggs, but forthwith they practice
to make webs, as if they had brought with them (even out of their Mothers womb)
together with their life, the artificial skill of webbing. Holy and reverent is
that piety that we owe to our Parents; Parens enim est genitor, parens patria,
parens denique est ipse Deus. For he that begot us is our parent, our Country
is our parent, and lastly God himself is our parent.

It has been often questioned, Why the Father loves the Son more dearly,
tenderly, and affectionately, than the Son does the Father. The Reason is this,
Quia patris amor in filium a natura est, filij in parentem ab officio. The
affectionate love of the Father proceeds of Nature, that of the Son of duty.
Therefore the sacred Law has decreed, Amabis patrem and matrem tuam, Thou
shall love thy Father and Mother, but not contrariwise: For where the Law of
Nature speaks, there is no need it should be assisted by Commandment.
Notwithstanding (even naturally) the love of the Son to the Father is great.

We may learn ( says Zanchius) by these minute Animals, how many and how great
instructions we may receive from the universal number of Creatures, that God
has given us for Instructors and teachers of Moral Discipline, so that we will
open our eyes to behold them, and listen to God's disciplining us in them.

Admirable doubtless is the Omnipotency of God in these Creatures; for as St.
Hierome says, Epist. ad Heliod. Creatorem non in Caelo tantum miramur, etc. We
do not admire God's power in heaven only, and in the earth the Sun, Elephants,
Camels, Oxen, Boars, Lions, etc. but also in his smallest Creatures, the Ant,
Flea, Fly, and small Worm, and others of like kind, whose bodies or shapes are
better known unto us than their names.

So much were the Israelites assotted in Idolatry, as that they esteemed beasts
for gods, as appears Wisd. 12. 24. For they went astray far in the ways of
error, and esteemed the beasts, which their enemies despised, for gods; being
abused after the manner of children that have no understanding.

So long is any Animal or living Creature said to have life, as he has breath
and the exercise thereof. And this Rule holds not only in fourfooted Animals,
but also in those that we call Insecta, and in gliding Animals also, as both
Galen and Pliny do teach; though Aristotle denies these latter to have breath,
but therein he speaks comparatively, viz. in respect of other Animals, that
do attract and deliver their breath more strongly and more sensibly, they seem
to have no breath at all.

One Example more I will propose, which shall be of the Emmet, as in this next
Escocheon.

He bears Argent, eleven Emmets, three, two, three, two, one, Sable. Of this
silly Creature also does Solomon make mention, saying, The Pismires a people
not strong, yet prepare they their meat in Summer. To this simple and feeble
Creature is the slothful man sent to learn wisdom; where it is said, Go to the
Pismire, O sluggard, behold her ways and be wise. For she having no guide,
governor, nor ruler, prepares her meat in the summer, and gathers her food
in the harvest, etc. Very often do the Sacred Scriptures propose unto us
Examples of brute Creatures, as well to upbraid us with our vices, as to stir
us up unto virtue. For as there are in man sparks of the understanding and
practice of heavenly spirits, even so the brute Animals have certain shadows or
footsteps of the virtuous qualities that are or ought to be in men. Moreover
Job 12. 7. Ask now the beasts and the fowls of the heavens, and they shall tell
thee; or speak to the earth, and it will show thee; or the fish of the Sea, and
they shall declare unto thee. And by the least of God's Creatures may we learn
many exemplary inducements to virtue, as also many forcible disswasions from
vice, by reason of the apparent signs of the wisdom, power, and mercy of God
that are found in them. By the Emmet or Pismi^e may be signified a man of great
labor, wisdom, and providence in all his affairs, and of a pregnant and ready
memory.

The Examples hitherto produced are taken only from Reptiles gressible, and
though of that kind which has more than four feet, I have alleged only the
two last Examples of Insecta, yet there are some other of many feet, which are
not Insecta; as the Palmer-worm, Cheeslip, Kitchinbobs, which being touched,
gather themselves round like a Ball, and such like, which must be referred to
the same head. And besides all these, there are yet othersome which be both
gressible and volant; such are those, that having their livelihood only upon
the earth, by the help of a kind of wings they oftentimes change their place
for the acquiring of their sustenance, as in Example.

He bears Gules, a Grasshopper in Fess passant, Or. Grasshoppers (says Pliny)
do fly with wings made like Pellicles or fine skins. The Males of the
Grasshoppers do sing in the Summer season, but the Females are silent. Whereupon
the Emmet, who did work (whiles the other did sing) takes occasion (as it is
in the Fable) to taunt their slothfulness and poverty, saying, Aestate quae
cantaveris, in Hyeme salta. You that sung all Summer, may go shake your heels
in the Winter. Among the Athenians the Grasshoppers were holden for a special
note of Nobility; and therefore they used to wear golden Grasshoppers in their
hair (as Pierius notes) to signify thereby that they were descended of noble
race and homebred. For such is the natural property of the Grasshopper, that in
what Soil he is bred, in the same he will live and die; for they change not
their place, nor hunt after new habitations. Hereupon Antisthenes took occasion
to scoff at the Athenians, saying, That in this property they did communicate
with Tortoises and Cocles, born and living in the same shells. Solomon reckons
the Grasshopper for one of the four small things in the earth that are full of
Wisdom, saying, The Grasshopper has no King, yet go they forth all by bands.

There are other of this kind, whose wings are less manifest than the
Grasshoppers, because they are closed in a kind of case that can hardly be
discerned, but when they are preparing to fly; for which respect they are
called Vagipennae (says Calepine) Quia alas vaginis quibusdam inclusas habent,
for carrying their wings sheathed; as the Hart^ly, Beetle, Lady-cow, etc.
which, together with Locusts, and such other as are both gressible and volant,
and many-legged, are to be reduced to this head, as to their proper and natural
place. I will close up all these with one Example of the Scorpion, which
Aelianus and others report to be winged in Egypt and India, though he doubts
whether they are not rather bred by the heat of the Sun, than by copulation;
and if by this latter, whether they come of Eggs, or come forth living.

He bears Argent, a Cheveron, Gules, between three Scorpions reversed, Sable,
by the Name of Cole. Pierius in his Hieroglyphics, says, That if a man
stricken with a Scorpion sit upon an Ass with his face toward the tail of the
Ass, his pain shall pass out of him into the Ass, which shall be tormented for
him. In my opinion, he that will believe this, is the Creature that must be
ridden in this case; but that the oil of Scorpions is a Chief cure against
their own stinging, is an ancient observation. And it is a Rule of Equity, That
where the wrong is offered, there the amends should be made. And as these in
this Escocheon are born with an Ordinary betwixt them, so sometimes are they
born upon Ordinaries (according to a general Rule premised) as may be seen in a
Window of S. Giles's in the Fields in Middlesex, where is born in an Escocheon,
Gules, three Pallets, Verrey, on a Chief, Or, a Scorpion erected Sable. And
thus much of Gressibles of all sorts.

CHAP. XVIII.
NOW touching such Creatures as we termed Gliding: Those may properly be said
to be such, which having no feet at all, do yet move, and as it were slide from
place to place; some more slowly, but othersome with a certain volubility and
flexible agitation of the body do make their speedy way upon the earth, with
many pliant bowings; and of these also, some have for coverture their skin
only, some both skin and shell also. Of the former sort are those now
following, with their like.

The Field is Gules, an Adder nowed, Or, by the Name of Nathiley. There is a
natural antipathy between Man and Serpents of all kinds; in which literal
sense, that was verified which God promised, That there should be Enmity
betwixt the Woman's seed and the Serpents; though a spiritual Enmity betwixt
Christ and the Devil (that old Serpent) was principally foretold. The Serpent
is very prudent and subtle, either to hurt other, or to save himself: But his
special care is to defend his head, knowing that part to be the principal, and
withal the weakest. This here enfolded may seem to be one of the Locks of that
monstrous Dame Medusa, every hair of whose head was said to be a Snake. And
indeed Albertus says, That the hair of a woman, taken at some seasons and laid
in dung, will become very venomous Serpents. Which some have supposed to befall
that Sex for the ancient familiarity it had at first with that accursed Serpent.

To the four-footed Egg-bearing Animals do the Serpents come very nigh, as also
other Reptiles, For all Serpents have blood, flesh, sinews, and other like
parts as four-footed Animals have, although not in that perfection that they
have them. They are endowed also with head, nostrils, eyes, tongue, teeth, and
with lights and spleen, and other inward parts and bowels of the body, but much
discrepant from the members and bowels of all others

Notwithstanding that Serpents are far unequal to four-footed Animals, both in
shape and strength; yet will they not give place to many of them for sharpness
of wit. It is a Creature full of subtilty, as Moses testifies, Genesis 3. And the
Serpent was more subtle than any Beast of the field: For besides his exterior
senses, he is crafty and subtle in preserving his life, in making choice of
his lurking dens, in acquiring his food, in hatching up his brood, in expelling
from him, and putting off his old slough. So that for good cause did our
Savior exhort us (in goodness) to imitate the wisdom of the Serpent.

These few Examples may serve instead of many, which might be brought of
Serpents of sundry other names and natures, which all are hither to be
referred. Now let us see one Example of such gliding or sliding Animals as are
more slow-paced, and have both skin and shell to cover them; of which number is
the Snail, reckoned of all other that are born in Coat Armor, the slowest. And
no marvel, since it carries on her back no less a burden than her whole house;
for which cause she is called Tardigrada Domiporta, the slow-going House-bearer.

He bears Sable, a Fess between 3 House-snails, Argent, by the Name of
Shelley. These are called House-snails, either because they so carry their
Houses upon their back, whereby they be aptly distinguished from the
Garden-snail, that has no house or shell; or because usually they breed about
old houses. The bearing of the Snail does signify, that much deliberation must
be used in matters of great difficulty and importance: For albeit the Snail
goes most slowly, yet in time, by her constancy in her course, she ascends
the top of the highest Tower, as the worthy and learned Gentleman Mr. Carew of
Antony, has wittily moralized in his Poem entitled, The Herrings Tail. It is
also fabled, that when the Snail and the Hare were to go a journey for a wager,
the Hare confident of his Footmanship, resolved to take a nap by the way; the
Snail knowing he had nothing to trust to but his indefatigable perseverance,
came to his ways end before the Hare could awake. But a worse thing in the
Snails going is this, that wheresoever he goes, he leaves such marks and
lines, that a man may as easily track him, as a young Thief that is not yet
perfect in his trade. And thus by little and little have we also with the Snail
ended one part of our journey concerning Animals Terrestrial, or which live
upon the earth: And because we have yet much way to travel, we will now take
wings, and will mount up with such Creatures as live above the earth.

CHAP. XIX.
A Second general Member of our Division of living Creatures, concerning such
as live above the Earth in the Air, as are the Fowls and Birds of all sorts:
and as we distinguished the former by their feet, so the same Method we will
follow in these. Their feet therefore are in some whole or conjoined; in others
divided. The whole-footed do in a sort resemble the palm of a man's hand, and
are therefore in Latin called Palmipedes; such as the Swan, Goose, Duck, and
for the most part all River Fowls, as partly shall appear hereafter by
Examples. But here I hold it necessary, entering into this Discourse, to set
down some general Rules or Notes concerning the bearing of Birds or Fowls, that
the Reader may know whither to resort for a resolution of such doubts as may
arise touching their bearing. Fowls or Birds are of more worthy bearing in
Coat Armor than Fishes, because they do more participate of air and fire (the
two noblest and highest Elements) than of water or earth. All fowls, of
whatsoever kind, must be born in Coat Armor, as is best fitting the propriety
of their natural actions, of going, sitting, standing, flying, etc. Otherwise
such Armory shall be said to be false, because Ars imitatur naturam in quantum
potest; Art as much as possible it can, does imitate Nature. All Birds are
mustered under the name of Fowls, as under their Genus or General, and so may
seem (after a sort) to be one. Nevertheless, in their Species, or several
kinds, they differ much touching their particular qualities; for some of them
are simple, some others subtle, some solitary, some sociable, some melodious,
some articulate, some docible, some doltish and indocible, some of long
continuance, and some only of a few months lasting. Leigh says, That Birds in
an Escocheon shall be numbered unto Ten, and if they exceed that number, then
they shall be said to be sans number, and shall be so blazoned. But Chassaneus
says, that they shall be numbered unto sixteen; and of such bearing and
blazoning he gives instances of Monsieur Montmorancie, and of the Lord Lovale.

Concerning the beaks or bills and feet of Birds, most Armorists finding them
to be of a different color from the rest of the body, do term them all
generally membred. But under reformation of the skill, I hold, that as there is
a difference in the Nobility of Birds, so ought they to have distinct terms of
blazon: So that all those that either are whole-footed, or have their feet
divided, and yet have no Tallons, should be termed membred. But the Cock, and
also all Birds of prey, should be termed in blazon armed; forasmuch as Nature
has assigned the Cock (being a Bird much addicted to battle) spurs; and to the
Birds of prey, sharp and hooked beaks and tallons, not only for encounter and
defense, but also to seize upon, gripe, and rend their prey, and are to them as
teeth and claws unto Lions, Tigres, and other fierce Beasts. Similium enim
similis est ratio; where the things are like, the reason is like. It is
generally observed, that amongst Fowls of prey, the Female is the noblest and
most hardy: which Nature did so provide, because (besides her own sustenance)
the care of feeding her young does especially lie on the Female; and therefore
if she should be timorous or cowardly, she would not be able to provide food
for herself and them. Such Fowls (says Vpton) as either in respect of their
uniformity do never change color naturally, or by nature are diversely
colored, shall be only named in blazon, and no mention at all made of their
colors, but shall be termed proper; unless they either in part, or in whole,
be born of some other color than is natural to them. In the blazoning of Fowls
much exercised in flight, if their wings be not displaied, they shall be said
to be born close; as he bears an Eagle, Falcon, Swallow, etc. close. As in
other forementioned Creatures, so in Fowls also, besides the whole bearing, the
parts or members are also usually born in Coat Armor, as the heads, wings,
feathers, and Legs: and both couping and erasing are as incident unto the parts
of Fowls, as of those Terrestrials, as by Examples following shall appear;
wherein I will first begin with River Fowls (which for the most part are
whole-footed) using neither curiousness in their form of placing, or
copiousness in their number; but only that by the assistance of some few chief
Examples, that which has been delivered by Precepts and Rules, may be the more
easily understood.

He bears Gules, a Swan, Argent, by the Name of Leigham. All River Fowls have
their tails shorter than other Birds; wherein Nature has providently ordained,
that the length of their tail should not be any impediment to them in their
swiming, diving, or running. The Swan is a Bird of great beauty and strength
also: and this is reported in honor of him, that he uses not his strength to
prey or tyrannize over any other Fowl, but only to be revenged on such as first
offer him wrong; In which case (says Aristole) he often subdueth the Eagle.
This Bird is dedicated to Venus, whose white color denotes sincerity; yet
Leda was by Jupiter deceived, when in that shape he fled into her Lap, when he
was pursued by the Eagle.

He bears Sable, a Swan with her wings expansed, Argent, membred, Or, within
a bordure engrailed of the same, by the Name of Moore. The Swan never
encounters with any other of his own kind, but in these two cases: First, if
any other be a Rival in his love, or offer to court his mate; in which quarrel
he will be revenged to the death: also, if another incroach upon his possession
and place of haunt, he is never at quiet till he has expulsed him. And these
two points are causes of most quarrels amongst the noblest Spirits.

Azure, a Bend engrailed between two Signets Royal, Argent, gorged with Ducal
Crowns with strings reflexed over their backs, Or. This is the Paternal
Coat Armor of Sir Charles Pitfield of Hoxton in the Parish of St. Leonards
Shoreditch in Middlesex, Knight. descended of the ancient Family of the Pitfields
of Symonsbury in the County of Dorset.

He bears Azure, a Bend, Or, between two Swans, Argent, by the Name of
Ienison; and is the Coat Armor of Thomas Ienison of Elswick in Northumberland,
Esquire Mayor of Newcastle upon Tyne for the year 1675.

Argent, on a Bend, Gules, between three Ogresses, as many Swans proper, by the
Name of Clark, and is the Coat Armor of Sir Francis Clark of the City of
London, Knight. of George Clark of Watford in Northamptonshire, Esquire of Robert Clark
of Long Buckley, and of Samuel Clark of Norton, both of the said County,
Esquires.

He bears Azure, two Swans, Argent, between as many Flanches, Ermyn, by the
Name of Melish of London, descended from the Family of the Melishes of
Sandersted in Surrey.

He bears Azure, three Swans necks erased, proper, by the Name of Lacy. It
seems these Swans died a violent death, by the renting off their Necks: but
for their natural death, diverse write, that it is so acceptable unto them, that
foreseeing the same, they sing for joy, which they never do in their young
days. In which respect, as also for his whiteness (the color of sincerity) he
was by the Ancients called Apollo's Bird; because those that are learned, know
best how to contemn this life, and to die with resolution and comfort; and also
for that good Arts should have sincerity and purity joined with it, but not
such as is in show only, and outward; for therein indeed the Swans purity is
too Puritanical, in that in his feathers and outward appearance he is all
white, but inwardly his body and flesh is very black.

He bears Sable, 3 Swans necks couped; proper, by the Name of Squire. Here
you shall not need to mention either the metal of these necks, being Argent, or
yet their membring, being Gules, because they be both natural to the Swan. But
if either of them differed from their natural color, then should you make
special mention thereof. Moreover in these and other Fowls, that are not much
exercised in flight, you shall not need to speak of their closeness: only if
their wings be open, then shall you take notice thereof.

He bears Gules, a Cheveron, Argent, between three wild Duks volant, proper,
by the Name of Wolrich. The wild Duck has many shrewd enemies, as Men, Dogs,
and Hawks; and therefore Nature has assisted her with many shifts; when any
man lays wait for them, they fly to the water; when the Eagle pursues them
there, they dive under water; when the Spaniel molests them there also, they
mount into the Air: by which varieties they often beguile the hopes of their
pursuers.

He bears Argent, a Stork, Sable, membred, Gules. This Coat pertains to the
Family of Starkey in Cheshire, where now resideth Io. Starkey of Wrenbury, Esquire
Thomas Starkey of Stretton, Esquire Ralph Starkey of Morfanny, Esquire and John Starkey
of Darley, Esquire In this Fowl we may observe the true and lively image of a Son;
for whatsoever duty a Son owes to his Parents, they all are found and observed
in the Stork. The duties of a Son to the father are four: The first is of love,
the second of honor, the third of obedience, the last is of aid and succor.
Forasmuch as he receives life by his Father (than which nothing is more
desirable) he is compelled by the Laws of Nature to love his Father. And
whereas it is the part and duty of a Father to bring up and instruct his Son in
virtue, and that virtue has no other reward than honor; unless the Son do
give honor to the Father, he does violate or rather lose the name of a Son.
Because also he receives nourishment from his Father, wherein consists the
sustentation of life; there is nothing comprised under this name of
sustentation, that the Son seems not to owe to his Father: finally, forasmuch
as the Father is God's Vicegerent, the Son, next unto God, is bound to obey his
Parents. These are the things that Nature, or rather God in Nature teaches us
by the Stork; Natura enim nihil agit, nisi aeternis consiliis, Nature does
nothing but by God's special direction.

He bears Azure, three Storks rising, proper, by the Name of Gibson. The
Stork is a Bird most careful of her young; and therefore Nature requires that
her care, for their young do take the like care for them in their old age.
Whence it is, that the Stork is the Emblem of a grateful man. In which respect
Aelian writes of a Stork, which bred on the house of one who had a very
beautiful wife, which in her husbands absence used to commit adultery with one
of her base servants; which the Stork observing, in gratitude to him who freely
gave him houseroom, flying in the Villains face, struck out both his eyes.

He bears Gules, 3 Herons, Argent, by the Name of Heron. This with the Arms
of Vlster, is the Coat Armor of Sir Cutbert Heron of Chipchase in
Northumberland, Baronet.

He bears Gules, a Cheveron, Ermyn, between three Herons, Argent. This is the
Coat Armor of John Heron of Godmanchester in Huntingtonshire, Esquire Consellor at
Law, who deriveth his descent from Sir John Heron, or Hairun, Knight. who came into
England with William the Conqueror, and married the daughter and heir of Sir
William Chepechase, or Chipches, of Chipchase Castle in Northumberland, Knight. of
the Saxon race; and by her had issue Sir Roger Heron of Chipchase Castle
aforesaid, Knight. lineal Ancestor of the said John.

Sable, a Cheveron, Ermyn, between three Herons, Argent, is born by Sir
Nathaniel Herne of the City of London, Knight and Alderman.

He bears Sable, a Fess between three Sheldrakes, Argent, by the Name of
Sheldon; and is the Coat Armor of Sir Joseph Sheldon of the City of London,
Knight. Lord Mayor thereof Anno 1676.

The Field is Azure, a Cheveron between 3 Sterns close, Argent, membred, Gules.
This is the Paternal Coat Armor of the ancient Family of Duke of Brampton in
the County of Suffolk, of which Sir John Duke Baronet, now resident at
Benhall-lodge in the said County, is the lineal descended Heir. And is also
born by Tollemach Duke of Lincoln's Inn in Middlesex, Esquire Exiginter of his
Majesty's Court of Common Pleas for London, etc. Son and Heir of Dr. Edward
Duke of Honington in Suffolk (by Elizabeth his wife, only daughter of Robert,
second son of Sir Lionel Tollemach of Bentley and Helmingham in the said
County, Baronet) and lineally descended of the whole blood from the ancient
Family of the Dukes of Brampton and Shadingfield in the said County. The color
Azure represents the Sapphire stone, whose virtue, as Philosophers write,
operateth much in according disagreements. This color in Armory by it self
signifies the Bearer thereof to be of a good disposition, and to merit
perpetual renown. And being compound with Argent, it denotes the Bearers
vigilance in his Sovereigns service.

Under these sorts will I briefly comprehend all River-Fowls whatsoever, viz.
all such as are whole-footed under the former; and all Cranes, Herns,
Cormorants, etc. under this latter; for that albeit they be of the kind of
River-Fowls, yet have they their feet divided.

CHAP. XX.
AFTER those River-Fowls whole-footed and divided, by order it now falls to
hand that I should proceed to such Fowls as do frequent, partly the Air, and
partly the Land; of which some are Fowls of prey, othersome are Predable, or
fit to be made a Prey.

Such as are Fowls of prey have their Beaks and Tallons evermore hooked and
sharp: hooked for sure seizing and detaining; and sharp for speedy rending and
dividing thereof. Such are Eagles of all sorts, Vultures, Falcons, Gerfalcons,
Sakers, Lanerts, Tercels, Sparhawks, Marlins, etc, as also Kites, Buzzards,
Owls, etc. Of Fowls (says Pliny) those that have hooked claws and tallons, are
not fruitful breeders, for the most part; wherein Nature has well provided for
all kinds of Fowls, that the mightier should not be so copious as the weaker,
and such as do fly from the tyrauny of others. Some of these Fowls of prey are
(in their kind) ennoblished by nature in as high a degree of Nobility, as the
chiefest of the Terrestrial Animals before handled. Such are those that do much
frequent the Air, as Eagles and Hawks of all sorts, which are much exercised in
flying; and albeit they do build their nests, and have their feeding upon the
earth, yet is their agitation above in the air. Therefore in regard of the
worthiness of the Element wherein they are chiefly occupied, I will begin with
Birds of prey, and after our former order, first with their whole bearing, and
so descend to the parts (promiscuously) of sundry Birds, according to the
dignity of their place, or more noble use, as in Example.

The Field is Azure, an Eagle displayed, Argent, armed, Gules, on a Canton of
the second, a sinister hand couped at the wrist, as the third. These Arms
appertained to the right worthy Sir Robert Cotton of Connington in
Huntingtonshire Knight and Baronet, now deceased; a learned Antiquary, and a
singula^ favourer and preserver of all good learning and antique Monuments.

Cajus Julius Caesar, Son of Lucius Caesar a Roman, in the year before Christ
52, having conquered France, overcame also Cassibulan King of Britain, and made
the Island become Tributary to him and his Successors 483 years, at which time
Constantine of Amorica obtained the Kingdom; he bore Sol, an Eagle displayed,
Saturn, armed, Mars.

Topaz, an Eagle displayed, Diamond; was the Coat of Edwyn a Saxon, who at the
time of the Conquest was Earl of Coventry; and he with Earl Swardus, and Marker
his Brother, kept the Isle of Ely against the Conqueror; for which cause he was
banished the Kingdom, and afterward was slain in Scotland without Issue.

Argent, an Eagle displayed, Sable, is the Coat Armor of Sir Theophilus
Bidulph of East-Greenwich in Kent.

Gules, an Eagle displayed, Or, is the Coat Armor of the Goddards of Norfolk.

The Eagle having her wings thus displayed, does manifest her industrious
exercise, in that she is not idle, but continually practices that course of
life whereunto nature has ordained her: and does signify a man of action,
evermore occupied in high and weighty affairs, and one of a lofty spirit,
ingenious, speedy in apprehension, and judicious in matters of ambiguity. For
amongst other noble qualities in the Eagle, her sharpness and strength of sight
is much commended; and it is a greater honor to one of noble Offspring to be
wise and of sharp and deep understanding, than to be rich or powerful, or great
by birth. The Eagle is the most honorable bearing of Birds; and for its
swiftness of slight, was called the Messenger of the Gods.

He bears Ermyn, an Eagle displayed, Gules, armed, Or, by the Name of
Beddingfield. This is an ancient Family, and of good note in the Counties of
Suffolk and Norfolk; and now pertains to Sir Henry Beddingfield of Oxborough,
and dwelling at Beck-hall in Norfolk, Baronet; to Philip Beddingfield of
Ditchingham, and Christopher Beddingfield of Witeton, both of the said County,
Esquires. And in the County of Suffolk, to Sir Thomas Beddingfield of
Darsham-hall, Knight. John Beddingfield of Halesworth, Esquire Henry Beddingfield also
of Halesworth, Esquire and Francis Beddingfield of Fleming-hall in Redlingfield,
Gent.

The Eagle is said to be Altivolans avis, an high-soaring Bird, that sometime
flies so high a pitch, as that she transcendeth the view of man. She has a
tender care of her young: when they be fligg or flush (as we say) and ready for
flight, then she stirs up her nest and fluttereth over them; yea, she takes
them on her wings, and so soareth with them through the Air, and carries them
aloft, and so freeth them from all danger. In that she carries her young ones
rather upon her wings than in her tallons, she shows her tender care and love
that she bears unto them. She is abundantly full of feathers, by means
whereof she glideth through the Air very lightly, and makes way through the
same with great expedition and swiftness. Our persecutors (says Jeremiah) are
swifter than the Eagles of heaven. And again, 2 Samuel 1. 23. Saul and Jonathan
were swifter than Eagles. The Crown of her head is enlarged with baldness as
her years are increased. As we may see Michah 1. 16. Make thee bald and shave
thee for thy delicate children: Enlarge thy baldness as the Eagle, for they are
gone into captivity from thee. Wherein the Prophet alludeth to the customs of
the Gentiles, who in the time of their mourning used to shave their heads, and
cut their flesh, and to scorch the same with stigmatical marks, which customs
God did expressly forbid the Israelites to use, as appears Deuteronomy 14. 1.

He bears Gules, an Eagle displayed, Or, crowned, Argent, by the Name of
Greaves; and with the Arms of Vlster, is the Coat Armor of Sir Edward Greaves
of St. Leonards Forest in Sussex, and of Harietsham in Kent, Baronet. This Coat
without the Arms of Vlster, and with its due difference, is born by his brother
Thomas Greaves, Dr. in Divinity.

The Field is Jupiter, an Eagle displayed checkey, Sol and Mars. This
Coat Armor (according to Bara) pertains to the Kingdom of Moravia. Albeit
that this kind of bearing may seem strange to us in England, yet it is very
common in Germany (says Sir John Fern in his Glory of Generosity) to bear
Beasts or any quick thing of colors checkey, as well as any other charge of
dead thing. And notwithstanding that such bearing be not agreeable to nature,
yet (says he) if it were either as ancient, or born by so great an estate (in
regard of the Armory) it holds comparison with the Coat of Caesar, which is
Or, and Eagle displayed with two necks, Sable, as far dissenting from Nature,
since it is monstrous for one body to have two heads. Yet in this and other
like, there are special mysteries of as honorable intendments, as there is in
those that are born according to nature.

He bears Argent, an Eagle displayed with two necks, Sable, by the Name of
Glynn; and with the Arms of Vlster, is the bearing of Sir William Glynn of
Bissister, alias Burcester, in Oxfordshire, and of Hawarden in Flintshire,
Baronet.

He bears Argent, an Eagle displayed with two necks within a bordure
engrailed, Sable, by the Name of Hoare; and is the Coat Armor of James Hoare
of Edmonton in the County of Middlesex, and of the Middle Temple, London, Esquire.

He bears Vert, 3 Eagles displayed in Fess, Or, by the Name of Winn; and is
the Coat of Sir Richard Winn of Gwedir in Caernarvonshire, Baronet. This Coat
is also born by Sir John Williams of Minster in the Isle of Thanet in Kent,
Baronet; and by Lewis and Richard Anwyll of Park in Merionethshire. Esquires.
Nor is it strange to see one Coat born by several Names, considering their
descent from one Tribe, for the different Surname is but a late accident.

Azure, a Fess indented, Or, between three Eagles displayed, Argent, by the
Name of Walter; and with the Arms of Vlster, is the Coat of Sir William Walter
of Sarsden in Oxfordshire, Baronet, descended from the ancient Family of the
Walters of Warwickshire.

He bears Argent, a Fess, Gules, between three Eagles displayed, Sable, by
the Name of Leeds; and is the Coat Armor of Mr. Edward Leeds of Lincoln's Inn
in Middlesex, only Son surviving of Mr. Anthony Leeds of Croxton in
Cambridgshire, who is son and heir of Edward Leeds of the said place, Esquire
descended from the Family of the Leeds anciently of Leeds Town, and also of
Leeds Castle in Kent, from which place this Family took their Name.

He bears Sable, an Eagle displayed between two Cotises, Argent, a Canton
sinister, Or, by the Name of Jordan; and is the Coat of Thomas Jordan of
Charlwood in Surrey, Esquire. Now I will show you an Example, where three of these
kind of Birds are born together upon one Ordinary; but when you find two or
more of them so born or in one Escocheon without interposition of some Ordinary
between them, you must not then term them Eagles, but Eaglets, as Leigh has
observed, page 104. And I take it, this Rule of his is grounded upon the same
Reason, that I have formerly given concerning Lions and Lioncels in the
fifteenth Chapter of this third Section, page 138. for the Eagle is the
Sovereign of Birds, as the Lion is of Beasts.

He bears Argent, on a Bend, Gules, three Eaglets displayed, Or, an Annulet
(for a difference of a fifth Brother) of the second. This Coat Armor pertained
to the Family of Abington of Dowdeswell in the County of Gloucester, of which
was descended that generous Gentleman Mr. Abington now deceased, sometime
Gentleman Usher to Prince Henry, and afterward one of the Gentlemen Pensioners
both to King James, and also to our late Sovereign. These Eaglets, because they
be still in exercise, do lively represent their Sires to be no Bastards or
degenerate Brood. It is storied, that the old Eagles make a proof of their
young by exposing them against the Sunbeams, and such as cannot steddily
behold that brightness, are cast forth as unworthy to be acknowledged their
Offspring. In which respect William Rufus, King of this Land, gave for his
Device an Eagle looking against the Sun, with this word Perfero, I can endure
it: to signify, he was no whit degenerate from his puissant Father the
Conqueror.

He bears Argent, a Cross between four Eaglets displayed, Gules, by the Name
of Strachey; and is the Coat Armor of John Strachey of Sutton-Court in
Somersetshire, Esquire Student at Lincoln College at Oxford, and Barrester of
Grays Inn.

The Field is Gules, a Cheveron, Verrey, between three Eagles displayed, Or.
This was the Coat Armor of Sir William Wilmer of Sywell in the County of
Northampton, Knight. The true magnanimity and fortitude of the mind is signified by
the Eagle, which never seeks to combat with any small Birds, or those which
for their weakness be far unequal to herself.

He bears Argent, three Eagles heads erased, Sable, armed, Or, by the Name of
Yellen. The Eagle, though he mounteth high, yet is his eye still roving on the
ground; so those who are highest elevated in honor, should yet still entertain
the humblest thoughts: But with this difference from the Eagle, in that she
looks downward to seek out some prey; which is most unworthy of any noble
Spirit, whom it ill befitteth to pry and prole into poor men's states to make a
prey of them, as those great ones of whom David says, that They humbled
themselves, that the congregation of the poor may fall into the hands of their
captains. The Beak of an Eagle in her old age waxes so hooked, that it
hinders her feeding, and so impareth her strength, then (according to some
Authors) she flies to the Rock, and whetteth the same so long, until she make
it proportionable to the neathermost, whereby she becomes no less capable of
food than before. And so renews her strength as Psalm. 103. Which satisfies
thy mouth with good things, making thee young and lusty as an Eagle.

He bears Argent, a Cheveron between 3 Hawks heads erased, Azure, by the Name
of Honywood; and with the Arms of Vlster, is the bearing of Sir William
Honywood of Elmested in Kent, Baronet, who is the eldest House of the said
Family, which has spread it self into several branches, amongst which are five
Knights.

The Field is Ruby, two wings inverted and conjoined, Topaz, by the Name of
Seymour. The wings are Hieroglyphics of celerity, and sometime of protection
and coverture; as the Psalmist often speaks of hiding under the shadow of the
wings of Gods favor: because the Hens do shelter their young from the rapine
of the mightier, with spreading their wings over them. And therefore some have
thought, that the displaying of the Roman Eagles wings did signify the
protection of the obedient, and the extending of her griping tallons to betoken
the rending and ruin of all that were resistant. Like as the Eagle in her life
makes prey of all other Fowl, so her feathers being mingled with the feathers
of other Fowls, are said to consume them all to dust: and therefore one
compares them to riches gotten by oppression or fraud, which will eat out in
time all the rest, though well gotten.

Diamond, two wings impaled, displayed volant, Or, in Lure, Pearl. This is the
Paternal Coat of the Right Honorable Robert Ridgeway Earl of Londonderry, and
Baron of Gallen Ridgeway in Ireland, etc. The place of his Lordships Residence
is at Torr in Devonshire.

He bears Gules, five Marlions wings in Saltire, Argent. This Coat pertained
to Sir Arthur Porter of Newark in the County of Gloucester, Knight. As wings of
fowls are born whole, so are their feathers also; amongst which the Ostriches
may justly bear praise for beauty, for distinction from all others, and for
frequent use and note in Armory, as I could show by diverse Examples of their
bearing, both by themselves and with and upon Ordinaries: but these following
may suffice.

He bears Or, on a Bend, Sable, three Ostrich's feathers, Argent, passing
through as many Scroles of the first, by the Name of Roger Clarendon, that was
base Son to the puissant black Prince. The proper conusance of the Princes of
Wales, being the same three feathers born altogether with one Escrole, having
this Motto, ICH DIEN; whereby in Princely modesty they dutifully profess that
which St. Paul avows, That the Son, as long as he is under tuition, is himself
a Subject. But the Ostrich's feathers in plume were sometimes also the Device
of King Stephen, who gave them with this word, VI NULLA INVERTITUR ORDO, No
force alters their fashion; alluding to the fold and fall of the feather, which
howsoever the wind may shake it, it cannot disorder it; as likewise is the
condition of Kings and Kingdoms well established.

He bears Argent, six Ostrich's feathers, three, two, and one, Sable, by the
Name of Iervis. This man was a principal Founder of Exbridge in the County of
Devon. Of the Ostrich, some have doubted whether he should be reckoned a Beast
or a Fowl, in respect of some participation of both kinds; yet does P. Belon du
Man's make no scruple at all to sort him among Birds: therefore I have held it
fit to place his feathers here amongst the parts of Birds.

He bears Sable, an Eagle's leg in Pale, erased a la quise, Argent, the
tallons, Gules, by the Name of Canhanser. This is termed a la quise; and quise
in French signifies a thigh. It is most undoubted that the devourer shall be
devoured in his due time, even as the rending and preying leg is here it self
rent off from the body. A worthy document for all great men, whose bearing is
of the ravening and preying kind, to stand in fear how they seize on any prey
against justice; because if they escape the like measure with man, yet it is a
just thing with God to show no mercy to them which are merciless.

He bears Or, two Eagles legs barr-ways, erased a la quise, Sable, armed,
Gules. Though the Eagles strength be much in her legs and beak, yet sometimes
she is for to use her wit to rend her prey; as especially she does in breaking
open all Shellfish, which she uses (as Fortune does many great men) to carry
them up very high, that they might fall with greater force, and so be broken up
for her food. Whereof there is recorded one memorable, but pitiful experiment
on the Poet Aeschylus, who sitting in deep meditation, an Eagle thinking his
bald-head had been a stone, let fall a Tortoise upon it, and so made a Tragical
end of that noble Tragedian.

The Field is Argent, a Cheveron between 3 Eagles legs erased, a la quise,
Sable, their tallons armed, Gules, by the Name of Bray. To these legs of
Eagles I hold it not unfit to adjoyn (for company) 3 Ravens legs born after
another sort. The Raven was the Ensign of the Danes when they invaded this
Kingdom; whose whole bearing you shall find hereafter.

He bears Argent, three Ravens legs erased, Sable, meeting in the Fess
point, their Guly tallons extended into the three acute corners of the
Escocheon, by the Name of Owen of Wales, the Son of Madock. The Raven has his
name for his Rapine, whence other like Birds are termed Ravenous; but his
stomach is most showed on dead Carcasses, whereas amongst generous Spirits, it
is accounted base to be valiant amongst them that cannot resist, or to hurt the
name and reputation of the dead.

As the Terrestrial Animals have their peculiar actions and gestures, so
doubtless have Birds and Fowls their gesture according to their kind: for
sometime we find them born pearching, which action is more usual with Birds or
Fowls of prey that are thoroughly mained and brought to the fist, as in this
Example.

He bears Gules, a Bend wavy, Argent, in the sinister chief point a Falcon
standing on a Perch, Or. This Coat pertained to the Family of Hawkeridge of
Hawkworthy in the County of Devon.

Now since we are come to treat of Fowls of prey; whereof (next to the Eagle,
which is reckoned the Sovereign Queen of all Fowls, like as the Lion is reputed
the King of all Beasts) the Goshawk, the Falcon, the Gerfalcon, and all other
long-winged Hawks; as also all Sparhawks, Marlions, Hobbeys, and other like
small Fowl of prey are the chief, it shall not be altogether impertinent
(though therein I do somewhat digress from my principal purpose) if I give some
little touch of the propriety of terms commonly used of Falconers in managing
their Hawks, and things to them appurtenant, according to the slenderness of my
skill, always subscribing herein to the censure and reformation of professed
Falconers. The cause of this my digression is, the desire I have to give some
superficial taste unto Gentlemen of the terms of Falconry, like as I have done
Chap. 14. of the terms of skilful Woodmen or Huntsmen: That so in their mutual
conversing together, they may be able to speak properly (though but
superficially) and deliver their minds in apt terms, when in their meetings
they happen to fall into discourse of the noble recreations and delights,
either of our generous Armorial Profession, or of Hunting and Hawking; that so
the standers by may say of them (when they shall observe their skilful
discourses) as old Father Simon said to Sosia his late Bondsman, touching the
delights of his Son Pamphilus, Ter. And.

Quod plerique omnes faciunt adole scentuli,
Vt animum ad aliquod studium adjungant, aut equos
Alere, aut canes ad venandum, aut ad Philosophos:
Horum ille nihil egregie praeter caetera
Studebat, and tamen omnia haec mediocriter.
It is a usual thing with the most part of young men to delight themselves,
either in pampering of Horses, or to cherish Dogs for hunting, or to addict
themselves to the study of Philosophy; he fixed not his delight in any one of
these more than another, yet was he meetly well seen in them all.

The terms of Falconry, that I purpose to touch in this place, are briefly
these that follow.

First, a Hawk is said to bate, when she striveth to fly from the fist.

She is said to rebate, when by the motion of the bearers hand she recovereh
the fist.

You must say, feed your hawk, and not give her meat.

A hawk is said (after she has fed) she smites or sweepeth her beak, and not
wipeth her beak or bill.

By the beak of an hawk is understood the upper part which is nooked.

The nether part of the beak is called the hawks clap.

The holes in the hawks beak are called her Nares.

The yellow between the beak and the eyes is called the Sere.

Hawks of long small black feathers like hairs about the Sere, are properly
called Crinites.

You must say your hawk jouketh, and not sleeps.

Also your hawk pruneth, and not picketh herself.

But your hawk cannot be said properly to prune herself, but when she begins
at her legs, and fetches moisture at her tail, wherewith she embalmeth her
feet, and strikes the feathers of her wings through her beak.

Her fetching of the Oil is called the Note.

Your hawk is said to rowse, and not shake herself.

Sometime your hawk countenances, when she picketh herself.

Then shall you not say she pruneth herself, but that she reformeth her
feathers.

Your hawk collieth, and not breaks; your hawk straineth, not clitcheth or
snatcheth.

She mantleth, and not stretches, when she extends one of her wings along
after her legs, and so the other.

After she has thus mantled herself, she crosses her wings together over her
back, which action you shall term the warbling of her wings and say, she
warbleth her wings.

You shall say your hawk mutesheth or muteth, and not skliseth.

You shall say cast your hawk to the Perch, and not set your hawk upon the
Perch.

Furthermore you shall say, she is a fair, long, short, thick hawk, and not a
great hawk.

Also you shall say, this hawk has a large, or a short beak, but call it not a
bill.

Also that your hawk is full gorged, and not cropped.

And that she has a fine head, or a small head well seasoned.

You shall say, your hawk puts over, and endueth, but both of them in a
diverse kind.

She puts over, when she removes her meat from her gorge into her bowels,
by traversing with her body, but chiefly with her neck, as a Crane or some
other bird does.

She never endueth so long as her bowels be full at her feeding; but as soon as
she has fed, and rests, she endueth by little and little.

If her gorge be void, and her bowels any thing stiff, then shall you say she
is embowelled, and has not fully endued.

So long as you find any thing in her bowels, it is dangerous to give her meat.

He bears Sable, a Goshawk, Argent, pearching upon a stock fixed in the base
point of the Escocheon of the second, armed, jessed, and belled, Or, by the
Name of We Will, and is quartered by Copleston of Egford. This Coat stands in
Staverton Church in the County of Devon: and it may represent some bearer who
was ready and serviceable for high affairs, though he lived at rest, and not
employed.

He bears Or, on a Canton, Azure, a Falcon volant, with jesses and bells of
the first, by the Name of Thurstone. This Fowl has her tallons or pounces
inwardly crooked like a hook, and is called in Latin Falco (says Calepine) non
quod falcatis unguibus, sed quod rostro and talis tota falcata sit ad rapinam;
because it has both tallons, beak, and all made hooked for to prey. Vpton
calls her Alietus, saying, Alietus ( ut dicit Glossa super Deuteron. 14.)
idem est quod Falco. This bird (according to the same Author) is very bold and
hardy, and of great stomach; for she encountreth and grapleth with Fowls much
greater than herself, invading and assailing them with her breast and feet.
Others (says he) affirm that Alietus is a little Fowl that preyeth upon small
Birds: of whom it is said, Obtinet exiguas Alietus corpore vires;
Sunt and aves minimae praeda cibusque suus:
The Aliet is a Bird of little power;
And little Birds are all he eats and does devour.


This bird (according to Vpton) does show that he that first took upon him the
bearing thereof, was such an one as did eagerly pursue, vex, and molest poor
and silly Creatures.

He bears Argent, a Fess, Gules, between three Falcons volant, Azure, beaked,
jessed; and belled, Or, by the Name of Georges; and is the Coat Armor of John
Georges of Cicester, alias Cirencester in Glocestershire, Esquire where he resided,
till forced thence in the late unhappy Troubles unto his Mannor-house of
Bawton, alias Bawdington, within a mile of the said Cicester, where he has
resided ever since: of which said Manor himself and Ancestors have been Lords
by lineal descent ever since the third of King Edward the Second, by marriage
then had between William Georges, and Katharine daughter and coheir of Robert
de Penington, and have been a Family of good repute in the said County. This
worthy Gentleman has always been loyal to his Sovereign, serving as a Burgess
of Cicester (his birthplace) in all lawful Parliaments since the beginning of
the reign of King Charles the First, unto this present year 1675. He is one of
the ancientest Justices of the Peace and Quorum of the said County; and at
present one of the most ancient Benchers of the honorable Society of the
Middle Temple, London.

He bears per Fess, Azure and Argent, in Chief two Falcons volant, Or, by the
Name of Stephens; and is the Coat of Thomas Stephens, Esquire the only Son and Heir
of Sir Thomas Stephens of Little Sadbury in Glocestershire, Knight. yet living, by
Katherine, one of the Daughters and Coheirs of William Combs of Stratford upon
Avon in Warwickshire. His Great-grand-father was Thomas Stephens, an eminent
Lawyer, Attorney General to Prince Henry, and after his decease to Charles the
First (whilst Prince of Wales) in which service he died. His Grandfather was
Edward, who married the eldest Sister of the Right Honorable John Lord Crew;
and the said Thomas is now married to Anne Neale of Deane in Bedfordshire.

He bears Azure, a Cheveron between 3 Falcons, Argent, by the Name of
Phillips, and is the Coat Armor of Ambrose Phillips of the Inner Temple,
London, Esquire.

He bears Or, on a Bend, Azure, three Falcons mounting, Argent, jesses and
bells of the first, by the Name of Degge; and with a Crescent, is thus born by
Simon Degg of Callow-hill in Staffordshire, and of Derby in the County of
Derby, Esquire second Son of Sir Simon Degge, Knight.

He bears Sable, a Falcon preying Or, standing with his wings expanded on a
Duck, Argent, on a Chief, Or, a Cross botonee, Gules, by the Name of Madden;
and was born by Thomas Madden of the Inner Temple, London, Esquire descended of the
Family of the Maddens of Maddenton in Wiltshire, who are now seated at
Rousby-Castle in the County of Fermanagh in the Province of Vlster in Ireland.

He bears Gules, three Sparrow-hawks, Argent, jessed and belled, Or, by the
Name of Atterton.

He bears Argent, on a Fess, Gules, three Falcons heads erased of the first,
by the Name of Baker; and is the Coat Armor of Sir John Baker of Wells in
Somersetshire, and of St. Paul's Covent Garden in Middlesex, Knight. Physician in
Ordinary to his Majesty King Charles the Second.

The Field is Sable, a Cheveron between three Owls, Argent. This was the
Coat Armor of Sir John Prescot, Knight. The Owl in Armory signifies prudence,
vigilance, and watchfulness by night; it is Minerva's bird, and was born by the
ancient Athenians for their Armorial Ensign, as I have before showed.

Sable, a Fess embatteled between 3 Owls, Argent, and is the Coat Armor of Sir
Francis Theobald of Barking-hall in the Parish of Barking in Suffolk, Knight. a
great lover of learning and Fautor of learned men; insomuch that Dr. Castle, in
his Polyglot Lexicon, makes this mention of him, That he is Harum Linguarum
Callentissimus.

He bears Gules, a Cheveron engrailed between three Owls, Argent, by the Name
of Hewitt; and is born by Sir George Hewitt of Pishobury in Hartfordshire,
Baronet.

Ermyn, on a quarter, an Owl, by the Name of Fowler; and is born by Walter
Fowler of St. Thomas in Staffordshire, Esquire.

He bears Or, a Raven proper, by the name of Corbet. This with the Arms of
Vlster, is the Paternal Coat Armor of Sir John Corbet of Stoke upon Tean, and
Adderley in Shropshire, Baronet; as also of Sir Vincent Corbet of
Moarton-Corbet in the said County, Baronet. This is good and ancient Armory, as
we showed before in the Escocheon of the Ravens three legs. It has been an
ancient received opinion, and the same also grounded upon the warrant of the
sacred Scriptures (if I mistake not) that such is the property of the Raven,
that from the time his young ones are hatched or disclosed, until he sees what
color they will be of, he never takes care of them, nor ministers any food
unto them; therefore it is thought that they are in the mean space nourished
with the heavenly dew. And so much also does the Kingly Prophet David affirm,
Which gives fodder unto the cattle, and feeds the young Ravens that call
upon him, Psalm. 147. 9. The Raven is of color black, and is called in Latin
Corvus, or Corax, and (according to Alexander) has but one kind of cry or
sound, which is Cras, Cras. When he perceives his young ones to be
pen-feathered and black like himself, then does he labor by all means to
foster and cherish them from thenceforward.

This bird (after his manner) is clamorous, fraudulent, filching things away by
stealth, and hiding them secretly: Furthermore Alexander says, That Ravens do
sometimes skirmish amongst themselves with much eagerness, and do assail each
other with their armors, viz. with jobbing with their bills, scratching with
their tallons, and beating with their wings: in which conflict if the Hen do
chance to have the better of the Cock, she ever after holds him in
subjection. But howsoever they do cope together in their encounter, certain it
is that the Victor ever after carries a hand over the conquered.

He bears Gules, a Pelican in her nest, with wings displaied, feeding of her
young ones, Or, vulned, proper, by the Name of Carne; and is born by Thomas
Carne of Nash, and John Carne of Wenny, both in Glamorganshire, Esquire The
Egyptian Priests (as Farnesius notes) used the Pelican for a Hieroglyphick,
to express the four duties of a Father toward his Children: whereof the first
is generation; the second is his office of education; the third of training up,
or instruction of learning; the fourth and last, this duty of informing the
eyes of his Children with the example of his virtuous and honest life: for in
the institution of civil behavior, the eyes are more easily informed for the
apprehension of instruction, than the ear. This bird was also born Topaz, in a
Field Sapphire, by that sapient and great Peer of his time, Richard Fox Bishop
of Winchester, Lord Privy Seal, and Counselor to two great Kings, Henry the
Seventh, and Henry the Eighth; which noble Prelates memory shall be eternally
blessed, for being the cause of the most happy marrying of the Lady Margaret
(daughter of Henry the Seventh) to James the Fourth King of Scotland; by whose
glorious Issue Great Britany now enjoys the height of Glory and Happiness.
The said Bishop was the magnificent Founder of Corpus Christi College in
Oxford, which also bears the same Coat Armor.

He bears Azure, a Cheveron Ermyn between three Pellicans, Argent, vulning
themselves, proper, by the Name of Cullum; and is the Coat of Sir Thomas Cullum
of Hawstead-Place in Suffolk, Bar.

He bears Azure, three Pellicans, Argent, vulning themselves, proper, by the
Name of Pelham; and is the Coat Armor of Sir William Pelham of Braklesby in
Lincolnshire, Knight. Son of Sir William Pelham of the said place, Knight. whose Father
Sir William Pelham of the place aforesaid, Knight. who was descended from the
ancient Family of the Pelhams of Laughton in Sussex, was a person in great
eminence in the time of Qu. Elizabeth, being by her Majesty entrusted in these
great Employs; viz. he was Lord Chief Justice of Ireland; he was in Anno 1586.
sent Lord Marshall of the English Forces that went into the Low Country; he
was also Master of her Ordnance, and one of her Honorable Privy Council; and
was an active Commissioner 1588. and in the following year in Scotland. This
Sir William married the Daughter of Nevill Earl of Westmoreland; his Son the
Daughter of the Lord Willoughby of Parham; and the Grandchild the Daughter of
the Lord Viscount Couway.

Hitherto of Fowls of prey, leaving other particulars to each man's observation:
Now of those which are predable, whereof some are savage, some domestical. The
savage I call those that are not subject to man's government, but do naturally
shun their society, and usually are commorant in Woods, Forests, Heaths, etc.
and are subject to prey and tyrannical oppression, as these which ensue.

He bears Azure, three Bustards rising, Or, by the name of Nevill. These
cannot be properly said to be volant, albeit they may seem to be flying, but
are more aptly said, according to the Opinion of some blazoners to be volentes
volare; as much as to say, as preparing themselves to make their flight. It is
an observation of Pliny, that all Fowls having long shanks, do (in their
slight) stretch forth their legs at length to their tails; but such as are
short legged do truss their feet to the midst of their bodies.

He bears Azure, a Bend, Or, on a Chief, Argent, two Choughs proper, by the
Name of Vyner. This with the Arms of Vlster, is the Coat Armor of Sir Robert
Vyner of the City of London, Knight, Baronet, and Lord Mayor thereof Anno 1675.
a great encourager of ingenious and commendable Undertakings.

He bears Argent, a Fess, Gules, between six Cornish Choughs, proper, by the
Name of Onslow; and is the Coat Armor of Arthur Onslow of Clandon in Surrey,
Esquire descended of the ancient Family of the Onslows of Onslow-hall in Shropshire.

He bears Or, three Swallows close, proper, by the Name of Watton. This bird
is the most welcome harbenger, showing the approach of the pleasing Spring;
being therein like feigned and temporizing Friends, who in the spring of
Honors, and summer of Abundance, will gladly converse with those, whom in the
winter of Adversity they will forsake, and scarce acknowledge they ever saw
them before. Such an one was that proud Cardinal, who upon his new dignity, not
vouchsafing to look on his familiar friends, one of them came to him (while all
others did congratulate his felicity) to deplore his misery; who wondering
thereat, and asking the cause of such his sorrow, Because (quoth he) since that
red hat came on your head, you have quite lost your eyesight, and cannot
discern your friends as you were wont.

He bears Argent, a Bar between three Swallows volant, proper, a Chief,
Gules, by the Name of Swallow. The Swallow (says Vpton) has a small bill and
comely shape, of a seemly black, white on the belly, and red about the throat,
having little flesh, but well stored with feathers and large wings, and
therefore is swift of flight. Man's industry will hardly suffice to perform
that, which this little bird does fashion out in clay, in making her Nest. The
bearing of the Swallow fitteth well a man that is industrious, prompt, and
ready in the dispatch of his business.

Azure, on a Chief, Or, three Martlets, Gules, by the Name of Wray. This is the
Coat Armor of Sir Theophilus Wray of Glentworth in Lincolnshire, Baronet. As
also of Sir Christopher Wray of Ashby in the said County, Baronet.

Argent, on a Chief, Azure, three Martlets of the Field, is the Coat of Sir
John Frederick of the City of London, Knight and Alderman.

He bears Argent, a Cheveron between 3 Martlets, Sable, by the Name of
Wymondesold; and is born by William Wymondesold of Southwell in the County of
Nottingham, Esquire one of the Society of Lincolns Inn.

He bears Argent, on a Fess, Azure, between two Martlets, Sable, 3 Flowers de
lis, Or, by the Name of Hustler; and is the Coat Armor of Sir William Hustler
of Acklam in Cleaveland in the County of York, Knight.

He bears Argent, a Cheveron, Sable, on a Chief of the second, 3 Martlets of
the first, by the Name of Wild; and is the Coat of Sir William Wild Knight and
Baronet, one of his Majesty's Justices of the Common Pleas.

He bears Pearl, on a Cheveron, Sapphire, between three Martlets, Diamond, as
many Crescents, Topaz. This is the Paternal Coat Armor of the Right Honorable
Edward Watson, Baron Rockingham of Rockingham Castle in Northamptonshire; a
great sufferer for his Majesty (as was his Lordships Father) in the late
unhappy wars: Son of Lewis Lord Rockingham, by the Lady Elianor, Sister to John
Earl of Rutland now living.

He bears Gules, ^ Cheveron embatteled, Ermyn, between three Martlets, Or, by
the Name of Wythens; and is the Coat Armor of Francis Wythens of Eltham in
Kent, Esquire one of the Society of the Middle Temple, London, descended of the
ancient Family of the Wythens, whose Ancestors have been there seated for
several Generations.

He bears Argent, a cross Patonce between four Martlets, Sable, a Canton
Ermynois, by Name of Stringer; and is the Coat Armor of Thomas Stringer of
Bexwells in the County of Essex, Esquire

He bears per Fess, Gules and Argent, six Martlets counterchanged, by the
Name of Fenwick; and with the Arms of Vlster, is the Coat Armor of Sir John
Fenwick of Wallington in Northumberland, Baronet, one of the Captains of the
Royal Regiment in France under the Command of his Grace James Duke of Monmouth,
etc.

He bears Or, an Escocheon within Orle of Martlets, Sable, by the Name of
Brownlow; and is born by Sir John Brownlow of Belton near Grantham in
Lincolnshire, Baronet.

He bears Argent, a Bend engrailed bewixt six Martlets, Sable, by the Name of
Tempest. This with the Arms of Vlster, is the bearing of Sir Thomas Tempest of
Stella in the Bishopric of Durham, Baronet; a delightful seat, pleasantly
situate on the South side of the River Tyne.

He bears Azure, a Bend, Argent, cotized, Or, betweet 6 Martlets of the same.
This Coat Armor pertains to the ancient Family of de Labere, whereof Richard
de Labere of Sowtham, in the County of Gloucester, Esquire is lineally descended.
The Martlet, or Martinet ( says Bekenhawb) has legs exceeding short, that
they can by no means go: and thereupon it seems the Grecians do call them
Apodes, quasi sine pedibus; not because they do want feet, but because they
have not such use of their feet as other birds have. And if perchance they fall
upon the ground, they cannot raise themselves upon their feet as others do, and
so prepare themselves to flight. For this cause they are accustomed to make
their Nests upon Rocks and other high places, from whence they may easily take
their flight, by means of the support of the Air. Hereupon it came, that this
Bird is painted in Arms without feet: and for this cause it is also given for a
difference of younger Brethren, to put them in mind to trust to their wings of
virtue and merit, to raise themselves, and not to their legs, having little
Land to put their foot on.

He bears Or, on a Bend, Gules, cotized, Azure, between six Martlets of the
second, three wings, Argent, by the Name of Walden; and is the Paternal
Coat Armor of Sir Lionel Walden of Huntington in Huntingtonshire, Knight. lineally
descended from Robert Walden, second brother of Sir Richard Walden Knight. Lord of
Erith in Kent, tempore Hen. 8. which said Sir Richard's Daughter and Coheir
Elizabeth, was married to George Talbot, fourth Earl of Shrewsbury of that
Family; by whom he had Issue Anne (sole Heir of her Mother) who married Peter
Compton Esquire by whom he had Issue Henry Lord Compton, Ancestor to the present
Earl of Northampton. The aforesaid Sir Lionel, by Elizabeth Daughter and
Coheir of Mr. Charles Balam in Cambridgeshire, has Issue Lionel, Mary, and
Catharina.

He bears Sable, on a Cheveron between 10 Martlets, Argent, five Plates, by
the Name of Bard; and is the Coat Armor of Maximilian Bard of Caversfield in
Bucks, Esquire descended from an ancient Family of that Name of North-Kelsey in
Lincolnshire.

He bears party per Pale Sable and Azure, a Saltire, Argent, charged with
five Cocks, Sable, between 3 Towers or Castles flaming, and two Spears
Saltire-wise in base, Or, by the Name of Johnson; and is born by Nathaniel
Johnson of Killesworth in the Bishopric of Durham, Gent. chief Farmer of the
Chimney-money of his Majesty for the four Northern Count^es.

CHAP. XXI.
FROM Predable Fowls that are savage, we come to Fowls domestical and homebred,
that are delighted with man's society: Such are these that follow, with their
like.

He bears Sapphire, three Cocks, Pearl, armed, crested, and jellopped, proper.
This is the bearing of the Rt. honorable O. Brian Cokaine, Viscount Cullen in
Ireland, whose seat is at Ruston in Northamtonshire. As some account the Eagle
the Queen, and the Swallow or Wagtail the Lady, so may I term this the Knight
amongst Birds, being both of noble courage, and also prepared evermore to the
battle, having his Comb for an helmet, his sharp and hooked bill for a
faulchion or courtlax to slash and wound his enemy; and as a complete Soldier
armed Cap-a-pe, he has his legs armed with spurs, giving example to the
valiant Soldier to expel danger by fight, and not by flight. The Cock croweth
when he is Victor, and gives a testimony of his conquest. If he be vanquished,
he shunneth the light and society of men. Of all birds, this may best be said
in blazon to be armed, that is thus furnished and prepared to the encounter. He
is the Herald of the day, and the Sentinel of the night for his vigilance.

He bears Argent, three Capons, Sable, armed, crested, and jawlopped, Or, by
the name of Capenhurst. I do term these Capons armed, because Natura sunt
bellicosi, tametsi castratione facti sunt omnind imbelles, by Nature they were
valorous, though by reason of their kerving, their courage is not only abated,
but utterly taken away. This bird, because he waxes the fatter for being
kerved, is brought for one of the Arguments to prove the single life the
happiest, and that Coelibes are Coelites, the single life the Saint-like life.
But Lipfius must bring better Witnesses than Capons to approve the truth
hereof, before it will be received for truth.

Azure, a Cock upon an Escallop-shell, Or, by the Name of Otterbury.

He bears Argent^ three Peacocks in their pride, proper, by the Name of
Pawn. The Peacock is so proud, that when lie erecteth his Fan of Plumes, he
admireth himself. And some write, that he swalloweth up his Excrements, because
he envieth man the use thereof. Indeed those which are most proud, are
generally of such sluttish and dirty qualities. He displayeth his Plumes
against the rays of the Sun, that they may glister the more gloriously: and he
loses this beautiful train yearly with the fall of the Leaf; at which time he
becomes bashful, and seeks corners, where he may be secret from the sight of
men, until the spring of the year, when his train begineth to be renewed. And
such is the quality of many Dames, who being painted and richly attired, cannot
keep within doors; but being undressed and in their own hew, they are loath any
man should see them.

He bears Argent, a Cheveron, Sable, between three Turkycocks in their pride,
proper, by the Name of Yeo; and is the Coat of Paul Yeo of North-Petherwin in
Devonshire, Esquire

Like as there are Insect Animals that live upon the Earth, as has been before
showed, in shutting up the Tract of Terrestrial Animals: so are there in like
sort Insects that live above the Earth, whereof I purpose to produce some few
Examples, and so to perclose this Treatise of such Animals as do live above the
Earth in the Air.

He bears Azure, three Bees volant, En arriere, by the Name of Bye. The Be I
may well reckon a Domestic Insect, being so pliable to the behoof of the
Keeper. The admirable policy and regiment of whose Commonwealth, both in Peace
and War, with the several duties both of the sovereign Be, and of the
subjects, is beyond belief, and will ask as large a Volume as the Commonwealth,
either Plato's or Licurgus, to set it forth as it deserves.

These small and slender bodies are endowed with a perfect soul (if I may so
say) as by the effects appears: for they do not only live and engender; but
also have the use of the senses, as sight, hearing, smelling, tasting, and
feeling, no less than other Volatiles or flying Animals; and in some of them we
may observe a singular sharpness of wit, and (to speak with Solomon) fullness of
wisdom; as in these Bees and such others. Great is the Lord therefore that
made them, and right mavelous also is he in all his works, who has given
this fullness of wisdom to these contemptible Creatures.

The Be is reputed to be of a doubtful kind, in regard that it is uncertain,
whether he may be fitly numbered amongst the savage or domestical kind of
Animals; therefore they are reckoned his that has obtained the possession of
them according to our vulgarspeech, Catch that catch may. They are said to be
ferae naturae: therefore the Bees that do swarm on your trees, until you have
gathered them into an hive, they are no more reckoned yours, than the birds
that do build their nests in your tree: but being once hived, they cease to be
public, and shall be adjudged the possessors, though he be not interessed in
the ground: and till then, it is lawful for any man to take the Honycombs, if
they have any at all. Also a swarm escaped out of your hives, is no longer
reckoned yours than you have them in sight, and it is lawful for you so long to
prosecute them; but if they fly out of your sight, fiunt occupantis.

The Egyptians reckoned the Be a figure of Regal Power, because in him
(besides the Nature of brute Animals) he is constituted a King, that
administreth his function (as it were) by deep counsel, forasmuch as he is void
of sting, and governs his hive, as his Commonwealth, altogether by lenity.

If a Be sting a dead carcass, she loses not her sting; but if she sting a
living man, she loses her sting. So death stinging us, who were as dead flesh,
did not lose his sting: But stinging Christ, has lost his sting. Therefore we
may say, O death where is thy sting, etc. 1 Cor. 15. Death has only the name
of death, but not the sting of death; as the brazen Serpent in the Wilderness
had the form and shape of a Serpent, but not the life nor sting of a Serpent,
Numb. 21. 9.

He bears Argent, a Bee-hive beset with Bees diversely volant, Sable, by the
Name of Rooe of Cheshire. The Be (says the Wise man) is the least of Birds,
but she is of much virtue; and she provideth both honey for pleasure, and wax
for thrift. And not only do they carefully preserve their own petty state, but
by their labors do much sway in all humane states and policies also; as is
said in that Verse, The Calf, the Goose, the Be;
The World is ruled by these three.
Meaning that Wax, Pens, and Parchment sway all men's states. Bees have three
properties of the best kind of Subjects; they stick close to their King; they
are very industrious for their livelihood, expelling all idle Drones; they will
not sting any but such as first provoke them, and then they are most fierce.

He bears Sable, an Harvest-fly in Pale, volant, en arriere, Argent, by the
Name of Bolowre. As touching Insects that live above the earth in the air,
Pliny gives this general note, That all such as are armed with a sting in
their body or tail, have four wings a piece; and none again have above two,
that carry their weapon in their mouth. To the former ( says he) Nature has
given it for their revenge; to the other, only to feed themselves withal, and
to content Nature. All Insects ( says the same Author) having hard eyes, have
their forefeet longer than the rest, to the end that with them they may other
whiles scour their eyes.

He bears Sable, 3 Gad-bees volant, en arriere, Argent, by the Name of
Burninghill. This fly makes a great humming noise when he flies, and of some
is called the Gad-bee, and of others the Dun-fly, Brimesey, or Horse-fly, which
in the summer time do grievously vex Cattle, having (as Aelianus says) a sting
both great and stiff. These are of the nature of common Barretors,
Pettifoggers, and Promoters, which are ever disturbing the quiet state of their
civil and honest Neighbors.

He bears Azure, a Cheveron between 3 Butterflies volant, Argent, by the Name
of Papillon; and is the Paternal Coat of Thomas Papillon of the City of London,
and of Awcridge, alias Acrysse in Kent, Esquire.

CHAP. XXII.
HAVING finished our intended survey of Animals, both Terrestrial and Aerial,
and of their use in Armory; I will now (according to order) proceed to the
handling of watery Animals, being such as have their principal abode and relief
in the waters; as Fishes of all sorts. As fishes are of a less complete nature
than earthly or aerial Animals, so must they in reason be of less esteem in
Coat Armor, Data paritate gestantium, unless the quality of the Bearer add an
honor thereto: because those others do approach much nearer to the nature of
man, than the watery sort does; Et illud est melius, quod optimo est
propinquius; That is the better, which comes nearest to the best. And the
Picture which is the adumbration of the thing pictured, cannot invert or alter
the order or worth of the things whereof it bears the similitude, Quia fictio
non plus operatur quam veritas; representations may not alter the truth of the
principal.

But here I speak of arms composed of fishes, as they are considered in their
self-nature; which notwithstanding as they be born of many persons descended of
Noble and Royal Families, are so much enoblished in their estimation, as that
they are to be preferred before many that are formed of beasts or fowls. This
therefore must be here also recommended for a general Rule, That the worthiness
of the Bearer is not the least respect we should use in considering the dignity
of things born in Coat Armor.

Like as birds have their plumes, wings, and trains, by means whereof they do
cut their way, and make smooth passage through the air; in like sort fishes are
furnished with fins, wherewith they guide themselves in their swiming, and cut
the current of the streams and waves, for their more easy passage, wherein
their course is directed by their tail, as ships are conducted by their Helm or
Ruther. And for their kinds of motion, fishes are in Scripture termed Reptilia:
In ipso magno mari and spatioso, illic reptilia sunt, etc. In the great and
wide sea there are things creeping innumerable, both small and great: which are
therefore said to be Reptilia, as Chassenus notes, Quia omnia quae natant
reptandi habent vel speciem, velnaturam: because things when they swim seem to
creep along in the water.

Fishes, albeit they have not breath (as we may say in a comparative sort) so
strong and sensible as four-footed Animals have, because they want Lungs or
Lights, as Aristotle has taught, yet it behooveth they should have both
attraction and respiration of breath in some fashion, which we call in Latin
Inspiratio, which is a drawing in of breath, and Respiratio, which is a venting
out of the breath attracted, as both Plato and Galen do teach, who do affirm
that fishes do receive and deliver their breath by their galls; For no longer
is any Animal said to have life, than he has attraction and remission of
breath.

Whereas Moses makes mention Genesis 2. 19, 20. That God caused all the beasts of
the field, and the fowls of heaven to come unto Adam, that he might see how he
would name them: there is no mention of the coming of fishes unto him, neither
that he gave names to them. The reason is, for that such is the nature of
fishes, as that they cannot live long out of their proper Element, which is the
water. Besides fishes do serve men for no other use, but for food, and some
sorts of them for medicine; whereof it comes, that we have not so many names
of fishes mentioned in the Scriptures, as of other Animals. For these Reasons
fishes were not produced before Adam, that he might give them Names answerable
to their Natures: Nevertheless God gave him dominion over them, as well as over
the rest, when he said Dominamini piscibus maris, etc.

Hereof it comes, that man has less familiarity and acquaintance with fishes
than with many other animals; as Horses, Dogs, small Birds of many kinds,
which we daily use, either to serve our necessities, or for our delights.

Fishes are born after a diverse manner, viz. directly upright, imbowed,
extended, endorsed, respecting each other, surmounting one another, fretted,
and trianguled, etc. All fishes (says Leigh) that are born feeding, shall be
termed in blazon devouring, because they do swallow all whole without
mastication or chewing: and you must tell whereon they feed. All fishes raised
directly upright, and having fins, shall be termed in blazon Hauriant, ab
hauriendo, signifying to draw or suck; because fishes do oftentimes put their
heads in such sort above the waters, to refresh themselves with the cool and
temperate air; but especially when the waters do so rage and boil in the depth
of the seas against some tempestuous storm, that they cannot endure the
unwonted heat thereof. All fishes being born transverse, the Escocheon must in
blazon be termed Naiant, of the word Nato, to swim; for in such manner do they
bear themselves in the waters when they swim.

Concerning both the variety and the innumerable multitude of fishes, Pliny is
of a pretty fantastical conceit, affirming that the seeds and universal
elements of the world are so sundry ways commixed one with another, partly by
the blowing of the winds, and partly by the rolling and agitation of the sea,
that it may be truly said, according to the vulgar opinion, That whatsoever is
engendered or bred in any part of the world besides, the same is to be found in
the sea; besides many things more in it, which no where else are to be seen. A
fish (if you will believe Farnesius) is called piscis a pascendo, Quia ad rem
nullam nisi ad pastum natus est; he is bred only to eat, and to be eaten. Of
fishes, some have hard and crusty coverings; others have a softer outside: and
those latter are also of two sorts, some having only skin, and others scales.
Scaled fishes by their fins are both adorned and greatly assisted also in their
swiming: but Congers, Eels, Lampreys, and such like, may seem (in respect of
the smalness of their fins) to have received them of nature, rather for
ornament than for use in swiming, especially because they lie most in the
bottom of the waters, and therefore less need their fins.

Of these several kinds I will briefly give some few Examples, wherein I rather
purpose to lay open their diverse forms of bearing in Coat Armor, than meddle
with their unlimitable particular kinds: as in Example.

He bears Argent, three Eels Naiant in Pale barr-ways, Sable, by the Name of
Ellis. Of this sort are all Lampreys, Congers, and others of like kind, whereof
some are born Naiant aften this manner, and other Hauriant. This sort, of all
others, does most nearly resemble in their motions such Reptiles, as having no
feet, do with a kind of volubleness make their way in the waters with many
intricate doublings. To these may be added Plaices, Soles, Flounders, and
whatsoever other fish, whose covering consists merely of skin, and have not
the defensible furniture of scales, such as next ensue; as in Example.

He bears Argent, a Cheveron, Gules, between three Soles-fishes hauriant,
proper, within a bordure engrailed, Sable. This Coat pertained to the Family of
Soles of Brabanne in the County of Cambridge. These arms are agreeable to the
Bearers name, which happen very often in armory; for diverse men taking their
Names form beasts, birds, fowls, or fishes, do bear Coat-Armours semblant
thereunto. This fish is known unto the Latinists by three names, Solea, a
similitudine Soleae, i. a shoes sole: Sandalium, which comes from the Greek
(...), or (...), a kind of shoe open with latchets on the instep; Lingulaca,
quod formam linguae referat: The French call this fish, Vne sole. The
delicateness of it in taste has gained it the name of the Partridge of the sea.

He bears Azure, a Dolphin naiant, imbowed, Argent, by the Name of
Fitz-Iames. The Dolphin is a fish of so great strength and swiftness, that when
the fishes, which he follows for his prey, fly to the rocks or shore for
shelter, in the fierceness of his pursuit he sometimes, dasheth himself dead
against the rock, and sometimes runs himself on shore. Such many times is the
success of over-heady and outrageous men, who seeking furiously the hurt of
others, feel the smart themselves in their own overthrow.

Sable, a Dolphin naiant devouring a fish, proper.

The Field is Jupiter, a Dolphin hauriant, Sol. This Coat is evermore born
quarterly with the three Flowers de lis, Sol, in a Field, Jupiter, by the
King's eldest Son, who bears the Title of the Dauphin of France; and is
thereby known to be heir apparent to the Crown of that Kingdom. The Naturalists
write, That the she Dolphin has Duggs abounaing with Milk, wherewith she
gives her young ones suck; and that she is (as in that respect) like to women,
so also in her affection of love; insomuch that Dolphins have fallen so
exceedingly in love with fair youths, as that they became most familiar with
them; and afterward wanting their company, have died for grief. They are
reported also to be great lovers of Music.

He bears Or, three Dolphins hauriant, Azure. This is the Paternal
Coat Armor of Mr. Peter Vandeput of London, Merchant, whose Grandfather Mr.
Giles Vandeput, came out of the Province of Brabant, and here feated himself;
where the Family has ever since continued eminent Merchants.

Azure, a Bend between two Dolphins, Or, by the Name of Frankland. This with
the Arms of Vlster, is the Coat Armor of Sir William Frankland of Thirkleby in
Yorkshire, Baronet.

He bears Argent, on a Bend, Azure, three Dolphins of the Field. This with
the Arms of Vlster, is the Coat of Sir Richard Franklyn of the More in
Hartfordshire, Knight and Baronet.

He bears Gules, Crussuly, Or, three Lucies or Pikes hauriant, Argent, by the
Name of Lucy; and is born by Sir Kingsmill Lucy of Facombe in Hantshire,
Baronet.

He bears Azure, three Dolphins naiant, extended in Pale, barry, Or. This is
a Venetian Coat Armor, and is born by the Name of Dolphin. These Dolphins here
are in their natural form of swiming, wherein they use to marshal their great
Troops in admiring order: for in the vantgard swim all their young ones, in the
middle all the Females, in the rereward all the Males; like good Husbands,
looking both to the orderly demeanor of their Wives and Children, and also
having them still in their eye, to defend them from danger.

The Field is Gules, a Cheveron, Ermyn, between three Dolphins naiant, imbowed,
Argent. This was the Paternal Coat Armor of Samuel Bleverhasset of Lowdham in
the County of Suffolk, Esquire The Dolphin is said to be a fish of such exceeding
great swiftness, as that oftentimes he out-strippeth a ship under Sail, in her
greatest ruff and merriest wind, in swiftness of course. In this fish is
proposed unto us an Example of charity and kind affection toward our Children,
as Pliny in his Description of the nature of this fish shows, lib. 9. c. 8.
and Aelianus, lib. 5. cap. 18. as also of his singular love toward man,
whereof Aelianus produces strange Examples. To this Head must be referred all
other fishes of hard scale, as the Sturgeon, etc. Other scale-fishes there are,
but of a more soft and tender sort; such as these which ensue.

He bears Sable, three Salmons hauriant, Argent, by the Name of Salmon. If
Apicius (whose tongue was a touchstone to try the excellency of all dishes)
were to give his sentence in the Senatehouse of Gluttons, it is thought he
would prefer the Salmon before all other fishes, though the old Romans made
chief reckoning of Acipenser, a fish of an unnatural making and quality; for
his scales turn all toward the head, and he ever swimeth against the stream.
These three Salmons here were very fair bearing in a great Charger, Argent.
Fishes are born hauriant, both respecting each other, and also endorsed, as in
these next Examples.

He bears Azure, two Barbels hauriant, respecting each other, Argent. A like
Coat to this (but different in colors) is born by the Family of Colston of
Essex. This fish even in his name bewrays his shape, which gave occasion
thereof, by reason of the small and tender films that grow about his mouth,
resembling after a sort the form of a Beard, whereupon he receives the Name of
a Barbel.

He bears Gules, two Pikes hauriant, endorsed, Or. This Coat is quartered by
the high and mighty Prince, the now Duke of Wittenberg, for his fourth Coat,
and are the Arms of the Dominion of Phiert, within the Territories of the said
Duke. Sometimes you shall find fishes born fret-ways, that is to say, fretted
or interlaced one over another, as in this next Example.

He bears Azure, three Trouts fretted in triangle, Test a la queue, Argent,
by the Name of Trowteheck. We use these words Test a la queue in blazon, to
signify the manner of their fretting. The Heir of this Family was in the time
of Henry the Eighth married to John Talbot of Albrighton, from whom the Talbots
of Grafton now living, are lineally descended, and do quarter this Coat.

He bears Or, three Chalbots hauriant, Gules. This did belong to that worthy
Earl Philip Chalbot, Earl of Newblanch, and great Admiral of France, whom King
Henry the Eighth vouchsafed to make Knight, and Companion of the most noble
Order of the Garter. A Chalbot fish seems to have the shape of a Gournard,
for so does Bara describe him.

CHAP. XXIII.
THE hardiness of scaly fish (whereof we have before spoken) is not continuate,
but plated fitting for motion: but there is another sort of hard covering,
which is continuate; Of which sort some are crusted, other some are shelled, as
Examples shall show.

He bears Argent, a Cheveron, Sable, between three Crevices upright, Gules. I
term these upright, because they wanting fins, cannot without breach of the
Rule formerly given, be properly said to be hauriant.

He bears Gules, on a Bend, Or, a Lobster, Sable. Gongulo Argote de Molina,
in his Book entitled Nobleza de Andalviza, notes this for the Coat Armor of
Grilla. It is noted by certain Naturalists, that the Lobster is subtle in
acquiring his food, for he watches the Escallop, Oyster, and other like fishes
that are fenced by Nature with a stronger and more defensible Coat than
himself, to become a prey unto him, by observing when they do open their shell,
either to receive food or air, and in the mean time with his claws he takes a
stone, and casts it between the shells of the Oyster, so as she can neither
save her self, nor annoy her foe; using his wit for a supply of his strengths
defect, according to the old Proverb, Where the Lions skin is too scant, it
must be pieced out with a Fox case.

He bears Argent, a Lobster's Claw in Bend sinister, Saltire-like, surmounted
of another dexter-ways, Gules, by the Name of Tregarthick. Those other fishes,
which are said to be shelled, and are naturally enclosed in strong and thick
walls, do dilate and open their shells at certain seasons, either to receive
the benefit of the air, or of food; and again contract them (at their pleasure)
and so defend themselves from all harm and violence. Of these, the shells are
of most frequent use in Arms, and are diversely born, as well with Ordinaries
between them, as charged upon Ordinaries, as by Example in the next Escocheons
in part shall appear.

He bears barry wavy of six, Or and Gules, three Prawns naiant in the first
and of the second, by the Name of Sea, alias Atsea, of Herne in Kent.

He bears Argent, a Cheveron engrailed, Sable, between three Sea-crabs,
Gules, by the Name of Bridger. It is an observation amongst Fishermen, that
when the Moon is in her decrement or wane (as we commonly call it) these sort
of fishes have little or no substance at all in them, which moves them to
forbear to fish for them in that season, in regard that the Moon is the natural
and secondary cause, that the Crabs of the Sea are either full and plum, or
else shear and (after a sort) empty.

The claws of the forefeet of this sort of fish are called forcipata brachia
Cancrorum, of forceps, which signifies a pair of Tongs or Pincers, or such
like, alluding to their quality, which is to pinch and hold fast whatsoever
they do seize upon.

He bears Argent, and Escallop-shell, Gules, by the Name of Prelate. This
Coat stands in the Abbey Church of Cirencester within the County of
Gloucester, and seems to have been of long continuance there. The Escallop
(according to Dioscorides) is engendered of the Dew and Air, and has no blood
at all in it self; notwithstanding in man's body (of any other food) it turns
soonest into blood. The eating of this fish raw is said to cure a surfeit.

He bears Azure, three Escallop-shells, Or. This is the Coat Armor of Sir
John Mallet of Audres in West-Quantox-head in Somersetshire, Knight. And this Coat
was born by Henry Lord Mallet, who came into England with William the Conqueror.

He bears Ermyn, on a Fess, Gules, three Escallop-shells, Or, by the Name of
Ingram; and is the Coat Armor of Sir Arthur Ingram of the City of London, Knight.

Azure, three Escallops, Or, between two Flanches, Ermyn, by the Name of
Clarke; and is the Coat of Sir Gilbert Clarke of Somersall in Derbyshire, Knight.

He bears Or, on a Chief, Sable, three Escallop-shells of the first, by the
Name of Graham; and is the Coat of Sir Richard Graham of Netherby in
Cumberland, Baronet, descended from the second son of the Earl of Monteith in
Scotland; who about the time of King Henry the Fourth, married the Lady Anne
Vere, daughter to the Earl of Oxford; which said Sir Richard is now married to
the Lady Anne, second daughter to the Right Honorable Charles Earl of Carlisle.

He bears Gules, on a Cheveron, Argent, three Escallop-shells of the first,
by the Name of Harding; and is the Paternal Coat Armor of Sir Robert Harding
of Kings-Newton in the Parish of Melborne in Derbyshire, Knight. a Person for his
Loyalty to his Prince K. Charles the I. and Second, has been a great Sufferer
in the late unhappy times; for which good Services his Majesty conferred the
said honor of Knighthood on him.

Or, a Fess between three Escallop-shells, Gules; and is the Coat of Henry
Arthington of Arthington in the West Riding of Yorkshire, Esquire.

He bears Gules, a Fess dauncette, Or, between three Escallopshells, Ermyn;
and is the Coat of Francis Diue of Bromham in Bedfordshire, Esquire son and heir of
Sir Lewis Diue of the said place, Knight. whose Family have been there seated for
several Generations, and were descended from the ancient Family of the Dives
who were formerly seated at Wyke, Brampton, Holwell, Harleston, and Quinton in
Northamptonshire.

He bears Sable, six Escallop-shels, Or, three, two, and one, by the Name of
Escott of Cornwall. Here I think it fit to note out of the Number and position
of the Charge of this Coat Armor two things: the one concerning the number,
which you see is six, which some Armorists hold to be the best of even and
articulate numbers that can be born in one Escocheon; their reason is, because
none other even number under ten can decrease in every rank one to the base
point of the Escocheon, and produce an odd one in the same point. Next touching
this manner of the position of this number; which suiteth most aptly with the
figure of a triangular Escocheon, as in the Elements of Armories, page 181. is
observed.

He bears Pearl, a Lion rampant, Ruby, on a Chief, Diamond, th^^^
Escallop-shells of the first. This is the Paternal Coat of the Right Noble and
Worthy Family of the Russels, Earls of Bedford. The present enjoyer of the said
Dignity being the Right Honorable William Earl of Bedford, Baron Russel of
Tavestock and Thornhaugh, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, etc.
Such is the beautiful shape that Nature has bestowed upon this shell, as that
the Collar, of the Order of St. Michael in France, in the first Institution
thereof, was richly garnished with certain pieces of Gold artificially wrought,
as near as the Artificer could by imitation express the stamp of Nature.

Which Institution doubtless was grounded upon great reason, to show the
steadfast amity and constant fidelity, that ought to be between brethren and
companions of one society and brotherhood: For take one of these fishes, and
divide the shells, and endeavor to sort them with (I will not say hundreds)
but millions of other shells of fishes of the same kind, and you shall never
match them throughout: therefore do they resemble the indissoluble friendship
that ought to be in Fraternities and Societies, because there can be according
to Cicero, Offic. 1. Nulla firma Amicitia nisi inter aequales. The
consideration whereof (it I be not deceived) moved the first Founders of this
Order to sort them in the collar of this order by couples, for that all others
do disagree with them, Secundum magis vel minus, and none do concurt together
with them in all points, but only those that nature has conformed, and made
agreeable to each other in all points.

The Field is Argent on a Fess, Azure, three Escallop-shells of the first, a
Bordure engrailed as the second, in Chief a Crescent, Gules, for a difference
of a second brother. This was the Coat Armor of that worthy Gentleman John
Fenne, one of the Captains of the City of London. I read in a French Manuscript
remaining in the Office of Arms, to this effect, That the bearing of the
Escallop in Arms signifies fieth the first bearer of such Arms to have been a
Commander, who by his virtues and valor had so gained the hearts and loves of
his Soldiers and Companions in Arms, that they desired much to follow him,
even into dangers mouth; and that he in reciprocation of their loves, had
ventured to sacrifice himself for their safeguards.

He bears Argent, ten Escallops, four, three, two, and one, Sable, on a
Canton, Gules, a Mullet pierced, Or, by the Name of Kingscot. I do here blazon
the Charge to be ten Escallops, although there be but eight to be discerned;
for such was the Coat before the addition of the superjacent Canton; which as
it is intended, does overshadow those other two that are not seen.

He bears Argent, a Heron volant, in Fess, Azure, membred, Or, between three
Escallops, Sable, by the Name of Herondon. Here also you see one gesture of a
Fowl volant, in the carriage of his legs, which was not before exemplified.
Pliny says, That all Fowls that stalk with long shanks, as they fly they do
stretch out their legs in length to their tails; but such as are short legged,
do draw them up to the midst of their bellies.

He bears Sable, a Fess engrailed between three Welks, Or, by the name of
Shelley. Who so shall advisedly view the infinite variety of Natures
workmanship, manifest even in the very shells of fishes; shall doubtless find
just cause to glorify God, and admire his Omnipotency and Wisdom, showed in
these things of meanest reckoning. To this head must be reduced all other
shell-fishes, of what kind soever, that are enclosed with hard shells.

CHAP. XXIV.
WE have long insisted in the bearings of Animals or living Creatures
unreasonable, distinguishing them according to their kinds, sorting them into
several ranks, placed them under sundry heads, exemplifying their manifold use
and forms of bearing in Coat Armor, to the end that they might give better
life and warrant to such Rules and Observations, as concerning them are
formerly given. The last place I have here reserved to the most noble Creature
and first in estimation, I mean Man, whom God has endued with a reasonable
Soul, and for whose sake he crcated all other things, subjecting them to his
sovereignty, that they should serve man, and man should serve God. Thou have
given him (says David) sovereignty over all the works of thy hands, and have
put all things in subjection under his feet; all sheep and oxen, and all beasts
of the field, the fowls of the air and fishes of the sea, etc. For God made man
in his own image, not only in giving him an understanding soul, and an holy
will, but also a sovereign jurisdiction over these inferior creatures; even as
Kings are the Image of God, in a more peculiar manner, because God has given
them sovereignty over men. Neither is the beauty of the body it self lightly to
be regarded, whose admirable proportions and uses made Galen (a heathen) to
acknowledge the infinite wisdom of an eternal Creator: And that godly King to
break out into terms of admiration, saying, Thine eyes did see my substance yet
being unperfect, and in thy book were all my members written, which day by day
were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them. Inasmuch as we are now come
to treat of man, the most excellent of all God's creatures, and for whose sake
all things else were created; let us take a considerate view of the order of
the Creation, and we shall find many forcible motives to stir us up to the
glorifying of our gracious God, that has so graciously and abundantly provided
for our sustentation and maintenance before we were yet created: that so we may
be provoked with more circumspection and regard to meditate upon Gods admirable
Omnipotency, Mercy, and gracious Providence; and be induced more regardfully to
ponder and consider the inexplicable glory of the heavens, and their most
beautiful ornaments, the fruitfulness and riches of the earth, the infinite
variety of shapes, colors, qualities, and operations of Animals and
Vegetables; of all which there is not the least, or whatsoever we hold most
contemptible, but will minister unto us just cause to glorify God's
Omnipotency, Mercy, and Wisdom.

Man as touching his body has a threefold estate, viz. Esse, in Creatione. Non
esse, Morte. Semper esse, Resurrectione. God has created man, and placed him
in this world, to the end he should be a diligent searcher, viewer, and
beholder of all his works; and withal, that he should not be only a Spectator,
but also a serious and zealous Enarrator of his infinite wisdom, power, and
mercy, in that he has most powerfully created them, most wisely disposed them,
and most providently conserveth them in their several ranks and subordinate
places and offices.

But when we speak of man, we must not understand him to be that outward form
or lineaments of body, that is subjected to our visible sense; but the mind of
each man is the man indeed, not that part of him that may be demonstrated by
pointing of the finger.

The mind of man penetrateth and passes through all things in a moment, more
swiftly than the stars, more speedily than imagination, yea with more celerity
than time it self.

So great is the estate and dignity of man's condition and nature, as that there
is no good can suffice him, but the chiefest and only good of all.

The soul of man is of a Divine Nature, and therefore immortal and eternal; he
ascends up by degrees evermore, and never cease until he attain divine and
celestial things: Which nature and property is not found in any creature but in
man only.

God indeed has created man of an upright stature, with his countenance raised
up toward heaven; whereas he has given all other Animals a grovelling
countenance, fixed upon the earth: whereby he would notify, that man's soul is
a celestial thing, and that his ultimum bonum is in heaven; that heaven is his
country, that there is his everlasting habitation, if he love his God, and
become pliant and obedient unto his Divine will.

Plato calls man the miracle of God; for, says he, man is endued with the
force of nature of the World. For what is the world, but an universality of
things compacted together in the form of a Sphere? And what is man, but a
Compendium or Epitome of the universality of things? Therefore was he not
mis-named by Aristotle, when he called him a little world: For he understands
with the Angels, he has sense with living Creatures, he communicates of food,
growth and generation with Plants; and finally he has being with all the
Elements, and retains with the world the form of a Sphere. For as Julius
Solinus says, look how much breadth a man has when he extends his hands to
the full, so much is his length from the crown to the heel: So as if you draw a
circle about him, you shall comprehend him within the form of a compas^ed
Sphere.

Moses speaking of the particular works of God in his Creation before he had
created man, says, Ea visa fuisse Deo bona; but after he had created man, and
all things pertaining to his sustentation and preservation, as also all things
behoveful for the propagation of all mankind prepared, then did he take a
general view and survey of the whole fabric of the World, Et Deo visum fuisse
valde bonum, they were exceeding, that is, so perfect good in the highest
degree, as nothing could be wished to be added thereto for the bettering
thereof.

As touching the food allotted to man, at the first it is most certain, that
the same was herbs and fruits, as appears Genesis 1. 29. Ecce dedi vobis omnem
herbam, etc. And God said, Behold I have given unto you every herb bearing
seed, which is upon all the earth; and every tree, wherein is the fruit of a
tree bearing seed, that shall be to you for meat. That is to say (says
Zanchius) multam, amplissimam, suavissimam and utilissimam, in great plenty,
abundant, most delicate and most wholesome; herewith shall ye be satisfied and
contented without seeking after other food.

These three things ( says Zanchius) are most certain; first, that before the
flood both herbs and fruits of trees were so wholesome and good, as that man
needed no other food; in regard whereof there was no need, that the eating of
flesh should be permitted unto him. Secondly, it is also undoubtedly true, that
after the flood the earth was so corrupted by the inundation thereof, and
consequently man's body became so weakened, that he stood in need of more solid
and strong nourishing meats, as the flesh of Oxen, Kine, Sheep, etc. In regard
whereof God gave him permission to use them for food. Thirdly, this also is
without all controversy, that God did not prohibit unto man any sorts of
meats, because all things are clean to the clean: as also for that every
Creature of God is good, because they are sanctified by his Word.

Of the mixture and composition of the four Elements before mentioned, and of
the humors of them, and of them engendered, two principal parts of matters of
our bodies have their being, viz. our bones with their nerves or sinews,
wherewith they be conjoined and knit; and our flesh with the veins, whereby the
blood is conveyed throughout all parts of the body, together with her arteries,
whereby the vital and animal spirits are carried into every part and member
thereof.

These two parts did Adam well express, when speaking of Eve he said, Haec est
os ex ossibus meis, and caro de carne mea. First he makes mention of bone, as
the more solid and substantial part, and as it were the fundamental part of the
whole body; and after of the flesh, as of the matter wherewith the bones are
covered.

To these two parts there is annexed a skin, wherewith the whole frame of the
body (being united and knit together) is covered, and wherein it is
comprehended and contained. And this skin is not scaly, such as is proper to
fishes; neither feathered after the manner of fowls; neither hairy and rugged,
as many sorts of beasts are; neither thick skinned, as many bruit Animals have;
but a soft tender skin, and of a delicate touch, and such as may well beseem
such a mind, as the mind of man is: for where there is store of wit, there
needs not a hard skin, but a soft tender skin fitteth best a generous and
ingenious mind. For so was it the pleasure of the most wise God, to add unto
the noblest mind the noblest flesh, and the tenderest and most dainty skin,
that so the external shape might be an evident testimony of the inward mind.
That this Creature, Man, is also born in Coat Armor both limb-meal (as I may
term it) and also entire, with all his parts conjunct, I will show by Examples:
and we will first here set down the whole bearings, and afterward proceed to
the parts.

The Field is Jupiter, our blessed Lady with her Son in her right hand, and a
Scepter in her left, all Topaz. this Coat pertains to the Bishopric of
Salisbury. Since it has pleased some (doubless out of a devout affection) to
assume the bearing of the blessed Virgin with her most blessed Babe, I hold it
great reason to set this Escocheon in the first place. For I am far from their
opinion who damn it for Superstition to pourtrait that glorious Virgin, or her
Babe; but yet I hold it undoubted Idolatry to offer to these, or any other
Pictures, those Services of Worship and Prayer which God has made his own
peculiar Prerogative, not to be communicated to that holy Virgin herself, much
less to her Image; which yet are so far oftentimes from being her Image, that
it has been acknowledged, that some lewd Painters have pourtraited that
unspotted Lady to the likeness of their own Courtizans, and so have proposed
her in Churches to be adored. This worship of the Virgin Mary has almost worn
out the worship of her Son, especially where their ridiculous feigned Miracles
daily broached do find any credit.

The Field is Topaz, a King enthronized on his Seat Royal, Sapphire, crowned,
sceptered, and invested of the first, the Cape of his Robe Ermyn. These are the
Arms of the City Sivil in Spain. As we formerly prescribed of unreasonable
Creatures, that they should be set forth in their noblest action: so much more
is it fit, that man (the most excellent of God's Creatures) should be set forth
in his greatest dignity. And as amongst men there are manifold degrees and
callings, so is it decent (says Bartolus) that each particular person should
be habited as is fitting for his estate, calling, and employment; viz.
Principes in solio Majestatis, Pontifex in Pontificalibus, Miles in armis, sive
equestris, sive pedestris, depingi debet: a King in his Throne of Majesty, a
Bishop in his Pontifical Vestures, and a Soldier in his Military habit, either
on foot or horsback; so shall they receive such reverence, as is answerable
both to their persons and functions.

The Field is Sapphire, a Bishop seated in his Chair, habited in his
Pontificals, sustaining his Crosier in his left arm stayed upon the Chair, and
extending his right hand toward the dexter point of the Escocheon, Pearl. This
Coat Armor was quartered by Eberhardus, sometimes Bishop of Lubrick in Saxony,
who was descended of the noble Progeny of the Hollij. The Dignity Episcopal is
next unto the Regal, insomuch that Constantine the Great (the first Christian
Emperor) received a Bishop with no less reverence and honor, than if every
one of them had been his own Father: and great reason, since they directly
succeed the Apostles of Christ in the Government of the Church; especially if
together with this Apostolical Dignity they join the truth of Apostolical
Doctrine, which the Romish Bishops have abolished.

He bears Gules, a Saracens head erased at the neck, Argent, environed about
the Temples with a Wreath of the second, and Sable, by the Name of Mergith of
Wales. After Examples of the whole bearing of man, it is fit the head should
first be handled before the other parts; for that amongst all the parts of
living Creatures, the head obtains the chiefest pre-eminence, says Pierius:
and (as Isidore notes) it is called Caput, not only because it is capable of
the knowledge attained by the Senses; but for that also it comprehends and
contains them all. As this Member is chiefest in dignity, so has Nature
appropriated thereto the highest and principal place, it being lifted up on
high, as in a Watch Tower, that it might oversee all approaching danger before
it come near; for which cause also Nature has given man more flexibility to
turn about his neck and look on all sides, than other Creatures have.

In the workmanship of this principal member of man's body may we behold with
admiration the unspeakable power, providence, and mercy of God, if we shall
attentively consider the order and composition of the head, with the external
and internal parts thereof.

First of all the skull, called in Latin Cranium, is the uppermost bone of the
head, fashioned in the form of a Globe, and distinguished with their orders of
small holes and seams. An Example of hearing in Coat Armor of three of these
skuls on a Cheveron I have formerly given you, page 114. where I treated of
bones. The skull is outwardly covered with skin and thin flesh, lest the same
should be overburthened with too much weight. This flesh with that skin is
therefore made full of pores, or small invisible holes, for the more commdious
evaporation of the gross humors of the brain, and certain excrements thereof;
whereof hairs are engendered and may have their passage. The skull is inwardly
hollow, to the end that the brain, which is the seat of all the senses, might
be the more commodiously conferred therein.

The skull has God distributed into three parts, viz. into Sinciput, which is
the forepart thereof, and conjoyneth to the forehead; into Occiput, which is
the hindmost part thereof; and into Verticem, which is the Crown or middle part
of the same, seated between the fore and hinder part aforenamed.

Under these three partitions are placed three several faculties: In the
forepart is the Fantasy, or Sensus Communis, scil. the Judgment of the
Senses, or universal notion of things; in the middle the Imagination; and
Memory in the hinder part of the head.

Within the concavity of the skull the brain has his being, distinguished with
3 little Ventricles or Cells, one in the forepart, another in the midst, and
the last in the hinder part: In which three Ventricles, the forms and ideas of
things, apprehended by the exterior senses, are severally and distinctly
imprinted. Therefore to the end the same might be more effectually performed,
God made not the brain fluent, like water, for then would it not apprehend or
retain those conceited forms; nor yet of solid substance, like bones, for then
could it not easily admit the impressions of such imaginary forms: but he made
the brain of an indifferent temper, viz. moderately soft, and moderately hard,
to wit, of a soft and temperate nature.

Furthermore, God has made in the brains of man certain concavities or
hollownesses, and those has he replenished with vital spirits, without which
the interior senses could not consist: and these spirits does the soul use to
understand by, and to the performance of other actions which she produces in
the head.

Moreover, in the brain has he placed the fountain of the sinews, which from
thence are dispersedly conveyed throughout the body; as well those nerves and
sinews as are sensitive, as also those that are motive, viz. those that give
motion to the body. But who can express or conceive in mind the manifold
instruments of the soul, that God has placed in the head of man?

In the head we may observe (well-nigh) all the uses of the soul. Behold the
admirable composition of man's head, which of all other parts of the body is the
noblest; and how all and singular the parts thereof are accommodated and
applied by our most gracious Maker, Conserver, and Redeemer, to serve for the
uses of all the faculties of the soul!

If the framing of this one member (I mean the head of a man) be so admirable
in it self; how much more is the composition of the whole frame of the body,
being conjoined and united together with sinews and arteries, in a
proportionable manner, and furnished throughout with all the external and
internal parts, and their particular appurtenances to be admired?

The members of Animals are (of Philosophers) usually distinguished into
external and internal, and so be handled severally each one apart by it self:
but I laboring to be brief herein, will handle those outward and inward parts
only, whose shapes and forms I find to be born in Coat Armor, leaving the more
copious and exact handling of them to the consideration of Physicians,
Chirurgions, and Anatomists professed, to whose consideration they do more
properly appertain.

The head in Latin is called Caput, because it is the chief and principal
beginning of the whole fabric of the body, and withal the noblest of all other
the members thereof.

In the head do the two principal faculties of the sold rest, viz. the
Intelligent and Sentient, and do there execute their functions, albeit that the
vegetable faculty also has his operation there, but the other two do reign and
chiefly predominate therein: therefore it is the seat and residence of all the
senses, as well internal as external, placed in the head, and that for good
cause; for since that the faculty Intelligent understands not in any other
sort than by inspection of imagination and imaginary shapes, which are
engendered of external forms, and are by the outward senses conveyed to the
fantasy or image conceived in the mind. Most wisely therefore has God there
placed the seat and wisdom of all the senses, where the mind has her being,
that so she need not go far to seek those imaginary forms whereof she is to
consider, to understand and dispose of according to order.

Therefore inasmuch as the senses are become serviceable to the mind, there the
seat or residence of the senses is most fitly placed, where the mind does
exercise her offices and operations.

From the same head do proceed all the nerves and sinews wherewith each bone
and member, as also the universal body is conjoined and fastened together, and
consolidated, and also receives increase, and being. In the head is placed the
principal part of manly form, the Visage, whereby the differs from all other
Animals, and does far surpass them in favor and comeliness; whereof the Poet
rightly wrote in these words, Finxit in effigiem moderantum cuncta deorum.
Pronaque cum spectent animalia caetera terram,
Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque tueri
Iussit, and erectos ad sidera tollere vultus.
Ovid. Met. 1. -- fixed the form of all th'all-ruling Deities.
And whereas others see with down cast eyes,
He with a lofty look did man endue,
And bade him Heavens transcendent glories view.
Forasmuch as God would that the faculties, both intelligent and sentient,
should predominate in the head; therefore did he form and accommodate therein
instruments well fitting for either use: Of these instruments there are only
two sorts, whereof the first contains the instruments of the inferior
senses, and the other of the outward.

The instruments serving for the use of the external senses (whereof there is
use in Armory) are not many; therefore will I handle them as I shall find use
of them in Coat Armor: the rest I will only name, and so pass them over as
impertinent to my purpose. These instruments of the external senses are in
number five, that is to say, the eyes, nostrils, ears, mouth, with the roof and
palate thereof, and the tongue. Of these I find only the eyes born in
Coat Armor, therefore of them only will I treat something in their due place,
as those that are best known to use.

He bears Argent, three Moors heads couped, Sable, banded about the heads,
Gules, by the Name of Tanner; and is the Coat of John Tanner of Court in
Cornwall, Esquire

Or, 3 Moors heads couped, Sable, banded about the heads, Argent, is born by
the Name of Mico of London.

He bears Or, a Cross, Gules, between four Black-moors heads couped at the
shoulders, proper, by the Name of Iuxon. This with the Arms of Vlster, is the
Coat Armor of Sir William Iuxon of Little Compton in Glocestershire, Baronet.

He bears Argent, a Cheveron, Sable, between four Black-moon heads couped,
proper, by the Name of Iues. I find that some have given this Coat Armor
another blazon thus, He bears Argent, a Cheveron between 3 Jews heads couped,
Sable; but then I take it the Bearers name should have its Othography thus,
Jews.

Now I will show you a rare, yet an ancient bearing of Childrens heads couped,
enwrapped about the necks with Snakes.

He bears Sable, a Cheveron between 3 Childrens heads couped at the
shoulders, Argent, their Peruques, Or, enwrapped about the necks with as many
Snakes, proper, by the Name of Vaughan. It has been reported (how truly I
cannot say) that some one of the Ancestors of this Family, was born with a
Snake about his neck; a matter not impossible, but yet very unprobable: Ideo
quaere.

He bears Argent, a Cheveron, Gules, between three Peruques, Sable. This Coat
stands in one of the Windows of New-Inn Hall without Temple-barr in London.
Clodius (surnamed Comatus, because of his long hair) having attained the
Government of the Stern in the Kingdom of France, at his first coming to the
Crown, did institute, a Law, That the French men should in common wear their
hair long in taken of liberty. And so contrariwise shaving off the hair was a
sign of servile bondage: For the Romans (says France de Rosiers) did institute
by a public Edict, that the hairs of bondage should be shaven in token of
bondage. But as hairs change according to time, so it is the part of a a wise
man (says Farnesius) to conform himself to the mutability of times and seasons.

He bears barry Nebule of six pieces, Azure and Argent, on a Chief of the
second 3 eyes, Gules, by the Name of de la Hay of Ireland. The eyes has God
formed with admirable skill in such sort, as that by them the visible spirits
are transferred to the soul. For by them, as it were by Windows, the soul does
apprehend the forms and kinds of things colored by way of attraction;
therefore to the end the same might be the more commodiously performed, first
of all, he made them slippery and round, that they might more easily move and
stir every way, and so apprehend the colors of all sorts of things which are
either above, below, on the right hand, or upon the left, as it were in a
moment. He would that the eyes should consist of three distinct humors, to wit,
of a watery or whitish humor, of a glassie and a christaline humor; and those
severed each from other with most thin films or skins, to the end that they
should be capable of the species or kinds of colors. In the midst of these
there is a little ball (as it were) which we call the ball, or apple of the
eye, as it were a certain hole, through which the sight has its passage; by
which, as through a little window or casement, the visible spirits of the soul
are sent forth to their objects, and also the species or kinds of colors are
received inward, and conveyed to that we call sensus communis or the fantasy
(which is seated in the forepart of the brain) by means of sinews that do bring
sight to the eyes.

God has annexed those two nerves or sinews, as the Wagons of the shapes and
resemblances received into the eyes, to be conveyed to the fantasy: which
sinews, albeit there are two of them annexed to each eye, nevertheless, when
they are protracted to the brain, they do join together and end in one point,
for this end and purpose, that the shapes that were twofold in the two eyes,
they should yet end in one, forasmuch as the conceived shapes are simply of one
color, and that so the Judge of the Sensus communis; or the fantasy should
not be deceived.

Furthermore, he has covered the eyes with lids, as it were with folding
doors, both for a defense against harmful objects, and more specially for
sleep, that these being shut, man might take his rest and sleep.

These are the means and instruments of sight, that is to say, of the eyes,
whereof who can attain the knowledge of the exact workmanship of them?

The rest of the beforementioned external instruments, viz. the Nose, Ears,
Mouth, with the Roof and Palate thereof, and the Tongue, I do pass them over,
as not being of any, or (at the least) frequent use in Armory, but as they are
parts of the head, and therewith united and conjoined. After the head and parts
thereof, the heart does challenge the chiefest place, as in Example.

He bears Argent, a heart, proper, a Chief, Sable, by the Name of Scambler.
If the heart (according to Homer) does waste and consume in those, that by any
accidental occasion are attached with some vehement or long lingering sickness;
much more must the heart waste in those, which are possessed with the fretting
canker of Envy against the prosperity of others, according to that saying,
Invidus ipse sibi est long tristissimu^ hotius; The envious man is a most
deadly foe to himself.

He bears Gules, on a Chief, Argent, three hearts, proper, by the Name of
Heart. The heart (says one) is naturally shaped long, and not round; to
signify that our thoughts and consultations ought to be long, deliberate, and
not hasty and inconsiderate. This is the Fountain, Seat, and Treasury of Life,
wherethrough the whole body receives the vital spirits; which are (as it were)
certain quickening flames, which by the ministry of the arteries and veins, are
dispersed throughout all parts of the body, giving thereto life and vigor, and
enabling the same to the performance of every action.

He bears Argent, a Fess, Gules, between three hearts vulned, and distilling
drops of blood on the sinister side, proper, by the Name of Tote. These are
termed vulned of the Latin word vulnus, which signifies a wound. This noble
Member has Nature placed in a seat well fitting the dignity thereof, insomuch
as it may well be said (according to Aristotle) Natura constituit rem
nobiliorem in nobiliori loco, ut cor in medio; To the best part the best place.
This is that which of all other parts God requires us to reserve for himself,
and to his service, where he says, My son, give me thy heart; and good reason,
since he was pleased to give us his Sons heart, to be pierced to the death for
our demerits. And this place may decide their doubt, who make question whether
be the more principal part of a man, the brain or the heart, since God
prefers the heart, as more esteeming the hearty affection of true Charity,
than a speculative contemplation void of Christian practice.

He bears Gules, a heart between two wings displayed, Or, by the Name of
Henry de Wingham. The Ancients used to hang the figure of an heart with a lace
or chain from the neck upon the breast of a man, signifying thereby a man of
sincerity, and such an one as speaks the truth from the heart, and is free
from all guile and dissimulation, and is far unlike those that the Psalmist
mentions, saying, They give good words with their lips, but dissemble with
their heart. Too rife are they found in this Age, whose tongue and heart go two
diverse ways. Therefore well is that saying verified of these and like persons,
which is usual in the mouths of many men, Mel in ore, verba lactis; fell in
cord, fraus in factis; Honey in the mouth, Gall in the heart, and Guile in
their actions.

He bears Argent, an arm sinister, issuing out of the dexter point, and
extended toward the sinister base in form of a Bend, Gules, by the Name of
Cornhill. The arm is a member of the body ordained by Nature for labor: and
for that purpose she has fortified the same strongly with arteries, muscles,
and sinews. By the arm therefore is signified a laborious and industrious man;
but that no man should rely on his own, or any other man's power or industry too
much, God has forbidden us to trust to the Arm of flesh.

He bears Gules, three dexter arms conjoined at the shoulders, and flexed in
triangle, Or, with fist clenehed, Argent. This Coat Armor pertains to the
Family of Tremaine of Colacombe in Devonshire. These arms and hands conjoined
and clenched after this manner may signify a treble offer of revenge for some
notable injury done to the person or fame of the first Bearer, which to an
honest man is no less dear than life; Nam honor and honestas pari passu cum
vita ambularent.

He bears Or, on a Chief, Gules, a hand extended and born transverse the
Chief, Argent, by the Name of Mainstone. The hand is the pledge of friendship
and fidelity, which was in ancient times confirmed by shaking of hands; but
later times have taken up another fashion, by embracing with the Arms. But the
truth is, a handful of that ancient amity is more worth than a whole armful of
the new, which now every where consists in words, not in deeds. The hand is the
chief working instrument of the body, and of no less comeliness than use; Quam
multarum artium ministrae sunt, says Zanchius; of how many Arts is the hand
the worker? and it is called manus (according to some) a manando, vel quia ipsa
e brachio manat, vel quia ex ea manant digiti, either for that it proceeds
out of the arm, or for that the fingers proceed out of it. This member is
divided into five parts, whereof each one has a name appropriate to the
particular use thereof; as the Thumb is called Pollex, quod virtute prae
caeteris polleat, for the strength of it. The forefinger is named Index, Quia
homo illo digito omnia indicat, for pointing with it. The next is called of the
place, Medius, the middle finger. The fourth Anularis, or Ring-finger. The
fifth Auricularis, because men use to pick their Ear therewith.

He bears Argent, three sinister hands conped at the wrists, Gules, by the
Name of Maynard; and is the Coat Armor of that eminent Lawyer Sir John Maynard
of Gunnersbury in the Parish of Ealing in Middlesex, Knight. Sergeant at Laws to
his Majesty K. Charles the Second.

The Field is Pearl, a Cheveron, Sapphire, between three sinister hands couped
at the wrist, Ruby. This is the Coat Armor of the Rt. Honorable William Lord
Maynard of Estains in England, and of Wicklogh in the Kingdom of Ireland.

In the actions and gestures of the body, of all the members thereof the hand
is (as I may say) the most talkative: For it is a usual thing with the most
sort of men, by the motion of the right hand to crave silence; when we make any
speech or protestation of our selves, we do clap our hands upon our breasts;
when we are moved with admiration, we strike our hand upon our thigh; with the
hand we do becken and allure unto us, and therewith we do repel and put from
us; when we speak to other men, we do extend our hands toward them. The
apposition of the finger to the mouth, is a note of silence craved; the
striking of the breast with the fist, is a token of sorrow and repentance; the
exalting and shaking of the right hand aloft, is usual with military persons
when they will notify any prosperous success.

The hand, as it is comely in sight, so is it also of singular use, and an
Instrument of many Arts: for by their help there is no invention of man's wit
left unattempted and brought to perfection; and therefore it is of all other
members of man's body, the nimblest and most universal: yet is the same no
longer reckoned a part of man, than it can perform her function, as witnesses
Aristole Metaph. Manus non semper est pars hominis, nisi quando potest
perficere opus suum.

The clapping of hands is a token of joy and applause, and has been in use not
only with men of modern times, when they would signify their consent and
approbation; but also with those of ancient time, as we may see when Iehojada
the Priest caused Ioash the Son of Ahaziah to be crowned King; Then he brought
out the King's Son, and put the Crown upon him, and gave him the Testimony, and
they made him King, and anointed him, and they clapped their hands, and said, God
save the King.

Anciently the cutting off hands and feet was used for a military punishment,
for such as had committed some capital crime meriting death. So we read that
Aufidius Cassius, by a new and unexperimented Example, did punish diverse
fugitive Soldiers that had abandoned their Captain, by cutting off their hands
and feet, a^^irming that such punishment was more exemplary and disciplinable
than the putting of them to death, by how much a long and lingering reproachful
life is worse than death it self, that gives a speedy end to all lamentable
and wretched calamities.

It has been an ancient custom, that when a Master requires his servant to
perform for him any matter of importance (and would oblige him by taking of a
solemn Oath to use his best care and diligence for the effectual accomplishing
thereof) to cause his servant to put his hand under his thigh, and to take his
Oath, as we may see Genesis 24. 2, 3. Put now thy hand under my thigh, and I will
make thee swear by the Lord, the God of Heaven, and the God of Earth, that thou
shall not take a wife unto my Son of the Daughters of the Canaanites amongst
whom I dwell. This Ceremony showed the Servants Obedience to his Master, and
the Masters power over the Servant.

He bears Argent, a Fess, Sable, between four dexter hands couped at the
wrist, Gules, by the Name of Quatremaine. This was the Coat of Quatremaine Dr.
of Physic. The kissing of the hand so much in use with us at this day, may be
thought to be an invention of the latter hatchers; but if we look back into the
customs of ancient times, we shall find that it was in use many Ages past, and
is by the revolution of time become new again: For what is new (says Solomon)
that has been informer times. Of this custom of kissing the hand we read as
follows, Many when a thing was lent them, reckoned it to be found, and put
them to trouble that helped them. Till he has received he will kiss a man's
hand. And concerning the Antiquity of this action of kissing the hand, you may
further read learned Mr. Seldom in his Titles of Honor, p. 40.

He bears barry of six pieces, Or and Sable, over all a Pale, Gules, charged
with a woman's dugg, distilling drops of milk, proper, by the Name of Dodge. And
here, because I find in the Office of Arms a copy of the first Grant of this
Coat Armor, and that very ancient, I think it convenient to acquaint the
Reader with some particulars of the said Patent, as I there find it; whereby
appears that James Hedingley, then Guyen King of Arms, after recital made of
the loyal and valiant service which Peter Dodge, born in the Town of Stopworth
in the County of Chester, Gentleman, had done to King Edward the first (for as
it there appears by the Copy, this Instrument bears date the eighth of
April in the 34th. year of that Kings Reign) in diverse battles and sieges, for
which the said King had remunerated him the said Peter with the Gift of a
Seignory or Lordship there mentioned: He (I say) the said King of Arms, after
such recital made, does give and grant unto the said Peter Dodge, that from
thenceforth, Il (understand the said Peter) portera son escu d'Or and Sables,
bar de six pieces and ung Pale de Gules, avec une mamelle de femme
degoullant; for so are the very words and their Orthography, in the Copy of the
Patent, which is in French. Thus much whereof I thought fit to present to the
public view, not doubting but the Judicious Reader, by careful observation
thereof, may make some good use. The Function of this Member is thus taught us,
2 Esdr. 8. For thou have commanded the members, even the Breasts to give milk
unto the fruit appointed for the breasts, that the thing which is created might
be nourished for a time, till thou disposest it to thy mercy.

The Earths Fountains are made to give water, and the Breasts of women are made
to give suck: But Gentlewomen and Citizens wives are said to be troubled with a
perpetual drought in their Breasts, like the Gout that haunteth the rich and
wealthy only. By the Teats sometimes are meant the plentiful Fields wherewith
men are nourished; as we may read Isai. 32. 12. Men shall lament for the teats,
even the pleasant fields, and for the fruitful vines. Like as wholesome and
plentiful feeding nourishes and increases milk: so contrariwise thin diet,
sorrow, and grief of mind or sickness, dries up, and much wastes the same.

The Prophet Isaiah showing the untowardness of those that should learn the
Word of God, says, Whom shall he teach knowledge? and whom shall he make to
understand the things that he fears? Them that are weaned from the milk, and
drawn from the breasts, Isa. 28. 9. Whereby he sharply reprehendeth their
backwardness in Religion, and compares them to Babes newly weaned from the
Breasts.

He bears Or, a man's leg couped at the midst of the thigh, Azure, by the
Name of Haddon. The Leg is the member of strength, stability, expedition, and
obedience. It was a custom of the ancient World, that Servants or Children
should put their hand under the thigh of him to whom they should be obliged by
Oath. Which Ceremony (as some take it) they used, as well to show the ready
obedience of the Servants and Children toward their Masters and Parents, as
also the Jurisdiction and Authority of their Masters and Parents over them, as
I have formerly showed, p. 187. So did Abraham cause his Servant to do; and the
like Oath also did Israel require of his Son Joseph.

He bears Argent, a man's Leg erased at the thigh, Sable, by the Name of
Prime.

In blazoning of Coat Armor consisting of Legs born after this manner, I hold
it needless to mention the bearing thereof in Pale, because it is natural for a
man's Leg to stand upright: But if the same be born in any other sort than
thus, then shall you make special mention thereof.

He bears Sable, 1 Leg couped below the Knee, Argent, by the name of
Shrigley of Ch^shire. The Leg being the lowest and lowliest part of the Body,
therefore do we use the motion thereof, to show humility and submission to our
Superiors: And of all gestures of the Leg, it is not more pliable to any,
than to that whereby we humble our selves before God in kneeling and praying,
as if Nature had especially framed our Bodies, as well as our Souls, for that
service to him that made us. And in this sense God does delight in man's Legs,
though he does not^ (as himself says) in the strength or beauty thereof. And
as the Leg cut off from the Body loses all his former strength: so man cut
off from God loses all his grace, power, and felicity, which are only
preserved by our Union with him.

CHAP. XXV.
IN the process of our former Tracts touching Animals, as well Rational as
Irrational, we have been very careful to limit every several kind of Creatures
with his own natural and distinct bounds, forms, and proprieties; whereby it
happens that such other kinds of living Creatures, as are any way exorbitant
from Natures general course and intendment, either for qualities or essence
(and therefore wanted a certain place amongst the rest) have been reserved for
this last place. And of these are diverse sorts; as first Amphibi^, such as live
sometimes as if they were Water-creatures, at other times as if they were
Land-creatures, as Examples here shall show.

He bears Argent, a Bever erected, Sable, devouring a fish, proper, armed,
Gules. This Coat stands in a Glass-window in an Inn of Chancery called
New-Innhall without Temple-Barr near London. The Bever is like an Otter, and
both of them are like sly dissembling Companions, who to make their profit, and
feed their own bellies, will closely keep good quarter with contrary sides, in
affection to neither, but only for their own behoof: therefore I could wish
they had one other property of the Bever, which is to geld himself, that so he
might escape from his pursuers, who hunt him for his Testicles, which are much
used in Physick^ This Bever has only his Tail fish, and therefore keeps that
part most in the water: he has his hinder Legs like a Swan, and his former
like a Dog, and so swimeth with the one whiles he preyeth with the other.

He bears Argent, a Fess between three Otters, Sable, by the Name of
Lutterel, Sir John Maundevile in his Discourses reports, that in the Country
of China they use Otters for Water-doggs, bred tame among them in great number,
which so often as they are commanded, go into the waters and bring forth fish
to their Masters.

He bears Argent, a Cheveron between three Seals feet erected and erased,
Sable. These Arms do pertain to the Town of Yarmouth in Norfolk. The Fins
wherewith this fish does swim, do serve her turn also as feet to go withal upon
the Land. The milk of this Seal (or Sea-calf) is very wholesome against the
Falling sickness; but she sucketh it out, and spilleth it of envy, that it
should not profit any other. To this head of Amphibia all other of like nature
are to be reduced.

The second sort of Nature's unnatural Creatures (as I may call them) are
B^genera, such as are engendered of two distinct kinds of Beasts against the
prescript of Nature's Order. Of which prodigious kinds of Beasts, as some have
been procreated by means of man's idle invention, and others by casual accident:
so are there sundry sorts of Beasts no less unnaturally engendered, through
careless neglect of the separating each sort of Cattle by themselves, and by
permitting the Beasts of distinct kinds to sort and feed together confusedly in
the time of their heat. Such are those that Vpton calls Musimones, engendered
of a Goat and a Ram; Tityri, of a Sheep and a Goat; Hybrides, of a wild Boar
and a tame Sow; Castorides, Dogs ingendered by a Fox and a Bever; Lyciscus, of
a Wolf and a Mastiff, and such like.

These bigenerous Beasts (says Vpton) may well beseem the bearing of Abbots
and Abbesses, who bear the Miter and the Cross, which are representations of
Pastoral Jurisdiction, but have not the actual exercise thereof; as the Mule
and Leopard, having the generative Instruments of the Horse and the Lion, yet
have not the natural use of them: though in this property Abbots and Abbesses
have never been very like them, but for the other respect. Whereupon a certain
Author has this saying;

Mulus and Abbates sunt in honor pares: Mules, Abbots, and Abbesses are alike;
They bear the weapons, but cannot strike.


He bears Gules, a Musimon, Argent. This is a bigenerous Beast of unkindly
procreation (like as the Mule before exemplified amongst whole-footed Beasts)
and is engendered between a Goat and a Ram; like as the Tityrus is engendered
between a Sheep and a Buck-Goat, as Vpton notes.

He bears Gules, a Leopard passant gardant, Or, spotted, Sable. The shape of
the Leopard bewrays his unkindly birth, forasmuch as he in all proportion of
body is more like the Pardus, as well in respect of the slenderness of his body,
as of his spots, and wants the courage notified by the plentiful Mane,
wherewith Nature has invested the Lion, being the express token of his
generous and noble spirit. This mis-begotten Beast is naturally an Enemy to the
Lion, and finding his own defect of courage to encounter the Lion in fair
fight, he observes when the Lion makes his walk near to his Den, which (in
policy) he has purposely wrought spacious and wide in the double entrance
thereof, and narrow in the midst, so as himself being much more slender than
the Lion, may easily pass: when he sees the Lion, he makes toward him
hastily, as if he would bid him battle in the open fields; and when he sees
the Lion prepared to encounter him, he betaketh him to his heels, and makes
toward his Den with all celerity, whom the Lion eagerly pursues with full
course, dreaming of no danger by reason of the large entrance into the Den. At
length, through the vehemence of his swift course, he becomes so straightened in
the narrow passage in the midst of the Den (by reason he is much bigger bodied
than the Leopard) that he can go neither forwards nor backwards. The Lion being
thus distressed, his Enemy passes through his Den, and comes behind him, and
gnaweth him to death. Of this Beast, the head is more usually born in
Coat Armor than the whole, and that in a diverse manner, as by these Examples
next ensuing may be seen.

Sable, three Leopards rampant, Argent, spotted, Sable, is the Coat Armor of
Sir Thomas Lynch of Rixton-hall (anciently called the Pele) in the Parish of
Great Sonkey in Lancashire, Knight. which came to him by his Mother, Elizabeth
Daughter and Heir of Thomas Rixton of the said place, Gent. which said Sir
Thomas is descended of the Family of the Lynches of Groves in the County of
Kent, and is one of the Gentlemen of his Majesty's Privy Chamber in Ordinary,
and was late Governor of the Island of Iamaica.

Diamond, a Cheveron between three Leopards heads or faces, Topaz, is the
Achievement of the Right Honorable William Earl of Strafford, Baron Wentworth
of Wentworth-woodhouse, Newmarch, Oversley and Rabby, Knight of the Garter, and
one of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.

Pearl, a Cheveron, Ruby, between three Leopards heads, Diamond, is the
Coat Armor of the Right Honorable Francis Viscount Newport of Bradford, Baron
Newport of High-Ercall, Lord Lieutenant of the County of Salop, Treasurer of
his Majesty's Household, and one of the Lords of his most Honorable Privy
Council.

Vert, a Cheveron between three Leopards heads, Or, is the Coat of Sir Barrow
Fitch of Woodham-walter in Essex, Knight.

Sable, a Cheveron between three Leopards heads, Argent, is the Coat of Mr.
Tho. Hawes of the City of London, Merchant.

Or, a Cheveron between three Leopards heads, Sable, with the Arms of Vlster,
is the Coat Armor of Sir Charles Wheler of Burbury in Warwickshire, Baronet,
anciently of Martin-Hussingtre in the County of Worcester.

He bears Argent, a Pile surmounted by a Fess between four Leopards heads,
Gules, by the Name of Garroway; and is the Coat of William Garroway of the City
of Chichester in Sussex, Esquire

Gules, on a Bend, Argent, three Leopards heads of the Field, is the
Coat Armor of Colonel Robert Werden of the City of Chester, Comptroller to his
Royal Highness James Duke of York, and first Lieutenant and Major of his Guards.

Or, on a Bend, Azure, three Leopards heads Argent, is the Coat of John Mingay
of Gimingham in Norfolk, Esquire

He bears Argent, on a Fess engrailed, Gules, three Leopards heads, Or, by
the Name of Barbon, and is born by Nicholas Barbon of the City of London, M. D.
and one of the College of Physicians of the said City.

Azure, two Bars, Argent, in Chief three Leopards heads, Or, by the Name of
Wright; and with the Arms of Vlster, is the Coat Armor of Sir Henry Wright of
Dagenham in the County of Essex^ Baronet. This Coat is also born by Sir
Benjamin Wright of Cranham-hall in the said County, Baronet.

He bears Sable, two Bars, Ermyn, in Chief, three Leopards heads or faces,
Or, by the Name of Feltham; and is the Coat Armor of Owen Feltham of Gray's Inn
in the County of Middlsex, Esquire

He bears Argent, a Cheveron, Gules, between three Leopards heads erased,
gardant, Sable, by the Name of Farrington; and is the Coat Armor of John
Farrington of London, Merchant, descended from the ancient Family of the
Farringtons of Werden near Farrington-heath in Lancashire; a Family that came
into England with William the Conqueror, and have since continued in a
flourishing condition, there having been eight Knights of the said Family.

He bears Verry, on a Pale, Gules, three Leopards heads, Or, by the Name of
Ockowld. The Leopard has a name well fitting his unkindly procreation and
double Nature: for being ingendered between the Lioness and the Pardus, is
thereupon called a Leopard. It is oftentimes found in the hot Climates,
especially in Africa, where, through great scarcity of waters, many Beasts did
often convent together at some River to drink, of whose commixtion many
monstrous births have been produced; which gave occasion of that vulgar
Proverb, Semper aliquid novi fert Africa; Africa still yields new Monsters.

The Field is Sable, a Leopards head, Argent, jessant, a Flower de lis, Or, by
the name of Morley; and is born by Sir William Morley of Halnaker in the County
of Sussex, Knight. of the Bath. What jessant is, I have formerly showed you in the
fifteenth Chapter of this third Section, page 144. And now I will show you
three Leopards heads jessant^ the like flowers born in one Escocheon.

The Field is Sable, three Leopards heads jessant, Flowers de lis, Or. This
Coat is also born by the Name of Morley, and is the Coat of William Morley of
Glinde in Sussex, Esquire Some are of opinion that this color Sable, is the most
ancient of colors; and their reason is, for that it appears in Genesis,
chap. 1. 2. that darkness was before God made light. Here you see this Sable
Field charged with Or. And what kind of qualified and conditioned Bearer a
Coat Armor of this color and metal befitteth, I have already declared in the
tenth Chapter of this third Section, page 107.

Now in the blazon of this next ensuing Escocheon, I in this present Edition
shall upon better consideration differ from that which I gave it in my former,
Secundae cogitationes saepe sunt meliores.

He bears Gules, 3 Leopards heads, Or, jessant Flowers de lis, Azure, over
all a Bend engrailed of the third, by the Name of Dennis. This is that ancient
Coat Armor of that Family, as appears in the Cathedral Church of Worcester
and Hereford, as also in the Churches of Durham and Auste, and many other
places: nevertheless, some have of late years altered the Flowers de lis into
Or, wherein they have much wronged the Bearers, in rejecting the ancient form,
which is both warranted by antique Monuments, and no way discommendable, since
it is born in the natural color.

The Field is Gules, three Leopards heads reversed, swallowing as many Flowers
de lis, Or. This Coat pertains to the Sea of Hereford. These Leopards heads
differ from the former in this, that they are born reversed; of which form of
bearing you must take special notice in blazon; as also of the Flowers de lis,
which in these are said to be swallowed, and not born.

CHAP. XXVI.
ANOTHER sort there is of exorbitant^ Animals much more prodigious than all the
former; such are those Creatures formed, or rather deformed, with the confused
shapes of Creatures of different kinds and qualities. These (according to some
Authors) are called in Latin Monstra a Monstrando, for foreshewing some strange
events. These Monsters (says St. Augustine) cannot be reckoned amongst those
good Creatures that God created before the transgression of Adam: for those did
God (when he took the survey of them) pronounce to be valde bona, for they had
in them neither access nor defect, but were the perfect workmanship of God's
Creation. And of them Zanchius says, that Eorum deformitas habet usus, cum and
Deo serviant ad gloriam ipsius illustrandam, and electis ad salutem
promovendam. If man had not transgressed the Law of his Maker, this dreadful
deformity (in likelihood) had not happened in the procreation of Animals, which
some Philosophers do call Peccata Naturae, Errors in Nature; Quoniam uatura
impeditur in horum generatione, ne possit quale velit producere Animal. Some
examples in this kind here ensue.

He bears Argent, a Griffon passant, his wings displaied, Sable, armed,
Gules, by the Name of Halton, Leigh in his blazon of this Beast adds this
word Sergreant, in regard of his twofold form, wherein he does (as touching
his foreparts) participate with the Eagle, and (in the hindmost parts) with the
Lion: If that be the cause, then doubtless that term cannot be said to be
peculiar to the Griffon, as he would have it, but rather common to whatsoever
other Animal of double nature; as the Wiverne, Cockatrice, etc.

He bears Or, a Griffon rampant, with wings displaied, Sable, by the name of
Morgan, a spreading Family in Monmouthshire, and many of the Welsh Counties:
Amongst which are Sir Thomas Morgan of Langattogg, Baronet, William Morgan of
Tredegar and Machen, Esquire. Thomas Morgan of Penrose, Esquire. Thomas Morgan of
Lanromney, Esquire James Morgan of Lantillio-Pertholey, Esquire and William Morgan of
Wengohen, Esquire all in Monmouthshire; and William Morgan of Newton in
Brecknockshire; Esquire.

Vert, a Griffon rampant, Or, is the Coat of Richard Coleling of Coreley in
Shropshire, Esquire Principal Secretary to the Right Honorable Henry Earl of St.
Albans, Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty's Household.

Azure, a Griffon sergreant or rampant, Or, is the Coat of Sir John Read of
Brocket-hall in Hartfordshire, Baronet. As also by the Name of Cursellis; and
by Mr. James Cursellis of London, Merchant.

Sable, a Griffon sergreant, Or, is the Coat of the Honorable Society of
Gray's Inn, being one of the four Inns of Court. The erecting of the fore-leggs
of this Griffon is an evident testimony of his readiness for action, which
adds a second force of his attempt, and promises a successful event of his
enterprise, by reason he uniteth force and industry together. The Griffon
having attained his full growth, will never be taken alive; wherein he does
adumbrate, or rather lively set forth the property of a valorous Soldier,
whose magnanimity is such, as he had rather expose himself to all dangers, and
even to death it self, than to become a Captive.

As a Lion rampant is figured erectus, elevatus, mordax ore, radens pedibus; so
may a Bear, Griffon, or whatsoever other Animal of fierce nature (as aforesaid)
that is shaped in like form and action: For the Lion is not said to be rampant,
because he represents the shape of a Lion, but in respect of his fierce and
cruel action; so this in like manner using the same actions, may apertly
participate the same terms of blazon, his double shape notwithstanding,
Similium enim similis est ratio.

He bears Azure, a Griffon passant and Chief, Or, by the Name Evelyn, a very
spreading and worthy Family in Surrey, Buckinghamshire, Kent, and elsewhere: Of
which Family are George Evelyn of Blechingley, Esquire, George Evelyn of
Wotton, Esquire Edward Evelyn of Long^Ditton, Esquire George Evelyn of Godstone, Esquire
and Richard Evelyn of Ebisham, Esquire all in the County of Surrey: Also John
Evelyn of Sayes-Court in Deptford in Kent, Esquire and George Evelyn of
Hunters-combe in Bucks, Esquire

He bears Or, a Griffon sergreant, Sable, within a Bordure, Gules, by the
Name of Boys, a Family of good account in Kent, now existing in the persons of
John Boys of Fredvill in Nonington, Esquire John Boys of Botshanger, Esquire and Samuel
Boys of Hawkes-herst, Esquire

He bears Or, on a Cheveron between 3 Cinque-foils, Azure, as many Escallop
shells, Argent, on a Chief, Gules, a Griffon passant, Argent, by the Name of
Hawkins; and is the Coat Armor of Richard Hawkins of Marcham in Barkshire,
Gent.

Sable, a Cheveron between three Griffons heads erased, Argent. This is the
Coat of Sir John Cotton of Lanwade in Cambridgshire, Baronet.

He bears Sable, a Cheveron per Pale, Argent and Or, between three Griffons
heads erased, Argent, by the Name of Boume; and is born by John Boume of
Morefields in the Parish of St. Leonards Shoreditch in Middlesex, Dr. of
Physic.

He bears Per Bend, Or and Gules, three Griffons heads erased, counterchanged
on a Chief, Argent, a Flower de lis between two Roses of the second, by the
Name of Rycroft, or Roycroft, who from Abivill in Normandy, planted themselves
in Lancashire; from whence are derived the several Stems in Shropshire,
Cheshire, Devonshire, and London; and is born by Josiah Rycroft of London,
Merchant.

He bears Argent, on a Fess, between three Griffons heads erased, Sable, as
many Mullets of the Field, by the Name of Cliffe; and is the Coat Armor of
Allan Cliffe of the City of London, Esquire Grandchild to Allan Cliffe Rector of
Great Whitley in Shropshire, who was one of the younger Sons of Sir Richard
Cliffe of in the said County of Salop, who lived tempore Hen. 7.

He bears Argent, a Wiverne, his wings displaied, and tail nowed, Gules, by
the Name of Drakes. This word Nowed is as much to say in Latin as Nodatus. This
tail is said to be nowed, because it is intricately knotted with diverse
infoldings, after the manner of a Frette. Like as a Griffon does participate of
a Fowl and a Beast, as aforesaid; so does the Wiverne partake of a Fowl in the
wings and legs, and with a Snake, Adder, or such other Serpents (as are not of
gressible kind, but glide along upon their belly) and does resemble a Serpent
in the tail.

The Poets do feign that Dragons do keep, or (according to our English phrase)
sit abrood upon Riches and Treasures, which are therefore committed to their
charge, because of their admirable sharpness of sight, and for that they are
supposed (of all other living things) to be the most valiant. Adag. col. 515.
whereof Ovid. Metamorph. 7.

Pervigilem superest herbis sopire Draconem. The Dragons are naturally so hot,
that they cannot be cooled by drinking of water, but still gape for the Air to
refresh them, as appears Jeremiah 14. 6. And the wild Asses did stand in the
high places, they snuffed up the wind like Dragons; their eyes did fail because
there was no grass.

He bears Sable, a Cockatrice displaied, Argent, crested, membred, and
jolloped, Gules, by the Name of Buggine. The Cockatrice is called in Latin
Regulus, for that he seems to be a little King amongst Serpent^ not in regard
of his quantity, but in respect of the infection of his pestiferous and
poisons^^ aspect, wherewith he poisoneth the Air. Not unlike those devilish
Witches, that do work the destruction of silly Infants, as also of the Cattle
of such their Neighbors, whose prosperous estate is to them a most grievous
eyesore. Of such Virgil in his Bucolicks makes mention, saying,

Nescio quis teneros oculus mihi fascinat Agno^^ I know not what wicked eye
has bewitched my tender Lambs.


He bears Argent, a Reremouse displaied, Sable, by the Name of Bakster. The
Egyptians (says Pierius) used to signify by the Reremouse a man that having
small means and weak power, either of Nobility, or of Fortune, or yet^ stored
with pregnancy of wit, has nevertheless stepped up so suddenly, that he might
seem not so much to be supported by the earth, at by a sudden flight to be
exalted above the same. Sometimes you shall find this Bird born in the form of
some Ordinary; for so shall you see them born displaied in Pale, three of them
one above another. As in the Ensigns of the Kingdom of India, sorted amongst
the Coat-Armours of the innumerous multitude of the great assembly holden at
the Council of Constance, Anno Dom. 1414. This little Creature does partake
both with Beast and Bird, in such nearness of resemblance to either of them, as
that it may (with reason) be doubted of whether kind he is. By occasion whereof
the takes advantage in the Battle between Beasts and Birds (mentioned in the
Fables of Aesop) to flutter aloft above them, to behold the event of that
dangerous fight, with a resolution to incline to the stronger part. Of all
Birds (according to Pliny) this alone brings forth young alive, and none but
she has wings made of panicles or thin skins. So is she the only Bird that
suckleth her young with her paps, and gives them milk.

He bears Azure, an Harpy with her wings disclosed, her hair flotant, Or,
armed of the same. This Coat stands in Huntington Church. Of this kind of
Bird (or rather Monster) Virgil writes in this manner; Tristius hand illis
monstrum, nec saevior ulla
Pestis and ira deum Slygiis sese extulit undis,
Virginei volucrum vultus, foedissima ventris
Ingluvies, uncaeque manus, and pallida semper
Ora fame. --
Of monsters all, most monstrous this; no greater wrath
God sends amongst men; it comes from depth of pitchy Hell:
And Virgins face, but womb like gulf unsatiate has,
Her hands are griping claws, her color pale and fell.


The Field is Azure, an Harpy displaied, crined, crowned, and armed, Or. These
are the Arms of the noble City of Norenberga, which, according to some Authors,
is situate in the very Center of the vast and spacious Country of Germany.
The Harpy (says Vpton) should be given to such persons as have committed
manslanghter, to the end that by the often view of their Ensigns they might be
moved to bewail the foulness of their offense.

He bears Argent, a Mermaid, Gules, crined, Or, holding a Mirror in her right
hand, and a Comb in her left, by the Name of Ellis.

To these must be added Montegres, Satyrs, Monk-fishes; as also Lions-dragons,
Lions-poisons, and whatsoever other double shaped Animal of any two or more of
the particular kinds before handled.

CHAP. XXVII.
UNTO this will I add some sorts of Animals, which although they be duly
shaped, and therefore may seem to agree with those of the same kind formerly
treated of, yet do they much differ from them, either in their unnatural
postures and gestures; or else being with some liberty-debarring instrument by
man's industry and invention restrained of their natural freedom, as by a chain,
or the like; and therefore could not, according to Methods strict rule, have
been handled promiscuously among the former. Some few Examples of this kind of
bearing of Animals of this sort in Coat Armor, I here present unto your view.

He bears Or, a Lion rampant, ragardant, Sable, armed, Gules, by the Name of
Gway the Void, sometime Lord of Cardagan in Wales.

Argent, a Lion rampant, regardant, Sable, is the Coat of Thomas Matthew of
Castle-Mengch in Glamorganshire, Esquire

Or, a Lion rampant, regardant, Sable, is born by John Lloyd of Keyswyn in
Merionethshire, Esquire.

This action does manifest an inward and degenerate perturbation of the mind,
which is merely repugnant to the most courageous nature of the Lion, Cujus
natura est imperterrita, according to the saying, Leo fortissimus bestiarum ad
nullius pavebit occursum.

The form of bearing of the Lion regardant, albeit in respect of his courage
and magnanimity it be contrary to his natural quality, for that it may be
thought, and is indeed generally holden to be a chief note of timorousness,
which is merely contrary to his generous nature; yet nevertheless it is good
Armory, not only in him, but also in all other Animals of like bearing, so long
as they are born significantly; and it fitteth our profession to interpret all
sorts of bearing to the best, that is to say, to the most honor of their
Bearers. To the end therefore that I may give some satisfaction touching the
commendable bearing thereof to such as do hold the contrary, I hold the same
form of bearing to be born (not only in the Lion, but in whatsoever other
Animals) significantly, and therefore commendably: forasmuch as such action
betokens a diligent circumspection or regardful consideration of fore-passed
events of things, and comparing of them with things present, that he may give a
conjectural ghess of the effects of things yet to come, and resting in
deliberation, which proprieties are peculiar to men that are careful and
considerate of such businesses as they do undertake.

He bears Argent, a Lion rampant coward, Purpure, by the Name of Rowch. This
is termed a Lion coward, for that in cowardly sort he clappeth his tail between
his Legs, which is proper to all kind of Beasts (having tails) in case of
extremity and fear, than which nothing is more contrary to the magnanimity and
noble stomach of the Lion, who will not shrink or be abashed at any encounter,
so valiant and resolute is he of nature.

Other sorts of bearing of Animals there be, whose natural actions are hindered
by reason of the apposition of certain Artificial Impediments; as shall appear
hereafter in these next following Escocheons.

He bears Argent, a Lion rampant, Sable, gorged with a Collar, and a Chain
thereto affixed reflexing over his back, Or, by the Name of Meredith. Such form
of bearing may signify some Bearer thereof to be captivated by such an one as
was of greater power than himself.

No Beast can be truly said to be free that is tied about the neck, which
Aristotle observes, saying, Nullum animal tunc est liberum, quando collum suum
vinculis habet solutum.

The Field is Gules, a Boar, Argent, armed, grisled, collared, and chained, Or,
tied to an Holly-bush on a Mount in base, both proper. This was the Paternal
Coat Armor of George Owen, Esquire. deceased, a singular lover and an industrious
Collector of Antiquities, as Learned Mr. Camden writes in the description of
Pembrokeshire. He was owner of the Barony of Keimes in the said County, which,
as the same Mr. Camden there notes, consists of twenty Knights fees, and
twenty six Parishes over and above the three Boroughs of Newport, Fishgard, and
St. Dogmaels. By this Mr. Owen's industry the printed Mapp of the said County
was, as you may see in the said Mr. Camden's description, composed.

He bears Sable, a Horse passant, Argent, spanceled on both Legs of the
nearer side, Gules, by the Name of Percivall. Albeit this Horse be now
spanceled as you see, yet must you not account him to be of so base and
dejected nature, as that he has been forced to this subjection, but rather won
thereunto by tractable usage: for such is the quality of noble Spirits, as that
they are rather brought to conformity by gentleness than by severity, according
to the memorable saying of Seneca, Generosus animus facilius ducitur quam
trahitur. For it is with irrational Animals as with the rational, who are
rather drawn by the Ears than by the Cloak, that is, they are sooner won by
persuasion than forced by compulsatory means: which being taken in this sense,
the imposition of this artificial note of restraint, does no way derogate from
the worth of the Bearer.

In the closing up of this third Section of Irrational Animals, I will note
unto you some few Examples (not unworthy your observation) of some other sorts
of bearing than have been hitherto spoken of; for that I would not willingly
omit any thing worthy of note, that may serve for your better information: For
I had rather you were ill furnished at my hands, than that I should leave you
altogether disfurnished. The things that I purpose to note unto you in this
place, are briefly these, to wit, That there are some Coat-Armours, whose
Fields (besides their grand Charge) do admit some petite Charge to be annexed
to the primer Charge. Others there are, wherein the Field being freed of such
petty Charges, the same are imposed upon the Charge it self. Hence it is, that
we have so many Lions and other living things born Gutte, Billette, Escalloppe,
Pellette, etc. as by this that ensues in part may be seen.

He bears Azure, a Lion rampant, between eight cross Croslets fitched, three,
two, two, and one, Or, charged on the shoulder with a Crescent, Gules, a Chief
of the second, by the Name of Iordane. A like bearing to this (the Chief
excepted) has the Lord Delaware for his second Coat, which is Gules, crusule
botonne fitche, a Lion rampant, Argent, by the Name of Laware, which I do note
unto you for a further instance of such bearing.

Azure, flory Or, a Lion rampant, Argent; and is born by Nevill Pool of Oakley
in Wiltshire, Esquire

The Field is Diamond, a Lion rampant between eight crosses Croslets, Pearl
This Coat Armor pertains to the ancient Family of Long of Wiltshire: whereof
that Honorable and virtuous Baronness, the Lady Russel, sometime wife to the
late Right Honorable and thrice-worthy Sir William Russel, Lord Russel of
Thornehaw, deceased, was descended; whose several virtues deserve to be
published by a more skilful pen. Yet can I not but show my dutiful affection
unto them for many those honorable respects touching my own particular.

Or, a Lion rampant between eight cross Croslets, Azure, by the Name of Bo^nel
of Norfolk.

Argent, Semy de Cinque-foils, Gules, a Lion rampant, Sable is the Paternal
Coat Armor of William Pierrepont of Orton in Huntingtonshire, Esquire Brother to
the Right Honorable Henry Marquess of Dorchester, etc.

Sable, Semy de Cinque-foils a Lion rampant, Argent, is born by the Name of
Clifton.

Azure, flory a Lion rampant gardant, Argent, by the Name of Holland; and is
the Coat Armor of Sir John Holland of Quidenham in Norfolk Baronet

Sable, a Lion rampant, Argent, debruised with a Bendlet, Gules, by the Name of
Churchill, and is born by Sir John Churchill of Churchill in Somersetshire, Knight.
descended from the ancient Family of the Churchills in the Counties of
Somerset, Devon, and Dorset, flourishing in the Reigns of King John, Henry the
Third, and Edward the First.

He bears Argent, a Lion rampant, Sable, Gutte, Or, by the Name of Bromwich.
As this Charge is born Gutte, so shall the careful observer find other Charges
born Billette, Pellette, etc.

Sol, Semy de Coeur des hommes, proper, three Lions passant gardant, Jupiter.
This Coat was born by Swane King of Denmark, who in the year of our Lord 990.
gained the Kingdom, and compelled King Aetheldred to pay him tribute for twenty
years, at which time Hardicanutus, the Danish King, deceasing, King Edward was
crowned in his place.

The Field is Gules, two Lioncels passant, Argent, between nine crosses
Croslets fitched, Or, an Inescocheon of the second Charged with a sinister hand
couped at the wrist as the first, in Chief one Cresscent surmounted by another
(for a difference of a second Brother of a second) by the Name of Acton; and
was born by Sir William Acton Knight and Baronet, Alderman of the City of
London, who is descended of the Actons of Aldenham in the County of Salop, a
Family of good worth and note there. I do here in the blazon mention nine cross
Croslets fitched, although the one of them, by reason of the addition of the
superjacent Inescocheon is little discerned, and another of them is by the
Crescents somewhat obscured. A like blazon of an undiscerned Charge you may see
in Chap. 23. of this third Section in the Coat Armor of Kingscot, page 180.
And so concluding this third Section, I will hasten to the next.

The end of the third Section.
Felices essent Arts, si de his solummodo Artifices judicarent.
THIS Fourth Section treats of Coat-Armours formed of things Artificial, that
is, of such things as are wrought by the Wit, Art, and Endeavor of Man, for
the use of Man: whether we consider such Artificials as appertain to the use of
Civil Life, as the Ensigns of Dignities, both Temporal and Ecclesiastical, and
of Professions, both Liberal and Mechanical; or else as they belong to the Life
and Actions Military; for Artificials being made for the behoof and several
Uses of Men, they are here proposed according to the several Actions and
Estates of Men.

Scientia non habet inimicum praeter ignorantem. The Table of the Fourth
Section.
Artificials, as they are born in Coat-Armours, are considered according to
Men's Estates and Actions Civil, in regard of Pre-eminence of dignity Temporal,
Supreme, as Emperors, Kings, Free States, Subordinate, as Princes, Dukes,
Grand-Officers, Magistrates, etc.
and their ensigns are Born by the Persons themselves having such Dignity, as
Crowns, Chapeaus, Robes of Estate, Scepters, Mounds, etc. Born before them as
tokens of such their Dignity, as the Sword of Estate, the Lord Chancellors
Purse, the great Mace, etc.
Ecclesiastical, Antichristian, as Pope, Cardinals, etc. Christian and
Apostolical, as Archbishops and Bishops, etc.
and theirs likewise either Born or worn by the Persons themselves, as the
Triple Crown, Cardinals Hat, Pall, Miter, Croy^ier. Born before them, as the
Cross, Vierge, etc.

Professions and Arts Liberal, which are Cardinal, or chief Faculties, as
Theology for our Souls. Physic for our Bodies, to which Surgery also is
referred. Law for our Fortunes.
Subordinate, as the seven Sciences, Grammar. Logic. Rhetoric. Geometrey.
Music. Arithmetic. Astronomy.

Mechanical, For necessity, and so principal, as Agriculture, Pasture,
Vine-dressing, etc. Clothing, Tailery, etc. Armature, Architecture, Carpentry,
etc. Navigation. Venation, Hunting. Hawking. Fishing.

For delight only, and so less principal, Cookery. Embroidering. Painting.
Carving. Playing On Stage. At Cards, Dice, Tables, etc.




Military, whereof some serve for Order, whereof some are of Show, as Banners,
Pennons, Guidhims, Penonsels, Standards, etc. Sound, as Drum, Trumpet, Fife,
etc.
Execution of Order, Invasive, of which some are Missile, as great Ordnances
with their parts and appurtenances, Bows, Arrows, Darts, Slings, etc. Manual,
as Swords, Spears, Bills, Partisans, Glaives, etc.
Defensive, serving for Man, and are for Defense only, as Shields, Pavices,
Targets, Bucklers, etc. Defense and Habit, as Caskes, Helmets, Gauntlets,
Corslets, Curasses, with their parts.
Horse, and are ordained for Defense and Ornament, as the Sha^rone, Cranet,
Barde, etc. Common use, as Bits, Bridle, Snaffles, Saddle, Stirrops,
Horse-shoes, etc.






A DISPLAY OF HERALDRY.
SECT. IV. CHAP. I.
AS all Natural things (of which hitherto we have entreated) were made by the
powerful hand of the Almighty and All-wise God for the use of Mankind: so did
God also endue Man with an admirable power infused into him, with a reasonable
Soul, whereby every man might invent ways and means to help himself, and one
man to help another by the benefit of Arts, for the better use of those things
which God and Nature has provided. In which respects Art is reputed Naturae
Simia, Natures Ape, for imitating those things which Nature herself has
framed, as we see in Painting, Poetry, and the like. But we may go further
(since Art goes further) and add, That Art is also Natura Obstetrix, Medica,
Leno: Natures Midwife, in helping her for the safer and better producing of her
fruits, as is Husbandry, etc. Natures Physician, in preserving Natures works,
as Architecture, Armature, and Physic it self: Lastly, Art is Natures Pandor,
in setting her out to the most tempting and pleasing fashion, by inventing
those things that tend either to the adorning or delight, so to please the
senses and phansies with those things, which in their own nature without Art,
would not be so contentful. And therefore Aristotle yields this reason of the
invention of Arts, Quia Natura multipliciter est ancilla and multis angustiis
oppressa, idea inventa est Ars, ut suppleat defectum Naturae, Nature is much
kept under and oppressed like an Handmaid, and therefore Arts were inventted,
to supply those defects of Nature.

In this place therefore we intend from the works of Nature to come to the
works of Art, so far forth as they are used in Coat Armor. And here we must be
born with, if we use the word of Art in his largest signification, including
all Sciences and Knowledge, whether Contemplative or Operative and Pratick
whatsoever; for so one has defined it, Art is the cunning of doing or teaching
any thing by certain Rules [or prescript forms:] And therefore some have
thought Arts to be ab Arctando, Quia arctis brevibusque praeceptis concluditur,
because it is comprised in brief and compendious Precepts: whereas those who so
call it, quia per Artus operatur, for the works of the limbs or joints, they
comprehend only Arts Mechanical by that name. Some more probably derive it from
the Greek word Arete, which signifies Virtue; because the perfect Skill or Art
of doing any thing is properly the virtue of that Action. In handling these
Artificials, I will follow our prescribed Order, and begin with the Ensigns of
the Actions of Estate Civil, and first with the Highest and Sovereign, as in
Example.

The Field is Jupiter, a Crown Mitral Imperial, Sol, garnished and enriched
with sundry precious Gems, proper. These Arms do pertain to the City of Toledo
in Spain. This sort of Crown was devised to represent a twofold dignity united
into one, viz. Sacrifical and Imperial (in which respect I have given it this
new coined form of blazon:) For in ancient times Emperors and Kings were also
Priests, Tanta est Sacerdotalis dignitas, etc. (says Chassa.) So great is the
Priestly Dignity, that in the glorious times of the Romans no man might be
Emperor or King, but he was to be also a Priest; and thence are they instiled
in their Coyns Imperatores, and Pontifices Maximi; whence we may see, that the
original was merely heathenish of the Popes Usurpation of that Title Pontifex
Maximus; surely he could find in his heart also to style himself Imperator
Maximus, for that high command he challenges over all Emperors and Kings. And
though this be now the Ensign of the Empire, yet it is rather in possession of
the usurping Papacy.

The Field is Mars, a Crown Imperial, Sol. This is called an Imperial Crown, in
regard of the Imperial Jurisdiction and Prerogatives, that an absolute King (to
whom such a Crown is due) has within his Kingdom. The high rising of the
Diadem does signify the greatness and perfection of of such a King, from whom
there is no appellation; forasmuch as he acknowledges no earthly Superior in
any thing pertaining to his Royal Jurisdiction; neither owes he duty, but only
to the King of all Kings, of whom he holds by an immediate right.

The Kings Crown is arched, to show its correspondency to the Imperial Heaven;
its adornment with precious stones, as it were with stars, to represent its
splendour; and its being lined with furrs does declare its honor.

The cause that moved the Egyptians to insert a Crown amongst their Sacred or
Hieroglyphical Letters, may not impertinently be expressed in this place, where
we are to handle their diverse forms according to the several Dignities and
Estates, to whom they do appertain: For as Gamesters make but cold sport, when
there is no money at stake; so knowledge does oftentimes faint, if it be not
seasoned with the Salt of Reason. In this Hieroglyphick we may observe the four
causes of the Law: The efficient cause is understood by the Head of the King
that is adorned with this Crown. The final cause is conceived by the Flowers,
or by the profitable use of fruit; which how great the same (in likelihood)
will be, may be conjectured by the Flowers. The material cause may be gathered
by the context or interlaced form and workmanship of the Crown, which carries
a resemblance of the People or Subjects. Finally, by the Orbicular form of the
Crown is understood Justice; and amongst Mathematicians the Spherical form is
reckoned the perfectest and most noble, Farnes. 3. 65.

The Prince is to the People the Author of all goodness; inasmuch as from him,
as from a plentiful Fountain, does flow a sweet current of plentiful streams of
honor, profit and pleasure: In regard whereof he is reputed to be the Common
Parent of all his Subjects, in that he affords unto them whatsoever a Natural
Parent owes to his Children. The platting of these Flowers in the Crown does
represent the end of the Law, which end has its determinate period in utility,
Farnes. 4. 66. For that Tree which bears no blossoms, for the most part
produces no fruit at all, Ibid.

Crowns in times past have been of great value, and sumptuously enriched with
precious stones, as we may read 1. Chro. 20. 2. And David took the Crown of
their King from off his head, and found it to weigh a Talent of Gold, and there
were precious stones in it. And it was set on David's head.

In these latter Ages the Emperor elected (before his Coronation) does write
himself King of the Romans, as a title of less esteem and dignity than is the
Title of Emperor. But in ancient times the Romans had three degrees of Supreme
Dignity; that is to say, a King, a Dictator, an Emperor; and of these the
Dignity of a King was the chiefest; and next thereto the Dignity of a Dictator
was holden the worthiest; and after the Dictatorship the Estate of an Emperor
held the third place, as inferior to both the other. Hereof we have a manifest
proof, in that the Senate and People of Rome minding to give unto Octavian the
Emperor (being a man well deserving of them) some advancement or increase of
honor and dignity, they purposed to make him Dictator, which he (reverently
bowing his knee) refused, for that he reputed the same a Dignity more
ambitious, and of greater esteem, and withal more subjected to spite and envy,
esteeming the Title of Emperor to be popular, and of small account, in
comparison of the eminency of a Dictatorship. We may easily perceive by this^
that Julius Caesar (that time he was Dictator) did affect to aspire to the
Dignity of a King, for which cause he was slain: forasmuch as the Citizens
could not endure that he should exercise Royal Authority over them; but well
could they suffer him to use the power of a Dictator as a Jurisdiction of less
esteem Leonard. Aretini Epistolar. Lib. 5.

There can be but one King at one time in a Realm, whose Power must be
absolute, for the better managing of the Estate and Affairs thereof; for if
there be more, they will cross and hinder each other in his Government, and so
destroy the nature of a King, in that neither of them can sway the whole weal
public, but each of them should admit a participation in government. This do
both ancient and modern times manifest unto us by Examples: For neither Numa,
nor Hostilius, nor Ancus Martius, nor any other of succeeding Kings of the
Romans, could endure any Fellow or Copartner in Government. The like also may
we observe in Kings of modern times: for neither does England nor France admit
more than one King at once to sway the Sovereign State, but one alone has the
sole Government: So that it is a thing merely repugnant to the Nature of Royal
Jurisdiction, that two Persons at one time should exercise Kingly Authority.

The Field is Jupiter, three Crowns in Pale, Sol. Belinus King of this our
Britany, having conquered France, Almain, all Italy, and the City of Rome,
together with all Greece, he returned into this Land, and assumed unto himself
new Arms (as Vpton reports) Tres Coronas auratas in Campo Azoreo, quia ipse
fuer at terna vice in diversis Regnis coronatus, Three Crowns, Or, in a Field,
Azure, because he was three times crowned King in sundry Kingdoms. But this
kind of Crown is now held proper to such a King as owes homage or fealty to
some other King, as to his Superior Lord: In which respect some have given it
the Name of a Crown Homager.

It is in your choice whether you will term the foresaid Crowns Or, or not; for
it suffices only to mention their Form, because it is proper to them to be
made of Gold: But when they are found to be born in other kind of Metals or
Colors, you should in blazoning make mention whereof they are.

He bears Gules, 3 Crowns Ducal Or, on a Chief of the Second as many Laurel
leaves proper, by the Name of Berkenhead; and is the Coat Armor of Sir John
Berkenhead, Knight. Master of Requests to his Majesty, and Master of the Faculties.

The Field is Jupiter, a Scepter Royal in Pale, insigned with an Eye, Sol. This
is the second Ensign that is born by the person himself that has the exercise
of Royal Jurisdiction and Authority. This Coat Armor is of diverse Authors
vouched to have been anciently born by Orysius Surnamed Jupiter, the just Son
of Cham, the cursed Son of Noah. The Eye betokens Providence in Government;
Oculus enim est custos corporis, the Eye is the Watchman of the body; and the
Scepter signifies Justice.

A Scepter (with many Nations) is holden for an especial Ensign of Royal
Jurisdiction and Authority, and the extending thereof a special note of the
placability and royal favor of the King; as we may see Hester 15. 14. And he
held up his golden Scepter, and laid it upon her Neck. That the Scepter
betokens Jurisdiction and Authority, it is manifest by that which is written,
Baruch 6. 13. One holds a Scepter, as if he were a Judge of the Country, yet
can he not slay such as offend him: which is here spoken of the vanity of the
Idols before mentioned in the same Chapter; Now shall you see in Babylon Gods
of Silver and of Gold, and of Wood, born upon men's shoulders to cause them to
fear.

The Field is Sol, a Mound, Saturn, environed with a Circle, and insigned with
a Cross Avellane, Mars. Bara in his Book entitled, Les Blazonnes des Armories,
sets down this for the Coat Armor of one Chawlas. This kind of Cross is
called a Cross Avellane, for the resemblance it has of a Philbert Nut, which
in Latin is called Avellana. This also is one of the Ensigns that represents
the Sovereign Majesty and Jurisdiction of a King. By the roundness of the Mound
and insigning thereof with the Cross, is signified, that the Religion and Faith
of Christ ought to be received and religiously embraced throughout his
Dominions, which high duty is residing in his own Sovereign Power, and not to
be derived from any Foreign Spiritual Jurisdiction.

He bears Sol, a Cap of Maintenance, Mars, turned up, Ermyn. A like Cap did
Pope Julius the second send with a Sword to King Henry the Eighth. And after
him Pope Leo the Tenth gave him the Title, Defender of the Faith, for that he
had then lately before written a Book against Martin Luther. The Bull by which
this Title was given, is now printed by that worthy and famous Antiquary Mr.
Seldom in his Titles of Honor, p. 54, 55. of his last Edition. But howsoever
the Cap may seem then and thereof to be first called a Cap of Maintenance, yet
certain it is, that the Kings of England did long before that time declare and
profess themselves Defender of the Faith, as by diverse of their Charters yet
extant may easily appear; and for an instance thereof, you may read in the Book
of the Acts and Monuments, that King Richard the Second in his Commission
(which went forth in the sixth year of his reign) used these words, Noszelo
fidei Catholicae cujus sumus and esse volumus defensores in omnibus (ut
tenemur) moti salubriter and inducti, etc. page 441.

He bears Luna, a Mantle of Estate, Mars, doubled, Ermyn, ouched, Sol,
garnished with Strings fastened thereunto fretways dependant, and Tasselled of
the same. These Arms do pertain to the Town of Brecknock. The Mantle is a Robe
of Estate peculiar to Emperors, Monarchs, Kings and Free Estates, and thereof
perhaps received his Name, as I here understand the same in the strict
construction thereof; but taken in the largest signification it may represent
as well those kinds of Mantles, that (together with some Dignity or
Jurisdiction) Emperors and Kings do communicate unto such as they advance to
some Principality, Dukedom, etc.

Hitherto of Honorary Ensigns, that serve for a declaration of the Royal
Majesty or Function of an Emperor and King, and are worn by the persons
themselves that do exercise Sovereign Jurisdiction over their Subjects within
their Dominions. To which Ensigns I hold it not impertinent to add these few
Attires or Ornaments following, viz. Garters and Tassels, as in Example.

The Field is Gules, three Garters buckled and nowed, Argent. This Coat Armor
pertains to the Family of the Sydemers. The Garter here demonstrated has
some resemblance to that which is the proper Ensign of the Noble Society of the
Knights of the most Honorable Order of the Garter, instituted by the famous
King Edward the third, every Knight of which Order is bound daily to wear
(except when he is booted for to ride) on his left Leg a blue Garter, richly
decke^ with gold and precious stones, with a Buckle of gold, having these words
upon it, Honey soit qui mal y pense: and when he is booted to ride, it suffices
to wear upon the same Leg, under his boot, a blue Ribon of silk in
signification of the Garter. Of this Honorable Order diverse have already
largely written, as worthy Sir William Segar Garter Principal King of Arms,
Learned Mr. Cambden, sometimes Clorenceux, and the beforementioned judicious
Linguist Mr. Seldom, with others. And for the hidden Mysteries which seem to
lurk under this Noble Ensign of the Garter, and of every circumstance thereof,
you may read the Book entitled Catechismus Ordinis Equitum Periscelidis, long
since compiled, but lately printed; wherein the Author, among many other
Observations of this Order, and of this token or ensign, writes, that Sicut la
larretiere (he means, Periscelis seu fascia poplitaria) tenet densam caligam,
caligaque tensa forma^ tibiam, and tibia hominem compositum reddit^ ita
justitia stringit tibiam, id est, conscientiam, quam ad instar tibiae Deus
rectam creavit, page 9, 10. And now I will show you an Example of three of
these born in Coat Armor dimidiated or divided into halves.

He bears Or, the perclose of three demi-Garters nowed, Azure, garnished of
the first. This was the Coat Armor of the Family of the Narboons. For I find
that Richard Narboon Richmond, Herald, who lived in the time of Edward the
sixth, and was afterward by the High and Mighty Prince Thomas, Duke of Norfolk,
Earl Marshal of England, in the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
crowned and created Vlster King of Arms of Ireland, bore this Coat Armor with
a Martlet, Sable, in Chief, for a difference of a fourth Brother; and John
Narboon Richmond, Herald, who lived in the time of King Henry the Eighth, bore
the same Coat Armor also, with a difference of a Mullet for a third Brother.
Though this Garter be dimidiated, or severed into two halves, yet does the most
permanent part thereof remain, which is that buckled and nowed part of the
same, which detaineth and restrains the Garter being entire, or howsoever
dimidiated from dissolution, inasmuch as the buckle and interlacing thereof,
and of the pendant, are the chief stay and fastening thereof, whether the same
be whole dimidiated or howsoever.

He bears Gules, 3 Tassels, Or, by the name of Wooler, The Mantle of Estate,
which even now I showed you was garnished (as you, may remember) with strings
tasseled, which kind of tasseling is an addition to diverse other strings or
cordons, as those used about the habit of the Prince of Wales at his Creation,
and of a Knight of the Garter when he has the whole habit on, and to the
Prelate of the Garter and others.

Now of those other Honorary Ensigns that areborn before an Emperor or King,
or Persons that do exercise Sovereign Jurisdiction as their Vicegerents,
holding place of Supreme Dignity under them, in signification of that their
Dignity (which for brevities sake) I will here only name, leaving their
Examples to be hereafter observed. Such are the Sword of Estate, the Canopy of
Estate, the Cap of Maintenance, the Purse, wherein the Great Seal is born, the
Great Mace, etc. All which shall follow hereafter in place convenient.

CHAP. II.
HAVING in the former Chapter discoursed of things Honorary, representting
Estate or Dignity Temporal; let us now consider of such Ornaments as bear a
representation of Estate or Dignity Ecclesiastical, according to the
distribution thereof, of which sort are these ensuing Examples.

The Field is Gules, a Papal Infula, insigned with a treble Crown and a Cross
Patee, Or, two Labels pendant, Argent. This kind of Infula or Miter is worn by
the Antichristian Prelate of Rome, to signify the threefold Jurisdiction that
he does arrogate to himself as Christ's Vicar General in Heaven, in Earth, and
in his supposed Purgatory. Guido Duke of Vrbin in Italy, who was elected Knight
of the most Honorable Order of the Garter, Anno 23. Hen. 7. did bear this Coat
quartered next to his own. As touching the installation of this Duke, Sir
Gilbert Talbot Knight. Sir Richard Bear Abbat of Glastenbury, and Dr. Robert
Sherbourne Dean of Paul's, being sent Ambassadors to Rome unto Pope Julius, did
bear the Collar and Habit of this Order unto the Duke; who receiving the same,
sent Balthazar Castalio Knight. (a Mantuan born) to the King, which Balthazar was
installed in his room according to the usual Ordinance.

The Field is Argent, a Cardinals Hat, with strings pendant and platted in
True-love, the ends meeting in Base, Gules. These are the Arms of Sclavonia, a
Region in the Sea Hadriaticum, and is commonly called Windeshmarke. Pope
Innocentius the fourth ordained that Cardinals should wear red Hats, whereby he
would signify, that those that entered into that Order ought to be prepared to
expose themselves even to the shedding of their blood, and hazard of their
lives (if need so required) in the defense of the Ecclesiastical Liberty. And
this Institution was made (according to Chassan.) at the Council holden at
Lions, 1273. But they have ever since so far digressed from it, as that they
have more justly deserved that Censure of a Learned man, thus:

Semiviros quicunque patres radiante Galero Conspicis, etc. Whoever marks our
carnal Cardinals Weeds,
Their Hat and pendant Robe of purple strain;
Believe me, it is no crimson juice which breeds
This sanguine hue, nor costly scarlet grain:
But it is the guiltless blood of martyred Saints,
Wherein their thirsty vestures they have died;
Or else it is blushing which their weeds depaints,
As shaming as the shameless beasts they hide.


The Field is Jupiter, a Staff in Pale, Sol, and thereupon a Cross Patee, Luna,
surmounted of a Pall of the last, charged by four other like Crosses fitched,
Saturn, edged and fringed as the second. This Coat belongs to the
Archiepiscopal See of Canterbury, which has annexed with it the Title of
Primate and Metropolitan of all England; to whose high place it of right
appertains to Crown and Inaugurate the Sovereign Monarchs of this Kingdom.
This Ornament is called in Latin Pallium, Quia ex eo plenitudo dignitatis
Archiepiscopatus in gestante, palam fit omnibus. What a Pall is Chassanaeus
shows in these words, Pallium est quoddam ornamentum ad modnm Stolae
Socerdotalis cum quibusdam crucibus nigris contextis, quod defertur super alia
ornamenta, circundans pectus and humeros, ad modum coronae dependens. In
ancient time it was (through the intolerable pride and tyranny of the Roman
Bishop) not lawful for any to take upon him the Title of an Archbishop, before
he had received from the Pope this Ornament which we call a Pall, and that was
reckoned to be a manifest demonstration of the lawfulness and fullness of his
Archiepiscopal Jurisdiction. Besides, he was to take a Corporal Oath to hold
faith and obedience to the Church of Rome at the receiving of this Pall. No man
ought to lend his Pall to any other, but contrariwise the same to be buried
with the Possessor and Owner.

He bears Sable, a Mitre with two Labels pendant, Argent, garnished, Or. This
Coat stands in St. Thomas's Church in Nantwich, otherwise called Which
Mulbanke. Amongst the sundry Ornaments ordained for the illustration of the
Bishops Dignity, Polydore Virgil reckons the Mitre for one, and affirms the
same to have been received from the Hebrews. And as touching the forked shape
thereof, he writes in this manner, Adduntur bina cornua, quoniam Moses
acceptis tabulis, quibus Mandata Dei inscripta erant, visus est suis cornutus.

The Field is Gules, on a Lion rampant, Argent, a Bishop's Croysier in Bend
sinister, Or, born by Odo Bishop of Bayon, half brother to William the
Conqueror, by whom he was created Earl of Kent. This staff (according to
Polydore Virgil) was given to Bishops to chastise the Vices of the People; and
it is called Baculus Pastoralis, as given to them in respect of their Pastoral
Charge, and superintendency over their flock, as well for feeding them with
wholesome Doctrine, and for defending them from the violent incursions of the
Wolf, wherein they do imitate the good and watchful Sphepherd, of whose Crook
this Croysier has a resemblance. Besides these Ornaments, the same Author
speaks of a Ring given to a Bishop, in signification of the conjunction or
marriage of Christ with his Church, whereof the Ring is a Pledge: and of his
Gloves, that betokened cleanness of hands, free from all contagious corruption:
and lastly, his Sandals, that betokened his industrious vigilance over his
Flock: all which are said to have been instituted by the Decrees of Pope
Clement.

In blazon here you shall not say debruised or oppressed, both in respect the
Croysier extends not to the extremities of the Escocheon, as also in respect
of the slender substance thereof, whereby it may be intended, the Lion may
easily free himself thereof, if it were extended throughout to the Corners of
the Escocheon. Howsoever, most true it is, that those who are advanced to the
Calling represented by the Croysier, ought to be like Lions, both for courage
and vigilance, in execution of that great Authority and Jurisdiction wherewith
Christ and his Church have honored them, for the repressing of obstinate
Offenders, and preservation of the Churches Peace and Discipline.

He bears Argent, on a Bend, Vert, between six cross Croslets fitched, Gules,
three Croysiers, Or, by the Name of Wear of Devon. And is quartered by
Fortescue of Filley. This Coat stands in Wear Church in Com. praedict.

To this Head must be referred all other Ornaments properly pertaining to
persons of Ecclesiastical Dignity or Function. But this is sufficient in this
place to show their use in Coat Armor.

CHAP. III.
OF things artificial born or worn by Persons in Dignity, and represented in
Coat-Armours, we have spoken in the 2 Chapters preceding: In this shall be
delivered Examples of such Ornaments, or representations of Dignity, as are
born before Persons of such Majesty or Dignity, for the more honor of their
Place and Calling.

The Field is Pearl, a Sword of Estate in Pale, the point crected, Ruby, hilted
and pomelled, Topaz, the Scabbard enriched with stones of diverse kinds, set in
Goldsmiths work, proper. The manner of bearing this Sword varieth according to
the several Estates and Dignities of the Persons for whom they are born. But
the same is not born before the Head-Officers of Boroughs and other Towns
Corporate (says Leigh) comparable to the orderly bearing thereof within his
Majesty's Chamber of London, by reason of the want of judgment therein. It is
therefore to be observed, that when the Sword is born before our Sovereign Lord
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, the Bearer thereof must carry the point
thereof direct upright, the blade opposite and near to the middle part of the
forehead. And as to the form of bearing the Sword before inferior Estates, as
a Duke, Marquess, Earl, etc. I refer the Reader to the Accidence of Armory.

The Field is Jupiter, a Mace of Majesty in bend, Sol. I call this a Mace of
Majesty, to distinguish the same from the Mace born by a common Sergeant, not
only in form, but also in use; forasmuch as this is born in all solemn
Assemblies before his Majesty, as also before his Highnesses Viceroys. In like
manner the same is born before the Lords Chancellor, Keeper, and Treasurer of
England, and the Lords President of Wales, and of the North parts, and the
Speaker of the Parliament House in time of Parliament.

The Bearer hereof is called a Sergeant at Arms; whose Office is to attend the
Estates and Persons aforesaid, for the execution of their Commands, for the
Arrests of Traitors, the Remove of forcible Entries, and the Apprehension of
Malefactors. A man that is under Arrest of a Sergeant at Arms, is protected all
that time from all other Arrests.

The Field is Pearl, a Purse open, the long strings thereof pendant, fretted,
nowed, buttoned, and tasseled, Mars, all hatched, Topaz, embroidered all over
with the Sovereign Ensigns of his Majesty, insigned with a Crown triumphant,
and supported of a Lion gardant and an Unicorn, underneath the same an Escroll.
This Purse is born before the Lord Chancellor and Lord Keeper, as the peculiar
Ensign of his high Magistracy, whose Office is to mitigate the rigor of the
Common Laws of the Realm, according to the Rule of Equity, and by apposition of
his Majesty's Great Seal, to ratify and confirm the Gifts and Grants of
Dignities, Offices, Franchises, Privileges and Immunities, Estates in Fee for
term of life, or for years, granted by his Majesty: As also to correct and
reform whatsoever seems to him (in any of those Grants) either prejudicial to
his Majesty, his Royal Dignity, Honor, or Profit, before he do confirm the
same under the Great Seal. He is (according to Chassanaeus) the King's Vicar;
for that (in his Majesty's stead) he ordains Provincial Governors,
nominateth Judges without Election by Voices, and appoints other Officers of
inferior place and service. He has his Name a cancellando, of cancelling
things amiss, and rectifying of them by the Rules of Equity and a good
Conscience. Of whose Dignity Polycratus has this Tetrastich.

Hic est qui Leges Regni cancellat iniquas,
Et mandata pij Principis aequa facit.
Siquid obest populis aut legibus est inimicum;
Quicquid obest, per eum desinit esse nocens.
Of Ornaments representing Dignity born before Ecclesiastical Persons, the
chiefest are the Cross before exemplified, and the Vierge, which is born before
them in Cathedral Churches, within their several Jurisdictions, which I leave
to each man's own Observation.

CHAP. IV.
TO these honorary Ensigns, as well Temporal as Ecclesiastical, worn by the
persons dignified, and born before them in token of honor, it shall not
infringe our order, if I add such honorable Donations and Badges of Dignity as
have in former Ages been bestowed by Emperors, Kings, Princes, and States upon
their Favorites, and upon such others as they esteemed worthy, in respect of
their merits, to possess some pledges of their favor, as testimonies of their
own worth; in which number are Rings, Chains, Collars, Chaplets, and such like.
That these in former Ages were bestowed upon persons advanced to honor,
appears by many evident testimonies both of sacred and profane History.
Pharaoh minding to advance Joseph (for that he found by experience that God had
bestowed upon him gifts worthy to be highly honored) put upon his finger a
Ring, and about his neck a Chain of Gold; Detrahens Pharaoh (says Moses)
annulum suum e manu sua, induit illum in manum Iosephi, jussitque illum induere
vestes xylinas, and apposuit torquem aureum collo ejus, etc. And as touching
Collars of Gold, they were bestowed for Rewards upon such as were of the Blood
Royal of Kings, or such as were near of Alliance unto them, as appears in the
first Book of Maccabees; Fuitque, ut audivit Alexander Rex sermones istos, ut
ampliore honor Ionathanem afficeret, mittens ei auream fibulam, ut mos est
dari cognatis Regum, etc. Of these last mentioned Ornaments, Rings are most
usually born in Coat Armor.

He bears Sable, 3 Gem-Rings, Or, enriched with Turkesses, proper. The Romans
having lost three great Battles to Hannibal, one at Ticinum, another at
Trebeia, and the third at Thrasimene, Mago his brother went to Carthage to make
report of his happy Victories to his Countrymen there: and for approbation
thereof, he poured forth before the Senate (as some report) above a bushel
full, and as others write, above three bushels and an half full of Rings, which
had been taken from the Roman Knights. And though custom and time has made
the Ring a common Ornament for every Mechanic hand; yet of right none should
use them, but such as either Blood, Wars, Learning, or Office and Dignity had
made capable thereof.

The Lacedaemonians waging battle against the Messeni, a people of Peloponnesus
in Greece, to the end their people that deceased in the Wars should have
Funeral Rites, and not be exposed (unburied) to all casualties, they had
certain Rings about their Arms, wherein their Names were engraven.

When Gideon purposed to make an Ephod to signify his thankfulness unto God
for his Victories against the Midianites, he required of the Israelites, that
every man would give him the Ear-ring of his prey, whereto they willingly
consented; the value whereof amounted to the weight of one thousand and seven
hundred shekels of Gold, besides Collars and Jewels, and purple raiment that
was on the Kings of Midian; and besides the Chains that were about the Camels
necks, Judges 8. 24. etc.

The Ring is a type or representation of Fidelity, as appears in the sacred
Writs of the Egyptians; for the Ancients did not wear Rings on their fingers so
much for ornament or ostentation, as for use of Sealing, in regard that the
Seal gave a better approbation than the writing did, concerning the validity
and verity of the Charter: therefore in after ages men used to fortify their
last Wills and Testaments with seven Manual Seals, or Rings Manual, of
witnesses called thereto, to signify the verity and validity thereof. Hereof
came that saying of Cicero ad Quintum fratrem, Annulus tuus non minister
alienae voluntatis, sed testis tuae.

He bears Or, six Annulets, three, two, and one, Sable, by the Name of
Lowther; and is born by Sir John Lowther of Lowther-hall in Westmoreland,
Baronet, whose Family has there flourished beyond any Record; and do reckon
thirty Descents lineally from Father to Son, and all, or the greatest part
Knights. Which said Sir John is Grandfather of John Lowther Esquire who is Hei^ to
the Estate and Dignity of the said Sir John by the death of his Father the
eldest Son of Sir John, who married one of the Daughters and Coheirs of Sir
Henry Bellingham of Levenes in Westmoreland Baronet, deceased. This Coat is
also born by Sir John Lowther of White-haven in Cumberland, Baronet; by Anthony
Lowther of Mask in Cleaveland, in the North Riding of Yorkshire, Esquire and by
diverse other worthy Gentlemen, branches of the said Family.

Gules, six Annulets, Or, by the Name of Newport.

Azure, six Annulets, three, two, and one, by the Name of Musgrave; and is born
by Sir Philip Musgrave of Musgrave and Harcle-Castle in Westmoreland, Baronet,
who has Issue Richard, Sir Christopher, Knight. and Thomas; and by Edward Musgrave
of Ashbey in the said County, Esquire. These are called Annulets in respect of
their small quantity, wherein they differ from the bigger sort, and do
thereupon receive the name of diminution, and are supposed to be the Rings of
Maile, which according to Leigh) was an Armor of Defense long before the hard
temper of Steel, and was devised by Missius Massinus, and then called an
Habergion, for the nimbleness thereof: Some others take these to be diminutives
of the former Rings. And so from Examples of Artificials representing
Dignities, I proceed to Artificials annexed to Professions or Arts of all sorts.

He bears Diamond on a Bend cottized, Gules, a Rose between two Annulets,
Argent; and is the Coat Armor of the Right Honorable Edward Lord Viscount
Conway, and Baron of Ragley in England, Viscount Conway of Kilultagh in
Ireland, Lieutenant General of the Horse, and one of the Lords of his Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council for the said Kingdom of Ireland, etc.

This Coat with the Arms of Vlster, is also born by Sir Henry Conway of
Botringham in Flintshire, Baronet.

CHAP. V.
WE now come to Coat-Armours betokening or borrowed from the Arts Liberal;
which (according to Ioh. de Tur. Cremat.) are so denominated for three
respects: First, Quia liberam mentem requirunt, to put a difference between
them, and those Mechanical Sciences wherein Artificers do more exercise their
limbs than their minds. Secondly, they are called Liberal, in regard they are
attained without any impeachment of credit, or cauterize of Conscience.
Thirdly, for that in times past, only the Children of noble and freeborn
persons were admitted to be instructed and trained up in them. Patricius says
that Arts Liberal are so termed, Quia liberos homines efficient ab omni turpi
and sordido questu, etc. Because they make men to be of liberal and ingenuous
minds, free from base and sordid covetousness and sensual delights, ennobling
them with true wisdom (the most noble endowment of mankind) whereby men are as
it were linked unto God, and made most like unto him.

And this especially is effected by that high and heavenly Art, Theology, a
Science not invented by man, but proceeding from the Eternal Wisdom of the
Almighty, whereunto all other Arts are but Handmaids; in which respect the
Professors thereof are by right, and also by common consent of best approved
Heralds, to have the precedence of all worldly Professions whatsoever. And this
Celestial Science tending to the eternal happiness of the Soul, is accompanied
with two other Faculties of great esteem (though inferior to the former) which
are Physic and Law; the one respecting the good of our Body (and therefore
worthily to have the next place after our Souls) the other tending to our
outward Estates of Fortune, which are not to be neglected of the wisest. And
these three we call the Cardinal Sciences, because of their great necessity and
noble use above the other seven Liberal Sciences.

Man naturally desires knowledge, but is not able to attain the perfection
thereof, no though he be well read in Natural Histories, in Chronography and
Moral Discipline, as may be seen Ecclesiast. 1. 13. And I gave my heart to
seek, and search out by wisdom, concerning all things that are done under the
heavens: this sore travel has God given to the son of man, to be exercised
therewith, and all is but vexation of the spirit. For in much wisdom is much
grief, and he that increases knowledge increases sorrow, verse 18. And
further, by these, my son, be admonished, of making many Books there is no end,
and much study is a weariness of the flesh. Whereby we are given to understand,
that wisdom and knowledge are not gotten without great travel of body and
mind; and when a man has attained to the highest pitch, yet is his mind never
fully satisfied; wherefore we must depend only upon God, and acknowledge that
there is no true felicity in this life. One Example I will give you, which
shall comprehend all the Liberal Sciences jointly, which is this next following.

The Field is Jupiter, a Book expansed in Fess, Luna, garnished, having seven
Labels with Seals, Sol, and this Inscription, Sap^entia and Felicitate, Saturn,
between three Growns of the third. This Coat Armor pertains to the Famous
University of Oxford; the bearing whereof appears to be very ancient, by that
which is engraven in the top of St. Sampsons Church in Greklade in
Glocestershire, where that University in the old Britains time (as is thought)
was first planted. The Book it self some have thought to signify that Book
mentioned in the Apocalypse, having seven Seals: but these here are taken rather
to be the seven Liberal Sciences, and the Crowns to be the reward and honor of
Learning and Wisdom; and the triplicity of the Crowns are taken to represent
the three Cardinal Professions of Faculties before specified. The Inscription I
find to vary according to variety of times: some having Sapientia and
Felicitate, Wisdom and Happiness; others (and that very ancient) Deus
illuminatio mea, The Lord is my light; others this, Veritas liberat, bonitas
regnabit, Truth frees us, Godliness crowns us; and others thus, In principio,
etc. In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God. This one
Escocheon may serve for a pattern of all the other Sciences, yet of some of the
rest I will give instance.

He bears Gules, ten Billets, four, three, two and one, Or, by the Name of
Cowdrey. This Billet in Armory is taken for a paper folded up in form of a
Letter; for so I understand by the Author of that French^ Manuscript which I
have so often cited in this Edition, where he writes of Billets and Billette.
I will presently in my Lord Chief Justice Heath's Coat Armor show you the very
words; in the mean time I, for the easier understanding of that place of the
Manuscript, will observe out of Leigh, page 159. the difference between Billets
and Billette, which is this. If the number of the Billets born in one Escocheon
be ten, or under; then you must in blazon of such a Coat Armor say, He bears
such or such a Metal or Color, and so many Billets, as in this present
Coat Armor of Cowdrey I have done: But if the number of the Billets exceed
ten, then you may tell the Color or Metal of the Field, and then say Billette,
as in this next Example is more plainly demonstrated.

He bears Argent, Billette, Sable, by the Name of Belvale. Now I will show
you one other Escocheon of this kind, with the addition of a Charge thereunto
of another sort: But first give me leave to tell you that this Billette is by
some French Heralds blazoned Billets sans nombre.

Diamond, a Bend engrailed between six Billets, Pearl. This is the Achievement
of the Right Honorable William Lord Allington, Baron of Killard in Ireland,
etc. and dwelling at Horse-heath in Cambridgeshire.

The Field is Pearl, Billette, Ruby, a Cross engrailed of the second. This was
the Paternal Coat Armor of that worthy Judge Sir Robert Heath Knight. Lord Chief
Justice of his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas; and is now the Coat of Sir John
Heath of Brasted in Kent, Knight. his Majesty's Attorney General of the Duchy of
Lancaster. And now, according to my promise, I will show you out of the late
mentioned ancient French Manuscript, the very words of that Author, concerning
the bearing of Billets and Billette in Armory, and their difference and
signification; Billettes on Billette sont ung peu plus longues, que carres and
sont une mesme chose si non pour difference de nom, les Bills on Belletts se
numbernt; and le Billette est sans nombre; and a little after, Et est Billet
senefiance de lettres closes qui sont communement plus longues que lers (I
think he means larges) and en plusurs pais appellees bills, parles quelles len
adiouste foy credence and connoissance servantes a corpse dome, and senesie que
celvi qui premier les porta en arms estoit home hault and bien trenchie de
members, a qui lun adionstoit foy creance and connoissance en ses parolles, and
en ses fais and segret en ses affairs. The curious Frenchmen I know will much
blame the Orthography, but I in this, as elsewhere in the like case, have with
all the care I could, followed the very Letter of the Author punctually;
although I know well, that since the time that this Author wrote, the French
have much varied their Orthographical form of writing.

Gules, ten Billets, four, three, two and one, Or, a Bordure engrailed, Argent,
Torteux and Heurty. This is the Coat of Edward Salter of Rich-Kings in
Buckinghamshire Esquire Son and Heir of Sir William Salter Knight. Cup Bearer to the
Queen, Son and Heir of Sir Edward Salter Knight. Carver in Ordinary to King Charles
the First, and one of the Masters of the High Court of Chancery.

He bears Gules^ three Pens, Argent, by the Name of Co^pe^^ This has
affinity with the Art of Grammar^ and is therefore here placed. The wisdom of
a Learned man comes by using well his vacant time; and he that cease not
from his own matters and labor may come by wisdom, Eccles. 38. 34. In ancient
Ages, before the invention of Printing, the only means of preserving good Arts
(without which the World had been overwhelmed in barbarism) was by this fully
Instrument, The Pen; whereby greatter matters in the world have been achieved,
than ever could be by Sword or great Cannon: and a great Monarch said, That he
(...) feared one blot or dash of a Learned Pen, which might wound his Fame
(...) all Posterity, than the Armies of his most powerful Enemies.

It is a custom with many men that are slow or dull of apprehension, when they
set themselves to write of any serious matter, long to deliberate with
themselves, how they may best contrive the same, and during all the time of
their meditation, to gnaw or bite their pen, whereupon it seems the Proverb
grew, Demandere Calamum, which may be applied to them that bestow much time,
and take great pains to accomplish that they undertake. Whom shall he teach
knowledge, and whom shall be make to understand the things that he hears?
them that are weaned from the milk, and drawn from the breasts, Isa. 28. 9. For
precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept, line upon line, line upon
line, here a little and there a little, verse 10.

The Field is Argent, a Penner and Inkho^^ in Fess, Gules, s^ing^d, Azure.
These are the badges whereby Nov^ces and Practitioners in Learning are known,
and by means whereof many men by long practice and industrious travel do attain
to sundry places of Eminency in the Weal Public, to the great benefit of
themselves, and good of their Country, and oftentimes do merit to be highly
rewarded by the Sovereign; than which there cannot be a greater spur to good
endeavors, or more beneficial for the unive^^^ good, for that it returns
with plentiful interest; as a certain Author notes, saying, Professoribus
atque veris bonarum Artium studiosis quic quid tribuitur, etc. Whatsoever is
bestowed upon Professors of Arts, and those that are truly studious, that
returns an hundred fold benefit to the Commonwealth; whilst every man
performs the Function whereunto he is called; either by preaching the Word of
God, or by forming some politic course of Government, or by curing of the
diseased. Where on the contrary part, that which is bestowed upon counterfeit
Professors, idle, Massmongers, and Monks, does turn wholly to common
destruction of the general good. Rightly therefore did Frederick the Emperor
bestow double privilege upon such as employed their time and travel in the
practice of good Arts.

He bears Argent, a Cheveron between three Text Tees, Sable, by the Name of
Tofte, Letters have not had originally any one prescript form of Character, but
have in all Ages and Countries varied their form according to the conceit of
their first deviser; as Bekenhaw^ notes, saying, Literae sunt quaedam elementa
figurarum ad voluntatem instituentis factae, ad notific andum vota hominum
absentium, vel tacentium instituta; Letters were instituted to make known the
thoughts of men absent or silent.

He bears Ermyn, on a Chief indented, Gules, three Taus, Or, by the Name of
Thurland; and is the Paternal Coat Armor of Edward Thurland, only Son of Sir
Edward Thurland of Reygate in Surrey Knight. one of the Barons of his Majesty's
Court of Exchequer. Sir Edward Byshe in his Book of Heraldry says, That Litera
Graeca Tau is the ancient Coat of the Thurlands, but some use to bear them
Argent.

The comfortable Letter amongst those of ancient time was A, which signified
Absolution or Pardon: Contrariwise the sad and woeful Letter was C, which
betokened Condemnation or Death. The Text Letters are ordained for perspicuity,
that they may easily be discerned afar off. In such was that Vision written,
that was commanded to Habbakkuk to be put in writing, that it might be legible
even to him that beheld the same running; And the Lord answered me and said,
Write the Vision, and make it plain upon Tables, that he may run that reads
it, Habak. 2. 2.

He bears Gules, three Text Esses, Or, by the Name of Kekitmore. Commendable
was the invention of Artemidorus the Philosopher, who read Philosophy to
Octavian Augustus. For when he saw him easily inclined to anger (to the end he
should do nothing rigorously, whereof he should afterward repent) he did
admonish him to rehearse the four and twenty Greek Letters; that so his
momentany passion (which according to Horace is a Eury for the time) might by
some like intermission of time be delivered, and so vanish away. This Letter S.
as it has the form of a Serpent, so does it resemble their sound and hissing.
So much for the Grammatical Escocheons.

Of demonstrable Examples of Instruments pertaining to the Arts Liberal, the
number is not great, unless it be of such as do peculiarly pertain to the Art
of Music. As touching the rest, either they have no material Instruments at
all, for that their attaining and exercise are altogether in Discipline and
Instructions by speech only; as Grammar, Logic, Rhetoric, etc. Or if they
have Instruments, they are such as are common with them to other Professions;
as the Rule and Compass, etc. whereof the Carpenter and Mason have use as well
as the Geometrician. As for Globes, Spheres, Quadrants, and other Astronomical
Instruments I find them not usual in Coat Armor; wherefore I let them pass.
The Musical Instruments are of three sorts, whereof some are Wind-Instruments,
as are the Organs, Shagbuts, Howboys, Cornets, Flutes, etc. The second sort
consists in strings, and in the skillful fingring of them; as are Harps,
Viols, Rebecks, Virginals, Claricords, Bandore, Alpharion, Cittern, etc. The
third sort consists in striking; as the Taber, Timbrel, Ordinary Drums and
Kettle-Drums, and such others, whereof in another place.

The Field is Sapphire, two Organ Pipes in Saltire, between four Crosses Patee,
Pearl. This Coat Armor pertained sometimes to the Lord Williams of Tame. As
touching the first finding out of Musical Instruments, it is clear that Iubal,
the Son of Lamech did devise them, as appears Genesis 4. where it is said, Nomen
autem fratris ejus Iubal, is fuit Author omnium tractantium Citheram and
Organon.

He bears Azure, three Howboys between as many cross Croslets, Or, by the
Name of Bourden. Albeit the Harp or Organs are only named to be the invention
of Iubal; yet we must by them understand him to have been the first Deviser of
all other Musical Instruments. For so does Tremellius observe in his
Annotations upon that place before alleged, saying, His nominibus Synecdochic^
comprehendit omnia Instrumenta Musica quae digitis ventoque moventur. Of some
Wind-Instruments, as the Fife and Trumpet, we shall speak among Military
Instruments.

He bears Ermyn, on a Canton, Sable, a Harp, Argent, by the Name of Fr^unces.
By the Harp (says Pierius) men used in old time to signify a man of stayed
and of a well composed and tempered judgment, because therein are conjoined
diverse distinct sounds in note or accent of accord. Which office man seems to
perform, when he does moderate and reconcile his disordering and repugnant
affections unto reason: and therefore this Instrument was worthily approved in
praying and praising of God, and used by the godly King David in his most
devout Meditations.

He bears Gules, three Treble Violins transposed, Argent, stringed, Sable, by
the Name of Sweeting. Diogenes (who for his taunting and crabbed Quips did
merit the Surname of Cyni^us) not without cause used to tax Musicians in this,
That they could skilfully tune and accord the strings of their Instruments, but
had the affections of their mind disproportionable and far out of frame. Under
these will I comprehend all other sorts of stringed Instruments whatsoever. And
now I will proceed to Astronomical Examples.

The Field is Oules, on a Bend sinister, Argent, three of the Celestial Signs,
viz. Sagittarius, Scorpio, and Libra, of the first. This Coat is said to
appertain to the King of Spain, in respect that he found out an unknown
Climate, under which his Indians have their habitation. But in such Conquests
it were to be wished, that as well Justice's Balance, as Sagittarius his Arrow,
or the Scorpion's sting were put in practice.

King Stephen entering this Realm, the Sign being Sagittarius, and obtaining a
great Victory by the help of his Archers, assumed to his Arms the said Sign,
and left of bearing both the Arms of his Father, Stephen Earl of Champaine, and
his Grandfather William the Conqueror. Gules, a Sagittarius, Or.

The Field is Argent, on a Bend, Azure, three of the Celestial Signs, viz.
Gemini, Taurus, and Aries, Or. This (like as the other last precedent)
contains a fourth part of the Zodiac, and has no owner that may challenge
any property in him, but is formed by imitation of the former, and may
(doubtless) be as well born as that, Quia ab esse ad posse bonum deducitur
argumentum, From that which is, to that which may be, we may well frame a good
Argument. It is born, therefore it may be born; but of the contrary you cannot
say, It may be, therefore it is. This is another quarter of the Celestial
Zodiac.

CHAP. VI.
THOUGH great be the difference of dignity and esteem betwixt the Noble and
Liberal Professions (before entreated of) and those other which we call
Mechanical and Illiberal; because those are the objects of divine spirits and
understanding minds, whereas these are for the most part but the employments of
an industrious hand: yet in these also, as there is great use for the necessity
of man's life, so is there much reputation for the exquisite varieties of
invention. And albeit they are called Illiberal, Quia libere exerceri non
possunt, sine corporis viribus, because they cannot be freely practiced without
bodily labor; yet in another respect they may be more truly called Liberal
than the Liberal Sciences themselves, for that commonly they bestow more wealth
on their Professors, whiles, as Virtus, so Scientia laudatur and alget. In the
first rank of these Illiberals reason exacts that Agriculture should have
precedence, it being the chief Nurse of man's life, and has in the times of the
ancient Romans been esteemed an estate not unbefitting their greatest Dictators
and Princes: and it was devised and put in practice soon after the Creation, as
appears in the Text, where it is said, Habel Pastor Gregis, Kaiin vero
Agricola; for here we understand not only Tillage, but also Pastorage, Vintage,
and all kind of increase of Beasts, or fruits for Food, under this Name of
Husbandry.

After the Deluge God made a Covenant with Noah, that from thenceforth he would
never destroy mankind by water, as has been before touched: but that his first
Ordinance concerning the fourfold seasons of the year should remain inviolable
unto the Worlds end; In assurance of this same infallible promise of God, we do
fit ou^ actions according to the several seasons; as our plo^ing, seeding,
mucking, and dunging of our Land, in planting, pruning, and such like.

That Tillage and Husbandry was the first of all the Mechanical Trades (as we
now call them) it is manifest, Genesis 2. 15. Then the Lord God took the man, and
put him into the Garden of Eden, that he might dress it, and keep it. Wherein
(says Zanch.) God would moderate the pleasure and delight that he had given to
Adam, in some kind of Trade or course of life, and honest Exercise. Whereof
Tillage is of all other the most ancient and commendable, inasmuch as it was
instituted in Paradise, and that in the time of man's innocence before he had
transgressed.

There is a great difference between the Husbandry that man was initiated unto
before his fall, and after: For after his transgression it was performed with
much labor, pain, and sweat, and to supply necessity, such as is the Husbandry
now used; For Husbandmen be forced to till the ground, if they will have
wherewith to sustain life. Therefore God said Maledicta terra propter te, etc.
Cursed be the earth for thy sake: In sudore vultus comedes, etc. In the sweat
of thy brows shall thou eat of it all the days of thy life, Genesis 3. 17. Thorns
also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee, and thou shall eat the h^rb of
the field, verse 18. Before Adam's fall he was enjoined to till the ground only
to prevent idleness; such as is the Husbandry that Noblemen are delighted
withal, and do perform the same with great contentment.

There is a kind of Tillage much differing from this, whereof Petrarch says,
Ager est animus, cultus intentio; semen cura, messis la^or, ^unc si colas
diligenter uberrimum fructum capies; The mind is the field, intention the
tillage, care the seed, labor the harvest, if thou husband the field
diligently, thou shall receive a plentiful harvest.

Sometime ease and quietness becomes restless and troublesome; therefore ought
we evermore to be in action, and exercised in some good Arts or Studies, as
often as we find our selves ill affected with sloth and idleness which cannot
abide it self. Many are the Instruments pertaining to Husbandry, I will make
choice of some of the chiefest, and of most frequent use in Coat Armor.

He bears Azure, Plow in Fess, Argent, by the name of Kroge. It was the
manner in ancient time, when a City was to be built, to (...) out the Circuit
thereof by drawing of a fu^^ow with a Plow, as (...) ab Alex. notes. So (...)
it in use also, when they intended the final destruction of a City, to plow it
up, and to sow salt therein: as we ^ead that Abimelech having taken the City of
Sichem, put the people to the Sword that were therein, destroyed the City, and
sowed salt therein; which was done (as Tremellius ^^teth) in token of perpetual
detestation thereof: But that kind of circuiting their Cities was an ominous
token of succeeding abundance, and fertility of all things which the Citizens
should stand in need of.

He bears Ermyn, three Harrows conjoined in the Nombril of the Escocheon with
a wreath, Argent, and as the second, toothed, Or, by the Name of Harrow, This
is an Instrument of Husbandry^ ordained for the breaking of Clods after the
Husbandman has plowed and seeded his Land, for the better preparing of the
Corn to take root, and preservation thereof from the Fowls. Moreover, it has
been used sometime by Conquerors, to torture and torment their enemies withal,
and to put them to death. So we read that David did execute the Ammonites his
enemies, where it is said, Populum vero qui in e^ er at eductum dissecuit
serra, and tri^^^is ferreis, and securibus: and sit fecit David omnibus
Civitatibus Ammonitarum.

He bears Gules, 3 Scithes in Pale Bar, Argent, by the Name of Kempley. The
condition of this kind of men is well set down Eccles. 38. 25. How can he get
wisdom that holds the Plow, and he that has pleasure in the goad, and in
driving Oxen, and is occupied in their labors, and talks but of the breed of
Bullocks? He gives his mind to make furrows, and is diligent to give the Kine
fodder.

He bears Gules, 3 Wheels, Or. This was the Coat Armor of Sir Pain Roet Knight.
who had a Daughter married to the famous English Poet Sir Geffery Chaucer. I
find in Roman History of a Husbandman, who was accused before the Magistrate
for being an Inchanter, for that his Grounds were fertile when others were
barren. A day being appointed, he promised to bring forth his Enchantments, and
then brought forth his Plows, Carts, Oxen, etc. saying, Haec mea incantamenta,
These are my conjurings: meaning that his industrious care made his Grounds
fertil^ which others neglecting, found the punishment of their Idleness.

Wheels are the Instruments, whereby Chariots, Wagons, and such like things are
carried both speedily and with great facility; and they are so behoofful for
these uses, as that if any one of them happen to fall off, the whole carriage
must either stand still, or at least is forced forward with great difficulty.
As we may see Exodus 14. where God took off the Wheels of the Chariots of the
Egyptians that vehemently prosecuted the Israelites, as appears verse 25. And
he took off their Chariot Wheels, and they drove them with much ado; so that
the Egyptians said, I will fly from the face of Israel, for the Lord fights
for them against the Egyptians.

The Wheel is called in Latin Rota a rotunditate, or else (as some hold) a
ruendo, quia in declive faciliter ruit, because it rolleth down suddenly from
the steep declining part of the ground.

Other sort of Wheels there are, which albeit they are not meet for Husbandry,
yet I have held it fit to annex them to these, in respect of their near
resemblance, as in these Examples may be seen.

He bears Or, on a Bend, Azure, three Katharine Wheels, Argent, by the Name
of Rudhall. In the primitive Age of the Church, even Children and young
Virgins, for the profession of their Faith, did constantly endure most terrible
deaths, as did St. Katharine by this kind of Wheel, wherewith all her tender
limbs were bruised and rent in pieces. Now men will scarce be true Christians,
when they may be such, not only without punishment, but both with quietness and
commendation also.

He bears Argent, a Cross, Gules, in the first quarter, a Katharine Wheel of
the second, which was sometimes born by Robert de Stone.

He bears Gules, 3 Katharine Wheels, Argent, on a Chief of the second, a
Bull's head couped, Sable, by the Name of Matthews. This with the Arms of
Vlster, is the Coat Armor of Sir Philip Matthews of Edmonton in Middlesex,
Baronet.

He bears Argent, on a Fess, Gules, cottized, Azure, three Lambs of the
first, between as many Katharine wheels Sable, by the Name of Scott; and is
born by Thomas Scott of Great Bar in Staffordshire, Gent.

He bears Argent, a Cheveron between three Tuns, Sable, their bungs flaming
proper, by the Name of Inkledon; and is the Coat Armor of Lewis Inkledon of
Buckland in the Parish of Branton in Devonshire, Esquire

Under this Head may we aptly bestow all other Instruments pertaining either to
Husbandry, or to the several Trades of Shepherds, Vine-dressers, Bakers,
Brewers, Vintners, etc. for that these are all grounded upon Agriculture.

CHAP. VII.
AGRICULTURE is for mere necessity: clothing is partly for it, and partly for
ornament and decency; but had not man sinned, he had not needed clothing; which
were worth the considering by those who are so proud of their Apparel.

As touching such Arts or Trades that we call Handycraft or Mechanical
Professions; so called perhaps of Moecha, which signifies an harlot or an
adulterous person; for that as an harlot counterfeiteth the modest behavior of
an honest Matron, so do Mechanical Artizans labor to resemble the Works of
Nature, In quantum possunt. These are not performed so much by wit and
invention (like as the Arts Liberal are) as they be by exercise of the limbs
and labor of the body. And hereof they are thought to be called Arts, ab
Art^bus, which properly do signify the muscles, sinews, or other ligaments of
the body; but metaphorically it is often taken for the limbs themselves that
are so combined and connected together.

How meanly soever we reckon of these in a relative comparison to the Arts
Liberal; nevertheless it is clear, that these (no less than those) do proceed
from the immediate gift of God, as does plainly appear by Bezaleel and Aboliab,
Exodus 35. 3.) and are no less behoveful and necessary for man's use, and for the
support of humane traffic and society; as we may see Eccles. 38. 31. where
after he had made mention of the care and diligence the Carpenter, Porter, and
Smith, and other men of Trade do use in their several Professions, he
concludes thus, All these trust their hands, and every one bestows his
wisdom in his work. Without these cannot the Cities be maintained nor
inhabited; hereby we see the necessity of these Artificial or Mechanical Trades
or Professions.

With little reason may any man contemn the tokens of Instruments, pertaining
to Mechanical Trades or Professions, since they are express notes of Trades, so
very behoveful for the use of man's life, and their exquisite skill, and
knowledge issued out of the plentiful Fountain of Gods abundant Spirit.

In things Artificial that manner of translation is reckoned the more worthy
from which it is extracted, than that whereunto it is transferred, according to
that saying, Transmutatio in rebus Artificialibus famosius dicitur esse de
genere ejus ex quo, quam ad quod.

He bears Sable, three Wool-Cards, Or, by the name of Cardington. Marcus
Varro makes mention, that within the Chapel of Fortune was kept the very
Royal Robe or Mantle of Estate, that Tanaquil the wife of Tarquinius Priscus
made with her own hands after the manner of Water-Chamlet in Wave-work, which
Servius Tullius used to wear.

He bears Argent, three Fusils upon slippers, Gules, by the Name of Hoby; and
is the Coat Armor of Philip Hoby of Neath-Abby in Glamorganshire, Esquire. These
are called Fusils of the Latin word Fusus, which signifies a Spindle of Yarne.
Marcus Varro reports, that in the Temple of Sangus, there continued even till
the time that he wrote his Book, the Wool that the Lady Caia Cecilia did spin,
together with her Distaff and Spindle. As for the Antiquity and necessary use
of spinning, we have an undoubted president in the 35. of Exodus 25, 26. where
it is said, And all the women that were wise-hearted did spin with their hands,
and brought that which they had spun, both of blue and of purple, and of
skarlet and fine linen: And all the women, whose hearts stirred them up in
wisdom, spun Goats-hair.

He bears Sable, three Fusils upon slippers transposed, the points downward,
Argent. This Coat is quartered by Knowell of Sanford. Closter the Son of
Arachne, taught first the making of the Spindle for Woollen-yarn. It was (
says Pliny) a fashion and custom at Rome, that when Maids were to be wedded,
there attended upon them one with a Distaff dressed and trimmed with kembed
Wool, as also a Spindle and Yarn upon it, to put them in mind that Huswivery
and Wivery were to go together. Fusils ( says Leigh) are never pierced or
voided, but are diversely born, in respect of their local position or mutation.
And the Frenchmen ( says he) take them for Spindles, we take them for Weavers
Shuttles, and the Dutch for Mill-pecks.

He bears Argent, a Cheveron between 3 Wharrow-Spindles, Sable, by the Name
of Trefues. This Spindle differs much from those precedent, in respect of the
crook above, and of the Wharrow imposed upon the lower part thereof. This sort
of Spindle women do use most commonly to spin withal, not at the Torn as the
former, but at a Distaff put under their girdle, so as they oftentimes spin
therewith going. The round Ball at the lower end serves to the fast twisting
of the thread, and is called a Wharrow; and therefore this is called a
Wharrow-Spindle, where the other are called Slippers that pass through the Yarn
as this does.

He bears Argent, three Weavers Shuttles, Sable, tipped and furnished with
Quills of Yarn, the threads pendant, Or, by the name of Shuttleworth; and is
born by Io. Shuttleworth Gent. descended from the Shuttleworths of Asterley in
Lancashire. Weaving was the invention of the Egyptians, and Arachne was the
first Spinner of Flax thread, the weaver of Linen, and knitter of Nets, as
Pliny notes. But it seems that those Arts were at first learned by imitation
of Silkworms, Spiders, and the like, whose subtle works no mortal hand can
match.

Under this Head must be reduced all manner of Tools and Instruments born in
Coat Armor, and pertaining to the several Trades of Weaving, Fulling, Dying,
Shearing, etc. As also such as do pertain to the several mysteries or
occupations of Embroiderers, Sempsters, and such others. Amongst Artificers and
Men of Trade (says Chassanaeus) this is a note of Observation, That each one
is to be preferred before other according to the dignity of the Stuff whereon
he does exercise his Trade. Hereto we will annex some Examples of Taylorie.

The Field is Pearl, a Maunch, Diamond. This is the Paternal Coat of the Right
Honorable Theophilus Earl of Huntington, Baron Hastings, Hungerford,
Bolreaulx, Moulins, Moules, Hoinel, and Peverel, etc.

Topaz, a Maunch, Ruby, pertained to the Honorable Family of Hastings,
sometimes Earls of Pembroke; and is quartered by the Right Honorable Henry
Gray, now Earl of Kent. Of things of Antiquity (says Leigh) that are grown out
of use, this is one which has been, and is taken for the sleeve of a Garment.
Which may well be; for you may see in old Arras Clothes Garments with sleeves
wrought not much unlike to this fashion, but now much altered from the same;
for fashion and times do go together. That this is a sleeve I will make more
apparent by this next Example.

Azure, a Maunch, Or. This with the distinction of a Crescent, Gules, charged
with another, Or, is the Paternal Coat Armor of Edward Conyers Esquire principal
Store-keeper of his Majesty's Ordnance and Armor in the Tower of London, who
is descended from the Family of Conyers late of Wakerly in the County of
Northampton, being a branch of that ancient Family of the Conyers of Sockburne
within the Bishopric of Durham, whose Ancestors in the Reign of William the
Conqueror, had the Office of Constable of the Castle of Durham granted to them
in Fee; which Estate is yet continuing in the same Family, though not in the
same Name, being descended to an only Daughter of (...) Conyers of Sockburne
Esquire who married the Right Honorable Francis late Earl of Shrewsbury. From this
Family is likewise descended the Right Honorable Conyers Lord Darcy Meynell
and Conyers of Hornby Castle in the County of York, whose Grandfather Thomas
Dar^y Esquire married Elizabeth, daughter and heir of John Lord Conyers of Hornby.
And thence is also descended Tristram Conyers of Walthamstow in the County of
Essex Sergeant at Law.

He bears Gules, a dexter Arm habited with a Maunch, Ermyn, the hand holding
a Flower de lis^ Or. This Coat Armor pertained to William Mo^^^, al^as
Sappell, sometime Lord of Dunstore, who came into England with William the
Conqueror, who gave him the Earldom of Somerset, of whom did descend Renold
Mohun Earl of Somerset, that was disinherited by Henry the Third in the Barons
wars. From this Renold de Mohun did descend, as Heirs-male, Mohun of Cornwall;
and as Heir general, the Earl of Derby by the Lord Strange, and Sir Peter Carew
Knight. This word Maunch seems to be derived from the Latin word Manica, which
signifies the sleeve of a Garment. And the same of some Armorists is termed
Manche mal tailee, Quasi manica male taliata, as an ill shapen sleeve. To wear
sleeves unto any sort of Garment was with some people holden reproachful, as
appears in the Exposition of the Epistle of St. Hierome ad Eustochium, in
these words; Objiciebatur quasi delicatum apud Maronem, quod tunicae haberent
Manicas. The coming of the hand out in this manner does show the same to be a
sleeve. For (if you observe) you may herein discern the bought of the Arm in
the midst, as also the elbow opposite thereunto, and the widing thereof at the
shoulder, as if the same were enlarged with a Gusset under the arm-pit. Also
the hanging down of the bagg from the handwrist does concur with that form of
sleeve, which the women of Galoway in the North parts of Ireland at this day do
use. The same does the former also express, although in a more obscure manner,
as if you compare one of them with the other, you may easily perceive.

As touching Apparel, we find, that though the same be made chiefly to clothe
our nakedness; yet shall we find that they were not only ordained by the
invention of man, but also allowed (and for some special end) expressly
commanded by God himself to be made and provided, as well for glory as also for
ornament and comeliness, as appears Exodus 28. Likewise thou shall embroider
the fine linen Coat, and thou shall make the Mitre of fine linen, and thou
shall make the Girdle of needle work. And for Aaron 's sons thou shall make
Coats, and thou shall make for them Girdles, and Bonnets shall thou make for
them for glory and for beauty.

Rich Garments and costly Jewels are reckoned Ornaments, as appears 2 Samuel 1.
24. Ye daughters of Israel weep over Saul, who clothed you in scarlet, with
other delights, who put on ornaments of gold upon your apparel. And they be
called Ornaments, because they do illustrate and adorn or beautify the person
that is garnished with them.

He bears Argent, a Cheveron between 3 Maunches, Sable, by the Name of
Maunsell, a spreading and worthy Family in Glamorganshire, and other Welsh
Counties. The chief Ornament of which is Sir Edward Maunsell of Mergam in
Glamorganshire, Baronet. This Coat, with a due difference, is born by Richard
Mansell of Iscoed in Carmarthenshire, Gent.

To this Head may be reduced all sorts of things whatsoever pertaining to the
adorning, decking, or triming of the body, as Combs, Glasses, Head-brushes,
Curling-bodkins, etc. and also Purses, Knives, etc.

He bears Sable, a Cheveron between 3 Combs, Argent, by the Name of Tunstall.
The Comb is a necessary Instrument for triming of the head, and seems (as
touching the form thereof) to have been devised by imitation of the backbone
of a fish; and serves not only for cleansing the head from dandruff and other
superfluities, but is of most use with women for shedding and triming their
hair and head-tires, wherein some of them bestow more labor for the adorning
of them, than their whole body is worth.

He bears Argent, a Cheveron between 3 Palmers Scrips, Sable, the tassels and
buckles, Or. These are the Arms of Sir Henry Palmer of Howlets in the Parish of
Beakburne in the County of Kent, Knight. Comptroller of his Majesty's Navy Royal,
Son of Sir Henry Palmer of the said place, Knight. sometime Admiral of the Narrow
Seas, and Comptroller of the Navy Royal. These Arms, although some part of them
allude unto the Name, are very ancient, and were impaled in Otford Church in
Kent before it was burned, where this Knight's Ancestors had some possessions;
with the several Coats of the Torrels, Fitzsimonds and Tirrels. And in the
Chancel at Snodland in Kent, Thomas Palmer that married with the daughter of
Fitzsimon, lies buried, of whom I have read this Epitaph, not derogating from
the best of versifying in that Age: Palmers all our Faders were,
I a Palmer lived here
And traveled still, till worn wud age
I ended this worlds pilgrimage.
On the blessed Ascension day,
In the cheerful month of May,
A thousand with four hundred seven,
I took my journey hence to Heaven.


Sir Thomas Palmer of Leigh near Tunbridge in Kent, Knight. Grandfather to the
elder Sir Henry Palmer Knight. before recited, was owner of the Manors of
Tottington and Eccles in Aylesford and Boxley, adjoying to Snodland aforesaid,
which came unto this Family by a match with a daughter of the Lord Poynings:
And Katharine Palmer, this Sir Thomas Palmer's sister, was married to John Roe
of Boxley in Kent, Gent. Father of Reginald Roe of Leigh aforesaid, Gent.
Ancestor to Sir Thomas Roe Knight. living 1632. whose worthy merit in the discharge
of many Embassages, wherein he has been employed by this State, deserves to be
remembered with an honorable Character.

The Field is Argent, on a Chief, Gules, three Bezants, by the Name of Russel,
sometime of Durham in the County of Gloucester. What Bezants are, and of what
form, weight, and value they were in ancient time, and why they were so named,
I have already showed in my first Section, page 20. in the blazon of the
Bordure of Richard Plantagenet King of the Romans, and Earl of Cornwall;
whereunto I refer you for the avoiding of needless repetition.

The Field is Ermyn, on a Fess, Gules, three Bezants. This Coat Armor
pertained to John Milward one of the Captains of the City of London, and first
Governor of the Corporation of the Silk trade: And with a Mullet for a
difference, is now born by Richard Milward D. D. Canon of Windsor. Some
Armorists are of opinion that Bezants and Plates in Armory are Emblems of
justice and equal dealing among men.

He bears Pearl, a Cheveron, Ruby, between three Torteuxes. This is the Coat
of the Right Honorable Bennet Lord Sherrard, Baron of Letrim in the Kingdom of
Ireland; whose Seat is at Stapleford in Leicestershire.

He bears Or, on a Fess, Sable, three Plates, by the Name of Bramston; and is
born by Sir John Bramston of Screens in Roxwell in Essex, Knight of the Bath;
by Sir Mundeford Bramston of Woodhamwalter in the said County, Knight. one of the
Masters of the Chancery; and by Francis Bramston of Sergeants Inn, London,
Sergeant at Law.

He bears Pearl, six Pellets, a Chief embattelled, Diamond, by the Name of
Brouncke^; and is the Coat Armor of the Right Honorable William Viscount
Brouncker of Lions; and Baron Brouncker of New Castle in Ireland, etc. This,
with a due difference, is the Coat Armor of his Lordships brother, Henry
Brouncker of Roumboldweeke in Sussex, and of Brokedish in Norfolk, Esquire.

He bears Sable, two Bars, Argent, in Chief three Plates. This is the
Coat Armor of that honorable and ancient Family of the Hungerfords, sometime
Barons of this Kingdom, till in Henry the Fourth's days the Heir of Robert Lord
Hungerford, Botreux, Molins, and Moles, was married to Edward Lord Hastings,
and had George first Earl of Huntington. The Chief Ornament of this Family at
present is Sir Edward Hungerford of Farley Castle in Wiltshire, Knight of the
Bath.

He bears Azure, 3 Bars, Argent, in Chief three Bezants, by the Name of
Atkyns. This with the Arms of Vlster, is the Coat of Sir Rich. Atkyns of
Muchhaddam in Hartfordshire, Knight and Baronet.

Or, on a Pale, Azure, three Bezants, by the Name of Wildman; and is the
Paternal Coat Armor of John Wildman of Beaucot, alias Becket in Berkshire Esquire.

He bears Argent, a Cross, Sable, between four Pellets; and is born by Sir
Robert Claton of the City of London, Knight. and Alderman.

He bears Argent, three Bars, Sable, in Chief as many Torteuxes, within a
Bordure, Ermyn; and is the Coat Armor of Sir Thomas Bludworth of the City of
London, Knight and LordMaior thereof Anno 1666.

He bears barrey wavy of six, Argent and Azure, on a Chief, Gules, three
Bezants, by the name of Astry; and is born by James Astry of Wood-end in the
Parish of Harlington in Bedfordshire, Esquire by Luke Astry of Lincolns Inn in
Middlesex, Consellor at Law; and by Richard Astry of Huntington in the County
of Huntington, Gent. all descended from Sir Ralph Astry Knight. Lord Mayor of
London, tempore Hen. 7.

He bears Sable, six Plates, three, two, and one, by the Name of Punchardon.
These are Bullions of silver, having no manner of impression upon them, but are
only prepared ready for the stamp. In the blazoning of this, and of the other
last precedents, there is no mention made of their Color; because, as the
former are evermore gold, so in like sort are these always silver.

He bears Sable, ten Plates, on a Chief, Argent, a Lion passant of the field,
by the name of Bridgman; of which Family is the Honorable Sir Orlando Bridgman
of Great Leaver in Lancashire, Knight and Baronet, late Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal of England; whose brother, the Right Reverend Dr. Henry Bridgman,
Lord Bishop of the Isle of Man, bears the said Coat with a due difference; as
does Orlando Bridgman of Ridley in Cheshire, Esquire son and heir to the said Sir
Orlando.

He bears Gules, 3 Bezants, each charged with a crowned King, his Robes,
Sable, doubled, Ermyn, sustaining a covered Cup in his right hand, and a sword
in his left of the second. This Coat pertained to John de Lylde the eighteenth
Bishop of Ely.

The Field is Argent, on a Bend engrailed, Sable, three Plates. This
Coat Armor pertains to the ancient Family of the Cutts of Arkesden in the
County of Essex, where in the Parish Church remains a Monument, whereupon these
Arms here demonstrated, as the Paternal Coat Armor of this Family, are
pourtraied; the Heir of which Family is at present Richard Cutts of the said
place, as also of Childerley in Cambridgshire, Esquire. Near unto which Tomb lie
enterred Richard Cutts Esquire and his four sons, viz. Richard Cutts Esquire eldest
son, who erected that Monument, Sir William Cutts Knight. second son, (and lately
his only son and heir Richard Cutts Esquire) Francis third son, and John the fourth
son; which Francis married Katharine, one of the daughters and coheirs of John
Bondivile or Bonvile, of Sponton in the County of York, Esquire who for his
Coat Armor bore Sable, six Mullets, three, two, and one, Or. Leigh writes in
his Accidence of Armory, page 14, 15. That that Coat Armor whose field
consists of Argent, and the charge of Sable (as you see the Coat of Cutts
does) is the most fair kind of bearing; and with him agree other Armorists.
Leigh there shows this reason, Because Argent or White will be seen in the
darkest place, and Sable or Black in the clearest light; and since these two of
all other Colors may be discerned farthest of, therefore is the shield thus
born and charged called the fairest.

In respect we are now come to speak of Stamps and Coins, I hold it not
impertinent (by the way) to give some little touch of the Royalty of Coining.
It is therefore to be observed, that the power to coin money has been evermore
reckoned to be one of the Prerogatives that in our common Law we do call Iura
Regalia, and pertains to the Sovereign Power amongst many Regal Immunities to
that Supreme Jurisdiction peculiarly belonging, and to none others.

Nevertheless we read that Monarchical Kings and Sovereign States have imparted
this Prerogative or Pre-eminence unto others their inferiors upon special
acceptable service done, or for whatsoever private respect, as we may see
Maccab. 15. 6. where amongst many other preheminences granted by Antiochus the
son of Demetrius to Simon the high Priest, which had been formerly granted to
him by the Predecessors of Antiochus, he enableth him to coin money, saying, I
give thee leave to coin money of thine own stamp within thy Country.

He bears Azure, three Peny-yard pence, proper, by the Name of Spence. These
are so named of the place where they were first coined, which was (as is
supposed) in the Castle of Peny-yard near the Market Town of Ross, situated
upon the River of Wye in the County of Hereford.

To this Head must be reduced all other sorts of Bullion or Coin, and whatever
else pertains to traffic or commerce.

He bears Argent, a Purse Overt, Gules. This Coat pertains to the Family of
Conradus Wittenbergensis Comes, that was first invested by Henry the Fourth,
Emperor, to whom he gave faithful aid in his wars, and did much detest the
strife betwixt him and Rodolph of Swevia, his competitor to the Empire, whom
the Pope had nominated Emperor: he much labored a pacification of the tumults
then stirred up in Germany, as Hemingius in his Genealogies notes.

By this open Purse we may understand a man of a charitable disposition, and a
frank and liberal steward of the blessings which God has bestowed upon him,
for the relief of the needy^ Of such an one St. Hierome has this saying, Non
memini me legisse mala morte mortuum, qui libenter opera charitatis exercuit;
habet enim multos intercessores, and impossible est multorum preces non
exaudiri.

He bears Gules, a Cheveron between 3 Irish Brogues, Or. This Coat pertains
to the Family of Arthure of Ireland. The pulling off a man's shoe (which in
Irish is called a Brogue) seems to have been a note of reproach or infamy, as
we may gather by that which Moses has observed unto us, Deuteronomy. 25. where it is
showed, that if a man happen to die issuless, then his next kinsman should
marry his wife, and raise up to his brother a name amongst the Israelites:
which if he refused to do, then upon complaint by her made to the Elders, he
was warned before them; if then he refused to marry her, then came the woman to
him in the presence of the Elders, and pulled off his shoe, and did spit in his
face, and say, So shall it be done unto the man that will not build up his
brothers house: And his name was called in Israel; The house of him whose shoe
is pulled off.

Though the shoe be an habit serving for the foot, which is the most inferior
part of man's body; yet it is not therefore to be contemned, forasmuch as it is
a note of progression, and very behoveful for travelers: In the Scriptures it
is often taken for expedition, as Psalm. 60. In Idumaeam extendam calceamentum
meum; And proceeding to Idumea, I will cast my shoe over it.

It was an ancient custom amongst the Israelites (in transferring of
possessions) for him that departed therewith to pluck off his shoe, and to
deliver the same to his neighbor, as now it is with us, to pass livery and
seis^ of Inheritance by the delivery of a turf and sprigs taken off the ground,
and delivering the same to the Purchaser, as appears in the Book of Ruth;
where it is said, Now this was the manner before time in Israel concerning
r^deeming and changing, for to stablish all things: A man did pluck off his
shoe, and gave it to his neighbor, and this was a sure witness. By which
Ceremony he publicly acknowledged that he had transferred, and put over his
whole right unto the Purchaser, Ruth. 4. 7, 8, 9.

But in after Ages it seems the Jews passed Inheritances by Charters, sealed
and testified by witnesses (a custom of use with us at this day at the Common
Law) as appears in the Prophecy of Jeremiah; Men shall buy fields for money,
and make writings and seal them, and take witnesses in the Land of Benjamin,
and round about Jerusalem, etc. 32. 44. And again, Ier. 32. 25, And thon have
said unto me, O Lord God, buy unto thee a field for silver, and take witnesses.
And I bought the field of Hananeel my Uncles son, that was in Anathoth, and
weighed him the money, even seventeen shekels of silver: And I subscribed the
Evidence, and sealed it, and took witnesses, and weighed him the money in the
balances, etc.

Now since I am casually fallen upon this Argument of sealing of Deeds, I hold
it not amiss to give some little touch (by the way) of the first coming in of
this custom of sealing (in this our Nation) which is now of so frequent use
amongst us.

First, it is to be observed, that our Ancestors the Saxons had not the same in
use; for they used only to subscribe their Names, commonly adding the sign of
the Cross. And I need not to prove the same by the testimony of diverse
witnesses; for this custom continued here in England until the time that this
Realm was conquered by William Duke of Normandy, who together with the state of
Government (a thing of common custom with absolute Conquerors) did alter the
before mentioned custom of testification of Deeds, into sealing with wax;
whereupon the Norman custom of sealing of Deeds at length prevailed amongst
us. Insomuch that the before mentioned use of the Saxons therein was utterly
abolished; as witnesses Ingulphus the Abbot of Crowland, saying, The Normans
do change the making of writings, which were wont to be firmed in England with
crosses of gold and other holy signs, into printing wax. And they rejected also
the manner of English writing. This change was not effected all at once, but
took place by degrees: so that first the King only, and some few of his
Nobility besides, used to seal; afterward Noblemen for the most part, and none
others.

At this time also, as Ioh. Ross. notes, they used to grave in their seals
their own Pictures and Counterfeits covered with a long Coat over their Armours.

After this Gentlemen of the better sort took up this fashion: and because they
were not all warriors, they made seals engraven with their several Coats or
Shields of Arms for difference sake, as the same Author reports.

At length, about the time of King Edward the third, seals became very common;
so as not only those that bear Arms used to seal, but other men also fashioned
to themselves signets of their own devising: some taking the letters of their
own names, some flowers, some knots and flourishes, and other beasts and birds,
or some other things, as now we behold daily in use.

CHAP. VIII.
HAVING exemplified such bearings as are borrowed from the two Arts of
nourishing and clothing our bodies; the third place may justly be challenged by
that Art which we call Armature, whereby we are defended from all outward
injuries, either of foes or weather: For by Armature we understand not only
those things which appertain to Military Profession (whereof we will speak in
its proper place) but also those defensive Sciences of Masonry, and Carpentry,
and Metal works, which do concur to building and other necessary strengthening
for protection of our weak Carcasses. For house are mansions for our bodies, as
our bodies for our souls; and the weakness of the one must be supplied by the
strength of the other. Escocheons of this kind are these which ensue, as first
for Masonry and Stone-work.

He bears Sable, 3 Pickaxes, Argent, by the Name of Pigot of Abington-Pigots
in Cambridgshire, a Family of long continuance there. This Coat may compare for
Antiquity with any; in respect that it, or some such Instrument, seems to
have been used by the most ancient of Mankind, who was appointed to digg and
delve in the Garden of Eden. Where we may see how little cause any (though of
noblest and ancientest blood) has to be proud, if he looked unto the Pit
whence he first was dug, being the very same from whence the meanest also is
derived.

He bears Sable, on a Cheveron between 3 Milpecks, Argent, as many Mullets,
Gules, by the Name of Mosley; and is the Coat of John Mosley of Mosley in
Staffordshire, Esquire. This is an Instrument of great use, by which the bluntness
of the Millstone is amended. The Mill it self, as every one well knows, is
very useful in a commonwealth; for with it Corn is ground, and made fit for
bread, which is the staff of human life.

He bears Argent, 3 Mallets, Gules, by the Name of Forte. Touching this and
sundry other Instruments we must observe, that whereas such Instruments are
usually made by one Trade, and used by another (as the Smith makes the Axe
which the Carpenter does use;) we thought it fitter to place them under those
Arts, for whose use they were made (the end and use of each thing being the
perfection thereof) than to referr them to those Arts which form and make them.

He bears Gules, a Cheveron between 3 Mallets, Or. This is the Coat of John
Soame of Little Thurlow in Suffolk, Esquire.

He bears Azure, 3 Levels with their Plummets, Or, by the Name of Colbrand.
This Instrument is the type of equity and uprightness in all our actions, which
are to be levelled and rectified by the Rule of Reason and Justice. For the
Plummet ever falls right, howsoever it be held, and whatever betide a virtuous
man, his actions and conscience will be incorrupt and uncontrollable.

To this Head must be reduced all manner of Instruments that do pertain to the
several Trades of Bricklaiers, Plaisterers, Paviers, and such others, whose
work consists of Stone, Lime, or Mortar. So much may suffice for Examples for
Masonry. Now we come to Carpentry, as may appear by these next following
Escocheons.

He bears Argent, a Cheveron between 3 Carpenters Squares, Sable, by the Name
of Atlow. Artificers (says Plutarch) do use their Squares, their Rules, their
Lines and Levels; they go by measures and numbers, to the end that in all their
works there should not be any thing found done either rashly or at adventure.
And therefore much more should men use the like moderation and rules in the
performance of those actions of virtue, wherein man's happiness does consist;
especially those who sit in the Seats of Justice, which in Moses's time were
wont to be men fearing God, and hating covetousness, which is the perfect
Square which such ought to follow. But Aristotle writes of a Lesbian Square or
Rule, which was made of so flexible a stuff, that it would bend any way the
workmen would have it: but most dangerous is the estate of that Commonwealth,
whose Judges work by such Squares, making the Laws to bow to their private
affections, and sometimes to mean one thing, another time the contrary, as
themselves are disposed to incline.

He bears Or, a Mill-Ink, Sable, on a Chief, Gules, three Antilopes heads
erazed, Or, by the Name of Marshall; and is born by Mr. Samuel Marshall Vicar
of Fremington in Devonshire.

He bears Sable, a Fess between 3 Hatchets, Argent, by the name of Wrey. This
with the Arms of Vlster is the Coat of Sir Bourchier Wrey of Trebish in
Cornwall, Knight of the Bath, and Baronet. This Instrument is also much used in
Execution for beheading of great Offenders. In which sense Iordanus Vrsinus,
Viceroy of Sicily, being Imprisoned by his own son, gave for his Impress an
Axe, and a pair of Fetters, with this Motto, Patientia in adversis, to show his
resolution and patience in so great an indignity. Not many years since there
was a Reverend Judge of this Family, with whose Function this Coat suited very
aptly, forasmuch as he did execute the Office of Chief Justice of England.

The Field is Argent, a Cheveron engrailed, between three Compasses dilated,
Sable. These Arms do pertain to the Company of Carpenters.

Under this Head must be comprehended all sorts of Instruments (whereof there
is use in Coat-Armours) pertaining to the several Trades of Joyners,
Milwrights, Cartwrights, Turners, Coopers, etc, and whatsoever other Trades,
whose use consists and is exercised in working or framing of Timber,
Wainscot, or any sort of Wood. And so from Tools of Masonry and Carpentry born
in Coat Armor, we come to Instruments of Metal-work (the other Species of
Armature) whether the same be malleable and wrought by Hammer, or Fusil, and
formed by fire.

The Field is Sable, a Cheveron between 3 Hammers, Argent, crowned, Or. This
Coat Armor belongs to the Company of Smiths, whose trade of life, as it is
most laborious, so is it of most behoof for the strength both of private men's
persons, and of Kingdoms: And therefore the Iron Hammer does well deserve the
Crown of Gold on it, Iron it self in respect of the use being much more
precious and necessary for a Commonwealth than Gold is: which the Enemies of
God's people knew very well, when they would not permit a Smith to live amongst
the Israelites, as may be seen 1 Samuel 13. 19. where it is said, Then there was
no Smith found throughout all the Land of Israel; for the Philistines said,
lest the Hebrews make them Swords or Spears. The Hammer and Anvil are two of
the chiefest Instruments of this Trade for forging and forming of things
malleable for necessary use. Of these does Ecclesiasticus make mention, chap.
38. v. 28. where speaking of the laborious travel of the Smith, he says, The
Smith abides by his Anvil, and does his diligence to labor the Iron: the
vapor of the fire dries his flesh, and he must fight with the heat of the
furnace: the noise of the hammer is ever in his ears, and his eyes look still
upon the thing that he makes: he sets his mind to make up his work,
therefore he watches to polish it perfectly.

This Coat Armor is born by the Name of Clovell, and is thus blazoned; the
Field Argent, two Cheverons Sable, each charged with five Nails, Or. The Na^l
has had his use in Military Service, as well as Domestic use. For with this
did the prudent Lady Iael end the cruel war betwixt the Ca^^^nites and
Israelites, by striking a Nail through the temples of Sisera, who was General
of King Iabins Host. As to the Domestical use of the Nail, we see that
Householders minding to settle themselves in some house wherein they mean to
make them a settled habitation, do drive Nails into the Walls, for the more
commodious and seemly hanging up and bestowing and orderly placing of things
necessary^ Whereof Ezra in his prayer to God takes a similitude, saying, And
now for a little space grace has been showed from the Lord our God, to leave
us a remnant to escape, and to give us a Nail in his holy place, etc. Ezra 9. 8.

He bears Argent, a Fess between three pair of Pincers, Gules. This Coat is
quartered by the Right Honorable and worthy Gentleman Sir William Russel, Lord
Russel of Thornhaw, deceased. Though the Pincers be an Instrument peculiar to
the Smith that formed the same, yet is the use thereof communicated unto the
Professors of diverse other Trades, as Carpenters, Joyners, Farriers, etc. As
touching the first invention of this Instrument, Pliny says, That Cynira the
son of Agrippa devised Pincers, Hammers, Iron Crows, and the Anvil or Stythe.

Next will I speak of such as are formed of Fusible Metals, so called a
fundendo, because they are liquid, and poured forth into the mold wherein they
are to be framed; but one Example shall serve.

He bears Argent, a Cheveron, Gules, between three Plummets, Sable, by the
Name of Iennings. The Plummet may aptly serve for an Hieroglyphick of Prudence,
in respect that Mariners, by the help of this Instrument, fastened to some Line
of many fathoms, do sound the depth of the Seas, when by some tempestuous
storm, or other accident, they are forced upon an unknown Coast; that so, if
necessity require, they may betake them to their Anchor-hold, or divert their
course some other way: Whereby we are admonished to sound the depth of our
intentions before we put them in practice, lest we hazard our Fortunes or Lives
(through want of foresight) upon the shoals of destruction.

Hitherto I have only given Examples of the Instruments of the said Arts; I
will proceed to some Examples of the works and effects of the same.

CHAP. IX.
AMONGST the sundry works of the foresaid Artizans, some are fixed and
permanent, as Buildings, either profane, for ordinary use of dwelling; or
sacred, as Temples for Gods service: and some others are moveable, as Tents,
etc. Examples whereof we will now produce.

He bears Argent, a Tower triple towred, Sable, chained transverse the Port,
Or, by the Name of Oldcastle. Munster reports, that Catiphus Governor of the
City Susa, had therein a Tower full of Gold and Jewels, but for Avarice would
not disperse his heaped treasures amongst his Soldiers. Afterward Alan, King
of the Tartarians, surprised this City, and taking Catiphus, shut him up in his
Tower, saying unto him, If thou had not so greedily walled up thy Treasure,
thou had saved thy self and this City; now therefore eat and drink, and take
thy fill of that thou lovedst so dearly. So died he miserably through the
Famine in the midst of his excessive Treasures.

Castles and Towers are strengths and fences fortified most commonly on the
tops of hills, or other lofty or well-fenced places by nature, as well for
descrying of the Enemy afar off, as for repulsing him upon his approach:
whereupon they are called in Latin Arces, ab arcendo, of keeping the Enemy
aloof, or repulsing and foiling him; and do serve rather for a place of retreat
for the timorous to lurk in, than for the valorous to perform any noble feat of
Martial activity in, acording to Petrarch, where he says, Arces scito non
receptacula fortium, sed inertium esse latibula, The greatest valor is showed
in aperto Mart, in the Champian field; therefore the most valiant and resolute
Generals and Commanders have evermore reckoned it a chief honor to grapple
with the Enemy hand to hand; and do reckon those Victories most honorable,
that are a^chieved with most prodigal effusion of blood, as witnesses the same
Author, saying, Militia nisi largo sangu^ne magnisque periculis honestetur, non
militiae, sed militaris ignaviae nomen tenet, non Regum modo judicio, sed
vulgi. Castles and Towers have proved many times very pernicious unto such as
have reposed trust in their safety: For there have been many that living out of
Castles or Towers, lived securely and free from danger, who afterward taking
stomach to them upon a conceived safety in their strength, became turbulent,
and betook them to their holds, and have finally perished in them; and so their
adventurous temerity has been there chastised, or rather subdued, where it
took beginning.

He bears Argent, a Tower triple towred, Sable, on a Mount, proper, by the
Name of Chiverton; and is born by Sir Richard Chiverton Knight. sometime since Lord
Mayor of London.

He bears Diamond, a Bend, Pearl, ^n the sinister Chief a Tower triple towred
of the second. This is the Paternal Coat Armor of the Right Honorable Luke
Plunkett Earl of Fingall, and Baron of Killeene in the Kingdom of Ireland.

Gules, on a Fess, Argent, two Ogresses, in Chief a dexter Gauntlet between two
Castles of the second, by the name of Tonson; and is born by Major Richard
Tonson of Ardrally in the County of Cork in the Kingdom of Ireland.

He bears Argent, a Tower between three Keys erect, Sable, by the Name of
Baker; and is the Coat of John Baker of Mayfield in Sussex, Gent.

The Field is Gules, a Lion rampant, Argent, a Castle in the dexter point, Or.
These were the Arms of Sir Francis Castilion of Benhall Vallence in the County
of B^rke, Knight. descended of the Noble Family of the Count Castilion in Piemont,
near unto Mantua.

The Lion is a magnanimous Beast, and of an invincible courage, and is not
daunted with any occurrent, neither (being laid down) will he be rowsed but at
his pleasure, as appears Genesis 49. 9. Judah, as a Lion's whelp shall thou come
up from the spoil, my son. He shall lie down and couch as a Lion, and as a
Lionness, and who shall stir him? Moreover, of his incomparable strength and
noble courage, a certain Author says, Leo fortissimus Bestiarum ad nullius
pavebit occursum, The Lion, the strongest of all Beasts, fears not the
encounter of any.

He bears Or, a Castle triple towred, Gules, the Port displayed of the Field,
Leaved, Argent. Note, that when the Architecture or Masonry extends it self
all over the Field from the one side of the Escocheon to the other, then must
it be named a Castle. But if it be thus turretted and environed by the Field,
then must it be blazoned (as above) a Tower triple towred, or a Tower with so
many turrets. The Gate must be conceived to be transparent, so as the Field
does manifestly show it self through the same; and all the Port should have Or,
if the conceited shadow, representing the thickness thereof, did not extenuate
a great part of the same.

He bears Argent, a Tower, Sable, having a scaling Ladder raised against it
in Bend sinister, Or. This Coat is quartered by Sir Edward Maunsell Knight. The
Ladder thus raised against the Tower, may put us in mind to stand carefully
upon to our Guard, who live in this world, as in a Castle continually assailed
with our spiritual and corporal Enemies, that cease not evermore to plot and
put in execution whatsoever tends to our destruction.

He bears Argent, on a Cross between four Frets, Gules, a Tower of the Field,
by the Name of Bence; and is the Coat of John Bence of Alborough in Suffolk,
and of the City of London, Esquire.

After these buildings of profane and vulgar use, we should annex Examples of
buildings sacred, as Churches, etc. in stead whereof we will content our selves
with these Examples following.

He bears Gules, three single Arches, Argent, their Capitals and Pedestals,
Or, by the Name of Arches. These are supposed to be Arches of a Bridge. And
Nicholas de Ponte, Duke of Venice, gave a Bridge for his Device, beaten with
the waves, with this Motto, Aliis inserviendo consumor. Pope Xistus the fourth
also gave a Bridge, with this word, Cura rerum publicarum. And it may signify
the cares and patient stability of men in Magistracy, who must endure the
assaults, taunts, and envy of the discontented vulgar.

He bears Or, on a Bridge of three Arches in Fess, Gules, masoned, Sable, the
streams transfluent, proper, a Fane, Argent, by the Name of Trowbridge of
Trowbridge. This Coat stands in Kirton Church in the County of Devon: and it
seems to have been given to the first Bearet thereof as an allusion to his
surname Trowbridge, quasi Throwbride, having respect to the current and fall of
the streams that do pass through the Arches; wherein the Deviser had an
ingenious conceit in the fitting thereof to his Name, yet so as it was not so
palpably understood of the vulgar sort.

He bears Or, a Pillar, Sable, enwrapped with an Adder, Argent, by the Name
of My^tur. The Adder thus enwrapped about the Pillar, may signify Prudence
conjoined with Constancy; both which being united in men of high spirits, do
greatly avail to the atchieving of noble Enterprises. Farnesius making mention
of the chief virtues that ought to be in a Prince, sets down two in
especial; whereof the one is Prudence, whereby the Helm of the Weal-publick is
governed in time of peace; the other Fortitude, whereby the attempts of the
Enemy are frustrated in time of war.

Pillars, the Hieroglyphics of Fortitude and Constancy, were erected for
diverse ends and purposes: Sometimes to limit out the bounds of the possessions
of people that bordered one upon another: Sometimes for memories of vows made;
as that which was erected by Jacob at Bethel, Genesis 28. 18. Sometimes for
Ornament, as those of the Temple, 1 Kings 7. 15. Sometimes for Testimonies of
Covenants, as that which was erected by Jacob for a memorial between him and
Laban, Genesis 31. 44, 45. Sometimes for Monuments to extol the valor, worth and
merits of well-deserving men; as those that were decreed by the Senate and
people of Rome to men of special desert and approved virtue. Sometimes they
were set up for preservation of Names of Families from oblivion; of which sort
is that mentioned in 2 Samuel 18. 18. Now Absalom in his life time had taken and
reared up for himself a Pillar, which is in the King's dale; for he said, I
have no son to keep my Name in remembrance: and he called the Pillar after his
own Name, and it is called unto this day Absalom 's Pillar.

To these we will add one Example of a work moveable, as in this next Escocheon.

He bears Sable, a Cheveron between three Tents, Argent, by the Name of
Tenton.

Tabernacles or Tents were the chief habitation of our Fathers in the first Age
of the World, as we may see Genesis 12. 8. Such kind of habitations did best fit
their uses, for the often removing of their Seats to refresh their Cattle with
change of Pastures; sometimes at hand, and otherwhiles in places remote: which
they could not commodiously do, if they had been still commorant in solid and
settled buildings. Such is the manner of the Tartarians at this day: they have
no Cities, Towns, or Villages to inhabit, but the open and Champian fields in
Tents after the manner of the ancient Scythians, because they are (in manner)
all Herdsmen. In the Winter season they plant themselves in the Plains and
Valleys; and in the Summer they live in mountainous places, where they may find
the rankest and best Pasture.

Of this sort are the Ships and Boats hereafter to be handled, and all other
navigable Vessels; in respect that during the time that men do undergo any
voyage, they are to them a kind of Domestical habitation. Now proceed we to
Examples of buildings ordained for sacred use, whereof in these immediately
ensuing.

He bears Gules, a Cross crossed, mounted upon three Grieces, Or. This Coat
was quartered by Edward Jones of Lanuaire in the County of Denbigh. The Cross
thus mounted upon 3 Grieces, may put us in mind of the means of our Salvation,
even Christ Jesus, who in the fullness of time, thereto appointed by his Father,
suffered the ignominious death of the Cross for our Redemption; whereby he has
joined us unto God the Father, and by that his Own Oblation, has purchased us
eternal Redemption. The three Grieces or steps whereby we mount up to Christ
crucified, are Faith, Hope, and Charity, the three Chief Theological Virtues.

He bears Sable, 3 Bells, Argent, by the Name of Porter. This sort of Bells
that are cast by the hand of a Founder, is not of so great Antiquity as some
others hereafter handled; yet their use no less approved than those: forasmuch
as both these and those were ordained for good uses; these to assemble the
people together to hear Divine Service; the other to move them (being
assembled) to attention, when the High Priest did exercise his Office.

Because we have here spoken of Buildings and Houses, it will not be much amiss
to add hereunto such Escocheons as are derived from Instruments of Household
use; such are these ensuing.

Sable, a Fess, Ermyn, between three Bells, Argent, by the Name of Bell. This
was the Coat Armor of Sir Robert Bell Knight. Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer,
who died of that pestiferous Sickness at Oxford, Anno 1577. together with the
other Judge of Assise; which Sir Robert, by Dorothy sole daughter and heir of
Edmund Beaupree of Beaupree-hall in Norfolk, had Issue Sir Edmund Bell and
Sinolphus, with three daughters, viz. Mary, Dorothy, and Frances.

He bears Gules, three Cushions, Ermyn, buttoned and tasseled, Or, by the
Name of Redman. Howsoever these are now taken for Cushions, others are of
opinion that they are more truly Pillows, and given to some Ancestors of this
Bearer (if Fame be true) for that by occasion of a combat challenged upon him
by a stranger, for the performance whereof the day and place being appointed,
this man being more forward than the Challenger, came very early to the place
at the day appointed, and by chance fell on sleep in his Tent: the people being
assembled, and the hour come, the trumpets sounded to the battle, whereupon he
wakened suddenly, ran furiously upon his Adversary and slew him.

These and such other Utensils do serve as well for Ornament as Necessity;
whereas others there are, which serve for necessity only, as in Example.

He bears Gules, a Fess Humet, between three Trestles, Argent, by the Name of
Stratford. More aptly (in my conceit) may this transverse Charge be termed a
Table than a Fess Humet, for so have I seen the same anciently blazoned, and so
taken it is a note of special Hospitality and Housekeeping, a thing in this
Age much commended, but little practiced.

Now in respect we are in hand to speak of Hospitality, it shall not be amiss
to give some little touch by the way of the bountiful hospitality of Kings in
former Ages, whereof I find King Solomon to be the most famous president: for
his daily expenses that I read of, wherein he exceeded all others that preceded
or succeeded him, as we may see 1 Kings 4. 22. where it is said, And Solomon 's
victuals for one day were thirty measures of fine flour, and sixty measures of
meal; ten fat Oxen, and twenty Oxen of the Pastures, and one hundred Sheep
beside Hearts, Robucks, and fallow Deer, and fatted Fowl.

From King Solomon's Housekeeping descend we now to the Hospitality of the
ancient Kings of this Land. I find in an ancient Manuscript that King Lud
commanded his household Officers to have in daily custom, to cover the Tables
in the Hall from seven of the clock in the morning till seven in the evening.
His daily Diet was not much in rare and delicate Viands; but that he kept it
constantly with all good Cates as could be gotten; and at the four great Feasts
he caused Proclamations to be made in all Countries for all manner of people to
come thither.

Moreover, the same Author makes mention of a very memorable and most royal
Feast, that Cassibelane made upon his second Triumph over the Roman Emperor.
And forasmuch as it is a chief point to be observed of him that shall cite
Authority for any thing that he writes or speaks of, to use the express
words of his Author which he voucheth, I will therefore deliver it as he
himself relates the same.

Domus Regis Cassibelani stands for a special note, which after his second
triumph upon the Emperor, gave out his Royal Commandments to all the Gentiles
in Britany, to come with their Wives to magnify his Feast: For which he slew
forty thousand Kine and Oxen, one hundred thousand Sheep, thirthy thousand
Deer, and other wild Beasts of the Wood, besides the diverse kinds of Pulline,
Coneys, wild Fowl and tame, of Sea and Land, with much other purveyance of
victual, with many disguisings, plays, minstrelsie and sports.

He bears Argent, a Trevet, Sable, by the Name of Trevet. A Trevet seems to
be so called of its three feet, or a Tripode, which in Greek signifies a stool
of so many feet. Amongst the Heathens Apollo's Priest was said to give Answers
from the Oracle, sitting on such a stool; whence he that speaks Oracles, is
said to speak tanquam ex Tripode.

He bears Argent, three fleshpots, Gules, by the Name of Mounbowchier. It
appears by History that the Ancients were wont to seethe their meat in the
hides of Beasts, which yet is in use in barbarous Countries, but Art supplieth
that defect. The fleshpots of Egypt are objected to the fleshly minded Jews,
who were contented to forsake the hope of blessed Canaan, to enjoy again their
belly-cheer: and Esau's mess of Pottage is with many of more esteem that the
birthright and inheritance of the heavenly Canaan.

He bears Argent, three pair of Bellows, Sable, by the Name of Scipton. The
invention of this Instrument for making of wind was much more witty than that
conceit of the Poets of Boreas his keeping of winds in Bottles. The Author of
these (as Strabo witnesses) was Anacharsis.

He bears Argent, three Lamps, Sable, a File of three points, Gules, by the
Name of Lamp law.

We read of a certain Church dedicated to Venus, wherein was a Lamp that burnt
continually, and never went out, but still gave light, yet was not maintained
with any kind of Oil, or other fatty matter or substance, and this was holden
for a special miraculous thing; yet might the same be performed by some other
natural means; as with a certain kind of stone that is found in Arcadia, and is
called Asbestus, which is said to be of that nature, that being once kindled
and set on fire, does never extinguish or go out, neither is it thereby
consumed or wasted, Zan. lib. 4. de potent, demon. chap. 12. page 255.

There are doubtless both in herbs and stones admirable virtues (not manifest)
whereby strange and unwonted effects may be wrought. Therefore men being
ignorant of the efficacy and forcible virtues of things natural, and
apprehending only their effects by sight, do forthwith conceive that there is
wrought some strange or great miracle; whereas indeed it is nothing less but a
matter proceeding merely from some natural cause.

Besides these aforesaid, there are sundry other Instruments of household use,
as Mortars, Gridirons, etc. which we leave to observation. And to this may be
referred Candles, Torches, etc. The great Turk Solimannus gave four Candles for
his Device, one burning, the other three extinct; to signify that other
Religions were nothing light in respect of his; or that the other parts of the
world should lose their beauty by the brightness of his glory.

He bears parted per Cheveron embatteled, Or and Gules, three Roses
counterchanged, slipped, proper, on a Chief of the second, three Hour-glasses
of the first. This Coat pertained to Dr. White, sometimes Bishop of Winchester;
a Descendant of which Family is Nehemiah White of Islington in Middlesex,
Clericus. Albeit the Sun is the Governor and Moderator of time, yet because we
cannot aplty express the same to the view, I have made choice of this Coat to
manifest the same thereby, in respect of the Hour-glasses placed on the Chief
thereof: For as the Sun is the measure of time; so is the time also the
measurer, not only of public, but also of private affairs. For who is he that
has any business to perform, that desires not to know how he proceeds
therein, and whether he be before hand with time, or that he be belated? And
for this end were Dials, Clocks, Watches and Hour-glasses devised.

Endless is the swift passage of time, which we shall better discern, if we
look backwards to the times that have already over-slipped us.

The best means we can devise to bridle time is to be evermore well exercised
in some honest, virtuous, and laudable work; so shall it not escape us
fruitlesly, according to that saying of Petrarch, Virtute and industria,
bonarumque artium studiis fraenari possunt tempora, non quia fugiant, sed ne
pereant. So shall we be sure to carry a hand over time, and not time over us:
so shall we, if not clip his wings that he glide not from us, yet so attach
him, that he shall not so pass us, but that we shall make some good use of him,
that he pass us not unprofitably,

Time slippeth from us suddenly, and outstrippeth us, which only we ought
greedily to seize upon, and in no case barter or exchange the same for any
costly price or reward. Let us (though late, yet not too late) begin to love
and hold time in estimation, which only a man may lawfully and honestly covet.
Let us bethink our selves of the shortness of our time, and our own frailty,
and endeavor our selves to make good use thereof; and let us not then (as
Seneca admonishes us) begin to live, when life begins to leave us.

To this place are Clocks, Watches, and such like Instruments (representing the
swift incessant motion of time) to be referred, wherein we may observe that
every wheel therein is moved by some other of more swift motion that it self
has; whereby is verified this saying, Quilibet motus mensuratur per velociorem
motum seipso.

CHAP. X.
NEXT to Armature, with the appendices thereof, succeeds Navigation whereunto
pertain all sorts of Ships and Boats, with their several parts, their Hulls,
Stems, Sterns, Masts, Tops, Tacklings, Sails, Oars, Cables, Anchors, etc.
whereof diverse are born in Coat Armor, as shall by these next Examples partly
appear.

He bears Gules, three pieces of Masts couped, with their tops, Argent, by
the Name of Cromer. The invention of the Mast, as also of the cross piece
whereunto the Sail is fastened, and is therefore called Sail-yard, came (says
Polydore) from Daedalus, that excellent Engineer of Athens, who is famous for
making the Artificial Cow, wherein Pasiphae (that Monster of womankind) did put
her self, and so enjoyed her lust and bestial desires with a Bull, with whom
she was in love.

He bears Gules, three Sails, Argent, by the Name of Cavell, alias Locavell.
Pliny ascribes the invention of Sails to Icarus the son of Daedalus, who for
this Device is said (by Poets) to have flown with Artificial wings. In a
natural conflict ( says Alex. ab Alex) to strike Sail, or take down the Flag
at the command of another, is a token of yielding or submission, which is yet
observed by men of Naval Profession. There are three things ( says one) which
excel all other for beautiful show; a goodly man at Arms bravely mounted on a
warlike Steed; a Woman of fair and goo^^y feature bearing a great belly; and a
goodly ship in her ruff, and under full Sail.

He bears Gules, an Anchor in Pale, Argent, the timber or cross piece
thereof, Or, by the Name of Goodreed. Anacharsis (says Pliny) made Anchors
first with two Hooks. The Anchor signifies succor in extremities; and
therefore the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, resembles Hope to the
Anchor, where it is said, Vt spem propositam teneamus, quam velut animae anchor
a^ habemus tutam and firmam; because Hope does establish and confirm our Faith
against all the tempestuous Gusts of adverse occurrents. Cosmus Medices Duke of
Hetruria, gave two Anchors for his Impress, with this word, Duabus, meaning it
was good to have two holds to trust to. But Richard the First, King of England,
gave a Sun on two Anchors, with this Motto, Christo Duce; a worthy and Princely
choice of so heavenly a Pilot.

He bears Sable, a Cheveron between 3 Anchors, Argent, by the Name of Holder;
and is the Coat Armor of Thomas Holder of South-Wheatly in Nottinghamshire,
Esquire. (late Auditor General to his Royal Highness the Duke of York) a Person of
approved Loyalty to the Crown all along the late Rebellion.

Or, on a Pile engrailed, Azure, three Anchors of the Field, by the Name of
Bide; and is the Coat Armor of Skynner Bide Esquire. son and heir of Sir Thomas
Bide of Ware-Park in Hertfordshire, Knight. and with a due difference, is the Coat
of Edward Bide of Lincolus-Inn in Middlesex, Esquire.

Azure, a Fess, Or, in Chief three Anchors of the second, by the Name of Terne;
and is born by Christopher Terne Dr. in Physic, Fellow of the College of
Physicians in London, Physician to St. Bartholomews Hospital, and Reader of
Anatomy to the Company of Barbers-Chirurgions, London.

He bears Azure, a Ruther or Helm of a Ship, Argent. By the help of this Helm
does the Pilot wield the Ship at will through the most violent Seas. Some men
are of opinion, that the first invention of the Helm of a Ship was taken from
the observation of a Kite flying, or rather gliding in the Air, that by turning
of his tail one while one way, another while another way, does guide his course
in the Air: whereby it seems that Nature would manifest in the clear Air,
what was behoveful to be practiced in the deep waters. So necessary is the use
of this Instrument, as that without it no shipping can be directed in a certain
course, but would be evermore in peril of splitting upon Shoals and Rocks,
through the forcible current and surging waves of the Sea, and the violence of
the boisterous winds, notwithstanding the might of the skilfullest Pilots or
Mariners, to their great hazard and astonishment, as we may see Psalm 107. 25,
26, etc. For at his word the stormy wind arises, which lifts up the waves
thereof. They are carried up to heaven, and down again to the deep; their soul
melts away because of the trouble. They reel to and fro, and stagger like a
drunken man, and are at their wits ends. Other parts of Ships have been born
both in Coat Armor and Impresses. Horatius ^onsaga gave the Prow of a Ship
tied to a Plow-wheel, with a Laurel over it, signifying his quiet Country life
after his Naval life. And Cardinal Raphael Riarius, affecting the Papacy, gave
an Oar on the Globe of the Earth, with this word, Hoc opus; showing what a
Pilot he would be, if he had the Command.

He bears Or, a Lighter-boat in Fess, Gules. This Coat Armor pertains to
the Family deWolfo of Sweuland. Like to this was born in Devise by the Prince
Iam Bentivolious, who opened his meaning with this word, Me video in Mari sine
gubernatore, I find my self in the Sea without a Pilot. Such is the condition
of a Commonwealth without a Ruler, or a man without Reason, tossed with every
wave of affection. But in these tossings of Fortunes waves, wise was the
resolution of Vicount Hugo de Melan, whose Device was a Ship without any
tackling to stay it, with this word, In silentio and spe fortitudo mea, My
strength is in silence, patience and hope.

The Field is Mars, the Hull of a Ship, having only a Main Mast, and a top
without any tackling, Sol. This is the Coat Armor of the high and mighty
Prince Duke Albertus de Alasco of Polonia, who did bear the same also for his
Crest, with this Motto, Deus dabit vela, God will give Sails; showing that
heavenly guidance is that whereby worldly affairs are governed, and that we
must not altogether rely on humane helps.

He bears Argent, a Ship with three Masts, a Sail trussed up and hoisted to
the top of the Main Yard, shrouded, Sable, by the Name of Meeres. Andreas
Doreo, Admiral of Spain, gave for his Impress a Ship under full Sail, with this
heavenly Motto, Omnia Fortunae committo, I commit all to Fortune: But another
of that Name (Admiral to Charles the Fifth) gave the same Device with a much
more Christian-like word, Non dormit qui custodit, He that is keeper is no
sleeper.

He bears Azure, a Galley passing under full Sail, Or. This is a Coat of
Spanish bearing, which Nation much uses this kind of vessel on the
Mediterranean and calmer Seas, the Rowers therein being so many captived
slaves, chained fast to their feat, lest they should rebel against the
Ministers of their oppression. The first Ship we read of was made by Noah, for
the preservation of increase of all living Creatures in the time of the general
Flood. But Jason first made the Galley which Sesostris King of Egypt used
after him.

CHAP. XI.
THE last of the foresaid Arts we reckoned to be Venation, which Plato divides
into three Species, Hunting, Hawking, and Fishing; all which, because they tend
to the providing of sustenance for man, Farnesius does therefore account a
Species of Agriculture. The dangerous chases of the Bear, the wild Boar, Bull,
etc. whether the same be performed on horseback or on foot, has a resemblance
of Military practice; for it makes a man provident in assaulting, as also
valorous in sustaining the brunt of the enemy: it makes them politic for
choice of places of advantage, and enableth them to tolerate hunger, thirst,
labor, storms, tempests, etc. all which are most requisite for such as do
profess a Military course of life. What valorous Commanders those men have
proved, that have been trained up in the Art of Hunting, when they have come to
the administration and managing of Martial Affairs, the Persians can
sufficiently witness unto us, who had no better means to become expert
Soldiers, than their daily exercise of Hunting: As also the History of
Mithridates King of Pontus, who was so much transported with the love of
Hunting, as that (according to Farnesius) by the space of seven years he took
not the benefit of any house either in City or Country to lie in; by means
whereof he so enabled and enured his body to sustain all hardness, that
afterward he became a scourge and terror to the Romans. And therefore this
noble kind of Venation is privileged from the title of an Illiberal Art, being
a Princely and Generous Exercise: but those only, who use it for a trade of
life, to make gain thereof, are to be marshalled in the rank of Mechanics and
Illiberal Artizans.

As touching the number of Examples of things pertaining to this noble exercise
of Hunting, proposed for the first Species of Venation, I purpose to be very
brief; not in respect of their scarcity, but because of the manifold
employments of the Workman for the present, that he is not able to furnish me
with more. And having ended with them, I will proceed, according to order, with
the other two Species of Venation, viz. Hawking and Fishing.

He bears Sable, a Bugle or Hunters horn garnished and furnished, Argent.
This Coat Armor is of very ancient erection in the Church of Rewardine within
the Forest of Dean in Glocestershire, and pertained to the Family of Hatheway
of the same place.

He bears Argent, 3 Bugle horns, Sable, stringed, Vert, by the Name of
Wyrsey; and is the Coat Armor of Humphrey Wyrsey of Hampsted-hall in
Staffordshire, Esquire one of the Prothonotaries of the Court of Common Pleas at
Westminster, fifth Son of Humphrey Wyrsey of Hampsted-hall aforesaid, Esquire.

Sable, three Bugle horns stringed, Or, garnished, Azure, born by John Thurston
of Hoxon in Suffolk, Esquire. This Color Sable is resembled to the precious stone
called Diamond, which signifies in Armory durableness; and the Charge of this
Escocheon being of the metal Or, is oftentimes in blazon described by the Topaz
stone, the Emblem in Heraldry of a sure Messenger, as Sir John Fern notes.

He bears Gules, a Cheveron between two Leopards heads in Chief, and a Bugle
horn in base Argent, by the Name of Slingsby, a Family of good antiquity and
repute in Yorkshire and elsewere; and is born by Sir Thomas Slingsby of
Read-house in Yorkshire, Baronet.

He bears Argent, on a Cheveron between three Stags heads couped, Sable, as
many Bugles, stringed of the first. This Coat pertained to Sir George Huntley
of Frowcester in the Country of Gloucester, Knight. Other Coats derived from this
Noble Exercise I might produce, as three Dog-hooks born by the Name of
Mertingham, three Leashes or Slips, by the name of Hayward; but these Examples
may stand in stead of the rest. And hitherto are to be referred Toils, Hayes,
Collars for Greyhounds: of which last sort I find an Escocheon erected in the
Church of Newent in the Forest of Dean, in Field Sable, three Greyhounds
Collars, Argent, edged, studded, and tyrretted, Or.

He bears Or, on a Fess, Azure, three Hawks Bells of the first, by the Name
of Planke. This sort of Bells is of no late invention, but of great antiquity,
and in use amongst the Hebrews, whose High Priest had little Bells at the
skirts of his uppermost Garment, as appears Exodus 28. 33. And beneath upon
the skirts thereof, thou shall make Pomegranats of blue silk, and purple and
scarlet round about the skirts thereof, and bells of gold round about: to show
that the attention and devotion of Gods people must be stirred up by the
Ministry of this most sacred Function.

He bears Azure, a Cheveron between 3 Bells, Or, by the Name of Ent; and is
the Coat of that eminent Physician Sir George Ent of East-Laughton in
Lincolnshire, Knight. President of the College of Physicians in London.

He bears Sable, a Cheveron, Or, between three Lures, Argent, by the Name of
Prenue. This Coat was quartered by Sir Nicholas Arnold Knight. sometimes of Hyneham
in the County of Gloucester. A like Coat to this is born by the Name of Lie, and
well accords with the Name; for Faulkners use to deceive their Hawks with
casting up of this, as if it were some Fowl, and so they give them a lie for a
truth. And these two Examples may suffice for the Noble Art of Hawking. The
next and last is Fishing.

The skill of fishing is diversely exercised, viz. sometimes with Nets,
sometimes with Hooks, otherwhiles with Salmon-spears, or Eel-spears, and
sometimes with Gi^s, with Puttes, Weels, etc. all which are found born in
Coat Armor. Now first of Nets. These are most usually born in Arms piecemeal,
or in fragments, which are the same (if I be not deceived) which we call in
blazon Frets, because the Frenchmen call a Net Retz, and we by intermixture of
Language have added thereunto the Letter F. These Fragments are sometimes born
single, and otherwhiles manifold, as appears by these next Examples.

He bears Gules, 8 Mascles, Or, five and three, by the Name of Preston. The
Mascle is taken for the mash of a Net, as I shall presently show you by good
Authority. And Nets are in sacred Writ Hieroglyphics of persuasion, whereby
men are induced to virtue and verity, and so may seem after some sort to be
caught. Far diverse from this is that sort of Net, which is in use with many
men in this Age, to catch and ensnare men of honest and plain dispositions,
entangling them therein, not only to the decay of their bodies, but also to the
utter subversion of their Estates, for the enriching of themselves and their
posterity: of such the Prophet Habakkuk speaks Chap. 1. 15, 16.

There is also born Gules, eight Lozenges, Argent, four, three, and one, by the
Name of Preston.

He bears Gules, a Cheveron, Ermyn, between three Mascles, Argent, by the
Name of Belgrave; and is born by William Belgrave of North Kilworth in
Leicestershire, Esquire. These are by some taken to be the same with Lozenges. I
Mascle in Armory (says Sir John Fern) is a representation of the mash of a
Net, signifying the Bearer thereof in a Field, Gules, to have been most prudent
and politic in the stratagems of Wars, for that the Field is dedicated to
Mars. The bearing of Mascles therefore is of greater honor than many other
Charges are, that in vulgar estimation are more accounted of. Sometimes these
are born to the number of six, viz. three, two, and one, jointly, without the
interposition of any Ordinary. Otherwhiles they are born of the number of seven
conjunct, as in this next Escocheon.

He bears Gules, seven Mascles conjunct, viz. three, three, and one, Or, a
Canton, Ermyn. This Coat Armor pertained to Henry Ferrers of Badsley in the
County of Warwick, Esquire a man very judicious in matters of honor. Whereas Leigh
says that the Mascle ought always to be square, whether the same be void or
whole; I hold, that if they be mashes of a Net, as Sir John Fern takes them
to be, then can they not in any case be whole, but must be evermore transparent
and void: for if they be solid, they may better be resembled to quarrels of
Glass, or some other thing of massy and sound substance, wrought every way
square like a Die; from which a Lozenge is said to differ, in that the same is
longer one way than another.

He bears Argent, a Fret of eight pieces, Azure. This was the Coat Armor of
a noble Norman well descended, called Seigneur de Montier Aullier, as is
testified by an ancient French Manuscript. If in any Coat of this bearing there
be found more than eight pieces, then (says Leigh) you shall not need to
number the pieces; but in the blazon of such Coat-Armours you shall say, He
bears Frette; one Example whereof follows.

The Field is Emerald Frette, Topaz, a difference for a second Brother of the
third House. This Coat Armor pertains to George Whitmore, a few years since
Lord Mayor of the Honorable City of London, descended of the Family of the
Whitmores of Whitmore of Shropshire; in which County at Apley, now resideth Sir
William Whitmore Baronet, who bears the said Coat, only with omission of the
Mullet, and the Addition of the Arms of Vlster. And now I will give you an
Example of a Fret of eight pieces, each charged in the joints or midst.

He bears Argent, a Fret of eight pieces, Gules, each charged in the midst
with Flowers de lis, Or. This Coat pertained to Sir Lawrence Hamelden Knight. who
was one of those Knights that exercised the Tornament holden at Dunstable, in
the second year of King Edward the Second. Like as in this Coat you see the
Fret charged, and the Field (otherwise) free from any other charge; so
contrariwise you shall find the Frette free, and the Field charged between, as
in Example.

He bears Argent, Frette, Gules, semy de Castles of the second, by the Name
of Nechur. Now I will show you an Example of the bearing of a Fret, which
differs from all the former bearings.

Argent, Frette, Gules, a Chief, Azure. This Coat is born by D^^cy Curwen of
Sella-Park in Cumberland Esquire. Grandchild of Sir Henry Curwen of Workington in
the said County, Knight. and Baronet.

Topaz, Frette, Ruby, a Canton, Ermyn. This is the Coat Armor of the Right
Honorable Baptist Noel Viscount Camden, Baron Noel of Ridlington, and
Elmington, Lord Lieutenant of the County of Rutland, etc.

The Field is Diamond, a Fret, Topaz. This was the Coat Armor of Henry Lord
Maltrevers or Mautravers (for I find the Orthography both ways) an ancient
Baron of this Kingdom, and is now quartered by the Right Honorable Thomas
Howard Earl of Arundel and Surrey, Earl-Marshal of England. When the Fret
consists of six pieces, then (says Sir John Fern in Lacie's Nobility, page
69.) we say a Fret, without saying any more: but in this we differ from the
French Heralds, who blaze such a kind of bearing, a Fret of six pieces; and
there he notes further, that a Fret cannot be of less than six pieces, you
shall also sometimes find a Fret ingrailed, as in this next Example.

Sable, a Fret, Argent, is born by the Name of Harrington; a bearing so
excellent, that it is generally known by the Name of Harrington's knot.

Gules, a Fret, Argent, is the Coat of Fleming, and is born by Daniel Fleming
of Ridale-hall in Westmoreland, and of Beckermet in Cumberland, Esquire.

He bears Gules, a Fret engrailed, Ermyn, by the Name of Eynefort. If this
Fret (says Leigh) be of more pieces than you see here, then it alters from
the same name, and is blazoned Diaper. Of the manifold sorts of Diapering I
have formerly given Examples, together with certain Observations thereupon,
whereunto I do refer you for satisfaction therein. These Examples may serve for
Nets, to show their diverse manner of bearing, and to minister occasion to the
Reader, to make a more strict observation of such others, as I do here pass
over, because I labor to be brief.

He bears Sable, a Cheveron between 3 fishing Hooks, Argent, by the Name of
Medvile. Not unproperly ( says Pierius) do men signify by this kind of Hook
fraud and guile, Quia decipere est unum ostentare, and aliud praeter opinionem
infer: for the fisherman, under a show of rendering food to the fish (having
subtly covered the hook all over with the bait) does give him his deadly
bane. And of this trade are more in the world, than will acknowledge themselves
of the Company of Fishermen or Fishmongers.

He bears Sable, a Cheveron between 3 Eel-spears, Argent, by the name of
Stratele. These do Fishermen use for the taking of Eels, which being (for the
most part) in the mud, cannot be taken with Net or other Gin; which gave
occasion of the invention of this Instrument, a long staff being set in the
socket thereof, and so to strike into the depth of the mud, and by means of the
Barbs of this Instrument, they detain as many as come within the danger
thereof. And therefore this Engine has a signification of such an action of
desert, wherein both strength and policy are conjoined.

He bears Argent, a Cheveron, Ermyn, between 3 Weels, their hoops upwards,
Vert, by the Name of Wylley. And indeed this is like the insnarings and deceits
of wily men: for as this mouth is made broad and easy for the fish to enter,
but is narrow, within, that they cannot get forth; so crafty Varlets will make
fair pretense to draw men into their dangers, out of which they cannot get
forth, being once entangled. And this kind of trade is much more base and
illiberal than any of the afore-specified. And with these are to be ranged all
those, quorum lingua venalis est (says Tully) who sell their tongue, their
skill, their conscience, only to get a Fee of their Clients. And thus much of
Arts Mechanical of the first and principal rank.

CHAP. XII.
ARTS Mechanical of more necessary use for the nourishing and preserving of
man's body, we have proposed in the preceding Examples: there yet rest other
Arts of a second rank, which tend rather to the embellishing and beautifying of
Natures works than to the necessary supply of humane uses; yea some of them
such, as are rather baits to please the senses, than means to further man's
good. Yet because the custom of times, and opinion of men, and a certain
curious and affected skill has given esteem and name of Art unto such
superfluous curiosities, we will not utterly pass them by; the rather, because
all of them being used with moderation, by understanding men, and for good
ends, they may deservedly have both approbation and commendation. The first of
these is the skill of Cookery, for the exquisite pleasing of the Palate; unto
which kind of men, some have been so addicted, that it is storied of a certain
Prince, that he proposed a great reward to every man that should invent a new
conceited dish. And the Sybarites were famous in this kind, who bid their
guests a year before the Feast, and so long were catering for dainties. It is a
Proverb amongst the Jews, Qui multiplicat carnes, multiplicat vermes: and most
true it is, that he that daily feeds his body, is but a Cook to dress meat
for worms. Painting, Carving, and Imbroidering, serve to please another sense,
the sight; and therefore is a more ingenious delight: and in this kind some
have been so excellent and renowned, as that they have been numbered amongst men
of admirable wisdom; as Apelles, Phidias, Polycletus, and others, whose works
have deserved immortal reputation, and some of their Masterpieces have been
prised beyond belief. All these have sundry Instruments, which may be (and
doubtless have been) born in Coat Armor; but because they are not usual, I
will referr them to each man's own observation, and will give instance in the
last of this kind of Arts of Delight, which we call Playing; which
comprehends either Theatrical recreation, or other Games whatsoever.

And forasmuch as their first institution was good, and that they are in
themselves the commendable exercises, either of the body, or of wit and
invention (and if there be in them any evil, it is not in them per^se, but per
accidens, because they are abused by those that do practice and exercise them)
I have thought good to annex them unto the same: such are Table-playing, Chess,
Dice, Racket, Balloon, etc. The things wherewith these Games are practiced, are
born in Coat Armor, as by these Examples following may appear.

He bears Azure, three pair of playing Tables, Argent, bordered, Or, pointed
and garnished within of the first, by the Name of Pegress. Recreations which
are honest are as necessary for the mind, which is employed in great affairs
and cares of importance, as meat is for the body which is exhausted with daily
labor; and therefore of all men living, Statesmen and Students are to be born
with, if they are more addicted to the refreshing of their minds surcharged
with meditation, than other sorts of men. But the play at Tables is not held so
fitting for the Female Sex, thereby they learn to bear a man more than they
should.

He bears Azure, a Fess between 3 Chess-Rooks, Or, by the Name of Bodenham;
and was born by that great lover and promoter of Heraldry Sir Wingfield
Bodenham Knight. It seems these were at first called Rooks, for being the defense
of all the rest; and therefore they stand in the uttermost corners of the
Chess-board, as Frontier Castles. This is a game of noble exercise for the
mind, as requiring much forecast and understanding. King William the Conqueror
was much addicted to this delight, and lost great Lordships at this play. And
indeed, were it not too serious a recreation, and going beyond the nature of
Games, it might well beseem a King; because therein are comprised all the
stratagems of war, or plots of Civil states.

He bears Argent, six Chess-rooks, three, two, and one, Sable, by the Name of
Rockwood; and is born by Nicholas Rockwood of Kirby in Suffolk, Esquire

He bears, Gules, a Ferdemoulin pierced between two Martlets, Argent, by the
Name of Beversham; and is the Paternal Coat Armor of Sir William Beversham; of
Holbrook-hall in Suffolk, Knight. one of the Masters of the high and honorable
Court of Chancery.

He bears Ermyns, on a Cross quarter pierced, Argent, four Ferdemoulins,
Sable, by the name of Turner; and is the Coat Armor of the honorable Sir
Edward Turner of Parendon in Essex, Knight. Chief Baron of his Majesty's Court of
Exchequer.

This is also the Coat Armor of Sir Edmund Turner of Stoke-Rochford in the
County of Lincoln, Knight. which honor he received from his Majesty King Charles
the Second, the Nineteenth of January 1663.

He bears Sable, on a Cross, Argent, five Ferdemoulins pierced of the Field,
by the Name of Turner; and is the Coat Armor of John Turner of Kyrkleatham in
the North Riding of Yorkshire, Sergeant at Law, elder Brother to Sir William
Turner of the City of London, Knight and Alderman, and late Lord Mayor thereof.

Azure, fifteen Ferdemoulins, Or, on a Canton of the second a Lion rampant,
purpure. This Coat pertains to the honorable Society of Lincoln's Inn, being
one of the four Inns of Court.

He bears Or, three Dice, Sable, each charged with an Ace, Argent, by the
Name Ambesace, as appears by an old Roll late in the hands of Mr. Starky
deceased. There is no successful event of Dicing, none prosperous or fortunate,
but all ominous and lamentable: for he that loses is tormented; and he that
wins is enticed and tolled on, until he be entrapped or ensnared in some
wily or dangerous plot.

If a man play at dice, and depart a winner, let him try his Fortunes again, he
shall be sure to lose. If a man win, his gains is wasted by giving away here
and there to standers by, and to the Butlers box; but let him lose never so
much, there is none that will afford him one jot of restitution.

In this kind of play many men do overshoot themselves, and commit such errors
for the loss of a little money, as otherwise they would not for great sums be
hired to do.

In this Game all manner of vices, especially those of covetousness and
swearing do predominate and bear chief sway. Neverthele^^ many men observing
the casual chance of the Dice, out of a covetous desire of gain, and not being
rightly informed of the use of this our mortal life, do with vehemence
prosecute their insatiable thirst and desire of gain, as if that were the only
scope whereto they ought to direct all their actions of this life: whose folly,
or rather extreme madness, is lively expressed in the Book of Wisdom 15. 12.
But they counted our life a pastime, and our time here a market for gain: For
(say they) we must be getting every way, though it be by evil means.

To conclude, the hazard of Dice-playing (according to Petrarch) is an huge and
insatiable Gulf, a dreadful and sudden Consumption of Patrimonies and
Inheritances, a tempest of wind, a cloud of same, a spurr to wickedness, and
the roadway to desperation: And howsoever other recreations are sports, yet
this is nothing but mere grief and vexation of mind.

He bears Argent, a Cheveron between 3 Dice, Sable, each one charged with a
Cinque of the first. This Coat was quartered by Mr. Fitz-Williams of Malton.
This is the Game of Fortune, and Fortune's Children. The square, which always
falls right howsoever it be cast, is the emblem of Constancy; but the
uncertainty of the Picks is the very type of Inconstancy and Mutability. He
that lays his estate on the eyes of these Dice, will leave a small estate for
his own eyes to look on.

To this Chapter may be referred all other Games; as the Racket, and that of
Iacobus Medices, General to Charles the fifth, whose Device was a Ball with two
Balloons, with this word, Percussus Elevor, The harder I am stricken, the
higher I mount. And this may serve for conclusion of all Arts and Professions
civil, whether liberal or illiberal, necessary or delightful whatsoever.

CHAP. XIII.
WHAT manifold variety of Coat-Armours (consisting of things Artificial) is
borrowed from the several Dignities, Arts, and Exercises of men of civil life
and condition, the foregoing Tracts and Examples have sufficiently declared.
There now remain such Artificials as are in use amongst men of military
profession, with which we will shut up this whole Section of things Artificial.
By things Military I understand all such as do pertain to the use and exercise
of Martial Discipline and Service; whereof some do serve for Order, some for
Execution of Order. Of the first kind are those things which are for direction
in Marchings, Encampings, Arisings, Assaults, Retreats, etc. and such are the
Banner-Royal, the Standard, Guidon, Penon, Cornet, etc. For albeit it be true,
that Leges silent inter Arma, Laws cannot be heard amongst clashing of Weapons;
yet without certain Laws of Discipline and Order it is impossible for any
Martial attempt to be successful. And therefore this is reckoned as Hannibal's
highest glory, that being Captain of an Army consisting of men of so sundry
Nations and Conditions, he notwithstanding kept them all under quiet
Discipline; the want whereof has commonly been the cause, when any great
design has proved unprosperous.

The valiant Zisca being stark blind, yet sitting in the midst of his Army,
whiles they were in any pitched Field with the Enemies, gave such directions
upon all occasions, as that his Army was ever Victorious. And Caesar was in
this kind so fortunate, that he fought fifty pitched Fields with honor,
wherein he alone surpassed the valorous Marcus Marcellus, who is said to have
been forty times save one in the Field. And requisite is it in matters of so
high nature, as are decided by wars, an exquisite care both in directing and
obeying, should be observed; because it has often happened, that the neglect
or mistaking of someone small Circumstance has been the overthrow of whole
Armies, and all the States thereon depending.

And since we are about to treat of such Artificials as are in use amongst men
of Military profession, I hold it not impertinent to discourse a little of
Military Laws, and some observations concerning Battles and Armies, beginning
with such Military Laws and Discipline as were divulged to the Israelites, in
the beginning of the second month of the second year, after their coming out of
Egypt.

The all-powerful and most provident God and wise disposer of all things,
having made special choice of a people selected out of all the Nations of the
world for his own peculiar service, and minding to exercise them under many
afflictions, to prove what was in their hearts (to the end they might have a
feeling sense of his Almighty presence, and ready deliverance at all seasons
out of all their calamities, that so he might humble them, and make them meet
for himself) he did not presently lead them into the Land of Promise, so soon
as he had brought them out of the Egyptians servitude; but led them to and fro
in the Wilderness by the space of forty years, keeping them in continual
exercise, to prove their faith, and to bring them out of liking with this
world, and to learn them to depend wholly upon his Divine Providence, and in
all their necessities to rest solely upon him, and to seek their comfort and
relief from him only.

This most gracious God, having a tender care of these his people, and
foreseeing in his Divine Providence how needful discipline was for the ordering
and conducting of so huge and populous a multitude, in a passage so long, and
withal so full of perils; and knowing that all Civil Discipline consisted in
commanding and obeying, prescribes to his servant Moses a regular form of
government, whereby he might contain them in their several Offices and Duties.

First, he commanded Moses to number the Israelites, saying, Take ye the sum of
all the Congregation of the children of Israel, etc. Number. 1. 2.

And then having given Moses and Aaron general directions for the marshalling
and ordering the whole Army of the Israelites, he says, Numb. 2. 2. Every man
of the children of Israel shall camp by his Standard, and under the ensign of
their Fathers house: far off about the Tabernacle of the Congregation shall
they pitch.

And on the East side toward the rising of the Sun shall they of the Standard
of the Camp of Judah pitch, throughout their Armies: and Naashon the son of
Aminadab shall be Captain of the children of Judah. And his host, and those
that were numbered of them, were threescore and fourteen thousand, and six
hundred.

And those that do pitch next unto him, shall be the Tribe of Issachar: and
Nethaneel the son of Zuar shall be Captain of the children of Issachar.

And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were fifty and four
thousand, and four hundred.

Then the Tribe of Zebulon: and Eliab the son of Helon shall be Captain of the
children of Zebulun.

And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were fifty and seven
thousand, and four hundred.

All that were numbered in the Camp of Judah, were an hundred fourscore and six
thousand and four hundred throughout their Armies: These shall first set forth.

On the South side shall be the Standard of the Camp of Reuben, according to
their Armies: and the Captain of the children of Reuben shall be Elizur the son
of Shedeur.

And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were forty and six
thousand, and five hundred.

And those that pitch by him shall be the Tribe of Simeon: and the Captain of
the Children of Simeon shall be Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.

And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were fifty and nine
thousand, and three hundred.

Then the Tribe of Gad: and the Captain of the sons of Gad shall be Eliasaph
the son of Revel.

And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty and five
thousand, and six hundred and fifty.

All that were numbered in the Camp of Reuben, were an hundred thousand, and
fifty and one thousand, and four hundred and fifty throughout their Armies: and
they set forth in the second rank.

Then the Tabernacle of the Congregation shall set forward, with the Camp of
the Levites in the midst of the Camp: as they encamp, so shall they set
forward, every man in his place by their Standards.

On the West side shall be the Standard of the Camp of Ephraim, according to
their Armies: and the Captain of the sons of Ephraim, shall be Elishama the son
of Ammihud.

And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty thousand and
five hundred.

And by him shall be the Tribe of Manasseh: and the Captain of the Children of
Manasseh shall be Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.

And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were thirty and two
thousand and two hundred.

Then the Tribe of Benjamin: and the Captain of the sons of Benjamin shall be
Abidan the son of Gideoni.

And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were thirty and five
thousand and four hundred.

All that were numbered of the Camp of Ephraim, were an hundred thousand, and
eight thousand, and an hundred throughout their Armies: and they shall go
forward in the third rank.

The Standard of the Camp of Dan shall be on the North side by their Armies:
and the Captain of the Children of Dan shall be Ahiezur the son of Ammishaddai.

And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were threescore and two
thousand and seven hundred.

And those that encamp by him shall be the Tribe of Asher: and the Captain of
the Children of Asher shall be Pagiel the son of Ocran.

And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty and one
thousand and five hundred.

Then the Tribe of Naphtali: and the Captain of the Children of Naphtali shall
be Ahira the son of Enan.

And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were fifty and three
thousand and four hundred.

All they that were numbered in the Camp of Dan, were an hundred thousand, and
fifty and seven thousand and six hundred: they shall go hindmost with their
Standards.

Here have we in this second Chapter of Numbers an uncontrollable warrant
pronounced by the mouth of Almighty God for the use of two sorts of Ensigns,
the one general, being in number four, only ordained for the leading and
direction of the four Regiments (as I may so call them.) And the other
particular, serving for the demonstration of the several families, and for the
distinguishing of the particular persons of each family, for the more
commodious distributing of them into bands; a thing most behoveful for the
bestowing and conducting of so huge a multitude, considering how many thousand
of persons were comprised in and under every of the abovenamed Regiments: So
as it is most clear, that these are no less requisite (in their kind) than the
former in theirs, for the more orderly and effectual managing of this military
expedition of so long a continuance, and withal subjected to infinite dangers.

As touching the tokens or sings used in the general Standards, we have showed
what they were after the opinion of Martinus Borhaus (who differs from
Speed:) his very words you may read in the first Chapter and first Section of
this Book.

But since here is mention made of signs pertaining to particular families and
persons, it may perhaps be questioned what these signs were. Whereto I answer,
That they must of necessity be signa existentium in rerum natura, because there
cannot be a representation of things that are not. If then they consisted of
the similitude of the things in Essence, or being; no doubt they were such, as
not only the skilfuller sort, but the vulgar also (through frequent use and
custom) did well know by their daily fight and use of them: as being the
express pourtraitures either of Celestial Bodies, as of the Sun, Moon, Stars,
etc. or of things Sublunar, as Meteors fiery, Meteors watery, whereof we have
before spoken in their due places: Or else of Vegetables, as Trees, Shrubs,
Plants, Fruits, Herbs, Flowers, etc. Or else they were resemblances of
sensitive Creatures; as of Man, Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, Reptiles: Or else of
Instruments, or Tools of familiar use in the exercise of Mechanical Trades,
pertaining to life Civil or Rustic. Which in respect of their common and
ordinary use were best known to men, and therefore served most fitly for notes
or marks or precise differencing of each particular family and person from
other.

When a King or Prince do enter the field to give battle to their enemies, it
behooves that he be strongly fenced of the Army, both before and behind; and
that he have his being near the great Standard, in the heart of the battle, for
the more safety of his person, and that he may the better give directions upon
all occasions to the whole Army, as the necessity of the service shall require.

It is a thing very dangerous for a King, Prince, or other General, or
whatsoever other their great Commander, to be over-forward or venturous to
encounter his enemy in battle in his own person: It suffices such to command,
and to give direction, and never to hazard their persons in battle. But if he
must needs put his person upon the jeopardy of the uncertain and dangerous
events of a battle, it behooves that he deferr the same to the last conflict;
for that upon the safety of his person depends the hopeful good success of
the battle, and the safety of the whole Army.

Besides, so long as the chief Commander is in life and safety, albeit he be
foiled and discomfited; yet may he repair his Forces, and subdue him by whom he
was foiled: but his person being either slain or surprised, there is no hope of
recovery.

Upon the first display of the Banner of a King or Prince, or of their General
or chief Commander, it behooves that some discreet and ancient Counselor
should make known publicly the cause, why those wars were undertaken, to the
intent the same may be known to be grounded upon lawful cause; and that the
King or Prince does not rashly attempt the same, but that he does it in a
lawful quarrel, and upon just cause.

Which done, then should he command the chief Herald to unroll and display the
said Banner, and deliver it to him that is appointed to bear the same (who
before he take the same must receive the order of Knighthood, if he be not
before Knighted) with a strict charge and command to hold the same fast, and to
maintain the honor thereof, even with the extreme hazard of his life, and
thereupon to advance the same in the Name of God, the sole Author and Giver of
all Victory.

Like as the Laws of Civil Magistracy and Government were ordained by God: so
also were Military Laws and Ordinances grounded upon his express Commandment,
uttered by the mouth of the Prophets and Priests; as you may see particularly,
for the exhortation of Priests, Deuteronomy. 20. 1, 2. and of other Officers, Deuteronomy.
20. 5. and Iud. 7. 3. besides Military Laws for fight, Numb. 21. 21. that the
Conditions of Peace must be offered, Deuteronomy. 20. 11, 12. etc. for Spoil, 20. 19.
and the division thereof, 1 Samuel 30. 26, etc. 1 Chronicles. 26. 27. Josh. 22. 8. 2 Chronicles. 28. 15. for Victory; that it is the duty of Captains and their Armies
(after victory obtained) to ascribe the whole glory thereof to God, and with
one heart and one voice to magnify his most glorious Majesty by the example of
Judas Maccabeus, Thus they went home and sung Psalms, and praised the Lord in
heaven, for he is gracious, and his mercy endures for ever, 1 Maccab. 4. 24.

The skilful managing of Military Affairs is a kind of Art; neither does the
public profession of the name of a Soldier, nor yet his lofty countenance or
change of habit forthwith make a man a Soldier, it is a matter of greater
consequence, and of no less secrecy; for a Soldier is to be confident in that
he undertaketh, and to wage battle with an assured hope of Victory, and to
retire himself and his Forces (if the necessity of the cause so require)
without fear of reproach or danger. For as the common Proverb says, A more
valorous man is he that wisely flies, than he that foolishly exposes himself
to adventure and hazard; Periti enim bellatoris est non minus scire fugiendi
arte^, quam pugnandi: for it is a matter of no great difficulty to draw men on
to fight; but if the Captain in his providence, whilst they be in action, shall
discover some unexpected disadvantage or damage that may befall him and his
Band, and can wisely retire himself with honor and with safety of his
Soldiers, he shows himself both valorous in his encounter, and wise in his
retreat.

The greatest Victories have not been gotten by handy-strokes always; but many
times for safeguard of the effusion of blood, either the one part, or the
other, devised some witty unexpected sudden policy or stratagem, to astonish
the adverse part, that so they might suddenly slaughter them, or put them to
shameful flight. Large is the field of stratagems which every Commander has by
particular invention; neither has there been more Victories or Trophies gained
by any one means than by these Stratagems. Whatsoever comes beyond expectation
makes a disturbance or amazement in the Enemy: but it must be wrought with
this caution, that it be no disturbance to our selves.

Neither is every slight invention fit to be put in practice, but such only as
have foresight and circumspection annexed to them. He must be Argus that is a
General or chief Commander; he must be eyed behind, before, in his head, in his
feet; and then shall all things be easily disposed according to order, and take
good effect, when orderly distribution, and providence, and premeditation, have
made way thereto.

It is not the length of a man's age, or the number of years, that yields the
art or skill of managing Military Affairs; but a continual meditation how he
may encounter all occurrents, and put them in exercise and practice: For if a
man receive never so many stipends, yet is the unexercised man still but a
freshwater Soldier notwithstanding.

There were in former Ages two sorts of dismission or discharge from Military
Service; the one named ignominiosa, that is to say, approbrious or infamous: as
when a Soldier for some notorious crime was discharged from his service, and
disgracefully put out of pay and place, as for slothfulness, cowardice,
forsaking of his Captain, or such like; then he was by the Tribune dismissed of
his place, and branded with the mark of infamy and reproach, if he were so by
the Tribune discharged and deprived of his Military Ornaments.

The other was called Causaria missio, as much to say as an occasional
dismission or discharge, grounded upon good and lawful considerations: as when
in regard of debility, by reason of age or sickness, wounds or other
infirmities possessing a man, he was licenced to depart to his home; and those
that were thus dismissed, did most commonly dedicate their Shields, Swords, and
Armor, Laribus suis, to their Household Gods, as the Heathen termed them, by
hanging them up upon the walls in some chief or special place or room of their
House, for a memorial of their service performed in defense of their Friends
and Country.

Martial men are evermore in peril and hazard of life, in regard of their light
esteem of the manifold varieties, casualties, and dangerous events of wars,
whereunto they do evermore expose themselves: for Fortune thundereth not her
perils more abundantly upon any sort of men, than upon those that set her at
naught; such are high spirited and valorous men. And not without cause; for as
others do labor to shelter themselves from danger, and do shun the violence
thereof; these contrariwise do lay open themselves to the utmost hazard that
may befall them.

Call to mind the fore-passed Ages, and examine them to the point, and you
shall find that the valiantest men (for the most part) have been swallowed up
with a violent death. Victory does oftentimes make men to swell with pride, and
to insult over others, and provoke them to their own destruction, as we may see
2 Kings 14. 8. where Amaziah summoned the son of Iehoahaz King of Israel to
single combat, saying, Come let us look one another in the face. Who answered
him, Because thou have smitten Edom, and thine heart has lifted thee up; glory
of this and tarry at home: for why should thou meddle to thy hurt, that thou
should fall, even thou and Judah with thee?

Some men are of opinion, that such as are vanquished in battle ought not to be
captivated to such as had subdued them, unless the wars were just and lawful,
as Dr. Casius has observed. But Borreus holdeh, that albeit the ground or
cause of the wars that are undertaken be unjust; yet it is not simply unjust
that such as are vanquished in battle, should be subjected under the power of
the Vanquisher; Quia Legislatoris intentio est, ut virtus vincentis sic
honoretur; the purpose of the Lawmakers was that the valor of the Vanquisher
should be so rewarded. Besides, it is no ignominious thing for a man to be
subdued by a man accounted of valor, according to that saying, Non tam turpe
est vinci, quam contendisse gloriosum; It is not reckoned a matter so
reproachful to be subdued, as it is honorable to have coped with a magnanimous
and valiant man.

Many men are remunerated for the virtues that are found in them, or for the
external tokens of virtue that are observed in their outward carriage. Hereupon
is that Law grounded, Quod capti bello victoribus subserviant; not for that the
Conquerours are always the better men, but in regard that in them the signs and
tokens of virtue and valor are more apparent than in those that are subdued.

It is a just dominion or superiority, and agreeable to the order of Nature,
that the more powerful should predominate over the weaker fort. And the Laws do
seem to approve the same, Cum velint victum captum in bello victoris servum
fieri.

It is a Law of perpetuity ( says Zenophon) observed amongst men, that when a
Town or City that held out the Assailants is surprised, whatsoever is found
therein is due to them that took the same, as well the persons as their whole
substance; whose opinion herein Aristotle follows, Polit. 40. And St. Ambrose
lib. 1. de Patriarch. writes, That the prey of the King of Sodom was in like
sort in the power of Abraham that conquered him.

This custom has been also observed, That to ask leave to bury the slain in
the time of open hostility, and whilst men are in Arms in the Field, or depart
the Field after Battle, is a kind of yielding of victory: for it beseems not
them that won the Battle to seek any thing of the enemy by way of entreaty.
Like as also the unwillingness to join Battle, and protraction or delay of
Battle was taken for a yielding of Victory.

And now we will begin with Examples of bearing such things in Coat Armor,
whereby Martial Discipline and Order, which we have now discoursed of, are
preserved; whereof some are for show, other for sound.

The Field is Jupiter, three Banners disvelloped in Bend, Sol. Virgilius Solis
notes this for the Arms of the Kingdom of Baldachia. Disvelloping is the
proper term for spreading or displaying of this Martial Ensign, as Wyrley
notes in the life and death of the Capitol de Bur, saying, With threatening Ax
in hand I was at hand; and my disvelloped Penon me before, etc.

Very behoveful are these Ensigns for every particular Band of Foot and Troop
of Horse, to the end they may know whither to draw together in expectance of
the command of their Captain for the performance of all occasions; and that
they may by them be directed after any conflict or skirmish, whither to retire
themselves without danger: they also serve for the manifest distinguishing of
Bands and Companies. And by these they are all directed in their Services, as a
Ship is guided through the forcible and violent surges of the Seas, by the
benefit of her Helm and a skilful Pilot guiding the same.

The Ensigns that the Romans anciently used^ were of diverse shapes: the Eagle
fixed on the top of a Pike or Pole was the chief; but that they had Penons or
Flags also, appears by Lazius, who says they were called vexilla, a velis
navium, from the Sails of Ships, which they resembled, being so named tanquam
minus velum, as it were a little Sail.

He bears Azure, four Spears in Bend garnished with Penoncles dexter-ways,
counterly surmounted of as many other like, Argent. This Coat was born
quarterly by Laz, van Schwendi, a Dutchman. These Penoncles made of certa^n
small pieces of Taffata or Sarcenet, cut after the form of a Peno^, wherewith
Martial men do oftentimes adorn their Spears and Lances, which albeit of
themselves they be things of no moment; yet do they very often (like as also
Banners do) astonish the Enemy through their continual motion: forasmuch as
they are evermore wafting and wavering in the wind, whereby they do so occupy
the enemies eye, as that it breeds a terror in the mind of their foes,
through a conceived opinion, that those that come against them (being all
Troops of Horsemen that use this kind of Spear) are of a far greater number
than indeed they are, as Wyrley in his said Book notes, saying, To
Cockerel-ward we light into the way,
Where we beheld the Foe-mates proud display;
So many Banners wafting in the Air,
They seemed twice the number that they were.


These foresaid Instruments serve for direction on and order to the eye, and by
show. To these Ensigns thus born in the Field in time of Battle either expected
or acted, we may add this known Ensign of premonstration of eminent hostile
invasion, which is the fired Becacon, which gives a sudden warning of instant
intended attempt or invasion of Enemies, the notice whereof gives occasion of
the firing of the Beacon: whereupon a Gentleman of good reputation chose to
bear for his Impress, upon a Mount a Beacon fired, with this Motto annexed, Sic
periisse juvat; meaning to die for his Countries safety was his desire. The
bearing in Arms of three of these fired Beacons appears in this next Example.

He bears Sable, 3 Beacons fired, Or, the flames proper, by the Name of
Dauntre. As touching the name of Beacons, it seems to be a Saxon word,
derived fron the Saxon word Becuian, which signifies to call by sign or to
beckon, as we use the word at this day, and thereof are they called Beacons.
Before the time of King Edward the Third, they were made of great stacks of
wood; but about the eleventh year of his reign, he ordained that there should
be in Kent high Standards with their Pitch-pans on the top of them. Lambert's
Perambulation of Kent, page 69. Now I will present to your view some Examples
of the bearing in Coat Armor such Military Instruments which direct more
distinctly by sound.

He bears Gules, a Drum in Fess between three Drum-sticks erected, Argent.
The Drum is of frequent use (with diverse Nations) in the Field. The Parthians
for this purpose have great Kettledrums, hollow within, and about them they do
hang little Bells and Copper-rings, all which sounding together, do make a
noise much like a dead sound mingled with the braying and bellowing of a wild
Beast. This Instrument as it serves for direction, so likewise is it of use in
drowning the fearful cries of wounded and dying men, lest that ghastly noise
should daunt the hearts of the Soldiers. Zisca that renowned Captain of the
Bohemians, being sick to death, willed his Soldiers to pluck off his skin, and
to make a Drum of it, assuring them that when their Enemies should hear the
sound of it, they would fly before their face.

There is manifold uses of the Drum, Fife, Trumpet, and other Musical
Instruments used in Martial Affairs, inasmuch as they serve not only for the
direction of Companies and Troops, but also of the whole Army in their
Marchings, Encampings, Risings, Assaults, Retreats, etc. but also to dead and
drown the cries of the maimed and wounded, and to stir up valor and courage in
the Soldiers to the fierce encountering and assaulting of the Enemy: and for
these ends was the use of them ordained in wars, to which purpose do these
Instruments much avil, Sonus enim cornuum and tubarum (in praeliis) magnum vim
habet ad spiritus, and sanguinem evocandum. For it is not with men as it is
with beasts, which can stir up courage in themselves, as I have before showed:
For men in respect of fear and faint courage, are hardly provoked to fight,
therefore had they need to be drawn on and provoked thereto.

He bears Argent, a Cheveron engrailed between three Trumpets, Sable, by the
Name of Thunder. This Coat Armor stands in a Glass-window in St. Peter's
Church in Drogheda in Ireland. God himself vouchsafed to give direction to
Moses for the making of this kind of Instrument, saying, Make thee two Trumpets
of silver, of an whole piece shall thou make them, that thou may use them
for the Assembly of the Congregation, and for the departure of the Camp, Numb.
10. 12. and ibid. 14. But if ye blow an Alarm, then the Camp of them that pitch
on the East part shall go forward, Ibid. 15. If ye blow an Alarm the second
time, then the host of them that lie on the South side shall march; for they
shall blow an Alarm when they remove. So that the sound of the Trumpet is but
as the loud and far-reaching voice of the General: and though the Trumpet fight
not, yet it does more than many others, because it encourages them to the
fight.

He bears Ruby, 3 Clarions, Topaz. This is the Coat Armor of the Right
Honorable John Earl of Bathe, Visc. Greenvile of Landsdown, Baron Greenvile of
Kilhampton and Bidiford, Lord Warden of the Stanneries, High Steward of the
Duchy of Cornwall, Lord Lieutenant of the Counties of Cornwall and Devon,
Governor of Plymouth, Groom of the Stool, first Gentleman of his Majesty's
Bedchamber, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.

These Clarions are sometimes described Rests: but whether they be understood
to be the Rudder, or from the Name to be a thing whereon to rest their Lances,
I know not; but am rather induced to believe them to be Instruments used in
Battle and Tournaments, as we do Trumpets: For I find Robert Consul's Coat,
base Son to Henry the first, blazoned Clarions of these very colors: And in
many old Descriptions of Tilting, we find the Knights to come in with Clarions
sounding before them.

He bears Azure, three Fluits in Bend, Argent. This Instrument seems to
have been invented, for the quiet settling and composing the Soldiers minds
before the fight. And some such did the Lacedaemonians use, who (says Plutarch)
being ready to join Battle, did first Sacrifice, and then all adorned with
Garlands sung a Martial Song, their King marching with the whole Army in
admirable quiet and composed order. But the Sybarites were not so happy in the
use of such music; for themselves being altogether given to wantonness and
pleasure, all their Gentry taught their Horses to dance at the sound of Musical
Instruments; which their Enemies having notice of, being then in the Field and
ready to join, they commanded a noise of Music in the Front of the Army to
sound, whereupon the Sybarites Horses fell all a dancing, and overthrew their
Riders, whereby their Enemies departed Conquerours. And thus much for
Instruments of Military Order, either for eye or ear.

CHAP. XIV.
THE next are such things as serve for execution of order, which is the final
end for which Military Profession is instituted, viz. propulsation, or revenge
of wrong, or for foiling the wrong-doer, refusing to give satisfaction to the
party grieved. And as in the Law Politic, so in this Law Military, Execution
is reckoned the soul thereof. To the accomplishment of execution of order,
sundry sorts of weapons are requisite: some invasive or offensive, others
defensive; the one to protect our selves, the other to impeach our foes. And of
these invasives will we speak in the first place; beginning with those which we
call Missilia, such as are cast or forced by strength of hand, or slight of
Engine: and after we will come to such as are manual, or managed with the hand.

He bears Argent, a Culvering dismounted in Fess, Sable, by the Name of
Leigh. Before the invention of Guns, many sorts of weapons, as well invasive as
defensive were devised, which (says Munster) by the space of every hundred
years have admitted alteration twice or thrice, like as also the Armor
wherewith our bodies are covered and fenced. But one says that it was the
Devil himself, who invented this hellish Instrument for confusion of mankind.
Indeed it was a Monk who first invented Gunpowder. And I have read, that the
first founder of these huge great Pieces was himself slain with the breaking of
one of them. A certain Captain was wont to call the mouth of the great Gun
Hell-mouth; and said, that he who trembled not when one of them thundered, did
fear neither God nor the Devil.

There are diverse sorts of these kind of Guns, but I shall only show you an
Example of bearin of one other sort of them called Chambers; of which you may
here see three born with an interposition of one Ordinary surmounted of another
between them.

He bears Argent, a Cheveron, Sable, surmounted of another, Ermyn, between
three Chambers, placed transverse the Escocheon of the second, fired, proper,
by the Name of Chambers.

Whether the invention hereof were behoveful and necessary, or (as others
reckon it) most pernicious and devilish, I will not take upon to dispute, but
referr you to Sebastian Munster, lib. 3. of his Cosmography, where he makes
mention of Bertholdus Swartz the Monk that first devised them, Anno Dom. 1354.

The Field is Sapphire, three murdering Chainshots, Topaz. This Coat Armor was
born by the Right Honorable the Earl of Cumberland, next to his Paternal Coat;
and it is thought to be an augmentation. Some have taken these to be the heads
of Clubs called Holy Water sprinkles; other suppose them to be Balls of
Wildfire; I rather think them to be some murdering Chain-shot. Amadaeus Duke
of Savoy gave two staves topt with Wildfire, with this word Iactae crescimus.

He bears Argent, a Fess, Sable, three Ogresses or Pellets in Chief, proper,
by the Name of Langley.

There I tell not the Color of these Ogresses or Pellets, because they be
always Sable, as shall be more plainly showed in the conclusion of this fourth
Section.

He bears Argent, a Fess, Sable, two Pellets in Chief, and one Martlet of the
second in Base. This was the Coat Armor of Henry Lee, one of the Captains of
the City of London. How proper it is for a Martial Commander to bear in his
Armorial Ensigns such Military Instruments, I shall not need to prove by
strength of Argument, dum res ipsa loquitur.

He bears Argent, on a Fess, Gules, between two Matches kindled, proper, a
Martlet, Or. This Coat Armor pertains to the Family of Leet of Southoo in
Huntingtonshire, descended from the Leets of Suffolk. To this head must be
referred all other the appurtenances of great and small Ordnance, as Scoups,
Ladles, Spunges, Flasques, Touch-boxes, etc.

He bears Argent, a Swepe, Azure, charged with a Stone, Or, by the Name of
Magnall. This was an Engine of war, in fashion seeming like to that which the
Brewers use to draw water withal, and therefore we call it a Swepe as they do.
With this Engine they used in ancient time to throw great stones into the Towns
and Fortifications of the Enemy. Some such Instrument did Vzziah King of
Jerusalem use among many others for the defense of the City against the
assaults of the Philistims, as appears where it is said, And he made very
Artificial Engines in Jerusalem, to be set upon the Towers and upon the Corners
to shoot Arrows and Stones, etc. These are called Engines for the ingenious and
witty inventions of them, wherein former Ages were so exquisite, as that
Archimede could draw up the enemies Ships from the Water.

The Field is Pearl, three battering Rams, Barr-ways, proper, headed, Sapphire,
armed and garnished, Topaz. This is the Paternal Coat Armor of the Right
Honorable Robert Berty Earl of Lindsey, Baron Willoughby of Eresby, Lord Great
Chamberlain of England, Gentleman of the Bedchamber, and Privy Counselor to
his Majesty King Charles the Second, and Lord Lieutenant of the County of
Lincoln, etc.

This Coat is also born by his Lordships Brother by another venture, the Right
Honorable James Lord Norris, Baron of Rycot in Oxfordshire, etc. As also by
Capt. Bertue of Secretary to the Right Honorable Thomas Earl of Latimer, Lord
High Treasurer of England.

This battering Ram was a warlike Instrument much used by the Romans, when they
besieged any City or Hold with purpose to surprise them. Such an Engine
(amongst diverse others) did Titus Vespatianus erect against the City of
Jerusalem, which were by Josephus and his Associates consumed with fire. Such
is the force of this Engine, as that there is no Tower so strong, or Circuit of
a City so spacious, but if that they resist the first brunt thereof, through
often use they will be subverted.

He bears Ermyn, a Cross-bow, bent in Pale, Gules, by the name of Arblaster,
quasi Arcubalista. This Instrument Military (says Polydore) was first devised
by the Cretians. And in former Ages was called in Latin Scorpio; and out of
this they used to shoot stones, as Ammianus Marcellinus notes, saying, Et
Scorpiones quocunque manus perite duxissent, rotundos Lapides evibrabant.

He bears Ermyn, three long Bows bent in Pale, Gules, by the Name of Bows.
This kind of Bow is called in Latin Arcus, ab arcendo, of keeping the Enemy
aloof, and not permitting him to approach near to us, by darting (as it were)
out of the Arrows, whereby we do gall, wound or kill them afar off. This is a
Military Instrument of the Missile sort, and that not of the meanest rank, if
we considerately peruse the Histories of former Ages; for we shall find more
Set-battels fought, and famous Victories achieved by English men with Bows and
Arrows, than any Nation of Christendom has obtained by any one Instrument
whatsoever, without exception. But this weapon alone suffices not of it self
to perform any action, but with the Arrows assistance, whereof you have an
Example in this next Escocheon.

He bears Azure, three broad Arrows, Or, by the Name of Archer; and is the
Coat Armor of Thomas Archer of Vmberslade in the County of Warwick, Esquire.

Gules, three broad Arrows, Or, feathered and headed, Argent, by the Name of
Hales, a Family of good Antiquity in Kent, where now resideth Sir Edward Hales
of Tunstall Baronet. Sir Robert Hales of Beaksborne, Baronet, and Edward Hales
of Chilstone in Bocton-Malherb, Esquire.

The Arrow is called in Latin Sagitta (as some do conceit it) quasi satis
ictus, for that it annoyeth and galleth the Enemy far enough off, so as he
cannot approach the Archer to endammage him, because by the smart delivery of
the Bow the Enemy is put to hazard a great way off: others would have it called
(and not unaptly) quod sagax sit ictus ejus, for that the same being directed
by the hand of a cunning and skilful Archer does cleave the pinn or mark
oftentimes in two, though the same be but of a small scantling.

He bears Sable, a Cheveron engrailed between 3 Arrows, Argent, by the Name
of Forster; and is the Coat of Sir Humphrey Forster of Aldermaston in
Barkshire, Baronet.

The Arrow is reckoned one of the number of weapons destinated to avengement,
as appears Deuteronomy. 32. 42. I will make mine Arrows drunk with blood (and my
sword shall eat flesh) with the blood of the slain and of the Captains, when I
begin to take vengeance of the Enemy.

Sometimes you shall find both these Martial weapons born together in one
Escocheon, as in this next appears.

The Field is Sable, two long Bows bent in Pale, the strings counterposed, Or,
between as many sheaves of Arrows, banded, Argent. This Coat stands in Kirton
Church in Devonshire. This sort of bearing may signify a man resolved to abide
the uttermost hazard of Battle, and to that end has furnished himself to the
full, as well with Instruments of Ejaculation, as also of retention. The Bow
and Arrows in former Ages have won more glory to this Kingdom than any other
sort of Soldiery whatsoever, as the renowned Victories obtained in France do
well testify. There is yet another form of bearing of Arrows diverse from
these, as in Example.

He bears Argent, a Quiver, Gules, banded and replenished with Arrows, Or,
between three Pheons, Sable. This Coat was quartered by Lloyd of Hollyrood
Ampuey in the County of Gloucester. It was a custom amongst the Persians, when
they went to warfare, every man to cast an Arrow into a Chest ordained for that
purpose, and placed before the Throne of their King: and at their return every
one to take his own shaft, that so by the number of the Arrows remaining, the
number of the deceased might be certainly known.

The Field is Argent, two Bars, Sable, on a Canton of the Second, a Pheon of
the first. This was the Paternal Coat Armor of Sir John Bingley, Knight.

The Pheon is the head of an Instrument of the Missile sort, which we call a
Dart, the same being a long and light staff headed after this manner, and
having a thong fastened to the midst thereof, for the more sleighty and
strong forcing the same against the Enemy to keep or annoy him afar off. This
is called in Latin Iaculum, quia e longinquo jaciatur; it pierces speedily,
and makes a large wound, by reason of the wide-spreading barbs thereof. The
bearing of Pheons is both ancient and commendable.

He bears Argent, a Fess between three Pheons, Sable, by the Name of Rowdon
or Raudon (for I find it written both ways, and that anciently. This is a
Yorkshire Family, and was resident at Rawdon or Roudon, as appears by diverse
Deeds in the time of Richard the Second, Henry the Sixth, and Henry the Eighth.

He bears Sable, a Fess, Ermyn, between three Pheons, Argent, by the Name of
Egerton. This is the Paternal Coat Armor of Randolph Egerton of Betley in
Staffordshire, Esquire first Lieutenant and Major of his Majesty's own Troop of
Guards, under the Command of his Grace James Duke of Monmouth.

The Field is Argent, on a Fess, Gules, between three Pheons, Sable, a Lion
passant, Or. This was the Coat Armor of Marmaduke Rowdon, one of the Captains
of the City of London. And now this next Example will show you a Charge
somewhat like unto this Pheon; yet differs it much from it in name, and in
the fashion also, if you observe it with a curious eye, as it well becomes a
good Blazoner to do.

He bears Vert, on a Cheveron, Argent, 3 barbed Arrow-heads, Sable, by the
name of Kemys; and is now born by Sir Charles Kemys of Kevenmabley in
Glamorganshire, Baronet.

And hitherto of Missils: we now come to Manuals. Weapons Manual are so called,
because manu tractantur, they are managed by the hand; when by the use of them
we do assail our foes, or put away proffered wrong, by encountering or grapling
with them at handy strokes. Such are these that follow, and their like.

He bears Argent, a Sword in Pale, by the Name of Dymock. The Sword is a
weapon fitted for execution and vengeance, as we may see Deuteronomy. 32. 41. If I
whet my glittering Sword, and mine hand take hold on judgment, I will render
vengeance to mine enemies, and will reward them that hate me. Furthermore it is
said, Ier. 46. 10. For the Sword shall devour, and it shall be satiate and made
drunk with their blood; for the Lord God of Hosts has a Sacrifice in the North
Country by the River Perath.

The Field is Gules, three Swords in Pale, Argent, an Inescocheon of the
second, charged with a sinister hand couped at the wrist as the first. This was
the Paternal Coat Armor of Sir Simon Clark of Salford in the County of
Warwick, Knight and Baronet, sometime Cofferer to King James, who deriveth his
descent from Anketell de Wood-Church in the County of Kent.

He bears Gules, three Swords conjoined at the Pomels in Fess, their points
extended into the corners of the Escocheon, Argent, by the Name of Stapleton.
The Galateans in stead of ordinary Swords, used a kind of two-handed or bastard
long-sword, which they fastened with Chains to their right sides. A like manner
of fastening our Swords to our right sides was in use with our Horsemen in
England in the time of King Edward the Third, as may be seen by the great Seal
then used. It is a reproachful thing for a Knight to be disarmed of his Sword
in Battle; Quia si gladio spoliaretur, omnem perderet honorem militiae and
Privilegium.

He bears Azure, three Swords, one in Pale point upward, surmounted of the
other two, placed Saltire-ways points downward, Argent, by the Name of Norton.
A certain Laconian, when his Son found fault with his Sword that it was too
short, made his Answer, Idcirco parvum datur forti viro, ut addat gressum;
Therefore is a short Sword given to a man of courage, that he may lengthen the
same with a step. Meaning thereby, that because his Sword was short, he should
approach so much the nearer to his Enemy, and so might he make the same long
enough; so may he buckle with him hand to hand, and perhaps wrest the weapon
out of the Adversaries hand, to his great credit: Gloriosum enim est victoriae
genus, ab eo cum quo decertas Arma capere, It is a praiseworthy thing for a
man to bereave or despoil his enemy of his Arms or Weapons; yea, so glorious is
it reckoned, as that many men having possessed themselves with their enemies
weapons, either by surprise or slaughter, have used the same and none other all
the days of their life; as appears (in part) 1 Maccab. 3. 12. So Judas took
their spoils, and took also Apolonius 's Sword, and fought with it all his life
long.

Which is a good Sword Seneca shows in these words, Gladium bonum dices, non
cui deauratus est baltheus, nec cui vagina ge^mis distinguitur, sed cui ad
secandum subtilis est acies.

He bears Sable, 3 Swords in Pale, two with their points downward, and the
middlemost upwards, by the name of Rawline. There are besides these diverse
other forms of bearing of Swords, as three Swords points in point, in Bend,
Bar, etc. I find another Coat of like Charge and Name, but diversely born from
this; as by Example appears in this next Escocheon.

He bears Gules, 3 Swords extended Barnways, their points toward the dexter
part of the Escocheon, Argent, the Hilts and Pomels, Or, by the Name of Chute,
and is the bearing of Chaloner Chute of the Vine in Hantshire, Esquire. a worthy
Successor of his Fathers Virtues, who was a Gentleman of much eminence and
knowledge in his practice of the Laws.

The Field is Sable, three Swords Barr-ways, their points toward the sinister
part of the Escocheon, Argent, the Hilts and Pomels, Or, a Cressant for a
difference, by the Name of Rawlyns; and is the Coat of Thomas Rawlyns of
Kilreege in the Parish of Langarran in Herefordshire, Esquire This Coat is also
born by Robert Rawlyns of the Middle Temple, Esquire

As touching the invention of Swords, Polydore Virg. says their use was found
out by the Lacedemonian. The Romans in their Saturnalian Feasts, amongst other
Exercises used the game of Sword-playing, to the end that in time of Peace they
being accustomed to behold Fighting, Wounds, and Swords, might be the less
discouraged, when they see the feats of Arms in the Field against the Enemy;
and therefore the Chiestain or General of the Host was to exhibit to the
people a game of Fence or Sword-playing.

The Field is Gules, a Cross between four Swords, Argent, the Pomels and Hilts,
Or. This Coat was given to Sir John Philipot Knight. sometime Lord Mayor of London
(and used with his ancient Arms, which are Sable, a Bend, Ermyn) for a Coat of
Augmentation. For this Sir John Philipott at his own charges set forth a Fleet
of Ships in the Year 1378. (which was in the second year of King Richard the
Second) and scoured the Seas, at that time so forely infested with Pirates, that
the Merchants Ships could not traffic in safety. Mr. Cambden in his Britannia
sets forth, That he like a good Patriot of his Country, surprised John Mercer
a Scottish Rover, and all the Robble of his Adherents, besides fifteen Sail of
Spanish Ships richly freighted with Merchandise, which they had taken as prize,
whereof he made no other use bu^ to give supply to his Sovereign; for he
maintained one thousand men in the Kings wars in France, and performed many
pious and laudable works in his life time, and ordained many more by his last
Will extant in the Registers of Hoysting, London. King Richard the Second
rewarded his good Service with a grant of forty pounds of yearly Revenue of
Land escheated to the Crown, yet in the possession of Sir John Philipott his
next Heir in Philpott-Lane in London; and made him Knight in Smithfield, when
he rewarded Sir William Walworth Mayor of London with that Order at the same
time, when he vanquished that arch Rebel of Kent, Wat Tyler. He builded a fair
Chapel at his Manor of Granch in Gillingham in Kent, which Manor is a Member
of the Cinque Ports, which he bequeathed to his second Son, from whom descended
Captain Thomas Philipott, that valiantly maintained a Challenge in the Low
Countries against Captain Debee that had wickedly depraved our late Queen
Elizabeth, and slew the said Debee in the single Combat. And from another Son
of Sir John Philipott is descended Captain Thomas Philipott of Apston-Hall in
Hertfordshire, not far from Woodhall Philipotts, the ancient Seat of this
Family, who by following the wars in Queen Elizabeth's days at an expensive
rate, was constrained to alienate those Lands. Sir John Philipott, now one of
the Justices of the Common Pleas in Ireland, but born in Kent, is branched from
those of Gillingham aforesaid. I have seen some Evidences which do persuade me
to believe that the Lands now belonging to Sir John Philipott, the chief of
this House at Stepney nigh London, came to his Ancestors by marriage with the
sister of Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury. The Swords are the truest
Emblems of Military Honor, and should incite the Bearers to a just and
generous pursuit of Honor and Virtue in Warlike ways, especially when they
intend the defense of the Christian Faith, denoted sufficiently in the Cross,
as here in this Coat. Much might be spoken here of the bearing of the Sword, it
being an Emblem of Government and Justice, and born before the King, God's
Lieutenant; and in other places to honor Lieutenants to the King's Majesty:
But of a bearing so apt to be displaied I need say no more.

He bears Azure, a Curtelax in bend, proper, garnished, Or. This Coat
pertains to the Family of Tatnall in the County of Chester; and is now born
by William Tatton of Withenshaw, Esquire. The old Britains our Ancestors, were wont
to wear a short and broad Sword; so did the Spartans also, whom, when one of
their Enemies mocked for so curted a Weapon, it was replied, That it was not so
short, but it could reach into their hearts as often as they met in the Field.

He bears Azure, three Lances in Bend, Or, armed, Argent, by the Name of
Carlowe. It was a custom amongst the Romans, when they did undertake any lawful
wars, after denial of restitution demanded of things unlawfully taken, or
satisfaction for wrongs offered, that the King of Arms (to whom the denouncing
of Battle and Defiance did properly appertain) should amongst other Ceremonies,
throw a Spear headed with Iron, imbrued with blood, and scorched with fire,
into the Soil of that people against whom such war was denounced; to notify
unto them, that they would severely prosecute them with fire and force for the
wrong by them committed.

He bears barrey of six, Argent and Gules, three Crescents, Ermyn, on a Chief
of the second two Lances in Saltire, their heads broken off, Or. This was the
Coat Armor of William Watson Esquire. sometime Keeper of the Store of the
Ordnance, as well of those in the Tower of London, as of these belonging to the
Navy; who was Grandfather to those five Brothers, viz, William Watson of
Frendesbury in the County of Kent; John Watson of Wolpett in Suffolk; Richard
and Norton Watson both of London; and Thomas Watson one of the Clerks of his
Majesty's Court of Kings Bench.

He bears Argent, on a quarter, Gules, a Spear in bend, Or, by the Name of
Knight, Hybern. It was the manner of the Romans to bestow Spears upon the
valiant and well deserving Soldiers in recompense of their acceptable service
performed. To this end and purpose (as Festus Pompeius supposes) because the
Spear is the perfection of Martial Affairs and Imperial Jurisdiction: and for
that it was a custom to make sale of Captives under the same; as also to make
them, and such Soldiers as had transgressed the Military Discipline (whereupon
they were disarmed of their Military Belt, and received the ignominious name of
Discincti) to pass the yoke; the first, for that they were brought into
subjection by force; the other, for transgression of the Laws Military.

This yoke consists of three Spears, whereof two were pitched upright, and
the third was bound cross-ways to them both; under this yoke were both enforced
to pass, that their reproach might be the greater.

Before a man shall go about to buckle with his enemies, it behooves that the
Army be fully furnished, and provided with all sorts of Military Provisions
both defensive and offensive, by the example of Vzziah King of Judah; of whom
it is said,

Uzziah had also an host of fighting men that went out to war by bands
according to the count of their number under the hand of Jeiel, etc.

And Uzziah prepared them throughout all the host shields, and spears, and
helmets, and brigandines, and bows, and stones to sling, 2 Chronicles. 26. 11, 14.

He bears Argent, three Spears heads, Gules, a Chief, Azure. This Coat Armor
belongs to Robert Reyce of Preston in the County of Suffolk, Esquire a worthy
Gentleman, whose great charge and care in collecting and preserving the
Antiquities of that County merits a large Encomium. The Spears heads being apt
and ready to pierce according to the opinion of some Authors betokens a
dexterity and nimbleness of wit to penetrate and understand matters of highest
consequence.

As concerning the quantity or weight of Spears heads, we find them in all Ages
answerable to the strength of the persons that were to manage them: So we read
that the Spearhead of Golias, that encountered with David, weighed six hundred
shekels of Iron, which was correspondent to his Spear, that was resembled for
bigness to a Weaver's beam; as also to the hugeness of his stature, which was
six Cubits and a hands breadth, 1 Samuel, 17. 4. Also we read of Ishhibenob the
son of Haraphah (of the race of the Giants) whose head of his spear weighed
three hundred shekels of brass, even he being girded with a new sword thought
to have slain David.

Argent, on a Chief, Vert, two Spears heads of the Field, gutte de sang, by the
Name of Brodrick; and is the Paternal Coat Armor of Sir Allen Brodrick of
Wandsworth in the-County of Surrey, Knight.

He bears Sable, a Cheveron between 3 Spears heads, Argent, their points
embrued, proper, by the Name of Morgan. Alexander the great compared an Army
without a good Captain to a Spear without a strong head: for that as the shaft
of the Spear could have little force without the head, though it be much larger
than it; so the greatest Army can little avail without the foreguidance of a
valiant Leader.

Now I shall, I hope, without any great breach of Method, demonstrate the
bearing in Armory of some part of a Tilt-spear or Tilt-stave, call it which you
please: which kind of weapon or instrument, although it be not of any use in
the wars; yet the well managing thereof makes a man the more expert for
Military Service on Horsback, and therefore may challenge to be ranked among
Martial weapons managed with the hand.

He bears Sable, a Cheveron, Ermyn, between three Cronels of a Tilt-spear,
Argent, by the Name of Wiseman. These Cronels or Coronets (for I find them
called by both these names) are the Iron heads of Tilt-spears, or Tilt-staves,
which usually have six or eight Mourns (for so are those little piked things
called which are on the top or head of this Cronel or Coronet) three of which
appear in each of these, the other three which are not here seen, cannot be
demonstrated by the Art of Cutting or painting. Some have termed, or rather
mistermed these Cronels, Burrs; for the confutation of which Error, I have
caused the true Figure of a Tilt-staff or Tilt-spear to be here presented unto
your view without the Vamplet.

A shows unto you the Burr, which is a broad Ring of Iron behind the hand, or
place made for the hand; which Burr is brought unto the Rest, when the Tilter
charge his Spear or Staff. B shows the hand, or place for the hand. C
demonstrateth the Cronel, ^ronet, or Coronet, which occasioneth this Discourse;
and this next Figure makes plain unto you what the Vamplet of a Tilt-spear or
Tilt-staff is.

This Vamplet demonstrated by the Letter D is of steel, and is used for the
safeguard of the Tilters hand, and is taken off, and put on to the Staff or
Spear at pleasure.

And for the further clearing of this point it is expressed in the Charge, from
the Master of the Armory to the Yeoman of the Tilt-staves, thus,

Tilt-staves with Coronets and Burrs Serviceable -- Unserviceable --


Vamplets Serviceable. -- To be repaired. Unserviceable. --
Expressing the particular numbers of every of them.

And in an ancient Book remaining in the Office of Arms, I find Wiseman's Coat
blazoned, a Cheveron between three Cronels.

I could here, if it would suit with my intended brevity, enter into a large
Discourse of the Noble and Knight-like exercise of Tilting, which is the School
of Chivalry and Horsemanship, without the knowledge whereof the Horseman in the
wars can do little good service.

Tilting is called Hippomachia from the Greek words (...), i. Equus, and (...),
i. pugna: it is also called by the Latins Ludus militaris, or Ludus Trojae;
for Troy was the place where it was first invented, as some are of opinion.

Diverse Statutes and Ordinances have been made by the Commandments of former
Kings of this Realm concerning Royal Justs and Tiltings within this Kingdom,
which do sufficiently prove their former use to have been more frequent than
now they are; and it is much to be wished that this Royal and Honorable
exercise might be more frequently practiced, to which none are to be admitted
as Actors by the ancient Ordinances, but such as are well known unto the King
of Arms of that Province where it is to be performed, to be Gentlemen of
Coat Armor, Blood, and Descent: But no more of this at this time, which
deserves rather a Volume than a Page, for setting out its due commendation and
antiquity.

He bears Argent, three Bills in Pale, Sable, by the Name of Gibbs. These are
taken by some to be Danish Hatchets. To this Head must be referred all Glaves,
Partisans, Clubs, Pole-axes, and whatsoever other Weapons of like kind,
wherewith we do either assail or repulse our Enemies by encountering them at
handy strokes. The brown Bill is a not able weapon for execution, and has been
of great use in Military Services, but now near antiquitated, if not
altogether, since the Muskot and Caliver have come in use.

He bears Sable, three Scaling Ladders in Bend, Argent, by the Name of
Shipstowe.

To this Head must all other Martial Instruments of these natures (not hitherto
handled) be reduced, whether they pertain to order and direction, or else to
execution, and bestowed under their particular Heads, according to their
propriety of their several kinds.

CHAP. XV.
OF weapons invasive or offensive we have formerly discoursed: Now come we to
the handling of the other member, comprehending weapons defensive bo^ in
Coat Armor. Of these some do serve for defense only, others serve both for
defense and habit also. Of the former sort are such as next ensue, and their
like.

He bears Argent, three Escocheons, Sable. This was the Coat Armor of Sir
John de Loudham or Lowdham, Knight. owner of the Manor of Lowdham in Suffolk in
the time of Edward the Third: It is now quartered by the beforementioned
Samuel Bleverhasset Esquire. now Lord of the same Manor. Unto Dame Ione, the
Relict of this Sir John Loudham, did Sir Edmond de Vfford Knight. brother of Robert
de Vfford Earl of Suffolk, Sir Robert Bacon Knight. and Robert de Prestone, by
their Deed with their several Seals of their Arms thereunto affixed, release in
the two and fortieth year of Edward the Third, their right in certain Lands,
etc. in Herksteed, Holbroke, Wolferston, and other Towns in Suffolk.

He bears Or, a Barrulet between two bars Gemews, Gules, three Escocheons,
Verrey, by the Name of Gamolle. This was the Coat Armor of Alanus de Gamoll
Knight. that lived about the time of Edward the Third King of England. By occasion
of which name I am put in mind of a Gentleman of the same name, but of diverse
Family, as may appear by his Coat Armor, the same being Or, three Maliets,
Sable; of whom I find mention in an Inquisition taken in the County of Chester,
Anno 13. Edward. 3. in haec verba; Compertum est, quod Henricus Filipnham de
Gamul tenet dimidium unius feodi militis in Storton, etc. From whom is
descended Edmond Gamull Esquire one of the Aldermen of the City of Chester: whose
endeavors and furtherance to the Commonwealth there deserves a memorable
recordation, as well in respect of his particular actions, as the good example
he shall leave to aftercomers of like merit.

He bears Or, three Escocheons barrey of six, Verrey and Gules, by the Name
of Mounchensey. A Lacedemonian Dame, having a son entering into Military
Profession, at his departure gave him a Shield, and therewithal used these
words, Fili aut hunc, aut super hunc. Thereby admonishing him briefly so to
bear himself in battle, that either he should return with Victory, bringing his
Shield with him, or should valiantly die, and so be brought home dead upon the
same. Touching signs in ancient times depicted upon Shields, Vegetius has
these words; Ne Milites aliquando in tumultu praelij a contubernalibus
aberrarent, diversis cohortibus diversa in scutis signa pingebant, quae ipsi
nominabant digmata, sicut etiam nunc moris est: Praeterea in adverso scuto
uniuscujusque Militis literis erat nomen adscriptum, addito ex qua esset
cohorte, quave Centuria. These Shields are merely for defense.

Touching the variety of Shields or defensible weapons and their uses, we read
that the Roman Captains or Leaders had their light harnessed Soldiers on foot,
armed only with Sword and Target, and were called Rorarij; whose Office was
with a light skirmish to give the first onset on the enemy, to see if they
could force them to remove their first station, and so make way for the
Horsemen, sicut Ros ante gelu, as the dew or moist goes before the frost, Alex.
genesis dierum. lib. 6. page 369.

This sort of Soldiers were highly rewarded of Kings, in regard of their bold
adventure in bearing the first brunt of the battle. Of these some were called
Peltati, because they were armed with a kind of Shield or Target like to a
Half Moon; some Cetrati, for that they were armed with light Targets or
Bucklers after the Spanish or Africa fashion.

Ca^us Marius did prohibit his Soldiers the bearing of slight and small
Targets, in regard of their unserviceable use.

After that Romulus had made a League with Tatius King of the Sabines, the
Romans laying aside the Grecian Shield (which formerly they used) assumed the
Sabine Shield; and Romulus did interchange Armours with the Sabines, and
continued the use of them It is a thing that has been of some men holden for
an infallible observation, that all Nations do change (if not the form of
Martial Discipline) their Military weapons at the least, once in the space of
an hundred years upon some one occasion or other.

Among the Germans it was holden a thing so ignominious for a man to lose his
Shield in fight, as nothing could be more reproachful; insomuch as he that was
found culpable therein was excluded from all Sacred Rites and Common Councils;
yea, so odious was it holden amongst them, as ^^at many (having escaped the
battle) were branded with this public infamy, and being unable to sustain so
great reproach, have hanged themselves.

Amongst the Romans it was in use oftentimes to lay their Children new born in
Shields instead of Cradles; because they held it a presage of future fortitude
and valor in the Child. So we read that Hercules, who exceeded all other of
that Age in Fortitude, was rocked in a Shield.

A certain Lacedemonian skirmishing with his Enemy, and having his Sword drawn,
and spying some advantage thereto, was minded to have run him through therewith
instantly: the sign of retreat was given, whereupon he forbear; and being
demanded why he slew not his Enemy when it was in his power; he answered,
Melius est parere Imperatori, quam hostem occidere.

Moreover, as touching the Shield, we read that it was usual to hang them up in
Churches instead of Epitaphs, as is the use here amongst us at this day, though
not to that end, as is gathered by the words of Trebellius Pollio in the
History of Chaudius Caesar, where he says, Claudium Principem l^quor, cujus
vita, probitas and omnia quae in Repub. gessit tantam posteris famam dedere, ut
Senatus populusque Romanus novis eum honoribus post mortem affecerit. Illi
Clypeus aureus, vel ut Grammatici loquuntur, Clypeum aureum Senatus totius
Iudicio in Romana Curia collatum est, ut etiam nunc videtur expressa thorace
vultus Imago. Lazius lib. 9. 936.

Like as the Shield served in the battle for a defense and safeguard of the
body of Soldiers against blows and wounds: even so in time of peace, the same
being hanged up, it did shield and defend the owner against the malevolent
detractions of the envious sort, who do labor to deprave men's best actions,
they themselves never endeavoring any that were laudable; whereby they do
verify in themselves that most true, and no less approved saying of Lipsius,
Livor and invidia bonorum operum sunt impedimenta, aut venena: for if they
cannot hinder them from passing, they will labor to corrode them with their
venomous teeth of detraction after they be passed. Besides, these shields which
we call Arms suspense, do (withal) not only possess, but also beautify the
room with a Military Ornament; wherein each man's particular Arms are expressed
at this day, and the Helmets and Crests, consisting of Crowns, Horns, and Wings
of Fowls affixed upon them, are placed above the shields; Lazius lib. 9. 934.

Now will we exemplify such as are for defense and habit also.

He bears Argent, a Close Helmet, Gules, by the Name of Kingley. It was the
manner of the Romans in their warfare to cover the Habergions and Headpieces of
those that were called Levis armaturae milites, or light harnessed Soldiers
(whether they were Horse or Foot) with the skins of Bears; like as it was of
the ancient Grecians to cover their heads with Otters skins instead of Helmets;
and both of them to one end, namely, that thereby they should seem to be more
terrible and ghastly in the sight of their Enemies, and their Enemies eye being
occupied in admiration of the strangeness of such habits, they might be the
less able to attend their fight, and so (with more facility and less danger to
themselves) be the more easily overcome.

He bears Argent, three Helmets with their Bevers open, Sable, by the Name of
Miniet. The bearing of the Helmets after these several manners (to wit)
sometimes close bevered, and other whiles with their Bevers open, have their
several intendments; those of Action, and these of Cessation. So much briefly
of their diverse bearing, as for the present may suffice. Of the reasons of
such their bearings I shall have occasion to speak hereafter more fitly, when I
shall treat of the Achievements of the particular state of Dignities.

He bears Azure, three Helmets, Or, between two Bars, Argent, by the Name of
Armiger; and is the Coat Armor of Sir Clement Armiger of North-Creak in the
County of Norfolk, K^. as also of Gabriel Armiger of the said place, and of the
Inner Temple London, Esquire.

He bears Diamond, a Lion passant gardant, Topaz, between three Helmets,
Pearl. This is the Coat Armor of the Right Honorable James Earl of
Northampton, Baron Compton of Compton, Lord Lieutenant of the County of
Warwick, Constable of the Tower of London, and one of the Lords of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc. of which Family are several
worthy Branches.

He bears Gules, two Helmets in Chief, Argent, and a Wheatsheaf in base, Or,
by the Name of Cholmeley; and is the Coat of Sir Hugh Cholmeley of Whitby in
Yorkshire, Baronet; and is also born by Thomas Cholmeley, or Cholmondley, of
Vale Royal in Cheshire, Esquire.

He bears Argent, on a Bend, Gules, an Helmet in the dexter point. Or, by the
Name of Trayton. The Helmet thus placed, and being a chief part of Military
habit, may rather seem to be a reward for service than an ordinary charge, and
of it self may betoken wisdom as well as valor; as we may gather by the statue
or image of Minerva, whom the Poets do fain to be the Goddess of Wisdom, and
all good Arts and Sciences; which statue is evermore found to be adorned with
an Helmet on her head, which does represent to our understanding, not so much
the safeguard and defense of the head from violence, as also that the same is
inwardly fraught with wisdom, policy and reason, and is impenetrable by force
or guilefull practice. The head so armed is securely fortified against
invasions, and prepared for answering of all Questions. It well fitteth Martial
men to discourse and sing of Battles and Victories, of Armor, Horses, and
Military Exercises; as the Romans were accustomed to relate and sing of
Victories, and the memorable Exploits of worthy Warriors, according to that
saying, Navita de ventis, de tauris narrat arator,
Enumerat miles vulnera, pastor oves.


The true Ornaments of Martial men are a shattered Shield, a dented Helmet, a
blunted Sword, and a wounded face, all received in battle.

The Field is Pearl, a Cheveron, Ruby, between three Morions or Steel Caps,
Sapphire. This is the Paternal Coat Armor of the Right Honorable Robert Earl
of Cardigan, Baron Brudnell of Stoughton, etc. This Morion, Steel Cap or Scull,
was the ancient Armor for the head of a Footman that served in the wars; it
is called a Morion, quia Mauri hujusmodi utebantur casside. I confess this
Morion here demonstrated differs in form from that which is now in use: and
because no bearing in Coat Armor of a modern fashioned Morion at this present
occurrs unto my memory, I have caused one of them to be cut, as in this next
Figure you may see.

The Field is Azure, 3 left handed Gauntlers, Or, by the Name of Fane; and is
the Coat Armor of the Honorable Sir Francis Fane of Fulbeck in Lincolnshire,
Knight of the Bath, second son to the Right Honorable Francis Earl of Westmore
land. Panormitanus makes mention of one Duke Reynard, who by an Herald sent a
Gauntlet unto Alphonsus King of Aragon, and withal denounced him Battle; who
willingly accepted the same, demanded of the Herald whether he challenged him
to fight with his Army, or in single Combat: who answered, Not with his Army.
Whereupon Alphonsus assigned a day and place for the purpose, and came at the
prefixed time; but the Duke failed. Such is the Law of Arms in case of single
Combat, that the party defendant shall appoint the time and place for the
performance thereof, as witnesses Spigellius in these words, Iure belli licet
provocato diem and locum Praelij dicere.

This is to be understood in private Challenges: for otherwise it is, where the
Combatants are sentenced by the public Magistrate to fight; in which case,
with us in England, the time, place, and weapons are to be appointed by Judges
of that Court before whom the matter depends.

He bears Argent, on a Pile, Azure, three dexter Gauntlets of the Field, by
the Name of Iolliffe; and is the Coat Armor of John Iolliffe of the City of
London, Esquire Governor of the Muscovy Company, descended from the Family of the
Iolliffs of Botham in Staffordshire. This Coat is also born by William Iolliffe
of Carswall-Castle in Staffordshire aforesaid, Esquire

He bears Gules, three dexter Arms vambraced and proper, by the name of
Armestrong. Well do these Arms thus fenced agree with the Name of the Bearer;
for then are the Arms best fitted for the performance of high enterprises, when
they are thus fortified and made strong against all violent encounters; for by
means thereof the Soldiers are so emboldened, as that nothing can daunt them:
in which respect men of former Ages reckoned Armor the members of Soldiers,
for that the use thereof is no less behoveful for Military persons, than are
their natural members.

He bears Vert, a Bar compony, Argent and Azure, between 3 Curasses of the
second, on a Chief, Argent, as many Fermails or Buckles as the third, by the
Name of Baldberny of Scotland. The Curass is that part of Armor that serves
to secure the breasts, bowels, and intrails of man against all force and
violence whatsoever, from the gullet of the throat to his loins whereupon they
do chiefly rest. Damaratus, a Noble Captain of the Lacedaemonians, being
demanded why it was lawful for the Spartans in coping with their Enemy to
forsake their Helmets and Curasses, but in no case to forgo their Swords: he
made answer, That these were to guard their private persons, but their Swords
served to secure the Weal-publick. A man may expose himself to danger or to
death, but may not in any case leave his Religion, Prince, and Country void of
succor.

Concerning the defensive furniture of man's body we read, that anciently they
were made of linen cloth, of exceeding high proof. Such was that much famoused
linen Brigandine of Amasis King of Egypt, whereof every thread consisted of 360
other threads, wherein were pourtraied and set forth the forms and shapes of
manifold sorts of Animals (that he used to prosecute in his accustomed exercise
of Hunting) in gold and diverse colored yarn. And not only the furniture
ordained for the safety of man's body were made of linen in those days; but also
the furniture of the Horses (of such as were called Cataphracti Equites) as
their Bardings and Caparisons, were also made of linen artificially wrought
with bars of Iron after the manner of feathers, and both of them so curiously
intermixed and platted together, as that (in fine) it becomes a defense of
impenetrable resistance against any sort of weapons: which kind of furniture
was in use with the Romans, not only for the safeguard of the Horses, but also
for the safety and preservation of the Cataphracti, or such as we term men of
Arms completely furnished Cap-a-pe (as the French pharse is) to withstand and
sustain the shock or brunt of the Enemy, by whom also the discomfited forces
have been often repaired.

The Field is Ruby, 3 Legs armed, proper, conjoined in Fess at the upper part
of the thigh, flexed in Triangle, garnished and spurred, Topaz. This Coat is
quartered by the Right Honorable William Earl of Derby, etc. In ancient time
Soldiers that either had sold or otherwise lost their Armor by negligence,
were (by a Military Law) punished with death, as he that runeth from his
Captain. Thus far of Military furniture of defense pertaining to men. Now
shall be touched such things as belong to Horses of service for the field;
though some of them are in common for other Horses.

Of the first sort are the Shafron, the Cranet, and the Bard, whereof I find no
particular Examples of bearing single and apart, but as they are born conjunct
in the total furniture of Horses for the Field, as shall hereafter in their due
place be showed. I will here therefore set forth such as are of ordinary and
common use, as they are severally born in Escocheons as follows.

He bears Gules, an armed Leg couped at the thigh in Pale, between 2 broken
Spears, Argent, headed, Or, by the name of Gilbert; and is born by Henry
Gilbert of Lockoe in Derbyshire, Esquire

He bears Argent, three Saddles stirropped, Sable. The Saddle is of great use
for all sorts of Horsemen, as well for ease in journeying, as for sure sitting:
but most behoveful is the same for Martial men, that serve on Horsback in the
Field; for that by the means thereof, and of the Stirrops thereto affixed, they
may be able to sustain the shock of their Adversary, as also the more forcible
to encounter him.

He bears Argent, on a Cheveron, Sable, five Horse-shoes, Or. This is the
Coat Armor of Sir Nicholas Crispe of Hamersmith in Middlesex, Baronet. The
bearing of Horse-shoes in Armory is very ancient, as the Arms of Robert
Ferrars, Earl Ferrars testifies, who lived in the time of King Stephen, and
bore for his Arms Argent, six Horse-shoes, Sable.

He bears Or, a Bend, Sable, charged with three Horse-shoes, Argent, by the
Name of Shoyswell of Sussex.

To these may be added whatsoever other parts of the furniture of Horses
fitting for the wars; as Snaffles, Bitts, Bridles, and such other like tokens,
whereby is signified restraint of liberty, or servile subjection, as appears
where it is said, After this now David smote the Philistims and subdued them,
and he took the Bridle of Bondage out of the hands of the Philistims.

The Field is Gules, a barded Horse passant, furnished at all points for the
Field, Argent.

A Horse thus furnished is fitted and prepared for the use of a Soldier of
that sort which we call Cataphracti Milites, or men at Arms, of whom I shall
make mention in the next Escocheon. Not much unlike this is the Caparison
wherewith we use to set out our Horses prepared for the Tilt, in our joyful
Triumphs of Peace. I read that it was a custom amongst the Romans (as well in
their lesser as greater Triumphs) that no man (but such as by Prerogative,
either in respect of some honorable or eminent place, or special merit, were
thereto privileged) might meet or accompany him that triumphed on horsback,
but altogether on foot, which custom was of long time observed amongst them.

The Field is Gules, a Chevalier armed at all points Cap-a-pe, brandishing his
Sword aloft, Argent, garnished, Or, mounted on a barded Courser furnished
throughout of, and as the second. This Coat Armor (according to Bara)
pertains to the Duchy of Lithuania.

These were those Soldiers strongly armed in steel, called Cataphracti
Equites, which I lately spoke of: they were habited with Habergions, which were
either Coats of Mail or of Plate; and differed much from those that we call
Levis Armaturae Milites, in respect of the ponderous we ght of their furniture,
whereby both themselves and their Horses were the better enabled to receive the
shock and strong encounter of their enemy. Whose Armor were a Sallad or a
Headpiece, their Shield, Graves and Brigantines, all of Brass, their Bassenets
or Sculls, Spears and Swords, like those in use with Footmen. Such was the
force of these Cataphracti Milites (or as we call them, men mounted upon barded
Horses) as that they were able to endure the brunt of the Enemies, and did
oftentimes repair the Forces of the trembling and distrustful Armies.

CHAP. XVI.
HAVING in the two former Chapters handled Artificials Military, both invasive
and defensive, I think it not much amiss now a little to treat of Trophies and
tokens of Martial Victory, and to show you some Emblems of Rewards for Victory
obtained, born in Coat Armor, since Victory and the hope thereof sweetneth all
those dangerous Travels and intolerable Labors, which the brave Martial man
joyfully runeth through, yea even to the hazard of his life. Trophies (says
Lazius) are spoils forced from the conquered Enemy, all embrued with blood, and
hanged up as they were upon the next Tree that could be found to fit that
purpose; or else the conquering Soldiers brought them home to their Houses,
where they hanged them up upon some Pole or Tree called Gentilitia arbor, for a
monument of the increase of Glory that they had achieved to the Family by
their valor. The like custom (says Wolf. Laz.) do we not only read of in
Thucydides; but my self have seen and observed represented in ancient Coins, an
Oak having the limbs cut off, and upon the snaggs thereof were hanged a German
Cloak made of Badgers skins (or such other like) called Lacerna Germanica; two
Shields, a Barbaria Pipe, and a German Ensign.

There was also another sort of Trophie, when a man had subdued his Enemies,
the manner was to express the memory of the victory achieved (as it was acted)
in Letters engraved and cut in stone, together with the names of the People and
Kings that were vanquished; and this was usually set up in some public place
for the perpetuating of the memory of such their famous conquest to all
Posterities. To this purpose is that which Cicero mentions ad Heren. Hic in
Macedonia Trophaea posuit, eaque quae bellicae laudis victoriaeque ommes gentes
insignia and monumenta esse voluerunt. And so is that place of Pliny, lib. 37.
cap. 2. where he writes that Pompey the Great ^aused an Inscription of a
Trophie to be erected in the Pyrenean Mountains, Wolf, Lazius lib. 9. 898.

The ancient Rewards for victory obtained in the field, born in Arms are
Garlands, which the Armorists call Chaplets, and in Latin they were anciently
called Coronae militum: and of these there then were diverse sorts, which were
conferred on the Victors, and were significant demonstrations of the manner of
the victory obtained; for the ancient Bearers, Horsemen, Captains and
Lieutenants of Cities, Towns, and Ports, which had valorously sustained and
endured the siege of their Enemies, and were delivered from them, were
guerdoned in ancient times with a Garland of Grass, called in Latin Corona
Graminea sive obsidionaria; which although it were made of Grass (being the
only herb that can be supposed to be found in a place long besieged) yet is the
same Garland Gramine (as Pliny witnesses) most honorable and noble, and to be
esteemed above all others; Gold, Pearl, Olive, Laurel, Palm, Oak and Ivy,
giving place to common Grass, that Royal Herb of Dignity.

He also that could prudently delay his Enemy, and preserve the Army committed
to his charge from loss, without giving battle, was wont to be rewarded with
this kind of Gramine Garland: such an one was Fabius Maximus, Qui corona
Graminea donatus fuit ab universa Italia; quandoquidem non pugnando sed cavendo
rem Romanam restituisset, and exercitum sibi creditum conservasset.

There was another sort of Chaplet called Corona Civica, which among the Romans
was in esteem next to the Corona Graminea. And it was made of Oaken leaves and
branches, with the fruit of Acorns hanging on it. This Garland or Chaplet was
given to him that had saved a Citizen when his life was in extreme peril,
killing his enemy, and making good the place where the danger happened. And
Pliny makes mention, that this sort of Chaplet was to be given to one who slew
the first Enemy, that mounted on the walls of a City or Fortress, being
defended by, or for the Romans. And I read, that Hostius, the Grandfather of
the Roman King Hostilius, for his prowess was the first that was remunerated by
Romulus with a Chaplet called Corona Frondea, and this was quod Fidenam
irrupisset; it was Anno Mundi 3295.

The triumphal Chaplet was first made of Laurel, and such an one did Tiberius
Caesar use. The Athenian Victors had their Chaplets or Garlands of
Olive-leaves; and these Chaplets were rewards also as well for Mercurial as
Martial Deeds, some of which at first made of leaves, were afterward altered
and composed of Cold. Pliny writes that the Rose, the Lily, and the Violets,
be the flowers wherewith the Chaplets or Garlands of Noblemen ought to be
adorned. I confess he there uses the Latin word Corona; but I think, under
favor, there that word Corona cannot be taken for a Crown, I mean such an one
as is in use with us at this day made of Gold, but rather for a Chaplet or
Garland.

I find also that Chaplets are sometimes made of other Herbs, as of Rue; as
that which is born bend-wife upon the bars of the Coat Armor of the Dukedom
of Saxony; which, as learned Mr. Seldom out of Kran^zius has noted, was at the
time of the Creation of Bernard (son of Albert Vrso, Marquess of Brandenburg,
and brother to Otho the then Marquess, and to Sifride Archbishop of Breme) Duke
of Saxony, granted to the said Bernard by the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa,
upon the request of the said Bernard, to difference his Arms from his brothers;
Tunc Imperator (are the words as Mr. Seldom cites them) ut erat coronatus per
aestum Ruteam Coronam injecit ex obliquo supplicantis clypeo: which was
afterward born so on their Coat, being before Barry, Sable and Or.

And thus much may suffice to have spoken of Chaplets; now come we to show some
Examples of bearing them in Coat-Armours.

He bears Argent, three Chaplets, Vert, by the Name of Richard son. As these
are here born as the sole Charge of the Field, so may you also find some
Ordinary interposed between them, as in this next Example.

He bears Or, a Fess; Sable, between three Chaplets, Vert. I read that
Hercules first made himself Garlands of the Herb called in Latin Apium, which
is so called, quia ex eo apex, id est, Caput antiquorum triumphantium
coronabatur. This Herb is always green, as Theophrast observed. It is called in
English Merche.

The Field is Or, on a Chief, Gules, three Chaplets of the first. This was the
Coat Armor of Sir Charles Morison of Cashiobury in the County of Hartford,
deceased. Diverse others there be that bear these Chaplets in their
Coat-Armours; but these here showed may suffice to make known unto Students in
Armory how to blazon such a Charge when they meet with it.

He bears parted per Fess, Argent and Azure, three Chaplets counterchanged,
by the Name of Duke; and is the Coat Armor of George Duke of Cosenton in
Aylesford in Kent, Esquire. and of Richard Duke of Maidstone in the said County, Esquire

CHAP. XVII.
UNTO these before mentioned remunerations of joyful victory I will add such
artificial things, wherewith the victorious Martial man does commonly deprive
of liberty those whom the fortune of the wars have given him as Captives and
Prisoners; such be Prisoners Gives, Fetters and Sha^kles, o^ prison. Bolts,
which are all notes of subjection and captivity. Of the bearing of some of
these in Coat Armor I will show you some Examples.

He bears Argent, a Shackbolt, Sable, by the Name of Nuthall. Some call this
a Prisoners bolt. He that by his valor shall in the wars take his Enemy and
retain him as his Prisoner, may well for such his good service be guerdoned
with such a kind of bearing as is here demonstrated, which is an honorable
bearing in Armory, in regard it does sufficiently to an Artist declare the
first occasion thereof.

He bears Sable, two single Shackbolts, and one double, Argent, by the Name
of Anderton; and is now born by Matthew Anderton of the City of Chester, Gent.
These kind of Arms may also well be given to such a brave Spirit, who by his
prowess can fetch off with strength, or by his charity redeem any of his fellow
Soldiers in captivity.

CHAP. XVIII.
TO these Martial Armorials we may add, as an Appendix of necessary use in
warlike businesses, the Water-bowgets, which in ancient times were used to
carry and conserve in the Camp that useful Element of water. In such vessels
some suppose that David's three Worthies, which brake into the Host of the
Philistims and drew water out of the Well of Bethlehem, brought to their King
that water he so much ^onged for^ These three mighty men deserved to have been
remunerated with such Armorial Marks in their Coat-Armours for their valor.

The usual depicting of these Water-bowgets in Escocheons of our present Age,
if we shall compare them with those of former times, we shall find these and
them much differing in form, as by these next Escocheons (the first being
according to our modern form, and the other two agreeing with the ancient)
evidently appears.

The Field is Ruby, three Water-bowgets, Pearl. This was the Coat Armor of Sir
William Roos, a Baron of this Kingdom, who lived in the time of our two first
Edwards after the Conquest.

He bears Argent, a Fess verry, Or and Gules, between three Water-bowgets,
Sable, by the Name of Dethick; of which Family was Sir John Dethick, Knight.
sometime since Lord Valor of London. As al^^ those two ingenious Gentlemen,
Thomas Dethick who has lon^ resided at Leghorn, and Henry Dethick of (...)
near London, sons of Sir Henry Dethick, son of Sir William Dethick Knight. son of
Sir Gilbert Dethick Knight. both principal Kings of Arms by the Title of Garter.

He bears Gules, a Fess between three Water-bowgets, Ermyn, by the Name of
Meres; and is the bearing of Sir Thomas Meres of Lincoln, Knight.

The Field is Pearl, a Cross engrailed, Ruby, between four Water-bowgets,
Diamond. This was the Paternal Coat Armor of that Honorable Family of the
Bo^^^iers, sometimes Earls of E^ in Normondy, from whom are descended the
Bo^rchiers Earls of Batl^, and that truly noble Knight Sir Henry B^^rchier, a
careful and diligent searcher out of the hidden Antiquities, not only of this
Kingdom, but of Ireland also. Leigh in his Accidence of Armory, page 127.
calls these Water-bowgets, and page 176. he terms this kind of Charge a
Gorge.

These Water-bowgets were anciently depicted and pourtraied in Coat Armor
according to the form in this present Escocheon demonstrated, witness old Rolls
of Arms and Monuments of stone. The Ancients themselves did somewhat differ in
the pourtraiture of this Water-bowget: For I find in a very ancient Roll in the
custody of the beforementioned Sir Richard St. George, Claren^eux (who I must
with a thankful acknowledgment confess has been very free in communicating
such his Collections to the furtherance of the second Edition) that Robert de
Roos, son of the late mentioned William de Roos, did bear these Water-bowgets
depicted as in this next Escocheon, with a File of five Lambeaux or Points.

This is the true Figure both of the Escocheon and Charge as they be in the
said Roll, which is written in a hand of that time, or very near. And these
Examples may suffice for Water-bowgets.

Sable, three Cups covered, Argent, by the Name of Warcupp; and is born by
Edmund Warcupp of North-Mort in Oxfordshire, Esquire

Azure, a Cheveron between three C^ps covered, Or, by the Name of Butler; and
is the Coat of Sir James Butler of Lincolns Inn in Middlesex, Knight. Steward of
his Majesty's Palace and Marshals Court. And is born by John Butler D. D.
Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty King Charles the Second, and Canon of
Windsor.

This Coat is also born by Nicholas Butler of London, Dr. in Physic.

CHAP. XIX.
SINCE there be some things born in Arms, which have a near resemblance among
themselves, yet do really differ each from other in name, of which we have not
hitherto given any Rule: I hope, with the Readers courteous leave, I may gather
such here together, which otherwise, according to strict Method, should have
been ranked far asunder; by which means the Student in Armory (for whose
benefit only this work is compiled) may with more facility observe the nice
differences of such Charges, which are differenced, and consequently change
their names, only from their

Distinction of their Colors or Forms.

Of the first sort are Roundles, of which Leigh gives Examples of nine sundry,
each differing from other in name and blazon, according to their different
Colors; as for Example.

If they be 1 Or Then we call them 1 Bezants. 2 Argent 2 Plates. 3 Vert 3
Pomeis. 4 Light blue 4 Hurts. 5 Sable 5 Pellets or Ogresses. 6 Purpure 6 Golps.
7 Ten 7 Orenges. 8 Sanguine 8 Guzes. 9 Gules 9 Tor^eauxes.

Of some of these, viz. Bezants, Plates, Hurts, and Pellets, I have given
Examples formerly in this Book. Examples of Bezants and Plates you may see page
188, 189. of Hurts, page 103. of P^llets, page 245.

It is not requisite in blazon to name the Colors of any of these nine
Rundles, except they be the counterchanged Charge of a Field transmuted, as in
Abt^'s Coat, of which you shall find the blazon in the fifth Section and second
Chapter; and in such a case they are called Rundles, and by no other name. But
otherwise it is sufficient to say, he bears Argent, on a Chief, Gules, three
Bezants, as I have done in the blazon of Russel's Coat Armor, p. 219. without
telling of the color of the Bezants. The like you may observe in Captain Lee's
Arms, page 245. which I ^ave blazoned without telling the color of the
Pellets. As for the word Proper used in the blazon of the Hurts, page 103. and
of the Pellets in Langley's Coat, page 245. they are faults I must confess
escaped in the correcting of this Edition; therefore I do entreat the Courteous
Reader with his Pen in those two places to put out the word Proper: yet I
cannot deny but that in ancient blazon I have seen the Colors of some of these
Rundles named; yea, and some are of opinion that one or two sorts of these
differ their names in the quantity of their figure, and not in color; but of
latter times, amongst our English blazoners, it is accounted a great fault to
tell their colors, except where they are found counterchanged in a Field
transmuted, as I have formerly said.

If you find above the number of eight Be^ants born in one single Coat,
according to some Authors, you are not then to tell their number, but to say
Bezantee; for they give concerning this Point this Rule both for Bezants and
Torteauxes, Be^anae numer antur usque ad octo, quem numerum, si excedant,
dicentur Besantee, and Tortellae numer antur sicut Besanae; and Chassaneus is
of the same opinion, Chass. Cato. 1. Glor, mundi pars conclus. 75^

Leigh says that the Rundle, called a Guze, is resembled to the Ball of the
eye; and Golps are in signification wounds, Ac^idence of Arms, page 151. Pome
is are taken for Apples without their stalks: what Bezant^, Plates, Pellets and
Hurts be, I have formerly in their due places showed.

Now I will show some Examples of the bearing of some of these Rundles, viz.
Tor^eauxes in Coat Armor.

He bears Topaz, three Tort^auxes. This is the Coat Armor of that noble and
ancient Family of Courtneys of Devo^shine, particularly of Powder ham, of which
is Sir William Courtney, descended in a direct Male^line from Hugh Churtney,
second of that Name Earl of Devonshire in the time of King Edward the Third;
the elder Family being in possession of that Honor till the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth, diverse of which were Dukes of Exeter.

Anciently Blazoners did use to tell the manner of the position of a Charge,
consisting of three things of one sort or kind placed in triangle, as you see
these here are, by saying, three Torteauxes, Plates, Mullets, Crescents, or the
like, in triangle, or two and one; but it is now observed as a general Rule,
That when the number three is rehearsed in Arms, without further declaration of
the location or position of the charge demonstrated by that number, then are
they always placed in the fashion that is showed in this present Escocheon; but
if they have their location in any other form, then you must always tell how
and in what manner, as in this next Escocheon.

He bears Argent, three Torteauxes in bend, between two Cotizes, Sable, by
the Name of Ince of Lancashire, and Iuys bears Argent, three Torteauxes,
between two Bends, some say Cotizes, Gules. These (says Leigh, page 156.) have
been by old Blazoners called Wastles, which are cakes of bread, but must be
named by none other name than Torteauxes.

The Fusil.
The Lozenge.
The Mascle.
The Fusil is longer than the Lozenge, having its upper and lower part more
acute and sharp than the other two collateral middle parts; which acuteness is
occasioned by the short distance of the space between the two collateral or
middle parts in the Figure demonstrated unto you by the Letters B B; which
space, if the Fusil be rightly made, is always shorter than any of the four
Geometrical Lines whereof it is composed, as you may observe in the Figure
thereof: in which you find that the distance between the two Angles
demonstrated by the Letters A and B, is longer than that which is between the
two collateral or middle Angles marked with B and B: but all this is to be
ununderstood of Fusils of the modern figure or form; for anciently they were
depicted in another shape. And Chassaneus shows a Fusil somewhat near to the
ancient, in proportion thus,

And thus much may suffice to have spoken of such Charges as are differenced
only from their distinction of their Colors, and consequently change their
Names; all which you may observe to be composed of a Circula^ Figure. Now it
remains that I treat of those other which have a nearer resemblance among
themselves, yet vary their names only from their distinction of form.

Of this sort are Fusils, Lozenges, Mascles.


The Geometrician calls the kind of Figure whereof every of these is composed
Rhombus, which Keckerman says, is Parallelogrammum obliquangulum and
equilaterum; for in truth every one of these consist of four Geometritical
lines of equal length, yet these are differently named by Armorists, as I shall
presently show you. But I think it first necessary to demonstrate unto you the
Figure of every of these, as in Example.

In this Figure you may observe the sides be not anguled, but rather round. He
there thus describes Fusils, Fusae sunt acutae in superiori and inferiori
partibus, and rotundae ex ^t r^que l^^ tere.

A Lozenge differs from a Fusil, in that the space between its two collateral
or middle Angles equals the length of any of the four Geometrical Lines whereof
it is composed, as its Figure before more plainly manifests; where the space
between the Angles demonstrated by the figures 3 and 3, and 1 and 3, are of
equal length. I confess sometimes you may find in things made for Lozenges, the
distance here demonstrated by the figures 3 and 3 to be a little longer than
that from 1 to 3, but it can never be shorter, for then it is a Fusil.

A Mascle differs from both the Fusil and Lozenge; first, because the Mascle
is always voided, that is, part of the Field is transparent through it. I
confess in this I dissent from Leigh's opinion, who in his Accidence of Armory,
page 157. b. seems to grant that a Mascle may be whole: but of this I have
formerly showed my opinion and my reason for the same, page 234. Next, a Mascle
differs from a Fusil and a Lozenge in the proportion of space, which is
evidently demonstrated in the Mascles Figure by the Letters C and D, which
shows a Mascle to be as long as it is broad.

Now proceed we to give you some Examples of bearing these Fusils and Lozenges
in Coat Armor; as for Mascles, I have already showed some, page 234.

The Field is Pearl, three Fusils in Fess, Ruby. This was the Paternal
Coat Armor of William Montague Earl of Salisbury. I know well that Mr. Brook,
York-Herald, in his Catalogue of the Earls of Salisbury, has blazoned these
Lozenges; but old Rolls of Arms with their blazon in French do testify, that
these be Fusils; for it is thus written in one of them, Mons. de Montague,
Count de Sarum, port^d' Argent a trois Fusilles, etc. This Roll now at this
present remains in the custody of Sir Henry St. George, Knight. Richmond Herald,
whose industrious Collections of such Antiquities, and his willingness in
affording the view of them for the forwarding of this present Edition, cannot
without a manifest note of ingratitude be here overpassed in silence. These
Fusils may also be born in bend or triangle, as Leigh writes, page 157. b.

He bears Gules, three Fusils, Ermyn. This is the Coat Armor of Sir John
Denham, Knight. one of the Barons of his Majesty's Exchequer, a good and able
Justicer. The Fusil is never pierced, or voided, as Leigh notes. What a Fusil
represents in Armory, and how the English, French and Dutch vary in their
Opinions about it, I have formerly showed unto you out of the Accidence of
Armory, in the 216th page of this Book.

He bears Gules, four Fusils in Fess, Argent, by the Name of Carteret; and is
the Achievement of the Right Honorable Sir George Carteret of Hawnes in Com.
Bedford, Knight and Baronet, Vice-Chamberlain of his Majesty's Household, and
one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.

He bears Argent, a Cheveron between three Fusils Ermynois, by the Name of
Shaw. This with the Arms of Vlster, is the Coat of Sr John Shaw of Eltham in
Kent, Knight and Baronet.

This Coat without the Arms of Vlster, and with a due difference, is born by
Mr. Thomas Shaw of the City of London, Merchant.

He bears Argent, a Pale Fusuly, Sable, by the Name of Daniel; and is the
Paternal Coat Armor of Sir Thomas Daniel of Beswick in the East Riding of
Yorkshire, Knight. Major to his Majesty's Regiment of Foot Guards, and Captain of
his Majesty's Archcliffe Fort in Dover. Now I will show an Example of bearing
of Lozenges in Arms.

The Field is Azure, three Lozenges, Or. Lozenges are thus described by
Chassaneus, Lozangiae factae sunt ad modum Lozangiarum quae ponuntur in
vitrinis sub forma quadranguli, sed superior and inferior parts plus tendunt
in acutum quam aliae duae collaterales seu mediae, and sic plus longae sunt
quam largae, Chassaneus, pars 1. a conclusio 75.

Gules, seven Lozenges, three, three, and one, Verrey, by the Name of Guise;
and is the Coat of Sir John Guise of Elmore in Glocestershire, Baronet. As also
of Henry Guy, or Guise, of Dunsley in Hartfordshire, Esquire

Pearl, a Fess, Diamond, in Chief three Lozenges of the second. This is the
Paternal Coat Armor of the Right Honorable Walter L. Aston, Baron of Forfare
in the Kingdom of Scotland, now residing at Tixall in Staffordshire, where his
Lordships Predecessors have been seated for about three hundred years; whose
Father, Sir Walter Aston, was made Knight of the Bath at the Coronation of King
James, and was created a Baronet in the Ninth year of the said King's Reign:
under whom (with the Earl of Bristoll) he was employed Ambassador into Spain
about the Treaty of the Spanish Match: after which, in the Third year of King
Charles the First, he was advanced to the said Dignity of a Baron. Of which
Family see more in Combden's Britannia in his Description of Staffordshire.

He bears Pearl, on a Fess, Sapphire, three Lozenges, Topaz, by the Name of
Fielding; and is the Paternal Coat Armor of the Right Honorable Bazil
Fielding, alias de Hapsburgh, Earl of Denbigh, Visc. Fielding, and Baron
Fielding of Newenham Padox, and St. Lis.

This Coat, with a due difference, is born by Robert Fielding of the City of
Gloucester, Dr. in Physic; and by his brother Edward Fielding of the City of
Bristoll, Esquire one of the Sheriffs thereof for the year 1674.

He bears Argent, on a Bend, Gules, four Lozenges of the Field, by the Name
of Mort; and is the Paternal Coat Armor of Thomas Mort of Astley near Leigh in
Lanchashire, Esquire.

He bears Azure, three Mascles, Or, over all a Bend, Gules. This is the
Paternal Coat Armor of John Catterall of West-witton in the North Riding of
Yorkshire, Esquire descended from the elder House of the Catteralls of New-hall in
Craven, which had their Original from the Catteralls of Catter all in
Lancashire.

He bears Sable, three Lozenges in Fess, Ermyn, by the name of Gifford, a
Family of long continuance at Halsworth in Devonshire, from whence descended
that great Collector of choice Rarities, Humphrey Gifford of the Poultrey
Compter, London, Gent.

He bears Argent, on a Cheveron between three Mascles, Azure, as many Bucks
heads cabosed, Or, by the Name of Stanley; and is born by Mr. Edward Stanley of
Barnstable in Devonshire, a great lover and incourager of the study of Heraldry.

To these Charges that thus resemble each other, yet change their Names from
their nice differing forms, may be referred the Quarter and the Canton, the
Delf and the Billet, and such other like. Examples of the bearing of every of
which I have formerly given, leaving the Student in this way to learn their
differences by his careful observation, to which Leigh in his Accidence of
Armory has given great light.

Thus have I in this one Section run over this whole Chaos of things
Artificial; which I have so compendiously set down, considering the infinite
variety of things incident unto Arts of all sorts, as that any Judicious Reader
will rather approve my brevity therein, than concur in judgment with that rash
and unadvised Censurer of this Book, who (before it was in Press) sought to lay
this aspersion on it, That it was wholly stuffed with Superficials of things
Mechanical, etc. which Calumny needs no other refutation, than the view of that
which here presents it self to all men's scanning.

The end of the Fourth Section.
Simplicitas formae Antiquitatis nota.
THE Fifth Section comprehends Examples of Coat-Armours, having no Tincture
predominating in them, showing withal their sundry Forms of Partition; as also
of the Transmutations or Counterchangings that are occasioned by reason of
those Lines of Partition.

The Table of the Fifth Section.
Fields of Coat-Armours, wherein there is no Tincture predominating, etc. are
Abstracted from Some of the Ordinaries by a derivation Manifest, as Gyrony,
Pale-ways Bendy, etc. and are born Simply of themselves. After a compound sort,
viz. charged In Part, viz. with some Chief, Canton, Quarter, etc. All over,
with some other Ordinary or Common Charge,

Obscure, of which sorts some do Keep their Names, as Paly, Bendy, Barry, etc.
Lose their Name, as Cheekie.

Some common Charge; such are those as we term in Blazon Fusily, Lozengy,
Masculy, (...) Of Fusils, Lozenges, Mascles, etc. whereof they bear the sorms
or representations.
Composed of Lines of partition only, Plain; as those beforementioned in the
first Section, which are carried evenly without rising or falling. These being
charg^^ do constitute a form of bearing called Transmuting or Counterchanging.
Bunched or cornered; whereof are created a kind of bearing which we call in
blazon Messiles, because of their mutual intermixture one with another.



Those of manifest derivation have their denomination from some of the
Ordinaries whose forms they do represent, whose names also they do still retain
as a Memorial of their particular derivations. As Party per Pale, per Bend, per
Fess, per Cheveron, per Saltire, etc. Others, though abstracted from
Ordinaries, do lose their names.

And both these sorts last mentioned are no less subject to be charged in part,
or all over, with charges both ordinary and common, than any other
beforementioned wherein Tincture is said to predominate.

A DISPLAY OF HERALDRY.
SECT. V. CHAP. I.
HAVING finished the former Section, treating of Coat-Armours formed of things
Artificial, in which there is tincture (that is to say, Metal, Color of Furr)
predominating: I will now ( secundis velis) proceed to give Examples of
Coat-Armours having no Tincture predominating in them. These are formed of
sundry sorts of lines of Partition, occasioning oftentimes Transmutation and
Counterchanging.

Coat-Armours having no Tincture predominating in them, are such as are so
composed and commix'd of two colors, as that neither of them do surmount
other. Such are these that follow, and the like, which are formed of lines of
Partition only.

In giving Examples of these forms of bearing, it is requisite that I begin
with those which consist of single lines of Partition; and then proceed to such
sorts as are formed of manifold lines, as in Example.

He bears parted per Pale, Argent and Gules, by the Name of Walgrave.

Such Coat-Armours as are formed only of lines of Partition, do (generally)
yield testimony of an ancient Family, as Hieronymus Hennings in his Genealogies
notes (upon the Coat Armor of the Noble Race of the Ranzovij, which is born
parted after this manner, though of different colors) in this Distichon: Forma
quid haec simplex? simplex fuit ipsa vetustas:
Simplicitas formae stemmata prisca not at.
What means so plain a Coat? times ancient plain did go:
Such ancient plainness ancient race does plainly show.


After this manner may two Coat-Armours of distinct Families be conjoined into
one Escocheon, as shall be showed hereafter in place convenient.

He bears parted per Fess, Or and Azure. These Arms do pertain to the Family
of Zusto of Venice. After this manner also (says Leigh) may several Coats of
distinct Families be born jointly in one Escocheon. The consideration whereof
shall appear hereafter in the last Section of this Book, where I shall treat of
marshalling diverse Coat-Armours together.

He bears parted per Bend, Or and Vert, by the Name of Hawley. In this and
the former I give the pre-eminence in blazon to the metal, not in respect of
the dignity thereof, but for that it occupies the more eminent and honorable
part of the Escocheon which is the Chief; for otherwise the right side having
precedence of the left might have challenged the first place in blazon, as in
Coat-Armours parted per Pale it does.

A Gentleman of blood, being a younger brother, before apt differences of
Coat Armor were devised, used to take two of his nearest Coats, and to marshal
them together in one shield parted per Cheveron, after the manner expressed in
this next Escocheon.

He bears parted per Bend embattelled, Pearl and Ruby. This is the
Coat Armor of the Right Honorable Richard Boil, Earl of Burlington, Baron of
Clifford and Lansborow in England, and Earl of Cork, Viscount Dungarvan, and
Baron Youghall in Ireland, etc. whose brother, the Honorable Robert Boil Esquire
is praiseworthy for his great knowledge in Chemistry, and other Secrets of
Nature.

He bears parted per Cheveron, Sable and Argent, by the Name of Aston. These
foresaid Coats thus half in Tincture, are of much better esteem than the
Apparel worn by those brethren in Flanders, who having a Pe^sant to their
Father, and a Noble Lady to their Mother, did wear their upper Garment one half
of Country Russet, the other of Cloth of Gold, for a monument of their Mothers
matchless match. So much of Arms consisting of single lines of Partition, both
perpendicular and transverse. Now follow Examples of such as are formed of a
mixed kind.

He bears Gules and Argent. This Coat Armor pertains to Sir Henry Cock of
Bruxborne in the County of Hertford, Knight. late Cofferer to his Majesty.

Leigh holds that this sort of bearing is not otherwise blazoned than
quarterly. But (some Blazoners are of opinion that) when this composition
consists merely of Metals and Color, or of any the beforementioned Furrs
and Color, without any charge occupying the quarters of the Escocheon, such
bearing is more aptly blazoned parted per Cross, but if they be charged, then
they hold it best blazoned quarterly.

He bears parted per Pile in point, Or and Sable. Only the Pile part of this
Coat may be charged (says Leigh) and no other part thereof, and that (says
he) may be used as one only Coat. And if it be charged, you shall leave the
Field untold. In this Coat the Pile has the pre-eminence; for if the Escocheon
were made after the antique fashion, you shall see very little of the Field.

Two other sorts of parted per Pile I find, which for their rare use I have
thought fit to insert into this place, whereof the first is, as in this next
Escocheon.

He bears parted per Pile traverse, Argent and Gules. Were it not that these
lines had their beginnings from the exact points of the Chief and Base
sinister, and so extend to the extreme line in the Fess point on the dexter
side, I should then hold it to be a Charge and no Partition; and then should it
be said to be a Pile, and not a partition per Pile. This Coat pertains to the
Family of Rathlowe in Holsatia. As touching the plainness of this Coat, Jonas
ab Elvet has these verses; Forma quid haec simplex? Simplex fuit ipsa vetustas:
Simplex est etiam simplicit at is honor.


The other sort of Partition per Pile takes beginning from the two base
points, dexter and sinister, and do meet in the exact middle chief point of the
Escocheon, as in this next Example.

He bears parted per Pile transposed, Or, Gules, and Sable. This kind of
bearing is rare, as well in regard of the transposition thereof, for that the
natural and accustomed bearing of Piles is with the points downwards; as also
in respect that thereby the Field is divided into three distinct Colors or
Tinctures. This Coat is proper to the Family of Meinstorpe or Menidorpe in
Holsatia. Jonas ab Elvet.

He bears parted per Saltire, Ermyn and Gules, by the name of Restwold. This
(according to Leigh) may be good Armory, if all the four pieces be charged with
some thing quick or dead: But it is better (says he) if it be charged but with
two things of one kind, and that especially upon the Gules; but best of all it
is to have but one only quick thing all over the Field. An Example of which
last bearing shall be given hereafter in his due place.

He bears per Saltire, Or and Sable, a Border counterchanged, by the Name of
Shorter; and is born by Sir John Shorter of the City of London, Knight and
Alderman.

Per Saltire, Argent and Sable, a Border counterchanged, is born by Peter Got
of Gray's Inn in Middlesex, Gent.

He bears Gyronny of six pieces, Ermyn and Azure. The most usual manner of
blazon is to begin at the dexter corner of the Escocheon; but in this Coat I
begin with the middle part, not for that medium est locus honoris; but in
respect that the Ermyn does occupy the most part of the Chief, and the Azure
but the Cantels thereof. Some blazon this Coat parted per Gyron of six pieces.
Gyrons may be born to the number of twelve, as hereafter shall be showed.

He bears parted per Pale and Base, Gules Argent, and Sable. This bearing is
no less strange than accustomed with us, whose rare use ha^^ occasioned me to
insert the same here. This Coat Armor pertains to Io. a Panowitz that was
(amongst infinite others) present at the Royal Exercises on Horsback and on
foot performed without the City of Vienna, Anno Dom. 1560. Proceed we now to
Coats of this kind charged in part, as in these next.

He bears parted per Fess, Gules and Ermyn, a File of five points, Argent, by
the Name of Betfield. Of these forms of bearing I will not produce many
Examples, because their use is common: only I purpose by a few to make known my
meaning touching the different manner of charging of Coat-Armours in part, and
all over, that so they may be manifestly discerned to be of different kinds,
and likewise avoid their confused mixture.

He bears quarterly Gules and Or, a Cross flory on the dexter quarter,
Argent. This Coat Armor pertains to Middleton of Middleton-hall in
Lancashire, who married Anne, sister to Thomas Green Esquire for the body to
King Henry the Seventh, by whom he had a daughter married to John Harewell of
Wotton Esquire. whose daughter Anne was wife to James Clifford of Frampton upon
Severne, Esquire Grandfather to James Clifford, Esquire. living 1612.

He bears quarterly, Sable and Or, in the first quarter a Flower de lis of
the second. This is the Coat Armor of Elias Ashmo^e of the Middle Temple, Esquire.
Comptroller of his Majesty's Excise Office.

The Bearer hereof has for his Armorial Ensigns Gyronny of eight pieces, Azure
and Or, a Canton, Ermyn. This Coat Armor pertained to the Family of Okton.
Besides these Examples of Gyrons formerly given, you shall find others that do
bear Gyronny of ten pieces: as in the Coat of Crolly, who bears Gyronny of
ten pieces, Argent and Sable: and that of Basingborne, which bears Gyronny of
twelve pieces Verrey and Gules.

He bears Gyronny of six pieces, Or and Sable, three Nigroes heads couped,
proper, by the Name of Callarde. Otherwise may you blazon it thus, Gyronny of
six, Or and Sable, three Nigroes heads couped of the second. Coats consisting
of Gyrons are of old Blazoners termed counter-coined, for that the coins or
corners of their contrary or different colors do all meet in the center of the
Shield. Therefore Coat-Armours of this form of bearing were anciently thus
blazoned, Portat Arma contra contraconata.

As touching such Coat Armor of Partition as are charged all over these few
Examples may suffice.

The Field is parted per Pale, Ruby and Sapphire, three Eaglets displaied,
Pearl. This Coat Armor pertained to Sir Edward Cook Knight. sometime Lord Chief
Justice of his Majesty's Court of the Kings Bench.

I do blazon this Coat Armor by precious stones, in respect the Bearer hereof
is ennoblished by his rare virtues and approved loyal Services done to Queen
Elizabeth of blessed memory, and to the King's Majesty late deceased; as also
in regard of his so many learned and judicious works publicly manifested in
sundry Volumes extant, and approved by men of best judgment in that kind.

He bears per Pale, Gules and Azure, an Eagle displaied with two heads, Or,
by the Name of Mitton of Shropshire.

He bears per Pale Gules and Azure, three Bucks passant, Or, by the Name of
Sucklin; and is born by Robert Sucklin of Wotton in the County of Norfolk, Esquire

He bears parted per bend sinister, Ermyn and Ermyns, over all a Lion rampant
within a Border ingrailed, Or, by the Name of Jones of Denbighshire.

Per Bend sinister, Ermyn and Ermys, over all a Lion rampant, Or, by the Name
of Trevor; and is born by Sir John Trevor of Brynkynalt in Denbighshire, Knight.
descended from Tudor Trevor Earl of Hereford.

The Field is quarterly, Topaz and Ruby, over all a Bend, Verrey. This
Coat Armor pertains to the Right Honorable Family of the Sackviles, Earls
of Dorset, and Barons Buckhersts of Buckherst.

This Coat, with a due difference, is born by Colonel Thomas Sackvile of
Selscome in Sussex, a person that served King Charles the First in all his
Civil Wars, and was one of the Captains of his Life-guards at the Battle of
Edg-hill: He was Son of Sir Thomas Sackvile of the said place, Knight of the
Bath; and is now married to Margaret, Daughter of Sir Henry Compton of
Brambletye in the aforesaid County, also Knight of the Bath, by his first wife
the Lady Cicely Sackvile, Daughter to Robert Earl of Dorset.

He bears quarterly, Gules and Verrey, over all a Bend, Or. This is the
Coat Armor of the Ancient and Knightly Family of the Constables of Yorkshire;
and is born by Marmaduke Constable of Beverley, Esquire John Constable of Catfish,
Esquire and Thomas Constable of Ganstead, Esquire.

He bears party per Saltire, Sable and Ermyn, a Lian rampant, Or, armed and
langued, Gules, by the Name of Grafton. In the blazon of Coat-Armours of this
kind, having no Tincture predominating, I think it fit to give ^reheminence to
that Metal, Furr, or Color which occupies the Chief, or the greatest part
thereof; as you may observe I have done in the blazon of Hawleys and Restwold's
Coats, and the like, in this present Chapter. Mr. Boswell gives Grafton's Coat
the same blazon that I do here, beginning with the color Sable. Johannes
Peronus, Nauclerus, Paradine, Vlpian, Gerrard Leigh, and others, both ancient
and modern writers; altogether allow the blazon of this Coat Armor to be party
per Saltire, as before. Some others (whose conceit herein I utterly dislike)
whether nicely or ignorantly, have endeavored to blazon this Coat Gyronny of
four, or of four pieces: But my opinion is confirmed with that of the said
former writers, alleged to be the seventh Partition per Saltire, without any
term of Gyronny at all. The Ancestors of this Gentleman enjoyed a large Revenue
in Lands in the City of Worcester, and in Grafton, Fliford, and Pendock in the
County of Worcester, as other Lands in the County of Stafford, as appears by
a Deed (which I have seen) dated in June Anno 29. Henrici 8. but at this day
dispersed into strange hands. Nevertheless I wish virtue her due reward; then
shall not this Bearer (a true lover of Arms) depart empty handed.

As these last mentioned Coats are framed of straight lines of Partition, so
shall you find others composed of sundry lines before spoken of, in the
beginning of the second Section of this Book, as well of those sorts that I
call cornered lines, as of those that are bunched. And as these last handled do
utterly exclude all mixture of the Tinctures whereof they are formed, by reason
of the straightness of the lines wherewith they be divided: so contrariwise
those Arms that do consist of those other sorts of lines, do admit
participation and intermixture of one color with another, for which cause they
are of Leigh termed Miscils, a miscendo, of mingling; to whom I will referr you
touching Coats of that kind, for that he has exemplified them at large in his
Accidence of Armory.

CHAP. II.
IN the former Chapter are comprehended such Coat-Armours as consist of single
and manifold lines, as well charged as simple. Now shall be handled such other
kinds of hearing, which albeit they consist of lines of Partition, as the last
spoken of do; yet (by reason of the variable apposition of some one or omore
lines of Partition) they do constitute another form of bearing, and receive
also a diverse denomination, being called Coats counterchanged or transmuted.
All which shall briefly^ yet plainly, appear by the few Examples following.

Counterchanging or transmutation is an intermixture of several Metals or
Colors, both in Field and Charge, occasioned by the apposition of some one or
more lines of Partition. Such Coat-Armours may be fitly resembled to the
party-coloured-garements, so much esteemed in ancient time, as they were held
meet for the Daughters of Kings during the time of their virginity. So we read
of Thamar the Daughter of King David; Erat induta tu^ica verse-colore, sic enim
vestiebantur filiae Regis virgins pallis: and so we read that Joseph, the
special beloved Son of Israel, was by his Father clad in a Coat of diverse
colors. Touching the high estimation of which kind of garments, we find, where
the Mother of Sisera, discoursing with her Ladies touching her Son's overlong
stay after the Battle against the Israelites; said, Partiuntur praedam, puellam
^uam^ imo duas, in personam quamcunque: praeda versicolorum est Siserae, praeda
versicolorum Phrygioncium opus, etc. Bends (says Sir John Fern) or any other
principal Charges, Ordinary, may be parted of two colors on more.

And such bearing is no novelty in Arms, but are as ancient as the Norman
Conquest, and before; so as they are both honorable and ancient. Of which sort
of bearing you shall in part see in these next ensuing Escocheons.

The Field is parted per Pale, Topaz and Ruby, three Roundles counterchanged.
This was the Coat Armor of Abtot Earl of Worcester, that lived in the time of
King William Rufus. Such bearing does signify a stout resolution of the Bearer
to undergo with patience and manly courage the bitterness of all times, and the
sharpness of all darts, be they never so pungitive, or full of change; as he
says, Diversorum in Scuto colorum transmutatio designat, latorem omnem telorum
ac temporum amaritudinem cum magnanimitate perferre voluisse.

The Field is parted per Pale, Or and Vert, twelve Guts or Drops in Pale,
counterchanged, by the Name of Grindoure; whose Family has been of ancient
continuance within the Forest of Dean, and County of Gloucester, and were men of
great Possessions in the same Forest. Their Patrimony is now transferred into
the generous Family of Baynam of Clorewall, who now quartereth this Coat by the
match of the Heir general. As touching the blazon of this Coat Armor it is in
your election, whether you will give it the blazon abovementioned, or
attribute unto them their proper terms (according to that which has been
formerly delivered touching this sort of Charge, saying, The Field is parted
per Pale, Or and Vert, six Guts de Olive, and as many de Or, Tail-ways.

He bears parted per Pale, Argent and Gules, a Bend counterchanged. This Coat
pertained to the famous and learned Poet Geffrey Chaucer, Esquire whom Leiland and
others suppose to have been born at Woodstock in Oxfordshire: but some gather
by his words in the Testament of Love, that he was born in the City of London,
though his education and abode, were in Oxford and Woodstock, in the eighth
year of King Richard the Second. This Prince of English Poets was Comptroller
of the Custom House in London, as Thomas Speght in his Additions to the Works
of Chaucer notes: and to this most learned of Poets the most learned of
Antiquaries applies those Verses: -- Hic ille est, cujus de gurgite Sacro, etc.
Lo this is he, from whose abundant stream divine
Our Poets drink their fits, and draw their fancies fine.
And being now to high Parnassus top aspired,
He laughs to see the Rout below with ^^iming tired.


Sometimes you shall find Coat-Armours parted per Pale, indented and
counterchanged, as in this next Escocheon.

Party per Pale, Argent and Gules, on the dexter side, two Bands of the second.
This Coat was born by Swardus a Saxon, who at the time of the Conquest was Earl
of Southampton; and he with Edwyn and Marker, Earl of Leicester, kept the Isle
of Ely against the Conqueror; for which he was banished into Normandy, and
there kept in Prison during his life. And although this man was a principal
Actor in the North against hi^, yet for his valor was held worthy to marry his
Niece: a true sign of a noble Nature to love virtue even in his Enemies.

He bears barry of six, parted per Pale, indented, Argent and Gules,
counterchanged, by the Name of Peyto, and is now born by William Peyto of
Chesterton in Warwickshire, Esquire. And as these are born parted per Pale plain
and indented, as in these Examples; so shall you by observation see this
Partition per Pale of sundry other forms of lines beforementioned, Sect. 2.
Chap. 3. as in part may be seen in these next Examples.

He bears quarterly per Fess indented, Or and Gules, by the Name of Leighton;
and is the Coat of Robert Leighton of Watlesborough in Com. Salop, Esquire.

Per Fess, Argent and Vert, a Pa^e counterchanged, three Lions heads erased,
Gules, by the Name of Argall; and is the Coat of Samuel Argall of Low-hall in
the Parish of Waltham-stow in Essex, Dr. in Physic, Candidate and Honorarie
Fellow of the College of Physicians of London, and Physician in Ordinary to
her Majesty.

He bears quarterly of four, Or and Sable, three Mascles counterchanged, by
the Name of Pargiter; and is the Paternal Coat Armor of Sir William Pargiter
of Greetworth in Northamptonshire, Knight. a Family of good Antiquity, whose
Ancestors have been there seated for many Generations.

Quarterly, Or and Azure, a Cross of four Lozenges between as many Annulets
counterchanged, born by the Name of Peacock.

He bears per Pale, Nebule, Azure and Or, six Martlets counterchanged. This
Coat was born by Sir Miles Fleetwood, Knight. Receiver of his Majesty's Court of
Wards and Liveries.

As there is counterchanging, as in these precedent Examples; so also may you
observe the like bearing Barr-ways, as in this next Escocheon.

He bears barry of six, Argent and Gules, on each three Flowers de lis (save
one in the last) all counterchanged, by the Name of Swetington.

He bears parted per Fess, Gules and Argent, a Pale counterchanged by the
Name of Lavider. Sometime this kind of bearing has another Charge added unto
it^ as in this next Escocheon.

He bears parted per Fess, Azure and Or, a Pale counterchanged, three buckles
of the second, by the name of Spalding. Some blazon this thus, He bears Azure
and Or, countercoloured in six quarters, three Buckles of the second, in the
first. Others thus, Azure and Or, party per Fess, a Pale counterchanged in
every piece, of the first, a Buckle of the second.

He bears Paly of six, Argent and Gules, on a Chief, as the Field, as many
Crescents all counterchanged. This is an Italian Coat of rare use, which I
thought fit to add to these former; it is born by the Name of Sileto.

He bears parted per Cheveron unde, Sable and Or, three Panthers heads erased
counterchanged, by the Name of Smith, of old Buckenham in Norfolk. Some Authors
are of opinion that there are no Panthers bred in Europe; but in Africa, Libya
and Mauritania they are plentiful. The Panther is a beast of beautiful aspect,
by reason of the manifold variety of his diverse colored spots wherewith his
body is overspread. As a Lion does in most things resemble the nature of a man,
so after a sort does the Panther of a woman; for it is a beautiful beast, and
fierce^ yet very natural and loving to their young ones, and will defend them
with the hazar^ of their own lives; and if they miss them, they bewail their
loss with loud and miserable howling.

CHAP. III.
THERE are certain other kinds of bearing of Arms, having no color
predominating, and are named of the several things from whence they are
derived; for such are abstracted either from Charges ordinary or common. Of the
first sort are such, as being derived from some of the Ordinaries entreated of
formerly, have their derivation either manifest, and do keep their name; or
else obscure, and do lose their name.

Those are said to have a manifest derivation, whose Original is apparently
discerned to be abstracted from some of the said Ordinaries, as from Pale,
Bend, Fess, Bar, etc. Such are these that follow, and their like.

He bears Paly of six pieces, Or and Azure, by the Name of Gurnay. Were it
that some of the lines of Partition beforementioned were added unto
Coat-Armours of these kinds, you shall see a strange Metamorphosis ensue
thereupon, if withal you do vary the colors counterly: For so much will they
differ from themselves, as that they may be thought fitter to be ranged with
those last handled, than with these. Hereof I will give you one Example for
all, viz. Play of six parted per Fess, all counterchanged by the Name of
Symbarbe: but this Escocheon is not cut.

Sable, two Bars Argent, on a Canton of the second, a Buck of the first,
attired, Or, by the Name of Buxton; and is born by John Buxton of Tibenham in
Norfolk, Esquire

He bears barry of six, Or and Sable, by the Name of Mariet; and is the Coat
of Thomas Mariet of WhiteChurchin Warwickshire, and of Alscot and Presto^ in
Glocestershire, Esquire who married one of the Daughters and Heirs of Sir Richard
Brawne of Alscot in the County of Glocestershire, Knight.

Barry of six pieces, Or and Azure, by the Name of Constable. These were
anciently the Arms of one Fulco de Oyry, a noble Baron of this Realm, whose
Daughter and Heir the Ancestor of these Constables had married, and bore the
Arms of the said Fulk, according to the usual custom of that Age.

He bears Barry of six, Argent and Sable, a Canton, Ermyn, by the Name of
Marshall; and is the Paternal Coat Armor of Ralph Marshall Esquire. Secretary to
the Right Honorable William Earl of Craven, descended from the Family of the
Marshalls of Yorkshire.

Sometimes you shall find a Coat Armor composed of more than of six of these
pieces, as in this next Example.

He bears barry of twelve pieces, Argent and Gules, by the Name of Manwaring
of Cheshire; and is born by Sir Thomas Manwaring of Peover, Baronet; Thomas
Manwaring of Calveley, Esquire; and Manwaring of Kerthingham, Esquire In the blazon
of an Escocheon of this kind of bearing, the pieces of which it is composed are
always of an even number; for if they consist of an odd number, then such a
Coat must be blazoned otherwise: As where the Field is Argent, three Bars,
Gules, which consist of seven pieces. And the like is to be observed in Coats
of the like composition, always well remembering the true quantity of every such
Ordinary, or its derivative wherewith the Field is charged: Concerning which
quantities you may receive sufficient satisfaction by the reading of the third,
fourth, fifth, and sixth Chapters of the second Section.

He bears Bendy of six, Azure and Argent, by the Name of John de Saint
Philibert. He was a noble Knight, and lived in the time of King Edward the
Third. This is an ancient Family in the County of Norfolk, and has matched
with diverse Houses of good note, as well in the same County as elsewhere.

He bears Bendy wavy of six, Argent and Azure. This is the ancient
Coat Armor of Playters of Sotterly in the County of Suffolk, as appears by
diverse Seals of old Deeds, and many ancient Monuments of that Family yet to be
seen in the Parish Church of Sotterly aforesaid. The chief of which Family is
Sir Thomas Playter^ Knight and Baronet, now Lord Proprietary of the said Town.

Note that these, and such others, are no less subject to charging, both in
part and all over, than those last exemplified, as by the ensuing Examples is
apparent.

Bendy of ten, Argent and Gules, by the Name of Talbot; and is the Paternal
Coat Armor of Sir Gilbert Talbot of Salwarp in Worcestershire, Knight. Master of
the Jewel-house to his Majesty King Charles the Second; descended of an
ancdient and honorable Family, as by his Descent and Pedigree does appear.

He bears Bendy of six, Argent and Gules, on a Chief, Azure, a Bar indent^d,
Or, by the Name of Wittewrong; and with the Arms of Vlster, is the Coat Armor
of Sir John Wittewrong of Rothamstead in the Parish of Harpenden in
Hartfordshire, Knight and Baronet, descended from the Wittewrongs in Flanders;
whose Grandfather Jacques Wittewrong of Ga^nd in the said Province, did thence
transplant himself and Family into this Kingdom Anno 1564.

He bears Paly of six, Or and Azure, a Canton, Ermyn, by the Name of Shirley;
a very ancient Family, and descended from Henry, Son of Sewallus, that lived in
the time of King Henry the First, and held of him five Knights Fees in the
County of Darby.

This Coat with the Arms of Vlster, is now born by Sir Robert Shirley of
Staunton-Harold in Leicestershire, of Chartley in Staffordshire, of Ettington
in Warwickshire, and of Shirley, Brailsford, and Edneston in Darbyshire,
Baronet.

He bears Paly of six, Argent and Gules, a Cheveron, Or, by the Name of
Barkham. This with the Arms of Vlster, is the Coat Armor of Sir Edward Barkham
of Westa^re in Norfolk, Baronet.

Paly of six, Argent and Azure, a Bend, Sable, by the Name of Sanderson; and
was the bearing of the Right Reverend Father in God Robert, late Lord Bishop of
Lincoln, who lest Issue Robert and Henry Sanderson, Esquires.

He bears Paly of six, Argent and Azure, on a Bend, Gules, three Cinquefoils,
Or, by the Name of Stradling. This is the Paternal Coat Armor of the ancient
Family of the Stradlings of St. Donates in Glamorganshire; the present Heir
being Sir Edward Stradling of the said place, Baronet, who is the three and
twentieth that in a direct Line has been dignified with the Honor of
Knighthood, or of a Baronet.

He bears Or, a Fess, Azure, surmounted by a Bend, Gules, by the Name of
Elwes, and is the Coat Armor of Sir Gervas Elwes of Stoke juxta Clare in
Suffolk, Baronet. This Coat without the Arms of Vlster, is born by Sir John
Elwes of Stanton-Hassey in Wiltshire, Knight.

He bears Barry of six pieces, Or and Azure, a Bend, Gules, by the Name of
Gaunt. These were the Arms of Gilbert de Gaunt Earl of Lincoln, a very noble
and worthy Family, which came in with William the Conqueror to aid him, being
his Wives Kinsman, and descended from the ancient Earls of Flanders.

He bears Argent, on a Pile, Azure, a Cheveron counterchanged, Argent and
Sable, by the Name of Otway; and is the Coat Armor of Sir John Otway of
Ingmire in the West Riding of Yorkshire, Knight. one of the Readers of Gray's Inn,
Chancellor of Durham, Vice-Chamberlain of the County Palatine of Lancaster, and
one of his Majesty's Counsel learned in the Law.

He bears Paly of six pieces, Argent and Azure, on a Bend, Sable, a Sword of
the first, by the Name of Sanderson of Biddick within the Bishopric of Durham,
which is as much to say as Filius Alexandri. A like Coat Armor I do find born
by the same Name, which is thus blazoned, Pale-ways of six, Argent and Azure, a
Bend, Gules, charged with three Mullets of the first.

CHAP. IV.
HAVING given Examples of Coats abstracted from Ordinaries by a manifest
derivation; now follows in order to speak of such as have their derivation
from them after a more obscure manner; as in Example.

He bears Paly of six, Topaz and Diamond, a Bend counterchanged, by the Name
of Calvert, and is the bearing of the Right Honorable Caecilius Calvert, Baron
Baltemore de Baltemore in the Kingdom of Ireland, absolute Lord and Proprietary
of the Provinces of Maryland and Avolan in America.

The Field is Paly-bendy, Topaz and Diamond. Here you see that this Coat Armor
is composed of a kind of mixture of two Ordinaries of several kinds, to wit, of
Pales and of Bends born one overthwart the other; for which cause the same is
termed Paly-bendy, a name not unfitly appropriated to such bearing, in respect
that the participation thereof is no less significantly expressed thereby, than
by the self demonstration of the Coat.

Now I will show you a Coat Armor, which although it be of this kind, yet does
it much differ from the former.

The Field is Barry of six, Argent and Sable, indented the one in the other.
This Coat Armor is born by the Name of Gise. Some others blazon this
Barry-bendy-lozengy, Argent and Sable, counterchanged. Sir John Fern gives
this same Coat the same blazon that I do. But there is no doubt but that one
and the self-same Coat Armor may receive two manner of blazons, yet both good.

He bears Barry-bendy, Argent and Sable. This Coat Armor as you may observe,
consists of a mixture of Bars and Bends, even as the first Escocheon in this
fourth Chapter does of Pales and Bends; and therefore I give it this blazon;
for similium similis est ratio. I confess Leigh in his Accidence of Armory;
page 156. demonstrateth this next Escocheon, and blazons it Barry-bendy; and
says it consists continually of eight pieces, and is properly so called
without any other name; but it is by other Blazoners thought to be better
blazoned, Barry-pily of so many pieces. And so I shall, under correction of Mr.
Leigh, now blazon it.

He bears Barry-pily of eight pieces, Gules and Or. I doubt not, if the
courteous Reader well consider the form of the Pile used in Armory, and the
manner of the position of the Charge of this Escocheon, that he will not much
condemn this new blazon given to this Coat Armor. As for the blazon of Hoyland
or Holland's Coat of Lincolnshire; I take it to be parted per Pale, indented,
Gules and Or.

This shall suffice for Coat-Armours having an observe derivation from some of
the Ordinaries; and do keep their name. Of such as do lose the name of their
Ordinaries, whereof they are composed, I find only one sort, which is checky.
And this form of bearing is also chargeable both in part and all over, as shall
appear by these next Examples: wherein I do omit to exemplify the single sort
of bearing, because the same is manifestly and universally known; but will
explain the compound only as follows.

He bears Checky, Argent and Azure, a Chief, Gules, by the Name of Palmer.
This sort of composition (if you do well observe it) is abstracted from Pallets
and Barrulets commixt; yet does it not participate either of the one name or
the other, but is termed in blazon Checky. As this Coat is charged in part, so
are there others also of the same kind that are charged all over, as in this
next Example.

He bears Checky, Or and Azure, on a Bend, Gules, three Lioncels rampant of
the first. This Coat pertained to the worthy Family of Clifford of Frampton
upon Severn in the County of Gloucester, being a branch of the Right Noble Stemm
of the Earls of Cumberland. Of this Family Puntins a Nobleman of Normandy
(coming in with the Conqueror) was the original Ancestor, whose second Son
Osbert held Frampton upon Seven aforesaid, in the twentieth year of his Reign;
from whom (for want of Issue) it descended, to Richard his brother, eldest Son
of Puntins, and from Richard to Walter de Clifford, Son of Richard, Father to
Rosamond the Fair, who was here born; in which place this Family has ever
since continued, being above five hundred eighty and odd years. Captain John
Clifford, the present owner and possessor of that ancient Seat, Anno 1675.
(being the seventeenth in a direct Male-line) is for want of Issue-male, like
to be the last of that name there.

Of this Family of the Cliffords have been many Persons eminent in their
Generations, both in Peace and War; and of late years George Earl of
Cumberland, famous for his many Services under Queen Elizabeth, especially his
taking Porto Rico in America from the Spaniards; and since him Thomas Lord
Clifford, Baron of Chudleigh in Devonshire, late Lord High Treasurer of England
under his Majesty King Charles the Second.

He bears Checky, Argent and Sable, a Fess, Gules, by the Name of Ackland.
This with the Arms of Vlster, is the Coat Armor of Sir Hugh Ackland of
Colomb-Iohn in Devonshire, Baronet.

Checky, Or and Gules, on a Fess, Azure, three Escallop-shells, Argent, by the
Name of Baldock; and is the Coat of Sir Robert Baldock of Cauleston in Norfolk,
Knight.

He bears Checky, Argent and Gules, on a Fess, Azure, three sinister
Gauntlets of the first, by the Name of Goodhand, This wi^h a Crescent for a
difference, is the Coat Armor of Charle^ Goodhand^ of the (...) of London,
Gent^ belonging to the Office of his Majesty's Ordnance; descended from the
Family of the Goodhands of Kyrmond, alias Kererlemon le Mire in Lincolnshire.

He bears Checky, Or and Gules, a Chief, Verry, by the Name of Chichester; a
Family of good account in Devonshire, where resideth Sir John Chichester of
Raleigh, Baronet; John and Francis Chichester of Hall, Esquire. and George
Chichester of Georgeham, Esquire

He bears Checky, Or and Azure, on a Chief, Gules, three Estrich-feathers in
Plum^ issuant of the first. This is the Coat of Henry Drax of Sibsy in
Lincolnshire, and of the Island of Barbados in America, Esquire

He bears Checky, Argent and Gules, a Chief indented, Azure, by the Name of
Micklethwaite; and is the Coat Armor of Joseph Micklethwaite ^ of Swayne in
Holderness in the County of York, Esquire.

Concerning Coat-Armours having no color predominating, and are derived from
Ordinaries, that which has been spoken is sufficient: I will now conclude with
two Examples of such as are abstracted for common Charges, viz. from Fusils,
Mascles, and Lozenges, which being born all over the Field, are termed in
blazony Fusily, Lozengy, Masculy, that is Fusil-ways, Lozenge-ways,
Mascle-ways. These also are found charged, and that all over, as in these
following Examples.

He bears Fusily, Ermyn and Sable, a Canton, Or, by the Name of Patten; a
Family of good note and antiquity: For in the six and twentieth of Henry the
Sixth William Patten, alias Wainflete (from a Town in Lincolnshire, where he
was born) was Son and Heir to Richard Patten, and eldest brother to John Dean
of Chichester, and to Richard that lived and died at Baslove in Derbyshire. He
was a Person by Parentage born a Gentleman; for his learning he was first
consecrated Bishop of Winchester; then for his wisdom made Lord Chancellor of
England, and was the sole Founder of Magdalen College in Oxford. Richard his
brother being a Layman, had Issue Humphrey, who seated himself in Lancashire;
from whom Thomas Patten of Thornley in the said County, Gent. is descended.

The Field is Fusil, Ermyn and Sable, on a Chief of the second, three Lilies,
Argent. These Arms are belonging to Magdalene College in Oxford, which was
founded by William Wainflete, Anno 1456. sometimes Bishop of Winchester.

Io. Buddenus (in Wainflete's Life) affirms his Name to be Patten, of which
Family this is the Paternal Coat. And that he honored the same with this
Chief, to acknowledge his Education in the College of Eaton, to which the
Lilies do belong. His words are these, A parentibus (says he) accepit hujus
vitae usuram, a Collegio decus and dignitatem, utrique pro eo ac debuit
respondendum fuit. Gessit idcirco in eodem clypeo utriusque insignia, Rombos
cum Liliis.

and thus briefly concluding this fifth Section, comprehending Examples of
Coat-Armours having no Tincture predominating in them, and withal showing their
sundry forms of Partition, Transmutation, and Counterchanging, I will address
my self to the sixth and last Section.

The end of the Fifth Section.
Artis progressio velocius clauditur quam inchoatur.
THIS Sixth and last Section does demonstrate the manner of Marshalling diverse
Coat-Armours (pertaining to distinct Families) in one Escocheon, as well of
those that by occasion of some adventitious Accident are annexed to the
Paternal Coat of any Gentleman, as of those that by reason of entermarriage of
Persons descended of several Families, are therein to be conjoined. Likewise
the manner of the Bearing of Women not under Covert Baron.

The Table of the Sixth Section.
Marshalling is an orderly bestowing of things Within the Escocheon, by a
Disposition of Coat-Armours of distinct Families Manifest, betokening Marriage,
Single; as when two Coat-Armours of distinct Families are conjoined in one
Escoheon, paleways in one Escocheon, which we may call Baron and Feme.
Hereditary, signified by bearing the Coat of the Feme Upon an Inescocheon by
the Biron after Issue received. Quarterly, by their Heir.

Gift of the Sovereign, in respect of Special favor. Remuneration of service.

Obscure, as when Persons of distinct Families conjoined in Marriage, have
their Coat-Armours so marshalled, as that they cannot be conceived, thereby to
signify a Matrimonial Conjunction.
Without the Escocheon, to wit, Above the Escocheon; such are the Helm, Mantle,
Crown, Chapeau, Wreath or Torce, and Crest. About the Escocheon; such are the
several Orders founded by Persons of Majesty; as Emperors, Monarchs, Kings,
Such are the most Honorable Orders of the Garter, of Saint Michael, Saint
Esp^ite, etc. Inferior Dignity; as the Orders of the Golden Fleece, and of the
Annunciation.
In some place near to the Escocheon, On the sides of the Escocheon, which
being, Living things; the Arms are said to be supported by them. Dead things;
the Arms are properly said to be cottised of or with such things.
Underneath the Escocheon; such are the Compartments of Escrole, containing the
Motto, Conceit, or Word of the Bearer.




A DISPLAY OF HERALDRY.
SECT. VI. CHAP. I.
FROM our first ingress in this Book, hitherto has been handled at large the
first part of the Division of this whole Work, under the general Head of
Blazoning; wherein have been confined and illustrated Examples of the diverse
and variable kinds of bearing of all manner of Coat-Armours, of whatsoever
substance, form, or quality consisting, together with the general and
particular Rules in their proper places, for the better instruction of the
regardful Reader. It now succeeds in order to explain that other general Head
(being the second part of the first Division) termed Marshalling. Which term I
am not ignorant of how far extent it is, not only in ordering the parts of an
Army, but also for disposing of all persons and things in all Solemnities and
Celebrations, as Coronations, Interviews, Marriages, Funerals, Triumphs, and
the like, in which the Office of an Herald is of principal use for direction of
others; and therefore his Learning, Judgment, and Experience ought to be able
to direct himself in so weighty Affairs. But that noble part of Marshalling is
so absolutely already performed by the industrious Pen of the Judicious Sir
William Segar Knight. late Garter and Principal King at Arms, in his Book of Honor
Military and Civil, as that it were but Arrogance joined with Ignorance for me
to intermeddle in an Argument so exactly handled: Neither is here my purpose
other, than to confine my self to Armory only, and so far only to speak of
Marshalling, as it concerns Coat-Armours. This Marshalling therefore is an
orderly disposing of sundry Coat-Armours pertaining to distinct Families, and
of their contingent Ornaments, with their Parts and Appurtenances in their
proper places. Of these things, some have their place within the Escocheon,
some without: and of those within the Escocheon, some have their occasions
obscure, other some manifest; as are those whose Marshalling (according to
ancient and prescript forms) do apparently either betoken Marriage, or some
gift of the Sovereign. Such as betoken Marriage do represent either a Match
single or hereditary: By a single Match I mean the conjoyning of the
Coat-Armours of a man and a woman, descended of distinct Families, in one
Escocheon Pale-ways, as by Examples following shall appear. And this form of
Impaling is diverse according to the several Functions of persons, whether
Ecclesiastical or Temporal. Such as have a Function Ecclesiastical, and are
preferred to the high honor of Pastoral Jurisdiction, are reckoned to be knit
in Nuptial bands of love and tender care to the Cathedral Churches whereof they
are Superintendents, insomuch as when a Bishop deceaseth, Ejus Ecclesia dicitur
viduata. And therefore their Paternal Coat is evermore marshalled on the left
side of the Escocheon, giving the pre-eminence of the right side to the Arms of
their See, obreverentiam dignitatis Ecclesiasticae, for the honor due to
Ecclesiastical Dignity; as also in respect that the Arms of such several Sees
have in them a kind of perpetuity, for that they belong to a Political Body,
which never dies. An Example of such Impaling is this which follows, and
this manner of Bearing we may aptly call Baron and Femme.

The Reverend Father in God James Montague, deceased, when he was Lord Bishop
of Bath and Wells, and Dean of his Majesty's Chapel Royal, bore two Coats
impaled, viz. Azure, a Saltire quarterly quartered, Or and Argent, for the Arms
appropriated to his then Episcopal See, conjoined with his Paternal Coat, viz.
Argent, three Fusils in Fess, Gules, within a Bordure, Sable. Which worthy and
learned Prelate was afterward translated to the Sea of Winchester, and
consequently made Prelate of the most Noble Order of the Garter. This form of
bearing, with some others before expressed, does serve fitly to exemplify the
Rule formerly delivered touching Bordures, viz. that a Bordure must give place
to Impaled Coats, Quarters, Cantons, Chiefs, etc. I will to this former add
other Examples of this kind of impaling.

The most Reverend Father in God, Dr. William Lawde, late Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury his Grace, Primate of all England and Metropolitan, Chancellor of
the University of Oxford, and one of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council,

Bears these two Coats impaled, viz. The Field is Jupiter, a Staff in Pale,
Sol, and thereupon a Cross Patee, Luna, surmounted of a Pall of the last,
charged by four other like Crosses fitched, Saturn, edged and fringed as the
second. This Coat belongs to the Archiepiscopal See of Canterbury, conjoined
with his Lordships own Arms, viz. Sable, on a Cheveron, Or, between three
Stars, as many Crosses Patee fitchee, Gules. Here by the way you may observe
that in this blazon, I neither tell the number of the points of the Stars, they
being six, nor their color, it being proper, which is Or, lest I should break
the two Rules given, page 79, 80.

The Right Reverend Father in God Richard Stern, by Divine Providence Lord
Archbishop of York, Primate and Metropolitan of England, etc. bears Gules,
two Keys in Saltire, Argent, in Chief an Imperial Crown proper, being the Arms
of his Episcopal See, impaled with his Graces Paternal Coat, viz. Or, a
Cheveron between three Crosses floree, Sable.

The Right Reverend Father in God Henry Compton, by Divine permission Lord
Bishop of London, Clerk of his Majesty's Closet, Dean of his Chapel, one of
the Lords of his most Honorable Privy Council, and brother to the Right
Honorable James Earl of Northampton, etc. bears two Coats impaled, viz.
Gules, two Swords in Saltire, their points erected, Argent, the Hilts and
Pomels, Or, being the Arms of his Graces Episcopal See, impaled with his
Paternal Coat, viz. Sable, a Lion passant guardant, Or, between three Helmets,
Argent.

The Right Reverend Father in God Peter Gunning, by Divine permission Ld.
Bishop of Ely, etc. bears two Coats impaled, viz. Gules, three Ducal Crowns,
Or, being the Arms appropriate to his Episcopal See, impaled with his Graces
Paternal Coat, viz. Gules, on a Fess, Argent, between three Doves, proper, as
many Crosses form of the Field.

The Right Reverend Father in God Nathaniel Grew Lord Bishop of Durham, Clerk
of the Closet to his Majesty, and one of the Lords of his most Honorable Privy
Council, Son of the Right Honorable John Lord Crew, Baron of Stean, bears
Azure, a Cross, Or, between four Lions rampant, Argent, impaled with his
Lordships Paternal Coat, viz. Azure, a Lion rampant, Argent.

This is the Coat Armor of the Right Reverend Father in God Seth Ward, by
Divine permission Ld. Bishop of Sarum, and Chancellor of the most Noble Order
of the Garter ^ his Grace bears Azure, the blessed Virgin with her Son in her
right hand, and a Scepter in her left, all Or, being the Arms of his Episcopal
See, impaled with his Paternal Coat, viz. Azure, a Cross Patee, Or.

To these, with the Readers patience, shall be added two other Examples, which,
in regard they are environed with the Garter of the Order, merit Observation.

The Right Reverend Father in God Lancelot Andrews deceased, when he was Lord
Bishop of Winchester, and Prelate of the most Noble Order of the Garter (which
Office always pertains to the said See) bore two Coats impaled, viz. Gules,
two Keys endorsed, the Bows interlaced in Bend, the uppermost Argent, the other
Or, a Sword interposed between them in Bend sinister of the second, Pomel and
Hilts of the third, being the Arms belonging to the said See, conjoined with
his Paternal Coat, viz. Argent, on a Bend engrailed between two Cotizes, Sable,
three Mullets, Or, both Coats within the Garter (for so does the Prelate of the
said Order always bear his Arms.) The works of this Right Reverend Bishop,
lately published, do give sufficient testimony of his worth and learning.

Now because the Kings of Arms do sometimes in like manner (as Bishops use)
impale the Arms peculiar to their several Offices together with their own
Paternal Coats, as Baron and Femme, but always in such case marshalling the
Paternal on the left side, I will insert one of their impalements, as in
Example.

That worthy Knight, Sir William Segar, Garter Principal King of Arms, thus
impaleth the Arms pertaining to his Office of Garter with his own. The Coat
that is peculiar to his Office is thus blazoned, Argent, a Cross, Gules, on a
Chief, Azure, a Crown environed with a Garter, buckled and nowed betweeen a
Lion passant guardant, crowned, and a flower de Lis, all Or; conjoined in Pale
with his own proper Coats, which are two, quarterly; the first is Azure, a
Cross moline, Argent, by the Name of Segar; the second Or, a Cheveron between
three Mullets, Azure, by the Name of Cakenthorpe; the third as the second, the
fourth as the first. In like manner do Mr. Claurence^u^ and Mr. Norroy, the
other two Kings of Arms marshal their Coat-Armours belonging to their several
Offices with their own Paternal Armorial Ensigns, which for brevity sake I here
omit.

To the end it may be the better conceived what is meant by the right and left
sides of an Escocheon or Coat Armor born impaled after this manner, you may
imagine a man to be standing before you, invested in a Coat depicted with the
Arms of two several Families thus conjoined in Pale; and then that part that
does cover his right side will answer to your left: So then accounting the Coat
to be his that wears it, you cannot err in your judgment touching the true
distinction of the dexterside of the Escocheon, that is due to the Man as to
the more worthy, from the sinister part that is allotted to the Woman, or the
Inferior.

The manner of such impaling of Coat-Armours of distinct Families (as Baron and
Femme) by persons Temporal, is diverse from this before mentioned; for they do
evermore give the pre-eminence (of the dexter side) to the man, leaving the
sinister to the woman, as in Example.

This Shield is parted per Pale, Baron and Femme, the first Argent, a Lion
Rampant, Ermyns, gorged with a Collar, Or, Langued and Armed, Gules, and is
born by the Name of Guillim; the second is Pale-ways of six, Argent and Sable,
on a Bend, Or, three Pheons heads of the second, by the Name of Hatheway.

If these were not Hereditary Coat-Armours, yet should they have this form of
marshalling and none other, because the same is common as well to single
marriages having no hereditary Possessions, as to those that be hereditary.
Only in this these have a prerogative, which the other have not, that the Baron
having received Issue by his Femme, it is in his choice whether he will still
bear her Coat in this sort, or else in an Inescocheon upon his own, because he
pretends (God gives life to such his Issue) to bear the same Coat of his
Wife to him and to his heirs; for which cause this Escocheon thus born is
called an Escocheon of pretense. Moreover, the heir of these two Inheritors
shall bear these two Hereditary Coats of his Father and Mother, to himself and
his heirs quarterly; to show, that the Inheritance, as well of the Possessions,
as of the Coat-Armours, are invested in them and their Posterity; whereas, if
the wife be no heir, neither her husband nor child shall have further to do
with her Coat, than to set up the same in their house, Paleways, after the
foresaid manner, so to continue the memorial of the Fathers match with such a
Family. Examples whereof behold in hese following Escocheons.

He bears 4 Coats quarterly; first, Topaz, two bars, Ruby, each charged with
three Trefoils slipped of the first, by the Name of Palmer; secondly, quarterly
per Fe^s indented, Pearl and Ruby, four Crescents counterchanged, by the Name
of Stopham. Thirdly, Pearl, two Bends wavy, Diamond, on a Chief, Ruby, three
Leopards faces, Topaz, by the Name of Clement. Fourthly, Ruby, a Lion rampant
within a Bordure indented, Topaz, by the Name of Tuder-Maur Prince of
South Wales. These Coats thus born belong to the Right Honorable Roger Palmer
Earl of Castlemaine, and Baron of Limberick in the Kingdom of Ireland,
descended from the Palmers of Angmering in Sussex, a Family, eminent in that
County for its Antiquity, and the very great Possessions it had there. The Name
signifies Pilgrim, for those devout persons used (as Cambden has it in his
Remains) to carry a Palm when they returned from Jerusalem. 'Twas this
Religious Appellation the Adventurers in the Holy War assumed, as we find in
Fuller and our other Writers; so that several brave Champions (though of
different Families) returning from that most Christian Expedition, retained it
ever after. This Family bore formerly in Chief (and some Branches of it do so
still) a Greyhound current, Sable; and have since the Reign of Edward the first
(with whom the Holy War may be said to end) to the present year 1678. married
into four Noble Families, to wit, the Lord Sandes's, Audley's, Powis's, and
Grandison's; and to ten heiresses, viz. to Sedingham, Stopham, Bilton, Clement,
Wesse, Verney, Touchet, Sherley, Villiers, and Ferrers; and (omitting other
Coats) they quarter by the clements that of Tuder-Maur aforesaid. They have
also matched with several other persons of good quality, as the Pelhams,
Poleys, Mallets, etc. and their present principal Houses or Seats are Wingham
in Kent, Dorney in Bucks, and Fairfall in Somersetshire.

The Right Honorable Charles Moore, Earl and Viscount of Droheda, and Baron of
Mellefont in the Kingdom of Ireland, bears four Coats quarterly; the first
Sapphire, on a Chief indented, Topaz, three Mullets pierced, Diamond, being his
Lordships Paternal Coat. Secondly, Ermyn, on a Chief, Sapphire, three Lions
rampant, Pearl. Thirdly, Gules, a Cross bottone, Topaz. Fourthly, Sapphire, a
Craw-fish erect, Pearl.

He bears 2 Coats quartered; first Azure, two Estrich Feathers in Saltire
between three Boars-heads couped, Argent, by the Name of Newton, Secondly,
Sable, a Bend fusilylozengy cottized, Argent, by the Name of Puckering; the
third as the second, the fourth as the first. These Coats with the Arms of
Vlster, is the bearing of Sir Henry Puckering alias Newton, of the Priory near
the Borough of Warwick in Warwickshire, Baronet.

He bears 2 Coats quarterly; first, Argent, a Dragons head erazed, Vert,
holding in his mouth a hand couped at the wrist, Gules. Secondly, Gules, three
Towers, Argent; the third as the second, the fourth as the first. These Coats
with the Arms of Vlster, are born by Sir Thomas, Williams of Elham in Kent,
Knight and Baronet, (...) and principal Chemical Physician to his Majesty King
Charles the Second.

He bears 2 Coats quarterly; first, Azure, six Plates, on a chief, Or, a demi
Lion rampant, Gules, by the name of Seys, quartered with Sable, a Cheveron
between three Spearsheads, Argent, with their points imbrued, born by Aeneas
Seys, who was Hostage for the County of Glamorgan, seat to William the
Conqueror; the third as the second, the fourth as the first, These Coats are
thus born by Evan Seys of Boverton in the said County, Sergeant at Law, by
Richard Seys of Swanzey, Esquire and by William Seys of Killan in the said County,
Esquire Sons of Richard Seys of Boverton before said, Esquire eldest Son of Roger Seys
of Boverton, Esquire Attorney General of all Wales to Queen Elizabeth, and lineally
descended from Aeneas Seys, and from him Sir Degary Seys, who was a person of
great eminence for his Military Services, being commissionated to serve King
Richard the Second in his wars upon several Expeditions, as appears on Record,
viz. he did command and keep the Castle of Pembroke, he served in his wars at
Calice, also against the Scots, and in a Voyage against Spain and Portugal, for
which good Services, amongst other his Rewards, he was made Knight Banneret.

He bears quarterly, first, Azure, a Saltire, Ermyn, by the Name of
Stoughton. Secondly, quarterly, Sable and Gules, a Cross, Argent, the first
charged with three Lance Rests, Or; the second with three Cockatrices, Or, by
the Name of Jones; the third as the second; the fourth as the first. Thirdly,
Argent, a Lion rampant, Gules, charged on the shoulder with a Trefoil slipped,
Or, between eight cross Crossets fitchee of the second, by the Name of Brett;
the fourth as the first. These Coats are thus born by Nathaniel Stoughton, Son
of Anthony, who was Son of William, and he Son of Anthony, who was second Son
of Gilbert Stoughton, descended from the ancient Family of the Stoughtons of
Stoughton in Surrey, who were there seated in the time of the Conquest; which
Seat is now in the possession of Sir Nicholas Stoughton Baronet, lineally
descended from the said Family; the bearer hereof being the twentieth in a
lineal descent by the second Line, as appears by their Pedigree at the College
of Arms, and has now living two Sons, William and George, by Anne Daughter and
Heir of William Brough Dean of Gloucester, deceased, by Elizabeth Daughter of
Edmund Thorold of Marston in Lincolnshire; Esquire

He bears 2 Coats quarterly; first, Gules, on a Cheveron, Or, between three
Bezants as many Crosses pattee fitchee, Sable, by the Name of Smith. Secondly,
Azure, three Urchins, Argent, by the Name of Heriz; the third as the second,
the fourth as the first. These Coats are thus born by Erasmus Smith alias
Heriz, of St. John's in the Parish of Clarkenwell in Middlesex, Esquire son of Sir
Roger Smith of Edmonthorp in Leicestershire, Knight. deceased, whose great
Grandfather William Smith alias Heriz, of Witchcock in the said County, Esquire was
descended of the ancient Family of Heriz in Nottinghamshire, and married
Katherine daughter of William Ashby of Loseby in Leicestershire, Esquire whose
Ancestor married with the Heir general of John Burdett of Loseby aforesaid, Esquire
who married Elizabeth sole daughter and heir of Sir Roger Zouch of Lubsthorp in
Leicestershire, Knight. whose lineal Ancestor Allan, Viscount of Rohan in Little
Britain in France, married Constance daughter of Conan Duke of Britain, by
Maud his wife daughter of Henry the First, King of England.

He bears 2 Coats quarterly; first, Or, a Griffon rampant, Gules; secondly,
Gules, a Sarazens head erazed at the neck, Argent, environed about the temples
with a wreath of the second, and Sable; the third as the second, the fourth as
the first. These Coats are thus born by William Williams of Glany-wan and
Dyffryn in the Lordship of Denbigh, Bachelor in Divinity, Chaplain to the
Right Honorable Dorothea Helena Countess Dowager of Derby, Rector of the
Parishes of St. George and St. Llanddulas, and Vicar of Abergeley. The first
Coat he bears as descended from Griffith Gock Lord of Rhos and Rhyvomoc; and
the second as descended from Marchudd one of the fifteen Tribes of North Wales.

He bears 2 Coats quarterly; first, Argent, three Lozenges in Fess, Gules,
within a bordure, Sable; secondly, Or, a spread Eagle, Vert; the third as the
second, the fourth as the first. These Coats are thus born by the Right
Honorable Ralph Mountagu Esquire son and heir to the Right Honorable Edward Lord
Mountagu of Boughton, Master of the Horse to her Majesty Queen Katherine, and
one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.

These Coats are thus born by William Mountagu Esquire son and heir to the
Honorable William Mountagu, Lord Chief Baron of his Majesty's Court of
Exchequer.

He bears 2 Coats quarterly; the first per Pale, Argent and Gules, a Cross
engrailed counterchanged, in the dexter Chief a Cinquefoil of the second, by
the Name of Lant. The second, Gules, a Sa^tire Or, surmounted by another, Vert,
by the Name of Andrews; the third as the second, the fourth as the first. These
Coats thus marshalled, with the difference of a Mullet for the third House, is
the Coat Armor of Andrew Lant of Thorp-Vnderwood alias Thorp-Billet in the
County of Northampton, Esquire son of Robert Lant of London, Esquire by Elizabeth
daughter and heir of Richard Andrew of Thorp-Vnderwood aforesaid, Esquire which
said Andrew Lant has Issue now living by Judith, daughter of William V^^nam of
London, Esquire Judith, Elizabeth, Katherine, Sarah, and Anna.

He bears 2 Coats quarterly; first, Vert, an Eagle displayed, Argent;
secondly, Argent, a Lion rampant guardant, Vert; the third as the second, the
fourth as the first. These Coats thus born do belong to Edward Sherburne of the
Tower of London, Esquire Clerk of his Majesty's Ordnance within the Kingdom of
England; whose Father Edward was Son of Henry, who was born near Preston in
Lancashire, from whence he removed and seated himself in the City of Oxford,
being descended from the ancient Family of the Sherburnes of Stony-hurst in the
said County of Lancaster.

He bears quarterly; first, Sable, on a Bend, Or, between two Nags heads
erazed, Argent, three Flowers de Lis of the first, by the Name of Pepys;
secondly, Gules, a Lion rampant within a bordure engrailed, Or, by the Name of
Talbot; the third as the second, the fourth as the first. These Coats are thus
born by Samuel Pepys of Brampton in Huntingtonshire, Esquire Secretary of the
Admiralty to his Majesty King Charles the Second; whose great great Grandfather
John Pepys of Cottenham in Cambridgeshire, married Edith sole daughter and heir
of Edward Talbot of Cottenham aforesaid, Esquire of the Noble Family of the Earl of
Shrewsbury.

He bears 2 Coats quarterly; first, Or, two Cheverons, Gules, between six
Martlets, Sable; secondly, Sable, a Bucks head cabosed, Or; the third as the
second, the fourth as the first. This with the Arms of Vlster, is the
Coat Armor of Sir Thomas Cooks of Norgrave in Com. Worcester, Baronet.

He bears quarterly; first, Sable, a Cross engrailed, Argent, on the dexter
quarter an Escocheon of the second, by the Name of Pagitt. Secondly, Paly,
Gules and Azure, three Bucks heads couped at the Necks, Or, by the Name of
Lewyn. Thirdly, Gules, on a Fess engrailed, Argent, between three Waterbougets,
Or, as many Crosses patte, Sable, by the Name of Mercy. The fourth as the
first. these quarterings are now born by Justinian Pagitt of Gray's Inn in
Middlesex, Esquire Custos Brevium and Recordorum Banco Regis, upon the death of
Elizabeth (first wife to the Lord Mansfield, and after his decease wife to
Charles late Duke of Richmond and Lenox) Grandchild and heir of William Lewyn
of Ottringden in Kent, Dr. of Laws; and by her death the said Justinian is
Coheir unto her, by reason that James Pagitt Esquire his Grandfather, married
Katherine her great Aunt, and daughter of the said Dr. Lewyn.

He bears 2 Coats quarterly; viz. Barry of six Ermyn and Gules, by the Name
of Hussy; secondly, Or, a Cross, Vert, also by the same Name and Family. This
is the Coat Armor of Sir Thomas Hussy of Hemington in Lincolnshire, Baronet.
These Coats are also born by Thomas Hussy of Woodford in Essex, Gent.

He bears quarterly; first, Argent, two Bars crenelle or
counter-embattelled, Gules. Secondly, Argent, 3 Ferdemolins bar-ways, Sable.
Thirdly, Barry-wavy of six, Argent and Azure, on a Chief, Or, three Swallows
volaht, Sable. The fourth as the first. These Coats are thus born by Sir John
James of Wilsborow in Kent, Knight. and by Roger James of Rygate in Surrey, Esquire
descended of the ancient and spreading Family of the James's, who transplanted
themselves out of Cleve in Germany into England, about the beginning of the
Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Of which Family, Mr. Philpot in his Survey of
Kent, page 140. says; That Eightam passing from Sir Robert Read, Lord Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, for want of Issue-male it passed away by Sale to
Iames^ descended from Jacob van Hastrecht, who was anciently seated in Cleve,
Ancestor to William James alias Hastrecht, Esquire thrice Knight of the Shire
within the space of five years, who by Paternal derivation is Lord of the
Manor of Eightam: He also says this Family of the James's were originally
called Hastrecht, as being Lords of a place of that Name near Gouda, and were
branched out from the ancient Family of Arkell. Further he says, That Roger
James, son of Jacob van Hastrecht, came out of Cleve (whither his Ancestor, a
younger son of the Lord of Hastrecht, had been chased by one of the Lords of
Holland, for that his Father, who was also forced to Drunen near Huesden by
that Count, had been an eager Partisan of his Enemy the Bishop of Vtrecht) into
England about the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, and being
after the Belgic mode called Roger Jacobs, the English contracted it into
James. And to conclude, he says, That by marriage the Family of Hastrecht and
Arkell are allied to the eminent House of Wassenaer, issued out from the
ancient Counts of Holland, as likewise to the Family of Waermont near Leyden,
who matched with the heir of Hastrecht of Drunen, where this Family for many
Descents had been planted ever since their first expulsion thither by the Earl
of Holland.

He bears quarterly; first, Or, a Lion passant, Sable, in Chief three Roman
Piles of the second, by the Name of Loggan. Secondly, quarterly per Fess
indented, Or and Sable, four Griffons heads erazed, counterchanged, a
quartering anciently belonging to the Family. Thirdly, Azure, a Cheveron
between three Kites heads erazed, Or, by the Name of Kite. The fourth as the
first. These Coats are thus quartered by William Loggan of Butler-Marston in
Warwickshire, Esquire.

Here you see the bearing of Hereditary Coat-Armours (both of the Father and
Mother) by the Son; and this Coat Armor must be blazoned after this manner.

He bears two Coats quarterly as follows. The first is Argent, a Lion
rampant, Ermyns, gorged with a Collar, Or, langued and armed, Gules, by the
Name of Guillim. The second is Pale-ways of six, Argent and Sable, on a Bend,
Or, three Pheons of the second; the third as the second, the fourth as the
first, by the Name of Hatheway. And in this manner shall you blazon all Coats
of like bearing, as in Example.

He bears two Coats quarterly; whereof the first is Sable, Platee, two
Flaunches, Argent; the second is Gules, a Chief, Ermyn; the third as the
second, the fourth as the first. These Coat-Armours thus marshalled, are born
by Sir Henry Spelman Knight. a man very studious, a favourer of Learning, and a
careful preserver of Antiquities. And sometimes you shall find four several
Coats born quarterly, for the reason aforesaid, as in Example.

He bears four Coats quarterly; whereof the first is Sable, a Fess, Or,
between three Asses passant, Argent, by the Name of Ascough. The second is Or,
a Bend, Azure, by the Name of Cathrope. The third is Argent, a Saltire, Gules,
on a Chief of the second, three Escallops of the first, a Crescent for a
difference, by the Name of Talboys. The fourth is Gules, three Mullets, Argent,
by the Name of Ha^sard. These Coat-Armours thus marshalled, did belong unto Sir
Edward Ascough of the County of Lincoln, Knight.

He bears two Coats quarterly; first, Sable, a Lion passant, Argent, by the
Name of Tailor; secondly, Sable, a Cheveron, Ermyn, between three Rams heads
erazed, Argent, armed, Or, by the Name of Ramsey; the third as the second, the
fourth as the first. These Coats are born by Thomas Tailor of Bradley in
Hantshire, Esquire son of Thomas, and he of John of Rodmorton in Glocestershire, by
the sister and sole heir of Sir Thomas Ramsey Knight. sometime Lord Mayor of
London; which John was descended from Carlisle in Cumberland.

He bears 6 Coats quarterly; first, Argent, three Cinquefoils, Gules, each
charged with five Annulets, Or, by the Name of Southwell, Secondly, Ermyn, two
Annulets linked together, Sable, on a Chief of the second, three Crosses
Pattee, Argent, by the Name of Witchingham. Thirdly, quarterly Or and Azure,
over all on a Bend, Gules, three Escallop-shells, Argent, by the Name of
Falstofe. Fourthly, Azure, a Fess between two Cheverons, Argent, by the Name of
Tendering. Fifthly, Gules, a Cheveron between ten cross Croslets, Or, by the
Name of Holbroake. Sixthly, Or, three Bulls heads cabosed, Sable, by the Name
of Gore. These Coats are thus born by Sir Robert Southwell Knight. one of the
Clerks attending his Majesty in his most Honorable Privy Council, descended
from the Family of the Southwells, anciently of Southwell in Nottinghamshire,
afterward of Woodrising in Norfolk, and now of Kinsale in the Kingdom of
Ireland.

This form of bearing of diverse Coats marshalled together in one Escocheon
impaled, as aforesaid, was in use near hand within a thousand years since
within the Realm of France, as appears by Frances de Rosiers, lib. Stemmatum
Lotharingiae; where amongst many Transcripts of Kings Charters made to
Religious Houses, under their Seals of Arms, he mentions one made by Dagobert
King of France, to Modoaldus Archbishop of Trevers, for the Cell of St. Maurice
of Toledo in Spain; which Charter was sealed with three Seals: His words are
these, Hoc diploma tribus sigillis firmatum est, primo aureo Dagoberti, which
was (as he had formerly described it) habens insculptum scutum liliis plenum,
secundo cereo Cuniberti, tertio etiam cereo Clodulphi; in quo est scutum
partitum impressum, prior pars decorata cruce, ac Escarbocle, seu Carbunculo;
altera fascia: Dat. Gal. Maij, Anno Dominicae Incarnationis, 622.

Concerning the orderly bearing of such Coat-Armours Paleways in one Escocheon,
note that Gerard Leigh, making mention of the marshalling of diverse Femmes with
one Baron, says, If a man do marry two wives, they shall be both placed on the
left side in the same Escocheon with him, as parted per Pale. The first wives
Coat shall stand on the Chief part, and the second on the Base. Or, he may set
them both in Pale with his own, the first wives Coat next to himself, and his
second uttermost. And if he have three wives, then the two first matches shall
stand on the Chief part, and the third shall have the whole Base. And if he
have a fourth wife, she must participate the one half of the Base with the
third wife; and so will they seem to be so many Coats quartered. But here you
must observe, that those forms of i^palings are meant of Hereditary Coats,
whereby the Husband stood in expectancy of advancing his Family, through the
possibility of receiving Issue, that so those Hereditary Possessions of his
wife might be united to his own Patrimony.

It was an ancient way of impaling to take half the Husbands Coat, and with
that to join as much of the Wives, as appears in an old Roll, wherein the
three Lions, being the Arms of England, are dimidiated and impaled with half
the Pales of Arragon. The like has also been practiced with quartered Coats,
by leaving out half of them, as in Example.

Dering having married the daughter and heir of Haut their Grandchild, leaving
out the left half of his Shield, did in that place impale his wives Arms,
whereof are many Examples. This being of the age of Henry the Seventh's time,
is both carved on Monuments and colored in Glass, and is in this manner
blazoned: He bears per Pale, Baron and Femme; the first of two Coats per
Fess, Or, a Saltire, Sable, by the Name of Dering. The second, Or, a Cross
engrailed, Gules, differenced with a Crescent, Argent, by the Name of Haute,
matched with Azure, a Lion rampant, Or, crowned Argent, by the Name of Darell.
This was thus born by John Dering of Surenden Dering in the County of Kent, Esquire
whose Grandmother was the Coheir of Haute, and his wife the sister of Sir John
Darell of Calehill in the said County, Knight. The Heir of which Family and Manor
of Surenden Dering is at present that excellent accomplished Gentleman Sir
Edward Dering, Baronet, from whose modesty (though he be the exact Pattern of
virtuous qualities for the Gentry of this Kingdom to admire and imitate) I am
to fear a check for this too brief Eulogie. From the other Coheir of the said
Haute is descended by Godwell Sir Thomas Roe Knight. whose deserts in Public
Service has made him famous. From the aforesaid Sir John Darell of the ancient
Family of Sezay in Yorkshire, did descend Sir Robert Darell of Calehill, Knight.
who by Jane Daughter and Coheir of Christopher Tolderby, Esquire left Issue four
Sons, the eldest of which was Sir John Darell, who married Elizabeth daughter
of Sir Edward, and sister to the abovesaid Sir Edward Dering.

He bears per Pale, Baron and Femme; the first of the two Coats, Luna, a Lion
rampant, Saturn, as King of Leons. the second, Mars, a Castle, Sol, as King of
Castile, impaled with Luna, three Bars, Jupiter, a Bordure, Mars, being the
Arms of the Earl of Pontife, whose Daughter the King of Leons and Castile
married.

Thus also the Arms of France and England are impaled for the French King Lewis
the Twelfth, and Mary his Wife, sister to our King Henry the Eighth, as is
apparent by Escocheons in colors of the same Age whilst they lived.

And for the Antiquity of bearing diverse Coats quartered in one Escocheon, the
same Author Francis de Rosiers, recites a Charter of Renate King of Angiers,
Sicily, and Jerusalem, etc. concerning his receiving of the Brethren of the
Monastery named Belprey, into his protection, Actum Nanceij, Anno 1435. adding
in the end thereof these words, Arma Arragoniae, Siciliae, Jerusalem, Andes.
Whereby (if I mistake him not) he gives us to understand that his Seal of Arms
did comprehend all these Coats born together quarterly in one Escocheon;
because he holds the same form of description of Seals of that kind
throughout all his Collection of Charters.

As touching this quarterly bearing of many Coats pertaining to sundry Families
together in one Escocheon, William Wicley does utterly mislike it, holding the
same to be better fitting a Pedigree to be locked up in a Chest, as an evidence
serving for approbation of the Alliances of Families, or Inducements to title
of Lands, rather than multitudes of them should be heaped together in or upon
any thing ordained for Military use: For Banners, Standards, and other like
Martial Ensigns, were ordained for no other use, but for a Commander to lead or
be known by in the Field; to which purpose these marks should be made apparent
and easy to be discerned, which cannot be where many Coats are thronged
together, and so become unfit to the Field, and therefore to be abolished of
Commanders.

Only he holds it expedient, that a Prince or Nobleman, having title to some
Country, for the obtaining whereof he is enforced to make war, should show
forth his Standard of the Arms of that Country quartered with his own, amongst
those people, which in right and conscience do owe him obedience; that they may
be thereby induced the sooner to submit themselves to him as to their true and
lawful Sovereign or Lord. So did Edward the third, King of England, when he set
on foot his title to the Kingdom of France, showing forth the Arms of France
quartered in his Royal Banner with the Arms of England. But for such persons as
are but Commanders under them, it is very absurd, since thereof ensue
oftentimes many dangerous errors; Et irrecuperabilis est error qui violentia
Martis committitur. Having before made mention of an Inescocheon, and of the
bearing of the Arms of the Femme by the Baron after Issue received by her, she
being an Inheritrix, I will now here give you an Example, as well to show the
occasion of such bearing, as also the manner and situation thereof.

The Field is Pearl, a Cross raguled and trunked, Diamond, the Paternal-Coat of
the Lord Sands, thereon an Inescocheon of two Coats born quarterly; the first
is Pearl, a Cheveron between three Eagles legs erazed a laquise, Diamond. The
second, Verry, three Bends, Ruby, both which are born by the Name of Bray. This
Coat Armor thus marshalled, was born by William Lord Sands that was Lord
Chamberlain to King Henry the Eighth (by whom he was advanced to that Dignity)
and took to Wife Margaret Bray, Daughter and heir of John Bray, and also Niece
and Heir to Reginald Bray a famous Banneret. This William Lord Sands, was
Father to Thomas Lord Sands, and Grandfather to William Baron Sands; and having
Issue by the said Margaret, did thereupon assume the bearing of her Arms upon
his own in an Inescocheon on this manner, which he could not have done unless
she had been an Heir, for otherwise he must have born the same still impaled,
and not otherwise, notwithstanding the Issue received by her. Some other
Examples of which kind of bearings are demonstrated unto you in these next
Escocheons.

He bears Azure, flory, a Lion rampant guardant, Argent, by the Name of
Holland, and with the Arms of Vlster, is the Coat Armor of Sir John Holland of
Quidenham in Norfolk, Baronet, descended from the Hollands of the ancient House
of Denton in Lancashire. The Inescocheon of Pretense is Gules, two Bars Ermyn,
on a Canton, Sable, a Ferdemoline, Argent, by the Name of Panton, and is thus
born by him in right of his Lady Alathea, Daughter and Coheir of John Panton of
Bruinshop in Denbighshire, Esquire who was Dowager of the Right Honorable William
Lord Sandys of the Vine in Hantshire, deceased.

He bears Argent, three Mascles, Sable, on a Chief of the second, as many
Lions rampant of the first, by the Name of Hanson. The Inescocheon of Pretense,
viz. a Lion passant in Chief, and three Daggers in Base with their Pomels
conjoined, and their points extended to the corners of the Escocheon, is the
Arms of Norton, and is thus born by Francis Hanson of Abingdon in Berkshire,
Esquire who is now married to Prudence, one of the Daughters and Coheirs of Sir
Thomas Norton of Coventrey in Warwickshire, Baronet.

He bears two Coats quarterly, with an Inescocheon of Pretense, viz. the
first per Bend Nebule, Or and Sable, a Lion rampant counterchanged, by the Name
of Sympson. The second, Argent, a Fess, Gules, between three Sparhawks, Sable,
by the Name of Oneslow. The third as the second, the fourth as the first. The
Inescocheon of Pretense, Azure, a Pile, Ermyn, by the Name of Wyche: This is
the bearing of Dr. John Sympson, son of Mr. John Sympson of Polton in
Bedfordshire, by Martha Daughter and Heir of George Oneslow of Oneslow in
Shropshire; he married Elizabeth Daughter and Heir of Richard Wyche, eldest
Brother of Sir Peter Wyche.

He bears four Coats quarterly, with an Inescocheon of Pretense, viz. the
first is Argent, three Cornish Choughs, proper, by the Name of Penneston. The
second is, Gules, a Fess between six Billets, Or, by the Name of Beauchampe of
Holt. The third is Gules, a Lion rampant, Argent, differenced with a Crescent,
by the Name of Mowbray. The fourth is quarterly, Or and Gules, a Bend of the
second, by the Name of Beauchampe Baron of Bedford. The Inescocheon is Argent,
a Fess, Gules, in Chief three Crosses botony of the second, by the Name of
Watson, all which, amongst many other quarterings, appertained to Sir Thomas
Penneston of Halsted in Kent, Knight. and Baronet, deceased, whose Wife Elizabeth
was Daughter and sole Heir of Sir Thomas Watson Knight. (Relict of Sir William Pope
Knight. eldest son to the Earl of Down, by whom he the said Sir Thomas Penneston
has Issue, by reason whereof he bears her Coat Armor in the Inescocheon: I
have omitted to blazon his Baronets mark, because it is not cut in the
Escocheon.

As for antiquity of bearing of Inescocheons, I find them very anciently used a
long time by the Emperors of Germany; for they always placed an Inescocheon of
their Paternal Coat on the breast of the Imperial Eagle. And also diverse noble
and worthy Families of this Land, used the like bearing in the several reigns
of sundry of our Kings, viz. in the time of Richard the second, Simon Burley
bare in an Inescocheon the Arms of Husly. In the time of Henry the fifth,
Richard Beauchampe the great Earl of Warwick, bare the Arms of Spenser and
Clare quarterly in an Inescocheon over his own Paternal Coat Armor, and many
other in like sort.

Concerning the bearing of the Wives Coat Armor by the Husband impaled, or
otherwise, there are some that do boldly affirm, That it is not permitted by
Law, but only tolerated through custom; and do (with Chassanaeus) allege for
proof thereof, Quod Arma non transeunt ad cognatos and affines, quia cognati
descendentes ex femina non sunt de familia: because by reason of her marriage
she renounceth the Name of the Family whereof she is descended, and assumeth
the Name of her Husbands Family, as we formerly showed, where we entreated of
differences which are not permitted to the Females. And an especial reason
thereof may be this, Quia Agnationis dignitas semper debet esse salva; the
Agnation (which is of the Fathers side) must be preserved entire, and therefore
the Honor or Arms of it not to be carried into another Family.

Now because some misunderstanding the Rule given in the sixth Chapter of the
first Section, where it is said, That to Daughter never were any differences
allowed, do hold, that the Husband in the impaling of his Wives Coat Armor
with his own, may omit such difference as her Father (admitting him to be a
younger Brother, or descended of a younger Brother) bore to distinguish him
from the elder brother; I think it not amiss here to observe unto the young
Student in Armory, that every Gentleman of Coat Armor which marries a
Gentlewoman whose Father did bear any difference in his Coat, ought in the
impalement of his Wives Arms to retain the same difference which her Father
bore, as in these Examples.

He bears Baron and Femme two Coats impaled; first, Ermyn, two Piles in
point, Sable, by the Name of Holles. The second, a Cross between 4 Nails, by
the Name of Pile, and is the Coat Armor of the Honorable Sir Francis Holles
of Wynterborne St. Martyn in Dorsetshire Baronet, only Son and Heir apparent of
the Right Honorable De^zel Baron Holles of Ifield, whose present Baronettess
is Anne Pile, the eldest Daughter and Coheir of Sir Francis Pile the second of
that Name of Compton-Beauchampe in Berkshire, Baronet.

He bears Baron and Femme, two Coats impaled; first, Sable, a Maunch, Argent,
within a Bordure, Or, an Orle of Lions paws in Saltire, Gules, by the Name of
Wharton, and is the Paternal Coat Armor of the Right Honorable Philip Lord
Wharton, Baron Wharton of Wharton in Westmoreland. The second, on a Cheveron 3
Mullets by the Name of Carr, and is so born by his Lordship in right of his
Lady Anne, Daughter of William Carr of Fernihast in the Kingdom of Scotland,
Esquire who was one of the Gentlemen of the Bedchamber to King James. By which
said Lady his Lordship has Issue William Wharton Esquire his fourth Son; and three
others by his former Lady.

He bears Baron and Femme; the first per Fess, Argent and Sable, a Fess
counter-imbattelled between three Falcons counterchanged, belled and jessed,
Or, by the Name of Thompson; impaled with Argent, a Cheveron between 3 Wolves
heads erazed, Gules, by the Name of Lovel. These Coats are thus born by Sir
Henry Thompson of Marston within the County of the City of York, Knight. who
married Susanna Daughter of Thomas Lovel of Skeleton in the North Riding of
Yorkshire.

He bears Baron and Femme; the first Ermyn, on a Chief, Azure, three Lions
rampant, Or, by the Name of Aucher; impaled with Azure, a Cheveron between
three Garbs, Or, by the Name of Hatton, and is thus born by Sir Anthony Aucher
of Bishopsbourn in Kent, Knight and Baronet, now married to one of the
Daughters of Sir Robert Hatton deceased, one of the Chamberlains of his
Majesty's Exchequer.

He bears Baron and Femme; the first, Vert, a Cheveron between three Bucks
standing at gaze, Or, by the Name of Robinson; impaled with Azure, crusily
three Cinquefoils, Argent, by the Name of Darcy. These Coats are thus born by
Sir Medcalf Robinson of Newby in the North Riding of Yorkshire, Baronet,
married to Margaret Daughter of Sir William Darcy of Witton-Castle in the
Bishopric of Durham.

He bears Baron and Femme two Coats impaled; the first, Sable, a Cheveron
engrailed between three Plates, each charged with a Pale, Gules, by the Name of
Dockwray. The second Paly of six Argent and Azure, on a Bend, Sable, a Sword of
the first, by the Name of Sanderson. These Coats thus marshalled are born by
Josias Dockwray Doctor of the Civil Law in both Universities of this Realm, and
now resideth at Nuburne in Northumberland, being Vicar thereof, where he has
built at his own cost a new Vicarage-house.

This Escocheon is parted per Pale Baron and Femme. The Baron's Arms are Gules,
a Fret, Argent, which belong unto the ancient Family of the Flemings, and which
are now enjoyed by Daniel Fleming of Rydal-hall in the County of Westmoreland,
Esquire who quarters the Arms of Vrswick, Lancaster, Hodleston, Millum, Boyvill,
Fenwick, Stappleton, Falconbridge, Fitz-Alan, Maltravers, Ingham, De la Pool,
and Chaucer. He is descended from (being next Heir-male of) Michael Fleming of
Gleaston-Castle in Aldingham within the County of Lancaster, and of
Caernarvon-Castle in Beckermet within the County of Cumberland; who being an
active young man, and related unto Baldwine Earl of Flanders, was sent over by
him with Forces to aid King William the Conqueror his Son in Law, and was
afterward sent Northward with diverse of his Contrymen, to oppose the Scots;
and a Colony of Flemings was placed at Carlisle by King William Rufus soon
after he had repaired the same, and built the Castle there. This Michael, for
his good service, had a very fair Estate given him in the said Counties; part
of which still continues in his Family and Surname: And as he was called
Fleming from Flanders his Native Country; so was Mitchel-Land (or
Michael-Land) in Lancashire denominated from him. He and his Posterity had
commonly in Records and Writings Le prefixed to their Surname, until King
Edward the fourth's time. this Michael placed Sir William le Fleming Knight. his
eldest son, at Aldingham aforesaid (to help to defend that shore against the
King's Enemies) whose Estate not long after did go with a Daughter to the
Cansfields, and from them in like manner to the Harringtons; and Sir Richard le
Fleming Knight. his second son, he seated at Beckermet aforesaid, who had that
Manor (with other Lands) given him, and whose Issue-Male does still enjoy the
same. From this Stem (its said) the Earls of Wigton in Scotland, and Barons of
Slane in Ireland, are branched forth. And although King Henry the first sent
most of the Flemings then in England unto Ross, a Country in Wales; yet he
permitted the said Michael and his Children to remain in Lancashire and
Cumberland, when many other of his Mothers kindred were removed. The Femme's
Arms are Argent, a Cross engrailed, Sable, between four Ogresses, charged with
as many Pheons of the first; which Arms the said Daniel Fleming does impale,
having married Barbara the eldest Daughter of Sir Henry Fletcher of Hutton in
the Forest within the County of Cumberland, Baronet, who being a Colonel for
the late King, engaged so heartily and valiantly in his service, as he raised a
Regiment of Foot for his Majesty, he assisted in the Defense of the City of
Carlisle, during all the time of that memorable Siege; and he was afterward
slain (with many other Noble and Loyal Persons on the King's side) in the Fight
at Routon-Heath, within two miles of the City of Chester, the 24th. day of
September. Anno Dom. 1645.

He bears Baron and Femme; the first, Argent, on a Chief^ Vert, three
Crescents of the Field, by the Name of Sympson. The second is Gyronny of four,
Argent and Gules, a Saltire between four cross Croslets, all counterchanged, by
the Name of Twisden; and is thus born by Sir John Sympson of the Inner Temple,
London, Knight. one of his Majesty's Sergeants at Law, descended from the ancient
Family of the Sympsons in the North of England; now married to Jane, eldest
Daughter of Sir Thomas Twisden of East-Malling in Kent, Knight and Baronet, one
of the Justices of his Majesty's Court of King's Bench.

He bears Baron and Femme, two Coats impaled; first, Azure, a Crescent,
Argent, by the Name of Lucie; impaled with Argent, on a Chief, Gules, two
Mullets, Or, by the Name of St. John. These Coats are thus born by Jacob Lucie
of the City of London, Esquire now married to Mary Daughter of John St. John of
Coldoverton in the County of Leicester, Esquire.

He bears per Pale Baron and Femme; first, Or, a Pile engrailed, Sable, by
the name of Waterhouse; impaled with Or, 3 Stars issuant from as many
Crescents, Gules, by the name of Bateman. These Coats are thus born by Edward
Waterhouse of Greenford in Middlesex, Esquire who married Elizabeth Daughter of
Richard Bateman, eldest Son of Robert Bateman Esquire Chamberlain of London.

He bears per Pale Baron and Femme; first, Gules, a Fess, Argent, between
three Plates, by the name of Minors; impaled with Or, two Bars, Gules, in
Chief three Torteuxes, by the name of Wake; and is thus born by Richard Minors
of London, Merchant, who married Elizabeth Daughter of Sir John Wake of
Clevedon in Somersetshire, Baronet.

He bears Baron and Femme; first, Sable, on a Cheveron embattelled, Or,
between 3 Pole-Axes, Argent, as many Pellets, by the name of Fryth; impaled
with Azure, on a Cheveron, Argent, between three Pheons, Or, as many Crosses
formy, Gules, by the name of Wightwick, in right of his wife Elizabeth, only
daughter of Francis Wigthwick of Wightwick in Com. praedict. Esquire These Coats
are thus born by Rowland Fryth of Thorns in Staffordshire, Gent.

This Escocheon is parted per Pale Baron and Femme. The first is Or, on a Fess
between three cross Croslets, Sable, as many Escallopshells of the first, by
the name of Huggen. The second is Argent, on a Bend, Gules, between two
Cotizes, Sable, three pair of wings joined in lewer as the first, in Chief a
Flower de Lis, for a difference by the name of Wingfield. The Husbands name,
whose Arms are here demonstrated, was Alexander Huggen, who took to wife
Elizabeth daughter of Humphrey Wingfield of Brantham in Suffolk, Esquire and of
Elizabeth his wife, daughter and coheir of Sir Thomas Nevill Knight. younger son of
Richard Nevill Lord Latimer; which Humphrey Wingfield being descended of Sir
Humphrey Wingfield Knight. a younger brother of the ancient Family of the
Wingfields of Letheringham in the said County, bore his Coat Armor so
differenced with the Flower de Lis.

But now to return to marshalling: If a Coat Armor that is bordured be born
sole of it self, then shall the bordure inviron the Coat round; but if such a
Coat be marshalled Paleways with another, as a marriage, then must that part of
the bordure which respects the Coat annexed, give place thereunto, whether
the Coat bordured be marshalled on the dexter part of the Escocheon, or the
sinister, as in Example.

This Escocheon is parted per Pale, Baron and Femme. The first is quarterly, Or
and Gules, a bordure, Sable, charged with Escallop-shells, Argent, by the name
of Henningham. The second, Checky, Or and Azure, a Fess, Ermyn, by the name of
Calthrop. Here you see that part of the bordure exempted that is next to the
impaled Coat; so should it also have been if the same had been marshalled on
the sinister side.

He bears per Pale Baron and Femme; the first, Sable, a Cheveron, Argent,
between three cross Croslets fitchee, Or, by the name of Strut. In the second
place or side, three Coats barrways; the first, Argent, a Fess, Vert, between,
three Torteuxes, by the name of Stanesmore. Secondly, Sable, a Cheveron between
three Cinquefoils, Ermyn, by the name of Woodhouse. Thirdly, per Cheveron,
Argent and Gules, a Crescent counterchanged, by the name of Chapman. These
Coats are thus born by Sir Deuner Strut of Little-Warley in Essex, Baronet, who
first married Dorothy daughter of Francis Stanesmore of Frowlesworth in
Leicestershire, Esquire secondly, Elizabeth daughter of Sir Thomas Woodhouse of
Kimberley in Norfolk, Knight and Baronet; and thirdly, Mary daughter of Thomas
Chapman of London.

He bears Baron impaled between his Femmes or Wives. The first, Argent, a
Lion rampant, Gules, within a Bordure, Sable, on a Canton, Azure, a Harp Or,
crowned, proper, by the name of Lane. On the dexter side, Gules, on a Bend, Or,
three Martlets, Sable, by the name of Brabazon. And on the sinister, quarterly,
Or and Gules, a Bend Verrey, by the name of Sackvile. These Coats with the Arms
of Vlster, are born by the Right Honorable Sir George Lane of Tulske in the
County of Roscomon in Ireland, Knight and Baronet, principal Secretary of
State, and Privy Councellor to his Majesty King Charles the Second in the
Kingdom of Ireland. He was first married to Dorcas daughter of Sir Anthony
Brabazon Knight. third son of Edward Lord Brabazon Baron of Atherdee; and brother
to the Right Honorable William Earl of Mead; and now married to the Lady
Francis Sackvile, fifth daughter (but second now living) to the Right
Honorable Richard Earl of Dorset.

He bears Baron impaled between his wives. The first, Gules, on a Bend, Or,
three Martlets, Sable, by the name of Collins. On the dexter side, Azure, a
Fess, between three Chesrooks, Or, by the name of Bodenham. On the sinister,
Argent, on a Bend, Gules, three Eaglets displayed, Or, by the name of Abington.
These Coats are thus born by Samuel Collins Dr. in Physic, late Fellow of
Trinity College in Cambridge, only son of John Collins, late Parson of
Retherfield in Sussex, descended from the ancient Family of the Collins of the
Counties of Somerset and Devon. First married to Anne eldest daughter of John
Bodenham Esquire descended from the ancient Family of the B^denhams of Wiltshire
and Herefordshire, by whom he has Issue Martha, and is now married to Dame
Katherine, Countess Dowager of Carnwath in Scotland, daughter of John Abington
of Dowdeswell in Glocestershire, Esquire. descended from the ancient Family of the
Abingtons of Glocestershire, by whom he has two daughters now living, viz.
Anne and Elizabeth.

He bears a Baron or Man impaled, or in Pale, between his 7 Femmes or Wives,
four on the dexter side, and three on the sinister, all barrways. And first in
the middle, Sable, Semy de Cinquefoils, a Lion rampant, Argent, by the name of
Clifton. Then in the chief dexter, Ruby, a Chevron between three Crosses
botony, Topaz, being the Coat of the Lady Penelope Rich, first wife of the said
Sir Gervas, daughter of the Right Honorable Robert Earl of Warwick. Secondly,
on the same side checky, Topaz and Sapphire, a Fess, Ruby, being the Coat of the
Lady Francis Clifford, daughter of the Right Honorable Francis Earl of
Cumberland, second wife of the said Sir Gervas. Thirdly, per Pale, Azure, and
Argent, a Griffon passant, counterchanged, by the name of Egioke, third wife.
Fourthly, in the base dexter, Gules, three Cheverons, Argent, by the name of
Meek, fourth wife. Fifthly, in the chief sinister, Argent, two Bars, Gules, in
chief, a Mullet, Sable, by the name of South, fifth wife. Sixthly, Argent, on a
Cheveron, Sable, three Caterfoils, Or, by the name of Air, being sixth wife.
Seventhly, Pearl, a Manch, Diamond, which is the Coat of the Lady Alice,
daughter of the Right Honorable Henry Hastings Earl of Huntington, the seventh
and last wife of the said Sir Ge^vas.

I will show you in like manner, how if a Coat Armor bordured be honored with
a Canton, quarter, etc. the bordure must in like manner give place unto them,
as in these next Examples may be seen.

He bears Gules, a Cheveron between three Lions paws, erected and erazed
within a bordure, Argent, on a chief of the second, an Eagle displayed, Sable,
by the name of Brown. Here you see the bordure gives place unto the chief.
Though this Coat may seem to be over much charged (to be good) yet the occasion
of the addition of the chief and Eagle thereupon being duly weighed, it is both
good and commendable bearing; for that it was given for some special service
performed by the first bearer hereof in Embassage to the Emperor.

He bearth Argent, three Palets, Gules, on a Canton of the second, a Spurr with
a rowel downwards, leathered, Or, a bordure engrailed, Sable, by the name of
Knight; and is born by Nathan Knight of Ruscombe in Ber^shire, Esquire As the
bordure does here give place to the Canton, so must it also to a Quarter, etc.
Tilliet, making mention of a Spurr, says, That gilt Spurrs were fit for the
dignity of a Knight, and white Spurrs for an Esquire; both Spurrs and Bridles
are necessary for men of command; yet with that caution wherewith Phoebus
admonished young Phaeton in guiding the Horses of the Sun, Parce puer stimulis,
and fortius utere loris.
Be sparing of thy Spurrs, but Bridle strongly use.


Note, that if a bordured Coat be to be marshalled amongst other Coats
quarterly, then shall no part of the bordure be omitted, but the bordure shall
environ the same round (except it be honored with a Chief, Canton, Quarter,
etc. as aforesaid) even as it were born alone of it self.

CHAP. II.
FRom such marshallings as do betoken marriage, I come to such as betoken a
gift of the Sovereign by way of augmentation. These are bestowed, either for
favor or merit; though the very winning of favor with Sovereign Princes must
be also reputed merit, because Principibus placuisse viris non ultima laus est;
To win great Princes love great praise it merits.

Of the first sort are all those Armorial signs which the Sovereign (to honor
the Bearer, and to dignifie his Coat Armor) does annex to the Paternal Coat of
some especial Favorites, imparting unto them some parcel of his Royal Ensigns
or Badges, that so he may transferr to Posterities some Monument of his
gracious Favor; and of those some are marshalled Paleways, and others
otherways.

Of the first sort are the next Escocheons, and their like, wherein the
priority of place is due to those of free gift, which must be marshalled on the
dexter side of the Escocheon, before the Paternal Coat, Ob reverentiam
munificentiae Regalis, as in Example.

The Lady Jane Seymour, afterward wife to King Henry the eighth, and mother to
the most noble Prince, King Edward the sixth, received as an augmentation of
Honor to her Family by the gift of the said King her Husband, these Arms born
on the dexter side of the Escocheon, viz. Sol, on a Pile, Mars, between six
Flowers de Lis, Jupiter, three Lions passant guardant of the first; impaled
with her Paternal Coat, viz. Mars, two Angels-wings Paleways inverted, Sol.
which said Coats are now born by the Right Noble John Duke of Somerset, etc.
and by the Right Honorable Edward Seymour of Maiden-Bradley in Wiltshire,
Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons, Treasurer of his Majesty's Navy,
and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.

Upon like consideration the said King Henry the eighth gave unto the Lady
Katherine Howard his fourth wife, in token of special favor, and as an
augmentation of Honor these Arms on the dexter part of this Escocheon, which
for like respect were preferred before her Paternal Coat, viz. Jupiter, three
Flowers de Lis in Pale, So^, between two Flanches, Ermyn, each charged with a
Rose, Mars, conjoined with her Paternal Coat, viz. Mars, a Bend between six
cross Croslets fitchee, Luna.

Moreover, the said King Henry the eighth for the respect aforesaid, gave unto
his sixth and last wife the Lady Katherine Parre, as an increase of Honor to
her and to her Family, these Arms on the dexter side of the Escocheon, viz.
Sol, on a Pale between six Roses, Mars, three others, Luna; annexed to her
Paternal Coat, scil. Luna, two Bars, Jupiter, a bordure engrailed, Saturn.

These may serve sufficiently to exemplify the bearing of augmentations or
additions of Honor annexed to Paternal Coat-Armours Paleways. Now shall follow
such as are marshalled with them after some other manner: for in some of them
there is annexed a part in a part; in other some, the whole in a part. By a
part in a part, I mean the annexing of a parcel of the Royal Ensigns or Badges
of the Sovereign in or upon some one portion of the Escocheon, as in or upon a
Canton, Chief, Quarter, etc. as follows in these next Examples.

He bears, Azure, the Wheel of a Water-mill, Or. This was the Coat Armor of
that worthy Gentleman Nicolas de Moline, a noble Senator of the magnificent
State of Venice, who being employed by the most noble Duke and the State in
Embassage to the sacred Majesty of our late dread Sovereign King James, upon
acceptable service by him performed both to his then Majesty and to the said
State, it pleased his Highness not only graciously to remunerate him with the
dignity of Knighthood in an honorable Assembly of many noble Peers, Ladies,
Knights and Gentlemen; but also for a further honor by his Highnesses Letters
Patents under his great Seal of England, to ennoblish the Coat Armor of the
said Nicolas de Moline, by way of augmentation, with a Canton, Argent, the
charge whereof does participate of the Royal Badges of the several Kingdoms of
England and Scotland, viz. of the red Rose of England, and Thistle of Scotland,
conjoined Paleways, as by the said Letters Patents appears in these words:
E^ndem Dominum Nicolaum de Moline in frequenti Procerum nostrorum praesentia,
Equitem aur atum merito creavimus. Et insuper equestri huic dignitati in
honoris access^onem adjecimus, ut in avito Clypeo gentilitio Cantonem gestet
argenteum, cum Angliae Rosa rubente partita and Scotiae Carduo virente
conjunctum: Quae ex Insignibus nostris Regiis speciali nostra gratia
discerpsimus, ut virtuti be^e merenti suus constaret honor: Et nostrae in
tantum virum benevolentiae testimonium in perpetuum extaret.

He bears, Argent, a Chief, Azure, over all a Lion rampant, Gules, crowned,
Or. This was the Coat Armor of Sir Henry St. George, Knight. Richmond Herald, who
being employed by the Sacred Majesty of our dread Sovereign King Charles the
first, to Gustavus Adolphus King of Swedeland, Anno Dom. 1627. when the Order
of the Garter was sent to that King, was not only remunerated by the said King
of Swedeland with the dignity of Knighthood, but also by Letters Patents under
the said Kings great Seal, had his Coat Armor by way of augmentation, adorned
with a Canton, Or, charged with the Arms of the Kingdom of Swedeland, viz. in
an Escocheon, Azure, three Crowns, as by the said Letters Patents, bearing date
the 26 day of September, in the Year of our Lord God 1627. appears. This kind
of augmentation agreeing in nature with the former, I thought not amiss to
insert here. These Arms thus marshalled, as in the Escocheon is demonstrated,
may receive this blazon, He bears, Argent, a Chief, Azure, over all a Lion
rampant, Gules, crowned, Or, on a Canton of the fourth, an Escocheon as the
second, charged with three Crowns. Here in this blazon I tell not the color of
the Crowns, it being Or, for the reason given page 203. And here I think it not
impertinent to the matter here handled, to treat of such augmentations as our
late Sovereign King James, of happy memory, granted to Baronets of this Kindom,
who for certain disbursments toward the Plantation in Vlster in the Kingdom of
Ireland, created diverse into this dignity, and made it hereditary. To which
Baronets his said Majesty by decree granted, that they and their descendants
shall and may bear, either in a Canton in their Coat of Arms, or in an
Inescocheon at their Election, in a field, Argent, a hand, Gules; examples of
which bearing by Baronets you may find in diverse places of this present Book.
But here I cannot but give a Caveat to those worthy Personages, who have been
created into this dignity, that they should be more careful than many of them
have formerly been, in bearing of this worthy augmentation: for there are some
of these, who being misinstructed by some Pr^tenders to the Knowledge of
Armory, have very incongruously, and contrary to the Rules of Heraldry, without
consultation had with any Officer of Arms, marshalled this augmentation with
their own Arms in places improper.

He bears quarterly, crenelle, Gules and Or. In the first quarter upon a
Tower, Argent, a Lion passant guardant. Secondly, Vert, a Buck passant within
an Orle of Trefoils slipped, Or. The third as the second, the fourth as the
first. These Coats are thus born by Sir John Robinson of the City of London,
Alderman, Knight and Baronet, and Lieutenant of his Majesty's Tower of London.

He bears, Or, on a Fess, between two Cheverons, Sable, 3 Crosses form of
the field, a Canton, Gules, charged with a Lion of England, being the Coat of
Sir John Walpoole Knight. Cornet to the late King in his own Troop; to memorate
whose prudence and courage in his Majesty's Service, particularly at
Croplady-bridge, Letithiel, the first Newberry, Rowton, Naseby, and other
places, his Majesty by Sir Edward Walker, Garter King at Arms, conferred this
Canton for an augmentation, and for his Crest an Arm holding the Cornet-Royal,
therein the Kings Motto, Dieu and mon Droit.

The Honorable Sir Edward Walker Knight. Garter, Principal King at Arms, and one
of the Clerks of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, bears 2 Coats
quarterly; first, Argent, on a Cross, Gules, five Leopards heads, Or, being an
augmentation to his Paternal Coat, viz. Argent, a Cheveron between three
Crescents, Sable. The third as the second, the fourth as the first.

He bears quarterly, Sable and Argent, in the first and fourth three Mullets
of the second, by the name of Newman; and is the Coat Armor of Richard Newman
of Fiffield-Magdalen in Dorset-shire, Esquire and as an augmentation of Honor, his
present Majesty King Charles the second, for the good service and imprisonmet
of Richard Newman Father of the said Richard, in the late Civil Wars, did
grant to him and his Family the said augmentation, viz. Gules, a Percullis
crowned, Or.

He bears quarterly, first, Vert, a Bend Lozenge, Or. Secondly, per Cheveron,
Argent and Sable, three Cinquefoils counterchanged. The third as the second,
the fourth as the first, by the Name of Knight; over all as an augmentation of
Honor in an Escocheon, Argent, St. George's Cross, is the bearing of John
Knight of Durham-yard in the Parish of St. Martins in the fields in Com.
Middlesex, Esquire Principal Surgeon to his Majesty King Charles the second.

Sometimes these augmentations are found to be born upon a Chief of the
Escocheon, above the Paternal Coat, as in this next Example.

The Field is Topaz; two Bars, Sapphire, a Chief quarterly, Jupiter and Mars,
on the first two Flowers de Lis, Sol; the second charged with one Lion passant
guardant of the last; the third as the second, the fourth as the first. This
Coat belongs to the Right Honorable the Earl of Rutland, Lord Rose of
Hamlake, Trusbut and Belvoire, which was given in augmentation to this Family,
they being descended of the Blood Royal from King Edward the fourth. This also
is a form of bearing of a part in a part: for here is abated one Flower de Lis
of the Arms of France, and two Lions of the Arms of England, and born on the
chief part of the Escocheon.

Now in the next place, by the Whole in a part, I mean the bearing of the Royal
Ensigns of the Sovereign wholly in some part of the Escocheon, as in Example.

The Field is Topaz, a Fess of the Sovereign Ensigns within a bordure
Gobonated, Pearl and Sapphire. This Coat Armor appe^tained to the most noble
and truly honorable Edward Somerset, late Earl of Worcester, etc. deceased, a
Noble Peer, whose great Virtues were every way correspondent to the greatness
of his place and honor. But the present Marquess of Worcester, who is Earl of
Glamorgan, Baron Herbert of Chepstow, Ragland, and Gower, Lord Lieutenant of
the Counties of Gloucester, Hereford, and Mo^mouth, President of Wales and of
the Marshes, Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter, and one of the Lords of
his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc. bears within a Garter, and a
bordure Gobony, Pearl and Sapphire quarterly, France and England.

Thus much for tokens of the Sovereigns Favor: which kind of gifts, though the
proceed also from high merit (for the most part) in the receivers, yet we
rather entitle them favors than merits, because their gratitude is the
greater, by whom such Princely regards are rather imputed to their Sovereigns
mere bounty, than to their own desert.

CHAP. III.
IN the precedent Chapter enough has been said of augmentations or additions
of Honor bestowed by the Sovereign in token of Princely Favor: Now of such as
he gives in remuneration of merit, either immediately by himself, or mediately
by his General or Vicegerent, either in requital of acceptable service
performed, or for encouragement to future honorable attempts, which is then
chiefly effected when virtue is duly rewarded. Such remunerations are conferred
upon men employed either in warfare (be it secular or spiritual) or in affairs
civil.

Of the first sort were those that were professed in the several orders of
spiritual Knighthood of late use in this Land, but now abolished, viz. the
Knights of Saint John of Jerusalem, and Knights Templers; of which the first is
the chiefest, whose beginning, says Sir John Fern, was in the time of Godfrey
first Christian King of Jerusalem.

The profession of this Order was to fight for Gods honor against the
Infidels, and (as they were taught by the Romish Synagogue) for holy St. John.
This Order was begun in the Year of Grace 1120. Their Habit was a long Gown or
Robe of black, with a white Cross upon the breast. The Ensign Armorial of their
Order was an Escocheon, Gules, a plain Cross, Argent. And this is now known for
the Arms of Savoy, by reason that the first Amadeus or Amy, Earl of Savoy,
being in Arms with the Brethren of this spiritual Knighthood at the siege of
Acres, after that their Grand-master was slain by the Saracens, least the
Infidels should thereupon take a greater confidence of Victory by knowledge of
his death, at their request he did put on the Armor of their slain General,
and the long Robe of black Cloth, with the Arms of the said Order, and then
demeaned himself with such valor in Battle, that after he had slain the
Admiral of the Saracens with his own hand, he sunk and put to flight the most
part of their Foists, Ships, and Galleys, and in fine, redeemed the City of
Acres from a perilous Naval siege.

For which benefit done to Religion, the Knights of the said Order requested
the said Earl of Savoy to advance for his Coat Armor this Ensign here
mentioned. Since which time, all those that entered the said Order, have also
had their Paternal Coat Armor insigned with this Cross on the Chief of their
Paternal Coat, as follows.

He bears two Coats quarterly, the first is parted per Fess Undee, Sable and
Azure, a Castle, with four Towers, Argent. The second is Or, on a Cheveron,
Vert, three Ravens heads erazed, Argent; the third as the second, the fourth as
the first, ensigned all over with a Chief, Gules, and thereon a Cross of the
third. This Coat Armor thus marshalled, was born by the Name of Rawson, Knight
of this Order, and sometime Lord Prior of the late dissolved Priory of
Kylmaneham, situated near to the City of Dublin within the Realm of Ireland.
Such remunerations as are bestowed upon military persons secular, are these
that follow and their like.

He bears, Argent, on a Bend, Gules, between three Pellets, as many Swans,
proper, rewarded with a Canton sinister, Azure, thereupon a demi Ram mounting,
Argent, armed, Or, between two Flowers deLis of the last, over all a Battoon
dexterways, as the second in the Canton. Here you may note by the way, that it
is no fault to repeat any word in the blazon of this Canton which was used in
the blazon of the Paternal Coat, this Canton being upon the occasion here
declared, added to the Paternal Coat. This Coat Armor thus marshalled
pertained to Sir William Clarke Knight. deceased, by hereditary descent from Sir
John Clarke his Grandfather, who took in lawful wars Lewis de Orleans Duke of
Longevile and Marquess of Rotueline prisoner, at the journey of Bomy by
Terovane, the sixteenth day of August, Ann^ Henr. 8. 5. In memory of which
service the Coat Armor of the Duke was given him, marshalled on a Canton
sinister in this manner, by special commandment from the King, who sent his
Warrant to the Heralds, willing and requiring them to publish the same
authentickly under their hands and seals, for continuance of the memory thereof
to Posterity ensuing; which was performed accordingly: the substance and effect
whereof, together with this Coat, is expressed upon the Monument of the said
Sir John Clarke in the Church of Tame in the County of Oxford. In this Coat is
confirmed my Assertion formerly set down, touching as well the use, as the
dignity of the Canton sinister, which in worth is equal to the dexter Canton,
though not so usually born.

He bears per Fess, Or and Gules, a Lozenge counterchanged, rewarded with a
Canton, Azure, thereon a Lion supporting a Curtelas blade, chained and
collared, Argent, by the Name of Kirk; and is born by Sir John Kirk of
Eastham in the County of Essex, Knight. one of the Band of Gentlemen Pensioners in
Ordinary to his Majesty King Charles the second, and Receiver and Paymaster of
the said Band by Patent under the great Seal of England; which said Sir John is
descended from Sir David Kirk Knight. who was Governor and Proprietor of
Newfoundland in America. This augmentation was given to the said Sir David
Kirk, to Lewis Kirk Governor of Canada, and to Captain Thomas Kirk
Vice Admiral of the English Fleet, and to their Descendants, for their good
services done in encountering and vanquishing the French Navy under the Command
of Monsieur de Rockmond then Admiral, and bringing the said Admiral prisoner to
England; and for taking the said Country of Canada then belonging to the
French, which was fortified by them, in which Expedition the said Sir David
took Monsieur Champlaine their Governor, and brought him prisoner to England.

To these donative augmentations of Arms, I will add certain Arms Assumptive,
which are such as a man of his proper right may assume as the guerdon of his
valorous service, with the approbation of his Sovereign, and of the Herald. As
if a man being no Gentleman of blood or Coat Armor, or else being a Gentleman
of blood and Coat Armor, shall captivate or take prisoner in any lawful wars
any Gentleman, great Lord or Prince (as says Sir John Fern) he may bear the
shield of that prisoner, and enjoy it to him and his heirs for ever, if the
same be not by like infortune regained, be he Christian or Pagan, for that is
but a vain and frivolous distinction. These are such as the Bearers or some of
their Ancestors have forced from the enemy, either in compelling him to flight,
and so to forsake his Arms or Ensigns, or by strong hand surprise him prisoner,
in justo bello, or having slain him, so gained to himself ( jure gentium) an
absolute interest in the Ensigns of his conquered Foe. And in this sense may
that assertion of Bertolus be verified, where he says, Et jam populares
propria authoritate arma sibi assumere possunt; but not otherwise, because the
base sort of men having no generous blood in them, are not capable of Armorial
Ensigns, which are the badges of noble disposition or generous birth, and
therefore they ought not to be bestowed upon such persons, Quia entia nolunt
male disponi, Arist. Met. But in this sense it may be understood that he that
is not descended of gentle blood, is holden worthy to bear the Coat Armor that
he has gained, for the apparent tokens of virtue and valor that are found in
him. That the vanquisher may bear the Arms of the vanquished, I shall make
apparent by this next Example.

The Field is Topaz, a Lion rampant, Diamond, langued and armed, Ruby. Peter
Balthazar in his Book of the Descents of the Foresters and Earls of Flanders,
says, That the Arms now born by the Earls of that Country, were won by Philip
of Alsace, the sixth Earl thereof, about the Year of Redemption 192. (what time
he made his Voyage into the Holy Land) from Nobilion King of Albania, a Turk,
whom he had put to flight, and slain with his own hands in a Battle. And this
is the Justice of the Law Military, Quia dominium rerum justo bello captarum in
victorem transfertur, as Ayala observes. Yet this is of many men holden a
thing very injurious, for that oftentimes the more valourous man by mere
casualty falls into the hands of the less valiant, and the most worthy is
often surprised by him that in comparison is of no worth at all. Nevertheless,
the Law whereupon this Custom is grounded, is equal and just, albeit the event
thereof falls out oftentimes very hardly, as notes Cassius, saying, Meliores
in bello victi quandoque detericribus parere compelli videntur. For the
Lawmakers did providently ordain for encouragement of men of action, that the
Victor shall be rewarded on this manner: For albeit the faculties and inward
indowments of the mind can by no means be discovered, whereby each man ought to
receive remuneration answerable to the true measure, of his worth and valor,
yet did they prudently provide for the rewarding of them: In quibus vestigia
quaedam and quasi expressae imagines verae fortitudinis and magnanimitatis
apparent. And Balthazar Ayala says, Quod dicunt justo bello capta fieri
capientium, non solum in rebus sed etiam personis liberis jure gentium and
civili receptum fuit, ut mancipia fierent capientium. If then the persons of
the vanquished be subject to this Law, it were an absurd thing to think that
the possessory things of the vanquished should be more privileged than their
owners that are interessed in them.

CHAP. IV.
COncerning Coat-Armours marshalled within the Escocheon, whereof the occasions
are manifest, we have hitherto entreated; now of such as have their occasions
less manifest. Those are such as being hereditary Coat-Armours are so obscurely
marshalled in one Escocheon, as that thereby the beholder can yield no reason
or yet conjectural probability of such their union, nor may well discern them
to be distinct Coats: So as it often falls out that they are mistaken for
some new coined Coat, rather than two Coats of distinct Families, and so
reckoned to be a Coat too bad to be born. And such marshalling is either one
above another, or one upon another. Of the first sort may we reckon the
Coat Armor of Brown before exemplified, as also these following and their
like.

He bears per Pale, Gules and Sable, on a Cross engrai^ed, Argent, five
Lozenges, Purpure, on a Chief, Or, three Eagles legs erazed a ^aquise, Azure,
by the Name of Mundy of Marketon and Quarndon in Derbyshire, descended from Sir
John Mundy Lord Mayor of the City of London, Anno 1522.

He bears, Sable, an Eagle displaied, Or, on a Chief, Azure, bordured,
Argent, a Cheveron between two Crescents above, and a Rose below, Or, by the
Name of Mynors. This form of marshalling of diverse Coats does Vpton approve, in
case where a man has large Possessions by his Mother, and small Patrimony from
his Father, then he may bear his Mothers Arms wholly on the nether part of the
shield, and his Fathers on a Chief, in this manner. And for the better
approbation hereof, he sets down an exemplary Coat, which he blazoneth after
this manner: Portat unum signum capitale de nigro, and tres Rosas rube as in
campo aureo, cum uno capite rubeo, and tribus talentis in eodem. Upon some such
like consideration it may seem that these, being formerly the Coat-Armours of
two distinct Families, were conjoined as in this Escocheon appears, but now
being both thus united, and withal invested in the blood of the bearer, through
custom and tract of time concurring, reckoned but one Coat, and born by one
name.

Another form of bearing of diverse Coats (upon like occasion) much different
from this, does the same Author commend, that is to say, the bearing of the
Mothers Arms upon the Fathers (by the heir) in a Bend: And this does he reckon
to be the best manner of bearing such Arms, saying, Optimus certe modus
portandi diversa arma in uno scuto habetur in istis Bendis, quia habens
patrimonium a suo patre dimissum, and alias certas terras per matrem sibi
provenientes, quibus quidem terris maternis certa appropriantur Arma ab
antiquo, ut forte quia ipsa arma materna sortiuntur nomen progeniei suae; Tunc
ipse haeres, si voluerit, potest portare Arma integra sui patris in scuto
plano, and in tali Benda potest portare Arma materna. Of this form of bearing
you may see a demonstration in this next Eschocheon.

He bears, Gules, a Cross flurte, Or, on a Bend, Azure, three Flowers de Lis
of the second, by the Name of Latimer. The first and undermost of these was of
it self a perfect Coat, and born by the Name of Latimer, before the Bend thus
charged was annexed: And that this Coat born on the Bend is also a perfect
Coat, you shall perceive, if by Vpton's direction you reduce the Bend into the
form of an Escocheon, and place the three Flowers de Lis in the corners of the
same. I see not, but a man may as well say, that the bearing of Arms of the
Husband or of the Wife one upon another on a Fess, were as good and lawful, as
upon a Bend, Quia similium similis est ratio. But these may seem rather to be
conceited forms than received grounds of marshalling; otherwise their use would
have been more frequent. But the most approved sorts of marshalling with us are
those beforementioned, viz. impaling, quartering, and bearing in an Inescocheon.

Not unaptly may these Coats be said to be obscurely marshalled, when the
occasion thereof cannot be either certainly discerned, or yet probably
conjectured, neither can it be with reason conceived, whether the Superior be
born for the Fathers Coat, or for the Mothers. And thus much shall suffice
concerning Coat-Armours marshalled within the Escocheon.

CHAP. V.
AMongst the various bearings of Coat Armor in this Book, the Author, Mr.
Guillim, has given no example of the bearing of women in a Lozenge, as not
under Covert Baron; which being very necessary to be taken notice of, I have
here inserted the Arms of o^e few, who for their Virtues and generous
Educations, may deservedly be made the Patterns of Bearings in this kind. This
manner of bearing in Lozenges by unmarried women, may seem to take its rise or
original from the Fusil or Spindle of Yarn, single women being called
Spinsters, Nunquam a Lancea transibat ad fusum, says Favine, speaking of
Salique Land, It never past from the Lance to the Fusil, Lozenge, or Spindle.
But Plutarch gives a more noble and ancient derivation of this form of bearing,
where he tells us in the life of Theseus, That in the City of Megara (in his
time) the Tombs of Stone wherein the bodies of the Amazons lay in^erred, were
cut in the form or fashion of a Lozenge, in imitation of their shields,
according to the manner of Greece.

She bears in a Lozenge per Pale Baron and Femme, 2 Coats impaled. The first
Diamond, 3 Bucks heads cabosed, Pearl, attired, Topaz, by the name of
Cavendish. The second, Topaz, a Saltire and Chief, Ruby, by the Name of Bruce.
This is the Achievement of that great and virtuous Lady Christian, Countess
Dowager, of Devonshire, Widow of the Right Honorable William Cavendish, Baron
of Hardwick, and Earl of Devonshire, Mother of the Right Honorable William now
Earl of Devon, and Daughter of the Right Honorable Edward Lord Bruce, and
Sister to the Right Honorable Thomas Earl of Elgin, etc.

She bears in a Lozenge per Pale Baron and Femme. The first Vert, a
Cinquefoil within a bordure engrailed, Argent, by the Name of Ashley. The
second Sable, on a Fess between three Crosses pattee, Or, as many Martlets of
the Field, by the Name of Samwayes; which said Coats were born by Anne Samwayes
Lady Dowager Ashley, the Widow of Sir Francis Ashley of Dorchester in the
County of Dorset, Knight. one of the elder Sergeants at Law unto K. Charles the
first; which Lady deceased on the 10th of June 1649. aged 66 years and six
days, whose body lies invaulted with the body of her Husband, who deceased
about the same age, in the Chancel of the great Church of St. Peter in
Dorchester aforesaid.

She bears in a Lozenge Baron and Femme, the first a Cross, between four
Nails, by the Name of Pile. The second, Argent, Gutte de L'eau, three Roses,
Gules, barbed proper, by the Name of Still; which Coats are born by Jane Still
Baronettess, Dowager Pile, the Widow of Sir Francis Pile, the second of that
Name, of Compton-Beauchampe in the County of Berks, Baronet.

She bears two Coats impaled; the first, Gules, Semy de Mulle^s, Or, 3 Swords
barways proper, the middlemost encounttring the other two, a Canton per Fess,
Argent and Vert, thereon a Lion of England, by the Name of Chute. The second,
Argent, a Cheveron, Gules, between three Flowers de Lis, Sable, by the Name of
Dixwell; which Coats were thus impaled by Elizabeth Daughter of Mark Dixwell of
Brom in Barham in Kent, Esquire late wife of Edward Chute of Surrenden in
Bethersden in the said County, Esquire.

Thus much for the bearing of Widows, who may on no pretense whatsoever bear
either their Paternal-Coat, or their Husbands single; for if in an Escocheon or
Shield, then it will be taken for the bearing of a man, and if in a Lozenge,
then the bearing proper for a Maiden Gentlewoman.

She bears in a Lozenge, as the bearing of a Maiden Lady, two Coats
quarterly. First, Gules, two Wings conjoined or impaled, Or, by the Name of
Seymour. Secondly, Or, a Fess engrailed, Azure, between three Escallops, Gules,
by the Name of Prinne. The third as the second, the fourth as the first. This
is the Coat of Frances Seymour, Daughter of Francis Lord Seymour of Troubridge,
etc. by Frances Daughter and Coheir of Sir Gilbert Prinne Knight.

Ermyn, two Piles in point, Sable, by the Name of Holles; which Coat in a
Lozenge did belong unto the daughters of the Honorable Sir Francis Holles of
Winterborn Saint Martin in Dorsetshire, Baronet, by the Baronettess, Lucy Carr
his wife, viz. Mrs. Mary Holles the eldest by birth and heiress apparent, was
born the first of June 1662. deceased the same day, and was invaulted in
Holles-South-Isle at Ifield in Sussex. By Mrs. Denzella Holles the second, who
during life was heiress apparent; she was born September the fourth, 1667.
deceased January the fourth, 1668. and was invaulted in the same place with her
sister. And by Mrs. Jane Holles, who was born on Saturday, April the twentieth,
1672. and deceased on Tuesday, December the sixteenth, 1673. aged one year
seven months and six and twenty days, and was invaulted in Holles-South-Isle at
Ifield aforesaid.

She bears in a Lozenge two Coats quarterly. The first, Argent, a Maunch,
Sable, by the Name of Hastings. The second, Or, a Fess engrailed, Azure,
between three Escallops, Gules, by the Name of Prinne. This is the Coat of that
accomplished Lady Katherine Hastings, daughter and Coheir of Sir George
Hastings, brother of the Right Honorable Henry Earl of Huntington, and of
Seymour Daughter and Coheir of Sir Gilbert Prinne Knight.

She bears in a Lozenge, Azure, a Fess wavy between three Coats heads erazed,
Argent, by the Name of Sedley; and is the Coat Armor of Katherine Sedley, sole
Daughter and Heir of Sir Charles Sedley of Southfleet in Kent, Baronet.

She bears in a Lozenge, as a Maiden Lady, Ermyn, a Saltire, Gules, by the
Name of Lewis, and is the Coat of Anne Lewis of Pengwerne in Merionethshire.

She bears quarterly, first, Sable, a Lion rampant, Argent, by the Name of
Williams. Secondly, Argent, a Cheveron between 3 cross Croslets, Sable, by the
Name of Anderson. The third as the second, the fourth as the first. These Coats
are thus born by Madam Elizabeth Williams of Denton in Lincolnshire, sole
Daughter and Heir of Richard Williams of the said place, Esquire.

CHAP. VI.
IN the former Chapters has been treated of such Coat-Armours as are
marshalled within the Escocheon; in order it now succeeds to speak of
marshalling without the Escocheon.

These are certain Ornaments externally annexed to the Coat Armor of any
Gentleman, by reason of his advancement to some honor or place of eminency by
the gracious favor of the Sovereign, as an honorable addition to his generous
birth. Of these there are diverse particulars, which being conjoined and annexed
to a Coat Armor, do constitute an Achievement.

An Achievement, according to Leigh, is the Arms of every Gentleman well
marshalled with the Supporters, Helmet, Wreath and Crests, with Mantles and
Words, which of Heralds is properly called in Blazon Heawme and Timbre. The
French word Heaulme, which we call in English an Helmet, seems to have given
derivation to that word Heawme. And the word Timmer to our Timbre; for that in
the Almain Tongue is the same that we in Latin call Apex, or Summitas
acuminata, and betokens the Crest that is usually born upon the Helmet: For
so does Kiltanus Dufflene expound it, calling it, Timber of Timber van Den
Helm, which is as much to say, as Crista galeae, Conus galeae, Summus Apex.

Note, that the general words used by Leigh, in his said description of an
Achievement, must be restrained only to those particular persons to whom
Supporters (either by Law or by Custom) are properly due; for that none under
the degree of a Knight Banneret may bear his Arms supported. And in some
Countries (as by name in Burgundy, says Chassaneus) it is not permitted to
persons inferior to the degree of a Knight, to Timber their Arms, that is to
say, to adorn them with Helmet, Mantle, Crest, etc. as Chassaneus notes,
saying Nulli licitum est, nec solet quis Timbra^e Arma sua, nisi sit saltem
Eques militaris, vulgo Chevalier. But with us the custom is otherwise; for in
bearing of Arms each particular Country has something peculiar to it self,
and has her proper customs which have the vigor of a Law, Quia consuetudo,
ubi Lex scripta non est, valet quantum Lex ubi scripta est. Therefore herein
the custom of each Country is to be respected, Specialis enim consuetudo
vincit legem in eo loco ubi est consuetudo, dummodo post legem fuerit inducta,
alias vincitur a lege superveniente. But it may seem that such bearing is
rather tolerated through custom, than allowed in the strict construction of
the Law of Arms.

Now that the things so externally annexed to Coat Armor, and also the order
of their placing may the better be conceived, I will handle each part by it
self, wherein I will ensue that course of Natures Method, which Zanchius says,
was by Moses observed in the History of the Creation, which is, a principiis
componentibus ad res compositas. The parts compounding are those before
mentioned, viz. the Helmet, Mantle, Crest, etc. of which some have place above
the Escocheon, some under it, some round about it, some on each side of it.

Of the first sort are the Helmet, Mantle, Escroule, Wreath, Crown, Cap, etc.
And forasmuch as with us the Nobles are divided into Nobiles majores, as Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Vicounts, Barons and Bannerets; and into Nobiles minores, as
Knights, Esquires, and ordinary Gentlemen; and that to these particular degrees
there are allotted sundry forms of Helmets, whereby their several states are
discerned: I will exemplify their diverse fashions, beginning with the
Inferior sort (for that is the progress proper to degrees or steps) and so
ascend to the highest; as in Example.

This form of Helmet, placed side-long and close, does Ger. Leigh attribute to
the dignity of a Knight; but in mine understanding, it fitteth better the
calling of an Esquire, whom we do call in Latin Scutifer, and Homo ad ^^a. Of
these each Knight (in time past) had two to attend him (...) the ^arrs
whithersoever he went, who bare his Helmet and Shield before him; forasmuch as
they did hold certain Lands of him in Sc^tag^, as the Knight did hold of the
King by Military service. And they were called S^ntiferi (says the learned
Clarenceaux) a Scuto ferende, ut olim scutarij Romany dicti, qui vel a C^peis
gentilitus, quos in nobilitatis Insignia gestabant, vel quia Principibus and
Mujoribus illis Nobilibus ab Armis erant, nomen traxerunt.

This kind of service is exceeding ancient, as we may see of Abimelech, of whom
it is said, Quare inclamans celeriter puerum Armigerum edixit ei; Stringe
gladium tuum and morti trade me, ne dicant de me, mulier interfecit me. Also 1 Samuel 17. it is sai^, Et qui Scutum ferebat, antecedebat eum: And a little
after, Verse 41. Viro illo, qui fe^ebat scutum praecedaente eo. Since then the
office of these Esquires or Pages, as some do name them, was to precede their
Commander upon whom they attended, bearing those his Military Habiliments, it
fitteth well the respective care that they ought to have for the execution of
his directions, oftentimes with a regardful Eye, and attentive Ear, to observe
and listen what he will prescribe them: and therefore the Helmet, born thus
sidelong (if I err not in my understanding) does denote unto us attention and
obedience, and therefore is properly attributed to the dignity of a Knight, to
whom (among those that we call Nobiles minores) it pertains in Martial
Affairs, to give and not attend directions.

This form of Helmet (in my conceit) does best quadrate with the dignity of a
Knight, though Leigh improperly uses the same; the same (I say) in regard of
the direct standing thereof, but diverse in this, that the Beaver of that is
close, and this open. For he assigns this to the degree of an Esquire,
wherein I altogether dissent, as well for that the full faced Helmet does
signify direction or command, like as the former presents attention and
obedience, as also for that it is a greater honor to bear the Beaver open than
close; the close bearing signifying a buckling on of it, as a preparation to
the Battle, and the open Beaver betokens a return from Battle with glory of
Victory. So said Ahab King of Israel to the messenger that he sent to Benhadad
King of Syria; Tell him, Let not him that girdeth his harness boast himself, as
he that puts it off: which Tremellius thus interprets, Qui induit arma
pugnaturus, ne ita gloriator ac si victoria parta illa deponeret; that is,
according to the vulgar saying, We must not triumph before the Victory. And for
a further proof that this form is more agreeable to the dignity of a Knight
than the former, you must observe, that if among Nobiles majores, or their
Superiors (having Sovereign Jurisdiction) it be reckoned a chief token of
Honor to bear their peculiar Helmets full faced and open; then doubtless,
amongst Nobiles minores, it is no less Honor for Knights (who amongst them
have a kind of Superiority) to bear their Helmets after the same manner: Illud
enim est melius, quod optimo est propinquius; and in eodem casu idem jus
statuendum est.

This fashion of sidelong Helmet and open faced with gardevisure over the
sight, is common to all persons of Nobility under the degree of a Duke, whereof
a Baron (says Leigh) is the lowest that may bear the same on this manner. And
of these each one is subordinate unto other, as well in Jurisdiction, as in
rank of Nobility, as Chassaneus notes, saying, Sicut Rex debet habere sub se
december Duces, ita Dux debet habere december Comites, seu Marchiones; and Comes seu
Marchio december Barons, and Baro december Feudatores. And for these respects, if I
be not deceived, do they all bear their Helmets sidelong, for that each one of
them attends the directions of the other, to whose Jurisdiction they are
subjected.

The word Gardevisure, corruptly imprinted Gardeinsure, is a French term,
devised for the more apert expressing of the use thereof; forasmuch as they do
serve for the safeguard and defense of the face; for so may we lawfully invent
words in case we want apt terms to express the nature and use of things, as
Lipsius well notes, saying, Datur venia novitati verborum rerum obscuritatibus
inservienti.

Moreover, there are many more things in the world, than there are names for
them, according to the saying of the Philosopher; Nomina sunt finita, res autem
infinitae; ideo unum nomen plura significat; which saying is by a certain (or
rather uncertain) Author approved; Multis speciebus non sunt nomina: Idcirco
necessarium est nomina fingere, si nullum ante erit nomen impositum.

This kind of Helmet is proper to persons exercising Sovereign Power over their
Subjects and Inferiors, as Emperors, Monarchs, Kings, Princes, and Dukes, and
such as do by an absolute Jurisdiction manage the government of free States or
Countries. And a Duke (according to Leigh) is the lowest that may bear his
Helmet on this fashion. As the first and third sort of Helmets before expressed
do signify attention and observance (for the reasons formerly delivered) in
their several degrees; so contrariwise the second and this fourth sort in
theirs, do betoken authority, direction, and command; for so do all Sovereigns,
as also all Generals, Captains, and Commanders in Martial Affairs, and
Magistrates and Governous in the managing of Civil Government, in prescribing
of Orders and Directions to the Multitude, use a steady and set countenance,
fixing their eyes directly on those to whom they address their Councils or
Commands; and such a gesture beseems men of such place, for that it
represents a kind of Majesty. This property is observed to be naturally in
the Frog, whereof Spenser the Poet making mention, terms it the Lording of
Frogs, because in their sitting they hold their heads steady, looking directly
in a kind of gravity of State, without any motion at all.

Now the bearing of the Helmet in Achievement is sometimes single, sometimes
manifold. It is said to be born single, when the Achievement is adorned with
one only Helmet, as in those hereafter ensuing shall be seen.

I call that a manifold Bearing, when for the garnishing and setting forth of
an Achievement, two Helmets or more are placed upon the Shield or Escocheon,
because sometimes for beautifying the Achievement of some great personage of
noble birth, or eminent place, three Helmets are placed jointly upon the Shield.

Touching the manner of placing diverse Helmets upon one Shield, these Rules
following are to be observed, viz. If you will place two for the respects
aforesaid, then must they be so set, as the Beaver of the one may be opposite
to the other, as if they were worn by two persons aspecting or beholding each
other. But if you place three Helmets, for any of these respects above
remembered, then must you place the middle standing directly forwards, and the
other two upon the sides, after a sidelong manner, with their Beavers turned
toward the middlemost, in representation of two persons aspecting the third.

The next in order of these exterior parts of an Achievement, is the Mantle,
so named of the French word Manteau, which with us is taken for a long Robe.
This was a Military Habit used in ancient time of great Commanders in the
Field, as well to manifest their high place, as also (being cast over their
Armor) to repel the extremity of wet, cold, and heat, and withal to preserve
their Armor from rust, so to continue thereby the glittering luster thereof.

Of this kind of Habit the famous Sir Geffery Chaucer makes mention in the
Knights Tale; where treating of the Adventures of Palemon and Arcite, for the
love of Emely the Dukes daughter of Athens, he describes the Habits and
Ornaments of the Kings that accompanied them to the Lists of the Combat: where
of Demetrius King of India he says, that he Came riding like the god of Arms
Mars,
His Coat Armor was of cloth of Thrace,
Couched with Pearl white round and great,
His Saddle was of burnisht Gold newly beat.
A Mantle on his shoulders hanging,
Beat full of Rubies red as fire sparkling.
Where I collect, that this Mantle here mentioned was worn for the purposes
formerly spoken, and that in the hanging thereof from the shoulders of
Demetrius it did cast it self into many plaits (as naturally all garments of
large size do) which form of plaiting in the Art of Painting is termed Drapery.
Wolfang. Lazius speaking of this kind of Habit, calls the same chlamys
mantuelis, saying, Chlamys mantuelis recensetur itidem a Tribellio inter dona
militaria a Galieno Claudio, qui post fuit Augustus, data. Zanchius ait, De
nostris Parthicis paria tria, singilones Dalmatenses december, Chlamydem Dardaniam
Mantuelem unam. This sort of Habit have some Authors called Toga Militaris, and
other Lacerna: Ego vero (says Lazius) togam militarem eandem cum Lacerna
extitisse autumo. As we showed a difference of Helmets used in the garnishing
of Achievements of persons of different estate and dignity, so it may seem
there has been in ancient time a diverse form of mantling used for the
difference betwixt Nobiles majores and minores. For Franc. de Rosiers
mentioning the Charter of Charles the second. Duke of Lorrain to the Abbey of
Belprey 1420. he says concerning the Seal thereof, Portat in Tymbre Aquilam
cum paludamento Ducali; whereby we may probably gather that Dukes in those
days, and in that place, had a different form of mantling from persons of
inferior degrees: But in these things, each Nation for the most part has some
custom peculiar to it self.

Rodolph Duke of Lorrain, son of Frederick the third, was the first that bare
his Arms Tymbered, as the same Author affirms, saying, Hic Princeps fuit
Primus qui portavit Arma cum Galea Tymbrata, ut patet in literis ejus and
aliorum ducum: But I suppose the generality of these words must be restrained
to that particular place. For Wolf. Lazius seems to affirm that such a form
of bearing has been anciently used amongst the Romans, where he says, Atque
hactenus de Cristis quae in majorum nostrorum insignibus magis ad Romanam
similitudinem accedere arbitror, sic ea cum pictura nostra in frontispicio
operis contuleris.

Neither has this habit escaped Transformation, but has passed through the
forge of phanatical conceit (as well as those Helmets before handled) insomuch
as (besides the bare name) there remains neither shape or shadow of a Mantle:
For how can it be imagined that a piece of cloth, or of whatsoever other stuff,
that is jagged and frownced after the manner of our now common received
Mantlings used for the adorning of Achievements, being imposed upon the
shoulders of a man, should serve him to any of the purposes for which Mantles
were ordained? So that these being compared with those, may be more fitly
termed Flourishings than Mantlings.

But as they are used in Achievements, whether you call them Mantles or
Flourishings, they are evermore said in Blazon to be doubled, that is, lined
throughout with some one of the Furrs before handled in the first Section of
this Work, as well of those Furrs that do consist of more colors than one, as
of those that be single and unmixt. For so the Romans used to wear their Cloaks
or Mantles lined throughout, sometimes with one colored Furr, and otherwhiles
with Furrs of variable colors, whereof they were called Depictae penulae: of
which latter sort Alex. ab Alex. speaks, saying, Tametsi legamus Caligulam
depictas penulas saepe induisse; and Lazius, Penula picta lascivioris vitae
imperatoribus in usu f^^^t whereof he gives an instance out of Tranquillus,
who says of Caligula, that he was saepe depictas gemmatasque penulas indutus.

These were called depictae penulae, because of the variety of the colored
skins wherewith they were furred or lined, which made a show as if those
doublings or linings had been painted. Some of those doublings are of rare use
at these days, which have been more frequent in former times, as I find in the
Church of Gravenest in the County of Bedford in a window, a Mantle, Sable,
doubled Varrey.

Next to the Mantle the Cognizance does arrogate the highest place, and is
seated upon the most eminent part of the Helmet; but yet so, as that it
admits an interposition of some Escroll, Wreath, Chapeau, Crown, etc. And it
is called a Cognizance a cognoscendo, because by them such persons as do were
them are manifestly known whose servants they are. They are also called Crests
of the Latin word Crista, which signifies a Comb or Tuft, such as many Birds
have upon their heads, as the Peacock, Lapwing, Lark, Heathcock, Feasant,
Rustcock, etc. And as those do occupy the highest part of the heads of these
Fowls; so do these Cognizances or Crests hold the most perspicuous place of the
Helmet, as by the examples following shall appear in their due place.

Concerning the use of these Cognizances or Crests among the Romans, Lazius
(having spoken of Shields and the garnishing of them with pourtraitures of
living things) has these words, Hactenus de clypeorum pictura, sive sculptura
Romanae Reipub. celebrata, unde nimirum and nostras caelaturas in his clypeis,
quas Wappas dicunt, profectas credendum est. Iam enim Galeas illa quoque atque
coronas supra positas cum cristis atque avium alis representabat.

But that the wearing of such Crests was common to other Nations as well as the
Romans, Alex. ab Alex. shows, affirming that the Almains and the Cymbrians
used Helmets wrought about with the shapes of hideous gaping Animals. The
Carians had Rustcocks for their Crests. Alexander Magnus did inviron his Helmet
with a gallant Plume of purest white.

The Galatians bare sometimes horns, and otherwhiles the shapes of living
things. The Trojans, Mysians, and Thracians bare upon their brazen Helmets the
ears and horns of an Ox. Amongst the rest (says he) that of Covidius the
Centurion, which he used in the battle that he had against the Mysians, was
holden to be admirable; that he bare upon his Helmet a cup, that one while did
flash out flames of fire, and otherwhiles would suck them in. Many more
Examples could I give to prove as well the antiquity as the general use of
Crests; but holding this to be sufficient, I will now proceed to give Examples
of things that are interposed between the Mantle and the Crest, beginning with
those of inferior reckoning, and so to those of better worth and estimation.

It may seem an inveterate and overworn fashion in this Age to bear a Crest
upon an Escroll made of this or some other like manner; but how obsolete soever
the same may be thought, Gerard Leigh does confidently affirm, that both in the
time of King Henry the fifth, and long after, no man had his Badge set on a
Wreath under the Degree of a Knight: But howsoever time and usurpation
concurring with prescription, has so much prevailed, as that it will be a
matter of great difficulty to reduce men to that form of bearing so long
neglected; yet may you observe that our most noble Prince of Wales himself to
this day thus bears this badge.

This is an ancient ornament of the head, and much in use with the Turks and
Saracens. Amongst all the interpositions before mentioned that are placed
between the Mantle and the Crest, there is none of so frequent use as this;
which sometimes is called in blazon a Wreath, because it is made of two
colored silks or more wreathed together; sometimes also a Torce, for the same
cause; Nempe quia torquetur, because it is wound or twisted. The mixture of the
colors of this Wreath is most usually taken from the Metal or Colors
contained in the Paternal-Coat of the Bearer. For the orderly making of this
Wreath, Leigh ascribes this Rule, viz. that you must evermore begin with the
Metal, and end with the Color.

This kind of Head-tire is called a Cap of Dignity; which Cap (says
Chassaneus) Dukes accustomed to wear in token of excellency, because they had a
more worthy government than other Subjects. Also they used to wear the same in
token of Freedom; Quia debent esse magis liberi apud Principem supremum quam
alij. This Cap must be of Scarlet color, and the lining or doubling thereof
Ermyn. Some do boldly affirm (says Sir John Fern) that as well the Earl and
Marquess, as a Duke, may adorn his head with this Chapeau or Cap, even by the
same reason and custom that they do challenge to wear their Coronets, because
this Cap, as also their Crowns are allowed them, not only for a declaration of
their Princely dignities and degrees, but withal for tokens and testimonies of
triumph and victory. For the wearing of the Cap had a beginning from the Duke
or General of an Army, who having gotten victory, caused the chiefest of the
subdued Enemies, whom he led Captive, to follow him in his triumph, bearing his
Cap or Hat after him in token of subjection and captivity.

Albeit there are diverse other sorts of Crowns more usually born interposed
between the Mantle and the Crest; yet because this is sometimes put to like
use, and that it is of all the rest the chiefest, I have selected this as an
Example of Crowns put to such use, the rather because I willingly comprehend
all those of less esteem under it. That the Romans did bear Crowns upon their
Helmets after this manner, it is clear by the testimony of W. Lazius, as well
in that I have formerly alleged, where I have spoken of the use of Crests, as
also by his confirmation thereof, where he says, Caetera Coronarum genera in
universum, quae vel Galeis in Armis suspensis ob virtutem donatae militibus,
vel capitibus hominumvel Sacerdotum aut Emeritorum imponebantur, octodecim
invenio, Quarum, exceptis Aurea and Argentea, reliquae omnes ex plantis passim
and herbis conficiebantur. The prerogative or pre-eminence of wearing of Crowns
belongs not only to such as have received the same for a remuneration of
virtue, but also to persons to whom the exercise of Sovereign Jurisdiction does
appertain, as the same Author witnesses, saying, Prerogativam vero Coronas
ferendi non hi solum habebant; quibus hoc erat minus ex virtute concessum,
verum etiam quibus ex officio licebat, Imperatoribus, Regibus, Sacerdotibus,
etc. Touching sundry other forms of Crowns, I referr you to the judicious
writings of Sir William Segar late Garter, Principal King of Arms.

CHAP. VII.
THus far have I touched things placed above the Escocheon; now I will proceed
to such as are placed elsewhere, of which some are peculiar, some more general.

By such as are peculiar I mean those that are appropriate to persons having
Sovereign Jurisdiction, and to such as we called Nobiles Majores, of which Rank
a Baronet is the lowest. But amongst the particular Ornaments belonging to the
Coat-Armours of persons having either Supreme or Inferior dignity, there are
some that do environ the Coat Armor round about, and do chie^ly belong to
persons exercising Sovereign Jurisdiction, and to such others as they out of
their special favor shall communicate the same unto, by associating them into
the fellowship of their Orders. Such are the most honorable Order of the
Garter, the Orders of the Golden Fleece, of Saint Michael, of the Annunciation;
of all which Sir William Segar, late Garter King at Arms, has written so
learnedly, that to his Works I must again referr the Reader for satisfaction
therein; the discourse thereof being altogether impertinent to my intended
purpose in this present Work.

Yet here you must observe, that a man being admitted into the Society and
Fraternity of any two of the Honorable Orders before mentioned, he may in
setting forth his Achievement adorn the samewith the chief Ornaments or
Collars of both these Orders whereof he is elected and admitted a Fellow and
Companion, by placing one of the Ornaments next to his Shield, and the other
without the same. In such manner did the most high and mighty Lord Thomas Duke
of Norfolk and Earl Marshall of England, bear the chief Ornaments of the Orders
of the Garter and of Saint Michael.

But leaving those peculiar Ornaments of Sovereigns or others, I return to
those that are communicable (by a certain right) as well to those called
Nobiles majores, as to Sovereigns. Such are those which are said to be placed
on the sides of the Achievements, representing sometimes things living, and
sometimes dead.

But these of some Blazoners are termed Supporters, whose conceit therein I can
hardly approve, Quia diversorum diversa est ratio; and therefore the Blazon
that I would give unto things so different in Nature is, that if things be
living, and seize upon the Shield, then shall they be called properly
Supporters; but if they are inanimate, and touch not the Escocheon, then shall
such Arms be said to be (not supported, but cotised, of such and such things:
For how can those be properly said to support that touch not the thing said to
be supported by them? Therefore Nomina sunt aptanda rebus secundum rationis
normam.

To persons under the degree of a Knight Banneret, it is not permitted to bear
their Arms supported, that Honor being peculiar to those that are called
Nobiles majores.

And these Cotises have their name agreeable to the thing whose quality they
represent, and are so called (as we elsewhere showed) of Costa, the Rib, either
of man or beast; for it is proper to the Rib to enclose the Entrails of things
Animal, and to add form and fashion to the body; in like manner do these
enclose the Coat Armor whereunto they are annexed, and do give a comely grace
and ornament to the same.

Another ornament there is externally annexed to Coat Armor, and that is the
Motto or Word which is the Invention or Conceit of the Bearer, succinctly and
significantly contrived (for the most part) in three or four words, which are
set in some Scroll or Compartiment, placed usually at the foot of the
Escocheon: and as it holds the lowest place, so is it the last in blazoning.
Of this word Abra. Franc. writes in this manner, Quod a recentioribus verba
quaedom ipsis Armis subjiciantur, videtur id nuper inventum ad imitationem
eorum quae Symbola a nobis appellantur. And indeed the Motto should express
something intended in the Achievement, though use has now received whatsoever
fancy of the Deviser; and this Motto is of universal use to all Gentry and
Nobility of what rank soever.

Now as touching the blazoning of these Ornaments exteriorly annexed to any
Coat Armor, it is to be considered, that we are not tied to that strict
observation in them, as in the blazoning of things born within the Escocheon;
for these are the essential parts of Coats, and those merely Accidental. For
the Crest or Timber, Wreath, Mantle, Helm, etc. (says Fern) are no part of
the Coat Armor, but Additions to Achievements added not many hundred years
ago to the Coats of Gentry. And therefore when you have aptly set forth all the
Fields and Charges, and their Colors contained within the Escocheon, your
Blazon is done; so that when we shall describe any of those Exterior
Ornaments, we stand at liberty for naming of our Colors, and in those it is
held no fault to name one Color twice.

AN ACCOUNT OF SOME Coats of Arms Omitted in the foregoing SECTIONS Which in
the next Impression shall be inserted in their proper places.
The Right Honorable John Fitz-Gerard, Earl of Kildare, primier Earl of the
Kingdom of Ireland, bears for his Lordships Paternal Coat Armor, Pearl, a
Saltire, Ruby.

He bears Argent, three Cinquefoils, Gules, by the Name of Darcey. This with
the Arms of Vlster is the Paternal Coat Armor of Sir Thomas Darcey of St.
Clere-hall in St. Oseth in the County of Essex, Baronet.

He bears Argent, on a Chief indented, Gules, three Crosses form of the
Field, by the Name of Percivale. This with the Arms of Vlster, is the bearing
of Sir Philip Percivale of Burton in the County of Cork in Ireland, Baronet,
descended from the Percivales of North-weston near Bristol in Somersetshire.
The Family came into England with William the Conqueror, and were before of
Vile near Caen in Normandy.

He beareth^ Azure, a Falcon volant, Argent, armed, jessed, and belled, Or,
within a Bordure, Ermyn, by the Name of Fairborne, and is the Paternal
Coat Armor of Sir Palms Fairborne of Newark in Nottinghamshire, Knight.
Lieutenant-Governour of Tangier, Lieutenant Colonel to the Regiment there
residing, and Commissary-General of his Majesty's Army in Flanders; a person of
an approved valor and conduct, as is evidenced by those worthy exploits
performed by him, not only in the service of the Venetians in their wars by Sea
and Land against the Ottoman Empire, but also since his Majesty's most happy
restoration in the several Trusts committed to his management, and commands at
Tangier; where on the 19th of September 1675. he was commanded by the Right
Honorable the Earl of Inchequin Governor thereof, to sally out into the
Fields of Tangier, in order to the securing several Provisions lodged near that
place, as his Lordship was informed by one Hamett a Moor, who made himself a
Christian for the carrying on the design with the better success; but by the
valor and good conduct of the said Sir Palms he made his retreat from a great
body of Moors, and having got the outmost Lines of Tangier, mist his Reserve,
by which he did conclude that the said Reserve had come up to his Succor,
whereupon he advanced the second time near two miles distant from the said
Lines, where he was attacked Front, Flank, and Rear, with about three thousand
Foot and Horse, he having not above three hundred in his party, which he
brought off with the loss only of twelve killed, and six and thirty wounded,
but the Moors had a very great loss, to his immortal Fame. He also by his great
prudence and valor quelled two Mutinies at Tangier.

He bears two Coats impaled, Baron and Femme; first, Gules, two Bars,
Argent, by the Name of Martyn and is thus born by Nicholas Martyn. of
Lincolus-Inn in Middlesex, Esquire son and heir of Nicholas Martyn of Lincoln's Inn
aforesaid, Esquire deceased, who was descended from the Family of the Martyns
anciently of Admiston alias Athelhamston in Dorsetshire, impaled with Gules, an
Eagle displayed, Or, crowned, Argent, in right of his Wife Dorcas, daughter of
Richard Graves Esquire deceased, late Reader of Lincoln's Inn aforesaid.

He bears Argent, a Cross between four Spread-Eagles, Gules, by the Name of
Strachey, and is born by John Strachey of Sutton-Court in Somersetshire, Esquire.

He bears Argent, three Palmers Staves, Sable, the heads, rests, and ends,
Or, by the Name of Palmer, and is the Coat Armor of William Palmer of Winthorp
in Lincolnshire, Esquire Captain of a Troop in the Regiment of his Grace^ the Duke
of Monmouth, Captain General of all his Majesty's Landforces.

He bears Gules, on a Bend, Or, three Martlets, Sable, by the Name of
Brabazon, and is the Paternal Coat Armor of Edward Brabazon of Ballyarthur in
the County of Wickloe in the Kingdom of Ireland, Esquire second Son of the Right
Honorable Edward Earl of Mead, deceased.

He bears Ermyn, on a Bend, Sable, two Hands and Arms to the Elbows issuing
out of Clouds at the Elbows, all proper, holding an Horshoe, Or, by the Name of
Borlace, and is the Coat Armor of Humphrey Borlace of Treluddro in the County
of Cornwall, Esquire.

He bears Sable, a Bend, Ermyn, between two Cottises flory, Or, by the Name
of Keck, and is the Paternal Coat Armor of Anthony Keck of the Inner Temple,
London, Esquire

He bears Or, a Bend engrailed between six Roses, Gules, by the Name of
Warner, and is the Paternal Coat Armor of John Warner of Brakenthwaite in the
Parish of Kirby-Overblow in the West Riding of Yorkshire, Esquire lineally
descended from the Warners of Warner-Hall in Essex.

Argent, a Fess humid, Gules, between three Ravens rising to fly, Sable, born
by Richard Pierce of the City of London, Esquire.

He bears Argent, a Fess Nebule, Gules, between three Eagles displayed,
Sable, by the Name of Cudmore, and is the Coat Armor of Thomas Cudmore of
Kelvedon in Essex, Esquire son and heir of Thomas Cudmore Esquire deceased, by Dorothy
eldest Daughter and Coheir of Sir Thomas Cecill Knight. son of Thomas Earl of
Exeter by Dorothy Daughter and Coheir of John Nevill Lord Latimer, son and heir
of John Lord Latimer by Dorothy Daughter and Coheir of Sir George Vere Kt^
which said Sir Thomas died Anno 1662. and lies buried in Stamford-Baron in
Northamptonshire amongst his Ancestors.

Per Pale, Vert and Ermyn, an Eagle displayed, This Coat is born by Richard
Goodlad of the City of London, Esquire.

He bears Gules, a Cheveron, Ermyn, between three Flowers de Lis, Argent, by
the Name of Crome, and is the Paternal Coat Armor of Valentine Crome of
Mayden-Early in Berkshire, Esquire decended, from the ancient Family of Lewis in
Yorkshire.

Argent, a Fess between three Flowers de Lis, Sable, by the Name of Evance,
which said Coat is born by John Evance of the City of London, Esquire

He bears Gules, a Quaterfoil, Or, by the Name of Row, and is born by
Anthony Row of St. Martins in the Fields in Middlesex, Esquire third son of Sir
Tho. Row of Moswellhill in the said County, Knight.

Argent, a Cheveron between three Cinquefoils, Gules, is born by Charles
Beauvoir of the City of London, Esquire descended from the Family of the Beauvoirs
in the Island of Garnsey.

He bears Or, two Bars, Azure, in Chief three Escallop-hells, Gules, by the
Name of Clark, and is the Coat Armor of Edward Clark of the Inner Temple
London, Esquire son and heir of Edward Clark of Chipley in Somersetshire, Esquire

He bears Vert, a Greyhound current in Bend, Argent, collared Gules, studded,
Or, by the Name of Blome, and is born by Richard Blome of Abergwilly in
Gaermarthenshire, Esquire by Io. Blome of Sevenoke in Kent, Gent. and by Richard
Blome of Chobham in the Parish of Westham in Essex, Gent. This Coat being false
cut in the body of the Book, is here rectified.

He bears Gules, a Cheveron ^ngrailed, Ermyn, between three Eagles, Argent,
by the Name of Child. This with the Arms of Vlster, is the Coat Armor of Sir
Josias Child of Wanstead in the County of Essex, Baronet.

He bears Argent, a Bend, Sable, in the sinister Chief a Garb, Gules, by the
Name of Whitworth, and is the Coat Armor of Richard Whitworth of Adbaston in
the County of Stafford, Gent.

He bears Sable, on a Bend, Argent, three Lozenges of the Field, by the Name
of Carington, and was the Coat Armor of John Carington of Sponton in the North
Riding of Yorkshire, Gent. deceased; second son of William Carington of Sponton
aforesaid, Esquire who was second Brother to John Carington of Carington in
Cheshire, Esquire

Thus having largely treated of all the parts of Achievements, our next
business will be to represent them conjoined together, for which we will referr
the Reader to the second part, viz. Honor Military and Civil.

TO THE Generous Reader.
My Task is past, my Care is but begun;
My Pains must suffer Censures for reward:
Yet hope I have, now my great pains are done,
That gentle Spirits will quite them with regard.
For when my love to Gentry here they find,
My love with love they must requite by kind.
But if the ungentle Brood of Envies Grooms,
Misdoom my Pains; no force, they do their kind,
And I Will do mine, which is to scorn their Dooms,
That use unkindly a kind well-willing mind.
Thus I resolve: Look now who will hereon,
My Task is past, and all my Care is gone.
A Conclusion.
BUt He alone, that is free from all defect,
And only cannot err (true Wisdom's Sire)
Can, without error, all in All effect:
But weak are men in acting their desire.
This Work is filde, but not without a flaw;
Yet filde with Pain, Care, Cost, and all in all:
But (as it were by force of Natures Law)
It has some faults, which on the Printers fall.
No Book so blessed, that ever escaped the Press
(For ought I ever read, or heard) without;
Correctors full'st of Art, and Carefulness
Cannot prevent it; Faults will flee about.
But here is not many: so, the easier may
Each gentle Reader rub away their stains:
Then (when the verbal Blots were done away)
I hope their profit will exceed their pains.
Besides, it may be thought a fault in me,
To have omitted some few differences
Of Coronets of highest and low'st degree;
But this I may not well a fault confess:
For, 'twixt a Duke and Marquess Coronets
Is so small odds, as it is scarce discerned.
As here in the Earl and Vicounts frontilets
May by judicious Artists now be learned,
Then these are faults that Reason does excuse,
And were committed wilfully, because
Where is no difference there is no abuse
To Grace, Arms, Nature, Order, or their Laws.
This breaks no Rule of Order, though there be
An Order in Degrees concerning This;
If Order were infringed, then should I flee
From my chief purpose, and my Mark should miss.
ORDER is Natures beauty, and the way
To Order is by Rules that Art has found:
Defect and excess in those Rules bewray,
Order's defective, Nature's much deformed.
But ORDER is the Center of that GOD
That is unbounded, and All circumscribes;
Then, if this Work has any likelihood
Of the least good, the good to it ascribes.
In Truth, Grace, Order, or in any wise
That tends to Honor, Virtue, Goodness, Grace;
I have mine ends: and then it shall suffice,
If with my Work I end my Vital Race:
And, with the Silkworm, work me in my Tomb,
As having done my duty in my Room.
Finis Coronat Opus.
JOHN GVILLIM.
AN ALPHABETICAL TABLE OF THE NAMES OF THE Nobility and Gentry Whose Coats are
made Patterns of Bearing in this Display of Heraldry.
A.
ABdy 109 Abington 163, 299 Abrahall 152 Abtot 274 Achiles 143 Ackland 280
Acton 198 Aldam 83 Aldham 53 Alington 210 Allen 60 Alstone 81 Amade 98
Ambes-ace 237 Anderson 307 Anderton 259 Andrews 65, 287, 290 Aquitain Duke 134
Arblaster 246 Archer ibid. Arches 226 Argall 275 Armstrong 255 Armiger 254
Armine 135 Arnest 100 Arthington 179 Arthur 221 Ashburnham 91 Ashcough 292
Ashley 306 Ashmole 272 Askew 120 Astley 110 Aston 264, 270 Astry 220 Atkins 63,
219 Atlow 223 A^terton 167 A^wood 107 Aucher 143, 296 A^din 143 Aulier 234
Ayloffe 140
B.
BAco^ 90 Baker 122, 167, 226 Bakster 194 Baldberny 256 Baldock 280 Banks 108
Barbon 191 Bard 171 De Bardis 147 Barkham 278 Barkley 110 Barnadiston 61
Barnard 148 Barriff 143 Barrington 49 Baskervile 103 Bateman 86, 297 Baynes 114
Baynham 122 Beauchamp 295 Bedingfield 161 Bell 228 Belgrave 234 Belinus King of
Britain 203 Belvale 210 Bence 226 Bennet 144 Berchem 271 De la Bear 203
Berkenhead 65 Berkley 62 Berry 59 Bertram 55 Berty 245 Betfield 271 Beverley
102 Beversham 237 Bevill 121 Bidulph 161 Bingley 247 Biron 43 Blackamore
Blackstock 98 Bleverhasset 176 Blome 149, 317 Blount 93, 94 Bludworth 220
Bodenham 236, 299 Bolter 114 Bonnell 197 Booth 131 Bolowre 173 Borgoigne 150
Borough 98 Botereux 154 Bouchiers 260 Bourden 212 Bourn 193 Bowen 126 Bows 246
Bowet 129 Bowls 132 Bowthby 146 Bowyer 44 Boil 270 Boys 193 Brahazon 298, 315
Bradford 129 Bradstone 102 Bramston 219 Bray 165, 294 Brett 289 Bridger 178
Bridgman 136, 220 Brixton 120 Broderick 251 Brograve 136 Bromwich 197 Brounker
219 Brown 299 Brownlow 171 Bruce 69, 306 Bulleine 121 Brecknock 204 Bryane 53
Brudnell 255 Brutus 134 Buggine 194 Bulkeley 128 Burninghill 173 Burton 87, 150
Butler 260, 278 Buxton 139, 276 Bye 173, 231
C.
CAdwallader 60 Callard 272 Calthrop 298 Calvert 279 Cambell 145 Cambden Camel
131 Canhanser 164 Canterbury 206 Capenhurst 172 Cardington 216 Carington 317
Carlowe 250 Carn 168 Carpenters 224 Carr 296 Carrick 150 Carselake 121 Carter
143 Carry 103 Castilion 226 Cathrop 292 Catterall 264 Cavell 230 Cavendish 128,
306 Caesar 103 Chaffin 150 Chalbot 177 Chaloner 75 Chamberlain 81 Chambers 245
Chandos 52 Chapman 298 Chaucer 274 Chawlas 203 Chetwynd 91 Chicheley 109
Chichester 280 Child 315 Chiverton 225 Cholmley 254 Chorley 111 Churchill 197
Chute 249, 306 Clarendon 164 Clarke 159, 178, 248, 303, 317 Clayton 220 St.
Clear 82 Cliffe 194 Clifford 299, 280 Cliston 197, 299 Clopton 66 Cock 270
Cocks 129 Cokaine 172 Cole 156 Colebrand 223 Coleman 141 Collingwood 129
Collins 299 Colston 177 Colt 119 Colwall 50 Conisby 152 Constables 273 Conway
209 Conyers 217 Cook 272 Cooks 291 Cooper 154 Corbet 168 Cork 146 Cornhill
186 Cottingham 127 Cotton 161, 193 Covell 139 Coventrey 85 Courtney 261 Cowdrey
210 Cowpen 211 Cox 68 Cradock 131 Craven 61 Crew 138, 287 Crisp 257 Crome 316
Cromer 230 Crouch 68 Cudmore 316 Cunliff 152 Curwen 234 Cutts 220
D.
DAnby 70 Daniel 263 Dannet 113 Darell 293 Darcy 110, 296, 314 Darnall 141
Davies 91 Dauntrey 243 Deane 68 Degg 167 Delahay 79, 185 Delaluna 84 Delamere
67 Denham 263 Dennis 192 Dering 128, 293 Descus 83 Dethick 260 Digby 106 Disney
107 Dive 179 Dixie 140 Dixton 67 Dixwell 107, 306 Dobson 107 Dockwray 296 Dodge
188 Dolman 105 Dolphin 176 Doughty 90 Down 148 Downs 66 D'oyley 66 Drake 81
Drakes 194 Drax 180 Duckenfield 58 Dudley 49 Duffield 47 Duke 160, 259 Duras
138 Duncombe 150 Dymocke 248
E.
EDgcombe 132 Edrick 138 Edwyn 161 Egiock 299 Egerton 247 Ellis 175, 195 Elmes
99 Elphinton 118 Elwes 278 Emme 144 Engaine 233 English Ent 233 Escott 179
Escourt 80 Estanton 52 Etheldred 60 Evance 316 Evelyn 193 Everard 81 Eynford
235 Air 299 Eyres 109
F.
FAgg 43 Fairbourn 315 Fairclough 140 Faldo 128 Falstaff 292 Fane 255 Fanshaw
107 Farington 130, 191 Feake 107 Field 105 Feilding 264 Felbridge 138 Feltham
191 Fenne 179 Fenners Fenwick 171 Ferrers 15, 234 Fitch 190 Fitz 113
Fitz-Gerard 315 Fitzhugh 70 Fitz-Iames 175 Fitz-water 69 Fitz-williams 234
Fleming 235, 297 Fleetwood 275 Fletcher 297 Flint 95 Foley 110 Ford 43 Forster
246 Forte 223 Fortescue 66 Foulis 99 Fountain 110, 119 Fowler 168 Frampton 146
Frankland 176 Franklyn ibid. Fraunces 212 Frederick 170 Frith 298 Fuller 68
G.
GAmboa 99 Gamole 253 Garway 191 Garzony 103 Gaunt 278 Gawdey 154 George 167
St. George 301 Gerard 63 Gibs 252 Gibson 160 Gifford 264 Gilbert 256 Gilsland
126 Gisez 279 Gleane 143 Glegg 137 Glinn 162 Glisson 91 Glover 86 Goodland 280,
316 Goodred 230 Gore 61 Got 271 Gotley 122 Govis 145 Grafton 273 Graham 178
Grand-George 104 Grant 142 Gravenor 104 Greaves 162 Greby 104 Green 127
Greenvile 244 Gregory 136 Gresby 36 Grill 60 Grimestone 91 Grindoure 274
Guillim 288, 292 Guise 264 Gunning 287 Gurnay 276 Gway 195
H.
HAcket 135 Haddon 188 Hales 246 Hall 111 Halton 192 Hamelden 234 Hanmer 136
Hansord 292 Hanson 143, 295 Hardbean 106 Harding 178 Hare 69 Harewell 152
Harlewin 102 Harling 130 Harman 132 Harrington 235 Harrow 214 Heart 185 Harthill
125 Harvey 86 Hassenhull 90 Hastang 144 Hastings 217 Hathway 292 Hatton 296
Haute 293 Hawes 137, 190 Hawkeridge 165 Hawkins 108, 193 Hawley 63, 270 Head
131 Heath 210 Henley 141 Henlington 22 Henningham 298 Herbert 142, 302 Hereford
192 Heriz 290 Heron 160 Herondon 180 Hervey 109 Hewit 168 Hicks 107 Highlord 43
Hill 138 Higham 59 H^ar 162 Host 122 Hobard 80 Hoby 216 Hodgkins 110 Hokenhull
120 Holbrook 292 Holford 149 Holder 230 Holland 197 Ho^^es 53, 296, 307 Holme
126 Holworthy 109 Honywood 163 Hopton 90 Hoskins 142 Howard 61, 300 Huggen 298
Huitson 79 Hulgreve 53 Hul^e or Howes ibid. Humble 126 Hungerford 219 Hunlock
147 Hunt 64 Huntley 233 Hussy 56, 291 Hustler, 170
J.
James 291 Ianes 140 Jason 132 Iekyll 128 Ienison 159 Iennings 224 Iervis 164
Ince 262 Incledon 215 Ingleby 78 Ingoldsby 64 Ingram 178 Inwine 100 Johnson 171
St. John 91 Iolliff. 255 Jones 49, 126, 227, 272, 289 Jordan 163, 196 Journey
111 Ireton 42 Iues 184 Iuxon ibid.
K.
KAdrode-hard 151 Keate ibid. Keck 316 Kekitmore 212 Kemys 247 Kempley 214 King
140 Kingley 254 Kingscott 180 Kinke 304 Kite 292 Knatchbull 66 Knight 250, 299,
302 Knolles 62 Kroge 214
L.
LAcy 159 Lampelaw 229 Lamplugh 59 Lane 298 Langham 148 Langley 245 Lant 290
Lattimer 305 Lavider 275 Lee 245 Leeds 162 Leet 245 Leg 129 Leigh 244 Leigham
158 Leighton 275 Lemming 113 Lesone 82 L'Estrange 136 Leverton 80 Levison 99
Lewin 291 Lewis 138, 307 Lewkenor 49 Limbery 142 Lincoln's Inn 237 Liskirke 24
Lisle 69 Loggan 135, 292 Long 197 Lovell 151, 296 Lovet 148 Londham 252 Low 148
Lowther 208 Lloyd 195, 247 Lucy 85, 176, 297 Lund 137 Lutterell 189 Lylde 220
Lynch 190
M.
MAbb 147 Machell 150 Mackloide 88 Madden 167 Magdalen College 281 Magnall 245
Malherb 100 Mallett 178 Mallory 144 Malton 65 Mainstone 152, 186 Man 122
Mangotham 152 Manwaring 277 Markham 144 Maroley 101 Marsh 120 Marshal 223, 227
Martyn 315 Marwood 122 Matthew 195 Mathews 215 Mauleverer 149 Maunsell 218, 226
St. Maure 113 Maurice 102 Mautrevers 235 Mawley 41 Maynard 187 Medvile 235
Meek 299 Meeres 231, 260 Meinstorpe 271 Mellish 159 Mercy 291 Meredith 196
Mergith 182 Mico 184 Micklethwaite 280 Middleton 51, 149, 272 Micklefield 114
Milveton 95 Milward 219 Mingay 191 Miniet 254 Minors 298, 305 Mitton 272
Modyford 106 Mohun 217 Moile 121 Molesworth 19 Molineux 61 Moline 300 Mompesson
138 Montague 263, 286, 290 Moore 289 Morien 24 More 149, 158 Morgan 192, 251
Morice 141 Morison 259 Morley 191, 192 Morris 68 Mort 264 Mosley 222
Mounbowcher 229 Mounchensey 253 Mounson 49 Mowbray 138, 295 Mundy 305 Musgrave
208 Musterton 130 Mynter 227
N.
NApier 64 Narboon 204 Nathiley 156 Naylour 142 Nechur 234 Needham 129 Neve 108
Nevill 63, 169 Newdigate 146 Newman 302 Newport 190, 208 Newton 114, 289 Noel
235 North 135 Norton 248 Norwood 58 Nuthall 259
O.
OBrien 137 Ockwold 191 Ockton 272 Odo 206 Ogilby 135 Oldcastle 225 Oldsworth
137 Oneslow 169, 295 Osborne 142 Otterbury 172 Otway 278 Owen 142, 165, 199 St.
Owen 69
P.
PAcker 103 Pagit 291 Palmer 85, 149, 218, 288, 279, 315 Panowitz 271 Panton
294 Papillon 174 Pargiter 275 Parker 129 Parr 300 Patten 281 Pawn 172 Peacock
275 Peck 62 Pedley 108 Pegress 236 Pierce 316 Pelham 169 Penarthe 148 Penneston
295 Penruddock 99 Penthar 69 Percivale 196, 315 Pepys 29^ Petyt 139 Peyto 275
Peyton 58 St. Phillibert 277 Phillips 167 Philpot 249 Pickering 139 Pierrepont
197 Pigot 222 Pile 296, 306 Pilkinton 58 Pindar 145 Pine 98, 101 Pitfield 158
Plantaginet 20, 22, 23 Plank 233 Players 113 Playters 277 Plott 145 Plunket 225
Pool 197 Pope 49 Porter 164, 228 Portman 106 Povey 110 Pratt 119 Prelate 176
Prenue 233 Prescott 168 Preston 87, 105, 233 Prichard 140 Prime 188 Prinn 307
Proger 142 Puckering 289 Pudsay 59 Punchardon 220 Pyrton 98
Q.
QVatermaine 187
R.
RAdcliffe 42 Raincourt 106 Ramsey 132, 292 Randall 91 Rathlow 271 Rawden 247
Rawlins 248, 249 Rawson 303 Raynsford 56 Redman 228 Redmere 108 Reresby 62
Restwold 271 Retowre 99 Reyce 250 Rich 63, 64, 299 Richardson 145, 257 Rider 85
Ridgway 164 Rigby 59 Rigmayden 128 Roberts 139 Robertson 127 Robinson 127, 201,
296 Rockwood 236 Roet 215 Rolls 143 Rove 173 Roos 260 Ross 302 Roundell 98
Row 109, 132, 316 Rowden 247 Rowch 196 Roycroft 194 Roydenhall 114 Rudetzker
59 Rudhall 215 Russel 179, 219, 224 Rutland 55 Rye 104 Rynester 40
S.
SAckvile 273, 298 Sadler 139 St. John 297 Salmon 176 Salbury 140, 180 Salter
211 Samford 67 Samwayes 306 Sanders 122 Sanderson 278, 296 Sands 294 Sault 92
Saunders 119 Scambler 185 Scipton 229 Scott 215 Scudamore 59 Scythia King 119
Sea 178 Securades 88 Sedley 122, 307 Segar 287 Seymour 164, 300, 307 Seys 289
Shaw 262 Sheffield 105 Sheldon 160 Shelley 130, 156, 180 Sherburne 290 Sherrard
219 Shipstow 252 Shirtey 277 Shorter 271 Shoyswell 257 Shrigley 188 Shurstab 88
Shuttleworth 217 Sileto 276 Skeleton 120 Slingsby 232 Smith 107, 276, 290 Smiths
224 Soame 223 Soles 175 South 51, 299 Southwell 110, 292 Spalding 275 Spelman
292 Spence 221 Squire 159 Stafford 48 Stamp 119 Stanesmore 298 Stanley 164
Stapleton 138, 248 Starkey 159 Stephen King 213 Stephens 167 Stern 62, 286
Still 306 Stone 215 Stoughton 289 Strachey 163 Stradling 278 Strange 136
Stratford 141, 228 Strattle 235 Stringer 170 Stroad 151 Strutt 298 Stuckley 101
Sturton 88 Sucklyn 272 Swallow 170 Swardus 274 Sweeting 213, 275 Swift 127
Sydmeres 204 Symes 84 Sympson 295, 297
T.
TAlbot 140, 277 Talboys 292 Tanner 182 Tatnall 250 Tailor 290 Temple 120
Tempest 171 Tendridge 202 Tenton 227 Terne 231 Theme 100 Theobald 168 Thompson
86, 296 Thorpe 109 Thrckmorton 67 Thunder 243 Thurland 212 Thurstone 166, 232
Titus 136 Tofte 211 Tomlins 100 Tonson 225 Tote 186 Trayton 254 Trefues 217
Tregarthick 177 Tremaine 186 Trevett 229 Trevor 273 Trevors 141 Trewarthen 131
Trowbridge 227 Trice 91 Trowtebeck 177 Trunstall 218 Turner 237 Twisden 64, 297
Twisleton 152 Tyldesley 98
V.
VAndeput 176 Vanheck 103 Vavasor 48 Vaughan 134, 182 Veale 121 Verney 92
Vernon 105 Vincent 109 Viner 169 Usher 146 Underwood 135
W.
WAke 298 Wakeman 64 Walden 171 Walgrave 269 Walker 86, 302 Waller 100 Walleys
43 Wallop 42 Walpool 301 Walter 162 Ward 287 Warner 316 Warnet 126 Warcupp 260
Waterhouse 52, 297 Watson 170, 250, 295 Watton 169 Wear 206 We Will 166 Weld 85
Wells 88 Welsh 90 Wentworth 190 Werden 191 Western 86 Wharton 296 Wheeler 190
White 131, 229 Le white 105 Whitmore 234 Whitwith 317 Wyche 295 Wightwick 298
Wilbraham 66 Wilcocks 141 Wild 170 Wildman 219 Williams 141, 212, 290, 307
Williamson 109 Willington 64 Wingfield 298 Wilmer 163 Winchester-Colledge 108
Winn 162 Windham 145 Wingham 185 Winwood 59 Wintemberg 130 Wise 50 Wiseman 251
Witchingham 292 Wittewrong 277 Wolf 231 Wooler 205 Wolrich 159 Wolstonholme
135 Wood 97 Woodhouse 298 Woodnoth 60 Woodvile 68 Worsley 39 Wray 170, 223
Wright 191 Wroth 145 Wycombe 143 VVylley 235 VVymondesold 170 VVyrley 232
VVythens 170
Y.
YArdley 126 Yarmouth 189 Yellen 163 Yelverton 142 Yeo. 172
Z.
ZVsto. 270
FINIS.

