A Humble ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF THE SINS OF THE MINISTRY OF SCOTLAND.
Printed in the year 1653.

THE PREFACE.
ALthough we are not ignorant, that mockers of all sorts may take occasion by
this Acknowledgment of the Sins of Ministers, to strengthen themselves in their
prejudices at our persons and Callings, and turn this unto our reproach, and
that some may misconstrue our meaning therein, as if we did thereby intend to
render the Ministry of this Church base and contemptible, which is far from
our thoughts, We knowing and being persuaded in our selves, that there are many
able, godly and faithful Ministers in the Land; yet being convinced that we are
called to humble our selves, and to justify the Lord in all the contempt that
he has poured upon us: That they who shall know our sins, may not stumble at
our judgments: We have thought it our duty to publish this following Discovery
and Acknowledgment of the corruptions and sins of Ministers, That it may appear
how deep our hand is in the Transgression, and that the Ministers of Scotland
have no small accession to the drawing on of these judgments that are upon the
Land.

Only in this following Acknowledgment we desire it may be considered, That
there are here enumerated some sins, whereof there be but some few Ministers
guilty, and others whereof more are guilty, and not a few, which are the sins of
these whom the Lord has kept from the more gross corruptions herein
mentioned; And that it is not to be wondered at, if the Ministry of Scotland
be yet in a great measure unpurged, Considering that there was so wide a door
opened for the entering of corrupt persons into the Ministry, for the space of
above thirty years under the tyranny of Prelates, and that also there has been
so many diversions from, and interruptions of endeavors to have a purged
Ministry in this Land.

THE SINS OF THE MINISTRY.
First, such as are before their entry to the Ministry.
1. LIghteness and prophanity in conversation, unsuitable to that holy Calling
which they did intend, not thoroughly repented of.

2. Corrupt education of some in the Prelaticall and Arminian way, whereby
their corruptions and errors were drunken in, and abilities improven, for
strengthening and promoving the same, not repented of.

3. Not studying to be in CHRIST, before they be in the Ministry; nor to have
the practical knowledge and experience of the Mystery of the Gospel in
themselves, before they preach it to others.

4. Neglecting to fit themselves for the Work of the Ministry in not
improving prayer and fellowship with God, education at Schools and
opportunities of a lively Ministry, and other means, and not mourning for
these neglects.

5. Not studying self-denial, nor resolving to take up the Cross of CHRIST.

6. Negligence to entertain sight and sense of sin and misery, not wrestling
against corruption, nor studying of mortification and subduednesse of spirit.

Secondly, in entering.
1. Carnal, corrupt and crooked ways for entering to the Ministry, such as
bribing in the time of Prelacie, soliciation of friends and the like; whereby
many have not entered by the door, but did climb up another way.

2. Entering to the Ministry by an implicit, execrable, Canonical Oath and
subscription given to the Prelates for acknowledging them, and advancing their
corruptions introduced and to be introduced.

3. Entering to the Ministry without trials, and receiving ordination either
from the Prelat, or by a recommendation from him to the Presbytery, and
sometimes without or against the mind of the Presbytery.

4. Entering either only by Presentations, or by purchased Supplications from
the plurality of the Parochiners, without or against the consent of the godly
in the Parioch.

5. Entering to the Ministry without respect to a Commission from Jesus
Christ, by which it has come to pass, that many have run unsent.

6. Entering to the Ministry not from the love of Christ, nor from a desire to
honor God in gaining of souls, but for by-ends, for a name, and for livelihood
in the World, notwithstanding solemn declaration to the contrary at admission.

7. Some offering themselves to trial without abilities, and studying to
conceal and hide their weakness, by making use of the help and pains of some
friend and acquaintance, or other men's Papers, in several parts of the trial;
and some authorized to preach, and others admitted to the Ministry, who have
little or no ability for performing the duties thereof.

8. Too much weighed with inclination to be called to the Ministry in a place
where we have carnal relation.

Thirdly, After entering, which is first in their private condition and
conversation.
1. IGnorance of God, want of nearness with him, and taking up little of God
in reading, meditating, and speaking of him.

2. Exceeding great selfishnesse in all that we do, acting from our selves, for
our selves.

3. Not caring how unfaithful and negligent others were, so being it might
contribute a testimony to our faithfulness and diligence: but being rather
content, if not rejoicing at their fault.

4. Least delight in these things wherein lies our nearest communion with God,
great inconstancy in our walk with God, and neglect of acknowledging of him in
all our ways.

5. In going about duties, least careful of these which are most remote from
the eyes of men.

6. Seldom in secret prayer with God, except to fit for Public performances,
and even that much neglected, or gone about very superficially.

7. Glad to find excuses for the neglect of duties.

8. Neglecting the reading of Scriptures in secret, for edifying our selves as
Christians, only reading them in so far as may fit us for our duty as
Ministers, and oft-times neglecting that.

9. Not given to reflect upon our own ways, nor suffering conviction to have a
through work upon us, deceiving our selves by resting upon abstinence from, and
abhorrencie of evils, from the light of a natural conscience, and looking upon
the same as an evidence of a real change.

10. Evil guarding of, and watching over the heart, and carelessness in
self-searching, which makes much unacquaintednesse with our selves, and
estrangednesse from God.

11. Not guarding nor wrestling against seen and known ills, especially our
predominants.

12. A facilite to be drawn away with the temptations of the time, and other
particular temptations, according to our inclinations and fellowship.

13. Instability and wavering in the ways of God through the fears of
persecution, hazard, or loss of esteem, and declining duties, because of the
fear of jealousies and reproaches.

14. Not esteeming the Cross of Christ and sufferings for his Name honorable,
but rather shifting sufferings from self-love.

15. Deadness of spirit after all the sore strokes of God upon the Land.

16. Little conscience made of secret humiliation and fasting by our selves
apart, and in our Families; that we might mourn for our own and the Lands
guiltiness and great backslidings, and little applying the Causes of public
humiliation to our own hearts.

17. Finding of our own pleasures, when the Lord calls for humiliation.

18. Not laying to heart the sad and heavy sufferings of the people of God
abroad, and the not thriving of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the power of
godliness among them.

19. Refined hypocrisy, desiring to appear what indeed we are not.

20. Studying more to learn the language of Gods people not their exercise.

21. Artificial confessing of sin without repentance, professing to declare
iniquity, and not resolving to be sorry for sin.

22. Confession in secret much slighted, even of these things whereof we are
convinced.

23. No Reformation after solemn acknowledgments and private Vows, thinking our
selves exonered after Confession.

24. Readier to search out and censure faults in others, then to see or take
with them in our selves.

25. Accounting of our estate and way according to the estimation that others
have of us.

26. Estimation of men as they agree with or disagree from us.

27. Not fearing to meet with trials, but presuming in our own strength to go
through them unshaken.

28. Not learning to fear by the falls of gracious men, nor mourning and
Praying for them.

29. Not observing particular deliverances and rods, nor improving of them for
the honor of God, and edification of our selves and others.

30. Little or no mourning for the corruption of our nature, and less groaning
under, and longing to be delivered from that body of death, the bitter root of
all our other evils.

Secondly, in our Conversation and Walk with and before these of our Flocks and
others.
1. FRuitless conversing ordinarily with others for the worse rather then for
the better.

2. Foolish jesting away time with impertinent and useles discourse, very
unseeming the Ministers of the Gospel.

3. Spiritual purposes often dying in our hands, when they are begun by others.

4. Carnal familiarity with natural wicked and Malignant men; whereby they are
hardened, the People of God stumbled, and we our selves blunted.

5. Slighting fellowship with these by whom we might profit.

6. Desiring more to converse with these that might better us by their parts,
then such as might edify us by their graces.

7. Not studying opportunities of doing good to others.

8. Shifting of prayer and other duties when called thereto, choosing rather to
omit the same, then we should be put to them our selves.

9. Abusing of time in frequent recreation and pastimes, and loving our
pleasures more then God.

10. Taking little or no time to Christian Discourse with young men trained up
for the Ministry.

11. Common and ordinary discourse on the Lords Day.

12. Slighting Christian Admonition from any of our Flocks, or others as being
below us, and ashamed to take light and warning from private Christians.

13. Dislike of, or bitterness against such as deal freely with us by
admonition or reproof, and not dealing faithfully with others who would welcome
it off our hands.

14. Not making conscience to take pains on the ignorant and profane for their
good.

15. Our not mourning for the ignorance, unbelief, and miscarriages of the
Flocks committed unto us.

16. Impatient bearing of the infirmities of others, rashly breaking out
against their persons, more then studying to gain them from their sins.

17. Not using freedom with these of our charge, and for most part spending our
time with them in common discourses, not tending to Edification.

18. Neglecting Admonition to friends and others in an evil course.

19. Reservednesse in laying out our condition to others.

20. Not praying for men of a contrary judgment, but using reservednesse and
distance from them, being more ready to speak of them then to them, or to God
for them.

21. Not weighed with the fallings and miscarriages of others, but rather
taking advantage thereof for justifying our selves.

22. Talking of, and sporting at the faults of others, rather then
compassionating of them.

23. No pains taken in religious ordering of our families, nor studying to be
Paterns to other Families in the government of ours.

24. Hasty anger and passion in our Families and conversation with others.

25. Covetousness, worldly mindedness, and an inordinate desire after the
things of this life, upon which follows a neglect of the Duties of our
Calling, and our being taken up for the most part with the things of the World.

26. Want of Hospitality and Charity to the Members of Christ.

27. Not cherishing Godliness in the People, and some being afraid of it, and
hating the people of God for Piety, and studying to bear down and quench the
work of the spirit amongst them.

Thirdly in the discharge of Ministerial Duties. Which is first in regard of
laboring in the Word and Doctrine.
1. NOt entertaining that edge of spirit in Ministerial Duties, which we found
at the first entry to the Ministry.

2. Great neglect of reading and other preparation, or preparation merely
Literal and bookish, making an idol of a book, which hinders Communion with
God, or presuming on bygone assistance, and praying little.

3. Trusting to gifts, parts and pains taken for preparation, whereby God is
provoked, to blaste good matter well ordered and worded.

4. Careless in employing CHRIST, and drawing virtue out of him for inabling
us to preach in the Spirit and in power.

5. In prayer for assistance, we pray more for assistence to the Messenger then
to the Message which we carry, not caring what become of the Word, if we be
with some measure of assistance carried on in the Duty.

6. The matter we bring forth is not seriously recommended to God by Prayer to
be quickened to his People.

7. Neglect of Prayer after the Word is Preached, that it may receive the first
and latter rain; and that the Lord would put in the hearts of his People what
we speak to them in his Name.

8. Neglect to warn in Preaching of snares and sin in Public affairs by some,
and too much frequent and unnecessary speaking by there is of Public business
and Transactions.

9. Exceeding great neglect and unskilfulnesse to set forth the excellencies
and usefulness of Jesus Christ, and the New Covenant which ought to be the
great subject of a Ministers Study and Preaching.

10. Speaking of CHRIST more by hearsay then from knowkedge and experience, or
any real impression of him upon the heart.

11. The way of most Ministers Preaching too Legal.

12. Want of sobriety in Preaching the Gospel, not favoring any thing but what
is new, so that the Substantials of Religion bear but little bulk.

13. Not Preaching Christ in the simplicity of the Gospel, nor our selves the
Peoples servants for Christ sake.

14. Preaching of Christ not that the People may know Him, but that they may
think we know much of him.

15. Preaching anent Christ's leaving the Land without brokennesse of heart, or
up stirring of our selves to take hold of him.

16. Not Preaching with bowels of compassion to them who are in hazard to
perish.

17. Preaching against Public sins, neither in such a way nor for such an end
as we ought for the gaining of souls, and drawing men out of their sins, but
rather because it is of our concernment to say something of these evils.

18. Bitterness in stead of zeal, in speaking against Malignants, Sectaries,
and other scandalous persons, and unfaithfulness therein.

19. Not studying to know the particular condition of the souls of the people,
that we may speak to them accordingly, nor keeping a particular record thereof,
though convinced of the usefulness of this.

20. Not wealing what may be most profitable and Edifying, and want of wisdom
in application to the several conditions of souls, not so careful to bring
home the point by application as to find out the Doctrine, nor speaking the
same with that reverence which becomes his Word and Message.

21. Choosing texts whereon we have something to say rather then suting to the
condition of souls and times, and frequent preaching of the same things that we
may not be put to the pains of new study.

22. Such a way of Reading, Preaching and Prayer as puts us in these Duties
further from GOD.

23. Too soon satisfied in the discharge of Duties, and holding off chall enges
with exucses.

24. Indulging the body, and wasting much time idly.

25. Too much eying our own credit and applause, and being taken with it, when
we get it, and unsatisfied when it is wanting.

26. Timorousness in delivering Gods Message, letting people dye in reigning
sins without warning.

27. Voguinesse and pride of heart because the Lord fulfilled our word in the
year 1648.

28. Rash speaking in the Name of the Lord in reference to the success of our
Armies of late.

29. Studying the discharge of Duties, rather to free our selves from censure,
then to approve our selves to God.

30. Shifting to preach in places where we were for the time for fear of
displeasing, in this time of Public backsliding and trial.

31. Not making all the Counsel of God known to his People, and particularly
not giving testimony in times of defection.

32. Not studying to profit by our own doctrine, nor the docctrine of others.

33. For most part preaching, as we our selves were not concerned in the
Message we carry to the People.

34. Not rejoicing at the conversion of sinners, but content with the
unthriving of the Lords Work amongst his people as suteing best with our minds,
fearing if they sholuld thrive better, we should be more put to it, and less
esteemed of by them.

35. Many in Preaching and practice, bearing down the power of godliness.

36. Unfaithful discharge of Ministerial Duties in attending the Armies.

37. We Preach not as before God, but as to men, as does appear by the
different pains in our preparation to speak to our ordinary hears, and to
others to whom we would approve our selves.

38. Not making the Ministry a work in earnest as a thing to be accounted for
in every duty, which makes much laziness and unfruitfulness, doing duties ex
officio, not ex conscientia officii, rather to discharge our Calling nor our
conscience.

Secondly, In the Administration of Sacraments. I. In Baptism.
LIttle minding in our selves, or stirring up of others to mind the obligation
that lies on us and them, by the Covenant made with God in Baptism.

2. Not instructing Parents in their duty, not charging them with their promise
given at the Baptizing of their Children, nor trying what pains they have taken
to perform the same.

3. Being very superficial and formal in the administration of this Ordinance.

Thirdly, In the Administration of the Lords Supper.
ADmitting of mixed multitudes to the Lords Table, not separating betwixt the
precious and the vile.

2. Unequal dealing with poor and rich, in admitting to, or suspending and
debarring from the Lords Table.

3. Great neglect to prepare for that action, preparing for it more as
Ministers, then as Christians.

4. Carnal and unworthy carriage of Ministers at the Communion, being more
desirous to have that action by our hands, with credit to our selves, then with
profit to the people.

5. Thinking when that action is by-hand, that we have a vacancie from other
Ministerial duties for a time.

6. Little wrestling with God to have the People prepared for it, or the guilt
of profaning of it by our selves and others taken away.

Fourthly, in Visiting.
NEgligent, lazy and partial visiting the sick; if they be poor, we go once,
and only when sent for; If they be rich and of better note, we go oftener, and
unsent for.

2. Not knowing how to speak with the tongue of the Learned a word in season to
the weary and exercised in conscience, nor to such as are under the loss of
husband, wife, children, friends or goods, for the improving of these trials to
their spiritiall advantage, nor to dying persons.

3. In visiting, wearying, or shunning to go to such as we esteem graceless.

4. Not visiting the People from house to house, nor praying with them at fit
opportunities.

4. In Catechizing.
1. Lazy and negligent in Catechizing.

2. Not preparing our hearts before, nor wrestling with God for a blessing to
it, because of the ordinariness, and apprehended easiness of it; whereby the
Lords Name is much taken in vain, and the People little profited.

3. Looking on that Exercise as a work below us, and not condescending to study
a right and profitabl way of instructing the Lords People.

4. Partial in Catechizing, passing by these that are rich and of better
quality, though many of such stand ordinarily in great need of instruction.

5. Not waiting upon and following the ignorant, but passionatly upbraiding of
them often.

5. In Ruling and Discipline.
1. NOt making use of this Ordinance of Church Censures for gaining of souls,
but turning it in a mere Civil punishment; and in the administration thereof
becoming either coldrise, or without a spirit of meekness, and using a way
either merely rational by wordly wisdom, or merely authoritative, more then by
motives drawn from the love of Christ; and by our carriage in Judicatories
putting a humane shape upon the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, carrying our selves
in too stately a way, like the men of this world.

2. Partiality in administration of Censures with respect of persons, not using
the like faithful freedom toward high and low, sib and fremd.

3. Rash taking on us to open and shut Christ's door.

4. By our practice, teaching (as it were) formality in Repentance to
offenders, hardening them in their sins, by accepting bare forms without any
evidence of Repentance, and loosing when we were persuaded Christ did not
loose: and of late turning profession of Repentance into a State engine for men
to step unto preferment and public employments.

5. Following scandalous persons with the highest Censures of the Kirk, with
little or no care to hold them up to God.

6. Want of compassion to these on whom Discipline is exercised, not laboring
to convince them of sin, but imperiously and with passion instead of zeal
threatening them, thinking it sufficient if we be obeyed, though they be not
gained to Christ.

7. Superficial, sinful, and slight censuring one another, at times appointed
for that end in Presbyteries and Synods, and neglect of faithful freedom and
love in performing that duty.

8. Admitting of men to the Ministry who were not qualified with Grace as well
as Gifts, not withstanding the Word of God and Constitutions of this Kirk do
require the one, as well as the other; which has been the fountain of many
evils.

9. Great unfaithfulness in bringing in, and holding in, unworthy persons in
the Ministry, and keeping Censures off unfaithful men.

10. Unfaithfulness in giving Testimonials and Recommendations, and receiving
persons upon Testimonials merely negative, especially Expectants and Students
of Divinity.

11. Constituting Elderships of such men as are known to be ignorant profane
and disaffected to the Work of God, and being careless to have them consisting
of the most able and godly men within the Congregation, a great cause of much
ignorance, profane and scandalous carriage among the People.

12. Neglecting to remove from the Elderships such as are ignorant and
scandalous.

13. Neglecting to hold out the necessary qualifications and duties of Ruling
Elders, and to stir them up to their duty.

14. Not carrying our selves in Judicatories and other ways toward Ruling
Elders as toward Brethren, and joint Overseers in the work of the Lord.

15. Not making conscience of keeping Kirk Judicatories, but wearying of the
expenses and attendance, whereby diverse things has been hastert and miscarried
therein: willing deserting of them, and shunning to give testimony in them, for
fear of inconveniences.

16. Not stouping to a gaining way in Debates, nor making application to God
for knowledge of his mind in things debated, before they pass in a conclusion.

17. Wearying to hear men fully who represent their doubts, and to weigh all
the Arguments that can be represented for the negative, before the affirmative
be concluded.

18. Too great animosities in Judicatories, even about matters of small weight.

19. Pride, impatience and peremptoriness of spirit, not staying on others
clearness in our debates and conclusions, through which it comes to pass that
we judge rashly of precious men; and alienatition of affections steals in and
is entertained.

20. Hasty concluding of Acts and pressing obedience thereto without convincing
grounds holden forth from Scripture for satisfying the consciences of the Lords
People.

21. Silence in Assemblies when unsatisfied, being carried by the authority of
men, and too much following other men's light and suppressing their own.

22. Making Votes subservient to the humors of men and humane interests.

23. Some altogether neglecting wholesome Acts and Constitutions of Assemblies,
and others, receiving their Acts too implicity.

24. Too bitter expressions against Adversaries in Public Papers and Sermons,
for eshewing reproaches, whereof there is no fruit but irritation.

25. Abusing transportations by making them too frequent, and almost the
ordinary way of Planting places of any eminency; sometimes enacting them when
there is no pressing necessity, and without tender endeavoring the
satisfaction of the People interested and without care of providing them
thereafter.

In relation to the Public.
1. NOt studying the controversies of the time, that we might be enable to hold
forth light, and convince gain sayers of the truth.

2. Not fearing to meddle in matters too high for us, and desiring to be taken
notice of, more then to be stedable in the Public.

3. Following of Public bussiness, with too much neglect of our Flocks.

4. Following of Public bussiness with much pride and passion, and loftiness
of spirit upon carnel principles and desire to be esteemed of, rather then true
zeal to Jesus Christ and his matters, and with little or no prayer.

5. Superficial admitting of all to the Covenants, and solemn Acknowledgment,
without taking sufficient pains to instruct and inform them in the knowledge of
the things contained therein.

6. Being too instrumental for bringing disaffect persons to trust.

7. Unequal zeal against enemies, cooling in our zeal against one enemy as it
is increast against another.

8. Much repining at the judgments of God upon the Land from carnal respects,
and transferring the causes of the wrath off our selves upon others.

9. Too easy satisfied in such things as might tend to the prejudice of
Christ's inteaest, weighing the consequences of great Revolutions more by
respect to our selves, then to his honor.

10. Agreeing to receive the King to the Covenant barely upon writing, without
any apparent evidences of a real change of Principles.

11. Not using freedom in showing what we were convinced, was sinful in
reference to the late Treaty with the King, but going on therein when we were
not satisfied in our consciences for fear of reproach and of being mistaken.

12. Silence in Public, and not giving Testimony after a discovery of the
Kings Commission given to James Graham; for invading the Kingdom.

13. Pressing the King to make a Declaration to the world, whilst we knew by
clear evidences that he had no real conviction of the things contained therein.

14. Too much desiring to lurk upon by ends, when called to give a Testimony.

15. Not bearing Testimony against Public Defections in a right and spiritual
way.

16. Unfaithfulness in bearing burden with them, whom the Lord raised up to be
his witnesses against the public backslidings, omitting to bear Testimony our
selves upon carnal respects and lukewarmness in adhering to public Testimonies
formerly given.

A Postscript. Which could not be gotten printed.
THe foregoing causes of Gods wrath being on several days of solemn
Humiliation laid out and confessed before the Lord, we thought fit to subjoine
here some other causes of our late Humiliation; as

1. The late declining of the Land by consenting and engaging unto the public
actings of the present Powers, so contrary to the Covenants, and so much
prejudicial to Religion and liberties.

2. The defection of diverse, who are accounted religious, from their former
principles, unto Separation, and other Errors of the time.

3. The Usurpation and Carriage of the present pretended Assembly.

4. The English their great Encroachments, upon the Liberties of this Church.

5. That the promised Conversion of His Ancient people of the Jews may be
hastened.

6. That the Lord may make our present resolutions for reforming our selves,
our Elderships and people effectual, and may bless our Endeavors to this
purpose.

FINIS.

