THE NOVELTIE OF POPERY, Discovered and chiefly proven by Romanists out of
themselves.

IER. 6. 16. Ask for the old path's, where is the good way, and walk therein.
TERT. L. 2. CONT. MARCION. Omnino res Christiana sancta antiquitate constat,
nec ruinosa rectius reparabitur, quam si ad originem reducatur. By William
Guild, D. D. and Preacher of Gods word.

ABERDENE, Printed by JAMES BROWN, 1656.

TO The worshipful, and worthy of all respect, DAVID WILKIE Dean of gild of
Edinburgh.
Worshipful Sir,
THere are two remarkable points of Policy which are used by the enemies of
the Truth the Papists, for bearing down the same, and for upholding the Dagon
and Diana of their idolatrous worship. The first is, the claim of venerable.
Antiquity, to be only on their, side, being herein like the Gibeonites, who
tho they dwelt near hand, yet pretended that they were come from a far, or like
the Pharisees, who deryved the leaven of their new and corrupt doctrine from
the very chair of Moses it self.

The second is, the imputation of Noveltie to us, and laying that foul
aspersion on the fair face of truth and of our profession, as (tho like
Elihues confession of himself Job, 32. 6.) the same were but young and of
yesterday, but theirs (like Jobs other friends) w^r only old or ancient, which
imputation indeed is no new trick of enemies to the Truth, seeing we see the
same aspersion cast on our Saviors and his Apostles doctrine, Act 17. 19. and
whereby also Pagans labored to make the Christian religion at first odious to
the world.

But we are content to be tried by Antiquity, the old way (as Jeremy ^^eakes
6. 16.) being the only good way, and (as Tertullian says cap. 4. ad praxeam)
That, that only is truth which is first and most ancient, as that was the
good seed only which was first sown in the Masters field, it being tares
only which were sown later by the envyous enemy.

Therefore we must distinguish between Antiquity of Truth, which is like the
Legitime, and first borne, and between Antiquity of Error, which is later and
of a bastard brood, which made our Savior to oppose to this, Math. 5. ( it
was said of old.) this other speech of his ( but from the beginning it was not
so) by which sort also of primitive antiquity Jerusalem was sometimes a
faithful City (as Isaiah calls her, 1. 21.) but afterward by the other
sort became a Harlot, and as Ezekiel also speaks 23. 43. waxed old in her
adulteries: even as Rome in likemanner was first famous for her faith
throughout the world, by holding the antiquity of truth. But thereafter like
Jerusalem making defection to error and Idolatry* she has in likema^ner
played the Harlot, and waxed old in her Adulteries. Whose followers (as
Demetrius cried up their great Diana of Ephesus, or the Jews, the Temple of
the Lord.) so, tho they in likemanner cry up the holy Roman Church, Mother and
Mistress of all other, yet justly we may reply, as is said of her, Revel. 17.
5. That she is a mother indeed, but the Mother of harlots and abominations of
the earth, and so, old indeed, but (as Ezekiel speaks) old in adulteries, and
who because of the multitude of her whoredoms (as the Prophet Nahum speaks
3. 4.) is the mistres of witch-crafts, whose skirts the Lord has discovered
upon her face, and will more and more show the Nations her nakedness, and the
Kingdoms her shame, who at last shall hate the Whore, (as Revel. 17. 16.) make
her dosolate, eat her flesh, and burn her with fire, for strong is the Lord
who judges her.

Howsoever therefore they upbraid us with Noveltie, who are of that Apostaticke
Church of Rome, and synagogue of Antichrist, yet it shall b^e seen (God
willing) by this ensueing Treatise. That (...) Potiphars wife was only guilty
of that foull aspersion, wherewith she accused innocent Joseph: so that they in
likemanner are only guilty of that aspersion of Noveltie, which they impute
to us and to our profession, and that their doctrine is neither that first
sown seed in the Lords field by his Apostles, whereanent Paul says Gal. 1.
8. If an Angel from heaven should ^each any thing beside that which we have
taught, let him be accu^sed, nor yet consona^t thereunto, but altogether
disagreeable and dissonant therefra, and like the supersemination and mixture
of the tares by the envyous enemy in the LORDS field.

Which pains I have Dedicate to you ( Sir) as a pryme lover of the Truth, and
promover of learning, to whom by Divine providenoe as the patronage of six
Bursers of Philosophy in the University of Saint Andrews and Leonardin
College thereof now belongs, founded by that worthy and never to be
foregotten Principal thereof Master ROBERT WILKIE of happy memory. So your
godly care and conscientious manageing thereof, with your love to that place,
which owes so much to you and to your surname, has moved me in this barren
age of encouragements to virtue and learning, to single you out as fittest and
most worthy to whom my pen and pains may contribute their best respects, the
increase of whose prosperity and happiness every way, I shall ever wish who
am

Sir, Yours most affectionatlie devoted. William Guild.

The Noveltie Of POPERY.
CHAPTER I.
That the most Ancient Religion, is only true and Catholic.
THERE can be no better direction in matter of Religion, than that of the
Prophet, saying, Ierm. 6. 16
Stand in the ways, and see, and ask for the old way, which is the good way.
Neither can there be a greater prescription against Heretical pravitie, than
that of our SAVIOVR'S, Math 19. 8.
from the beginning, it was not so. Or can there be a surer preservatiue
against the seduction of those who speak lies in Hypocrisy, than that which
is set down by the Apostle S. IVDE: to wit, Jude 3. 4.
Earnestly to contend for that Faith which was once delyvered to the
Saynctes? to wit, at the beginning: and therefore, who are said to be built
only (as the Apostle speaks) upon the foundation of the Apostles, Ephesians. ^,
20.
and Prophets; JESUS CHRIST Himself being the Cornerstone.

Therefore, as it was PAVL'S Protestation to the CORINTHIANS. 1 Cor. 11. 23
That what he received of the LORD, that only he delyvered unto them; So it
was his precept to TIMOTHY, and TITUS, To hold fast that form of sound
doctrine, 2 Timothy 1. 13. Titus 1. 9.
and word of Faith, which they had been taught, and had heard of him.

It was the primitive Churche^ practice in lyke-manner, next to these
Apostolical times, (as witnesses Lyrinensis) not to delyver their own
inventions to posterity; Vinc. Lyrin. adversus here^.
but to hold fast only that which they received from their Predecessoures:
so that as any one more flowrished in Religion (says he,) the more he
with-stood ever any new inventions. Whence it is, that the Church was called
a diligent, and wary preserver, of these doctrines of Faith, which were
concredit unto her, without changing any thing ever therein: without
diminishing therefrae, or adding any thing thereto, (says the same Father.)
Her teachers venting that which was concredit to them, not invented by them,
which they received, not excogitate, and not any brood of their own ingyne,
but the bread of heavenly doctrine; which is not of private usurpation, but of
public deliverie or tradition, brought to them, not broached by them, wherein
they should not be Authors, but keepers; not instituters, but observers; not
leaders, but followers: teaching the same things to others by word, which
themselves had from the Apostles by WRIT. So that tho they speak after a new
manner of speaking or expression, yet they should speak no new thing for
matter: observing that as in the growth of our bodies, there is no increase of
new members in number, but augmentation of the same in measure: So in the
Churches knowledge, that the growth thereof should be in the same doctrine of
Faith, already delyvered, but no new Article of doctrine afterward to be
broached.

For preventing whereof, therefore did that holy Apostle, like BONARGI, or a
son of Thunder, throw that dreadful Thunderbolt, against all Novelists*
saying, Tho we, Gal. 1. 8.
or an Angel from Heaven, preach unto you ((...)) beside that which we have
preached, let him be accursed. So that it did not suffice, (says Lyri^ensis)
for keeping sound that doctrine of Faith, which was once delivered, to make
mention of man, although it were peter, Andrew, John, or all the company of the
Apostles, except that he comprehended in lyke-manner, the very excellency of
Angelical powers.

And which speech of the Apostles, Augustine explayneth thus, If we or an
Angel from Heaven, preach unto you any thing concerning Faith and Life,
besides that which ye have received in the Legal, and Evangelicall
Scriptures, (says he) let him be accursed: limiting so what the Apostle
preached in the matter of Faith, or manners, within the pale of the written
word; and leaving no place therein, to unwritten traditions.

Thus it being clear, that the true Religion, is only most Ancient, and
that the most Ancient Religion likewise, is only most true: as having it
whole Origin from CHRIST, and His Apostles, and from that warrant of holy
Scripture, which they have left behind them: which made Tertull^an to say,
Tertul. de praescript. adv. hereticos c. 6.
Doubtless that is to be held (says he,) which the Church has received
from the Apostles, and the Apostles from CHRIST, and CHRIST has received from
GOD. It follows necessarily, that that Religion, or Doctrine what-so-ever,
that wants this Antiquity, and is of later invention, is neither true nor
Catholic. The first property of Catholicisme, being that of time, to wit,
which has been ever, and from the beginning, taught in the Church: therefore
says the forenamed Vincentius Lyrinensis. In the Catholic Church a
special care must be had, that we hold that which was ever, every where,
and by all believed: so that, that Doctrine which is deficient in the very
first point, to wit, the universality of time, and was not semper, or ever in
GOD'S Church; but whereof it may be said, as our Savior says of the Jewish
Bills of Divorce, From the beginning it was not so: the same is no ways sound,
and Catholic Doctrine, but like that later Supersemination of Tares, after
the good Seed in the LORD'S Field; neither is any person who professes the
same, verus and genuinus Catholicus, a true and upright Catholic, but on the
contrary a giddie and profane Novelist, whose lust as it were of profane and
new hatched Curiosity, (says the same Father,) can not contain it self
within the chaste limits of sacred and vncorrupt Antiquite.

CHAPT. II.
The Noveltie of Popery, instanced in 14 particular points of Erroneous
Doctrine.
THis challenge, then, of Noveltie, and consequently, of an unjust usurpation
of the name of Catholics, we justly lay to the charge of the Romanistes of
these times, which the better that we may clear and confirm, we shall
instance the same, first in 14 particular points of Doctrine, as making up a
sufficient Dittie, the Noveltie where-of severallie next, shall be (God
willing) proven, by the witnessing of their own mouths, vt ex ore suo
judicetur servus nequam, or by the undeniable records of venerable Antiquity.

The Points are these that follow.
THat beside Scripture, there Council. Trid. S^ss. 4*
which men are bound no less to reverence and believe, than GOD'S written
Word, and as Articles of Faith; under pain of damnation.

That people should not be permitted

That beside CHRIST, the Rome, Bell. l. 1. de Romans pont. c. 10.
as S. Peter's successor: so that he is both the foundation and head
thereof, as universal Bishop.

That by virtue of the same prerogative, Bell. l. 4. de ro^. po^t. c. 22. (...)
he is over and above all the members thereof, even in temporal things.



Co^^il. Trid. Sess^ 9.
both to Sayncts and Angels

Ibide^.
with a Religious Adoration.

Council. Trid. Sess. 6 Rhem in ^eb. 6. 10.
our good works are also meritorious causes of the Kingdom of Heaven: so that
GOD were unjust, if for their condignitie He bestowed not the same upon us.

Council. Trid. Sess. ^
for the souls in Purgatory.

That beside CHRIST'S satisfaction, Council. Trid. Sess. vl^.
there are also satisfactions of the Saynctes; whereof with the sufferings of
CHRIST, is made up the Churches Treasure of indulgences.

That beside Baprisme and the Council. Trid. Sess. 7
there are also five other Sacraments of the Gospel, properly so called.

That the Body and Blood of CHRIST, Council. Trid. Sess. 3 sub Iulio 3.
is not only truly and reallie present in the Sacrament of the Supper, but
likewise that the very visible Elements, are transubstantiate into the very
substance of CHRIST'S Body and Blood.

That the Cup in the Communion Council. Trid. Sess. 5 41.
or given to the people.

That beside CHRIST'S Sacrifice of Himself once upon the Cross forever, there
is also a daily, proper, propitiatory, and real sacrificing of Him upon the
Altar, for the quick and the dead: and this is the sacrifice of the Mass.

CHAPT. III.
Of the Noveltie, then, first, of the doctrine of unwritten traditions, whereon
the main body of Popery is built altogether.
THE first vrgers, then, of unwritten Traditions in the Christian Church, we
find to have been some Heretics, Iren. Lib. 3 Cap. 2
who arose in IRENEVS days, Anno 180; of whom he writes thus, When they are
convinced by the Scriptures, they fall out into the accusation of the
Scriptures, (says he) as if they were not rightly alleged, or of
authority of themselves: and because they are ambiguouslie set down, and that
the truth can not be found out of them, by those who knows not Tradition,
which was not delyvered by writ, but by word; for which cause Paull himself
said, We speak wisdom amongst these that are perfect.

In which words is not only set down, what Armor only the Orthodox
Fathers then used, for convincing of Heretics, to wit, the holy Scriptures;
but also in these ancient Heretics, is seen the true picture of our new
Romanistes, who when they are in lyke-manner convinced by Scripture, they fall
out lyke-wyse into the accusation of the Scriptures; that they are not rightly
translated by us, and are not of sufficient authority of themselves: without
the Churches declaration, that they are also ambiguous and obscure, and that
the truth in all points of Doctrine can not be had out of them, 1 Cor. 2. 6.
Bell. l. 4. de vorbo ^. 8.
without unwritten Tradition, bringing also for the mayntayning thereof, this
same place of Scripture, adduced by these ancient Heretics.

The same does Tertu^^ian likewise testify of the Heretics in his time,
T^rtal l. de praescript. adv. ^^ret. c. 25.
who would not grant (says he,) that the Apostles revealed all things to
all men, but some things they taught secretly, and to a few, (even as
Bellarmine speaks) which were to be preserved from age to age, Bell. l. 4 de
^^rbo c. 11.
by unwritten Tradition: for which cause the Apostle says to TIMOTHY, O
Timothy, keep that which was committed to thee.

The Author also of that Book, de Vnitate Ecclesie, Lib. de unitate Eccles in
Tom. 1^.
(thought to be Waltram Bishop of Na^^^rg) shows, that this ^aven sp^ed most
and prevayled in the Roman Church, when the Papacy came to an hight in
Hildibrandes time, about the year 1072, script. germa^ a M. fr^hero Edit. p.
233. et 228
by the monastical sort of that age; of whom he (being living in that same
age) says, That despysing these doctrines that are of GOD, (to wit, in holy
Scripture) they affect other doctrines, (says he) and brings in into the
Church commandementes of humane institution. And again, he shows why they
suffered not their Novices, (as they ought) to exercise themselves diligently
in Scripture; to wit, that their unpolished minds might be fed with the
husks of Devils, which are (says he) the customs of the traditions of men.

And which thing was so far contratie to the ancient custom, used at first
in Monasteries, Duarenus de sacris Ecclesiae minis^ l^ 1. c. 20.
that their own Duarenus testifies, they were nothing else but Seminaries of
Divinity, wherein they studied (says he) diligently the Scriptures: and
out of which, as out of a Seminary, these were chosen and taken out, for
undergoing Ecclesiastical charges, who were amongst them of best life and
learning.

Whence it is lyke-wyse that venerable Beda testifies, Beda l. 3. Hist.
Eccles. Angli ^. 4.
that this was the exercise of those who were in that Famous and Religious
Monastery of our Land, called Colmekill; to wit, that they might only learn
these Doctrines, which were in the Prophetical, Evangelicall, and Apostolical
Scriptures (says he.)

Which thing is far different from the Doctrine of the Roman Church now, who
teaches, that the Scripture is the least part of revealed truth, Charroneus
verit. 3. c. 4. Hosius c. 9 ^. conf^ss.
and the far greater part of the Gospel is come to us by unwritten
tradition, (as says Hosi^s,) of which sort Petrus a Soto grants these to
be, to wit, the sacrifice of the Mass, invocation of Saynctes, the Popes
Supremacy, Prayers for the Dead, the five Sacraments, beside Baptism and the
LORD'S Supper. Canisius catec^^ c. 5. Lind^^nus l. 4. panopo c. 100. Luke 1 4.
2. Pet. 1. 19.
Whereunto their Canisius joyneth, worshipping of Images, and their Bishop
L^ndan^^ adds Transubstantiation, the Communion under one kind, Indulgences
and Purgatory: so that by their own confession, the main body of Popery,
is not built upon the sure foundation of Prophetical, and Apostolic writ, as
on the Rock, but upon the sandy and unsure foundation of pretended unwritten
tradition.

CHAPT. IV.
That these Doctrines of Faith, for which the Romanistes pretend only
unwritten tradition, as their warrant, are not only beside, but also plainly
contrary to the written word, by their own confession: and so can not be but
the latter sown Popple in the Lord's Field.
BELLARMINE in his fourth Book of the Word of God, Bell. l. 4. de verbo c. 11.
^ctavo
professes in the name of all Romanistes, saying, That such traditions as are
repugnant to Scripture, we never do defend, (says he,) seeing there-fore
he renounceth such, and abdicateth them both from his profession, and
patrocinie. Let US inquyre concerning some points of Popery, (by their own
confession,) whether they be Babels babes, or the brood of such a bastard
birth.

And first, we know that public prayer, and performing of divine worship, in
an unknown tongue to the People, is a doctrine and practice of Popery, having
no ground but unwritten tradition. But if it be asked whether this be
agreeable to Scripture, 1. COR. 14. or contrary thereto, their own Cardinal
Cajetane on that place will tell us, saying, By this doctrine of S. Paull it is
to be held, that it is far better for the edifying of the Church, that
public prayers, which are uttered in the hearing of the people, be said in a
language common, and known both to the Clergy and people.

And again, (says their own Benedictus Montanus,) Bishop Montanus, in 1.
Cor. 14.
although the Apostle would have prayers said in a language that is understood,
yet notwithstanding it is to be held, that the Church (to wit, of Rome,) for
most just causes, has decreed and ordained the contrary. Here, then, we see
that the Roman Church, can decree clean contrary to the doctrine of the
written Word.

Again, we know that the prohibition be agreeable to Scripture, or no, and
especially to COLOSS. Espen. in Titum ^. 2.
3. 16; their own Bishop Espenceus will tell us, saying, It is manifest by the
doctrine of the Apostle to the Colossians, 3. 4. and by the practice of the
Church, (says he) that of old the use of the Scriptures was permitted to
the people. Therefore says the Jesuit Azorius, Azor. instit. moral l. 8. c.
26. (...) 28.
we confess that in S. Jerome, and Chrysostomes times, the Laicke people were
exercysed in reading of the Scriptures, because they were written in these
Languages which they did vnderst^d, Alf^s. a Castro verbo Scriptura, Agrippa,
de van. sci. Cap. 100.
and so says also their Alfonsus a Castro, Agrippa, and others.

Bell. l. 2. de Reli. que c. 8.
That the making the Image of GOD the Father, after the likeness of an old
man, is a doctrine and practice of Popery; having no warrant, but the
tradition of the Roman Church: But if it be asked, whether this be agreeable
to Scripture, EXODUS 20. 4. and DEVT. 4. 15. a cloud of witnesses of their own
Doctors will tell us the contrary, as Bellarmin^ confesses, Abul^sis in Deuteronomy.
4. q. 5. Durand. in 3. Did. 9. q. ^. Peres^ de
Abulensis to be, Durand, and Peresius, to whom we may join also the late
Jesuit Vasquez, and others: Wherefore Johannes Ragusius, in his Oration at the
Council of Basil, is forced to confess, That although in the old Law, the
visible Images of GOD, and of his Saynctes, were forbidden by the Law of GOD,
and no liberty was granted since, either in the Old or New Testament to make
any such; Trad. Part. 3. de Imag^ vasq. l. 2. de ^dor. c 3. disp 4. number 74*
yet the Church taught (forsooth) by the holy Ghost, (says he) has not
only permitted, but decreed and ordained the contrary. Where we may see a
strange liberty assumed by the Church, and a far stranger inspiration of her
by the holy Ghost, he to be contrary to himself, and she to trangresse
GOD'S express command in Scripture, by his inspiration.

More-over, we know that the giving of the Communion to the people, under one
kind only, is a doctrine and practice of Popeperie, having no warrant for it
but the tradition and authority of the Roman Church: but if it be asked
whether this be agreeable to Scripture or no, the Council of Constance,
Council. Constance S^ss. ^3.
all in one voice, will tell us the contrary, and confess that neither was it
so in CHRIST'S institution set down in holy Scripture, nor was it the
practice of the Apostles, or of the primitive Church; but is brought in later,
for such reasons as the Church of Rome thought good. For so says the
Council, Albeit CHRIST after Supper did institute this venerable Sacrament,
and gave it to His Disciples under both kynds of bread and wine: As also, tho
in lyke-manner this Sacrament was received by the faithful under both kinds,
Notwithstanding thereof, this custom* for eschewing of certain dangers and
scandalls that might ensue, upon good reason is now brought in, that the same
shall be received by Laickes under one kind only. Where we see that the
Church of Rome thinks her self wyser, and more provident in foreseeing of
dangers, than CHRIST, His Apostles, and the primitive Church was, and that like
the Pharisees and Scrybes of old, by her traditions she has made the word of
GOD to be of no effect.

CHAPTER V.
That these Doctrines of Faith, for which the Romanistes pretend only
unwritten Tradition, by their own confession, are neither necessary nor
profitable to salvation; and consequently not only superfluous, but
vnjustlie urged to be believed, upon danger of salvation.
Cardinal Bellarmine, Bell. l. 4. de verbo c. 11.. his not^tis.
in his fourth Book of the Word of GOD, confesses, that the Apostles did
preach unto GOD'S people, all these things which were necessary and
profitable unto them, (says he) unto their salvation: But what they preached
so to all, that also they wrote, and left registrate in Scripture: Ibide^.
for so says Bellarmsne in lyke-manner, I affirm, that all these things
were written by the Apostles, (says he) which are necessary for all men,
and which they publicly preached to all. Therefore it follows, that in the
Apostles writs are contained all things, which are necessary and profitable
to salvation.

But to subsume: These doctrinall Traditions, whereon is grounded the main
body of Popery; were not written by the Apostles, (as is confessed.)
Therefore it follows, that the same are neither necessary nor profitable to
salvation: and so we see, what doom their own mouths by the force of
truth, are made to pronounce upon these unwritten Doctrines and Traditions;
and consequently how vnju^^lie they are obt^uded upon Gods people.

Next, Act. 20. 27
I a^gue, What the Apostles did preach unto all, as necessary and profitable
unto salvation, l. Cor. 25. 2.
and which S. PAVLL calls else where the whole council of GOD, that only
should their successoures teach unto all, as necessary and profitable unto
salvation.

But the Apostles (as is confessed) did preach nothing unto all, as necessary
and profitable unto salvation, but that which is written in holy Scripture,
under the pain of that curse denounced by S. Paull, GAL. 1. 8.

Therefore, nothing should be taught by true Pastors as their successoures
unto all, as necessary and profitable unto salvation, but that which is
written in holy Scripture. Aug^ l. 3. cont. petil. c 6. So Basil su^ma moral
72 c. 1
Where-fore says Augustine, if we or an Angel from Heaven preach unto you
any thing, beside that which ye have received, in the Legal and Evangelicall
Scriptures, let him be accursed. As also says their Aquinas, It is to be
affirmed, that no other thing ought to be preached, Aquinas in Gal. 1
but that only which is contained in the Gospells, and Epistles, and in the
holy Scripture, playnlie or more obscurelie.

Whosoever then teaches for doctrines of faith, any unwritten traditions,
neither contained in holy Scripture playnlie nor obscurelie, Canu^ Loc. Theol.
c. 3. fund. 3.
(as Canus affirms most points of their doctrine to be) it follows that
he is no true teacher, nor successor to the Apostles; but controlling
Scripture, and deserting their practice, he declares himself to be an
impostor, guilty of profane Noveltie, Gal. 1. 8.
a sower of Tares in the LORD'S Field, and will-fullie to incur that
Apostolical Anathema.

CHAPTER VI.
Of the Noveltie, of withholding the people from reading of the Scripture.
FIrst, then, omitting Testimonies of Scripture formerlie set down, which make
for this point, I come to the Testimony of one of their late and famous
Bishops, Espen^^^us in Ti^. 2
Espenceus by name, whereby he witnesses, That this withholding of Scripture
from the people, was neither in the Apostles time, or agreeable to their
doctrine, nor yet was it in the time of the primitive Church, whose practice
was contrary to their now-a-dayes: his words then are these, It is manifest
(says he) by the doctrine of the Apostle, COLOSS. 3. 16. and by the practice
of the primitive Church, that of old, the public reading of the Scripture,
Chrysostom. Hom. 9. in Epist. ad Coloss.
was permitted to people.

Whence it was that Chrysostom in his time, did vehemently urge the same upon
his auditors, saying, I beseech you all that are Laickes, that ye get Bibles
to your selves, the medicine of the soul: and if ye will not get more, get to
your selves the New Testament at least. And again, he says, Hom. 10. in
Johan ^^m.
What is it, then, that we so earnestly require of you, but that one of the
days of the week, or at least upon the Sabbath day, ye would have a care to
read the Gospells, which before ye come to these Sermons, ye have amongst
your hands at home, and that ye would frequentlie repeat the same, and
diligently search out the meaning, and note what is clear, and what is
^bscure therein. By doing whereof, he shows what good will redound both to
him who was their teacher, and to them who were his heare^s; to wit, that he
should need the less labor and pains, to make them understand the meaning
of the Gospel, when at home they have made the Text samiliare to themselves;
and they also should thereby be made the more sha^pe and quick in
understanding, not only only to hear and perceive what is said unto them,
but also to teach others. And if any should plead the want of scarcity of
Books, he shows concerning this, that it were ridiculous to answer these
who were rich; and as for the poor sort, he shows also, that it is a shame
to them to want the Scripture, which can afford so great profit to them, as
their souls instruction, and yet carefully to acquire such tools or
instruments, as their several Trades required, for winning their bodily
Food: but if any be so poor, (says he) that by no means he can acquire
Books ^o himself, then by the continual reading of the Scriptures, which is
in this place, he needs not to be ignorant of any thing that is therein.

Which thing made the I^suit Azortus to say, Azor. instit* moral l. 8. c. 28.
et 26.
We confess, that in the times of Jerome, and Chrysostom, (which was 400
years, and above, after CHRIST) that the Laickes were exercysed in reading of
the Scripture, because they were written in these Languages, (says he) which
they did understand.

Wherefore also did Theoderet affirm, Theod de cur Gra^^^ aff^ct. l. 5. f. 51.
(in the 500 year of God) that the Hebrew Text of the Old Testament, was not
only translated into the Greek tongue, for the Grecians to read and
understand, See also Bell. l. 2 de (...) c. 16 and vera igitur sente^tia.
but also into the Latin, Egyptian, Persian, Armenian, Scythian, and
Sauromatican; and that I may speak it in one word, (says he) the Scriptures
are translated into all Languages, which at this day any Country what-so-ever
uses to speak: whereby it comes to pass, that ^verie where you may see,
that these doctrines of says which we hold, (says he) are not only
familiarlie known by these who are Churchmen, and teachers of the people, but
lyke-wyse by very Shooe-makers, Smithes, Weavers, and all such like Craftsmen:
yea, by all our Women, and not these only who be learned, (if any such be)
but also by poo^e Trades-women, menders of Clo^thes, serving women, and way^ing
ma^des. Neyt^^^ do they only who dwell in Towns, (says he) understand
well these things, but likewise the Husbandmen: so that you shall find
diggers of Ground, Heards-men, and setters of Plants, discoursing of the holy
Trinity, and the Creation of all things, and having more knowledge of the
nature of man, than ever Plato or Aristotle had.

And that this also was the ancient BRITANE practice within this I Will, in the
700 year of GOD, Venerable Bed^, Beda lib. 3. E^cl. Hist. Aug. c. 5.
who lived in the succeeding Ce^turie or there-by, in his Ecclesiastical
Story of the English Nation, mostclea^lie do^th show^, where speaking of the
life of that Religious Bishop A^^anu^, he tells us, that not only the
Clergy men that were with him in company, but also these who were Laickes,
were diligently exercysed in reading of the Scriptures, or learning PSALMS by
heart. For which end also Cornelius Agr^ppa reports, Agrip pa de vanit sci.
c. 100.
That there was a Decree in the first Council of Nice, that none who were able
to read, should want the Book of the Scripture: and whereunto ye have heard
how seriously Chrysostom did exhort his auditoures: Not-with-standing whereof,
how peremptorily people are now forbidden, to have or read the same, let this
ensuing prohibition, printed of late, and published in Spain, testifi^.

The Spanish Prohibition, of having the Bible in any vulgar tongue, or any
ways to read the same, set forth by Don Bernardo de Sandonal, i rozas,
Cardinal of S. Anasia, Archbishop of Toledo, Primate of Spain, and Inquisitor
general.
COmo la experiencia aya ensenado que de permiter se la sagrada biblia en
lengua vulgar, In judice expurg. hispan excus. Madriti. 1612. regl^. 4.
se sign, por la temeridad de los hombres, mas damno que pronecho, se prohibe
la biblia con todas sus parts, impressa, o de mano en qualquier lengua vulgar,
i assi mismo los sumarios, i compendios, aunque sean historiales, de la misma
Biblia, o libros de la sagrada escritura, escritos en qualquier idioma, o
lengua vulgar.

The same in English.
SEeing it is manifest by experience, if the holy Bible be permitted in the
vulgar tongue, that through the temeritie of men, more hurt than profit will
arise: therefore the Bible is prohibit with all the parts thereof, whether
printed or written, in what-so-ever vulgar tongue it be, as also all summaries
or compends, although they be Historical only of the said Bible, or books of
holy Scripture, in what-so-ever vulgar tongue or language the same be any
wise written.

CHAPT. VII.
The Novelty of the Popes Supremacy, and first, The Noveltie of the style of
Universal Bishop, where-by he claymeth the same.
THis point of Pap^^l Supremacy, (the loftiest Tower of ^abels proud
building.) Boneface the eight declared to be of such consequence, as all
Christians are bound to be subject there-to, Extra vag. comm^n. lib. 1. Tit.
8. c. 1. de major et obed. Bell. l. 2. d^ pont. Romans ^. 31.
and b^lieue the same, under pain of damnation, saying, More-over for all
humane creatures to be subject to the jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome, we
declare, affi^me, decree, and proclayme, that the same is altogether of the
necessity of salvation, Now, (says Bellarmine) one title amongst all others,
out of which is collected the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, is this, the
title of Universal Bishop, of the antiquity whereof, if we inquyre we shall
find.

The first who ever usurped this title, (as all Histories record) to be JOHN,
Patriarch of Constantinople, who obtained of the Emperor Mauric^^us so to be
called, 600 years after CHRIST; and which style was strongly opposed by Pope
Gregory the first, Cusan concord Eccles lib. 2. c. 34. Greg. Lib. 4. Epist. 38.
in this sense as Cardinal Cusanus testifies, to wit, as it imported one to
be so principal, as all others should be subject to him, (as Boniface
decreed) or as Gregori^ himself says, one to mount above others to such an
hight of singularity, as that he would be under none, but he alone would
be abo^e all: Lib 4 Epist. 36. et Lib. 6. Epist. 30.
and which style he challenges expreslie of NOVELTIE, calling it novum nomen
and nova presumptio.

And lest this should have been thought a Noveltie, only in the Patriarch of
Constantinople, usurping against Rome, and that Pope Gregory had quarrelled
it, only as an injury done to himself, and to his Sea, Lib. 9. Epist. 32.
therefore he first clears himself thereof, saying to the Emperor, Do I
in this matter (most Religious Lord) defend any cause of mine, or do I
challenge herein any special wrong done to me? And to clear this the^more,
Lib. 4 Epist. 36.
he says, None of my predecessors would ever consent to use such a
prophanetitle, no, not Peter himself the first alleged founder of that Sea,
who although he was the chief of the Apostles, and according to his Apostolical
place, had the care of the whole Churches committed to him, 2. Cor 11. 28
(as Paull also professes) yet notwithstanding, (says he) he is not called
the Universal Apostle.

And as he witnesses this of his predecessoures, Lib. 4 Epist. 36.
so he shows, that this title was offered to himself, and yet he would
nowayes accept of the same: therefore he says to Eul^gius, Bishop of
Alexandria, and Anastaciu^, Bishop of Antioch, Seeing we would not in any
case accept any such honor, (says he) being offered unto us, consider how
shameful a thing it is, for any man violently to usurp the same: wherefore
let not your holiness in your writings, ever style any man whoso-ever he
be, Vni^ersall Bishop.

And even when it was given to himself in a letter, written by Eulogius,
Bishop of Alexandria, he rejected the same as a title of damnable piyde,
saying, Lib. ^ indict ^ Epist 30.
Behold in the preface of a letter which ye seat unto me, who forebade any
such titles, you have caused set down the word of a proud style, calling me
Universal Bishop. which I beseech your sweetest Holiness, that you do so no
more.

Yea, he shows that this wicked style, imported no less pride, than that of
Lucifer himself, Lib. 4 Epist. 38.
saying to John of Constantinople, Who else, I pray thee, by such a wicked
title is set before thee to imitate, but he who despysing the Legions of
Angels, who were in one society joined with him, attempted to mount above them
to such a hight of singularity, that he would be under none, (says he)
but he alone would be above all others? And again, What else say thou
hereby, but I will ascend to H^aven, and exalt my Throne above the S^arres,
and b^ like to the h^g^est? For what are thy brethren Note that he calls all
Bishops, Bishops of the Vaive^ Call Church, but will have none called
Universal Bishop: this being the difference, (as their ow^^ Salm^ron sh^w^t^)
that the one has a care of (...) good of the whole Church, and vult om^ibus
prodesse, the other will be above the whole Church, and folus omnibus preesse.
Salm^^on Tom. 12. Tract. 63.
Bishops of the Catholic Church, b^t the Stars of Heaven?

More-over, he declares this style to be plain Antichristian, and
consequently clearlie guilty of Noveltie: for (says he) I confidentlie
affirm, that who-so-ever he be that calls himself Vni^ersall Bishop, or
desires so to be called, he is the forerunner of Antichrist, who by pride
extolleth himself above all others. And therefore being Antichristian, the
same Gregory tells, Greg. Lib. 6 Epist. 30. l. 4 Epist. 39.
that it is so far from true Catholic says, to assent thereto, as on the
plain contrary, this is to depart from the faith, and make Apostasy to
Antich^ists (...). For to give assent, o^ acknowledge any such style, what
else is it, but to lose the says, and make ship-wracke there of, (says he?)
Which thing made Cardinal Cusanus, Cusa^us co^^^rd cathol l. 2. c. 13. in fine.
to deny plainly, that the Pope was Universal Bishop, but only the first
Bishop, saying, And while we defend this part, to wit, that the Pope is not
Universal Bishop, but only the first above others, (to wit, in place) and
while we ^ound the vigor and str^^gth of holy Counsels, not on the Pope,
but upon the consent of all, because in so doing we defend the truth,
(says he) and reserve unto every one their own honor, hereby we
reverence the Pope a-right.

The cause likewise, why the primitive and godly Bishops of Rome, never
claymed any such supremacy, quasi Episcopi vrbis potius quam orbis, (says
their own Duaren) and would never use or assume, Roffen cont. Lu. there Veritas
8.
(as Gregory testifies) any such proud title, their own Bishop of
Rochester clearlie sets down, saying, For that age (being near to the
Apostles times) did study to modesty, and humility, for as yet the word of
CHRIST was recent in their memories, (says he) which says, Except that ye
be co^verted, and become as these little ones, ye can not enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. Wherefore they had a care to debar from them these
glorious titles, (says he) whereon the very lightest occasion of pride
might arise. Insinuating thereby evidentlie, not only the latter Noveltie of
any such lofty styles and supremacy, which the latter Bishops of Rome do
usurp; but also the ground wherefrae the same proceeds, to wit, the want of
that wonted modesty and humility of their predecessoures, and the oblivion of
these words of CHRIST, which were ever recent in the memories of their ancient
and godly forebeares.

CHAPTER VIII.
The Novelty of the Popes supremacy it self, and first, over the whole
Clergy in matters Ecclesiastical.
THE Noveltie of Papal supremacy it self, (employed in the forenamed title
of Universal Bishop,) will the more clear lie app^a^e, by s^tting down the
beginning and progress^ thereof, as their own undeniable records give
evidence thereof.

First, then, their own Duarenus says, That the more ancient and holiest
Bishops of Rome, being content with their own Sea and Church, did leave to
other Bishops, the free governament of these Churches that were committed to
them: being (says he) rather as the Bishops of a City, than of the whole
world. But these Bishops who came after them, did not contain themselves
within these bounds; but as it were Lords and Kings, they made no doubt to do
all things at their pleasure, (say^th he) and to ascrybe to themselves the
governament of the whole Church.

He who was afterward one of their own Popes, Aeneus Sylvius, after Pius. 2
Martino Maer. Epist. 227.
likewise testifies, saying, Before the Council of Nice, every one lived to
himself, and small respect was had to the Church of Rome.

After this, Emperors becoming Christian, there were appointed about the time
of the Council of Nice, for the better governament of the Church, four
Patriarchs, all of a-lyke jurisdiction, and the Bishop of Rome amongst them as
one, having only the Primacie of place, for the dignity of the City, and
imperial seat therein; Council, Chalced. Act. 16.
as is evident out of their own writers, and especially out of that Famous
Council of Chalcedon, consisting of 430 Bishops, whose mind was (says
Bellarmine) that the Church of Rome had therefore the first place, Bell. l. 2.
de pont. c. 17. and alteru^
because that City was the Seat of the Empire.

But thereafter, says their own Cardinal Cusanus, Cusa lib. 2. concord
cathol c. 12.
by use and custom of subjection unto him, we may see how far the Bishop of
Rome has prevayled in jurisdiction, beyond the holy and ancient bounds
(says he) and allowance, which was only within his own western Patriarchie.

The first thing they strove for, (after the days of Gregory) was for that
style of Universal Bishop, which he had so much damned, and with it to claim
an universal supremacy of jurisdiction over all others in matters
Ecclesiastical: which style (as Platina tells us) Boniface the third
obtained from Phocas the Emperor, Anno 657.
magna cum contentione, or with great opposition in the very hatching: for,

How far contrary this was (as Gregory himself says) to the Evangelicall
ordinance and decrees of Counsels, Greg. lib. 4. Epist. 32.
let the Canons of the first four general Counsels testify, Lib. 1. Epist.
24.
which four their canonized Pope Gregory, did reverence alyke, as he did the
four sacred Evangelistes.

The first whereof, was that Famous and first Council of Nice, under
Constantine the first Christian Emperor, consisting of 318 Bishops, and
celebrate Anno 325, In the sixth Canon whereof it was thus decreed, that the
Bishop of Alexandria, should brook alyke jurisdiction within his province, as
the Bishop of Rome did in his: showing thereby that all the Patriarchs were
alyke in jurisdiction within their own precincts, without any subordination
of one to another. Wherefore Cardinal de Cusa, Cusa lib. 2. concord cath. c.
12.
(setting down the meaning of Parilis Mos, used by the Council) says, As
the Bishop of Rome, has power over all his own Bishops, so lyke-wyse the
Bishop of Alexandria, has the same privilege of power throghout all Egypt.
Which limitation of every ones proper power within their own precinctes, is
called (...), or the ancient custom amongst Bishops before: therefore says
the Canon, concerning Antioch, Let Antioch also and other provinces, keep
their Ancient privileges.

Whence we conclude out of this Famous Council, that if this was the ancient
privilege, and custom of other Churches, to be free from any subjection to
the Church of Rome, then her universal claymed supremacy, now over all other
Churches, as Mistress, and Mother over them, is nowayes the ancient faith,
nor profession of the Catholic Church: but an ambitious usurpation, and a
mere Noveltie.

The next general Council, whose sacred Canons militate against the Noveltie
of Papal supremacy, is that Famous Council of Constantinople, consisting of
150 Bishops, and held in Anno 380; Bell. Pr^f. de Romans Pon^.
which (as Bellarmine confesses) withstood altogether any such supremacy: the
fifth Canon of which Council, gives only a primacie of order to the Bishop
of Rome, amongst his fellow Patriarchs, which they declare he had only
given him, for the dignity of the City, being the imperial seat.

The third general Council, Apud Biniu^ Tom. 2. Act Council. Ephesians. app. 1 c. 4.
p. 768.
that gives evidence of Romes Innovation herein, is that Famous Council of
Ephesus, of 200 Bishops, celebrate in Anno 434; resolutelie thus decreeing, Let
it be observed, (say they) in all Provinces and Diocesses, that no Bishop draw
under his subjection, any province which was not his from the beginning: lest
under pretense of Priesthood, he bring into the Church arrogancy and pride.

The last, but not the least evidence of the Noveltie of this Papal usurped
supremacy, is that of the Famous and fourth Council of Chalcedon, of 430
Bishops, and held Anno 451; decreeing peremptotilie, that how-so-ever the
Bishop of Rome, had the primacie of place before the Bishop of Constantinople,
yet that the Bishop of Constantinople, in all other things should be equal,
and have alyke privileges with the Bishop of Rome, Now we know, that the
equality of power and privileges between two, dissolveth ipso facto
Monarchy, which can not be but in one, as the very word imports.

This sacred Conncell, and the Act thereof, so galleth the romaenistes, that
forgetting all pretended reverence to Antiquity, and authority of ancient
Counsels, Bellarmine spares not to impute to these godly Bishops, Bell.
praef. de^
fraud and deceat, saying, They decreed this indeed, Romans Po^t.
but not (says he) without fraud and guyle. Which (as says Lyrinensis) What
is this else, but to tread under foot the decrees of the holy Bishops, almost
of the whole Eastern Church, for preventing so wyselie, pronounci^g so
clearlie, opposing so stoutly, and decreeing so piouslie, against ani^ such
Noveltie, of the new Roman Hierarchy?

CHAPT. IX.
The Novelty of the Popes Supremacy, which he claymeth over Princes, as well
as Prelates, and in things temporal.
HEREIN, in these two points the Novation stands, made by the Bishops of
Rome, 1. in subducing their necks from that homage and subjection, which they
yielded of old to the Emperors, as their dread Soveraygnes, and 2. in
reducing them to such subjection under them, that they have trodden upon some of
their necks.

First, then, for witnessing of the Bishops of Rome, their homage and
subj^ction, which from the beginning and of old, they gave to the Emperors,
Bell. l. 1. de (...). c 13.. 4a. r^tio.
Bell^^mine himself will instruct us, speaking of that time, which was many
hundredth years after the Apostles, saying, At that time, al^ho the Bish^p of
Rome in spiritual things was the head of all, even of Empe^^^res themselves,
yet in temporal things he was subject to the Emperoures, (says he) and
because he acknowledged the Emperor to be his temporal Lord, therefore he
made supplication to him, that he would command a Council to be conveaned.

Whence it is, that Cardinal Cusanu^ declares, Cusa co^^ord Cat^* lib. 2^ ^^
^5.
That the eight first general Counsels, were convocate by the Emperoures, and
no ways by the Popes: in so much, that Pope Leo, with much intreat^e desired
to Theodosius, that a Council might be celebrate in Italy, and ye could not
obtain it.

Gregory ^yke-wyse the great, every where in his Epistles to the Emperor
Mauritius, styleth him his supreme Lord and Sovereign: and writing unto him
concerning his imperial command, that he should cause publish a certain Law,
Greg. ^ib. 2 Epist. 61.
which Gregory thought unjust, he says, I as the most unworthy servand of
your sacred Majesty, being subject to obey your command, I have caused send
your Law which ye have made, through sundry parts to be published; and
because the same is nowayes agreeable to the Law of Almighty GOD, Behold, I
have by my letter signified the same to my most excellent Lord: there-fore
every way I have performed what I ought to do, who has both given ^^edience
to the Emperor, and have not been silent, in that which I thought fit to
speak for GOD.

And yet in a more humble manner does Agatho the first, Apud, Bin^u^. Tom. 3.
Act, 4. in oecum Council. 6. sub Agathone. Ep, 1. apud. Bin^u^ t^m. 3
profesie his subjection to the Emperor, supplicating in th^se words, Bowing
humbly the knees of the mind, we entreat your royal Clemency. Wherewith
also Adrian the first, joyneth the prostration of the body, saying, Prost^ate
upon the ground, and ^alling down grooflinges at the soles of your feet, do
I entreat your Majesty.

Thus we see, that servitude and subjection, with prostration and humble
supplicating, was the ancient practice and profession, of the Bishops of Rome,
to the Roman Emperoures, many hundredth years after CHRIST, till in place of
humility, Luciferian pride was installed in seat of Antichrist.

The next point of Innovation, is the reducing of Emperors and Kings, by the
Bishops of Rome, unto their subjection, and dominiering so over them, as to
inthrone or dethrone them, at their pleasure, Bell. I. 5. de p^ont. c. 8.
as BELLARMINE de facto instanceth, to have been done to Emperoures and
King's; and yet that the ancient Bishops of Rome, never usurped such power,
nor used such practices, against either Hea^hen, Bell. I. 5. de pont. 6. 4. et
7.. q^od si
Heretical, or Apostate Emperoures, Bellarmine himself clearlie acknowledges.

The particular time then, when the Noveltie of this usurpation began to peep
out, their own Charter Monk, author of that book entitled, Fasc. temp. in
vita Bonif. 2.
Fascic^lus temporum, tells us, That it was in the days of Boniface the
second, Anno 523; for, remarke, (says he) that about this time, the Popes
began to oppose themselves to the Emperoures, even in temporal things, far
more than of old they were wont.

Thereafter, Otho lib. 20. Ch^o^. c. 35.
their own Bishop Otho Frigensis, condescendeth upon the very time of putting
this usurpation first into practice, showing that Gregori^^, the seventh, was
the first who deposed any Emperor: so that till 1060 years after CHRIST,
this bold Noveltie began not to be practiced. Therefore says their own
Barclay, Barclaius cont. Monarchoma chos l. 6* c* 26
For the space of a thousand years and more, although the Church did flowrish
with all wealth, and that there was also a great number of the wicked Princes
and Tyrants, yet none of the ancient Fathers, or Orthodox w^yters in these
times are found, (says he) who either by word or writ taught any such thing.

And when it began to be practiced, Sigebert the Monk, who lived in the
^leventh hundredth year of CHRIST, Sigeb. Chron 1088. p. 101
and time of Gregory the seventh, says thereof, Let it be spoken with
leave of all good men, (says he) that this NOVELTIE, I will not say Heresy,
before this time was ever hatched, or peeped out in the world.

And last, to put on the kepstone of Antichristian pride, and Tyran^ious
usurpation, the Author of Fasciculus Temporum, Fascic temp. in vita Bonif. 8.
tells us, that Beniface the eight rose up to that hight of pride, (says
he) that he called himself Lord of the whole world, as well in temporal, as
in spiritual things: as if Kings only did reygne by them, and with the
Tempter, they might dispose of the Kingdoms of the Earth, to give them to whom
they will.

Who-so-ever, then, they be, who may so clearlie see the Noveltie of this
usurpation, and yet so highly advance the Bishop of Rome, as only, that they
make him not GOD. Cassand. de officio pii viri.
(says their own Cassander) and who extolleth his authority to be not
only above the whole Church, (as well in temporal, as spiritual things)
but above the very holy Scriptures, etc. I can not see, (say^th he) why
these men may not be called false, or Pseudocotholickes.

CHAPTER X.
The Noveltie of public Prayer, and other divyne Service, in a tongue
unknown to the people.
FIrst, in this point, that the Apostles doctrine, and Churches practice in
their time, was contrary to the Romani^tes now, Cajet. in 1. Cor. 14.
Cardinal Cajetane does evidentlie testify, saving, Out of the doctrine of
S. PAVLL, we have it clearlie set down, that it is better for the edification
of the Church, that public prayers which are uttered in the audience of the
people, be spoken (says he) in a Language common both to Clergy and
people, than otherwise. And that this was also the Churches conform practice,
in the days of Iustine Martyr, is evident, who in the end of his second
Apology for Christians, in express terms tells us, Bell. l. 2. de verbo
c. 16.. sed ^equc.
(says Bellarmine) That the whole people in the Church used to answer, AMEN,
when the Presbyter ended the Prayer or Thankesgiving: wherefore it will follow,
that the Prayer or Thankesgiving was in the vulgar tongue, else says the
Apostle, how shall he that occupies the rowme of the unlearned say, AMEN, at
thy Thankes-giving, if he understand not what thou say?

Next, what was the practice of the Church, after Iustines days, both in the
East and West, is lyke-wyse clear out of Bellarmine, who testifies, Bell.
loco quo supra.
saying, That this custom was also a long time observed, both in the East and
West, is evident out of Chrysostomes Liturgy: where most clearlie (says he)
are distinguished, what the Prie^^ and Deacon, and what the people in divyne
Service did sing. As lyke-wyse out of Cyprian, in his sermon on the LORDS
prayer, where he shows, how the people did answer, saying, We have our
hearts unto the LORD: and out of Jerome, in the preface of his second book on
the Epistle to the GALATIANS, who writes, That in the Churches of the City of
Rome, the people was heard like a heavenly thunder, aunswering with a loud
voice, and saying, AMEN.

Therefore their Nicolaus de Lyra, Lyra in 1^. C^r. 14. So Aq^^nas. and
Gretzer. def. l. 2. de Gerbo c. 16. Cassand. Liturg. cap. 28. et 36. See also
his consult. art. 24.
(and with him Aquinas, Gretzer, and others) freely acknowledges, saying, In
the primitive Church the Thankes-givings, and all other common Serv^ce, was
performed, (says he) in the vulgar Tongue: and the Canonical Prayers,
(^ayth their Cassa^der) and specially the words of consecration of the body
and blood of our LORD, the Auncientes did so read, that all the people might
understand, and say AMEN thereto.

Which custom of the Church, (as yet used in Egypt, Erasmus in 1. Cor. 14.
and Ethiopi^,) it is a wonder, (say^th Erasmus) how it became to be changed.

And if we consider M. Hardinges reason, in his answer to Bishop Jewel, why
Prayers and all other divyne Service, was used in the primitive Church, in the
vulgar tongue, we shall find that the same reason holds still, and so
mili^ateth constantly against this practice of Romish Noveltie: Harding. art.
3. divis^o ^8.
for thus says M. Harding, In the primitive Church this was necessary, when
faith was alearning: and therefore the Prayers were made then in a known
tongue, understood by the people, (says he) because of their farther
instruction. And can any man say now, but people in lyke-manner are learning
the faith daily, and have need of farther instruction than they have already?
Or will any affirm, that this ^ule of the Apostle, 1. Cor 14. 3. etc.
Let all be done unto edification, held only for a time? Therefore seeing
the edifying of GOD'S people, (which is the fi^all cause why Prayer and
public Thankes-giving, should be performed in the vulgar,) does not vary
by diversity of times, but continues still: even so, then, should speaking in
the Church unto their understanding,

CHAPTER XI.
The Noveltie of the invocation of Saynctes departed. Council. Trid. Sess. 9 and
Bulla Pii 4. pro ferm^ co^fess. fid^i dat. Romans 1564.

FOr discovery of the Noveltie of which doctrine obtruded, to be believed and
practiced by all Catholics, under pain of damnation, we have before CHRIST
the first four thousand years prescription, against any such doctrine or
practice in the Church of GOD, by the confession of Bellarmine, Bell. l. 1. de
sanct. c. 19.
and all other Romanistes, who grant, That during all that time, both before
and under the Law, there was no invocation of Saynctes departed.

Next, A. Eckii Enchi tid. c. 15.
if we come to our SAVIOVR'S time and his Apostles, their own Eckius (Luthers
great Antagonist) declares, That in the New Testament the Apostles and
Evangelistes, neither taught by word, nor delyvered or left any such thing by
writ, that the Saynctes departed should be invocated; neither would the holy
Ghost, (says he) suffer them so to do, by whose inspiration they spoke. D.
B^nnes, in 2a. 2^. q. 1. art. 10 Sal^ meron in 1. Tim. 2 disp. 8
The same also does their Dominicus Bannes, and the Jesuit Salmeron testify,
rendering this reason, Because it would seem hard to the Jews, (says he)
who were never taught so to do by Moses nor the Prophets, and the Gentiles
should have thought, that there were many gods exhibit to them, in place of
the multitude of gods, which they had forsaken.

Behold, th^n, here a doctrine of the Roman faith, confessed to have for the
warrant there of, neither Gods written word, nor yet Apostolical unwritten
tradition: now if it was neither written, nor preached by them, let any man
consider if the Noveltie thereof be not clear, and that they can not eschew
the Apo^tles Anathem^* who says. Gal. 1. 8.
If an Angel from Heaven should preach unto you, beside that which I have
preached, let him be accursed.

Next, to the Apostles times, if we come to after ages, and inquyre how long
was it after the Apostles* before any mention was ever heard of any such
thing, their own Bishop Poresi^s, P^resius de trad. 3 part de cul^us sanct.
Will playnlie tell us, saying, That before the ^yme of the Martyr Corneli^s,
(which was about 252 years after,) there was no mention, (says he) so far
as we can see, of any invocation, or intercession of Saynctes.

What was the practice likewise of the Church, in S. Augustin's time, (who
lived after the 400 year of CHRIST,) and specially of the western or Roman
Church, himself does declare, saying of the Martyrs and Sayncts departed, As
for such men of God, Aug. l. 2^. de civit. Dei c. 10*
(says he) who have overcome the world, in confessing of Him, they are named
in their own place and order, but they are not prayed unto.

Yea, in the 1200 year of God, Bernard did put it in doubt, Bernard do obi^^^
Hum berti.
whether the Saynctes departed, any ways heard the living: which if they do
not, then speaking to them by prayer, were altogether foolish: for speaking of
devoute Humbert, he says, Neither see I him now, nor perhaps does he hear
me.

More-over, it is to be observed, that the Fathers of the primitive Church,
used this as a spec^all Argument, to prove Christ to be GOD, because He was
everie-where prayed unto. Which Argument had been of no force, if in those
times they had prayed either to Saynctes or A^g^ls.

Therefore O^igen shows, Orige^ l. 8. in Epist. ad Romans c. 10. So No vatia
nus de Trinit ^. 14.
That PAVLL (1* COR. 1. 2.) proves hereby CHRIST to be GOD, because His Name
is every where incalled upon; for the Apostle (says he) does thereby
pronounce JESUS CHRIST to be GOD, because His Name is incalled upon. And if to
incall upon the Name of GOD, and to worship GOD, be all one and the same
thing, then as CHRIST is incalled upon, so is He to be worshipped (says
he.)

Hence it is also, Bell. l. 1. de bonis operibus in partic c. 1.
that the Fathers in their several definitions of prayer, (which Bellarmine
rehearses out of them) makes the same to have express reference to GOD
o^elie, and therefore also styleth it, That ^atte and greatest Sacrifice,
Tertul Apologet. c. 30. Clem, Alex* l. 7. strom. Bell. praef. de sanctis Aug.
l. 8. d^ civit. Dei, c. 27. Amb. in Romans 1.
which Himself has commanded to be offered up unto Himself, (says
Tertullian) and that best and most holy Sacrifice of any: (says Clemens of
Alexandria) yea, that most excellent sort of worship, (as Bellarmine calls
it.) Now as Augustine shows, and the Romanistes confess, There is no
Sacrifice that is lawful to be offered up unto any creature, and therefore
least of all that of Prayer, which is the greatest and best.

And as for that reason, which Romanistes give for their recourse to Sainct^s,
the Fathers also have not failed to take that away: S. Ambrose telling us, that
the very heathen Idolaters, pretended this miserable excuse, saying, That they
had recourse to such that had departed whom they worshipped, that they may have
acce^se to God by them, as by Courtiours to a King: and then he subjoyneth,
saying, But is there any man so mad, (says he) and so unmindful of his
salvation, as to give the Kings honor to a Courtier? whereas if any were
found to do so, they would be justl^e c^ndemned as guil^ie of Treason: and
yet these men think not themselves guilty* who give the honor of GOD'S Name
to a creature.

In lyke-manner says S. Chrysostom* When thou have neede^ to put up a suit
unto men, Chrysostom. Sermon. 7. de p^nit. ^om. 6 ed^t. Savi^. p. 802 qui in allis
edit. est Sermon. 4. Chrysostom. in (...). Cana ne^ tom. ^ edit. Sa^il. P. 190
thou^ art forced first to deal with doorekeepers, and to entreat flatterers,
and to go a long way: but with GOD there is no such matter, without an
intercessour He is entreated: it suffices only that thou cry in thy heart,
and bring tears with thee,

And therefore he bids us mark the wisdom of the Canaanitish Woman: she
entreated not James, (says he) she besought not John, neither did she come
to Peter, but brake through the whole company of them, saying, I have no need
of a mediator, but taking repentance with me for a spokes man, I come to the
fountain it self, for this cause did he descend, for this cause took He
flesh, that I might have boldness to speak to Him.

Last, to what hight of impiety and gross Idolatry, this Romish Noveltie is
come unto, let us see in the last rowme: First, then, their own Vi^es
testifies, that they worship no otherwise their he and sh^e Sayncts, Viv^^ in
c. 27. l. 8 Aug. de civit. D^^
than GOD Himself: neither see I (says he) in many things, what
difference there is between their opinion of Saynctes, and that which the
very Heathen had of their gods.

Lyke-wyse they are come to that hight of Blasphemy, See al^so the same in the
virgins Psal^^r Psalm. 25.
as they are not ashamed in their public Roman missall, to say to the
Virgin Marie, O foelix puerpera, nostra pians scelera
Iure matris, impera Redemptori.
Tua semper ubera nostra sanent vulnera.


that is, O happy Mother, who expiateth our sins, by the authority of a
Mother, command our Redeemer, and let thy Pappe-milke heal our wounds.
Amphitheatrum honoris Caroli Bonartii,


Even as of late Carolus Scribenius. Provincial of the Jesuits, has written,
saying, Lac matris miscere volo cum sanguine nati,
Non possum antidoto nobiliore frui.


That is, I will mix the milk of the Mother, with the blood of the Son; and
so I can not have a more excellent salve for sin.

They have also turned the whole PSALMS from GOD, to the Virgin MARIE alone,
and in the 71 ^SALME of that Psalter, they attribute j^stice only to CHRIST,
and mercy to the Virgin MARIE: therefore also thus they begin the 93 PSALM,
saying, GOD is the Lo^d of reveng^: but thou boun^^full Mother of mercy, do
bow Him to show pity. And as Assuerus promised to Esther, to the half of
his kingdom, Biell in can missae lect. 80. Bern. de busto Mariali part. 3
Sermon. 3.
even so (says Biell on the Mass) seeing our heavenly Father has justice
and mercy, as the best things of His Kingdom, r^serving justice to Himself,
He^ has given mercy to the Vi^gine His Mother, wherefore it is lawful,
(says their Bernardin de Busto) to appeal from the Sons justice, to the
Mothers mercy.

CHAPT. XII.
The Noveltie of prayer to Angels.
THis worshipping and prayer to Angels, b^gan to be br^ached in the very
Apostles time, who the^^fore did fore-warne, that the mystery of iniquity did
then allr^adi^ work^: but no ^ooner did this doctrine under a specious show of
voluntary humility peep out, but the Apostle discovered and declared the
same to be a deceatfull doctrine of error, whereof he bids all Christians
beware, saying in express words, Let no man dec^aue you of your reward, in a
voluntary humility, ^oloss. 2. 18.
and worshipping of Angels.

The first and principal Author, then, of this error, we see, was that
spirit of error and delu^ion: therefore says Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in
Coloss. 3. Hom. 9.
The Devil was he, who brought in this worship of Angels, envying us the
honor which we have, (to wit, of immediate access by CHRIST) therefore tho
he be an Angel, (says he) or Arch-angell, and tho they be Cherubims,
endure it not; for neither will these powers themselves admit it, but reject
the same, when they see their Lord dishonored: I have honored thee, (says
the LORD) and have said, Call upon me, and do thou dishonor Him? (says
that holy Father.)

After these Apostolical times, if we inquyre who was the first broacher o^
this error, and setter of it on foot again, Origin tells us, Orig. l. 8.
cont. Celsu^ p. ^06
that it was Celsus, a Philosopher, who said, Because the Angels understood
the ^ffaires of GOD, therefore we should pray to them, that they may be
favorable to us. Whereunto Origin replyeth, saying. Away with Celsu^ counsel,
saying that we should pray to Angels, and let us not afforde any little
audience thereto: for we must pray to GOD alone, (says he) who is GOD
overall, and to the word of GOD, His only begotten and first borne of all
creatures.

Which er^our of prayer to Angels, spreading it self as a gangren in the
Church, was not only opposed by Origin, and such others severallie, but also
by a whole Council, Theod i^ Coloss. 2. Cocil. Laod. can, 35.
as Theodore^ sh^weth, which being assembled in Laodices, the chief City of
Phrygia, by a law did forbid, (says he) prayer to Angels, condemning the
same as Idolatry; whereby the Communion both of CHRIST and His Church was
forsaken: and therefore accursing the practisers thereof, saying, If any be
found to give himself to this private Idolatry, let him be accursed, because
he has forsaken the LORD JESUS CHRIST, the Son of GOD, and given himself
to Idolatry.

Whence it is, that from thence, forth, all those who transgressed this Cano^,
were by the ancient Fathers, and whole Orthodox Church, Aug. de Here Is. c. 39.
Isidorus l. ^. ^. 5.
accounted ever Heretics, and therefore called Angeliei, because of their
worshipping and prayer to Angels, as witnesses Augustine, Isidore, with
dyverse others more.

CHAPTER XIII.
The Noveltie of the worship of Images.
TO come, then, to the discocoverie of the Noveltie of this gross sort of
Idolatry, Iacobu^ Nacla^tus in Epist. ad R^ c. 1. sol. 4^ Edit. Venet. an^o
1557.
which is not only to worship by or before an Image, but to worship the Image
it self: for which cause says one of the Bishops, It must not only be
confessed, that the faithful in the Church, do adore before the Image, (as
some perhaps would warily speak) but also do adore the Image it self
without any scruple: yea, with that same worship, where with they adore the
thing that is represented thereby.

First, Cassand. co^sult* art. 2^
their own Cassander tells us, that it is certain in the beginning of the
preaching of the Gospel, (says he) and a good while after, that there was
no use at all of Images amongst Christians, but especially in Churches: so
that when Adrian the Emperor had commanded that Temples should be made in all
Cities without Images, Lampridus in Alexa^dro.
it was presently conceaved, that he was preparing these for Christians. And
when the ancient Christians themselves were demanded by the Gentiles, why they
had no Images, Minutius Foelix in Octavio
Minutius F^elix returns them this answer, What Image should we make to
GOD, when man himself is GOD'S Image? (says he.)

The primitive Church likewise, for preventing of that Idolatry which
thereafter ensued, was so careful and provident, that the Council of Eliber
i^ in Granado in Spain, Council. El. b. ^. 36.
(in Anno 305) decreed plainly, that no Pictures at all should be brought
within Churches, for fear of adoration, which might ensue thereafter.

Neither was this the decree of a provincial Assembly only, but an
ordinance also, in all other parts of the whole Church, Lib. de non celeb. non
in stitut. c. 11.
as witnesses their own Clemangis, ^ Parisian Doctor, and Arch-deane of
Bajon, saying, Of old the whole universal Church did decree, (being induced
thereto by good reason) for their cause who (...) Gentilisme, were converted to
the says, that no Images should be set up in Churches.

The first breach, and violation of which ordinance, we, find ^o have been
in Epiphanius time, Epiphanii Epist. ad lohan. Hierosol: tom. 1 oper^ Hieronymi
Epist. 60.
Bishop of Salamins in Cyprus, (about the year 390) who as himself (...),
entering into a Chapel for his own private devotion at Anablatha, and seeing
a certain Veil hanging on the wall thereof, having painted thereupon the
Image of CHRIST* or some Saynct, (says he) he took down the same, and
rent it in pieces, and thereafter wrote to the Patriarch of Jerusalem, within
whose precinct it was, finding fault, that any such thing should have been
done within his bounds; and desiring him that he would command, that
thereafter in the Church of CHRIST* no more such Vailes or Pictures should be
hung up: this being contrary to the authority of Scriptures, and against our
Religion, (says he.)

But a good while there-after, how they were more commonly brought in into
Churches, Corneli^s Agrippa thus does declare, Agrippa de van. scien. c. 57.
saying, The Heathnish custom, and their false Religion, has also infected
ours, and has brought into Churches, Images, and Pictures, with many other
pompous Ceremonies, none whereof were found amongst the first and true
Christians.

Under what specious pretense also, and for what end at first this was done,
Cassand. co^sult. (...)
their own Cassander hereby clearly testifies, saying, At last it is evident,
that Pictures were admitted into Churches, to represent only the ^torie of
things done: although Augustine spoke plainly against it, Aug. de co^ sens^
Eva^g. l. 1. c. 9. et ^0.
saying, These deserve to be thought altogether to er^e, who seek the
knowledge of CHRIST and His Apostles, not in holy Scriptures, but upon painted
walls. But how far the ancient Fathers, who lived in the primitive Church,
did abhor from any worship of Images, only Origin writing against Celsu^ may
declare, (says he.)

Thus being, then, generally set up into Church, through the superstition of
people, about the 600 year of GOD, in the time of Pope Gregory the first,
they began to be adored: at what time Cerenus Bishop of Marsil^. publicly
opposed the same* by breaking all the Images, and removing out all the
Pictures, that were within the Churches of his whole Diocesses: Greg. l. 9.
Epist. 9.
which thing Pope Gregory himself does relate to us, in that Epistle of his
written to Ser^nu^, commending his zeal which he show against any worshipping
of Images, as being (says he) altogether against the Scriptures: but thinking
amiss only, that so rashly he altogether had broken them in pieces.

What fierce contentions also afterward arose in the Church, concerning Images,
it were too large a task at length here to set down, the Greek Emperoures,
Leo, Isaurus, Constantinus Caballinus, Nicephorus, Stauratius, Leo Armenus,
Michaell Balbus, Theophilus and others, who were therefore called Iconomachi,
or the enemies to Images, opposing them and their adoration constantly in the
East, till at last their worship was established in that second Council of
Nice, held by that superstitious Empress IRENE, in Anno 787; which Council
was quickly thereafter opposed, by the Council of Franckeforde, convocate by
Charles the Great, and held in the West: at what time, (says their own
Cassa^der) when the coppie of that Council of Nice was brought unto
Franckeforde, Cassand. co^sultart. 21 Ba^o. Tom. 9. An. 794, Sect. 3 9. e^ 41.
and diligently read, by the command of the Emperor Charles, the Council of
Franckeforde was indicted, at which the Legates of the Bishop of Rome were
present, and there, by the full consent of the Western Bishops, (says he)
that Grecian Council, in so far as the same decreed the worship of Images to
be lawful, was disallowed, and condemned, as not only contrary to
Scripture, but also to the doctrine of the ancient Fathers, and to the custom
of the Roman Church it self. So that we see, 800 years after CHRIST, that
the Roman Church was then as far from the doctrine and practice of the
Roman Church now, in this point of worshipping Images, a^ ever Luther, or
Calvin, or a^ie Protestant now.

Whereby it is evident, how falselie the Roman Catechism affirms, Ca^^chis.
Romans
that it is not only lawful to have Images in the Church, part. 3. c. 2.
Sect. 14.
and to give honor and worship to them, but also that this has ever, or in
all ages been done, to the great good of the ^aythfull.

Ney^her was that reason or excuse, thought to be of any worth then, Cassand.
ibide^,
(says their own Cassander) which is by some now-adayes pretended, that this
worship is not given to the Images themselves, but to them whom they represent:
for this excuse (says he) was lyke-wyse made by Pagans, to color their
Idolatry.

Which practice of Romish devotion and piety, is come to that hight of
madness, Polyd. Virg. l. 6. de inven^^^rum ^. 13.
(says their Polydor Virg^ll) that this part of Religion, is little different
from impiety: for there are many so exceeding rude and stupide, (says he)
who worship Images made of Stocks and Stones, Brass and M^rble; and these
also, that are painted over with dyverse sorts of Colors upon walls: not is
representing figures, but as if they had sense and feeling, and confide more in
these* than in CHRIST Himself.

Yea, they so dote upon Images, (says their own Gabriell B^ell) that they
believe a certain Deity, Biell in Canon. Missae Lect. 49.
grace or holiness to be in them, whereby they are able to work miracles,
restore health, and delyver from dangers, and to preserve men from hurtes and
snares, out of the confidence of the forenamed, being moved to worship them,
that they may obtain some of the former things.

Whence it is also, (says he) that they vow and obliedge themselves to
undergo Pilgrimages, some to this, and some to that Church, according as they
respect the Images; beli^ving that this Image in such a place, to be of
greater virtue, than in another, and to be more famous for miracles, and of
greater power. And if at any time miracles be wrought upon men, who have
recourse unto them, this is not by the virtue of the Images. (s^yeth he) but
some-tymes by the operation of the Devil, to deceive such Idolatrous
worshippers, GOD so permitting, and their infidelity so deserving the same.

CHAPT. XIV.
The Noveltie of the doctrine of Merit.
HEREIN the Romanistes are so gross, Bell. l. 5. de justif. c. 17. Rhemon 2.
Tim. 4 8. Heb 6. 10. and 2 Thessalonians. 1. 5. Vasq. c^men in l. 2^ q. 114. Disp. 222.
number. 30 31
that BELLARMINE says not only, That good works merit a reward, for their
own worthiness and condignitie: but the Rhemistes add also, that they are so
fully worthy of eternal life, which GOD of His j^stice owes to the workers
of the same, that GOD should be v^just, if He rendered not Heaven for them.

Yea, the Jesuit Vasquez. goes so far in proud and open blasphemy, that
he says, Seeing the works of the righteous, by their own worthiness,
merit eternal life, as an equal recompense and reward, there is no need of
the interveaning of any other merit of condignitie, such as the merit of
CHRIST, that eternal life should be rendered unto them.

To come to the confessed Noveltie of which proud error, beside Scripture
clear in this point, their own Cassander tells us, Cassand. co^sult art. 6.
what was the constant and uniform doctrine, of the primitive Church, and
ancient fathers therein, saying, Wherefore this doctrine is not to be passed
by, which with a full consent all the ancient Fathers delyvere: to wit, that
our whole confidence of the remission of our sins, and the hope, both of
pardon, and of life eternal, is to be placed in the only mercy of GOD, and
merit of CHRIST.

Whence it is, that their Waldensis says, Wild. tom. 3 de^sacramenta lib.
tit. 1. c. 7. who wrot^ anno 1430.
I esteem him a sounder divyn^, and more faithful Catholic, (says he)
and more agreeable to the Scriptures, who simply deny^th any such merit; and
who grants according to the Apo^tles, and Scriptures manner of speech, that
simply a man meriteth not the kingdom of Heaven: but only that it is given
him of the mere favor of GOD, and will of the giver, a^ all the ann^ient
holy Fathers, unto the latter Schoolmen have held, and as the whole Church
did profess, accounting it an Heresy to profe^se the contrary.

The truth of which speech, (...) the first part of this Trea^ise.
of these two forenamed, may be seen at length, in the clear testimonies of
the Fathers themselves, who show how the godly get eternal life from GOD,
ratione pacti, non facti, or by reason not of our wo^kes m^riting, but his
mercy promising. Therefore, A^g. in Psalm. 109.
(said Augustine) whatso-ever GOD has promised, He promised the same to
these who were unworthy, that the reward might be seen to be promised, not
for the merit o^ the work, but of free^grace, (as the word it self
imports.)

Which doctrine of truth overthrowing* merit was also professed of old in
the Churches of BRITANE, as may be seen in the order appointed in the
^uncient Liturgy of E^GLAND, for visitat on of the sick, chiefelie in
Ansel^es time Archbishop of Canterbury, Ordo baptizandi et vi^tand^ ^grotos
edit. V^n^^ anno 1575. ^t Col^ni^ 1576.
Anno 1080, wherein the Priest says to the sick^ person, Do thou believe
to come to Glory, not by thy own merits, but by the virtue and merit of the
Passion of the LORD JESUS CHRIST, and that none can be saved by his own
merits, or by any other means, but by the merit of His Passion. To which the
sick party was taught to answer, All this I believe.

The contrary of which doctrine, mayntayned now by Rom^nist^s, was also long
ago condemned, by the whole Faculty of Divinity at PARIS, Guido re^oc*
erro^um fa^t.
Anno 1354, as most Heretical, and Blasphemous, in their sentence against one
Guid^, an Augustine Friar, by way of recantation prescrybed unto him, Parisiis
anno 1354 Tom. 14. bibli^the^. patr^ edit. Colon p. 347 Bell. l. 5. de justif.
c. 7.
saying, I said against a Batchelour of the preaching Friars, in my conference
with him, that a man meriteth eternal life, for the worthiness of the work;
that is, so, as if the same were not given unto him, there were wrong done unto
him: which opinion I recant, as False, Heretical, and Blasphemous.

Therefore their own Cardin^ll Bellarmine, was forced to conclude, saying,
Because of the uncertainty of our own unrighteousness, and the danger of
vain glory, it is most safe, (says he) to put our whole confidence, in the
only mercy of GOD, and His only goodness.

An advertisement to the Reader.
THE Noveltie of this proud error being discovered, yet, lest with the veil
of the Word, MERIT often used in Antiquity, they should craf^ilie palliate the
Noveltie of their doctrine of merit, their own Vega, Vega l. 8. de justif. c.
8 p. 189.
in his book written in defense, and for the understanding of the Council of
Tren^, and wherein he was a chief Disputer, plainly confesses, saying, I am
not ignorant that the word, ( mer^te) is used ost-tymes, (says he) where
there is no meaning of deserving, either by condignitie, or congruitie.

And therefore we find, that sometimes improperlie, i^simplie signifies to
o^tayne favor, without doing either good or evil: as where Ambrose says.
Am^* Sermon* 53.
That John the Baptist in his birth, obtained so great a favor, as to be the
forerunner of CHRIST, the words being, tantam gratiam nascendo meruit.

Sometimes also it is put for obtaining favor, Greg. l. 9. moral in Job c. 17.
quyte contra^ie to deserving, as where Pope Gregory speaking of PAVL'S
conversion, says. When he was laboring to extinguish the Name of our
Redeemer on earth, he obtained that favor to hear His words from Heaven,
where the words are, Verba de coelo meruit audire.

And sometimes it signifies generally, works, whether good or evil, as Aug.
Epist, 46, and sometimes specially good works, yet excluding all worthiness
in them to merit eternal life; Bern. Sermon. 1. in annu^^ B. Mariae.
as where Bernard says, Neither are men's good works of such worth, that for
their merit eternal life should be due unto them, or that GOD should do
wrong except He gave the same for them: where the words are, Neque eni^ sunt
talia hominum merita, etc. and which speech of Bernand's, is diametralie
opposite in ipsis termin^^, to that proud assertion of the Rhemistes, who say,
Rhem in Heb. 6. 10.
that GOD should be unjust, and do wrong, if He rendered not Heaven for them.

CHAPTER XV.
The Noveltie of Pv^* GATORIE.
FIrst, then, if we ask their own Bishop of Rochester, and great Champion
against Luther, whether this new Article, which avarice has hatched, ignorance
does foster, and fire and ^aggo^ maintaine^h, Rosse^ cont. Luther art. 18
was known of old, or believed by the primitive Church, he will tell us,
saying, It was not so necessary to believe Purgatory, in the primitive Church.

And if we ask him farther, to wit, how long it was before either Purgatory,
or indulgences, (which depend upon it) was known or received by the
Catholic Church, he will tell us, That it was known but of late, (says
he) and that after many ages, the belief of Purgatory and indulgences, was
received by Orthodoxe Christians; and therefore he grants, that thereof
little or no mention was at all in the ancient Fathers. But on the contrary,
Justin Martyr 7. 75.
Justin Martyr does teach us, That after the souls departure from the body,
sta^sm, or instantly, the souls of the godly are carried to Paradise,
Prosper. l. 1. de Vita contempl. c. 1. Aug. medit. c. 22.
where the sight of Angels and Archangels, and the sight of CHRIST is. And so
lyke-wyse says Prosper, that Christians having ended their Pilgrimage,
presently thencefoorth reygne happy in their native country. In lyke-manner
Augustine, that the soul being set at liberty out of the body, presently
goes to Heaven. ^^l. 20 de c^. vit. De^ c. 15. Bell. l. 1. d^ sanct. c. 3.


Yea, Bellarmine himself, upon these words of S. PAVLL, 2. COR. 5. 1.
confe^^eth no less, saying. The reasoning of the Apostle, then, is excellent,
to wit, this (says he) if this mortal life perish, we have presently the
enjoying of another, sarre better in the Heavens.

Last of all, if moreover to prove the Noveltie of this error, we consider
the universality or Catholicisme, both of place and persons, we shall find
that as it has not been semper, or ever in the Church, so neither, has it
been held or believed; Vbique nec ab omnibus, or, in all places, and by all:
which beside the irrefragable not orietie thereof, their own Bishop of
Rochester clearlie confesses, Roffe^ cont. Luther art. 18
saying, As for the Grecians, even unto this day, they did never believe
Purgatory: and yet of the Grectan Church their own Bishop of Bit^nto, in his
Oration before the Council of Trent, Eia igitur Graci^a matter nostra cui to
tum id debet quod ha^et Ecclesia Lati^^.
professes her to be the mother Chruch, from whom the Roman Church has
whatsoever she has, (says he) to wit, of sound and Orthodox doctrine.

And if beside the Grecians, we consider and join the Musco^ites, and Abys^in
Christians, the Gorgians, and Armenians, as also the Syrians and Chaldeans,
that are subject to the Patriarch of Antioch and Babylon, from Cypr^^ and
Palestina, to the East Indies, besides the reformed Churches in Europe, we
shall find these who believe Purgatori^, to be but a few.

CHAPT. XVI.
The Noveltie of Papal Indulgences.
HAving before cleared the Noveltie of Purgatori^, by the Roman^^tes own
confession, it follows necessarily, that Papell Indulgences can brage of no
Antiquity: For, says their own Bishop of Rochester, Roffon cont. Luther
art. 18.
If ye take away Purgatory, what need will be of indulgences? for upon it,
(says he) depends all the respect that is had to indulgences.

Yet to discover more clearlie, the Novelty of Papal indulgences, we will
first consider what were these ancient indulgences, which are mentioned in the
records of Antiquity, to have been at first in use in the Church of CHRIST,
that by the general name common to these ancient, and the now late Papal
indulgences, none may be deceaved.

First, then, the indulgences of old, were only a releasing of penitent^,
from some part of the severitie of discipline, enjoined to scandalous
offenders, as their serious repentance and public evidence thereof did
procure: as may be seen, Bell. l. 2. de indulg c. 6.
2. COR. 2. and as Bellarmine himself makes manifest, out of the Acts of the
Counsels of Nice, and Ancyra, set down by him at length.

Which thing also their own Cassander shows, Cassand. cosult art. ^2
saying, That the diminishing of Canonical Penance, or that relaxation which
was granted by the Bishop to public penitents, when either somewhat of the
time, or of the rigor of the penance was lessened, was called an Indulgence:
so that it was a lessening and mitigation, of their disciplinarie satisfaction
to the Church, who were penitents and alive, granted by every Bishop to such
of his Diocese, and that very sparingly, Bell. I. 1. de indulg c. 3.. post
et c. 12.. posterior
as Bellarmine shows, but no largess and application of the satisfactions of
Saynctes, joined with CHRIST'S sufferings, for the relief of those that are
dead, out of a forged fyrie Purgatory, granted only by the Bishop of Rome,
for satisfaction to him in moneys: B^ll, ibide^. 30
and as Bellarmine acknowledges, for the lightest causes as any, lavishing
out greatest Indulgences, as that is, which is granted to all who heareth^
Popes blessing at Easter.

Now if we inquyre what is become of these ancient Indulgences, Bell. l. 1.
de indulg c. 8.
Bellarmine will tell us, saying, I confess indeed, (says he) that the
form of drspencing with a number of years or days, or Lents appointed for
penance, Prier. l. cont. Luth. pro indulg Antonius part. 1 tit. 10 c. 3.
Cajet. opuse. l. 5. c. 1. et^. de indulg. initio
which was of old in use, is now clean left off.

Next, if we inquyre concerning these new Papal Indulgences, that are come in
their place, whether they have any Antiquity for them, either by Scripture,
or ancient tradition, their own Syl^ester Prier^as, Antonius, Cajetane, and
others, will g^ant, that they have none: for thus says Prierias, (and with
him the other two) Indulgences are not known to us, by any authority of
Scripture: nor was there any use of the in the beginning of the Christian
Chruch. Roffen cont. Luth. art. 18
(say^th their Bishop Fisher.)

To come next from Scripture, to the authority of Fathers, Cardinal Cajetane
tells us, Cajet supra.
That none of the Ancient Fathers, Greek or Latin, have brought these to our
knowledge, (says he) which therefore makes Bellarmine, that he cites not
one Father for them.

As also to consesse, that Durandus, Antoninus, Bell. l. 2. de indulg c. 17.
and Rochester, deny, (says he) that Indulgences were known in the times
of Jerome, Augustine, and other Fathers, who lived in the first five hundredth
years.

Next, after the first five hundredth years, if we inquyre, in the ancient
Fathers that thereafter lived, whether any mention is to be found of Papal
Indulgences, Anto^. part. 1 tit 10 c. 3. (...).
their Antoni^^^^ will tell us, saying, There is no testimony for them in the
ancient Fathers at all, but only (says he) out of more later writers.

Wherefore their own Alfonsus a Castro, Alfo^s. adv. Here Is. l. 8. ^it
indulgentia Chem exam. de indulg. c. 4.
upon the same ground grants, That their use (says he) is only oflate in
the Church.

Justly therefore, is that challenge made by Chemnitius, that no T^stimonie can
be produced out of any Father by any, that any such doctrine or venting of
Papal Indulgences, was in use in the Church, for the space almost of twelve
hundredth yea^es after CHRIST: the first author of them being (as their own
Polydor, and Agrippa tells us) Boniface the eight, who lived about that time,
and extended them to the souls in Purgatory: and for the better sale, and
venting of them, devysed a solemn Iubile* being therein a successor, rather
to Simon Magus, than to Simon Peter.

So that we see this doctrine of Indulgences, is new in the institution, now
in the p^actise, new in the extent, and n^w every way, and consequently
false, and impiouslie deceatfull.

CHAPT. XVII.
The Noveltie of the Popish five Bastard Sacraments.
FIrst, then, to clear the Noveltie of this doctrine, set down by the
Council of Trent, Sess. 7 can. 1. ^^ 4.
with such a dreadful fulmination of a curse to the controllers thereof, if
we inquyre beside these two Sacraments, to wit, Baptism and the LORD'S
Supper, whether they be any more, which the Antiquity of holy Scripture
does countenance, and allow to be true and proper Sacraments of the Gospel,
as having Christ's institution, and being visible signs of invisible
justifying grace, conferred on the receavers in the right use thereof: then,
Bessarion de sacram, Euchar.
their own Cardinal Bessarion, and Bishop of Tusculum, will tell us, saying,
In the Gospel we read that ^nelie these two Sacraments, (says he) were
delyvered to us plainly.

Or if we will ask at their Paschasius an Abbot, Paschasius de coena Domini.
who lived about the 800 year of CHRIST, which are the Sacraments of CHRIST,
to be found in His Church, he will show us, That these are they only, to
wit, Baptism, and the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of CHRIST, without
mentioning more: which therefore Fulbertus, Fulbertus Epist. 1.
Bishop of Chartres, calls, duo vitae Sacramenta, or the two Sacraments of
life and salvation.

Lyke-wyse, beside their own Doctoures, if we ascend higher to inquyre of
the ancient Fathers, what are the proper Sacraments, which the Church then
acknowledged, Aug* de symb.
Augustine will tell us. That Baptism, ad caetechim et de doct. Christ l. 3.
c. 9. Cyprian l. 2. Epist. 1. ad Stephanum.
and the LORD'S Supper, are these, saying, Haec sum Ecclesiae gemina
sacramenta: or, these are the two Sacraments of the Church, like two twins:
In lyke-manner does Cyprian speak, saying, Then, at last, men may be
sanctified, and be the children of God, si vtroque sacramento nascantur: that
is, If they be borne anew by both the Sacraments, to wit, Baptism, and the
LORD'S Supper.

And if we consult with Bellarmine himself, he will show us the reason, why
both the ancient Fathers, and many of their own Doctoures, countenance no
other Sacraments, as properly so called, saying, Bell. l. 1. de sacra^ c. 9.
The holy thing it self, which the Sacraments of the new Law does signify,
is three-folde: 1. justifying grace, which is demonstrate as present, 2. the
suffering of CHRIST, as the cause of that grace, and which is commemorate as
bygone, and 3. eternal, life the effect of that grace, and which is prefigured
as to come: and concerning Baptism, and the LORD'S Supper, the matter herein
is most evident, but concerning the other sieve Sacraments, it is not so
evident, (says he.)

Wherefore justly did their own Cassander say, Cassand. co^sult art. 13
as touching the seven Sacraments, It is certain that the Schoolmen, and
Roman doctoures, (says he) never thought that all of them, should be
called alyke properly Sacraments.

Therefore, Alexand^r Halen part. 4 q. 24. memb 1.
as to confirmation, Alexander of Hales shows, That it is no Sacrament of the
Gospel properly, because it wants CHRIST'S institution, and is of no
greater Antiquity, than the Council of Milda,

Next, Cassander co^sult art. 13
concerning Marriage, as Cassander reports, Lombard denies that grace is
thereby conferred: and Durand affirms, that it is nowayes properly a
Sacrament. Durand in l. 4. did. 26. q. 3.


Thirdly, as for penance and confession, Hugo de sancto Victore, in express
terms excludes it from being a Sacrament, properly of the new Law. Hugo de
sac^^m, Bell. de sacram. ordinis c. 5.. acprimum.


Fourthlie, touching ORDOVRS, Bellarmine himself tells us, That Episcopal
Ordination, (which Durand shows to be all one with Presbyteriall) is denied
to be a Sacrament, prop^r^^e so called, not only by sundry ancient
Schoolmen, and Doctors of the Roman Church, but by these also who are more
recent, as Dominieus a Soto, and others: whence he conclude^h, saying,
Wherefore, if Episcopal Ordination be not a S^cram^nt, we cannot p^oue out
of Scripture, (says he) that Ordination is a Sacrament at all.

Last, Sua^. tom. 4 disp. 39. sect. 2
as for extreme unction, the lesuit Suarez declares, That Hugo, Peter
Lombard, Bonaventure, Aleusis, and Altizidorus, five Famous and learned Doctors
in the Roman Church, deny playnlie, that it was instituted by CHRIST, and
consequently that it is no true Sacrament.

The peremptory time, then, and author when this doctrine of seven sacraments
got foot in the Church, their own Cassander specifieth, s^ying, Herein
surely there is no contraversie, that there are two special Sacraments of
our salvation, wherein specially our salvation consists, and is apprehended
by us: as speaks Robertus Tuitiensis, and Hugo de Sancto Victore, to wit,
Baptism and the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of CHRIST: neither shall ye
find any who rashly before Peter Lombards time, did set down any certain,
and definite number of Sacraments: which time was about the 1140 year of GOD:
and so the same i^ but a very late Noveltie.

CHAPT. XVIII.
The Novelty of Transsubstantiation.
BEfore we come to the discovery, of the Noveltie of this lurde error, we
will show first, how gross not only the Romani^tes of old have been
therein, but lyke-wyse their very late lesuits: First, then, to use the words
of the Council of Rome, held by Pope Nicolas, (Anno 1060) whereunto they
caused Berengarie, by way of recantation, to subscrybe, The Bread and Wine
which are set upon the Altar, Decreti 3 pars did. 2. c. 42* ego Berengarius.
after consecration, (say they) are not only the Sacrament of CHRIST'S Body
and Blood, but are the very true Body and Blood of CHRIST, and sensibly in
the very truth, is handled by the hands of the Priest, and kroken, and chawed
by the teeth of the faithful.

A late lesuit lyke-wyse, Cornelius a Lapide, says upon these words of ISAI,
A Lapide in Isai 7. 14.
Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son. In this venerable
Sacrament, this mystery (says he) is truly performed, and daily in very
deed renewed: which here ISAIAH fore-telleth, and which was performed when
the Word was incarnate: for by the words of consecration, as the Bread is
truly and reallie transsubstantiate, so CHRIST is brought forth, and as it
were begotten upon the Altar; as powerfullie and efficaciouslie, as if CHRIST
were not as yet incarnate, yet by these words, This is my Body, He should
be incarnate: and assume an humane body, as grave Divynes do teach:
there-fore (says he) the Priest is as the Virgin that bare him, the Altar
is the Manger, the little Emmanuell which he bears, is Christ brought forth
under the little Host^e, by virtue of the Highest, and over-shadowing of the
holy Ghost: which made their Postellu^ to call Transsubstantiation, nativitas
m^diatoris vltima, or the last birth of our Mediator CHRIST.

For detection of the Noveltie of which blasphemous error, Biel in can. M^ssae
l^ct. 40 Roffe^ c^nt ^^ptiv B^byl. number. 8 e^ 90.
if we first inq^yre of the Antiquity thereof in Scripture, a cloud of their
own witnesses will tell us, that it is not expressed in Scripture, nor can be
proven there^y a^ all, and that it may be justly doubted, (says Bellarmine
himself) whether these words, This is my Body, Cajet. 3. 9. 78. are. ^.
Bell. l. 3. de Euch. 6. ^3.
be clear anough to enforce it, seeing the most sharp witted and learned
Doctors of the Roman Church, (such as Scotus was) have thought the contrary,
(says he.)

Next, if we ask for the Antiquity thereof, in the writs of the ancient
Fathers, Johan Y^ibar nus in 4. sent did. ^1 9. 3. disp. 4^.
or if it was believed in the primitive Church: then one of their schoolmen
will tell us, saying, In the primitive Church, it was not believed as a point
of faith, that the substance of bread, was converted into the body of Christ.

Next, of the Transsubstantiation of the bread, into the body of CHRIST,
(says Alfonsu^ a Castro) in the ancient writers, there is very seldom
mention. Cus^n l. 6. ex ercit. tit. ex quar^^ sermon. p. 522 Theod dial. ^


Yea, sundry ancient Divynes do a^^irme, that the bread is not
Transub^tanti^te, (says their Cardinal Cusanus.)

Where^ore Theodores tells us clearlie, That the mystical signs after
consecration, depart not from their own nature, but remain in their former
substance, figure, and form, and may be seen and touched as before.

Yea, Gelasius d^ duab^^ Chri^
their own Pope Gelaesius, writing against Eutyches, says expreslie, That
tho in the Sacrament we receive a divyne thing, to wit, s^in^tur^^ c^nt.
Eutych^n. in bibliotheca patru^ tom. 4 Cassand. co^sule. art. 10
the Body and Blood of CHRIST, yet the substance and nature of the bread and
wine ceasseth not to remain, (says he.)

And if any speeches of Fathers would seem to sound other ways, their own
Cassander tells us, That the late School men do acknowledge these speeches
to be figurative, whereby the sign is called, by the name of the thing which
is signified, and is present also in the Sacrament. So that justly said the
elder Schoolmen, Su^rez in 3. Thomae disp. 80. Sect. 2 p. 602.
(as Suarez. reports of them) that the doctrine of Transsubstantiation is not
very ancient.

This error, then, was first broached in the East, by Damascene, in the time
of Gregori^ the third, (Anno 740) and opposed then chiefelie by the Council of
Constantinople, Dimas. l. 4 Orthod. fidei c. 14.
consisting of 338 Bishops, (Anno 754) who declared, That the bread in the
Eucharist, was the true resemblance of Christ's natural body, and
consequently not the body it self. council. Genesis Tom. 3. page 599. and edit.
Romans page 600. (...) (...).


About an hundredth years there-after, Lib. 3. de eccles. offic. c. 24 Florus
in actis synod. Carisiac. See Philip Morney do missa. l. 4. ^. ^.
in the time of Gregory the fourth, the same also began to be propounded in
the West, by one Amularius, Bishop of Lions, who was censured, and opposed, by
the Council of Carifiacum, wherein it was declared by the Bishops of France,
That it was to be understood, that the bread and wine, were the body and
blood of CHRIST, after a spiritual manner only.

Heere-after howsoever, sundry held this gross opinion of
Transsubstantiation, Paschasius Radbertus, a Deacon, (Anno 850) who to that
purpose wrote a Book to Placidus, of the body and blood of CHRIST: yet others
stoutly mayntayned the truth in the contrary, as Rabin^s M^^rus, who at the
same time opposed Paschasi^s, and w^o^e thereof to Abb^t Egilo, whereby arose
great disputes by sundry upon both sides: whereupon Carol^s Calvus, then King
of FRANCE, willing to have these differences composed amongst his people, and
the truth of the matter cleared, singled out one Bertram, a Priest and M^nke
of Corbey, as Non minus vita quam doctrina in signis, (s^y^b Tritemius of bi^n,
(...) wrote 1490 being Abbot of spa^b^i^^. Bertramus l. de corp. et sa^g.
Christ^^dit Co^o^^^^.
a man m^st famous in those times, both for learning and piety, and req^yred
him to write to him his judgment in that matter* which he accordingly did in
his book yet extant, written (Anno 876) wherein he declares and proves,
That the bread and wine, are Christ's body and blood figuratiuelie only, or
by representation, according to the nature of Sacraments, and sacramental
speeches, taking so the name of that which they signifi^: but for the substance
of the creatures or elements themselves, they are the same after consecration,
as they were before: Anno 1551. page 18^0 200. et 205 Index expu^g Belgic Lit.
B. T^rrian, contr. Volan. l. b. I. de Euthar, cap. 22.
(says he) for which cause the Romanis^es in the Belgicke expurgatorie
Index, wish, that this Book had altogether perished: the Jesuit Turrian giving
the reason thereof, Because the citing of it declares that Calvine's Heresy
is not new.

About which time also of Bertrams writing, a famous countreyman of ours also,
Johannes Scotus, wrote a See Lanfranc. lib. de sacra^. euchar contr^ Berengar.
where this book is mentioned and the co^te^ts thereof
book of the same matter, and to the same sense, who for his extraordinary
great learning in those times, was surnamed, John the wise.

And in ENGLAND, in the days of Aeifricke an Abbot, (Anno 975) there was an
ancient Homily, which the said Aelfricke at the command of W^lfstane
Archbishop of York. translated out of Latin and Sax^n, into English,
synodicallie appointed to be read to the people, for their instruction, at
every Easter, before the receaving of the holy Housell, (as he calls the
Sacrament) wherein the very same doctrine, Fox Martyrolog. page 1119. edit.
1576. Scotus cited by Bell l. 3. de Euchar. c. 23.
set down by Bertram, and professed now by us, is clearlie set down, as the
said Homily at large may be seen, in Master John Fox his Book of Martyrs.

Yet at last, error in the times of ignorance, and Papal usurpation so far
prevailed, that (Anno 1215) it was established as an Article of faith: so that
as Scotus affirms truly, before the Council of Laterane, it was no
doctrine of faith, (says he.)

CHAPTER XIX.
The Noveltie of half Communion, or withholding the Cup from the people.
FOR the clear detection, of the Noveltie of this sacrilegious error, Aqu^^.
in lohan. 6 Lyr^ in I. Cor. II.
first their own Canonized Aquinas (and with him Lyra, and others) declare,
according to the custom of the ancient Church, all the people as they did
communicate of the body of Christ, so did they also of His blood, (says he.)

And if we ask at their own Cassander, C^ssand. co^sult art, 22
how long this custom did continue in the Church of Christ? he will tell us,
saying* It is sufficiently certain, that the universal Church of Christ,
even unto this day, did celebrate the Sacrament under both kinds, and that the
Western or Roman Church, more than a thousand years after Christ, (chiefelie
in the solemn and ordinary celebration of this Sacrament) did give the same
in both kinds, both of bread and wine, See them ti^ed and set down by
Cassander, consult. art. 22. page 1034.
to all the members of the Church of Christ: which is manifest, (says he)
out of the innumerable Testimonies, both of Greek and Latin Fathers.

And if, then, we inquyre, when this custom of communicating in one kind,
began in the Roman Church generally to be received, Valen^ia de legittimo vsu
Euth^^r. c. 10. Council. Confrance Sess. 13.
their own Gregorte de Valentia, in lyke-manner will tell us, That it was but
a little before the Council of Constance, which was held in ^nno 1414.

There-after, if we come to the Council of Constance it self, where it was
first decreed, and inquyre of the Noveltie thereof, they are forced to
confess, that Christ instituted this venerable Sacrament, in both kinds of
bread and wine, and gave it so to His Disciples, (say they) as also, that in
the primitive Church, the same was received by the faithful in both kynds, and
that for eschewing some perils and scandalls, this custom was thought fit to
be altered

Next, after the clear and confessed Noveltie of this point, both in altering
and mayntayning of Christ's institution, if we will examine out of their own
confessions, whether it be best to adheare to Christ's institution, who gave it
in both kinds, or not, Bellarmine will teach us a general rule, Bell l. 4. de
Eu^h. c. 7.. quia vero.
saying, It can not be doubted of, but that is best, (says he) and most fit
to be done, which Christ Himself did. But to subsume, Christ gave the
Sacrament of His body and blood under both kinds: therefore inevitably it
follows, that without doubt, it is fittest and best, to give it as yet in
both kinds.

Wherefore in express words, not only did Ruardus Tapperus, Deane of Lovane
say, Tapperus cited by Cassand. page 1034.
that it were better and more covenient to give it so, as being more agreeable
to the institution of Christ, His example, and Fathers of the primiti^ Church;
but also their own Cassander sets down the particular, and pregnant
reasons, why it is better to give it so, under both kinds, and why the
primitive Church ever so gave it: I. because of the institution and example of
Christ, who gave this Sacrament in both the Elements unto His Disciples,
representing then the persons, (says he) of the whole faithful
communicants: 2. because they did believe in the Sacrament, by the Element of
the wine, that there was signified a certain peculiar grace, of the blood of
Christ, to wit, according to Christ's words, The remission of sins: 3.
because thereby was represented the full Passion of Christ, which did consist
in the oblation of His body, and the shedding of His blood, according to that
of S. PAVLL, As often as ye shall eat of the bread, and drink of the Cup, ye
shall show the LORD'S death till His again coming. 4. because ou^ perfect
feeding, or now^ishment, is thereby signified, which is usually not only by
meat, but by drink also: and 5. because lyke-wyse is signified thereby, the
perfect redemption of man, in His body, by the oblation of Christ's body, and
in his soul the fountain of life, (which is said to be in the blood) by the
shedding of Christ's blood.

So that it is not without cause, that one of their own Popes, Gelas. cited by
Gr^tian. part. 3 decret de consecrat. did. 2
Gelasius, said, That the divyding of one and the same Sacrament, can not be
done without great sacrilege, and therefore that he commanded, that either
the whole Sacrament under both kinds should be taken, or else that these
superstitious persons, who will not participate of the Cup, he debarred from
the Sacrament altogether.

Lyke-wyse, as they have withdrawn the Cup from the people, so they have also
taken away a significant Rite, in giving to them ^ wafer for bread, without
fraction, which was acted and instituted by CHRIST, to signify the breaking of
His Body, and of the confessed N^veltie whereof, let Cardinal Cajetane
witness, Cajet in I. Cor. 10.
saying, In the primitive times, that the Church did use fraction of the bread,
when the Communion was given to the people, even the very Acts of the
Apostles do testify, in imitation of CHRIST, as I believe, (says he) Who
took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and so gave it to His Disciples. But
it was afterward that the Church used severallie little Hosties, which noway^s
may be broken.

CHAPTER XX.
The Noveltie of the MASS, where-in the Priest only reccaveth.
FIrst, for the clearing of the Noveltie hereof, See the first part of this
Treatise, c. 19.
having before spoken of the Noveltie of the name, we see that it has no
warrant in holy Scripture, being contrary both to the institution of CHRIST,
and to that name which it gets from the holy Apostle, Of a Communion: for
in the institution we see there was fraction of Bread, which fraction was for
distribution, and this distribution, was for common participation, every one
with another, as we see, I. COR. 10. 17. and as it was said of the Cup also,
Drink ye all-of this, or, Divyde it amongst you.

Next, it is against the name of Communion, I. Cor 10. 16 Hugo Card. in speculo
Ecclesiae. Cassand. co^sult. art. 24
which the Apostle gives it, for therefore is it called a Communion, (says
their Hugo Cardinalis) because in the primitive Church, the people did
communicate thereof daily: neither properly can it be called a Communion,
(says their Cassander) except more than one participate.

The same is contrary also, to the alleged Canons of the Apopostles,
Cochl^us d^ sacrif. Missae cont. Mu^culu^.
and wrytings of the Fathers: for thus says their own Cochleus, Of old,
all, both Priests and people did communicate together, as appears by the
Canons of the Apostles, and wrytings of the ancient Fathers.

In lyke-manner, the same contradicts their own Canon of the Mass
directly, their own Cassander telling us, Cassand. supra.
That therein the Priest prays not only for himself, and his own
communicating, but also for those who do communicate with him, saying, Be
merciful to as many of us, as have been partakers of this Altar: and
chiefelie in his prayer after the Communion, he seems to pray only,
(says he) for those who have been communicants.

In lyke-manner, Odo Camerace^sis, Cassand. ibide^.
writing on the Canon of the Mass, affirms, That those solitary Masses were
not of old, (says he) in use in the Church, seeing that no Mass was
without a collect, that is, some number who did offer, and participate of the
Sacrament together.

Their own Durandus lyke-wyse tells us, Durand. rationale divin l. 4. c. 53.
saying, In the primitive Church, all who^ were present at the celebration of
the Mass, did every day communicate, because all the Apostles did drink of
the Cup, according to the LORD'S command, Drink^ ye all of this: and their
oblation was a great loaf, (says he) which was sufficient for all, and
which custom the Grecians are said to keep even unto this day. Tolossanus l.
de vitib. ^. 58. Belethus in explie. ^ax. cap. 30.
Which thing also their Tolossanus, Belethus, and sundry others, testify.

And to add the famous testimony of Pope Innocent the third, Innoc. 3. l. 6.
myster miss^ c. 5.
In the primitive Church, (says he) every day those who were present at the
celebration of the Mass, Cassand. de s^li^. miss^^.
were wont to communicate. And all the best learned do acknowledge, (says
their Cassander) this to have been the ancient custom, of the Roman Church
in particular: ^. Hofmeisterus cited by Cassand* ibid.
which custom how it has ceased, is to be marveled, (says their
Hofmeisterus) and it is to be indevoured, that this good custom, (says he)
may be restored to the Church.

CHAPTER XXI.
The Conclusion of this Treatise.
THus having demonstrate the Noveltie of Popery, and detected the same to be
the latter sown Tares in the LORDS Field; we see that the Antiquity whereof
they so much brag, belongs nowayes to them, more than the living child to
the false mother: and if the Roman Church in these points formerly
discovered, will needs still claim Antiquity at all, it is manifest, that no
other can be yielded unto her, than that which was yielded to Judah, and
Israel, by the Prophet Ezekiell, under the names of Aholah, Ezek^. 23. 43
Isaiah I. 21.
and Aholibah, to wit, That she is old in her Adulteries, the sometime
faithful City, (as speaks I saiah) having become an Harlot: and, as says
Lyrinensis in the same place, now being a filthy Borthel, of wicked and
profane erroures, where a sacred storehouse was before, of chaste and
uncorrupted truth, CHRIST'S sheepe-folde being p^sterd with disguysed Wolves:
and (as it was objected to PAVLL concerning the Grecia^s) these things being
brought within the Temple, which have defiled the holy place.

As Elihu then said of himself, That he was but of yesterday, Job 32. 6.
in comparison of Jobs elder friends; even so may Popery justly in
lyke-manner confess of her self, that she is but of yesterday, in respect of
that eternal Gospel spoken of in the Revelation, Revel, 14. 6.
and the Popish Church being the meretricious mother only, of such bastard
births, like brats of Babell, as she may well father upon the broodie brain
of vain man's invention, puffed up (as the Apostle speaks) by his fleshly
mind, but can never say with Jacob of such. These are the children which the
LORD my GOD has given me.

Let no man therefore marvel, that we have come out of Babell, as the LORD'S
obedient people, lest we should partake of her sin^es, and so receive of her
plagues; nor think that we have forsaken Rome, farther than she has forsaken
the truth, and her former estate, when she was once the faithful City: it
being our duty (as says Lyrinensis) to receive true teachers with the
Church; but not with false teachers in the Church, to desert the true faith of
the Church, and embrace Novelties. For if any man follow him, Ignat Epist. 6.
ad Philladelph.
(says Ignatius) who have departed form the truth, he shall never inherit
the Kingdom of GOD: and he who departs not from a teacher of lies, shall
be condemned to Hell fire: for neither must we depart from them who are
godly teachers, nor must we have fellowship with these who are wicked.

Let her therefore with Ephesus, return to her first love, renounce her
Whoredoms, quyte her Erroures, reject her Novel^ies, forsake her Idolatries,
and from Babell, turn Beth^ll; else we solemnlie protest, that we would have
cured Babell, but she would not: and as LYRIN^N^IS speaks, That our care is
hereby to reduce the seduced multitude of the wo^ld, stricken with the cruel
tempest of repentiue Heresy, from new broached error, to the ancient faith;
from the phrenesie of Noveltie, to their won^ed health; and from the blindness
of former darkness, to the primitive light of most sacred Truth: that so, GOD
may have (...) ie; the Church, her luster; Satan, an over-throwe; BABELL, a
downe-fall; the Saynctes may have joye; and Verity, the victory.

AMEN.
Glory to Him who gives ability to the faint, and increases strength in
them who have no might, ISAIAH 40. 29.
AN APPENDIX To this Treatise Of the Noveltie of Popery: Clearlie showing
next, The antiquity of the Protestant Religion.
HAving thus singled out Popery, from the profession of true Christian
Religion, as Chafe from the Corn, or Popple rather from the good Wheat; and
having shown the Noveltie thereof, as of a disease which has overtaken a
body, which was sound and healthful at first, but like BABELL had need of
cure at last; it will not be amiss to set down the points of the true
Christian Religion, which is that only Ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic
Faith, Which was once (says S. IVDE) delyvered to the Saynctes, and which in
all the positive points thereof, we at this day contend for and profess,
and wherein also our very adversaries do not dissent from us.

Which thing does serve, 1. to show the great advantage that we have of them
herein, to wit, that what are the positive points of our Religion, therein
they agree with us, and cannot say but the same is the truth: but in all the
former points of Popery, which they do profess, we justly disagree from
them, because of the proven Noveltie thereof, and disagreement from the Word of
GOD. Next, this shall serve to answer two ordinary and customable questions
of theirs; to wit, 1. whereby they ask, where was our Religion before Luther?
and

2. what became of the souls of our forefathers, who dyed before the
reformation?

First, then, this Catholic antiquity of our doctrine, we shall prove, GOD
willing, by the plain in^uction only of the positive points thereof,
wherein (as is said) our very Adversaries the, Romanists themselves, do
agree.

First, therefore, concerning the Scriptures, we say, according to Scripture,
that they are the sure and safe rule of faith: and so says Bellarmine Bell.
l. 1. de verb^ c. 2.
with us: The Scripture is the rule of our faith, most sure, and most safe,
(says he.)

2. We say, that all doctrines of faith and manners, which are simply
necessary for all men,, are playnlie set down in Scripture: and so does
Bellarmine profess, Bell. l. 4. de verbo c. 11. vltimo.
that as this was the doctrine of Augustine* so it is true of the doctrines of
faith, (says he) which are simply necessary for all men to salvation.

3. Next to the word, to come to the Sacraments, we say, that Baptism, and
the LORD'S Supper, are the two proper Sacraments, instituted by CHRIST unto
our salvation: Bell. l. 2. de effect^ sacr^. c. 24^
and this Bellarmine also confesses, saying, Of Baptism, and the LORD'S
Supper; there is no question at all.

4. We say, that in the Lords Supper, the body and blood of CHRIST is
present, not only in a sign or figure, but truly and reallie; yet
spirituallie, and mystically: Bell. l. ^. de Euchar. c. 20.. 30. vegula*
and so does Bellarmine confess, as Bernard teaches in his sermon of S.
Martine, where he says, That in the Sacrament is ex^ibite unto us, the true
substance of Christ's flesh; but yet spirituallie, not carnally (says he.)

5. From the word and Sacraments to come to the Church, we say that the Rock
whereon the same is built, Bell. l. 1. de Romans pont. ^* 10.
is CHRIST: and so grants Bellarmine, saying, No man doubts, but Christ is
that Rock.

6. As He is the Rock and Foundation, we say in lyke-manner, that He is the
only Head and King of His Church: and so says Bellarmine, Bell l. 2. de
Romans pont. c. 31.
Only Christ is the head of all the Churches, and all others under Him are
not heads nor Princes thereof.

7. As He is only King, so is He the high Priest thereof, whose
righteousness and sufferinges, in our justification, is made ours; so that we
may offer up the same unto the Father as ours, for the remission of our sins:
and so says Bellarmine, That Christ is called our righteousness, Bell. l. 2,
de ^ustif. ^. 10.
because He has satisfied the Father for us, and so gifteth unto us (...)
satisfaction, (says he) and communicates it to us, when He justifies us,
that it may be called our satisfaction and righteousness: and this way it is
not absurd for any man to say, that Christ's righteousness and merits are
imputed to us, (says he) seeing they are so given and applied to us, as if
we our selves had made satisfaction to GOD.

8, We say, that good works are necessary to salvation, as Bellarmine
acknowledges, Bell. l. 4. de justif. c. 1.
saying, Cal^in and Luther do teach, That good works are to be done, and in
some sort are necessary, Ephesians. 2. 10.
seeing they affirm, that it is not true faith, which brings not forth good
works: and so say the Romanistes, jumping herein with us.

9. Yet, notwithstanding that we affirm them to be necessary, we say,
That to obtain salvation, it is the only safe way to put our whole
confidence in the only mercy of GOD, and merits of CHRIST only: and so
says Bellarmine, For the uncertainty of our own righteousness, Bell. l. 5.
de ^ustif. c. 7.
and danger of vain glory, (says he) it is safest to repose our whole
confidence, in the only mercy and free favor of GOD.

10. Lyke-wyse, for religious worship, we say, that the holy Trinity is to
be so worshipped, and to GOD only we should pray, as the author and giver
of all good things: Bell. l. 1. de S^nct. c. 20.
and so says Bellarmine, That this most divyne excellency is to be
worshipped; and it is most evident, that GOD is to be prayed unto, (says
he) yea, GOD only, as the author of all good gifts.

11. We say, that after this ly^e t^ere is Heaven prepared for the godly who
die in the LORD, and Hell fo the wicked who die not in the LORD: Bell. l. 1. de
Purg. c. 12.. resp ad li^eram*
and so says BELLARMINE, Calling the South, whereinto the tree is said to
fall in ECCLESIASTES H^aven; and by the North, that Hell is understood.

12. Last of all, in a word; we believe the holy Trinity, and whole Articles
of the Creed, which contain the whole sum of the Christian faith; so that
here by the Antiquity of our doctrine and Religion, and in all the forenamed
positive points thereof may be clea^lie seen, beside which what-so-ever
doctrines of faith, since have been vented and invented in Pope^ie, as the
l^tter supersemination of Tares, is branded with that Apostolical Anathema,
and is to be rejected.

Therefore, for our part, we say with Vincentius Lyrinensis, Let that vessel
of election (to wit, PAVLL) cry, and that teacher of the Nations, and that
trumpet of the Apostles, that preacher of the World, and who had knowledge of
the very Heavens: Let him (I say) cry, and cry over and over again, and
unto all men, and ever, and every where let him by his letters proclayme, If
any man shall teach any doctrine of faith which is new, let him be accursed.

AN ANSWER, Then, 1. to that usual and customable Question, Whereby the
Romanistes ask us, where was our Religion before Luther?
HAving therefore, ininstanced the positive points of our doctrine, which are
the very foundamentall points of Christian Religion, held ever, and
mayntayned as truethes, in the very bosom of the Roman Church even unto this
day, as is clear by their former confessions, we see how easy it is to
answer to their vulgar question, whereby they ask, where was our Religion
before Luther?

Indeed as that woman descrybed in the REVELATION, Through the fury and
cruelty of that red Dragon, was driven for a^time into the Wilderness, (which
the R^emistes themselves expone to be the true Churches lurking for a season
in time of persecution) so this has been the condition of the professoures of
the truth, sundry times to be brought to a very few number, and by
persecution made lyke-wyse to lurk in the time of errou^es p^evayling: Hier^.
dialogadv^
which we may see clearlie in that time whereof S. JEROME speaks, when the
whole world groaned, Luciferianos. Athanasius ad so. litaria^ vitam age^tes.
and wondered, that it was turned Arrian: and of which time Athanasius thus
complains, What Church now does freely worship, (says he) seeing if it
be holy and true, it lies under many dangers: and if there be in any
place, faithful servantes of CHRIST, (as there be) yet they are hid,
Stapleton l. 2. princip. do^ctrina lium* c, 18. Pererius in Dan. l 15. in (...)
veniet te^pus. Abbas in Revel. ^. 2.
like that great Prophet ELIAS? So that the profession of the Orthodoxe faith,
(says Stapleton) was then but with a few, and those lyke-wyse living in exyle.

As also, the very Romanistes themselves give us to understand, that the same
shall be the estate of the true Church, in the time of their pretended
Antichrist, to wit, that then the true worship, (says their Jesuit Pereriu^)
shall be only in private, and the whole Congregation of of the godly shall
be hid, (says Ioachim Abbas.) For so shall the Elect be wise unto
themselves, that they shall not presume to practice openly, because that
darkness shall prevayle: and as the Rhemistes affirm, Rhem annot in 2 Thessalonians.
2. 3.
The external ^ate of the Roman Church, and public intercourse of the
sayth^ull with it, is like to cease: and the communion of Christians with the
fame shall be only in heart, (say they) and their worship in private.

Therefor, what was the estate of true Religion, and the pro^essoures thereof,
in the time of Arrianisme prevayling, or to be ^n the time of their pretended
Antichrists prevayling, it were ^ot absurd for us to say, that the ^ame was
the estate of true Religion, and professoures thereof, in ^he time of the
prevayling of Popery, which we count Antithristianisme.

But yet to come nearer them, in answering to this question, we say, that as
it is easy to answer, fit were asked in lyke-manner, Where were GOD'S people
before they came out of BABELL? Revel 18. 4^
by replying thus, that they were even in BABELL it self: even so our
Religion, which consists in the main positive points forenamed, and wherein
we agree, the same was in the bosom of the Roman Church it self, (as has
been shown) held by the Doctoures thereof, and preached and preserved by
them, in the very time of erroures greatest prevayling, the same being in
their mouths as the uncorrupted text of the Law, and sound doctrine of the
Jewish religion, (in many things conform thereto) was in the mouths of the
Scrybes and Pharisees, who in that respect were said to sit in Moses Chair,
and the people were commanded by our SAVIOVR to hear them. But in so far as
those Pharisees, (like the Romanistes) joined their own traditions to the Law
of GOD, teaching them for doctrines, and put false Glosses upon the Law it
self, in that respect our SAVIOVR declared ^^em to be blind guydes, and
wil^^d all men to beware of the leaven ^f their false doctrine.

Again, if they ask in these ^oyntes wheerein we disagree and oppose them,
where was our ^eligion before Luther? we an^were, that the same was pro^^ssed,
taught, and mayntayned ^y the Roman Church her self, ^ her purer integrity,
and by the ^^ncient Fathers, both in the ^reeke and Latin Church: and ^anie of
their own latter Do^oures, who lived many hun^reth years long before Lu^^er,
The particular places are noted, and the words set down, after
as

1. That the Books of APORYPHA, are not Canoni^k^ ^cripture, not only does
Atha^asius, Hilarie, Ruffinus, and ^amascen declare, b^t also S. ^rome, and
with him Lyra, tells ^s, That the whole Church in those times held so, long
before ^uther.

2. That all doctrines of faith and manners, necessary to salvation, are
contained in Scripture, the particular points of doctrine handled orderly, as
they lie in the first part of this Treatise, and in the witness sing of
Antiquity, subj^yned in every point to the
without unwritten traditions, Athanasius, and Augustine, with dyverse others
have taught, long before Luther*

3. That the Scripture is plain in all things necessary to salvation, and
therefore should be read by the people, and nowayes withheld from them,
Augustine, Chrysostom, Theodoret, with sundry others mayntayned this, long
before Luther.

4. That the true Church, or number of Orthodox professors, has been
redacted sometimes to a very few, who have been made to lurk for a time,
because of cruel persecution, S. Jerome, Ambrose, and Athanasius, have
demonstrate, long before Luther.

5. That the Bishop of Rom^ may err, and has erred, the sixth general
Council held at Constantinople, of 289. Bishops, an^ the seventh general
Councel^ assembled at Nice, declared thi^ in the person of Honoriu^, wit^
sundry latter Roman Doctoures, autho^rity of Scripture, whether I referr^ the
Reader.
long before Luther.

6. That the Bishop of Rome had no supremacy over the whole Church, as
Universal Bishop thereof, nor yet an^e other, S. Cyprian, and their own Pope
G^egorie the first, has at length mayntayned, long before Luther.

7. That public Prayers, or any other divyne Service in the Church, should
not be said in a tongue unknown to the people, (beside S. PAVLL) Ambrose,
Chrysostom, Seduliu^, and Haymo, taught clearlie, long before Luther.

8. That GOD only is to be prayed unto, and neither Saint nor Angel,
Ignatiu^, Martyr, Ori^gen, and others delyvered, long before Luther.

9. That no Images are to be any ways worshipped, the Council of Eliberis,
Augustine, and Pope Gregory himself, with dyverse others declared, long
before Luther.

10. That no Relics of Saints or Martyrs, are to be adored, S. Cyrill and
Jerome did teach, long before Luther.

11. Against free will, or the indifferency thereof in the estate of
corruption, either to good or evil, the Council of Orange opposed it self,
with Augustine, Prosper, and Bernard, and dyverse others, long before Luther.

12. That we are not justified before GOD by our own works, or inherent
righteousness, Ambrose, Bernard, and many more mayntayned, long before Luther.

13. That none is able in this life to keep GOD'S Law perfectly, let be to
supererogate, Lactaentius, Firmianus, Jerome, and sundry others have
testified, long before Luther.

14. That no man is able by his own works, to merit eternal life, S.
Basil, Augustine, Bernard, and many more have clearlie demonstrate, long
before Luther.

15. That there is no Purgatory, or place, where the souls of the godly go
unto after this life, but only Heaven, Cyrill, Gregory, Nazianzen, and
dyverse others have taught us, long before Luther.

16. Against the absolute necessity of the Baptism of Infants, Augustine,
Bernard, and others have instructed us, long before Luther.

17. That there is no Transsubstantiation in the Sacrament of the LORD'S
Supper, Ireneus, Theodoret, Pope Gelasius, Bertram, and sundry others have
clearlie declared, long before Luther.

18. That the Cup should not be withheld from the people, Ignatius, Iustine
Martyr, and Chrysostom taught, and as the Council of Constance grants, the
primitive Church practiced; yea, as Cassander shows us, the whole Roman
Church mayntayned and practiced, for the space of a thousand years, long
before Luther*

19. That in the Mass, there is no proper prop^tiatorie sacrifice for the
quick and the dead, Chrysostom, Eusebius, Ambrose, with many others, even of
their own latter Doctoures, as Lombard, and Aquinas, have taught us, long
before Luther.

And if they inquyre f^rder, of any people, before Luther, who professed as
we do, and opposed these doctrines of Popery, which we this day oppose? we
name to them the Waldenses, (as they term them) of whom their own Raynerus
Raynerus, Lib. contra Waldensis c. 4.
testifies, That there were in every country of them, and that they lived
righteouslie, and believed all things aright concerning GOD, and held all the
Articles contained in the Creed; only that they spoke against the Church of
Rome, Thua nus l. 6. Hist. de doc. trin. Waldensin Fasci^ Temp. in vita Innoc.
3.
to wit, her corruptions: the particulars where-of, their own Thuanu^
declares to be these, That they spoke against Purgatory, the Sacrifice of
the Mass, the worshipping of Sayncts, and Soule-Masses, etc. And therefore,
against whom Innocent the third, caused preach a Crusado every where for their
extirpation, as their own Charter Monk, the Author of Fasciculu^ Temporum,
does testify.

And tho they would say, that yet these doctrines of ours, wherein we oppose
them, and they dissent from us, were not generally received, not had a
perpetual succession of Pastors professing the same ever expreslie, and from
the beginning, we may justly answer, that this was because these doctrines
of Popery, which they now maintain, like the Tares, did not peep out at
first after their sowing, nor were they received in the Western Church
generally to be believed, till of latter times, (as has been already
proven, in the detection of the Noveltie of the whole points of Popery) more
than the Pharisees leaven and traditions, which our SAVIOVR opposed, were in
the Jews Synagogue.

As lyke-wyse themselves clearlie confess, That the present Roman Church,
Stapleton in defens authorit. Eccles. l. 1. c. 2. sect. 5.
has at this day received some doctrines of faith, which she held not of
old, (as Stapleton, and others with him declare) and for which,
not-withstanding they can not assign, a perpetual succession of Pastors, at
all times professing the same.

AN ANSWER, To that other common and customable Question of the Romanistes,
Whereby they ask, what became of the souls of all our Predecessoures, who
died in the time of Popery, before the Reformation?
Whereunto it may be answered, that in Paganism^ indeed there was nothing
could save, nor no word of grace, but in the most ignorant and corrupt time of
Popery, there was ever so much light and knowledge to be had of the mystery
of redemption, and principles of faith, like good Gold mixed with dross, and
good Seed, tho growing amongst Tares; that who-so-ever of our forefathers,
did adjoyne themselves to the common ensign of the Christian name, and had the
knowledge of the common Articles of faith, (in the unity whereof all do
agree, and upon the sole profession whereof, admission has ev^r been by
Baptism into the Church of CHRIST,) and with this mean measure of saving and
sound knowledge, whosoever joined an holy and righteous life, and specially
died relying only for salvation on the merits of CHRIST, (as almost all
did) these (I say) in a safe and holy simplicity, contenting themselves in
those times, with the former measure of knowledge, and being ignorant of the
many erroures of Popery, which make up the mystery of iniquity, died (we
hope charitablie) under the mercy of GOD, and are saved eternally.

Neither was it to be accounted a small happiness to them, that that by that
invincible ignorance wherein they were detayned, wanting the means of farther
knowledge, and which was then counted the mother of devotion, they were fred
from the guiltiness of these erroures, which otherwise might have proven so
prejudicial to their souls, so that their sober simplicity, contenting
themselves with the common principles of Christian Religion, and not suffered
to dy^e into the bottom of such mysteries, (as are indeed the deepnesse of
Satan) was to them a happy sort of ignorance, like Adams, not knowing of evil
in his estate of Innocence, which thereafter he too well knew.

But as for them who now live in the time of the light of the Gospel, when
these foggie mistes are dispelled, which arose before out of the bottomless
pit, and obscured both Sun and Air; that is, Valentom. 3. d^sp. 1. q. 1. p.
6. col. 102*
(as says their Valentia) when some doctrines of faith were buried in
darkness and overwhelmed as it were therewith, by error, malice, or
negligence of men: such men (I say) who in so clear Sunne-shyne, will yet
remain in wilful error and ignorance, refusing to hear GOD'S Word, the
ordinary mean of knowledge and conversion, upon all such is our Saviors
speech spoken of the Jews, verified, If I had not come and spoken unto them,
John 15. 22
they should not have had sin: and therefore, as it is said, This shall be
their just condemnation, that light is come unto the world, but they have loved
darkness rather than the light. The like whereof can neither be said of
those who then lived in the time of prevayling Popery, nor of such as live in
these places now where the cruelty of inquisition, and Popery as yet only
dominiereth, the estate of such being only, the want of the means of the
knowledge of the truth; but the error of the other being a perverse
disposition, that they will not hearken to instruction, nor embrace the truth.

Of both which sorts, (says S. Cyprian) Cyprian Epist. 63. 13
If any of our Elders have not observed these things, ^yther through
ignorance or simplicity, nor have held that which our LORD has, both by His
example and doctrine taught us, the LORD may pardon (says he) the simplicity
of such men: but we can not be pardoned at all, who being now admonished,
and instructed by the LORD, yet reject these admonitions and instruction* of
His: the first sort being only like those who followed Absolon, ignorantly
in his rebellion against DAVID his father, and therefore as being excuseable,
are said in holy writ, to have done this in the simplicity of their heart;
whereas the other are like the complotters with him, and treasonable adhearers
to him, even to the end.

FINIS,

