ANTICHRIST Pointed and painted out in his true Colors. OR The Pope of Rome,
proven to be that Man of Sin, and Son of Perdition, fore-prophesied in
Scripture. By the clear witnessing of Roman Catholics themselves; Who lived
and died in the Communion of that Church. For converting or convincing of any
Papist that is not wilfully obdured.

DEUTERONOMY. 32.31. Even our enemies themselves being Judges.

By WILLIAM GUILD, Doctor of Divinity, and Preacher of GODS WORD.

Printed in Aberdene, by James Brown, 1655.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND RELIGIOUS, ALEXANDER, LORD FORBES OF PETSLEGO.
Right Honorable, and Noble Lord,
IN the time of so great defection from the Truth to Popery, within this
Kingdom; and especially in these northern parts of late. If ever there was a
necessity laid upon the Lords Servants, To give Warning from the Watchtower,
Ezekiel. 33*3*
as Ezekiell) speaks) and to blow the Trumpet, Jude 3.
it is now: And, as the Apostle speaks, Act. 20.29.
Earnestly to contend for that Faith which was once delivered to the Saints:
Seeing (as the Apostle Paull, in his time, did fore-warn the Elders of Ephesus,)
There are greevous Wolves, entered in amongst us; not sparing the flock, These.
2.3.
as also of our own selves me^ ar arise^n speaking perverse things, to draw
disciples after the^. And more particularly seeing that man of sin and son of
perdition, of who^ he speaks, by his emissaries, with all subtilitie and
sedulitie, is seeking to repare the breaches of that tottering Babell, which is
near to her fall; by seeking with all deceaveablenesse of unrighteousness, (as
the Apostle speaks,) in them that perish to seduce unstable souls: These.
2.10.
and such who have not received the love of the Truth, that they might be
saved, that therefore through strong delusion they should believe a lie. Yet,
notwithstanding, they shall not prevail: For, howsoever, Rev. 13.11.
that Beast spoken of in the Revelation, (whom all agree to be that foretold
Antichrist,) by his false resembling of the horns of the Lamb, and pretending
to be CHRIST'S Vicar, has before times deceaved the inhabitants of the earth:
and made them drunk with the wine of Whoorish Fornication, (as Hose speaks,)
The spirit of whoredoms, Hoseae 4.12.
causing them to err. Yet now his lying mouth speaking like the Dragon, is so
well known to all GODS People that are come out of Babell, and follow the Lamb,
that as the Apostle speaks concerning the Gospel, if it was hid, it was to
them only that perish: Even so it may be said in like manner; If in so clear
a light of the Gospel, this be hid from any blinded papist, that popery is
Antichristianisme, and the Pope that foretold Antichrist, it is only to these
who wilfully continuing in their error; appearinglie GOD has destinated to
destruction: and against whom that sad threatening is denounced, ( Rev. 14.10.)
that they shall drink of the wine of the wrath of GOD; which is powered out
without mixture into the Cup of His indignation, etc.

Seeing, therefore, of al Contraversies between the Papists and Us, this is the
chieffest; and of such consequence: That if we prove the Pope to be
Antichrist; Then all Popery is overthrown, and all other Contraversies between
them and us, easily decyded. The Pope and his infallibilie, being the Diana
of Ephesus, 1. Sam. 5.4.
there Atlas, and Idol Dagon, this Pillar of whose house being pulled down, the
whole Fabric, or Superstructure thereof falls, as it did in Sampsons time:
For, Judge 16.29.
then it will follow, that all Papists are limbs of Antichrist; and all Popish
doctrines are Antichristian errors, opposite to the Truth of CHRIST, and the
Gospel. Therefore, for convincing the obstinate Papist, and converting the
tractable. As also for establishing the wavering; and confirming such as are
rooted in the Truth. I have taken pains, beside clear Testimonies of
Scripture, adduced heretofore, by many worthy Servants of CHRIST, to prove
the Point, in this short Treatise, by taking another course to my knowledge,
not taken hitherto by any. That is, to evidence by the witnessing of Roman
catholics themselves, who lived and died in the Communion of that Church. That
the Pope is Antichrist, and that man of sin, and son of perdition,
fore-prophesied, by the Apostles, 2. Thessal* 2.3. And, that Beast spoken of by
John, Rev. 13.11. Whom the LORD shall consume with the Spirit of His Mouth; and
abolish by the Brightness of His Coming. That so, (as is said, Deuteronomy. 32.31.)
Even our enemies being judges and as it was said to the wicked servant, Luke 19
22. Ex ore tuo, etc. Even so, out of the mouths of Romanists themselves, the
Truth hereby may be established, and themselves convinced.

Which pains that I have taken in this point, I have dedicated, to Your
LORDSHIP, beside other Motives and Relation; Because of Your LORDSHIPS Known
Religious Disposition and Love to the Truth: The want whereof, is assigned by
the Apostle, to be the cause of that delusion of many now adays, and of
their Apostasy from the Truth: And which I may say is one of the greatest
Evidences of GODS Love to You, and of the standing of Your Noble Family; while
as many others ar like Ionahs gourd fading and falling; Because of the want of
that Love to the Truth, and contempt of the Gospel: That is like that worm
which was at the root thereof. In which Love of GOD, and His Truth, and in
joining a Gospel life, with a Gospel light; as Your Lordship grows in years;
that the LORD may likewise (as the Prophet speaks,) Be like Dew to You; and
make You to grow in Grace as the Lilly; And, Hosea 14 5.
to spread Your Roots in the stabilitie thereof, like the Trees of Lebanon;
shall be ever the hearty Wish and Prayer, of

Your Lordships humble Servant in CHRIST, WILLIAM GUILD.

TO THE READER.
Christian and courteous Reader,
Marvel not, that after so many Worthies in CHRIST'S Church, who have so
largely written of this Subject; That I should need any more to put Pen to
Paper in this particular. For, that which has moved me, is not only that
these spoken of, have written partly in Latin not understood by all, and
obvious to few. And, others that have written in English, have so copiouslie
enlarged themselves by discourse therein; and are likewise rare here and in the
hands of few. But, likewise my special Motive has been the daily increase of
Popery almost, and the spreading it self everiewhere: Partly, through these
unhappy differences in CHRIST'S Church of late, within the three Kingdoms: And,
partly, through the sedulitie of the masked Jesuits and Seminary Priests,
who numerouslie now swarm everywher, upon the presumption of inpunitie, and
like the Pharesees of old, do make Proselytes to themselves, in all parts.
Which with grief (I am sure) should zealouslie affect every sound Professor.
But, chiefly, Pastors, and such as have been called to the holy Ministry,
to give Warning from the Watch Tower: And, contend for the Faith once delyvered
to the Saints: Against such disguysed wolves; coming in sheeps clothing, to
devour CHRIST'S Flock. And, in particular, to discover that Antichrist: And, let
GODS People see who he is: And* that these are his Emissaries, who seek so to
seduce them. For, whose detection likewise, I have taken a course to my
knowledge) not formerlie taken by any: Both in respect of brevitie, and more
easy perusal. As, likewise, for proving the Point, and every particular
thereof, by vndenyble Testimonies; Writs, and Witnessing, of Romanists
themselves. Whereby is evidenced to any not Prejudged, or Wilfully Obdured,
and Obstinate; that the Pope is that grand, Antichrist foreprophesied in
Scripture: And, dare give a Defyance to any Priest or Papist, to instance any
other who-so-ever* to whom the whole Prophecies; and Properties* set down in
Scripture, and in this subsequent Treatise; being collectivelie, and joyntlie
taken; and assented by the Romanists themselves, does clearlie agree. Except
only to the Pope. By which this being proven that he is that Antichrist; It
consequently follows, That Popish doctrine, is Antichristianisme. And* that
these who embrace the same, are Followers of Antichrist, and Drinks of that
golden Cup, that is in the hand of that mystical Whore, full of Abominations
and Filthiness of her Fornication: And, except they repent, and come out of
Babell, as they are partakers of her sins: So they shall be partakets of her
plagues. And, one day, as is threatened, REVEL. 14.10. They shall drink of the
wine of the Wrath of GOD; Which is powered out without mixture, into the Cup of
His Indignation. Which I pray GOD, That every one that is a Christian, may
avoid, and eschew.

A TABLE, Of the Contents of this Book.
CHAP. 1. THe Introduction to this Treatise, concerning Antichrist. 2. That
Antichrist is not one individual person, but a continued succession of many.
3. What manner of person Antichrist is; and how he is described by Paull, 2.
Thessalon. 2.3. and proved to be the Pope. 4. How Antichrist is descrybed by
John, Revel. 9. 5. How Antichrist is descrybed by John, Revel. 13.11. 6. How
Antichrist is descrybed by John, Revel. 17.11.12. etc. And, by all these
places, proving the Pope to be that Antichrist. 7. Where Antichrist is to be
found; or his place in general, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. 8. Antichrists Seat, or his
Place, in particular, proved to be Rome, Revel. 17.9. 9. Of the time when
Antichrist should come, and be revealed, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.8. 10. Of the marks,
whereby to know Antichrist. And, 1. Of his exorbitant and matchless pride: In
exalting himself, above all that is called god, 2 Thessalonians* 2.4. 11. Of
Antichrists sitting in the Temple of god, as God: Showing him self, that: he
is god, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. And, of his names of Blaspemie. Revel. 17.3. 12. Of the
Popes not only equalling himself with God* But also exalting himself above
God. Which is the hight of Antichristian pride, and matchless impiety. 13. Of
Antichrists, or the Popes Idolatry, and Spiritual whoredom, Rev. 17.6. 14.
Of Antichrists, or the Popes Bloody Cruelty, Revel. 17.6. 15. Of Antichrists,
or the Popes Spiritual Merchandise, or Simonie, Rev. 18.13. 16. Of
Antichrists, or the Popes Lawless and most wicked life, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. 17. Of
Antichrists, or the Popes and his Clergy, their feigned miracles, and lying
wonders* 2 Thessalonians* 2.9. 18. Of the final destruction of Antichrist; and ruin
of that Papal Sea, Revel. 18.2. and 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
ANTICHRIST Pointed and painted out in his true Colors. OR The Pope of Rome,
proven to be that Antichrist* by the witnessing of Romanists themselves.
CHAP. I. The Introduction to this Treatiss, concerning Antichrist.
THE two greatest mistakings in the world; and of greatest concernment; are the
first of the obstinate Jew; the other, of the misled Christian. The one
concerning the true MESSIAH CHRIST: The other, concerning his opposite
Antichrist, clear Prophecies of the Old Testament, so plainly pointing out
(...) the one; That it is a wonder, how the blind Jew long ago should not have
known CHRIST: And, no less plain praedictions, and places of the New
Testament, to the life painting out the other: That it is no less wonder, that
seduced Christians so long, should not know who is that Antichrist. But, the
like cause of such mislaking by both; Is, while the incredulous Jew, looked for
a worldly temporal Monarch to come; He stood amongst the midst of them, who
was the true SAVIOR OF SOULS CHRIST, foretold by the Prophets: Even so while
the seduced Christian looks for an individual Antihrist, as yet only to
come, of such a conceated Tribe, Nation, and Continuance, (as their Impostor's
teach them.) In the mean time likewise, he sits amongst the midst of them,
as in the Temple of God* who is the Destroyer of Souls Antichrist, foretold by
the Apostles. So that the diversion of the eye from the right object; and not
remarking what is present, to gaze ydlelie, after a misconceated future, has
been Satan's policy, to make the Savior of mankind, unknown to the incredulous
Jew; and is now the same to make that ABADDON, and Destroyer of Souls, unknown
in like manner to the misled Christian.

But, will we trace the footsteps of a revealed Way, and the Words of that
Evangelicall Prophecy; Forbidden to be sealed up; but given to be shown unto
GODS Servants: And, whereof both sanctified Hearers and Readers, Rev. 22.10.
are pronounced Blessed; we shall clearlie see him to be that Roman
Antichrist: Pretending, notwithstanding, to be Christ's Vicar on earth: And,
therefore, to be horned, like the LAMB: But, if we look to his mouth, or
doctrine, we shall find him to be his main opposite; and, to speak like the
Dragon.

Seeing, then, that notwithstanding of the false resemblance of the Lambs horns
the blasphemous mouth of the Dragons Vicar, (rather than CHRIST'S,) is so well
known: And; that the retreat from mystical Babylon, to holy JERUSALEM does so
clearlie sound. Seeing, also, that, that whore and mother of whoredoms, is so
clearlie discovered, is greatly also deserted. And, at last, destroyed shall
be: And, as is said, REVEL. 16.12. The waters of the great River Euphrates, is
so much dried up; upon which the Whore sits; which are Peoples, Rev. 17.15.
and Multitudes, and Nations, and Tongues. Ierem. 51.33.
And, that, (as the Prophet speaks;) The time of Babell's Threshing is come:
And yet a little while; and the time of her harvest shall come, when the LORD
shall bring her down so, that her dust shall be scraped from her: And, she
shall be made like the top of a bare rock. My earnest wish, therefore, shall
be, That none be so desperately mad, as to be like Lots sons in law; Not
to go out of Sodom, Rev. 11.8.
(as she is spirituallie called,) till by fire and brimstone they be
consumed; nor, to abide in Babell, after the call of evocation, to be
partakers of her sins, till they receave of her plagues. But, as the wise men
followed the star, till they found out CHRIST; that they might adore HIM. So
that they being spirituallie wise, may, inlyke manner, follow the star of
GODS revealed Light: Whereby they may find out Antichrist: That so they may
avoid and abhor him. By which (GOD willing,) they shall see both who he is,
and where he is. Next, whence he came, and when he came. And, last, what are
his marks, and whither he goes.

CHAP. II. That Antichrist is not one only individual person, but a continued
succession of many,
FIrst, then, we are to consider, that the name Antichrist, as it is
generally, or more largely taken; signifies all that are any wise enemies
to CHRIST, or the Truth, as we see it taken, 1. Ioh. 2.18. But, as it is
taken more properly and peculiarly, or by way of emine^cy, it signifies that
man of sin, and sonn^ of perdition: of whom the Apostle speaks, 2 Thessalonians.
2.3. Whom John, also, Revel. 9.11. calls that King, or Monarch over these
Locusts, that came forth out of the smoke of the bottomless pit: And, Revel.
13.11. That Beast that arose out of the earth; horned like the Lamb: But
speaking like the Dragon. And, whom all agree to be that Grand and
fore-prophecied Antichrist. And, whom we take not to be any one only
individual person; but a continued succession of many. So that, when we say,
That the Pope is Antichrist. We mean not individuallie; this or that Pope
only: But, collectivelie, that the whole succession from Boniface the rhird;
downwards is such: who about the year 607. obtained from the Emperor Phocas;
that Antichristian Title, Greg. l. 4. indict. ep. 38.
(as Gregory calls it,) Of Universal Bishop; or, Head of the Church. Which
none of his Predecessors ever assumed. And, of whom the same Gregory
foretold, saying, The king of Pride, is at hand, (meaning Antichrist:) and,
which is fearful scarce to be spoken, (says he;) an army of priests, is
prepared for him. So that here we have who are the Locusts, of whom John
speaks; and, who is their king over them, who is called ABADDON* and, who by
a Popes own declaration is, to be a Prince of Priests; as the Pope is styled.

And, seeing this is a Principle; That the Pope can not err: Especially, such
a Pop^, as Gregory the Great, speaking definitivelie. Then, they must
confess, that Antichrist is come a thousand years ago. And, being a Prince of
Priests; consequently, is a person Ecclesiastical. Neither is it unusual in
Scripture, Ribera, in Apoc. 17. verse. 10.
(says their Jesuit Ribera,) that by one many alyke; and of the same
incorporation, are signified. Which he proves out of Matthew. 22.11. Where by
one man, many are signified: and, out of Daniell, 7. and the Angels
interpretation of the Ram that he saw having horns. Which Ram, (says the
Angel, is the king of the Medes and Persians: Quibus verbis, (says the
Jesuit,) vt recte Hieronymus exposuit, non hic aut ille Rex designatur; sed
omnes reges Medorum atque Persarum sibi ordine succedentes, and quasi vnum
corpus efficientes: That is, by which words, as Ierom rightly expounds, is
designed; not this or that king: but, all the kings of the Medes and Persians;
succeeding each one to another, in Order: And, making all up one body.
Therefore, also, Aquin, in Apoc.
says Aquinas, accordingly, that Antichrist is the whole body of such: And,
not one man, so, also, speaks the ordinar gloss, and Cardinal Hugo; calling
Antichrist the Universe, or whole succession of such. Yea, the Papists
themselves, when they say, That the Pope is the Vicar of CHRIST, and head of
the Church. They mean not any one Pope only: But, the whole succession of
such, which they deryve from PETER.

Thus having shown, that Antichrist is not one only individual person: but, a
succession of many. We come next, to consider, how he is in holy Scripture
descrybed. And, before we any further proceed, we are to frame this
irrefragable Argument, and plain Demonstration, thus:

Unto whom the Prophecies of holy Scripture, descrybing Antichrist, do sole,
and only agree, he is that Grand Antichrist, foretold in the Scriptures. But,
unto the Pope of Rome, the Prophecies of the holy Seripture, descrybing
Antichrist, do sole and only agree.

Therefore, it follows; That the Pope of Rome, is that Grand Antichrist,
foretold in the Scriptures. The Major is undeniable, all the Controversy,
therefore, is only in the probation of the Minor: which I shall (GOD willing)
labor, to prove, by the Induction, of the Prophecies themselves: and, their
Application, all of them, to the Pope. And, that being taken collectivelie or
joyntlie, they are applyable to none else, but to him.

CHAP. III. What manner of person Antichrist is: and, how he is described by
Paul, 2. Thessalon. 2.3. and proved to be the Pope.
FIrst* then; The Apostle Paull descryveth him, that he shall be the head of
a falling away, or Apostasy, from the Faith. For, so Bellarmin himself
speaks, saying; By this falling away, most rightly, Bell. l. 3. de Pont c..
ad postremu^.
may Antichrist be understood: For, he shall be so an Apostate, that he may
be called Apostasy himself Whence it follows, That he shall not be (as
the Papists fancy) an Obstinate Jew; who never professed the Christian Faith.
And, therefore, can not be said, to have made Apostasy from the Truth
thereof: But, an Apostate christian: Who still retayning the Christian name,
shall notwithstanding make defection from the Truth of Christian doctrine.
Therefore, says Augustine, upon his resemblance of the horns of the LAMB;
Sub Nomine Christiano agnum praefert, Aug. him. 11. in Apos.
vt draconis veneua latentur infundat: That is; Under the Christian name, he
resembles the LAMB, (says he,) that the more secretly he may power in the
poison of the dragon. And, again, in the same place; He would not counterfit
the lyknesse of the Lamb, (says he,) if he did openly speak against him:
But, does counterfit Christianity: That the more craftily he may deceave
the simple. So, likewise, speaks Origin, on Matthew. 11.27. and others.

And, to make us the more clearly to know this Apostasy, whereof the Apostle
speaks, 1. Tim. 4.1.3.
he instanceth two doctrines thereof; which he calls the doctrines of
devils. Which the Pope, and his adherents do teach: Thereby showing that of
^im he means this Apostasy: To wit, the forbidding of marriage: Did. 82.
^. proposuit.
which under the name of uncleanness, (contrary to GODS Word, calling it the
Bed undefyled,) he forbids to the Clergy: And, commanding, to abstaisn
from meats, at certain forbidden times as unlawful, and for conscience sake,.
Which in the contrary, according to Chtistian liberty, GGD has created,
(says the Scripture,) to be received with thanks giving.

Where, likewise, it is to be noted; That to show his deep dessembling, in
opposing the Truth of CHRIST, under the Christian name, it is said; 1. Tim.
4.2. 2 Thessalonians. 2 3.
tha^ he shall speak lies in hypocrisy. And, therefore, gets Judas style,
being called the son of perdition: To show us, that as Judas, was the chief
ringleader of those who came against CHRIST. Yet, professing him self a
Disciple of His; and saluting Him, Master, with a kiss. So is Antichrist, the
chief ringleader of these t hat are against Christ's Truth: Yet, professing
him self a chief Disciple: Yea, CHRIST'S own Vicar. Therefore: does their
own famous Florentine: Petraroha epist. 18. LIB. 1. epistol. rerum senilium
epist. Amico cui titulus, calamitatem urbis Romae describit.
And, so much extolled Petrarcha, say* what other is done continually there,
(to wit, at Rome,) by these enemies of CHRIST, and the Pharisees, of our times
(says he) but like Judas and the Roman Soldiers, whill they would seem to
worship Him, they sell Him, they crown him with thorns, they spit on Him, they
mock Him, they pearce Him, and of new they crucify Him.

Next it is to be observed from this same title common with Judas which is
given also to him, that he shall not only be a professor of the Christian name
in hypocrisy and by dissembling of unrighteousnes, but likewise ( like Judas)
he shall be a Preacher thereof. Therefore says Hilarie, Sub opinione falsae
pietatis and specie evangelicae praedicationis, Hilar co^tra Auxentium.
Christo contrari^s erit, ut Dominus noster Jesus Christus denegetur cum
praedicari creditur, That is under the show of piety and preaching of the
Gospel, he shall be contrar to Christ, so that even then our Lord Jesus Christ
shall be denied, when it is believed that he is preached. Therefore Rev. 9.
He is called a fallen star, whereupon says the Jesuit Ribera, Ex quo
perspicitur praedicatorem aliquem magnum significari, Riberae in Apoc. 9.
that is, whereby is evident that some great or eminent preacher is understood
(says he)

CHAP. IV. How Antichrist is described by the Apostle John, Revel. 9.
THe Apostle John does likewise discribe Antichrist, REVEL. 9. to be a Staerre,
and what is meaned by stars in the Revelation the first Chapter tells Revel.
1.16. To wit, Bishops and pastors of the Church, as the Jesuit Ribera upon that
place acknowledges, and who is meaned by this Star, ALFONSUS declares
saying, primae notae Episcopus, or an eminent Bishop. 2. He is called a fallen
starr like Lucifer, therefore says their Lyr^, Episcopus malus est, qui
stelladicitur ratione officij. That is, he who is called this star. Is a
wicked Bishop, so called a star by reason of his office. 3. He is said to
be a fallen star from heaven to earth, that is, 1. From the purity of
heavenly doctrine to that which savours only of the earth, or humane
invention and traditions, whereupon most points of of popery ar grounded. 2.
From a holy and heavenly disposition and seeking things above, to an earthly
disposition* affecting earthly things, as riches, preferment, and Monarchik
power and Jurisdiction, etc. Concerning which defection of the Roman Church,
and the head thereof. Platina, the Pope's own Secretary; in the life of
Marcellinus gives this Testimony; saying, Our Vices are come to that hight;
that scarce there is any place, left of obtaining Mercy at GODS Hands: For,
how great is the Av^rice of Priests, (says he?) And, of these who are in
highest place, (meaning the Pope;) Whas Lust? What Pomp, and Pride? What
Idleness, and Ignorance of themselves; and, of TRUE CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE? How
little Religion? And, the little, that is rather Hypocricall, then true? 3. By
falling away from the Heaven, to the earth: is understood, His falling away
from the true Church; (Which because of her heavenly disposition, is so called
in the Rev elation, in opposition to the earthly sort: Called thereforethe
earth; (as their Carthusian expounds.) So that, tho he pretend to be
chieffe Pastor, and Head of the true Church. He is not so much as a true
Member thereof: But, an Adversary, and an Enemy thereto. Therefore, said
Eberhardus, Archbishop of Salisburg of the Pope at an Imperial dyat at
Reinsburg, ANNO 1246. (as Aventin reports,) Sub Pontificis maximi titulo and
Pastoris pelle, lupum se^issimum, (nisi coeci sumus,) sentimus. Avent. ^. 7.
annal. Bojorum. p. 547.
That is, Under the Title of Pope, or Chieffe Bishop; as under the Skin of a
Shepherd, we feel (except we be blind) a most cruel Wolffe. As, also, so
speaks that noble PETRARCH, Vides enim non modo CHRISTI adversarium;
Petrarch. epist. cui titulus calamitatem vrbis Romanae deplorat. p. 803.
Sed quod est gravius, sub-CHRISTI vexillo rebellantem CHRISTO, militantem
Satanae, and CHRISTI Sanguine tumidum. That is, Thou see not only CHRIST'S
Adversary, (meaning, the Pope,) but, which is more grievous to see, That under
the Banner of Christian Profession, he rebelleth against CHRIST, fights for
Satan; and, is drunk with the blood of CHRIST:) To wit, in His Members.)

Next: Whereas he claymeth, (as PETER'S Successor to have committed to him
the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; the Apostle here shows, That it is the
key of the bottomless pit, that is given to him, quia ei permittitur, (says
their own Lyra,) abuti potestate Episcopali. That is, Because it is permitted
unto him, to abuse Episcopal authority, or power. Which by the keys is
understood, in opening, or shutting; damning, or saving. Which power over the
bottomless pit; who is he that claymeth it so much, as the Pope? In throwing
down to Hell, by his Thunderbolt of Excommunication, whom he lists; and,
liberating Souls, out of his Hellish Purgatory, whom he pleases. So that as
he changes his Station, and falls from Heaven: So, he loses the keys of
the Kingdom of Heaven: And, as he becomes the Angel of the Bottomless Pit;
so suteablie he gets the key thereof. And, from a Star, which abefore,
(while he stood in his first Station* Verse. 11*
as the Primitive Bishops of Rome;) being now fallen by Apostasy, from the
True Faith, 1. Tim. 4.
(as the Apostle speaks:) He becomes a Broacher of Darkness: and,
brings in both Error and Ignorance, on the face of the Visible Church, as
the Popish ordinary gloss, and the Jesuit Ribera expounds. And, therefore,
Gloss. ord. in Rev. 9.2. and Ribera.
is said to open the Bottomless Pit; which before by the preaching of the
Gospel, in power and purity was shut, (as it were,) Ignorance and Error
being thereby suppressed. Out of which first proceeds smoke: and out of the
smoke, Locusts. Over whom he becomes a Sovereign Head and Monarch. And,
therefore, ( Verse. 11.) is called their king Abaddon, Appollyon: To show thereby
That first Ignorance and Error, should be brought in by him, in place of
Knowledge and Truth. And, next; That Ignorance and Error, ^red and brought
forth the swarms of Locusts. Which Beda calls the disciples of Antichrist:
and, Lyra, ejus Sacerdotes and Ministros. That is, His Priests under him and
ministers: Following Pope Gregory the first herein: Who declaring the Title of
Universal Bishop, to be Antichristian, propheticallie speaks of his
Successor, Boniface the third: who assumed that Title; saying, The king of
Pride, Greg. l. 4. indict. ep. 38.
is at hand: and, which is fearful to be spoken: An army of Priests is
prepared for him. The diverse Orders of whom; and, of the Popish Clergy, are
here compared to Locusts: 1. Because of their swarming multitude. For which
cause, the hudge army of the Midianites, who infested Israel; are compared to
them, Judge 7.12. 2. Because of their devouring and eating up of every Herb,
Fruits of Trees; and every green thing, as we see in that Plague of Egypt,
Exodus 10.15. As the Romish Clergy, in like manner, have inhanced to
themselves, the best places and things in every land, where they didswarme. 3.
They are very busy still busing and leaping, from place to place: Even as
Seminary priests in like manner and Jesuits do, to advance and advantage
themselves, and their Religion: And, like the old Pharisees, to make men their
Proselits, the children of the Devil, seven times more than themselves. 4. As
Locusts do most harm by their mouths: So do these Locusts by their false
doctrine. 5. It is said, also, That power was given to these Locusts, as the
power of Scorpions. Therefore, Verse. 10, It is said, That they have tails like
Scorpions: and, their sting is in their tail; whereby they hurt. By which
tails, are meant False doctrines: as we see expounded Isai. 9.15. Which are
venomous, and infect poor souls. Therefore, says their own Jesuit Ribera,
Vulnera s^^a and venenata infligunt. Riber^, in Apoc. 9.3
That is; They sting with cruel, and venomous stinging. 6. And, this also,
they do, (says he,) Furtim and latenter. That is; Slighlie, and
unperceaveablie, (as the Apostle speaks,) By deceaveablenesse of
unrighteousness: And, in a mystery, like the envyous man, who did sow the
Tares in the night. 7. Their stinging is not at first felt hurtful: Because
the same is in a sort pleasant: But, is found to be thereafter paynfull, and
deadly: Even, so, is Popish doctrine, in death especially, filling the hearts
then of poor souls with doubtinges, terroures of conscience, and fear of
Purgatory, and the like: Which makes them to be f^ed therefrom; to bequeath
such large Legacies for Soule-Masses and Diriges, etc. 8. The shape of these
Locusts, are said, To be like horses, prepared unto battle, denotating their
forward, fearce, and furious oppositions; by all bloody Plots, and Practices,
against the Truth; as the poor Waldenses found, the Massacre of Paris can
witness; and the intended Invincible Spanish Armado, in 88. and English
Pouder-treason, in 1605. 9. They had upon their heads. as it were, crowns;
which their own Lyra expounds, To be Tonsura clericalis, propter quam,
(says he,) homines honorem illis deferunt. That is, Their shaven crown; for
the which, men have them in an honorable respect: And, wherehy is signfied,
Rabanus Maurus, in institutione cleric. lib. 1. cap. 3.
, (says their RABANUS MAURUS, and DURAND* in his Rationale divinorum.) That
they are not only Priests, but Kings, and have a Royal Priesthood. 10. Their
faces, were as the faces of men: Showing their fair Pretenses, and courteous
humane carriage: Through covetousness, (as PEYER speaks,) With feigned
words; making merchandise of souls. And, 2. Pet. 2.3.
therefore, also, are said, To have hair, like women's hair: Signifying
thereby, their alluring ways; to draw men, to their spiritual whoredom, and
sensual religion. Therefore, says their own Jesuit, Ribera, Capilli ergo
mulierum significant non solum eos humanitatem simulatoros esse* sed etiam
blanditias, muliebribus similes adhibituros: That is* Therefore, their women's
hair signifies not only, that they shall counterfect humanity, But also,
shall use alluring forms; like the in^ysings of women. 11. But withal it is
said, that their teeth that are hid under this, are as the teeth of Lions.
Signifying thereby either their cruelty against all their opposers as their
own Lyra expounds, or their making a prey of such as they obtain by their
simulate humanity and allurements, as experience has taught of the Roman
Clergy, and Jesuitical sort especially, and as the Apostle foreprophecyed of
such, who under pretense of long prayers should devour Widows houses. 12. It
is said of them that they had as it were Breastplats of iron. Whereby ( says
Bedae) is understood, Obdurata contra veritate^ praecordia, that is their
obdured hearts against the Truth, or as Andreas Caesariensis expounds, Quae
obfirmatam notant duritie^, that is, which denotats their obfirmed induration,
so that we need not to think it strange although in in so clear convincing
light we see them obdured in their errors. 13. They are said to have wings,
signifying thereby not only their sedulity, like the old Pharisees compassing
sea and land to make Proselits to themselves. But likewise their exalting and
lifting up of themselves above all others, as being the spiritual estate, and
exeeming themselves from and above all Civil Jurisdiction. And last, IT IS
said that they have a KING over them, to show that the gover^ement under which
they are, is Monarchical, which Bellarmin proves the papal to be, and if we
would know from a Cardinals mouth who is this KING, Hugo Cardinalis tells us
that he is Antichrist, whose name is set down both in hebrew and greek to be a
destroyer, to show that the LORD would have him to be known to be so, both
to Jew and Gentile, that they may the better avoid him, and his crafty
seduction; as our SAVIORS Name is likewise set down in both these languages,
to show that He is a Common SAVIOR to be embraced both by Jew and Gentile.
And that this forenamed king of the^e Locusts is His maine opposite. (...) is
called a destroyer (as the true KING of His Church is called a SAVIOR.) 1.
Because by his errors and Idolatry he seeks to destroy the Faith, from which
he has made apostacy, and the true Worship of GOD. 2. Because thereby he is
also a destroyer of souls. 3. Because by his bloody persecution he
destroys the bodies of true Professors by fire and sword, as we see
foreprophe^yed of him. Revel. 11.7. and therefore is said to be Drunk with the
blood of the Saints. REVEL. 17.6. And 4. He destroys and devoureth up men's
goods, by his pardons, indulgencies, soule-masses, and making all things
sellable at Rome, as Aeneas Sylvius, Aen. Syl. Epist. Iohanni Periga^^o.
afterward Pope Pius 2. testifies, saying, There is nothing which the Court of
Rome gives without money, For the very imposition of hands: and the gifts of
the Holy Ghost are sold, neither is the remission of sins bestowed upon any
without Money. Bap. Matuan de calam. temp.
As also Carmelite Friar Mantuan says. Templa, sacerdotes, altaria, saecra,
coronae,
Ignes, thura, preces, coelu^ est venale, deusque
Now how agreeable ^e all the former to the Pope and his clergy we have
shown, and let any papist that breathes, show the same can be so applyable to
any other whom they call heretics, and that they acknowledge or have any one
universallie over them: as king, and exercising Ecclesiastical Monarchical
government.

CHAP. V. How Antichrist is descrybed by John, Revel. 13.11.
FIrst for our better information herein, Antichrist his first original, or
manner of rising, whence and how is set down to wit, as Revel. 13.1. The first
beast there described (whereby the old Romam Empire is signified) is said to
have come out of the sea: that is, to have risen to it greatness by tumultuous
wars, like stormy s^rges and waves of of the sea, and by Martial
atchievments. So the second beast, designing Antichrist by consent of all
Interpreters and described verse 11. Is said to arise out of the earth, because
1. As the Jesuit Ribera expounds, he shall arise from a very small beginning
to a great hight, as these things that from small seeds arise and grow out of
the earth to be tall trees, which their own Franciscus Duarenus tells us was
the way of the Popes arising from Episcopus unius urbis, Duarenus de Sacris
ecclesiae ministeriis.
to be Episcopus totius Orbis; or Universal Bishop of the whole Church. 2. He
is said to arise out of the earth, to show that as things that arise out of the
earth, do rise and grow up unperceiveablie, ita vt crevisse non crescere
cernimus, so should Antichrist arise piece and piece, working in a mystery and
by deceiveablenes of unrighteousnes. 1. Tim* 4.3.
which began in the seeds thereof in the Apostles times (as they declare and
we may see COLOss. 2.) And as the tares which the envyous man did sow in the
night time whill the servants were asleep, did grow up to a good degree before
they were espied, so did Antichrist before he was revealed and thereafter
opposed. 3. This beast did arise out of the earth, as being hatched out of
earthly avarice and ambition, as Gregory speaks of Antichrist, Greg. l. 4.
indict. ep. 38.
calling him therefore, The King of Pride, who by usurping the title of
Universal Bishop would exalt Himself like Lucifer above all his fellow Angels,
and who arises out of the earth (says their own Carthusian) that is (says
he) Ex rerum terrenaru^ opulentia, out of the abundance of earthly riches,
wherewith that mystical Whore is so puffed up, that she is described so
glorious, Revel. 17 4. and says, I sit as a Queen and shall see no sorrow.

Next seeing that it is said that this beast is horned like the Lamb; but
speaks like the Dragon, Let us 1. see what is meaned hereby in general, 2.
What is to be ^nderstood by these horns in particular. First then in general
hereby is shown that Antichrist is not an open and avowed, but a covered and
disguysed enemy, like a Wolf in sheeps clothing, oppunging CHRIST and His
Truth not by force, but by fraud, 2 Thessalonians. 2 10. 2 Thessalonians. 2 7.
and all Deceiveablenes of unrighteousnes speaking lies in hypocrisy, Therefore
Antichristianisme is called The mystery of iniquity, whereupon the ordinare
gloss says, The impiety of Antichrist is mystical, that is, cloaked under
the name of godlienes, so that he is a prime hypocrit, like Judas after whom
he is called The son of perdition, pretending himself to be Dux foederis,
that is, the prince of the Covenant, as Ierom calls him, Hierom in Dan. 11.
and consequently the Head of the Church, whillas he is the greatest opposer
thereof, Neither could it be (says Radulphus Flaviacensis) that Antichrist
should attain unto Ecclesiastical honors, in Levit. l. 18. cap. 1. apud
Magdeburg. cent. 10.
and (as the Apostle testifies) sit in the Temple of GOD, that is the society
of the Faithful* and take the Chair of honor, unless having first pretended
a kind of conformity with the Faithful, he should deceive these of whom he
is to be received. Next by the two bornes of the Lamb, whereby simple and
unsound Christians are deceived, are understood ( says their own Primasius
and with him the ordinare gloss) the Two T^staments, to wit, the Old and New
which agree with the Lamb CHRIST, and which the beast shall attempt to usurp
(as having authority over the Scriptures,) and counterfiting himself to be the
Lamb (says he) to wit, in power, as his Viccar upon earth, that so he may
(says he) invade the Lamb. to wit the more craf^ily. The Jesuit Ribera also
says that by these two horns is meaned, The beasts simulat meeknes and
holieres, (which the Pope also pretends being called his holiness, and the
servant of Gods servants, whill as he is Lord of Lords. As likewise he is
horned like the Lamb. (says their ordinare gloss, because thereby he will
counterfit himself to have innocence of life (pretending chastity,) and true
doctrine, (pretending infallibility. (Others also understand by these two
horns the Royal and Prophetical Offices of CHRIST. Which as CHRIST'S Viccar
the Pope does claim, as to be sole Monarch, and the infallible DOCTOR of the
Church, and as Platina the Pops Secretary reports in the life of Paull the
second that he said, that all Laws were placed in the Cabinet of his breast,
so that what he determines, all flesh must yield unto.

But it is said, that he is horned like the Lamb, whereby he deceives many
simple souls, yet he may be known by this, that he speaks like the Dragon,
to wit, by his erroneous doctrine clearlie opposite to what CHRIST speaks in
his holy Scriptures, as may be instanced almost in all the points of popery,
likewise (says Ierom of Antichrist) Quasi Deus loquetur, Hierom. in Dan. 11.
vt qui Dei assumit potentiam, that is, he shall speak as if he were GOD, as
taking upon him divine authority or power, to wit, that he cannot err, and
again in the same place, Religionem omnem suae subijcere potestati conabitur,
(says he) that is he shall attempt to subject al Religion to his power, yea
more, augere tentabit (says he) Sacramenta Ecclesiae, that is he shall
augment the number of the sacraments of the Church, to wit, his fyve bastard
sacraments, all which that the Pope does, none can be so impudent, as to deny.
For how he subjects al Religion to himself, let Cardinal Cusanus declare,
Card. de Casa ep. 2 and 3. ad bohenos.
who affirms that according to times and occasions he may change the sense
of Scripture, and when His sense or the Churches is changed, it is to be
believetd that GOD changes his Judgment, which if this be not the Dragons
mouth. I know not what can be it. In like-manner in the Popes Cannon Law, Did
40. c. 6. si Papa^
there it is said, that tho the Pope should lead in troops innumerable people
after himself to hell. Hujus culpas redarguere praesumat mortaliumnullus, quia
cunctos ipse judicaturus, a nemine est judica^dus, that is, Let no mortal man
notwithstanding presume to find fault with him because he is to judge all men,
but is to be judged by none: And if this again be not the Dragons mouth; let a
Pope himself Gregory the first declare, Greg. l. 4. indict. ep. 38.
who speaking of him, who should usurp the Antichristian title (as he calls
it) of Universal Bishope (Which the Pope now does) says; Qui conabitur in
culmen singularitatis erumpere, vt and nulli subesse and solus omnibus praeesse
videbitur, That is, who will strive to such a Hight of singularity, that he
will be subject to none, and yet he alone will be above all others; Card.
Cusan. lib. 2. concord. eccles. c. 34.
Which Cardinal Cusan declares to be the right meaning of that title of
Universal Bishope, which the Pope now assumeth, saying, that It imports one
to be so Principal, as all others should be subject to him, and he to none.
which made Eberhardus Archbishope of Salisburg likewise in an imperial dyat
holden at Reinsburg, in the year, 1246. Avent^^ l. 7. a^nal. Bojor. p. 54.
As Aventin reporteh, avowedly speaking of the Pope, to call him that
Antichrist, saying, Perditus ille homo quem Antichristum vocare solent, in
cujus front blasphemiae nomen scriptum est; Deus sum, errare non possum, in
templo Dei sedet ac long lateque dominatur, etc. That is, that man of
perdition. whom they use to call Antichrist, in whose forehead the name of
Blasphemy is written, that is, I am God and cannot err, he (I say) sits now
in the Temple of GOD, (says he) and far and wide does reign, And tho he
calls himself the servant of servants; yet as if he were GOD, (says he)
He will be Lord of Lords. Thus we see how this apocalyptick and
Antichristian beast speaks like the dragon, of whose blasphemous and dragon
mouth, we shall speak more herafter.

CHAP. VI. How Antichrist is described by John, REVEL. 17.11.12. etc.
IN that place Antichrist is described by the Apostle, to be the last head or
sovereign government which should reign or rule over that Great City, Which in
John's days did reign over the Kings of the earth, by which City Rome is
understood by the consent of all, Bell. l. 2. De Pont. Romans c. 2.
For so says Bellarmin, Vrbs illa magna sedens super septem montes, and habens
imperium super Reges terrae, Roma est; That is, that great City, that fits on
seven hills, and has dominion over the Kings of the earth, is Rome: so
likewise says the Jesuit Ribera, Ribera in apoc. 17.6
yea further, Hoc in nullam urbe^ aeque convenit ac in Romam, That is, this
cannot agree to no other town or city (says he) as to Rome.

By this great City then so situate and discribed, seeing that it is granted
that it is Rome; We are to consider, who is the the last head or sovereign
government over the same, under which it shall go to utter ruin. (As we see
REVEL. 18.19. is foreprophecyed of her) and to show this is the papacy, IT is
shown unto us 1. By the origin and rising thereof, to wit, that this head or
sovereign government over that city should arise by the decay and fall of
the old Roman empire, and at the same time also, when by the same decay other
Kings should arise to Monarchik Dignity with her, which, verse 12. is called
at one hour, as 1. John 2.18. Verse 12.
the last hour is taken for the last time: Neither is it to be understood
that at one precise period of time, the papacy over Rome, and the rising of
other Kings should be, whose kingdoms before were tributarie provinces only
to the old Roman Empire, but as John's last hour includes some ages, so this
some difference of time, neither by ten Kings is a precise number of such to
be understood, but a definite number put for an indefinite, as we see usual
in scripture Genesis 31.7. Numb. 14* 22. and as likewise BELLARMIN acknowledges.
Bell. l. 3. De Romans Pont. c. 8.
Whence it is as sure that Antichrist is come, and not to come (as papists
fancy) and has the sovereign government over Rome, as it is visible to the
whole World, that there are Kings now in the several kingdoms of Europe,
which before were tributarie provinces only to the old Roman and now decayed
Empire, seeing that at one time he was to rise to his soveragnitie over Rome
with them.

2. As it is shown unto us who shall be the last Head over Rome by the time of
his rising to be so, when, even so it is shown unto us verse 8. Who he shall
be by the place from which he arises, or whence, in these words; The beast
that thou saw was and is not, and (speaking in the future) shall ascend out
of the bottomless pit, where first we must remember that by the beast in
general is understood in this prophecy the Roman Jurisdiction, whereof, the
Apostle or rather the Angel makes fo^re estates. 1. That he was, to wit,
before John's days in the person of fyve kings, that is several sorts of
governements, (as the Jesuit Ribera and others do expound) And which fyve,
verse 10. are said to be fallen, which were Kings, Consuls, Decemuirs,
Tribuns, and Dictators. 2. Is not (says the Angel in John's days) to wit,
as before, under any of the former governements. 3. And yet is, to wit under
the imperial government, which then stood, and therefore in the present time,
is the sixth Head spoken of, verse 10. Whereof the angel says, and one is.
And 4. Speaking in the future and of the last sort of government over that
city; he says, and shall ascend out of the Bottomless pit, etc. Where he
sets down three things concerning the papal government, 1. Whence it
comes. 2. The general subjection thereto, and 3. The last total ruin
thereof, and of Rome over which the same is chiefly exercised. First then he
says that this beast or last Head shall ascend out of the bottomless pit,
having reference herein to that fallen star spoken of Chap. 9. Who verse 11.
is called the Angel of the bottomless pit, agreed by all to be Antichrist,
and expounded by Romanists themselves, (as I have shown Chapter 4.) To be some
eminent Bishop, and who shall have Monarchik soveragnity, and therefore is called
the King that shall be over the Locusts there described, which Beda calls, the
disciples of Antichrist, and Lyra, his priests over whom he is Prince, and Pope
Gregory calls The Army or swarm of Priests which were prepared for the
King of Pride, who in his ^yme was near at hand, (a thousand years ago) as
he playnlie affirms.

2. The general subjection that shall be to this last Head, or sort of p^pall
government over Rome, is set down in these words. That they that dwell upon
the earth shall wonder (whose names, are not written in the book of life) when
they behold the beast, Reference being had to that which is said Chap. 13.3. of
the general subjection to the old Roman empire, That all the World wondered at
the beast, which general subjection also is set down verse 13. Where it is
said, That the Kings, who received power as Kings at one hour with the beast,
(meaning the European kings) and (as verse 2.) Who had committed spiritual
Fornication with the Whore, being idolatrous, and having one mind with her,
they should give their power and strength unto the beast (as his secular arm)
To make war against the Lamb; That is, to persecute the professors of the
Truth of CHRIST, but at last The Lamb should overcome them, to wit, by
conversion or eversion. And therefore, 3. The last and total ruin of Head and
state under him is set down in these words (that as Antichrist is called The
son of perdition 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. So He should go into perdition.

Having thus spoken of the beast, as the eight and last Head of Rome (The
seventh being that of the Goths, which continued only 70 years, and
therefore is said verse 10. to continue but a short space.) The better yet to
know him, we have to consider the mystery of the woman that is born up and
supported by this beast, that is, by the papacy, which is the Roman Clergy,
whom they call the Church or their Churchmen. First then this is a woman, by
which a Church is meaned, as we see Revel. 12 1. 2. She is a Whoorish woman
that is here spoken of, like AHOLAH and AHOLIBAH, or an Idolatrous Church. 3.
As making the kings of the earth, and inhabitants thereof, drunk with the wine
of her Fornication, and procuring, as has been said, such a general
subjection to her, She is a pretended catholic Church. 4. As a mother of
Harlots, (as she is called, v. 5.) She is a mother Church, and 5. mystical
Babylon, which Jesuit Ribera and other Romanists expounds rightly to be
Rome, She is the Roman Church, all which being put together makes up here the
clear description of that Antichristian Church, over which the Pope is Head
and Monarch, which is, the Roman, catholic, mother, Idolatrous church so much
doted upon by seduced papists, and generally submitted unto by them.

Out of which complete description of Antichrist, let any papist under Heaven
find out any other but the Pope, to whom the same in all points may be
applied, as being the eight head of sovereign authority over Rome, who arose
thereto by the the decay of the Roman Empire, and at the same time when others
arose to sovereign authority with him, as kings over these Kingdoms which
now they rule, and which before were tributarie provinces only to the Roman
Empire, and who claims a suppreame ecclesiastical authority over all
priests and ecclesiastical persons, as Universal Bishope, and Monarch of the
Church, and who also has claimed and heretofore obtained a general
subjection of all persons whatsoever to him and his sea (according to his
decree theranent) as being head of the Roman Catholic, mother Church,
Extravag. Tit. 8. c. 1. unam sancta^^.
which has dependence upon him and which he again supporteth by his pretended
infallibility and power.

From all which former, we therefore frame this argument; The eight head as
governor, who now sits in Rome, and who arose at one time to soveraignitie
over that City, when others arose to be free kings over their kingdoms,
which before were tributarie provinces to the old Roman Empire, (as all
Histories record) and has procured all subjection of al persons to him and his
sea, not by force, but by allurement, of a sensual Religion, and like an
intysing Whore, has made these that are subject to him to committ spiritual
Fornication, which is idolatry, and who also claims especially a supreme
ecclesiastical authority over all priests and ecclesiastical persons, as
universal Bishope, sole Monarch, and Head of the Roman Catholic mother
church. This head I say described so by John, is that grand Antichrist. But the
Pope is such; Therefore he is that Grand Antichrist. The major is scripture,
expounded as has been shown, by Romanists themselves, and by evidence of
histories. the minor likewise is clear by fit application in all points, to
the Pope, and applyable to no other, and by his own undeniable practice;
Therefore the conclusion inevitably follows.

CHAP. VII. Where Antichrist is to be found; or his place in general, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
HAving thus seen who is Antichrist; Next we are to search and try where he
is, and first His place in general. 2. in particular. First then as for his
place in general, Paull tells us, 2 Thessalonians. 2* 4.
That he shall sit as GOD (pretending to be his Vicegerent and usurping his
power) in the Temple of GOD, by which not any one material Temple is to be
understood, (as that of JERUSALEM, which the papists fancy tha^ Antichrist
shall reedifye and which their own Pintus upon ISAIAH 25. ^howes shall never be
reedifyed.) But the Professour^ of the Christian Name in common ar thereby to be
understood, which therefore have the name of the Church, So also expounds
Oecumenius and Theophylact. and Auselmus in 2 Thessalonians 2. says thus, in me^
tibus christa^ nor^ quo^ seduces, qui fueru^e templ^m Dei.
and as we see the^ so called, (especially these who are truly Christians.)
1. Cor. 3.16. and Ephesians. 2.21. And therefore says Chrysostom upon this place.
2 Th^ss 2.4. Sedebit in Templo DEI non eo quod est Hierosolymis, sed in
Ecclesiis, That is he shall sit in the Temple of GOD, not in that which is in
JERUSALEM, but in the Churches, and what is meaned by these words of Sitting.
Theodoret tells us, (The Spirit of GOD using the same word that the papists
use, speaking of the Pops reign, saying, Sedittot annos, and calling Rome the
Apostolical Sea or Seeds Apostolica*) Thus therefore says Theodoret, Templum
appellavit Ecclesias i^ quibus primam sedem arripiet, That is, the Holy Ghost
called the Churches the Temple, in which Antichrist shall usurp the first seat
or primacie. Thus also speaks Aquinas. Aquin. in 2 Thessalonians. 2 4.
Therefore it is expounded (says he) In templo DEI. Idest in Ecclesia, quia
multi de Ecclesia eum accipient, vel secundum Augustinum, in templo DEI sedeat,
idest, ut principetur and dominetur ta^quam ipse cum suis nunciis sit templu^
DEI, sicut CHRISTVS est cum suis. That is he shall sit in the temple of GOD,
that is in the Church, because many that are of the Church shall receive him,
or according to Aug^stin, he sits in the Temple of GOD, that is, the Prince or
Monareh thereof, and has Dominion therein, as if he with his Clergy were
the church of GOD, as CHRIST is with His followers; So likewise speaks the
ordinar gloss and Lyra upon this place, and the express words of Augustine are
these Rectius putant latin dici, Aug. De civi^. D^i, l. 20 c. 19.
sicut in graeco est. Non in Templo DEI, sed in Templu^ DEI sedeat, tanquam
ipse sit Templum DEI quod est Ecclesia, sicut dicimus, sedit in amicum, idest,
ut Amicus. That is, they think that more rightly it may be said in the latin,
as it is in the greek, not in the Temple of GOD, but that Antichrist should
sit as the Temple of GOD, that is, as if he were the Temple of GOD, which is
his Church. Even as we say, he sits for a Friend, that is as if he were a
friend, and (which title of the Church) we see that that the Pops parasits
gives unto him, calling him the Virtuall Church wherein only is
infallibility. Rad. Canonicus frifingensis l. 2. c. 51. etc.
Whereupon Radevicus a Roman channon, speaking of Pope Victor 2. says thus,
Ipse Antichristi tempora prafigurans, usque adeo erectus est supra se, vt in
Templo DEI sederit, ostendens se tanquam sit DEVS, and multi abominationem
desolationis stantem in loco sancto, non sine multa lachrymarum effusione
corporis oculis inspexerunt. That is, he prefiguring the time of Antichrist,
was so far exalted above himself, as that he did sit in the Temple of GOD,
showing himself as if he were GOD, and many did behold this abomination of
desolation standing in the Holy place, not without much effusion of tears, and
which sitting of Antichrist as the vicar of Christ in the Church, (whose horns
he resembles, by a deceiveablenesse of unrighteousnes) did so seduce simple
and unsound Christians, that except by the Scriptures, he could never
otherwise be known, nor his Dragon mouth perceived. Therefore says
Chrysostom, Haeresis impia quae est exercitus Antichristi, stabit in sanctis
l^cis Ecclesiae, obtinens Ecclesias vt si velit quis cognoscere quae sit vera
Ecclesia, unde cognoscet similitudinis confusione, nisi tantummodo ex
scripturis. That is, that wicked heresy, which is Antichrists army. shall
stand in the holy places of the Church: pretending that they are the Church; so
as if any would know what is the true Church. How or whereby shall he know this
in so great a confusion of likeness, but allanerlie by the Scriptures?

From the former words then and explication of them we reason thus. He who
sits in the Temple of GOD, that is, his Church, as GOD (His vicegerent to wit,
or vicar of CHRIST) and therefore usurpeth the first place and primacie
therein, and as Monarch thereof who shall claim dominion over the same; Yea
moreover, who shall sit in the Church as if he himself were the church (to wit,
virtuall as they call him, and being only infallible) he I say who does this
is the grand Antichrist, But the Pope does this, Therefore he is the grand
Antichrist. The Major is Scripture, expounded by fathers and Romanists
themselves, The minor is clear likewise by the Pops own claim and Bellarmins
doctrine of him. LIB. 2. de pont. Romans cap. 12. and LIB. 2. d^ Ecclesia, cap.
15.16. etc. Therefore the Conclusion inevitably follows.

CHAP. VIII. Antichrists Seat, or his place in particular, Revel. 17.9. and 18.
proved to be Rome.
AS for Antichrists seat or place in particular, It is described two ways:
REVEL. 17. First by the name of mystical Babylon, verse 5. And thereafter by
the name of That great City* which in John's days did reign over the Kings
of the Earth. Now that Rome is signified by both these we are to prove, and
consequently, that Rome is the Seat of Antichrist; First then that by
mystical Babylon, Rome is understood: resembling the Assyrian Babylon in
pride, Idolatry, and filthynes; and especially in cruel persecution of the
People of GOD. We have not only the testimonies of Fathers, as TERTULIAN,
IEROM, AUGUSTINE, AMBROSE, BEDA and OECUMENIUS and especially IEROM writting to
PAULINUS, Hier. ad Paul. To^^ 9. in LIB. didymi de Sp. Sancto in praef. ad
finem.
speaking thus of ROME* When I was in Babylon, (says he) and Lived an
inhabitant of that Purple Whore, I desired to treat some what of the holy
Ghost, and to dedicate my work to the Bishope of that City, and behold, the
assembly of the Pharisees There (meaning the Roman Clergy) They cried me
down. And as for the testimonies of the forenamed Fathers. They are to be found
as followers, TERTULLIAN adversus Iudaeos, and LIB. 3. contra Matrimonium.
AUGUSTINE de civitate DEI, LIB. 18. c. 2. AMBROSE in 2 Thessalonians, 2. BEDA and
OECUMENIUS in 1. Pet. cap. ult. out of which place by Peter's writing from
Babylon which the Romanists themselves expound to be Rome, Lyra and Card.
Cajetan in 1. Pet. 5.13.
they would prove that Peter was a^ Rome, for so Lyra and Cajetan expound that
place, as also Bellarmin and Baronius. Bell. De Romans pont. l. 2. c. 2. Baron.
annal. anno 43. Art* 17. Vieg^ in Apoc. 17. Com. 1. Sect. 3. Ribera in Apoc.
17. number. 21. and 30. also, Bell. l. 3. de pont. Romans c. 13 consesseth, per
mer^tricem intelligi Romam.
The Jesuit also Viega speaks thus, Omnia quae in his capitibus de Babylone
commemorantur, in Romam urbem aptissime quadrant; That is, all these things
which are spoken of Babylon in these Chapters most fitly agree to the City of
Rome, Etiam quae erit tempore Antichristi; Even as it is to be in the time of
Antichrist. The Jesuit Ribera likewise Arbitror ergo (quod Andreas Episcopus
Caesareae, and Arethas in hujus libri Commentariis nonnullos sensisse
testantur) Romam nomine Babylonis designari, That is, I believe therefore (that
which ANDREW also Bishope of Caesarea, and ARETHAS testifyeth that some others
in their Com^mentaries upon this book did ^old) that by the name of Babylon,
Rome is understood, and again. Hui^ convenient aptissime omnia quae de
Babylone dicuntur in hoc libro, That is, all things that are spoken of Babylon
in this book most fitly agrees with Rome, which he proves thereafter by many
Authorities and witnesses.

The only evasion that Romanists use is, that by Babylon, Rome is designed as
it was Heathen in the days of NERO, and other heathen Emperors, or as it
shall be in the end of the World under their fancied Antichrist ye to come,
whereby as ever they grant that Rome is the proper seat of Antichrist. But to
show their error in the first, to wit, that it is not called Babylon as it was
heathen and under the old Roman Heathen Emperors, but under the Pops. First,
Rome Heathen was under the sixth Head, which was imperial government, but Rome
as it is described by John, and to be the Seat of Antichrist, is under the
last head which is papal government. 2. Rome Heathen under imperial
government procured subjection of nations to her by force and martial
coaction, but Rome as she is described by John to be the Seat of Antichrist,
and under papal government procured subjection of nations to her by fraud and
Whoorish allurements (as v. 4.) of crafty seduction. 3. Rome as the seat of
Antichrist is described committing spiritual fornication with the kings of the
earth, who are called, v. 12. the horns of the Beast, to whom they give their
power, as his secular arm, to war against the LAMB, by persecuting the
saints of GOD His Martyr's: but when Rome was Heathen, these kings were not at
all, for they were to rise a long time after Romes ceasing to be under the
heathen Emperors. 4. Rome is described by John as the Seat of Antichrist, by
way of prophecy, not what she was then in John's days, but what she was after
to be. And 5. Rome is described by John under her eight or last head, (which I
have proven the Pope to be) under whom she is to go to such utter ruin, as
never any more to be inhabited, nor the light of a Candle to be seen in her,
Where it is evident that this never yet befell to Rome Heathen under the old
imperial government. R^vel. 18.21.22.23


Next, where they would allege, when the former evasion failieth them, that
it is Rome, as it shall be in the end of the world, under the fancied
Antichrist, yet to come. 1. Ribera in Apoc. 14, p. 446.
(as has been said) hereby they confess that Rome is the proper Seat of
Antichrist. 2. If this were true, then the Beast spoken of should have more
Heads then eight, to wit, a nynth after the Papal government; under which it
is prophesied that it shall go to utter ruin, and so not to have a nynth head
at all. Ribera in Apoc. 17. Number. 34.
3. The Jesuit Ribera says of Rome, Si quando haec eadem fecerit, quae
Iohannis tempore faciebat, iterum Babylon, vocabitur, That is, if Rome shall do
these same things, which she did in John's tym, then she shall justly be
called again Babylon, as she was before, and consequently come to that utter
ruin foreprophecied of her, Cap. 18.2. and 21. For it is manifest (says he)
Quod peccata quae extremo tempore patrabit* Number. 46.
omnino similia futura iis quae fecit cum imperiu^ tenebant Imperatores. That
is, that the sins which she shall committ in the last times, shall be
altogether alike with the sins which she committed when the Emperors of old
did reign over her. Now that she is guilty of the same sins, and in a greater
measure; Let these ensuing Romanists themselves declare, Epist. 18. l. 1.
1. Their own famous Florentine, Arch-deane and chanon Petrarch, who lived in
the 1300 year of CHRIST, speaks thus, Ecce jam oculis vides, jam manibus
palpas, Epist. 18. l. 1. ep. rerum senilium. epamico cu^ titulus, calamitaten^
urbis Romae describi^.
qualis est Babylon illa novissima, fervens, aestuans obseena, terribilis, etc.
That is, behold now thou sees with thy eyes, and feels with thy hands what a
City this last spoken of Babylon is, hot burning in lust, filthy, and
terrible, etc. Wherein what ever impiety (says he) or most wicked manners
every where, the whole World ever had or has, thou shall find all accumulated
there in one mass of impiety, and thereafter he says; Yea, what other thing
is done there, by the enemies of CHRIST, and Pharisees of our time, (to wit, the
Roman clergy) but like Judas and the Roman Soldiers, while they would seem
to worship Him, they sell Him, they crown Him with thorns, they spit on Him,
they mock Him, they pierce Him, and of new they crucify Him* and then concluds
thus* O Pudor, O Dolor, O Indigni^tas, talium hodie ur dicitur, est Rom^. Tha
is, O sh^me, O grief, O disgrace, for as has been said, of such persons
consists Rome at this day, and more particularly speaking of the Pope he
says, Non Apostolicam sed predonis in morem videres, neque signis virtutu^ ac
miraculis, sed ^ignis castrorum and miris instructum legionibus, quasi in has
terra^non Petru^ sed Hannibile^ desti^asset, That is, where thou may see, not
an Apostolic man or successor, but one like a Robber, nor one Famous for
signs of virtue or miracles, but for military Ensigns and Armies mightily
furnished, as if he had not been appointed by CHRIST, to be a Successor to
Peter, but rather against these land^ to be another Hanniball.

The next whom we produce is Platina the Pops own Secretary, Platina in vita
Marcellin.
who in the life of Pope Marcellin speaks thus of the Roman Clergy, Hi enim
livore, superbia, inimicitiis, odiis, inter se certantes, tyrannidem potius
quam Sacerdotium sapere videbantur, Christian^ pietatis omnino obliti, ^c
divina mysteria potius prophanantes qua^ celebrantes, sed quid futurum nostra
aetate aerbitramur, quum vitia nostra eo crevere u^ vix apud DEVM miserecordiae
locum nobis reliquerint? Tha^ is, For these men by envy, pride, inimitie and
hatred striving amongst themselves, did rather seem to savor of tyranny,
then of Priesthood, being altogether forgetful of Christian piety, and rather
profaning holy mysteries, then celebrating them, but what think you will be
the estate of things in our age to come? when our vices are grown to that
hight, that they have left scarce any place with GOD, for mercy and forgivenes?
and immediately thereafter he says, Quanta sit avaritia, and cor^^ maxim
q^ireru^ potiuntur, quanta libid^ undique conquisita, quanta ambitio, and
pompa, quanta superbia and desidia, quanta ignoratio tum sui ipsius, tum
doctrinae Christianae, quanta p^rvareligio, and s^mulata potius qua^ vera, quum
corrupti mores vel in prophanis hominibus, quos seculares vocant, detestandi
non attine^ dicere, cum ipsi ita aperte and pala^ peccent, a^ s^ inde laudem
quaerere^^* That is, How great is the ava^ice of Priests, and chiefly of
those, who are in highest place (meaning the Pope) What leacherie where ever it
may be exercised, what ambition and pomp, how great pride and idleness, how
great ignorance both of themselves and of Christian doctrine, how little
religion, and that rather Hypocritical nor true, what great corruption of
manners, that even in profane persons whom they call secular men were
detestable, it belongs not to speak, when as they sin so openly and in
public, as if by sinning so they were seeking praises to themselves. This made
Nicolaus Clemangis in his book, Cap. 14. and 26. page 64. and 65.
De corrupto Ecclesiae statis, who was Arch-deane of Bajon, in the year 1400.
to send Rome to that prophecy of Ezekiell, and in the two sisters AHOLAH and
AHOLI^AH to read her like guiltienes, and judgment to come upon her, and
thereafter says he, F^c eorum vaticinia alio spectare, quid de tua Prophetia
Iohannis scilicet in Apocalipsi censes? an non illam saltem aliquae ex part
pertinere putas? Number pudorem ita cum sensu perdidis^i ut haec neges? Illa^ ergo
i^tuer^, and lege damnationem magnae Meretricis super aq^as multas sedentis,
illicque tua facta praeclara contemplare and tuos fururos casus. That is, but
let it be that the Prophecies of the Prophets look another way, what thinks
thou of the prophecy of John in the REVELATION that c^ncerneth thy self? Does
thou not think that in some part at least it belongs to thee? Has thou so
far lost shame and all feeling that thou dare deny the same, look therefore
upon that prophecy, and read the damnation of the great whoor that sits
upon many waters, and in her behold they fine deeds, and thy future fall;
Therefore also said Bernard more particularly, Bestia illa de Apocalypsi cui
datum est os loqui blsphemias, and bellum gerere cum sanctis. Petri cathedram
o^cupat, tanquam leo paratus ad praedam. Epist. 125. That is, that beast spoken
of in the Revelation, to whom a mouth is given to speak blasphemies, and to
make warr^ against the saints, does now occupy Peter's chay^e, as a lion
prepared for his prey.

By all which former famous testimonies of Romanists themselves, We see that
Rome under papacy is presently, and has been long ago, that mystical
Babylon, and great Whore that siteth upon many waters, and who is that great
City spoken of Revel. 17.18. And that she is guilty of no less sins, but
rather greater, nor ever she was guilty of in the time of the old Roman
Emperors, both in the Head, and inferior clergy, which made him to be long
ago to be declared* and avowed to be Antichrist, Aventin l. 7. annal. Bojor. p.
547.
and his clergy to be Ministers of Antichrist, as Eberhardus Archbishope of
Salisburg in a solemn imperial dyat at Reinsburg anno 1246. publicly
professed. and as in ENGLAND, anno 1340. A worthy gentleman Gefrey Chaucer, of
woodstok and Elm esquyre, Ambassador oftimes from king Edward the third to
foreign Princes, did plainly express in his poem of the plough-mans tale
speaking first of the Pope himself thus; CHRIST sent the poor to preach,
The royal rich He did not so,
Now dare no poor the people teach,
For Antichrist is all their foe.
And thereafter of his Clergy he speaks thus.

CHRITS Ministers clepen they been
And rule all in robbery,
But Antichrist they serven clean
Attyred in all tyrrannie. So speaks also Bernard of the Roman Clergy, ser.
33. in CANTICA. Omnes amici and omnes inimici, Ministri sunt Christ^ sed
serviunt Antichristo; That is, All profess themselves to be friends, but are
all foe^, they are called the servants of CHRIST, but they serve Antichrist.

From all the former we agree thus* Mystical Babylon (called the whore that
siteth upon many waters) etc. Is the seat of Antichrist, as all do agree. But
Rome under papacy is Mystical Babylon as has been proven by Romanists the^.
selves. Therefore Rome, under papacy is the seat of Antichrist.

CHAP. IX. Of the time when Antichrist should come and be revealed, 2 Thessalonians. 2
7 8
HAving spoken of the Place where Antichrist is. We are next to enquire of the
tym when he should come and be revealed, which the Apostle declares to be in
these words When he that lets (speaking of his own times) should be taken
out of the way, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.
and then that wicked man should be revealed, etc. To wit, Antichrists. Wherein
we have two things to consider. First, What the Apostle means by him who did
then let or hinder Antichrists rising and revealing. 2. Whether he who then
did let be taken out of the way.

Bell. l. 3. de pont. Ro^ c. 5.
First then Bellarmin acknowledges by the uniforme consent of Fathers, and of
latter writers, that by him who did then let, the old Roman Empire as it was
then in it grandeur and integrity, is understood; For who shall be taken out
of the way, but the Roman state (says Tertullian) whose taking out of the way
by the division thereof amongst ten Kings shall bring in Antichrist, Tertul. de
refur car^is.
So also says Ambrose, That after the decay of the Roman Empire, Paull says
that Antichrist shall appear; in 2 Thessalonians 2. Cyril Catechesi 16.
So speaks Cyrill, Ierom ad Algasiam, Oecumenius, Theophy^act, Sedulius,
Primasius, and Auselmus upon that place of Paull, and m^re remarkable
Chrysostom, who says That when the Empire shall be dissolved, he shall
seize upon the vacancie, and shall challenge to himself the rule or government
both Humane and Divine, as Mantuan says of the Pope, Ense potens gemino, etc.
And as the Pope claims. Extrav. c. unam sanctam. Next, the same likewise
does Romanists affirm, as Aquinas, Cajetan, Lyra and others upon this place
of Paull.

It rests then next to consider, If the ^ld Roman Empire be taken out of the
way (in so far specially as it did let Antichrists comeing or rising and
appearing in his colors.) For probation whereof we have a cloud of witnesses.

First Haymo a german Archbishope, who lived anno 800. writing upon this place
says, The Apostle shows that our LORD shall not come to judgment, till
first a decay be of the Roman Empire, which we now see fulfilled (says he)
and that Antichrist does now appear in the World, who shall kill the Martyrs
of CHRIST; Lyra likewise upon the same words of Paull, says, That in his time
(anno 1300) The whole Kingdoms of the World had already revolted from the
Roman Empire, denying subjection or tribute thereto. Aquinas in like manner
upon these words says thus, That it was a sign of CHRIST'S comeing, to wit,
the rule over all the World of the Roman Empire, so it is a sign of
Antichrists coming, to wit, the revolt of Countries frrm the Roman Empire, but
(says he) Countries have long since revolted from the Roman Empire, and now
in place of of that temporal Monarchy has succeeded one which is spiritual,
into which the temporal is changed, That is, in playner terms, that the
Antichristian Monarchy foreprophecied by Paull is in the place thereof erected.
Salmeron also the Jesuit (on 2 Thessalonians. 2. disput. 2. says, The Roman Empire
is long ago overthrown and divided in many Kingdoms, and as it were (says
he) altogether extinct. So that he who is now called the Roman Emperor is
but a very smallest shadow (says he) of the old Empire, in so far as he
possesses not the very City of Rome from which he is styled Roman (says
he.) The like does the Jesuits Justinian, Viega, and A^osta affirm,
commenting upon Paulls words, with Stapulensis and others.

The Author likewise of Fasciculus tem^orum; A Charter Monck shows that this
irrecoverable decay begane, anno, 639. So that now (says he) all the four
Monarchies are decayed and there rests none now but that of Antichrists. Which
decay in like manner when it begane by the invasion of the Goths and Vandall's
and became thereafter divyded into so many Kingdoms, There Paulus Iouius in
the beginning of his History declares, and says, That at that time,
Potentia Caesaru^ ^ato cessit, or, the old Roman Empire expired and (as it
were) gave up the ghost, (says he) where I cannot omit, how that Bellarmin
and others from the greek Article (...) and (...), Bell. l. 3. de pont. c. 2.
that man of sin, and son of perdition, would prove Antichrist to be an
individual person* and not collective or successive government of many, to
whom I must for answer, 2 Thessalonians. 2 and 3.
ask here, whether does the like article v. 7. praefixed before (...), He who
letelh, verse 7.
denotat one individual Roman Emperor who then lived and did let, or
acollective and successive government of many singular Emperors, who were to
come one after another, till the abolishing thereof, which therefore in the
preceding verse is called (...). verse 6.
And which I think no learned Romanist will have face to deny.

Now, as for the revealing of this man of sin, whereof Paull speaks, There
are two principal degrees; The first, when Boniface the third assumed to
himself the supremacy over the whole universal Church, which he did when he
usurped the title of Universal Bishope and Head of the Church, which his
predecessor Gregory the first had declared to be Antichristian, and that he
nor none of his predecessors had ever usurped the same, which was done about
the year 607.

The second degree was when Boniface the eight (as their own author of
Fasciculus temporm speaks) In tantam arrogantiam seipsum erexit, ut Dominum
totius mundi se diceret, tam in t^mporalibus, quam in spiritualibus, That is,
(says he) who exaltet^ himself to that hight of pride* that he affirme^^
himself to be the supreme Lord of the whole World, as well in temporal as in
things spiritual. Which is that proper mark of Antichrist, whereof the Apostle
speaks 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. and which Gregory also the first, sets down in his
moralls and expos^o^ of Job, 29. of whom also Platina the Pops Secretary
speaks thus, Who endeavors (says he) more to strick with terror,
Emperors, Kings, Princes, Nations and People, then to promove Religion, and
who attempted as it pleased him, to give or take away Kingdoms, and to depose
Kings from them or restore them to them. Sigeb. monachus Ge^b lacen in Chr.
anno 1088.
Which is the Pops practice unto this day, and whereof their own Sigebert in
his chronicle speaks thus, Haec novitas, non dicam Haeresis nondum in mundo
pullular^^. That is, before this time, this noveltie, not to call it Haeresie,
had not before that time sprung up in the World, which makes this usurpation
of supremacy over Emperors and Kings by Gregory the 7. (alias Hildebrand)
and Boniface the 8. his successor, after the Thousand year of GOD, to be
esteemed the second degree of the revealing of Antichrist: Whence it was, that
(as their own Aventin reporteh, Annal. B^jor. l. 5.
) Plerique tunc Hildebrandum Antichristum esse praedicabant. That is, that
sundry did preach that Hildebrand was Antichrist, and under the title of
CHRIST'S vicar, did play the part of Antichrist* sitting in the Temple of GOD,
and exalting himself above all that is called GOD, as if he were GOD: glorying
also (said they) that he cannot err, and what ever he says, that it is the
Law of GOD. So that Omnes boni* aperti, justi, ingenui eo tempore Antichristi
Regnu^ cepisse cernebant. That is, all good, plain, just, and ingenuous men,
(says he) saw that then began the Kingdom of Antichrist. We hold then
that Antichrist was come, and first revealed himself in Boniface the Third, and
thereafter came to his full growth and clearer revelation, in the person of
Gregory the 7. and his successors, Boniface the 8. and others, in whose time
Platina reports that there was such a terrible Earthquake that the like was
never seen before and a dreadful Comet portending great calamity to come upon
the World.

From all which former we frame this argument, how soon as the Roman empire
(which did let in Paul's time) was abolished and taken out of the way, then
Antichrist was to come: and thereafter to be revealed. But the Roman Empire
which did let in Paul's time, is many ages ago abolished, and taken out of
the way: Therefore, many ages ago Antichrist is come, and revealed, and
consequently is not yet to come, as the Papists do fancy.

The major proposition is contained in scripture. 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.8. Expounded to
be the Roman Empire by the general consent of Fathers and Romanists
themselves, the assumption likewise is clearly proven by a cloud of witnesses
of Romanists themselves in like manner, therefore the conclusion inevitably
follows.

Having then seen 1. Who is Antichrist, for his person. 2. Where he is, for
place, and 3. When he was come, for time, Follows now 4. How he is to be
known by his marks, and first.

CHAH X. Of Antichrists exorbitant and matchless Pride, in exalting himself
above all that is called GOD. 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
The first mark then whereby the Scripture deseriveth Antichrist to be known,
is his exorbita^t and matchless pride, For which Gregory the first called him
Rex superbiae, or the king of pride, and which pride the Apostle describes in
these words 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. who opposes and exalts himself (says he) above
all that is called GOD, that is, (as says their own Carthusian) above al
creatures, that are either reputed or for some singular eminency are so called
by participation of name only, and not of essence; whom the Apostle 1. Cor.
8.5. distinguishes in these who are either Earthly or Heavenly, saying, For
tho there be that are called gods whether in Heaven or upon Earth, etc. of
which the earthly are princes, so called Psalm. 82.6. and the heavenly are
angels so called, Psalm. 97.7.

Extrav. l. 1. Tit. 8. ^. una^ sanctam.
Now to apply that the Pope exalts himself above all Princes or Magistrates;
that proud claim and decree of Boniface the 8. witnesses: wherein he
affirms that He is to judge al men, but is to be judged by none, and that all
humane creature whatsoever is to be subject to him under pain of damnation,
and that he so far exceeds the Emperor, as the sun does the moon; whereupon
(as has been said) the author of Fasciculus temporum. a charter Monck says,
That it was he tha^ raised himself to such a hight of pride, as he called
himself Lord of the whole World.

With this proud decree, so speaks also his parasits, Rep^rt. Panor. tit. P
apa.
therefore says Panormitan, The Pope (says he) Habet subditas omnes
creaturas, that is, he has subject to him all creatures, and none may decline,
nor appeal from his Jurisdiction. Cardinal Turrecremata likewise speaks
thus, Turrecre^. l. 2. summae c. 52.
As CHRIST got Dominion from his Father (says he) above al principalities
and powers, and over all creatures whatsoever that has being, that all knees
should bow to him* so has he give^ this full domini^ and power to Peter and his
Successors.

Where I cannot omit that which is related by that learned Italian, author of
the history of the Council of TRENT. hist. of the council of Trent. lib. 3.
p. 395.
who speaking of Paull the fourth, tells That he never spoke with
Ambassadors, but he thundered in their ears, (says he*) That he was above
all Princes, and that he would not that any of them should be too homely or
familiar with him. That he could also change and dispose of Kingdoms, and was
his successor who has deposed Kings and Emperors, and did often repeat, for
a beginning of the authority exercised by him, that he had made Ireland a
kingdom, and went on so far (says he) that in consistory, and at his
table publicly in the presence of many; He said, he would not have any prince
for his Companion, but all subjects under this foot. (so he said, stricking it
against the ground) as it is fit, and as it is his will who has built the
Church, and has placed them in this degree.

Yea not only will he have kings and princes subject to him, and (as Platinae
reports of Boniface the 8. as we have shown) at his pleasure will depose
them from their kingdoms, In praef. operis De principiis.

Blondus Did. 96.


or repone them; but likewise he will have them all to adore and worship him,
as the supreme God on earth, (as Stapletoun and others style him. Therefore
says Blondus. Omnes Principes orbis terrarum Po^tificem u^ Deum summum
adorant. That is, All the princes of the World adore the Pope as the most high
GOD. Whence it is, that their Carmelit Friar Baptista Mantuanus speaks thus
of him. Cujus vestigia adorant.

Caesar, and aurato vestititi murice Reges. Whence it is also that Stenchus
speaking of the Emperor Constantins Donation of Rome to the Pope, says, That
at that tym Constantine adored the Pope as GOD. Platina likewise in the life of
Steven the second tells us how Pepin king of France at the Pops entry within
his bounds kissed his foot and adored him, Lib. 27. ^ist. p. 5.7.
and Paulus Iovius, speaking of Charles the fifth his coronation at Rome,
says, That he religious^ie kneeling, and grooflings having kissed his foot,
he adored or worshipped the Pope, (by a religious adoration, as CHRIST'S vicar
upon earth. l. 7. c. 26. Baron ananno 1191
)

Ranulphus also in his polychronicon, and Baronius in his annal's, sets down
the manner of the Coronation of the Emperor Henry son to Fredrick by Pop
Celestin the third. That sitting in his pontifical Chair, he held the
imperial Crown between his feet, and when the Emperor bowing his head lowly
had taken it up, and it was put upon his head* The Pope presently with his
foot stricking of the Crown, cast it down upon the ground in token that he had
power, if he deserved, to depose him there from: and then the Cardinals taking
it up, set it again upon the Emperors Head, which made Matheus Parisiensis
say of the forenamed Innocent, Math. paris. in Iohanne rege Angliae.
that he did know, and many ways had learned by experience; Quod Papa super
omnes mortales ambitiosus erat and superbus. That is, That the Pope beyound all
mortal men was the most ambitious and proudest. As likewise made that
worshipful Gentleman, and great poet in his time Gefrey Chaucer, of whom we
spoke before, a^no 1340
to say of the Pope, as head of the Roman Church. in his plow-mans tale. Her
head loves all honor,
And to be worshipped in word and deed,
Kings mot to him kneell and cowr,
To the Apostles that Christ forebeed:
So seems he above all.
And Christ above him nothing,
When he sitts in his stall.
Damneth and saves as him think,
Such pride before God does stink.
Yea not only is it enough that Emperors and Kings be subject unto him, and
that he exalt himself above them, and that he make them kiss his foot, and
kick off their Crowns off from their heads (tho he be the Emperor) but lykwise
when he pleases, to tread upon their necks, as Abbas Vrspergensis reports
that Alexander the third, did to the Emperor Frederick at S. MARKS church in
Venice. As also we have it set down in the book of sacred Ceremonies, Fol.
26.35* and 41.
That the Emperor or greatest Prince that is present at the Pops Coronation,
is to carry his train that day, to hold his stirrup at his leaping on and
lighting: and if he go in litter, to carry him on their shoulders, hold the
basen to him, and bring in his first measse of meat. Whereof I may say, Is this
the imitation of CHRIST'S humility which he recommended to His disciples? Or as
Bernard said to Pope Eugenius, in the like case, did Peter so? l. 4. de
consider. Ad Eugenium
or played Paull such prancks? when he was reprehending Eugenius for his
pompous carriage and convoy, saying, Thou goes in procession glistering with
gold, and compast about with such a variety of convoy, and by so doing what
example gets Christ's sheep or edifying? If I durst say, (says he) it is the
Devils pasture rather which they get, teaching them pride, nor Christ's, and
thou may see that all ecclesiastical zeal is now hot, only for defending of
worldly dignity (says he) all men hunting after honor, but little or
nothing after piety. Thus you see how the Popes pride, and his Clergies was
painted out in Bernards time near 500. years ago.

Next; let us see how the Pope exalts himself above Angels, that are
likewise called gods, Psalm. 97.7. Roder. Episcop. Zamorensi^, l. 2. cap. 1.
And first Rodevicus a Popish Bishop who was Constable of the castle of S.
ANGELO in his Book called Speculum vitae humanae says That the Pope is
ordained to be above not only humane but divine principalities, and not
only to rule mortal men, but immortalls, not only men* but Angels. After
which he applies to the Pope places of scripture which speak only of GOD,
in JOB. That he is one, Ioh. 9.4.
and there is not a second, and again, Thou art mighty above the mightiest and
wise in counsel, and elsewhere in Scripture, where it is said by the Prophet,
to who^ all power and dominion is given, and of whom David meaned, when he said
he has given him all power and dominion, and that all people and languages
should be subject unto him. Of which blaphemous trash the reader may see more
in the oration uttered before Pius the second, by the Deputies of Florence,
registrat by Antonius bishop of that City, as also in that of Iacobus Tecano
Chamberlain to Urban the sixth, and Alvarez Pelagius Penitentiarie to John the
22. As likewise in Augustinus triumphus, alias, de Ancona in his Book De
potestate Ecclesiae, dedicat to John the 22. and thereafter to Gregory the 13.
Printed at Rome, 1582. With the Popes privilege, and in Lancelotus Conradus
his book of the same subject, approved by Pius the 4. And the Bishop of Bitonto
in his Oration before the council of Trent, with diverse others.

Next we see that he exalts himself above Angels in respect, as Johannes
Faber says, Faber in Praef.
he permits himself to be adored, by religious adoration, as Paulus Iovius
speaks in the place before cited, which the Angel refused Revel. 22.9.
because he was John's fellow servants, and yet the Pope hypocriticallie calls
himself the servant of GODS servants; As also, whereas the Angels are only
called holy, yet he is called in the abstract, Holienesse it self.

Thirdly, In the bull of Clement the sixth, in favors of these who should
happen to die coming to his jubilee, these were his words. We command the
Angels to carry their souls into Abraham's bosom which bull is extant,
registrat in the treatise of Johannes Phofferus Professor of divinity in
Friburg. DE MATERIA INDULGENTIARUM, anno 1472.

From all the which former, we frame this argument, he who exalteh himself
above all that is called GOD, is the Grand Antichrist, and man of sin, foretold
of 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. But the Pope does this, as has been clearelie proven by
Romanists themselves: Therefore the Pope is that Grand Antichrist and man of
sin, See also A ventin l. 7. a^nal. p. 54.
foretold of 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.

CHAP. XI. Of Antichrists sitting in the Temple of GOD, as GOD, Showing himself
that he is GOD. 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. And of his Names of blasphemy, Revel. 17.3.
HAving shown how Antichrist exalts himself above all that is called GOD. We
come next to his sitting as GOD, in the Temple of GOD, showing himself that he
is GOD, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. That is, so far as any
mortal man can in the hight of pride equal himself with GOD, which the Pope
does 1. By usurping not only the Title of CHRIST'S vicar upon earth, that is,
as it is said of Moses being to Aaron, in stead of GOD, Exodus 4.16. But also
2. In usurping blasphemouslie the very name of GOD in the singular, which in
the plural only is communicated to Kings and Princes, Psalm. 82.6. As it was
written upon that Triumphall Arch at Rome. Oraculo vocis mundi moderaris
habenas,
Et merito in terris diceris esse Deus.
Therefore Panormitan calls him Dominus Deus noster Papa And of late
Stapleton in the Dedicatorie Epistle of his Treatise De principiis Doctrine.
Panor. ^. per Venerabilem. Number. 2. and 4. f. 60.
calls Gregory the 13. Supremum Numen in terris, or the Supreme GOD upon
earth, therefore says Frossardus in his fourth ^ome and tenth Chapter, That as
there is but One GOD in Heaven, so there is no reasen but there ought in like
manner, to be but one god only upon earth, to wit, the Pope. Platina in vita
Pauli 2.
Wherefore, (as Platina records) Pope Paull the second used to say, That he
had all Laws in the cabinet of his own breast, and could rescind or approve
the actions of all me^^ according to his pleasure. Whence also that worshipful
Gentleman forenamed Gefrey Chaucer speaks thus of the Pope in his time, in
his Plow-mans tale. And to Popes hest's such take more heed
Then to keep Christ's Commandment,
Of gold and silver mot be ^is weed,
They hold him whole Omnipotent.
Whence it is likewise that their own Cassander of late says, Cass. de officio
pii vi ri, p. 792. excus. parisiis apvd Abraham^m Pacard 1616
Pontificem vero Romanum (quem Papam dicimus) tantum non Deum faciunt, ejusque
authoritatem non modo supra totam Ecclesiam, sed supra ipsam scripturam divinam
efferunt, and sententiam ejus divinis oraculis parem, imo infallibilem fidei
regulam consti^^^nt. That is, They make the Roman Bishop, (whom we call the
Pope) little less nor GOD, and extolleth his authority not only above the
whole Church, but also above the holy Scriptures (which is to be above GOD)
and makes his sentence or decree equal to the Oracles of GOD, (and
consequently himself to be equal to GOD,) yea to be the infallible Rule of
Faith.

3. He shows Himself to be GOD, and sit as GOD in the Temple of GOD, whill
as he usurpeth the other Tytles that are only proper to GOD, a^. 1. To be
Head of the Church of GOD, as Bellarmin styleth him, ascribing that unto him
with other tytles as follows, Bell. l. 2. de pont. Roma. c. 31. and praef. de
summo po^- Greg. l. 4. indict. ep- 36.
which as it is contrar to holy scripture. 2. Cor. 11.2. Where CHRIST is
called the One and only Husband of His Church, and consequently her only
Head, so Gregory the first calls it A divelish usurpation, under pretense of
humility, by pride of a pompaticke title (says he) to attempt so the
subjecting of Christ's members to himself, as Head of the Church, quae omnia uni
soli capiti cohaerent, (says he) That is, all which cohere to one only
head thereof, to wit CHRIST, and again writting to John patriark of
Constantinople who began first to usurp the same, he says If Paull eschewed
that the members of the LORDS body should be particularly subjected unto
other heads beside CHRIST, although they were Apostles, what will thou be able to
answer at the strick Trial of the last judgment to CHRIST the Head of His
Universal Church, who preasseth by the title of Universal Bishope to subject
all these his members unto thee as head? which wickedness (says he) what else
is it but thereby to imita^ him, to wit, Lucifer, who despysing the Legions of
his follow Angels, joined with him, in one society; did attempt to mount above
them to such a hight of singularity: That he likewise, would be under none;
but he alone would be above all others: (which is, indeed, to sit, as God, in
the Temple of God.) And, therefore, such Style Gregory declares, Greg. l. 4.
indict. Ep. 36. and 38. and l. 6. Ep. 30. and l. 7. ep. 30
to be not only proud and profane; but also Antichristian. And which none of
my Predecessors (says he,) Bishops of Rome, would ever consent to have:
Neither I my self, would consent thereto, for what were this, else but to lose
the Faith, (says he;) and, to make shipwreck thereof*

2. BELLERMINE styleth the Pope, l. 2. de po^. c. 31.
The Husband of CHRIST'S Church: contrary to the place forecited, 2. Cor. 11.2,
Of which says BERNARD, to* Pope EUGENIUS; when he had told, Ep. 137.
That Christ is the only Husband of His Church: Wherefhre, (says he,) call
not his Beloved Spouse Thine, and challenge thou nothing as proper to thee over
her. And, which Title their canonized AQUINAS, LYRA, and LOMBARD; on 2. Cor.
11.2. shows to be proper only to CHRIST alone; and without blasphemy, is
not communicable to any.

3. Bellarmine, also, Praef. d^ Romans Pont. Greg. lib. 4. indict* Ep. 38.
calls the Pope General Father. A Title proper only to GOD: Therefore,
says Pope Gregory to John of Constantinople; who first attempted to usurp
that Style. How will thou answer in the Day of that Terrible Examination of
CHRIST the Judge; who is to come, who deserves to be called, not only
Father, (says he,) but also, The General Father of all?

4. By the same Bellarmine, in the place forecited, he is called That Corner
Stone* spoken of by Isai. cap. 28. proved, and precious; which Title to be
only proper to CHRIST; and without gross blasphemy, to be communicable to
none, these Romanists bears witness: To wit, Hugo de S. Charo, Pintus, and
Perusin, on this place, rendering these Reasons: 1. Because he, and he only as
a corner stone coupled together, both Jew and Gentile in one unity of Faith.
2. He is called PROVED, by the Passion of His Cross; which He only endured.
3. As, also, He is called PRECIOUS; In respect both of the Infinite Worth and
Excellency of His Person; being GOD and MAN: As likewise, by the Merit of His
Sufferinges, whereby the world is redeemed.

He was called, That Light that came into the World: And, which the World
received not by Cornelius Mus, Bishop of Bitonto, in a public Oration, before
the Council of Trent; which is extant, and printed at Rome in Platea Parionis:
which is spoken ( John 1.9.) only of CHRIST. And, which Title their own Lyra,
Carthusian, and Ferus, shows to belong only; and is competent to CHRIST.

So, likewise, (as Antoninus, Archbishop of Florence reports in his History,
Ant. summa hist. part. 3. See history of the Council of Trent. p. 161.
) when the Sicilian Ambassadors asking pardon of Pope Martin the fourth,
delyvered their Embassage in these terms: saying* Agnus DEI qus tollis peccata
mundi miserere nobis. The Pope accepting of this Title, replied disdaynfully:
saying; In the terms whereby the Souldeours mocked CHRIST, Ave, Rex Iudeorum,
and dabant illi alapas.

So that by assuming such Tytles proper only to GOD, and CHRIST JESUS, GOD and
MAN; we see he sits as God, in the Temple of God: All which being so many
Blasphemies, it is no marvel therefore, that, That Scarlet colored Beast
spoken of, Revel. 17.3. Is said, to be full of the names of blasphemies.
Amongst which in express terms Gregory calls the Title of Universal
Bishop, Nomen Blasphemiae; tho there were no more than that name alone, to
prove the Pope to be Antichrist.

From all which former, we reason thus, he that sits in the temple of God,
as God, that is, as in Gods stead claiming to be his vicar general, and who
usurpeth alike Tytles with God, which are only proper to God: and in him are
the names of blasphemy spoken of Revel. 17.3. Did. 19. c. 6. in canonicis.
Who also equalleth his decrees and traditions with the very oracles of God,
he is the Antichrist.

But the Pope does all this, as we have proven in all this preceding Chapter,
by the witnessing of Romanists themselves, Therefore, it follows that the
Pope is Antichrist.

CHAP. XII. Of the Popes, not only equalling himself with GOD; But extolling
himself above GOD himself. Which is the hight of Antichristian Pride, and
Matchless Impiety.
HAving shown, how the Pope exalts himself against all that is called GOD, by
participation only of name: And, equalleth himself, also, with him, who is GOD
only, in Essence* Follows, to show, How like Lucifer in his Meridian, or
highest ascension, he extolleth himself, above GOD. 1. Extolling his
Authority, over the Scriptures; which are the WORD of GOD: And, consequently,
above GOD himself. 2. Making himself Judge over GODS WORD: And, what it says
is lawful. He saying; It is unlawful. 3. In taking from GODS WORD; and
cancelling some of His Commandments. 4. In the contradicting in express
terms GODS WORD: For which He is justly called Antichrist: That is,
Con^^^rie in his Doctrine to CHRIST. And, 5. In dispensing against GODS WORD:
And, allowing that which GODS WORD condemns.

First, then, (as their own beforecited Cassander speaks,) He extolleth his
Authority above the Scriptures, which are GODS WORD; in so far (as Romanists
teach;) That the Authority of the Church, (whereof he is head,) is above the
Scriptures: And, that Scriptures must follow the Church, (as her Lackey;) and
not the Church the Scriptures. Therefore, says, Cardinal Cusanus; Sequuntur
igitur Scripturae Ecclesians; sed non e converso. Ep. 7. ad Bohemos. p. 8.5.8.
That is, Therefore, the Scriptures follow the Church: But not that the Church
is to follow the Scriptures; Quare nec mirum (says he,) si praxis Ecclesiae
vno tempore inter interpretatur Scripturam vno modo, and alio tempore, alio
modo, nam intellectus currit cum praxi. That is, Therefore, it is no marvel,
if the practice of the Church interprets the Scripture at one time, one way;
and at another time, another way: For, the meaning of the Scripture runs
with the practice of the Church; in so far as, mutato judicio Ecclesiae,
(says he,) mutatum est and DEI judicium. That is, The Church changing her
judgment; Ep. 3. ad Bohemos. p. 8, 8.
GOD must also, change His judgment. Then, which what can be greater exalting
a^oue GOD, and Blasphemy?

Secondly; He extolleth himself above GOD; in so far as he makes himself
judge over GODS WORD. And, what it says, is lawful: he says, is
unlawful. One example whereof in place of many, we have in the Popes Ca^on
Law: Where it is said, speaking of second Marriages; ^ausa 31. c. h^s ratione.
Secundam quidem accipere vxorem, secundum prec^ptum Apostoli (propter
incontinentiam hominum,) licitum est, secundum veritatis autem rationem, vere
fornicatio est. That is, TO MARIE a second wife, according to the Apostles
command, (because of men's incontinencie,) it is, indeed lawful. But according
to the rule of truth: it is truly fornication. So that he censureth the
Apostles command, which is GODS, to command sin and uncleanesse: And, not to
be according to the Rule of Truth. Which is highest Pride and Blaspemie: And,
nothing elss, but the mouth of the Dragon.

Thirdly; He extolleth himself above GOD; in so far, Contrary to Revel.
22.19.
as he dares to take from GODS WORD; and blot out some of his moral
commandments. For example; The second Commandment forbids three things:
1. The representing of GOD by any image: 2. The worshipping of any image:
and, 3. Any sign of religious adoration; as bowing down to them. Now, lest the
poor people should find how far they are misled; and made to commit
Idolatry, by worshipping of images. Therefore, in their Catechismes they have
taken out the second Commandment of the moral law. Nay, they are become so
shameless, when they are pressed with this Lurd Impiety: That the Jesuit
Vasquez saye^h; That* that prohibition was only a positive ceremonial law; L.
2. de ador. disp. q. c. 3.. 74.
Ideoque tempore legis Euangelica, (says he,) debet cessare. That is; And,
therefore, in the time of the Law of the Gospel, it ought to cease, (says
he,) as if Idolatry were but a ceremony; and that the Gospel did not forbid
the same. Contrary to 1. COR. 6.9.

Fourthlie: He extolleth himself above GODS WORD, and HIS Commandments, in
contramanding; and express contradicting of GODS WORD. Whereof the Apostle
notes Therefore, two of his Doctrines; to be Doctrines of Devils; 1. Tim.
4.3.4.
In forbidding of marriage; and, commanding to abstain from meats, which GOD
has created, to be received with thanksgiving, of them which believe; and
know the Truth; for every creature is good, (says the Apostle,) and,
nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving. Yet, on the
contrary: Heb. 13.4
Albeit of marriage, that the Apostle says, It is honorable amongst all, and
the bed undefyled. 1. The Pope says, It is not so amongst all: Because not
amongst the Clergy, to whom he has therefore forbidden the same. Did. 82.
c. preposuisti.
2. Neither is the bed of Marriage, a bed undefyled, (says he,) Because it
is the uncleanness of the flesh; and, they that are in the flesh, (says he
in his Decretall of the Canon Law,) can not please GOD. Now, what doctrine this
is; and, how opposite to GODS: The Apostle not only tells us; But, also,
that worthy Martyr, Ignatius, the disciple of John, in his sixth Epistle to the
Philadelphians; saying, Si quis legitimam commixtionem, and liberorum
procreationem corruptelam, and pollutionem appellet, talis Apostatam illum
draconem in se habitantem fovet. That is, If any man shall call lawful
copulation in marriage, and procreation of children, to be carnalitie and
pollution Such a one entertaineth that Apostat dragon dwelling in him, (which
is the devil.) Likewise, His prohibition and commanding, to abstain from
meats, at such or such times, for conscience sake* contrary both to GODS WORD*
and Christian Liberty; what elss is it, also: But, the same apostat dragons
mouth? And, while as in like manner, any who shall transgress this his
command concerning meats; or any other, which are called Precepta Ecclesiae,
shall be, and have been more severelie punished than any who transgress the
Commandments of GOD: What else is this, but the exalting himself above GOD?

I might instance here the whole Doctrines of Popery expresslie contradictorie
to the Doctrine of GODS WORD; As, The Forbidding the people to read the
Scriptures: Expresslie contrary unto CHRIST'S Commandment, John 5.39. And, the
Apostles, Col. 3.16. The Invocatio^ of Saints or Angels. Contrary to Rom,
10.14. Prayer. also in an unknown tongue. Contrary to 1. Cor. 14.15.
Representing GOD by any Image. Contrary to Isai 40.18. The worshipping of
Images, or bowing to them. Contrary to Exodus 20.5. The doctrine of Freewill in
our conversion. Contrary to 2. Cor. 3.5. Justification by works. Contrary to
Romans 3.21. The doctrine of Merit. Contrary to Romans 6.23. The doctrine of
Purgatory: contrary to Revel. 14.13. Of Transubstantiation in the Sacrament:
contrary to 1. Cor. 11.26. Of Keeping back the Cup. from the people: contrary
to Matthew. 26.27. and, 1. Cor. 11.28, And, Of the Mass: contrary to Heb. 10.14.

Fyftlie: He extolleth himself above GOD; Summa Antonini part. 3. tit. 22. c.
6.
by dispensing with the Law of GOD: Whereas it is a common received Rule; That
no inferior can dispense with the Law of a Superior: but, on the contrary.

Now, that the Pope arrogateth to himself, this power to dispense with the Law
of GOD; both the Romish doctrine, and the Popes practice conform does show.

And, first, Tit. Papa, f. 141.
for doctrine Angelus Clavasinus, in his Summa Angelica, gives this reason,
why the Pope dispenceth sometimes with GODS Law; Because we have the example
of GOD Himself, (says he,) that oftentimes he has dispensed himself with
his own law. And, the Pope may do all things, (says Panormitan,) which GOD
Himself may do. Likewise; Repert. Panor. tit. Papa, 4. c. prop^suisti, number.
12. f. 77.
The Pope may dispense against both the Old and New Testament, (says he,)
Cap. licet, n^m. 3. de feriis, f. 206. and Cap. 51. number. 4. de divertiis, f.
69. Imo Papa tollit jus divinum* dispensando contra Evangelium, (says Petrus
de Monte, in his Monarchia Papae.) That is, The Pope may take away GODS Law, by
his dispensation against the Gospel.

Next: For practice the forenamed Angelus Clavafinus, in his Summa Angelica, f.
241. relates that Pope Martin, the fyfth, gave one a dispensation To marry
his own sister: And, tells us, That Sanctus Antoninus is a conjunct Recorder
of this with him.

Likewise: Villa, Scotus, and Orbellis, all three on the fourth of the
Sentences, Villa did. 27. f. 195 Scotus, did. 33. q. 2. f. 255. Orb. did.
33.. 2.
reports; How that Pope Lucius dispensed with one Panormitan, to have two
wives at once. Tho also, an Archbishop; Out of the plenitude of his power,
(said they,) against the Apostle, 1. Tim. 2.3.

And, how the Pope of late dispensed with the king of Pole, Sigismund, to
marry two sisters: As he did Henry the eight before, to marry his brothers
wife, is notore to the whole world.

From all which former, I argue thus: He who extolleth himself, not only
above all that is called God: But, also, above GOD himself: who is so in
essence; He is that Grand Antichrist; That Man of Sin, in an eminent way;
and son of Perdition; As the SCRIPTURE testifies.

But, the Pope does this many ways, as we have shown in this preceding
Chapter.

Therefore, He is that Grand Antichrist.

CHAP. XIII. Of Antichrists, or the Popes idolatry, and spiritual whooredome.
Revel (17.6.
IN regard whereof Rome with her Papal Head, Gloss. ordin. integer
Antichristus, caput and corpus.
( Revel. 17.6.) is called That Great Whore, (and alluding to Her usual. and
usurped Title of Mother Church.) She is called, The Mother of Harlots; and,
abominations of the earth: Being not only guilty herself of idolatry,
(called spiritual whooredome;) But, also, being the propagater thereof to all
other parts under her jurisdiction. So that she is like Jeroboam: Who not
only sinned by Idolatry himself; but also made all ISRAEL to sin.

How guilty then, the Pope, and the Roman Church under him is hereof, we
shall make manifest: 1. By their Adoration of Images. 2. By their Invocation of
Saints and Angels: And 3. By their Adoration of the Host.

First, then, concerning the Adoration of Images; Decreed in their late
Council of Trent, under Pius the fourth, Sess. 9. the doctrine; which by all
their Schoolmen is asserted, (as testifies their own Bishop Peresius, Peers.
de traed. part. 3.
) is this; That Images are to be worshipped, with the same worship as these
whom they represent. And therefore, the Images of GOD and CHRIST, are to be
worshipped, with the highest Divine Honor; which they call LATRIA. Which
doctrine these who are here after named do maintain: To wit, Their canonized
Saint, Thomas Aquinas. part. 3. q. 25. art. 3. Alexander de Hales. part. 3.
q. 30. art. vlt. Azorius, instit. moral. l 9. tit. 1. c. 6. Bonaventure, in
tertiam Sent. Did. 9. Cabrera in tertia^ Thomae, q. 25. art. 3. disp. 2. number.
34. Iacobus Atlantus, in Romans 1. f. 42. edit. venet. 1557. with dyvers others.

The Jesuit Vasquez, in like manner, disputes the ^uestion, and concludes;
Vasq. l. ^. de ador. c. 1. disp. 6. number. 168.
That if the worship of Images, be a religious act at all, it may justly be
called LATRIA: For LATRIA and Religion, are the same thing, (says he.) And,
so says their Bishop Peresius likewise, in the place forecited. And, as for
such subtle distinctions; whereby they would palliat their Idolatry. They are
such, (as Bellermine speaks; Bell. l. 2. de imag. c. 22.. 4.
which neither themselves understand, who have broached them. And, far less
the unlearned people, (says he.) And, especially, that of DULIA; The
Scripture witnessing, That the religious act thereof, is proper to GOD only,
Deutr. 6.13. 1. Sam. 7.3. and Act. 20.19. And, when it was given to any
creature, it was ever counted Idolatry, GAL. 4.8.

And, as this is their Idolatrous do^trine, concerning the sort of Adoration.
So, likewise, concerning the extent, Bell. l. 2. de imag. c. 21. and 23.
or termination there of; Thus says Bellarmine: To wit, That images are to
be worshipped properly: That is, As they are considered in themselves* So
that the worship stays it self in the Image, (says he.) For, if the Image
were not to be worshipped; but improperly. To wit, Because before it, or in
it, or by it that which it represents, is adored. Then, surely, it might be
simply denied, (says he,) That Images should be worshipped at all.

Next: To come to the practice of Adoration of Images: It is more than
manifest, Cass. consult. de imag. c. 21.
(says their own Cassander,) Then can be expressed by words; that the worship
of Images, is come to that hight: That the very Pagans themselves have given
to their Idols. Neither is that excuse of any worth, (says he.) Which some
use to pretend, that they worship not the Images, Arnob. l. 6 adv. gentes Lact.
l. 2. divin. in. stit cap. 2. Aug. in psalm. 96. and 13.
but them whom they represent, for this color the Pagans also used for their
idolatry as we see in Arnobius (says he) and may be also seen in Aug. l.
3. de doct. Christ. c. 7. and elsewhere. And which excuse likewise BELLARMINS
forecited words refuteth, where he says, That if the Image were not to be
worshipped, but improperlie: Because before it or in it; or by it that which it
represents is adored. Then, surely, it might be simply denied, (says
he,) that Images should be worshipped at all; yea, the same is come to that
hight of madness (says their own Polidor Virgil.) That this part of Religion
is little different from impiety it self, L. 6. de inven. reris* c. 13*
for there are very many so exceeding rude and stupid (says he) who worship
images made of stocks and stones, brass and marble etc. not as representing
figures, but as if they had sense and feeling, and confide more in these (to
whom specially they go in Pilgramage) then in Christ Himself.

Yea, some dote so upon images (says their own Gabriel Biell) that they
believe a certan Deity, grace or holienes to be in them, Biel. in camissae,
lect* 49.
whereby they are able to work miracles, restore health, and deliver from
dangers, and to preserve from hurts and snares, out of the confidence of the
forenamed, being moved to worship them, that they may obtain some of the
former things: Whence also it is (says he) that they obliege themselves to
undergo Pilgramages* some to this and some to that Church, according as they
respect the images, believing that this image in such a place is of greater
virtue than in another, and is more famous for miracles, and of greater power,
(a cleir example whereof we have in the pilgramages to our lady of Loretto and
Hales) And if at any time miracles be wrought upon men who have recourse to
them, this is not by virtue of the image (says he) but some times by the
operation of the Devil, to d^ceiue such idolatrous worshippers, GOD so
permitting, and their infidelity so deserving the fame.

Secondly of Popish Adoration and invocation of Saints.
This their idolatry which they perform herein, they seek to palliat by this
distinction, that they invocat them not as mediators of redemption, but only
of intercession, which last, tho it be altogether unlawful, CHRIST being only
our Mediator of intercession in the heavens, and this being that part of his
priestlie office which he there performs, and shall perform till his second
coming, and wherein he will have no partner neither Saint nor Angel, yet to
show the contrare, to wit, that they invocate the^, as mediators of
redemption, I shall prove the same. 1. Out of their Roman missall, where they
say to the virgin Marie, O Faelix puerpera, nostra pians seelera,
Iure matris, impera redemptori.
And thereafter, Tua semper ub^ra nostra sanent vuln^ra. That is,

O Happy Mother, who expiats our sins, by the authority of a Mother command
our Redeemer, and let thy Pape milk heal our wounds. Where we see the expiation
of our sins, and healing our souls wounds attributed to the virgin Marie and
her milk, which is only proper to CHRIST, and to His Blood, and that most
blasphemouslie is ascribed to her a power now to command her Son* and
consequently the Creator to be subject to the creature, and therefore also in a
book called ANTIDOTUM ANIMAE. They speak thus, Tu ancillam Jesus Christi te
vocare voluisti, sed vt doc^^ Lex divina, tu illius es Domina: nam Lex jube^
and ratio, matrem praesse Filio.

The like blasphemous stuff we have in that book written by a Jesuit of late
named Carolus Bonartius, alias, Scribonius called Amphitheatrum honoris, Who
inquiring what is the best souls plaster, answers, Lac matris miscere volo
cu^ sanguine Nati
Non possum antidoto nobiliore frui.
That is I will mix (says he). the Mothers milk with the Sons Blood, for
I cannot have a more sovereign plaster than this.

Yea, moreover they affirm (as we have it in their own famous Gabriel Biell.
Lect. 80. in Canone Missae.
) That as Asuerus offered to Ester the half of his Kingdoms: so GOD has
divyded his Kingdoms between Himself and the virgin Marie (says he) giving
to her, Mercy to bestow, and reserving justice only to Himself, wherefore
it is lawful (says BERNARDIN de busto) to appeal from the Sons justice to
the Mothers mercy; In mariali part. 3 Sermon. 3.
And therefore, in like manner they have turned the whole psalter of David
which suteth mercy, from Domine* Psalterum B. Virg.
Lord, to Domina, our Lady, as may be seen specially psalm. 71. and 93. where
they say psalm. 71 Deus judicium tuum regi da, and misericordiam tuam Reginae
matri ejus* and psalm. 93. They say of CHRIST, Deus ultionum Dominus, sed tu
Benignae Matter misericordiae ad miserandum inflectis illum. That is, O GOD Thou
art a LORD of revenge, but thou myld Mother of mercy thou art she that moves
Him to pity And not only call they her Domina but Dea, and therefore they
sing unto her, Tunc tibi lauds Dea dicet omnis sexus and aetas. In lib. 8.
Aug. de civit. Dei, cap. 27.


So that (as their own Vives testifyeth) They are come to that hight of
Idolatry in this point, that they worship no otherwise their he and she Saints
(says he) then they do GOD Himself, neither see I (says he) in many things
what difference there is between their opinion of Saints, and that which the
very Heathen have of their gods. Yea, They have placed more confidence in
their merits and intercession than in CHRITS merit, (says their own
Cassander, Cass. consult. art. 21.
) and so having obscured that Office of CHRIST'S only mediation, they have in
place thereof substitute (say^h he) the advocation of the Virgin Marie, and
others.

I may here add their Idolatrous Adoration by kneeling and kissing of
pretended Relics of Saints, which being most part false through the avarice
of Priests (says their own Cassander) have been obtruded, Cass. Consult.
Art. 21.
for entysing of simple People, and fained miracles have been alleged to
have been wrought by them, whereby the superstitition of people has been
greatly fostered.

Yea, not only are such Relics worshipped by kneeling and kissing, but also
by putting up prayers to them, as if they heard, or had sense or life, for thus
they pray to the Cross, as Bellarmine grants which has now no being.

O Crux ave spes unica, Ange piis justitians, reisque dona veniam. That is,
Hayle holy Cross, our only Hope, who upon earth do live,
To godly righteousness augment, to guilty pardon give.
So likewise they pray to the spear that pierced CHRIST'S side.
Ave ferrum triumphale, faelix hasta nos amore per te fixo saucia.


That is All hayle triumphant iron, and spear that happy is.
Lance us with love of Him, whom thou did pierce, I wis.


And to that Picture of CHRIST'S face on Veronicas Handkerchife, they pray thus.
Nos dedu^ ad patriam o faelix Figura, In mirabilia Romae. p. 24.
ad videnda^ faciem quae est CHRISTI purae.

And as for their worshipping and Idolatrous praying to angels, chiefly whom
they call their guardians, as the same is expreslie against COL. 2.18. Who
affirms that these who do so under pretense of Humility do not hold the
Head, and consequently cannot retain communion with the Body, which is
CHRIST'S Church. So likewise that famous and ancient Council of Laodicea. CAN.
35. not far from the COLOSSIANS did solemnly decree against the same as
manifest Idolatry, and pronunced anathema to al such who did invocat Angels,
because (say they) These who do so, have foresaken Our LORD JESUS CHRIST,
((...)) and given themselves to Idolatry, which canon also Theodoret upon the
second to the Colossians cites, and shows that this was their pretense of
humili^ie for their Idolatry, saying, that GOD was invisible and inaccessible,
and therefore it was fi^ that men should obtain GODS favor by the means of
Angels, which is now in like-manner the very excuse of Popery.

Thirdly, of Popish Idolatry in Adoration of the Host.
But before I come to this their Idolatrous adoration, I cannot pass by First,
Their blasphemous assertion. Which Gabriel Biell sets down in these words of
the Priest, Lect. 4. in canone^ missae.
saying, He that created me has given me power to create Himself, and He
that created me without me, is created by me. Their late Jesuit likewise
Cornelius a lapide says, A Lapide in Isai 7.14,
That CHRIST is borne and as it were begotten upon the Altar (says he) and if
He were not yet incarnat, yet as powerfullie He should be incarnat by the
words of consecration, as He was at first, wherefore the Priest (says he)
is as the Virgin that boore Him, the Altar is the manger, and the little
Emmanuell which he bears, is CHRIST brought forth under the little Host.

Next, as for the worship which is to be given to it, the Council of Trent
has decreed that it is the highest Divine worship, Sess. 13. Can. 5.
which they call Latria. Now if the conceate which Papists have of
Transsubstantiation prove false, Cap. 12.
Their Jesuit Coster in his Euchiridion freely confesses That then they
should committ the grossest Idolatry, the like whereof (says he) was never
heard nor seen in the whole world. Did. 2. de consecr.. c. Hoc est.
Now (beside the word of GOD against it, and their own exposition of the words
of consecretion in their cannon law, declaring them to be figurative)
according to their own principles they cannot certanlie know that
Transsubstantiatio^ is made by the priests consecration, and consequently that
the Host which they worship is any other thing but bread, and therefore that
their act of adoration is Idolatry, seeing the change does wholly depend upon
the consecration, Council. Trid.. Sess 7. can. 11.
and the consecration again depends upon the intention of the Priest, which
none can certanly know but himself, Bellarmin himself saying thus, Neque potest
quis certus esse certitudine fidei se percipere verum sacramentu^, De justif.
l. 3. c. 8.
cum sacramentum sine intention ministri non conficiat^r, and intentione^
alterius nemo videre possit. That is, Neither can any be sure by the certanty
of faith that he receivth a true sacrament, seeing the sacrament is not made
without the intention of him who ministrats it, and no man can see the
intention of another. Whence it will follow that no Papist can be sure that he
commits not Idolatry, but admit that the Priests intention should be right
at the time of consecration, yet if either he that bap^ised him, or the Bishope
that gau^ him order have missed in their right intention, then he is neither a
Christian, nor a Priest, and consequently what he does is no consecration, so
that the bread remeaneth bread still, and consequently the worshippers thereof
are gross Idolaters, and all Papists are in no better case then the Samaritans
were in, of whom our Savior said, Ye worship ye know not what. John 4.22


Where I cannot omit that notable discourse of Catarinus Bishop of M^nori in
the Council of Trent, Hist. of the Council of Tre^t lib. 2. p. 240.
consonan^ to this of mine; If a Priest (said he) having a charge of 4. or
5000. souls were an Ath^^st or infidel in heart, but yet a formal Hypocrit,
and in absolving the penitent, baptising of Children, and consecrating the
Eucharist, had an intention not to do what the Church does, i^ must be said,
that the Children are damned (said he) the penitents not absolved, and that
all remain^ without the fruit of the Communion, he added, if any would say,
these cases were rare, would to GOD it were so (said he) and that in this
corrupt age we had no cause to doubt they were many. But suppose they are very
few, or but one only, let there be a knave priest (says he) who faineth,
and has not an intention to minister true baptism to a Child, who after being
a man grown, is created Bishope of a great city, and lives many years in
that Charge, so that he has ordained a great part of the Priests, it must be
said that he not being baptized, is not ordained, nor they ordained who are
promoted by him, so that in that City there will be neither Eucharist, (and
consequently an Idolatrous adoration of bread) nor yet confession or
absolution (said he) because that cannot be without the Sacrament of order,
nor order without a true Bishope nor can he receive order who is not baptized,
Behold then (said he) millions of nullities of Sacraments by the malice of one
Minister, and in one act only.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Popes or Antichrists bloody cruelty, Revel. 17.6.
OF Antichrist his Bloody Cruelty, John speaking Revel. 17.6. Says thus, And
I saw the Woman drunk with the blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus, which
to be true of the pope, I will, 1. insta^ce their famous forecited Petrarch in
the third Chapter of this Treatise, Petrarch. l. 1. ep. 18.
and in that Epistle of his, wherein he deploreth the calamity of the city of
Rome, and speaking of the Pope and his Clergy there, says to his friend to
whom he writteth, being then at Rome, There thou sees (says he) not only
CHRIST'S Adversary (meaning the Pope as Antichrist) but which is more grievous
to see, under the Banner of Christian profession, fighting against CHRIST, and
drunk with his Blood (to wit, by persecution of his Saints.)

Bernard likewise in his first sermon of Paul's conversion cries out thus, Heu,
Bern. ser. 1. co^vers. B. Paul's.
heu, Domine Deus, quia ipsi sunt in persecutione tua primi, qui videntur in
Ecclesia tua primatum deligere and gerere principatu^, That is, Alas, alas,
LORD GOD, that these are first in the persecution of Thee, who are seen to
love the primacie in thy Church, and to have the chief place, (meaning the
Pope) and thereafter to clear himself more particularly and plainly he
says, Egressa est haec iniquitas a senioribus judicibus, Vicariis tuis, qui
videntur regere populum tuum, that is, This iniquity is come forth from the
eldest that are Judges, even these that pretend to be thy vicars, and who seem
to govern thy people.

In-like-manner that charter Monk, who is author of Fasciculus temporum,
Fascicul. temp. ann^ 900.
he cries out upon the 900. year of CHRIST, saying, O worst times that ever
were (says he) wherein the godly man does perish, and truth is decayed
amongst the sons of men, and after rehearsal of other vices in the Roman
sea, he says, O what persecution is now? Alas, what company, what Assembly,
yea, what man may be now secure.?

Likewise Platina the Popes Secretary in the life of Silvester the third
shows, That in these times good men were oppressed by the Popes, who had
entered in by pride and Simonie, and which fashion (says he) I wish our times
had not observed, and except GOD prevent it we are to see worse.

An example whereof both he in the life of Pope Honorius the second sets
down, In chron. Her. Sangiensi.
as also the Abbot Tritemius in his Chronicle, Platina tells us thus, That
one Arnolphus, Christianae religionis praedicator egregius, Plat. in vita
Honorii 2.
that is a notable preacher of the Christian religion, whom (says he) many of
the Roman Nobility did follow as a true disciple of CHRIST, and as a Prophet,
was killed by the Clergy at Rome, Quia acerbe nimium in eorum lasciviam and
libidinem inveheretur, and quia eorum pompam and in comparandis divitiis nimium
studium improbaret, etc. Hunc laudibus ad Coelum tollebant, hinc odium, hinc
irae, in perniciem been sentientis usque ad necem excitatae. That is, because
he vehemently enveyed against their voluptuousnes and lusts, and because he
reproved their pride and their too great care to gather riches, who^ the Roman
Nobility extolleth therefore with praises to the very heavens, but hence was
the Cleargies hatred against him, hence was their wrath stirred up against him,
who did rightly think of these things (says he) even to the very murdering
of him.

The like may be said of that famous Jerome of Sauanarola, whom for the same
cause thy burned in ashes, as is said of him. Periit ignivomis Sa^anarola
rogis. Hence it is also that Michaell Cecaenas (above 400 years ago) General
of the gray Friars, or order of S. Francis, in his book, Contra tyrannidem
Papae complayneth, That there were two Churches, the one of the wicked, which
then flowrished, and over which the Pope does reign (says he) and the other
of godly and good men which the Pope (says he) does persecute. which made
likewise that forecited worshipful Esquyre and famous Poet in his time Chaucer
to speak thus of the Pope and his Clergy. Chaucer in his ploughmans Tale.
Were CHRIST on the earth eftsoone,
These would damn Him to die,
All his hestes they have foregone
And says hi^ Laws been H^resie,
And against his commands they cry
And damn all His to be hrend,
For it lyks not them such lose^grie
GOD Almighty them amend.
Whence it is likewise that the forecited Arch bishope of SALISBURG Eberhardus
in his oration before the imperial meeting at Reinsburg, anno 1246. Said of
the Pope avowedlie, Under the title of High Priest and chief Pastor (says
he) except we be blind, Aventin^ annal. l. 7. p. 547.
we may see a most cruel devouring Wolffe.

And yet no marvel that they were so cruel against the faithful witnesses of
CHRIST in former times, who opposed them, (as we see foreprophecied, Revel
11.7.) When they were so cruel each one against another, as Platina witnesses
in the life of Sergius the third, who took the dead carkise of his
Predecessor Formosus out of the grave, and as he had been alive beheaded him,
and thereafter did cast the trunck o^ his body into Tyber, whereupon says
Platina, See how far the Popes did degener from their Predecessors, who
being most holy men and giving themselves to prayer, and preaching of Christian
doctrine refused any such dignity when it was offered, but these (says he)
hunting after the Popdome by Simonie and ambition, and having so attained
thereto, misregarding all worship of GOD, Inimieitias non secus ac sevissimi
quidam Tyranni inter se exercebant. That is, They did exercise hatred and
cruelty one against another amongst themselves, no less than the most cruel
Tyrants that ever were, (says he)

What bloody wars likewise they stirred up through all Christendom, that
Noble Roman Vall^ as the Abbot Tritemius calls him, tells us in his
treatise of Constantins counterfite donation* in the end thereof: saying, Papa
and ipse bella pacatis populi^ infert, and inter civitates and principes bella
and discordias serit that is, The Pope both warreth himself against peaceable
people, and sows discord and wars amongst cities and princes, whereupon he
(about the middle) exclameth thus. O Romani Pontifices ^xemplum facinorum
omnium caeteris Pontificibus, O improbissimi Scribae and Pharisei qui sede^is
super cathedram Moysi, and opera Dathan and Ahiron facitis. That is, O ye
Bishops of Rome who are an example of all most wicked crimes to all other
Bishops, O most wicked Scribes and Pharisees who sits in Moses chair, and
yet does the works of Dathan and Abiron. The instance of the truth whereof
may be seen in that Tragical History between the Emperor Frederick the
second and Gregory the nynth, set down truly and impartially by Pandolphus an
Italian and Romanist, concerning which (says that author) When I consider
with my self that CHRIST (whose vicars the Roman Bishops boasts themselves to
be) said to his disciples that they should follow Him, and imitate his example
as their Master and Teacher, and commanded them further that they should not
draw the sword, but put it up in the sheath, etc. And when I compare the
Bishops of Rome, how near they follow Him whose vicars they say they are, and
considers so many and great conspiracies, treasons: and rebellions stirred up
by them. etc. And when I meditate with my self the destruction of so many great
and famous Cities, the subversion of such Commonwealths, the slaughter of so
many men, and effusion of so much Christian blood. etc. I am persuaded with my
self to think and believe that to be true (says he) which Aeneas Sylvius
writteth in his history of Austria, that there is no great and notable
destruction, no notorious and special calamity that has happened either to the
Commonwealth, or to the Church of GOD, whereof the Bishops of Rome have not
been the authors.

And as for the Popes cruelty against the poor Waldenses the author of
Fasciculus temporum, a charter mo^k, tells us in the life of Innocent the
third, that an hundredth thousand of them were partly s^ayne, and partly put to
flight by the Earl of Montferrat the Popes General, of whom their own
Reynerus testifyth, L. contra^ Wald. c. 4
That they lived before men both piouslie and justly, and helieved all things
rightly concerning GOD, and the articles of the Creed, only that they hated
and spoke evil of the Church of Rome, calling her the malignant Church, and
that whore spoken of in the Revelation, and which sort of people (says he)
are thought to have continued from the very Apostles times, and were spread
abroad in all places, for (as Yhuanus tells us in the preface of the History
of his time) being overcome by arms, they fled for refuge, some into the
country of Provence and to the Alps bordering upon France, and found in these
places refuge for their lives and doctrine, a part also went into Calabria and
continued there long (says ^e) till the time of Pius the fourth, a part passed
also into Germany, and dwelt amongst the Bohemians, some also went to Pole and
Liue-land, and others turning Westward (says he) found refuge in Britane.

A notable example of which bloody cruelty against the remainder of these
Waldenses, Lib. 2. p. 119.
We read in the history of the council of Trent. anno 1545. While that
bloody council was sitting, who inhabiting the Alps of Provence were
suddenly and unexpectedlie persued by the President of the Parliament of Aix,
Who neither having Weapons, nor thought otherwise than by flight to defend
themselves, al such who could not fly, but stood to their mercy, without
sparing old or young, of what age or condition soever, they slew above 4000.
persons who without making defense begged for mercy, and razed the Countries
of Cabriers in Provence and Merindoll, in the County of Viinoifin; wherein
they formerlie had their abode.

From which time of that bloody cruelty against the Waldenses, what also has
been likewise used against John Huss and Ierom of Prague, and these who after
the^ they called Hussits in BOHEMIA, and Lollards in ENGLAND; The History of
the council of CONTSANCE, and of the BOHEMIAN wars by the Emperor Sigismund
and the popes Emissaries, written by Aeneas Sylvius afterward Pope. As also the
annalls of ENGLAND, can testify, and tho the exact number of them be not set
down who suffered death and torments for the Truth in several places, yet it
is certane that in less than 300. years, their number far exceeded the^ who
suffered in the times of of the ten Heathen persecutions. L. 8. Demo^nst. 34.
As Sanders the priest makes mention in his book of the Churches visible
Monarchy. AND from the rising of the Jesuits to the year 1580. which was
little more to that time nor 30 years, Baldwin de A^christo counts almost
nine houndreth thousand to have been put to death. C. 6. nuus. 42.
The Duke of Alva likewise used to glory that in few years in the
Low Countries he had cut off 36000. Hugenots, as Iunius likewise and Tilenus
testify. Iunius and Tile^. cont. Bell. l. 3. de pont. c. 7.
Paulus Vargerius also a Roman Bishope (who best knew the same) testifies that
in the inquisition in the space of 30. years, 150000. were destroyed, as
Downam of the Antichrist shows.

The Author likewise of the History of the Council of Trent, Lib. 5. p. 413.
declares that at Pope Paull the fourth his instigation, and by the great
persuasion of the Cardinal of Loraine for the French, and of Granuell Bishope
of Arras for the Spaniards, in a very short time, before the year 1558. 50000.
were executed for religion by the hand of the Hangman in the Low-countreyes,
besides these huge multituds that suffered in France in the reign of Henry the
second, and his son Francis, who succeeded as well in his Fathers cruelty: as
in his kingdom, and who having appointed the Inquisitor Antonius Democares to
discover them of the religion, by the instigation of George Cardinal of
Armignac destroyed in Paris Poytou, Toulouse and Aix of PROVENCE, and other
places so great a number as could scarce be counted, and for discovery of such
they caused the pict ure of the Virgin MARIE, and of saints to be placed in
every corner of PARIS, and throughout all FRANCE, and men to stand by them*
with little boxes to ask alms for buying wax candles to be burnt before
them, and whosoever refused to give, or bowed not to these images in passing
by, was taken for a Hugenot and committed to prison, what cruelty was used
likewise by Philip the 2. in Spain against Johannes* Pontius Count of Bayleno
who with a preacher and many of the College of S. Isidor, were burnt as
Heretics, may be seen in the forenamed History of the Council of Trent, Lib.
5. p. 417.
also against Constantius Pontius confessor to Charles the 5. and 13 Nobleme^.
and 28 of the prime Nobility of Valladolid who were burnt in his presence, all
done by thy Popes instigation.

As also that bloody decree of Charles the 9. king of FRANCE in July 1562. by
the Parliament of Paris is not to be omitted, whereby it was decreed that it
should be lawful to slay all the Hugenots, which by public order was read
every sunday in every parish Church declaring them Rebels, public enemies,
infamous, and all their posterity, and their goods confiscate. Hist. of the
Council of Trent, LIB. 7. p. 648.

I omit the particularizing of the bloody wars of Germany, in the time of
Charles the fifth Emperor, recorded by Sleidan. The bloody persecution
likewise of queen Marie in ENGLAND, which the book of Martyrs reports* L 52.
hist. ^. 1001.
That never enough detestable massacre of Paris also; wherein as Thuanus
witnesses were killed 30000 protestants and above. The intended cruelty
inlikemanner of that Spanish Armado, anno 1588. The Gunpowder Treason of
England likewise. The bloody wars and of long continuance in Germany of
late, and the Rebellion also and cruel massacre of protestants in Ireland, all
stirred up by the Pope, and plotted by his Conclave at Rome.

So that justly it may be said, as Revel. 18.24. That in Her was found the
blood of the LORDS Prophets, and of his Saints, and of all that have been
slain upon the earth.

CHAP. XV. Of Antichrists, or the Popes spiritual Merchandise or Simonie,
Revel. 18.13.
TO put a further Mark upon that Mystical Babylon and Her Antichristian Head,
Revel. 18.13. It is shown with what Merchandise her Merchants should
traffeque, amongst which is recounted last, as the most special to sum up
all, The Souls of men, or practice of that horrible sin of Simonie; in making
merchandise of Spiritual things which concerns men's souls and salvation.
And which the Pope does both by buying, and next by selling, as we shall show
by Romanists themselves.

First then to begine at buying spiritual offices, and the highest of them, the
Popedom it self, let that famous testimony of Platin^ the Popes own
Secretary make the same manifest, who in the life of Sylvester the third says
thus, That these who most exceeded in pride and brybrie attained to that degree
of dignity, all good men being born down and rejected* which custom (says
he) I wish our times had not kept, but this is but little, and except GOD
preven^ it, we are see worse times, (says he) and to show it was an ordinar
way of climbing up to the Popedom. In the life of Benedict the 4. (he says)
That the Popes of that age were rather Monsters than men, a quibus ambitione
and largitione Petri seeds occupata est, potius qua^ possessa, that is, by who^
Peter's most holy chair was rather usurped than justly possessed. Whereupon in
the life of another Pope, Sergius the third, he exclaimeth, saying, See then
how far these later Bishops of Rome have degenerat from their predecessors,
who being most holy men contemned that honor when it was willingly offered
unto them, being wholly given to prayer and preaching, whereas these later
(says he) neglecting divine worship, and seeking and attayning to the Popedom
by pride and Simonie, have exercised such inimitie amongst themselves, like so
many cruel tyrants. etc. The like he testifyeth in the life of Stevin the
sixth, as also Onuphrius Panvinius does the same in the life of Gregory the
sixth and others.

Glaber also a Monck about the year 1047. Glab. monachus cluniacensis.
who dedicat his history to Abbot Odilon speaking of Sylvester the Third,
says thus. Now the Pope of Rome the Nephew of his Predecessors Bennet and
John is a Child about ten years old, L. 4. c. 5. and l. 5. c. 4. See also
Baronius an. 1045.
Intercedente thesaurorum pecunia. That is, by the means of a treasure of
moneys (says he) by which means likewise he tells that the rest of the
prelates in the Roman Church were advanced, Quos auru^ potius vel argentum
exaltabit quaem meritu^, whereupon he concludes saying, Pro^ dolor de his
evidentissime scriptura ait, imo os ipsius DEI, principes extiterunt, and non
cognovi. That is, Alas for grief, for of these the scripture (yea, GODS own
mouth) speaks most clearelie, they became Rulers, but not by me, and I did
no^ know it, that is acknowledge them. This Sylvester the third, Bennet the
ninth* and Gregory the sixth, Platina in the life of Gregory the sixth
calls Triateterrima monstra, that is, three most wicked monsters, and of that
Sylvester says, Like a Thief and Robber he entered not by the door, but by
the posterne. Cardinal Baronius also calls these three, Tricipitem bestiam
portis inferi emergentem, Baron. annal. 1044 and 1031.
That is; That three headed beast, or Cerberus that came from the gates of
hell, and yet were in their times counted and called, the heads of CHRIST'S
Church. From this wicked practice of Simonie, Petrus Damianus Bishope of Ostia
took occasion to complain, that Peter who by a perpetual curse damned Simonie
before, was uow forced to set up a shop of Simoniak trade, and in these verses
to cry out. Heu seeds Apostolica, orbis olim gloria,
Proh dolor efficeris, officina Simonis,
Terunt incude mallei, nummi sunt tar^arei.
This also made a Monk Bernard In his satyrs, wherein he poynteth out the Pope
and his Simoniak clergy: to cry out likewise, saying. O mala saecula,
venditur inf^la pontficalis,
Infula venditur, non reprehenditur emptio talis.
Next; for selling spiritual and ecclesiastical Offices and other things.
First let their famous Bernard and Abbot of Clarevall speak, who says in his
sixth sermon upon the 91. psalm. Ipsa quoque Ecclesiasticae dignitatis officia
in turpem quaestum and tenebrarum negotium transiere, nec in his salus
animarum, sed luxus queritur divitiarum. That is, the very offices of
ecclesiastic dignities are turned to filthy gain and the work of darkness,
neither in these is sought the salvation of souls, but the abundance of
riches.

Whence it is that Baptista Mantuanus their carmelit Friar in his book, De
calamitatibus temporu^ speaks thus of Rome, Templa, sacerdotes, altaria,
sacra, coronae,
Ignes, thura, preces, coelu^ est venale, deusque
That is, all things are sellable at Rome. Churches, and priesthoods, altars
and other sacred things, shaven crowns, purgatory fire, incense and prayers,
yea, Heaven and God Himself is there to be sold.

Agreeable heereunto speaks Clenard in his Epistle, being professor in
Lovane, and thereafter in Portugal, saying, Quisquis opes saeras nummo
reperire prophano
Querit, eat Romam, sacra sunt venali^ Romae.
Their famous Petrarch likewise in his Epistle whose title is, Calamitatem
Romae deplorat, and which has been before cited, speaks thus, Do they not
(says he) buy, sell, and make merchandise of CHRIST Himself? Whose Name
night and day they extol with praises, and cloatheth his Images with gold and
silver. Marsilius Patavinus Inlikemanner anno 1320. in the 24. Chapter of the
second part of his book, entitled Defensor pacis, says thus, These who have
visited the Church of Rome, which I may more truly call a shop of traffic,
and an horrid den of thieves, (says he) they shall see playnlie that it is
become a receptacle of al villainies, and Merchants for all wares both
spiritual and temporal, a very haven for all Simoniaks. So also speaks that
noble and learned Roman Laurentius Valla in his book, De donatione Constantini,
saying of the Pope, That he was not only a devourer of the People, and not
only destroys the Commonwealth, which Verres, nor Catelin, nor any robber
durst. Sed and rem Ecclesiasticam and Spiritum san^tum questui habet, quod
Simon ill^ Magus etiam detestaretur, That is, but also he expounds to gain
ecclesiastical things, yea the very Holy Ghost, which Simon Magus himself
would detest. Inlikemanner Theodoricus Vricus of the order of the Augustine
Monks, in his first book, De consolatione Ecclesiae, dedicat to the Emperor
Sigismond, says thus.

Heu Simon regnat, per munera quoque reguntur
Iudiciumque pium gaza nefanda vetat,
Curia papalis fovet omnia scandala mundi,
Delubra sacra facit, perfidiaque forum,
Ordo sacer, baptisma sacrum cum chrismate sancto,
Venduntur turpi condition fori.
Which is Englished thus.

who now but Simo^ raigns? bribes al in all
And wicked pelf just judgeme^t does forstall,
The popish court does foster al disgrace,
And turns the church into a market place
Chrism, orders, baptism, all which holy a^
Are basly sold, as at a pedling fair.
And if we will hear a Popes own confession to wit Pius secundus who before
he was assumed to the Popedom and was called Aeneas Sylvius in his fourth
epistle to John Peregall his procutor then ar Rome writteh thus, There is
nothing which the Court of Rome gives without money (says he) for the very
imposition of hands and gifts of the Holy Ghost are sold, neither is the
remission of sins bestowed upon any (says he) but upon such as give money
for the same.

And Platina the Popes secretary, in the life of Boniface the ninth, tells
us that the Popes plenarie indulgences were every where so ordinarlie sold,
that the authority of the keys and Apostolic letters was altogether vilifyed.

And of late Claudius Espenceus a spanish Bishope, sets down in his
Commentar upon the first of Titus and second digression, a list of the many
Tricks and devyces of the court and chancerie of Rome, by gross Simonie to
draw in money, referring these who desire further information herein, to the
book called Taxa cancellariae Apostolicae, and Taxa penitenti^ria, printed at
PARIS by Tousant Denis, anno 1520. Wherein every sin or crime whatsoever is
rated, for obtaining of remission thereof. The like practice of Simonie and
merchandise of spiritual things does Lodovious vives regrait, upon Augustins
eighteenth book of the City of God, and the 22 Chapter. As likewise the
worthy* English Esquyre Gefrey Chaucer of Woodstock, in his plowe-mans tale,
400 years ago, saying of the Popes Clergy. They Christ's people proudly curse,
With broad book and braying bell,
To put pennies in their purse
They will sell both Heaven and hell.
Whence it is that the Abbot of Vrsperg in his Chronicle and life of Philip the
Emperor says, That the waterfloods of all the treasures of the earth did
flow to Rome, to quench her insatiable thirst of money, as her Chancerie and
penitentiarie courts sufficiently can testify.

Hence it was that in the reign of Henry the third of ENGLAND, it was found
(beside large accidents) that the Popes set rent in England was equal to the
Kings, to wit, at that time 60000. merks, as the Monk Matthew of WESTMINSTER in
his Flores historiarum, reports in the year, 1245. Beside that he exacted
of all Residenters at their benefices the third thereof, Page 191. and 227.
and from non-Residents the half of their yearly rent and the goods of all
who died untested. Duarenus likewise a French Lawier and Romanist in his book
Pro desensione libertatis Ecclesiae gallicanae, witnesses that in the time of
Pius the third, the Pope drew out of FRANCE in one year for dispensations,
pluralities of benefices, and the like; seven and twenty hundredth thousand
crowns.

CHAP. XVI. Of Antichrists or the Popes lawless and most wicked Life, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
FOR which respect Anchrist is called ((...)) That Man of sin, by way of
Eminency or excess therein, and v. 8. That lawless and wicked one, who as he
professes in his Cannon Law, (did. 40 cap. 6. Si Papa etc.) Is to judge all
but to be judged by none, although he should not only go to Hell himself, but
also lead innumerable troops of People with him.

Whence it is that of Benedict the ninth, Platina and Onuphrius reports,
Plat. in vitae benedict 9.
after his death he appeared to sundry in an horrid and monstrous shape
telling he had been such a Pope, and being asked how, or why he did so
appear, he answered, Quia in vita Exlex and sine ratione vixi, that is,
because I lived lawless, and as an unreasonable beast (said he) whence it is
also, that Laurentius Valla that noble and learned Roman before cited, and
channon of S. Lateran, speaks thus, Nulla itaque usquam religio, nulla
sanctitas, nullus Dei timor, De donatione Constantini.
and quod referens quoque horresco, omnium scelerum impii homines a Papa sumunt
excusationem, That is, There is no religion at all to be seen, no holienes,
no fear of God, and which I tremble also to speak of al sort of wickedness,
wicked men from the Pope himself makes their excuse.

To come then in particular, to the sins whereby it is evident that the Pope is
that lawless and awlesse wicked one, or man of sin foreprophecied: in place of
many (already spoken of) I shall mention two only maine ones, whereby he
resembles Satan, (the vicar of whose power he is) to wit, cruelty and
uncleanness, as satan is called an unclean Spirit, and Murderer from the
beginning, of the which sin of cruelty and blood-thristines, having spoken
before, It rests now only to speak of the other, the sin of uncleanesse,
whereof their own Carmelite Friar Baptista Mantuanus thus speaks.

Roma ipsa lupanar
Reddita, faemineo Petri domus oblita fluxu
Ad stygios olet usque lares, incestat olympu^,
Nidore hoc, facta toto execrablis ore.
Englished thus, Rom's now a stew's where Peter once did dwell infect with femal
flux, it does most beasty smell Down to the hellish vaults, and up unto the skys
And is so loathso^ grown in all the worlds eyes.

Which made also their own most noble Petrarch in his Epistle, entitled, De
inameno occiduae Babylonis statu, speak thus of that bestiall (and scarce to
be named amongst Christians) sin of Sodom, Hic Tauro supposita pasiphae
mixtumque genus (quod Maro ait) prolesque biformis, veneris monumenta nefandae
etc. Qui jam pontificalis lasciviae ludi sunt (says he)

Particular instances of which sins of uncleanesse I shall only relate out of
their own most famous Authors, as first, Sergius the Third who succeeded
Formosus, whose dead body (as has been said) he untombed, beheaded, and
cast into Tyber, was a most unclean beast, abusing his body with a most
famous strumpet Marozia upon whom he begot, (as Onuphrius tells us) John who
afterward succeeded Pope, by the name of John 11. or as Platiua counts John
the 10.

After which forenamed Sergius succeeded John the Tenth, (or as Platinae
counts the Nynth, elected to be Pope (by their own Onuphrius testimony) by
the means of a most notable strumpet, Theodora daughter of Marozia, who burnt
in excessive lust with him, etc who was thereafter strangled by the means of
Marozia, Sergius harlot, that so her son John the eleventh, (or as Platina
counts the tenth) might come to the Popedom.

This John likewise son to Pope Sergius by his harlot Marozia, by her means
coming to the Popedom, had his life suitable also to his birth and entry,
his life being wicked and his death violent. Which makes their own Cardinal
Baeronius in his tenth Tome of his Annalls, anno 912. art. 3. cry out thus,
Quae tunc facies Ecclesiae Romans? quam foedissima, cum Romae dominarentur
potentissimae aeque ac sordidissimae meretrices? quarum arbitrio mutarentur
seeds, darentur Episcopi, and quod auditu nefandum est, intruderentur in sedem
Petri earum amaesii, That is, O what face then had the Church of Rome, how
filthy? wherein did rule and domin most powerful and most filthy Whoores, at
whose pleasure Bishops were made, and transplantation from one sea to another,
and which is most horrible either to be heard or spoken that their Whore.
masters should be by them intruded even into Peter's chair.

After this wicked Monster John the eleventh, succeeded in short time John the
twelth a boy of eyghteen years of age (as Baronius reports) by simonie of
his parents, who from his youth (as both Platina and Onuphrius reports) Was
defiled with all manner of wickedness, being given (says Platina) only to
dycing, hunting, and whooring, so that it is reported that this wicked Monster
(says he) was stricken through in the very act of Adultery by the woman's
Husband, whom he had abused, a famous husband indeed himself to the spouse of
CHRIST'S Church upon earth.

After this Monster of wickedness, succeeded shortly Boniface the Seventh, by
strangling (as Onuphrius reports) of his predecessor, a most sacrilegious
Thief and Monster of cruelty (as Platina calls him,) as well as of
uncleanness. (a famous Pope indeed, to be called his holienesse.)

After whom in short time stepped up to the Popedom, Sylvester the Second, Who
(as Platina and others do witness) gave himself wholly by paction to the
Devil to attain to the Popedom, whose Body at last being rent and torn in
pieces by the Devil, at his own direction beforehand, was laid upon a Cart and
carried to the Church of S. LATERAN, where it was buried, and where before the
death of any Pope since, his tomb is seen to sweat, (says Platina) and a
collision or rumbling of his bones is heard. (A worthy head indeed of such a
body as is the Church of CHRIST.)

Afterward succeeded Benedict the ninth Who was a Monster of all sorts of
wickedness, and who after his death (as has been said) appeared in so
monstrous and uglie a shape, and declared that it was, because he had lived
lawless and awles: and (as Baronius reports) who attained to the Popedom by
simonie of his parents, being only twelve years of age.

After Benedict the ninth, succeeded Sylvester the Third, Who entered (says
Platinae) not by the door, but like a Thief and Robber came in by the
posterne.

After him in likemanner succeeded Gregory the sixth, whom Platina with the
former two, calls Tria teterrima Monstra, and Cardinal Baronius the three
headed Cerberus, and yet heads of the Church of CHRIST.

After this Gregory the sixth, in short time succeeded Gregory the seventh,
called before Hildebrand, or more rightly, a Hells-brand, Whom the Council of
Brixia accused of these wicked crimes following, (as the Abbot of Vrsperg
reports) to wit, In vit^ He^rici 4. Imp. f. 237.
Simonie and intrusion, sedition, adultery, sacrilege, murder. perjurie,
witchcraft, and necromancie, and therefore accordingly adjudged him worthy to
be deposed.

Thereafter did Boniface the Eight succeed in the Papal sea, who (says
Platina) Strove more to shake with terror Emperors, Kings, Princes, Nations,
and people, then any ways make them religious, (far contrare to CHRIST'S
example or PETER'S, whose vicar or successor he^ claims to be) and of whom
that Charter Monk, author of Fasciculus temporum, says, That he entered like
a fox, he lived like a lion, and dyed as a dog.

But what shall I say of that notable Whore and crafty Strumpet, who was Pope
under the name of John the seve^th* whose villainy and vile unclea^nes, was
discovered by her bearing her birth on the very open streets of Rome, by Gods
special providence, while she was going in procession to the church of
Lateran, between the Theater called Colossum, and S. Clements Church, which
thereafter since that time, Detestandi facinoris causa (says Platina) never
any Pope went, and for preventing the like whereof in time coming that hole in
the Chair wherein the Pope elected is first set, was devised, that by the last
Deacon his genetalls may be handled for declaring him to be of the Masculine
sex, as is reported by Platina, Martinus Polonus, Sigebert, Fasciculus
temporum, and a cloud of many more popish historians.

Likewise may be added that incestous Monster. Alexander the sixth with his
own daughter Lucretia, Whose Epitaph was this. Hoc jacet in tumulo Lucretia
nomine, sed re
Thais, Alexandri filia, sponsa, nurus.
Whose life, as Guicciardin testifies in his history of Italy was nothing
else, But an acting of all monstrous uncleanness, Lib. 6. p. 202.
immoderate ambition, pestiferous perfidie, unheard of avarice, (says he)
and most horrible cruelty.

I could recite many more examples, but these may suffice, so that it is most
true which the Jesuit Pererius speaks of Antichrist, In dan. 9. lib. 4.
^ecpriora.
that inwardly and in secret Super omnes voluptuarius and libidinosus erit,
externa vero conversatione castitate mentietur, That is, above all men he
shall be given to voluptuousnes and lechery, but in outward conversion he
shall counterfite chastity.

CHAP. XVII. Of Antichrists or the Pope and his Clergy their fained Miracles
and lyeing wonders, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9.
OF this the Apostle forewarneth, speaking of Antichrist, and saying, 2 Thessalonians.
2.9. Whose coming (says he) is after the working of Satan with all power
and signs and lyeing wonders, which he there calls also, The
deceiveablenesse of unrighteousnes, and which (...) called lyeing wonders, l.
20. c. 19.
as Augustine teaches in his book of the City of God, because they are either
fained by men, or the tricks of lying spirits for inducing men to believe lies,
and so are either ^ falso as their Author, or ad falsum in their end. All
which popish miracles I distinguish in three ranks, the first is of these who
are falsely reported, but not done, the second is of these that seem to be
done, but are only counterfited, the third is of these that are truly done,
but by satan. The first of which are bred of lies, and nourished by credulity,
the second sort is bred of fraud, and fed by superstition, it being hard to
tell whether Iuglers or priests (like these of Baal) have been greatest
Cozeners. The third is, the working of Satan (as the Apostle speaks 2 Thessalonians.
2.9.) and his strong delusion of such, who because they receive not the love of
the truth, therefore are given over to believe a lie, so that all popish
miracles are either falsely reported, or falsely done, or falsely ascribed to
God, saint, or angel. Whereof I may say with the learned and noble Roman
Laurentius Valla, in his book, de donatione Constantini, Non desiderat
sinceritas christiana patrociniu^ falsitatis, the sincerity of Christian
religion stands not in need of the patrocinie of falsehood, It is
sufficiently defended (says he) by it self, and by it own light and
verity, without these counterfit and juggling tricks or fables, that are most
contumelious (says he) both against God, Christ, and the Holy Ghost.

The first end of which lying wonders, their own Lyra shows to be filthy
gain, saying upon Daniel the eleventh, and history of the dragon, The people
were then deceived says he) by their Priests who worshipped the Dragon, for
their temporal gain, and even so now in the Church there is sometimes great
deceiving of the people, by miracles fained by priests and their adherents
(says he) for their gain inlikemanner.

Their own Cassander likewise shows us that the fostering of error in the
mynds of the people is another end, Consult. Art. 21.
And that wicked men continuing in their wickedness, notwithstanding have
believed, that by the intercession of saints only, they would readily be
pardoned, which pernicious error (says he) so far as can be; has been
confirmed by counterfit miracles. Of which sort that book called, the golden
Legend and Speculum exemplorum is fraughted and full, and which their own
Melchior Canus Bishop of the Canaries, ingenouslie and with a sorrowful heart
(as he professes) calls both false and ridiculous. Loc. co^. 11. c. 6.


To begin then with these fained miracles whereof their own Lyra speaks
which are for gain, I will instance first, That notable one practiced by Pope
Boniface the Eight (as the Pope^ own Secretary records it, Platina i^ vita
Bonif. 8.
) not for a petty gain like inferior priests, but to attain to a Popedom,
which was thus.

Boniface perceiving his predecessor Caelestin (who had been a Here^ite and
was against his will elected Pope) to be a simple man, to move him to resign
over the Popedom to him, suborned one in the night time to be in the house
near to his Chamber, and to counterfit himself to be an Angel sent from God,
and by speaking through a hollow reed to him to direct him to dimitt the Popedom
to Boniface, if he would be saved, which the simple man took to be a miraculous
advertisment, and so dimitted the Popedom.

Another notable and later example in anno 1534. known to all FRANCE was this,
See Sleid. com. lib. 9. f. 94.
The provost of Orleans wife died, and forebade her body to be buried with
great solemnity (as use was) whereby the gray Friars in whose Church she was
buried, being disapointed of the great gain which they expected, suborned a
young Friar, placed above the syling of the Church in the time of even-song, to
make a great noise, whereupon many resorting thither, and conjuration of the
spirit being used to declare who he was, Answered, that it was the soul of
the Provost of Orleans wife, and was damned for the Lutheran heresy (tho she
died a Roman Catholic) and she made that noise that her body might be raised
out of the grave in that Church, and laid in some other common and unhallowed
place, which thing the Provost, and some both of his and her friends,
suspecting this to be a fraudulent trick of revenge, because they had not
gotten their expected gain at her death and burial, they went to the King and
desired the matter to be tried, which being done before the Parliament of
PARIS, it was at last found out and confessed; and the young Friar, with the
first Devysers, who were Colimannus, and one Stephanus Atrebatensis with their
associats, were adjudged to be carried to Orleans, where the fact was
committed, and thereafter to be brought forth to the place where public
execution is used upon Malefactors, and openly there to confess their fraud,
and to be accounted thence-foorth infamous for ever.

Wherefore is it likewise but for gain? that the Pope ascribes such wonders
that his consecrated Aguus Dei's can work, if any do wear them about them, as
is comprehended in these verses following. Fulgura doorsum depellit, omne
malignum
Peccatu^ frangit, vt Christi sanguis, and angit,
Pregnans servatur, simul and partus liberatur
Munera fert dignis, Let 88. disprove this.
virtutem destruit ignis,
Portatus mundae de fluctibus erip^^ undae.
So that the Pope cannot only work wonders himself, but as he pretends
here, can give a constant virtue to a dead thing carried about to do the like.

But of all popish miracles this may be accounted the greatest lyeing wonder,
which a priest daily does work by his whispering over a little piece bread
fyve words of consecration, that he thereby immediately turns the same into
the substance of Christ's flesh and blood, and that thus Christ's body is
multiplied in so many thousands of places at once, where the mass is said, and
the creature becomes the Creator of his own creator.

Next to come to these Fabulous fained wonders that are for confirmation of
errors, they are either fabled to be so by men, or if they be reallie wrought
they are (as their own Biell hereafter declares) by the operation of the
devil.

These then which are fabulouslie reported by men, we have one, whereof Platina
makes mention in the life of Sergius tertius, to confirm the great reverence
that is due to the Pope, which was, that after Sergius the 3. had raised out of
the grave the body of his predecessor Formosus, and after beheaded him, as if
he had been alive, and did cast his body into the river Tyber, as unworthie
of Christian burial, yet thereafter his body being caught into a net by some
fishers, and brought to S. PETER'S Church, all the Images that were there, bowed
to him and did reverence.

Another to confirm the reverence and adoration that is due to the Hostie,
Bellarmin tells us in his third book of the Eucharist and 8. Chapter of a
hungry Mare, who notwithstanding, the Hostie coming by, left her corn and
turned her about to worship the Hostie.

Another does Gabriel Biell report, That some Shepherds in the field, Biel in
c^non, missae, Lest.15.
having laid down their bread upon a stone, and having pronunced over the same
words of consecration, the bread turned into flesh.

Another to confirm the order of their Friars* It is reported that S. Dominik
had such power over the Devil, that he forced him, when he appeared to him, by
his conjuration: so long to hold his Lamp in his hand till it was consumed, and
that the Devil was not only troubled there with, Loc. com. 11. c. 6.
but also greatly tormented. This their forecited Melchior Canus reports, and
yet ingenouslie giving his own judgment thereupon, calls it a thing that is
most ridiculous.

And more particularly to come to such sort of miracles that are reported to
have been done in Rome, in a most ancient book (which I have beside me) called
Mirabilia Rome, printed at Rome by one John Besicken, anno 1500. in the tenth
year of Pope Alexander the sixth.

1. In the Church of S. Paull, at the right side of the Quire, it is reported
that there stands the Cross which spoke to S. Bridget for her continual
Prayer before the same 2. That in S. Mary's in the porch, are two Images of
CHRIST, and the Virgin Mary, which a noble Roman Lady, named Galla received
while she was at dinner, sent down to her from Heaven for her great devotion.
3. In the Church of S. Alexius upon the hill called Aventine that the image of
the virgin Mary which is there, spoke to the keeper of that Church much to the
praise of Alexius. 4. That in S. Mary's Church, is Her image, which spoke to
Pope Gregory, saying, Why do thou not of^ner salute me, seeing ever as thou
passes by thou saluts this my image? for which neglect upon his knees he
presently craved Pardon, and ordained that all who should salute her there,
should have 15. years of indulgence.

This made that learned Valla of their own, cry out saying in his book of
Constantins donatio^, O miram hominu^ dementiam qui his anilibus deliramentis
fidem habent. That is, O wonderful madness of men who give credit to such
old-wyves fables and fancies. And therefore he subjo^neth saying, ^r^bescat
Christianus homo qui veritatis se ac lucis filium nominat proloqui quae non
modo vera non sunt nec veresimilia. That is, let any Christian man be ashamed
who calls himself a son of truth and of the light to utter these things which
not only are no-wyse true, but has not a lyklie-hood of truth.

Last of all to come to such signs and lyeing wonders that are for
confirmation of popish errors and are by the delusion or operation of the
devil, whose vicar the Pope is more truly than CHRIST'S, First, for apparition
of souls, and confirmation of purgatory whereas we have sundry popish
histories, let Chrysostom declare in his 29 Homile upon Matthew, what these
are, for thus he speaks, These voices that say, I am the soul of such a one
proceeds (says he) from the fraud and deceat of the devil, for it is not
the soul that departed that says that, but Satan (says he) who that he may
deceive the Hearers faineth himself to be that soul.

Next whereas for confirmation of the worship of Images and going to such
places in pilgramage as Loretto, our lady of Hales, and the like, sundry
miracles ar ob^ruded to be believed to be wrought by them set down by Turselin
the Jesuit. Their own famous Gabriel Biell in his 49. lecture on the Cannon
of the Mass speaks thus. If at any time miracles be wrought upon men (says
he) who have recourse unto them, this is not by virtue of the Images, but by
the operation of the devil sometimes, to deceive (says he) such disorderly
Worshippers, God so permitting, and their infidelity so deserving the same.

Of all these miracles then, that are pretended to be wrought by the Pope, or
the Roman Church,, we may justly answer them in Augustins words, and threteen
treatise upon John, saying. The Lord has forewarned us of these who pretend
miracles, fortelling us that in these last days false Prophets shall arise,
working signs and wonders that they may seduce (if it were possible the very
Elect, and that the coming of Antichrist shall be after the working of Satan,
with all power or efficacy, and with signs and lyeing wonders. So that how
many miracles or wonders Romanists do allege for them, to prove them to be
the true Church, with so many arguments do they furnish us against them, to
prove their Church to be Antichristian, and the Head thereof to be that foretold
Antichrist.

For Moses did show Deu. 13.1. that a false Prophet may work a sign and
wonder, and for this end to draw Gods people to idolatry, as our Savior
likewise did forewarne that false Prophets should arise and work (...), great
wonders. Math. 24.24.
The Romanists therefore argue preposterouslie, while they would prove the
truth of their doctrine by miracles, whereas they should prove their miracles
to be true, by the truth of their doctrine, and agreement with scripture, this
alone being the true and golden rule which Iustine Martyr sets down to know
true and divine miracles and discern them from others, Quest. 5.
to wit, by the doctrine which they confirm, if it be that, which is registrat
in the Word of God, to which they are seals

As for that Revel. 13.13. Where it is said, that the second beast (whereby
Antichrist is meaned) does great wonders, so that he makes fire come down from
heaven upon the earth in the sight of men, allusion thereby being made to that
fact of Elias in destroying his enemies by calling for fire from heaven to come
down upon earth in the sight of men. 2. King. 1.10.11. Their own Lyra
expounds this saying, Hic accipitur ignis metaphorice sicut and alia quae hic
dicuntur, That is, fire is taken here metaphoricallie, as other things also
which are here spoken. And thereafter, Inconspectu hominum, id est secundum
falsa^ estimationem credentium (says he) that is, according to the false
estimation of them who believed so. Whereby may be denotate the Popes
thunderbolts of excomunication against such as opposed him, and which
(according to the false estimation of them who believed it) he has power to
throw down to destruction both their souls and bodies as unto fire eternally.

These things therefore being demonstrat concerning Antichrist, First, who he
is for Person. 2. Where he is, for Place. 3. When he came for Time, 4. What
were his properties for Marks. To wit, 1. Exorbitant pride under a pretext of
humility. 2. Gross Idolatry, under color of devotion and piety. 3. Bloody
cruelty, palliated under the pretext of holy zeal and sanctity. 4.
Mercha^dize of spiritual things or simonie, joined with horrid tytles of
blaesphemie. 5. A Lawless life, and in lechery, through fained holienesse and
continency. And 6. Lyeing wonders, by subtilitie, abusing Christians
simplicity.

From all which former premises in all the preceding Chapters, I repeat that
argument Wherewith I began, thus. Unto whom the whole prophecyes of holy
scripture describing that grand Antichrist, and being joyntlie or collectivelie
taken, does sole and only agree. He is that grand Antichrist, foretold in the
scripture.

But unto the Pope the whole prophecyes of holy scripture describing that
grand Antichrist, being joyntlie and collectivelie taken, does sole and only
agree. Therefore it follows that he is that grand An^ichrist foretold in the
scriptures.

And I defye any Priest or papist to find out any other to whom these
prophecies or properties collectivelie taken, (as said is) does agree. And
specially by the testimonies of these, that are of that persons profession, as
we have brought the testimonies of Romanists to prove these of the Pope.

Whence it is, that since the Pope came ^o that Meridian or (...) of his hight,
about the thousand year of God in the time of Gregory the 7. (as has been
said) and was fully then seen to be that man of sin spoken of 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
The Lord has stirred up from time to time in every Centurie since, some
witnesses to avow him to be that grand and foretold Antichrist, as in the year
of God, 1100. or thereby. The Bishope of Florence in the time of Paschalis the
second declares clearlie that the Pope was that Antichrist. anno 1100
The same likewise did one Dulcinus Navarensis preach, as may be seen more
ample in that book, called, Catalogus testium veritatis, and the Mageburg
centuries, Cent. 12. As likewise Ioachimus Abbas declares the same, being
asked by Richard the first of England, as witnesses Roger Houeden in the life
of Richard the first. So likewise did Honorius Augustodunensis dialog* de lib.
Arb. and predest. And as their own forecited Aventin reports, All good,
plain, Just, and ingenous persons (says he) saw, that then began the
kingdom of Antichrist. Avent. annal. Bojor. lib. 5. c. 10.

Inlikemanner, anno 11200. one Walter Mapez Arch-deane of Oxford, anno 1200
a famous man both for life and learning, of whom Giraldus Cambrensis makes
mention, in his book, called, Speculum Ecclesiae lib. 3. c. 1. and 14.
Avowedlie maintained that the Pope was that Antichrist. The same did Eberhardus
Archbishope of Salisburg in a public imperial diet at Reinsburg, as Aventin
records in his 5. and 7. books of the Bavarian annals^ As also Robert
Grosthead called the worthy Bishopeof Lincoln, as Matthew Paris reports in
the life of Henry the third Whose bones therefore were thereafter caused to be
raised by Pope Innocent and cast out of the Church.

anno 1300
Likewise in the 1300 year of God, Marsilius Patavinus in his book called
Defensor pacis, c, 25. affirms that the Pope was that foretold Antichrist. So
likewise did that worthy gentleman and famous Poet in his time, Gefrey Chaucer
in his plow-mans tale at large. As also Michael Caesenas principal or pryor of
the gray Friars, with diverse others. But most specially their famous Petrarch
in that Epistle where he deploreth the calamity of the Town of Rome cited
abefore.

Inlikemanner, in the year 1400. anno 1400
John Wickleff in England, whom thereafter followed John Huss and Ierom of
Prague in BOHEME, avowedlie taught and did prove the Pope to be Antichrist.
Witnessing the same to their death. Which then many houndreths, yea thousands
publicly professed and maintained with their blood.

Last of all in the year 1500. anno 1500
or little after, beside Jerome Savanarola in Italy* The Lord stirred up
Luther in Germany, Melancton and many more to discover and declare the Pope to
be that man of sin and foreprophecied Antichrist. which in all reformed
Churches is now held for a most sure and true assertion, upon the grounds an d
reasons that already has been declared. So that it is no new doctrine,
braoched only since Luther's time (as papists affirm) that the Pope is
Antichrist. But grounded upon scripture and avowed by many who lived and dyed
in the external Communion of the Roman Church, long before Luther.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the final destruction of Antichrist and ruin of the papal
sea. 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
IT being already shown concerning Antichrist, who he is, and where he is,
when he came, and whence he came, and what are his marks also whereby he may
be known, follows now at last that we see, what shall be his end, or
whether he goes, and this shall be according to his name given to him by
Paull, and common with Judas, that is, he is called the son of perdition, and
accordingly to perdition he shall go. And as he is called Abbadon Apolyon a
Destroyer, so shall destruction be his later end. The manner whereof the
Apostle sets down 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. That first that wicked man shall be
revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the breath of his mouth, and at last
shall destroy him with the brightness of his coming. Which Cardinal Cajetan
so expounds, By the breath of his mouth that is (says he) by the spiritual
virtue of the word of the Gospel piece and piece shall he turn away men from
following of Antichrist, and lead them to embrace the truth. Which indeed is
that victory of the Lamb spoken of Revel. 17.14. And the effect of that
glorious work of Reformation begun before our days, and which shall hold on
in magre of the opposition of all the enemies thereof, till it come to the
finishing cubit, and Dagon utterlie fall before the Ark of God, so that it may
justly then be said, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, and that these lofty towers
of hers are utterlie and for ever laid in the dust. Revel 18.


Of which her final destruction long ago did her own Nicolaus Clemangis
Archdeane of Bajon and Parisian doctor of Theology forewarne her in his book,
P. 64.
De corrupto Ecclesiae statu, saying. If therefore according to Ezekiels
parable of the two sisters Ahola and Aholiha, their elder sister (meaning Rome)
has done the like, yea, in a mad humor has exceeded them in wickedness and
fornication, How shall she think upon impunitie? Therefore awake (says he)
at last out of thy long sleep (O unhapy Sister to that Synagogue) I say awake
at last, and put an end (as I may say) to thy sleeping out of thy drunkenesse
wherein so long thou have continued. And see read and understand that Prophet,
and others, if by the testimony of that prophet, thy ebrietie has not
besotted thy heart, If therefore there be any spark left unto thee of a sound
mind, diligently (says he) consider the Prophets speeches and thy own
estate, and that thy confusion is not sleeping, but it is at hand, and thou
shall see what end abides thee, although wickedlie and dangerously thou have
lain so long in thy filthienesse; And if thou will not hear the Prophets, nor
believe that they speak of thee, when they threaten so heavy judgments, thou
truly deceives thy self and by too dangerous an error beguyleth thy self:
For it is of thee that they speak, and thou should acknowledge, that these
things which they threaten shall fall upon thee except thou repent. But giving
and not granting that their prophecyes concerns others than thee. What
thinks thou (says he) of that prophecy that meerlie concerns thee, to
wit, that of John in th e Revelation? at least do thou not think in some part
that belongs to thee? Or have thou lost so all shame and sense tha^ thou can
deny that? Behold therefore that prophecy, and read the damnation of the
great Whore that sits on many waters (says he) and there behold thy
wicked deeds, and thy fusure fall. A good progres^ whereof to Gods glory and
his saints rejoicing is already seen, and as Euphrates was diverted by Cyrus
from the eastern Babylon before her overthrow, so by the diverting and drying
up of these waters in a great part, whereupon the Whore sits, by Gods
people deserting this western Babylon and their coming ou^ of her upon Gods
call (as Lot did out of Sodom, Gods people out of Egypt, and the Christians out
of Jerusalem to Pella before the destruction thereof) her overthrow and final
destruction likewise is shortly to follow, and as the Prophet speaks Ier.
51.33. As the tim of Babel's threshing is come, yet a little while, and the
time of her harvest shall come, and tho she sit as a Queen and in her security
says, She is (...) Widow, and shall see no sorrow, yet her destruction and
plagues shall come upon her in a day when she looks not for it, the reason
whe^eof is rendered to be this, in o^position to her strength and all her
adherents, For strong is the Lord that judges her* and loud is the cry of that
blood, shed by her. Rev. 18.24. In which work (as was said of Esterne Babylon
before) so happy shall they be whether princes, pastors, or people, Psael.
137.9.
according to their several stations, that shall be found most isntrumental;
The full performance whereof the Lord hasten to His glory and his saints
rejoicing. AMEN.

To be added after the 3 line of 151. page.
This John the 12. in a Council at Rome, anno 692. Under the Emperor Otho was
(as their Onuphrius reports) multis and magnis criminibus damnatus. Which
their own Abbot Tritemius paticularizeth as horrid cruelty, multiplied
incests, drinking to the devil, Chr. Trit. f. 42.
at dyce invocati ng Venus and Juno with other heathen gods, murder, perjury,
and sacrilege, etc. Whereby any may judge how justly this Pope migh tbecalled
his Holienes.


