A NEW DECLARATION Presented to the COMMONS of ENGLAND: CONCERNING Certain
Heads or Propositions, presented to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, for the
voting home His Royal Consort the Queen, and restoring of His Majesty to His
Crown and Dignity.

PRinted and published, to be communicated to the Freeborn Subjects within
the Kingdom of England, and Principality of Wales.

OXFORD, Printed for Leonard Williamson, for the use of all His Majesty's
loving Subjects, 1647.

NEW PAPERS FROM THE ARMY
SIR,
HAving lately received a printed Paper, entitled, Certain Heads or
Propositions presented to the Kings most excellent Majesty by the Army, which
Propositions, as they are there entitled, goes under the notion of the whole
army in general, which (as I conceive) has been fomented and contrived, by
some wicked Instruments, who desire to make the breach wider, betwixt the
Parliament and Army, rather then to bring it to a happy close and period.

Therefore, thus much I dare presume to declare, in behalf of all my
fellow soldiers, that the army had not the least thought of contriving or
presenting any such papers to his Majesty, to desire the style or title of his
army, or sending for his Royal Consort the Queen over, unless they conceived
it might tend to the common good of the Kingdom; I have (to the utmost of my
power, endeavored to find out the authors or fomenters of the said paper, but
cannot (in the least) find any man guilty of such an action. And therefore, it
is further declared, that we do not desire to change that title, which we
have for these 5 or 6 years endeavored to maintain with the loss of our
lives, having obtained many renowned Victories under the same; but according to
our former Engagements, we desire to see the Kingdom settled in peace, his
Majesty stated in his Royal Palace at Westminster, and the privileges of
Parliament, and liberty of the subject, fully maintained and confirmed, our
only aims being to obtain a firm peace, and not a new War.

The Governor of Warwick Castle does not seem to hold correspondency with the
army in their late Engagement, but does utterly renounce and declare against
the same. His Majesty moves according to the motion of the army, but upon his
removal from the Earl of Salisburies house, the chief Officers of the army,
proposed to his Majesty certain propositions, concerning his advance from
thence, desiring to know what place his Majesty had a desire to reside at the
next night. His Majesty is very merry and cheerful, and desires to see London,
His Majesty received his two Chaplains, Dr. Hammond, and Dr. Shelden, very
courteously, and (we hear) they have had a Conference together. For other
particulars, concerning the army, I refer you to the ensuing papers. But by the
next, you shall hear further from

Your humble Servant. James Gardener.
Watford June 29. 1647.
MY Lords and Gentlemen,
In answer to the Letters of the House of Commons, which we received from you
this expressing their readiness to receive any particulars, and to hear any
witnesses against the Gentlemen impeached by the Army, we shall be bold to
mind you, That the Remonstrance sent to you the last night to be presented to
the Houses, do express the desires of the Army to have the Members charged to
be suspended from sitting in the House, which if not granted to us) we know
their interest and prevalency is such, That we can expect but small fruit in a
further proceeding except the desires of the Army be answered therein; Nor can
we hope for good to the Kingdom, or settlement of an happy peace, as long as
men of their interests and prevalencie have power to justify themselves and
practices; who, that they may be able to effect it, do endeavor by all means
possible ^o inflame this kingdom in a second War; so which we shall be forced
to the utterost of our powers to apply a timely remedy, as being the only way
and means we know of to prevent the involving this Nation again in Blood, then
whith nothing's more odious to us,

By the appointment of his E^cellency Sir Th. Fairfax and the council of War.
JOHN RUSHWORTH.
St. Albans, June 24, 1647.
Another Message from the Army.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
IN answer to your Desire of a reason of the Armies motion this day, I thought
fit to let you know, That our quaters are more contracted, but not nearer
London then they were before, namely, at Watford, Vxbridge, and the Towns
about them. We have often said we cannot stand as lookers on to see the Kingdom
ruined by the obstruction and denial of justice; and therefore we desire you
to move the Parliament we may not^ he holds still in doubt, and put upon the
disputes of their commands, to which we shall yield ready obedience, when we
see the Kingdom in a possibility of settlement, which we think cannot be,
unless that the fountain of justice be delivered from those that corrupt it.

By the appointment of His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and his Council of
War. John Rushworth.
Barkhamstead June 25. 1647.
To the Right Honorable, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common council of the
City of London.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
WE have in all things dealt clearly and plainly with you, and hope we shall
continue still to do so: As soon as the worthy Aldermen, and the other two
Gentlemen, your Commissioners, came the last night to us, we acquainted them
with our purpose, to draw the Head-quarter to Vxbridge, that so we might
contract our quarters, which have hitherto lain scattered; at which place we
hope to receive that which will be satisfaction to the Kingdom, and will
remove Obstructions out of the way of Justice, wherein if right were done, we
should let you and all the world see, That we would be so far from pressing
near your city of London, it should be indifferent to us, to march not only to
the d^stance prescribed, but to any part of the Kingdom we should be commanded
to by the Parl. We have asked nothing hitherto but right, in the things that
are known as if they were proved an hundred times before them from whom they
have sought them; which if granted, would not only be a justice to the Army,
but would let the Kingdom see the Fountain in a way to be cleared without
which nothing of Force or Power would be a security to any man.

We wish the name of Privileges may not lie in the balance with the safety of
a Kingdom, and the reallity of a Kingdom, and the reallity of doing, Justice;
which as we we have said so often, we cannot expect whilst the persons we
have accused are the Kingdoms and our Judges, a little delay will endanger the
putting the Kingdom into blood; notwithstanding, what has been said, if it be
considered, That in Wales, besides underhand workings in your city and other
places, Men are raised, and that in no small number; and are not those men in
the Parliament, who have continued faithful to the principles of common
interest from the beginning of this Par. to this very day still awed by the
concourse of Reformado-Officers and others to their doors; expense of time
will be their advantage only, who intend to bring evil purposes to pass.

We have written this to you for your satisfaction, that so nothing may be
done, without giving you a perfect account of our intentions and ends, and
still to continue our assurance to you, that should necessity bring us nearer
to the city, our former Faith given you shall be observed inviolably, there
being nothing more (next to the good of the Kingdom) in our thoughts and
desires, then the prosperity of your city.

By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Council of
War. Signed, John Rushworth.
Barkhamstead, June 25,
FINIS.

