Mr. GARDINER's SERMON ON THE DEATH OF THE DUKE of GLOUCESTER.

A SERMON PREACHED At St. Michael CROOKED-LANE September the 8th. 1700

Upon OCCASION of the DEATH OF HIS Illustrious Highness The DUKE of GLOUCESTER.

By James Gardener, M. A. Rector of the said Parish.

LONDON: Printed by Hugh Newman, at the Grasshopper in the P^^try. MDCC.

Zechariah, Cap. XI. Verse. 2. Howl Fir Tree, for the Cedar is fallen.
HAVING observed in Print, that V. Causes of a Solemn National Fast and
Humiliation at Edinburgh, July 31. 1700.
the Commissioners of the Late General Assembly in SCOTLAND, have thought it
highly necessary, to oblige all the Lords People in that Church and Kingdom to
a Solemn Fast, (as on Thursday, the 29th Day of August last) to Humble
themselves greatly before God, in consideration of the sad Disappointments of
Endeavors and Undertakings for Advancing the Trade, and Wealth of that Nation,
and particularly the Lamentable Dispersion of the African, and Indian Companies
Colony in America; and more especially (in consideration) of their Slighting
and Misimproving the Purity and Plenty of Gospel Ordinances -- and other their
Sins, which they know (...) themselves to be Guilty of.

HAVING Observed this, I say; How much more ought we of this Established Church
and Nation (though we have not the Formality of a Proclamation in the Case) to
Mourn, Zech. 12.12, 13, 14.
every Family apart; the Family of the House of David apart -- the Family of
the House of Nathan apart -- the Family of the House of Levi apart -- the
Family of Shimei apart; Every Family apart, and their Wives apart for those
Iniquities, and Abominations, which have caused the Lord, to whom Vengeance
belongs, to show himself.

V. Archbishop Tenison's Sermon at Her Majesty's Death, p. 20.
IT was the Immorality, the Sin of the Nation, which hastened the Death of the
Late V. Archbishop Tenison's Sermon at Her Majesty's Death, p. 20.
QUEEN (the Blessed QUEEN) as a Judgment, says our Excellent Archbishop; and
with Shame, and Confusion of Face we may speak the Words, the sad Truth, over
again, That it is the Immorality, the Sin of the Nation, which hastened the
Death of the Duke too. And, thus much indeed was told us if we had had an
Understanding Heart, almost in the same Melancholy Breath (as if it was
Immediately Revealed to Our Most Reverend Father) when He Subjoyns, The Light
shone, and we followed not it is Direction, and God has removed one Branch of
it; let us sin no more, lest those which remain be Extinguished also.

NOT unlike these, are the Words of another Worthy Prelate; V. Bishop of
Bangor's Sermon on 30 of January, 1695/6 p. 29.
God (says He) has showed us a Token of his Heavy Displeasure against us, in
taking away that Excellent QVEEN, the Great Blessing and Glory of our Church
and Nation: I tremble to think what we have reason to fear he should do more.

Jer. 44.22.
SINCE, therefore, the Lord could no longer forbear, because of the Evil of our
Doings, the Blow of the Axe, at the Fall of the Cedar, should Ring through the
Forest, and a Dreadful Shriek be heard through the Whole Wood;

Howl Fir Tree, for the Cedar is fallen. THESE Words have a vast Spirit in
them, and in our own Language, (for Trees have been made Vocal, not only
amongst Profane, but Sacred Authors) Speak thus much, viz.

several Claffes, Ranks, and Orders of Men in the World.

Great Men must fall by the Stroke of Death, and retire into their Graves as
well as others.

Great and Public Persons should be signally Remarked, and deeply Lamented. Of
these in their Order.

I. THAT it is very Requisite, and Commendable, that there should be the
several Classes, Ranks, and Orders of Men in the World. The Forest of a Nation
has not all Trees of the same growth. Are all Apostles? Are all Cedars? No:
The Whole Body is not One Member 1 Cor. 12.14.
. There are the Nobler, and ignobler Parts.

IT has been said indeed, and stickled for, (and Those there are still, I Am
afraid, in Reserve, who would make special Use of this Doctrine, were it in
their Power) that Princes, (Men Noble by Birth, Descent, or Blood,) ought to be
cantoned into the Commen Level; that there is not any such thing as a
distinction amongst Men, in respect or of Dignity or Fortune; but a perfect
Equality; and that therefore they ought to be brought down to a common Talley.
Such a wretched Principle this, (like Procrustes's Bed, which would wrac, or
cramp all Men into One Size, or Stature;) that there is not a Creature under
Heaven, whether Beast of the Field, or Fowl of the Air, or Fish of the Sea, or
Plant of the Ground, but at Once sufficiently confutes the Folly, and testifies
against the Impiety of it: and, by consequence, its Extravagant Abetters
(which, one would think, could be none, but an Highway Man, or Banditi) are
sunk not only below Christians, and Men, but Brutes, and Inanimate Beings. Not
a Creature under Heaven did I say? Nay, in the Heavens above us, What
Observable Distinctions are there!

THERE is an Hierarchy amongst the Angels, both those who are so by Nature, and
those who are such by Office, and Denomination. Rev. 1.
There are Principalities in the Heavenly Places; Archangels, Cherubims, and
Thrones, as well as Angels. Michael is expressly called a Prince.

BESIDES the Sun and Moon, the King and Queen of Heaven, there is a kind of
Peerage, Stars of the first Magnitude, 'twixt them, and the Common People of
the Skies. And, as there is One Glory of the Sun, another Glory of the Moon,
and another Glory of the Stars, for one Star differs from another Star in
Glory, God having not levelled them either in Height, or Magnitude: 1 Cor. 15.41.
So there is one Terrestrial Glory of Kings, and another Glory of Nobles, and
another Glory of the Common People; and these have not the same Glory in
Common, even amongst them, one Man differs from another Man in this Worldly
Glory.

GOD has disposed, and ordered Men, as he has the Supersicies of the Earth;
making some parts of it plain, others Mountainous; some Valleys, and some
Hills: Some stand as upon even Ground, Men of Ordinary Fashion; others are as
High Mountains, over topping, and over looking the rest.

PARDON me but this one Similitude more: Have you not observed in the Alphabet
of Letters, some to be of a larger, and a deeper Cut then others? Thus it is in
that of Mankind: Kings, and Princes are, it is confessed, but Men; yet they are
Men in a Great Character; as Aleph, suppose, among the Letters, which as it is
first in Order, so it signifies a Chief, a Prince, and a Leader.

BUT further yet, to clear up the Point, let us search the Scriptures, and hear
what they say. Truly they in so many words tell us not only that there are the
Abjects Ps. 35.15.
, the Lowest of the People 1 Kings 12.31.
, Children of base Men, viler then the Earth Job 30.8.
, and on the other side that there are the Mighty of the Land 2 Kings. 24.15.
, the Honorable Person Isa. 9.15.
, Men of high Degree 1 Chr. 17.13.
, the Shields of the Earth Ps. 47.9.
, So Great, that they are called Mountains of Israel Ezekiel. 36.1.
, and so high, that their Height is like the Height of Cedars Amos 2.9.
, And brand them for Heretics who speak Evil of Dignities Jude 8.
, (or Blaspheme Glories, as the Greek Words (...) signify.) But moreover, they
declare unto us how that these Distinctions are Instituted by God. By Me Kings
Reign, and Princes decree Justice; by me Princes Rule, and Nobles, even all the
Judges of the Earth Prove. 8.15, 16.
, Again, Let every Soul be Subject to the Higher Powers, for there is no Power
but of God, the Powers that be are Ordained of God Romans 13.1.
. If there were not a Distin, guishing Dignity to be ascribed to Persons of
Sublime Place, but all Men must be alike, and brought down to a Par, Why is
Joseph called the Second Man in the Kingdom? Joseph of Arimathea an Honorable
Counselor? Festus spoken of by the way of Noble? And the dear Jesus himself
compared to a Nobleman?

WAS there ever any Nation heard of that allowed not Degrees, and Terms of
Distance? That cannot give most clear Images, and Impressions of them to very
good Advantage?

AND well it is for the Children of Men, that Providence has so ordered it;
since it is impossible, in the Nature of the Thing, that any Civil Society
should subsist, or Nation support it self where there is neither Government nor
Order, neither Managery, Guidance, nor Superiority. And therefore They that
would thus Democratically argue, and turn the World into a Dividend, are
pernicious Neighbors wherever they are; and this Determination is both Just,
and plain upon them, viz. That He that cannot be content to have less, or be
less then another; is altogether unfit, not only to be as Great, or to enjoy as
much as another, but to be, or to have any thing at all.

LET none therefore dare to wrest from you your Titles ye Men of Honor, or the
Distinctions of your Qualities ye Men of Renown; maintain your Crests, and your
Rights, for ye are Cedars, and not the vile Crabstock, nor the Brier and Thorn,
which cannot be taken with Hands, but the Man that will touch them must be
fenced with Iron, and the Staff of a Spear.

1. ONLY, thus much may be insinuated, we humbly presume, that this Privilege
ought to teach the Nobleman Gratitude; to say, with Jacob, I am less then the
least of all thy Mercies; with David, Who am I, O Lord, and what is my Father's
House, that thou have brought me hitherto? A Cedar you are, you say; Look to
the Rock our of which you were hewn, and let the Praises of God be ever in your
Mouth, that has caused your Lot to fall in such a good Place; be thankful
unto him, and speak good of his Name, for Waters of a full Cup; for Silver
Wings, and Feathers of Gold; for riding upon the high Places of the Earth;
Ascribe you Greatness to the Lord, who has set you among Princes, and made you
to Inherit the Throne of Glory. If a Poor Man ought to bring a Turtle, and Two
young Pigeons; the Great, and Mighty cannot any way be excused under an Whole
Burnt Offering, an Heacatomb; the Altar should Flame with Sacrifices to that
God who has made Him thus to differ,

2. AGAIN, thus much, without Offense, may be said, that it ought to be Pious
Greatness. As Cedars, they ought to be Trees of Righteousness Isa. 61.3.
, and full of Sap Psalm. 104.16.
. They are called Fools to their Faces, that have a Price in their Hands, and
yet will not permit Religious Practice to correspond with Ability. How is God
Almighty offended, when He had planted a Noble Vine, and it turned into a
degenerate Plant! It was dismal when Jeremy Isa. 61.3.
went unto the Great Men, thinking that they had known the Way of the Lord, and
the Judgments of their God; and yet these altogether had broken the Yoke, and
burst the Bonds in sunder. Bring unto the Lord, O ye Sons of the Mighty! Be ye
Presidents of Religion, let who will be Neglictive of their Duty. For such
Personages to degenerate is a Reproach, and a shame not to be forgotten, though
They were born of a better Father then ever was Jupiter; to use the Words of
Menander.

3. LASTLY, Thus much, from the Premises, may be Suggested without offending
against the Rules of Decency, viz. That they ought to be as really servisable,
as their Order and Rank in the World bespeaks, and justly demands. That they be
of a ductile Temper, benign, and placid in their Expressions; (the Cedar, you
know, is not rough and knotty, but smooth and pleasant;) sweet, and obliging in
deportment; not swelled with Conceit, not strutting, and looking down with
Contempt upon the Creation; but free and easy to be entreated, making use of
the soft, still Voice, like Great Moses, who was the Meekest Man upon Earth;
and Mordecai, who spoke Peace to all his Seed. Not Humoursome, or supercilious;
not designing or reserved for themselves, but useful, as Cedars, for the
building of the Commonwealth: not keeping their Timber within it is own Bark,
but ready and willing to have Pieces quartered out of it, to rear up Structures
of Honor to a Kingdom, and to Repair the Breaches and the Old wast Places of
their Native Soil. If a Man's Country be like another God, as Hierocles said,
then should a Man, the Man of Splendor and Capacity especially, be ever
Sacrificing to this Numen, always contriving how to be serviceable in his
Circle, before that Time comes, when he shall be laid aside, as Useless,
amongst the other Rubbish of the World; for, Die he must as well as others:
Which naturally leads me to the consideration of the Second Proposition, viz.

2. THAT Great Men must fall by the Stroke of Death, and retire into their
Graves as well as others. The Loftiest Cedars in Lebanon, and the Goodliest
Oaks in Bashan must down, as sure as the Sycamors in the Valley, or Willows by
the Waterbrooks. This Truth, that God accepts not the Persons of Princes, nor
regards the Rich more then the Poor, is Written indelebly in their very Dust;
and the One must be content to mingle Ashes with the Other. It is to their
Persons, as it is to their Habitations; Destruction takes hold upon Castles,
and Abbeys, as well as the Mud wall and Thatch of the Cottager: Neither is it
any more trouble for Death to pull the strongest Prince out of his Palace (and
that it will come to at last) than to turn a Beggar out of his House of Hurdles.

WHAT Ground there is for that Observation; The Life of Man is short, of Kings
shorter, of Popes shortest (whether it be because they are subject to Envy, and
a Rival-ambition; or, because they that stand high are prone to be giddy
headed, and consequently are aptest to catch a Fall;) I list not now to
enquire: certain it is, since they are part of Adam's sinful Progeny, that die
they must; their strength is not the strength of Stones, which yet the very
drops of Water wear out; nor their Sinews of Brass or Iron, which yet the Rust
and Canker consumes.

DEATH, like Caesar, Taxes the Whole World, and his Mortal Sithe Mows down the
Lilies of the Crown, as well as the Grass of the Field. The Mighty of the Earth
have no more Dominion over it then the British King Canutus of Kent had against
the Seas incroaching upon his Throne. Those who have a just Power of Life and
Death, as to their Subjests, have none over their own, to prolong their Lives,
or protract their Deaths one moment. Nay, could thou, by thy Power, and
Policy exalt thy Throne above all the Thrones of all the Kings upon the Face of
the Whole Earth, and proclaim thy self Universal Lord and Monarch, and send
Yokes by thine Ambassadors to all the Princes, and States of the Universe; Yet
the Time will come, and will not tarry, when the Grandees, and Potentates of
the World, who have gone down into the Dominions of Death, and Darkness before
thee, may take up this Proverb against thee, and say, Art Thou also become weak
as we? Art thou also become vanity like unto us? The Globe at One end of the
Library, and the Skeleton at the Other, was a pretty Emblem of what we are now
Discoursing, and may signify thus much, that supposing a Man Master of the
Whole Ball, yet his Spirit shall be taken from Him, that He may be dissolved
and become Earth Tobit. 3.6.
. Diogenes is brought in by Witty Lucian, as Jearing the Ghost of Alexander
after Death; (...) What, is Alexander Dead as well as Diogenes? Alexander had
then learnt, that he was not Immortal, and co'd say, (...) It Is no wonder I am
Dead, since, at best, I was but a Man.

WHATEVER course God gives to our Fortune, Nature will certainly maintain and
keep hers; and make the Pulse beat alike in Men of High degree, and those that
are obscure; and will inflame both alike with Fevers, and chill both alike with
Rheums, and finally close the Eyes of both alike by Death, which draws the
Curtain of the Stage, and then the Comedy of Fartune is at an End; Nature,
which brought them forth Naked, takes them in more naked then she brought them
forth, Stripping the Soul off the Body, and the very Flesh off the Bones: Death
divesteth all the Actors of this Play of Life of the False Properties of
Fortune, and then, Who can say, This is the Noble, and that the Ignoble Dust?
for, in Death, there is neither Small nor Great, neither Male nor Female,
neither Bond, nor Free; the Greatest shall lie as low as the Meanest; every One
there shall be but as his Neighbor, and as his Brother in the Flesh.

BUT for the further Illustration of this Great Truth, That no Period of Life,
no State, or Quality is secure a Moment from the Arrest of Death, that all our
Destinies are hurstled in the same Urn, and sooner or later we shall be all
carried into Eternal Exile: let us turn to, and ruminate a little upon these
following Texts; for thus it is Written, Heb. 9.27.
It Is appointed for ALL Men Once to Die. No Privilege, no Immunity from the
Grave. It Is a Statue-Law that has been in Force in all Ages, and will be so to
the End of Time. The Decree is irresistible, and you may pretend as soon to
obstruct the Course of Nature, or hinder God's Covenant of Day and Night, as to
preserve Men of what Names or Titles soever Dignified or Distinguished, from
going to the Place appointed for all Living. This is called in another place
Josh. 23.14.
the Way of all the Earth; Some walk indeed on the Golden Sands, others in Dirt
and Mire; but the same Uncontrollable Necessity involues all; and whatsoever
the Way be, Plea ant or Troublesome, yet every One passes in it with equal
steps, measured by the same invariable Spaces of Hours, and Days and arrive at
the same common End of Life. Again,

Romans 5.12.
DEATH passes upon ALL Men, for that ALL have Sinned. Whatever it is that
makes Men Great, makes them not more then Men, nor less then Sinners; and the
Work, and Wages are inseparable; for, the Wages of Sin is Death: Nay Death
found a Passage where Sin had made none; even the most Holy Jesus was Dead, and
Buried. Again,

Isa. 40.6, 7, 8.
ALL Flesh is Grass, and the Goodliness thereof as the Flower of the Field; the
Grass withers, the Flower fades. But is this a Truth so Universal that it
admitts of no Exception? Are not the Princes, and Herves of the World exempted?
Have not They something in them that may be a Preservative from, the insults at
least of this Tyrant Death? Something that They may, upon Occasion, plead
against the Common Fate? The Prophet seems to agree to this, and therefore
makes some difference betwixt the Great and the Person of Low Estate; But what
is it? No other then what is between Green Grass, and a Flower; which, though
more Beautiful and taking to the Eye, and pleasing to the Sense, is every whit
as subject to be trod under foot as the Grass; and as they grow together in the
same Field are equally liable to be cut down by the Edge of the same Sithe.
Nay, say they escape the Browsing Mouth of the Beast, the Pruning Knife, the
Plucking Hand, and the Nipping Air; yet are they still perishing, still fading,
and will wither away of themselves. Again,

Psalm. 39.5.
VERILY Every Man at his best Estate is altogether Vanity. Every Word strangely
Emphatical! In the Original it runs, Every Man is every Vanity. Imagine what
Vanity you will, Man is that. This is the true, perfect Mapp of the Little
World Man, drawn and Colored by the Pen of the Royal Prophet as his Hand was
guided by the Holy Ghost. Behold, I show you a Mystery; The Lesser World Man,
is more comprehensive of Vanity than the greater. Again,

Psalm. 89.48.
WHAT Man is He that Lives, and shall not see Death? Shall He deliver his Soul
from the Hand of the Grave? Selah! The meaning is, No Man can escape it. Which
is the reason that the Assertion is not left bare, and naked, but fixed with a
Selah, to assure the Truth of it, or so to engage our Attention, as not to pass
it by till we have given it a Serious, and a feeling Thought: Upon which
account, it is highly probable, that Man is not here expressed by that common
word Adam, which tells him how that He was basely born from the Earth, and
derives from the Ground; nor by that word Enos, which implies his Accidental,
or rather Providential Infirmities, Sicknesses and Sorrows; but Geber he is
called, which represents Man in his most topping Circumstances either of Honor
or Greatness; in the best and greatest Figure that possibly he can make? Q. D.
What Great, what Mighty Man is there, that lives and shall not see Death? Once
More,

Psalm. 82.6.
I have said ye are Gods, and all of you the Children of the Most High, but ye
shall dye like Men, and fall like One of the Princes. Or rather by much, as
some render the Hebrew, And the Princes shall die as One, or as any One, i. e.
as any other Ordinary Man. Great Ones indeed are Baptized with God's own most
Reverend and Glorious Name; they be as Gods by Deputation, and by Authority
delegated from on High; but it is all but tanquam Lumina illuminata, as Stars
are Lighted from the Taper of the Sun; all Earthly Majesty being but a Ray of
that which is Omnipotent and Independent above in Heaven: Even (there) all
Crowns are cast before the Throne of God, Revel. 4.10.
. Therefore is it added, They shall die like Men, In the Eminency of Dignity
they resemble God, being clad with Majesty and Honor before the People; yet in
the frame, and Substance of their Bodies are of the same Materials with the
poorest Creature you can meet in the Streets: So that it is certain, though They
be Gods with Men, yet (if I may be Pardoned in turning the Words) they are Men
with God; and their Lot is to die as other Folk, and Inherit the Place of a
Skull.

Nay, may we not here fix a farther Remark, and say that such Persons are not
only Mortal as others, but many times sooner cut off, and more Subject to
Violent Death then the Inferior Part of Mankind? Of the Kings of Judah from
Rehoboam down to Zedekiah there were in Number Twenty Six of them, that is,
almost a Third part Slain: Again, of the Kings of Israel from Jeroboam down to
Oshea there were also Thirty in Number, that is, a just Half Slain. And if we
look into our own Stories, and our English Chronicles, they are all Bloody;
from the Conquest downward of Three and Twenty deceased Princes we find Eight,
that is more then a Third part, Slain. What a dreadful thing would it be
amongst the Populace if One in Three were Subject to violent Death! But this by
the by, though not altogether impertinent to the Argument under Consideration.

But why this Pains-taking, you may say, to make out a Truth which Every Hour
of the Day Demonstrates, and none doubt of in their retired Thoughts? Let it be
so; yet, for all this, since there is a vast Difference betwixt a bare
Speculative Knowledge Swimming upon the Understanding, and a Practical,
Sanctified, and Reduplicative One, when we know the Truth as we ought to know
it, by Influenceing our Wills, tempering our Affections, and steering all the
Courses and Passages of our Lives, which is called by the Apostle a Knowledge
according to Godliness, and knowing of the Truth as it is in Jesus, it may be
feared we do not know this Truth (in this Sense) as common as it is. David
understood the Difficulty of it, and therefore about to make a Sermon of Man's
Frailty, He begins thus, I will incline mine Ear to a Parable, I will open my
dark sayings Psalm. 49.4.
. And the Prophet going to proclaim all Flesh is Grass -- brings it in with the
Solemnity of a Dialogue 'twixt a Voice from Heaven, and Himself; The Voice said
cry, and he said, what shall I cry. The saying was so Dark, and our Natures so
averse to digest it, that there is need of Crying and Crying again.

(1.) THEREFORE, The Message is to you, O Nobles, Princes, and Governors. O
Earth! Earth! Earth! hear the Word of the Lord Luke 12.40.
, Be ye ready also: Stand upon your Watchtower, look toward the West, to the
Setting of the Sun; and since ye know not the Hour that this Arch-Thief will
come to break up this sorry, little House of Clay, which the Soul of the
Greatest Man is confined to, no higher usually than Two Yards, if so high, but
nothing over; Watch with a Watch more jealous than Besieged Cities keep, that
have their Eyes and Ears open to all Alarms, to every approach, and single
Motion of the Enemy.

LET not this be the Language of Greatness, or so much as their inward Thought,
That their Houses shall endure for ever, and their Dwelling Places to all
Generations, since they know, that Man in Honor abides not, but is like the
Beast that perishes: But this rather, (seeing it cannot be avoided, but they
must be visited with the Visitation of all Men,) Let me die the Death of the
Righteous, and let my last End be like His. Let it never be observed that there
is the least shadow of Likeness 'twixt them and Him we read of in Luke 12.19.
Who from the abundance of his Wealth thought he should live a prodigious while,
saying, Thou have Goods laid up for many Years, Soul take thine Ease, eat,
drink and be merry; (as if nothing would destroy but starving:) since they know
how unexpectedly he received his due Character for that his vain assurance --
for, God said unto Him, thou Fool -- and the Punishment of it too, This Night
shall thy Soul be required of thee: Rather let this Light and Understanding and
Excellent Wisdom be found in them, (since they have not a Power over the Spirit
to retain the Spirit,) by Temperance and Humility of Soul (which afford a
particular Scene of Pleasure) to enjoy what is given, with Patience attending
the Appointment of God, when ever His Pleasure shall be, that they shall taste
of Death.

IT IS amongst the Memento's of the Ancient Greeks Stob.
, (...). Being Momentary, and Mortal, it becomes a Man to be Humble: not to
advance upon so loose a Foundation, which, like Quicksands or Quagmires, in a
short Time swallow up the Building that is reared upon 'em. How ridiculous would
he be that should bestow much Time to hew, and square, and polish Cakes of Ice,
in order to Build him a Splendid Palace, which he should fancy to be comparable
to the Etherial Mansions of Heaven? A Sober thought upon the Matter of our
Bodies, that we are only a Lump of Clay, a little refined Dust, that moves and
breaths for a Moment, but drops immediately into its First Principles, would
cure the most Arrogant and Exalted of the Folly of Pride and the Madness
thereof: As Sovereign a Remedy it would be against those Flatuous and High
Imaginations of the Heart, as we are told a dead Hand is, by rubbing it on the
Tumors of the Body, to allay, disperse, and as it were Mortify those
Irregular, and Deformed Excrescencies: And the same shame would happen to Us
upon the Reflection, that does to the Bird upon the sight of the black Foot,
after it has been spreading, and perusing its gaudy Train of Feathers. If
indeed the Body, which was from the Earth, was to return to it no more, it
would be another matter, and Pride would admit of a very fair Apology. But the
Law of Death runs thus, etc. All Honors, Titles, etc. to the contrary in
Any-wise notwithstanding: Nor co'd all the Vain-gloriousness of an Haughty
Herod exempt him from the stroke of the Destroyer, or make him other than a
louzy God Acts 12.
.

HEAR this all ye Gilded Potsheards of the Earth, ye Great Ones that would fain
nestle in the Clouds, and in your soaring Thoughts, with that proud Persian,
Sapor, write Brother to the Sun and Moon; that have deify'd your selves in your
own Imaginations of your Heaven upon Earth; hear this, and rouse your selves
from your bewitching Dreams; submit to what Sense, and Reason, and Experience,
and Scriptures speak so loud; and disdain not to make it a Piece of Religion,
(seeing the Grave expects you, and bids its other Corpse make Room,) to provide
against that Hour, when your Names shall be written in the Shell, and you taken
away by a kind of Ostracisme.

(2.) IT is to Us; It speaks that we repose not our Confidence in any Son of
Man, let him appear never so big, and lofty: Because, this will be to make
Falsehood our Refuge, and to hide our selves under Vanity. The Duty that we owe
to those in Eminency is Faithfulness, and Obedience, not Considence, and Trust.
Alas! What can Dust do for Dust? If the weak trust in the weak, how shall it be
made strong? Affiance is an Act due from the Creature only unto God, whose is
the Power, and whose is the Dominion; and an high Affront we offer his Majesty,
if, when He lends us any of these Precious Jewels, we deal as the Israelites
did in the Wilderness, and turn our Golden Earrings into an Idol. And most
certainly true it will be found in the Conclusion, That never any Persons
smarted more under the Disappointment of their towering Expectations, than
those very Men that made Flesh their Arm. The Troops of Tema looked, the
Companies of Sheba waited for them; they were confounded because they had
hoped; they came thither, and were ashamed Job 6.19, 20.
.

CEASE we therefore from Man whose Breath is in his Nostrils, for wherein is he
to be accounted of Isa. 2.22.
. And, let us follow that Advice which is given us by a great Prince, from God
Psalm. 146.3, 4.
, Put not your Trust in Princes, nor in the Son of Man in whom there is no
Help; (it is not tanti, not worth the while;) His Breath goes forth, he
returns to his Earth, in that day all his Thoughts perish There is nothing in
these words of an (...), as Pope John 22d. would gather out of them; as though
after Death his Soul should Sleep, and think of Nothing: What they express is,
that all his great glistering thoughts when alive, at Death come to Nothing.
. Happy is the Man that has the God of Jacob for his Help, whose hope is in
the Lord his God, which made Heaven, and Earth, the Sea and all that therein
is; which keeps Truth for ever; whose Name is from Everlasting Isa. 63.16.
. But although we are not to rely or stay upon them, yet know this too, that it
is a Sin against all Conscience and Equity not to make doleful Resentments
upon, not to eye the hand of God in the Death of the Princes of the People;
which calls to mind the Third and last Proposition, viz.

(3.) THAT the Death of Great and Public Persons should be signally remarked,
and deeply lamented; especially where it is precipitated, and has not in it the
Unavoidable reason of Old Age, and the fullness of days. It Is fit, when such are
taken away, that their Death should be solemnized by a Tribute of Tears levied
upon the Whole Kingdom: Our Souls ought then to be Elemented, as it were, of
nothing but Sadness, and Sorrow, and the Misfortune should command a Brinish
Shower. Can any Man forbid, or fault this Holy Water? Who would not be Baptized
in such a Fountain? If that Tyrant, John Basiliwic of Muscovy, exacted Phialas
sudore plenas, the Sweat wiped off his Subjects Brows, to be preserved in
Glasses, purely for Him to look upon; Certainly it may be justly expected, when
a Virtuous Prince is taken away, not only that the Eyelids should gush out,
and that the Public Face of the Nation should be bedewed with Tears; but that a
Subsidy also should be bottled up, and kept in store in Remembrance of the Loss,
and the Severe Infliction.

THE Hearses of such Magnificent Persons have, in all Ages, been thus
Mournfully Attended; not only of such who have dropped away with Age, but theirs
who have been blasted in the Tenderness of Youth. 2 Chronicles. 35.24.
All Judah and Jerusalem Mourned for Josiah.

HOWL, then, Fir Tree, for the Cedar is fallen. Does it not grieve you, all ye
that pass by, to see such a Goodly Plant lie on the Ground, which, but now,
stood with Admiration? Can you go, unconcernedly, on the other side of the Way,
as the Priest and the Levite did by the Wounded Man, and have no Sense, or
Impression of the Blow? What! no more than, That which Dies, even let it Dye;
and that which falls let it fall; Nay, which is worse, can you be pleased at
the stroke, and express your Odious Joys at the Breach? Like the Inhabitants of
the Earth, who rejoiced when the Two Witnesses were Killed, and sent Gifts one
to another Rev. 11.10.
. O Cursed Insensibility! O bitter Spirit! O Ominous Presage of further
Calamity! When we were in the Dregs of Misery, and Church and Nation lay, as it
were gasping under the Bitterness of Death, Heaven took pity upon us, and
recovered us by the Hand of our now Dread Sovereign, and we all saw the Great
things were done for Us, whereof we were -- Scandalously unthankful: For which
Iniquity we received of the Lord a just Punishment in the Death of the Late
QVEEN: But yet, in the midst of that Judgment he remembered Mercy; and, as if we
were a Land that the Lord our God cares for, He extended Peace to it like a
River and like a flowing Stream Isa. 66.12.
. But instead of a Religious Improvement of it, the Land abounds in
Transgressions, and the City is full of Perverseness: Insomuch, that Death is
come up again into our Windows, and entered into our Palaces, Isa. 4.11.
and God has taken away a Prince in his Anger. So that our Condition too much
resembles that of Jerusalem, which the Mournful Prophet bewails in the 55th
Chapter, v. 18. There is none to guide her of all the Sons she has brought
forth, neither is there any to take her by the hand of all the Sons she has
brought up: And loath I am to say, that this was the very Method God took when
he Threatened to Stretch out the Line of Confusion, and the Stones of Emptiness
upon it; The Nobles shall be called to the Kingdom, and there should be none
there; and all her Princes should be nothing, i. e. there should be no Princes or
Nobles left that should be fit to take the Rule, and Government upon them, and
then he tells them, not (Sarim) but (Sirin) not Princes, but Thorns s^o'd come
up in her Palaces; not (Chorim) but (Chochim) not Nobles, but Brambles in the
Fortresses thereof; and it should be an Habitation for Dragons, and a Court for
Owls. God forbid that ever our Island sho^^d be made a Spectacle to Men and
Angels in this respect. Well! the Power is lodged in our own Hands, by a
Repentance in common, happily to Prevent it. O Repentance! it is thou alone
can save us; Help us, Thou Joy of Angels, and Crown of Nations! Turn in unto
us, and let England take Shelter under thy Wings.

I will plant the Cedar, and the Shittah-tree, and the Myrtle and the Oyl-tree,
the Fir, the Pine, and the Boxtree together, that ye may know, and consider,
and understand, that the Hand of the Lord has done it Isa. 41.19.
. What though we be ranged under Contrary Persuasions, and a Diversity of
Judgments and Opinions is amongst us; yet, were our Hearts United in the Fear
of God, could we Walk by the same Rule, in turning to the Lord, even this heavy
Loss of the DVKE wo^^d soon be made up; and God would Continue to be Gracious to
the Land, through the Blood of Jesus, which is Sprinkled upon Nations, as well as
Particular Persons. And then, let the Priests of Rome build Seven Altars, and
add Seven more to them, and let them Offer upon Every One Seventy Times seven
Bullocks, and as many Rams, Masses, Relics, Candles, Hosts, and what they
please; let them Continue to Shake our Foundations with the Engine of their
Brain, and their Subtilty; and call in all the Devils in Hell to their
Consultation, and Gather together the Kings of the Earth against us; Tush, it is
in vain, and the Evil they Devise, they shall not be able to perform; for the
Lord s with us, and the God of Jacob is our Refuge.

To which God and Lord be Ascribed all Honor, Power and Praise, by both
Worlds, now and over. Amen.
FINIS.

